Imprimatur,

Aug. 18. 1676. G. Jane, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacr. Dom.

Two Sermons Preached at the FUNERALS Of the Right Honorable ROBERT LORD
LEXINGTON, AND THE LADY MARY his WIFE.

By Samuel Holden A.M. late of Lincoln College in Oxford and Chaplain to his
Lordship, Deceased.

LONDON, Printed for J. Edwyn, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street. 1676.

A FUNERAL SERMON Upon the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord LEXINGTON, Who dyed
October. 11. 1668. The SERMON being deferred till December. 21. Being the Day of his
Birth.
ECCLES. Chap. VII. Ver. 1. A good Name is better than precious Ointment: And
the day of Death, than the day of ones Birth.


THese words of Consolation call for the perusal of Mourners; of Eyes, from
which Tears must be wiped away, ever they can read them. Solomon designs the
confutation of sighs (especially when inordinate) for good Men deceased, and to
unlearn Survivors that obstinate Grief, which Nature or the Fashion may either
feel or imitate.

This Spectacle of Death seems to bid Mourn; and in the words of David to
enquire, Know you not that there is a Great Man dead in Israel? But then the
recellection of his life past, and the apprehension of his life present,
counsel to refrain, and in the words of David's Lord advise, Weep not for me,
but weep for your selves. Which counsel I designing to enforce, selected this
Position of David's Son, A good Name is better than precious Ointment, etc.

Still, still methinks the words do whisper me, that there is no reason we
should be perplexed with long deploring of the Good; But then methinks the
Audience whispers me, that there is no reason I should perplex my self with long
insisting upon that Advice; for shortness of Concern to some, and length of
time to others, have already Preached my Introduction. I shall therefore
address my self to the words, A good Name is better than Ointment, etc.

A Bad Name, there is none so Bad to covet, though many design the Actions that
deserve it. A great Name most Men wish, though few attain success so great as
may atchieve it. The first of these the wicked have, Wisd. 2.4. and the foolish
deserve, whilst they by oppression add field to field, and call their Lands
after their own names, Psalm. 49.11. The second, (viz. A Great Name) the
Babel-builders desired, Genesis 11.4. Let us get us a Name; the Jews were
promised, Zeph. 3.19. I will get them praise and (...) in every Land; and the
Giants enjoyed, being (...) Men of Renown, Genesis 6.4. Hero(...) who burnt
Diana's Temple, designed this (...)esses the first; being the proud C^nt(...)ed
memory.

And (...)ny more still hunt for? what thousands strive to fill the World with
noise? and studiously expose their breath to dangers, to live in the surviving
breath of others? This Name, when once grown guilty of decay, how boldly do Men
struggle to regain? making too often a balsam of their own hearts blood, to cure
a bleeding estimation. This Name how many Heathens have acquired? for Curtius,
that his Name might find no Funeral, leaped living into one; and Hippobotus,
quoted by Diog. Laert. in vita Empedoc is.
Empedocles became a voluntary Loser in his Person, to be a Gainer in his
Memory; casting himself alive into the flames of Aetna, to be talked on after
Death; and dying the prey of fire, that he might live a life of smoke.

But alas! what imports such a Name to the Dead, which (besides their want of
fruition) is varied at the discretion of the living? How many Men have made
their lives give light to others seeking Virtue in the dark, and left (when
dead) bright beams of Fame to guide them? In which beams some Men admire much
luster; others find strange alloyes of darkness and of shade. Thus Life is
succeeded by dubious reputation, as Daylights room's inherited by Moonshine; in
which some kind Spectators see a Man; some idle heads a Bush; and some a Dog.
The breath which often makes up Man's repute, obtains the fate of common Air,
returning what wholesome or infected lungs shall make it. Concerning the
Apostles (even alive) some in amazement cry Acts. 1.12.
, What means this? But others in derision, They are fall of new Wine.

But could the world be so little the world, as to be uniform and constant in
its opinions; yet what is a Name that is only Great? It is a Monument built, like
stupendous Pyramids, more for Men's wonder, than their approbation. Fame is a
noise resembling that of Thunder, which rattles in our ears, and makes no
Music; It Is Goodness gives the relish.

A Good Name.
Now every Name that is Great, is not still Good; nay, a Great Name is very
often Bad; whilst a Man's sense of his own power and glory enclines him to act
by presumption, conceiving himself secure from control: As Heathens in Laurels
defied Thunder. Herod had a Name as great, as he had Virtue little. The Chimney
is the highest part of the House, and it is the foulest too. Good Names are the
acquisitions of Goodness, not of Power; of Triumphs over Vices, not over
Kingdoms. It Is Moderation, not Titles, must be known unto all men Phil. 4.5.
. Those make Menlive the Slaves of Epithites, and dye perhaps the Martyrs of
Orations, and slattering Inscriptions.

It Is true (...) in the Text, only imports a Name, and the Hebrew omits this
Attribute of Good, it being the addition of the Septuagint, or vulgar Latin, or
else (as Lorinus says) of the Chaldee.

But though the word's not in the Original, the Sense is there. It is the Good,
Ecclesiastes means; for Names no more than Great, are not so useful as to
outvalue precious Ointment; they seldom live before the Owners dye; and then
each enjoyes them but the Men that should. But a Good Name, though it survive
the Man, and though himself be senseless of the rumor; yet he possesses the
result of all those Actions that acquired it, being happy by them; and what
though other Men alone discern the clinking, if I enjoy the treasure?

Besides, Solomon must needs mean a Good Name, because none but of Power and
Eminence gain Great Ones; But even the mean and poor may reach to that repute,
which is (to them) better than Ointment; and which way may that be, but by
being good? That Is not the achievement of the brawny arm alone, the feeble
knees may have it? It Is not a thing so proud, as ever to enclose it self in
Cedar; but is often the Tenant to low Roofs and Cottages; whilst Lazarus is a
Name better than Julius Caesar.

A Great Name so differs from a Good Name, as a Great Man does from a Good Man;
and whatsoever Virtue Man may discern in Man, proportionably entitles him to
that Appellative of Good. Now that style, that title, should be all Men's
Avarice Negligere quid de se quisque sentiat, non solummodo arrogantis est, sed
omnino dissoluti. Cic.
, though it proves few Men's Riches; it is all Men's love, though it be few Men's
study; it is Warmth in the Winter; Sunshine in the Grave; the Emulation of the
Wise; and the Envy of Fools. A Good Name is

Better than Ointment,
Now by Ointment, some (with Olympiodorus) understand,

I. To flow in Riches and Delights; reflecting upon that of David, Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more than when their Wine and Oil increased, as it is
in our Service-Translation of Psalm. 4.8. This the Psalmist elsewhere expresses
by Rivers of Oil; the same word being there rendered, Oil, which is here,
Ointment. Nay, the very word (...) is in this very place Translated by the
Septuagint (...), good Oil; which we (with Symmachus) teach to speak as much as
(...) precious ointment, or rather indeed, ointment of a good savor; which
some (as I said) expound, Riches, etc.

These indeed are oils or ointments; but (like that of the Eccl. 10.1.
Apothecary) full of drowned Flies: Infatuated men (the sons of Ease and
Sunshine) perish here. Here indeed (according to holy David's language) Rivers
of oil may be; and such as flow, like Pactolus, upon golden Sands. Here you may
survey the prosperous rich man's state; upon those Rivers Banks we have a
Landtschape of Elms tall and fair, and without fruit; of Tantalus his Apples,
glorious to the eye, to raise a distant expectation, and deceive approach; our
Savior's Fig Tree, of a tempting show, and cursed; Job's Vine, which shakes
its Grapes off, yet unripe; his Olive too, miscarrying in its flowers Job 15.33.
; and Jonah's Gourd, for shade without duration: And here sleeps wealthy man,
and here he dies; and often unfortunately dies amidst delights: like an unweildy
body, which sinks deep where the ground's soft.

The Greeks perhaps might have their wealth more literally termed ointment;
who, by expensive unction of their heads, at once betrayed their riches, and
laid them out; which practice was derided by Diogenes, anointing his own feet,
and crying out, That (...) Diog. Laert. in vita Diog.
ointment on the head lost all its virtue in the Air, but from the feet sent up
its sweets into the Nostrils. But alas! this made them sweet beneath the sex of
men, wasting their reputation with their unguents; whilst, grown effeminate,
they often left their names the sacrifices to perfumes and sweet consistencies.
Besides, what kindness could this do them in the Land of Moles and Pismires,
where all their odors found a Grave with them?

But a good Name perfumes the breath of Children, and Childrens Children. The
wealthy may awhile blaze in the world with much show, and some heat; and in a
while, like dying Coals, cover themselves with Ashes, when Death (their
universal Night) approaches; But a good Name survives in gleams of light, and
glows to long posterity. A good Name is better than riches, Prove. 22.1. That Is
one sort of oil or ointment; but a good Name is better than that, and better
also

Than Ointment, which
II. Is used in the anointing Kings; for in this place the Chalde Paraphrase
understands, by Ointment, Superiority and Rule. Saul was thus anointed 1 Samuel
10.
: And his Successors had it, in a manner, as the Sacrament of their Authority.

Superiority and Rule? This, this is Ambition's gay encouragement; when
Plutarch. in vita Marii.
Marius thinks that GREATEST is a style much better than BEST; when men fill
splendid outsides, with black and horrid insides; (not much unlike those odd
Intruders into Mysteries, that place Hell in the Body of the Sun) when men
regard not how much Devils they prove, so that each man may stand on a high
Mountain, and cry, All this is mine.

But, though even harmlesly acquired, what is Dignity? It makes men wonder, and
it makes men envy; whilst they look up to wish the Owner lower. By this men
swell into a Power public enough to have whole Kingdoms curse them. Men in
mean garments may perhaps be slain; but it is, like Ahab 1 Kings 22. ver. 34.
, with a Bow drawn at adventure: But men in Robes are shot at with design; and
all, like Syrians, level all their darts at gay Jehoshaphat 1 Kings 22. ver. 32.
O Dignity! if rightly weighed, an odious Privilege! By this men have a right
to ride before, like Postillions of the world, for all the Beasts that follow
to bespatter: So that it well may be unwish'd in life; but 'twill at Death be
surely unenjoy'd. Man shall carry nothing with him when he dies, neither shall
his pomp follow him Psalm. 49.17.
. I have said ye are gods, but ye shall dye like men, etc, Psalm. 82. ver. 6,7.
. Or else perhaps dye like the god in the Fable, which every Frog dares trample
and disdain, when he perceives him to lie still.

But a good Name (the poor man's sole felicity) makes even the poor a Prince;
and so much more a Prince, by how much more beloved than feared; and even
interred he is obeyed by good men (if not in particular commands, yet) in his
public example; for imitation may be one sort of obedience. And so lying
still; Gloriosa satis requiescit urna. A good Name is better

Than Ointment, which
III. Is used in Funerals. Mos antiquitus suit ut Nobilium Corpora sepelienda
ungerentur, and cum aromatibus sepelirentur
Eucherius Lugdunensis tells us, 'Twas an ancient custom to anoint Bodies to be
buried, and to interr them with perfumes. And this the Jews (as Casaubon
Casaub. Exerc. in Bar. Annal.
observes) derived from the Egyptians. Some think this Solemnity attended with
exenteration, or embowelling for keeping; But although this was customary in
Egyptian Pollinctures; yet have we not ground to conclude the Jews their
Scholars in the practice; the Septuagint, skilled in the Jewish customs, using
for anointing (not so much (...), as) (...), which merely does import an
unction: so that, amongst the Jews, the unguents seem not so much intended for
the conservation of the dead, as to intimate the kind regards of the living; to
which, in all probability, our Savior refers, in saying, She has beforehand
anointed my body to the burial Mark 14.8.
.

But what is this to a good Name? What was this practice, but a fond employment,
to deck the Body up in gaudy garments, when 'twas to take a journey in the dark;
to go hence and be no more seen. They seemed to take great care, lest they
should prove annoyance to the Worms, or bring a savor which might be offensive
to the curiousness of some Neighbor carcass. But (which abates the value of
this ointment) Fools might buy it, and Knaves sell it; Survivers frequently
bestowed it upon those in Death, whose Lives (of all the world) they would the
least desire should be repeated. The Ignorant might dye supplied of this; and,
when they lay down in the Bed of dust, might sleep as sweet as Socrates.

But it is one good quality of a good Name, that it is the wise man's purchase;
and vouchsafed in his death, only to those whose lives men loved. This is an
Ointment, which, when the waters are come in, almost unto our Souls, still
floats above; and makes the wise esteem himself out of the reach of drowning;
like Oil, it heals the wounds bad times inflict; like Oil, 'twill keep us safe,
although perhaps repute may be attempted to be venomed with the poison of Asps
which lies under some lips. A good Name is better than precious Ointment, and

The day of Death, better than the day of one's Birth.
Zeno thought Life and Death in themselves (...), things indifferent; because
whatever in it self is bad, can by no circumstance be rendered good; and
whatsoever in it self is good (...). Diog. Laert. in vita Zen.
, he thought it was not in our power to use, either ill or well at pleasure.
But be they things indifferent in themselves, or be they not; this is most
certain, that there is no such felicity in Life, as may justify our customary
fondness in it; or horror in Death (I mean abstracted from sin and its
consequences) as may countenance our general aversion from it (...). Menand
. Nay, when compared with Life, Death may look temptingly; surely a great and
aged Judge of Beauty informs us, that it has the better features, Death is
better than Birth, better therefore than Life. It Is of more friendship too; or
if in Death be ought of enmity (since it is said, the last Enemy that shall be
destroyed is 1 Cor. 15.
Death) we may defeat it by dying ere it comes; though living in Christ by
Faith, yet dying to Sin by Repentance; which may be much improved, even by
contemplation upon Death; thus conquering Death, by minding Death; killing it
self, with it self; like the Athenians, who (before defenseless) made
themselves walls of Tombs and Gravestones.

Now Deaths Privileges lie,

I. In what it ends.

II. In what it begins.

I. In what it ends.
St Jerome instances in the imprisonment in the Body from which Death delivers
the Soul: Although perhaps the posture of the Soul, in state of separation, may
not so properly be reputed freedom, since it is a property fixed to its essence,
to be (in such a state) desirous of reunion. Insomuch that some (in that place
of St Peter 1 Pet. 3.19.
concerning Christ's Preaching to the Spirits in Prison) have rendered (...),
expectation; making the separated state of humane Spirits a Prison, because
they are debarred the satisfaction of their so natural inclinations. But
however, with St Jerome,

1. Death puts a period to uncertainty and doubt; to which our Birth entitles
us, making the wise unsure what we may prove; and Fools misread the Alphabet of
Heaven, to find what Letters make our future Fortunes. By Birth we enter into
Life so dubious, that Pyrrho and the Scepticks doubted not to doubt of every
thing, and to resolve all knowledge into scruple and conjecture.

Through all the parts of time, with Solomon, we live uncertain of our time,
and know not what a day may bring forth. We all are strong Idolaters of to
morrow; neglecting well to manage present time, by our too great anxiety for
the future, for hours which we presume shall come, but which (for ought we
know) the Sun shall never live to make; For who can tell but every Night may
close his eye, and hang the world in mourning for his death?

Uncertain are we in our Friends, like Amasa 2 Samuel 20.9.
, or Julius Caesar, we well may perish the deluded Sacrifices of pretended
Brothers, or adopted Sons; For Natures do not ever answer Names; nor is it
always Truth which tempts our eyesight with the fairest Print.

Uncertain are we in Enjoyments. Riches make themselves wings, wings (like the
Butterfly's) gilded and fluttering, and unresolved how to bestow themselves:
They, from the good, often travel to the bad; often do they quit a Rose, hover
awhile, then light upon a Thistle.

Uncertain is our Health; the slave of weather; varied with Heat and Cold; it
shakes at a Frost, and sickens at a Sunbeam; whilst poor Physicians, mortal
as our selves, (the real Sons of our Infirmities, though the pretended Fathers
of our Healths) offer at Reasons to protract Man's life; and then themselves
dye to confute them.

Uncertain are our Joys, which (like Belshazer's) appear upon our faces, soon
to be dashed with some surprise, some hand upon a wall; nay, Joy is so
uncertain, that it is uncertain if such a thing exist on this side Heaven.

Nay more, Uncertain are even our selves, when we cannot confide, no not in our
own dispositions; but teach to morrow to repel those Acts which yesterday
allowed, and make this hour correct what seemed discretion in the last; and
that with some new wisdom to be controlled the next. All these, and more
Uncertainties our Birth begins.

But then comes certain Death, (for what man is he that lives, and shall not
see Psalm. 89.48.
Death?) and shuts out all Contingencies. Man then enjoyes a blessed security;
But then it must be one, who (by a second Birth) has gained exemption from a
second Death, for else his Certainty is dismaller than Doubt. Man being dead,
no more consults the variable Moon; nor studies Heaven, to mistake his Fortunes
upon Earth; no more regards the wind; for him, it still may blow, and where it
lists may blow; no more, by doubting Friends, shall he deserve to find them
what he suspects them; he then no more shall fear the wings of riches, nor clog
them with his cares to stay their flight; no Mean Tekel then shall startle him;
nor shall he abate his pleasures whilst he has them, with dread lest he too
soon should be without them; no more shall he distrust his constitution, nor
ask his trembling pulses how he does; nor shall he any more have reason to
diffide in his own resolves.

2. Birth begins temporal misery, Death ends that. Although the good are never
truly wretched, yet few there are that make themselves such Monsters, as (in
the common crowd) not to complain. It Is not alone at others Funerals that we
contend to be in mourning; but each Man in his own losses pursues the fashion,
and, what he wants in woe, makes out in noise; he puts his Fortunes into black,
to court his Neighbors pity; so that whilst he clothes his complaint with
sables (much above the quality and true estate of his exigence) he makes his
misery as it were his boast, and it appears more like the daughter of his
pride, than his misfortune; as if Jerusalem's sad exclamation became his mouth,
Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow Lam. 1.12.
? Each man's particular unhappiness is to his own eyes magnified beyond the
proportion of another sufferings. What Man in pain, deems not his own
distemper most insupportable? How many does misfortune urge to wish that to
themselves, which Hezekiah deplores in others, That when they being Children
came to the Birth, there had not been strength to bring forth 2 Kings 19.3.
, even, with Job, unwishing their Nativities?

When we contemplate humane misery, and add (to that) the infirmity of our
constitutions; Birth seems to render us as capable of wishing Death, as secure
of meeting it. Nor seems Death only the design of Birth, but its near Kinsman
too; for Death is Sleeps Brother, says the Philosopher; and Life's a Dream,
says the Preacher Eccles. 6.
: A Dream (like Pharaohs) wherein Men (like Beasts) devour each other, and the
worse the better; for bad Men prosper by defrauding good Men, yet style they
this detestable success by the beloved name of good fortune; yet even in this
good fortune (besides the guilt) what great unhappiness lies hid? what
tortures, and what agonies of thought? what nips of conscience, and what keen
reflections? The splendid condition of evil Men, holy David Psalm. 37.
resembles to a flourishing green Tree; and in another Psalm he styles Man
Grass: Now rich Men grow, like Grass under that Tree, much higher and much
greener than the rest; and sowrer too by much, considering their sins and
cares; and often too, shorter-liv'd by much, their too large growth inviting (as
it were) Deaths fatal Sithe. Nor does Job mend the character of Life, when he
compares it to a Poast; soon ends the Stage, after a restless journey full of
haste and dirt.

But what a pleasant place the Journey ends in? Why dread ye Death, the
Begetter of Ease? says Menander (...). Men.
. What is Death? the laying down a heavy Burden, says St Austin Quid est Mors?
Depositio Sarcin^ gravis. Aug.
. Blessed are the Dead, which dye in the Lord; from henceforth they rest from
their labors, says the Spirit Rev. 14.13.
. This great advantage of Death, prompted Isidorus Pelusiota to conceive that
our Savior wept not for the decease of Lazarus; but because (for the belief of
the Jews) he was to reduce him to that Life (that vexatious Life) from which
Death had absolved him.

The Grave at once shuts up Man's Corpse, and Cares. Hid in the dark, there no
misfortune finds him: The Drum shall beat, and yet his pulse not strike a
stroke the faster. The earth shall blush in her own childrens blood, for her
own childrens spilling it; and yet his visage suffer the complexion neither of
shame nor fear. Sickness shall come, and mingle Fevers with warm Sunshine; till
each Neighbor dies, at once his Neighbors wonder and example; till weary Graves
implore the aid of more capacious Pits; yet the Dead shall never molest himself
with seeking Sanctuary in some distant dwelling, where he may live a Coward to
each strangers face, or dye the business of Deaths further travel. Poverty
shall come, and Want as an armed Man, and Friends (astonished at the sight)
withdraw like fearful Women; yet still shall he lie void of want and care,
amidst the quiet company of his old Relations; in the embraces of corruption,
to which he may say, Thou art my Mother; and of the Worms, to whom, Thou art my
Sister and Brother Job 17.4.
. And this perhaps might be some reason why the Muscovites (if we believe
Observantur Dies obitus, quem anniversariis cele brant epulis. Sabel.Enn. 10.
lib. 3.
Sabellicus) do annually solemnize the Funerals of Friends, with no less pomp
than some of us our Nuptials. And now, so kind is Death, so cruel, Life; that
he who covets this, deserves not that; especially if we consider with
Olympiodorus, that

3. By Birth we enter into a capacity of actual sin, which (in the good) Death
puts an end to. And could it but oblige the wicked so; the Learned suppose,
that even to the Damned, Death would be better than Life; For penal Evil, viz.
Suffering, is a less Evil than the moral, viz. Sinning, by how much less it
opposes the Supreme Good; Sin, in the act, has no colors but what desie God,
but Suffering wears the Livery of his Justice. So that, were but the Damned
exempt from Sinning, their posture were much better than this Life (which still
involves us in it) in spite of all their Suffering. But even as the Damned now
are, or ever shall be, their Birth has naught to boast of over Death; for to
whom e're it is not good to dye, it had been better he had never been born.

But however, with the good the case is indisputable. His Death outdoes his
Birth, by undoing Sin; Sin! Life's Concubine (for it never lies from it) and
Deaths Mother (for, the Apostle says, it brings it forth) This Mother dies in
bringing forth the Daughter. The Viper makes her own Nativity her Dams Funeral,
revenging on her the harm she did the world, in the production of so dire an
offspring: Just so does Death destroy the cause of dying: The good, by
suffering it, desist to merit it; for they desist to sin.

Hitherto we have considered the Obligations of Death, in those ills it
determines; and Birth is swallowed up in Victory; now we must view,

II. That great Good which it introduces.
Like night, it blots out one day, to begin another; For Dying makes a Man
immortal; and that great Argument, which proves him but a Man, promotes him to
society of Angels: But then, still Death must be what Balaam wished, O that I
might dye the Death of the Righteous! Man, by his Birth, assumes a Life, by
which he lives in daily likelihood of no longer living; but he dies into an
incapacity of Dying. We know that we have a House, not made with hands, eternal
in the Heavens. WE KNOW, says the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.1.
.

But why then is it said, WHO KNOWS, etc? Eccles. 3.21. Quaer.
Our Translation is somewhat more favorable than either the Greek or Latin, or
indeed our ancient English Translations; for, that which we read, Who knows the
Spirit of Man that ascends upwards; They render, Who knows the Spirit of Man,
if it ascends upwards (...); etc. Septuag. Si Spiritus, etc. vul. lat.
.

Does then the learned Apostle contradict the wise King? Or was his knowledge
improved beyond the reach of Solomon's? One demands (and demanding, denies) Who
knows? The other seems to reply, We know.

To reconcile these places, the Scotists distinguish betwixt Knowledge by
Divine Revelation, viz. Faith; and Knowledge by Natural Deduction, viz. Reason:
And then they reply, that Ecclesiastes only demands this, Who knows BY REASON
whether the Soul be immortal? And the Apostle tells us, That (although we may
not attain the assurance of our Souls Everlastingness by Reason, yet) We know
it by FAITH. But this Reply falls short of satisfaction; nor can these Texts
refer to the Souls Immortality alone; for of that even Socrates and Plato were
sufficiently secure, even by rational Collections: Nay, 'twas the general
persuasion of Heathens; for who amongst them apprehended not something of
bliss, or pain, on the other side the Grave? And it is indeed very demonstrable
(were it, at present, so convenient) that Humane Spirits are all Deathless. So
that Lorinus conceives it only an Article of Faith to shallower Intellects,
whose weakness craves the assistance of Divine Discoveries, to make them
apprehend it. But nevertheless, Dependence on Gods Word for the firm credence
of the Truth, is a practice more secure and commendable, even in the most acute
capacities.

But in Answer to this doubt, Solomon here (by ascending upward) means but the
same with that in his 12th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, Ver. 7. And the Spirit
ascends unto God who gave it; which imports, not only the humane Spirits
eternity, but also (if of the pious) its felicity; not only its perpetuity, but
also its place of abode in that perpetuity. And here indeed REASON falls short,
and FAITH flies home. The Heathens knew that their Souls should not die; but
how, or where they should live, how ignorant were they? how unsatisfi'd? We may
well ask with Solomon, Who knows, by REASON, the place and posture of our Souls
surviving? But yet we may answer with the Apostle, By FAITH we know, that, when
this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved; we have a House, not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens.

This, with the rest, are Deaths Privileges. So that, although it be the rich
and bad Man's Fury, yet it is the poor and good Man's Mistress. The good Man
courts her to advance his Fortune; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is far better: The other, for his Sanctuary, and in his own
defense. To both the Grave is advantageous, and to dye is gain. Better is their
Death, than any natural thing that attended their Lives, and better than Birth
that began them.

But, though the Text be full of Consolation to the dying Man, or his surviving
Friends; though Death exceeds either our Birth or Life; Yet we must wear this
Caution in our Bosoms, not wilfully and violently to exchange our Life for
Death. We all must study to provide for Death, not to procure it. The
encouragement will never justify some bold Pretenders, who furiously lay hands
upon themselves; and court not Death, but ravish her. 'Twas once indeed a
Learned Man's Dr Donn.
persuasion (though altered afterward) That Self-murder did not any thing
entrench on the Divine Authority, nor violate that great Command, Thou shall
not kill: presuming that Injunction only related to the Lives of others.

But if to theirs, then also to our own; though not in Precept, yet in
Presupposal. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, is our Saviors Summary
of the last Six Commandments: So that in our own Bosoms, we bear directions
for our deportment toward others. Our Nature then being presumed averse from
wishing that we might be robbed our selves, we are commanded therefore Not to
Steal: So likewise in False Witness and Defamation: and as in other Precepts,
so in this; it being presupposed, that none would willingly anticipate his End,
by engaging himself in his own Death; it follows therefore, Thou shall not kill
thy Neighbor. And how can that Command which presupposes the Negative, permit
the Positive? But what if murdering our selves, we murder others too? Examples
often contract a guilt by others imitation: And who can pronounce Brutus innocent
of Portia's blood, when she learnt death of him, and died enamored on the fatal
President Plutach. in vita Bruti. in fine.
. Nay, what if I (in my own private fall) become a general Assassinate? For he
that kills himself, does what he can to kill Mankind; and were the World as
docile in sins of pain and horror (for horrid enough Death seems, though it is
not so) as in guilt of other complexions, Killing might grow infections, till
the Universe became but one Aceldama; one Man would dye his Neighbors
destruction, and become a Rule for the next Man to expire by; he to the next,
and so throughout the species, till never a vein were left in Humane Nature, to
bleed the sin over again.

But though (as some may think) there should be no intrenchment upon Gods
Command, in Self-destruction; yet stands not his Veracity inviolate. For on
what grounds could he assert, That Man remains uncertain of his latter end [
man knows not his time Eccles. 9.12.
;] if it be subject to his own disposure? He that may be his own Executioner,
may be his own Prophet too; and readily foretell that Fate, which he has
liberty and power to make. Nor is this kind of Death (as Cato and others,
fancied) the strong result of generous spirits; but the offspring of timorous
dispositions: For, though those Tyrants over their own flesh relented not at
those Black Guards, which still stood ready mustered in the vale of Death; yet
dreaded they those bloody Colors, which they saw displayed against them on the
Plains of Life; proclaiming to the world that they durst dye, because they were
afraid to live. If this be Bravery and Courage, each Fool may be a Hero, with
the assistance of misfortune, and a little peevishness; and though he lives,
like Nabal, and folly with him, he may depart the world like a Counselor, and
lie down in the dust as wisely as Achitophel.

So that, although kind Death does make us Presents richer than Life, yet we
may not snatch at them. All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change come. The great felicity we would atchieve, is lost by eager and too hot
pursuit. Death catches back its benefits (like Tantalus's waters) from hasty
and too violent endeavors. Thus we may make our Angel prove our Fiend.
Sufferings have often, Sin has sometimes instructed pensive and dejected men to
seek ease in the Grave; but they have lost it, by thus seeking it: nay, they
have hastened desolation, and lengthned it to everlastingness. When Sins
reduced to memory have wrought despair, and armed Men to their proper ruin;
their streams of grief have drowned, where they should but have washed; their
blood has then unsanctify'd their tears, and blotted out in fury whatever good
Lines Remorse had written.

Though Death be pleasing, when it is well considered; yet patient submission to
Divine Decrees, is one great feature, which presents her lovely. Whereof our
memories may soon relapse into a fresh example, and these Garments hang, like
Phylacteries, to mind us of him.

Shall I say, his Name is better than Ointment? than Oil? And yet my Language
show not like the worst of Oils, the Oil of Flattery. Shall I attempt the
description of his Life? His Cheeks now cannot blush: How say you then? Shall I
present you now, after his Death, with Catalogues of Epithites and Praises,
which (though the virtues of his life deserved, yet) one great virtue of his
life, his modesty, would not (in his life) have endured to hear? It is the
custom too; but be it so, too common therefore for desert so singular. And it
perhaps might blemish that great worth, should I describe it; for it might be
said, He lived beyond others, but was buried like them. Besides, in public to
display his Name, were to disprove it rather; for by pretending to give you a
description of his worth, I should but seem to say, It was so little, that you
before were unacquainted with it.

But I Will take leave to recommend to you some Worthies, to whose Renown most
here perhaps are strangers.

You knew not Sempronius Densus, Plutarch.
whom (in a general defection from the Roman Emperor) nothing in Life could
invite unto inconstancy; and Death it self (which most Men repute something)
could nothing scare from Loyalty.

You knew not Aristides, styled the Just, whom the Athenians Love furnished
with that name; that name, the true begotten of his own disposition, though
also the begetter of their envy: his meekness was so signal, that his breath
was noted to perfume the names of many, but to blast the estimation of none.

You knew not Philopoemenes, whose Humility high Fortune found impregnable. He
thought Content a glorious Heaven; of which to take a prospect, he suppressed
all his own luster; and in the bottom of Humility (like Men in Pits) saw that
Heaven to best advantage, permitting not his sight to be divided with scattered
beams of his own glory.

Nor yet knew you Pelopidas; of whose friendship no weather ever varied the
complexion. He still persisting toward all (to whom he ere pretended Amity) an
unaltered Friend, made all the world his own Friend.

You knew not that Aratus, who then conceived he studied most Self-interest,
when most he did expend his industry and thoughts to his Countries public
benefit; he lived the gain of all Men, and he died their loss.

Nor knew you Marcus Brutus, signally observed for kindness to his Wife and
Family; whom scarce a Virtue left unfrequented, and scarce any Man's Love
unattended.

Now will you have the Sum of all? We read that these were brave -- and that
they died; That they died worthy of much longer living, had life been worthy to
defer their dying.

If still you are desirous to know more of them -- be pleased to read it there,
and then cast up how much a precious Name enjoyes of fragrancy above all
Ointment. And whilst your thoughts are there employed, you will find (what all
these wanted) true Religion too. What words of life made up his dying breath?
How did he draw in common Air, to return it odours? His languishing being full
of pious, fervent, and of frequent Prayers and Ejaculations; with which his
choice had furnished well his memory out of our Liturgy; by his dying practice,
approving his living judgment^ expiring (as much as Man can guess) in great
submission to the Father, consolation in the Spirit, Faith in the Son, and Duty
to the Sons Spouse, the Church. Now when these things have met your
observation, you will think he justified the close of the Text; and that his
latest hour, did surmount his earliest.

Living, we all enjoyed him; now we see what a small spot of ground he (being
dead) possesses. But his Name lives, and fills up room enough; and I have room
enough to live upon his Name, but that I Have lived too long upon your patience.
You knew him; I know, you knew him: You loved him; knowing him, you must love
him: You remember him; you have reason to remember him: (O that we could all
conspire to imitate him!) confiding in your memory, my Discourse may now (as he
did) bid you all Farewell. It has lived, like him, to more than an ordinary
Age; though not, like him, in extraordinary value. Convenience now will prompt
you to conceive the minute of the Sermons Death, to be better than those of its
Life; As the Conversation of the Sermons Subject has instructed us to conclude
the Day of his Death, better than that of his Birth.

Now to that God, with whom he is; to whom the issues of Life and Death belong,
Be all Honor and Glory, henceforth, and for evermore. AMEN.
ANOTHER Upon the Right Honorable THE Lady MARY his WIFE, Who was Buried in
his GRAVE, September 25. 1669.
JOB XIV. Ver. 12. So man lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no
more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.


THe Flesh, whose Livery these Walls are dressed in, has slept almost a Year;
and hither now retires the other part of that one Flesh, to share in his
repose. Vexatious Life is often compared, and well, to Thorns and Bry^rs; and of
some Briars no end appears above ground: Now such a Bryar was our last years
Life, having both ends in the earth. When the first Corpse of these lay down in
peace, and these black Curtains first were drawn about his Bed of dust, that
Text of Ecclesiastes Eccles. 7.1.
, A good Name is better than Ointment, etc. became the Subject of our
Meditations. In the first words of that Verse, the Wise man applauds (what
indeed all Men wish) a good Name; and in the last he gives no small Encomium to
that which all Men fear, viz. Death. Death is said to be wedded to our humane
Natures: And though to timorous dispositions (who view her at a distance) she
seem a Bride but of a ghastly hew; yet Solomon, who had more thoroughly perused
her features, seems to dress her in the character he gave the spiritual Spouse
in the Canticles, Thou art black, but comely, etc.

And since that Text applauded so her Countenance, what throngs has her
distended Arms embraced? as if Men's deaths were the result of fondness, rather
than force; and she had vanquished them more by Attraction, than Constraint;
and as if they had not expired so much her Captives, as her Lovers. Nor is
their stay, unlike the stay of kindness; it is long, it is very long. Man fails
from off the face of earth, as the The Verse preceding the Text.
Waters fail from the Sea, and as the Tides in Rivers decay and are dried up.
And as those Waters do again return into the Sea, and Tides into the Rivers; so
shall Man find the effects of Renovation, but not, alas! with equal expedition,
to what the Sea and Floods enjoy. The Heathen Poets much delight themselves
with Fables of their Jove, fancying (amongst the rest) that visiting Al^mena,
he stretched out the night unto the length of three; but his three nights, to
this of Death, were but a twinkling. Man being once laid down to sleep in the
Pavilion of Death, Until the Heavens be no more, he shall not awake, nor be
raised out of his sleep.

How obvious in the words are these Collections.

I. That Death's a sleep. II. That it is a long sleep; Till the Heavens be no
more. III. That the Heavens shall, once, be no more; for Death is but a sleep,
and sleep imports awaking. IV. That when the time is come, wherein the Heavens
shall be no more, then Man shall be again; he shall be raised out of his sleep.
I. Then, Death is a sleep.
For Death, Job apprehends by lying down. But Death is fourfold.

1. There Is a Death to Sin, and that is the Death of Grace. When Men being dead
to Sin, live no longer therein Romans 6.2.
. But mortify the deeds of the flesh Romans 8.13.
. Hence the Philosopher tells us, it is one way of dying, by our contempt of
pleasure, restraint of passion Morietiam dicitur, cum anima, adhuc in corpore
constituta, corporeas illecebras (Philosophia docente) contemnit; and
cupiditatum dulces insidias, reliquasque omnes exuit passiones. Macrob. lib. 1.
in Somn. Scip. cap. 13.
. 2. There Is a Death to Grace; and that is the death of sin, or rather in sin.
Hence some are said to be dead in trespasses and sins; some to have a name that
they live, and yet they are dead; for to be carnally minded, is Death Romans 8.6.
. 3. There Is a Death to the Actions of the Body. It Is the dissolution of the
Compositum, and that is the Death of Nature. So first, God said to Adam, In the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye Gen 2.17.
, (i.e.) be liable to Death. And secondly, because he eat himself into
Mortality, it is said of all his Successors, Psalm. 89.48.
What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death? The second sort of Death,
and this, are joined together, Mat. 8.22. Let the dead bury their dead; i. e.
says St Austin De Civit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 6.
, Let the dead in sin, bury the dead in nature. 4. There Is a Death to
Unhappiness, and that is the Death in Hell, a Death of Soul and Body, being
their separation from felicity; and this is called the second Death, Rev.
20.14.
The first Death, is the separation of the Soul from sin: But this is far from
sleep, it is a continual watching.

The second, is the separation of the Soul from Grace. This is a sleep we must
avoid; from this we must not only wake, before the Heavens cease to be the
Heavens that they are; but also, before we return to the earth that we were, or
else we must be dead in this sin for ever; for the Damned protract their
sinning, with their suffering.

The fourth, is the separation of both Soul and Body from glory, rest, and
hope; so far is this from being rest or sleep: therefore

The third, the Death of Nature, or rather Death according to Nature, viz. the
separation of the Body and Soul, must be this sleep. But yet, because the Body
(not the Soul) in that disjunction, desists to live and act; the sleep we speak
of, appertains to that: nor (in propriety of speech) can that, or lying down,
be attributed to any other thing.

This is that sleep, which he must be asleep, who does not frequently perceive
expressed in Sacred Writ: She is not dead, but sleeps Matthew. 9.24.
.
We shall not prevent them which are asleep 1 These. 4.15.
.
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life Dan. 12.2.
, etc.
Our friend Lazarus sleeps Joh. 11.11.
.
When Stephen had said this, he fell asleep Acts 7.6.
.


Thus generally departed Kings (in Scripture) are said to have slept with their
fathers.

And thus the Poet, Sleeps are the little Mysteries of Death (p) (...) Menand.
.

Now it resembles, or rather is a sleep; in that it corresponds with the
definition and properties of sleep.

1. Sleep binds the Senses up Arist. de Vigil. and Some.
; so the Philosopher, It is the Ligament of Sense, and such is Death. Where Is
then the eye which dotes on specious objects, and is it self esteemed one;
which never is well satisfied with seeing, nor ever satisfies with being seen?
Upon the sleeping and the dead, the Sun (or whatsoever glories of the Skies)
lays out his light in vain; Midnight and Noon are equal shades to them.
Where Is then the Ear, through which Trumpets convey life to the hands, and
Tabrets to the feet; whilst holy David at the sound of the one fights for the
Ark, and at the noise of the other dances before it? To Sleep and Death, these
are no more than Silence. Midnight and the Grave are two Exceptions against
Noise. Awake you may ye Lute and Harp; but to what purpose, when it is not, I my
self awake right early? Where Is then the Scent? And where is the difference
betwixt the Dormant, and the Dead? The one perceives no sweetness in a Bed of
Roses, nor yet the other in his Apartment strow'd with Flowers. Corruption
shall make this last (as the Sister concluded of Lazarus) yield an ill savor;
but neither last, nor first, discern a good one, nor yet disdain a bad one.
Where Is then the sense of Tasting? Then sweet and sour fall into indistinction:
Then naught is palatable nor disgustful: No rarity contended for in meats, nor
property in sawces; no relish vaunted of in fruits, nor gusto in the wines: No,
no, there is no other Epicure in sleep, than Fleas; nor in the Grave, than
Worms. Where Is then the sense of Feeling? To those that soundly sleep, and to
the dead, Good English Broad-cloth may contend with Satin: And (were not Men
alive as reasonless, as Men asleep and dead are senseless) an Act for Funerals
in home-made Woollen, might be embraced with less reluctance. What feels the
living sleeper? what the dead? The one perceiving not the Thief which robs his
Purse, nor the other the Sexton which strips his Carcass.

Then what is Sleep, but Death Quid est som^m, gelidae n^s;i mortis imago?
abbreviated? Or Death, but Sleep protracted?

2. As to Anxiety and Care, their Natures much accord. In Sleep they dye, in
Death they fall asleep. Farewell, in both, to doubts and jealousies, to fear
and grief. When wearied with distraction, how welcome does Man entertain
repose, in Bed or in the Grave? Man goes forth unto his labor until the
Evening, and then, the sleep of a laboring Man is sweet (s) Eccles. 5.12.
; so much for Sleep. In the world ye shall have tribulation John 16.33.
, yet proceed to work out your salvation Phil. 2.12.
: That when the night of Death approaches, and none can work, you may be happy
with those that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors Rev. 14.13.
. So much for Death; in both conditions, Trouble finds a Grave.

What though the world be lost in horrid fears, like to benighted Men? And in
that night, what although Groans (like Screams of Owls) grow loud; and Joys
(like dying Swans) have sung their last? Yet what is all this, to those that are
at rest? It Is to the waking, to the living it is, that the Winds roar, and that
the Billows foam; that the Masts crack, and that the Cordage bursts; that
Clouds hide Heaven, and the Waves the Clouds: But it disturbs not Jonas, for he
sleeps: Nor yet his Ancestors, for they are dead. This is that water of Lethe,
which the Heathens conceived powerful to convey oblivion to the memory. Thou
Vanquisher of Ills; Thou Calmness to the Mind! etc. says Seneca to Sleep Tuque
O Domitor somne malorum, requies animi, etc. Sen. Her^. Fur.
. And such a Sleep is Death. For, O Death! acceptable is thy sentence to the
Needy; to him whose strength fails, and is vexed with all things; to him that
despaireth, and has lost his patience, says the son of Syrach, Chap. 41. ver.
2.

3. As to the desisting of motion and action, how well may they be Twins? In
each of them there is a defect of these. The Body being tied in bonds of sleep,
it lies as buried; in the interim, the Soul (whose power is independent on the
Body) perpetuates her action: so when the term of mortal life is come, down
lies the Body all torpid and unactive; but the Soul, the invisible part, does
still retain possession of life in the behalf of the whole Man. And in both
cases too, the Body shall again assume its former vigor, to show it was not
lost, but intermitted; but of that more, in a more proper place.

4. Sleeping and dying are of one necessity, and equally to nature
indispensable. Many men wake with coveting to sleep; and their too eager hopes
of some repose, keeps them in long frustration. Just so, some live, spite of
themselves, subsisting in opposition to their sierce desires of Expiration;
such was perplexed Job, Jeremy, and Elias. And others sleep, whilst they
contend to wake, such were the Apostles Mark 14.37.
: Just so, some Men embrace their Deaths, whilst they conceive they oppose it;
and meet it, where they think they travel from it. Yet all (some time or other)
must partake of either; unless Death prevent sleep at the first, and Doomsday
prevent Death at the last. In vain's the study to evade them; it is of a nature
like the industry expended to procure the Philosophers stone; they labor to
convert what'ere they have into Gold, and convert that little Gold they have
into Nothing. So we, sollicitous to improve that little health we have into a
treasure of inexhaustible life, reduce that little life we have into death.
Like him, who should contrive to watch long, and drops asleep with the
contrivance. Not that I would men should neglect their lives, or be indifferent
in their conservation; but that they should be careful of them, with an
assurance once to forego them, and still be ready with alacrity to resign them:
For who is he that lives, and shall not see death?

5. Sleep equals all men, of what age soever, what strength, or what degree;
and so does Death. None in their dark Dominions, can discern a Throne from a
Pedestall. The Corpse of sleeping Bartimaeus, has equal bliss with sleeping
Herod; and much more than Herod, when awake: So is dead Diogenes, as happy as
dead Alexander; and much more than Alexander, when alive. Various ways, and
different postures there may be of both in lying down; but being laid, their
State is undistinguished Mista Senum ac Juvenum deflentur Corpora. Horat. Nulla
distinctio inter Cadavera mortuorum, nisi for^e gravius saetent Divitum
Corpora, luxuria distenta. Amb. Hexamer.
, and promiscuous.

Some die distracted, harassed with wandering and benighted thoughts; and these
sleep like Ezekiel's Jews, in the Woods Ezekiel. 34.25.
.

Some men expire in the pursuit of Fame, oppressed with Titles, and voluminous
Inscriptions; and these sleep like Isaiah's Idolaters, in Monuments Isa 65.4.
.

Some have short winter-lives; a little daylight in them, but much tempest;
these men expiring in the midst of cares, seem to have troubled themselves to
death; and these, like Jonah, sleep in a storm Jon. 1.5.
.

Some are prescribed to death, pursuing the directions of Physicians, (Deaths
great Acquaintances) and tied to their Receipts; these sleep, like St Peter,
among Soldiers, and in Chains Acts 12.6.
.

Some are misguided by a flying fire (by seeming honor) into the Graves great
precipice, and dye of a disease called Valor; these sleep, like Sampson, in
Gaza Judge. 16.3.
, which (being interpreted) is strength.

Fullness of bread sometimes may send another to the Grave; and he sleeps, like
Boaz, at a heap of Corn Ruth 3 7.
. Whilst Indigence perhaps destroys his Neighbors; and they, like Ruth, sleep
at his feet Ver. 14.
.

Others dye of Promotion, and (like smoke) are taught to vanish by their
exaltation; and these sleep, like Saul, on the top of the House 1 Samuel 9.26.
.

Others dye wearied out with Expectation; and they sleep, like Vriah, at the
Gate of the Kings house 2 Samuel 1.9.
.

Now, though the method of Expiring varies, the state of the Expired is all
equality. The low and weak can be but empty then: And even the Proud, when they
have slept their sleep, and those (whose hands were mighty) have found nothing.

Now therefore, since that which we in rigorous Expression term Death, in mild
construction is but Sleep;

(1.) Thrice happy they, whom it defers not long! Quick sleeps discover regular
Constitutions. It Is much advantage to be early happy; and to prevent the
restlessness and tumbli^gs of weary Age, with undelay'd repose; For thus God
gives his beloved sleep, says the Prophet Psalm. 127.2.
. And those, whom the Gods affect, dye young, says the Poet (...). Menand
.

(2.) That really in Death we may have rest, as in sound sleep; we must
contend, whilst yet we are awake, to perfect all our task in God our Masters
most important service, and work out our salvation whilst we may. Sleep, we
know, seals up at once our industry and eyes, no working then; we in the
morning therefore should contrive to make night no surprise: That when it once
grows heavy on our eyelids, we may not leave our duties unattempted, or our
attempts unaccomplished: like interrupted and abortive structures, which show
what Architects presumed, not what they did.

And so much more should we be sedulous to have our task determined, ere we
sleep, by how much less we shall be capable to fill up its perfection, when we
wake. For here indeed Death varies from the method of ordinary sleep; in that,
what ere to day ( i. e. in our lives) lies uneffected, must be perpetuated so.
As the Tree falls, so it must lie Eccles. 11.3.
. There is no borrowing of to morrows Sun, to pay the arrears of this. No, no,
we shall not open once our eyes to wake, till the Heavens close all their eyes,
and fall asleep; nor shall our morning ere begin to be, till the place, where
morning dwells, shall be no more. When once our drowsy temples, are bound up
with Deaths swarthy Night-cloaths, Farewell to Spring, which is our growth in
grace; Farewell to Summer, and fruits meet for repentance; Farewell to
Sunshine, being the light of grace; And Farewell showers, the droppings of the
Sanctuary: For man lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more, etc.

II. It Is then a long Sleep.
Till the Heavens be no more. A time of tedious distance for ought we know. But
yet, how near soever (if we reflect on those who went before us) how much
soever Death resembled Sleep in quality, it is much beyond it in the quantity.

The grand distinction of these sleeps, consists in their duration. A Sand
participates the essential properties of Earth. But ah! when their dimensions
come in competition, that nature of the Earth, which the Sand possesses, is but
enough to privilege it from being nothing: So Sleep, though constituted of the
calm and gentle qualities of Death, when we peruse them in their just extent,
appears (in the comparison) to have but so much ease, as does but just exempt
it from being labor. Here we soon sleep, and strait as quickly wake. Our lives
are but successive, and short fits of darkness and of light. And if the night
protract itself beyond our slumbers, how restless grow we, tortured with
repose, and making our ease our anguish? But Bodies, once asleep beneath the
Coverlets of Turfs, find not themselves so hasty to be stirring.

We shall remove no Curtains with our hands; nor, with our eyes, seek daylight
in a Window; nor, with our vain enquiries, look for glimmerings in the East.
No, no, we shall not hunt for day, till we shall miss the Heavens, from which
it used to start. We now lay not our selves to sleep, until our selves (or
servants, those Deputy selves) have put out the Candle; but being laid down in
Death, we shall not wake, till he that never sleeps, puts out the Sun: For the
Sun shall be turned into darkness Joel 2.31.
, and be no more our light Isa. 60.19.
. The Sun and Darkness shall at once forsake us; nor shall the one (I mean
Death) withdraw its drowsy shades, till the other wraps his Sunbeams up in
Sables; and (instead of bidding Good Morrow, like a Bridegroom Psalm. 19.5.
) shall bid Goodnight like a Mourner.

But, as soundly as we shall sleep in Body, so surely was Lactantius in a
Dream, who (with the other Chiliasts) would humble Christ's celestial
Sovereignty, into an earthly Throne, to be erected at Jerusalem, and be
established for 1000 years; for which space also he presumed, the Martyrs
should be empowred with sublunary dominion, and enjoy pleasures, equally
terrestrial with their jurisdiction. Now the foundation of this fantastic
building, they lay upon a ground, which will not bear it; they instance in Rev.
20. and from these expressions ( The Devil is bound for a thousand years, ver.
2. And the Souls of the Witnesses (or Martyrs) lived and reigned with Christ
for a thousand years, ver. 4.) They conclude, That Satan shall literally and
temporally be bound, and the Martyrs temporally rule.

And lest we should conceive, they understood this their Supremacy to be only
in Spirit, they not only insist upon ver. 4. where it is said, The Souls of the
Witnesses lived and reigned: But introduce the fifth verse, where it is said,
The rest of the dead lived not again, till the thousand years were finished i.
e. Those that are dead in Body and in Gra^e shall have no Resurrection at all,
till all things are accomplished, and then they shall arise to a second Death;
But these that had part in the first Resurrection, (i. e.) from Sin, the second
Death (which is of Soul and Body) shall have n^ power ^n.
: From hence concluding, That the Martyrs Souls should all this while be
reunited to their Bodies, which only can be supposed to live again For the Soul
lives not again, but continues to live.
.

And lest Error should be too narrow to expatiate in, their Fancies rove yet
further, and recur to 2 Pet. 3.8. where one day, is said, to be with God as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Inferring hence, That the
Worlds Glass shall be 7000 years in running out, in proportion to the seven
days which make up every Week; and since the seventh day had a Prescription of
Repose and Piety, the six preceding being lights to guide men into toil and
sweat; they fancy the last thousand years must supply the room of a continued
Sabbath to the Saints, after the first 6000 years being spent in industry and
expectation. But this opinion does directly thwart that Text Matthew. 24.36.
, But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels, etc. And the
other opinion contradicts that other Text John 18.36.
, My Kingdom is not of this world. But both oppose our present Text, which
says, Man ( i. e. all Mankind, except those which rose with Christ to attend
him their first fruits, and to whom they limit not their fancied Empire) awakes
not till the Heavens be no more.

Yet even St Austin Nam etiam nos haec epinati fuimus aliquando. Aug. de Civ.
Dei. lib. 20. chapter 7.
once indulged this misconception, although with an opinion more refined, and
which allotted not such carnal pleasures to this dominion of the Saints, as
other Patrons of this Error did. But on review, and better thoughts, he tells
us, That by a thousand years (being a perfect number) is meant the latter Age,
begun by the Messiah in the fullness of time; in which the Devil is bound, i. e.
he does not, with his old more boundless power, detain the world in Error, and
enjoy his former usurpation of Souls Aut certe mill annos pro omnibus an^s
hujus seculi posuit, ut perf^cto numero notaretur ipsa temporis plenitudo. Aug.
ibid.
. But for the Saints, although their Bodies should remain the slaves of
Sepulchers, (those only excepted which arose with Christ) yet should their
spirits reign with Christ in Heaven Quamvis ergo cum su^ dum, jam tamen little
animae regnant cum illo. Idem ibidem.
.

And this exactly squares with that, My Kingdom is not of this world; not but
that Bodies too shall partake his triumphs, but that will be, not till the
Heavens be no more.

III. Why then, the Heavens shall be no more.
For should they still continue as they are, and should man never revive,
whilst they continue so; how could his Death be termed a Sleep, to which no
waking ever should succeed?

The Heavens now are like an open Book, full of strange Characters, which men
consult (how wisely, let their effects determine) to be informed, when great
men's Lives shall be no more; when Kingdoms, and when States shall be no more;
when public Blessings, and when public Curses shall be no more. But there
will be a season (and e're long 'twill be) when they themselves shall be no
more; They shall perish, fayes the Psalmist: But of the critical moment, not a
word in all the Book of Spheres. What Tales soever they tell of other Beings,
they will still keep their own counsel; and whensoe're they break (like to
great Traders here on earth) their breach shall be the worlds surprise: Of that
day knows none. Their Prophecy in that, is silent as their Harmony; yet such
a day there will be: But the question is, First, What Heavens shall be no more?

Secondly, How shall they be no more?



First, What Heavens shall be no more? Besides the Empyreal, or Supreme,
Philosophers compute the number of the Orbs (counting the Fire and Air) to be
eleven. But the great Bishop of Hippo (reflecting on the rapture of St Paul
into the third Heaven, where he had the glimpse of great, unutterable glories)
concludes the Empyreal (the Heaven of Gods more immediate splendour, and the
receptacle of the blessed, to see him, as 'twere, face to face) to be the third
Heaven; computing none besides, excepting the Sydereum and Aereum, the Starry
and the Aerie.

But be they more, or be they less, the Heaven of heavens is generally exempted
from dissolution: which some conclude from Thy Throne is established for ever.
So that, of all the rest, although we cannot certainly determine what is their
number, yet we may conclude a little of their nature; though we are insecure
how many they be, yet we may well be resolute what they shall be, or rather
what they shall not be, They shall be no more: But

Secondly, How no more? They shall perish Hebr. r. 11.
Now what should be this perishing, but their change? For as man's death is
called a change Job 14.14.
, I will wait till my change come: So the Heavens change is called a death, or
perishing; for, that the word (perish) imports no more in the forecited place
to the Hebrews, is evident from the ensuing Verse, As a vesture shall thou fold
them up, and they shall be changed.

Nay, this very place, the Heavens shall be no more, is (in the vulgar Latin)
atteratur Coelum, till the Heavens be worn away, not annihilated. Worn like an
old Garment, Psalm. 102. Man is the little world, and as his Clothes cover him,
so the Heavens cover the great world, Tegit omnia Coelum. Hence, Ovid.
when we Travel, Lucretius tells us, We change the clothing of Heaven
Coelimutamus amictum.
. Conformable to this is even the Septuagint, in this of Job, which renders it,
Till the Heavens be (...). No more be sowed together.
unsow'd. How has God clothed the Macrocosme, as we the Microcosme, with the
best Clothes on the outside? We all, at great Solemnities, contrive to habit
our selves after the newest fashion: Lo, then shall Christ appear in Solemn
Triumph; Lo, then shall be the Marriage of the Lamb; and then the world shall
change its fashion too: The fashion of this world passes away 1 Cor. 7.31.
. When Sunday comes, it is generally entertained with Citizens best Clothes; Lo,
then the Sabbath of the Saints shall come; then the Lords day; the day of the
Sun of Righteousness; and then the Universe shall be aray'd in cleaner and more
splendid Vestments.

Now Job's, shall be no more; is St Peter's, shall pass away, whilst the
Elements melt for fervent heat 2 Pet. 3.10.
. Now, whatsoever melts, melts not to nothing, but into substance of a purer
nature; so likewise, to pass away, is not to cease to be, but to be varied in
its place or properties. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, says our Savior;
and there shall be new Heavens, and a new Earth, says St Peter 2 Pet. 3.13.
. Both these are united, Rev. 21.5. Behold, I make all things new. Now, to make
all things new, is not to make all things nothing; no more than mending is
destroying. To be no more, than, is to pass into new; and it is not needless to
observe that (...) to change, is rendered Psalm. 90.9. by passing away, or
passing over: from whence the world is styled (...) a change, or passing over.

But you may ask, What change is this?

It Is not a change of substance, but of accidents; Heavens shall not absolutely
cease to be, but to be as they are; so also the Elements. All compound Beings
(except man's Body, which must subsist with the Soul) shall lay aside their
Essence. Birds, and Beasts, and Fish, so likewise Trees and Plants, which owe
their Beings to their Compositions, shall bid farewell to Nature; when every
Element shall challenge from them, what each contributed to their composure.
Earth shall retreat to Earth, Water to Water; and whatsoever Fire or Air
bestowed, for ever shall recede into its native properties.

But for more simple and unblended Natures, their change shall be but a
refining. Some Greg. Bed. Gloss.
have conceived indeed, That Fire and Water should both be totally consumed,
whilst Earth and Air should be no more than mended. But this the rest reject.
Aquinas Aquin. in 2 Pet. 3.
thinking, that Fire and Water should but lose their heat and cold. But that
were neither to be Fire nor Water. But that Lorinus heartily expounds him, That
by their losing heat and cold, he means, that heat and cold should be
restrained from acting.

As is the change with the Elements, so with the Heavens; the variation's not
of things, but qualities. Aristotle pronounced Heaven incorruptible; and so it
is indeed as to its fitness for duration, (which the Schools call its
internals) but not as to its power, abstracted from divine disposure Ab
intrirseco Coelos esse incorruptibtl^s, communis Scholasticorum est opinio. i.
e. secundum sabstantiam and aptitudinem, non dispositionem divinam and actum.
Lo^. in Psalm. 102.19.
; for whatsoever at first results from nothing, by the same virtue, may relapse
into nothing; or, as the cause of its first being pleases, be varied from its
present being. Therefore THOU shall change them Psalm. 102.26.
. By which change, says Lorinus De sola nonnulla renovatione, per vacationem a
mo^u and actu and ministerio in res sublunares, hominemque vitam ducentem
mortalem. Ibid.
, is meant some kind of renewing, by a vacation from Motion and Action, and
influence on Sublunaries, and on Man leading a mortal life. And thus being
altered, they will better suit with the condition of renewed Mankind. In which,
St Austin tells us, That at the general Conflagration, those qualities of the
corruptible Elements (which agreed well enough with our corruptible Bodies)
shall utterly perish by Combustion; And the same substance shall (by miraculous
change) acquire qualities convenient for immortal Bodies; to the end, that the
world, being renewed for the better, may the better suit with men renewed for
the better in their flesh Conflagratione mund^a Elementorum corruptibilium
qualitates, quae corporibus nostris corruptibi^ibus congruchant, ardend^
penitus interibunt; Atque ips^ substantia eas qualitates habebit, quae
corporibus immortalibus mirabili mutatione conventant. Ut scilicent mundus in
melius inroua^us, apt^ accommodetur hominibus etiam in carne melius innovatis.
Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 20. cap. 16.
.

From these things then we may raise these Conclusions.

1. That the Heavens shall no more measure time; For, 2. Time shall be no more,
Rev. 10.6. And hence indeed, in proper speech, the Heavens shall be no more.
Shall, is the Future Tense; but in Eternity there is no Futurity. Now when there
is no time, but all Eternity, who can, without great impropriety, say the
Heavens shall be; when, Shall, imports a time to come? 3. If no time, then no
motion; for time is the measure of motion Tempus est mensura motus; omnis motus
est in tempore.
: and therefore 4. No more action; for without motion, there is no action in
Naturals. 5. Therefore no more influence on Sublunaries; for without action, no
influence: therefore 6. No more generation nor corruption; for these are not
without influence. Thus then, the Heavens shall be no more: And now
IV. Man shall awake, and be raised out of his sleep.
Methinks I see his Body now begin to be again. Methinks I see the Sea (like
Jonah's Whale) surrendering what it had long time concealed. Methinks I see Men
bolting from the Earth, like Rabbets from their Warrens. Some from the Waves,
some from the Graves I see, just wakened by the Trump; and shaking off, many
their dew, and many more their dust: For they must awake, they must be raised
out of their sleep.

But it may be of use to mind the expression; it is they shall be raised, not by
their virtue, but some others power. But what is his Name, if thou can tell?
It Is my Redeemer; I know that my Redeemer lives, and he shall raise me up at
the last day Job 19.25.
.

My Redeemer] There Is God's power. Shall raise me up] There Is Job's assurance.
At the last day.] There Is the time prescribed.
My Redeemer lives] 1. To confute the Jews, who disown his Resurrection. 2. To
prove that he also shall raise us up. Christ the first fruits; afterward, they
that are Christ's, 1 Cor. 15. For, He shall raise me up] To refute those who
repute our expectation of reduction from the Grave, as a Dream. At the last
day] To confute Hymeneus Philetus, and Hermogenes, who concluded the
Resurrection already accomplished, because it is recorded that the Bodies of the
Saints arose, Matthew. 27. So holy Job (even in the Text) supposes and implies,
what there he expresses, viz. That when the Heavens shall be no more, Man shall
be raised.
1. Then he shall awake, arise: 2. How shall he be raised? But
1. Man's Body shall arise.
These very Numerical Bodies; these that we sinned in, or repented in. Methinks
I hear the Trumpet sound a Call; wherefore Awake, Awake! Whoever, Where're,
However you are. Whoever have been devoured by Wolves, those Wolves being
strait devoured by Lions, those Lions dying and strait devoured by Kites!
Whoever to Fishes have been made a Prey, which even themselves have soon become
a Prey to other Fishes! Whoever you are, that in your Bodies have performed the
Stages (which fond Pythagoras prescribed to Souls) in journeys through each
various kind of Beasts! Whoever you are, have been reduced to dust, and
dissipated through the spacious world, till every dust has been removed a Mile
from dust of kin to it! Awake, Awake; indeed you must awake. It Is a resistless
power that raises you. It Is God shall raise the dead, Acts 26.8.

But some may ask, What if a Man devour those of his own species? What if
Claudius devour Sempronius, and (after time for due digesting him) Claudius
himself become another Meal? How shall Sempronius ( and others in the like
capacity) be raised up in his own Numerical Body, unless whatsoever was eaten
by Claudius, (and may be conceived to have become a part of his Body) be
restored? Which if it be, How then shall Claudius rise with his Numerical Body?

This is the Query which Objectors think, Sadduce. But it is indeed a trivial
doubt, and of no force to any but the willing. For it is not he shall arise, (as
I observed before) but he shall be raised; which includes an unrestrained power
to be the Agent: and it is the same Almighty Power which does support the
living. That God shall raise Man, who now seeds Man. He needs no aid of meat to
keep a Creature living. How obvious may we then conceive it (though Claudius do
devour Sempronius) for God to strengthen Claudius, and support him, without
permitting any of Sempronius to be concocted into his constitution; especially
since he composed not Man, to be Man's food?

But now what think you, if even to Reason (for at that Weapon they must be
encountered, who contradict this Doctrine) I say, what if to Reason it is a
thing impossible, but of the self-same Body there must be infallibly a
Resurrection? Not to trace all the Causes back up to the first, to prove a God
accomplished in whatever good reason ere thought good. I shall suppose the
Existence of a Deity already granted, I know none deny it.

There being then a God, he must be just; but just he cannot be, without a
Resurrection: For (to man's eye) the worst often live and dye with least
misfortune. Now, if no vengeance seize them after death, where is then the
Justice, and where is then the God? Will any say, that (after dissolution) the
Soul may suffer, and still God be just, although the Body sleeps? But if the
Body shared in sinning, and be exempted from the suffering, a Malefactor
escapes: then where is the Justice? and next where is the God? Or will you say
(as some are very forward) that Death it self is the Bodies punishment?

But I say (1.) the Soul and Body sinned together for each others greater
satisfaction; in justice therefore we may think, that they should suffer
together for each others greater affliction. But they by death (so far does it
resist their suffering together) are far removed asunder; if death then be the
Bodies sole infliction, still where is the Justice?

(2.) Can the Body be punished with what it never feels? But often great Sinners
sink into the Grave, under a stupefaction of the senses, and dye extempore. And
if the flesh do only suffer death, which brings no corporal pain for mighty
corporal transgressions, still where is the Justice?

(3.) The Body sinning against an infinite Person, committed infinite sin; for
(as we see in Treason) the Object gives proportion to the Crime. Infinite sin
must have no finite suffering: But Death is a finite suffering; for that is
accomplished when the Soul is gone. If therefore Death be all the vengeance to
the Body, where is still the Justice? Will any say the Bodies being dead, and
separated from the Soul for ever, is its eternal punishment? But can there be
punishment, and nothing suffer? As soon as dead, the humane Body is not; it was
the humane Body when it sinned, by death it leaves to be the humane Body: And
how can that, which is not, suffer? Or will you say (with Pomponatius) that sin
is its own punishment? O strange Philosophy! And more strange Justice! In all
Philosophy, the offense is still cause to the punishment; if sin then be the
punishment to itself, it is its own cause, and it is its own effect: But others
in Philosophy will tell us, That Nihil est causa sui ipsius Quisquam ne
morta^ium idem vocat facinus and poenam? Quintil.
; And in all Justice punishments designed to mend the Sufferer, or to
disencourage others from the like offense. But what sin ere (which had no other
punishment) detered another from attempting it? And as for the Offender, I
presume none will conclude that sin can much amend him. Many would wish their
strength might never decline, that they might never be impotent for sin. If sin
be then its proper punishment? It Is a most strange one, which the Offender ever
would request to undergo, and prize beyond rewards Nullapoena est nisi invito
(and alibi) Supplicium quisquam vocat, ad quod prosilitur, quod exposcitur.
Quintil.
. If sin were the sole judgment on the Malefactor, O what a means had the
Almighty found, to bring his Justice in contempt! And then where were his
Wisdom too? And then where the God?

Therefore whoever thou art, that art possessed with Dreams like these, Awake
thou that sleep, lest ere thou dream'st of it, it may be said, Awake, and
come to judgment: But

2. How shall Men arise? And with what Bodies shall they come?
I answer with St Paul, 1 Cor. 15. they shall rise (1) Incorruptibly; it is
raised in incorruption, ver. 42. (2) Gloriously; it is raised in glory, ver.
43. (3) In agility; it is raised in power, ver. 43. tanta facilitas, quanta
faelicitas, says St Austin. (4) Very near to the nature of Angels; much more
resin'd than formerly; not only from carnal lusts, but also from the grossness
of our substances. The natural Elements shall be resin'd, so shall our Bodies;
it shall be raised a spiritual Body, ver. 44. Not but that we shall have flesh
and bones, and integral parts, answerable to the pattern of our Savior after
his Resurrection, Luke 24.39. Handle me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have. But yet improved they shall be much.

Aquinas in Ephesians. 4 ver. 13. Corpus Christi fuit perd^ction ad plenam aetem
virilem (scilicet 33 annorum) in qua mertuus est; husus^todi autem aetatis
plenitudini corform^itur aetas sanctorum resurg^tium. So a so the Author of
these Sermons or Homilies fathered on St Ambrose, vol. 3. page 44. Ibi enim nec
infa^s nec senex, nec parvus erit, qui non impleat dies suos; utpote silius
resurrectionis and in mensuram venict plenitudinis Christi, ut nec desint
ali^ui annorum spacia, nec supersint.
yet goes further, and assures us, That we shall rise in the complete age of
our Savior, viz. 33 years old. For whereas we read, Till we all come in the
unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect Man, to
the measure of the STATVRE of the fullness of Christ, he (as also our old
Translations) reads the measure of the AGE of the fullness of Christ. But this
we safely may leave undetermined, being assured that Man shall awake destitute
of nothing essential to his perfection, but not so secure of what God may
esteem so essential.

But this is the Resurrection of those who have part in the first Resurrection.
Others shall want the glory; but yet shall be endu'd with bodies, free from
corruption; to protract their torture to eternity; with bodies agile, to
entitle them to the greater restlessness; for the more active the Sufferer, the
more tormenting the Chains and Anguish. Nor shall he want the prejudice of a
refined body, that all his senses may be more acute, for entertaining each its
proper torment to the most high improvement.

So now we see Men shall be raised up; and we see how. Unhappy then are they,
that put far from them here the evil day; to be shut up in worst of nights
hereafter. Woe to him, that eats and drinks, because to morrow he shall dye;
since, after that to morrow, he must rise, and be wakened out of his sleep. But
happy he, thrice happy, who being to forego his life, hid it with Christ in
God; at the last day they shall know where to find it. In the mean time foolish
are those that lament him, since they again shall see him, if yet they are not
still more foolish, by their neglecting to lie down like him. How is our
industry concerned, to care that our uprise be to felicity? by death to sin,
and rising again to newness of life, to furnish our selves for a Resurrection
free from a second death.

And will you know how it is to be achieved? By doing so, as did the Subject of
this days Solemnity. If you expect her Character, consult each man his loss in
her departure. None need commend an absent Friend to those, who by that absence
find much detriment. Go ask the Poor, Go ask the Sick, whose Consolation and
Relief are now in a great measure gone to Heaven with her. How have the glories
of the ancient Heroes lived in Records of blackest Ink? So it is with her, for
in our sable fortunes, in our dark wants, her worth is largely written. We need
no tedious toil to prove her happy, as to her Soul, and ready for the
Resurrection, as to her Body; our greatest Task will be (not to learn how she
is, but) to be like her, fit for our going, and our Saeviours coming.

But you will ask how? Let the Apostle tell you; St Peter, designing to display
Christ's dreadful coming in his third Chapter of his second Epistle, endeavors
to prepare men for it in his first Chapter, advising diligence in procuring

1. Faith, which believes God true in all his promises, which teaches Man to
lay aside his Reason, that so he may be more than Man, and apprehend things
much beyond the reach of natural capacity. Faith is the evidence of things not
seen. Faith, which lays all our sins down at Christ's Cross. Faith, which
applies Christ's merits to our selves. In short, Faith, which depends on the
Fathers mercy, through the Sons sufferings and intercession, by the Spirits
support and consolation, to evade deserved destruction, and attain most
undeserved bliss: therefore to wake to happiness, take Faith, and add to your
Faith

2. Virtue. Not Virtue in the general, because Temperance follows as a
particular; but Virtue, i. e. Fortitude or Valor. For so is Virtus rendered,
when importing a single Virtue. Some Grammarians will informs us that it
signifies Manhood, from Vir in the Latin; and Courage, from (...), the God of
War, in the Greek, from whence comes (...). Join to thy Faith Fortitude.
Fortitude, that nothing may enfeeble thy Resolves; That no bad Times prevail
upon thy Principles, though thousands on thy left hand tumble down, and break
the neck of Conscience, to preserve the lives of their Estates or Liberties;
though at some other time (even in thy greatest danger) thou shall discern the
fall of a loved Friend, submitting to the frequent menaces and haughty looks of
an outlandish Foe; yet still keep Fortitude, that thou may stand in the evil
day; and when thou have done all, may stand. But yet to this Virtue, must be
added.

3. Knowledge, whereby you may discern 'twixt good and bad, and not be lead by
an implicit Creed; but have a Faith according to knowledge, and be able to
give a reason of the Faith that is in you. In vain is Courage, where there is
no Sight; what signifies stout Hands, and never an Eye? Not that we should with
too much eagerness pursue Speculations; nor read much, that we may know how to
talk much, but study to know Christ, and him crucified; For it is life eternal
to know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; therefore to wake to
Happiness, take Knowledge, and to that add

4. Temperance. By Fortitude, Man overcomes another; by Temperance, himself.
Not only in affair of Eating, of Drinking, and of things of Pleasure, but even
of Passion too; still entertaining from malevolent spirits whatever actions of
hostility, yet keeping still a temper that shall never vary with provocation.
To Temperance add

5. Patience, which does empow'r a man to embrace Affliction. Patience, which
overcomes by being beaten, which lives on Death, and dies for want of danger;
for where no peril is, no patience can be. What although Children (which are at
once men's images and hopes) lie down in Dust, and Graves (short as their Lives)
of a span long? What though they fall greater, and of nearer expectation of
Manhood? What although Wives, though Husbands, (excellent Husbands) languish,
groan, and dye? What although cruel and prolonged Distempers poison our
Constitutions? And what though much more cruel Tongues poison our Reputations?
Yet still we must submit to Gods disposure, and gratefully receive whatever he
permits to be inflicted; knowing that our Savior entered not into joy, but
first he suffered pain; that we, following the example of his patience, may
(when the Heavens shall be no more) awake up after his likeness. But add to
Patience

6. Godliness, which does enroll men Citizens of Heaven, whilst they are
Sojourners on earth. This does unteach remissness in Devotion, and suffers not
man's Temporal Calamity to hinder or disable Spiritual Piety. This renders men
zealous for Prayer, and ardent in it, forward themselves, and instigating
others. Above all things make supplication, says the Apostle; First seek the
Kingdom of Heaven, says his Master; That when ye shall be raised, ye may awake
to a new Heaven. Take

7. Brotherly Kindness, which teaches men not to exalt themselves, but clips
the wings of Arrogance. It treats the lowest and the poorest affably,
instructing even the powerful to bow, and condescend to the necessities of the
most abject. All Mankind is our Brother earth, and each man should be kind to
his Brother earth; that when he shall be wakened from his Mother earth, he may
for ever live with God the Father of Heaven. But above all, take

8. Charity, which loves God above all things for his own sake, and her
Neighbor as herself for Gods sake. Which does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, which bears
all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things 1 Cor.
13. vea. 5.7.
. Which relieves Friends, and remits Enemies, praying for those that
despitefully use her. This Virtue shall endure, when Faith and Hope are
superseded by Fruition; this shall attend us, when they shall be no more, when
the Heavens shall be no more, when we shall be awakened out of our sleep.
Therefore be diligent to get these Virtues, looking for Christ's coming, that
you may be found of him without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.14.

I have been long addressing to your Ears, now I apply my self to your
Memories. Out of St Peter, I have read you words, how you may fit you for the
Resurrection; but if you will learn by Deeds -- then There Is the Text, Read it,
and Read it well. O make the old Rule true, which tells us how much President
instructs beyond Precept. She dyed indeed, and there is our loss indeed; but
being dead, she speaks, there is our advantage; yea, and still lives, there is
her felicity. She sought for Health, Eternity she found. In a strange Country
she went to her long home, and traveled herself into everlasting rest. Like
Israel, She went through Amalek to Canaan. We all deplored that her infirmities
would not dispense with her abode with us; we coveted that She might reside
with us, but Providence denied it: O let us then be sedulous to live with her;
that, Providence invites to. But of that life we must obtain fruition, by this
life's imitation; to accompany her in Heaven, we must pursue her on earth. What
shall I say? Get Faith, get Virtue, get Wisdom, get Temperance, get Patience,
get Godliness, get Brotherly Kindness, and get Charity. And these be diligent
to get, and get them while it is called to day; when the night comes, farewell
to diligence, to opportunity farewell. For man lies down, and rises not; till
the Heavens be no more, they shall not wake, nor be raised out of their sleep.

Now to him that then shall wake us, the Watchman of Israel, that never
slumbers nor sleeps, be Honor and Glory evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

