Adams Condition IN PARADISE DISCOVERED: Wherein is proved, That Adam had right
to Eternal Life, in Innocence; and forfeited it, for Him, and His.

ALSO, A Treatise of the Lawful Ministry; and The manner of Sion's Redemption
opened: In Answer to a Book of George Hammond, a Tailor, of Biddenden in Kent;
who calls himself Pastor of Christ's Church there: (And affirms, that Adam's
Sin did bring but Temporal Death on him, and all in his Loins; and that all his
Enjoyments, in Paradise, were Earthly; That none yet are in Heaven or Hell;
That the Jews shall return to their own Land, and enjoy it; That Christ shall
reign in Earth a thousand years, etc.) The truth is asserted, and proved; and
the Errors refuted,

By Hezekiah Holland, Anglo-Hibernus Minister of Sutton-Valence in Kent.

Geo. Hammond's Book, is, in part, an Answer to a Letter sent him from Mr.
Rutton, about a former Dispute between them, about Original Sin, etc.

Who is this, who darkens counsel by words, without knowledge?

Job 38.2. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, but understanding neither what
they say, or whereof they affirm,

1 Timothy 1.7. -- Contentionis quam veritatis cupidiores,

Cic. Orar. l. 89. London, Printed for George Calvert, at the Half Moon in the
New Buildings in Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

To his benevolous Friend, Mr. Maximilian Tailor of Sutton.
SIR,
YOu remember how George Hammonds Books were spread in my Parish: was it not
time for me to look to my people? I took his Book, and (by way of preaching)
answered and confuted its errors: when, I remember, you took notes, covetous
to enform your own spirit of the truth; What you once heard preached, you have
here printed by your timely encouragement. And indeed, though I owe more then
my self to many friends in and about Sutton (as to your noble Cosen Mr. Edward
Tailor, of Hollingborn; to my ingenious Friend, M. Edw. Knatchbull of Sutton;
to my bountiful Friend, Mr. Tho: Tyndall; to my Cordial Friend, Mr. James Lamb
of Sutton) yet this Book owes its self to you (next to my self) of all men
under Heaven. For it lay by me as a dead thing, forgotten, till you revived my
muse, and your encouragements gave life to my Book. When Satibarzanes (who
revolted from Alexander the great) challenged any of his Soldiers to fight,
(as George Hammon almost does the Clergy); Erignis an old, but spirited man,
accepted the Challenge, with that expression: What Soldiers Alexander once
had, I Will show you; and at the first Onset, slew him. It Is a folly to think to
conquer an Anabaptist, persuadebis and non persuaseris, such will take no
answer. If I can strengthen my own people, I am well enough: for, my thinks,
^h^ar Motis (in Erasmus) saying, that to go about to confute Hammon is but
(...) to measure the sand, etc. when I consider the many; errors in his Book,
I am thinking how he might have excused all with that jest in Lipsius, si vera
dico agnoscite (those are rare); si falsa ignoscite, (that is most of four
Book.) He much speaks against learning, and Oxford and Cambridge-knowledg: it is
wished he had more of their knowledge, that his book might have had fewer
errors; but in that, he is but (...). I find errors of moment in his book
not tolerable in a Commonwealth. R. Answ. in the Book.
As that Adams sin brought on him, and all in his loins but temporal death,
etc. Hence no Children eternally lost, or need Baptism: (yet the Apostle
says,) One man's offense brought condemnation on all, Romans 5. were we not by
nature Sons of wrath? twice dead? by nature, and otherwise? Jude 12. Nay, born
altogether in sins? (...), John 9. notwithstanding, the Pharisees obrayding the
blind man. How the whole man was infected, is some difficulty: but as the blind
man said, John 9.25. this one thing I know, I was blind, and now I see, and we
did once see (in Adam) and now are naturally, miserable, poor, blind and waked,
Rev. 3. I confess, all in Adam sinned only against the first Covenant; but
that the breach of that Covenant merited no more then temporal death, I deny,
because of Romans 5.18. That the souls of Adams Progeny were in Adam, according
to subsistence, I have proved, not according to essence. When the souls were
created in disposed bodies, is controverted, Tract. 4. de Anim. rat. Quest. 1.
Page 327.
yet Eustachius concludes in maribus circa diem a conceptu quadragesimum, in
foeminis circa octogesimum; only excepts our Saviors body, whose conception
was extraordinary. Another error is, holding that actual sins only, Sum of
Relig: Page 92.
make men Vessels of dishonor, p. 22. Dr. Usher denies sin to be the cause of
Reprobation (and that truly) only the means to bring it about. Gods decree to
be glorified in mercy and justice, is the first cause of all. Were not some
foreordained to condemnation? Jude 4. read Exodus 9.16. Prove. 16.4. Wicked
made for the day of destruction. God raised up Pharaoh for temporal ruin; but
why not for eternal? it seems he hated him, nay hardened first his heart,
Exodus 7.3. so persons are reprobated by the means of sin, and thousands for
only Adams; being by nature Children of wrath, and dying out of Christ. Again
he denies Hell in being at present, See Answ. in the Book.
or any in glory as yet, contrary to 2 Pet. 2.8. Indeed such an Opinion was
once, as appears by Revel. 14.13. but Reformation cried it down, verse. 6. The
great Humanist Dr. Fotherbey in his learned book against Atheists (given me by
a good Friend) proves that Atheists are much tormented with fear at their dying
hour. Mr. Tho: Barber of Char^.
l. 2. c. 13. because of hell. And are not all souls of Saints alive unto God,
Luke 20.38? where are souls departed? asleep for so many thousand of years?
did not Moses and Elias talk with Jesus? Matthew. 17. I thought Peter knew not
what he said: it seems it was Moses and Elias, who talked in their sleep to
Jesus. Why did God command a reward at Even to be paid to laboring men? Mat.
24.14. since those who labor unto the death for him, have no reward till day
of judgment? I will not much longer trouble you (Mr. Tailor) but refer you to
the book: Ep. Ded. to Sr. Tho: Moore.
jamque tuum non meum (in the words of Erasmus): only when George Hammond, or
any of that judgment say, De vol. Dei.
that God would save more then he does, believe them not, though Matthew. 23.37.
speak that Language at first sight. Lombard or Moulin will enform you, that
Christ did gather all ordained to life out of Jerusalem (ipsis sacerdotibus
nolentibus) though the Scribes and Pharisees were unwilling to have it so. Who
can hinder Gods work? Isay 53.13. But to end, I fear my studying to be brief,
makes me too obscure. I pass by George Hammonds jeeres, as telling Mr. Rutton,
that Hell was under his Coat: I could tell him, that except he repent of his
errors, I would not be in his Coat one day, for -- And it is well (though he
call himself Pastor) if Cyprians words may not be made good of him and such,
Lib. 1. Ep. 7.
Non fidei duces sed persidiae magistri, Nam pastores sunt impostores -- but
farewell Sir, -- You know I am making haste for Ireland, and it is well if my
friends salute me not with the Poets words, Hom.
(...); having been absent from them above a dozen years. Pray God make this
poor pains of mine beneficial to his people. Sir, I am your loving Friend and
Servant.

Sutton-valence Febr. 3. 1655. Hez. Holland.

(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...). To George Hammond, of Biddenden in Kent.
SIR,
ONe of your judgment, having presented me with your book; which being
dedicated to the Clergy, I thought with my self, that if I should have passed
it by in silence, you might have said I was such an one as your self, according
to Psalm: 50 21. or unable to answer you: for I confess you have gotten into
great repute with those who know not how to contradict you. You have the
substance of all your Book answered, and your material quotations of Scripture,
I confess your Treatise of Original sin, has more witty (if not wicked)
arguments in it, than any piece written by any Heretic, since the Resurrection
of our Savior to this hour: and I know I have the Epitome of all Errors or
Heresies from Christ's time, to this, lying by me. Therefore I shall be larger
in answering that part of your book, but briefer (yet full enough) in
considering Sions Redemption, being not so material. You have quoted many texts
of Scripture, contrary to the purport or meaning thereof, as shall appear: I
wonder a man for liberty of Conscience, should force the Text of Holy Writ to
take your part volens nolens against the intent of the Spirit thereof: But I
begin to consider your Examination of Mr. Rutton's Letter about Baptism and
Original Sin,

George Hammonds Examination of Mr. Ruttons Letter, examined.
Where you say, Page 9. Sprinkling of Infants is Baptism.
that sprinkling a little water in the face of a Child, is not Baptism, but a
cozening shift brought in, by Pope Innocent the 3d. (what acquaintance you have
got with Popery of late!) and that Baptizo does not signify sprinkling (bue
Rantizo does) but only to plunge, or over-whelm in water. Magisterially
spoken! Here I must consider, first, that sprinkling is naught. 2. Infant
baptism, a cozening shift. 3. Pope Innocent the first Author of it. To the
first, baptizo is taken for dipping or sprinkling often: as Mat. 3.11. (...).
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. And pray, are not sanctified men
rather sprinkled then plunged with the spirit? Are we not imperfect here below?
knowing in part, and sanctified in part? Again, in Matthew. 20.22. Christ says,
he has a Baptism to be baptized with, meaning that of his Est ergo baptisma
triplex; fluminis, flaminis, et sanguinis.
Passion; (as Paraeus on the place.) Now Christ was rather sprinkled, than
plunged, in regard of outward man. Suppose the Thorns were on his head (indeed
we read not of their pulling off) and Nails and Spear wounding also, yet he
was not wounded in each part of his body: Jo. 20.25.
Therefore, this Baptism rather was sprinkling then plunging. And remember how
the Parallel lies between John's Baptism with water, and Christ's with spirit,
Act. 1.5. So if Christ's giving the spirit (compared to pouring, in respect of
the few drops in the Law) be rather sprinkling (for Christ only was plunged
with it (receiving it without measure) so was his Water-baptisme, or else the
Parallel is nothing, which the Evangelist from Christ urges: But what think you
of that known place, in 1 Cor. 10.2: All our Fathers (...), To dip or sprinkle,
(...) To plunge, vide Pasor on the word, (...) or (...), these much differ.
baptized in Cloud and Sea: 'Twas Water-baptisme, yet they went on dry ground:
some water might sprinkle on them from the Sea, as they walked through, and a
Cloud does fall by drops (as Experience testifies) more like to sprinkling,
than plunging; especially considering how little rain falls in those parts,
where Israel then was, if we will believe Travelers; or Reason, because of the
Suns excessive heat drying up the Clouds.

But what think you of the sprinkling of blood in the Law, so often mentioned?
Heb. 9.19. (...). He sprinkled the people. Was not it a type of Christ's blood
called the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. And why shall (...) sprinkling on
Infants (signifying Christ's blood shed for them) be counted Baptism, since the
word will carry it, unless you believe it is the muchness of water, and not the
sprinkled blood of Christ (signified by Baptism) does the work? Peter was once
for a kind of plunging, Joh. 13. till better catechized by our Savior, ver. 9,
10. I am sure the Promise was of sprinkling, * Ezekiel, 36.25. Sanguine Jesu
Christi, says Trem, on the place.
and a Gospel-promise. Annotations of Assembly refer us to Ephesians. 5.26: for a
farther illustration of the place: Christ gave himself for the Church, that he
might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing of water, (...). Sowhat
sprinkling is in Ezekiel, is washing in St. Paul's Exposition; and why not
sometimes used indifferently, since the word Baptizo, and Texts of Scripture
will hold it out. The old Common Prayer Book allowed of Dipping or Sprinkling,
if our Climate could at all times suffer it. Our great Fonts in England show
our former Custom; both have been used, Dipping and Sprinkling: but no way
will please you, if Children be baptized, which we shall consider anon: only I
wonder how the Jailer and his could be plunged (baptized they were, Act. 16.)
'twas night, ver. 33. and in likelihood, in the Prison, into which he sprang
with a light, ver. 29. For though it is said he called them forth, ver. 30.
(that is, out of the inner prison into which they were thrust, ver. 24.) yet
they are but brought into his house afterward, ver. 34. So that the Jaylors
household came out of the house to the Apostles, not the Apostles into the
Jaylors house to preach: but be it in Jail or House; where was water enough to
plunge him, and his in so dry a Country? Did he venture, trow, to carry them
to some River; his fear, if not his care, hindered. But had they a large tub of
water there, and were they plunged: How came they, being very wet, to sit at
meat presently with the Apostles rejoicing? Nos pro baptismo ^^antismum potius
habeamus hoe est aspersionem. Zep. de Sacram. (...) Lix. vide Mr. Hall
quarctect, page 114.
But I forbear, persuading my self, they were contented with some sprinkling:
of which, says one, instead of Baptism, we have rather (the word bearing both
significations) used Rantisme, considering the cold climes wherein we live. Yet
I say, not that Baptism and Rantisme are quite the same; but that Baptizo
signifies Sprinkling sometimes, as well as Dipping: read Leigh Cr. Sacra in
verbum, and Dr. Featley, Dipper dipped. Circumcision to Israel was as Baptism to
us: now that was not but in one part, read Genesis 17. and the Hebrew word for
baptising (tabhat) signifies Washing in part, or Dipping: Read Josh. 3.15. and
the feet of the Priests that bare the Ark were dipped in the brim of the water:
The word Baptizo does signify as much, therefore used for Sprinkling, moderate
Washing, or Dipping; not Plunging. What the Apostle calls Washing, Heb.
9.10.13. (in Greek, Baptismous) he expounds himself by Sprinkling, ver. 19.21.
in Greek, Rantismous: so that Baptizo signifies Sprinkling; for their
Baptismes, or Ceremonious Washings, were Sprinklings. We read of 3000. baptized
at once, and no mention of any Rivers, Act. 2.41. Therefore, in all likelihood,
Sprinklings were there used. But, to draw to a conclusion, we deny not, but
Baptism may include Dipping; but since it includes Sprinkling also, we use
that out of care and tenderness to Infancy: For as the Sabbath was made for
man, so Baptism for our good, and not detriment; and therefore Sprinklings, in
cold Climates, to be used rather; since the word will bear it.

Infant Baptism proved.
But I come to the second point, and prove, that Baptism belongs to Children:
First, because there was but one Covenant since the Fall, (which in substance
was Christ) though in respect of its several Administrations called Covenants,
as being several ways administered; under the Law, by Circumcision; under the
Gospel, by Baptism. Now if God allowed Isreal's Children the prerogative of
Circumcision under the Law, (as was accounted, Romans 9.4) shall we, under the
Gospel, be barred from an answerable privilege in Baptism? You Will say, 'twas
no privilege, read Romans 9. and consider, the foolishness of God is wiser then
men, and the weakness of God stronger then men: in 1 Cor. 1.25. To be a marked
sheep, or Lamb of the flock of Israel, is a mercy. 2. Believers Children are
federally holy, 1 Cor. 7. therefore to be received by Baptism into the Church
of Christ. 3. Children were baptized in the Cloud and Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2.
compared with Exodus 12.37. These, the Apostle calls Fathers, to the succeeding
Israelites. 4. As God owned those Children presented to him in Circumcision,
Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. and called them, his Children: So, we believe, he will own
ours; especially, considering 5. The promise to those under the Gospel, and
their Children, Act. 2.39. to them believing, and their Children, by virtue of
the Parents Faith, (as to Abraham believing, and his Seed: for we have but one
Covenant, Christ, by whom all are to expect Salvation) and to all afar off,
when they believe; and to their Children, by virtue of their Faith; and to as
many as God shall call to Faith, and to their Children, by virtue of that
Faith. Hence the Apostle says, The Promise is made to you (in Greek (...))
quoting that Promise made to Adam Abraham, and Israel of Christ Jesus: and
shall not we and ours partake of it, as well, as Israel, and their Children?
Read Romans 11.17. We partake of the fat of the Olive tree; as, those branches of
Jews did before their cutting off; but they and their Children did; therefore
we, and ours also. And here, by the way, observe, we plead a Church-priviledge
for Children, to be, at least in outward Covenant: we say not all of them shall
be saved; we use the means, and leave the issue to God: There are some branches
seemingly in Christ, who bring not forth fruit, Joh. 15.1, 2. yet have the
benefit of an external privilege, as in Israel, Mr. Marshall against Mr.
Tombs, p 138,
In Mar. 6.10. To such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, must not be interpreted
of all Children, (as such) but of Children, whose Parents were in the Covenant,
as these were, and brought by Parents, or near friends, to Christ; suffer such
to come to me: You believe these were Children of Jews, yet in Covenant. Now
though Christ baptized them not, nor any other, Joh. 4.2. yet he laid his hands
on them (A preparative to Baptism in the primitive times, if you will believe
Antiquity Read Doctor Hammond of baptizing Infants, p. 194.
) and blessed them. (If Christ gave Children the greater benefit, Blessing, why
do ye deny them the lesser, which is Baptism?) Now I suppose you believe it
was a spiritual blessing, being Christ's gift, for Esau had a temporal and
earthly (an heir of the world, as well as Jacob) yet he counted himself
deceived of the blessing, Read my Glim. of Christ's love, p. 93.
Genesis 27.36, 37, 39. Christ also affirmed, that to such (Children of Parents in
Covenant) belongs the Kingdom of Heaven: Then deny not Baptism to the heirs of
heaven.

But 7. What if Matthew. 28.19. make for Infant Baptism? though (I wis) you take
that Text for your Masterpiece. Go, discipulize all Nations; for so is the
Original. Pray, may not Children be made Disciples by Baptism? read Joh. 4.1,
2, 3. where Christ is said to make more Disciples than John, baptizing them,
intimating the way to make Disciples, is, to baptize them, and after to teach
them, ver. 20. Read it carefully, (...). So that though some small knowledge,
and confession, or desire after Christ was required in grown people (none in
Children) before Baptism: yet most teaching, and consequently knowledge, was
afterward. And hence that passage of St. Peter, 1 Epist. 3.21. is most
admirably opened by a learned man, Dr. Hamond of Infant Baptism, p. 196.
not to be rendered, the Answer of a good Conscience (speaking of Baptism) but
the question, of a good Conscience toward God; for so the Original, (...)
signifies. For men were discipulized with small quantity of knowledge, and
children with none, but taught afterward, and so asked after the things of
God, and a good Conscience after its Baptism. Now that Children are accounted
Disciples, read Act. 15.5.10. where, when Circumcision was urged (which was
most peculiar to Children) Peter answered [in that most famous Council] why put
ye a yoke on the Disciples, meaning on Believers, and their Children, under the
Gospel: so Children were Disciples, and may be discipulized. You Will say, Why
were not Children mentioned in the Commission? Answ. because needless: for what
was often mentioned in Old Testament, is more sparingly in the New: Now what more
frequent in Old Testament, than to be a God to men, and their Seed, Genesis 17.
[if well perpended] and (ye and your Children stand before God to make a
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 11.12.) where is a special command now for Sabbath, except 1
Cor. 16.1. and that so variously read by Authors, that it seems not clear for
that purpose? And Dr. Heylin History of the Sabbath, part 2. c. 1. p. 26, 27.
brings in many Expositions of those words; (upon the first day of the week.
(...)) occasioned by the Greek words, which may be rendered, either upon one day
of the week, or on the first day, or on the Sabbath day (for that day was
observed, as well as the Lords day, many years after the Resurrection;) as Dr.
Heylin observes out of Gal. 4.10. (an Epistle written in the year 59. after
Christ). And so far were the Primitive Christians from believing there was a
Command to keep holy the first day of the week, that after Divine Exercises
used in memorial of theirs Saviors Resurrection, and other blessings which
befell them that Day, they went to their common work the remainder of the Day:
And the learned Hierom tells us, that a devout and pious woman, one Paula, who
lived at Bethlehem, with certain poor Widows and Virgins privately, after they
had been at the Holy Exercises of the Congregation one Lords Day, returned home
to their common work, Instabant operi: et vel sibi vel aliis vestimenta
faciebant. See Helyn Hist. Sab. part 2. c. 3. p. 79.
which was making clothes. This I the rather write, to show, that what was
commanded often in Old Testament, is sparingly in the New. Now the Sabbath being
moral (only the Seventh Day changed into the first day of the week) what
needed new Commands?

And so for bringing Infants into Covenant in the New Testament, We have just
grounds, having so many Commands in the old: if you say, that in 1 Cor. 16.1.
there is a Command for observing the Lords day, because it is said, As I have
ordained in the Churches of Galatia. I answer, that relates rather to the
collections there mentioned, then to the enforcing a Command for setting a part
the Lords day: And, in a digression, we have firmer Ordinance for Tithes
(forgive that Jewish expression) in 1 Cor. 9. Even so has God ordained ((...))
that those that preach the Gospel, Tithes in Gospel time proved.
etc. the Apostle quotes a former Statute or Ordinance for
Ministry-maintenance, and that seems out of Moses Law, for v. 9. the Levitical
Text is alleged, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, etc. Now never
did God appoint any Free will-offerings of a atter date.
way to maintain those who did his service; but the way of Tithes, which was
never type of any thing, nor never repealed; and indeed if Moses Priesthood had
a set maintenance, why should our Saviors come short? And the Apostle pleads a
set maintenance, Who goes to war at his own charges, 1 Cor. 9. have not
Soldiers set-pay? I could here be large with reason, but it is a digression.
Here is a plainer Ordinance for Tithes, then for the Lords day, yet not looked
on. What special Command have you for Women's partaking of the Pascall Lamb, or
Lords Supper now? except you court that Text of 1 Cor. 11.28. to take your
part: Let a man examine himself, etc. and under man comprehend both sexes: the
words are masculine ((...)): but you will say, The man is a courteous Creature to
the woman, and will be content to comprehend her under him. Thus though in
express terms in the new Testament, we are not commanded to baptize Children,
nor keep Lords day, nor pay Tithes, nor admit Women to the Lords Supper, no nor
to speak against Usury, or to hold Christian Magistracy: yet by good
consequences in the new, and Commands in the old Testament, or Rules that look
very like Commands. My last Argument for Infant Baptism, is in Ephesians. 2.3.
since by nature they are Children of wrath; and therefore need Christ's blood
(represented in Baptism) to wash away their sins: The baptizers say, the Text
calls them Sons of wrath only, who walked in sinful and evil courses; but I
answer, That Exposition, gives the Text the lie; for the Apostle there plainly
shows, first, the Ephesians actual transgressions, v. 2. and part of the
third; and then their original state in respect of Adam, they were by nature
Children of wrath (of which more anon). Were not Children, when born, natural
Children? well then by nature Sons of wrath, which made them break forth into
so many actual sins, Person may be loved, and their State hated.
of which in v. 2.3. here observe, because the Ephesians were elect, that their
persons were ever beloved, but their state was the state or condition of wrath,
in respect of original sin; but thus much for Baptism of Infants, I could
produce more Arguments, and answer Objections, but it is not my task: there is
abundant satisfaction to be had in Dr. Featley, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Hall, Mr.
Fuller, B. D. Dav. Chytraus de infantum Bapt. Mr. Pagit. Rossaeus, and others,
so that Mr. Fishers voluminous Book (where he calls Baby-Baptisme Babyisme)
shall never prevail with me, to deny Childrens Baptism. The third thing you
affirmed, was that Pope Innocent brought in Baptism of Infants; but this is a
most gross error, for Innocent the third lived but about the year of our Lord
1198. and brought in Transubstantiation, Description of Italy, pa. 184.
and Auricular confession (as Dr. Heylin tells us) but Infant Baptism was in
use above 1000. years before; but you are not the first who have fathered this
Infant Baptism upon Innocent the third, as you may read in Pagit his
Heresiography, page 16. Mr. Marshall against Mr. Tombs, Pa. 92.93, 94. etc.
has taken pains to prove the Antiquity of Infant Baptism, to have been in the
year, 150. after Christ, in the days of J. Martyr, Infant Baptism very
ancient.
and produces his Testimony for it, which was long before any Pope of Rome was
in being, and Origene who lived not very many years after, affirms
Paedobaptisme to be a tradition received from the Apostles, [in whose time the
word Tradition was used in a good sense, read 2 These. 2.15.]. Irenaeus a Grand
Father, who lived in the same Century, with I. Page 23.24, 25. etc.
Martyr confirms Infant Baptism to have been in use in his time. You may read
Mr. Marshall, who will also give you account why Constantine, Greg.
Nazianzen, nor Chrysostom, etc. were baptized when Infants, to wit, because
their Parents were not believers at their births. And having mentioned some of
the Fathers, Scientia non habet inimicum nisi Ignorantem.
I wonder why you so speak against them for darkening the light of the Gospel.
Some of them lived near the Apostles times, saw them who heard the Apostles,
and received light from their light; he that is wise will drink as near to the
Fountains head as he can, because of the pureness and clearness of the water.
Dulcius ex ipso sonte etc. Fideliuns fili sanctitatis candidati, and sancti ex
seminis praerogativa.
And indeed I believe the cause why you complain against them, is not for want
of ignorance of their worth and abilities --. I could produce the testimony of
Tertullian for Infant Baptism, who lived in the same Century with Irenaeus,
who calls Children holy, in respect of their Prerogative in Generation, to
wit, because of believing Parents, and federally holy; Tert. (...). de Anima.
but I refer the judicious Reader, to Dr. Hammonds Treatise of baptizing
Infants, page 213. And I will wait upon what you say concerning Adam's sin.

What punishment Adams sin brought on his Posterity.
THat Adam's sin brought more on him and his, than temporal death, Habuit
vitam aeternam partim promissione and spe. Paraeus in cap. 2. Genesis p. 348.
with sorrows, sicknesses etc. I prove 1. because Adam forfeited eternal life,
which I thus prove: what the second Adam restored, the first lost; but the
second Adam, restored eternal life, 2 Timothy 1.10. who brought life and
immortality to light, intimating it to have had some kind of being before, to
wit, in Adam at least, in an inclusive promise (in feeding on the Tree of life,
etc.) The Tree of life was the representer of eternal life, and of Christ
Jesus, the means to bring it about upon the Fall, Rev. 2.7. Hence Paraeus, In
Genesis 1.3.
Arbor vitae est Christus, paradisus terrenus symbolum erat caelestis gratiae,
and ejectio e paradiso signum aeternae abjectionis a Deo, nisifuerit
reconciliatus, ibid. Paradise typed out glory the Tree of Life Christ, the
ejecting man, Contemplation on Paradise.
signified man's rejection without reconciliation. Hence Dr. Hall, O infinite
mercy! Man saw his Savior before him, ere he had need of one; he saw him in
whom he should recover eternal life, Ephesians. 2.12. Page 130.131. In Genesis Cap.
2. Page 345.
ere he lost it. Now that Adam was not promised eternal life in Paradise, has
been the opinion of many: Mr. Love thought so, Mr. Wotton in his Sermons on
John 1. v. 11. whose Arguments prevailed with me, to be once of that judgment.
Paraeus brings in 7. Arguments to prove, Et sane multis ne contemnendis
rationibus nititur haec sententia. Idem, Ibid.
that Adam had not promise of eternal life in Paradise, but refutes them;
proving, because we lost eternal life in him, therefore he had promise of it;
and the Image of God in him, was the earnest of it, the Tree of life a symbolum
of it; and Christ's restoring life proves it lost in the first Adam. Here
observe how differing. Heretics have been about this matter. Pelagius held
(and Socinus after him) that Adams sin brought only eternal Death, Trelcat.
de Orig. peccato Page 169.
and that temporal Death was by nature not the wages of sin, because not
removed by Christ. Pighius denies any to be guilty of eternal death, till they
have actually sinned, the very Opinion of George Hammond: mark how he agrees in
part with a Papist. Mark how Heretics dissent among themselves; but consent
(as Pilate and Herod) against truth. That place in the Romans, Chap. 5.12.14.
proves, Death reigned over all who had not sinned actually as Adam, because we
all sinned in Adam: of which at large anon. Now Christ was to remove only
eternal Death from Elect, and not temporal, only its bitterness. And though
it may be objected, that Adam had principles of mortality within him, before
the Fall, yet he had never died, had he not sinned, which made Paraeus say, he
was in some sense mortal, in some immortal; L. 2. distinc: 19. p. 368.
and Lombard gives the distinction how, mortal in respect of body, --
immortal in respect of his Creator (whose will it was, had he not sinned, to
have preserved him from Death, by feeding on the Tree of Life) but after the
Fall, Contemplation on Paradise.
spiritual meat was not fit for a mortal stomach, says Dr. Hall. But let us
consider the first Argument: What Christ restored, that Adam lost, but Christ
restored eternal life. Hence Adam was called the figure or Type of Christ,
Romans 5.14. therefore some similitude between Adam's loss, and Christ's
restoration, that as Adam lost eternal life (once) so Christ restored it.
This I prove further, because Judgment came by one (viz. Adam) to
condemnation, Romans 5.16. Here is damnation on all by Adam, not only temporal
Death. Now, that condemnation, there, is damnation, (...).
read the same Greek word in Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those that
are, etc. that is, no damnation: read John 5.24. This may be proved further,
because we were all in Adam, Romans 5.12. and sinned all in him. Now the grounds
are just, had Adam stood, we all had stood and lived for ever, therefore since
he fell, we fell all in him; he being our representative or Parliament (as I
may say) a common person, the root of mankind. But you say, Our souls could not
sin in Adam, Page 15.
because they were not in him, being not in being. To which I answer, We were
in him enough to be guilty with him of his Sin. I Will show you the most acute
judgments of learned men, on that place of Romans 5.12. to give satisfaction to
any indifferent man; but give me leave a little to play the Scholar with you:
were not all souls and bodies in Adam? then did not Adam beget a perfect or
complete Creature, Genesis 5.3.
as the Beasts do in their kind. How did he beget a Son in his own likeness,
meaning in sin? was Adam only a body-can a body beget without a soul? Du
Moulin ag. Armin. p. 66. c. 10.
was a sinful body his likeness? can a body be well sinful without the soul?
Adam's soul did first sin; there was the wills consent, before the hand took
the fruit. Sin comes not chiefly by the body, Magister hic non approhatur.
nor a body cannot sin not beget alone. If Adam were only a body, how got he a
Child in his own likeness? Indeed Peter Lomb. l. 2. did. 31. affirms, sin to
be only from the body; but Peter Du Moulin, only or chiefly from the soul; I
believe from both in some sort. For the body, who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? Creando infunditur, etc.
For the soul, it is created (though holy) yet destitute of its former Original
righteousness, which deficiency to it, is sin: nay, That we call original.
Amesius med. Theol. c. 17. Page 70
The learned Amess tells, us, that the want of Original righteousness may be
considered as a punishment, or sin; As from God a soul: is created in the body
without it; it is a just judgment from God; but as that original righteousness
should be in our nature, and is not; ipsa deficientia est animae peccatum, Read
his book page 15.
That deficiency is sin. Thus in jesting with my Antagonist, I have almost
answered the Question, unless he oppose that souls are from God, not Adam,
Zach. 12.1. Eccless. 12.7. the soul returns to him that gave it. It may be
answered, God gave it, in giving Adam at first a power to get it: If that of
Heb. 12.9. where Fathers of flesh, are opposed to Father of spirits; and so
Fathers of flesh there, are not Fathers of spirits; It may be answered, that by
Father of spirits, Read Paraeus in Genesis c. 2. v. 7. p. 338. and Du Monlin. ag.
Ar. p. 67.
may be understood Father of Regeneration, because sanctifying our spirits. And
we know Augustine was almost of this judgment to his dying day, who was
mallens Hereticorum. Who does desire more satisfaction faction, let him read
the most elegant and learned reasoning of Mr. Nathaniel Culverwel, Page 106.
in the eleventh Chapter of the light of nature, who would almost persuade,
that as materia oritur ex materia so forma ex forma, one soul may produce
another, one does print another with the same stamp of immortality, that it
self had engraven first upon it: one person of the sacred Trinity produced
another; one Candle lights another, etc. but I forbear, Heb. 1.
because my Pareus calls it, bruta and pecuina opinio, and so Du Moulin.
Otherwise, if any had questioned, how an immateriall being had or could have
conveyance in a seminall way, let them show us the way how it is united to the
body, (...) Homer as Virg. has it hominum sator atque deorum.
and we will as easily tell them, how it entered into it; but lets not look for
soul's Parentage on earth, We are of the offspring of God, Acts 17.28.
Prometheus stole fire from Heaven, to quicken bodies, as the Poets fabulize.

Yet we were all in Adam, and sinned in him, Romans 5.12. How did Levi pay Tithes
in Abraham? Heb. 7. did his body and not soul? just so, friend Hammond, you pay
Tithes now, without any consent of the soul: when God said to Adam, the day
(thou) eatest thou shall die; spoke God to Adam's body, without the soul? Omnes
erant in Adamo, and peccarunt non actualiter sedvertualiter incurrendo
originale peccatum quod iis imputatur is culpam, in quantum aliquo modo erant
in primo parente and idem cum ipso, as Dion. Carthas in loc. Romans cap. 5. on as
Lyra 92. futura erant membra ipsiu^ in Romans 5.
(I am so charitable to your self, friend Hammond, to pay for all you will eat,
be the meat never so costly, when your soul has left your body) or was soul and
body both in Adam, and forbid eating? surely what God spoke to Adam, he spoke
to all mankind in him, as he spoke to him: well, he sinned in soul and body,
and we in his loins: therefore his sin is imputed to our whole man; But mark
one heresy of yours, worse then that of Pelagius. You deny that Children were
lost, or endangered to be eternally lost in Adam: how came they saved, what
without Christ? no, sure Acts 4.12. will deny that; But did Christ save them?
then they were lost in Adam; for he came to save what was lost, Matthew. 18.11.
and that Chapter speaks of little Children, verse 2.3. whom the world offends,
verse 6, I believe in denying Church Priviledges to them. Let your Needle-ship
well consider this. Wollebius tells us, that Adam must be considered, not as a
private person: (so you esteem him, making our souls no way engaged in his) but
as the Parent, Persona Adae infecit naturam and natura personas nostras,
Wolleb. l. 1. c. 9.
head and root of all Mankind: So what he received for himself, and his (as the
Image of God, and promise of Eternal Life, upon his obedience) he lost for him,
and his,

But you will say, How were our souls in Adam? I answer with the learned
Trelcatins, the soul is not out of Adam, or we in him, De Orig. pec. page 154.
Trelcat.
according to its essence, but according to its subsistence sive (...): for
though it be created of God, yet it is not created but in the body, neither has
it subsistence before the body. You Will never be able to deny upon any good
grounds, but that we were all in Adam, according to what is here said. God
promited a soul to each one of Adams Posterity, just such, as he by obedience,
or disobedience should make them capable of: so by virtue of Covenant, or
Promise, we were all in Adam; which Promise, might some way be included in that
Command, Increase and multiply. Dion Carthusian. in Romans 5.12.
As many members are in one Body, or Individuals, in one Species, so we in
Adam: Bulling. in Heb. 7.
As Levi was in Abraham, so we in Adam; Levi was in the Loins of his Father,
Vti in arbore malum nondum enatum, says Bullinger; as an apple in the Tree
before Fruit-time. And so was our Savior, both in Adam and Abraham: In Adam,
the Nature sinned which he took, In Heb. 7. ver. 10. Joh. Diodati.
but it was not sinful in his person, because conceived by the Holy Ghost: In
Abraham, Christ in his servantlike condition may be said to have paid Tithes to
Melchizedeck, the type of himself; though the learned Diodate thinks, Christ
was not to be comprehended amongst the Tithe-payers (though in Abraham's Loins)
because as Son of God he was Priest, in whom his humane nature subsisted. The
same Author tells us, In Romans 5.12.
All were in Adam, as in the main stock of all Generation, being the head and
root of mankind. And the Assemb. Annot. use the same words on that place. In
Genesis 2. and page 409.
Paraeus says, we were all in Adams loins, as part of him, and so his sin
was properly ours. The Syriac translation of Tremellius reads it, By the hand
of one man sin entered -- as if; Totus homo totum hominem naturaliter fundit:
nec est peccatum materiae out partis hominis, sed totius suppositi: homo
generans communicate, quod materiale materialiter, quod immateriale causa liter.
lucas. Trel. page 153.
when Adam took of the fruit, we all stretched out our hands in his, and are
when he are. Coucludimus nec in substanstia animae out carmis hanc contagionem
habcre causam: sed quia a Deo fuit ordinatum etc. vide Calvin, nist. l. 2. c. 1.
A learned Protestant Divine tells us that the whole man begets the whole man
naturally: the material part he begets materially; the immateriall causally,
as being the cause of it is subsistence in the body. And Gorrhanus expounding
how we were in Adam, says, we were in Adam, as in the matter not only sinning
by Adams example (as the Pelagians affirm) but we were in him, as in the cause,
because his sin was the cause of ours. Gorrhanus in Romans 5. The Greck words
may be read two ways, either, By one man's offense sin entered into the world,
and Death by sin, because all sinned: so the Syriac translation: and
Bulliger, expounding it (...), for this cause: or else in whom all sinned, we
being all legally in Adam, and by way of Equity and Justice, to stand and fall
with him. And thus your Exposition of Psalm. 51. 5. (In sin I was conceived)
falls to the ground, without any fur there Answer. For if David were conceived
in sin, there must be soul as well as body: Now the soul wants its original
righteousness, to guide and direct it, out of a just Judgment from God; which
want to it, is sin besides the bodies stains. So that what other Expositions
you make on the Text, (which I shall not trouble the Reader with) are yours,
not David's, and sit beside the saddle. How David's, or any ones soul and body
meet and work in the contagion of sin, I willingly pass by, and come to your
objection out of Ezekiel. 18. The Son shall-not die for the Father: Which falls to
the ground by what has been said. I yield, An innocent Son shall not die for the
Fathers sin (as that Chapter means) but Adam's Sons were not such: in him we
all sinned, Romans 5.12. As really as Levi paid Tithes in Abraham's Loins, Heb.
7, But 2ly, that Chapter in Ezekiel. speaks only of actual sins, not such as we
have from Adam; therefore it proves nothing to purpose.

You draw an Argument against Childrens being defiled, (and that therefore they
need not Baptism, nor were corrupted in Adam in the inward man) No defiled
Creature can enter into Heaven; but children are fit for the Kingdom of Heaven,
therefore not defiled. Magisterially delivered Answ. The Kingdom of Heaven is
to be taken two ways, and Children to be looked upon under a twofold
condition. 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is to be taken for the Kingdom of Grace,
according to Mar. 9.1. and so in Mat. 11.12. Some were there standing, who
tasted not Death, till the Kingdom of God came with power; till Christ owned,
Churches gathered, Ordinances administered: Now Children of believing Parents,
belong to this Kingdom, and it to them, though such as you bar them from the
Ordinances of the Kingdom of Grace. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven is taken for
glory, and no children fit for it, being all naturally defiled, and children of
wrath.
Now consider Childrens natural condition and they are defiled, (...)
Praeparavit, says Beza, in Romans 9.23. (...) Idoneos licet non dignos fecit,
Col. 1.
and their state a condition of wrath, But again, consider them as Elected and
in the Eternal Covenant with God in Christ, and so all the persons of Election
were ever beloved, and fitred for Heaven, by Justification, and Sanctification.
That all vessels of mercy, are fitted or prepared for glory: Read Romans 9.23.
and Col. 1.12. Now I ask the question, Were children vessels of mercy, or no? I
am sure, you are say, yes: First, then, they were lost in Adam, and in misery
(for mercy presupposes misery.) And 2. then they must be fitted for glory,
therefore not naturally fit. Dr. Usher tells us largely, in his book called,
The Sum and Substance of Christian Religion, page 416. How Children, by
Sanctification, are fitted for glory; and though by reason of ignorance, and
tender youth, they are not capable of justification, as to understand it, yet
they have nefit of that Eternal and Immanent act of God in Christ Jesus, in
which he imputed their sins to Christ, and his righteousness to them, though
the transient act were not perceived by them: Read Dr. Kendal against Goodwins
Redemption redeemed, In his most learned Digression against Mr. Baxter. Page
17, 18.
who will tell you, That if God did not some way act in Justification from
Eternity, then God does something in time, not formerly decreed, which argues
some change in God. But I proceed, to examine your mind about Esau and Jacob:
You conceive no Text proves Esau's Reprobatior before born. I could produce the
judgment of above a hundred famous Writers affirming it, Read Prove. 16. ver. 4.
but I Will come to reason, and argue thus: If God did not hate Esau before he
was born, but after; then he loved him before he was born, but he loved him
not; because, (1.) that would argue a change in God to love and hate the same
person. 2. The 9. of Romans says, God had a purpose about them before they were
born, ver. 11. Was that purpose to love Esau, or hate him? If he love him, how
could he, without change, hate him? I perceive God after hated him: therefore,
in all likelihood, before he was born: for Gods Decrees are positive and
unchangable; he calls the things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. He
saw him condemned, before born; for Gods Decrees depend not upon man. 3. How
comes Malachy to quote that place of Genesis 25. and, Paul to quote both, if not
to one purpose? 'twas declared, (...) (As) notes the likeness and coherency of
the Texts.
the Elder should serve the Younger, before they were born; and St. Paul says,
As it was written, Jacob have I loved: To wit, before-born: And Esau have I
hared; to wit, before-born.
Or how comes else the Apostle to quote several Texts, if not one to explain
another? Sure, none put an old piece to a new garment, or parallel texts where
no agreement is. Pray, does not the effect prove the same? Why found he no
place in God, nor father, (to change his mind, after giving away the Blessing)
nor in himself for Repentance, if not reprobated? And was not his servitude
foretold before born, a token of hatted? and Jacobs privilege of Mastery over
his Brother, foretold, beforeborn, and evident sign of love? I could proceed
to enlarge my self on this subject, but I must study to be brief. You allege,
Ezekiel. 33.11. that God desires not the death of sinners. Answ. I confess,
Voluntas sigui non beneplacili.
God desires not the ruin of any sinner who can repent; Esau could not to any
purpose, Heb. 12. which was a sign of Rejection: For if Believing be a sign of
Election, (as it is Act. 13.48.) then Unbelief and Non-penitency is a sign of
Reprobation. God only can give Repentance, in a Tim. 2. But, secondly, were
these such wicked as Esau? Then I deny, that God ever intended them repentance
more then to Tire and Sidon, Matthew. 11. 21. but men utterly appointed to
destruction, as Benhadad in the Letter, 1 King. 20.42. and foreordained to
Condemnation, Jude 4. For God desires Justice to be done to the Wicked. 3. Were
not these Elected, but Wicked, while in their sins, whose ruin God would not
have? But 4. this expression shows Gods revealed Will, (if he spoke to
Reprobates) to make them some way unexcusable; not his concealed, or decretal
will: of which anon. But you press, 1 Timothy 2. God would have all to be saved.
Pray consider, how the Apostle commands to pray for Kings there, and gives that
Reason, because he would have all, i. e. all sorts of men to be saved; though
Kings then did persecute Gods people much: And to that place, in 2 Pet. 3.9. I
answer, the Apostle speaks of the Saints and Beloved, v. 1. and tells them, Why
God was so slack in coming to judge Wicked: Why so patient, etc. that Gods
long-suffering was to Usward (not the Wicked) ver. 9. Not willing that any; to
wit, of us, the Elect should perish etc. Pray, what have you got by these Texts
though you brag of your acquaintance in Script; ob-rading Mr. Rutton, for not
exercising therein, and for mistakes: Though I am confident, Page 19.
he is more apound Bible, them thousands of such as you. You proceed, and would
prove that Romans 9. [Has not the Potter power over the Clay? -- ] will prove
nothing to our purpose; but would make the Apostle quote it out of Jer. 18.6.
Which Texts are not a like, nor have any agreement: for that of Jeremy either
means, First, that the Potters work was Adam, and we in him: Secondly, Adam's
marring, and we in him: Or else it means, 1. Gods work, in making them a
people, Church, or State. 2ly, Their marring by disobedience, etc. But could
ought be marred in Gods hand, against his will? Was he deceived of his work, or
in it, as the Potter. Was Adam lost, or Israel ruined without God? and yet God
is most holy, just, and good the Evil from Man: the overruling from God. (Read
my Comment upon Rev. Page 135.
chap. 17. v. 17. how God put it into the hearts of the Kings: how the matter
of an action is from God: how the formality, or the obliquity is from man etc.)
What made the Potter go about to make a vessel of honor, was it any worth in
the clay? Was it desert in Israel caused God to make them a people? Or do you
believe Election, and an Eternal Bosom of Love in God the Father? Was it not
want of power made the Potter mar his Vessel? And does God lack power Read
Esaias 43.13. I will work, and who can hinder?
to save those who are lost? Could he have done no more to Israel, in Esaias 5?
Then he must cease to be omnipotent, and cease to be God. He did enough to
Israel, to make them inex cusable: He had power enough to save all the world,
had he not otherwise decreed. But examine carefully, and you will find more in
Romans 9. then in Jer. 18. The former, pleads Gods Prerogative-Royall over all
Creatures, making them such as he pleases, rejecting Pharaoh, Esau, the Jews,
Read Prove. 16.4. Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.22.
though murmuring at it, ver. 19, 20. with that Expostulation, Has not the
Potter power over the Clay? The latter, means Isreal's marring in Captivity,
being first marred with sinfulness, Examine Romans 9. and Jer. 18. and they will
show your mistake: For in Jer. the same Vessel is made; and being marred, is
re-made into another form: But in Romans 9. the Potter is said to have power, out
of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and (another) to dishonor, as
in Jacob and Esan: Pray, what agreement is here? Do not Reprobates murmr,
ver. 19. saying, Why have thou made us so? We were cast in Adam, and resisted
not thy Will, till actual transgression, before which we were cast: And why
does God yet find fault with us, since cast in Adam? To which the Apostle
answers out of Gods Prerogative, Sodom now suffering punishment in Hell sire.
Has not GOD (as well as a Potter) power over the clay of the same lump, (so we
were in Adam) to make one vessel to honor, etc.) Thus your Argument is marred
in your hand, against your Will, as the Vessel in Jeremies Potter. I have said
enough in answert to Tim. 2.20. already. We cannot make out selves Vessels of
mercy, if once our persons were made vessels of wrath. There is a great gulf
fixed, Luk, 16. They are by God before prepared for glory, Romans 9.23. who are
vessels of mercy; only man must co-work. Your Exposition of Sodoms suffering,
will suffer much upon Examination. You dany the Sodomites to be in Hell, and
that fire was called Eternal, because from Heaven, not kindled by man.

Answer, You almost deny, or give the Scripture the Lie: for Jud. 7. tells,
that Sodom and Gomorrha are (suffering) the vengeance of Eternal Fire, that is,
now in misety. Now the former fire is Sol in Pol Hist. ca. 48.
out, which destroyed their bodies (for a great Lake called the Asphaltite, in
the vacancy of Inhabitants, has taken possession of that Plain, where Sodom,
etc. stood) Read Mr. Fullers Pisgah-sight of Palestine. So, the fire in which
the Sodomites suffer now, Lib. 2. c. 13. p. 270.
is Hell. Jude (in all probability) took part of his Epistle, our of the second
Epistle of Pet. 2.6. (Read Mr. Fran. Roberts, on Jude.) Though you 06 would not
have one man borrow of another, Key of Bible.
(page 69.) where Peter tells how the cases, or bodies, were destroyed: but
Jude tells us of their now suffering; therefore the Jewels are by the Devil
burning in Hell.

Apriori, or aposteriori.
I could laugh, and tell you, that if Sodom's fire were Eternal, it must be
Eternal as God is, and then some Creature coeternal with the Creator, or to
last for ever, and then Hellfire and it will be kin to each other.

Now if the Devil actually suffers in Hell, the Sodom, as it is plain in Jude
5.6. The Devil suffering in Hell.
The Angles which kept not their first habitation, even as Sodom, suffering the
vengeance, etc. But you deny the Devil yet suffers, p. 28. Read 2 Pet. 2.4. If
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, (...). What
plainer? Now if Devils in Hell, then Sodomites, (for Peter and Jude parallel
them) then children, then they deserved damnation in Adam. That Children
suffer, we believe, because all in Sodom suffered, in which were Women and
Children (young and old, says Genesis 19.4.) And John saw such, Rev. 20.12. small
and great stand before God ready to be judged, therefore such are guilty.

But you deny any soul yet in glory: Page 34.
What means Rev. 14.13. Blessed from henceforth are the dead? And Luke 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. If you say, a day with the Lord is
as a thousand years, 2 Pet. 3.8. I answer, Christ meant it of a Natural Day:
Saints now in glory.
As Jonah was in 06 the belly of the Whale three days; so the Son of Man in
the Earth, Matthew. 16.4. And one of those say, that Paradise is not heaven: Read
2 Cor. 12.2-4. and be satisfied. For what the Apostle calls Heaven, v. 2. he
calls Paradise v. 4. Now the Objections brought against Satan's being in Hell,
may be thus answered: though the fullness of torment be not till hereafter, when
Christ shall take full vengeance, as 2 These. 1.7, 8. and Jude 14. may be
understood, yet the damned suffer in part, as is proved. You object Matthew. 8.
Why, art thou come to torment us before the time? Answ. They knew not how soon
the day of judgment would come, and desired liberty to sin till then, then
they knew they should be in full misery, 'twas recreation to them, to do hurt
to poor Creatures, Christ's miracles and preaching dispoffessed them, and
troubled or tormented them. Hell is the place of wicked, hence Judas went to
his proper place, Acts 1.25. Tell me, where are all the souls of Saints and
wicked departed? Revel. 6.10. says, Matthew. 17.3.
the Saints souls were under the Altar, Christ; therefore in bliss. Christ
says, All are alive to God, Luke 20.38. therefore all Saints happy. But you
say, the Devil is Prince of the Air, therefore not yet in torment: besides,
Earth shall be Hell, Isay 24. Answ. though he exercise, under God, some
Authority, yet he is in some torment, as is proved, 2 Pet. 2.4. it is some
pleasure to do hurt, hencethey beg not to be dispossessed, Mar. 1.24. chap.
5.7. freedom and liberty from Hell is some pleasure: (...).
Hence they plead not to be cast into Hell, Luke 8.31. with we render by, into
the deep, which is Hell; for if by Deep, Hell were not meant, Read Pasor on
that word.
the Devils foolishly begged not to go into the deep, v. 31. and yet desired
to enter into the Swine, and run into the Sea, v. 32.33. You affirm, Hell will
be in Earth, therefore none for the present. Your proof is in Isay 24:21. God
will punish the Kings of the Earth, in the Earth, or on it.

Answer. Pray, what Kings of the Earth have not been punished by Gods hand,
some by Assyrians, they by Babylonians, they by Persians, they by Grecians,
etc. here on earth? then Hell is past, if the Text meant it. 2. High ones were
punished, i. c. Emperors, Isay 24.21. opened and cleared.
Monarchs and petty Princes under them, whose Thrones were, as it were on
earth, in respect of them, whose Throne was among the Stars (in conceit) Isay
14.13. But it this place meant Hell, how could they be visited again, as v. 22.
should their visitation be for better or worse? if for better, here is good news
for damned: if for worse, pray what can be worse then Hell, especially if men
be in full torment; as you mean by this place, applying it after the day of
judgment; but in brief, God punished Kings, but visited them again in
temporalls, or their fuccessors and Nations, with the Gospel of peace, in
respect of whose glory, Sun and Moon were dim, when Christ (by ascension and
sending the spirit, garthering Churches) reigned before Israel gloriously. In
my conceit, when you say, Hell shall be on earth, and that darkness, no Sun nor
Moon: you oppose your Tenet of the restoration of the Creation. In conclusion
of your examination of Mr. Ruttons letter, you say he asked you for a sign of
your Ministry. Sed cum nullum fecil, ipse suit miraculum.
You tell us, An adulterous Generation seeks for a sign. John came with no
miracle, yet acknowledged for a true Teacher of Christ, John 10.41. but I
answer, if you have no more to plead for your being a Minister of Christ, then
this lying book, you may read your doom in Mat. 7.23. Go, I know you not. And
thus much for your Examination of Mr. Ruttons letter. God decreed not Adams
eternal ruin, and all his, upon his fall unevitably.
You further argue. That if Adam had decreed against him eternal Death, and
all in his loins upon his disobedience, and that not inflicted on them, then is
God changeable, according to those that maintain that tenet, To decree a thing,
and alter it argues a change; but God changes not: therefore.

Answ. God never decreed, that Adam and all his should eternally perish, God
decreed to send Christ: therefore decreed not to eternally ruin Adam and his
Posterity, which I prove thus. If God decreed not to send Christ to redeem man
(foreseeing the fall) and that from eternity, then God did somewhat about
Christ and man's salvation, not formerly decreed, Causa transgressionis Adami
nec Deus nec decretum: 92. interdixit homini a fructu and decretum non
impellebat ad peccandum Wolleb. cap. 9. and Canon. 1.
or decreed in time (a strange and unheard of decree of God:) the same may be
said of Adam's fall: was it decreed or not? If Adam's fall decreed (and God no
way guilty) and Christ's coming into the world, then not Adam's eternal
inevitable ruin, because these are contrary; but these two last were decreed,
Adam's fall and Christ coming to redeem man. So that though Adam were invested
with right to eternal life, and forfeited it for him and his, yet Christ was
partly in that decree, to bring all about again for Gods glory; and so no
change in God; or plainer, God did not so inevitably decree Adam's ruin
eternally, but that Christ was in that decree, to bring life and immortality to
light through the Gospel.

Now observe, Gods outward will is not always, nay sildom, his decree: though
he threatened Adam, Lomb. Lib. 1. and Distinc. 45. of Gods will, or Petrus
Aquila. in 46. of Scocus destinc.
he had not decreed inevitably his ruin. All School men allow of a concealed
and revealed will (if I could render the words so, volunt s sigui and
beneplaciti) the former is unchangeable, not the latter. In the latter are 1.
his threatenings (as to Adam, Hezekiah, and Ninive) 2. Commands as to Pharaoh,
to let Israel go, and to Abraham, to sacrisice his Son, etc. here God changed
his sentence, not his decretall will, which is most one and unchangeable. Du.
Moulin likes not this distinction, but Dr. Kendall maintains it; For plainer
and for further satisfaction, read my Glimps of Christian love, page 21.22. and
come to the second Argument, wherein you say, that Adam's sin was only against
the first Covenant, (which is true) and in your third Argument, that all his
enjoyments were only earthly: now say you, the punishment of the first
Covenant was only temporal death, etc. and the sin against the second
Covenant, only, did deserve damnation in Hell: now Children in Adam sinned,
but the first way, against the first Covenant.

Answ. All in Adam sinned unto condemnation, Breach of fir covenant deserved
damnation, not onel a temporal Death.
or damnation, Romans 5.18. as is proved largely already, all being in his loins,
as before is maintained: if Children sinned only against the first Covenant,
(in your sense) how are they Children of wrath by nature, as is expounded
before? how came they to enjoy Heaven? by Christ, or not? if by Christ, then
they were lost, as if they had been in the second Covenant: if some go to
Heaven without Christ, what means Acts 4. no other name men have to be saved
by, but by the name of Jesus. Now though Adam's enjoyments are named most as
earthly, did they not signify, heavenly to be enjoyed upon obedience? was not
Paradise a Type of Heaven? What meant Tree of Life, but eternal life? Rev.
2.7. why was he not endued only with an earthly soul? or what needed an
immortal soul for only earthly enjoyments? You do not wisely look unto the
end and meaning of these things; but as the Jews on their sacrifices: or, art
willingly ignorant, as in 2 Pet. 3.5. which is worse. I pass by your
Exposition of 1 Cor. 15. what though Christ was the quickener after Adam's
fall, and beyond Adam? was not Adam invested with an immortal soul? was he not
superior to the earthly condition of Beasts? had he not a posse non mori? (...)
what means that Text, in dying, thou shall die? as the Hebrew has it, but in
dying temporally, thou shall die eternally, (according to Gods revealed will.)
Read my Glimps, how many Deaths, p. 29. But suppose it but an Hebrew
expression; Wolleb. lib. 1.^.12.
yet under Death, all man's misery is contained as Death spiritual, Rev. 3. I
know thy works, and that thou have a name that thou art alive; but thou art
dead, 2. the death of afflictions, as Exodus 10. Entreat the Lord, that he
remove from me this death. 3. Death temporal, the body shall return to dust,
Eccles. 12.4. eternal death, as Rev. 21. called the second death; but I attend
what you say in your fifth Argument, where you argue thus, That opinion wh^^h
makes God a liar, and the Devil tell true, is to be rejected; but that Opinion
which holds, that Adam should die more then a temporal death, is such; for
Adam's Posterity are not in Hell, only die temporally, and Satan told them, ye
shall not die, etc. but God said, ye shall surely die: therefore Adam was only
threatened with temporal death.

Answ. Your Minor is false; for though God threatened Adam with eternal Death,
yet he lied not, in not inflicting it, because his threatening was to deterr
Adam from sinning, and not Gods peremptory resolution, but as to Hezekiah and
Niniveh; for God had decreed before the salvation of the Elect in Adam, by
Christ Jesus: therefore intended not their ruin; but of this already. Gods
sentence was for Death, not his decree, except for Reprobates; but you that can
excuse the Devil, and accuse God, according to this judgment: how did the
Devil say true, do not men die temporally and eternally for first sin? By one
man's offense judgment came upon all to condemnation, Romans 5.18. as the free
gift in Christ Jesus, was to justification. Either say, Christ brought not
justification to life by his obedience, or else conclude, Adam brought eternal
condemnation (on non-Elect) by disobedience, or else say, there is no sense in
the Apostles arguing, Romans 5.18. all were condemned to die temporally the day
Adam sinned, but were repliev'd to increase the world: so all the Reprobates
were condemned in Adam (fore ordained to condemnation in Jude) but judgment
deferred for many Reasons, not remitted. Your sixth Argument is already
answered, that tho Children bring into the world such sins, as make them liable
to the second death, yet they may belong to Heaven, as I have showed: the
person of an Elect Vessel may be loved, sanctified in time -- though the
natural condition were hated. And it were sad for Children, if not naturally
Children of wrath and lost, or else have no Savior, if no sin, Matthew. 18.
not are to be found, if not lost. To such the Kingdom of grace belongs, by
virtue of Parents faith. How prove you, that their Parents or friends that
brought them, had not faith? they were Sons of Jews yet in Covenant, who had a
good opinion of our Savior, and in all likelihood, brought them for a
spiritual end; or else how did Christ answer their expectation, in blessing
them? You say Matthew. 18. is not understood of Children in Age. What think you
of verse. 2. (...) --
Jesus called a little Child? what think you of his placing him (which
intimates the Child's youth and ignorance) from which Child Christ says, men
must be converted as Children. Go then 1. Children are subjects of
sanctification (which is part of conversion) or else go not to Heaven, because
flesh and blood cannot, 1 Cor. 15. (2.) have faith, though not actually, yet
the seeds and habit of faith, which will appear in time. (3.) may be offended,
or you an offense to them, in denying them admittance into the Kingdom of grace
by baptism.

Of the Lawful Ministry.
ANd thus much of your Treatise of Original Sin. I come briefly to your
Characters of Ministers: and shall tell you, that it would be too great an
honor to you, to answer you at large in this particular; and it were to
confess some guiltiness in our Calling: Yet had you questioned our Office, or
our Ordination, or our coming through the Church of Rome, I would have
endeavored to satisfy any ordinary man therein; and a word anon of it.
However, I remember when Scaliger that proud Critic, had abused the noble
English Nation, Dr. Heylin tells him, Description of Prit. p. 468.
(as I can tell you) A Fools bolt is soon shot; and quotes Socrates Resolution,
(...). If an Ass (excuse the expression) kick us, we must not put him in the
Court; the best is, Many shoulders will make the burden light. You endeavor to
disgrace all Ministers, it is thought your mouth is no slander; L. 10. and Ep.
82.
such wounds, are our glory. Ambrose his Observation upon Isreal's disowning the
Prophet Elias, is seasonable Corvi agnoscebant prophetam Domini quem Judei non
agnoscebant, 1 Timothy 4.14.
pascebant corvi quem genus illud per sequebatur. The Ravens owned him for a
Prophet of the Lord, whom the Jews disowned; and fed him, whom those people
persecuted.

Is not our Ordination good? We had imposition of hands by the Ministry, as
Timothy (in some way) had. You Will say, Then the Spirit was given by Imposition.
-- Pray show me a Reason, why we may not use the Ceremony, and hope for a
blessing? Is not the weakness of God stronger then man? 1 Cor. 1.25. And that
(...) foolishness of God wiser then men? You Will say, We are ordained without
consent of People: I must tell you, that Titus (in all likelihood) did so. Paul
left him in Crete, (...), to ordain Elders in every City, as Paul appointed.
Now I know no other Appointment, but by Imposition of hands: The people could
not make them Ministers themselves, or by their choice; for then what need had
Paul to have left Titus there? Again, the word implies, that the power was in
Titus: and so the same word is used, Act. 7.10. The King of Egypt did appoint
Joseph ((...), the same word) Governor of Egypt, where, I hope, the power was
conceived to be in the King, not People: Which passage, Philo Judens renders by
(...). As Dr. Hammond quotes him; intimating the power (as the Greek words used
for Imposition of hands, or Setting apart, Concerning Ordination, page 314.
imply) to be in Titus, and the Presbytery, not People: though I should consent
to the Peoples approbation, could it well be obtained. You Will say, our Ministry
came from Rome. I answer, Suppose once Popery crept into England, have we not
separated from all their Ceremonies, and keep close to the word, and shall we
not be accepted? Or, could their Ceremony spoil the substance? But I deny that
we are of Rome, only were in Rome, or came through it. And came not Christ
from Adam through sinful Loins, and yet the true Christ? Did not Aarons
Priesthood successively come to our Saviors time (sed quare) through sinful
men, and yet owned by our Savior? the Priesthood, not the Persons, who
crucified him. And may not a Priesthood come undefiled through Rome, for matter
of substance? But I Will prove we were Christians in England, and had Ministers
before Romes Apostacies many years.

Our Histories make manifest, The British Church, Independent from Rome.
that Augustine the Monk was so far from being the first Planter of
Christianity here, that he found Brit. Bishops, who did deny obedience to the
Chu. of Rome, as appears by the B. of Bangors Letter, to Aug. the Monk,
desiring his subjection to the Roman Church. Notum sit vobis, etc. Nos esse
sub gubernatione Episcopt Caerlegionis super Osca, etc. And before, Sir Hen.
Spelman, out of the Annals of Gisburn cites, thus: Council. Anglic. p. 188. and
p. 26.
Aburbe legionum Meneviam translata seeds Metropolitana tempore S. David
Episcopiper Arthurum, from Caerlyon upon Oske the Metropolitan Seat was
translated to St. David's, by King Arihur, in the time when St. David was
Bishop, where there stood 13 chief Bishops, -- where Consecration was, without
making any subjection to any other Church. And Lanfrank, Bishop of Canterbury,
under William the Conqueror, refused to be subject to Gregory the 7. of
Festivals of the Church, page 419.
of Rome. Of which, read Dr. Hammond, who page 412. proves, That Christianity
was planted in England, in the Apostles time. Oregine confesses, That
Christianity was in England in his time, (on Ezekiel. Hom. 4.) And Tertullian
affirms here it before his time. Some gather some ground from 2 Timothy 4.10. where
Crescens is sent to Galatia, conceived to be France, from whence the Gospel
came to us. Mr. Cambden tells us from ancient Authors, that Joseph of Arimathea
planted it here: but enough to prove, that our Original was not from Rome,
though in after-time the Superstition of Rome crept in amongst us, which we
have now forsaken, and are ordained according to the Gospel-Rules. Who desires
more satisfaction about Ministers Ordination, let him read the learned Treatise
of Mr. John Collins, Vindiciae Ministerii Evangelici.
proving, That gifted-men should take the Seal of the Church by Ordination, as
Barnabas and Paul did, Act. 13. where the Ministry, and not People, set them
apart; as Christ did his Disciples, Act. 10.41. And the Greek word, when
applied to Ecclesiastical business, requires not the peoples consent: Read Mr.
Vines on 2 Pet. 2. 1. page 20 proving, (...)
that the Apostles ordain Elders without the peoples consenting, or giving in
Suffrages, Act. 14.23. Read Leigh on the Word: Yet I am not against peoples
choice also, where to be had conveniently. Read the Diatribe, printed 1647.
proving, that many of our godly Reformers had only inward Call, and Peoples
Suffrages: now as Election makes a King more then his Coronation; so peoples
Consent, more then Ordination. But I forbear, knowing that the approbation of
the Ministry (by reason of their abilities) is far beyond that of the people.
Well! we have Ministers both ways set apart, yet the Baptizers own them not.
But so much in general about Ministers, which your Characters caused me to say:
yet you find fault rather with the personal faults of the Ministry, than with
their Office: The Office is good, though a Cataphas, or a Judas miscarry in it:
He, amongst you that is without fault, let him throw the first stone.

The manner of Sions Redemption discovered.
NOw I come to examine your Sion's Redemption; How Sion redeemed.
in which you plead for the Jews return to their own Country. Brightman was of
that Opinion, and that Euphrates therefore is to be miraculously dried up, Rev.
16. In Rev. 16.
that the Jews beyond Euphrates may not be hindered in their return: This
Opinion Paraeus calls godly and probable, but not solid. Read my Exposition of
that Chapter, how Euphrates shall be dried up: The Jews promise themselves an
happy enjoyment of their Country. Rab. Men. Ben. Spes Israel
The learned Rabbi, in his Book dedicated to our longliv'd-Parliament, tells
us, The Rabbi is his book, called, Israelis.
that the Ten Tribes live together beyond the Cordiller Hills, and the River
Maragnon, differing in Religion from the Indians, in whose Country they are.
Sed parvas spes habet, Troja, si tales habet. For the Readers sake, Chap. 9.15,
16, 17.
I shall enlarge my self a little on this pleasant subject. The ten Tribes are
threatened never to be a people more, in Isaiah 7.8. Pray, what hope of their
return? And Hosea tells us of the Ten Tribes, God will love them no more (as to
return them) God will cast them away, and they shall be wanderers amongst the
Nations. The Jews return to Judae disproved.
Yet I believe there is hope of their Call, because Romans 11. and that passage
of Tamars Children prove in Genesis 38.28. Sarah might represent the Jew, with the
scarlet Thread, or Sacrifices, who first made proffer to serve God, as
firstborn, but drew back like a stiffnecked people; Pharez, in the mean time,
steps forth, Behold the Gentiles call! but Zarah was born at last: Zach. 10.10.
the Jew then shall be a people belonging to God. Nay, I believe the dispersing
the Ten Tribes will be a means to gain others to God upon their Call. Hence God
is said to sow them among the people, (good seed shall not perish) and they
shall remember me in far Countries.

Now, though their return to Gilead, and to Lebanon be there, it must be
spiritual: to wit, to the Church, or Spiritual Jerusalem, and that Spiritual
Land of Promise. Read Annotat of Assembly on the place. Book Ch: 35. page 5.
Hence, Mr. Fuller says of Israel converted; Any Mountain shall be their
Oliver, River their Jordan, Field their Carmel, Forest their Lebanus, Fort
their Sion, and City their Jerusalem. I am the rather induced to believe this,
because Canaan was their peculier Land, whiles they, Gods peculiar people: now,
the partion wall is broken down. And as for Judahs return to the Land of
Canaan, the Scripture is flat against it; as in Zach. ^.6. I will no more pity
the Inhabitants of the Land, and out of their enemies hands I will not deliver
them. And Jeremy tells us, God will break this people, Chap. 19.11.
and this City, as a Potters vessel, which cannot be made whole again. Ezekiel
is yet plainer, Chap. 16.53, 55. When Sodom and Gomorrha shall be restored to
their former estate, and Samaria to hers, then shall Judah's Captivity be
restored. Rossaus, p. 375.
That will never be; Jerusalem, says Hierom, in aternos collapsa est Cineres.
Indeed, the Scepter was to depart from Judah when Shilo came. Their house is
left desolate now, their Fig Tree cursed, and (wonder it was) their Land by the
Romans was sold: Here was Digitus Dei, who sold no other Land but that, says
Mede. But it may well be objected, That God promised them a return out of
Captivity, (all his people, to wit) that he would have compassion on them, and
remember them, Deuteronomy. 30.3. Lev. 26.44. Answ. Out of several calamities he did,
and out of the Babylonish Captivity: But hithetto they had only stoned the
Prophets, and abused his servants; but when once they had murdered his son, his
mercies (in returning them) were at an end for evermore. Hence forward any Text
(good Reader) that promises the Jews a return, either understand it, out of the
Babylonish Captivity, or construe it in a Spiritual sense, That the Jews shall
return to God, or out of darkness, to light, and out of the power of Satan to
Christ, to enjoy the true Jerusalem, and Celestial Land of Canaan. And thus,
Friend Hammond, your Texts are answered; except that of Esaias 60. which speaks
chiefly of the glorious estate of the Church under Messiah, described by the
multitude of proselytes, and those of chief note and place that should be
joined to it; so that the Heathens should bring in their riches, and join in
the service of Christ. Hence you perceive, that Prophecy must not be taken
literally, but spiritually: thus understand, The lews not to enjoy their Temple.
her opened gates, v. 11. to admit proselytes and members; and by the City
Jerusalem, the Church. Places which sound literally in the Prophets, must be
spiritually expounded, and applied in the Gospel. Thus the Apostle expounds,
Amos 9.11. in Act. 15.17. You proceed to prove, that Israel shall have their
Temple rebuilt at their return, because Ezekiel saw a Temple, Chap. 41. v. 1.
But Ezekiels Prophecy is spiritually to be looked on, Read Mr. Th. Fuller, l.
5. c. 1.
as appears by the miraculous Fruit which never fades, Chap. 47.12. And the
strange waters in the beginning of that Chapter. Now as was the Waters and
Fruit, so the Temple, Spiritual. The Temple was a Type, which is ended in
Christ. The Saints are now the Temple, 1 Cor. 3. and Jerusalem the Church, Gal.
4.

I come to examine how the Jews shall be converted: You say, Not by a
Gospel Ministry; but you greatly err, not knowing the Scriptures. For,

First, Romans 1.16. confutes you, where the Apostle tells us, That the Gospel is
the power of God to Salvation, to the Jew and Gentile.

Secondly, There is no other Name under Heaven, The Jews to be converted by the
gospel.
by which men must be saved, then by the name of Jesus, Act. 4. Now die Name of
Christ is conveyed to men in a Gospellway.

Thirdly, the Jews shall (through our mercies) obtain mercy, Romans 11.31. that
is, through Christ and his Gospel, (for those are our infinite mercies)
therefore, without doubt, the Jews are to be called by the Gospel, and not to
wait in their Sacrifices, or Temple, for Christ.

Now, should not these Jews be tolerated amongst Christians?

1. Because elected, Romans 11.28. and beloved. 2. Because Christians owe all to
them, as having both Law and Gospel by their means, and we grow on their Root,
Romans 11.18. 3. Because Christ left his glory (in part) for their sakes and he
and his Disciples went after them. 4. Because they begin to read Christian
Authors. ( Rabbi Menasseh Ben Israel quotes August. de Doct. Christiana, cap.
28. quod omnes sunt aeque diligendi, in his Book dedicated to our Lord
Protector, page 23. 5. They will not sacrifice but at Jerusalem, as the same
Rabbi testifies, p. 22.) 6. And are no great Usurers of late, Tolleration ^f
Jews.
taking but 4 or 5 per cent. as he affirms, p. 20. But enough! You proceed to
tell us, that the Witnesses in Rev. 11. are to dissuade the Jews from
believing in Antichrist; and not so much to preach Christ to them: But you do
but say it; they will never take the Pope for their Messiah; and the work of
the Witnesses is to draw people from Antichristianism, which had overrun all;
but the Jews were not infected with Popery: therefore needed not the Witnesses
help to deliver them from him. I have general acquaintance with a dozen and
half of Commentaries on Rev. 11. And all believe (as I remember) that the
Witnesses work, was to reform the Church (signified by the Temple, Rev. 11.1,
2.) then overspread with Popery: The Rod, like a Reed, is the * Word. So here
your second proof for a Jewish Temple is void, Read my Exposition of Rev. Chapter
11.
because the Temple is not literally to be expounded, but spiritually. Other
matters in your Argument, are answered above, where I proved, that by
Jerusalem, is meant the Church: So, by the Temple, may the Worship be
understood; and by the Courts, the Priests who officiated there, (as Paraeus on
the place affirms) Yet Piscator thinks by the outward Court, ^n Rev. 11.
the ungodly multitude is meant; whose time of Reformation was scarce come.
An easy Trope will give us leave to call the Court, the people, or to
understand the people by the Court. Thus we say the Court of Chancery, and
Sutton Church, though no people be there; though not the naked benches or
stones, make Court or Church.

I come to your third Argument, to prove a Temple, because Antichrist shall sit
in it, 2 These. 2.4. But none but the ignorant Pastor (as he calls himself) of
the Church at Biddenden, took that for a Jewish Temple: But for the Church over
which Antiechrist reigned as Lord and King, too too long: of which anon. But
suppose this a Jewish Temple, how does the Apostle set forth Antichrists
tyranny, by laying, he sat or set up his throne there: A poor honor! But he
as God sits, in Templum Del, (...)
(as Augustine learnedly speaks) for a Temple, or, instead of Temple, Qracle,
Priest and all. But Christ has destroyed him, partly, by the Word and Spirit,
(that breath of his mouth) and shall after confound him, by the brightness of
his coming to judgment: Till when, Antichrist will, in some measure, reign, and
hinder your Saints 1000. years glory. The Pope is Antichrist.
But you deny the Pope to be Antichrist: in troth he is beholding to you: but I
believe him Antichrist, (and you a limb of him. But what makes you huddle up so
many texts together, to prove the man of sins arising? page 101. I perceive you
understand not, what is meant by Gog or Magog, like enough forerunners of
Antichrist, as the little horn was a type of him, in Dan. 7. meaning that
Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes, (that sagacious or cunning, but blasphemous
wretch). You quote Esaias 14. 13. to be understood of Antichrist, which was
plainly spoken of the King of Babylon, v. 4. And, 2 These. 2. you will have
understood of Antichrist, not the Pope: Have you not been tutored by a Jesuit?
But let us try your Reasons, why the Pope no Antichrist.

First, because the Pope, or rather Romish Babylon, is ser forth by the name of
a Woman: as Rev. 17. but Antichrist is called the Man of sin, 2 These. 2.3.

Answ. Antichrist is set forth with a double form, Rev. 13. 4, 11. As Tyrano,
and false Prophet; yet but one Beast, v. 18. So Antichrist, as Woman, or
Whorish Church seducing; but as Man ( viz the Series of Popes) tyrannizing.

Secondly, the Romish Babylon confesses God; Qui scribit seservum servorum
provat s^ tyrannum tyrannorum.
but Antichrist shall exalo himself above all Gods, 2 These. 2.4.

Answ. He shall confess him in words, but deny in deeds: so does Romish
Babylon, or rather Pope, exalting himself above Augels and Kings, who are
called Gods.

3. You say, That Romish Babylon shall be destroyed before the appearance of
Christ, but Antichrist shall not. Answ. The Romish Church shall be diminished
before Christ's appearance as Judge; but not quite destroyed. Partly, she is
destroyed by the breath of Christ's mouth (his word and spirit) already, and the
rest by the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. but you may find that in
Rev. 17.17. and chap. 18.18. the City of Rome is to be destroyed by fire; but
the Pope shall survive, and the Romish Church (though diminished), till last
day, 2 These. 2.8. Rev. 19.20. plainly.

Sancta Maria Regena calisalva nos.
I could show you many Arguments to prove the Pope Antichrist, as 1. Who is
against the honor, Church, and truth of Christ, is Antichrist; such is the
Pope, praying to Saints (which derogates from Christ) counting himself as head
of the Church, remitting sins, bidding the Virgin Command her Son, etc.

2. Who exalts himself above all that is called God, Though he 0204 0725 V call
himself Servus serverum Dei.
is Antichrist; but so does the Pope, as above Emperors, Kings, nay Angels,
who are called Gods. The Lateran Council applauded the Pope, saying, Thou art
all things, and above all things. And again, the same Council said to him, thou
art another God on earth. Read Jewels Apology, page 447. or Aug. Civit. Dei. l.
20. c. 19. expounding in Templum; or, Annot. of Assemb. on 2 These. 2.4.

But 3 dly. Who sits in the Seat of Antichrist, is Antichrist; but so does the
Pope on seven hills of Rome, Rev. 17.9. where were seven Governments, and the
Pope the eighth, trading for souls of men, Rev. 18. And in John's time ruling
over Nations, ( Rome to wit, was the now feat, of Antichrist,) what need
further proof? -- From your page 112. to 128. you almost trifle away Pen, Ink,
and Paper: for my part I shall not fight with your shadow. Yet a word to what
you say. You would prove, that upon the last return of the Jews to their
Country, Antichrist, which you call Gog, out of Ezekiel. 38. shall destroy or
spoil Israel, till Christ succor them. But. 1. The Jews final return to their
Country, is disproved already. 2. Gog is not literally Antichrist (though an
enemy to Christ's Church.)
By Gog, understand the people of Asia, so called from Giges the King; by
Magog, the Scythians; and by both understand the Turk who came of them, and
raigns over them. Nov, Who Gay and Magog.
though the Gogims did much spoil Israel under Antiochus, and were overthrown
by the Macchabees (God wonderfully assisting) upon the Mountains of Israel, in
the latter days (not the last) Ezekiel. 38.16.21: Yet we expect a further
destruction of the enemies of Gods Church, comprehended under Gog and Magog,
Turk, etc. (Read Rev. 20.) which will hardly come to pass, till Christ come to
judgment, Rev. 20.9. when Christ shall come with flames of fire to destroy his
enemies. But Gog cannot be Antichrist, because of Unbelieving; for Antichrist
must sit in the Temple, as owning God, etc. Now you would prove, that this Gog
Antichrist, shall be destroyed by Christ, before the end; and quote Rev. 19.11.
No wart with Gog on Isreal's Mount.
to prove it; but that Text is meant of Christ's coming to judgment, as
appears by verse. 15. the sword coming out of Christ's mouth, being his sentence
to the wicked at the last day, when he shall slay them with, Go ye cursed, etc.
Thus all wars (in the letter) on the Mountains of Israel are ended. P. 128.
And I come to examine Christ's personal reign in earth 1000. years, when Gog
and all enemies shall be subdued to him, where a thousand to one, but I shall
find you tardy. Your grand proof is, because Christ was to enjoy the Throne of
David, Luke 1. which was not spiritual but temporal. But consider, Christ
tells Pilate, that his Kingdom was not of the world, John 18.36. Christ's
personal Reign disproved as in Earth.
in the sense that Caesar's was: so Christ must succeed David spiritually,
because also, Of his Kingdom there must be no end, Luke 1.33. Now by Jacob and
Israel there, the Saints are meant, the true Israel of God: thus he is called
King of Saints, Rev. 15, -- And to this purpose, other Texts of Scripture must
be understood, where Christ, is called a King: that learned Sermon of Dr.
Goodwin on Rev. 5.10. (we shall reign on earth) speaks louder, and more to
purpose then all other Books on that subject: yet because Christ's Kingdom was
spiritual before his ascension, I believe it will be so still, because the
Angels told the Disciples so, Acts 1.11. This same Jesus shall so come in like
manner, as you have seen him go into Heaven. So that Paraeus expounds the
Saints raiguing in earth spiritually, as they shall be Kings and Priests, to
wit, sacrifycing sin, reigning over wicked, by the spirit in them; for the head
Christ reigning, the members reign; but the Weapons of our warfare are not
carnal. The Saints reign in earth may be these ways, first by their prayers,
Saints Reign spiritual.
prevailing with God to bring judgments or blessings upon the earth: thus read
Isay 45.11. Concerning the works of my hands, command ye me: how did Moses and
Elias even govern the world by their prayers? to say nothing of the witnesses.
( Rev. 11-2.) By being admitted into high privileges in Heaven, of which 2
Rev. 17. Dun. 4.17. holy ones with Christ, carrying on the Government of the
world. What think you of Rev. 6.10. How long O Lord? But you will say, Saints know
not what is done below: (therefore cannot govern, or reign on earth, whiles in
Heaven;) for Isay 63.16. says, Jacob knows us not, etc.

Answ. Of themselves, Saints above cannot tell what is don below, Saints
knowledge of things below by Angles.
because of their remoteness, and because without bodies; -- but they have
acquaintance of the affairs below, by means of Angels, who partly govern this
world (under God) Heb. 2.5. Now Angels and Saints can make matters known to one
another, r. Luke 15. of joy in Heaven over one penitent sinner: therefore
Heaven (or Saints there) must know it. And in Rev. 18.20. upon Babylons
overthrow, Heaven, Prophets, and Apostles rejoice, therefore knew of its
overthrow; but enough. The grand objection against the spiritual reign of
Christ only, lies in Dan. 7.27. a Kingdom under the whole Heavens shall be
given to Saints, and v. 18. and v. 14. and this after the Beasts body is given
to be burned, ven. 11. But all this may be taken spiritually of Christ's Kingdom
upon earth, ruling and reigning in his Church; and thus the Saints building and
planting (of Churches, to wit) and eating ( i. e. feeding in Ordinances) may be
spiritual: in Isay 65.22. without wresting the Text; but let us briefly
examine Dan. 7. The four Beasts are the four Kingdoms. The fourth, some take
to be, not the Roman, but the Selucidan Kingdom of Syria, called a fourth, The
same for substance with Alexander, but differing in ten horns, read Annor.
because not absolutely Monarchical at present (for Macedonia, Asia, and
Egypt, were Kingdoms also in the hands of Alexanders succestors) as the former
were, and more terrible to the Land of Judea and Saints, which the Beast even
consumed, verse 23. The ten Horns were ten Kings in that Kingdom, Read Junius,
Eng. Annot. Diodati on Dan. 7.
from Seleucus to Antiochus (the little Horn) who was the tenth (as Junius
proves) and last, that reigned over Judaea, till Christ's time. Well, in sum
this Beast was slain by the Parthians, and King Tygranes of Armenia; and Syria
made a Roman Province by Pompey: here is his ruin; meant by his bodies burning
by consuming War, verse. 11, then the Saints time came according to promise, v.
18.14.27. quickly was Christ born the spiritual King; but where is the
temporal Kingdom? Or suppose, by four Beasts, the Roman Monarch were meant,
and by ten Horns, the ten Kings (or many) in Rev. 17.12. (which arose out of
the Roman Monatch) and suppose the Pope the little horn, typed by that in Dan
7. Well, the Beast (be it the remainder of the Roman Monarch in Turk, Pope,
Read my Exposition Chap. 19. Revel.
etc.) and Kings of the earth (who adhered to him) are taken a live (as at last
day) Rev. 19.19, 20. and cast into Hell fire (I believe): now after this, sure
no Kingdom for Saints, but that above in glory. For though in Dan. 7. the
apparition of Gods judgment might not signify the day of judgment; but Gods
judgment on his then Churches enemies: yet in Revel. 19.19 20. all things
being well considered, the last day is meant (after which no temporal Kingdom)
for Antichrist and Beast shall (in some sort) continue to the last, as 2 These.
2.8. prove, and Rev. 19. 20. Now whiles these reign, where is Saints temporal
Kingdom?

But it may be demanded, Why were the lives of the other Beasts prolonged,
after their dominion was taken away, Dan. 7.12. if not, because Christ and
Saints were temporally to reign over them? as ver. 13, 14.

Answ. It Is already plain, that Christ took not on him a temporal Kingdom.

2. The next Monarch prolonged the lives of the peoples (who once belonged to
these beasts) to reign over them. Every Empire or Enemy, in their time,
perished; but the people thereof continued in some low form or state, till
brought under by the Romans. But Christ is not to temporally reign in earth:
read John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for ye, (in heaven) that where I am, ye
may be (not in earth). And 1 These. 4.16. We shall be caught up to Christ in the
Air (when he comes to raise the Dead in Christ, who shall rise before the nest)
and to we shall be ever with the Lord; to wit reigning in the heaven, not on
earth. And Act. 3.21. Whom the heavens shall contain, till the time of the
restitution of all things. Now, Heaven and Earth is to be restored (of which a
word anon) but that will not be, till after Wickeds Resurrection, Rev. 20.12,
13. and Chap. 21.1, 2. compared. For if the Earth be restored before wicked's
resurrection, shall it be dug up again, or he faced, to raise up wicked's
bodies? Or must not their bodies be part of the glorified Earth? redime te
captum.

So Christ shall not come from heaven to reign before wickeds resurrection,
which is against your tenet: but 1 Cor. 15. makes it plain, ver. 23, 24. That
Christ comes to judgment at the end of all, then comes the end: therefore, no
time of temporal reigning for Saints after his coming: only this Caveat I Will
add, If Christ judge as man, then the day of the Lord may be as a 1000 years;
all which time, the Saints shall judge the world with Christ: But what is this
to a temporal reign? Besides, why should earth be preferred before heaven to
reign in? And if those alive must eat and drink (as some exound, Esaias 65.
literally,) is not here E picurism? Sure the Kingdom of God consists not in
these things, Romans 14.17. You may oppose, Rev. 20. where Saints are said to
reign a 1000. years: And 2 Pet. 3.13. we expect new Heavens, and new Earth,
wherein dwells righteousness. Answ. Paraeus in ev. 20. Read y Exposition, ev.
20.
Here is nothing will prove your design, * Paraeus has answered every
Objection, and cleared any difficulty about the thousand years, and first
resurrection: briefly, Satan was bound up a thousand years, as not to hinder
the propagation of the Gospel (though he raised persecution against the
Professors thereof). The thousand years of Satan's binding, in probability,
began about the ruin of the Jewish Temple, Anno Dom. 73. (for while that
Temple stood, the Jews much withstood the preaching of thee Gospl; in which
thousand years, multitudes of people believed, but were persetuted to death:
(...).
these John sees living and reigning with Christ (in glory) those thousand
years in which Satan was bound up; their conversion is called the first
resurrection, being to grace (many being bodily raised in Old and New Testamen
before) answerable to Fall of Soul first into sin. Now this was the first
resurrection or conversion of souls to grace in the thousand years. Remember,
John saw (visionally) the souls (not bodies) in heaven with Christ, (not in
earth) reigning after Death: Read my Exposition of that Chapter at large. To
that of Peter I answer; the words may be read thus: We, in whom dwells
righteousness expect a new heaven, and a new earth. But a word of the
renovation of the world; and of this new heaven, etc. and concerning the new
Jerusalem: Of which, George Hammond page 151. speaks strangely: For he would
have it to be a material City; but not made by man but God. I cannot believe it
for what City in the Letter can have twelve Foundations, as this has? v. 14. Or
Angels Porters, to a material City? as v. 12. Of the new Jerusalem.
How can gates be made of pearl; or how one pearl big enough to make a whole
gate? and such like improbabilities. Neither do I think this new Jerusalem to
be that once possessed by the Jews, and now newly re-edified. Against which
George Hammond uses many Arguments. But as Mr. Roberts, and Mr. Forbes agree,
On Rev. 22.
it may be spiritually taken for the state of the Church after the Jews
conversion, and after the whore and beast, with false Prophet, and other
enemies, are destroyed temporally, not damned. 1. Because the most precious
things in Nature are too abject (rather then too high) to express the
dispensation of grace (now at the highest.) 2. God is said to have his
Tabernacle with men chapter 21.3. (not men with God) and Jerusalem is said to come
down out of heaven, intimating it here below. 3. That here is nothing here so
magnifiquely spoken, which the Prophets have not almost in the same terms
uttered of the estate of the Church here in grace. Of which, read the Authors
themselves on that place. Indeed, I believe a choice time, when the Jews shall
be converted, called ( Romans 11) Life from the Dead: yet since the day of
judgment seems past before this City be seen; (...).
as Chap. 20.12. and 21.2. and Whore and Antichrist damned, Chapter 19. who were to
last till Christ's coming, (...).
2 These. 2.8.1 may believe with Paraeus, That this City represents the state of
the Church in glory, because actualled adorned, and sitted for Christ the
husband, too high for a stare of grace: especially considering all tears (and
therefore enemies, nay and sin the cause of tears) shall be wiped away: yet
when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith in earth? Adorned for Husband,
and not for Spouse.
Jerusalem, in the Vision, might seem to John to come down, not locally, but in
respect of her Original, which is from heaven. But enough: If we take
Jerusalem spiritually, as in earth, then by new Heaven, and new Earth, a new
face of the Universe may be meant; (for Scripture, by new Heaven, and new
Earth, is wont, says Mr. Roberts, to express great changes in the world. Esaias
65.17.66, 22.
) Now when Whore, false Prophet, and Dragon are destroyed, here is a new world
or new dweling, for the new Church. The bringing in the Eastern Kingdoms to the
Faith, and destruction of all enemies of the Church, may well be called, A new
Heaven, and new Earth. But, Read Engl. Annot. Diodat. Key of the Bible, on Rev.
21
if by New Jerusalem, we understand the state of glory; then by New Heaven etc.
we understand Heaven and Earth, literally by fire to be renewed, according to
Peter, and according to Romans 8.21, 22. (the hardest text in Paul's Epistles says
D. Hackwel in Ap.) the whole Creature groans; etc. not (...), but (...). I
expect Sun and Moons restoring to more light, Esaias 30.26. for reward of their
unwearied labor, (though you will have Earth dark hereafter, page 22.) And I
believe Sea may be restored, (though not with raging waves, etc.) to stand as a
Monument of Gods wisdom, mercy, and power: And I believe the Sons of God, in
glory, may visit these. But to expect restoring of each Tree, Leaf and Grass;
nay, or beasts (in what sense you please) for which you argue p. 154. is too
carnal and beastly, if well examined; they are not capable of glory: but, in
their time, shall be freed from bondage; the Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon,
shall have that glory they are capable of; but I must be brief. Read my Expol.
of Rev. Chap. 21. for further satisfaction. Thus I have done, Friend Hammond,
as to the substance of your Book: I intended not to answer every trivial
Objection, or to open each Text, impertinently quoted by whole Centuries; nay,
forced together like Sampsons Foxes: I have civilly given them quarter (being
violently forced to take up arms against the Truth) to return to their proper
place in the book of God, to assert that cause God at first commanded them. I
will not instance in any, to show your ignorance, or discredit your knowledge;
only that last text of Esaias 11. The Lion shall eat with the Ox, you produce
unadvisedly to prove, the restoration of Beasts (if I understand you) which is
understood of the most peaceable government of the Lord Jesus, in changing our
savage natures, and making us submit freely to his yoke. Several passages in
several pages of Geo: Hammond's Book; briefly, answered.
To all the rest of your Book I shall speak but in few words: And first, to
that place in p. 149. That as Adam had his Earthly Paradise; so shall Christ
have his heavenly upon Earth, which is the new Jerusalem: To which I shall
agree, if you understand the (even) glorious condition of the Church here below
upon the Call of the Jews, by the new Jerusalem: or that glorified condition of
the Church above, (for Adams Paradise was to represent the Celestial, in which
the Apostle was, 2 Cor. 12.4.) but a temporal Paradise I deny, as well as
Christ's temporal reign. And when, p. 154. you talk of the whole Creations
re-enjoying the condition that it was in once in Adams Innocence, you speak
without book; for, Romans 8.21, 22. cannot hold it. I ask you, shall every Beast
be so restored? The world is not able to contain them, no more then the Trees
can hold every branch or leaf, or the fields every former grass. But shall
only those Beasts have this privilege, who are alive at the last day? Pray,
why should these have such a privilege above their Fellow Creatures and
Partners in bondage? The World (Heaven and Earth) shall be restored to their
primitive glory, and better: But does God take care of Oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. but in
page 159. you affirm, that Man and Beast must have a more quiet and peaceable
time: for this is a time of persecution.

Answ. Man shall hereafter; hardly, here below: For Christ, Mark 10.30. tells
us, Saints have all here (or Grace Faith etc. (...)
which is, instar omnium) with Persecution but hereafter Eternal Life, here is
little peace; though toward the end, the Sea, figuratively, shall be no more;
that is, troubles, as formerly, according to them, who (by Jerusalems coming
down from Heaven) hold the Ghurches even glorious and peaceable condition,
after her enemies destruction.

To what you say in page 141. about the Saints possessing the riches of their
Enemies (as true heirs to the riches of the world) I say this is a pleasant,
(...)
but false doctrine.

For though Christ restored only the Elect to Celestial privileges, yet he
restored all to Temporal. Hence he gave Mount Seir to Esau, as really as Canaan
to Israel. And Luk: 16.25. the Glutton is said to receive his good things. And
indeed why should they be barred from Temporals, who have no share in Eternals?
p. 168. You say that National Congregations are not called the Church of
Christ; nor her Ministers, Christ's Ministers; and therefore you expect another
kind of Preaching, to convert the Nations toward the end of the world.

National Ministers, are called the Angels of the waters, as those waters are
expounded, Read my Expos. of Rev. 16.
Rev. 16.5. and and 17.15. O profound Doctor!

But did not Christ bid his Disciples, 5. and 17.15. about Angels of waters.
discipulize all Nations, Matthew, last. May there then not be a National Church,
and National Ministers in a good sense? Pray, how came so many Nations
converted, and by whom, if not by National Ministers; Such Teachers as you,
were not then in being; and it is well, if ye are not now born too soon. And
thus, Friend Hammond, I take my leave of you, and your Book; which, like the
Apples near the Asphaltite-Lake, Solnius ca. 48.
seem choice and pleasant: but being handled, moulder to dust, or nothing.

Febr. 6.1655.
FINIS.

