Don Zara Del Fogo: A Mock-Romance.

Written Originally in the British Tongue, and made English by a person of
much Honor, BASILIUS MUSOPHILUS.

WITH A Marginall Comment Expounding the hard things of the History.

Si foret in terris rideret Democritus.

London, Printed by T. W. for Tho. Vere, at the sign of the Angel without
Newgate. 1656.

To the most Nobly accomplished, ROBERT, THOMAS, and JOHN SPENCER, Esquires.
IN this Scribbling Age, when the Writing Evil (a disease that in time will
destroy us) is become epidemicall, it being a matter of more intricacy to find
seven fools now, then it was formerly to find seven wise men throughout all
Greece; I say in this paper-spoiling Age you may perhaps ask me what Scribbling
fiend prompted me also to vex the world in print, and do more mischief then
five whirlwinds; I answer, first, that the genius of the place where I then
resided would needs command it: Secondly, my self found some kind of pleasure
in the penning it: And lastly, because it could not find a fellow for method,
it being indeed a most serious piece of Drollery, but no blown fooleries, or
windy poor bladders, I confess a wanton method.

Here you may perceive a valiant and thrice renowned Knight, surrounded with
all the bewitching snares of beauty and excess having almost surrendered himself
a slave to sensuality break through all those blandishments that have so long
effeminated his manly heart, and (with Spencers F^ery Hero) return to the ruin
of Giants and Monsters.

If I may but find a candid reception from you (noble Gentlemen) I have all my
Ambition ayms at: as for the other sort of people, I know their thoughts, and
how their pulses beat, they have the gift of impudence let them be thankful,
every man is not born to such bravery, I had rather get the Pox then their
friendships, who are professed and mortal enemies to those honorable and
luminous principles you own, and to

The humblest of your servants, B. M.

Don Zara del Fogo: A Mock-Romance.
CHAP. I.
Don Zara his descent. The description of his Shield, and Martial Furniture.
His invocation, and setting forth to seek Adventures.

IT was now about that mungrell hour when the blackbrow'd night, and greyey'd
morning strove for superiority, when the mirror of Martial spirits Don Zara
del Fogo sweeping the somniferous God from o^ ^is ample front with that Broom
of Heaven his face-pounding fist, entered into serious contemplation of the
renowned Acts of his most Noble Ancestors, Thistram the terrible and the great
Lancelot of the Lake, so ravishing were those heroic, Rhapsodies, that (upon
mature chew of the cud) the Champion began to tax himself of tardity, as not
having accumulated that Fame, which at the price of so See the legend of Don
Sordido Knight of the Driping pan, written by the Author of Cass^ndra.
eminent dangers he had so hotly hunted after; this second cogitation had but a
while combated with the first, when he summons the Squire of his body Soto, who
lay soundly sleeping at his beds feet, commanding him (since himself never knew
Letters) to read the Chronicle History of Saint George, who bathed his body in
the bloody bowels of a fell Dragon, or the like Achievement of Sir Elamore, or
the hard Quest of Sir Topa^ after the Queen of Elues to Barwick, or of Sir Guy
and the fierce Boar of Boston; Sir quoth Soto (who had hardly gained sight
enough to see his Master) you were wont to take great pleasure in hearing the
redoubted Adventures of Sir Bevis, surnamed Southampton; and The Knight of the
Sun; that, that quoth the Champion, the Knight of the Suns actions would put
fire into a flint stone, animate a Log, and make a wooden leg to walk; Soto
had not long led his Master by the large ears ( Don Zara descended of the
stock of Kings, see Cambd. Avisoe.
for our Champion boasted a longlinckt Genealogy, from the Phrygian King
Midas, a hundred fourscore and fourteen descents by the fathers side) but
suddenly deserting his bed, he ceazed ( For it was the custom of the Knights of
that age to wear no shirts.
all naked as he was) on his naked Sword, that Thunder-crack of terror
Slay-a-Cow, the very same that he lately won on Monta-Mole-hill from the great
Giant Phrenedecrenobroso, the son of Pediculo, and leaning thereon like the
legitimate Heyr of Mars, he very attentively hoorded up the treasures of true
Magnanimity. At every close where the Knight either wounded the Giant, or
rescued the Lady, in token of the ardency he bare to such illustrious Acts, he
gave liberty to his nails to bring blood from either buttock, for such was the
ranckness of his courage, that not only his soul, but his skin had a
perpetual itching after honorable Attempts, ^ugmented by a herd of small
Cattle, which some Authors will have to be the Genuisses of deceased Worthies,
all waiting upon this man of men, which I confess This is spoken with all
reverenc to Antiquity, which we ought lightly to question.
I cannot credit since it was Soto's custom (in order to his Masters special
command) every morning to kill some of them; but the cheerful Lady of the
Light, old Tythons tender-skin'd Madam, appearing our Champion, commanded his
trusty Squire to buckle on his Armor; too long (quoth he) have we This needs
no clavis.
Padlockt Fames Tongue, not administering any tittle tattle to that tell-tale
Goddess; Soto amazed at his Masters mood, soon girds that Sword about him which
had often made headstrong Giants to reel, the flinty-edged Slay-a-Cow, putting
a Buckler fashioned like a Spanish Ruff (full half yard deep) about his neck,
in which with wondrous Art was pourtrayed the thricefamous story of that
renowned Combat betwixt those two Arcadian Hero's, Clinias and Dametas, as I
have seen those pair of Champions Whether by Vandike or Hilliard, is not
certainly known.
drawn to the life in Canvas against the walls of a mean Mansion made for
goodfellowship; those Bucklers that Two excellent forgers.
Homer and Virgil have fashioned for Achilles and Aeneas, were but the
varnishes of some Indian hand compared with this rare piece of Sculpture, about
the Reverse whereof was this Distich (which some attribute to Linus, others to
Hesiod) engraven,

This Shield by Vulcan
was in Lemnos forged,
That it might serve
Don Zara for a Gorget.
His Mace Aenigmatically, intimating, that he cared not a fig for the stoutest
antagonist.
bearing the figure of a Cambrian Fig Soto hanged at his Saddle bow, for he had
abjured the use of a Spear since that fatal Turnament in Utopia, when a
splinter of his Lance forced it self against the face of the truly
Sanctimonious Matron Bawdwhore^a; then seating himself on the back of good
Steed Founder-foot (a horse not to be bettered in Phoebus Stable for the flownce
or the frisk, and all the fashions of a prauncing Palfray) he appointed Soto to
Lacquey by his side, committing himself to the guidance of Fortune: Soto was
armed (not so much for his own preservation as his Lords defense) with an This
kind of weapon the old Romans termed a pile; the Arabians that bor der upon
Italy a ^ave^n; the Britains a half-pike. See Scaliger de usu clubibus, l. 6.
p. 10000:
Ashen plant, made tough by Time, and pointed with steel, his brain was bound
about with a Monmouth Turband, and his back and breast bulwarkt with
impenetrable Past-boord, so that he who had seen our Champion and his
Attendant, could not but have fancied the mighty Primalion and his Page, or the
famous Bragadochio and his man Trompart; nor could the piety of our Champion
permit him to castigate his Courser for the mending of his pace, till he had
offered up this solemn Orayson to the Some may perhaps gather from hence that
our Champ on was a papist or at least papistically inclined, but they ought to
know that their opinion is no way warranted by Antiquity.
souls of those deceased Worthies, whose complicated luster creates that
splendent path, called The Milkie way.

O Mervin, Mervin, (quoth he) thou mighty Son of the munificent Oger, who at
one stroke did pare away three heads from off the shoulders of an Orke
begotten by an Incubus! Thou George the great Champon of Christendom (the true
Apollo) who for the sake of the Sultans daughter, destroyedst a Python s^x
acres in length; Thou Amadis de Gaul, wh^ encountredst with a Dragon and a
Devil at once; Thou Palmerin de Oliva, who (by virtue of a Wart on thy nose)
did so many times pass the Aegean Seas in a Shallop contrived all of
Coney-skins; and thou Errant Knight of the Ruby Rose; Look down ye immortal
Essences of neverdying Fulgor, let your spirits be Centred and centupled,
meaning hid and hundrifide.
Centred and centupled in me whose By this it appears that his heart was
hollow:
heart is of a size sufficient to retain all your Excellencies, and in whose
ample breast there lodges as sublime a Soul as ever yet Nature coffined up in a
Carkas composed of a metal more robust then that of Roderigo, or
Rud-Hudrinbrass.

This Ejaculation was no sooner sooner extinct, but Soto (enamoured on his
Lords perfections, as if he had been inspired by one of Agrippa's holy Demons)
began to shake his skull very strangely, rolling his eyes like Abraham in Sands
his Show, insomuch that our Champion (could it have been possible for that
thing called Fear to build in his breast) had fled from the face of his
faithful Servitor; but to put a period to his anxiety, Soto thrust forth these
numbers, in a tone almost equal to Stentor was a Grecian Crier of the court to
K. Aga memnon. Homer Illi.
Stentors, the presages of his Masters incomparable, incomprehensible
performances.

LAce on thy Helmit,
mighty man of valor,
Fortune shall never squeeze thee
with her sq^llour:
Fierce Knights and crnell Beasts,
with many a Giant,
Thy charmed steel shall make
both smooth and plyant;
The fickle Goddess
on thy horses Crupra,
(As her best boast)
has fixed her Nil-supra,
For things beyond belief
thou shall atchieve-a,
Which shall make after times
to grutch and grieve-a,
When they shall find thou ^^st
as brave a Plea-as
The great Achilles,
and the stout Aeneas:
O therefore of thy Fame
b^ no neglector,
Thou that ar^ born
to rival glorious Hector:
Were there a Troy besieged,
and thou within it,
Not Greece, nor Gallo-Belgica
could win it;
Troylus should live,
so Rhaesus and Sarpedon,
Achilles dye on's wounds,
and Ajax bleed on:
All that is Magnanimous,
or high, or rare-a,
Being locked up in the breast
of our Don Zara.
Heightened with this poetical Prophecy (the British Trim tram, etc.
Proverb being verified by this brace of brave ones) our Champion already
fancied himself fighting with Gogmagog, or Gargantua for the moity of the
Universe; but so unfortunate was he this very first day of his most memorable
resolve, that desired Adventurs offered it self, neither fierce Lion, nor
furious Bear, yelling Dragon, foaming Boar, or angry Antilope, no perjured
Knight to fight withal, or injured Lady to infranchise, no Magical Wharfe, so
that the Champion did not causlesly curse so calm a Climate, that afforded no
viands for Valor to feed on; Thus chewing the cud of courage, he rode on in
much vexation, till the approaching night warned him to take shelter, which
Fortune favorably allotted him, for at the foot of a huge mountain, whose head
knocked against the Clouds, a This was something too mean a recep tacle for so
accomplished ^n Hero.
Cottage with a Called in old time a red Lettice, the signal of something that
tends to good-fellowship. See Causabon de structuribus and liquoribus, lib. 90.
chequered Portall, Piriwig'd with thatch, and lined with mud, offered it self
for his entertainment, its course outside was no less then a corasive to our
Champions conscience, but he had heard of That very Lucius Anneus Seneca, who
wrote of temperance and Fortitude, yet livd like an effeminate Epicure, and dyed
like a pusilanimous Coward.
Seneca's Avisoe, that, The wisest and strongest men ought to stoop to Time and
Fate; and threfore making a halt at the door of this sedgie structure, he
alighted from his good Steed, and demanded hospitable treat of the Captain of
that carowsing Citadel, who (in much astonishment) gave a trembling reception
to himself and Soto.

CHAP. II.
Zara and Soto their entertainment in the Cottage, their Host (looking upon the
Champions fist) tells him his Fortune, and recites a Copy of verses, with other
remarkable passages.

OUr Champions carcass was not more harrassed with tedious travail, then his
colon crammed with an accustomed vacuity, for he having been managed to this
maturity with Mares Milk, though he boasted not the strength, yet he retained
the stomach of a horse; the first thing therefore debated on by our Don, was
(as an Inquisitor) what food the Farmery afforded? the Host after many cringes
began to excuse his unpreparedness; his bed-Cockatrice seconding him with an
old-brew'd Apology, but quoth mine Host (who in all respects resembled that
This Roberts surname was Booker, a maker of Almanacks, he had two handsome
daughters and kept a Wine Alehouse. See the English Chron.
Robert of the Vale, who foretold the landing of Henry the 7th.) if your
worshipful Excellency shall deign to accept of such provaunt as at the present
your servant can purvay, your worshipful Excellency will eternally oblige me:
Pray thee (quoth Zara) leave thy prate, and provide such sustenance as my merit
commands, and thy estate permits; for by the soul of Caesar, I am as hungry as
an Ostrich, and could digest a bar of Iron bigger then an ordinary Mainmast:
The Astrologers (I am afraid) keep such Being twelve in all. See Merlinus
Anglicus de starribus and ejus mansionibus; tract. 100. p. 10000
Houses as thine when they sup on sides of Taurus, and joints of Aries: My guts
quoth Soto, are contorted like a Dragons-tayle, in Elf-knots, as if some
Tripe-wife had tackt them together for Chitterlings: The Host wondered at these
eagre expressions, and concluded that the Champion had bin lately upon some
Adventure fasting; while meat was making ready, the merry Host exhorts his
Guests to a free Carowse, beginning a Health to Charlemaine, which Don Zara not
refused, and commanding Soto to the same celebration; remember (quoth he) the
great Duke of Drowndland, whose Champion I am, and his sole Heir the most
illustrious and divinely fair, Morphena del Stupratia. Soto was ever an
obedient servant to his Master, especially if the injunction had any dependence
on the pot or the spit, and therefore he failed not in the premises, so that
Bacchus has almost baulkt Ceres, and our Champion is now more drink then diet:
But by this time It were needless to mention the^ covering of the Table, or
ranking and filing of the dishes.
Supper is served up, but neither Hostess nor Host can be persuaded to sit
down, but they waited on the Champion and his o'r-grown Page as incompatibly,
as if Homer had made Nestor and Hecuba to dance attendance after Diomed and
Teueer; they fast to admire Zara, and pray that themselves may escape the stroke
of his Or Knife,
steel, the Champion making it appear by the terribleness of his teeth, that he
dares tear the strongest opposite in pieces: Nor was Soto's courage much
inferior to his Masters, who eats and talks, making his stories the
parenthesis of his meals, what Fiction reports of mad Ajax, that having killed
a Sheep, fancied he had slain Agamemnon, is here proved true, for every gaping
Orifice that our Champion created, most lamentably butchered his Host, what
wide wounds he gives Routing all before him; so that he must trust to
tradition, that should say such and such once were: But at last his fury began
to be assuaged, being grown weary of the work of death, he sheathed his
Fauchion, and commanded a bowl of the same cratonian liquor to be brought,
which after a trebble pledge, abolishes all nicity Such is the potent vigor of
Ale.
and makes the Hero and his Host look like one another, the four which make
the Family now tipple promiscuously; Not that he was a Leveller, but being of
the same humor of some kings, who play at Nine-pins with their Pages, yet
thereby neither subject their persons not their ^owers.
His Excellency enforces the parity, who (big with fancy) narrates his several
Encounters, Onslaughts, and Batteries, his infranchising of inthralled Ladies,
his finishing Enchantments, his inquests at home, and Conquests in foreign
Countries, his binding of Giants in brazen Gyves, and driving out the souls of
Dragons and Demons; His Host and Hostess listening as attentively as if the
Lecture of the Seven Champions were now reading: But, quoth my Host, if your
Highness please I can inform you of your future Fate by an infallible Rule
which I once learned of an old Gypsy in Monmouthshire, who penned it in
Monosyllables, please to afford your victorious palm; these last words were
more terrible to our Champion then the points of a thousand Swords, imagining
that his Host would hint that old Maxim in Palmistry, viz. the farcing of the
fist with a piece of silver; but this terror was soon taken away by his
Hostess ready reception of his hand, who (having gently wiped away that filth,
which lay at the foot of his mons veneris with his spittle) began for to
foretell many future events, and amongst the rest predicted, that such a year
of his life the Champion should be Not that he should be condemned to be hanged.
beholding to his book for his persons safety: This Clause made Don Zara (who
knew that his neck could not be protected by his tongue) to laugh heartily,
which his Host perceiving (though angry that his Art should not find a more
serious welcome) he said, I find that your worshipful Highness had rather be
busied about some more merry employment; I confess Palmistry is so profound a
Science, that few or Meaning that the Angels only are acquainted with the
(...)pth of that Art.
none upon earth understand it: Behold Sir a Copy of Verses that our Vicar
lately composed (on St. Valentins day) occasioned by a great To which he was
not invited.
Feast made by Mayor of Quinborough, a City not above half a league distant
from hence; then pulling out a bag of the best Buckram, the Champion having
commanded silence, mine Host began to read the following numbers.

SAturn grown old, the Gods agree, a The old Mayor.

The new Mayor.
Jove should assume his Soveraiguty,
And become chief; a solemn day
Appointed, when the Gods most gay, c The Aldermen.

(Attair'd in habits rare and strange)
Came to be witness of this change;
The Fry of Gods were there beside,
Each with his Bastard, whore, and Bride,
The path which to Joves Palace leads
In order, all this rich troop treads,
An old wife.
Ceres threw wheat on Jove most d(...)nty
Thereby forespeaking future plenty:
Th'Instructed Swine did follow after,
And for their Wheat left something softer,
You may smell out the meaning.
Civet, like Irish Soap, good beasts,
Fit waiters at such solemn Feasts:
At length they reached Joves Hall of bliss,
The Gods sat down, the The Aldermens wives.
Goddesses
Were striving for the Superiority,
Till Mistress Maioresse.
Juno challenging the Majority,
Ended the business (most demurely)
Placed and displac't as pleased her surely;
The Tables stood full crowned with Dishes,
Enough to satisfy all wishes,
Of longing Wives, or Maids grown sickly
With fruits, and doing nothing quickly;
Huge Pots of Butter not full blew,
With Custards of a doubtful hiew;
Stewd Prunes, bread made of Bread made of Cruds see the Irish Dictionary.
Malahane,
And Honey fetched from Sugar Cane,
Green Apples, plenty of small Nuts,
T'imploy the teeth, and gorge the guts;
The Goblets proud themselves to see,
So full of Sider (verily)
Both Brandy-wine and Aqua-vitae,
And Ale in years and strength most mighty,
As plentiful as A common Irish drink. See the Dictionary.
Bonniclabbar,
That each Guest his lips might slabbar;
Thus with Satiety being crowned
with Bacchus wreaths in slumber drowned
The Two Fiddlers and a blind boy with a Bag pipe.
spheres made Music all the while,
The Their Poet
Bard brave Meeter did compile;
Then fulgent One of the A(...) (...).
Phoebus standing up,
(In's greasy fist, a greasier Cup)
Drank Daphnes health, Bacchus replied
And qnafft another to the Bride
Of Vulcan; this health passed along,
Mars's Fether wagging among the throug
Drank Pallas health (brave wench and wise)
Which draught cost The (...)dlers Boy.
Cupid both his eyes
Straining to pledge, Hermes stood still,
And marked how Ganymede did fill
The Bowls, which swiftly past around,
Till God and Goddesses had bound
They were almost all drunk.
Their heads with Ivy-leavs and Vines,
His head to his knee, now each inclines;
The Sun went down.
Apollo then slipped thence half drunk,
His burning Bonnet dofft he sunk
In Thetis lap, so Heaven lost light,
And day was dampt with irksom night;
Mr. Mayor called to his wife for Candles.
Jove bent for mirth, bad Juno spread
Her mantle ore the Worlds black head,
But She was drunk and would none
she enraged with Lyeus Juice,
And madly jealous without' scuse,
Refused to guild th'unspangled Sky,
With the eyes of her Cow-keeping Spy,
She took Mr. Mayor a bo^ on the car.
And aided by a vigorous Fate
And the shrewd Goddesses, Joves state
She durst assume, pressing as far
As th'Gyants in their mountain War,
They first bound Jove, the other Gods,
(Constrained by darkness, drink and odds,
Alas) were forced to condescend
To all things for a quiet end:
Mistress Maioresse might do what she would.
Jove granted Juno rule oth' Air,
Her frowns or smiles mak't foul or fair;
His Bolts and Lightning she may take,
And with her tongue the Ax-tree shake;
From hence her Sex their Charter hold,
To rule against reason, cry and scold:
Proserpina obtained of Pluto,
That all should speed who she-saints sue to,
That man's affairs in purse or state,
Should be ruled by the woman's rate;
Venus may lie with all that love her,
No saucy God must dare reprove her,
Dallying with manners, whilst Don Vulcan
Should to their pleasures drink a full Can^
Thus by the stern decree of Fate,
Our Ile's an Amazonian State.
This Drollericall Poem mightily augmented our Champions mirth, who (as the
fashion is for most great ones) was ever delighted with what his capacity most
condemned, as soaring too high for the frail sight of Amphibion-like Genius,
Sentenc^.
but such great spirits as that of Champions move not by Pedantick Statutes,
for their actions, though excentrick, illustrates the cause, and Priscians pate
receives honorable wounds, when they please to pummel his skull, but Morba the
Champions Hostess is almost in as bad a condition as if she had swallowed
purging Confects, casting up a very fair account ere the Champion Which he
always omitted, terming it the Tarnish of his honor.
could call for his reckning, so that six hands were not sufficient to convey
her to her Cowch: The night now was more then half spent, Baron Tell-clock had
twice sounded Boot-esel to our Worthy; and the busy Bell-man bounced twice at
the door, and as well the Champion as Soto began to grow dormious, which
occasioned the Host to petition their present departure to bed, which (with
heavy heads heaven knows) they went to; yet maugre his pestiferous Ebriety,
magnanimous Zara forgot not to have his Mace, and other Military Utensils
conveyed into his Chamber (a Receptacle just five foot Diameter) where that
night himself and Soto must make their abode on a Canvass Quilt stuffed with
the richest Rye-straw, their Sheets of a duskish kind of Flannel.

CHAP. III.
What happened to Don Zara in the night. His Host brings in his Bill of Fare. The
manner of the Champions departure, with other accidents.

WHole Warrens of starved Fleas, that bit like Ban-dogs (which you will say was
strange, considering their somniferous Ale-bury) the Champion and his fidelious
Landloper Soto, that they thought themselves delivered over to the disposal of
Demogorgons diminutive Demons, insomuch that the Champion grew unspeakably
enraged, especially since he was out raged by an enemy whose existence pleaded
a protection from the violence of either Sword or Mace, which causes him thus
to complain:

O ye powers celestial (quoth he) Zara's complaint.
that power down plagues at your pleasures on pervicatious mankind; what crime
greater then that of Who coffined up his Cousins in crust.
Atreus have I committed, that my body is thus baited by the basest of worms?
Rather ye mighty Powers, who have indewed me with Achillean Valor, and
Herculean strength; let my blood be drilled by the mightiest and most Noble
Champion in the world; order me the overthrow of Ottaman, to pull down the
pride of Persia, or to ruin the Russian Tyrant.

With these and the like complaints our distressed Champion spent the most part
of the dolesom night, but finding it all in vain to bewail a helpless ill, he
resolved to bear his biting Fate with as much magnanimity as was possible, and
so defying the eagerness of those sanguine-coated Aestrums, he waited with
incredible patience the approach of the Suns Postillion, but was beguiled of
that Mean^^g the Civick Crown which the Ancients appointed for (...) who (...)
his bad fortunt bravely.
honor he hoped, for a sudden drowsiness stuprated his senses, and he slept
as soundly as Adam when his fide was opened to find out that Rib of Ruin; so
that the Sun had travailed almost a thousand miles ere he opened the windows of
his eyes, by which time Soto (the very Emblem of an earnest zeal, and the mere
mithologie of masculine love) was currying of his Masters Courser, and
polishing his Armor with precious Vulcanian dust; the Champion awaking, soon
impoverished his bed to enrich his body, seating himself in his last nights
tippling Tenement; nor must Fame forget to relate this (as an especial and
infalible argument of our Champions incomparable candor) that though his
skarifi'd skin would hardly permit his shirt its wonted familiarity, Zaras
unparalleled Magnanimity.
yet he took not the least notice of his last nights cruel sufferance, but with
a cheerful voice accosting his Host and Hostess, he bestowed on them a
Complement consonant to the time of the day, commanding a Toast (in folio) to
be forthwith made, the steeple Bowl to be repleated with Roping Ale, and (if
possible) the powder of Nutmeg to be put therein; all which being performed
with wondrous celerity, the Champion drank his noones draught, and appointed
Soto the same Doce, who by this time had finished his morning employment, and
waited at his Masters elbow, who (whether by the malignant influence of some
petulant Planet, or else vexed at the villainy of his last nights bedfellows)
was exceeding sad and Saturnine, often starting, and sometimes with an irefull
Aspect, laying his hand upon his Sword, to the amazement of his Host and
Hostess; but Soto (who was intimately acquainted with these (seeming)
strangers, and could learnedly Comment on the complexion of his Masters soul
at such times as these) knew very well that these passions proceeded from no
other cause, but that innate Antipathy between his Masters purse, and the
proditory of a Reckning, which his A very, very Victu^ller.
Host (the legitimate child of Mammon, and Madam Avaritia) had just now wounded
his eyes with, the Champion (as not knowing its importment) accepted it, and
(as his manner was upon all like occasions) gave it Soto, commanding him to
read it; Soto receives it as a needy Gallant would his Tailors Bill, his
countenance as pale as a Country Gentlewomans, viewing the Lions at first
time; it was written in very legible Characters, and ushered with this
termagant Title.

A Bill of Fare.
Imprimis, Six Black Puddings, each of them a full yard in longitude. Item,
Five Loaves of the best Barleybread. Item, An Ox head baked after the
Franconian fashion. Item, Seven pound of the best Essexian Cheese, sawed in
sunder on purpose for the Champions eating. Item, A Gallon of Mares Milk
thickened with Meal. Item, Nine Stanes of Lanted Ale. The Lodging, large Toasts,
and other Appendixes not accounted.
Soto sang these blanck Verses in a very feeble tone, and having finished,
threw the paper into the fire with such fury, as sufficiently expressed how
angry he was that his Masters ears should be molested with such muddy
Sarcasms, which act of his put the Host and Hostess upon the tenters,
especially when gazing upon the Champion they beheld him foam like some
incensed Boar, a pallid Lightning leapt from his eyes, and ill-portending
Meteors hung upon his front so that he seemed the very picture of Doomesday;
but while all stood trembling, or rather wishing an immediate then lingering
death, the Champion thundered out this mennace.

But that thy Stars never ordained thee, thou man of Motley, as a fit morsel
for my renowned Kill-za-Cow to manducate, I would presently slice thee into
steaks, and broil thee upon thy own Grydiron; have thou a mind to have thy
Fabric fired in so many places, that all the Ale thou art Master of shall not
be able to quench it, till it lie (like another Troy burnt by me (Zara) greater
then the greatest of Grecians) low in its own ruins? have thou a will to have
thy barrel heads beaten out, thy brittle Vessels broken against the walls, and
thy wife led captive in Ovant Triumph.

This funguos Inflation operated so vigorously, that as well Morba as her
husband ^ell at the Champions feet, imploring remission, as not imagining his
displeasure: The Heroic Don graciously granted their Petition, not only
pronouncing their pardon, but affording his hand in order to their elevation;
but withal, warned them to take heed for the future, how they tempted the
rigor of Fate by a pecuniary proposal to a Knight Errant; this the poor
penitent swore to; which done, our Champion hanged on his Harness, mounting his
good steed with a Majestic nod took farewell of his Host and Hostess, who
seemingly afforded him a Princely Valediction, but in heart wished him in
Procustes bed, or Perillus brazen Bull.

CHAP. IV.
The Description of a fine, fragrant, flowery Vale, supposed to be the place
where Adam tasted the Apple. The marriage of the Phoenix with the Bird of
Paradise; her disloyalty, and his Tragedy. Don Zara's heroic hope.

FOrtune having allotted so favorable a departure to her dear Don he was not
only animated for after performances, but exceedingly pleased with his own
perfections, which had not only crammed his colon, but administered instruction
to the barbarous, how to bear themselves to true enobled Personages: Soto was
as bonny as a new Beneficed Priest, and ran by his Masters Horse as he had bin
ballasted with Quicksilver. The allseeing Sun had traveled more then half way
to the Antipodes, when the Champion lighted upon a This Vale is not now to be
found, but that there was such a place. See Mandevils Geography, lib. 10000.
^^ct. 20000.
Vale, so rich and so rare, that Nature grew Bankrupt when she modelized it,
and striving to be quaint (forsooth) forgot to keep any reserve; for by this
work the Champion assured himself that she could make no more such; This goodly
Plain was imbost with the choicest of Natures Jems; no frost nor winter there,
but continual Spring time, and everlasting Summer; here grow those happy Trees
from whence flows that precious Oil wherewith Kings and Priests are Anointed;
the choycest Fruit that Europe affords with such toil to the Husbandman, are
here to be had unplanted; Here Madam Flora gathers her Roses and Tulips, when
we (alas) have not so much as a Dasie to deck her head with; Here Medea picked
those Simples that restored the wise Aeson to youth; And here (that the World
may no longer be deceived) it is that the Phoenix builds his Nest, being ever
distinguished by his meniall Train, which are these:

The Pe-hen, The Turkey-hen, The Turtle, The Gold-finch, The Pheasant, The
Popinjay The Canary, and The Nighting^^^.
These are the Phoenix his Favorites, who travail with him through the Air
upon all occasions, but he never passes the limits of this Tempe, as holding
all other parts of the Globe not worth his visit: Some Authors (perhaps Pliny
or Solinus) report, that the Phoenix had espoused the Bird of Paradise, his
Bride was fair, and rare, and rich, and young, and wise, and noble, only her
She took this fault by kind, and therefore was the more excusable.
Tail is too ponderous for her body; this noble pair dwelt not long in peace,
for loves fire began to s^ake and cool Riddle.
ere the unconstant Moon had twice looked upon the foodfull earth with half a
face; she now began to hate and loath what she once so coveted, yet to Cover
her in the original.
overspread her had been no Herculean labor, had her insatiate Tail and mind
admitted of conscientious bounds; but thus;

Six golden Sentences borrowed from the 7. Sages of Greece.
The weakest stomachs desire the strongest meats. Thus the greatest smoke rises
from the smallest fire. Thus slender wits undertake the profoundest matter.
Thus swift pursuit makes a slow performance. Thus the Arpetite is moved by
impotence. Thus Palmerin the Champion orethrew the Giant Franarco.
So she though little her self, loved every Though it were long first.
great thing, and at last became so incorrigible impudent, that she durst
mention a Divorce, although the Phoenix with tears besought the contrary, not
so much out of affection to her, as to prevent the shame that must inevitably
follow such a bufiness, but all his persuasions were in vain, a separation is
made, and she is married to Cynosure, an unknown foul, both begot and bred by
the Air. he (according to kind) trod incessantly Had al spice of the French
firing his own Fabric to quench hers, who laid often, but yet they were but
Wind Eggs, though some See Co(...) and Poet Quid.
Naturallists say, that such Eggs do hatch the Cockatrice.

How sad the Phoenix was in mind? how sorry to be so slighted by her for whose
sake he had so debased himself I leave to those that have been Phoenixes to
judge; but so mightily he took it to heart, that now (too late) he resolved to
hate all second matches, and to dye a Widdower; but grief perplexed him so,
that he feared he should leave the world, ere he had created himself anew, and
so his nest being unmade, he might quickly lose both life and name; to prevent
which he takes his speedy flight over hills and Dales, Lakes and Rivers, over
Kingdoms and Countries, both East and West, and all this to gather Spices for
his Funeral (O The Author laments the deplorable condition of the Phoenix.
sweet Bird! how sad was thy Fate?) But it seemed better to him (according to
his pristine privilege) to kill his body, and renew his mind, then to pine
away with grief six hundred years, and therefore (having betaken himself to his
Nest) surrounded with his precious Gums and odoriferous Spices, the Sun shining
bright and hot, he with his wings augmented the heat, whose strong Retention
kindled his Bed, as Boys do dried leaves with Burningglasses, which soon
consumed his nest himself, and all to ashes.

And least all these sweets should want as sweet a harmony, a numerous troop of
Nightingales conspired in one consort, to warble forth the delicacies of their
abode, amid this Vale their glided a silver Brook, so gently, that the
subtillest eye might gaze very strictly, and not perceive it, on whose violet
bancks grew thick Cypress trees, to keep out Phoebus beams; Here Pan and
Faunus, the Dapper Dri^des, with Madam Marisco, Queen of Fairies used to dance
the Morris by Moonlight; the bottom of this azure Who knows (...) this was
(...) very Ta^^^ or Pactolus so famous in Po^si^,
Rivulet was paved with Pearls and Diamonds, which varied their gloss as the
gentle breath of Zephire, purled the surface of the stream, and presenting to
the eye (like a steel Glass) the spangled beauties of the Firmament; Dolphins
usually deserted the Ocean, to sport in this Pactolian Fountain: Our Champion
exceedingly rejoiced, that so happy a harbor proffered it self for his repose;
As also, that there was, now, a fair, probability of some remarkable Adventure;
and therefore clapping Soto on the shoulder, Com(...) (quoth he) with
Roman-like courage, for the Gods, I hope, have appointed me some hungry Lion,
or gag-toothed Bear, some deformed Giant, or male-contented Knight to encounter
with here in this Flowery Valley; So putting spurs to his Horse, like another
Alexander on Bucephalus, he made his way into the very entrails of the Grove,
at whose dreadful approach, Syluanus and his shaggy crew fled amain, and were
soon out of sight, to the Champions extreme discontent, who would fain have
been belabouring any thing that had life; but the (...) H^^nib^l was caught
with the delic^cies of (...).
pleasure of the place soon calmed his spit-fire contemplations, so that he
unlaced his Helmet, and unharnessed himself, lying down at the root of an
Almondtree, where (having been kept waking by malignant Fleas almost all the
night before) he so on became slave to Somnus, the prattling Brook in a pleasing
tone chaunting a Dulced Lullabie.

CHAP. V.
What Discoveries Zara and his Squire made, wandering up and down the Grove. The
Lady Gylo coming thither to disport her self, is encountered by the Champion.
His most elegant Courtship. Her Responsion. With other pass^ges.

THrice happy ZARA, who art thought worthy of that Paradise which the first man
forfeited for an Apple; But while the Champion slept, Soto (being surprised
with the beauty of the place) was ranging up and down to make discoveries, here
Potatoes and ripe Grapes offered themselves to his lips, there Pomgranates and
luscious Dates contended which first should salute his goodly-siz'd grinders;
Soto was not nice in acceptance, but gathered greedily of all sorts, returning
laden to his magnanimous Lord and Master, who snorted so loud on his Rosy
Cowch, that the verdant Grove reverberated his garulous repose, while Soto sang
this Dormitory.

SONG.
SOmnus, O thou Protean God,
That with woollen shoes art shod,
Thou that hate Trump and Drum,
Loath'st the Cock, but love the Comb:
Grand enemies to Fifes and Forges,
And the Daughters of Boanerges;
Friend to Fishes and to dumb men,
To silent women and to some men.
great God of C^^s,
of nods and naps,
Clumzey Somnus now prepare-a,
To rock the senses of Don Zara.
Soto had no sooner ended his Epidiction, but the Champions scales fell from
his eyes, and he perceived his faithful servant sitting at his feet, having
prepared a Repast after his Repose; the Champion fed furiously on the Grapes,
squeezing bunches of them by the dozen, as if he had search^ for Bacchus his
beloved a plump brown Nymph. See Cardan de ^^btilitate^.
Erigone, and now being sufficiently sated, he arose with a resolve to explore
for flesh, either Goat o^ Stag, but Nature had not played he^ paat so
profusely, and indeed she had manifested a prodigious prodigallity, had she
afforded a Shambles to her Fruiterie: The Champion and Sot^ had not long
qu^sted, but they happened on a spacious Cave, situate at the foot of a Cedar,
it was a very vast Receptacle, seeming the work of some Sylvan, or Wood-god, for
a Nocturnall Repository; Soto was first sensible of the novelty, and gave
information thereof to his Master, who commanded him forthwith to enter, but
Soto gave a modest negation to his Masters mandate; for, quoth he, who knows
but this may be the Mansion of that Genius which governs this goodly Grot, who
being justly incensed at such an intrusion, may metamorphose us into Mapl^s, or
some more sordid sort of F^well: Thou speak well, quoth Zara, but (that thou
may know thou serv^st a Master, whose courage is not a whit inferior to the
stoutest Champion that ever bore Buckler) I am resolved to enter this Cave were
it walled wit^ Dragons, and inhabited with Demons; so unsheathing Kill-za-Cow,
he resolutely leapt into the Cave, examining every angle thereof, he found it a
fit residence for an Errant Knight, yea, and a Lady Errant if occasion
commanded it; in all respects most resembling that very Vault which Joseph the
son of Goron possessed, when that venerable Quack sold his Brethrens lives (by
a Sortiligie) to save his own: Having taken strict notice of its Dimensions, he
called Soto to the Caves mouth; Enter, quoth he, (thou sperm of a hen-harted
Groom) and make it thy wonder, to survey what a subteranean shelter Fate has
allotted us: Soto (though shaken with an Ague fit) confidently entered, and
seeing no occasion of dread, took heart of grace, insomuch that he hardly
refrained upbraid his Master, as guilty of calumny in downright terms; Soto
his Apology.
My Lord, quoth he, you are too much an Heretic, if you think your Soto
refused to cast himself into this Cave out of any anxious cogitation as to his
person, for had it been the very throat of Tartarus, the gullet of Gehenna, or
the belly of Barathrum, his courage had afforded him a will to any attempt,
though supetnatural, especially having the great Hercules for precedent, who
forced the very Fiends to a compliance, and An. Mun. 75^9.
brought away Pluto's three-headed Porter; the truth is, it was my piety that
persuaded me to forbearance; I have read Sir those Lay Divines, Homer, Hesiod,
and Theocritus, and do believe with them, that Witnes^ the Aqu^tick and Te
restiall Angel^.
every Grove, Grot, and Stream has its tutelar and vehicular Deity; but these
obscurities (my Lord) are too deep for your reason, you must sit down with a
description, Periphrasis, o^ Adumbration; I say, had it not been impious for me
to have rashly rushed upon the Genius of the place: ^rithee no more, quoth the
Champion, these Puntillors befi^ not my observation, let feeble-soul'd Doradoes
listen to such effeminate Axioms, I am the Rod of Heaven, a man made to let
Mortals know how much that feared thing may be indebted to my self, the great
and true Amphipium; for thee (Soto) I do not much wonder at thy fear, though I
hope thy converse with me, together with thy strict observation of my Actions,
will render thee after some few months sufficiently Heroic; Having said thus, he
deserted the Cave (with a resolve to rest there that night) and returned to the
place where he lately both slept and eat, near which he beheld the
Thunder-crested Founder-foot feeding almost to a Not but that the Champion^
Horse was of a moderate temper, but this is spoken by a figure, called Aequo,
intimating what might have happened to a more luxuriant Palfray.
surfeit on the sweet and verdant Grass, which that plat of ground afforded of
an incredible height; Here arrived, he and Soto sat down, resolved to encounter
with a second Collation, when they beheld a woman (an infallible Argument, that
she was none of the soundest Politicians) plucking Pomgranates, and ripe
Oranges, which grew there in abundance; Soto supposed that some new Minerva was
dropped from Heaven, or another Venus newly born of the brackish waves, had
chosen this Grove as the most pertinent place of Aetheriall Delectation; she
was clothed in a rich and sparkling kind of stuff, woven by An eminent
Spinster.
Arach^es fingers, of the finest Calidonian Silk, buttoned before with green
Emeraulds, yet not so close but that those hills of snow, her immaculate
breasts were visible, ^urking under the shadow of Lawn; that Globe of blisses
her head was covered with attire of green Sarcenet, fringed with blew Flanders
Lace, studded with Bristoll Sapphires, which (could it be possible) augmented
the luster of her heavenly face, so that she seemed like another A Venetia^
Cou^teza^.
Aphrodite finifi'd for the embraces of Adonis, or a second Helen proud of the
lime-hound Paris: The Champion (though otherwise too tough for such tender
Creatures, having been trained up in the School of Mars, and not of Cyprides)
melted before the eyes of this Sunny substance, waxing A Disease called the
swelling of the ^e^. Se^ ^arnelius and Culpepers ^egaci^.
proud beneath the navell, and in a minute was molded into a perfect
^^amorate; Soto felt the same flames about his heart, but durst not manifest
the itching of his soul; our Champion a long time feasted his eyes without
speaking (resembling the Statue of Mark Anthony gazing on the beauteous Idea of
Cleopatra) remaining as it were extaside.

Such is thy force, O mighty Cupid,
Thou can make Mortals dull and stupid,
And when thy Tyrant pleasure varies,
Dick is all fire, and Tom all Air is;
From the Flayle unto the Miter,
From the Galeon to the Liter;
From the Stall unto the Stye,
Are thy Trophies raised on hye.
But at length recollecting himself, he commanded Soto to make up to the Lady,
and to Complement her in his name: Sir (quoth Soto) under your correction, I
think it would make more for your Honor, and predict a surer Accomplishment of
your wishes, if you accosted her in person, rather then by Proxey; The Champion
could not withstand this Oraculous Incitement; And therefore willing SOTO to
wait upon him in the most Ceremonious posture that could be thought on; he
hasted to the place where this Piece of Divine perfection resided, who seeing
(as she thought) a couple of Champions drawing near her, began to fly, as in
a wild amazement, but the Knights with his Helmet in his hand, and bowing
himself often to the earth.
courteous comportment persuaded her, that harm could not be intended, where
such officious zeal was intimated; Fortified with this resolve, she stood
still, expecting the Champions approach, who almost Being used to ride, not run.
out of breath, could not express himself with that fluent Accuracie, which
otherwise he had done; but after some respiration, taking her by that moist
Adamant, her Lilly-white hand, he delivered himself very volubly, Thus;

Most fair and beauteous Lady, whose eyes are the Sun and Moon of the Earth,
whose face, whose forehead, whose lip, whose hair, whose mouth, whose hand, and
whose all, pronounces all other of your Sex, but mere dashes, strokes, a la
vole^, or at random, that face was not formed for any beneath the degree of a
knight Errant to kneel to that lip (most fair Venus) was not Vermillion'd over
for any to kiss, that cannot boast the spoils of War, and the Trophies of
Victory; Behold (Natures best Piece) where Don Zara (whom Kings have kneeled to
for their lives, and Queens obsicrated as pensive Lovers) prostrates his Horse,
Armor, Sword, Mace, Shield, Servant, and Self at your bright feet, imploring
what the most resplendent beauties on earth Meaning a retalliation of Love. See
Cupids Messenger. page 10000.
have begged of him, it is Love most worshipful woman that Don Zara implores,
without which this soul of his (though to the whole worlds loss, if not ruin)
must forsake its mansion, and your self (all too late) repent your coyness,
that has destroyed the most fidelious fighting Servitor that ever laid just
claim to honorable beauty, and beautiful honor.

Gylo (for so was the Lady called) knew not what Responsion to yield to this
facetious Rhodomontado (a Complement not to be paralelled in any Grubstreet
Romance) but at last making most humble ^beysance to our Hero (with cheeks
blushing like Aurora) she answered:

Thrice Noble Sir, your manly figure, and soul-slaving Oratory, as they command
my wonder, so they constrain me to an ingenuous acknowledgement, that I am no
way worthy of your notice, whose wonder-working Valor merits a Minerva for
Mistress, and whose copious elocution makes Mercury ashamed of his emptiness;
but if the candor of my Stars allot me so bounteous a bliss, that your
honored self shall think I deserve your commands, yonder Mansion made of
Marble is my abode, and in the bowels of that room adorned with a Balconey do I
constantly cover my self.

Gylo had no sooner uttered this, but lowting low, she and her Maid forsook the
place, leaving the Champion and his Servitour in much amazement.

CHAP. VI.
Zara murders a monstrous Bear, who assaulted him in the Cave: He plays and
sings beneath the Lady Gylos chamber Window, and receives a very luckie return
of his Love.

JOy and wonder (like two opposite winds disturbing the already distracted
Simile.
Ocean) strove for Supremacy in our Champion; on the one side the Ladies
worthiness, on the other side her coyness palsied her brain, so that he
remained for a time as one Meaning transmografide, or memorphosed into a
Mandrake.
trans-elemented.

Such is thy power, O Love,
such is thy might,
When thou surprizest any
Mortal Wight;
Whether Orlando Smith,
or Oswald Clinker,
Whether the Great Turk,
or the brass-fac'd Tinker;
Thou mouldest him anew
in every part,
And for a pint of Mirth,
reckon'st a Quart
Of Sorrow, making a most
grievous puther;
A Pox upon thee,
and thy Sea-born Mother.
Soto a long time observed his Lord with a serious look; but perceiving, that
he cared not to put a period to this excruciating ecstasy, he burst out into a
hearty laughter, saying, Sentenc^
Cupids Arrows (I perceive) can pierce the strongest Armor, and supple the
most sternest soul, Sentence upon sentenc inserted by the Author, merely for
the solace of the sage.
as those are the most killing griefs that dare not speak, so (no doubt) those
are the most ineffable joys, that cannot gain utterance: Rejoice, my Lord, and
sing Paeans to the pretty little God, who has thus courteously awarded you: You
are the wittiest and best of Servitors, answered ZARA, O I could dye upon her
Meaning some pri(...) mark.
Spot, and venture life, or otherwise do more for her dear sake then those
famous Palladines, who were Kinsmen to mad Rowland; Hercules Labors were but a
Bakers dozen, mine shall puzzle Arithmetic truly to compute them: She is
indeed (quoth Soto) the Metaphysics of her Sex, the very Rule of Algebra; you
are the Jove that must press this Laeda, the Endymion, that are beloved by this
Cynthia, and the Anchyses that must enjoy this Venus: I know it (quoth Zara)
for did thou not observe how her color went and came all the time that I was
courting her; and though I say it (that should not) I never in all my life had
the happiness of more fluency on so short a warning: Hermes himself (quoth
Soto) could not have handled his business better; but Sir, take it from me, An
Axiom borrowed of Cato.
He that has a woman by the waste, has a wet E^le by the tail; And they hate
delays as much as they abominate debility: What would thou have me to do
(quoth the Don?) shall we presently visit her; not so soon Sir, quoth Soto, you
know that providence has provided us a place of rest, you may well waste this
night in contemplation of her Excellencies, and to morrow, ere the fleet hours
shall have harnessed Phoebus fiery Horses, we will bid her Bonjour at her
Balconey, by which time (if the Muses favor me) we will be provided with an
amorous Canticle, Rival to best of A most excellent Italian Ballad-maker.
Petrarchs, Sidney, or Ronfard, only the Alcean Lyre will be wanting, but that
our Voices shall supply, ( See Tom Dales Aphorism, Tome 9 sect 12. Apho. 19.
for the silent, note which Cupid strikes, is far sweeter then the sound of any
Instrument) celebrating her beauty, and inciting to the Paphian pleasure. Thou
art my better Genius, quoth Zara, and shall share my Fortunes, this was
excellently well thought on, and cannot but exceedingly take.

Approach thou silent Night,
mother of Rapes,
And dreary ruin,
friend to Owls and Apes,
Fly, fly, ye winged hours
with eager motion,
And bring the cheerful day
from forth the Ocean,
Father of life and light,
when thou appearest,
I Will take my rise,
resorting to my dearest.
I have often heard (quoth Soto) that Love can inspire the most insipid; now I
have proof my Lord, that you are a very Lover, witness this polite Poetical
passion, but the Night-Ra^en (Sir) has chanted her Vespers, and Madam Nox has
already hung her curtain over the Hemisphere, let us convey our selves to our
Concave, quoth Zara, and summon Somnus to a peaceful parley: I have, said
Soto, furnished our Pavillion with a bed of the best Moss, and the trunk of an
Alder tree for a pillow: Thou art in all things excellent, quoth Zara; but now
for the contrivance of our Ode: Let me alone for that, quoth Soto, I Will kick the
Mount to Attoms, swill up (...) John (...)lands ^^solvs, (...)m 2^.
Hellicon, ravish the Nine, and break Apollo's Fiddle about his pate, but I Will
Rant in most magnificent Miter; I Will warrant the Lady is your own, if (which we
have cause to guess) she be one of Minerva's Maids of Honor: This said, they
departed to their hollowed Mansion, and taking their Cowch, on a sudden became
speechless, when Fortune, the professed enemy to worth, appointed them a very
dangerous Adventure, for the fly Sergeant Morpheus had no sooner arrested
their senses, but the proper owner of the place, a Bear as black as blackness
it self, as fell as an Hyrcanian Tiger, entered the Cave (as was her wonted
guize) with a resolve to rest her self there that night, but finding uncouth
Inmates, she gave so Ioud a roar, that the Grove ecchoed the Thunder of her
throat; This yelling Allarum soon beat up the Champions Quarters, and he awaked
in much distraction, giving Soto (though accidentally) so sound(...). on the
breast with his Whether his left or right is not certainly known.
foot, that he cried out as he had bin broke on the wheel; by this time the
Bear had bitten our Champion quite through the calfe of his left leg, which made
him roar more audibly then this beast of prey entering the Cave: Soto mean time
(like a hardy Squire) strenuously assaulted this wild creature with his
Javelin, but found his hide too tough for penetration, and such was the mockery
of Fate, that the Champion had not opportunity to unsheath his Sword, so that
his face was scratched and scari^i'd, as his leg was bruiz'd and wounded, no
quarter from head to foot was free; was it not time then for the Champion and
Soto to lay about them, for this hairy Monster fought not to gain honor, but
to allay hunger.

Ah Zara, Zara, had I my wish, some The pious Author petifully bemoans the bad
condition of Zara.
God should turn thee into a Sheep, or Goat, nay rather then sail into an Ass,
to escape this vile visitation, then thus be taken like a tame Beast in thy own
Den.

Yet at last despite of Destiny he forced out Kit-za-Cow, and with one single
thrust pierced through the skin ribs, and riff of this saucy Savage, cleaving
her heart who giving a deep groan, becam exanimate: This Conquest being so
happily achieved, the Champion (with Soto's aid) disburthened the Cave of
this rough creature, whose length (by London measure) was no less then six
yards, and whose head the Cpampion immediately severed from the unwieldy Trunk,
hanging it on the top branch of a Beech Tree, as a Trophey consecrate to
Nemesis and Astrea, ingraving this Distich about the Bole.

Apollo, Python sl^w,
which was no Bear-a,
The Monster owned this head,
was slain by Zara.
But the wounds and scratches lately received, were not so irksome to our
Champion, as the sorrow he underwent to be maimed at such a time by this beast
of Mars, when he had wholly devoted himself to Venus, yet such was the ardency
of his affection, that Though one of his supporters had been (...) o^^well
says the (...) Love will (...) where it cannot go.
he resolved to visit his Mistress with the morning;

O true and unparalleled Amorist, worthy the Pen of another Parker! Others if
but pricked with Eglantine, or Phlebotomiz'd with the Guardians of Roses, think
themselves sufficiently excused for not doing that Devoyre to their Mistresses
which Cupid commands; but he, though creeping on hand and crupper, will not
fail to complement his fair one, and who knows but the compassionate Gods may
reward this admirable Ardour, with the miraculous cure of his wounds, without
the aid of Machaon or Podalyrius.

The Olympic powers, said Soto, have manifested their care of your courageous
carcass (thrice Noble and redoubted Hero) in that they guided your good Sword
to so home a thrust when in all probability you had been manducated by that
Monster, who now remains headless; the fightless Deity does always file their
names, whom he thinks worthy to wage war under his Banner with blood; But I too
long neglect to apply some healing herb to your yawning wound: Having said
this, Soto arose, and searching about the Grove for some For a better
understanding of this (...)Dr. Trigs Pr(...) Pu^ril^ p* ^0000
sanitating Simple; he at last lighted upon that (Hell-envied, Heaven-guarded)
weed, called See Clavels Recantation, page 121.
Morsus Diaboli, which he gently cropped, chaunting a Canticle to Tellus, and
resorting to his maimed Master, squeezed the juice thereof into his wound, and
then applying the leaf it self, bound it about with the rind of a Mulberry
Plant, which gave him present ease, and occasioned his Benizon on solicitous
Soto: By this time Aurora was visible in the East, clad in her purple Robe;
Aeous began to shake his fiery Main, neighing so loud, that Sol ( By this (...)
appears that the Sun himself is an ^dulterer. See the Act against Fornication
etc.
who had slept with Thetis all that night) sat upright in his watery bed, and
after a yawn or two, took his scourge in his hand; the Champion and Soto
therefore immediately set forward on their amorous enterprise, and were under
the Balconey, where our warlike Leander expected his Lilly-handed Hero ere the
Sun was warm in his Throne; for some minutes they diligently listened if they
might hear any body sti^, but neither jarre of Clock, nor the hoarce hum of any
drowzie Groom to be heard, all things buried in so profound a silence, as if
the God of dreams had here pit(...) his Pavillion. Begin the Hymn, quoth Zara,
the Canzonet that must give my Goddess the Alar(...) of love, my self will help
to bear the burden; then Soto having opened his Organ pipes with a Pegasian
hem, began to warble the following Song:

SONG.
1.
ARise thou true Aurora from thy East,
too long (good faith) thou keepst thy nest
Zara's no Incubus,
Nor thou a lazy Sus,
That thou art tardy thus,
thy Champions reddy with his spear in rest Ambo.
Then let the turn-pikes on my chin,
Take thy Half Moon Fortress in.
2.
Cupid (alas) does suck my best blood out,
I drop at heart as old wives drop at snout,
No Brescian Bear loves honey,
Or down-chin'd Miser money,
Better then I thy Con --.
appear, bright saint, and cure my amorous Gowt.
And let the turn-pikes, etc.
3.
Love has not only drove his Peg
Through my heart, but through my leg,
After such dire assault,
Here do I make a halt,
for I was n're yet shunned by Doll or Meg.
Let then the Turn-pikes, etc.
4.
Though (Mars appointing so) I Am framed of Iron,
And that strong bars of steel my flesh inviron,
Though strung with stubborn wire,
I melt in thy Coal-fire,
Cupids strong Cu^rasiere
I am, then glorious Girl put thy Attire on.
Then let the Turn-pikes, etc.
5.
Be thou my Sea-born Venus, I will be
Thy Mars, thy Vulcan (I go limpingly)
Let me view thy silken Dog,
(Able to vanquish Gogmagog,)
I Will be thy Ape, be thou my clog,
to love, and not be loved, is misery.
Then let the Turn-pikes, etc.
6.
Let Us laugh, and leave this world behind,
And procreate till we are blind,
That Gods may view,
With a Dildo-doe,
What we bake, and what we brew,
yet our intrinsic fervor never find.
Then let the turn-pikes on my chin,
Take thy Half Moon Fortress in.
They had no sooner finished their Ditty, but behold Madam Gylo (apparelled in
a loose vestment, her hair bound up in a carnation Cawl, which excellently
became her) appeared (like another Juliet ready to receive her beloved Romeo)
on the Battlements, bearing in her hand a Pewter Vessel, containing the
quantity of about three quarts of that (which like the Spider, she had
extracted from her own bowels) she had on purpose procured for our Champions
reception, and it appears ( See Albertus Aja^, de Modo Cacan di, Tome (...).
if there be any truth in Tradition) it was the Ladies Ordure to precipitate
any excrementious substance from that very window: The Champion and Soto
greatly rejoiced to see this morning Star irradiate that Horizon, but were soon
returned to their quondam dejection, when they found their ears unguented with
warm water, well lanted with a viscuous ^ngredient; the Lady having
accomplished her Atchievmen, returned to her place of rest, leaving Zara and
Soto in the wildest wonder; nor let any (seeming) Solon tax their ecstasy, for
even Alcides or Achilles had been the same sad ones, had Briseis or Omphale
practiced the like Complement; but after they had a long time busied their (new
wrunced) eyes with gazing one upon another, like men dropped from the Clouds, and
perceiving the Lady had left them, without probability of return, they (without
speaking one to another, so vast was their amazement) retired to their Grove,
their faces full of the ostents of shame and dolor.

End of the First Book.
Don Zara del Fogo: The second Book.
CHAP. I.
Zara's passionate Complaint against the Lady Gylo, and all her Sex in geneall.
Soto mittigates his ire, they travel to Mount Mongibell, where he is
munificently treated by Lamia the Witch.

REturned to their earth-wal'd Cittadell, the Champion and Soto (like penitent
Pilgrims) entered their Cave, hardly refraining to bedew each others Aspects
with briny drops; Soto was the first that broke silence, who taking his Master
by that hand made to pull up mighty Oaks, and pound prodigious Monsters and
tyrannous Tytans to attoms, Soto hi^ Oration.
Let not my Lord, said he, tolerate this sourse of sorrow and griping grief to
overwhelm him; we cannot, Sir, expound this aenigma, A Cunnin^ man or a teller
of Fortunes; th^s was he who told the old ^arl of Essex that h s Mistress should
make him headless.
Edipus himself durst not enter the lists against this Sphynx, who knows but it
may be the custom of this country for Ladies to treat their Lovers in this
method; Sentence.
Women's actions are like their Wombs, not to be fathomed; but we have no Oracle
to resort to, no Temple of Ammon or Cumean Cave; for my part, I believe the
Lady whom you are so vexed at, is of too noble and generous a temper to welcome
her Votarist with an affront, besides she seems no Penthiselea, no Camilla, or
Britomart, that she should think her self of sufficient strength to Bulwark her
Mansion, and all within from the Battery of just vengeance, in case your
warlike selfshould vow a devastation, there is therefore some Hyerogliphicall
Catastasis to be expected of this matter. Thou art (said the Champion a Traitor
to my Honor, and a betrayer of that Repute which I have hitherto retained
despite of Envy; Do thou think this could be any other then a contumelious
Quip; (...) A^iome borrowed of Lycophron.
Love though he be blind can smell, and though thy sense and scent have
forsaken thee at once, yet know that Zara cannot be deluded into a dull
Heresy; henceforth I will abjure the thought of that nefarious
Nitrosulphureous Sex, I will find some Country where it shall be Felony to
acknowledge I ever looked upon a woman, and high Treason to say I had a Mother;
let who will protect their persons, bols^er up their beauties, cringe to their
commands, and dye to do them service; Give me my Arms, I will instantly
demolish this crazy Castle, and put all its Tenants to the Sword, not sparing
this very woman, this vile woman, who has most egregiously abused the truest
and Noblest Servant that ever laid leg over Lady. Soto perceiving that the
Hemisphere being so strangely clouded, storms and tempests must inevitably
ensue, fell upon his knees, embracing The more to win upon him; this kind of
posture was used by all suppl^^nts of old. See Cottons Concord lib 20. p 30.
the calves of the Champions legs, beseeching him for his sake (his fidelious
servant Soto) to mitigate his justly conceived displeasure, and not to destroy
whole Families for the foolish perpetration of one whose ignorance (as to his
person and parts) might somewhat excuse her crime; and though it be true (said
Soto) that in all Comedies more know the Clown, then the Clown knows, and
though your Fame fill the Universe, this Lady yet may be one of those whose
ears have not sucked in the report: For thy sake, said the Champion, I will
spare these wretches, and inhume my intended Revenge; I confess I had been too
bloody but for thee; thus the Pelean Youth was persuaded by his Patroclus to
wire draw the Fate of Troy; I do acknowledge my self a sworn servant to that
sweet Sex, and (if with Neoptolemus) I had sacrificed this foolish Female to
Rhamnusia, I could not have expiated the giddy crime without a tedious journey
to Paphos; But let us leave this place, the Genius whereof (it seems) is an
utter enemy to Errant Knighthood, he then mounted his prancing Palfrey who fed
not far off, putting on his shining Armor, and inveloping his head with a Cap
of steel; Soto (having first repleated his Crib with ripe Dates, Almonds, and
other fruits) had soon harnessed himself, and attended the motion of his
Master, whose fretting soul occasioned the galling of Founder-foots sides, and
Soto's sweat, for the Knight rode as some would run for their lives, like such
another Hotspur as Astolpho, or Rogero, posting away from Logestilla; and how
long this eager mood would have held him, Heaven knows, if his eyes had not
clapped plummets upon his heels, when he beheld a Read Sir John Mandevils
Geography, l 40. And P^rchas. ^ilgrimage. Tome ^00. Tract. 10000.
Mountain of an incredible altitude, for (like Atlas and Olympus) its head was
hid in Clouds for many leagues upward, out of whose torrid entrails flaiks of
fire (accompanied with most Perhaps the howlings of damned souls
hideous noise) took flight to Heaven, towering in the troubled Air like so
many ruin-portending Comets; these were no sooner vaded, but (with the same
Thunder as before) stones far bigger then those belonging to Meal-Mills, were
ejected with horrible fragours, able to have astonished any Mortal save Zara,
who all un-moved, beheld this flaming heap, being a great Natural; and well
versed in Pliny, and Albertus Magnus, but yet he would not dare his Destiny by
an over-hardy intrusion to near the skirts of this voluminous Excrescence,
whose (...) were enough to persuade some that Tellus has formerly been a
profound Tipler, and (to the immor(...) honor of good Fellowship) wears a rich
face. The Champion had not long contemplated the mysterious, and not to be
resolved See Aristotle's Problems, (...) Pater, and unheard of Curiosities.
Riddles that trackless Nature exhibits, but he perceived a Cot (not thatcht,
but covered over with blue state, the outward walls seeming all of shining
Glass, yet not withstanding more hard then i^on) on his left hand in an humble
Valley, that lay about half a league from this fiery Mountain, Sentenc^
borrowed out of Greens groa^sworth of w^^, p. 10.
as if this lowly Grot would teach aspiring mankind, that to be safe is to shun
the Mountains heights of greatness, a thick smoke issued out of the top of this
tenement, the infallible symptom of some Hospitable Inhabitant, hither our
Champion addressed himself, with a resolve to rest for some minutes, but
knocking at the door with the pummell of his Sword, and calling to those (in
all probability) within, he received no answer, only the courteous door of it
self opened, as inviting him to enter, which he did, Soto following him; the
first thing he beheld was a kind of Pen, or punee Prison, but far stronger then
those the British Shepherds immure their Flocks in, in it were included a
great number of (seeming) These were once very proper men, but now
Metamorphosed by this Circe into Beasts.
Dogs, Wolvs, Badgers, Foxes, Apes, and Monkeys, who upon the Champions
approach manifested all the signs of Amity, the Dog^ wagged their tails and
friskt upon him, the Wolvs lickt his hands, the Badgers crouched at his feet,
the foxes (throwing away all the wiliness) became his real suppliants; Apes
danced antic merely to make him mirth, and the Monkeys (in the language of the
face and the eye) made many protestations of sincere service: Zara was
something amazed at this strange (yet auspitious) entertainment from creatures
whom he had never before conversed with: what would have amated others,
animated him; and that which to others had been * Lathe, to him was Helens
potion; nor was he so bestial, but to take notice of the courtesy of these
creatures whom he complemented peculiarly, with so winning a garb, that though
Oratory were wanting, their silence spoke more then some could have uttered
with all the ornaments of Rhetorical Elocution: Passing these, he came to a
door which he found fast locked, but peeping through the Keyhole, he perceived
where a Lady of excellent beauty was sitting by a fire made of the roots of
Fir, sorting heaps of herbs, a Girdle (borrowed from the head of a Hyena) full
of Magical Characters about her waste, her Rod, Staff, and other implements of
Sorcery stood by her on a Table of Abstersive Ebony, and about her head (with
such a noise of Bees commonly make when they conglomerate) flew millions of
These were Devils no doubt, who Complemen ted Lami^ in such shapes S(...) Bodin
de Bullibus, lib. (...)
Batts, Dorrs, and Butter-flyes: This Lady was no other then the Enchantress
Lamia, a woman insatiatly luxurious, insomuch that no Traveller that way, of
what degree or condition soever, could escape her; those that refused to
accompany her, she immediately turned into beasts, appointing them perpetual
captivity; this wicked Witch knowing by her Art, that Don Zara should about
this time visit Mount Mongibell; she (as was her constant manner upon the like
occasion) transformed her self (at other times a mere Maegera, the very Emblem
of deformity, and the compendium of a Chaos) into a most beauteous shape; Don
Zara must be the Ulysses whom this Circe will admit to her embraces, and now
perceiving his approach she commanded her ill-mannerd door to give him
ingresse, and her self rising from her Chair gave him that welcome which denoted
the high esteem she had of him; her Menial Train (which were all These Damsels
were crea^ed by Dedalus, whose Statues (as Plato affirms would walk and (...)ew
many ^ine tricks.
Statues of Marble, bearing the figures of untoucht Virgins) yielded him
homage; an Ivorie Chair of its own accord branching it self beneath his
buttocks, where he was no sooner seated, but a Table richly furnished with rare
Vyands and sweet Wines opposed it self to his view, the Marble bodied Maidens
waiting obsequiously and filling forth the Wine with much agility. Soto (at the
appointment of the Chantress) sat down also, but he who had noted the gogling
of his eyes (roving up and down as if he meant to muster all the varieties in
the room) would have concluded him a Puppet, whose every part found motion upon
wire: The Champion as was his usual guize) fed rapa ciously, and so gave Lamia
good hope of his strenuous activity when Venus should make proof of his
procreative part; the eating humor being over (grasping a vast Goblet in his
hand, whereon was pourtrayed the History of Io, being turned into a white Cow,
the great Jupiter Bulling her) he drank a deep health to the Inchantresse; Most
excellent Lady, I now celebrate your Highness health with as true a heart as
ever I came from School; This said, he exhausted the steeple Bowl with such
vigorous velocity, that Lamia could not but be astonished at the worthiness of
the man; Sir, quoth she, you are Master of all those ways that win most upon
us women; but I cannot but wonder at the bravery of your brain that can brook
such torrents as these: Sweet Lady, quoth the Champion, I always drink with the
same courage that I use to cleave those Helms that are thought Thunder-proof.

Fill me a Bowl, that I may bathe my head in it,
And rise like Phoebus in the East,
Shaking my dewy locks --
This said, he kissed the Inchantress with such ardency, as he would have eaten
her lips off, who very patiently permitted him to dwell upon those
Twin-Cherries, and sometimes to practice what good Rogero and Alcyna once
experimented, when their Tongues became insoul'd, as Sampsons Foxes were
inchain'd.

CHAP. II.
Soto courts Lapida. The Inchantress turns him into a Horse. She raises the
Ghost of Hercules, whom Zara encounters with, and is knocked down. He is
extremely enraged, but at length appeased by Lamia, who recreates his senses
with many rare sports and pastimes.

WHile his Master was thus Billing, it had been shame for Soto to sit as a
Mute, or whistle upon his thumbs ends, when so many beauteous Objects (as it
were) offered themselves to his embraces; therefore (after Solemnization of the
Health) he rose up, and addressed himself to Lapida (the fairest and most
portly of all the Attendant Nymphs) ^ Lapida in a most elegant, elaborate
style, perhaps h^^ving r^ad the Academy of (...)
Most pellucid Paragon, quoth he, whose Fulgor famishes the Fame of HERO,
HELEN, or Hebe; vouchsafe most illustrious morsel of Maids flesh, to accept of
Squire Soto his service, chief Chamberlain and sole Secretary to the
magnanimous and munificent Don Zara del Fogo, whose body and soul shall cringe
to thy commands; Lapida returned him no answer, save what her Virgin blushes
afforded, which animated Soto to a nearer approach, folding his sinewy arms
about her slender waste, and clinging close to her coral lips, which occasioned
many mops and mowes from the other Marble Maidens, and caused Lapida to desert
his desired embraces with a cloudy brow: Soto being thus shaken off, returned
to his quondam station, finding his Master in deep discourse with the
inchantress, who (at his request) informed him, That (those her Handmaids
were the legitimate issue of Pigmalion proved to have had issue by his Marble
Mistress, a rare piece of antiquity, hitherto not made public.
Pigmalion, whom (though the ancient Bards knew it not) the compassionate Gods
(pitying Pigmalions sufferance) graciously trans-elemented, furnishing her
with the finest flesh, and all other Feminie endowments. I perceive Madam (said
Zara) that your bright self can bring marvelous things to pass by your occult
perpetrations, I was once so bewitched that I could not shite, till two or
three Candls ends were thrust up --; Pray Madam, give your servant to know what
miraculous things may be effected by Enchantments: I will not hide from thee
(my dearest Zara) said the Soceres, The Inchantress declares what wonde^ous
things may be done by Witch(...)ft, a fine story, and undoubtedly (...), (...)
having be(...) an Article of faith in all former Ages, and believed by very
wise men of our time.
that by the potency of my Spells, and Incantations, I can take off the top of
St. Marks Steeple in Venice, and clap it upon St. Peter's in Rome, I can
contract the Elements, and (but that I would not destroy this goodly Mass of
things) jumble all to its original Chaos; I can seclude Aeolus and his sons in
a Hawking-bag. I can turn the tide o^ Tygris or Nyle, cloth the Earth with
Flowers, the Trees with leaves, and the Fields with verdure; in the midst of
winter I can call down Luna when I list from her sphere, give life to the dead,
and death to the living; Metamorphose men into beasts, and beasts into men;
cause Thunder and Lightning, Blasting and Mildews, Storms and Tempests,
Earthquakes and Water-quakes, demollish the stoutest Structures by land, and
the goodly Vessels by Sea with a nod: having thus spoken, she called Soto unto
her, and taking Zara by the hand, she said, That thou may have proof of my
abilities, and that thou art respected by her who can countermand the councels
of the Gods, behold the transmutation of thy Squire; With that, rising up, she
waived her Wand three times over Soto's scull, thrice she turned unto the East,
and as many times unto the West, mumbling over some mysterious Mattens, till
Soto by degrees Soto's Me(...)phosis.
was transhaped into a goodly Steed, who shaking his crested main, and pawing
on the pavement, neighed aloud, like another Phobos or Dimos, insomuch that the
Champion (had not the love he bare to his servant overcome his hasty wishes)
could have been contented that Soto should have continued in that shape,
Founder-foot being turned to grass to the wide world: Soto had not long proved
himself a perfect prauncing Palfray, but the courteous Inchantress restored him
to his pristine shape, to the Champions exceeding contentment, but to Soto's
extreme dejectment, who never after that could (faithfully) fancy himself any
other save a very beast: This business over, the Inchantress willing to delight
the Champion, demanded of him which of the ancient Worthies (Goliath, Judas
Maccab^us, etc.) he had most mind to behold; I would fain feast my eyes, quoth
he, with perusing the person of that monster-taming Hercules, the son of
Jupiter and Alcmena, he that made no more of a Lion then of an Izeland Cur, who
wielded Mountains as Pibbles, drew Cacus out of his Den by the heels, and
demollished mighty Cities with a fillip of his finger: The Champion had scarce
spoke, but a Tree sprang up, By this it appears that the Roof was not vaul^^^.
whose top almost touched the Clouds, its broad branches were laden with Apples
of Gold, most radiant to the eye, about whose body a Dragon (of an un-measured
greatness) twined it self, evomorating flames of fire mingled with hailstones
of an incredible magnitude, Hercules had soon vanquished the Dragon, wrything
his neck with as much dexterity as a Poulterer would spoil the cackling of a
British Hen: the Champion (though dehorted from it by the Inchantress) would
needs salute this noble Shade, but received a very rough return of his
Congratulation; for Alcides very rudely smote him on the head with his huge
Club, so that he sank to the ground as dead, wallowing up and down, as their
manner is, who are suddenly surprised with fits of the Mother, or (Hercules his
own disease) the Falling Sickness: Alcides having done this scathe, slipped away
very slily, leaving the Champion (almost soul-less) sprawling upon the Floor:
Soto was in an exteam Agony for his Master: Lamia was grieved and her
Handmaids heavy, but the Inchantress soon recovered him by watering his
Visnomy with her warm Urine (the customary way (it seems) of that Country to
revive the enfeebled) which not only illuminated his dim eyes, but
circumgyring about his weasand, enforced him to a manly neese, so that within a
little time (to their great comfort) he sat up, calling for some Wine, which
being brought, he drank a hearty draught to the Inchantress, though one might
perceive (with half an eye) wrath and disdain in Capital Characters on his
front; which Lamia perceiving, administered this Julip to allay his fiery
Choler.

Sir, quoth she, I perceive your soul sits heavy on its strings (wounded with
dolor for Hercules his rigid contumacie, and that your heart has entered into
Covenant with your hands (justly enraged to be shaken in pieces by a shadow)
to inflict a sudden and severe Revenge; but know (most redoubted Champion) that
Spirits are of a substance altogether impenetrable, and your anger cannot
dilate it self to a deserved punishment; how much did I dehort you from so
dangerous a^t Attempt; but the best on it is, your Sun-like Fame cannot be,
Ecclipsed by this Interpositon; for you were not felled by a Giant, but a
Goblin; by a Don, but a Demon; not by Achilles, but by Aloides himself; O
Heaven, said the Champion (pointing to the place where he was knoct down) that
what neither man nor Monster durst to have put in practice, should be
consummated by a paltrey Spectar, a subteranean shade, and ayerie Incubus; O
Alcides, that thy soul werein flesh, that I might grasp thy Gygantick bulk
betwixt my mighty arms; thou should find me no Two sturdy Wrestlers.
Anteus, or Achelous; but I power out my plaints to the vacant Air, and
fruitlesly deplore a helpless ill. Lamia (whose privy parts melted in the
Paphian fire) purposing to put a period to the good Knights grief, by the
potent vigor of her Thessalian Art, called up the Ghosts of Two famous
Fid(...).
Orpheus and Amphion, who playing upon their heavenly Harps, made most dulcid
melody; Then entered Flora, accompanid with a drove of Dryades (clad in green,
their heads encircled with Flowery Anadems) who hand in hand danced the Spanish
way, to the Champions unspeakeable Contentment; By this time the Sun was sunk
near his Evening Region, to Glaucas infinite joy, who thought each minute an
Age, till she had tasted those Oily sweets (which she resolved to retalliate
with Amber-Suds) that every Errant Knight prostrates at the Port-Cullis of his
Paramour.

CHAP. III.
Lamia and the Champion are transported through the Air in a Chariot drawn by
two flying Dragons, to the Vale of Vassalage. The manner how Witches wed
themselves to the Devil. They visit Charons house, where they find his Wife
Fatua at her Huswifery. Charons Canticle. They pass over the River Styx,
coming to the very gates of Barathrum, where they hear Pluto's Proclamation.

Lamia lay naked in her Bed,
and Zara's self lay by,
Upon his flesh she fiercely fed,
more sweet then Pork or Pie, etc.
OUr Champion and his beauteous Mistress were no sooner secluded in the silken
walls of a rich bed, but he performed those rites due to those twin-Goddesses,
Concupiscentia and Cytherea, while Soto (like a faithful Squire) accommodated
Founder-foot with Fodder, and other conveniences, hanging up his Master Armor,
his Sword, Mace, and other Martial properties (as he hoped) in the Acaenall of
Janus; for though Soto could willingly Soto's Elog c.
brook the brunt of a Bickering, the fatallity of a Fight, and the
consternation of a Combat, yet he was no foe to a tranquillious subsistence, no
peace-hater, or professed enemy to A famous fat Cook, canonized by Pope Sylvester
the 22 after he had bin worshipped many Ages by the (...) Greeks with divine
Honors. See Cooks Instit. Tome 30. p. 100^.
Comus: Having disposed of all things most methodically, he departed to his bed
with much grief (Heaven knows) that what his Master presided, could not be his
example.

Return we now to our thrice-Renowned Knight, and his Spel-charming Associate,
the courteous Lamia, who having reciprocally recreated themselves almost to a
surfeit, suffered Somnus to make prize of their senses, Doing causes
Drowziness: But they had not slept six hundred minutes ere Lamia called to
mind, what till then was slipped from her memory, viz. the hour of meeting her
Sisterhood in the Vale of Vassalage (so called, for that in this swarthy Grot
the Inchantress and her co-partnrrs did Homage to the King of Flames) she threw
her self out of the bed with such violence, that the Champion awaked, and
desiring his Dear to give him the cause of her so impetuous arrisall; she
answered, My dear Servant, it is no time now to use prolix Narrations, please
to desert the bed, you shall soon know the cause why I left you. Zara (who was
now as true a Lover as ever offered Incense to Aphrodite) soon obeyed his
Mistress commands, and was presently (as already she had served her self)
Anointed from head to foot with an Unguent, whose savor might aptly be compared
to that Ol(...) (...)didum Infantium. See Culpeppers Dispen(...), p. 100
Chemical Dew extracted from the dung of an Infant; this done, they adorned
their bodies with the same weeds worn the day before, and then Lamia (having
girded her Magical Cincture about her waste) approached the Hearth, where (by
the wondrous operation of her Art) the fire was never extinct, the immortal
Flame deriving its pedigree from that Caelestiall un-extinguishable Brand which
was born, before the mighty Darius, when he marched against little great
Alexander, to make proof which of them two merited the Worlds moytie; Into this
fire she flung a great many poisonous Weeds, which (with a rusty knife) she had
lately cropped on Mount Caucasus, and other Cambrian Promontories before the
break of day; to this she added See Doctor Lambs Aphorisms, lib 2. tract. 17.
Apho^, 1000000.
the entrails of those ominous Birds, the Owl and hoars Night-Raven, blended
with red Storax, and the blood of a Lapwing, the shavings of a Shooing-horn,
the feathers of a Salamander, the cry of a Mandrake, and the tongue of a
Jews-Harp; this done, she entered her Orbicular Goal (taking the Champion with
her, who stood trembling all the time, and let none marvel if the most
Magnanimous man living be appalled at the approach of Devils, there being no
greater Antipathy to be imagined, then between a terrestrial substance, and an
Inhabitant of Orcus) making the very basis of this vast Ball to totter with her
first Accents, repeating this ^oercive Charm:

The Reader must take heed that he read not this Charm either in private with
his face East by North when the winds are high, or after Sun set.
Great Heccate, Rectresse of shades,
Plashey Grots, and gloomy Glades.
Neptunes never-failing Friend,
Whom Night-Goblins do attend:
Flitting from their Ponds and Lakes,
From myrie Boggs, and thorny Brakes.
By whose beams (when Sol's away)
Span-long Infants sport and play.
By the Lapland Haggs hoars hum,
And great Demogorgons Drum.
By the Mandrakes killing cry,
And the Owls harsh melody.
By Alecto's Snaky Twine,
And the Tire of Proserpine.
By fiery Phlegeton and Styx,
And Puck-Hayries Genetrix.
Lest I ding thee down to Hell
(By the vigor of my Spell)
Aid, O aid my great desires,
By those ever-wandring Fires,
That lead Travailers astray
All the night, till break of day.
This potent, and never-equall'd Incantation (dangerous to be itterated by the
Reader in an audible tone) was no sooner uttered by the Inchantress, but it
tonitruated horribly, fulminating promiscuously from all parts of the troubled
Hemisphere, the Earth was shaken with an Ague fit, huge Oaks were torn up by
the roots, and steong Structures levelled with the ground, when behold a
Chariot (seeming all of fire) drawn by a couple of Comets in the shapes of
Dragons, received Lamia and the Champion, who travailed through the air till
they came to the Vale of Vassalage, where allighting, they found the mighty
Monarch of Gehenna ( The description of the Devil, according to the frequent
confessions of Witches and So^ce^ers
his bulk like some huge Mountain horned like a Goat, his feet resembling
Serpents, two rows of Teeth, each longer then the Mast of a Ship,) sitting
beneath a Cypress Tree, to whose Trunk (as his manner always was) he turned
his prodigious, face, allowing all, or most part of his back parts only to be
kissed, which all there (with most humble obeisance) saluted, and then with a
joint Acclamation (crying The same with that of Pasquil, de legibus, lib. 30
claw a Churl (i. e. the Devil) by the Arse he will sh^^e in your hand.
Har, Har,) they joined in an Antic Dance; which finished, each Sorceress had
the fruition of her Incubus, Lamia not excepted, which exceedingly stirred the
Champions choler; After this, they sat down to feast, the Earth, Air, and Seas
being plundered of its Inhabitants, to satiate these Sorcerous wretches; the
Champion (who never gave his Teeth cause to curse his Tardity) fed with the
foremost, but the spite was, the eating time being over, he could not mix with
the rest in the Coranto; for the truth was, our Champions Parents were no
Courtiers, nor himself ever acquainted with the nice Puntilloes of Kings
Palaces; All being vanished on a sudden, our Knight and Lamia were left alone,
who preparing to take Coach in order to their Journey homeward, the courageous
Don grasping his Mistress snowy hand, thus divul'd himself:

So many and so great (most mellifluous Madam) have those favors bin extended
to me your worthless Servitor, that were my head stuffed with the wit of
Hermes, my forehead decked with the branches of Pan, my eyes irradiated with
the fulgency of Sol, my cheeks adorned with the Roses of Ganymede, my nose
still running with divine Nepenthe, my lips qualified with a Carnation
tincture, my teeth of that very Ivory which pieced up the shoulder of Pelops,
my beard the Beesome of heaven, my neck a Pharian Tower, my shoulders bearing
up the world with Atlas, my arms sphearing the Earth, my hands grasping both
Poles, my belly more big then the Tun at Heildebergh, my thighs strutting like
a Rhodian Coluss, my legs supporters of the Globe, and my feet like those of
Erichtonius, yet I could never be Master of such a Gratitude as might refun'd
the fixtieth part of your incomparable indulgency; add but one more to all
your past favors, and make me eternally yours. I have heard that Ulysses and
Aeneas, (...) bring his affront, chap. (...)
I will not name Hercules, (the true Types of me) had the happiness to visit
that dark Dungeon where the damned dwell, and to have commerce with those
Aetherial souls that dance together in the Elisian Shades, and yet returned
(safe and sound) to their terrestial abodes; I would fain know what is done in
the other World, though I have no ambition to injure any there, or (with
Hercules) to captivate Cerberus.

That you may know (said Lamia) what an immense power you have over me (though
the Adventure be dreadful and dangerous) you shall have the fruition of your
desires, be sure you enjoin your tongue the strictest silence; this said, she
and the Champion re-entered their Chariot, being transported over Woods,
Cities, Seas, Villages, and tops of tall Steeples, and in a trice arrived at
that very place where (after solemn Sacrifice to his Mothers soul) Ulysses
began his Progress to Pluto's Monarchy; here they disburthened their Caroach,
and the Inchantress taking Zara by the hand, departed down a pair of winding
stayres, having no light save a kind of duskish glimmering, such as some call
Twilight; the bellowing of black Rivers and schrieking of Furies made a
dreadful diapason, to which was added a pestilential smell as of Brimstone,
Naptha, etc. They traveled so long down these stayres, that Zara (who now
repented his rash option) imagined himself con-centred in the Earth, and now
they beheld an exceeding high Wood, whose top seemed to touch the Clouds, every
Tree had its branches laden with a kind of swarthy Fruit resembling Cucumbers,
each of them including a damned soul, who were incessantly tormented in the
bowels of these Cucumbers, without hope of Infranchisement: Having past this
Wood, they arrived at the very brink of the River Styx, whose dark waves
evaporated a thick smoke; here they found Charons Boat (with only one Oar in
it) fastened to part of that Cottage where the grisly F^rriman resided, but no
Boat-man to be met with; the occasion of Charons absence was this, Pluto had
newly married his eldest daughter Tenebrosa to the great Duke Marathron, whose
Territories extended from Phlegeton to the Lake Avernus, having under his
command sixty Legions; and this withered Waterman had employment as Pilot in
Pluto's chief Galeon, to convey the Princely pair and their Retinew over
Acheron to their own Dominions; the Inchantress was extremely vexed to find
Charon a non-resident, insomuch that she was once resolved to punish Hell and
Heaven, as culpable of a contumacy, when behold Charons Consort (Fatua) a
Matron of much gravity, and daughter to Chaos and Nox, fell at the Inchantress
feet, beseeching her not to be offended at her husbands absence, relating that
his Prince had summoned his service, withal entreating her to approach her
homely Mansion; Lamia and the Champion were not shie to enter this homely
Pavillion, where they found a candid Reception from the aged Fatua, who upon
their entrance threw a kind of Gum into the fire (made of a kind of Pumice,
much resembling the British Turf) by virtue whereof, the Room where they were
seemed more luminous then the House of Sol, they received celestial Visions,
and fancied themselves equal with the Gods, they had not long enjoyed this
beatificall Vision, but they heard the aged Ferrimans voice, who sang the
following Canticle, walking upon the Surges.

SONG.
1.
FOolish Mortals (fed with Pap)
(Sporting in cold Tellus lap)
Always scraping, always scoring,
Always drinking, always whoring,
you spend your lives,
with wag-tayl'd Wives,
While the subtle Sirens rock ye,
Till your proud flesh make ye pockey.
Driving Acres down your Gullets,
Till you dine with buttered Bullets,
Drink and drab, study and stare on,
You must all conclude with Charon.
2.
Wash your throats with Wine and W^r^,
The Gods made man to make them sport;
Nor can ye ere be called men,
Though ye write threescore and ten;
You Are leaden Daddies,
To light Ladies,
Ships floating on a Sea of Glass,
The Stagerite was but an Ass.
Drink and drab, study and stare on,
You must all conclude with Charon.
By this time the grey-bearded Oarman had gained his Hive, and with a cheerful
hum saluted Lamia and the Champion after his rustic manner, who returned him
more Complementall Retribution: The Inchantress had no need to inform him of
her design, Sentence.
None ever touched the Strond of Styx, but they ballasted Charons Boat:
wherefore taking leave of Fatua, they immediately Imbarqued themselves, the
tough old Siegnior (having been well feasted in the Court of Pluto) tugged at
the Oar like any Terrestrial Barge-man against Wind and Tide; but by that
time they were half way over Styx, they espied an aged He is very oblivious
that knows not this old man's name See Apuleius his Golden Calf, li. 6. p 12.
person all naked, of a venerable Aspect (very near them) crying out for help,
for that he was in danger of drowning: The Champion (molded of a noble mind)
was proffering him his hand, had not Lamia hindered him, who related unto him
briefly what this old man was, and how inevitable a ruin had ensued, in case
he had afforded him aid; ere her Caution found period, they were within sight
of shore, where they landed, giving Charon his usual Sallary, who (wondering
what Mister Wights these were, since he had not above thrice before had
experience of the like) took his leave with more Ceremony then usual, and
returned to his Wherry.

The place where the Sorceress and our Champion now were, seemed a Marish
ground, or rather a perfect Quagmire overgrown with blasted Reeds, and
withered Sedge, yet of so solid a surface, that they trampled as upon Scythian
Ice; being past this ^og, they presently came to the very Gates of Barathrum,
fashioned of burnisht Brass, which (contrary to Ancient and Modern belief) were
fast locked, for that the God of Ghosts had lately made Proclamation.

FOr as much as our Brother Jupiter, King of Heaven (minding Pluto's
Proclamation.
merely his peculiar interest and selfglory) daily Delegates numberless
multitudes of the more leprous, turbulent, and Factious sort of souls for our
Territories, to the disturbance of our Weal, and apparent Assasination of our
Monarchy, while we are in daily danger of dethronizing by the malevolent
combinations of cursed spirits; These are therefore to will and command you
Cerberus, our chief Porter in ordinary, with the assistance of Our trusty and
well-beloved Minos, Lord chief Justice of Tartarus, that none of what condition
or quality soever, be permitted to pass as Pilgrims, or otherwise) into our
Dominions, that shall not be able to ^ender an account of their good behavior
in the upper World, and willingly take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy:
This you are not to fail at your utmost peril;

Witness our Self, at Aetna.

The horrid clamours that were heard within, made the Champion wish himself in
that very Cave again, where the Bear baited him; But there is no receding now;
(...)
He who sets his foot upon Hells Threshold, shall be enforced to enter the
house.

CHAP. IV.
The Inchantress and Sara visit the innermost parts of Hell. A description of
the various torments inflicted on the damned, till now not known. Thence they
pass to Elysium, where they find all in uproar, and return to Lamia's abode.

LAmia and the Champion had returned without their errand, had not Minos (who
knew the Inchantres knock) commanded Gerberus to paw open the Gates, yet though
the Judge were a great honourer of Lamia and the Champion, he durst not permit
them to pass on till they had taken the (...) Comel A^rippa his Occult
Philosophy. Or Tullies love written by the Master of Art.
Oath, and signed the Instrument; which done, they had free emission: Then the
Inchantress again anointed her self and Zara (with an Unguent far different
from the former) that so they might walk upon red hot Irons, tread on fiery
Serpents, and (if need were) wade through Rivers of boiling Lead untouched; she
also (for the preservation of his person, though to the torture of his tongue)
boared a hole with her Bodkin quite through that garulous nerve, which Nature
(very politickly) had secluded in By this it is evident that the Champion was
not toothless.
Ivorie grates, which made him bleate like one burned for swearing, drawing a
Ribband of a Seagreen color through the Orifice, which tied a true The Emblem
of Lamia's affection.
loves Knot so amply, that a gag could not have given better security to the
Sheriff for a Pilloriz'd Factionist: This done, they beheld all that erring
Mortals so much discourse of and so little know; but the Devil a Tyitius,
Tantalus, or ^xion were there; Sisiphus indeed was sitting upon his Stone very
melancholy, a bowl of boiling liquor before him, which he often ^ipt on, but
very charily for fear of scalding his chaps, it seemed no other then an
abstersive Posset, curdled with shavings of Ebony, Nero, Heliogabalus,
Caligula, Comodus, Basilides, Mezentius, and a thousand other Tyrants branded
by antiquity were there, yet neither broyling in blue Hames, nor fishing for
Salamandels in fiery Rivers; but what was worse, Nero was Cobling of shoes,
Heliagabalus and Caligula were busy at the Forge, Commodus crying (like any
Costermonger) (...) wieker basket with three legs.
Pippins eight pence the hundred, Basilides and Mezentius (sweating under their
burdens) were carrying sacks of Coals into Pluto's Kitchen; such like
punishments were inflicted on Phalaris, the Sycillian brethren, and others.

The Inchantress and Zara made all the haste they could from this dreadful
Den, and are now arrived in the Elizian Shades.

Where are no Locusts, nor six-footed Li^e,
But Popin-jayes, and Birds of Paradise,
Plump youths with bucksom maids do what they please,
And never fear the fatal French disease.
Here they found fix of Sols viz. Phaeton, Bremio, Borachio, Brunello, Boreo,
Bodino. See the Muses Interpr.
Sons (begotten on Climine) making perpetual day, not seated in Chariots, or
forced to use the Whip as their aged father Phoebus, but walking up and down,
ot sitting, as best sorted with the society of those sublime Souls, who
inhabited this thrice-happy place; not a shrub here but breathed odours, the
bounteous soil was clothed all over with Roses and Lillies, Fruits as fair, as
fragrant of taste, offered themselves to be plucked by any consecrated hand,
Vult^rnus was incessantly active in plundering the Ocean of its perfumes, which
he unladed here, fanning whole piles of Sabean Gums and Syrian Spices, with his
purpled Plumes, till these blessed ones were inveloped with Aromatic Clouds:
no Female, here, is branded with that egregious epithete of Whore and Strumpet,
for all women are in common, only they boast not the act of Generation, for
then Jupiter must in large his Elysium; but (as if these two had brought A
woman of a harsh tumultuous temper, a broacher of brawls and fomenter of
quarrels. See Vasque^ de Belins^atio.
Ate along with them) there happened such a business amongst these blessed ones
this day, as had not been known in thirty thousand years before, for Ajax
Telamon (by the instigation of Thirsites, a fellow as much misshapen of mind
as body) had upbraided Ulysses with cowardice in the Grecian War, and (which
all Lethe could not make him forget) that he attained Achilles Armor, rather by
odious connivance then by oraculous Eloquence; upon this the Trojan Worthies
congregated in heaps led by their old Chieftain Hector, and the Greeks appeared
in great bodies, under conduct of Achilles, so that all Elysium was in uproar,
while (as if to power Oil upon the fire) another brawl was newly broached among
the Gown-men, Homer having smote Hesiod on the head very grievously, for
boasting behind his back, that himself was in all respects his Rival, Pindar,
Stesichorus, Coluthus, Lychopron, took part with Homer; but Moschus, Bion,
Theocritus and Anacreon were for Hesiod; this was no sooner bruited abroad, but
it gave occasion to Statius to vaunt himself equal with Virgil, as if Adrastus
were co-equall with Aeneas; here was a new matter for Lucretius, Lucan, Ovid,
and Horace declared themselves point blank for Virgil; Propertius, Catullus,
Martial, and Perseus took part with Statius, so that there was like to be
fighting on all hands; the Greeks divided under Homer and Hesiod, and the
Latins under Virgil and Statius, and it had been well, had the horror (like to
ensue) made a halt her, for the fire of Emulation burnt fiercely in every angle
of this Paradise; the British Bards (forsooth) were also engaged in quarrel
for Superiority; and who think you, threw the Apple of Discord amongst them,
but Ben Johnson, who had openly vaunted himself the first and best of English
Poets; this Brave was resented by all with the highest indignation, for Chawcer
(by most there) was esteemed the Father of English Poesy, whose only
unhappines it was, that he was made for the time he lived in, but the time not
for him: Chapman was wondrously exasperated at Bens boldness, and scarce
refrained to tell (his own Tale of a Tub) that his Isabel and Mortimer was now
^ompleated by a Knighted Poet, whose soul remained in Flesh; hereupon Spencer
(who was very busy in finishing his Fairy Queen) thrust himself amid the
throng, and was received with a showt by Chapman, Harrington, Owen, Constable,
Daniel and Drayton, so that some thought the matter already decided; but behold
Shakespeare and Fletcher (bringing with them a strong party) appeared, as if
they meant to water their Bays with blood, rather then part with their proper
Right, which indeed Apollo and the Muses (had with much justice) conferred upon
them, so that now there is like to be a trouble in Triplex; Henry 4. his Poet,
Law^eat, who wrote disguises for the young Princes.
Skeleton, Gower, and the Monk of Bury were at Daggers-drawing for Chawcer;
Stencer waited upon by a numerous Troop of the best Bookmen in the World;
Shakespeare and Fletcher surrounded with their Lifeguard, Viz. Goffe,
Massinger, Decker, Webster, Sucklin, Cartwright, Carew, etc. O ye Pernassides!
what a curse have ye cast upon your Helliconian Water-Bailiffs? that those
whose Names (both Sir and Christen) are filed on Fames Trumpet, and whom Envy
cannot wound, shall now perish by intestine Discord, and homebred Dissension?
While these stirs were on foot Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Plotinus,
Epicurus, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Anaximander, Chrysippus, Epictetus, Zeno,
Aristotle, etc. both Perapateticks, Stoics, Epicureans, and all the (sometime)
discordant Sects of Philosophers (being now all of one selfsame opinion,
Diogenes excepted, who could by no means be won to a compliance) were all
seated in the School of Scepticus, not ashamed to learn who taught that there
was no power but that of the sword See Arise Evans Prophesies.
this in the Aetheriall, which they trampled upon in the Terrestrial world:
while they were giving diligent attention here, the gap grows wider, and open
War is almost proclaimed by the busy ones of Elysium, but the clement Gods
would not suffer so dire a catastasis, for Hermes entering the Lists, threw down
his Warder, summoning the incensed Bards to Phoebus Tribunal there to render
an account of this wild action; the Ringleaders of the Greeks and Trojans
(almost by the ears about Ajax his business) Cylenus arrested with his
Caducifer, warning them forthwith to appear before Mars, to answer this
prodigious contempt of his Power and Sovereignty, for he being the God of
Swords and Saltpeter, challenges the sole Superiority (as well over the
brawling wives of Belinsgate as the Subburbian Hectors) both for the creating,
carrying on, and composure of all quarrels from the Irish Skeyn to the
Scottish Dagger. This sullen Hemisphere is now serene again, and the more
peaceful Souls discarded of their Anxieties; the Inchantress gave little
regard to the (new-appeased) Garboyles, but the Champion took great pleasure in
their perusal, wishing a prolix date to their dire distemper; by this time
they arrived near the brink of a broad River, whose waves were of a greenish
color, but full of speckled Serpents, with faces like women, and tayls like A
hot hill in America.
Vesuvius; this was that plashcy Purpatory where Clitemnestra, Semiramis,
Phaedra, Modea, Agave, Myrha, Canace, etc. were eternally tortured, the manner
of the torment thus, twice every day they beheld (as they were chaind to their
torrid Pillars) a troop of beauteous young men, all naked with These torments
must needs be inpressible.
vast-siz'd Genitalls, sitting at a Table furnished with all sorts of
delicates, and after their repast dancing most gracefully, to the tune of Dido
the hapless Queen of Carthage, whom Lamia and Zara would fain have blessed their
eyes with, but could not, she had bin there (it is true) but the compassionate
Deities at the instant importunity of Aeneas (who himself was also Deifi'd)
gave her an Habeas Corpus, removing the langishing Lady from her watery Gaol, to
a starry Mansion, where she waited on Juno, rubbing her toes, and tying up the
trammels of her hair when occasion commanded; The Mark here our Champions
incomparable conrage.
Champion would fain have exercised his valor for the present liberty of these
Ladies, though all the powers of Orcus had thwarted him, had not Lamia declared
the vanity of the attempt, and how impossible it was to procure their
Infranchisement: Our Noble pair had now sufficiently sated themselves with
Acherontick novelties only yet they had not seen Pluto's Palace, nor kissed the
hand of Avernian Juno, Lamia would have visited the Court of that swarthy King,
had not Zara's indisposition impeded her Resolve; therefore they hasted with
all speed to the very Gates of Barathrum, which at their return they found wide
open, but so great was the desire of their attaining the terrestiall Globe,
that they made no inquiry of the cause thereof; their Caroach awaited their
coming very dutiously, into which having cast themselves, they were (within few
minutes) conveyed to Lamia's abode.

CHAP. V.
Zara (having made a strange Discovery) can by no means be persuaded to dwell
longer with his Love Lamia; his remarkable Speech at parting. Her woeful
Lamentation.

THat our Champions shirt was glewed to his Loins, and his whole Microcosm out
of frame, will be no man's wonder that considers the length, or rather depth of
his journey, and how hot a place Hell is, but no preservative is wanting that
may restore him to his lost strength, but he being of a tough constitution,
instead of Ginger-bread and Jellies, calls for the leg of an Ox, and the thigh
of a Sheep, the desolation whereof rendered him in his full vigor (so that
Lamia perceived it was rather his five hours fasting then any other obliquity
that occasioned his distemper) which the Inchantress could not credit, till she
had made experimental proof of his Meaning how he could use his Pen.
Abilities; Long time our Champion and Soto remained with this Acrasia, this
Armida, this Alcyna, this what shall I call her, -- this Witch, -- No delight
whatsoever but resided here, the palate pleased with curious Cates and
delicious Wines, the eye delighted with variety of the most glorious objects,
the ear feasted with Soulcharming Harmony, and finally all the five Senses fed
to an Atrophie in this Palace of Pleasure, yet cannot all these allurements and
blandishments so mollify our Knight, but he remembers, in the midst of these
false joys, these delusive delights, and Sugarplum contentments (that rot the
eater) that his business on Earth is of a different Die, to succor the
oppressed, to tame fastidious Tyrants, and make misshapen Monsters tremble at
the clashing of his Arms, but (not to make our Champion more hungry after Fame,
then indeed he is) why he would needs be going was, for that he had discovered
the damned fraud of the fallacious Lamia being far enough (as By this it
appears that Witches are not altogether so omnipotent and omniscient as Gaffer
Bodin and other witch mongers would make us believe.
she thought) from the perusal of her person, when peeping through the cranney
of a wall, he perceived his cunning Concubine in her true and native shape.

So old, so wondrous old,
In the Nonage of time,
Ere the Serpent fed on slime,
Or Eve put on her Petticoat,
She was in her prime.
It would have puzzell'd that Female Mastix Mantuan to have limm'd this
she-Chymera, The Description of a virtuously disposed Matron.
the wrinkles on her face might be called Cupias graves (not that Cupido is
dead) where the Dand-prat Deity sits triumphing in his own Trenches; this is
the Orcus that includes millions of Fiend-like frowns, Myriads of deep Ruts and
Sloughs, in all respects resembling a parched Dunghill perpetually moystned
with salt water leisurely distilling from the Lymbecks of her leaden eyes, her
breath like the steam of Tenarus, blasts the Spring be it never so forward;
take her whole face, together with all its furniture, and like Clouds it turns
day to night, and mightier then the Sea, makes Moors seem immaculate: Our
Champion was wrapped with no little wonder to behold this strange mutation, she
that some hours before seemed another Hellen, is become a very Hecuba, already
barkt into a Bitch, yet durst not our Champion take notice of the killing
Object, (Note here our Champions mere cunning) un-wary Narration his eyes had
beheld a number of Metamorphosed men turned into Beasts by the Enchantments of
this wicked Sorceresse, and to be an Ass was such a thing as made him tremble
to think on, desirous therefore to be quit of this foul Queen (having
recounted those many Obligations upon him, and protested the greatest Ardency
of Devotion) he humbly and earnestly besought Lamia to let him depart; for
quoth he, See Caesar's Commentaries in English.
the Rust of Ease feeds on Honor like a Moth, and to a true enobled mind
nothing is more irksom then idleness, adding he had been long benumbed with the
Torpedo of Excess, and so made himself enemy to that employment which God and
Nature had appointed; How many Parthenia's (quoth he) languish under the harsh
Tyranny of flinty-soul'd Demagorasses? How many Phalarian Tyrants trouble the
world with tempestuous Impositions and Diabolical Edicts? How many Dragons
sleep soundly in their Marble Cells at night who all the day do nothing but
devour those harmless Hobinols, that toil for the benefit of mankind? How many
Enchantments expect a period from the prudency of my courage; and how many
formless Giants (taller then Oaks) might have bin hewed down with Kill-za-Cow,
while Zara makes himself a Milk-sop, a Carpet-Knight, a Coxcomb, and what not?
Lamia had listened to this farewell (to her a Funeral Oration) very
attentively; but all the time our Champion was talking, he might perceive how
her sick soul sat upon her lips, looking as An infallible sign of a troubled
mind See Culpeppers last will and Testament. i. e his Legacy, chap. 12.
blue as Butter-Milk; Alas, said she, that the Fates should allot poor Lamia so
sad a sufferance; is there but one only Knight in the World (who draws my soul
as Barbary horses drag a Dutch Caroach) and do I find his love loose in the
hilts? who like those who choose rather to lie on boards then beds, with blocks
for pillows, despises the silken delicacies of Repose, to tread the path of
Tumult, and rashly wishes to experiment those hardships dogging Knights-Errant
at the heels: O my Zara, wherein has Lamia displeased thee? What have thy
wishes prompted thee to, that thou have wanted? Has not Heaven, Hell, Gods,
Men, and Furies been at thy beck? Mark the Majesty of these trope^
Has not Bacchus prostrated his blood, Ceres her store, Cyprides her delights,
Apollo his Lyre, Pytho her voice, Juno her stateliness, Hermes his wit, and
Jove himself his Heaven, and yet cannot all this create a compliancy? O my dear
Zara, let not thy ambitious desire to rival those rapacious Renegadoes of old,
whose best happiness was to purchase a Pageant Fame with a real infortunity,
and are at best but See the History of Mervin and Pregosus, with his three sons.
blended with dirt and blood, persuade thee to a tedious travel after that
glory which in the grasping passes through the fingers.

This said, she with her goggle
eyes did stare-a,
(As if she meant to look
him through) on Zara.
It would have bruiz'd a brazen heart (more hard then that Head once so baffled
by Mounsieur Miles) to have beheld her in that Agony for a long time, As in
expectation of the Champions remorse.
her looks gave the language of her heart, but reading his unalterable resolvs
written (Stenographically) in his face, she rose up (like a fierce Tygress)
taking by the throat (to his almost strangling) with such a voice (for all the
world) as Dido when she perceived that she must lose her sturdy Stallion, the
strong chined Aeneas, she said; O thou inexorable Beef-brained man, thy Mother
sure was some Welsh woman, who instead of her own fostered thee with Mare^
Milk, thy Father some salvage Kern, begotten by an Incubus, and thy breeding no
better then that the Boars of Belgia afford their swat-bodied Bantlings: Go,
but may my conglomerated curses go with thee; but if not for my sake (here she
began to treat the Champion in a milder tone, yet for that which this womb of
mine includes, thy Which the Champion had conv^ied into her through a pipe,
that it i^ possible so to do, s^^ Culpeppers Book of wom^n and of ^om^^^ womb^.
Seed, which even now cuts capers in my womb; be courteous to perishing Lamia;
here she let fall a number of salt tears, insomuch that Soto could not forbear
to accompany her; her Marble Maidens sweat brinie drops, making much
lamentation for their Mistress; not all this could mollify our Champions
mind, yed did he once more give the grounds of his Protestations, that no Lady
under Heaven should ever claim that Sovereignty which her bright self so
rightfully inherits; he would have added more, had not the Inchantress flung
away in a great rage, and locking her self up in her Closet, gave commandment
that none should have access to her; she gone, our Champion stood in a strange
dilemma, almost resolved to link himself to Lamia for ever; to this Soto very
powerfully exhorted him, and (no doubt) had prevailed, had not his fancy
immediately fallen upon the sullen contemplation of that sooty change, when he
beheld his Minerva a Megera, and his young beauteous Lady a black deformed
Dowdy, so that he commanded Soto to saddle his good Steed, and to bring his
Sword, Armor, and Mace, which Soto presently performing, the Champion forthwith
armed himself, commanding Soto to the like, and having mounted his fiery steed,
who (like one of Meaning Banks his Beast if it be lawful to call him a beast,
whose perfections were so incomparably rare, that he was worthily ter^d the
four-legg^d wonder of the world, for dancing (some say) singing, and discerning
Maids from Maulkins, finally having of a long time proved himself the ornament
of the British Clime, travailing to Rome with his Master, they were both
burned by the commandment of the Pope.
Banks's breed) danced under him for joy; he called for Lapida, with an intent
(since Lamia would by no means be spoke with) to send a zealous farewell to the
Inchantress by her, when behold Lapida was coming toward him, bearing a Box
fast locked, and in her hand the key, who coming to the Champion with humble
obeisance presented him with Lamia's last gift, using these or the like
expressions:

Sir Knight, quoth she, for whose sake the woeful Lamia wishes her self a beast
beast, that she might always bear so rich a burden as thy self, although thy
cruelty cannot be paralleled, who rejectest a Lady, for whose sake Kings would
kick their Crowns with the soles of their feet, yet she commits this Carket of
treasure into thy custody, willing thee to preserve it as thou would thy
life, a written Schedule informs thee how to deal, and the Gods go with thee:
Zara could not but stand amazed to find such affection from her to whom he had
manifested such obduracy; But as he was about to declar himself, Lapida had
left him, and was already with her disconsolat Mistress: Soto could not refrain
shedding of tears (his belly though wanting ears had the gift of prophecy, and
predicted a scarcity, after so much fullness as he found in Lamia's Pavilion) no
nor Some old Authors report that he wept bitterly.
Zara himself, though he cunningly absconded his reluctance by locking down his
Beaver, the Champion thought it vain to attempt a future colloquie, and
therefore kept his way, waited on with numberless numbers of formless
imaginations.

CHAP. VI.
Zara having left his Love Lamia, meets with a Noble woman of No-land, she
tells the story of Prince Emansor (son of Paraclet and Maulkina) changed in his
Cradle: The Counterfeit is exposed to the mercy of wild Beasts. Emansor
returns, and is known to his Parents. Duke La-Fool undertakes to prove the
Princess Maulkina a Prostitute. Champions resort from all parts of the world,
proffering their service to the Princess. Don Zara also resolvs for her
vindication.

HAving thus quitted Lamia's Mansion, our Don kept the beaten Road, riding a
very easy pace, vexed with various cogitations, till he arrived upon a vast
Plain, whose immensity gave him occasion to cast up his which he seldom did by
reason of their soreness occasioned by a salt Rhume.
eyes to Heaven, to see if the Sun were not near his Western Region, but
finding he had many miles yet to travail, he resolved to pass that Plain and to
Quarter in the next Quarry he met with; as he was thus contemplating (turning
himself about to speak to Soto) he might perceive a Lady of incomparable
beauty, mounted on a white Steed, richly trapped (clad after the Amazonian
manner, in her hand a shell fashioned like a Shield, whereon was most lively
pourtrayed the figure of some illustrious Princess, she was attended by one
only Squire, his body short, his beard long, his face pale, and his hair red,
these followed hard after the Champion, who imagined that Lamia might (perhaps)
have repented of her morosity, and was now in pursuit of him, to give the other
odd onset (by way of storm) to his most impregnable sesolve, and therefore he
stood still expecting her approach, who was no sooner within Tongue-shot of
him, but allighting from her Steed, whom she committed to the custody of her
Squire, she made most humble and lowly obeisance to the Champion, who very
courteously commanded Soto to raise her from the earth, for quoth he, I love
not to see your soft Sex fall upon the knee, but the Meaning that he would back
the^ in all (...)
back, or to hear ye supplicate for any thing save a A kind of Musical
Instrument fashioned like a Reed, if it be skilfully played on, it puts to
silence the brawlings of bitter wives and attenuates the friendship of the most
fascinorous female.
Syringe: The Lady knew not well how to expound this language, only she
thought the Champion a very conceited Worthy, a jocular Hero, a sportive
Martialist;

Here begins the story of Prince Paraclet, Maulkina, and Emansor.
Sir Knight, said she (whose lo^ks, language, and gesture create strange
thoughts within me) be pleased to know, that I am (I will not say the first) of
those Ladies of Honor, who wait upon the highborn, illustrious, and refulgent
Maulkina, Daughter to the high and mighty Prince Paraclet, Prince of No-Land,
on the confines of whose Territories we now are, so it is that the Divine
Maulkina having been a vowed Votaress to Diana (whose Priestess she was, and
whose Oracles she exhibited) upon a night as she sat at the feet of the Image
of that chaste Deity, Deaths elder-brother, Tygertaming Somnus sealed up her
eyes, when behold, Jupiter descended in the shape of a brave young Prince, and
had the fruition of her body, to the filling of her belly, as says the Adage,
with young bones, so that she became altogether incapable of officiating in
Diana's Temple, therefore exchanging the Church for the Court, after nine
Months were expired, Lucina falling from Heaven (with her two Handmaids Sarah
Safety, and Joan Ease) she made Prince Paraclet a Grandsire, to his little joy,
when he perused the Infants person so monstrously misshapen, his forehead
flat, his eyes squinting, his nose hardly visible, his lips thick, yet flaggy,
his chin resembling a Town-top with a brass nayl at bottom, his bulk a very
Babel of deformity, his legs borrowing their shape from a new bent Bow, and his
feet displaying themselves very dreadfully; nor were his internal indowments
incompatible with his shape, for (coming to years of discretion) his language
and comportment proclaimed him rather the son of a Plaisterer then a Prince,
the sons of Noble men he would shun, to accompany the sons of Citizens and
Car-men, nor could ever be brought to the knowledge of Letters by all the
endeavors that could be used, to the extreme grief of Paraclet, and the
unspeakable torment of Maulkina, yea, to the general sorrow of the whole Realm,
the people whispering in corners, that this Incubus could not be the son of the
great Jupiter, but rather the spurious seed of some Swabber; these wild reports
brought Paraclet to his wits end, and not knowing how to extinguish this fire
without scorching his fingers, he resorted to the Oracle at Delphos, where
after Celebration of the usual Ceremonies) he received this Answer:

By subtle Goblins fraud,
The real Child of Maud,
Was changed in the Cradle,
By See the Book of walking Spirits.
Tom, surnamed Ladle,
(Who is the master Elf,
And does what list himself)
But the true Son of Jove
About the world does rove,
(Not knowing of his Right)
Being called the Fairy Knight;
But by the Fates decree,
This Faery Prince you will see,
(The lawful Heyr of mo Land)
Within few days in No-Land,
When ere he haps to come,
You Will know him by his Thumb,
Who with his Sword shall prove
Himself the Son of Jove.
It were needless to recite with what astonishment Prince Paraclet (and all
with him) received this Answer from Apollo, but hasting back to No-Land,
Paraclet summoned his whole Nobility, who unanimously attending his pleasure,
he declared unto them what the Oracle had spoken, demanding their speedy and
serious advice, some counseled one thing, some another, but after much
hesitation, they voted as one man, that this prodigious Changeling should be
conveyed into some Wilderness, and there left to the acceptance of his Elvish
parents, whose advice (though Maulkina swayed with a groundless commisseration
withstood it) was suddenly put in practice, and this Perken Warbeck being
den^ded of his greatness, resigned to the protection of those Goblins who gave
him being; this action was diversely disputed on by the Vulgar, some applauding,
some condemning, and all censuring; they were silenced by the arrival of
Emansor For it was about the Spring of the year.
with 30. Squires, clothed all in green-a, who (by divine appointment) coming
to Court, proffered his servic to Paraclet, who beholding his well built form
and behavior, but especially fixing his eyes on his fingers, perceived his
right hand Thumb to be 12. digits longer then any of his other fingers,
wherefore assuring himself that this was he whom the Oracle hinted, his own
flesh and blood, and son of Jupiter and Maulkina, Here was true affection
indeed.
he embraced him in his arms, weeping over him as if he had been scourged with
Scorpions; Emansor was wondrously astonished at this uncouth entertainment,
insomuch that for a long time he remained speechless, but a sober recollection
having opened his organ pipes, he (on his knees) besought Prince Paraclet to
inform him what motives prompted him to this aenigmaticall Reception of one who
was utterly a stranger to him; Paraclet again folded him in his arms, and
beckning to all about him, that stood at distance (marvelling at this strange
inter-locution) he openly declared, that by the goodness of the Gods No-Land
was now restored to its ancient Glory, this being the true and only Son of
his Daughter Maulkina, and his undoubted Heir; This he spoke with a loud
voice, and then again saluted his Grandchild, while all there gave a showt,
which ecchoed in every corner of No-land, shrewdly shattering many Steeples and
Structures: By this time the welcome News came to the knowledge of the
Princess Maulkina, who came running swifter then a Roe to receive her
long-lost Son into her bosom, the mutual joy between Emansor and his Mother
cannot be expressed in words. I shall therefore give the Reader leave to think as
he lists, only I must not omit what a general Joy was every where manifested
by the multitude, who (like Loyal Subjects) were even drunk for Joy of their
new Prince; O the sweet and cordial Loyalty that the Ancients manifested to
their Princes, where shall we now find such fidelious ^ervency!
he that did not stagger as well as stammer was immediately knocked down for a
Traitor; After this, the sweet Emansor (according to the No-Land custom) took
his Mother to wife, by whom he has two Sons and one Daughter named Dowcabell,
the miracle of perfection, lately married to a Noble Personage, named DON
^VRBO-FALLACIO, who in Honor of his beauteous Bride, has appointed a Solemn
Joust or Tournament, to begin the Twelfth of this instant Month, having sent
His Challenges to every corner of the Orb, and bidding Defiance to any Prince,
Champion, or Errant-Knight, that shall put his Lady (how exquisite soever) in
competition with his brave Bedfellow, whose shadow this is; This was no
sooner bruited abroad, but DON-LA-FOOLE Lord of a Neighboring Island, openly
declared his dislike, crying up his own Lady as the sole Glory of her Sex, and
the most merriting Madam in the World, and the more to make himself odious to
all Noble Spirits, proffers to prove the Princess Maulkina a Prostitute by
dint of Sword, having cheated the credulous World with a false Report, that
Emansor was not begotten by Jupiter, for this reason he has entertained a great
number of Knights and Champions to be in readiness against the appointed day,
so that Prince Paraclet and Emansor have cause to guess that he intends rather
a bloody War, then a Wanton Tilt, and therefore they also have thought fit to
strengthen themselves against the day that must decide this Quarrel for
Beauty; and this (most Noble Knight) was occasion that commanded me abroad, to
summon in all those Knights of worth, whom the Gods of No-Land should appoint
me to encounter with not doubting of your cheerful assistance, when the most
fair Maulkina and the Divine Dowcabell shall beg the aid of your dead-doing arm.

The Celestial Powers (quoth Zara) I perceive are Favorers of thy Prince and
People, that thus opportunely thou have met with him, who will seat Paraclet
and Emansor above fear or danger, and chastise the pride of that Duke LA-FOOL,
else may Kill-za-Cow fail me in my greatest extremity, and Founder-foot make a
Halt, when I am riding to the Redemption of some Imprisoned Kings; The
substance of this refulgent Shadow shall bear the Bell from all Ladies that
ever yet had a being, or shall illuminate the Earth for the future: But how
near are we to Prince Emansors Court, or must we expect a tedious Travail ere
we gain the sight of his Glorious Palace: My Lord, said she, some two Leagues
hence (in a direct line with your nose) you shall find a Ship (in Safe
Harbor) riding at Anchor in the Aegean Sea, owned by a Merchant of No-Land,
who will think himself happi^ide in having the Honor to transport your self
and Soto your Squire; it is but four hours Sail (though I confess those Seas
are something dangerous,) from thence to Zardoniapola-Mancha, the Metropolis of
No-Land, where Prince PARACLET and EMANSOR reside in their gorgeous Pavillions:
My self (my Lord) must yet further by Land: Having said this, she took her
leave in a most submissive manner, receiving a friendly Farewell from the
CHAMPION, who now mended his pace toward the Ocean, for thet he perceived
Cynthius began to hide his countenance.

End of the Second Book.
Don Zara del Fogo: The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
The Champion and Soto imbarque themselves for No-Land, being on Board, he opens
the Casket that Lamia had sent by Lapida at his departure from Mount Mongibell,
wherein he finds a Charmed Bent, together with an Epistle warning him of future
events. A dreadful Tempest arising, himself and Soto are born from off the
Deck above a Cables length; they are saved by a Seahorse, and cast upon an
Island inhabited by Fishermen, where the Champion meets with a most strange
Adventure.

FOunder-foot and Soto were involved in sweat, ere the Champion could reach the
Egean Sea, but arriving at the desired Bay, our Knight complemented the Captain
and Master Meaning as became a Champion and a Knight Errant.
very ventrously, receiving from them as reasonabl a retort, they eat, drank,
and discoursed together, not like Aliens, but as having consanguinious
Alliance, and as if Neptune and Aeolus had been our Champions Pensionaries, the
wind on a sudden decame tractable to their design, so that weighing Anchor, and
setting Sail, they merrily set forward for Zardona-pola-Mancha, the Seas calm,
the winds courteous, the Seamen were singing, and the Passengers priding
themselves in their happy fortune; but O! the sick lenes of Fortune, Sentence
grave and wise.
whose blandishments are bruizes, and whose dandlings are dangerous; for they
had not say led many leagues ere Hyperion hid his face, The Description of a
sad Seastorm.
the Heavens were muffled in Mists, Eurus and Boreas break from forth their
prisons, bearing storms and tempests on their wings to the (already) enraged
Ocean, nor Charls-Wain, nor the Lesser Bear can be perused by the dispairing
Pilot, the angry Sea rowles it self in ridges as steep as the tall Pyramids of
Cayr, the monstrous Leviathan opening his mouth wider then Or^^s, watched every
opportunity to swallow the sinking Ship and its sorrowful inhabitants; nor
could Two eminent Steersmen, who guided Sir Walter Raleighs Ship on the Ocean,
when he was bound for the discovery of the Silver Mines.
Sunius or Palinure know which way to drive the distressed Vessel by the Rule
of the Rudder, while (alas) her whole bulk groans, and her Beak and Mainmast
crack, the Steers-man crying aloud, down with the Top-sayl, keep the Sprit-sayl
tight, hale the Main Bowling, while the crazed Bark, like a Bear baited with
Mastiffs, strives to keep her Beak aloof, some billows she breaks, others pass
over her Poop and Prow.

While things were in this confusion, Don Zara was sitting in his Cabin, in
very serious contemplation, conceiting (as indeed he had cause) that his Love
Lamia had procured this storm on purpose to plague him, this cogitation
remembered him of the Casket that Lapida presented him with when he left Lamia,
hitherto not thought on; which fatal oversight might (for ought any man
knows) have cost him his life, had not the celestial Powers indulged their
Darling with divine aid; but now (as to the present business all-too-late) he
opens the Carkanet, wherein he found a hilt borrowed from the hide of a Buck,
lined with Magical Characters, and Metricall Incantations, promising safety to
the Wearer, though environed with Millions of Enemies, and thrust at with
thousands of swords; Tradition tells us that this was the Cincture which the
mighty Son of Thetis, swift-foot Achilles, used to wear, by virtue whereof he
became invulnerable; this Girdle was given to Ulysses with Achilles Armor (for
he had not slaughtered the Woers else) he dying, lest it as an inestimable
Legacy to his Son Telemachus, from whose custody the Inchantress Lamia ravished
it by the potency of her Spells; one of the most efficacious Charms that was
embossed in this Belt, spoke thus in Hexameter Verses:

Oswald, Paradine, Thulo,
Hugo, Hubert, Aribert,
Astragon, Hurgonill, Orgo,
Ulfinor, Goltha, Tybalt. Thus Interpreted:
Ye mighty Dukes of Darkness,
let no wrong
Happen to him, who wears
this Charmed Thong.


With this protection there was also a Letter directed to the Champion in these
words:

Heroic Champion,
THough your unkindnesses to me are of a more killing consequence, then that of
Theseus, Aeneas, Paris, or Ulysses, to Ariadne, Dido, Aenone, or Circe, for
which your name (with theirs) should de hanged, drawn, and quartered, by the
common Executioneress Fame, yet so great is the love I yet retain toward you,
that it not only commands my forbearance from hurting you, but injoyns me to
put your person (which shall be exposed to many hazzards) above the reach of
danger; the Belt that this box incloses, if girt about you, will prove your
protection better then a Coat of Male, or the most inpenetrable Armor, nor
indeed can you be wounded while you wear this; but this gone, you are but the
same Zara you were; My Art informs me that your Destiny shall decree you for
No-land, appointing your passage through a turbulent Sea, but by no means
imbarque your self for that Ship (Passengers and all) shall become a prey to
the barbarous Element; when you arrive in No-land, many shall be your dangers,
some shall fight you, some flout you, and others fawn upon you, but your Girdle
shall give you victory over all your Enemies; Parting from thence, you shall
visit many strange Countries, and see more Monsters then Mandevile, but at a
certain time you shall find a winged Hog, grazing in a Green-plat, him ceize
upon (for he has been used to the snaffle) and make him yours, giving the Gods
and me thanks, who have made you Master of one of the rarest Beasts in the
world: Thus imploring you would not altogether forget her who shall always
remember you, I commit you to your Fate,

remaining the sorrowful Lamia.


The Champion was exceedingly vexed at his own stupidity, that he had not read
this Epistle before, and so prevented the present danger, but yet he would not
seem to be amated; How was he smitten with astonishment at this unparalleled
affection of Lamia? how did he repent him of his sullen and sudden departure?
By this time the Ship was shaken almost to pieces, Thunder rent the Air, the
Sea roared hideously, the misshapen monsters of the Deep were congregated in
great numbers, expecting a Feast of flesh and marrow, and the dying Vessel is
even now ready to give up the Ghost, the unhappy Passengers preparing themselves
to take the way of all Fish, yet the Champion views all these horrors unmoved,
and while others are sighing, he and Soto were singing the There is much
controversy amongst Expositors about this place, some will have walsingham
others Troy Town, and a third so^t the Merchants daughter of Bristoll.
heavenly tune of Walsingham; By this time the Ship (having bin a long time
sick of a Surfeit) being over-burthened; now, with what before supported her,
becomes foundered downright; when, behold, while magnanimous Zara, and his
fearless Soto were standing on the Deck, threatening defiance to Neptune, and
all the Marine Powers, a boisterous wave whirls them into the Sea above a
Cables length.

O Neptune, Saron, and all ye watery Deities, what now shall become of our
Sea-Champion, shall the Swordfish wound him, the Dog-fish bite him, or the
Whale devour him.

Behold what care the righteous Gods took for the preservation of virtue; our
Champion and Soto had not long brushed the azure billows with their active
arms, Don Zara preserved by miracle, but the truth is the Sea-horses were ever
very courteous to mank^nd. See Pliny, Soli^us, Albertus Magnus, and the Spa
nish Mandevile.
but a huge Hyppocamp (or Seahorse) gliding gently between the Champions
legs, received him upon his back, to his no less joy then admiration, who
beckned Soto to get up behind him, when (alas) the poor Squire was almost out
of breath, and now and then drank deep draughts of salt water, which he puked
up again; Simile of a new yeand Babe.
as I have seen a sullen Babe eject the new received pap, forced back again by
the thrifty Nurse, till at last it bulge the belly of the Infant; this was
Soto's savoury, ore rather unsavory condition, yet summoning all his strength
(as a dying Candle, that contracts its ardour to make one parting blaze) he cut
his passage through the swelling surges, with so vigorous a resolve, that
though he attained not the crupper, he had sure hold of the tail of this
courteous creature; by this miraculous indulgency of Fate, our Zara and his
Servitor were set safe on shore the Seahorse (not staying so much as for
thanks) having delivered his charge safe and sound to Rhea, plunged himself
into the lap of Thetis, leaving our Champion in the most insanious ecstasy, who
scarce could believe (what his eyes beheld) the wonder of his deliverance.

They were now in a Rockey Island, here and there a Tree, and (in some places)
near the Rocks, good store of But withal very scurvey. see Dr. Trigs Treatise
of purging Ale.
grass, here they feared as much to be famished as before to be drowned; yet
(by the favor of Mavors) our Champion had his good Sword girt to his
voluminous waste; nay more, his Charmed Girdle, Casket, and all safe lodged in
his pocket; Soto had on his Breast plate and Helmet, and his steel-pointed piece
of Ash, fast in his fi^t, which instrument of defense he had such care of all
the time he was sowced in the salt Ocean, that (as Caesar swimming with one
hand, and with the other preserving his Papers from pickle) he still kept it
above water; but the loss of Founder-foot unspeakably grieved our Champion, so
that he hardly refrained from tears.

Ah Founder-foot, Founder-foot, said he, have these hands of mine so often
Zara's complaint for the los^ of his Steed.
fed thee at Rack and Ma^ger, with Oats, Grains, Beans and Barley for this, to
fatten the ravenous Fishes of the Sea, and have thy hide cut out into more
Thongs then the skin of Didoes Bull, to make Harness for Neptunes Coach-Mares;
Farewell the glory of thy kind, thou Sovereign of Steeds, Prince of Palfrays,
and honestest of all Horses:

Founder-foots Elogi^.
Whose name shall live
free from all black reproaches,
While there are wincing Jades,
or Hackney-Coaches.
Soto bore a part in his Masters sorrow, for the loss of Founder-foot, though
his grief had a very different original from that of Zara's, for he (grown a
perfect Thracian) wished him there rather to feed on, then ride on, and indeed
his Sea-sickness made an Apology for the eagerness of his appetite, all know
what a civil war the tumbling of the vessel creates in the small guts, and
that those who have not been inured to Hoyes and Hulks, are very hainously
harrassed the first time of their gaze upon the garulous Ocean. Long time they
travailed up and down in hope to find some shed of shelter, but Fortune was
not so favorable to further their wishes, so that wet and weary as they were
(their carcasses curdled with cold, and their wembs repleat with water) they
sat down at the root of a blasted Oak, wishing for immediate death, rather then
a lingering destruction: Being thus reduced to the very brink of despair, and
every minute in expectation to become a prey to some ravenous Wolf, or
blood-thirsty Tiger, they might hear the showtings (as they thought) of
Shepherds, but indeed Fishermen, who had even then surprised something (styled
by them a Fish) of weighty importance, so that they were forced to summon in
the adjacent Fish-takers, with whoopings and hallowings, who understanding the
occasion of their clamor, soon incorporated themselves with them; no tongue can
tell, or Pen propose, how much the ship-wrackt Zara, and his sorrowful
Servitor, were rejoiced at these ecchoings, and therefore they rose up, and (as
near as they could guess) trod that path that might lead them to the place
where they heard these noyses, so much were they favored by Fate, that in a
short time (as if they had taken notice of the track for many Ages) they
arrived where they found not only Mortals but Mansions, Fabrics as well as
Fishermen, to their infinite contentment they saw the Fish-finders corroborated
in one lump, clubbing all their nets and strength to boot, to make themselves
Masters of some unwonted prize, some crying out they had caught a Whale, others
that they had fastened upon some Chest stuffed with Treasure; others, that they
should make some strange discovery, to the wonder of the world; Zara and Soto
stood as spectators all the time, while by main strength and Herculean
Fortitude they brought to shore what they had so long labored for, but (to
their astonishment) instead of Fish, were saluted with flesh; O strange and
never equaled accident, that as Zara surpassed al knights in the world for
courage and true Magnan(...)ity, so ^e might be furnished with Warlike
Habiliments, as never any worthy save himself (...)
Behold, a Panoplia, a Goat of Armor richly gilded, with a Shield, and a
stately Steed (of a Chestnut color, his Main curiously curled, a blue Star in
his forehead, a fair white spot upon either foot, etc.) and other Martial
Utensils; the Sea-Swaines were as much grieved, as our Champion comforted, to
peruse their Draught, insomuch that they were minded to return their gains to
him that gave them, had not Zara stepped in, and (after the Narration of his late
Shipwreck) besought them to confer the Horse and Armor upon him, they all
heard him attentively, and as freely answered his demands, departing every man
to his Cottage.

The duskish shades of night had now inveloped the world, and Zara (by the
suffrage of one of the Fishermen Piscatorio) was conducted (with his new
acquired Courser, and warlike Furniture) into a sedgie Cot, where he was kindly
received by Piscatorio's wife, and set to supper with a Cods head, and a
Salmons tail, whereon he and Soto fed like Farmers, nor was drink wanting (a
kind of Sider This must needs be a comfortable kind of drink
made of Alder-Berries and Wildings) whereof (having cured their Garments of
the Dropsey) they drank merrily, till the time of night warned them to their
rest, they therefore came to their lodging of clean Rye-straw, with Battavian
Blankets, where we will leave them to their Repose.

CHAP. II.
Zara arrives at Zardona-pola-Mancha, the chief City of No-Land, the Religion
of the No-Landers. Zara comes to Court, and joins himself with the rest of the
Knight^ and Champions; they present their Swords, Shields, etc. at the feet of
Maulkina and Dowcabell; their exquisite Impressa's and Devices. Zara's Motto
more taken notice of then any: With other accidents.

THe cheerful Cock had thrice given notice of Aurora's approach, when the
Champion (rowzing Sota from his rest) appareled himself with exceeding
cheerfulness, being now assured that the Destinies did own his resolvs by a
peculiar approbation, having so miraculously provided him a case for his skin,
with a horse seeming of the Bucephalian breed, he longed to see himself once
more in Armor, and to manage his proud Palfray, as none but Zara could do;
Soto wa^ soon ready, and the honest Fisherman also, who (burthening his board
with the best Provant his Cottage could afford, and the Champion and Soto
having fed as men doubting a future repast) took his leave of the Champion,
being exceeding joyous, that it was his fortune to be one of those whom Fate
had ordained as a consolatory Instrument for the furthering of so noble a
Nephew of Mars; Our Knight (having received instructions from his courteous
Host, which way to betake himself), mounted Soto behind him, to make his way
with the more celerity, not ceasing to hasten his horses pace til he beheld the
great City Zardona-pola-Mancha, the Metropolis of No-Land, whose argent Spires
being beaten upon by the Sunbeams, (...)endted a most fulgent delight to the
^gazer; In this City there were no less then By this may be gathered the
numberless number of inhabitants, (...) and dow^ liars in this mighty (...)ity.
nine hundred thousand Churches, the No-lands worshipped a God, they called in
their language Porco, the reason that they not only abstained from Swines
flesh, but by public Edict made it death for any to kill those kind of
creatures, embracing t(...) Society of Scots and Jews with the highest regard;
Zara who had never yet resided in so populous a place, was on the sudden
surprised with (I know not what) anxiety, so that Caution mixed with courage cau
sed this Dilemma, our Champion being as wise as valiant.
he sat a long time on his horse back in a profound study, but perceiving Soto
(who was just now restored to his feet) to eye him with a very strict regard,
he rode on, and came to the very Gates of the City, whose streets he found
paved with Aggats, the houses twelve stories high, all of Alablaster, and every
shopkeeper clad in Persian Silks, their wives in cloth of Gold, whose bodies
were even burdened with precious Stones; the Citizens ran out in heaps to gape
upon this strange Knight, so that if the Champion had not had a brow more solid
then Brass, he had been brought to ruin by very bashfulness; it was not long
ere he attained the sight of the Palace built of Parian Flint, and Podian
Freestone, with such admirable Art, that it was justly accounted the eighth
wonder of the World; its inside was all of O^hyr Gold, the Beds, Stools, and
Dresser-boards of Ivory; on the top of the Palace (after the old Roman manner)
were many rare gardens, watered with Chrystalline Rivulets, wonderful to
behold: The very day that our Champion visited the Court, were all those
Knights that were met together on the behalf of Maulkina and Dowcabell (whose
history we lately gave you) assembled in the Palace-yard, a place of that
magnitude, that Xerxes might there have mustered his Army; Prince Paraclet,
Emansor, the Princesses Maulkina and Dowcabell, with all the prime Nobles and
Ladies of the Court, in their richest Adornments, sat in a Theater contrived on
purpose for this business, beneath Canopies of state, the walls of the Theater
being hung with Velvet, enamelled with Gold, whereon were curiously pourtrayed
many ancient stories, the Expedition of the Argonauts for the Golden sheep, the
Labors of Hercules, Deucalion^ Flood, the Destruction of Troy, Medea and
Jason, with O^ Hero and Leander
the Loves of Dorastus and Fawnia, the Knights were all on foot (which caused
our Champion also to alight, giving his Steed to Soto) their Squires (who were
all clad in Crimson Tas^aty) holding their Steeds in one hand, and their
Shields in the other; each Champion had his Sword girded about him, with his
Spear in his hand, as prepared for present encounter, Zara not excepted; which
solemnity being ended, they one after another presented their Swords, Spears,
and Shields, at the feet of divine Maulkina and the beauteous Dowcabell; the
first was a Knight of Phrigia, whose Device (engraven on his Shield) was a Dog
biting his Fleas, very busily, with this Motto:

There is no trust The Knight of the Dog.

unto the Winds or Seas,
Those that lie down with Dogs,
shall rise with Fleas.
The next was a Knight of Transylvania, the son of a great Duke named Sharkino,
his Device was a Lion Rampant, but without Teeth or Nayls, with this Motto:

The Kingly Lions Teeth The Knight of the tooth less Lion.

have left his jaws,
His voice can kill,
though wanting teeth or claws.
The third was a Knight of Malta, a man very eminent for his valor against
Ottaman, his Device was a Jack Pudding dancing on the Ropes, with this Motto:

He who dares wear a face
that bites like Mustard, The Knight of the Pudding.

I Will maul, as Pudding
macerates his Custard.
The fourth was a Knight of Sardinia, of an excellent form, insomuch that
Maulkina and Dowcabell had their eyes continually fixed upon him, his Device
was a Jack-an-Apes, playing upon a Jews-trump, with this Motto:

Play on melodiously
(magnifick Jack) The Knight of the Jackanapes.

Until my Sword shall win
thee Nuts to crack.
The fifth was a Shentleman of Wales, Ap Shon, ap Owen, ap Richard, ap Morgan,
ap Hugh, ap Brutus, ap Sylv(...) ap, Aeneas, his Device was a large Cheese slit
asunder in the midst, toasting before a fire of Tur^, with this Motto:

If her ploud be up
twice and ones, The Knight of the tosted Cheese.

Take very many heeds
to bide her pones;
Merlin her Countryman,
Witness for her can;
God please her, none in
Heurope can appease,
Her anger's like a piece
of toasted Cheese.
The sixth was a Knight of Muscovia, a big man, but of a very Masculine Aspect;
this was he that stole aaway the Infanta of Spain in a Moonshine night, maugre
all her Guards, and married her to his son Lurdanio, his Device was a Civet-Cat
disburthening her self a posteriore into the Helmet of a Knight in shining
Armor, who held forth his Headpiece very handsomely, his Motto:

True typs of her,
whose breath's perfumed I find, The Knight of the Civet Cat.

Whether she vent it
forward or behind.
Then came Zara (for it would be tedious to relate all) with a Majestic pace,
and was received by Maulkina and Dowcabell, with a loud laughter, a favor they
had not yet afforded to any save himself, his Device was an Owl in an
Ivie-Bush, with this Motto:

Ravens and Daws in troops put on,
But Owls and Eagles fly alone, The Knight of the Owl in an Ivie-Bush.

My Shield, Horse, Armor, Helm and Sword,
Are owned by Pallas and her Bird.
This Device was much laughed at by some of the Noblemen and Ladies, and
derided by the Knights of little knowledge, which our Champion well enough
perceived, and wisely winked at, though within himself he vowed a sudden and
sharp revenge; but the truth is, our Don (being utterly a stranger to Letters)
was wholly ignorant of the matter, else no doubt his sagacitie had sought out
some other Emblem more suitable to his own serenity, and yet this (seemig)
despicable Badge will not want a second owner, which shall occasion the most
dreadful Duel that has bin foughten since the Creation, as the Process of the
History will inform: This Solemnity over, the Knights were admitted to lay
their lips to the Lilly hands of Maulkina and Dowcabell, and after the thanks
of Paraclet and Emansor, were conducted to a stately Pavillion, being feasted
after the most sumptuous manner; then they fell to Dancing, but Zara excused
himself from that employment, as an effeminacy he never affected, who had
rather fight then frisk, but for owning and celebrating Healths he was not
inferior to any, till the intoxicating fumes so bu^^etted his brains, that he
was forced to disgorge himself even at the Table, which some queazie appetites
were angry at, but the stronger sort of constitutions bore withal, as a thing
incident to tottering Mortality; And that nothing might be wanting to an
accomplished Entertainment, a Masque was this night presented in the Royal
Theater.

A splended, pompeous, and delightful Show,
(Some say) by Johnson, Jones, or Inigo.

CHAP. III.
The presentation of a never-equall'd Masque, Don Pantalone (resolving to
Quarrel Zara) imployes Don La-Fisk to bear his Challenge, etc.

PRince Paraclet and Emansor, the Heaven-born Maulkina and divine Dowcabell,
with all the Nobles and Madams of the Court, being seated each according to
their degree; the Knights Errant were also placed according to their several
Gradations, and the Music having charmed their senses with a Celestial
Dyrathamb, they were presented with a curious Contrivance, called

Venus and Adonis.: A Masque.
The Frontispiece was a thick-grown Wood, repleat with Lions, Tigers, Bears,
Antilopes, Panthers, and other Beasts of prey; Sylvanus, Priapus, Pan, and
other Wood-Gods, cracking of Nuts, and eating of Apples, while the following
Song was sung to the Tabor.
SONG.
HAil happy Powers, whose harmless [sway,
All the Sylvans do obey;
Had those above fed like to you,
(On Acorns and on Rainbow Dew)
When the World lay in its Cradle,
And there was no fiddle faddle,
Saturn had still kept his Throne,
And not been outed by his Son;
It Is headstrong Wine,
And Manchet fine,
That irritates
Ambitious pates:
Pan never quarrels with Sylvanus,
(For every Wood-god worships Janus)
The beauteous Nymphs are all in common,
None's the better Gentlewoman;
With a baneless love they greet,
Horns, and nayls, and cloven-feet.
CHORUS. Then unto the Woods let us wander,
To find out Hero and Leander.

This Song ended, twelve Nymphs, and as many Satyrs cast themselves into a
figure for the Dance; which done, the Wood-gods, with the Nymphs and Satyrs
withdraw, and the Goddess Venus with her Son Cupid, and her Handmaids the
Graces are discovered. VENUS. Nay, by my Altars that are reaking,
And those Lovers that are sneaking,
Homeward after full enjoyment, (...)
Either accept of this employment,
(Froward Boy) or else I Will strip the^,
And with Rods of Roses whip the^;
I have often (to my sorrow)
Felt the Launcing^ of thy Arrow,
Jove and Juno, Hermes, Hebe,
Mavors, Bacchus, yea and Phebe,
With the God that guides the Surges,
(Riding like a Belgic Burgess)
Will rejoice (like to inferiors)
While I plow up thy Posteriors,
Take away his Bow and Darts,
While I scourge him till a' smarts.
Bare his breech. Thalia --

CUPID. -- had I
Taken the counsel of my Daddy
(Whom you cuckold every hour)
By this I might have scornd your power.
Cannot Mars his steely chine,
(Who has almost lost his eyne
With over-doing) nor Anchyses,
With his Piltrums and his Spices,
(To heighten Appetite) nor Pe^^us
Sat your conduct to Cornelius;
But Adonis must be brought on,
To a thing he never thought on.

VENUS. Impious Elf (Aeneas broher)
What Is that to thee who rides thy Mother,
Horse him Thalia. --

THALIA -- Spare, O spare
(Great Goddess) this thy son and Heyr,
Lest on a Clown he make me doat-a,
I dare not touch his silken Coat-a.

VENUS. Do It, if thou despise thy duty,
I Will make thee fetch a Box of Beauty,
From the bottom of black Hell,
As Pshyche did (as stories tell.)

Here the Graces ceaze upon Cupid, and prepare him for the lash. CUPID. Hold,
(sweet Honey-Mother) hold,
I confess I Have been too bold,
If I live but till to morrow,
(As Gods cannot die) I Will send an Arrow
Into Adonis Marble breast,
Headed with a Hornets nest.

VENUS. On this condition take thy ramble,
To make the wombs of ladies wamble,
But fail not as thou love my smile,
Now I Will take Coach for Cyprus I Will.

Venus, Cupid, and the Graces being gone, Adonis (like a Huntsman) is seen with
his setting Dog. ADONIS. Come my Caniculo (sweet Cur)
In thy throat thou have a bur
I fear, thy voice was wont to ring,
With redoubled ecchoing;
"Strange thing, when Dogs forget their tones,
"And Letchers leave their Marrowbones
"Unbroken, in this shady Wood,
(Where shaggy Satyrs use to scud)
I reign sole Monarch of content,
And never think what my father spent,
To get and breed me; Pox a'wooing,
It Is fulsom to be always doing;
My life is strict, and right Laconick,
That love is best that is Platonic:
To hunt the swift-foot Stag, and follow
The furius Bear (...) whoop and hollow
Is my best delight, -- So -- ho,
Follow me Caniculo.

CUPID. Thanks Jove, see, where all alone is,
My Mothers misery Adonis,
But I Will mollify his mind,
"They are fools that think me blind;
Have at thee Adon. Here the Bow-string cried twang.
-- so, it is done,
Breech, thy preservation
Is signed and sealed; now must I go,
To wound a wanton I adies toc.

Adon is being wounded, Cupid goes off, leaving him to his Love passion.
ADONIS. Ye Gods that govern Man and Mouse
The King, the Duke, the Lord, the lous
What an uncouth change is here,
I am in love up to the ear,
The deadly rage of love.
So that I could court (methinks)
A wench that wants a nose, and blinks,
Were she splay-footed gummy-ey'd,
With all deformities beside
That can be mentioned; all too long
I have done beauteous Venus wrong;
Great God of Love to thee I bow,
"Thou art a devilish Rogue I vow;
Fire, fire, I burn, I burn,
And shortly shall to cinders turn,
Unless some courteous femall fall,
Beneath the Parent of all.

VENUS. How now, my dear Adonis, what?
With thy self in busy chat?
When, when O when shall Venus find,
The flinty-soul'd Adonis kind.

ADONIS. Squeeze me like to Milky Curds,
Drain all my sappy bulk affords,
Let me dwell upon your Venus is much praised by Ancient Poets for her Mole,
etc.
Spor,
You shall find me cold and hot;
But must not fail in Retribution,
When you find my constitution.

VENUS. Come then (my Paramour) let us sally,
To my Rosy Bower, and dally,
Till our kexey joints complain,
Then we will take breath again.

Venus and Adonis being gone, the wild Boar, who (according to Theocritus) was
deeply in love with Adonis, is seen. BOAR. I must enjoy thee (upon any score)
Adonis, or else cease to be a Boar;
I that despise the Javelin and the Spear,
Whose murdering Tusks the sternest Mortals fear,
Do stoop unto a stripling, had I thee
Within my power, thou sightles Deity
I Would crumble thee to attoms, and devour
Thy laughing Mother in her flowery Bower.
Mast will not down, I loath my wonted Food,
The unseen flame does set on fire my blood,
Licks up my moisture, and so loud I (...)runt,
My voice is heard hence to the Helespont.

ADONIS. It Was long (Alcides) ever thy back was right,
Having mounted fifty Virgins in one night.
Voracious Venus (void of ruth)
Has had no mercy on my youth.

BOAR. Beauteous Adonis, hark; how long in vain,
Unto thy sealed up ear shall I complain,
Thy scorn will kill me; Nature cannot save
His life, whom Love shall lead unto the Grave.
O pity my perplexity, though rude
In form, my heart is full of gratitude;
My mind's as smooth as pibble, though my hide
Be rough, and I have other gifts beside,
May sign my Patent for a Ladies clip,
Though I confess my hair will hurt her lip:
What ere this Wood affords shall call thee Lord,
So thou will deign but love for love t'afford.

ADONIS. (...) bri^led Monster, can thou hope
My love, I Will first embrace a Rope;
And on some fatal Yeugh resign^
My life, foul Monster, filthy Swine;
I will procure a Gay of Warwick,
Though I explore from hence to Barwick
(If thou desist not) that shall wear,
Thy head upon his charmed Spear.

BOAR. Nay, then it is time to cast of al remors
For when intreatles fall, to practice force,
Is Orthodox Adonis, by the Gods,
And their celestial ever-blest abodes,
I must enjoy thee --

Here the Boar endeavoring to express love to Adonis, wounds his tender skin
with his Tusk, which kills him. ADONIS. -- O I Am slain,
This bawdy Boar has wrought my bane.

BOAR. Out alas, what have I done?
He is dead as sure as Gun,
Fallen like some Poplar (in his pride)
Planted by a Rivers side,
Wounded by a Pelean Ax,
In Heaven now a Paralax.
O, O, ye infernal Juries,
Rhamnusia, and ye Snake-hair'd Furies,
The Boar is in an extreme Agony. Ye Harpies, Hags and Gorgons fell,
Horror of conscience.
Methinks I Am hurrying now to hell,
Witness ye Powers above, that I
Was not murtherous willingly,
I would have hugged him, but mistook,
And therefore (sure) may have my book
Where shall I bath this vexed body,
Tormented to a Hoddy-Doddy?
Within some gloomy Cave I Will pine,
And never drink, nor never dine,
Till I look like salt and piss,
And Hermes summon me to Dis.

VENUS. -- with the Graces.

VENUS. Here he was wont to go, and here
Tellus being proud to bear
So rich a burden, -- O my heart,
When with Adonis I did part:
Just such a sigh I fetched in sooth^la.
I hope Jove will protect the youth-la
from scathe; sad thoughts do clog my soul,
Which like to Neptunes waves do roll
And ride on one another backs,
My nether parts do melt like Wax,
or Butter in a Basting-ladle.
What do I see, -- do my eyes dazzle?
Or is Adonis drowned in gore?
O Fortune thou most damned whore,
What have thou done? lift heaven hier
Good Gaffer Atlas, that my fire
Of rage may have full vent; no stone is The Goddess falls upon the dead body of
Adonis.

More cold then my (once dear) Adonis,
His Nerve that wont to heave and stand
Stiff as a stake at my command,
Now droops and hangs the head, his wounds
Do yawn like chapt and parched grounds.
What Monster more then fell with fang
Of ruin, would destroy so young,
So fair, so smooth, so deft a ^ad,
Of whom such comfort Venus had.
O I am wild with rage; thy bulk
(Dear boy) in a rich Urn shall skulk,
With rich perfums, and whit-bred crumbs
Rich Odours, and Sabean Gums.
Take up the precious load my Graces
But ware he piss not in your faces;
For so (some say) d^ad people do,
This fatal Wilderness shall rue
Thy ruin Adon, Tempests shall,
Tear up the Oaks, the Elms, the small,
The great, the fruitful, and the barren,
With a Hors-pox and a Murren.
Lead on and weep till ye are blind, the while
We seat Adonis on his Funeral Pile.

Venus and the Graces (carrying the dead Adonis) being gone off, Temp^sts and
storms destroy the Wood, and nothing appears but a thick Stage, and a
thin-jaw'd Poet, who thus Epiloguizes. EPILOGUE.
Thus have you seen Adonis dreary Fate,
The Boars ill luck, and Venus wretched state
Masqus are no common things, specially such
As this, that leans upon no staff or crutch;
The Port stands within ^iting his nayls,
Sometimes his hope, sometimes his fear prevails:
Troth he is a pretty man, and comes as near
Tom Nabs (whose Microcosmos has no Peer)
As any he alive; If this don't like ye, (...) A Mock Masque in^ended for the
Press.

Next time Cupido coms, and Madam Psyche.
This Masque (as how could it choose) found a general applause, not so much as
one crittick in so great a crowd; but by this time half the night was spent, so
that Prince Paraclet, Emansor, Maulkina and Dowcabell, betook themselves to
their rest, whose example the Courtiers of both sexes followed, only the
Knights (Zara excepted) resorting to the place place where they had supped some
hours before, resolve to salute Somnus with a bowl of Bacchus his blood,
drinking so deep, that ye would have thought every man there Master of more A
kind of shining pibble found in the Desa^^^ of Dev^n shire, which whosoever
shall butter and bury in his belly in a morning fasting, shall be sure to shnn
drunkenness that day.
Amethists then one, so that the place where they were, seemed the very Bower
where the blyth Delphick God tipples Sack, and keeps his Bacchanalias; but
while they were quassing, Zara was sleeping, but he little imagins what plots
are even now (at this ominous hour of night) contriving against him, for the
Knights Errant being now (in their own conceits) discreeter then Socrates or
Solon, and valianter then Achilles or Alexander the Great, began every man to
pride himself in his own praise, and to enumerate the many Combats and
perilous Atchievments they had bin guilty of; this man having vanquished the
Knight of the Moon, and Seven Stars, who had nine fingers upon each hand, was
full six yards in height, and was thought able to rout a Royal Army; this
having taken in that Cittadell, maugre the opposition of a thousand men; a
third having rescued the Persian Sophy, when surrounded with twelve millions of
Turks, who were leading him captive to Constantinople; these vapors
dissipated, they began to discourse every man of his Horse, Armor, and Shield,
etc. each maintaining his own for the most Authentic: This discourse put 'um
in mind of our Champion Don Zara, whom every one censured as he li^ted, only
the Knight of the PUDDING (for so was Don Pantalone the Knight of Malta called,
because of the Jack-Pudding in his Shield) was most vehement, who articled
against him as a man both insipid and incapacious as to Military Atchievments;
this was the Knight whose Horse, Armor, Shield, etc. was made Zara's by
miracle, being (by an unparalleled providence) dragged to shore by Fishermen,
and by them conferred on our Champion, as the first Chapter of this Book has
informed; for Don Pantalone (being bound for No -land) was shipwrackt on those
very Seas where our Champion was cufft overboard, and was the only mortal
except a Spartane Spaniell) that escaped the danges (as it seems) by the
agility of his arms, and now this most dangerous and degenerate Knight (envying
the boon of Heaven) would recover those Emoluments by force, which (no doubt)
were worthily torn from him by the fraud of Fate, openly owning the Horse,
Armor, and Shield, and execrably protesting that he would be Master of them
within forty hours, or leave his dead body as a witness of his Devoyre; this
Resolve was highly praised by some, and as much cried down by others; but
Pantalone was too proud to hearken to dehortments, and therefore (betwixt drunk
and sober) he wrote a Challenge, desiring the Knight of the Ap^ (for so was
Dou-La-Fisk the Knight of Sardinia called, because of the Ape playing on a
Jewes-Trump in his Shield) to carry it about The time that all Challenges ought
to be carried, or not at all. Sea the Ordinance con cerning Duells.
eight in the morning to our Champion Don Zara; This done, (being scarce able
to tipple any longer) the Knights adjourned their House for some hours.

CHAP. IV.
Don Zara first appears in the Lists, where Don-la-Fisk presents him with
Pantalones Challenge; His stern reply. Duke-la-Fool with two thousand armed
Knights enters the Lists, and is totally routed by Zara. He is deeply enamoured
on the Lady Madona-del-Simplicia, to whom he directs an Epistle, etc.

THE Sun had no sooner seated himself in his flaming Throne, but the Heralds
(by sound of Trumpet) warned the Knights Errant to meet in the Palace-yard,
there to betake themselves to the business of the day, but those intoxicating
fume^ that usually attend ebriety, had so sealed up their senses, that you
would have thought Knight Errantry both dead and buried, had not the truly
valiant and most redoubted DON ZARA DEL FOGO appeared (with SOTO) completely
Armed, mounted on his courageous Courser, whom he called after the name of his
late lost Palfray, Founder-foot, and brandishing his bright weapon (like
another Actorides) he seemed to denounce Defiance to all under the Cop^; nor,
indeed, was he overconfident of his Abilities, though having had but little
experience hitherto of his own Fortitude; for by instinct (as it were) he on
the sudden became sensible of the wondrous vigor absconded in the mysterious
folds of his Charmed Belt, which (as by a providence unthought of, or unseen)
could protect him from the edge of ravenous steel, though Tilted at him by the
same See Mystagogus Poeticu^, or the Muses Interpreter, fol. 20000.
man that tore off Achelous his horn, and (being in a rage) threw it in to
Troy-novant, where being taken up (as if it had been sent from Heaven) it
became the Cor^^copia
City badge, though (I know not for what cause) it be not quartered with their
Arms; he had not long traversed the lists, but the Knight of the Ape, Don la
Fisk, on foot, only with his Battle-Ax and bastinado, saluted him, proposing a
written paper unto him, which put our Champion into much perplexity, not that
he dreaded a Challenge from the most approved Knight in the World, but left he
should be liable to the castigation of the censorious, as one not acquainted
with Alphabeticall Tables; but his ingenuity (by a most apt contrivance)
prevented the murder of his Fame, for (as despising so trivial an employment)
he called for Soto with as much indignation as haste, who came tremblingly to
receive the mandates of his Master; the Champion gave him a check for his
non-residency, but yet with so calm a countenance, that he might behold him
without blasting: Here, quoth Zara, read the contents of this Paper, which
done, fold it up for Bum-fodder; Soto receiving the Scrole, found it fraught
with this very language:

SYRRAH,
THough I cannot prove how, or where The Challenge.
thou attainedst those gllorious Arms; that Achillean Shield, and that strong
Steed, yet I will make it good on thy Carrion Corse, that thou ca^^st
Felloniously by them; they are mine, and as mine I demand their speedy
surrender, as thou would escape being beaten, abbominably beaten; I will not
rail on ye, but I will Cudgel and kick ye most Heroic Champion; therefore
(if thou be wise) speedily un-case and dismount thy self, sending my Horse,
Armor, and Shield, else expect no mercy, from

DON PANTALONE.


Soto was so amazed with the terrible tenor of this Epistle, that he could
scarce prolong his breath to pronounce his name that thus menaced his Master;
but from Zara's eyes you might perceive flashes of subtle lightning,
incessantly streaming, Zara's Indignation, having heard Pantalones Defiance.
his face was strangely altered, Death sat upon his front in a new shape, more
dreadful then ever Painter yet fancied him, so that Don-la-Fisk (a man
otherwise stout enough) was lost to his wonted courage, and began to repent him
of his ready undertaking so mortal a Message, to whom after a bite of the lip,
and a little pause, our Champion returned this Answer.

I Know not, said he, whether my cl^mency would be greater in sparing, or my
justice in sacrificing thy life (lost man) who have had the boldness to
present me with this putrid Paper, from him whose limbs shall shortly feast the
Fowls of the Air; did ever so voluminous a vaunt find foundation on so vain a
confidence? What is this fellow? or from whence? but No-land shall not shelter
him from my vengeance, were he Walled in with Dragons, and armed with the same
Thunder that Jove is; as for you, though you have justly merited the weight of
my anger, yet I will adjourn your Fate, for no other reason, but that you
return my Answer' to the Slave that sent you.


Having uttered this (in a tone that sufficiently manifested the mightiness of
his wrath) he put spurs to his horse galloping up and down the Lists with such
fury, that the ground groaned under his Horses hoofs, when behold Don Patalone
(as eager of Combat as himself) rode up to him with the highest Valor and
Resolution, charging him with his drawn Sword; Our Champion (who would fain
have been fighting with any man) imagined that this was he who had so grossly
abused him, and had there put a period to his life, had not Duke La-Foole with
two thousand armed Knights just then entered the Lists; Duke-la-Foole was armed
much like that haughty Pagan King Feragus, of whom the most excellent of our
English Martin Parkers Heroic Poem, called Valentine and Orson, Dedicate to
all the Nobles and Gentry of either Sex throughout this Nation.
Poets thus sings:

-- With a Shirt of Mayle,
A Helmet of strong Brass
upon his head,
A Shield of the same Metal,
which to fail,
Was not ordained,
a Sword two handfuls broad, instead
Of ponderous Club,
he bore a well-grown Oak,
Which threatened certain death
at every stroke.
This caused the two Knights to forbear one another, and turn their fury upon
these Strangers, what Homericall or Virgillian Pen can perfectly paint the
admirable deeds done by Don Zara, who (being invulnerable) had soon sent five
hundred of Duke-la-Fools Knights to Dis; so that Prince Paraclet, Emansor, and
the Nobility of No-land (being awakened by the trampling of Horses, and the
clashing of Armor) forsook their beds, and stood to behold the conflict on the
Battlements of the Palace, imagining that Mars himself was descended from
Heaven, in the shape of a man; How did they praise his Prowess? how magnify
his Magnanimity? By this time the Knights had taken the Allarm, and as one man
came to their assistance; But O ye vindictive Powers, what a slaughter was then
commenced! Here some lay spewing out their hearts blood, there others headless;
here one without arms, there another without legs, environed with a Lake of
blood; nor did the fury of the Fight take any to mercy, save Duke-la-Fool
himself, and 6 more, who being made captive, were carried to Prince Paraclet
and Emansor, who immediately rewarded their treachery Duke La-Fool be^^^ded.
with the loss of their heads: Twelve of Paraclets Knights were slain in this
bloody encounter; but Zara (covered over with blood and sweat, by a Messenger
from the Princes.) was singled out from the rest, and brought before Prince
Paraclet, Emansor, Malkina, and Dowcabell, who affording him the respects due
to a Deity, attributed the Victory, together with their preservations (in so
eminent hazard) merely to his Valor, enquiring his name and Country, to the
first he yielded a ready responsion, but to the other he answered in very
obscure terms; the Princes and all there admire the man's valor, but more his
modesty, imagining him a Saint as well as a Soldier, for what Syntax is there
betwixt a Helmet and a Cap of Maintenance; the Princess Maulkina gave him many
amorous glances, and no doubt had fixed her affection on him, had she not
doubted his acceptance, being deceived with the color of his countenance;
indeed a warlike Ammunition face, yea so preter natural, that it seemed rather
a Vizzard then a face, but his mind more smooth then pollished Pewter, and
foster then the Ravens feather, as may appear by his being surprised (even now
in the height of his anger, when his illustrious soul moved in the very
Apogaeum of death and vengeance, so much was he incensed against the Knight of
the Pudding^) with one of the Princess Waiters, named Madona-del-Simplicia, a
creature of a most excellent form:

Her gallant gray eyes,
Like Stars in the skies,
Denoted the whiteness of her two thighs.
Her face Rivalling the fairest of the Fatal Sisters; this is the Goddess to
whom our Champion offers his vows, to this fair Idea he paid his zealous
Orisons, calling her the Throne of Pleasure, and the very Promontory of
perfection, yet (such a bashfulnes was he born withal) could not our Champion
(though he earnestly endeavored it) compel his tardy tongue, to deliver of
what his heart dictated, though his soul (which brought its own sacred fire
with it) did (mentally) present her with a wounded Oblation, burning on her
brick Altar, offered up with as real a devotion as ever Cupid elevated any;
but his love was very ill placed, for Simplicia, though fair of face, had a
heart more rough then the Posteriors of a Bear, nor did she so much as return
one smile to the Champion, who for a long time had earnestly gazed upon her, a
thing that Prince Paraclet and all there took special notice of, but were more
stricken with wonder, when they beheld the Champion (withoutso much as taking
his leave) fling away, and mount himself with as much haste, as he had even
then bin Petitioned by some pensive Lady, for the infranchisement of her
captivated Lord held in durance by some horrible Giant.

The Author is in a pitiful plight for his good Champion.
O Zara, Zara, these memorable Loves mentioned in those Authentic Histories of
Parismus, The Knight of the Sun, or the Ingenuous Don Qnixot-dela-Mancha, upon
the barren Mountains of Morenna, bewailing the disdain of the Lady
Dulcina-del-Toboso, are but. Leaden Legends, compared with thy more solid
sufferance, in whose breast the little God seems solely to have seated himself,
as in some Magnificent Metropolis, where he keeps his Court and gives Laws to
the Nations of the earth.

But while the Princes and the rest were diversely censuring this Act of Zara's,
he (with an Arrow in his bosom) had gained his lodgings, Love that in others
causes affability, has in him a clean contrary operation, See Dr. Bulwers
language of the feet. Tome 9.
as the language of his face sufficiently demonstrated, looking so furiously
that none durst speak to him, his Secretary Soto excepted, who took the
privilege to talk to him, and demand the cause of this so sudden change.

Ah Soto, Soto, said the Champion, he whom neither Duke La-Fool nor his
thousand Knights, whom the Knight of the Pudding Don Pantalone, nor all the
Champions, Giants, Monsters, Satyrs, Devils, and Dragons can vanquish, is now
overcome with the looks of a weak, and (for ought I know) wanton woman, her
face is continually in my fancy, and I must enjoy her, or cease to be mortal.

Sir, said Soto, this is no such prodigy as you would insinuate; your
Predecessor the great Hercules, after all his Victories and Conquests, became
a slave to his own Codpiece, and (by Omphales appointment) spun Shooe-makers
thread, which employment he plied to purpose all the day, not wishing any
Sallary but to unravell at night: Was not the good Sir Guy flouted by Philida
into a bondage, cost him much blood and sweat ere he could wriggle himself into
her embraces? Jove himself has been a Bull ere now, merely to back Io the
white-faced Cow? If then the greatest of Gods, and the most eminent among men,
have been Vassals to Venus, and captives to Cupid; it had been strange if you
(my Lord) who are a God, a Hero, and what not, should not (at least) taste
what they fed on almost to a surfeit, nor need you despair of a prosperous
success, for what woman (though Mistress of more beauty then Loves Queen, or
dignified with more sovereign command then Semiramis) would not meet your
motion halfway, and bless that Fate that furnished her with such Magnetic
perfections, to attenuate the love of so brave a man. Thou art excellent, quoth
Zara, at versification, pen me presently a Copy of Verses, such as may gain thy
self a never-fading Fame, and me the fruition of her who is my Fate, upon whose
smiles or frowns my Destiny depends. Soto's extreme modesty, who though a most
excellent Poet, will not vaunt himself of his own abilities.
My Lord, quoth Soto, I have only ^ipt of Helicon, and taken a nap or two upon
Pernassus, but as I can, I will; so having taken off a bowl of Mereotick Wine,
he took Pen in hand, and wrote these numbers.

FAir Nymph, whose beauties all admire,
Whose face does set the World on fire;
Within whose brow (above the beak)
The Graces play at Barly-break,
Whose every curle a Cupid hides,
And many a sightlesse God besides;
Let not, O let not thy dire scorn,
Make me wish thou had nere been born,
Or boing born (since I am shotten)
Ere this thou had been dead and rotten
I am no ^ulgar Suppliant (Sweet)
No Parish-child found in the street;
My name is Zara, who of late
Encountering La-Fool, broke his p^te,
And sent his Errant Knights (poor men-a)
Unto the bottom of Gehenna;
Thou may he proud of this my proffer,
For'tis my first and only offer;
The Love I prostrate unto thee,
The mightiest Queens have b^g'd of me;
Marthesia was once my Mistress,
With Antiopa, and Thalestris,
Women that did great fame deserve
For handling Sword as well as Nerve:
O let not then thy coyness plunder
His life, whom naught can kill but thunder.
Your Beauties Vassale, DON ZARA DEL FOGO.

These deathless Verses having had Zara's approbation, were sealed up in the
form of an Epistle, and thus superscribed: For the most Magnetic, Illustrious,
Madona del Simplicia.

Soto himself was the Messenger, being hastened by Zara to a speedy departure.

CHAP. V.
Soto comes to Court and delivers his Masters Letter to the Lady Madona del
Simplicia. Her scornful Reply. The Champion (being transported with passion)
strikes Soto on the face. Soto turns upon his Master: Acruell Combat betwixt
them. Zara meeting with Don Pantalone there happens a bloody and dreadful
Fight. Soto's death and revivall.

IT was now about the hour when every maw expected its meal, when Soto came to
the Palace where he found the Lady Madona-del-Simplicia with the Princesses
Maulkina and Dowcabel at dinner, and was forced (to his great grief) to wait in
the Lobby till the time of exercising the teeth was over; the custom of the
No-landers, being quite diff^^^nt from that of other Nations, they never
inviting any stranger to eat or drink, out of a conceit (it seems) that by
their so doing they should prejudice the sellers of Roast or Boiled in the
City, who paid great Taxes to the Prince, and were ever the first who As his
Lifeguard.
waited upon him to the Wars at their own Charges; so that Soto having
attended long with much impatience, was admitted to the presence of the Lady
Simplicia, to whom (after many mannerly cringes) he presented his Masters
Letter; the Lady, though she courteously received it, did not seem the least
taken with the tenor, but having afforded a slight perusal, she But though
the Lady seemed to slight his Verses in public, she often made use of them in
a Privy place.
put it (not as SOTO expected in her bosom) in her pocket, returning the
Champion this Answer:

That she did wonder a man of a strange Country, who for ought she knew was no
more then a pretender to Arms, should be possessed with so bold a confidence to
court her by Letter, whom he had never so much as spoken to; she willed him to
forb^^r for the future any more to solicit her by Letter, lest he involved
himself in a Labyrinth, out of which he could not escape, but with the
forfeiture of his life, ^dding that if it were he ((...) she believed it was)
who departed from the Presence in the morning, in so m^d, or rather Clownish a
manner, she could not think him fit for any Society, save those of the
Black-Guard, being either not well in his wits, or a Coridonicall Coxcombe.

Having said this, she ^^ung away, her Gesture expressing the highest disdain,
leaving SOTO in as much amazement as Ulysses his followers, when they felt
themselves gradually giving up their manly shapes for that of Swine. What
should poor SOTO do? toreturn to his Master with this nipping Answer, were to
endanger his skin, and for to stay in this Inhospitable place were to starve
his stomach; for a long time he stood like a man Soul-lesse; but at last his
hunger overcame the thought of danger, and he set forward toward his Masters
Lodgings, who guessed the very event of the business by his face, but wisely
disguising his fear, he cheerfully demanded what Answer the Lady had sent him.
My Lord, said Soto, such an one as neither befits me to relate, nor you to
hear, suffice it, she is a proud, disdainful, contumacious woman, and is as
likely to be won by your endeavors, as it is probable for me to make Minerva
my Minion: This rather increased then mitigated the Champions inquiry, who
commanded him, as he would avoid his wrath, to declare the whole carriage of
the business. Since you will have it so, said Soto, know that she not only
condemned your confidence for daring to importune her, but bespattered you with
the odious epithets of Clown and Coxcomb. Death of my soul! said Zara, thou
art always (like the Raven) croaking my infortunity and disgrace, and I
believe a cherisher rather then a confronter of those that calumniate me, in
saying this (being transported with choler) he gave Soto so grievous a blow on
the face, that it made him The Champions invincible strength
totter thirty paces from him, the blood gushing out of his nose very
violently; so that Soto, who (as it seems) had never before seen any such
sauguinary flux, imagined himself wounded mortally, beyond all hope of escape,
the grief whereof so exasperated him, that it gave him (as it were) a new soul,
just when he looked for no less then a separation of soul and body, and (O
villainy!) he resolved to take vengeance on his Master as his Murderer, and
accordingly (with the highest courage) came up to the teeth of Zara, The
outr^gious Co(...) between Do^ Zara and his servant Soto.
striking him twice or thrice on the chaps, in a most butcherly manner; it was
long ere the Champion (so great was his astonishment at this impudence of Soto)
could believe both what he saw and felt, but having pregnant proof that Soto
was indeed in earnest, and of a Secretary and an assistant was become a Serpent
and an Assasinate, he redoubled his blows with inexpressible indignation,
which Soto not only received, but retorted with almost equal force, so that
the Combat grew both dangerous and dreadful, and it was hard to determine
which of they two should first purchase the Palm of Victory, for Soto (firmly
conceiting that his latest hour was come) had sworn to his own soul to take his
Master with him to Tartarus; this cruel contest continued for half an hour,
till the Champion (as scorning to struggle any longer with his slave) closing
with Soto, Being acq(...)ed (it seems) with that sleight of heel which
Wrestlers call the Cornish Hug.
compelled him to the earth; and now having this Typhon down, good reason that
he overwhelm him with a mountain, therefore he loaded his breast with the weight
of his bulk, ever and anon affording him a cuff or two, which Soto not knowing
how to retalliate but with his teeth, at one snap snatched away the tip of the
Champions nose, which (with a Sardinian smile) he forced in his face, who now
was skrew'd up to the highest key of anger, and therefore drawing his knife, he
cruelly cut off both the ears of Soto, attempting (O Scythian ferity) to cram
the new-cropt dowcets down his throat; by this one act of Barbarity he for ever
disabled Soto, who now concluded himself as dead as a pickled Herring, and
accordingly postured himself as one fit for Funeall, which caused the Champion
(who ever abhominated to insult over a dejected, or dead Foe) to forbear the
further prosecution of his rage, and imagining he had most certainly slain his
servant and Secretary, he presently harnessed himself, and mounting his strong
Steed (as if haunted with Furies, like Orestes or Orlando) he put spurs to his
Palfray (all bedewed as he was with Soto's blood) with a resolve to find out
Don Pantalone, the Knight of the PUDDING and in one day to rid the world of two
of his terriblest Enemies; his eyes had scarce lost the sight of his Lodgings,
where he beheld Pantalone riding toward him in shining Armor, his Sword drawn
in his hand. Zara was something abas^ed to meet him so pat, yet scorning to
have his Man of War sunk by a Sculler, he also drew his blade, and coming
within six yards of him, said,

Art thou that unmanner'd and degenerate Knight, that but yesterday did send
me a defiance by the Knight of the Jackanapes, challenging this Steed, Arms,
Shield, and Sword, as thine, and threatening to cudgel and kick me, in case I
delivered them not up into thy custody, as the true owner.

Yes, said Pantalone, I am that very man, and will justify that challenge,
proving with my life, that thou art an Errant Thief, and no Knight Errant, the
shame of Knighthood and the stain of honor.

In saying this he gave his Steed a prick with his spur, who (as Pantalone had
educated him) took a leap, which conveyed his Rider so near our Champion, that
striking him on the mouth with his hand and Gauntlet, he dislocated no less
then four of his foremost teeth, what can we fancy how much our Champion was
exasperated with this treacherous indignity; therefore spitting his useless
Grinders in Pantalones face (with such fury, that he had almost unhorsed him)
The dreadful Combat between Don Zara and Don Pantalone.
he gave the Knight of the Pudding so manly a blow on his Helmet, that he had
cloven him to the waste, had not his Cap of steel been created by the Chalybes,
and dipped in the River of Bilboe; Pantalone (who had never before felt such
force) sat upon his horse back with a shivering amazedness, but at length
recollecting himself, he seemed to make ample amends for his late stupidity, by
giving Zara a wide wound on his right arm, which could not have happened had our
Champions Belt been girt about him, by virtue whereof he defied the dint of
Sword, but (by the appointment of some malevolent power) that miraculous Girdle
(being broken in the midst by the vigorous motion of his body while he
encountered with Duke La-Fool and his 10000. Knights) fell from his waste the
day before, so that now (like the slack-sinew'd Hebrew Giant, with his hair
off) he was no more then a very Mortal, and yet the greatness of his spirit
for a long time supplied that insupportable loss, and he received wound upon
wound with incredible patience; Nor was the Knight of the Pudding wholly
exempted from danger (for^o a Knight on hors-back, as is storied of the
Centaurs, he that wounds the beast gashes the man) his Courser being wounded in
the neck, and having a considerable cut over the nosthril, so that Pantalone
was every minute in fear that his Steed should swown under him, and lie down
with loss of blood; in the mean time Zara's wounds were multiplied, yet his
heart not mollified, resolving rather to dye courageously, then to make a
cowarly Resignation of his Horse, Armor, Shield and Sword, and which was more
then all, his person; besides he had sufficiently tired himself (one would
think) in the late Battall against Duke la-Fool and his confederates, add to
this his dismal engagement with Soto, and therefore ought to have been excused
from Warlike employment (at least) for some months. What could Themistocles,
Cleomenes, Hanniball, Al^xander, or the mighty Montelyon, Knight of the Oracle
have done more; the excessive loss of blood so enfeebles him, that he is scarce
able to brandish his blade, or to keep the Saddle, unless he grasp the pummell;
which Pantalone perceiving (like a good and gracious Knight) exhorted him to
yield himself, and with the price of his Sword, St^^d, Armor and Shield, to
(...) delivery from eminent death; I will quoth Pantalone, not only spare thy
life, but be thy conduct to thy Lodging, thy wounds shall be sowed up by
skillful Chyru^gious, and thy body, brought to a (...) bed; Our Champion is now
more Zara's remarkable placability.
vanquished by courtesy then by strength, being so much taken with this kind
(...) of Pantalone, that alighting (though with much a^^, by reason of his
faintness) he took his Horse by the bridle, and humbling himself at Pantalones
feet:

(...) qu^th (...) what (...) all the steel of Tole^^ (...) A German Fe^cer
having a hundred hands.
Bryareus, though each ^and of (...) managed a Sword could (...), is effected
by thy (...) ca^ (...) this Shield, this good S(...)d, (...), and this sturdy
Steed as (...) gi^^ (my worth will command more wherever Destiny shall drive
(...).)

The Knight of the Pudding (with a smile) received what our Champion so
willingly surrendered, and seating himself on (...) foo^ afforded Zara a being
at his back, (...)ading his own horse in his hand (a thing that administered
some cause of distaste to our Champion, but having taken a Truce with his Enemy,
he would not be the first should break it) riding on till he came to Don Zara's
Lodgings, the people gazing upon him all the way very wistly, and whispering
vituperatively, which our Champion heard well enough, but discreetly took no
notice, being now become the very Emblem of the Golden Age, when a Pidgeon shall
converse with Vultures; nor was Pantalone perfidious, but (in order to his
promise) very courteously caused a skillful Chyronist to be called, himself
beholding those wounds which his hands had lately given carefully closed up,
and the bruised Champion laid in his bed, of whom having taken leave, he
returned (with his Horse, Armor, Shield, and Sword) to the Knight of the Ape,
and his other Companions.

It were needless to narrate what flouting, and what fleering there was
amongst the bundle of Knights about this business of Don Zara, every man
censuring as his fancy guided. The course of the History commands us to leave
them to the guidance of their Fate, and return to Soto (earless Soto) whom we
lately left dead on the floor all be-mangled by his Master; long time it was
(though he felt the palpitations of his heart and pulse, and that he was as
warm as a new-beaten Bailiff) before Soto could be convinced of his Heresy, or
believe himself to be alive, Soto's Resurrection.
first he moved an arm, then a leg, and at last took such heart of grace, that
he courageously leapt upon his feet, but the sight of his newlopt ears had
almost laid him along again; nevertheless (with trembling) he at length took
up his Lugs, and having heedfully wrapped them up in paper, put them in his
pocket, till time should furnish him with opportunity to afford them the Rites
of Sepulture; being thus out of all doubt, that he was now as other Mortals,
save for some maymes which he was resolved to keep from being seen by the help
of his hair, he began to be somewhat comforted; but that very sort of sorrow
which in others occasion drought, causes in him hunger, a sharp appetite to
meat; he therefore began to consider what was become of his Master Don Zara Del
Fogo, and to curse himself for opposing him as an equal, whom he ought to have
adored as a Sovereign; having therefore resolved to find him, out, (and if it
were possible) to reconcile himself, he resorted to the Host of the house where
his Master resided, and very demurely demanded whether Don Zara del Fogo his
Lord and Master were at home or abroad, in the Camp or the Court, answer was
made, that he was just now conveyed to his bed (being much wounded) by a
strange Knight, who seemed no other then he that had fought with him; Soto
therefore enquiring what manner of man he was, and what Arms he wore, knew
assuredly, that it was the Knight of the Pudding, Don Pantalone; he therefore
resolutely went up to his Masters Chamber, but found the door fast locked, for
the Champion having had his wounds bound up, and being laid in a soft bed, had
betaken himself to rest; Soto knocked twice or thrice very soberly, but
receiving no answer, he multiplied his strokes, so long till Zara being
awakened, demanded who was there; Soto retorted, Your Servant and Secretary
SOTO; at which the Zara takes Soto for a Ghost. Sea ^elthams Resolvs the third
Century, page 100000.
CHAMPION (imagining by this time he had been laid in Earth), became much
amazed, and in a distracted tone cried out:

I beseech thee, thou Spirit of wronged Soto, return to thy rest, and vex not
him with thy clamours who shall shortly visit thee in the other World.

Soto replied:
My Lord, we are both more happy then you conceit, I am alive, and Master of
the same faculties of flesh that you are.


At this the Champion scrambled out of his bed, and opening the door, Soto
supported him to his former station, where being laid he enquired of Soto how
and by what means he escaped, who related to him every particular both of his
death and Revivall: I shall the more cheerfully welcome Death, said the
Champion, that thou art alive; he then began to discourse what had happened
lately betwixt him and the Knight of the Pudding, and in the close of all
commanded meat to be brought, and was confirmed that Soto was no Ghost by his
eating: By this time it grew late, Cynthia being mounted in the highest of her
five and twenty Mansions, the Champion therefore, having embraced Soto,
permitted him to depart, and slank down into his bed the second time.

CHAP. VI.
The Champion recovered of his wounds, but inwardly vexed at Simplicia's scorn,
is comforted and restored by Soto's excellent Oratory. He and Soto forsake
their Lodging to avoid an after reckoning. Having left No-land, they arrive in
a continent where the Champion finds the winged Hog, promised him by Lamia; He
and Soto mounting their bristled Beast, are carried through the Air, meeting
with many strange Adventures.

OUr Champions exterior wounds are not so wide but they may easily admit of
cure, were not his interiours mortally vexed with the vigorous pangs of Love,
the scorn of his Mistress Simplicia stuck Needles at his heart; his sick soul
is surrounded with dolor, each thought is a thrust, and every cogitation a
Carbonado.

Zara's doleful Complaint.
O Love, Love, said he, thou least of bulk, but greatest in strength of all the
Powers immortal; what has Don Zara done unto thy Deity, that thou art so
partial in thy dispensations, emptying thy Quiver at his breast, and not aiming
so much as one Arrow at her whose heart is more hard then Scythian Ice, or the
scales of Dragons; Did not Gylo wash my head with warm Urine, and Simplicia
slight my Addresses as I had rather been a Lowt then a Lord, a Coxcomb then a
Champion, and a Knave Rampant then a Knight Errant; were my strength equal to
my will, I would break thy Bow and Bolts about thy ears, and write thy Elegy
with a Quill plucked from thy own wing.

With these and the like fascinorous fancies, he wearied himself almost all
that night, but Phoebus flinging about his Rays to illuminate the world, Soto
resorted unto him, using all possible persuasion to assuage his grief, but
(alas) to no purpose, for the Fistula of Love had seized upon his very
fundamentals, so that though he grew every day more and more healthy, being now
able to eat and drink devoutly, and traverse his Chamber as nimbly as a
Berkshire Squirrell, yet within he was more sickly then a Subburb Letcher, or a
drawl'd Prostitute, fitting her self for Fluxation, which Soto perceiving,
thought it his duty to take him to task, and to endeavor to drive this Devil
of Paphos out of him.

How now my Lord, said he, will you cast away that life which was given you to
redeem others from death and destruction The Author disclaims this Invective as
none of his, but Soto's.
for a Fis-gig, a flurt, a sickle, fantastic, fallacious, foolish Female? What
do we get by these Gim-cracks? Satiation of our Iusts: What is this fruition we
so much covet, but a kind of fulsome Recreation, that flags our Crests, and
makes us look worse then stale Drunkards, or losing Gamesters that have sat up
all night to undo themselves? Be your self (my Lord) the Son of Mars, and not
the slave of Venus; these whim-crown'd tumors un-man us all, and are at best
but coveted calamities.

This Satyricall Oration so much prevailed with the Champion, that he was now
quite changed into another man; his heart which before was as soft as Curds, is
now totally petrifide, and more obdurate then steel or Hangmen, so that he who
some minutes since was Loves creature, is now more then his Conqueror; it is
true, he shed abundance of tears, sighing and sobbing, as was pitiful to see;
but these showers were but the preludiums to Thunder-cracks. My Arms (quoth he)
O my Arms, my Sword, Shield, and Mace, but above all my Belt, the sad
vicissitudes of two days have laid a foundation of misery for many Ages,
bitten by a Bear, baffled by Gylo, reproached by Simplicia, and denuded by Don
Pantalone; what horror has Fortune yet to inflict? My Lord, said Soto, Fortune
was ever a foe to noble minds, letting others pass as not worthy her notice;
the tallest Trees and highest Towers are sometimes levelled, when sheds and
shrubs remain untoucht: Engineers are sometimes blown up with their own Mines,
when Mouf-trap-Makers dye merely with sickness or age; Dukes and Marquesses
fall by the Bullet or the Ax, when Dunghill-Rakers and Maulsters outlive
themselves; Did you ever know a Gnat perish of the Pox, Goats and Monkeys
destroy themselves with Doing; that then which you look upon as the Indignation
of Heaven, is the Indulgency of Jove, witness wise Seneca: Prosperity and happy
Fortune finds
Out Tapsters, Tinkers, and untutored Hynds


O who can sufficiently express the force of Eloquence! Our Champion is so
charmed with (...)o's Philosophical Elocution, that he cares now no more for a
Sword, then an Ape for a clog; or for a Shield, then a Slave for a
Bulls-pizzle; Armor is but a kind of honorable luggage, the confidence
whereof causes Cowardice; and for Charmed Belts, and for such kind of Infernal
securities, he said that the Devils word and his Oath were alike, and he was
most safe that had least to do with him; as concerning a Courser (he alleging
that it was both dangerous and despicable to travel ou foot) Soto informed
that the very Highways and Hedges, but especially Meads and Marish grounds
would afford them a pair of Palfrays; Heightened with these Heroic Rudiments,
the Champion and Soto (each grasping a staff or Truncheon in his hand)
resolved to forsake No-Land, as a Continent only fertile in Fatallities, and
to travel to the remotest parts of the Earth, but they would find men more
faithful, and women more flexible; One morning therefore, while Aurora was
combing her Crisped (...)ls, Sol being yet soundly sleeping in the Lap of
Thetis, they thought it fit to convey them, selves out of Zardona-pola-Mancha
before their Host, or any of the household were stirring, the course of the
Country carrying them through a Myrie Lane, almost three furlongs in length,
to their exceeding turmoyle, but by the help of their Staves they vaulted over
many deep Shloughes and Boggs, which otherwise might have been very banefull
unto them.

Having brought this Land to a period, they found themselves entered into a
large, but very pleasant Wood, here were Trees of Rosemary, far taller and
bigger of bulk then any British Elm, with Beds of Camomile six yards high,
the Grass no gowtier then that of other Climates, yet so incomparably
stubborn, that the CHAMPION and SOTO passed over their tops without the least
depressing of them, as on a Marble Pavement: In the midst of this Grove there
ran a Rivulet, not so Chrystalline as they could have wished, in which were
infinite numbers of Flying-Fishes, which sometime fought with one another in
the Air with incredible fierceness, many being slain on both sides, but
dropping into their native Element they are recovered again.

These Feuds were maintained by these Aquatillians, merely to please the Genius
of the place, called Diclon, who sat (inviconed with a Guard of Spectars) at
the root of a Palm Tree, but his shape was so dreadful, that neither the
Champion nor Soto durst stand him, and therefore they departed toward the East
side of the Grove, where the Champion espied that rare Beast which Lamia the
Inchantresse had prophesied he should meet withal; this wondrous Creature had
the shape of a Hogg, but far bigger then an ordinary Horse, two wings
expanding themselves on either side of him; his Saddle (very sumptuously
imbossed with Gold) on his back, and his Bridle hanging loosly about his neck;
he was feeding very voraciously on the verdant Grass, his teeth serving as a
Sickle with which he mowed down all before him.

The CHAMPION was so overcome with joy to behold this Beast, that he remained
for a time speechless, but at length recovering himself; See SOTO, said he,
where the winged Hogg (that gift of the Gods) long since assigned me by Lamia,
offers himself to my disposal: He had no sooner said this, but (like a
courageous Knight) he made up to this plumed prodigy, who seemed to fawn on
him like a Spanlell, and to be desirous of his service; The CHAMPION finding
him so gentle, immediately put the bit into his mouth, and leaping into the
Saddle, commanded SOTO to get up behind him, who was once in the mind rather to
desert his Master, then hazard his person in so eminent a danger; but at
length (O man of desperation!) he forced himself to a compliance, and loaded
the Crupper of this volatile Swine, who no sooner found himself burdened, but
he quitted the Earth, and (like some flitting Foul) made way with waving
Wings; through the moist Air, while the CHAMPION (like another Bellerophon)
was carried over Land and Sea, to the infinite astonishment of all that beheld
him, the people forsaking their houses, followed him in heaps, to feast their
eyes with so unparalleled an object; some thinking him to be Hermes, others
some Magitian, such as Agrippa on (...), having thus traveled many hundred
leagues, he gave his Hog a check, who gently saluted the Earth, the CHAMPION
finding himself in the in-most parts of Africa, in one place he saw those kind
of Devils called Onoscelli, with legs like unto Asses, in another place Incubi
and Seccubi, that leap upon men and women in their sleep; Some ignorant
Physicians say that these are nothing else but a Disease.
Ephial^ae and Hyphial^ae, those very things that in the shapes of men and
women, allure the very Mortals of both Sexes to Venery, whence it comes to
pass that we have many Hermaphrodicall Monsters amongst us even at this day,
being (indeed) half men and half Devils, but whether by the fathers or the
mothers side, is not material.

No marvel if our Champion were not very well pleased with this place which
afforded nothing for food, unless he would have fed upon the haunches of a
Hyppocentaure, or feasted on the fore-quarter of a Fiend; he therefore having
seated Soto once more behind him, gave his winged Beast the Rein, who forsaking
th^^ duller Earth; ^u^ (...) passage to the Clouds, traveling over the tops of
Steeples and Towers, with admirable celerity.

Ah Zara, Zara, had thy rude Father moystned thy minority with the Elements of
the Arts; till thou had grown tall and tough in Scien(...)all knowledge, what
excellent Cosmographicall Volumes had the World been witness of? and thou (with
Julius Caesar) have been as famous for thy Goose Q^^ll in after Age, (...) thou
art now emment for thy wondrous Hogg, and Heroic Resolution to visit strange
Countries, but it is bootless to bewail a helpless ill, and to weep over the
Bier will not bring the dead man to life aga(...): Proceed we therefore with
the Narration of our Champions admirable Adventures who (as did Sato) The
emptiness of the craw causes the heaviness of the carcass. See Marriot^
Madrigals, and Wood of Kents Aphotism.
grew more and more ponderous every minute, so that the Swine began to abate
much of his swiftness, and to fly but with a feeble wing, which caused the
Champion (though much against his will, for he had not yet perused a place pat
for his purpose) to salute the Earth a second time, but with the same fortune
he found before; this was part of Lybia, but not so full of Serpents as in
Cato's time, by reason that the River Nylus had broken that way, and made a
fair riddance of these foul creatures; here they found men and women with
heads like Dogs barking at one another most bitterly, and sometimes howling in
a most hideous manner, the comfortable Sun, nor the continent Moon never
beautifide these barren grounds, only a certain Star appeared in the East part
of the Horizon, which afforded a glimmering Lucency; the Champion and Soto were
exceedingly perplexed to find themselves now amongst Dogs, as lately among
Devils, insomuch, that had they worn Swords, ten to one but they had slain
themselves, but making a virtue of necessity (the Champion leading the winged
Hog in his hand) they footed it with much swiftness till they came within ken
of a Castle, situate upon a Rock, environed with many pleasant Trees; how
joyous our Champion and Soto were to behold this Mansion (in all probability)
made for Mortals to make merry in, let those that have been sensible of their
sufferances relate.

Here Time trips up the heels
of thy bright story,
Renowned Don, vexed at thy
Valors glory;
Dragons may now
securely sleep, and ugly
Deformed Orks seem to look
smooth and smugly;
Giants may wield their Maces
and their Oaks,
And knock down Knighthood
with their strenuous strokes:
Who now shall cure those Castles
that are haunted?
Affording aid to men
and Beasts Enchanted?
None, none, for Zara sleeps
(to gain new vigor)
And who shall dare to rowze
a snoring Tiger:
Let him that sings his Second Part
drink smartly,
Of Sack and Sulphur,
and then write most tartly.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
COurteous Reader I desire thee to mend several litterall faults and points
misplaced which does sometime make the sense harsh, and turn over to Book 1.
Chap. 3. at the second line, read, like Bandogs so tormented.


