THE IMPROVEMENT OF NAVIGATION A great Cause of the Increase of Knowledge. A
SERMON Preached June 7. 1680. before the CORPORATION of TRINITY-HOUSE in
Deptford Strand, At the Election of their Master.

By Richard Holden, Vicar of Deptford.

Published by their Appointment.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for John Martyn at the Bell in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of BERKLEY, Viscount DURSLEY, Lord BERKLEY
of Berkley-Castle, etc. and Master of the Corporation of Trinity-House in
Deptford Strand.
My Lord,
WHEN this Sermon was Preached before You, Your Lordship and the Worthy
Gentlemen of Your Society were pleased by many kind and obliging Expressions to
signify your favorable acceptance of it, and to let me know that it was your
desire it might be made public: Which, I confess, was somewhat of a surprise
to me. Yet I considered, that I ought to look upon the repeated declaration of
your Lordships pleasure, and the concurrent Vote of so many judicious persons,
in the nature of a command; and have therefore chosen by this act of submission
to pay that deference which is due to your judgment, thereby giving the best
assurance I can, that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, RI. HOLDEN.

DANIEL XII. 4. -- Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.


THis Book consists of History and Prophecy: In the historical Part, there are
great arguments of Daniel's and his Companions piety, of their constant faith
in God, and courage in persecutions, together with an account of the miraculous
deliverances which God wrought for them. In the prophetical, there are
predictions of strange Revolutions, and of great changes and alterations of
Government, which should happen in several of the great Kingdoms of the World;
and these so plainly described, that Porphyrie would not believe they were
written before the event.

But above all, there are clear and distinct prophecies of the Messiah, his
name, offices, and the time of his death, when he should be cut off, and make a
reconciliation for iniquity, Dan. 9.24, -- 26.

In the three first Verses of this Chapter, he speaks of the twofold coming of
Christ, at first to publish and confirm the Gospel, verse. 1. the other, to
reward his faithful Servants, and to punish obstinate and incorrigible Sinners,
ver. 2, 3. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt.

And because many things here foretold were not to come to pass of some Ages
after, therefore he is commanded in the beginning of this verse to shut up the
Words and seal the Book, until the time of the end; that is, to preserve it
carefully, that afterward by comparing the prophecies with the events, men may
see that these things were known to God long before.

For this is the great reason why God has been pleased in his Word to reveal to
his Church many things which shall happen in after Ages: His end and design
therein was not to gratify the curiosity of men, who are naturally desirous to
know what shall come to pass in future times; but to clear his own Omniscience,
and to make it manifest after their accomplishment, that they were not casual
or unexpected to him, but that he had a certain foreknowledge of them. Whence
it is, that Prophecies are wont to be expressed in obscure words and in a dark
language, and are called a sealed Book; because the meaning of them, at least
in all the circumstances, is hidden from us, till expounded by the event;
which, when all is done, is usually their best Interpreter.

But, says he, in the words of the Text, before the time of the end come,
before the accomplishment of this great Prophecy, concerning the consummation
and conclusion of all things, the end of the World and the Day of Judgment,
Many shall pass to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

In which Words we have these two Parts, 1. A Prediction of something
remarkable that should happen in the latter days, Many shall pass to and fro.
2. The consequent of that, the benefit which thence should redound to mankind,
And knowledge shall be increased.

1. For the former, the Prediction of somewhat remarkable that should happen in
the latter days, Many shall run or pass to and fro. Not to trouble you with
variety of Expositions, that which seems most probable in it self, as well as
most suitable to the occasion of this solemn Assembly, is, That in these Words
the Prophet foretells the great improvement there should be of Navigation in
the latter Ages of the World. And this Interpretation I ground upon the proper
notion of the Hebrew Verb here used (...) which as it signifies in Scripture
generally any way of motion or passage, so in the Chaldee (which is the
language wherein the Prophet wrote the greatest part of this Book) it properly
signifies to move upon the waters: and the words which come from it refer to
this sense, (...) Ezekiel. 27.8. is rendered Mariners, and verse. 26. thy rowers,
and Isai. 33.21. (...) is a Gally with Oars. And to this sense the vulgar
Latin had an eye when it translates the words of the Text, Plurimi
pertransibunt, and multiplex erit scientia, Many shall pass through (as it were
from one end of the World to another) and knowledge shall be increased.

And how exactly the event has answered the Prophecy, will easily appear to any
one who considers that the Mediterranean was the biggest Sea which was known to
the wisest Nations of those Ages, the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, whence in all
their Languages it is called the Great Sea, Numb. 34.6. Josh. 1.4. Romans 7.^.
it being greater by far than any other they knew; the Sea of Galilee, and of
Genezareth, and the rest being but bigger Lakes, and the Red Sea much less than
it.

And though they had heard of the Ocean, which is mentioned by Homer, yet
little or no use of it was made in many Ages for Navigation, insomuch that St.
Clemens, Ep^ad C^r. p. 28.
who lived in the first Age of Christianity, says, (...), that the Ocean was
not to be passed by men; Jun. in loc.
and yet it is thought that he meant no other but the narrow Sea which is
betwixt England and France. Further than Hercules's Pillars or Gades, they
accounted, as Pindar's words are, Oly n. 3. ad fin.
(...), wholly unpassable, filled with nothing but darkness and confusion.

And Herodotus relating how Neco King of Egypt sent out some Phoenician
adventures from the Red Sea, Lib. 4. Chapter 42. p. 237.
who when, after a voyage of three years, they were come home, affirmed that
they had sailed around Africa, (...) where they had the Sun on their right
hand, and so returned by the Streights through the Mediterranean into Egypt
again; he relates it trembling, as a story he durst give no credit to himself,
though possibly some others might.

Nay, he was so far from assenting to it, that he denies there is any such
thing as an Ocean, Lib. 2. Chapter 23. p. 98.
and blames the Geographers of his time, for affirming without any proof, that
the Earth was encompassed by it.

And as for those few who did venture to launch out into this great Deep, they
did it with much fear and caution, as appears by the Voyages of Solomon's and
Hiram's Fleets to Ophir, 1 Kings 10.22. that is, to Summetra or Zeilan, Boet.
Phat. Lib. 2. Chapter 27. Chan. lib. 1. chapter 46.
(as learned men prove from the Commodities they brought thence) in which they
did but creep by the shore all the way, as is manifest from the length of time
spent in one of those Voyages, three years, which is now performed in less than
half the time from these parts of the World, though the distance be ten times
as much from hence, as it was from the Red Sea, where Solomon's ships set out.
And when any one undertook and succeeded in an attempt of that nature, he was
looked upon as an extraordinary and Divine Person, as we read of Hanno a
Carthaginian, who, it is like, was the first that ventured out of the
Streights, and built some Cities upon the neighboring Coasts of Afric, that he
valued himself so highly upon this performance, and grew so vain in his
imagination, as to account himself a God; and that others might think so of him
too, Aelian says, Var. lib. 14. chapter 30.
he had taught certain Birds to call him, The Great God Hanno: So was he puffed
up with a successful Voyage into distant and unknown Places. Vit. Agr.
And Tacitus speaking of some seditious Soldiers in the Roman Army, who
seizing upon three Vessels, compelled the Mariners to sail with them round
about this Island of Britain: He calls it magnum and memorabile facinus, a
great and daring attempt, which deserved to have the memory of it perpetuated
to all Generations.

And now, I am sure, I need not in this Auditory add any thing to show how
much the modern improvements are advanced beyond the utmost that the boldest
Adventurers of old could attain to: the new Islands and Kingdoms, and the new
World discovered of late Ages do give abundant proof of that, and your own
experience confirms it.

I proceed therefore to the second Head, The consequent of this improvement,
the benefit which should thereby redound to mankind; that together with
Navigation, knowledge should likewise proportionably advance too. 1. The
knowledge of Nature. 2. The knowledge of Arts. 3. The knowledge of Divine
Providence; and 4. The knowledge of true Religion.

1. The knowledge of Nature; which is an effectual means to lead us to the
knowledge and love of God, Psalm. 19.1, 2.
The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork: the frame and motion and influences of the Heavens do demonstrate
to any man, who considers them with attention, how great and powerful, and wise
and gracious, that God is, who formed them and all the other Creatures, which
do continually preach and instruct men in the glories of the great Creator. The
whole World, says St. Basil, is (...), the School of reasonable Souls where
they may be taught to know God.

And for this reason the Psalmist calls upon the Heavens, and Sun, and Moon,
Psalm. 148.
and Stars to praise the Lord, because those heavenly bodies do by their
beauty, and order, and greatness, and usefulness, and long continuance,
proclaim the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of him who made them all out of
nothing; as Moses said at the beginning, God saw every thing that he had made,
and behold it was very good; so good as to glorify the maker, by exciting the
beholders to magnify and adore him.

If we go over the whole frame of things, says St. Augustine, Tom. 8. in Psalm.
26.
there is not a creature but tells us with a loud voice, Deus me fecit, God
made me. Whatever is good or delightful in the Work, commends the Author. If
you look up to the Heavens, they are the work of his hands, (I, and contrary to
the laws of Architecture, he made the Heavens first and then the Earth, set up
the roof before he laid the foundation:) if you look down upon the Earth, God
made that variety of Seeds, that diversity of Plants, that multitude of living
Creatures: and who can fully set forth the praises of all these? of the Heaven,
and Earth, and Sea, and all in them? or of the invisible Beings, the Angels,
and Thrones, and Dominions, and Powers? or of the Soul that is in us, which
gives life to the body, moves the parts, acts the senses, comprehends so many
things in its memory, and discerns and judges of them by its understanding? And
if we be at a loss in speaking of the effects, with what language can we
sufficiently magnify the glories of the Almighty cause of all?

Now the improvement of Navigation has hugely advanced the knowledge of
Nature, and of the works of God. Psalm. 104.24, etc.
O Lord, says the Psalmist, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou
made them all: the Earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide Sea,
wherein are things creeping -- There go the Ships: And by the help of them,
these latter ages of the World have arrived at a much fuller knowledge of those
manifold works of God, than former times could attain to. Every Region, and
every Country abounds with his wonders, which were all concealed and hidden, or
at most but imperfectly and fabulously related, whilst they were deprived of
intercourse with one another.

To give one instance of this. It was a general opinion amongst the Ancients,
that the Countries which lie under or near the Aequinoctial Line, were not
habitable by reason of the great and violent heats they must be subject to; for
finding all places, by how much nearer they lie to that, so much more exposed
to heat; they concluded that between the Tropicks all was exusta flammis and
cremata, as Pliny's words are, Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 68.
wholly burnt up and not to be endured.

I know a worthy writer of our own Nation is pleased to affirm, Sir w. Ral.
Hist. l. 1. c. 3.. 8.
That Tertullian of all the Ancients was of another opinion which came nearer
to the truth, and that he thought the Countries within the torrid Zone, to be
places of great pleasure and delight; imagining withal that Paradise where our
first Parents were placed, and where the Souls of good men go after death, was
seated there. But certainly this judicious person either did not read, or
strangely mistook his Author. Apol. c. 47.
For Tertullian's opinion appears to have been, That Paradise is not within the
Tropicks, but beyond the furthest of them, and that it is maceria quadam igneae
illius Zonae a notitia orbis communis segregatus: severed from the known world
by the hedge and fence, as it were, of the fiery Zone, which not being to be
past through, it is like the Angels flaming Sword, to keep men from approaching
near that Paradise which lies beyond it.

And give me leave to observe in passing, that possibly this conceit of his in
first making this earthly Paradise to be the seat of the Blessed till the
Resurrection, and then placing it beyond this (as he imagined) burning Region,
might give rise to the Doctrine of Purgatory in the Romish Church, which
teaches that there is a place of flames to be gone through after Death, before
the Soul arrives at a state of happiness. And thus ignorance in Geography begot
a very great error in Divinity.

For experience and late discoveries have convinced the World, that those
parts, which of old were with some color of reason judged uninhabitable, are
not only well peopled, but withal so excellent in the pleasant and healthful
temperature of the Air, and so abundantly stored with all manner of provision
and delight, that they yield to no part of the Earth, but go beyond all others.

And this does very much vindicate and clear that Divine wisdom which made the
World; Georg. l. 2. p. 76.
for had that been true which Strabo affirms, and was generally believed, that
if we divide the Earth into five parts, three of them are (...) incapable of
inhabitants, the scoffing Atheist would have had some color to ask, Why the
biggest part of the Earth was made in vain and for no use.

But now, when we consider that that part of it which the greatest Wits of
former ages judging in appearance with great reason, did conclude to be almost
all flame, so unsupportably hot, that men could not live or breathe in it, is
now found by experience to be so far from that, that it is rather the Garden
and Paradise of the whole Earth; it will teach us thus much, that as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 3.19.
The wisdom of this world (even of the wisest men in it) is foolishness with
God: and that there cannot be a greater folly, than for us men to think of
measuring his Ocean by our span, or that we can fathom his depths with the
short line of humane reason.

Ignorance and Impiety have only one thing now to object, which is, That still
those parts of the Earth which lie under each Pole, are by reason of their
excessive cold not to be inhabited. Of the North we have proof, and there is as
much ground to believe it of the South.

But to this I shall Answer in the sense of a most Learned person; Voss. de
Idol. l. 2. c. 2.
That the reason of the Universe required it should be so: For the Sun, the
Fountain of heat, being most fitly placed in the middle betwixt the two
Tropicks, it was necessary that under each Pole there should be a fountain of
Cold too, which might disperse it self over all the World to temper and allay
the Suns heat, as experience shows it does after an extreme hot season, by the
blowing of the North wind. And without this cold, the watery humor would have
been quite consumed, which yet is no less necessary to the production and
conservation of things than heat it self is.

2. The knowledge of Arts. Without Winds, and Seas, and Ships, Not. qu. l. 5.
c. 18.
as Seneca truly speaks, man would have been imperitum animal, an ignorant and
unknowing Creature, confined to his own home without the benefit or so much as
the knowledge of what might be learnt from the People, or enjoyed and made use
of from the product and improvement of distant Countries.

No Nation is so self-sufficient as to abound with all the provisions of life,
but either wants or does but sparingly enjoy what others have in great
abundance, both for themselves and strangers, some of which are for necessity
and use, others for delight and ornament: One Nation is a Granary for Corn,
another a Wardrobe for Clothing, a third a Vineyard for Wine, a fourth a Mine
for Gold and Silver, a fifth a Storehouse for all Provisions of War: And even
this Country of ours in the most barbarous and rude, and uncultivated times of
it, when only a small part of it toward the end of Cornwall was discovered by
the Phoenicians, Geogr. 1.2. p. 121.
(as Strabo tells us) they valued it so highly for the Mines of Tin which they
found there, that they did (...), conceal and keep it close from all the World
besides, that they might engross the benefit of that useful commodity to
themselves: And adds withal, That one of their Ships being followed by the
Romans out of a design to discover the place, the Commander discerning their
intent, ran his Ship on shore, and drew them after him into the same ruin; but
he escaping with his life, had amends made him when he returned home, out of
the public Treasury, for the good service he had done his Country in keeping
so beneficial a Trade still concealed from their Enemies, though it was with
the hazard of his life and the loss of all his goods.

Now Ships are the great Bridge of a Kingdom, which reach from hence to the
East or West Indies, transport into foreign Countries what can be spared at
home, and in exchange bring back with them whatever any part of the Earth
affords, and make the Sea become the great Mart of the whole World.

And, together with Wealth and the conveniences of life, Learning and all
useful knowledge is hugely improved this way. There may be a traditio lampadis,
not only from one Age, but from one Nation to another too. This Consideration
put some great Philosophers, Pythagoras and Plato, upon traveling all the
learned World over, that they might enjoy the Conversation of knowing men, who
were not all confined to one Country, however the vanity of the Greeks
reckoned all the World but themselves barbarous.

Whenas yet their own Writers confess, They learned Arithmetic and Astronomy
(we may add the very use of Letters too) from the Phoenicians, who were the
greatest Merchants and Navigators of those Ages, and by that means attained a
great name for Philosophy, and all kind of wisdom and knowledge; Il. 4. v. 743.
whence it is that Homer calls the Sidonians (...), as being men who had
acquaintance with all the best and most ingenious Arts. And the Scripture it
self, as in one place it gives it the Attribute of the Great Sidon, Josh. 11.8.
not as if there was any other of the same name less than it, but because it
was the chief City of all Phoenicia, having a convenient Haven, and abounding
in shipping, whereby it became exceeding rich and populous; so in another place
it calls it very wise, Tyrus and Sidon though it be very wise: Zach. 9.2.
for as the Inhabitants of those two Cities were observed to be naturally men
of sharp and lively and piercing wits; so by their traffic and conversation
abroad, they had much improved themselves in all kind of useful knowledge, and
were grown famous for their wisdom all the Eastern World over.

And as Navigation did advance them to this height of knowledge both in learned
and mechanical arts; so wherever it is upheld, it enlarges the minds,
improves the Parts, and sharpens the Wits of men; it discovers to them the
works of Nature, the inventions of Art, and the wonders of God.

3. The knowledge of Divine Providence. They who go down to the Sea in Ships,
Psalm. 107.23, 24.
these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the Deep. His works of
Creations, and his wonders of Providence.

Men are wont to think with some kind of astonishment upon those mighty
miracles, which God wrought for his ancient people, in dividing the Red Sea,
and drying up the River Jordan; but truly, if we were not shamefully blinded by
our own sin and ignorance, which keep us employed about any thing rather than
in weighing and meditating on the works of God, Aug. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 2.
we might every day see wonders as great as these, which ought in reason to
induce us to the admiration and love and worship of our heavenly Father.

We behold the Waters hanging aloft in the Air, and these not falling down all
at once, but in small drops, that they may refresh the Earth and make it
fruitful, but not oppress it.

The Sea, with its huge body of Waters, does daily with a mighty violence beat
upon the humble shore, which is no firm or well-compacted body neither, but an
heap of Sand; Job 38.10.
this is all the Bars and Gates which Almighty God speaks of that He has set
to it, and yet by these it is restrained in the midst of its greatest rage and
tumult, and forced to return back upon it self, as if God stood by it all the
while, and bespake it in those words of his in the next Verse, Verse. 11.
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud waves be
staid: though it be perpetually tumultuous, foaming and tossing and swelling it
self, laboring to overflow all by its Waves and Billows; yet has God set such
boundaries to it, that it observes a method in its disorder, a temper in its
madness, seldom transgresses the known marks. And yet (such is our folly and
absence of reason) we are more inclinable to ascribe these things to Nature,
than to God who is the Author and Parent of Nature.

But this is but a wonder of the shore; the Psalmist speaks there of God's
wonders in the deep, the amazing dangers and miraculous deliverances; sometimes
they meet with horrible and affrighting Tempests, Waves that toss their Ship
with such violence as if they would raise them to the Clouds, and at the next
moment sink them into the bottom of the Sea, and immediately overwhelm them;
and all this not a work of Chance, but of Divine Providence, Psalm. 13.5. -- 7.
it is God who has the winds in his treasuries, and can send them forth, or
recall them, as he pleases.

And though this be that which the Psalmist immediately referres to, yet the
Deep has many other wonders, the vast extent of it proportionable (according to
the most moderate account) to the whole Earth, which is dry and not covered
with waters; the great number of living Creatures which are in it; and, that
great Riddle of Nature, the daily flux and reflux.

But, as I observed before, the Ocean being unknown in those times and places,
the Prophet by the great and wide Sea, must be supposed to mean the
Mediterranean: and that likewise carries in it peculiar marks of Divine
Wisdom and Providence. I shall name but two; and these do both visibly bear
the signature of Gods hand upon them.

One is, That whereas vast Quantities of Water do constantly fall into this Sea
from the Euxin, Propontis and the Aegean Sea, and, as some think, from the
Caspian too, by certain passages under ground, which do all tend Westward; it
has pleased God in his wise Providence to prepare a most convenient outlet for
them all by the Streights mouth into the great Ocean. For it is a vain conceit
of those who think this was not a work of God from the beginning, but an effect
of man's art afterward, and that at the first Creation there was a neck of Land
reaching from Spain to Africa. Had this been so, where must the Mediterranean
Sea have emptied it self of all those waters which it received from abroad? So
that plainly, had it not been for that passage through which it discharges it
self, all those goodly Countries that border upon it must have been in
perpetual danger of being drowned and overwhelmed; nay, would doubtless all of
them long since have been nothing but Sea. Here then we have one great Argument
of Divine Providence.

The other is, The convenient situation of this Sea, so fitly placed for the
maintaining of Society and Traffic betwixt all the parts of the anciently
known World; that, as it has been piously and judiciously observed, Mr. Evelys
of Navig. and Com. p. 3.
Divine Providence seems to have done all for Man, and to have left nothing to
humane wit or industry to add to it.

4. The knowledge of true Religion. In the time of the old Law, Psalm. 76.1.
God was known in Judah, and his name was great in Israel. The right worship of
the true God was confined to one Nation, the rest of the World was overspread
with Superstition and Idolatry, Act. 14.16.
In times past God suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. But under
the Gospel the Pale of the Church is enlarged, and Christ is the desire of all
Nations, and there is neither Jew nor Greek, Gal. 3.28.
neither bond nor free, neither male nor female, but all are one in Christ
Jesus: Act. 10.35.
and in every Nation be that fears him and works righteousness is accepted
with him. Now what more glorious employment can any man wish to himself in this
life, than to be Gods hand to reach forth the greatest of his blessings to
Mankind? It is certainly far more honorable to be an instrument of Gods
Goodness, than of his Power; to save a Soul, than to be foelix terrarum praedo,
a destroyer of Kingdoms. For the latter, he often makes use of Satan himself,
or the worst of men, as he did of the Magicians of Egypt, from whom indeed
Pharaob hoped, that they should have removed the Plague, Exodus 8.7.
and sent for them to that end; but instead thereof they increase the evil, by
producing new ones.

Saint Paul says of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.8.
that they have their power for edification, and not for destruction; but
Satan's power is all for destruction; he and his Agents are not Physicians, but
Executioners. But for acts of favor and mercy, God usually makes choice of
those whom he loves to be his instruments in conferring of them: So Christ
tells the Angel or Bishop of Philadelphia, Apocal. 3.9.
That they of the Synagogue of Satan should know that he had loved him, because
he would make them come and worship before his feet: that is, because God would
make him the instrument of their conversion, and the golden Conduit to convey
the water of life to them. Which was a good sign of God's special esteem and
love for him.

Now the improvements which have been made in the Art of Navigation of late
Ages, have put fair opportunities into the hands of Christians to spread the
knowledge of their great Redeemer, and his most excellent Religion, much farther
than in former times it could have been. Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, says the Apostle: Now many Nations are of difficult
access, others altogether unaccessible, otherwise than by Sea; but of old, when
men kept close by the shore, no great discoveries or long voyages could be
made, they being, in a dark night when they could not see the Stars or discern
the Watch-towers or high Trees by the Sea side, always in extreme dread of
shipwreck. But now, by that excellent invention of the Compass, God has made
all the Quarters of the Earth easy to be approached unto. And it justly
deserves to be looked upon as a wonderful effect of Divine Providence, that God
who had promised to his Son the utmost ends of the Earth for his possession,
Psalm. 2.8.
should now in this old Age of the World bless it with that useful discovery,
by the help whereof the saving Doctrine of the Gospel, and the knowledge of
Christ Jesus might more easily and more speedily be published to all mankind.

And it would be a great Glory to any amongst us, who have the opportunity of
conversing with Infidels and barbarous Heathens that sit in darkness and the
shadow of death; I say, it would be your high Honor in the esteem of God and
of all good men, if, as you have ability and occasion, you would endeavor to
instill the knowledge of true Religion into their hearts.

I know it will be replied, That your business is Trade, and that the other is
the Ministers work, and does not concern you at all.

And indeed, it is not to be doubted but that it belongs only to such who are
called and solemnly set apart to that holy Function, ordinarily, publicly, and
by way of office to preach the Gospel; yet all Christians, keeping within the
sphere of their vocation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.
may comfort and edify one another, as the Apostle bids them do, and commends
them for doing. Though under the Law, God had settled the Priesthood in the
Tribe of Levi, yet he gives this command to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and
thou shall teach them diligently to thy children, and shall talk of them when
thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up.

And this is especially true in the present Case, when there is no settled
Church, no Ministers ordained, nor none suddenly can be. As St. Luke, Acts 8.
speaking of the persecution at Jerusalem, and how the whole Church was
dispersed, and what havoc Saul made amongst the Believers, he adds verse. 4.
that they who were scattered abroad preached the Gospel; and verse. 5. he says,
that Philip preached Christ in Samaria. Though the word be the same in both
Verses in our Translation, yet in the Greek there are two several words; of
those in verse 4. it is (...), they told the glad tidings, all the Christians
who were scattered abroad, people as well as Preachers, related to others what
they knew both of the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and of the mighty
miracles which they had seen wrought for the confirmation of it, they reported
the truth of what they did know and had seen.

But of Philip it is said verse 5. that he did (...), publicly and solemnly,
as an Officer designed to the work, he preached Christ; and verse 12. he
baptized them also, he openly exercised the office of a Deacon or Minister
amongst them, whereas the others did only occasionally tell what they had
learned of the Doctrine, and beheld of the Miracles wrought by the Apostles.
Though none but a public Herald can by way of office solemnly proclaim the
Kings Peace, yet any one who has heard of it may relate the good news, and make
it known to those he meets with, and acquaint them with the joyful tidings.

To this purpose we have an eminent instance in Church History of two Christian
Youths, Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 19. Theod. l. 1. c. 23.
Erumentius and Aedesius, who being delivered Captives to the King of the
Indies, did by degrees advance so far in his favor as that he entrusted them
in very weighty and important affairs; these men took all opportunities to
acquaint the Indians with the Doctrine of Christianity, and found many of them
very ready to listen to it, whereupon, having confirmed them what they could in
the Faith, they returned into their own Country. And Frumentius having related
to Athanasius the great Bishop of Alexandria what they had done; the good man
judging him who had laid the foundation the fittest person to erect the
building, ordained him Bishop of India, and sent him back amongst them, where
by his Preaching and Miracles and holy Life, he converted an infinite number of
them to the Faith, and was the first who planted a Church in those Countries.

This was it which Moses so highly commended in the Merchants of Zebulun, whose
dwelling was at the Haven of the Sea, as dying Jacob foretold, Genesis 49.13. who
as by their Traffic with foraign Countries they did hugely enrich themselves
and did suck the abundance of the Sea, Deuteronomy. 33.19.
and of treasures hid in the sand, as Moses words are; so they made use of
their trading abroad, as he speaks in the beginning of that Verse, to call the
people to the mountain, and to offer sacrifices of Righteousness: By occasion
of their Trading and commerce and acquaintance with the Heathens, they used all
means to win them to the love of true Religion and to the worship of the God of
Israel.

And this would be your praise, if, as you follow their employment, you would
tread in their steps, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
and do what you can to Turn men from Idols to serve the living God, by your
instruction, if you be able; but however by your example, walking honestly
toward them that are without, and by your Justice and Temperance and other
Christian Graces adorning your good Profession: Your Virtuous and Holy lives
would be the most powerful Argument in the world to win them to a love of your
Religion. When the Unbeliever shall see the Christian sober and composed and
regular in his whole conversation, (...) p. 524.
he will be astonished (says St. Chrysostom*) and will be ready to say,
Certainly the God of the Christians is a great God: What kind of men does he
make them to be? (...); of how bad, how good? of Men he makes them Angels.

It is a known saying of Plato's, that if virtue could assume an humane shape,
its beauties and excellencies are so great, that all men would be taken with
the love and admiration of it: Now by the good lives of Christians Virtue and
goodness are, as it were, imbodied and represented not only to the Ears, but to
the Eyes of men, made visible to all they converse with; which must doubtless
very much adorn their holy calling, and would have a mighty efficacy upon those
who should see these shining lights. Those Husbands, says St. Peter, 1 Pet.
3.1, 2. who obey not the word, may without the word be won by the conversation
of the Wives. Their Modest and Virtuous behavior would be a most likely means
to commend that Religion wherein they had been instructed.

Justin Martyr gives us himself for an instance of this, Apol. 2.
who as he says, being brought up in the School of Plato, and hearing the
Christians every where spoken against, (...), but seeing them fearless of
death, and whatever the world accounts dreadful, he concluded it was impossible
they should be wicked or voluptuous persons, (as they were represented to be)
who were so resolute and constant in the greatest dangers.

When the lives of Christians are visible Sermons, Epist. ad Trall.
and as the Blessed Ignatius says of a Primitive Bishop, (...), that his whole
carriage and behavior was a constant lecture of all Christian graces, whereby
at once, and that all his life long, he preached to his whole Diocese, then it
is no wonder if (as he there adds) that even Atheists and the most profane
contemners of Religion could not choose but stand in awe of such a person: for a
good man is the most sacred and venerable thing upon earth.

And certainly it would tend much to the honor of Christianity, for you to
manifest by your regular and exemplary lives, what influence the commands and
promises and threatenings of the Gospel, have had upon your own hearts.

And whilst the Schoolmen dispute with a great deal of curiosity more than
profit, about the Character of Baptism; do you show the reality of it in your
lives, by making it evident to those Heathens with whom you Converse and
Traffic, that your separation to Christ, your being marked out and designed for
his in your Baptism, has imprinted an indeleble Character of all Christian
Virtues and Graces upon your Souls: Eth. ad Nicom. l. 10. c. 7.
That so what Aristotle says loftily concerning the Contemplation of the great
Book of Nature, may, as in reason it ought, be the visible effect of your study
of this less but better Book of Scripture, that it does (...), as it were
render men Immortal, divest them of their bodies, and raise them above the
dregs and baseness of this lower world.

This would be a convincing demonstration indeed, which would even compel them
to come in to the Faith.

You would then carry thither a greater treasure than any you can bring from
thence: The Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel being a rich
Jewel, Matt. 13.45, 46.
a pearl of great price, which well deserves the parting with all we have, for
the attainment of it.

This would consecrate even your civil Employments, make your Trade become an
act of Worship and Religion, and as God tells the City of Tire, render your
Merchandise holiness to the Lord. Is. 23.18.


It would be your comfort in this life; you might then, Deuteronomy. 33.18.
as Moses bids them of Zebulun, Rejoice in your goings out; your Voyages abroad
would be really a cause of joy and comfort to you, when you made them
subservient to true Religion. For certainly, next to that Peace which passes
all Understanding, the calm and serenity which arises from a good Conscience
and a sense of Gods favor, there is nothing can be matter of more real and
solid joy, than to have rescued a Soul from the jaws of everlasting Misery, to
have made another happy, to have been the instrument of my Brothers Eternal
welfare.

And lastly, it will abound to your account, in the day of the Lord Jesus; for
as it is in the Verse before the Text, Dan. 12.3.
They who turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and
ever.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 4 marg. for Romans r. Dan. 7. p. 6. l. 2. r. adventurers. ib. l. 5.
for around r. by the South of. ib. l. 5. marg. for Boet. Phat. r. Boch. Phal.
p. 19. l. 7. r. Creation. p. 21. marg. r. Psalm. 135. 7. p. 24. l. 7. for should
r. would.


