A WORD TO THE SAINTS FROM THE Watch Tower

By a Faithful Ambassador, In Bonds for the Gospel diverse years, F. H.

LONDON: Printed in the year 1668.

Cambridge-Castle 27 December. 1667. TO THE Faithful Brethren in Christ IN LONDON:
FRANCIS HOLCROFT Wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God our Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ.
BEing in the morning before the Throne of Grace yesterday, seeking the face of
God, the word of God came with power to my Soul, with respect to the Church of
God here, and all the Israel of God with us in the Land: Ezra 9.8, 9. It Is said
before, Since the days of our Fathers, we have been in a great trespass unto
this day; and for our Iniquities both we, our Kings, our Priests, have been
delivered into the hands of the Kings of the Lands, to the Sword, to Captivity,
and to Spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this day: (Which has been now
our case for about seven years, but that in part only, for how marvelously
has our God, through this time of our affliction and confusion of face, stayed
the rough Winds and Storms of Persecution, by one or other wonderful and
remarkably wise and gracious work in his Providence and Administration of
things in the world.) But as if that were not enough for us, a sinful People of
his, Mark what our gracious God speaks by his providence and works to us at
this time, and that in this word I mention, Verse. 8, 9. And now for a little
space grace has been showed from the Lord our God, to leave us a Remnant to
escape, and to give us a Nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our
eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage, for we were bondmen; yet
our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended mercy to us in
the sight of the Kings of Persia, to give us a reviving to set up the House of
God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a Wall in Judah and
in Jerusalem.

Having had many thoughts touching this word of God, and the grace of God
toward us his People therein declared for the help of our Faith: I found upon
further consideration, that it may be you, my dearly beloved Brethren in
Christ, both the Prisoners of the Lord with you, and a the rest, are in an
especial manner concerned in this word; and that fora^ much as this grace has
been now for some time past given you from the Lord, since the fearful
Judgments of God by Plague and Fire have brake out on you. I say, grace has
been showed you from the Lord, to enjoy greater Liberties than your Brethren;
and again, our God has brought you to see somewhat of the glory of the solemn
Assemblies, for which you that are Mourners have been sorrowful; our God has
in some measure been gathering you, and bringing you again, the Ministers of
God, and others, to the places of concourse. God has opened a wide door to
some of You, which our God make yet more and more effectual; for which things
we your Brethren, I hope many of us in the Country, in Prisons, and others,
have and do rejoice, blessing God by Jesus Christ.

I thank our God, I have at some ^^mes, on the Lords Days especially, been at
liberty in my Soul; being present in spirit with you somewhat in your Solemn
Assemblies, rejoicing with you in this Mercy, brought to you by so wonderful a
hand of our God.

Now observe the Language the Holy Ghost here uses to set out this thing.

Now for a little space GRACE has been showed from the Lord our God: Mark that
word Grace, and that from the Lord our God: Its the language of Ezra, by Faith
laying hold of the everlasting Covenant of Grace, on the behalf of Gods own
People. Under the Law God spoke so to his people, Lev. 2.13. And every oblation
of thy meat offering shall thou season with salt, neither shall thou suffer the
salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering; with all
bine offerings shall thou offer Salt; and so up and down in the Word, we find
the holy men of God in their Prayers and Preaching, their spiritual offerings,
offering Salt, even the Salt of the Covenant of their God, as Ezra here, Grace
has been showed from the Lord our God; whose Covenant is this, I will be their
God, and they shall be my People, says the Lord.

Now I desire that you and we may by Faith wrought by the Spirit of grace,
savor more the grace of this gracious dispensation of our God and Father;
Grace has been showed us from the Lord our God in it. There is in it especial
favor of grace; grace flowing from the Covenant of grace, where our God is
making known to the Elect, called Heirs of Promise, the immutability and
unchangeableness of his Counsels and eternal purposes of grace, Liberty and
reviving in Bondage, given as a fruit of grace, and given with the grace and
shinings of the face of God, is a mercy indeed; such as the world have not,
they know not what it is.

Now (My Brethren) you know the grace of the Covenant of grace, was made known
graciously in the in the first Testament. But now in the new and better
Testament, whereof our Lord Christ is the Mediator, the Son of God himself,
Grace is more abundantly made known by Jesus Christ; the great design of the
Gospel of God, being the manifestation of the glory of the only begotten Son
of God, his Beloved in whom he is well pleased, and so the love also with which
God has loved his Elect, who are by the Father, given to Jesus Christ, of whom
the Lord Christ thus speaks, John 17. That the World may know that thou have
sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me.

Now the God of all grace, pour out richly on you, and us, at this season,
through our Lord Jesus, the Spirit of grace and supplication, that he may fill
our hearts with the Faith, and sweet Savor of this grace of God, showed to
Gods people at this time.

I was glad to observe of late, what is said of Holy Mr. Rutherford (one who
faithfully testified and defended in his Generation, the Doctrine of the Gospel
of the grace of God) It Is said that when the Lord at the beginning of these
times, took him to himself; on his deathbed he had on his heart, in some
especial manner, a desire, that all the Saints might instantly wrestle with God
for the pouring out of the Spirit of grace and supplications, according to the
Promise, Zach. 12.10. Thus shall great godly sorrow, working repentance never
to be repented of, be given to the House of David and Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
both Jews and Gentiles in the last days, who shall wall over Christ, whom they
have pierced, even all the Kindreds of the Earth, even so Amen. Thus our
Backslidings from our God, and our Breaches amongst our selves shall be
healed, as it is said by the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 50. In those days and in
that time, says the Lord, the Children of Judah shall come, they and the
Children of Israel together, (amongst whom there had been much bitter and
lasting strifes, for ages and generations) they shall come, going and weeping,
they shall go and seek the Lord their God: they shall ask the way to Zion, with
their faces thither-ward; saying, Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord
in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten.

(Holy Brethren) Let our hearts, desires, and prayers, be instant with the Lord
still, that this grace showed us from our God, may teach us to deny those
worldly Lusts, and Covetings, and ungodliness, for which our God has thus
wasted us; and that we may be more taught now by the grace of God, that brings
Salvation, the grace by which we are saved (that which the Holy Ghost calls
(...), The grace of God that is saving; or that brings Salvation) Bygrace,
says the same Apostle again, are you saved, (2 Ephesians.) and also by this grace of
God, in giving us this reviving, to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world, waiting, and looking for the Blessed Hope, and the glorious
appearings of the great God and our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ.

But I pray let us return again to the Word of God. Now for a little space
grace has been given us from the Lord our God, to leave us a Remnant to
escape, and to give us a little reviving in our Bondage.

Further, Observe this word little; and weigh it well: It is here twice
repeated. And therein our God as by a Watchword, speaks to you in London, and
to us all (for I am prone to hope that this grace may yet reach further to you,
and to your Brethren, then yet it has done) this grace given he speaks of, is
but for a Little Space, and to give us a Little reviving in our Bondage, in
brief thus. I have not been alone persuaded of it from sundry weighty grounds,
taken from sundry weighty grounds, taken from the word of God, that the fiery
Trial that waits yet for us is not over, yet are the ways of our God in the
deep; and he often repents him graciously of ^he evil he threatens; and so I or
others, I judge, ought not to speak peremptorily in these secret things which
belong to God. But I often have thought that word of God is for us, that in Ier.
9. after the Prophet had cried out, against the great sins of Gods own
Children, verse. 7. says thus, Therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts; Behold
I will melt them, and try them: for how shall I do for the Danghter of my
People? But now as the Lord speaks by anothe Prophet, And because I will do
thus, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. I am prone to think and believe, that
grace is now given us in this little space and little reviving from our Bondage
that is come, and may be yet coming; For this very end, that Israel may be
prepared to meet God in that fiery Trial that may yet be, viz* An hour of
darkness, before the utter downfall and judgment of the Whore, which also
hastes greatly; when God shall avenge the blood of his Servants at her hand;
after which, there shall be heard as the voice of many waters ( viz. Peoples
and Kindreds) Saying; Alleluja, for the LORD GOD Omnipotent reigns, as says
the Apostle John, Rev. 19. Then God will hasten the Coming in of that fullness
of the Gentiles, which shall be before the Jews be converted, For blindness
(says the Apostle Paul) in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall be saved: And the fullness of
the Jews ( Romans 11.) shall be also the Riches of the Gentiles, as was their
Fall and Diminishing: Then the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms
of our Lord and Christ; and he shall Reign for ever and ever. And after this
spreading of the Kingdom of God, and the Grain of Mustard Seed, (to which the
Lord Christ compares his Kingdom) shall be grown; and that Least of all Seeds
shall become the Greatest among Herbs, and become a Tree, so that the Birds of
the Air come and lodge in the branches thereof.

After this shall come, as it is written, The Time of the Dead, that they
should be Judged; and God shall Give Rewards to his Servants the Prophets, and
to the Saints, and to Them that Fear his Name, small and great; and he shall
Destroy them that corrupt the Earth.

Till which time of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of the Eternal Judgment,
I thank God I dare not, I do not, (with Gods Church of old) look for any
Personal appearing of Christ: For any Third Personal Coming of the Son of man
on Earth; which I judge to be as Apocryphal, and a dangerous Error touching
those grand Fundamental Principles of the Oracles of God, viz. The Doctrine of
the Resurrection of the Dead, and of the Eternal Judgment, Unto them, (says
the Apostle) that Look for him, shall He Appear the second time without sin
unto Salvation.

Dangerous and contrary to Scripture it is, to expect any end to be put to the
Ministration of the Spirit, the Comforter, in this World; before the End of it:
He is now now come; now Jesus, the other Comforter, is Gone away; and now He
(the Spirit on earth) continues to bear witness with the Water and with the
Blood; For these three bear witness (says the Apostle John) on earth, And they
agree in one. I say, dangerous is it to suppose a Coming of the Son of Man in
Person, that either shall not put an end to the administration of the Lord (the
Spirit) here in the Church, (see 1 Timothy 6.14. and 1 Cor. 11.26.) or that shall
put an end to it before That moment the Apostle Paul speaks of, when the
Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and the
Harvest comes which Christ calls the end of the World; how unsafe, I say,
either of these Assertions be, let those that fear God judge, viz. the
Children, to whom it is given to understand the Mysteries of the Kingdom.

Now (dearly beloved Brethren) let us mind what now lies before us; and
whatever our hand finds to do, in this little space of reviving from bondage,
let us do it with all our might; for I am prone to think the night comes again,
wherein little work will be done.

Now I shall conclude in the name of our Lord Christ, earnestly admonishing you
to redeem this season of Grace.

Let the Ministers of God, the Dressers of Christ's Vineyard, that have by Jesus
Christ prevailed for the Fig Tree, that it should not be Cut down, but be let
alone this year also; Let us (Brethren) call to mind our Vows and Promises in
the days of our wrestlings; how that if God would trust us again with an
Harvest-Season, that we would be more Faithful and Laborious, etc. So in the
Parable, says the Dresser of the Vineyard, Lord let it alone this year also,
till I Dig about it, and Dung it; which was a kind of Promise to God: As if he
should say, Ah Lord! Let it yet alone, and how will^ Labor and Dig about it;
and Dung it, etc. And then Let all the Saints, and also the Land, Mind what
follows: And if it Bear Fruit, Well; (Well indeed!) and if not (says the
Dresser, who before prayed for it) Then after that Thou shall Cut it Down: And
there will be then No remedy.

Now to the end we may wisely improve this Gracious Space of reviving from our
Bondage, that is by grace given us; I beseech you, (as a Worker together with
the Lord and his Ministers) that you Receive not This Grace of God in Vain:
Let Us mourn for All the past Grace that we have received in vain; and Watch how
we receive, and learn by this Grace that has been showed us from the Lord: To
Him let our eyes be, beyond all Instruments; Let us, I say, Learn Holiness and
Godliness.

And that we may herein be furthered,

Consider for what Ends our God may Vouchsafe us this Breathing: Call to mind
what I said partly before, that our Father seeing, how Back-slidden, how
Lukewarm we are, how unaccustomed to his Yoke, and Cross; and how Averse we
have showed our selves to bear them; how readyto walk after the Carnal
Imaginations of our Own hearts; He will give us a Little reviving in our
Bondage, to further the Reviving of our Souls by Faith and Sound Repentance,
and Recovering; that thereby our first Love may be restored, and that we may be
put into Heart for the Storm that is Coming; for it will put All that is within
us to it. If the Righteous shall be there in Scarcely saved, where then shall
the ungodly and Sinners appear, even, when this Judgment shall again begin at
the House of God?

Beware of False Mistaken Prophets, that say the bitterness of death in these
things is over, least you find at last they Bite with the Teeth, though you now
love to hear them cry to you, peace, peace. There has been too much of this
daubing with untempered Mortar already: The Lord Spare us.

Here is more than two years, and an half, twice told, passed over us, since
our Affliction began: and yet I think we hardly judge the Witnesses are yet
risen. And how many then, herein already, have been found false Witnesses, that
have presumed far and much about Set times, see you to it.

In this season, Cry out in the Spirit every one, O spare me that I may recover
strength, before the evil day come! How loud does God call in that word to us,
in the words of the Prophet, Ier. 12. If thou have run with the Footmen, and
they have wearied thee then how can thou contend with Horses? And if in the
Land of Peace wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee; then How will thou do
in the swelling of Jordan? The Race with the Horsemen, and the Sivelling of
Jordan are yet (I judge) to come: And now a season is given you to prepare for
them, improve it; and with dread call to mind how many have in these Nations,
by as it were the very Looking out of Tribulation, not only been found fainting
too much, which Gods Own must Mourn for; but they have been Tired outright, and
are turned Apostates, Perjured, Covenant-Breakers, Propliane, and
Superstitious, etc. and that after Enlightnings.

Furthermore (Brethren) to the end you may husband and improve this little
space aright, Mark in the Text for what ends there mentioned, it is Given to
us, as to them of old; and Let us See to it, that we do not forget or overlook
them, and trifle about them. Now for a little space (says he) Grace has been
given us from the Lord our God, to leave us a Remnant to Escape. Call to mind
the time, when not so long since, you lay in fears in your Beds, night by
night, because of the Fury of Bloody Papists, as if they were ready to destroy:
and Where is the fury of those Enemies? How does God at present Say to the
Floods of the Ungodly, Stand still? The captive Exile hasteneth that he may be
Loosed, and that he should not Die in the Pit, nor his Bread should fail.

Again, read on, This is to give us a Nail in his holy Place; and it is
repeated, verse. 9. To give us a Reviving to Set up the house of our God, and to
Repair the Desolations thereof, and to give us a Wall in Judah and Jerusalem:
Let all of us now see to it, that Ezekiel. 22.8.
we Despise not, as formerly, Gods Holy things; and that we yield our selves
unto the Lord, and Enter into his Sanctuary, which he has sanctified for ever;
Hag. 1.2, 3, 4. etc.
And according to our Light, and in our Places, Mind the Building of his House,
and Mourn over the Spiritual Desolations thereof: Sion, in this sense, is a
Wilderness in too many places, and amongst too many of Us. And then this is
added, That God may Lighten our eyes, and give us a little Reviving in our
Bondage. Which Lightening of eyes, Ah that it may also reach the eyes of our
Understanding; that through the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, the eyes of our understandings may be opened, and
our Faith in the Lord Jesus Increased: That when Fiery Trials may come, such as
the Primitive and Latter Churches also have seen, shall come; we may then, both
Rich and Poor, all be like the Wise Merchant, Who when he had found the Pearl
of great price, went and sold all, that he might Buy it. And that we may do
this also with Joy, and full choice of heart: hating Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, Brethren, Sisters; yea, our own Lives also, taking up the Cross, and
following Christ, like Disciples indeed, Beloved and Taught of God, according
to the Promise of the New Covenant. Amen.

Remember (I beseech you) still in prayer my Bonds, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you, Amen.

F. H.

FINIS.

