DOCTOR HOLDEN'S LETTE^ TO A FRIEND OF HIS, Upon the occasion of Mr Blacklow's
submitting Writings to the Sea of Rome: together. With a copy of the said Mr
Blacklow's submission.
SIR,
Having been Mr Blacklow's scholar ne^ forty years ago, when I was a youg
student; Having ^ over all his works with great attention; And having had any
and several conferences with him, by means of our f^quent conversation, in
matters of all sorts of learning, I^ particularly of Divinity, I am confident
I know as much his Grounds and Principles as any one whosoever. I can the ^
fore assure you, to satisfy your demand in this point, ^ I have ever clearly
found his doctrine to be thoroughly ^ lide, ^ound, and substantial. I confess
that, omitting vo^minous citations of skeptike phansies, and endeavoring to
i^cite Divins to seek for real science, and to show how connat^rall true
Divinity is to the better portion of man, he uses ^ ^vers expressions and
manners of speech not common in o^ schools, and he has several exotic and
peculiar opinion ^ which, (be it spoken with due respect, though in oppositi^
to so great a scholar and so learned a man) are much differe^ from my
sentiments. But I never saw, nor ever heard as yet, ^ any one of his tenets
inconsistent with the essential and perse^ integrity of our Catholic faith*
no nor censured in the ^ ^y any authority whatsoever. As we signified of late
Dr Labourne, in our common letter of mediation for pea^ betwixt him and Mr
Blacklow. Yet having heard that diverse ^ our nation (some through ignorance,
others through a wea^r frailty) have labored to brand his reputation, partly
for ^ints of doctrine (which they understand not) partly for dis^edience to the Sea of Rome, I was glad to see an Authen^k testimony under his own hand
(which I have ever know^ to be in his hart^ of his submitting his writings to
the Sea ^postolicke. Which my respect and love to his person, and my ^esire to
quench a scandal so unworthily thrown upon one, ^ose piety and learning may
do so much good to God's church, has made me think fit to publish in print.
Whe^of, because you seem to be in a wavering doubtfullnesse ^ the truth of
these aspersions, I here send you a copy. You ^now the greatest part of his
Adversarys, I mean of those those Profession it is to judge of such things
(for the laity in ^atters of doctrine belonging to Religion, ought to be
hea^rs and learners, not teachers or judges) are brought up in ^ur private
seminarys, and thence easily conceive what ever they ^eare either opposite to,
or unmentioned in their Maister's ^ictats, to be erroneous. Whereas if they
knew the latitude ^f our most learned men's singular, and sometimes new
inven^ed, or renewed opinions, daily mantained and problemati^ally disputed in
our public schools, without the least sus^icion of their integrity in
Catholic belief, they would ^ot (if no way blinded with Passion) so slightly
shoot their ^ensuring bolts at random; especially against a brother, and ^uch
a brother. If this his candid and ingenuous submission ^oe reduce and undeceive
such as have erred in their jud^ments to his prejudice, either through mis
information from others, or misunderstanding in them selves, I shall be glad
^o have published it; If not, I shall not be sorry to have endea^ored it,
hoping it will at least prevail with you, to whom I am

^s ever,
SIR,
In nomine Domini, Amen.
I Underwritten declare to whom it shall concern that upon a motion of peace
made by some worthy friends, to really act what is desired, do sincerely
profess that I hold it necessary, that all Catholics should, in heart and in
all humility and obedience, submit their Divinity writings to the holy Church
and See Apostolic. And, as this has ever been my opinion, so being now
required by the said friends, I do humbly and sincerely profess it to all it
shall concern, by this my present writing or instrument* And this to reach to
all my books either passed or to come. Protesting never to recede from this
resolution, as far as God shall give me grace; And this not only before men,
but also before God, as I hope and expect good from him. May 18. 1657. THOMAS
WHITE.

Whereas I underwritten have heretofore given a submission of my writings to
the holy Church and See Apostolik, to satisfye such as might doubt of my
obedience to the Pope; And that not withstanding I gave it as full and ample as
possibly I could, according as my true intention then was, now is, ever has
been, and ever shall be, God willing, I hear that some have misunderstood
it, and have conceived that I intended only by those words, Holy Church and See
Apostolik, the Catholic Church and Pope conjointly; but not to the Sea of
Rome, and S. Peter's successor the Pope, separat from a General Council: As
also that I only declared my opinion, but professed no actual submission of my
writings, I therefore do now ingenuosly and freely declare and profess that
it is my opinion and judgment, all Catholics ought in heart and in all
humility and obedience submit their Divinity writings; not only to the Holy
Church in common and in a General Council, where the Pope may be in person or
by his Deputys, but also to the particular See of Rome and S. Peter's
successor the Pope, even out of a General Council, which as I have always
done in my heart, so do I now likewise actually and willingly (...) all my
writings to the particular See o^ Rome and S. Peter's successor the Pope, even
out of a General Council; And this according as my opinion and belief has
ever taught me. Ratifying and confirming to this effect all the contents of my
former submission. In witness whereof I have set hereunto my hand, this 2.
July 1657.

THOMAS WHITE.


