Mr. HOLLIS HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, On Monday the 31. of Januarie, 1642.

Upon the delivery of a Message from the House of Commmons, concerning the
poor Trades-mens Petition.



London, Printed for F. C. T. B 1642.

Mr. Hollis HIS Speech to the Lords, upon the delivery of a Message from the
House of Commons.
My Lords,
I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House, to
present your Lordships with a Petition now delivered into their House, by
diverse poor Tradesmen in and about the City of London, containing in the same
the great want and necessity they and their families are fallen into, through
the decay of trading. The means and causes that have produced this decay, and
the remedies to prevent further misery, and revive trading: My Lords, it is a
common observation, and the experience of former Ages has made it manifest,
that when the sword of war is unsheathed, famine follows, the greatest
destruction of all Commonwealths and Kingdoms, witness the miserable
calamities and troubles that have of late years befallen upon Italy and
Germany. If we call to mind ancient Histories mentioning the fatal
destruction of the Eastern Empires, we shall find that the first step to
their desolation, has been^ domestic dissension, and homebred mutinies, upon
which has followed National wars, and the effects of all has been famine
and pestilence, which has given a full period to the utter confusion of those
Kingdoms. If we pry and search into the ancient Histories of Italy and Rome,
we shall find the only destruction both of that Kingdom and City, has
happened only by these occasions, the pride and abition of the Popes and
Bishops of that See, usurping authority to themselves over the Churches in the
East, produced the wars between the East Vandalls and the Romans, between
the East and West Goths, and the Italians, which was the utter desolation of
the City of Rome.

First, by Allarick Captain of the West Goths.

Secondly by Adolph their Captain.

Thirdly, by Athila King of the Hunns.

Fourthly, by Genserick King of the Vandalls.

Fifthly Odasar a German.

Sixthly Theodericke and East Goth.

And lastly, Totela Baldevil.

These Princes by the sword and fire, executed the just judgments of God upon
proud and wicked Rome; the original whereof was occasioned by the impurity and
uncleanness of the Clergy: and what terrible Famines and grievous pestilencies
followed these wars, is likewise too manifest by History; whereas in the
beginning when Rome first began to lift up her head against Gods true Religion
and his anointed Servants, Kings and Emperors, she had been dashed and
suppressed, all those blondy and long wars procured by the Bishops thereof in
all parts of the Christian world had bin prevented and avoided.

My Lords, I have spoken this only to remember your Lordships of the miseries
and calamities that have happened unto those Nations that have entertained
amongst themselves dissension and division about the diversity of worship of
God in Religion, which always has proved the root and principal means of
future destruction that now in time while opportunity does serve such occasions
of difference as do threaten the same desolations to the state wherein we
live, and whereof we be a part, may by the wisdom of this high Court of
Parliament be prevented and avoided.

My Lords, if Dearth and Famine be in a Nation, there can be nothing expected
but confusion as well of the rich, as of the poor, It is the Common Proverb,
necessity has no law. There is no delaying of present necessity. It is not to
be thought that Millions of men, women and children will starve and perish, so
long as there is Corn in the Land of Goshen, or in the custody of Joseph, It is
therefore the desire, my Lords, of the Commons, that as they have
compassionately considered among themselves this necessitated Petition of
distressed Tradesmen, and have limited a day certain for answering the same,
so your Lordships would be pleased to take the same Petition into your
considerations with them, that the petitioners may at the time appointed,
receive from both Houses of parliament, such answer from their demands, as may
give them full satisfaction.

My Lords, under favor, I am to speak a word or two of the means that have
occasioned the decay in trading, and the remedies to prevent the same for
future time, and again renew Trading, the means they conceive is principally
want of due ^xecution of Justice upon those persons that have bin the causers,
and Authors thereof, and then the remedies, due execution of justice, without
any further protraction of time and the Enacting of such wholesome and good
laws, for the restriction of vice, and maintaining of virtue, both in
government of the Church and State, as shall be congruent to the Word of God,
and the peace and prosperity of his Sacred Majesty, and all his Kingdoms, as
shall be thought meet by the wisdom and policy of this great and High Court
of Parliament, which I further humbly leave to the grave consideration of this
Honorable House.

FINIS.

