A PANEGYRIC ON THE CORONATION Of His Most Sacred MAJESTY CHARLES II.

BY SAMUEL HOLLAND.

LONDON, Printed for William Plaice, at Grayes-Inne-Gate in Holborn, 1661.

A PANEGYRIC ON THE CORONATION Of His Most Sacred MAJESTY CHARLES II.
OUR hallowed Vows are heard, our Just Desires
Are now obtained; no higher now aspires
Our richest zeal: for in this radiant Train
Our King has brought the Golden World again.
Hayl, Prince's Phoenix! Thou who causest so
In swelling Tides our Joys to overflow
By thy blessed sight, and make the World to see
What unknown wonders do attend on Thee!
Some swift-foot Nymphs, make haste from hence, and pray
The Hills and Floods come keep this Holy Day;
To all the world proclaims our Joys, and Feasts,
And do invite them to become our Guests,
And as you meet in Neptune's Azure Hall,
Bid them, bid Sea-Gods keep this Festival.
This Day shall be for evermore renowned,
This Day shall still our Calenders resound.
And that our love may to this Day appear,
Henceforth with it we will begin the Year.
Great Prince, what Age shall count thy matchless deeds!
Exceeding all what Fame and Time e're reads.
For Europes lights (all bright in their degree,)
Will lose their luster, paralleled with thee.
By just Descent, you from more Kings do shine,
Then many can name Men in all their line.
What most men toil to find, and finding hold,
You scorn the treasures of suborning gold.
And wisely think that Wealth to be the best,
Which is locked up in the Minds noblest Chest.
No stormy Passions do disturb your Soul,
No mists of Danger can it ere control.
What Man has been so meek? You life do give,
To those who do repine to see you live.
A Prince, that, though of none you stand in aw,
Do first subject Your Self to your own Law.
You joy in Good, and still, as Right directs,
You measure Greatness by your good Effects.
You Arms still manage for your own Defense;
Wrongs to repel, and foster Innocence.
Your Noble Virtues, your desires do grace,
Stern Chance does change, and to desert give place.
No more contemned shall hapless Learning lie,
The Arts and Muses shall be raised high.
And the Acidalian Queen amidst your Bays
Shall twine her Myrtles, and grant happy days.
O Halcyonian, O most happy Age!
No more shall Schisms, and Discontentments rage,
And vex Antartick Climates: Englands woes
Do vanish now, Joy in our Zenith grows.
Like your rare mind, which steadfast as the Pole
Does fixed stand, how e're the Spears do role.
That Rapine, Schisms, and lusts are fled to Hell,
And in their rooms with us all Graces dwell;
That Honor now we more then Wealth respect,
And Order more then Heresies affect;
That Piety unmasked now shows her face,
And Innocence with Greatness keeps her place;
That late-stern Foes do now like Brothers love,
And Vultures prey not on the harmless Dove;
That our Towns smile, our ruined Temples rise,
And their wind-courted Vanes do kiss the skies;
That buried Arts now rouse them to the Day,
And Night, and Falsehood, are both fled away;
That Wolves with Lambs now friendship entertain,
Are true effects of your most happy Reign.
O Virtues mirror, Glory of our Times,
Ordained by Heaven to expiate our Crimes!
Great King, but Better far then you are Great,
Whom State not honors, but who honors State.
By wonder born, by wonder first installed,
By wonder after to your Realms recalled.
Young kept by wonder from homebred Alarms
And saved by Wonder from bold Traitors harms,
To be in this your Reign which Wonders brings
A King of Wonder, Wonder unto Kings;
All those Perfections which by bounteous Heaven
To diverse Kings in diverse Times were given,
The Starry Senate pours at once on Thee,
That thou Exemplar to the world may be.
Let Traitors boast of Blood, and spoils of Foes,
Fierce Rapines, Murders, and a thousand Woes;
Unhappy Traitors, who t'inlarge their bounds
Have charged themselves with shame, their Friends with wounds:
Who had no Law, but their Ambitious Will,
And took delight their nearest blood to spill.
You are true Victor sent us from above;
What others strain by force, you gain by love,
And loudest Fame to You this praise imparts
To be the only Monarch of all Hearts;
They many fear, who are of many feared:
And Kingdoms got by wrong, by wrong are tear'd:
Such Thrones as Blood does raise, Blood throws down,
No Guard so sure as Love unto a Crown.
Run on, Great Prince, Your Course in Glory's way;
The End our Life, the Evening Crowns the Day.
Heap Worth on Worth, and strongly soar above
Those streights which made the World you first to love.
Transcend your Self, and make your Actions past
Be but as Beams, and Lightnings to your last.
Let those outstrip all of your younger time,
As far as Autumn does the flowery Prime.
Make happy long this Isle, which by your sight
Has now regained her former heat, and light.
So ever Bays your Noblest Brow adorn,
And never Time see your fair Fame out-worn.
So by your Subjects be you still desired,
And by all Strangers feared, and admired.
And may your high Exploits at last make even
With Earth your Empires, Gloryes with the Heaven.
FINIS.

