MASTER HOLLIS HIS Speech in Parliament, The 21. of March. 1642.

Wherein is contained his Declaration concerning the Kings Attorney General,
for his abuse given to the House of Commons, in the accusation of High Treason
against the six Members of the House.

As also his advise concerning the last commands, issued from the said House,

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Coe and Marmaduke Boas. 1642.

The Speech delivered by Mr Hollis one of the Members of the House of Commons,
now conjoined in PARLIAMENT.
With his Arguments against Master Harbert, His Majesty's Attorney General,
for drawing the Articles of high Treason against himself, and the other five
Members of the said House.

Master Speaker,
THe subtilety, policy, and dubious ways, bearing rule in a man corrupted,
whose evil actions come within the compass, and justly claim the due reward
of exemplary punishment, is always working; although by the destruction and
utter delabition of the virtuous, and innocent (whose words and works, actions,
and endeavors, can be termed to lay holds on nothing but realties) to clear
himself: The actions, conditions, and endeavors of the good man, being always
the contrary, there being no vicissitude or coherence with them, in respect
they are mere opposites, the one seeking to perform his duty both to God and
man, through his true dealing for the truth, the other seeking what in him
lies for the advancing of impiety: The good man joining with his practice, is
daily labors for the defense of virtuous and pious designs; thereby seeking
with vigilance to bring the malignant persons to deserved punishments, it being
a work, which in conscience is due both to God, his King, and Country.

First, To God in respect of Religion, and the true and real Faith, we now
profess in the Church of England, without which we are nothing, being no less
then mere Atoms to the World, and the just Antipothes to a ground Faith. No
faith can stand without that true Foundation of Christ; no grounds of salvation
can be had, but by and through those extraordinary merits and sufferings, which
we are partakers of in Christ: If so then does our Savior daily suffer in the
instigations, and quotidiall provocations against him; all which are violated
by those (who are many) malignants to the truth.

Secondly, To the King, what greater abuse can there be to His Sacred Majesty
then by the continual sufferance, the Subject endures through the ill Counsel
administered to our Sovereign, being done under the color of Loyalty; yet in
proving in matter no better then flat abuses to this whole Kingdom.

Thirdly, If that God and the King, so much suffer by the aforesaid means, the
poor Subject and Country can do no less; witness the daily disturbances which
are now a days, being so many, that there is no County almost within this His
Majesty's Dominions, but has delivered their humble petitions to this
Honorable Assembly, for removeall of the said grievances and the deprieving of
the aforesaid persous of their usurped authority.

Master Speaker,
It is palpable enough that the wicked man, cares not though he dishonours God
in the highest degree may he but defend himself and vices, thougth to the
utter abolishing of Religion, King, and Country, (as aforesaid) if opposite to
his designs.

We have had the experience of the evils and great troubles that have been
raised, this State by ill instruments men of power and authority in the same,
and not only of public misedoers and open enemies, but also of many private
disaffected Spirits, whose outward carriage has procured to themselves great
esteem and respect in their County. Nay so well have they been approved on,
that their Country has not misled them, with both their estates and
privileges, as electing them Members of this high Court of Parliament; wherein
also for a long time, they have discharged their duties to their King and
Country; nay and attained the general estimation, and respect of all men, as
worthy Members of the Commonwealth; but their hearts disagreeing with their
outward qualities, being not upright and perfect, have at least showed
themselves in their perfect colors, and brought themselves to shame and
dishonor.

Master Speaker,
I Have hitherto spoken of nothing but generals: Now I intend to insist upon a
particular, being the Gentleman, who as yet stands accused by this Honorable
House, His Majesty's Attorney General, who has been a man, upon whom all
these Honors aforenamed, have been conferred in the Parliament, and no le sse
esteemed by His Majesty; his place therein being sufficiently honorable, he
needed not to have proceeded so far as to prive ambitious, or malicious;
which of the two I cannot nominate, nor am able to distinguish, was his error,
or whether he is guilty of both; how ever, it does appear, his heart was not
right in discharging his duty in that great place committed to him; and as he
was a Member of the Parliament, had he been faithful to his King and Country,
he had never undertaken this enterprise to accuse us of treason, and draw the
accusation against us himself; for which we have already, and further are bound
to answer.

Master Speaker,
HIs offense is of a high nature, of dangerous consequence, a manifest Breach
of the Privileges of Parliament, an apparent treachery (if found to rely upon
him) against those accused Members, of which I am the least, yet moved to speak
in the Cause, The offense is generally against the whole State, deserving great
punishment for the same.

By this he has made himself guilty of those misdemeanors, that other
Delinquents have been impeached, and accused for, and nothing inferior to them
in their crime. This design was a great offense (if by him advised) against
His sacred Majesty himself, in seeking to work an evil opinion in him
concerning His Parliament, and their Proceedings in the great Affairs, of both
Church and State. This is the matter that discourages this Honorable Assembly
in proceeding in such businesses as may be for the honor of their King and
Country; when they peceive that all their endeavors, and dutiful actions, are
not well accepted by His Majesty, This and such like ill Counsels has caused
all this distraction in the State.

Master Speaker,
THe charge is apparent against him, the accusation is apparent before (as
though void;) therefore I in behalf of the rest of the Members, most humbly
desire you would proceed to voting him upon the same, as he shall be found
guilty, and his reward may be contributed for the same: I for my part have
performed my promise to those other Members accused, in moving you in the
business; To whose consideration I now leave it, as being best able to
determine of a matter of so great weight.

FINIS.

