THE LEARNED READINGS OF Sir Robert Holbourne, Knight, Attorney General to King
Charles I.

UPON The STATUTE of 25 Edw. 3. Cap. 2.

Being the Statute of TREASONS.

To which is added, Cases of Prerogative. Treason. Misprision of Treason.
Felony, etc.


Written by the Right Honorable FRANCIS BACON, Lord Verulam, Viscount St.
Alban.

And now Reprinted for the Public Benefit.

Indici conjurationis praemia constituta.

Salust. in Conjur. Catil. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Heyrick, at Grayes-Inn-Gate
in Holborn, and Matthew Gilliflower, in Westminster Hall, 1681.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. Line 4. for Dejective, read Directive. page 20. lin. ult. for kill,
read kills. page 21. lin. 12. for Case, r. Care. page 23. l. 14. for mysteries
are, read mistress is. ibid. l. 15. for there read she. p. 35. l. 19. for
without, read within. p. 36, l. 7. for Regne, read Rigne. p. 37. l. 10. for
Aid, r. Ayel. ibid. l. 18. for Heirs Facus, r. Haeres Factus. p. 49. l. 15.
for I. S. r. I. D. p. 55. l. 6. for word, r. Ward. ibid. l. 14. l. 15. l. 17.
for Costigase, read Cesty que use.

THE LEARNED Readings OF Robert Holbourne, Esquire;
Lecture I.
BEfore the Statute, Trespasses were made Felonies, and Felonies were made
Treasons; and we could not judge which were Felonies, and which were Treasons,
but it did rest in the breast of the Judges that were in those days. For the
preventing of which mischief, this Statute, which I now Read upon, was made,
which has two Parts: The parts of the Statute are first Declarative.
A Declarative part; and that does declare what shall hereafter be judged
Treason: And Treason also is commonly divided into two parts; that is,

First, High Treason.
High Treason, that is, against the Person of the King; and that will fall out
for this days Work. Secondly, Petty Treason.
Petty Treason, which is in the latter part of the Statute, as will appear
hereafter.

The second part of this Statute is the Dejective part, And secondly Dejective
High Treason.
and directs the Judges how far to proceed upon a Fact that is not within the
Statute.

High Treason is against the person of the King, or against his Government,
viz. as against his Judges, Seals, and Coyns. These are the Divisions that I
shall make of this Law.

The definition of Treason.
It is Lesa Majest. The definition of Treason.
which comprehends the Person of the King, and his Officers of Justice. For the
Person of the King and the Treasons that are committed more immediately against
his Person and they are Acts and Persons.

Persons, they are of two sorts; Persons against whom and the Persons by whom
these Treasons are committed The Acts, and they are diverse.

As first, Compassing the Death of the King: And for explanation of this word
Compassing, it is an old word signifying not a bringing t^ pass only, but a
going about as you shall find it in Britto^ and the Mir. of Just. but it is
since called in Latin Machinatio, and a going about, 1 Mar. Bro. tit. Treas.
24.
or compassing is Treason, though no effect do follow; as a compassing to kill
the King, though he be not killed; so a compassing without any other Act is
Treason: But there may be an Act done that does effect the death of the King,
and yet no Treason, if there be no compassing: as in the Case of Sir Walter
Terril, who shooting at a Deer, his Arrow glanced against a Tree, and struck
King William Rufus upon the breast that he died: Hollingshead.
and this was not Treason, because there was no compassing. And so it is in the
Case of a Physician, as if the King takes Physic and dies of the Physic
working, yet if it be not notoriously gross, and it does not appear that he did
any way compass the Death of the King, this is not treason within this Law; for
in the Case of a common person, if a Physician give one Physic, whereof he
dies, this is not Felony in him, although the Physician had no License to
practice Physic; for it is his fault that he will take Physic of him; and
volenti non fit injuria. If the Prince in person assaults a man, and drives him
so hard against the Wall, that if he do not defend himself he will kill him,
and he cannot do it without danger to the Prince; in that Case he ought not to
defend himself, but ought rather to dye than hazard the person of the Prince,
because he is Caput and salus Reipub. and yet Nature does teach a man to defend
himself against all danger. And thus much for Acts without compassing. And yet
some of these Acts that are without compassing are left to the Jury to judge
of, and some others are left to the Judges to judge of, as by presumption of
Law; as in Murder, the^^ ought to be malice fore^thought, and yet if an Officer
in executing of his Office b^ slain, this is Murder by the Law, and yet in this
Cas^ there do not appear any malice forethought, and so in this Case the Law
makes an Evidence for the Jury, and so in deeds of the like Cases.

The second Act is Violating; and this word is derived of vi perdendo, but yet
it may be done without any force at all.

The third Act is Levying War against the King: And what shall be said of
Levying War? that may be diverse ways; As if the Inhabitants of a Town will
gather themselves together to pull down the Fences of a Common, See Saint
John's argument in Sherly of Shefield's Case.
in which they have no Interest or Common, nor ever had, this is Treason within
this Law; but if they had an Interest or Common there, then it is no Treason:
but if they shall do it by Force of Arms in a Warlike manner, Qu. but in the
first Case it is a Levying of War against this Government.

Another Levying of War may be against the King, Nota.
as if it be to the displacing of his Officers, as in the Earl of Essex his
Case, in his coming to the City of London for to remove Officers that were
about the Queen, this was Treason: and so it is also to the same purpose in 1
Mar. Dyer 24. and so it appears, 1 Mar. Dyer 24.
A man may Levy War against the King, although he has no intent to meddle with
the person of the King, or any way to hurt him; and so you shall find also in
Bro. Tit. Treason 14. Brok tit. Treason 14.
And if any Levy War without the King, this is a Levying of War within the Law,
8 Hen. 8.
8 H. 8. If two conspire to Levy War, and one alone does it, this is Treason in
both.

The fourth part is to Adhere to the King's Enemies; Nota.
and first, who shall be said ^o be Enemies within this Law. ^econdly, who shall
be said Adhering to them that are E^emies within this Law. This word Enemy
cannot extend ^o Subjects, for they are Rebels and no Enemies, and so it is
expressed in the Irish Statutes: See Irish Statutes.
and this Statute cannot be taken according ^o Equity, for it is a Penal Law,
and of the greatest pe^alty that is; and therefore ^he aiding of Rebels cannot
be meant any way the aiding of ^he King's Enemies within this Law. Aiding the
Enemies within or without is an aiding of those that come into the Land, or of
those that are without. A Subject is of two sorts, Subjects two sorts.
ratione originis, and a Subject ratione loci.

A Subject ratione originis, 1. Ratione originis.
cannot be an Enemy, although he does Levy War (in respect of his Obedience)
but a Rebel he shall be.

A Subject ratione loci, 2. Ratione loci.
during his residence here, he can be no Enemy neither, but if he goes over
Sea, and then Levy War against this Kingdom, or any other of his Majesty's
Kingdoms, he is then an Enemy within this Law, and no Rebel. Dominium duplex.


There is also Dominium rectum, and Dominium utile, for ^f a man be born within
the Dominium rectum, as that of Scotland in ancient time, and ^here he Levy
War, he is an Enemy and no Rebel: but if ^e be born within the Domi^ium utile,
and Levy War, ^e is a Rebel, and not an Enemy.

Aiding, is by sending them Aid, as of Victuals, or of Weapons, and the like,
by giving of them Counsel, or ^y any other way, whereby ^hey may receive
strength or comfort from him.

Now for the persons by whom this Levying of War may be, and as to that all
Levies are within this Law as well Women as Men, for Women are comprehended
under this word Man.

Secondly, Persons of all Nations, that are within this Land, are within this
Law* for as they shall have protection by the Laws of the Land, so they ought
at their peril to take notice of the Law, so soon as they come into the Land;
for they ought to have notice given them, and cannot allege ignorance if it be
not given them, especially in such Laws as this, that are so beneficial both
the King and Kingdom.

Thirdly, Persons of all Degrees, as a Queen that is married to the King
attempting ^he death of the King, is within this Law. A Foreign Ambassador is
also within ^his Law; but if a Foreign King should come into this Land, by
License, and here ^ompass the death of the King, ^he question will be how he
shall be tried? for, he is a King here, and therefore ^ught to be tried per
Pares, which he cannot be, for other Honors are not allowed here.

Fourthly, all Ages are with^n this Law, as in Folks which have knowledge, or
men of non sanae memoriae, and a mad man is also within this Law, as to that
part of the Statute which concerns more immediately the Person of the King; for
if any of them before mentioned in this division shall compass his death it is
Treason within the first Clause, but not in the Clause of Levying War, as I
shall show you afterward: but a man that is surdus, caecus and mutus, is not
within this Law for it is impossible for him to have understanding.

Now for the persons against whom; a King before his Coronation is within thi^
Law, Northumberland 's Case.
as it is in the Duke o^ Northumberland's Case, for h^ is presently a King, as
soon as the other King deceaseth, and there is no Interregnum; for the King,
quatenus a King, never dies, but he is said to Demise, when he departs this
Life; and the King is Crowned because he is a King, and not a King because he
is Crowned; a King de facto, and not de jure, is a King within this Law; See 4
E. 4.1. 9 E. 4.12.
as it is in 4 E. 4.1. and 9 E. 4.12. A King conjugal or marital, that takes to
Wife the Queen of England, is within this Law; a Queen that is married,
although the marriage be void, yet that Queen is within this Law; so is a Queen
married by Proxy; a Queen within Age is also within this Law.

The first Case.
I. S. after the Divorce of the Wife of the Grandchild, First Case.
and Heir apparent to the Queen, does violate her, and imagine the Death of the
husband, and declares this to I. D. and after kills the husband of the Queen,
and conspired to Levy War against the Queen, and delivers to I. D. money to buy
Arms, and after becomes mad, and Aids the Enemies of the Queen within the
Realm, and then kills the Queen.

The Conclusion is, First, I. S. is a Traitor within this Law, for killing the
Husband of the Queen, and for conspiring to Levy War, and for killing of the
Queen, and in every one of these.

The second Conclusion is, that I. S. is not a Traitor within this Law, for
imagining the death of the Grandchild; and yet he is within the Case of the
Law, not for violating of his Wife, nor for aiding of the Enemies.

I. S. is a Traitor within this Law, for killing the husband of the Queen, but
not within these words, That whosoever shall conspire or compass the death of
the King; for as to that Clause he is not King, for the Queen is Regent, and
not he, and so not within that Clause, nor the meaning of it, but he is within
this word Companion; for he is as good a Companion to the Queen, as the Queen
is to the King; and so within the same Reason of Law: For the husband of the
Queen, in such a Case, is in a better condition and plight than a Queen to a
King, and so upon a stronger Reason; but this you must take as a Rule that I
have said before, viz. that this Statute is not to be taken by Equity; and this
you shall find as another Rule, as well for the expounding this Statute as any
other: Bro. Treas. for. 12.12. ass. pl. 30.
that those Cases that stand upon the same Reason shall be within the same Law,
although not taken by Equity; for where there is the same identity, parity or
majority of Reason in any Cases, there ought to be the same Law; as it is in
the Statute of Gloucester concerning Waste, and in this our Statute, the
mysteries are not named; yet there is within this Law, for if the Servant kills
the Wife of his Master, knowing her to be his Masters Wife, this is adjudged
Petty Treason by the Judgment of all the Judges of both Benches, Com. 87.6.
Fitz. Com. 7.118. Brook tit. treas. 8.
19 H. 6.47. Com. 87.6. Fitz. Com. 7.118. Bro. Tit. Treason 8. For as well the
Mistress as the Master has affiance in him, and he ought to give Reverence to
his Mistress as well as his Master, and yet the Master is only named in this
Statute; but in our Case, the express words are, That if any man shall Compass
the death of the Kings Companion, it shall be Treason; and so there is an
express proviso for him, being the Companion; for he is a Companion to the
Queen. A second Difference between our Case, and the Case of the Mistress, is,
that she is his Mistress, but gratia, and under the power of her Husband; but
in our Case the King marital has a Superiority over his Wife, as he is her
Husband; and so our Case is a far stronger Case.

If a Child kills his Father, or Mother, this is Petty Treason; and so it was
also at the Common Law, before the making of this Statute, 21 E. 3.17 Bro. tit.
Sanctuar. 2. Bro. tit. Treas. 6.
21 E. 3.17. Bro. Tit. Sanct. 2. and Bro. Tit. Treas. 6. because there is a
higher majority of Reason than that of a Servant, which is the Reason of the
Submission and Duty that is to the Father and Mother from the Child, and where
there is a majority of Reason, or a parity of Reason for the one Case as there
is for the other, there is always the same Law.

But you will Object, 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. c. 9.
there is a Statute made 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. cap. 9. that if any shall
imagine the death of the King, that it shall be Treason; and therefore he was
not provided for before this Statute, and therefore this Statute was made: if
it were Treason before this Statute, then this Statute was made in vain and to
no purpose.

That that Statute does provide as well for the preservation of the Queen, Answ.
as for the King, and makes it Treason for any to compass the death of the
Queen, and therefore ^t cannot be concluded from ^hence, that it was not
Treason to compass her death before that Statute. The second Reason is, because
that Statute does provide for other matters, as it does there appear.

The next Point is the declaring of this his imagination to I. D. which is an
Overt Act; 1 Mar. Bro. tit. treas. 24. The second point
for an overt Act is the declaring of his Mindand Intentions to others, by such
words as imply an Act to follow, or by bidding a man to do what he has
intended, or to do any thing that may tend to his purpose, or by writing to
declare his mind: but if a man have a thought of Killing the King, this is
only Primus motus; and although he afterward tells another that he had such a
thought this is no Overt Act; but i^ he does cherish this thought then it
becomes his own, and then he tells it to another, that he has such an
intention this is an Overt Act; for the words he does speak, are words
executory, and imply that he will do such an Act* Or if A. conspire with B. to
kill the King, this is an Overt Act; but to imagine with himself is not,
because it cannot come to be known: words of encouragement to others is an
Overt Act also.

For conspiring to levy War, is the next, and this is Treason within this Law,
although it be not within the words of the Statute; but yet it is within the
meaning and reason of the Statute: for how is it possible for any to Levy War,
but he must conspire the death of the King, Nota.
or his deposing at least? and the conspiring to do either of these, is Treason
within this Law, as aforesaid; and that within this word Compassing; which, as
I said before, ^s of a very large extent, but I must confess the Intention is
not so bad as an actual Levying of War, and yet it is as bad in him that does
intend it. And this Levying o^ War does mediately look a^ the person of the
King* though not immediately; and so in that respect it is Treason, and so it
is of deposing; and so is the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 12. and so you shall find
it in Doctor Storie's case, 13 Eliz: Dyer 298. b. 1 E. 6.12. Dyer. Story 's
Case. 13 Eliz. Dyer 298.
who did conspire with a Foreign Prince to invade this Land, and showed him a
means how to conquer this Kingdom, and yet there was no Act done by that Prince
against the Queen, yet this is adjudged Treason; and the reason there yielded,
was, because this Invasion could not possibly be without great hazard and peril
to the person of the Queen, which is a very full Case in proving of this point.
19 H. 6.47.
But a conspiring to Coin Money, is not Treason within this Law, because it is
not against the person of the King; but yet if two shall conspire to coin
Money, and one does it alone without the other, yet this is Treason in both.

The third point is, that I. S. after he became mad, kills the Queen, this is
Treason within this Law; first, because a man may counterfeit himself to be
mad, and he may do it so cunningly as it cannot be discerned whether he be mad
or no.

The second Reason, is, in respect of the great esteem that the Law gives to
the person of the King; for he is the Fountain of Justice: and for the proof of
this point, that it may be understood, we ought to see what the Common Law was,
before the making of this Statute, as to this Point; and then we ought to
enquire and see how the Law is altered since the making of the Statute; and by
this means, we shall find out the Law and the reason thereof; it is true, that
the Law, without special words, will not bind an Insant or a Madman, as to the
punishment of their Bodies, but yet it will extend to their Lands and Estates;
but this our Law is no new Law, but only a Declarative Law, and in that Case
general words will bind an Infant or a Madman without any special words. That
it was Treason at the Common Law is apparent in Britton, and the Mirror of
Justice; and this Statute does not declare who shall be Traitors, but what
shall be Treason, and therefore by this Act it is Treason in a Madman, or
whomsoever shall commit it; for a Madman is not excepted out of this Law: and
to make this appear more fully, you may be pleased to read the Case of Beverly,
See Beverleys Case. Com. 124.
in Com. 124. That a man that is non composmentis may commit High Treason,
although he cannot commit Petty Treason, nor Felony: Daltons Just. 206.
and so it is also in Dalton's Justice of Peace 206. that if a man that is non
compos mentis, shall kill the King, this is High Treason. Nay, Beverley's Case
goes farther, and says, That if he shall offer only to kill the King, this is
High Treason, Nota.
because the King is Caput and salus Reipub. and a Capite bona valetudo transit
in omnes: and for this Cause his person is so Sacred, that none must offer the
least violence to him; but he is Reus criminis laesae Majestatis, and pereat
unus, ne pereant omnes.

The second Conclusion, is, That I. S. is not a Traitor within this Law, for
imagining the death of the Grandchild; yet he is within the Care and Protection
of the Law; for he is not within the Words of the Law, but without the
Intention and Reason of the Law: for the words are, That if any man shall
compass the death of the Kings Eldest Son, that is Treason; but in the French
Language, in which this Law was first written, it is Le Regne fills and heir,
and yet if the Eldest Son dies, the second Son is within the Law, because he is
then the Eldest Son; and so it is of the third Son, for then he is also Heir
Apparent, and he is within the intention and meaning of this Law. And so to
this purpose is the Princes Case in Report 8. where it is, Princes Case 8.
Report.
that the Second Son shall be Duke of Cornwall after the death of the Eldest,
and yet it is only limited to the Eldest Son. A collateral Heir is also within
this Statute, because, as he conceives, this Statute intends to provide that
the next Heir to the Crown shall be secured from danger. And the Case that may
be likened to this, is that, where a Writ of Aid may be brought by the next
Heir; for the Writ says, Cujus haeres ipse est, F. N. B. 221
F. N. B. 221. so that it appears, that it lies only for the Heir Lineal or
Collateral, Male or Female.

The Eldest Daughter is also within our Law, Heirs Facus is also a grand Heir
within this Law; but this imagining or compassing the Death of the Grandchild,
or of any other Heir, is not Treason, unless there be a sufficient Declaration
of it to another: for no man can judge of the thoughts; for the imagination
only can be no Overt Act: and this Declaration of his imagination or compassing
to I. D. is not a sufficient Overt Act to make him a Traitor within this Law:
for he told him that he had only such an imagination, which is but Primus
motus; for he does not say that he will do it in the Future Tense, for that may
be Treason, for that it does imply an Act to be done afterward; but the other
is only against that is past. Then for violating the Wife after she is
divorced, this is not Treason within this Law. And yet the divorce is but a
mensa and thoro, but it is such a divorce as deprives her of his Company, and
so she is not his Companion within this Law: but yet she is his Wife, and a
Wife divorc't a mensa and thoro shall have her divorce; because that divorce
does not dissolve the Marriage, but she remains his Wife still; but yet if she
has any Children during that divorce, they are all Bastards, because she is
not to keep her Husband Company. A Queen Dowager is not within this Law,
because she is not Companion to the King; that then is, and is not provided for
by this Law: for the words of the Statute are, If any shall violate the Kings
Companion.

Lecture II.
THE Second Lecture, The Second Lecture.
according to my first Division is concerning the Government; and that is,
First, in the Seal, which is Clavis Regni. The Second in his Money and Coin.
The Third, in his Offices. For the First, which are the Seals; and they are,
first, The Great Seal. Secondly, the Privy Seal. And, Thirdly, the Seal of the
Exchequer. And of all these Seals the Common Law takes special notice, as that
the King may grant to one Power to make one Attorney under the Privy Seal;
and so is 37 H. 3.27. b. Co. 2.17. Lams Case; 37 H. 3.27. Co. 2.17. Lams Case.
and so of the other Seals: but our Law takes notice of the great Seal only as
for point of Treason; for the words are exclusive to all other Seals; for that
being the greatest, excludes all other inferior Seals that are the least. Now
what shall be said of counterfeiting of this Great Seal? and that must be by
making another Seal like to this, and for to Seal Patents with it: for, to make
a Seal like the Great Seal, to put this to a piece of Wax only, is no
counterfeiting of the Great Seal; but there ought to be a Writing annexed unto
it, and then it is a Counterfeiting within this Law: Nota.
but if the Lord Keeper does Seal a Patent without special Authority from the
King, yet this is no Counterfeiting within this Law; or if any one do find this
Great Seal, or other ways obtain it, and Seals Patents therewith, this is not
Counterfeiting neither, within this Law: for, if the Seal be truly and in due
manner put to a Patent, and afterward the Patentee does raze or add to the
Patent in any place, this is no Counterfeiting, as it is in Lakes Case, Lakes
Case 4 Jac.
4 Jac. and yet the razing of a Deed is the forging of a Deed.

Secondly, concerning counterfeiting the Kings Coin; and this ought to be
intended only of the Kings own Money, for that only is meant by this Law, and
not any Foreign Money; but Foreign Money is provided for by another Law. The
coining of Copper, if it be made Current, is also within this Law: for it is
only in the power of the King to imbase Coin, as it is apparent in the Case of
Money in Davices Reports; Case of Money in Davices Reports.
for the King is Master of the Coin: but in the Mirror of Justice, it is said
the King cannot alter his coin; for those things are not in this Law, because
they are not Current within this Realm. Foreign Money is not within this law,
because at the time when this Law was made, all Foreign Money that was brought
into this Realm, was but Bullion; because it was a great deal worser than that
of this Nation: and Foreigners afterward did make their Coin finer, and than
it was made Current here by a Statute, and so within this Law.

If any that have Authority and Power to Mint or Coin, and he coin pieces that
are less in weight than they ought to have been, by the Authority by him given,
this is a counterfeiting, because he has not pursued his Authority, and so is
as if he had no Authority to make it of that weight, which he has made it. And
so is the 3 H. 7. c. 10. to counterfeit Foreign Money, 3 H. 7. c. 10
and to bring it over, is not a counterfeiting within this Law: but if one
counterfeit the Coin of this Kingdom beyond the Sea, and brings it over and
Merchandises with it, 6 H. 7.13.
and thereby deceive our Merchants, this is a counterfeiting, as in the Book
aforesaid. And if one counterfeit the Coin of this Kingdom, although he does
not put it to others, yet this is a counterfeiting within this Law. 6 H. 7.13.
1 H. 31. Bro. Tit. Treas. 27. Stamf. Pleas 3. D. 1 R. 3.1. Bro. Tit. Treas. 27.
Stam. pl. 3. D.


What shall we say to the bringing in of Money, what not? the bringing in of
Foreign Money, ought to be intended of Money that is counterfeited in another
Realm, and like unto ours; for the words are so, Money, and not of Foreigners
Money. If two conspire to Coin and Counterfeit, and one of them does it, 19 H.
6.43. Stam. pl. 3.
it is Treason in both, 19 H. 6.43. Stamf. Pleas 3. a. but an intention to
counterfeit, is not Treason within this Law.

The Barons of the Exchequer are within this Law, and it is agreed in Tanfields
Case (who was one of the Barons of the Exchequer) that he was within the words
of the Statute; and the words of Oyer and Terminer are within this Law, but all
other Judges are not; as the Ecclesiastical Judges are not within this Law; for
they hold with the Court of Rome, and did derive their Authority from him in
ancient Time. Neither is a Constable within this Law.

The second Case.
I. S. Slits the Great Seal, The second Case.
and closes it to a Commission, and coyns Money in the form of Shillings,
invertendo the Arms, kills the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal in Chancery, and
brings in false Money like English, to Merchandise, knowing it to be false, but
does not offer it, and I. S. knowing this does succor him.

The Conclusion is, that I. D. is a Traitor in omnibus, and I. D. also within
this Law; the first Act is slitting of the Seal, and putting of it to the
Commission, and that is Treason; first, because that is slit, whereby it is
become now no Seal at all; it cannot be said that this half is the Broad Seal,
or that the other half is the Broad Seal; for they both together make but one
Broad Seal; and when he has closed them together again, and joined them to a
Commission, he has made the Seal a new, for it was no Seal when it was slit,
but now it is.

The second Reason is, in respect of the mischief that does come by this
translating of an old Seal to a new Commission; for both the King and his
Subjects are as much abused, as if it had been counterfeited: and the Reason of
Laws and not Authority ought to be our Rule to go by; for judicandum est
legibus, 40 Ass. 33. and Bro. Tit. Treas. 17. Brit. cap. 4. fol. 10.
non exemplis, and so he conceives the Case in Bro. Tit. Treas. ^. to be no
grand Law. This was Treason also at Common Law, as you shall find it expressed in
Britton, cap. 4. fol. 10. and in the Mirror of Justice cap. 1. sect. 6. and
since the Statute in the same Kings time that this Statute was made in, and
they who knew best the Reasons and Grounds of this Statute, and the meaning
thereof, and were at the making thereof, by all likelihood, did adjudge it
Treason, to take an old Seal from an old Patent, and to put it to a new one, as
in 40 Ass. pl. 33. and 2 H. 4.33. and Stamford says, 40 Ass. pl. 33. and 2 H.
4.33.
that it was so adjudged in his time.

In all Treasons that do concern the person of the King, the judgment ought to
be, That he shall be hanged, drawn, and quartered; but for other Treasons that
do not immediately concern the person of the King, the judgment ought to be,
That he shall be drawn and hanged only; and not that he shall be quartered. 1
H. 6.5. 19 H. 6.47. 6 H. 7.13.
As it is in 1 H. 6.5. 19 H. 6.47.

The second Act is, The Counterfeiting of the Kings Money, and the inverting of
the Arms of the King, whereby the Kings Liege people and others may be
deceived: for that is a sufficient Alteration to make it Treason, although it
be such a one as cannot be discerned without special notice taken of it. And
this does appear by the judgment given in the Star Chamber, for the
counterfeiting of Farthings. And it is Treason for any man to bear the Kings
Arms, as it appears in the Earl of Surreys Case.

The third Act is, The killing of the Officers of the King, as of the Lord
Keeper, and that is Treason within this Law; for the Lord Keeper is now
Chancellor, although at that time when this Statute was made, the Lord
Chancellors Office, and the Lord Keepers Office were two several and distinct
Offices, yet they are made now both one Office; 5 Eliz. c. 18 15 E. 3. c. 2
and that is by the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 18. and this Statute of 15 E. 3.
cap. 2. may and does extend to that Statute of 5 Eliz. which comes after, as is
very fully expressed to the purpose, though not to this Case, in Co. 4. fol. 4.
Vernon's Case, the Statute of Marleborough, which was made 52 H. 3. gave the
word of the Tenant that held by Knight Service, notwithstanding he had made a
Feoffment by collusion: from which time, and for 200 years and more, till the
Statute of the 4. of H. 7. cap. 17. which gave the Ward of the Heir of
Costigase, the Heir of Costigase was not in Ward, and yet it is held in the 27
of H. 8.9. that if Costigase, after the Statute of 4 H. 7. makes a Feoffment in
Fee by collusion, to defraud the Lord of his Ward, that this is taken within
the Equity of the Statute of Marleborough, and so of diverse other Cases that
you may see there cited in Vernon's Case above mentioned.

The Fourth Act is, The bringing in of false Money, like unto our English
Money, for to Merchandise withal; and this is Treason: for here is not only an
intent, but there is also an Act joined with this intent; for he brings over
this Money, which is the Act, with an intent to Merchandise. The second
Conclusion is, that I. D. is a Traitor within this Law, and his Treason does go
or extend to all the other four Treasons that were committed by I. S. for this
succouring of him after the Fact committed, makes him a Traitor within this
Law. And at the Common Law, before the making of this Statute, if a man had
succored one that had committed Treason, knowing him to have committed it, he
had been a Traitor. And so if one does now succor a Felon, it is Felony in the
Succourer. And why should it not be so in our Case? For the Reason of Law in
our Case is far stronger, that the Succourer of a Traitor, should be a Traitor;
than the succouror of a Felon should be a Felon, because the Offense is
greater; and therefore it is an aggravation of his punishment, to make him that
no man shall receive or succor him: for we see the Law inflicts a greater
punishment upon a Traitor than upon a Felon; and that is to deterr men from
such Acts as those are. And so it appears that there is Reason why he should be
a Traitor, although he be not within the words of the Statute. And therefore it
is in the Reason of the Statute. Another Reason is, because the Statute does
not say who shall be Traitors, but what shall be Treason, and this word Treason
shall be taken with all its Concomitants and Accidents, as it was at Common
Law; and then that was a concomitant to Treason that the Succourer should be a
Traitor.

But it is so in 3 H. 7. fol. 10. Object.
that the Succourer in Treason is no Traitor.

The Reason of that Case is, Answ.
because the Judgment was, that he knowing eam proditionem praedictam
perpetrdffe felonice hospitalis fuit: and this was not grand, because he was in
that Case indicted as an Accessory, and was not indicted as a Traitor; for
there can be no Accessaries in Treasons, as there is in Felonies. See Fitz.
Tit. Cor. 55. Fitz. Tit. Coron. 55. Bro. Tit. Coron. 135.
Bro. Tit. Coron. 135. and for express Authority it is in 1 H. 6.5. for if this
Statute had made Felony Treason, and one does commit that Treason, and A.
succors him, knowing of it, it had been absurd for to have said, that the
Succourer should have been only a Felon: but our Case is stronger; for this Law
does not make any one a Traitor, but only declares what shall be adjudged
Treason; but if this Statute had expressed, that all Abettors should have been
Traitors, then the Receivers or Succourers should not have been Traitors within
this Law; for then the intent of the Makers would plainly appear, that it was
not intended that the Receivers or Succourers after the Fact should have been
within this Law, but only the Abettors before and at the Fact.

Lecture III.
THis Lecture is of Petty Treason, and Petty Treasons does very little differ
from Felonies; for by the pardon of all Felonies, all Petty Treasons are
pardoned, Stamf. fol. 2. b.
Stam. fol. 2. b. but it has some correspondency with other Treasons; and that
is in respect of the Duty and Obedience that is due to each other; as it is
from the Subjects to the King, so from the Servant to the Master. All Servants,
although they receive no Wages, but only Meat and Drink, are within this Law. A
Servant that is not compellable to serve by this Statute, yet if he does serve,
he is within this Law. And so is a Bailiff of a Manor; for if he kill the Lord
of the Manor, it is Petty Treason within this Law. A Steward of a Court Leet
or Court Baron is not within this Law. A Wife divorced for Adultery, is within
this Law; although a Queen divorced for Adultery be not within this Law, as ye
have heard before.

Ordinaries are of two sorts, Ordinarius loci, Ordinarius Dioces. Ordinarius
leci, Ordinarius Dioces.
and the Superior Ordinaries they are all within this Law, Ordinarius loci, as
that of the Dean of Westminster. Ordinarius Dioces. is the Bishop of the
Diocese, and the Superior Ordinary is the Archbishop; they are all within this
Law, in respect of Obedience that is due to them. A Child killing his Father or
his Mother, he is within this Law, as you heard before, although he he be not
named in it: yet there is a majority of Treason in it more than that of a
Servant, and therefore is within that intent and reason of the Law. And so it
is in Dalton; If one command another to kill his Master, who does it, yet it is
not Treason within this Law, unless he be there present when the Fact is done,
40 Ass. 25.
40 Ass. 25. If a Wife command a Servant to kill her Husband, and he does it;
it is Treason in both within this Law: and so it appears that Abettors and
Partners are within the first Part of this Statute concerning Petty Treasons,
although they are not named. If a Servant goes from his Master, and then kills
him, this is Petty Treason within this Law; for it shall be intended that he
had such an intention to kill him before he departed out of his Service, Bro.
Tit. Treas. 15. 33 Ass. 7.
33 Ass. 7. And so is a Quarrel in Westminster Hall, the Courts sitting, and
then go out of the Hall into the Pallace-yard, and then one strikes the other,
this is punishable with the same punishment, as if he had struck him in the
Hall; for the punishment shall be to the loss of his hand, and the forfeiture
of his goods, and perpetual imprisonment, as it is in Darcies Case, 1 and 2
Eliz. Dyer. 188.
in the 1 and 2 of Eliz. Dyer 188. But some of these Offenses were Treason at
the Common Law, as the Son killing of the Father, 21 E. 3.17. 21 E. 3.17.
and of a Maidservant killing her Mistress, 21 Ass. 30. 21 Ass. 30.
If a Servant kill his Mistress, this is Petty Treason within this Law, and yet
she is not named, but is to be intended upon the same reason with his Master,
and the Obedience is due to the one as well as the other, 19 H. 6.37.
19 H. 6.37

Treason ought to be fully proved, as it appears by the words of the Statute,
and that is to be by two Witnesses, for the proving of every Treason. And the
Statute of 1 E. 1 E. 6.
6. is not repealed, as to this Point, by the Statute of Phil. and Mar. but only
the Trials in the Counties, and not concerning Witnesses, as by that Statute
more at large appears. And in the 14 of Eliz. in the Lord Lumley's Case, 14
Eliz. Lumley's Case.
it was agreed; that the Statute 1 E 6. was not reversed by the old Statute.
The Trial of Lords of Parliament ought to be per Pares; but in some Cases he
shall not have his Trial per Pares, 13 H. 8.11, 12. Bro. Tit. Treas. 29, 33.
as in an Appeal, but in an Indictment he shall, and the Indictment shall be
received into Parliament, because an Indictment is the Kings Suit; and the
Statute of Magna Charta is nec fuper eum ibimus, nec super eum mittimus, and
this is to be intended in the Kings suit, 10 E. 4. b.
10 E. 4. b.

But a Lord may refuse his Trial per Pares, if he will, as it was adjudged 1
Phil. and Mar. Bro. in the L. Gray's Case; 1 Phil. and Mar. Bro. Lord Grays
Case 13 Jac.
but in the Lord of Castlehaven's Case it was held the contrary, If a man be
killed in Rebellion, he shall forfeit his Lands, and is a Traitor: but there
ought to be an Inquisition taken of him, and that shall be a sufficient Trial.
As the Case in 13 Jac. Br. If a man do cast himself into the Water, and never
is found after; yet if it be presented by the Justice of Peace, this is
sufficient to make him forfeit his Goods.

As for those Treasons which are not here declared, the Judges Authority takes
Indictments of them, but they ought not to be proceeded against to Judgment;
for nothing is to be done in point of Judgment in such a Case, till it be
adjudged and declared in Parliament. And all other Treasons that are not here
declared, ought to be Felonies at the least, because Felonies were made
Treasons before the Stattute; and because the words of the Statute are, that it
ought to be Treason or Felony: but if it be but once declared in Parliament,
unless there be a Proviso that the Judges shall not proceed upon the like
Cases, they may afterward proceed by force of this Statute.

There are Treasons at the Common Law, notwithstanding the Stat. of 1 Mar. for
that did take away those Treasons, and Declarations of Treasons that were made
in Parliaments from the time of our Statute, to 1 Mar. but does not take away
the declarative Power in our Statute mentioned, nor the Common Law, but they do
remain still as before.

FINIS.
CASES OF TREASON.
CHAP. I.
WHERE a man does compass or imagine the Death of the King, the King's Wife,
the King's eldest Son, and Heir apparent, if it appear by any overt act, it is
Treason.

Where a man does violate the King's Wife, the King's eldest Daughtter,
unmarried, the Wife of the King's eldest Son, and Heir apparent, it is Treason.

Where a man does levy War against the King in the Realm, it is Treason.

Where a man is adherent to the King's Enemies, giving them aid and comfort, it
is Treason.

Where a man counterfeiteth the King's Great Seal, Privy Signet, Sign Manual,
it is Treason: likewise his Money.

Where a man brings into this Realm false money, counterfeited to the
likeness of English, with intent to merchandise or make payment thereof, and
knowing it to be false money, it is Treason.

Where a man counterfeiteth any Coin current in payment within this Realm, it
is Treason.

Where a man does bring in any money, being current within the Realm, the same
being false and counterfeit, with intent to utter it, and knowing the same to
be false, it is Treason.

Where a man does clip, waste, round, or file any of the King's money, or any
Foreign Coin, current by Proclamation, for gainsake, it is Treason.

Where a man does any way impair, diminish, falsify, skale, or lighten money,
current by Proclamation, it is Treason.

Where a man kills the Chancellor, the Treasurer, the King's Justices in
Eire, the King's Justices of Assizes, the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, being
in their several Places and doing their Offices, it is Treason.

Where a man procures or consents to Treason, it is Treason.

Where a man does persuade or withdraw any of the Kings Subjects from his
obedience, or from the Religion by his Majesty established, with intent to
withdraw any from the Kings obedience, it is Treason.

Where a man is absolved, reconciled, or withdrawn from his obedience to the
King, or promises obedience to any Foreign Power, it is Treason.

Where any Jesuit, or any other Priest, ordained since the first year of the
Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, shall come into, or remain in any part of this Realm,
it is Treason.

Where any Person, being brought up in a College of Jusuits, or Seminaries,
shall not return within six months after Proclamation made, and within two
days after his return, submit himself to take the Oath of Supremacy; if
otherwise he do return, and not within six months after Proclamation made, it
is Treason.

Where a man, committed for Treason, does voluntarily break Prison, it is
Treason.

Where a Jailer does voluntarily permit a man committed for Treason, to escape,
it is Treason.

Where a man relieveth or comfort a Traitor, and knows of the Offense, it
is Treason.

Where a man does affirm or maintain any Authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual,
or does put in ure or execute any thing for the advancement of setting forth
thereof, the third time, it is Treason.

Where a man refuses to take the Oath of Supremacy, being tendered by the
Bishop of the Diocese, if he be any Ecclesiastical Person; or by Commission out
of the Chancery, if he be a temporal Person; such Offense the second time is
Treason.

CHAP. II. The Punishment, Trial, and Proceeding in Cases of Treason.
IN Treason, the Corporal Punishment is, by drawing on an hurdle from the place
of the Prison to the place of Execution, by hanging and being cut down alive,
bowelling, and quartering, and in Women burning.

In Treason there ensues a corruption of blood in the Line ascending and
descending.

In Treason, Lands and Goods are forfeited, and Inheritance, as well intailed
as Fee-simple, and the profits of Estates for Life.

In Treason, the Escheats go to the King, and not to the Lord of the Fee.

In Treason, the Land forfeited shall be in the Kings actual possession,
without Office.

In Treason there be no Accessaries, but all are Principals.

In Treason no Sanctuary, nor benefit of Clergy, or peremptory Challenge is
allowed.

In Treason, if the Party stand mute, yet nevertheless Judgment and Attainder
shall proceed all one as upon Verdict.

In Treason no Counsel is to be allowed, nor Bail permitted to the Party.

In Treason no Witnesses shall be received upon Oath for the Parties
Justification.

In Treason, if the Fact be committed beyond the Seas, yet it may be tried in
any County where the King will award his Commission.

In Treason, if the Party be non sanae memoriae, yet if he had formerly
confessed it before the Kings Council, and that it be certified that he was of
good Memory at the time of his Examination and Confession, the Court may
proceed to do Judgment without calling or arraigning the Party.

In Treason, the death of the Party before Conviction, discharges all
Proceedings and Forfeitures.

In Treason, if the Parties be once acquitted, he should not be brought in
question again for the same Fact.

In Treason, no new Case, not expressed in the Statute of 25 E. 3. or made
Treason by any special Statute since, ought to be judged Treason, without
consulting with the Parliament.

In Treason, there can be no Prosecution but at the King's suit, and the Kings
Pardon discharges.

In Treason, the King cannot grant over to any Subject Power and Authority to
pardon it.

In Treason, a Trial of a Peer of the Kingdom is to be by special Commission
before the Lord high Steward, and those that pass upon him to be none but
Peers: The Proceeding is with great Solemnity, the Lord Steward sitting under a
cloth of Estate, with a white rod of Justice in his hand, and the Peers may
conferr together, but are not any ways shut up; and are demanded by the Lord
Steward their Voices one by one, and the plurality of Voices carries it.

In Treason, it has been an ancient Use and Favor from the Kings of this
Realm, to pardon the Execution of hanging, drawing, and quartering; and to make
Warrant for their beheading.

The Proceeding in case of Treason, with a common Subject, is in the Kings
Bench, or by Commission of Oyer and Terminer.

CHAP. III. Cases of Misprision of Treason.
WHere a man concealeth high Treason only, without any consorting or abetting,
it is misprision of Treason.

Where a man counterfeiteth any Foreign Coin of Gold or Silver, not current in
this Realm, it is misprision of Treason.

Where a man fixes an old Seal to a new Patent, it is misprision of Treason.

CHAP. IIII. The Punishment, Trial and Proceeding in cases of misprision of
Treason.
THE Punishment of Misprision of Treason, is by perpetual Imprisonment, loss of
the Issues and Profits of their Lands during Life, and loss of goods and
Chattels.

The Proceeding and Trial is, as in cases of High Treason.

In misprision of Treason Bail is not admitted.

CHAP. V. Cases of Petty Treason.
WHere a Servant kills his Master, the Wife the Husband, the Spritual man his
Prelate, to whom he is subordinate, and owes Faith and Obedience, it is petty
Treason.

Where a Son kills the Father or Mother, it has been questioned whether it
be petie Treason, and the late experience and opinion seems to sway to the
contrary, tho against Law and Reason in my judgment.

Where a Servant kills his or her Master or Mistress, after they are out of
Service, it is petie Treason.

CHAP. VI. The Punishment, Trial and Proceedings in cases of Petie Treason.
IN Petie Treason, the Corporal Punishment is by drawing on an hurdle, and
hanging, and in a Woman burning.

In petie Treason, the Forfeiture is the same with the Case of Felony.

In petie Treason, all Accessaries are but in case of Felony.

CHAP. VII. Cases of Felony.
WHere a man commits Murder or Homicide, of Malice prepensed, it is Felony.

Where a man commits Murder (that is) breaking of an House with an intent to
commit Felony, it is Felony.

Where a man commits manslaughter, that is Homicide of sudden heat, and not
of Malice prepensed, it is Felony.

Where a man rides armed with a felonious intent, it is Felony.

Where a man does maliciously and feloniously burn any man's house, it is
Felony.

Where a man does maliciously, etc. burn corn upon the ground, or in stack, it
is Felony.

Where a man does maliciously cut out another man's Tongue, or put out his
Eyes, it is Felony.

Where a man robs or steals, viz. takes away another man's Goods, above
the value of 12 d. out of his possession, with intent to conceal it, it is
Felony.

Where a man imbezelleth and withdraws any of the King's Records at
Westminster, whereby a Judgment is reversed, it is Felony.

Where a man, having the custody of the King's Armor, Munition, or other
Abiliments of War, does maliciously convey away the same, it is Felony, if it
be to the value of twenty shillings.

Where a Servant has Goods of his Masters delivered unto him, and goes away
with them, it is Felony.

Where a man conjures, or invokes wicked Spirits, it is Felony.

Where a man does use or practice VVitchcraft, whereby any Person shall be
killed, wasted, or lamed, it is Felony.

Where a man practices any VVitchcraft, to discover Treasure hid, or to
discover stolen goods, or to provoke unlawful Love, or to impair or hurt any
man's Cattle or Goods, the second time, having been once before convicted of
like offense, it is Felony.

Where a man uses the craft of multiplication of Gold or Silver, it is Felony.

Where a man receives a Seminary Priest, knowing him to be such a Priest, it
is Felony.

Where a man takes away a Woman against her Will, not claiming her as his
Ward or Bondwoman, it is Felony.

Where a man or woman marries again, his or her former Husband or Wife being
alive, it is Felony.

Where a man commits Buggery with man or Beast, it is Felony.

Where any Persons, above the number of twelve, shall assemble themselves with
intent to put down Enclosures, or bring down prices of Victuals, etc. and do
not depart after Proclamation, it is Felony.

Where a man shall use any words to encourage or draw any People together, ut
supra, and they do assemble accordingly, and do not depart after Proclamation,
it is Felony.

Where a man, being the King's sworn Servant, conspireth to murder any Lord of
the Realm, or any Privy Councellor, it is Felony.

Where a Soldier has taken any parcel of the King's wages, and departs
without License, it is Felony.

Where a Recusant, which is a Seducer, and Perswader, and Enticer of the King's
Subjects against the King's authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, or a perswader
of Conventicles, or shall refuse to abjure the Realm, it is Felony.

Where Vagabonds be found in the Realm, calling themselves Egyptians, it is
Felony.

Where a Purveyor does take without Warrant, or otherwise does offend against
certain special Laws, it is Felony.

Where a man hunts in any Forest, Park, or Warren, by night or by day, with
Vizard or other disguisements, and is examined thereof, and concealeth his
Fact, it is Felony.

Where one steals certain kind of Hawks, it is Felony.

Where a man commits Forgery the second time, having been once before
convicted, it is Felony.

Where a man transporteth Rams, or other sheep out of the Kings Dominions, the
2d time, it is Felony.

Where a man being imprisoned for felony, breaks Prison, it is Felony.

Where a man procures, or consents to Felony to be done, it is Felony, as
to make him accessory before the Fact.

Where a man receives or relieveth a Felon, it is Felony, as to make him
accessory after the Fact.

Where a Woman, by the constraint of her Husband, in his presence, joyneth
with him in committing of Felony, it is not Felony in her, neither as Principal
nor as Accessory.

Homicide, or the killing of a man, is to be considered in four kinds.

Chance-medley. Se defendendo. Manslaughter. Wilful Murder.
CHAP. VIII. The Punishment, Trial, and Proceedings in Cases of Felony.
IN Felony, the corporal Punishment is hanging, and it is doubtful whether the
King may turn it into beheading, in case of a Peer, or other Person of Dignity,
because in Treason, the striking off the Head is part of the Judgment, and so
the King pardons the rest: but in Felony, it is no part of the Judgment, and
the King cannot alter the execution of Law; yet Presidents have been both
ways: If it be upon Indictment, the King may, but upon an Appeal he cannot.

In Felony there follows corruption of Blood, except it be in cases made
Felony by special Statutes, with a Proviso, that there shall be no corruption
of blood.

In Felony, Lands in Fee simple, and goods and Chattels are forfeited, and the
profits of Estates for Life are likewise forfeited, but not Lands intailed: and
by some Customs, Lands in see simple are not so forfeited; The Father to the
Bough,
The Son to the Plough,
as in Gavel-kind in Kent, and other places.

In Felony, the Escheats go to the Lord of the Fee, and not to the King, except
he be Lord: But profits for the Estates for Lives, or in Tail, during the Life
of Tenant in Tail, go to the King; And the King has likewise annum, and diem,
and vastum.

In Felony, Lands are not in the King, before Office, nor in the Lord, before
Entry or Recovery in a Writ of Escheat, or Death of the Party attainted.

In Felony, there can be no proceeding with the Accessory, before there be a
proceeding with the Principal: If he dye, or plead his Pardon, or have his
Clergy before Attainder, the Accessory can never be dealt with.

In Felony, if the Party stand mute, and will not put himself upon Trial, or
challenge peremptorily above that the Law allows, he shall have Judgment, not
of hanging, but of penance, of pressing to death; but there he saves his Lands,
and forfeits only his Goods.

In Felony, at the Common Law, the benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary was allowed;
but now by Stat. it is taken away in most cases.

In Felony, Bail may be admitted where the Fact is not notorious, and the
Person not of ill name.

In Felony, no Council is to be allowed to the Party, no more than in Treason.

In Felony, if the fact be committed beyond the Seas, or upon the Seas, super
altum mare, there is no Trial at all in one case, nor by course of Jury in the
other, but by the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.

In Felony, no witness shall be received upon Oath for the Parties
Justification, no more than in Treason.

In felony, if the Party be non sanae memoriae, although it be after the fact,
he cannot be tried nor adjudged, except it be in course of Outlawry, and that
is also erroneous.

In felony, the Death of the Party before Conviction, discharges all
Proceedings and Forfeitures.

In felony, if the Party be once acquit, or in peril of Judgment of Life,
lawfully he shall never be brought in question again for the same fact.

In felony, the prosecution may be either at the King's Suit, or by way of
Appeal; the Defendent shall have his course, and produce Witnesses upon Oath,
as in Civil Causes.

In Felony, the King may grant hault Justice to a Subject, with the Regality of
Power to pardon it.

In Felony, the Trial of Peers is all one, as in case of Treason.

In Felony, the Proceedings are in the King's Bench, or before Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, or of Jail-delivery, and, in some case, before Justices of
the Peace.

CHAP. IX. Cases of Felony, de se, with the Punishment, Trial, and Proceedings.
IN the Civil Law, and other Laws, they make a difference of Cases of Felony de
se; for where a man is called in question upon any capital Crime, and kills
himself to prevent the Law, there they give the Judgment in all points of
forfeiture, as if they had been attainted in their Lifetime: And, on the other
side, where a man kills himself upon impatience of Sickness, or the like,
they do not punish it at all: but the Law of England takes it all in one
degree, and punishes only with loss of Goods, to be forfeited to the King,
who generally grants them to his Almoner, where they be not sormerly granted
unto special Liberties.

CHAP. X. Cases of Praemunire.
WHere a man purchases, or accepts any provision, that is, collation of any
Spiritual Benefice or Living from the Sea of Rome, it is Praemunire.

Where a man shall purchase any Process to draw any People of the Kings
Allegiance out of the Realm, in plea whereof the cognizance pertains to the
Kings Court, and comes not in Person to answer his contempt in that behalf,
before the King and his Council, or in his Chancery, it is Praemunire.

Where a man does sue in any Court which is not the King's Court, to defeat or
impeach any Judgment given in the Kings Court, and does not appear to answer
his Contempt, it is Praemunire.

Where a man does purchase, or pursue in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, any
Process, Sentence of Excommunication, Bull, or Instrument, or any other thing
which touches the King in his Regality, or his Realm, in prejudice, it is
Praemunire.

Where a man does affirm or maintain any Foreign kind of Jurisdiction
Spiritual, or does put in ure or execution any thing for the advancement or
setting forth thereof; such Offense the second time committed, is Praemunire.

Where a man refuses to take the Oath of Supremacy, being tendered by the
Bishop of the Diocese, if it be an Ecclesiastical Person; or by a Commission
out of the Chancery, if he be a Temporal Person, it is praemunire.

Where a Dean and Chapter of any Church upon the Conge de Lier of an Archbishop
or Bishop, does refuse to elect any such Archbishop or Bishop, as is nominated
unto them in the Kings Letters missive, it is Praemunire.

Where a man does contribute, or give relief to any Jesuit or Seminary Priests,
or to any Person brought up therein, and called home, and not returning, it is
case of Praemunire.

Where a man is a Broker of an usurious contract above ten in the hundred, it
is Praemunire.

CHAP. XI. The Punishment, Trial, and Proceeding in Cases of Praemunire.
THe Punishment is by Imprisonment during Life, forfeiture of Goods, forfeiture
of Lands in fee simple, and forfeiture of the profits of Lands Intailed, or for
Life.

The Trial and Proceeding is as in cases of Misprision of Treason, and the
Trial is by Peers, where a Peer of the Realm is the Offender.

Striking any man in the face of the King's Courts, is forfeiture of Lands,
perpetual Imprisonment, and loss of that hand.

CHAP. XII. Cases of Abjuration and Exile, and the Proceedings therein.
WHere a man commits any Felony, for the which at this day he may have
privilege of Sanctuary, and confesses the Felony before the Coroner, he shall
abjure the Liberty of the Real, and choose his Sanctuary; and if he commit any
new offense, or leave his Sanctuary, he shall lose the Privilege thereof, and
suffer as if he had not taken Sanctuary.

Where a man not coming to the Church, and being a Popish Recusant, does
persuade any the Kings Subjects to impugn his Majesty's Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, or shall persuade any Subject to come to any unlawful
Conventicles, and shall not after conform himself within a time, and make his
submission, he shall abjure the Realm, and forfeit his Goods and Lands during
Life; and if he depart not within the time prefixed, or return, he shall be in
the degree of a Felon.

Where a man, being a Popish Recusant, and not having Lands to the value of 20
Marks per annum, nor goods to the value of 40 l. shall not repair to his
dwelling, or place where he was born, and there confine himself within the
compass of five miles, he shall abjure the Realm; and if he return, he shall be
in case of a Felon.

Where a man kills the King's Deer in Chases or Forests, and can find no
Sureties after a years Imprisonment, he shall abjure the Realm.

Where a man is a Trespasser in Parks, or in Ponds of fish, and after three
years Imprisonment cannot find Sureties, he shall abjure the Realm.

Where a man is a Ravisher of any Child, whose Marriage belongs to any Person,
and marries the said Child after years of consent, and is not able to satisfy
for the Marriage, he shall abjure the Realm.

CHAP. XIII. Cases of Heresy, and the Trial and Proceedings therein.
THE Declaration of Heresy, and likewise the Proceedings and Judgment upon
Heretics, is, by the Common Laws of this Realm, referred to the Jurisdiction
Ecclefiastical, and the Secular Arm is reached to them by the Common Laws, and
not by any Statute for execution of them by the Kings Writ de Haeretico
comburendo.

CHAP. XIV. The Kings Prerogative in Parliament.
THE King has an absolute negative Voice to all Bills that pass the
Parliament, so as without his Royal Assent they have a mere nullity, and not so
much as Authoritas praescripta, or Senatus consulta had, notwithstanding the
Intercession of Tribunes.

The King may summon Parliaments, dissolve them, prorogue them, and adjourn
them at his Pleasure.

The King may add Voices in the Parliament at his Pleasure, for he may give
Privilege to Borough Towns as many as he will, and may likewise call and
create Barons at his pleasure.

No man can sit in Parliament except he take the Oath of Allegiance.

CHAP. XV. The Kings Prerogative in matters of War or Peace.
THE King has power to declare and proclaim War, and to make and conclude
Peace and Truce at his pleasure.

The King has power to make Leagues and Confederacies with Foreign States,
more straight and less straight, and to revoke and disannull them at his
pleasure.

The King has power to command the Bodies of his Subjects for the service of
his Wars, and to muster, train, and levy men, and to transport them by Sea or
Land at his pleasure.

The King has power in time of War to execute Marshal Law, and to appoint all
Officers of War at his pleasure.

The King has power to grant his Letters of Mart and Reprisal for remedy to
his Subjects upon foreign wrongs at his pleasure.

The King has power to declare Laws by his Letters Patents for the government
of any place conquered by Arms, at his pleasure.

The King may give Knighthood, and thereby mable any Subject to perform
Knights Service at his pleasure.

CHAP. XVI. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Moneys.
THE King may alter his Standard in baseness or fineness of his Coin, at his
pleasure.

The King may alter his stamp in form at his pleasure.

The King may alter the valuations of his Coin, and raise and fall Moneys at
his pleasure.

The King by his Proclamation may make Moneys of his own current, or not
current, at his pleasure.

The King may take or refuse the Subjects Bullion, and Coin, more or less money.

The King by his Proclamation may make Fereign money current, or not current.

CHAP. XVII. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Trade and Traffic.
THE King may constrain the Person of any of his Subjects not to go out of the
Realm at all.

The King may restrain any of his Subjects to go out of the Realm into any
special Part foreign.

The King may forbid the exportation of any Commodities out of the Realm.

The King may forbid the importation of any Commodities into the Realm.

The King may set a reasonable Impost upon any Foreign Wares that come into the
Realm, and so of Native Wares that go out of the Realm.

CHAP. XVIII. The Kings Prerogative in the Persons of his Subjects.
THE King may create any Corporation or Body Politic, and enable them to
purchase, and grant, and to sue, and be sued, and that with such restrictions
and modifications as he pleases.

The King may denizen and enable any Foreigner for him and his Descendents
after the Charter, though he cannot naturalize nor enable him to make pedigree
from Ancestors Paramount.

The King may enable any attainted Person (by his Charter of Pardon) to
purchase and to purge his Blood for the time to come, though he cannot restore
his Blood for the time past.

The King may enable any dead Person in Law, as men professed, to take and
purchase to the King's Benefit.

CHAP. XIX. An Answer to the Question proposed by Sir Alexander Hay Knight,
touching the Office of Constables.
TO the first; Of the Original of the Authority of Constables, it may be said,
Caput inter nublia condit, for the Authority was granted upon the Ancient Laws
and Customs of this Kingdom, practiced long before the Conquest, and intended
and instituted for the conservation of the Peace, and repressing all manner of
disturbance and hurt of the People, and that as well by way of prevention as
punishment; but yet so, as they have no Judicial power, to hear and determine
any cause, but only a Ministerial power, as in the answer of the seventh
Article more at large is set down.

As for the Office of the High Constable, the original of that is yet more
obscure; for though the High Constables Authority has the more ample Circuit,
he being over the hundred, and the pety Constable over the Village; yet I do
not find that the pety Constable is subordinate to the High Constable, or to be
ordered or commanded by him: and therefore, I doubt, the High Constable was not
ab origin, but that when the business of the Country increased, the Authority
of the Justices of Peace was enlarged by diverse Statutes; then, for convenience
sake, the Office of High Constables grew in use for the receiving of the
Commands and Precepts from the Justices of Peace, and distributing them to the
petie Constables; and in token of this, the Election of High Constables in most
parts of the Kingdom is by the appointment of the Justices of Peace, whereas
the election of the pety Constable is by the People.

But there be two things unto which the Office of Constable has special
reference, and which of necessity, or at least a kind of congruity, must
precede the Jurisdiction of that Office, either the things themselves, or
somewhat that has a similitude or analogy toward them.

1. The one is the division of the Territory, or gross of the Shires into
Hundreds, Villages, and Towns; for the High Constable is Officer over the
Hundred, and the pety Constable is over the Town or Village.

2. The other is the Court Leet, unto which the Constable is a proper Attendant
and Minister, for there the Constables are chosen by the Jury, there they are
sworn, and there that part of their Office which concerns Information, is
principally to be performed; for the Jury is to present Offenses, and the
Offenders are chiefly to take light from the Constables, of all matters of
Disturbance and Nuisance of the People, which they (in respect of their Office)
are presumed to have best and most particular knowledge of.

CHAP XX. Three ends of the Institution of the Court Leet.
1. THe first end of the Institution of the Court Leet is, To take the Oath of
Allegiance of all Males above the Age of twelve years.

2. The second, To enquire of all offenses against the peace; and for those
that are against the Crown and Peace both, to enquire of only, and certify to
the Justices of Goal Delivery; but those that are against the peace simply,
they are to enquire and punish.

3. The third is, To enquire of, punish, and remove all public Nusances and
grievances, concerning Infection of Air, corruption of Victuals, ease of
chaffer, and contract, of all other things that may hurt or grieve the people
in general, in their health, quiet, and welfare.

And to these three ends, as matters of policy subordinate, the Court Leet has
power to call upon the pledges that are to be taken for the good behavior of
the Residents that are not Tenants, and to enquire of all Defaults of Officers,
as Constables, Ale-tasters, etc. and for choice of Constables, as aforesaid.

The Jurisdiction of these Leets is ever remaining in the King, and in that
case exercised by the Sheriff in his turn, which is the grand Leet granted over
to Subjects; but yet it is still the Kings Court.

2. To the second, as was said, The Election of the pety Constable is at the
Court Leet, by the Inquest that makes the Presentiments; the Election of the
Head Constables is by the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions.

3. To the third, The Office is annual, except they be removed.

4. To the fourth, They be men (as it is now used) of inferior, yea, of base
condition, which is a mere abuse or degenerating from the first Institution;
for the pety Constables in Towns ought to be of the better sort of Resiants in
the said Town, save that they ought not to be Aged, or sickly, but men of able
Bodies, in respect of keeping Watch, and toil of their place, neither ought
they to be in any man's Livery: And the High Constables ought to be of the
ablest sort of Freeholders, and of the substantiallest sort of Yeomen, next to
the degree of Gentlemen; but they ought to be such as are not encumbered with
any other Office, as Mayor, Undersheriff, Bailiff, etc.

5. To the fifth, They have no allowance, but are bound by Duty to perform
their Offices gratis, which may the rather be endured, because it is but
Annual, and they are not tied to keep or maintain any Servants, or
under-ministers, for that every one of the King's People are bound to assist
them.

6. To the sixth; Upon complaint made (of his refusal) to any one Justice of
Peace, the said Justice may bind him over to the Sessions, where (if he cannot
excuse himself by some just allegation) he may be fined and imprisoned for his
Contempt.

7. To the seventh, The Authority of Constables, as it is substantive, and of
it self, or substituted and astricted to the Warrants and Commands of the
Justices of Peace; so again, it is Original or Additional; for either it was
given them by the Common Law, or else annexed by diverse Statutes. And as for
subordinate Power, wherein the Constable is only to execute the Commandments
of the Justices of Peace, and likewise the additional power which is given by
diverse Statutes, it is hard to comprehend them in any brevity; For that they do
correspond to the Office and Authority of the Justices of Peace, which is very
large, and are created by the branches of several Statutes, which are things of
diverse and dispersed natures: But for the original and substantive Power of a
Constable, it may be reduced to three heads.

1. For matter of Peace only. 2. For matter of Peace and the Crown. 3. For
matter of Nuisance, Disturbance, and Disorder, although they be not accompanied
with violence and breach of Peace.
For pacifying of Quarrels begun, the Constables may, upon hot words given, or
likelihood of breach of peace to ensue, command them in the Kings name to keep
the Peace, and to depart, and forbear: and so he may where an Affray is made,
part the same, and keep the Parties asunder, and arrest, and commit the
Breakers of the Peace, if they will not obey, and call Power to assist him for
the same purpose.

For punishment of breach of Peace past, the Law is very sparing in giving any
Authority to Constables, because he has no power judicial, and the Use of his
Office is rather for preventing or staying of Mischief, than for punishing of
Offenses; for in that part he is rather to execute the Warrants of the
Justices, or when suddden matter arises upon his view, or notorious
circumstances, to apprehend Offenders, and carry them before the Justice of
Peace, and generally to imprison in like cases of necessity, where the case
will not endure the present carrying before the Justices. And thus much for the
matters of Peace.

For matters of the Crown, the Office of the Constable consists chiefly in
four parts.

1. The first is Arrest. 2. The second is Search. 3. The third is Hue and Cry.
4. And the 4th is Seizure of goods.
All which the Constable may perform of his own Authority, without any Warrant
of the Justices of Peace.

1. For first, If any man will lay Murder or Felony to another's charge, or do
suspect him of Murder or Felony, he may declare it to the Constable, and the
Constable ought, upon such Declaration or Complaint, carry him before a
Justice, and if by common voice or Fame any man be suspected, the Constable, of
Duty, ought to arrest him, and bring him before a Justice, though there be no
other accusation.

2. If any house be suspected for the receiving or harboring of any Felon, the
Constable, upon complaint, or common fame, may search.

3. If any fly upon the Felony, the Constable ought to raise Hue and Cry, and
search for his goods, and keep them safe without impairing, and to inventary
them in the presence of honest neighbors.

4. For matters of common Nuisance and grievance, they are of a very variable
nature, according to the several comforts which man's Life and Society
requires, and the contraries which infest the same.

In all which, be it matter of corrupting Air, Water, or Victuals, or stopping,
straitning, or indangering passage, or general deceits in Weights, Measures,
Sizes, or counterfeiting Wares, and things vendible; the Office of the
Constable is to give (as much as in him lies) Information of them, and of the
offenders in Leets, that they may be presented. But because Leets are kept but
twice in the year, and many of these things require present or speedy remedy,
the Constable, in things of notorious and vulgar nature, ought to forbid and
repress them in the mean time.

8. To the eighth, They are for their Contempt to be fined and imprisoned by
the Justices in their Sessions.

9. To the ninth: The Oath they take is in this manner.

YOU shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve the King, and the Lord of
this Law-day; and you shall cause the Peace of our Lord the King to be well and
duly kept, to your power: And you shall arrest all those that you see
committing Riots, Debates, and Affrayes in breach of Peace: And you shall well
and duly endeavor your self to your best knowledge, that the Statutes of
Winchester for Watch, Huy and Cry, and the Statutes made for the punishment of
sturdy Beggars, Vagabonds, Rogues, and other idle Persons, coming within your
Office, be truly executed, and the Offenders punished; And you shall endeavor,
upon complaint made, to apprehend Barreters and riotous Persons, making
Affrays, and likewise to apprehend Felons; and if any of of them make
resistance with force, and multitude of mis-doers, you shall make Outcry, and
pursue them till they be taken; and shall look unto such Persons as use
unlawful Games; and you shall have regard unto the maintenance of Artillery;
And you shall well and duly execute all Process and Precepts sent unto you
from the Justices of Peace of the County; and you shall make good and faithful
presentiments of all Blood-sheds, Outcries, Affrays, and Rescues made within
your Office; and you shall well and duly, according to your Power and
knowledge, do that which belongs to your Office of Constable, to do for this
year to come. So help etc. 10. To the tenth, The Authority is the same in
substance, differing only in extent; The pety Constable serving only for for
one Town, Parish, or Borough, the Head Constable serving for the whole Hundred;
Neither is the petty Constable subordinate to the Head Constable for any
commandment that proceeds from his own Authority, but it is used, that the
Precepts of the Justices be delivered unto the High Constables, who being few
in number, may better attend the Justices, and then the Head Constables by
virtue thereof, make their Precepts over to the petty Constables.

11. To the eleventh, In case of necessity he may appoint a Deputy, or in
default thereof, the Steward of the Court Leet may; which Deputy ought to be
sworn.

Now to conclude, the Office of Constables consists wholly in these three
things; viz.

Their Office concerning 1. The conservation of the Peace. 2. The serving the
Precepts and Warrants of the Justices. 3. Their attendance for the execution of
Statutes.


CHAP. XXI. Of the Jurisdiction of Justices Itinerantes in the Principality of
Wales.
THese Justices have power to hear and determine all criminal Causes, which are
called, in the Laws of England, The Pleas of the Crown; and herein they have
the same Jurisdiction that the Justices have in his Majesty's Bench, commonly
called the Kings Bench.

They have Jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil Causes, which are
called in the Laws of England, Common Pleas; and do take knowledgement of all
Fines, levied of Lands or Hereditaments, without suing out any Dedimus
potestatem; and herein they have the same Jurisdiction that the Justices of the
Common Pleas do execute at Westminster.

Also they may hear and determine all Assizes upon Disseisins of Lands or
Hereditaments, wherein they equal the Jurisdiction of the Justices of the
Assize.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer may hear and determine all notable Violences and
Outrages perpetrated or done within their several Precincts of the Principality
of Wales.

In the Kings Gift are,
1. The Prothonotory, his Office is to draw all Pleadings, and to enter and
engross all Records and Judgments in civil Causes. 2. The Clerk of the Crown,
his Office is to draw and engross all Proceedings, Arraignments, and Judgments
in criminal causes.
In the disposing of the Judge.
1. The Marshal, whose Office is to attend the Persons of the Judges at their
coming, sitting, and going from the Sessions or Court. 2. The Crier, He is,
tanquam publicus Praeco, to call forth such Persons whose appearances are
necessary, and to impose silence to the People.
There is a Commission under the great Seal of England, to certain Gentlemen,
giving them power to preserve the Peace, and to resist and punish all turbulent
Persons, whose misdemeanors may tend to the disquiet of the People; and these
be called the Justices of the Peace, and every of them may well and truly be
called and termed Eirenarcha.

The chief of them is called Cusos Rotulorum, in whose custody all the Records
of their Proceedings are resident.

Others there are of that number called Justices of Peace and Quorum, because
in their Commission they have power to sit and determine Causes concerning
breach of Peace, and misbehaviour; the words of their Commission are conceived
thus, Quorum, such and such, unum vel duos, etc. esse volumus; and without some
one or more of them of the Quorum, no Sessions can be holden: And for the
avoiding of a superfluous number of such Justices (for through the Ambition of
many, it is counted a credit to be burdened with that Authority) the Statute
of 38 Hen. 8. has expressly prohibited, that there shall be but eight Justices
of Peace in every County. These Justices, being appointed by the Lord Keeper,
do hold their Sessions quarterly.

In every Shire, where the Commission of the Peace is established, there is a
Clerk of the Peace, for the Entering and Engrossing of all Proceedings before
the said Justices. And this Officer is appointed by the Custos Rotulorum.

Every Shire has its Sheriff, which word being of the Saxon English, is as
much to say, as Shire Reeve, or Minister of the County: His Function or Office
is twofold.

1. Ministerial. 2. Judicial.
As touching his Ministerial Office, he is the Minister and Executioner of all
the Process and Precepts of the Courts of Law, and thereof ought to make Return
and certificate. 34 H. 8. c. 16.

As touching his Judicial Office, he has Authority to hold two several Courts
of distinct natures: The one called the Turn, because he keeps his turn and
circuit about the Shire, and holds the same Court in several places, wherein
he does enquire of all Offenses perpetrated against the Common Law, and not
forbidden by any Statute, or Act of Parliament; and the Jurisdiction of this
Court is derived from Justice distributive, and is for criminal offenses, and
is held twice every year.

The other is called the County Court, wherein he does determine all petty and
small Causes civil, under forty shillings, arising within the said County, and
thereof it is called the County Court.

The jurisdiction of this Court is derived from Justice Commutative, and is
held every Month: The Office of the Sheriff is annual, and in the Kings gift,
whereof he is to have a Patent. Every Shire has an Officer called an
Escheator, which is an Office to attend the Kings Revenue, and to seize into
his Majesty's hands all Lands, either escheated Goods, or Lands forfeited, and
therefore is called Escheator; And he is to inquire, by good Inquest, of the
death of the King's Tenants, and to whom their Lands are descended, and to
seize their Bodies and Lands for Ward, if they be within age, and is
accountable for the same; and this Officer is named by the Lord Treasurer of
England.

There are in every Shire two other Officers, called Crowners, or Coroners:
they are to enquire by Inquest, in what manner, and by whom every Person dies
of a violent death, and to enter the same of Record, which is matter criminal,
and a Plea of the Crown, and therefore they are called Coroners, or Crowner as
one has written, because their enquiry ought to be public, in corona populi.
34 H. 8.20.

These Officers are chosen by the Freeholders of the Shire, by virtue of a
Writ out of the Chancery, De Coronatore elegendo: And of them I need not to
speak more, because these Officers are in use elsewhere.

Forasmuch as every Shire is divided into Hundreds, it is also by the said
Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 26. ordered, that two sufficient Gentlemen, or Yeomen,
shall be appointed Constables of every Hundred.

Also there is in every Shire one Goal, or Prison, appointed for the restraint
of Liberty of such Persons as for their offenses are thereunto committed, until
they shall be delivered by course of Law.

In every Hundred of every Shire, the Sheriff thereof shall nominate sufficient
Persons to be Bailiffs of that Hundred, and Under-ministers of the Sheriff; and
they are to attend upon the Justices in every of their Courts and Sessions.

THE CONTENTS.
Of the Readings, etc.
LEcture I. Page 3. The Definition of Treason, 5. The first Case, 20. Lecture
II. 41. The Second Case, 49. Lecture III. 62.
The Contents of the Cases of Treason, etc.
CHAP. I. CAses of Treason, Page 73. Chap. II. The Punishment, Trial, and
Proceeding in Cases of Treason, 78. Chap. III. Cases of Misprision of Treason,
83. Chap. IV. The Punishment, Trial, and proceeding in Cases of Misprision of
Treason, ibid. Chap. V. Cases of pety Treason, 84. Chap. VI. The Punishment,
Trial, and proceedings in cases of Pety Treason, 85. Chap. VII. Cases of
Felony, 86. Chap. VIII. The Punishment, Trial, and proceedings in cases of
Felony, 93. Chap. IX. Cases of Felony de se, with the Punishment, Trial and
Proceedings, 98. Chap. X. Cases of Praemunire. 99. Chap. XI. The Punishment,
Trial, and proceeding in Cases of Praemunire, 102. Chap. XII. Cases of
Abjuration and Exile, and the Proceedings therein. 103. Chap. XIII. Cases of
Heresy, and the Trial and Proceedings therein. 106. Chap. XIV. The King's
Prerogative in Parliament, 107. Chap. XV. The Kings Prerogative in matters of
War or Peace. 108. Chap. XVI. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Moneys, 110.
Chap. XVII. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Trade and Traffic. 111. Chap.
XVIII. The Kings Prerogative in the Persons of his Subjects, 112. Chap. XIX. An
Answer to the Question proposed by Sir Alexander Hay, Knight, touching the
Office of Constables, 114. Chap. XX. Three ends of the Institution of the Court
Leet, 118. Chap. XXI. The Jurisdiction of Justices Itinerantes in the
Principality of Wales, Page 132.
FINIS.

