The Faith and Testimony of the Martyrs and suffering Servants of Christ Jesus
persecuted in New England vindicated, against the lies and slanders cast on
them by Nathaniel Morton in his Book entitled New Englands Memorial.
Written for the sake of the honest hearted, by a servant of the living God,
who is a witness of the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, and of his appearance the
second time without sin unto Salvation. Christopher Holder.

A faithful witness will not lie, but a false record will speak lies. Prove.
14.5. they bend their tongues like their bows for lies, but they have no
courage for truth upon the Earth: for they proceed from evil to worse, and they
have not known me, says the Lord Jer: 9.3.
THere is no new thing under the Sun, as it has been always, so it is now he
that is born after the flesh persecuteth him that is born after the Spirit, the
fruits of which we have found plentifully in New England, the beast and false
Prophet has joined together to war with the Lamb and his followers, and the
Dragon has opened his mouth wide to swallow up the woman that is coming up out
of the wilderness, through whom the man child shall be brought forth to rule
the Nations with a rod of Iron.

In the power of which Dragon I have found one Nathaniel Morton, as by the
language which proceeds out of his mouth does plainly appear, in a Book
tituled New Englands Memorial, where in he undertakes to write against an
innocent harmless people whom God has made choice of to bear witness ^o his
Spirit, of God, are led by the spirit of God, and again as many as walk
according to this rule: peace be unto them, and mercy upon the Israel of God,
((...)) this is Christ by whom man became a new creature, as it is ^lea^ by the
fore going words in that Chapter, and how can you own it to be a settled and
permanant rule, when as one of your Majestrates William Collier, by name said
to William Newland, and Ralph Allen, that in Beza's translation there is eight
hundred errors, in the last translation three hundred errors, surely if there
be so many errors in that which ye call your settled and permanent rule, you
had need to have the Spirit of truth to show you wherein the errors are, or
else you will soon e're from the truth, and the rule of life, and salvation.

3dly. Thou say they deny the manhood of Christ, and affirm that as a man
he is not in Heaven.

Ans. As for the word manhood I know not of such a word in the Scriptures, but
if thou mean by manhood the man Christ Jesus, which was conceived of the holy
Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary, who was of the seed of David according to
the flesh, who took on him the seed of Abraham, who was crucified by the Jews,
and rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures, then I utterly deny
what thou say, and do affirm that that Jesus Christ we own, and no other, and
do verily believe through him, and by him to be saved and by no other, knowing
that he only died for our sins, and is risen again for our justification, and
is ascended into the highest Heavens, Angels, principallities and powers, being
subjected unto him, where he is glorified with the same glory that he had with
the father before the world was, who is the express Image of the invisible and
God, the first born of every creature, for by him were all things created both
visible and invisible, and is the head and ^ridegroom of the Church, which he
has purchased unto himself by his blood: this is our faith concerning Christ,
and if your faith is other wise then this, it is contrary unto the faith of
Gods elect, that gave forth the Scriptures, and then your Christ is not the
true Christ, but Antichrist, and you are of them that deny both the Father and
the Son and then your doctrine is damnable, and corrupt, and so that which you
charge others withal, you are guilty of your selves.

4thly. Thou say they deny the Resurrection of the dead.

Ans. This charge also I utterly deny, and do affirm that we believe, that as
in the first Adam all died, so in the second Adam shall all be made alive, and
shall be raised unto life everlasting, or unto condemnation everlasting, and
that all shall receive from the name of the Lord a just reward for their deeds
done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil, else were we
of all men most miserable, if we had only hope in this life, and as the Apostle
says, if the dead arise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead,
and why suffered we imprisonments, whipings, Cuttings, of our ears, and some of
us the loss of our lives, whose blood still lies at the doors of our
persecutors, in New England, herein thou may be a witness of the falseness of
the charge, for if we were such as thou would by thy lies make us to be, we
might say as the Apostle did, it being the consequence of such (...) tenant,
let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye, but our suffering unto death
does testify, that our hope was not only in this life, but that after the
desolution of our House of this Earthly tabernacle, we should have a building
of God, a House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, and it is evident
that they who deny the resurrection cannot with cheerfulness offer up their
lives to the death as our friends did because then the hope of all their
enjoyments are at an end, but our martyred friends being in the same faith as
the ancient worthies were, one of them not accepting deliverance but by
constraint when offered, that she might obtain a better resurrection and
further we can truly say as Paul did in the like case, what did it advantage
him of he had fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, if the
dead he not raised, so can we say, not what does it advantage us, if we have
fought with Beasts at New England after the manner of Men (if the dead rise not)
whom we found more like Wolves, Bears. and devouring Lions, then like Christian
Men, as witness your fore mentioned cruelty on the innocent Lambs of Christ,
whom he sent among you to warn you of the evil of your ways, so by what here is
written, and what we also suffered among you I hope it will manifestly appear
unto all honest hearted people, that not we but you as your practices have
shown do deny the resu^rection: and Nathaniel Morton if thou art as grossly
false in other things in thy Book called New Englands Memorial as in this it is
not worthy to be minded by any, but as the Memorial of the wicked perish.

5thly. Thou say they affirm that an absolute perfection in holiness and
grace is attainable in this life.

Ans. These are thy own words, but this is that we hold, we believe that Christ
is perfect, and that the gift and grace of God is perfect, and that as man is
led and guided by it, he is led to deny all ungodliness and Worldly lusts, and
to live Godly in this present World, and unto this Christ and grace and gift of
God which is perfect do we direct all people, that in him they may believe, and
from him they may receive power, that thereby they may know the Regeneration
and the new birth and so become the Sons of God, and that is the perfect state
which we say is attainable in this life, for that birth cannot sin, it is true
it may be slain or made a sufferer by sin, but it self cannot sin, as John
says, he that is born of God sins not, neither can he sin, because his seed
remains in him, and this is no new thing, nor strange nor damnable doctrine
for this was the end or work of the Ministry, which the Apostles had received
from Christ, for the perfecting the Saints, and that they might present every
man perfect in Christ, also he prayed for them that they might be perfect, and
entire wanting nothing, but this Faith or condition is not soon or easily
attained to, nor by no other means known but as Man comes through the death
with Christ to sin, and is made a live by him to Righteousness, and if you
preach any other doctrine then his, you preach another Gospel then what Paul
preached and so are under the curse which Paul pronounced against them that
preached another Gospel and so in the end you will be found your selves to be a
pernicious sect of Heretics, and not us called Quakers.

6thly, Thou say they placed their Justification upon their patience and
suffering for their opinions, and on their righteous life, and retired
severity, and affected singularity, in the words and Jestures.

Ans. This is a most abominable lie, and a false slander, for which thou must
receive thy reward, among the liars in the Lake except thou repent, for we
place Justification in none but in Christ, nor by no other means are we
justified in the sight of God, but by the Righteousness of Christ, who of God
is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and as
we feel this Righteousness of Christ wrought in us, and we wrought into it, we
feel our selves justified in Christ, and so have peace with God, and to believe
and witness this is no error nor delusion, and to preach it unto others is no
corrupt nor damnable doctrine.

7thly, Thou say as to civil account they used not nor practiced any civil
respect to Man though Superiors either in Majestratical considerations, or as
Masters, or Parents, or the Ancient in word or gesture.

Ans. This is another lie, and false slander, for as for civil respect we allow
it to all Men according to their places, both in word and gesture, as for
Magistrates we respect their commands in doing what is just and right, and in
suffering that which is unjust, not using any means of resistance by carnal
weapons, and as to Masters and Parents, we own subjection and obedience to them
in all things, that do not cross the command and will of God, but as to foolish
jestures and flattering titles, which are in themselves and as commonly they
are used, are uncivil and not civil, but usually done in Hypocricy and vain
glory, and deceit, these things we deny, and cannot give it unto any man, nor
receive it from any man, for in so doing we should be reprooved by our maker,
and of this mind was Elihu, who said, I will not now accept the person of Man;
neither will I give flattering titles to Man, for I may not give titles to man,
least my Maker should take me away suddenly.

8thly. Thou say we deny the use of oaths for the deciding civil
controversies.

Ans. That we do and upon all other accounts whatsoever, and that in obedience
to the command of Christ, who says swear not at all, but let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more, comes of evil,
the Apostle James says, before all things my brethren swear not, neither by
Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your
nay, nay, least you fall into condemnation, and is this corrupt and damnable
doctrine, do not thou condemn thy sel^ in the things that thou allowest
would thou have the Scriptures to be a settled and permanent Rule, and
^^^call the doctrine therein contained, corrupt, pernicious, and damnable,
would thou not have called Christ and the Apostles a pernicious sect and
their doctrine, corrupt and damnable, if thou had been in their days, to that
of God in thee I speak, which shall answer me in the day when the book of
conscience is opened and thou Judged out of it, and rewarded according to thy
work.

9thly, Again thou say this spirit of delusion became very prevalent with
many so as the Number of them increased to the great danger of the subvertion
both of Church and State, notwithstanding the endeavors of them in Authority
to suppress the same, had not the Lord declared against them in blasting their
enterprises and contrivements, so as they have of late withered away in a great
measure; sundry of their teachers and leaders which have caused them to err,
are departed the Country, and we trust the Lord will make the folly of the
remainder manifest more and more.

Ans. I grant that the truth which thou call a delusion became very
prevalent with many and has entered into the hearts of many, and has
prevailed, notwithstanding your Prisons, Whips, and Gallows, or any other, your
carnal Weapons and as it has prospered so it does prosper and shall prosper
notwithstanding all that you can say or do, for the Lord has not declared
against us, neither are we withered a way, but it thou have an eye open, thou
might see the contrary; for the Lord has appeared for us, and given us great
d^minion over you, so that we can pass from all your Jurisdictions without any
molestation, and that we are not withered a way its evident to all men, for our
Meetings are more public and larger then ever they were, and this is brought
to pass and accomplished through the help and power of God, notwithstanding all
your bloody persecuting carnal Weapons; and although some of us according to
the will of God are departed the Country, yet there are enough remaining to
make thy folly manifest unto all men more and more.

Again thou concludes with th^se vows let our deliverance from so great a
danger be received among the principal of the Lords gracious providence
toward New England.

Ans. Alas poor man thou gloryest in that which will be your shame; for I know
not why thou boasts of deliverance, except it be in this, that we come not so
often to your meetings and courts as we were used to do, and if it be so, if
thou rightly understand the cause thereof, it would cause thee to lament and
not rejoice if thou have any tenderness in thee toward God, for in that the
Lord requires us not to visit you as formerly, it plainly signifies that the
day of your visitation is over and that you are left to your selves and given
up to hardness of heart, and blindness of mind as Israel of old was, whom the
Prophet complained of saying why should they be smitten any more they revolt
more and more.

Again as touching Ephraim the Prophet says, Ephraim is joined to Idols let
him alone, and again Christ says of the Pharisees, let them alone, they are
the blind leaders of he blind, and again, he that is filthy let him be filthy
still, so that, it is an evident sign that, that visitation is over, and that
the next thing that can be expected is utter destruction from the hand of the
Lord, and I am jealous, nay I veri^y believe this is the case with many of you
at this day in New England, who have had a hand so deeply in shedding the
Innocent blood of the faithful servants and messengers of the most high, who
loved not their lives to the death that they might finish their testimony in
faithfulness to the Lord among you.

And why Nathaniel did thou not mention in thy Memorials how you have caused
the innocent people called Quakers to suffer by you, and how you have
imprisoned whipped, spoiled their goods cut off their ears, banished, and
hanged them for the breach of no known just Law, either of God or man, surely
it thou had^^ been an impartial Historian, thou would have mentioned this, but
I believe your actions have been so riged and bloody contrary to justice and
equity, Christianity and humanity, that thou art ashamed it should be recorded
for a Memorial for Ages to come, that they might understand how far you are
digressed, from that which ye pretended you came hither for, to wit, liberty of
Conscience, and why did not thou write impartially of things and men as they
were, as they did who writ the Kings and Chronicles, who plainly declared of
men as they were justifying of that which was good, and disowning that which
was evil in them, though they were their Kings, Governors, or Priests but thou
have manifest thy self to write by another spirit then they writ, and have done
quite contrary; crying up men beyond what they were and indeed beyond what your
principle is, its possible for man to be whilst in the body but thou have
manifested thy folly and hypocricy to all men, who knew these men it may be
better then thy self, as for some of them I well know to be men quite contrary
both in life and judgment to what thou have reported of them.

Therefore my desire is that (...) may come to see the deceit of thy heart and
the falseness (...) that roles thee, and if possible that thou may come to
repent of it, and turn from it, least thou he swept away in the like judgments,
as some of them were of whom thou make mention to be miraculously slain with
Thunder, for know this except you repent, ye shall all likewise perish and he
swept away in judgment, as your Fore fathers the Persecutors in other ages have
been.

For know this that the Lord nor God is risen to sweep the earth, and the day
of (...) is at (...) and the year of recompense draws nigh, for the sins of
the great (...) Babylon and Egypt (whose Children ye are as by your spirits is
manifest) and the cry thereof is come up unto Heaven, and God has remembered
her iniquiteis, and she shall receive double from the hand of the Lord for all
her transgressions, for in her has been found the blood of the prophets, and
Saints, and Martyrs of Jesu, Christ, and of all that has been slain upon the
Earth, and she shall be rewarded as she has rewarded us, and receive in the
cup double for that which she ha^h filled to us, have she or you, her children
called us Deceivers, Heretics, Antichristian pernicious and damnable we will
now call her Deceiver, Heretics, Antichristian, pernicious and, damnable, yea,
we can double it upon her for we can prove it, to be so or else her Children,
and as by your fruits, for as the have done so have you, murdered, killed and
scandalized the Innocent, harmless, Lambs of Christ so it is evident that ye
are members of the great Whore, falfe Church and Antichrist, and that you are
guilty of those charges, which thou and thy brethren have falsl^ charged upon
us who are called Quakers.

So in short I have said something for clearing of the Truth, from the flood of
slanders which thou have cast out against it, who am one of those that first
came among you; and have felt the cruelty of all your Laws except death, and
have outlived them, and by the power of the Lord come over them all, so that I
and the rest of my brethren, can walk through all your jurisdictions, and not a
hand lifted up against us, though thou have gloried so much of your being
delivered from us.

Christopher Holder. And now Nath. Morton, the truth in the above mentioned
particulars being c^eared, and thy lies falsehoods cast upon it disowned a few
Queries I put forth (who have been a sufferer among you in New England) for
thee or any other to answer who are of that Jewish and Antichristian spirit of
persecution to answer, that so it may appear whether your Doctrines and
practices are most agreeable to Christ and his Apostles or ours we being the
sufferers, and you the persecutors.

1. Whether the Jews in their zeal for the Law of Moses, and persecuting Christ
and his Apostles were not as justifiable as you, seeing they stood up for that
which they had received by Moses from the Lord, but you for that which you have
set up of your selves and received by tradition; and whether it be not the same
Spirit that is now working in you as was among them seeing your works are one
and the same with them? for they by Christ's coming to fulfill the Law thought
he did go about to distroy it, and you by our preaching up the Life and
perfection of the Scriptures think we go about to make them void and of no
effect.

2. Whether the odious terms which you cast upon us and our doctrines as a
cursed sect Heretics Blasphemers, holders of damnab^e doctrines and such like,
do not proceed from the same Spirit which was among the Jews and heathen, who
called Paul a pestilent fellow, a seducer a mover of sedition (...) a
Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazareeni, seeing we as he did teach no other
things, then are contained in the Scriptures of truth and is it not a certain
mark of a false Church ^o persecute? seeing persecution was never used by any
of the true Church, their weapons not being carnal but Spiritual, and
persecution was not known amongst them that bore the Name of Christianity, till
there was a degeneration among them: and whether you have not reason to
question your state, being found i^ the steps of their degeneration

3. Whether the people of New England in leaving their native Country intended
never to come to a further discovery of the Lord? and whether when the Lord
sent his servants among you to make known his way further to you, ye did well
so evilly to entreat them? even in the highest extremity, showing your selves
more like heathens then Christians?

4. Whether Christ's commands Swear not at all, be not positive? and whether not
at all does not exclude all manner of swearing by one thing as well as another,
in one case as well as an other? and whether any man upon earth is able to
dispense with the breach of this his command, se^ing there is a heavy
denunciation against him that shall break one of the least of them, and teach
men so to do, and a promise to him that shall observe them and teach them and
whether the testimony of him that fears the Lord, may not be as true and
worthy to be taken without an oath, as the testimony of him that fears not
the Lord nor breaking his command is with an oath, seeing the one out of
conscience to God dare not speak a lie, but the other not fearing to speak a
lie, may with the same searedness of conscience swear a lie also.

5. And what inconvenience have been found, where men's testimonies (under the
penallty of perjury for false swearing) have been taken seeing if a good
conscience be not kept they run the same hazard and corporal punishment as if
they Swore falsely, which is the greatest obligation upon men not fearing God
that may be John Rous

N. M. If there had been the same liberty in New England for the publishing
truth by us, as for thee to publish the Scandals a fore mentioned, an answer
had appeared in Print before this time.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 26. for (...), is manifest, p. 2. l. 29. for by, r. and that, p.
3. l. 2^. for and Gods, r. God and, p. 4. l. 32. for (...) what, r. what. p. 6.
l. ^. for the r. their.


