A SPEECH made by the Honorable DENZEL HOLLIS Esquire; at that time (when the
Judges had their Charge) concerning Sir RANDOL GREW.



London, Printed by E. G. for L. Blaikelocke, and are to be sold at his shop
next Temple Bar, in Fleet Street. 1641.

When the Charge went up against the Judges, I was appointed to carry up the
desire of the House Concerning, S. R. C.
MY Lords, These Gentlemen have represented unto your Lordships the sad object
of justice perverted, liberty oppressed, of judgment turned into wormwood,
the laws which should be the bars of our gates, to protect us, keep us, and
all that is ours in safety, made weak and impotent, to betray us into the
hands of violence, instead of props to support us, become broken reeds to
deceive us, and run into our sides when we lean upon them, even so many
snares to entrap and entangle us.

And all this by the perfidiousnesse of those, who are entrusted with our
laws, who call themselves the Guardians and the Interpreters of the Law, but
by their accursed glosses have confounded the Text, and made it speak another
language, and another sense, then ever our Ancestors the Lawmakers intended.

Our Ancestors made laws to keep themselves, their posterity after them in
the possession of their estates; these Judges could make the Law it self rob
us and despoileus of our estates. Were we invaded and persecuted at any time
for pretended crimes, or rather because they were free from crime? and did we
put our selves upon a legal defense, and shelter our selves under the buckler
of the law, use those lawful weapons, which Justice and Truth and the common
right of the subject did put into our hands; would this avail us? no, these
Judges would make the Law wrest our weapons from us, disarme us, take away all
our defense, expunge our answers, even bind us hand and foot, and so expose us
naked and bound, to the mercilessenesse of our oppressors; were our persons
forced and imprisoned by an act of power, would the law relieve us, when we
appealed unto it? No, it would join hands with violence, and add bitterness
to our sorrow; these Judges would not hear us when we did cry, no importunity
could get a Habeas Corpus; nay, our cries would displease them, and they would
beat us for crying, and overdoe the unjust Judge in the Gospel, with whom yet
importunity could prevail?

My Lords, The Commons of England finding themselves in this lamentable
condition, by the wickedness of these Judges; it is no wonder that we
complain of them; it is no wonder, if the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
assembled in Parliament, have sent up some of their members to stand upon Mount
Ebal to curse these Judges; to denounce a curse upon them who have removed our
landmarkes, have taken away the bound stones of the propriety of ^he subject,
have left no Meum and Tuum, but he that had most might, had most right, and the
law was sure to be of his side.

It has been the part of these Gentlemen who have spoken before me, to pray
for justice upon those men, who would not do justice to others. My Lords, I
come upon an other errand, and yet for justice too, for there is justice upon
Mount Gerezim, as well as upon Mount Ebal. It is as great a point of Justice to
give a blessing, a reward, where it is due, as punishment where punishment is
due: For reward and punishment, Praemium and poena, be the two legs that
Justice walks on, and reward is her right leg, the more noble and the more
glorious supporter of that sacred and divine body, that which God himself the
fountain of justice does more delight in.

Tardior ad poenas Deus est, ad praemia velox, Punishment is good, as Physic
in the consequence, reward as wholesome and nourishing food, in the essence;
the one we do, because we must do it as necessary, the other, because we love
to do it as being pleasing and delightful.

Your Lordships then, I doubt not, will as willingly join with the Commons, in
doing good to a good Judge, as in punishing of the bad.

My Lords, we honor them and reckon them Martyrs for the Commonwealth, who
suffer any thing by desending the common right of the subject, when they will
not part with their own goods contrary to law; when indeed their private
interest goes along with it, or rather before it, and the public concernement
seems to come but in a second place, such were those many, whom these Judges
have oppressed; yet these men we magnify and judge worthy of praise and reward.

But what honor then is he worthy of, who merely, for the public, has
suffered himself to be divested and deprived of his particular, such a Judge
as would lose his place, rather then do that which his conscience told him was
prejudicial to the Commonwealth: is not he worthy of double honor?

And this did that worthy reverend Judge, the Chief Judge of England at that
time, Sir Randol Crew, because he would not by subscribing countenance the
loan in the first year of the King, contrary to his oath and conscience, he
drew upon himself the displeasure of some great persons about his Majesty,
who put on that project, which was afterward condemned by the petition of
right, in the Parliament of tertio as unjust and unlawful, and by that means
he lost his place of Chief Justice of the Kings bench, and has these
fourteen years by keeping his innocence lost the profit of that office, which
upon a just calculation in so long a revolution of time, amounts to 26000^ or
thereabouts.

He kept his innocence when others let theirs go, when himself and the
Commonwealth were alike deserted, which raises his merit to a higher pitch;
For to be honest when every body else is honest, when honesty is in fashion,
and is Trump, as I may say, is nothing so meritorious; but to stand alone in
the breach, to own honesty when others dare not do it, cannot be sufficiently
applauded, nor sufficiently rewarded. And that did this good old man do: in a
time of general desertion he preserved himself pure and untainted.

Temporibusque malis ausus is esse bonus. My Lords, the House of Commons are
therefore suitors unto your Lordships, to join with them in the representation
of this good man's case unto his Majesty, and humbly to beseech his Majesty to
be so good and gracious unto him, as to give him such honor (the quality of
this case considered) as may be a noble mark of sovereign grace and favor,
to remain to him and his posterity, and may be in some measure a
proportionable compensation for the great loss he has with so much patience
and resolution sustained.

FINIS.

