THE PHAENIX HER Arrival and Welcome TO ENGLAND. It being an Epithalamy on the
Marriage of the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty with the Most Royal and Most
Illustrious DONNA KATHARINA Of PORTUGAL. By SAMUEL HOLLAND.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1662.

To the most Excellent and most Heroical Prince, PRINCE RUPERT.
May it please Your Highness,
THe Eyes of all knowing Persons, not only in this Nation, but all Europe over,
and beyond it also, are fixed on Your Highness: You attract them by Your
Candor, and oblige them by the Inimitable Example of Your Courage: And amongst
the number of those who daily do throng in to admire and honor You, it is my
Glory to be one, who having received my best Encouragements from the Influence
of Your Heroic Greatness, shall make it my daily business accordingly to
declare it, and to endeavor to be worthy of it.

May it please Your Highness,

The late War in many Testimonies of Incomparable Valor showed how much You
honored the Late King; and in some Testimonies again, it showed how much we
(who were Your Soldiers) honored You, whose Spirits You so often rouzed up to
the out-daring of all Dangers by the admirable Example of Your height of
Fortitude: Then I endeavored to serve You with my Sword, as I have done since
with my Pen, and have been in both as elaborate as Resolution, and Art can make
me.

May it please Your Highness,

I modestly do presume that this Piece on His Majesty's most Happy Marriage
with the Princess of Portugal will not be unacceptable to Your Highness; It
has received the happiness to be much applauded by Persons of Eminent Judgment
who have perused it: May it merit the Honor to be protected by Your Highness,
to whom most precisely it does devote it self, his Desires and Ambition are
crowned, who is,

(May it please Your Highness)

Your most affectionate and most humble Servant, S. HOLLAND.

THE PHAENIX HER Arrival and Welcome TO ENGLAND.
It being an Epithalamy on the Marriage of the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty
with the Most Royal and Most Illustrious DONNA KATHARINA Of PORTUGAL.
WOnders get Wonders, and their glorious Birth
Increase new numbers both in Heaven and Earth;
Though Charles the First this present Age did call
A Mirror, and a Miracle to all;
Yet 'twas the top and height of his Renown
He got so brave a Prince to heir his Crown;
And it is the Joy and Honor of his Son
To trace those Glories Charles the First had done;
To his Renown it was he did advance
The English Lions with the Flowers of France,
And to the Honors of his Son we all
Ascribe this Marriage made with Portugal.
Great CHARLES the Second, who is King of Hearts
And King of Arms, as well as King of Arts,
To bless this Nation by a Knot divine
Is married to the matchless KATHARINE.
Great CHARLES the Second whom Fames Trumpet rings
To be the Wonder and Delight of Kings,
Is joined to Her whom Heavens rich Mint did coin
For Englands Queen, the Noble KATHARINE.
Great CHARLES the Second, Second unto none
In Goodness, Greatness, and Religion,
Has met a Noble Parallel, whose Line
Answers His own, the Accomplished KATHARINE.
Great CHARLES the Second, like another Sun
Whose radiant Glories through all Europe run,
Has chose One with Him in His Orb to shine
Bright as Himself, the Beauteous KATHARINE.
But since the Course of Heaven and Nature shuns
The levelling Splendor of two equal Suns;
Therefore their Rival Lustres to atone,
Wedlock has tied these Sacred Lights in one:
And now since Venus is new joined to Mars,
Be they the Envy of all other Stars;
Let them on Earth of Blessings find such store,
Till Earth can ask, or Heaven scarce grant them more.
Lo where that Tagus who but lately rolled
His glittering waters intermixed with Gold,
And proudly flowing with a vain Desire
In his own Channels did himself admire,
Now pale with Grief, he his own Joys disclames,
To see his Glories in the lap of Thames;
His richest treasure, and more precious far,
More pure in substance, and in show more fair,
Then all the glory of the weighty Oar
That shines in spangles on his wealthy shore,
Is now (transported) from fair Lisbon come,
This Isle to make the Queen of Christendom.
See where she comes her Beauties do adorn,
And lend new splendors to the blushing Morn,
The Vigor of her rays, which conquering flies,
Dazzles the Sun to look upon her eyes;
There needs no Ribbands to adorn her hair,
The laughing Stars in knots are radiant there.
The Graces are her Ushers, and do strew
Roses before her where so e're she go,
And a long train of Virtues hand in hand
In Order all behind her do attend.
No sooner shipped for England, she set sail,
But Neptune sent forth a tempestuous Gale,
When lo her Beauties in the Seas highest Rage
Soon struck a Calm, and did their wrath assuage.
At which loud Triton did his suit prefer
To entertain him for her Trumpetter,
And many a Mermaid did attend upon her
And humbly craved to be her Maids of Honor;
The Dolphins near her shoal'd, and with their train
Swept the salt foame, and cut the curled Main;
So great the Tumult, one might well suppose
From Love, not Rage, the late high Tempest rose;
The Waves to enjoy her sight no pains did spare
To leap into the Element of Air,
The Air to bear so fair a burden fain,
Would change it is place and nature with the Main,
Whiles Winds that struggled who should most have crowned her,
So sinned in Zeal, that they almost had drowned her.
And now arrived, Saint Michaels Mount must be
The place of Fame, where happy Destiny
Decreed that first this Princess should be found
To plant her foot upon the English Ground.
Now all things smiled, and did conspire outright
To mingle Royal Greatness with Delight;
The Month is May, and the dressed Spring does stand
In all it is pride to welcome her to land.
Here having taken some days rest to ease
Her Body weary of the churlish Seas,
A winged Grove of Frigots does convay
Her Sexes Glory unto Portsmouths Bay:
Here did our Fears cast Anchor, to implore
The Pilots Conduct on the Seas no more;
Now Bon-fires heat the Air, Healths drench the Earth,
Portsmouth the Center, and the Stage of Mirth;
Some use their tongues, and speak their Mirth in Fancies,
Others their feet, and tread their Joys in Dances:
Now Youth, and Beauty, State, and Pomp do greet,
And Peace and Plenty walk in every Street,
And from above, Heavens Blessings more t'unfold,
It hails down Pearls, and rains down riguous Gold.
Portsmouth's the place where first His Majesty
His Royal Spouse Queen Katharine must see;
For though 'twas Cornwall to the Queen did bring
The happy sight of England, yet the King
(But when her Picture did present the same)
Never saw his Queen till she to Portsmouth came.
The holy knot was tied here in a blessed
And solemn Marriage, here the King possessed
Earth pure as Heaven, and stained with no Alloy,
Braganzaes Glories, and Terezaes Joy.
Now like two glorious Lamps may their Flames rise
Pure, and erect, until they touch the Skies;
May their rich splendor be by Age more bright,
And grace the World with their United Light;
May their Loves be a Sacrifice t'attone
Their Peoples Rage, and make their hearts but one:
May the Church flourish in her Truth, and Train,
And be as white as Innocence again:
May those who scorned us in our late distress
Now fear, and wonder at our Happiness;
May every Street, and every Countries Green
Ring with the Trophies of our King and Queen;
And may the thunder of their Arms chastise
And judge 'twixt all both Friends and Enemies,
To Advance the Good, and humble those are Fierce,
And give new Laws unto the Universe.
FINIS.

