The Peoples Happiness. A SERMON PREACHED IN St. MARY'S IN CAMBRIDGE, Upon
Sunday the 27 of March, being the day of His MAJESTY'S happy Inauguration: By
RI. HOLDSVVORTH D. D. Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge, Vicechancellour
of the Universitie, and one of His MAJESTY'S Chaplains.

Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the University of Cambridge, Anno Dom.
1642.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Had not adventured to bring these unpolished meditations into the public
light, much less to have set them before the Sun, but that Your Majesty was
pleased to becken them to Your self, and to draw them as by Your own beams, so
under Your own shade into Your Royal Presence, that being first animated with
the gentleness of Your beams, they might not be dazzled with the splendor.
Neither is this the least of Your Princely excellencies, that You please as
Christ in the Gospel, to come down from the Mount, Matthew. 8.1.
for the more free access of Your people; and know, with Moses, to put the
vail of Goodness over the shinings of Majesty, so that the meanest of Your
subjects may be refresht with the light of Your countenance notwithstanding the
luster, and draw livelihood from the splendor, through the serenitie, finding
the medium of their happiness as well as the object to be, under God, in Your
Self. It is not to be expected at this present, that the irradiations of this
light should be so vigorous in a cloudy Region: we now see to our grief what a
misery it is to have the Royal influence intercepted as of late it has been,
and still is, by those disastrous obstructions, which at first had only the
appearance of Elia's cloud, 1. Kings 18.44.
like the hand of a man; but are since grown to that vastness, as they
threaten to the whole Kingdom such ruin as our sins call for: Yet in the
midst of these sad distractions, it is Your Majesty's comfort, that as their
occasions are from below, so their disposal is from above, both for the
exercise of Your Princely clemency and patience, and for the trial of the
sincerest loyalty of Your subjects; yea, and religious hearts, through all
these clouds, can discern, and do with thankfulness acknowledge the saying of
Solomon to be most true, Prove. 16.15.
In the light of the Kings countenance there is life: the life of the whole
State, that it may happily rise to the former glory, wherein it so long
flourished: the life of the Church, that it may recover out of this sad
languishing condition into which it is brought: the life of the Universities,
that they may fruitfully spread forth their numerous branches to all parts of
the Land: Lastly, the life of this small inconsiderable Tractate in as many
degrees, as Nature has bestowed it upon man; in that Your Majesty vouchsafed,
first to require a copy in writing, then to command it to the Press, then to
afford it Your Patronage, whilst it presents to the world some little
portion of that great happiness, which this eighteen years we have enjoyed,
under your blessed government. I wish the Argument had had a better workman,
but what is defective in the Sermon, shall be supplied by my prayers, That the
happiness hereafter spoken of, howsoever it be now eclipsed, may again shine
forth in full strength, through Your Majesty's great prudence; whose Royal
beams as they are powerful for the fostering of piety, so I hope they shall be
powerful also for the dispelling of all foggie vapors, that may hazard either
to prejudice the welfare of Your people, or to pervert their allegiance. Which
as it has been hitherto untainted, to the envy of other Nations and honor of
our own: So, that it may be always inviolably preserved, is the daily prayer of

Your Majesty's humblest subject and servant, Ri. Holdsworth.

A Prayer.
O Lord hear our prayer, and let our cry come unto thee. We are here met
together to call upon thy holy name, and to be made partakers of thy holy word,
revealed in Jesus Christ. In whose name we are bold to begin these our weak
prayers, and supplications. In our own names we are unworthy, by reason of our
sins, that are so inbred in our natures, so strengthened by impenitency, and
so multiplied by custom; that as we dare not conceal them from thee, so now
when we would confess them, we are not able to number them. O Lord if thou
should plead with us, there is nothing that we can say for our selves, but
that which would make more against us; we are a sinful Generation, and even
now when in thy Courts where we should bring holy affections, we are above
measure sinful. Our original is wholly sinful, and our lives have answered,
and exceeded our original: and besides that we are born in sin, we confess
we have so lived, O Lord, as if we had been born to no other end, but to sin
against thee, and to grieve thy holy spirit. Our first misery is, that sin
has conceived us; our second, that we have conceived it, and brought it forth,
and made it our daily work, and fulfilled it with greediness. Our whole lives
are nothing else but a course of sin; we have run through sins of all sorts,
sins of Ignorance and of knowledge, sins of infirmity, and of wilfulness,
sins of a hard heart, and of a stiffneck; we have committed them after a most
presumptuous manner, and continued in them after an impenitent manner; against
heaven, and against earth, and before thee; therefore against them because
against thee; Against thy righteous law which points out unto us a better way
of piety; against thy manifold mercies which should be pledges, and engagements
of better obedience; against the glory of thy name, the motions of thy spirit,
the covenant of grace, the promises of salvation; the hope of heaven, the light
and peace of our own consciences; against our many solemn vows and
protestations of reformation. That now if thou should enter into judgment
with us, and call us to a strict account for all, or any of these; in the least
of them thy severity might find sufficient cause to deprive us of thy mercies,
to overwhelme us with thy judgments, to leave us to our selves in this life,
and after this life to give us our portion with hypocrites in that lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, where is nothing but weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth.

But we know that thou art a merciful God, that thou may be called upon in
a time accepted, and thy mercy is a sweet, and a safe Sanctuary; it is thy
self as well as thy justice: therefore in the confidence of thy mercy we are
imboldened to appeal from thee, to thee; from the bar of thy justice, to the
bowels of thy tender compassions: beseeching thee that thou will be pleased not
to look upon us as we are in our selves, but to behold us in the face and
mediation of Jesus Christ. In our selves we are vile, and unlovely: but in the
beholding of him alone there is abundant to make us amiable in thine eyes.
Abundant in the purity of his incarnation; abundant in his death, and
passion; abundant in his victorious resurrection, and ascension. Through these
we entreat thee to look upon us; through the veil of our nature which he took,
through the merits of that precious blood which he shed, through the sweet odor
of the satisfaction of obedience which he performed, through the atonement
which he purchased, the reconciliation which he wrought, and the intercession
which he makes at thy right hand. And having thus looked upon him, look upon
us, and give us grace to look upon our selves, to examine our own ways, to
try, and to search our own hearts, to leave no sin unrepented of; open our eyes
that we may see them, open our hearts that we may mourn for them, strengthen
our endeavors to strive against them. Make us truly to consider with our
selves, and to understand what we have done, what adventurous courses we have
taken, how holy a name it is we have profaned, how righteous a law that we have
broken, how happy a state that we have lost, how blessed a recovery that we
have neglected, how good a spirit that we have grieved, how righteous a father
that we have provoked. And by these considerations, weary us, and shame us out
of our sins into the true trade of piety, and love of thy holy name, that
loving thee we may seek thee, and seeking thee find thee, and in finding thee
hold thee, and in holding thee, we may apply our selves to walk in those ways
that are approvable in thy sight.

For the time past of our lives it may suffice: for it is enough, O Lord, it is
enough, and too too much that we have spent the prime of our years, and the
first fruits of our time in the vanities of this world, and the lusts of the
flesh hitherto: O give us grace so to order our steps, that we may consecrate
whatsoever of our future age remains wholly unto thy service hereafter: that we
growing on forward from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, from one degree
of righteousness to another, in the end of our days, we may enjoy likewise
the end of our hopes, the salvation of our sinful souls in Jesus Christ.

In whose name we are bold to continue these our weak prayers unto thee, not
only for our selves, but for the estate of thy holy Catholic Church
wheresoever dispersed over the face of the whole earth: that thine eyes may be
always open toward thine inheritance, to enlarge her borders, to water her
growth, to gather her dispersions together, to make up her breaches, to fulfill
her months of travel, to establish her station, that howsoever the winds
blow, and the rain fall, and the floods lift up their voice, the house which is
built upon thy self may stand, and the gates of hell may not prevail against it.

In this universalitie, we humbly beseech thee to pour down thy blessings upon
that part of thy fold in this land: O let the light of thy countenance still
shine upon us, in the pardoning our many backslidings, in the continuing our
peace and plenty and all other benefits we do enjoy by thy Gospel; that as thou
have fixed more eminent tokens of thy love among us, then among other nations,
so thou would give us grace also to bring forth fruit proportionable to so
plentiful means, even worthy amendment of life; that thou may continue to
be unto us, a good, and a gracious God, and we may continue to be also unto
thee a chosen Generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar
people, even thine own pleasant plant.

Bless all estates, and conditions herein from the highest to the lowest; and
more particularly we entreat thee for our gracious sovereign Lord, the King's
Majesty, Charles by thy grace King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the true ancient Catholic and Apostolic faith, and over all
persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, within these
his Majesty's Realms, and Dominions, next and immediately under Christ, supreme
Lord and Governor; Bless him in his Royal Person, establish his Throne in
Righteousness unto himself, set him as a seal upon thy heart, and as a signet
upon thine arm, that as thou have made him unto us, precious as the light of
our eyes, so let him be tender unto thee, as the apple of thine, that he may
prove an incomparable instrument of thy glory here, and a vessel of glory
hereafter.

Bless him, as in his Royal Person so, in the comfort of his beloved Consort,
the fruitful Vine, the most excellent Lady our Gracious Queen Mary; and in the
hopeful growth of his Royal Posterity, the precious Pledges of thy love unto
this Land, the Noble Prince Charles, the Duke of York, and the Lady Mary. And
in the happy reestablishment of those other illustrious Branches, of the same
Royal Stock beyond the seas, the most renounced Lady, the Lady Elizabeth, and
her Princely Issue. For the better effecting whereof be pleased to be assistant
to all their allies and confederates, to prosper their designs, to fight their
battles, to go in, and out before their armies, to crown thy servants with new
victories, that yet at length thy poor distressed people may return with joy
to their ancient habitations, that peace may be planted upon earth for the
further propagating of thy Gospel, the advancement of thy truth, and the
consummation of thy Kingdom.

Be pleased likewise to be gracious to all the people of this land, from the
Cedar of Lebanon to the Hysop upon the wall let thy several graces distill
down upon their heads for the discharge of those particular places wherein thou
have set them: The spirit of knowledge and piety upon the head of Aaron, the
Prelacy of the Church, the most reverend Archbishops and Bishops; and from
thence to the skirts of his clothing, the inferior ministers: The spirit of
wisdom, and understanding, upon the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and all the true hearted Nobility: The spirit of Justice and
integrity upon the Judges, and Magistrates of this land: The spirit of
increase, and fructification upon all Schools of learning, especially upon
those two famous Universities, Cambridge, and Oxford; and in Cambridge upon the
good estate of S. John's College: The spirit of obedience, and fear of the Lord
upon all the commonalty; in particular upon the condition of this great, and
populous City: The spirit of patience and consolation upon all thy poor
afflicted members, especially those commended to thee in our prayers at this
time: be pleased to compass them about with thy blessings, to establish thy
mercies, to replenish them with the graces of thy holy spirit, to make the
light of thy countenance to shine in their hearts, to fill them full of
heavenly comfort, to support them in all their conflicts, to supply them with
all those graces needful to their sick and weak estate: Mitigate their pains,
assuage their grievances, make those bones which thou have broken to rejoice,
Work in them true remorse of conscience for their sins, and seal unto them
the pardon of them in Jesus Christ, that from thence may arise that peace of
conscience, and that joy in the Holy Ghost, which is so unspeakable and
glorious: If it be thy blessed will, thou can restore them to their former
health, that they may praise thy name among much people; if otherwise thou have
disposed of any of them, prepare, and preserve them to thy heavenly Kingdom,
that they may have a peaceable passage out of these earthly tabernacles, into
those heavenly mansions, which thou have prepared for those that love thy
appearing.

And give us grace, all of us that are here present before thee this day, to be
warned by the many examples of our mortality that thou daily set before our
eyes, to prepare for the day of ourvisitation, whenever thou shall send it,
sooner or later, that we may have oil in our lamps, and our lamps always
burning, and the door of our hearts always open, to let thee the King of glory
in whenever thou shall knock.

Last of all, let thine illuminating, and sanctifying spirit, descend down upon
all congregations, assembled as this day in thy fear; in particular upon this
congregation here present, that thy word that is to be sown among them by me
thy unworthy servant, though in great weakness, by thine enabling Grace, may
prove thy strong arm of power to salvation, to the enlightening of their
understandings, the sanctifying of their affections, the amendment of their
lives, the comfort of their souls in this world, and the salvation of them in
the day of the Lord. Anoint our eyes with the blessed eye salve of thy Holy
Spirit, that the scales, and mists of ignorance being removed, we may clearly
see the wonders of thy law: prepare our hearts for the receiving of it, set an
edge upon our affections, that we may hunger and thirst after this heavenly
Manna, and be always gathering, some an Omer, some an Ephah, every one some;
and that for his sake who is the Manna that came down from Heaven, the eternal
Word with thee from the beginning, thy Christ, our Jesus, in whose holy Name we
pray unto thee further as he himself has taught us, saying: Our Father, etc.

FINIS.
PSALM 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case yea, happy is that
people whose God is the LORD.


THe Genius of this Scripture, as it is very graceful and pleasing in it self,
so it is also very suitable to the respects of this day, on which we are met
together. It presents unto us what we all partake of, if we be so well disposed
as to see it, Felicity or Happiness. And if a single happiness be too
little, behold it is conveyed in two streams; the silver stream, and the
golden. It is reached forth, as it were, in both the hands of Providence. There
is the happiness of the left hand, which is Civil, in the first clause of the
words; and the happiness of the right, which is Divine and Religious, in the
second. Answerable to these are the two welcome aspects of this day: the Civil
aspect or reference, which arises from the annual revolution, as it is Dies
Principis, a day of solemnity for the honor of the King: and the Religious
aspect from the weekly revolution, as it is Dies Dominica, a day of devotion
for the worship of God. In these there is so evident a correspondence, that I
cannot but congratulate, both the day to the text, and the text to the day, in
regard of their mutual complications. For we have, on the one side, both
clauses of the text in the day: and on the other, both references of the day in
the text. Happiness is the language of all: and, that which adds to the
contentment, it is Happiness with an Echo, or ingemination; Happy and Happy.
From this ingemination arise the parts of the text; the same which are the
parts both of the greater world and the less. As the heaven and earth in the
one, and the body and the soul in the other: so are the passages of this
Scripture in the two veins of Happiness. We may range them as Isaac does the
two parts of his blessing, Genesis 27. The vein of civil happiness, Genesis 27.28
in the fatness of the earth: and the vein of Divine happiness, in the dew of
heaven. Or (if you will have it out of the Gospel) here is Marthaes portion in
the many things of the body: Luke 10.41, 42.
and Mary's better part in the Vnum necessarium of the soul. To give it yet
more concisely, here is the path of Prosperity in Outward comforts; Happy is the
people that is in such a case: and the path of Piety in comforts Spiritual;
Yea, happy is that people which have the LORD for their God.

In the handling of the first, without any further subdivision, I will only
show what it is the Psalmist treats of: and that shall be, by way of Gradation,
in these three particulars. It is De FELICITATE; De Felicitate POPULI; De HAC
felicitate populi: Of happiness; Of the peoples happiness; Of the peoples
happiness, as in such a case.

Happiness is the general, and the first: a noble argument, and worthy of an
inspired pen, especially the Psalmists. Of all other there can be none better
to speak of popular happiness, then such a King: nor of celestial, then such
a Prophet. Yet I mean not to discourse of it in the full latitude, but only as
it has a peculiar positure in this Psalm, very various and different from the
order of other psalms. In this Psalm it is reserved to the end, as the close
of the foregoing meditations: In other Psalms it is set in the front, or first
place of all; as in the 32, in the 112, in the 119, and in the 128. Again, in
this the Psalmist ends with our blessedness, and begins with God's; BLESSED BE
THE LORD MY STRENGTH. In the 41 Psalm, contrary, he makes his exordium from
man's; BLESSED IS HE THAT CONSIDERS THE POOR: his conclusion with God's;
BLESSED BE THE LORD GOD OF ISRAEL. I therefore observe these variations,
because they are helpful to the understanding both of the essence, and
splendor of true happiness. To the knowledge of the essence they help,
because they demonstrate how our own happiness is enfolded in the glory of
God, and subordinate unto it. As we cannot begin with Beatus, unless we end
with Benedictus: so we must begin with Benedictus, that we may end with Beatus.
The reason is this, Because the glory of God it is as well the consummation, as
the introduction to a Christians happiness. Therefore as in the other Psalm he
begins below, and ends upwards: so in this, having begun from above with that
which is principal, Blessed be the Lord; he fixes his second thoughts upon
the subordinate, Blessed, or happy are the people. He could not proceed in a
better order: he first looks up to Gods kingdom, then reflects upon his own;
as not meaning to take blessedness before he had given it. There is no man can
think, but this is the best method. It is the method of Saints, as we see 1.
Sam. 25.32, 33. and 2. Chron. 31.8. First, Blessed be the God of Israel; then,
Blessed be the people of Israel. Nay, it is the method of Angels: Luke 2.14.
they first sing, Glory to God; then, Good will toward men. It must also be
the method of every Christian, whenever we are about the wishing of
blessedness, either to our selves or others, to begin from heaven, and ascribe
it first to the LORD. That we may receive, we must give: give what we have, and
give what we mean to have. To give is the way to get: both to get the thing,
and to get the greater degree. It is an undeniable consequence, If beatitude be
the ultimate end of man, and the glory of God the ultimate end of our very
beatification; then it follows necessarily, That by giving more glory to God
we gain more of beatitude to our selves, because more of the supreme and
beatificall end. So that he who will attain to the Psalmist's comfort, must
observe also the Psalmist's order: that he may end assuredly with BEATUS, he
must learn to begin with BENEDICTUS. That Is the first considerable thing in the
order as touching the essence of true happiness. The other is concerning the
splendor, which flows from the other part of the variation: in that the
Psalmist does end this psalm, as he begins diverse of the rest, with Happy or
Blessed; to represent, as it were, unto us utramquesplendor is paginam, the two
great excellencies of blessedness by the double situation of it. Happiness is
both the bonum Primum, and the bonum Vltimum, of a Christian: the spring of all
good things, and the crown: the spire, and the basis: the first and the last of
things to be desired; the first for eminence, the last for fruition. In the
descents of Christianity the first, because we move from it to inferior ends:
happiness gives law to all our actions; we move from it, that we may in time
come to the possession of it. In the order of ascent it is the last: for having
climbed once thither, we go no further, but set up our rest. It has this
resemblance with God himself, who is the Donour of it, That it is both the
beginning and the end, before which nothing should be loved, and after which
nothing can be desired. Answerable to these two respects are the positures of
happiness in the Psalms. As in military affairs, it is the custom of
Emperors to promise the Donative to their soldiers when they go forth to
war, that they may encourage them; but not to give it till the war be
ended, that they may reward them for their service: In like manner (says S.
Ambrose) does the Psalmist: velut praeco magni Imperatoris, he disposes of
beatitude both ways: he prefixeth it to the beginning of some Psalms, that
thereby we might be invited to piety; he annexeth it to the end of others, to
teach us not to look for it before our work be done. So even by this we may
learn how to order and dispose of our selves to happiness. Since it has the
double reference, it must have also the double honor, and the double esteem,
yea and our double endeavors for the attaining of it. Then we give it the
double, when we set it in both places, make it both our first and our last, the
prime of our life, and the perseverance. We must look through all things upon
happiness, and through happiness upon all: through all upon it, as not
resting in any thing else; and through it upon all, as seasoning every act of
our life with the thought of happiness. Otherwise, if we think to give it our
last respects without our first, pretend what we will, there is no hope to
overtake it. Thus far even worldly men will go: they are willing enough to
hear that they must make it their last work, and they fulfill it in a sort to
the letter, but not to the meaning. The love, the hope, the care of their own
happiness, they put them off all to the last: A very preposterous course for a
man to begin where and when he should have ended, and to defer his first of
motion to his last of rest. It is too late for the foolish Virgins to cry,
Matthew. 25.10, 11.
Lord open when the door is shut and a vain thing to expect happiness as our
end, unless we make it our beginning, and give it the same place in our hearts
and actions, which holy David affords it in his meditations: the first place in
other Psalms, as the best introduction to all other discourses; the last in
this, as a delightful farewell to be always fresh in remembrance. That shall
serve for the first step of the Gradation, the general part of the argument
handled: It is De FELICITATE.

The second is more special: it is defelicitate Populi; HAPPY, or, BLESSED ARE
THE PEOPLE. In the former part of the Psalm he speaks of such things as
concern his own happiness; Blessed be the Lord MY strength, verse. 1. Send down
from above, and save ME out of the great waters, verse. 7. Rid ME and deliver ME
from the hand of strange children, verse. 11. And he might as easily have
continued the same strain in the clauses following, That MY sons may grow up
as the young plants, MY daughters may be as the polished corners of the temple,
MY sheep fruitful, MY oxen strong, MY garners full and plenteous: and
accordingly he might have concluded it also, Happy shall I be, if I be in such
a case. This, I say, he might have done, nay, this he would have done, if his
desires had reflected only upon himself. But being of a diffusive heart, and
knowing what belonged to the neighbourhoods of piety, as loath to enjoy this
happiness alone, he alters his style, and (being in the height of wellwishes
to himself) he turns the singular into a plural, Our sheep, Our oxen, Our
garners, Our sons and daughters; that he might compendiate all in this, Happy
are the people. Here Is a true testimony both of a religious and generous mind,
who knew in his most retired thoughts to look out of himself, and to be
mindful of the public welfare in his privatest meditations. S. Ambrose
observes it as a clear character of a noble spirit, to do what tends to the
public good, though to his own disadvantage: And Salvian, in his first
Deprovidentia, does recon this as the principal thing which made the Fabii and
the Fabricii, and other Roman Worthies so renowned in their times, That they
were content to expose themselves to want and danger for the prosperity and
safety of the public. But (alas!) there are few such spirits in our time: It
is a rate thing to find a private man, who cordially devoteth himself to the
good of the Community. It was the complaint of Plato in his time, That every
man was impetuously carried (...) and of Thucydides the Historian in his,
Vnusquisque rem suam urget: and of Tacitus in his, Brivatacuique stimulatio,
and vile decus publicum. S. Paul himself was driven to this complaint, Phil.
2.21. All seek their own. Where he left we may take it up: Our own settling,
our own security, our own wealth, our own advancement, is all we generally
look after. There is hardly any man to be found, whose bent is not toward
himself: Whereas the public is the private infinitely multiplied; and so much
the more of nearer concernment, as it is of larger extension: whereas again man
is only a world in a figurative sense of speaking, and that but a microcosme
or little world, that is in effect, a small part of the great; yet, as in some
other things, so in this also it falls out, The Allegory devoures the letter,
the private eats up the public, the part the whole, the overweaning respect to
the little world does every where almost overturn the greater. I know there are
many which make fair shows, goodly pretenses, great ostentation of the
contrary: You shall have them often crying out, The Public, the Public; and
as fast as the Jews did, The Temple, the Temple: but it is with the like
insincerity; for their aim is wholly for themselves. So we show our selves
hypocrites even in things civil, as well as in religion. Each godly man is of
another temper. His word is that of S. Ambrose, Mihi parcior, foris totus: or
that of the Orator in Salust, Adsum en Caius Cotta, voveo, dedoque me pro
Republica. It was a brave resolution in a Heathen: but it concerns us
Christians more. For he was only a part of one Community: we, each of us have
a share in two; being members of the Church, as well as the State. So there is
a double tie upon us: and that we should daily remember it, it is insinuated in
the Lord's prayer: in which as there is one express petition for the public;
so there is a respect had to it in all. There is nothing singular, not an I,
nor a Me, nor a Mine; but all plural, We, Us, Our: noting that it is every
man's duty, even in his prayers, to be zealous for the Community. But the text
will not allow me that scope, to speak of this zeal to the public as it is the
duty of private men, but as it is an excellency of Kings and Princes. It Is
true, I might call it a duty even in them also; God requires it of them as a
duty: but it becomes us to repute it an excellency, both because the benefit
is ours which redounds from thence, and likewise because it is more eminent and
illustrious in them, then in other men. In others it is limited and
ministerial, in a Prince supreme and universal. He is the influxive head, who
both governs the whole body, and every member which is any way serviceable to
the body: The glorious Sun that gives light both to the world, and to the
stars themselves, which in their several stations are useful to the world.
Here Is enough to define it an excellency, to have the care and trust of the
whole in himself. Yea but further, to tender it as himself, and to set the weal
of the public in equipage with his own happiness, and to fold them up
together, his own in the public and the public in his own; is so high an
ascent of goodness, that it were a great wrong to such virtue, to style it by
any less name then an excellency. In this particular I might easily be large:
but it requires not so much proofs, as acknowledgements and retributions.
Therefore I will briefly proceed both ways: and first give you a few examples
for proofs; and then, I am sure, there is no man so unworthy, but will think
himself obliged to retributions. The first example shall be taken from Moses:
whom Philo reckons among Kings; and so does the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33.5. For
howsoever he had not the name, he had the power and authority: yet even in
that power he was not more Regal, then in his tenderness over the people. At
one time his tenderness was so great toward them, that because he could not do
them so much good as he desired, he besought the Lord to take away his life;
Numb. 11.15. At another time he was so perplexed with the fear of their
destruction, that he requested of God, either to keep them still in the land of
the living, or to blot him out of the book of life; Exodus 32.32. hereby showing
himself not only the miracle of Nature, as Philo calls him, but of Grace too,
in pledging for them that which was more worth then his life, his very
salvation. It was a rare ex ample of Castor and Pollux, so highly magnified by
Authors, That being twins, and (as the Poets feigned) one born mortal, the
other immortal, Pollux (to show his love to his brother) yielded so far, as
to take to himself a part of his brothers mortality, and to lend him as much
of his own immortality: being better pleased to enjoy a half immortality with
the good of his brother, then a whole one alone by himself. It is known by all
to be a fiction: yet if it were true, it is far short of this proffer of
Moses. He knew full well what belonged to immortality, and to the favor of
God: yet in effect he beseeches God, either to take them into his favor, or
to put him out of it; as content to hazard not half his immortality, but all,
out of his love to the Israelites, notwithstanding they were a people
ungrateful both toward him and toward God. After this of Moses I know no
example so transcending as that of the Prophet David: who (besides that he
urges it almost in every Psalm, The peace of Jerusalem, The salvation of
Israel, The felicity of Gods chosen, The blessing of the people) in one place
he argues for it even to his own destruction* You have it, 1. Chron. 21.16, 17.
It is there recorded, that seeing the angel of the Lord with his sword drawn
over Jerusalem to destroy it, he thus reasons with God for the safeguard of the
public: Me, me; adsum qui feci; IT IS I, EVEN I IT IS THAT HAVE SINNED: In me
convertito ferrum; LET THY HAND BE AGAINST ME, AND AGAINST MY FATHERS HOUSE,
NOT ON THY PEOPLE: FOR THESE SHEEP WHAT HAVE THEY DONE? He that considers
these words will hardly be able to tell what most to wonder at; the
condescending of his love, or the overflowing. He declared here, says S.
Chrysostom, a depth of love (...), an affection more spacious for love, then
the sea for water; and for tenderness softer not only then water, but then
oil. To lay down, as it were, his own royal neck under the sword of the
Angel, when he saw it hanging over him by a less third, then that of
Damocles: To open his own religious breast, to receive the blow, that he might
ward it from the people: To value the peoples safety so far above his own, as
to interpose himself betwixt the sword and the slaughter: O how far does he
here renounce himself, and recede, not only from royalty, but from life it
self! It is much which is mentioned in the text, that he should name the people
first to the happiness: more, that he should offer himself first to the
punishment: very much, that he should put the people betwixt himself and the
blessing: far more, that he should place himself betwixt the people and the
curse. He made himself in this SPECULUM PRINCIPUM, the mirror of Princes: a
mirror, into which (as we may well presume) our Gracious Sovereigne King
CHARLES has made frequent and useful inspections: for it is manifest by many
passages of his reign and happy government, that the tenderness of his love
toward his people, if it does not fully reach, yet it comes close up to the
recessions of David. It is the more remarkable, for that he has this virtue as
it were in proper and by himself, he is almost the sole possessour of it. The
most of ordinary men, as living more by will then reason, are all for holding:
so stiff and inflexible, so tenacious and unyielding, even in matters of small
moment; that they will not stir a hair-breadth. Entreat them, persuade them,
convince them; still they keep to this principle (and it is none of the best)
Obtein all, Yield nothing. It is a nobler spirit that resides in the breast of
our Sovereign, as appears by his manifold yieldings and recessions. Of such
recessions we have many instances in the course of his Majesty's government. I
might go as far back as his first coming to the Crown: when he receded from
his own profit, in taking upon him the payment of his Fathers debts, which were
great, and but small supplies to be expected from an empty Exchequer: yet the
love of justice and his peoples emolument overswayed him, and armed him with
Epaminondas his resolution, Totius orbis divitias despicere, prae patriae
charitate. Having but glanced at that, I might draw a little nearer to the
third of his reign: when, in that Parliament of Tertio, he was pleased to sign
the, so much desired, Petition of Right: a Title which, I confess, takes me
much: both because it speaks the d^^ifulnesse of the subject, in petitioning,
although for right; and the great goodness of a Gracious Prince, who knows how
to recede from power, and in some case even from prerogative, when besought by
prayers; and rejoices, not to sell his favors, but to give them. For I have
heard some wise men say, That that single grant was equivalent to twenty
subsidies. But the time will not give me leave to dwell, as I should, upon
particulars: therefore I will call you nearer to the transient remembrance (and
but the transient, for it is no pleasure to revive it,) of the commotions in
the North. The eyes of the whole world were upon that action, and they all are
witnesses what pains and travel were taken, what clemency and indulgence was
used, what yieldings and condescentions, both in point of hononr and power, to
purchase, as it were, by a price paid out of himself, the peace and
tranquillity of both kingdoms. Whereby he made all men understand, how much
more pleasing it was to his Princely disposition, with Cyrus in Xenophon, (...)
and to conquer, not by might, but by clemency. By clemency, I say, the word
which I named before, and I cannot name it too often. It is the virtue God most
delights in, to exercise himself; and it is the copy also which he sets us to
write after: It is the virtue which draws both eyes and hearts unto it; in that
it makes Royalty it self, which is so far above, to become beneficial and
sovereign: It corrects the brightness of Majesty, calmes the strictness of
Justice, lightens the weight of Power, attemperates whatsoever might cause
terror to our mind and liking. If we never had known it before, yet the only
time of this Parliament would teach us sufficiently how much we ow to the
King's clemency. The laws and statutes which have been made this last year,
are lasting and speaking monuments of these royal recessions, as well to
posterity, as to our selves. Surely if the true picture and resemblance of a
Prince be in his laws; it cannot be denied, that in the acts, for trienniall
Parliaments, for the continuation of the Parliament now being, for the
regulating of impositions, pressing of soldiers, courts of Judicature, and
others not a few of the like nature, are the lineaments, and expressions to the
life, of the perfect pourtraiture of a Benign and Gracious Prince, who seems
resolved of a new way, and hitherto unheard of, by wholesome laws to enlarge
his subjects, and to confine himself. Yet it may be said, It is not his only
hand which is in these laws: the proposal of them is from others, although the
ratification be in him. Be it so: But the ratification is ten-fold to the
proposal; nay, it is the life and essence of a law. So we ow the laws
themselves to his goodness. Nay, and if it be granted, that the proposal of
such laws comes from others; let us then look to the many gracious messages,
which occasionally have been sent, at several times, to that great Assembly.
In these he speaks only by himself; and in so gracious a manner, that to read
some passages, would ravish a loyal heart, as well as endear it. In some of
them we may see, how he puts the happiness of his people into the same
proximitie with his own: in others, how he neglects his own for our
accommodation. In that of January the 20, you have these golden words: That he
will rather lay by any particular respect of his Own dignity, then lose time
for the Public good: That, out of his Fatherly care of his people, he will be
ready, both to equal, and to exceed the greatest examples of the most
Indulgent Princes, in their Acts of Grace and Favor to their people. Again, in
that of the 28 of January there is yet more tenderness. He calls God to
witness (and with him the attestation of that sacred name is very religious)
that the preservation of the public peace, the law and the liberty of the
subject, is and shall always be as much his care and industry, as the safety
of his own life, or the lives of his dearest children. Lastly, in the other of
the 15 of March there is more then yieldings and concessions; a gracious
prevention of our desires: for he is pleased to excite and call upon that Great
Council, even the second time, to prepare with all speed such Acts, as shall
be for the establishment of their privileges, the free and quiet enjoying
their estates and fortunes, the liberties of their persons, the security of
the true Religion now professed in the Church of England. What now shall we say
to these things? Is not that of Solomon made good unto us (Prove. 16.10.) A
Divine sentence is in the lips of the King? Have we not good cause to take up
Ezra's benediction (Ezr. 7.27.) Blessed be the Lord which has put such things
as these into the Kings heart? Such things as these we were not so ambitious as
to hope for: I trust we shall not be so unworthy as to forget. For my self, I
could wish that, according to the duty of this day, I could set them forth as
they deserve. But they need no varnish of Oratorie: neither was it my
intendment to use them further, then for the proof of the proposition in hand;
to show you how this highest excellency of Princes, in the care of their
peoples happiness, is radiant in our Gracious Sovereign. Yet you may remember
also that I told you, The point needs not so much proofs, as retributions. It
calls aloud upon us for all dutiful returns, of honor, love, obedience,
loyalty, and thankful acknowledgements, into that Royal bosom, the first
mover and original under God of our happiness. In the sphere of Nature there
is none of us ignorant, how willing the members are to make return to the head,
for the government and influence they receive from thence: they will undergo
hardship, expose themselves to danger, recede from things convenient, nay
necessary; they will not grudge at any plenty or honor which is bestowed upon
the head; knowing by instinct that from the head the benefit of all redounds to
them. It is likewise obvious in the Regiment of families, which are as States
epitomized; that both honor and duty belong to the Paterfamilias, not only
for the right he has in the house, but for the provision and support and
comfort which all receive from him. Now Kings, by way of excellency, are
Fathers, who look upon all their subjects as so many children, and (with that
noble Emperor) account equally as daughters Rempublicam and Juliam. The very
Heathen, which saw only the outside or Civil part, reputed them as Fathers:
but the Prophet Isaiah, when he speaks of the Church, goes further, and calls
them Nursing Fathers: Isai. 49.23.
a word which in propriety of speech might seem incoagruous; because they have
no more of the nurse, then the bosom; nothing at all of the breasts, if what
is wanting in the sex were not supplied by their tenderness. Benignity, and
clemency, and sweetness of disposition, and facility of access, and
compassion toward the distressed, these are their breasts, more breasts then
two; the same both their breasts and their bowels, which day by day they open
to thousands severally, and to all at once, for the suckling and fostering of
the public. Therefore it behooves us to think of returns. By this word Christ
read us the lesson, Matthew. 22.21. Render, or Return unto Caesar the things which
are Cesars, or the things which are from Caesar. The protection of lives, and
fortunes, and worldly comforts; let him have these back again in the honor,
love, fear, obedience, supplies which belong to the Sovereigne Head and Parent
of a beloved people: that his throne may be established by your loyalty, his
reign still prosperous by your prayers and blessings, his life lenghthened by
years taken forth of your own: that so he may long rejoice to say with David,
Happy are the people. So I have done with the second step of the Gradation, the
special part of the argument here handled; It is De felicitate Populi.

The third is yet more special: It is not only De felicitate Populi, but De
felicitate Populari, that is, De Hac felicitate Populi, or De hoc Genere
felicitatis: Beatus cui SIC, Happy they who are in SUCH A CASE, or CONDITION.
What that condition is, you may see in the former words; in which there are
several blessings mentioned, and all of them temporal. Plenty is one, in
those words, That our garners may be filled with all manner of store; our oxen
strong to labor; our sheep bring forth thousands. Peace is another, in these
words, That there be no leading into captivity, no complaining in our streets.
Multitude of people, especially such as are virtuous, a third, in those, That
our sons may grow up as the young plants, our daughters may be as the
polished corners of the temple. The safety and prosperity of David their
King, a fourth (or rather a first, for it is first mentioned) He gives
salvation, or victory to Kings, and delivers David his servant from the
peril of the sword. Of all these civil threeds the Psalmist twists this wreath
of Happiness; Happy they who are in such a case. Now hence arises the
scruple; Why David, a man of so heavenly a temper, and of so good a judgment
in things which concern salvation, that he is said to be A man after Gods own
heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.
should place felicity in these temporalls. Devout S. Paul, who of all others
came nearest to David's spirit, had these outward things in no better esteem,
then as dross, Phil. 3.8.
or dung: and our blessed Savior, in his first Sermon, Matthew. 5.
thought good to begin the chain of happiness from poverty, and to second it
from hunger, and to continue it from suffering persecution. Non dixit, BEATI
DIVITES, sed, BEATI PAUPERES, as S. Ambrose observes. In this, I say, is the
scruple, That Christ should begin blessedness from poverty, and David place
it in abundance: that things earthly should be as dross to Paul, and as
happiness to David. This scruple wrought so far with some Interpreters, that
they conceived it to be a defective or imperfect sentence, and that the
Psalmist uttered it in the person of a worldly man: like that of Solomon,
Eccles. 2.24. There is nothing better for a man, then to eat and drink, etc.
Therefore, to take off the suspicion of a paradox, they interpose Dixerunt:
BEATUM [ dixerunt] POPULUM CUI HAEC SUNT, Men usually say, HAPPY ARE THE PEOPLE
IN SUCH A CASE. But we need not flee to this refuge: It is neither a defective
nor a paradox; but a full and true proposition, agreeable both to the tenor of
other Scriptures, and also to the analogy of faith. For first, the Psalmist
speaks not here, as in other places, of the happiness of a man, but of the
happiness of a people: it is not Beatus homo, but, Beatus populus. In some
other places, where he treats of the happiness of a man, he circumscribes it
always with things spiritual: a Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD imputes no sin, and in whose spirit
there is no guile: b Psalm. 1 12.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the LORD: c Psalm 40.4.
Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his trust: and the d Psalm. 65.4. and
84.5. and 128.1.
like. Here otherwise, seeing he speaks of the happiness of a people, he might
use more liberty to take in these outwardaccomplishments, as having a nearer
relation to the happiness of a Nation or Kingdom, then abstractively of a
Christian. Howsoever Aristotle affirms, in the 7th of his Politics, that there
is the same happiness (...), of a single man and of awhole city: Yet there is
a great deal of difference, which he, being not instructed in Christianity,
could not observe. Look as on the one side, the being of a State or Nation, as
a collective body, is not so ordered to immortality, nor by consequence to
happiness, as the being of a man: so on the other, the concurrence of
temporal good things is in no wise so essential or requisite to the
happiness of a man, as to the being and well-being, and so to the happiness
of a State or people. Experience tells us that a man may be happy without
children; a State cannot be so without people: a private man may keep his hold
of happiness, though poor and afflicted in the world; a State is only then
happy, when it is flourishing and prosperous, abounding with peace, plenty,
people, and other civil accessions. Men are the walls for strength, women the
nurseries for increase, children the pledges of perpetuity, money as the vital
breath peace as the natural heat, plenty as the radical moisture, religious
and just government as the form or soul of a body politic. Upon this ground
the Psalmist well knowing how conducing these outward things are to popular
happiness, he casts them all into the definition; his present argument being
the happiness of a people. In the second place, admit he had spoke here of the
happiness of a man, or a Christian: yet he mentions not these temporalls,
either as the all, or the only, or the chief of happiness; but as the
concomitants and accessories. They have not an essential influx or ingredience
into it: but a secondarie and accidental respect they have in these two
considerations. First they are ornamenta, as garnishings, which give a gloss
and luster to virtue, and make it more splendid. The Moralists say well, that
they are as shadows to a picture, or garments to a comely personage. Now as in
these, the shadowing makes not the color of a picture truly better, but only
seem better, and appear more fresh and orient; and as garments do indeed adorn
the body now in the state of corruption, whereas, if man had stood in his
integrity, they had been useless for ornament, as well as for necessity: So
likewise these outward things, although in themselves they have nothing of true
happiness, yet because they render it more beauteous and graceful, as the
state of virtue now stands in respect of our converse with men, we may well
reckon them without prejudice to virtue inter ornamenta. Then secondly, they
are adminicula also, helps and adjuments, as handmaids to piety, without
which virtue is impotent. Were a man all soul, virtue alone were sufficient; it
is enough by it self for the happiness of the mind: but being partly body,
and enjoying corporal society with others, he stands in need of things
corporal, to keep virtue in exercise. Want clippes the wings of virtue, that a
man cannot feed the hungry, or cloth the naked, or enlarge himself to the good
of others: on the other side, this (...), as the Philosophers term it, sets
virtue at liberty, and gives it scope to be operative. As fire, the more air
and fuel you give it, the more it diffuseth it self: so the more health,
peace, plenty, friends, or authority we have; the more power, freedom and
advantage we have to do virtuously. Put now all these together, and the reason
is evident, why the Prophet David here places this happiness in the things
which are worse; because they are serviceable to the things which are
better. Howsoever he reserves the mention of the better till afterward; Yet
he would give us to understand, that even these inferior things are the good
blenssigs of God, and such blessings, as being put together, make up one part
of the happiness of a people. It is true of popular happiness, as well as
personal, It is not one single good, but the aggregation or affluence of many.
In the twenty eighth of Deuteronomie, where Moses describes the blessedness
promised to the Israelites, he reckons up all sorts of outward blessings: and
agreeable to those is the conflux of these in this Psalm: The blessing of the
house, and of the city; That there be no leading into captivity, and no
complaining in the streets: The blessings of the basket, and of the store; That
the garners may be filled with plenty: The blessings of the fruit of the
body; That the children may be as young plants: The blessings of the field,
That the sheep may bring forth thousands, and the oxen be strong to labor: The
blessings of going ou^ and coming in; That they may be delivered from the hand
of strange children, and saved out of great waters. Here is briefly the
compound of the many simples which make up this case or condition of a peoples
happiness. And surely if by these particulars it be defined, we may boldly
say, The condition is our own, and men may pronounce of us, as truly as of any
Nation, that we have been for a long time a happy people. Our deliverances from
strange children have been great and miraculous, and our land it has been a
Goshen, a lightsome land; whereas the darkness of discomfort has rested upon
other Nations. The blessings of the city and field, of the basket and of the
store have grown upon us in such abundance, that many men have surfetted of
plenty: Our land has been as an Eden and garden of the Lord for
fruitfulness, as a Salem for peace; whereas other kingdoms do yet groan under
the pressures of sword and famine. Besides these, if there be any blessing
which the Scripture mentions in other places, Peace in the walls, Plenty in
the palaces, Traffic in the ports, or Salvation in the gates; if any part of
happiness which it speaks of in this Psalm, for plantings, or buildings, or
reapings, or storings, or peoplings; we have had them all in as much fullness
as any part of the world, and in more then most: only there is one particular
may be questioned, or rather can not be denied. That amidst the very throng of
all these blessings there are some murmurings and complainings in our streets.
But it need not seem strange to us, because it is not new in the world. In the
stories of all ages we meet with it. That men used to complain of their times
to be evil, when indeed themselves made them so. I may be bold to say, There
was cause in respect of sin then, as well as now, especially with godly men,
who are so good themselves, that it is no marvel, if they thought times a
little evil to be extremely bad: as always sin swells to the eye of grace.
But if we speak of outward pressures and calamities, I am certain there is not
cause now as then: for the riches of the Kingdom were never so great, the
peace of the Kingdom never so constant, the state of it for all things never
so prosperous. Only we must give leave to the world to be like it self: As
long as ambition or covetousness are in the world, men of such spirits will
cry out, The times are bad, even when they are best; because they (in their own
bad sense) still desire to be better. As nothing is enough, so nothing is
pleasing to a restless mind. An insatiable appetite is always impatient; and,
because impatient, querulous. Yet this is not the sole reason: for besides this
humor of appetite, the very corruption of our nature leads us hereunto, To be
weary of the present. It is the joint observation both of Divines and Moralists
(as of Salvian, Quintilian, Tacitus, and others, who agree as near almost in
words as in opinion) Quodusitatum est mentis humanae vitium, illamagis semper
velle quae desunt; and, vetera quidem in laud, praesentia in fastidio ponere.
Our own experience will tell us as much, if we will take pains to observe it,
How, through the pravity of our own dispositions, whatsoever is present proves
burdensome, whether it be good or bad. Salvian, in his third De Gubernatione,
sets forth this humor to the life: That men of all times were displeased with
all times: Si aestus est, (says he) de ariditate causamur; si fluvia, de
inundatione conquerimur: si infoecundior annus est, accusamus sterilitatem; si
foecundior, vilitatem. So winter and summer are both alike distasteful to
impatient men: In scarcity things are too dear, in plenty too cheap: poverty
pincheth, and abundance nauseates. If there be a little too much drought, they
cry out of a famine; if a shower or two extraordinary, they are afraid of a
deluge. You shall hear in good times, Quid nobis cum Davide? and in bad,
Antigonum effodio: as we read of the Israelites, That even when God himself
was pleased to order their civil affairs, they were not contented; but still
repined, as well when they had manna, as when they wanted it. The reason is (as
the Greek Historian notes) (...). But I hope we Christians are of a better
temper. It beseems not us of all others to be so injurious to God, who has
singled us out to be a happy people: It beseems us not to be so unthankful to
our Sovereigne, under whom we enjoy these blessings. Howsoever it ought to be
in the first place acknowledged, that the original of all our happiness is
from heaven: yet it must be confessed withal, that the crystal pipe through
which blessings are conveyed unto us, is his government: Our peace is from his
wisdom^; our plenty from our peace; our prosperity from our plenty; our
safety, our very life, our whatsoever good of this nature, it is by Gods
providence wrapped up in his welfare, whose precious life (as the Orator speaks)
is Vita quaedam publica, the very breath of our nostrils perfumed with
multitude of comforts. L^a. 4.20.
What then remains, but that our thankfulness should result from all, to make
our happiness complete? that so both receiving what we desire, and retributing
what we ow, we may give cause unto all Kingdoms to lengthen this acclamation,
and to say, Happy both Prince and people which are in such a case. So I have
done with the first general part of the text, the path of Prosperity,
answerable to the civil respect of the day.

I now proceed to the second, the path of Piety, answerable to the Religious
respect; Yea, happy. It Is the best wine to the last, though all men be not of
this opinion. You shall hardly bring a worldly man to think so. The world is
willing enough to misconster the order of the words, and to give the prioritie
to Civil happiness, as if it were first in dignity, because it is first
named: they like it better to hear of the Cui sic, then the Cui Dominus. To
prevent this folly, the Psalmist interposeth a caution in this corrective
particle, Yea, Happy. It has the force of a revocation, whereby he seems to
retract what went before, not simply and absolutely, but in a certain degree,
lest worldly men should wrest it to a misinterpretation. It is not an absolute
revocation, but a comparative; it does not simply deny that there is some part
of popular happiness in these outward things, but it preferres the spiritualls
before them: Yea, that is, Yea more, or, Yea rather: like that of Christ in the
Gospel, When one in the company blessed the womb that bare him, Luke 11.28.
he presently replies, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of God
and keep it. In like manner the Prophet David, having first premised the
inferior part and outside of an happy condition; fearing lest any should of
purpose mistake his meaning, and hearing the first proposition, should either
there set up their rest, and not at all take in the second; or if take it in,
yet do it preposterously, and give it the precedence before the second,
according to the worlds order, virtus post nummos: In this respect he puts in
the clause of revocation; whereby he shows, that these outward things, though
named first, yet they are not to be reputed first. The particle Yea removes
them to the second place: it tacitly transposeth the order; and the path of
piety, which was locally after, it places virtually before. It Is as if he had
said, Did I call them happy, who are in such a case? Nay, miserable are they,
if they be only in such a case: The temporal part cannot make them so without
the spiritual. Admit the windows of the visible heaven were opened, and all
outward blessings powered down upon us; admit we did perfectly enjoy whatsoever
the vastness of the earth contains in it: tell me, What will it profit to gain
all, and to lose God? If the earth be bestowed upon us, and not heaven; or the
material heaven be opened, and not the beatificall; or the whole world made
ours, and God not ours: we do not arrive at happiness. All that is in the
first proposition is nothing, unless this be added, Yea, happy are the people
which have the LORD for their God. You see in this part there is aliquid quod
eminet, something which is transcendent: Therefore I will enquire into two
particulars; see both what it is that transcends, and what is the manner of
propounding of it.

The manner of propounding it, is, as I said, corrective, or by way of
revocation: the sum whereof is thus much, That temporalls without
spiritualls, in what abundance soever we possess them, cannot make us truly
happy. They cannot make happy, because they cannot make good. They may
denominate a man to be rich, or great, or honorable; but not to be virtuous.
Nay, Seneca carries it a little further, Non modo non faciunt bonum, sed nec
divitem; They are so far from making a man good, that they make him not truly
rich; because they increase desire, and riches consist in contentation. Not he
that has little, but he that desires more is poor: nor he that has much, but
he that wants nothing is rich. Yea, and we may go further then Seneca; They are
so far from making good, that they often make evil, if they be not
sanctified: they possess the heart with vile affections, fill it full of
carnal and sinful desires. Whereas there are four good mothers which bring
forth ill daughters, prosperity is one. Truth begets hatred, security danger,
familiarity contempt, prosperity pride and forgetfulness of God. In this I
might well make a stop; but there is one degree more: They are so far from
making good, that they do not bring good, but many evils and inconveniences.
They bring not the good of contentment, but infinite distractions: they are
aureae compedes, as S. Bernard speaks, fetters or manicles which entangle the
soul, that it cannot attend upon better things: Nor the good of freedom: they
do enthrall the soul to that which is worse then it self; and it cannot be
apprehended how a thing worse then our selves can make us happy. Lastly, not
the good of safety: for they oftentimes expose us to dangers, Mulios sua
felicitas stravit, as Gregory speaks. Many men their lives had been longer, if
their riches had been less: their happiness made them miserable; and
consolationes factae sunt desolationes, as S. Bernard again. Upon these grounds
the Psalmist had very good reason to sequester them from true happiness, and,
by this corrective particle, to reduce them to the second place, though he set
them in the first. He knew very well that they are burdens, snares, impediments
to piety, as often as furtherances. He knew them to be vain and transitory
things, Prove. 23.5.
that we cannot hold. They make themselves wings, as Solomon speaks. They are
only the movables of happiness, Bractealis felicitas, as Seneca; (...), as
Nazianzen. What Is that? S. Austin seems to translate it, felicitas fallax, a
fabulous and personate felicity: Nay, not only fallax, but falsa, fictitious,
spurious, deceitful, which leaves the soul empty when it most fills it: that
being most true which the same Father adds, felicitas fallax, major
infelicitas; and falsa felicitas, vera miseria. Therefore, that I may shut up
this point, let this be the use of it. We must learn from hence to regulate our
judgments according to the wisdom of the Spirit revealed in the word: And
that we may do, if we keep to Gods method, and set every thing in the due
place, where God has seated it. Now the Scripture constantly does give the
inferior place to these temporal things. If to come after, be inferior; it
sets them there: Seek first the kingdom of God, etc. Matthew. 6.33. If to be
below be inferior, it places them there: Set your affection on things above,
etc. Coloss. 3.2. Even gold and silver, the best of these things, they are
seated under the feet of men, and the whole world under the feet of a
Christian, Rev. 12.1. to teach us to despise it. Lastly, if to be on the left
hand, be inferior; the Scripture reckons them there too: they are called the
blessings of the lest hand, to teach us to give them the same place in our
affections. In one sense, we may put them on the right, by using them to God's
glory: but in love and esteem they must be on the left. S. Hierome illustrates
it by this similitude: As flax when it is on the distaffe, it is on the left
hand; but when it is spunne into yarn, and put on the spindle, it is on the
right: so temporal things in themselves, when first we receive them, they are
as flax on the distaffe, all this while on the left hand; but spinne them
forth, and use them to God's glory, they are as yarn on the spindle,
transposed to the right. Thus we must learn to order them: to the right hand
only for use, to the left for valuation. Otherwise, if we pervert God's order,
and put them on the right; it is to be feared they will set us on the left at
the day of judgment: if we elevate them above, they will keep us below; and
make us come after, if we set them before. The highest place they can have, is
to be seconds to piety: there holy David places them though he mentions
piety last, yet he gives it the precedence in this word of revocation, Yea,
happy; that is, Yea first, yea more, yea more truly happy. That shall serve
for the first particular, the manner of propounding this truth unto us.

The second is the thing it self which transcends, in these words, whose God is
the LORD, or, who have the LORD for their God. In the general it is an
ordinary, as well as transcendent. An ordinary, because all partake of this
privilege. Whereupon S. Austin asks the question, Cujus non est Deus? But S.
Hierome resolves it; Natura Deus omnium, voluntate paucorum: In a community
the God of all, even to the sparrow on the house top, and grass of the field;
but the God of the righteous after a peculiar manner. To come to the meaning;
we must let go the general, this ordo communis providentiae, as he is Dominus
omnium, the Lord of all creatures: this brings not happiness along with it:
God's ordinary and general providence intitles not to that supreme
blessedness, which is in himself. The special references are only intended:
and those we may reduce to these two heads. The first is ordo specialis
influxus, on God's part, the respect of his being gracious to us. Then the Lord
is our God, when he shows himself benign and propitious, when he manifests his
mercy and goodness in the ways of grace and means of salvation. It is so
expounded Psalm 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest: and Psalm 33.12.
Blessed is the nation, whose God is the LORD, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own inheritance. Being thus taken, it affords us this
meditation, That there is no true happiness, but in the favor of God, and
light of his countenance; that is, in God himself: both because happiness is
only from him, he is the only author of it: Non facit beatum hominem, nisi
qui secit hominem; -- Qui dedit ut homines simus, solus dat ut beati simus; He
only makes Saints who makes men: it is S. Austin's elegant expression. Then
again, as it is only from God, so it is only in God. As the soul, says
Austin is vita carnis; so God is the beata vita hominis, so fully, that a man
cannot be happy either way, nec absque Deo, nec extra Deum: not without God,
because he is the Doner; not out of God, because he is the thing it self, and
all which belongs to it. As S. Ambrose of the four beatitudes in S. Luke
compared with the eight in S. Matthew; In istis octo illae quatuor sunt, and in
is it is quatuor illae octo: and as King Porus, when Alexander asked him how he
would be used, answered in one word, (...), that is, like a King. Alexander
again replying, Do you desire nothing else? No, says he: all things are in
(...), So in this which we are now about it holds much more: both the four,
and the eight, and all beatitudes, they are in God; so that he who has God,
must needs have all things, because God is all things. There is no notion under
which we can couch beatitude, but we may find it in God by way of eminency: if
as a state of joy, or glory, or wealth, or tranquillity, or security, God is
all these: if as a state of perfection, salvation, retribution; God is all
these: not only the giver of the reward, but the reward it self; both our
bonum, and our summum. A Christian is never truly happy; till he can find
himself and all things in God. The fruition of God, it is (...)(as Pelusiota
speaks) the very top of the spire or pinnacle of beatitude both here and in
heaven. In hoc uno summitas beatitudinis eliquatur, to use Tertullians words.
Were a man in paradise, were he in heaven it self, and had not God; he could
not be happy. Were he on Job's dunghill, in Daniels den, in the belly of hell
with Jonah, nay in the infernal hell with Dives, and yet had God; he could not
be miserable: for heaven is wheresoever God is, because his influxive presence
makes heaven. That Is the Ordo influxus I mentioned, for which he is said to be
our God. Besides this, there is ordo Divini cultus, on our part, The respect of
our being serviceable to him: when we love him, and fear him, and honor him,
and adhere unto him as we ought. To all these there is blessedness pronounced
in several Psalms: to those that fear him, Psalm. 128.1. to those that keep
his testimonies, Psalm. 119.2. to those that trust in him, Psalm. 84.12. If we
take it thus, the point is this in sum, There is no true happiness, but in
the worship and service of God: Felices sunt qui Deo vivunt, that is S.
Bernards: Servire Deo est regnare, that is S. Ambrose his expression: As much as
this, The godly man is only the true happy man. Yet we must understand it
aright: It is not to serve him only in outward profession, which either makes
us his, or him ours. There are many who pretend to serve him, who cannot
challenge this interest: for they serve him but with their lips; in act,
themselves and their own pleasures: in this both hypocrites and idolaters, that
under the show of one God set up many to themselves. The Epicure he makes his
belly his God, the lascivious man his lust, the voluptuous man his pleasure,
the factious man his humor, the covetous man his mammon. I name this last. It
is the observation of S. Austin, in his 7 book De Civitate Dei, and of
Lactantius in his second De Origin Erroris, That avarice gives laws to
religion, whilst generally sub obtentu Numinis cupiditas colitur. Yea, and S.
Paul expresses it more punctually, That covetousness is idolatry, Col. 3.5.
And the covetous man an idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. For he does the same to his gold,
that the heathen did to their idols: he makes his gold his God; his God,
because his joy, and his care, and his confidence: Those pictures he worships,
though otherwise he abhorres idols; to these he offers his service, he gives
them his heart, he extols them, ascribes unto them the glory of his happiness:
These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: this
money got thee such a preferment, procured such a deliverance, prevailed in
such a suite. It Is the secret idolatry which runs through the world. But
such men as these, they are as far from God as from his service, and as far
from happiness as from God. Whosoever will make sure of the Lord to be his
God, he must put the idols out of his heart, he must go out of himself, he
must not willingly harbor any sin. Sin separates from God, excludes from
happiness, cuts off both privileges, of God's being ours, and our being
God's. Yet there is one thing more; with which I will conclude: Since it is so,
that happiness is seated in these mutual intercurrences, of calling the Lord
our God, and our selves his people; and seeing religion is the Vinculum
unionis, which makes these mutual interests intercurrent, and couples them
together; it follows as the upshot of all, That the chief and choicest part of
National happiness consists in the purity of God's worship, in the enjoying
of God's ordinances, in the free passage of the Gospel; that is, in the truth
and integrity of religion. In this alone there are all sweets, all beauties,
all blisses, all glories. It is as the ark of God to Israel, and as the golden
candlestick to the Churches, the elevating principle which advances a
Christian Nation above the heathen, and the reformed Churches above other
Christian Nations, and this Island in which we live (I may say without
arrogancy) above all. There is no Nation in the world, which has had the
condition of religion so pure and prosperous, as we, for almost these hundred
years. It Is true, if God calls us to account, we cannot say that we have
answered our opportunities: we find not wherein to boast of our righteousness;
for we are a sinful people, whose lives (for the most part of us) are as
much worse, as our means and professions better then in other places. It is
true also, that of later years the love of religion in most has grown cold,
and the purity by some has been stained and corrupted: and I will not now
discuss where the fault has been; the rather, because it is every man's
endeavor to remove it from himself. Only I will add thus much, That
wheresoever the fault is, there is no man has showed himself more forward to
reform it then the King himself. But Princes cannot always attain their ends
according to their liking, because they see with other eyes, and execute with
other hands then their own. And if we should cast the faults of men upon
authority, we should do wrong (I fear) to those who do not deserve it: for
even this very year, notwithstanding the reformation of corruptions has been
with so much zeal and diligence endeavored, yet the end is not attained: Nay,
in some respects, it is so far set back that, to my understanding, the state
of religion has never been worse since the first reformation, then this
present year: in respect, first, of the greatness of our distractions, which
have divided us all one from another: then, of the multitude of sects and
sectaries which cry indeed, as the Jews before them, Templum Domini; but with a
worse addition, ut Templum Domini diruatur. Lastly, in respect of the many
dishonours done to the service of God, with so much scorn and scandal to
religion, that in foreign parts they question, whether all this time we had any.
No doubt all this is come upon us for our sins: let us remove them, and then
God will bless our study of reformation. But yet in the mean time let us
remember that message, which the good Bishop sent to Epiphanius, Domine, sol ad
oscasum descendit. Our sunshine is but yet declining; it may come to set, if
we now begin to disgust this greatest blessing of religion, which God has
bestowed upon us. Let us learn to regard it more, to love it better, to bless
God for it, and for his government who upholds it: a Prince so devout and
religious in his own person, that if all were like him, we should have a
Kingdom of Saints. In this respect, we may use Velleius his words of his
Majesty, Cum sit imperio Maximus, exemplo Major est: The luster of his piety
surpasses the luster of his empire. If therefore that of Synesius be true,
That men generally affect to write after the copies which are set by their
Princes; it behooves us all, both to take out the lesson, and to bless God for
the copy. And moreover, as this day puts us in mind, let us all send up our
most affectionate prayers, that his Throne may be established by
Righteousness, his Crown exalted with Honor, his Scepter be for power like
Moses rod, for flourishing like Aaron's; that his happy reign may in himself
outlive us all, and in his posterity be perpetuated to all generations; that
succeeding ages may confess, Surely God has been favorable unto this land,
and has not dealt so with any Nation. O how happy are the people that are in
such a case! Yea, how happy are the people which have the Lord for their God!

FINIS.

