THE EXPEDIENCY OF A Public Liturgy, To Preserve the REVERENCE OF PUBLIC
WORSHIP: IN A SERMON PREACHED at BRIDGEWATER, FOR THE Satisfaction of an
Eminent DISSENTER.

By MATTHEW HOLE, B. D. and Vicar of Stokegursey, in Somersetshire.

1 Cor. 14. ult. Let all things be done decently, and in Order.

LONDON, Printed for Matt. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street,
MDCXCVII.

A SERMON ON
PSALM lxxxix. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the Assemblies of his Saints,
and to be had in reverence of all that are round about him.


THESE Words are a brief Direction how to behave our selves in the House and
Presence of God; which we are here told, must be with Fear and Reverence. The
occasion of them was from the Psalmist's deep and serious Contemplation of the
Works of God; together with those glorious Attributes and Perfections, that
shine so brightly in them: The Meditation whereof filled his Heart with Joy,
and his Mouth with the Praises of his Maker. The Psalm begins with a Song in
Praise of his Goodness; Verse. 1.
My Song shall be always of the loving Kindness of the Lord; with my Mouth will
I show forth his Truth, from one Generation to another. And after some
remarkable instances of it, he breaks out in Admiration of his Greatness,
saying, Verse. 5.
The Heavens shall praise his wondrous Works, and the Earth shall sound forth
the Glory of his Power. In a word, the infinite Wisdom, Bounty, Truth, and
Faithfulness of God appeared in such lively Colors, stamped upon all the Works
of his Hands, that made him in the Verse before the Text to cry out, Verse. 6.
Who in the Heavens can be compared unto the Lord? or what is he among the gods
that can be liken'd unto him? And then, to imprint the greater awe and dread of
him upon our Minds, he adds these words, God is greatly to be feared in the
Assemblies of his Saints, and to be had in Reverence of all that draw nigh to
him.

The Sense of which Words, I shall briefly sum up and handle in this plain
Proposition; viz.

That all our Addresses to the Divine Majesty must be accompanied with a Holy
Fear, and Reverence: God is greatly to be feared, etc.

In treating of this Proposition, I shall not need to insist much upon the
proof of it: For the bare Light of Nature will teach us, that the Worship of
God is to be performed with the greatest Solemnity and Reverence.

For this being the Homage we are to pay to the Supreme Being, or the just
Acknowledgment we owe to our great Creator, Reason wills that it be done with
all imaginable Deference and Humility: And since we receive and expect all from
him, 'twill farther teach us, that the profoundest Reverence and Veneration we
can pay to him, must come vastly short of his infinite Excellencies and
Perfections.

But if the Light of Nature and Reason were more dim and defective in this
Point, than it is, The Light of Scripture would abundantly supply it: for there
we read many clear and express Precepts to this purpose.

The Royal Psalmist, in our Text, makes this to be a Tribute due to the
infinite Greatness and Glory of our Maker; God is greatly to be feared, says
he, in the Assemblies of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that
draw nigh to him. And therefore he calls upon the greatest Persons, even the
Princes and Potentates of the Earth, to serve the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2.
and to rejoice before him with trembling. Yea, we find God Almighty
challenging this Homage from us: If I be a Father, where is my Honor? Mal. 1.6.
if I be a Master, where is my Fear? says the Lord of Hosts. And elsewhere he
threatens the Neglect, and encourages the Performance of this Duty: Them that
honor me, 1 Samuel 2.30.
I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

In the New Testament we are called upon to serve God acceptably, with
reverence, and godly fear: Implying, Heb. 12.28.
that our Service cannot be acceptable, unless it be attended with these things.

I shall therefore take this for granted, as a Matter wherein we are all
agreed, that God is to be served with Reverence and godly Fear. The great
things to be considered in this case are, What this Reverence is; and how it
may be best expressed or performed in the Worship of God? Accordingly therefore
in handling of these words, I shall enquire,

First, Into the Nature of this Reverence, that is required in the Service of
God, and show wherein it consists.

Secondly, Into the Manner, how it may be best observed and secured in the
Public Assemblies. I begin with the

First, which is to show the Nature of this Reverence, and wherein it consists.
In order to which, I say in general, That Reverence is such a Religious sense
of the Glory and Greatness of the Divine Majesty, as engages us to behave our
selves becomingly in his presence. And this is partly Internal, and partly
External.

Internal Reverence consists in the aweful Apprehensions of the Mind,
concerning the Greatness of the Person, we address to.

External Reverence consists in the decent Demeanor of the Outward Man, by
well ordering of our words and gestures in our Applications to him. The former
is the Reverence of the Soul, and the latter of the Body; both which are to
attend us into the House of God, and to be carefully minded in our serving of
him.

(1.) I say, There is an Inward Reverence of the Soul, that is to accompany
Divine Worship: And this consists in aweful Apprehensions of the Mind,
concerning him, we draw nigh to. This is hinted to us in the First part of our
Text; God is greatly to be feared in the Assemblies of the Saints; That is, our
Minds are to be possessed with a profound and aweful Dread of the Divine
Majesty, in our approaches to him: which the Apostle styles a Godly fear: And
this arises from a sense of our infinite distance from God, and of our daily
and necessary dependence upon him. For when we consider, how vastly the great
Sovereign of the World, is above sinful Dust and Ashes; and are so affected
with the Thoughts of it, as never to appear before him but with the deepest
Humility, and lowliness of Mind; when we entertain such mean and abject
thoughts of our selves, and our own vileness, as even to blush, and be ashamed
to approach so great a Presence; when, I say, we have such a true sense of this
infinite distance and disproportion between him and us, then are we said, to
fear God in the Assemblies of the Saints, and to have a Religious awe and dread
when we draw nigh unto him.

Now to beget this holy Fear and Dread in us, we are frequently in our thoughts
to descend to a particular Consideration, of the infinite Attributes and
Perfections of our Maker; and this will help to screw up our Minds to a due
pitch of Reverence and Veneration for him.

Thus if we Consider,

1. The infinite Power of God, who made the World, and all things in it, by the
Word of his Mouth; who, as he spoke them all into Being, so can he speak them
back again into Nothing, when he pleases: And then think with our selves, that
it is this great and glorious Being, that in our Public Assemblies we are
speaking to, and attending upon, This will strike our Minds with a holy Awe and
Dread of him; and make us afraid to dally with such an immense and powerful
Being. Again,

2. If we Ponder upon the infinite Knowledge of God, who searches the heart,
and understands our thoughts long before hand; that his Eyes behold, and his
Eye lids try the Children of Men; that all things are open and naked before
him, and nothing can be hid from his Presence; And then consider, That it is
this All-knowing and Heart-searching Being, that in our Public Assemblies we
address to, This will farther imprint this Sacred Awe and Dread upon our Souls,
and keep us from all Irreverence in so great a Presence. Moreover,

3. If we take into our Consideration the manifold Mercies and transcendent
Goodness of God, who gives us life, and breath, and all things; upon whose
Bounty we entirely depend: If we call to Mind, that he is daily heaping his
Mercies and Blessings upon us; that we live wholly upon him, and cannot subsist
one moment without him: And then Consider, That it is this gracious and
bountiful Being that in our Public Assemblies we are directing our Worship to,
This will make us fear the Lord for his goodness, Hos. 3.5.
and so fix our Minds in the Love and Contemplation of him, that we shall be
both ashamed and afraid to offend so great and good a Benefactor.

Lastly, If we Consider how infinitely Jealous and tender God Almighty is of
his honor, and that he whom we Address to, will not be mocked with Vain and
Hypocritical Pretenses of Serving of him: That he is to be loved with all our
Heart, and all our Mind, and all our Strength; and will not be Rivaled by the
World, the Flesh, or the Devil, in the acts of Worship: And then call to mind,
that in our Public Assemblies we are Serving this Jealous God, who watches all
the Wanderings of our Heart from him, This will make us, in the Psalmist's
Phrase, to serve the Lord with fear; and even to rejoice before him with
trembling.

In a word, if we seriously meditate on the boundless and adorable Perfections
of the Divine Nature, and bethink with our selves who and what that God is, in
whose Presence we are, when we enter his House, and offer up our Prayers and
Praises to him, 'Twill make us bow our Souls before him, and create those
devout and awful Apprehensions of him, in which this Inward reverence and Godly
fear does mainly consist.

And this is one Reason, why the Public Liturgy of our Church, was cast into
so many short Prayers or Collects, each of which beginning with some Attribute
or Perfection of God, proper to usher in the Petition that follows it, is
thereby fitted, both to keep up the Reverence and Attention of the Mind in
asking it; and to quicken our Faith and Hopes of obtaining it.

And so much briefly of that Inward fear and reverence that is to attend all
our Addresses to the Divine Majesty, held forth in those words, God is greatly
to be feared in the Assemblies of his Saints.

Now these Internal awful Apprehensions of the Mind concerning God, are to be
expressed,

(2.) By the Outward Reverence of the Body; which consists in the well-ordering
of our words and gestures in our Applications to him. And this is held forth to
us in the last words of the Text; And to be had in Reverence of all that are
round about him.

That Reverence relates to the Outward Man, and implies becoming gestures and
behavior of the Body, is evident not only from the Nature of the thing, but
from the universal Consent and Practice of Mankind; who have always showed
their Respect this way, to those that are above them.

Mephibosheth the Son of Jonathan fell on his Face and did Reverence to David.
2 Samuel 9.6. 1 King. 1.31.
Bathsheha bowed her Face to the Earth, and did Reverence to the King. All the
King's Servants bowed and did Reverence to Haman. Hest. 3.2.
By which it appears, that humble and decent Postures of the Body, have been
ever reckoned to be Tokens of Respect and Reverence.

That this External Reverence is to be used likewise in the Worship of God, is
evident too from many Precepts and Examples in Holy Scripture. Romans 12.1^.
St. Paul beseeches the Romans, to present their bodies, as a living, holy and
acceptable Sacrifice unto God; which is our reasonable Service. Where the
Apostle calls the presenting our bodies a living Sacrifice, in Opposition to
the dead bodies that were offered to him under the law: And because brute
beasts and irrational Creatures were then offered up. He styles the presenting
our bodies a reasonable Service; which as it is more holy, so it is a more
fitting and acceptable Present to our Maker. The same Apostle exhorts the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
to glorify God with their bodies, as well as Souls; which is to be done by
reverent and becoming Gestures in his Service. And to engage them thereunto,
tells them, that they are both his, and must be both dedicated to him. He that
breathed into us a Living and immortal Soul, did likewise frame the Body to be
a fit Mansion and Companion for it; and united them together for his Service:
And therefore justly expects the Homage and Service of both. Yea he further
adds, that Christ redeemed the Body as well as the Soul from the bondage of
Corruption: And God has promised to glorify both hereafter: And therefore
both are required to glorify him here.

The Truth is, an inward Reverence for God will always draw after it the
Reverence of the outward Man; And where the Mind is possessed with awful
Apprehensions of the divine Majesty, it will discover it self in the External
Decency both of Words and Actions. And accordingly we find, that good Men, in
all Ages, have taken Care, not only to keep up a Religious Awe and Dread of God
in their Souls, but have been as careful, likewise, to express it by the
External Acts and Postures of the Body.

Now what outward Gestures are most expressive of Honor and Reverence, the
Practice of the Church, and the Custom of the Country where we live, will be
the best Guides to direct us. Uncovering of the Head, Bowing the Body, putting
off the Shoes, Kneeling, Prostration, lifting up the Eyes and Hands unto
Heaven, Lamen. 3.41.
have been Ancient Signs and Tokens of Honor. Exodus 3.5.
The Lord commanded Moses to put off his Shoes, because the place whereon he
stood was Holy Ground: And to this Solomon alludes, when he directs Men to look
to their Feet, Eccl. 5.1.
when they enter into the House of God. Josh. 5.14.
Joshua fell on his Face to the Earth, and worshipped God. And David calls upon
Men to worship, Psalm. 95. ^, 7.
and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker: By which we may observe,
That Discalceation, Kneeling, and Prostrating, were the usual Expressions of
outward Reverence under the Old Testament. 1 Cor. 11. 7.
In the New, we find uncovering the Head to be made a part of that bodily
Reverence that is to be used in Religious Assemblies. And our Blessed Savior's
Example has made kneeling the proper Posture of Devotion: For in all his
Prayers to his Father, Luke 24.^1.
we find him upon his Knees, the Evangelists frequently relating, That he
kneeled down and prayed.

In our Days, Uncovering the Head, Standing, and Kneeling, are the proper
Postures and Expressions of Reverence.

Hence we are wont to rise up to our Superiors, and to be uncovered in their
Presence, as a Token of Respect to them. When we offer a Petition to a Prince,
we do it upon our Knees. To sit in the Presence of a great Man, is reckoned a
great Rudeness; and he that presents a Petition to a King in that Posture,
instead of an Answer, will meet with nothing but Frowns and a Rebuke.

Now that which is irreverent and unmannerly, when done to Men, can never be
any part of Reverence toward God: For God, as he justly may, expects the best
things, that we have; and will be served in the humblest manner, that we can:
Otherwise, we incurr that heavy Curse, denounced by the Prophet Malachi, Mal.
1.14*
against such as having in their Flock a Male, will yet vow and sacrifice unto
God a corrupt thing. And therefore to sit at our Prayers, as the manner of some
is, and to offer up our Petitions to God in a careless, lolling, and slovenly
Posture, as too many do, is the rudest Affront that can be offered to the
Majesty of Heaven; and we may well think, that such an Indignity will be one
Day answered with the greatest Indignation. God Almighty has declared, That he
will not accept the blind, or the lame, for Sacrifice; nor be put off with such
rude and unworthy Services, as would be reckoned an abuse to an earthly Prince.
And therefore we find him thus upbraiding those that present him with such
Offerings, Go and offer it, says he, to thy Governor, Mal. 1.8*
and see whether he will be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person: And sure
they must have very low and mean Thoughts of God, who think that Service good
enough for him, which would be thought saucy and unmannerly when done to his
Creatures.

But our Text, if well attended to, would teach these Men better manners in all
their approaches to their Maker. For that tells them, That God is greatly to be
feared, by the inward Dread and Awfulness of the Mind; and to be had in
Reverence, by the outward Decency and Humility of the Body: And both these are
to accompany them to the public Assemblies, and to be carefully minded, by all
that draw nigh unto him.

And thus having described the Reverence that is to be observed in the Worship
of God, I shall add no more under this Head; but to admonish you to be mindful
of both parts of it, in all your solemn Addresses to him; that is, to possess
your hearts with awful Apprehensions of him; and to compose your bodies into
all the decent Postures of Humility and Adoration. So shall you serve God
acceptably, with Reverence and godly Fear, and thereby find Grace to help in
time of need.

From whence I proceed;

Secondly, To consider the Way and Manner how this Reverence may be best
expressed and secured in the Public Assemblies.

To this end we must note, That there are but two ways of celebrating the
Public Worship and Service of God; and they are either

First, By a Public Liturgy, or well-compos'd Forms of Prayer, wherein both
the Matter and Words are digested and prepared to our Hands; or,

Secondly, By Extemporary Effusions, where both these are left to the sudden
Conceptions of him that prays.

The former is the Established way of the Church of England, wherein she treads
in the Steps of all Antiquity; there being no Christian Church from the days of
the Apostles, to the present Age, but what has performed their public Worship
by a Liturgy or set Forms of Prayer.

The latter is the way of Dissenters; who have herein broke off from the
Ancient Practice of all Christian Churches; and have been unhappily misled into
it by the cunning Craftiness of some, who lay in wait to deceive.

My Business then at present will be, to examine which of these two Ways best
tends to promote and preserve that holy Reverence of Body and Mind before
described; that is, whether by set Forms, or sudden Effusions, God is most
feared in the Assemblies of the Saints, and had in Reverence of those that draw
near to him?

But before I enter upon the Discussion of this Point, I shall prepare my way
to it, by premising these four or five things. And the

1st. is, To assure you that I have no Design of offending or provoking any
Person; Jam. 1.20.
well knowing that the wrath of Man works not the righteousness of God. I
call God to witness, That my only aim is to inform and settle your Judgment
aright, in a Matter wherein your own Welfare, as well as the Peace, Unity, and
Edification of the Church are so deeply concerned. St. Paul bare Record
concerning the Israelites, that they had a Zeal, Romans 10.1, 2.
which yet in some things, was not according to knowledge; meaning, That they
had some mistaken Notions concerning the Law, and the Righteousness of it,
wherein they needed better Information. And therefore he not only prayed that
Israel might be saved, but instructed them too in the right way and method of
Salvation. And there are some likewise in our Days, who may have a good Meaning
toward God, and yet may mistake their way, and stand in need of a guide to
direct their good Intentions. And if, by the Example of this great Apostle, I
shall endeavor to rectify the misguided Zeal of such Persons, and to help
forward their growth in Grace and Knowledge, I cannot doubt their kind
Acceptance of my good Will; and that they will heartily hear and receive, what
is so honestly meant and tendered to them. Let me therefore bespeak you in the
Words of St. Peter, to lay aside all guile, and all malice, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.
and hypocrisy, and envying, and evil speaking: And as newborn babes, desire
the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby.

2. The next thing to be premised is, That the Question at present, is not
about the Lawfulness of Forms of Prayer; for this is now generally granted by
all sober Dissenters; and indeed 'twere strange if it should not, when our
Blessed Savior himself prescribed a Form, and commanded his Disciples and
Followers to use it; yea, Luke 11.1.
when all the Prayers we find offered up by our Savior, consisted of Forms:
For the Evangelists tell us, That he prayed three times, saying the same Words.

And as Forms of Prayer in general, so ours in particular are by the far
greatest part of Dissenters adjudged to be lawful; for they can, and do
frequently join with us in the use of them, and maintain occasional Communion
with us in them; which they would not do, if they thought them unlawful.

So that they are not now frighted from our Service, by the hard Names of Baal,
and Dagon, and Babylon, and Mass-Service, and the like; which some designing
Men, to create Schisms and Divisions among us, formerly put upon it: But ever
since they have been persuaded to come near it, and to be better acquainted
with it, all these Bugbears vanish; and it appears to be not only a tolerable,
but a pious and wholesome Model of Devotion.

3. As we are Agreed about the Lawfulness of Forms, so neither does our Church
condemn all use of more free and conceived Prayers in their due time and place.
For in our private and secret Prayers, wherein we are to confess our own
particular Sins, and to lay before God our own particular Wants and
Necessities, we are allowed to enlarge our selves, as we shall think meet.

But because the public Worship ought to be so framed and worded, that all may
know what they are to join in and say Amen to, therefore all Christian Churches
have thought a standing Liturgy most expedient to preserve the Unity and
Harmony of divine Worship; that Christians may with one heart and one mouth
glorify their great Creator.

But in private they are left at Liberty to their own conceived Devotions; and
may use their own or others Expressions, as they find them best suit with their
Necessities and Occasions: Yea, even in public too, in some extraordinary
Cases, wherein the Church has made no Provision, Ministers are not restrained
from a sober and decent Exercise of their own Abilities; provided it be done
with Prudence and a due Submission to Authority. In short, then, the Question
in Debate is,

Whether the Reverence and Solemnity of Public Worship be not better provided
for and secured by well-composed Forms, than by leaving Men to their own free
and Extemporary Effusions.

And that we may advance by degrees, to the better clearing of this Point, I
shall premise,

4. That a composed Address is always esteemed a Token of greater Reverence and
Respect, than sudden and unpremeditated Speech: For the one betokens a due
Sense of the Greatness of the Person we address to, before whom we dare not
venture to utter any thing rashly or hastily; the other betrays mean Thoughts
of the Person with whom we think fit to make so bold. And therefore we never
address to Princes, but in a composed form of words; to show the awe and sense
we have of their greatness: we bind up our Tongues to a form of Speech, lest by
letting them loose, we should unawares fall into those Indecencies, that might
rather Affront than Honor the Majesty we address to. And if this be a piece of
Respect to be showed to Men like our selves, to take a due care of our Words
and Behavior in speaking to them, can any think fit to make so bold with their
Maker, as to vent any thing of a sudden before him? Certainly, the Reverence we
owe to the Supreme Being, ought not to be less than that we are wont to pay to
Inferior Creatures: And therefore what is irreverent when done to them, must
be much more so when done to him; for it is not to be imagined, that the King of
Kings should have a less regard to his Honor, than Earthly Princes: and
consequently, it must be absurd and irrational to treat the Majesty of Heaven,
who is infinitely above the Kings and Potentates of the Earth, more rudely than
we are wont to do the Works of his own Hands.

But to advance farther in this Point, I shall premise,

5. That God Almighty is not to be wrought upon, either by the multitude or
variety of Words: and therefore neither of these can be any token of Reverence
and Respect to him. And because here lies the main Error and Mistake in this
Matter, I shall enlarge here a little the more, that we may the better discover
and remove it.

I say then, That the novelty and variety of Expressions in Prayer, has no
manner of Efficacy or Acceptance at all with God. For we find him often
condemning, but never commending the use of them: These things may indeed do
much with Men, who must be informed of our Wants, before they can relieve them;
and being led mostly by their Passions, are often moved by the Arts and
Importunity of Speech; but God Almighty, who knows our Necessities before we
ask, and is above and without all manner of Passions, is not to be moved or
prevailed upon by these Arts. So that to think that God is taken with many and
new Words, is to think him such a one as our selves; yea, it is to rank him
among the worst and meanest sort: for Wise Men easily see through these Arts;
and it is only the blind and weaker part of Mankind, that are led or influenced
by them. And therefore Solomon wills us to express the sense of our great
distance from him, by the Paucity and Discretion of our words; Eccl. 5.^.
for God is in Heaven, says he, and we are upon Earth; therefore our words
unto him should be few.

Indeed, to speak properly, Prayer is not the Work of the Tongue, or a Matter
of Words, but the Work and Business of the Soul: and consists not so much in
lifting up the Voice, Exodus 14.15.
as in the Elevation of the Heart unto God. Moses is said to cry unto the Lord,
when he uttered not a word: and Hannah spoke in her heart, 1 Samuel 1.13.
and prayed, when her voice was not heard. And we find St. James ascribing the
Efficacy and Success of our Prayers, not to the nimbleness and volubility of
the Tongue, Jam. 5.16. (...).
but to the inward workings and warmth of the Heart; telling us that the
inwrought fervent Prayer of the Righteous, (for so the word imports) avails
much.

The truth is, Ostentation and Vanity is commonly seen in many words; and Pride
lurketh under a Profuseness of Speech: Whereas Modesty and Reverence, the much
better qualifications of a Petitioner, are best seen in few and well-weigh'd
Expressions; and these evermore find the best acceptance: (...) 5.5.
for God and Man too resist the proud; and both conspire to show grace and
favor to the humble. A bold arrogant Petitioner, that comes rather to show his
Parts, than his Wants, and runs out his Petition into length and multiplicity
of words, is commonly dismissed with frowns and a repulse; and they that are
thus full of themselves, are sent empty away: whereas an humble Petitioner,
that comes with a deep sense of his own defects, and the greater excellencies
of him he applies to, and manifests both these by the humility of his Words and
Gestures, generally finds an easy access, and a kind acceptance.

A plain instance hereof we have in the Pharisee and the Publican. The poor
Publican, out of a deep sense of his own unworthiness, had scarce confidence
enough to lift up his eyes unto Heaven; but smote upon his breast; and with a
profound humility of Soul and Body uttered only this short form of Prayer, God
be merciful to me a sinner. Well, and what was the effect of these few and
hearty words? why God Almighty was well pleased with the humble Sincerity of
his Address, and sent him home justified to his own House. The proud Pharisee,
on the other hand, comes with his long Prayers, and spins out his Petition into
a multitude and variety of Expressions, bestowing many good words upon himself,
as a Saint of the highest form; God, I thank thee, I am not as other men, etc.
and many bad words on others, and especially on the poor Publican: But what was
the issue of this bold and vaunting Harangue? why, our Savior condemned him
for an arrant Hypocrite, and sharply rebuked his vain babbling. The one by being
low in his own eyes, rose the higher in God's: the other by exalting himself,
fell into the greater Scorn and Contempt. By which it evidently appears, that
it is not the multitude or variety of words, that is pleasing unto God: for
though much speaking may (as one has observed) storm the Ear, yet it is Modesty
and Humility that takes the Heart.

Lastly, There is one thing more to be premised, and that is, that sudden and
unpremeditated Speech is liable to many Indecencies and Imperfections; yea,
such as oftener stand in need of a Pardon, than procure Acceptance. Solomon
has told us, Prove. 10.19.
That in the multitude of words there wants not sin; and he that is hasty of
speech utters folly. It Is hard, when the Tongue has too great a liberty, to
prevent its Extravagance: and this unruly Member is not easily confined within
the rules of Decency.

Experience shows, that in long and sudden Speeches, many things are said, that
had been better not to have been spoke. And he that considers what raw,
indigested Speeches have proceeded out of the Mouths of such as have taken this
liberty in their Prayers to God, will see great reason to tie up the Tongue to
the good Behavior, and to beg Pardon for the Irreverence of such Addresses.
David resolved to keep his mouth as it were with a bridle, Psalm. 3.1.
to curb and restrain its Extravagance; and upon great deliberation, said, I
will take heed to my ways, that I offend not in my tongue. And this we should
all do, not only in our Conversation with Men, where rash and unadvised words
frequently occasion much Evil; but chiefly in our Addresses to God, where, as
the Danger is greater, so should our care and circumspection be so too. To
which end we should all pray with the Psalmist, Psalm. 141.3.
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, that nothing may pass through it without
due Examination; and keep the door of my lips, that no Evil may enter in, or
come out of it: And such a Doorkeeper ought every one to be in the house of
God.

And thus having a little prepared the Way, by premising these sew things, I
shall now come closer to the Matter in Question, and enquire whether a
well-composed Liturgy ot Forms of Prayer be not better to preserve and secure
that Reverence and Solemnity of Public Worship before described, than sudden
and conceived Prayers? To which I answer, Yes; and shall endeavor to
demonstrate it by these following Arguments.

First, That which best helps us to come preparedly to the public Worship of
God, does most conduce to preserve the Reverence that is to be used in it: But
public Forms of Prayer do best assist us in making such a Preparation; and
therefore must conduce most to secure the Reverence that is to be showed in it.

That Preparation is necessary before we approach the Divine Majesty, I suppose
will be easily granted by all that have any sense of his infinite Power and
Greatness: for without this we rush into the Presence of God, Jer. 8.6.
as the Horse rusheth into the Battle; not considering whither we are a going:
and therefore we are commanded to prepare our hearts to seek the Lord.

Now this Preparation is much better helped by a Public Liturgy, than it can
be by Extemporary Effusions. For where the Matter of Public Prayer is digested
into fit words, there we may peruse and meditate upon it before hand; and
thereby be assisted to come prepared, with Affections suitable to it. When we
know what we are about to confess, we may be able to excite that Sorrow, that
Shame and Indignation with our selves, that is fit to accompany such a
Confession. When we know what we are about to ask, we may come prepared with a
due Sense of our want of it, and with ardent desires of having it supplied.
When we know for what mercies and blessings we are about to give thanks, we may
stir up in our hearts that joy and inward sense of the divine goodness, that is
proper for such Thanksgivings.

In a word, when we can consider beforehand for whom, and for what we are
going to address to our Maker, weighing each Petition, and meditating upon the
sundry Attributes and Properties of God Almighty, with which they are ushered
in, we may suit our affections to the matter and words of such an Address, and
come ready to go along with all the Parts of such a Service.

Now this is impossible to be done in sudden and conceived Prayers; because we
cannot know before hand what will be uttered: And how can we prepare our selves
for such an Exercise, which we are wholly unacquainted with, and know not
either the Matter, or Words, or Order in which it will be delivered? Neither is
this possible to be known, when the Minister himself is uncertain beforehand
what he shall say. Such a one may confess some Sins in public, which many in
the Congregation cannot charge themselves withal: And so may falsely accuse them
before God. He may put up Petitions for things, which may be inexpedient for
some of them to ask, and for God to grant.

And how is it possible to prepare or bring devout Affections to such a
Service? 1 Cor. 14.8.
If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who can prepare himself to the battle?
If he that officiates be uncertain beforehand, what he shall say, and the
People uncertain what they shall hear, as both must be when their Prayers are
left to sudden Effusions; there can be no Preparation for such a Worship; and
consequently no due Reverence in attending upon it: Which is the first Argument.

Secondly, That which best helps us to pray with the Understanding, must best
promote the Reverence and Solemnity of public Worship: But a well composed
Liturgy best helps to pray with the Understanding, and therefore best promotes
the Reverence of divine Worship.

That Reverence is mightily promoted by the Understanding of our Prayers, I
think is too evident to need any Proof.

For since it consists (as we before observed) in awful Apprehensions
concerning God, it supposes a due Understanding before whom we are, and what we
say, in addressing to him: Eccl. 5.4.
Without which we only offer him the Sacrifice of Fools; which Solomon tells us
he takes no Pleasure in. For it is the Understanding, that makes our Prayers
both a reasonable and acceptable Service.

And therefore the Apostle directs Men to pray with the Understanding, 1 Cor.
14.
and to use such easy Terms and Language in the public Devotion, that the
People may be edified; blaming all praying and prophesying in an unknown
Tongue, or which is all one, in dark, difficult, and mystical Phrases; whereby
the mind is not edified, and the Understanding is unfruitful.

Now herein, likewise, a well-composed Form is of far greater Use, than sudden
and conceived Prayer. For in a public Liturgy, all the Expressions are well
weighed and considered; great Care is taken that the Words suit the matter; and
that both may be made easy and intelligible to the People: All the parts of it
are deliberately scanned and reviewed; that they may be fitted to the
necessities, and likewise to the capacities, of the whole Congregation: So that
the meanest Person may understand it, as well as the greatest; and he that
occupies the room of the learned, may apprehend and go along with the whole
Service.

This is more than any can be secured of in sudden and extempore Prayers. For
there the Minister being unprovided, beforehand of Words, may and often does,
speak very improperly and incoherently; and being forced to utter what first
comes to head, may let fall such Expressions, as neither suit the Majesty of
God, nor the Understanding of the People. He may be either confused in his
Method, or obscure in his Expressions; darkening speech without knowledge, and
falling upon such words and phrases, as a great part of the Congregation may
not understand: Which yet must pass as they come; there being no way of
reviewing or amending such Effusions.

These and such like Inconveniences, which it is well known attend such Prayers,
are great Hindrances to true Devotion, and mar the Reverence of public
Worship.

In a word, it is most certain that both Minister and Pecple may better pray
with the Understanding in a known Form, where the Matter and Words are well
digested, than they can possibly do, where both are left at great
Uncertainties. Second thoughts, we say, in Matters of Moment, are always the
best: And when these are clothed in plain, familiar, and intelligible Terms,
they are far to be preferred before sudden and hasty Conceptions: And as two
Eyes see more than one, so it is reasonable to conceive that a Synod or
Convocation of many able, pious, and learned Divines should butter contrive the
Matter and Method of public Worship, upon mature Deliberation, than any single
Person can do by his own sudden and indeliberate Effusions. This is so plain,
that one would wonder how it is possible for Men to be seduced into any Thought
or Belief of the contrary.

Thirdly, That way of Prayer wherein we may join with greater Faith and
Assurance, is the most solemn, and fittest to be used in public Worship: But
this we may better do in a Form than without it; and therefore that is the best
way to secure the Reverence and Solemnity of public Worship. That Faith and a
good Assurance of being heard are necessary Ingredients of an effectual Prayer,
St. James has plainly told us; for he wills all that would obtain any thing at
the Hands of God, to ask in Faith, nothing wavering; Jam. 1.6, 7, 8.
for he that wavers is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind, and
tossed: Let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
Matthew. 18.19.
A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. And our Blessed Savior has
told us, That we must agree, and join together in what we ask, before it will
be given us. So that a joint Consent and Agreement in our Prayers, offered up
in Faith, without wrath and doubting, is the best means of procuring to us the
Success of them.

Now this may be far better done by a public Form, than it can be by our own
private Conceptions. For by a standing Liturgy, People may be well acquainted
with their Prayers, and know before hand, what they offer unto God; they may be
satisfied, that the Matter and Words of their Prayers are so framed, as that
they will be both accepted by him, and so they may the more readily join in
them, and say with the Psalmist, Let the words of our mouth as well as the
meditations of our hearts, be acceptable in thy sight; for being well assured,
that what they ask is sound, and the manner of asking it well-pleasing unto
God, they may pray with full assurance of Faith, and heartily join in a regular
and well composed Devotion, saying Amen, to every part of it.

This is more than we can do in conceived or extempore Prayers; for not knowing
what the Minister will utter, we cannot tell whether we may safely join with
him or no, unless we take him to be divinely inspired, and so extraordinarily
assisted from above, that his Tongue cannot falter, nor his Heart vent any
thing amiss. But alas! considering the many Passions and Infirmities, that all
Men are subject to, this must be a very unsafe thing to depend upon. For some
may be unsound in their Principles, and so may vent their Errors in their
Prayers: Others may mistake their Choler for Zeal, and so mix their Humors and
Passions with their Devotion; by which means, the Public offices of Religion,
must receive a tincture from Men's corrupt Inclinations, and partake of the
Infirmities of those that perform them.

Yea some have arrived to that degree of Folly, as to tell God Almighty News in
their Prayers, and to acquaint him with the Affairs and Passages of the Town or
Place where they live. If any have disgusted them, they shall hear of it, in
their Public Assemblies; where they seek to draw in God Almighty of their
side, and to make him a Party in their Quarrels.

Sometimes you shall hear Men praying one against another; as in divided Places
and Congregations it often happens: where you may perceive their different
Opinions by their Prayers; and find their little Pets and Grudges mingled and
interwoven with their Petitions.

And are not these great Indecencies in the Worship of God? Can any wise or
good Man join or say Amen to such Prayers? Will you call this an acceptable
Sacrifice unto God? May he not justly say to such, as he did of old to the
Jews, Isai. 1.
bring no more such vain Oblations, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to
bear them? Is not this to offer strange fire unto the Lord; and such as may
justly kindle his Wrath against us? And how is it possible to remedy these
Evils, whilst Men are left to vent what they please, and are only fond of their
own Inventions?

Fourthly, That which helps us to perform the Duty of Prayer with the greatest
fervency and the least distraction, must best preserve the Reverence of Public
Worship: but this is best done by a public Liturgy; and therefore that must be
the most serious and solemn way of Worshipping God. For the better understanding
of this Argument, we must call to Mind, what I before premised, that the Duty
of Prayer consists not in Words, and much less in the Novelty and Variety of
them: for God Almighty is not to be charmed by the Arts of Speech, or wrought
upon by the importunity of words. No, he understands the most silent breathings
of the Soul after him; and hears the Language of those Sighs and Groans that
cannot be uttered; and these things are of greater force and efficacy with him,
than the most pompous Rhetoric or flourish of Words. All the use of words, in
the Service of God, is with respect to our selves; that we may join and agree
together in our Petitions, and with one mouth offer up the same Prayers and
Praises to God; which renders them the more pleasing and the more prevalent
with him.

But whether this be best done by the well-advised words of a form, or the
sudden Effusions of conceived Prayer, is the thing in Question: For the
clearing whereof, we must note farther,

That the inventing of Words in Prayer, which is the work of the Head, is one
thing; and the exciting Affections suitable to them, which is the work of the
Heart, is another; Now, because the Soul of Man is of so limited a Nature in
all its Operations, that it cannot attend to two or more things at once, at
least so closely and intensely as it can to one, therefore the inventing of
words in Prayer, which is the exercise of the Brain, must needs be a hindrance
to the Soul in exciting the Affections, which is the great business of the
Heart.

Now herein plainly appears the Usefulness and Convenience of Public forms, in
which the words being prepared to our hands, the Mind has nothing to do but to
excite and employ Affections suited to them; as namely, to stir up Sorrow in
Confessing, Desire in Petitioning, Joy in Thanksgiving, and the like; which
cannot be so well done, when when other things are to be minded at the same
time. And therefore a form of Prayer, which gives the Soul full scope and
leisure to attend to these things, without calling it off to the study of
words, must best promote the inward fervency and devotion of the Mind, in which
the life of Prayer does mainly consist.

And this is true with relation both to the Minister, and People.

The Minister, in a conceived Prayer, is wholly employed in finding out Matter,
and putting it into Words; which is work enough to take up his Thoughts: and
his Head being thus busied about these things, it must necessarily hinder the
greater work and business of the Heart: since the Soul cannot so closely attend
to both, at the same time.

And as for the People, they not knowing what the Minister will utter, must
attend likewise, as the words come, to the sense of them; and bethink with
themselves whether they may safely join in them: And so the People too are put
upon Studying, instead of Praying; and many times, before they can do this, the
Minister goes too fast for them; and whilst they are considering one thing, he
is gone to another: by which means they must be often at a loss, and their
Devotion miserably distracted and confounded.

Whereas in a well-composed form, all this trouble is saved; for the Matter and
Words being well known and considered before, there will be no need of
employing the Mind, either in inventing, or in judging of the sense or
soundness of our Prayers; but being well satisfied of this beforehand, the
Soul has nothing to do, but to apply it self to the Duty without distraction:
by which means, the Affections may keep pace with the Words; and the Heart go
all along with the Prayers.

Fifthly, That Way of Worship, in which the whole Matter of Prayer may be best
comprised in full and comprehensive sense, and likewise best digested into due
Order and Method, is certainly the most reverent and solemn Way of Public
Worship: But both these may be far better done in a Public Liturgy, than by
sudden Effusions; and therefore that must be the most solemn and reverent Way
of Public Worship.

That the whole matter of Prayer is to be comprised and taken care of in
Public Worship, is evident, because if it be defective in any part, the People
may go without some Blessings for want of asking: If it be redundant, they may
ask and not receive, because they ask amiss: So that nothing necessary ought to
be omitted, and nothing needless and superfluous ought to be asked in our
Public Worship.

Now, that these things may be better taken care of in a standing Liturgy, than
by suddenly conceived and extempore Prayers, is no less evident; because in the
one, all that we are allowed or required to pray for, that is, all things that
are agreeable to the Will of God, and necessary for the Wants of the People,
may be duly considered and digested into proper and particular forms, as they
are in our excellent Liturgy: where the daily matter of our Prayers being still
the same, is summed up in general Confessions, Petitions, and Thanksgivings; in
which, as all People are concerned, so they all may and ought heartily to join;
and as for other occasional Wants, they are provided for in particular Forms
and Collects, as the Exigence of Times and Necessities require.

Whereas in extempore Prayer these things cannot be so wisely taken care of:
for in that, some things through have and incogitancy may be omitted, that
ought to be prayed for; other things, through weakness and inadvertence may be
added, which are not fit to be asked: by which the Sacrifice becomes either
lame and imperfect, or else monstrous and impertinent; both which must render
it unfit to be offered to our Maker.

Then as for Order and Method, that too is to be taken care of in the Public
Devotions. For God Almighty, who has styled himself a God of Order, 1 Cor. 14.
has required that all things in his Service be done decently and in order.
Now this, in pious and well-consider'd forms, may be in some competent measure
provided for: as may be seen likewise in our Excellent Liturgy; where all the
parts and offices of Religion are disposed in a comely and orderly Method: Dr.
Comber and Dr. Beveridge.
as by two Eminent and Learned Divines of our Church has been made fully to
appear.

Whereas in extempore, conceived Prayers, Confusion and Disorder cannot well be
avoided; there not being sufficient time to weigh the Connection and Dependence
of one thing upon another; and so they must be dealt out to the People, not as
they are in order to each other, but as they come first to hand.

In a word, it must be utterly impossible that the Matter and Method of public
Prayers should be so well digested by sudden and unpremeditated speech, as they
may be upon serious and mature deliberation.

Sixthly, That Way of Worship which prescribes the Use of the most decent
gestures and behavior of the Body in the Service of God, does best preserve
the Reverence and Solemnity of public Worship: But this is best done by an
established Liturgy; and therefore that must best preserve the Reverence of
public Worship.

That God Almighty expects the Service of the Body, as well as that of the
Soul, and that the inward reverence of the Mind, must be accompanied with the
humble and decent demeanor of the outward Man, has been observed and proved
already.

Now that herein likewise a public Liturgy has vastly the Advantage of
conceived and extempore Effusions, will be obvious to any considering person:
For the one directs to and prescribes all the decent Postures of Devotion; The
other leaves men loose, to all manner of rudeness and irreverence in Religious
Exercises.

Indeed, Public Worship being that open and solemn Acknowledgment we jointly
make to our great Creator, ought in reason to be performed with all outward as
well as inward signs and tokens of Honor. For what Humility of Body, what
Decency of Words and Behavior, can be great enough to be showed to the Majesty
of Heaven? Especially when we come to make our solemn appearance together
before him?

For this reason we find in our excellent Liturgy, such pious Rules and Orders
of external decency, that in the use of them we may be enabled to serve God
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. For in our Confession of Sin, we are
directed to be upon our Knees, in token of the low abasement of our selves in
the sense of them: in our Confession of Faith, we stand; in token of our owning
and steady adhering to it. At the Name of Jesus, which is above every Name, and
at which all things in Heaven and Earth are commanded to bow, we reverently bow
our Bodies; in the Hymns and Praising of God, we lift up our Selves and our
Hearts unto God; which is the proper posture of Joy. In our Prayers we cast our
selves down, again, on our Knees; which is the humble posture of Supplicants,
calling for Mercy, and begging Grace to help in time of need: And thus in all
the parts and offices of Religion we are directed to those becoming gestures,
which are most Consonant to Antiquity, and most expressive of the Reverence
that is to be showed in Divine Worship.

Whereas in those Assemblies, where extempore Prayers guide the Devotion of the
People, little or no regard is had to bodily Reverence: for Sitting at Prayers,
when they are Speaking to God, Covering their head at Sermons, when God is
Speaking to them; with other such Indecencies, which would not be allowed in
Addresses to our Superiors, are commonly seen among them; Ever since the Cry
against innocent Ceremonies was begun and carried on by cunning and designing
Men, they have lost all the Reverence and Decency of Divine Worship, and have
brought in great Disorder, and Confusion in the room of it.

But if these Men would more seriously consider, that God is to be glorified by
our Bodies, as well as Souls; and that it is not the bare attendance, but the
humble and good behavior of our Bodies that is expected from us, they might
soon learn better manners in the presence of their Maker; which nothing can
better teach them, than a public and well-composed Liturgy.

Lastly, That which best prevents Tautologies, vain Repetitions, and all other
Indecencies in the Service of God, does best preserve the Reverence of public
Worship: But this is better done by a public Form, than sudden Effusions, and
therefore that must best preserve the Reverence of public Worship.

That these things are very offensive unto God in our approaches to him,
plainly appears by the sharp Rebukes our Savior gave the Pharisees, for their
much speaking, and vain repetitions in Prayer.

And that these and the like impertinences are incident to sudden and
unpremeditated Speech, has been before observed; and the Experience of such as
use it, can abundantly testify. For how frequent and fulsom are their
Invocations of Lord, Lord, when they are at a loss what to say? and how usual
is it to supply the defects and failures of their Invention, with taking God's
Name in vain? And indeed, few can be ignorant with what nauseous and vain
Repetitions, such Prayers do generally abound, Insomuch, that after a long
extempore Prayer, there is many times great need of a short form to beg Pardon
for the rudeness and irreverence of such an Address.

Now, what better Expedient can there be to prevent these Evils, than an
established Liturgy; where the Tongue is bound up from such loose Excursions,
and kept to a more serious and solemn Method of Devotion? And therefore we have
been told of one, who having an extempore Prayer taken after him in Shorthand,
was after presented with a View of what he had offered up to God, and how he
had entertained the People; the sight whereof filled him with that blushing and
confusion at the Impertinences and Tautologies of that exercise, that he
resolved never more to make so bold with God Almighty, and ever after betook
him to a composed Devotion. --

But before I dismiss this Argument, I shall take notice of two or three great
Inconveniences, which are known to attend conceived Prayers; which can only be
cured by prescribed Forms. As,

1. If he that officiates be a Person of Mean parts, that is of a slow
Invention, a bad Memory, and an unready Tongue, the Religious Exercise must
necessarily partake of his weaknesses, and so must be very lamely and
imperfectly performed; which cannot but disturb the Devotion both of the
Minister and People. For if he happen to hesitate, or express himself in flat,
or fantastic Terms, the Hearers, instead of minding the matter, will be
observing the Oddness and Emptiness of his Expressions: And this will cause
some to pity his Weakness, others to condemn his Impertinence; both which must
mar the Gravity and Solemnity of the Exercise. Yea sometimes (as one has
observed) the wretched dullness of the Performance occasions laughter in the
Hearers: And if it be helped out with mimical Tones and Gestures, becomes
rather a Scene of Mirth than Devotion.

This is a piece of Irreverence too well known in some parts of the Kingdom:
Which plainly shows, how unsafe it is to leave the public Offices of Religion
to the Weaknesses and Imperfections of such Men. But then,

2. If the Minister be one of better Parts and Abilities; that is, if his
Invention be more quick, his Memory strong, and his Tongue more voluble, the
People then will be apt to be taken up with the Admiration of his Parts; and
instead of attending to the main Duty of Prayer, will be listening to the
Promptness and Readiness of his Speech; observing the Method and Phrases, and
pleasing themselves with the Fineness and Fluency of his Expressions. Which
things may indeed gratify the Curiosity of itching Ears; but never sink into
the Heart: They go no farther than the Fancy, and serve only to warm and
deceive the Imagination; whilst the Soul is no way concerned in all this, and
the Affections are called off from all true Devotion.

Now nothing but public prescribed Forms, in which neither the Quickness or
Slowness of the Minister's Parts are to be seen, can sufficiently cure this
Evil. For there the People being used to the same Words, suited and prepared to
the Matter of their Prayers, have nothing to divert their Attention or
Affections from them. Then,

Lastly, Let the Minister be a Person of never so great Parts, and Piety too,
yet he must be as all Men are, liable to many Infirmities both of Body and
Mind; which may prove great Hindrances to the Exercise of his Abilities.

He may be seized with some Indispositions of Body, which may disorder his
Thoughts, and mar the Fruitfulness of his Invention; and then much crude and
indigested Matter, many odd and unadvised Expressions may drop from him. He may
be surpised with Wanderings of Mind, and Failures of Memory, that may put him
to a great Loss both for Matter and Words: which yet must be supplied, as they
often are, with vain and fulsom Repetitions.

He may be disturbed with Passion, or encumbered with worldly Cares and
Troubles: Besides many other such Accidents; which may distract his Mind, and
occasion great Confusion and Irreverence in the Service of God.

Now can any considering Person think it fit, that the public Devotions of a
whole Church, should be left to the Uncertainty of such Accidents? Does it not
become the Wisdom and Piety of our Governors to provide against these
Indecencies? And what other Remedy can there be, beside a stated Liturgy, or
Forms of Prayer, to secure the Worship of God from these and many other
Inconveniences? Upon the whole then, let any Rational Man judge, whether an
established, well-composed Liturgy, wherein both the inward Reverence of the
Mind, and the outward Reverence of the Body may be best taken Care of, be not a
more solemn and decent way of public Worship, than sudden and conceived
Prayer, wherein all things are left to the Infirmities and Indiscretions both
of Minister and People? --

This is what I affirmed in this place: And must now leave it to you,
impartially to consider, whether it be not fully proved.

And now having removed the great Stumbling Block that lay in your way to the
Church, I must exhort you, as you tender the Honor of God, and your own
Salvation, diligently and constantly to repair to it.

If the Service performed there, were only Lawful, your Duty to Superiors in
all lawful things would oblige you to attend it: But having showed it to be the
most Expedient, the most decent and devout way of worshipping God, I hope you
will make it your choice and your delight too, to resort to it; and say with
David, ^l. 84.10.
One Day in God's house is better than a thousand other-where. If any of you
have wandered from the Fold, and walked in by and forbidden Paths, it is time
for you to return to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, and to confess, in
the Words of the Church, that you have erred and strayed from God's ways, like
lost Sheep: And if you have left the public Prayers of the Church, for the
private Conceptions of Men's brain, you have Reason to go on, and say, That you
have followed too much the Devices and Desires of your own Heart.

Do not then withdraw from these Excellent Prayers and Confessions, which are
so well suited to all the Wants and necessities of your Soul: But set a due
price upon this inestimable Treasury of Piety and Devotion; in the Use of
which, you may be furnished with all divine Blessings, necessary for the Life
that now is, and that which is to come.

In a word, Let me prevail with you to frequent the public Assemblies, where
God is greatly feared by a Religious Dread and Awfulness of Mind, and had in
Reverence by the humble and decent Gestures of the Body, in drawing nigh to
him. And thus, by joining together in one Fellowship and Communion here on
Earth, we shall e're long be received into the ever-blessed Society and
Communion of Saints in Heaven.

FINIS.

