A BRIEF COLLECTION Of Certain Instances of Holy Scripture, AND Ancient Laws of
England, Concurring against Persecution, Oppression And Injustice.

Recomended to the serious Consideration of all Sincere Friends to the King and
KINGDOM.

By William Holgate.

Printed in the Year 1686.

CVrse not the King, no not in thy Thoughts, and Curse not the Rich, in thy
Bedchamber; for a Bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter,

Eccles. 10.20. Thus says the Lord God, let it suffice you O Princes of
Israel, remove Violence and Spoil, and execute Judgment and Justice, take away
your Exactions from my People, says the Lord God.

Ezekiel. 45.9. This is the City to be visited, she is wholly oppression in the
midst of her.

Jer. 6.6. He that turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayers
shall be abomination.

Pro. 28.9. O that thy were wise, that they understood this, that they would
remember their latter end.

Deuteronomy. 32.29. Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now
and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a Man, if there
be any that executes Judgusent, that seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it.

Jer. 5.1. Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Math. 5.10. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge amongst you, let him
show out of a good-conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

James 3.13. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?

Psalm. 11.3. The Cretion Radamanthus Virgil ranks,
Amongst Infernal Judges for his pranks,
He first Condemned, then Tried, and by his aw,
Subserviant to his will, did make the Law.
Who makes his will his Rule, and Power his Law,
Does plainly show, Gods will he does not know.
He that convicts upon an Information,
Not having heard the accus^d's Vindication,
Percliance may hit the mark, yet is his way
Very unjust, as all good Laws do say.
A Brief Collection of Certain Instances of Holy Scripture, and Ancient Laws of
England, concurring against Persecution, Oppression and Injustice, etc.
I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them, for they have
known the Way of the Lord, and the Judgment of their God.

Jer. 5.5.
THat the great men of England have in some degree formerly known the way of
the Lord, witness some of the ancient and fundamental Laws of England, and the
Maxims upon which they are grounded.

First that Book called Doctor and Student, chapter ^. p. 4. declares That the main
and principal Foundation of the Law of England, is the Law of God, and that Law
is written in the heart of man, which is, man created in the Image of God, and
this Law is always righteous, stirring up the man to do that which is Good, and
abhor that which is Evil; and therefore (says the Book) against this Law,
Prescription, Statute, Custom may not prevail, and if any be brought against
it, they are void, and against Justice, etc.

And page 12. chap. 4. Every good Law is ordained for the health of the Soul,
and to the fulfilling of the Laws of God, and to induce the people to fly evil
desires, and to do good works. Also the Cardinal of Cambrey writes, that every
Law of Man, must be consonant to the Law of God; and therefore the Law of
Princes, the Commandments of Prelates, the Statutes of Commonalities, nor the
Ordinance of the Church is not Righteous, nor Obligatory, except it be
consonant to the Law of God.

And of such a Law of man that is consonant to the Law of God, it appears who
has right to Lands and Goods, and who has not, for whatsoever a man has by
such Laws of man, he has Righteously, and whatsoever he has against (or
contrary) to such Laws is unrighteously (and unlawfully) had.

And the intent of a Lawmakers, is to make the people Good, and to bring them
to Virtue; and although I have somewhat in general showed thee whereupon the Law
of England is grounded (for of necessity) it must be grounded of these Laws
(that is to say) of the Law Eternal, of the Law of Reason, and of the Law of
God, etc.

But this shall be the Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws in their inward parts, and
write them in their hearts, and I will be their God and they shall be my
People, Jer 31.33.

With this agrees the Prophet of the Lord, Micah. 6.8. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

Stat. 20. Ed. 3.1. The Kings Justices shall do right to all, without respect
of Persons, notwithstanding the Kings Letters or Command to the contrary, and
if any such be, they shall acquaint the King and his Council therewith, they
shall take no fee but of the King, nor give Council where he is a party, and if
they do amiss they shall be at the Kings will in Body, Goods and Lands.

O house of David, thus says the Lord, Excecute Judgment in the Morning, and
deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor, least my fury go
out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your
doings, Jer. 21.12.

Thus says the Lord, Execute ye Judgment and Righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the Oppressor, and do no wrong, do no violence to
the Stranger, the Fatherless, nor the Widow, neither shed innocent blood, Jer.
22.3.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, etc. Matt. 25.34. and verse. 40. Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto
me.

Magna Charta 29.9. H. 3. No free man shall be taken, imprisoned, disseised,
out lawed, exciled, or other ways destroyed, or condemned without Trial by his
Peers, or the Law, Justice or Right shall not be sold, denied or deferred to
any, etc.

Thou shall not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his Cause. Keep thee far from
a false matter, and the Innocent and Righteous slay thou not, for I will not
justify the Wicked, Exodus 23.6, 7.

And I charged you Judges at that time, saying, Hear the Causes between your
Brethren, and judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the
Stranger that is with him, Deuteronomy. 1.16.

Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, but ye shall hear the small as well
as the great, you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is
Gods, verse 17.

And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons, judges every
one according to his works, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, 1
Peter 1.17.

Stat. 5. Ed. 3.9. None shall be atteached upon any accusation, nor fore-judged
of Life or Limb, nor his Lands or Tennements, Goods or Chattels seized into the
Kings hands, against the form of the great Charter, and the Law of the Land.

Stat. 28. Ed. 3.3. None shall be put from his Lands or Tennement, Imprisoned,
Disinherited, or put to Death without being brought to answer by due process of
Law,

And Nicedemus said, does our Law judge any man before it hear him, and know
what he does, John 7.51.

Acts 25.5, 7, 8, 10, 16. Festus told the Jews that it was contrary to the
Roman Laws to condemn any man, before he that was accused, had the accusers
face to face, and had license to answer for himself concerning the Crime laid
against him.

One Witness shall not rise up against a man for any Iniquity, or for any Sin,
in any Sin that he sins: At the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of
three Witnesses, shall the matter be established, Deuteronomy. 19.15.

In the mouth of two or three Witnesses, everword may be established, Matt.
18.16.

Stat. 4. Hen. 7.12. The King commands all Justices of Peace, diligently to
exercise their Office, to the end, that his people by that means living in
peace, and enjoying their own Husbandry may flourish, he also charge all both
Poor and Rich that shall suffer any grievance from others (wherein a Justice of
Peace may intermedle) that they forth with make complaint thereof to the next
Justice of Peace, etc.

Open thy Mouth for the Dumb, in the case of all such as are appointed to
Destruction. Open thy Mouth judge righteously and plead the Cause of the Poor
and Needy, Prove. 31.8, 9.

Blessed are the Peace makers for they shall be called the Children of God,
Matt. 5.9. Then Disturbers and false accusing Destroyers of their peaceable
Neighbors, shall not be so called.

Magna Charta, chap. 14. 9 Hen. 3. A free man shall not be amerced for a small
fault, but according to the manner thereof, and for a great offense according
to the quantity thereof, saving to him his conteniment, and Merchant, saving
his Merchandise, etc.

The elemency of English Natures has resolved into an Axiom, that Penal Laws
are to be taken (in Mitiori Sensu) in the more mild and favorable Sense, and
that Amerciaments should have (Misericordia) mercy in them.

Horn Mirror of Just. title Abuses of Common Law, It is an abuse to judge a man
to diverse Punishments for one Trespass, as to a Corporal Punishment, and to a
Ransom; since Ransom is but a redemption from corporal punishment by a Fine.

It is the Kings interest to have his Subjects pacified; force is an enemy to
the Law.

Magna Charta chap. 14. Mirror tit. Disseirin and Reddisseirin, chap. 2.. 25.
If one Distrain me so outragiously that I cannot Manure, Plow, or use my Land
duly, in which case it makes one an outrageous Distrainer, the reason given by
Chief Justice Cook is, for Trade and Traffic is the livelihood, and the life
of the Commonwealth, wherein the King, and every Subject has an Interest,
whence it follows, that they who destroy Trade, by their excessive distresses
and spoil on the Subjects Goods and Merchandise, etc. do act against the
Interest both of King and Kingdom.

Woe is pronounced by the Prophet against them that put far from them the evil
day, and causes the date of violence to come near, Amos 6.5.

He that has not oppressed any, but has restored to the Debtor his Pledge,
has spoiled none by Violence, has given his Bread to the Hungry, and has
covered the Naked with a Garment, has executed true Judgment betwixt man and
man: He is just, he shall surely live says the Lord, Ezekiel 18.7, 8, 9.

Do Violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your
wages, Luke 3.14.

The Prophet having a sight and sense of Gospel times, says, wasting,
violence, and destroying shall not bear rule, but be abhored of all that shall
know the Lord, Isa. 11.

The Lamb and the Wolf shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like
the Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents food, they shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy Mountain, says the Lord, Isa. 65.25.

If ye fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scriptures, thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, ye do well, James 2.8.

It is very apparent, that the Fundamental Laws of England are consonant with
the Royal Law of God, written in the heart of man by his holy Spirit, so let
all who have the least spark of reason left in them Judge, whether it is not
high presumption against God and his unlimitted Prerogative, and Law written in
the hearts of his people ( Jer. 31.33.) to set up man's Law above it, and force
the execution thereof against it. Oh, that all that are in Authority would
Read, Meditate and seriously Consider the Testimony recorded Isaiah 59. that so
they may never cause the cry of Oppression to be laid at their Doors.

I could give a large account out of Cook, Shepherd, Fortescue, Watterhouse,
Keeble and others, who have written in the praise of English Laws, and of the
great care the makers thereof had, for the preservation of Husbandry and Trade,
and that such as were employed there in might be preserved from Rapin, Wrong,
or other Injuries, or be vexed or injuriously punished, by Ill, Loose, Vicious,
Coveteous, Poor and Beggarly Persons; for the Law's Wisdom is apparent, in that
it has excluded necessitous persons, and such as have accustomed themselves to
shift and shark from all Credit as Witnesses, and also all such persons as may
or does expect any reward or profit by the recovery had by their Testimony.

I do not read of any Statute, Law or Decree, that is in force in England, that
appoints a punishment for any man or men, that worships God in Spirit and in
Truth; neither does any English Law (I know of) appoint a punishment for any
that meets together upon a Religious account simply and barely; but punishes
all such as makes Religion a Cloak for their evil Intentions, who meeting
obscurely, something that is evil in it self, either in words or actions at
such Meetings being said or done.

For the Liturgy of the Church of England, has this precept, That it is very
meet, right and our bounden duty, that we should at all times and in all places
give thanks unto thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty Everlasting God, etc.

I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without
wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8.

Upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples were come together to break
Bread, Paul Preached to them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his
speech until midnight: And there were many lights in the upper Chamber where
they were gathered together, Acts 20.7, 8.

And Paul welt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that
came in unto him: Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which
concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all Confidence, no man forbiding him,
Acts 28.30, 31.

On All Saints day Mat. 5. to the 13 verse. is appointed to be read; And seeing
the multitudes he went up into a Mountain, and when he was set his Diseples
came unto him, And he opened his Mouth and taught them, etc.

And the people were astonished at his Doctrine: For he taught them as one that
had Authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7.28, 29.

Seeing then that the Ancient Fundamental Laws and Statutes of England, the
Exposition made upon them, by the great Judges, and men learned in the Laws of
this Land, in praise of them, the confirmation whereof great Judges, in our own
days allow of the Testimony of holy Scriptures confirms, the Liturgy of the
Church of England allows, and also enjoins; who can think that Persons
affecting the Law, true Friends to the King and Kingdom, should ever be so far
mistaken as to strengthen the hands of them that Prosecute, Punish, Perseute
and Destroy, sober, peaceable upright hearted people (reprochfully called
Quakers) against whom nothing that is evil in it self can justly be proved, or
ever has been proved, but only concerning the worship of their God.

O ye great men of England, read Daniel's Cause of being Persecuted, recorded
Daniel 6.5. Then said these men, we shall not find any occasion against this
Daniel, except we find it against him, concerning the Law of his God; the whole
Chapter is worth your reading, and your consideration. As also the record of
Esther concerning Hamans haughtiness, who because Mordicai the Jew did not bow
unto him, nor reverence him as he expected, sought occasion to destroy him, and
all the Jews that were in the Kingdom of Ahasucrus, promising to bring ten
thousand talents of Silver into the Kings Treasuries.

Where First, Let it be observed, as well as it is recorded, that Mordicai
(though a Jew, and his and their Laws (as to Religion) were diverse from all
people of Media and Persia) yet he was admitted to sit in the Kings Gate,
having discovered the treasonnable intent of Bigtan and Teresh, two of the
Kings Chamberlains, Esther 2.21.

Secondly, the regard Mordecai had of Gods Honor and Commandment, not to give
flattering titles, or accept any man's person, Job 32.21, 22. Therefore did not
Mordecai bow unto Haman, nor do him such reverence as he expected, Esther 3.2.

Thirdly, The Envy, Wrath and evil Intent that arose in Haman aagainst
Mordecai, and the reason of it, as in verse 5.

Fourthly, The way and method he took to accomplish and avenge himself of him,
verse 8. He informed the King, saying, There is a certain people scattered
abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and
their Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the King's Laws,
therefore it is not for the King's profit to suffer them (the margin has it)
it is not meet or equal to suffer them, verse 9. If it please the King let it
be written, that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents of
Silver, to the hands of those that shall have the charge of the business, to
bring it into the Kings Treasuries.

Fifthly, Mordecai's behavior upon knowledge of the Kings decree, for his and
the Jews Destruction, Esther 4.1. He rent his Clothes, and put on Sackcloth and
wept bitterly. Mark, He did not plot or conspire Treason, neither did any other
of the Jews that were in the King's Provinces meet together to plot and
conspire Treason, but verse 3. In every Province whithersoever the Kings
Commandment, and his Decree came, there was great Mourning amongst the Jews,
and Fasting, and Weeping, and Wailing, and many lay in Sackcloth and Ashes;
mark, they did not meet to do any evil against the King, his Crown or Dignity,
though rendered and accounted Seditious.

Sixthly, The way the Jews took for their help, and to prevent the Decree
against them, They gathered all the Jews that were present in Shushan together,
to Fast and Pray and patiently waited the Lord's will concerning them, Esther
4.6.

Seventhly, How much the Kings damage would have been by so cruel and
outrageous a work, as the destroying of a great number of Families of the Jews,
which were scattered abroad through the hundred twenty and seven Provinces of
his Kingdom, who were industrious people. And it is a certain Truth that the
Glory of a Prince is in the multitude of his People, not idle loytering
Beggars, or profane spend-thrift Informers, but men of industry and diligence,
as the Jews were: But alas, who, that are truly conscientiously Religious can
escape, seeing their conscientious meeting together to pray unto God, and
worshipping him, is made so great a crime, as to forfeit the fruits of their
Industry and Diligence.

Eighthly, Read the just judgment of God upon Haman and his Family, with his
abetters (who giving the King knowledge of the great damage that would ensue to
his Kingdom, by Haman's wicked devise, which he had devised against the Jews,
turned the heart of the King, so that he caused the evil Haman intended,
against Mordecai and the Jews, to fall upon his own head, Esther 9.25.

Ninthly, The Lord's good will to his people, and the peace and tranquillity of
the King and Kingdom, when the wicked Counselor was removed from the King,
Esther 10.2.

Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established
in Righteousness, Prove. 25.5.

But the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest whose waters
cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20.

Scripture records Haman and his Counsel wicked, How then shall any in this
day, who are found doing things of the same nature be reckoned otherwise?

Therefore, O ye great men of England, if you love the King, and tender your
own Souls good, your Childrens and Families happiness after ye, labor to put
an end to those Laws, by which a great number of industrious and laborious
innocent peaceable people suffer, and that near to the utter ruin of many of
them and their Families; for be assured that the sums of money which (by such
prosecution) comes into the King's Treasuries, will not countervail the King's
damage, nor answer the gain that would come to the King by their lawful
Employments and Trades.

I observe in that excellent Declaration of King Charles 2. dated December 26.
1662. He declares his wonderful Restoration without the least bloodshed, by
the military sword, and expresses his Clemency, or the Clemency of his Nature
toward conscious persons, reflecting upon such as by words or practice renders
him otherwise, and accounts them wicked and malicious, yea the most dangerous
Enemies of his Crown, and of the peace and happiness of the Nation.

Considerations are to be had to the persons of men, and to the Laws of Charity
more then to the triumping in any opinion, for whatsoever is against the
foundation of Faith, or contrary to good Life, or destructive to humane
Society, ought not to be tolerated; mark, then no wicked Informers, or such
who have, or will swear that people, peaceably meet together to worship God are
Riotters.

And the experience which Christendom had in these last Ages is argument
enough, that tolleration of differing Opinions is so far from disturbing the
public peace, or destroying the interest of Princes or people, that it does
advantage the public, it secures the peace, because, there is not so much as
the pretense of Religion left to such persons to to contend for, it being
already indulged to them, and they Industrious, who desires to be serviceable
in their Generations, cannot but Love and Honor that Government that preserves
them in the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of what is their own, free from Rapine
and Spoil.

Eusebius in his second Book of the Life of Constantine, reports these 'words
of that great Emperor, Let them which err with joy receive the like fruction of
peace and quietness with the faithful, since the restoring of communion and
society may bring them into the right way of Truth, let none give molestation
to any, let every one do as he determines in his mind.

For it may be safe in diversity of persuasions, and it is also part of
Christian Religion, that the liberty of men's Consciences should be preserved in
all things, where God has not set a limit, and this is his limitting power, to
do good unto all, and to keep a Conscience clear both toward God, and toward
all men.

Now the end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

He that follows after Righteousness and Mercy, finds Life, Righteousness
and Honor, Prove. 21.21.

Mercy and Truth preserves the King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy, Prove.
20.28.

If therefore you would that God should preserve the King, as for the mercy he
has showed hitherto, and that you would have his Throne to be upholder, suffer
not your selves to be overawed, or grown upon by a false, merciless,
persecuting, furious people, whose conversations manifestly show what it is
their inclinations lead to (that is to say) Rapin and Spoil, for covetous
envious ends, subverting the Laws to contrary ends, then they seem to have been
made; as 22 Car 2. The Preface of which act is to prevent and suppress
seditious Conventicles, and such as at their Meetings, under color of
Religion, do or may contrive Insurrections, as late experience has shown, yet
has the bent of that Act, by Coveteous men, out of mere envy (thereby
rendering the Government cruel) been greatly employed against a peaceable
people, against whom neither plotting of hurt against any, nor the least show
of Sedition ever been, or proved against them.

Let it be observed what a great man of England once said, discoursing of the
hardship that many peaceable people in this Nation underwent by heard-hearted
men, spoke on this wise, It is certainly a uneasy kind of life to any man,
that has either Christian Charity, good Nature, or Humanity, to see his fellow
Subjects daily divested, of their Liberties and Birthrights, and miserably
thrown out of their Possessions and Free-Holds, only because they cannot agree
with others in some opinions and nicities of Religion, which their Consciences
will not give them leave to consent too, and which even by the confession of
those that would impose them, are no way necessary to Salvation; and that there
is in this Nation a gross mistake as to the point of Government, because it
makes every man safely to depend upon the wrong place, and not upon the
Governors, not a man living well toward this civil Government established by
Law, but upon his being transported with Zeal, for every opinion that is held
in the Church by those that have power; and I conceive it is a mistake in
Religion, because it is positively against the express Doctrine of Christ
Jesus. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things
that are Gods, Matt 22.21.

Doubtless to meet together to worship and wait singly upon God; is a chief
thing that is due unto him.

Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord
harkened and heard it, and a Book of remembrance was written before him for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name, Malachi 3.16.

Paul's advice is to avoid foolish and unlearned Questions, knowing that they
gender strife, but the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that opose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging
of the Truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.23, 24, 25, 26.

Then not to ruin any, nor take by violence and force their Goods or Cattels,
nor throw them into Prison, there to be destroyed if they have not their
corrupt wills answered; but what will be the Portion, and Gods Sentence to all
such their Aiders and Assistants, if they repent not, is recorded Mat. 25.41,
42, 43, 44, 45. And verse. 46. And these shall go into everlasting Punishment,
but the Righteous into Life Eternal.

Chrisostom said, It is not the manner of the Children of God to Persecute
others to death about their Religion, but it has been and is their condition
to be put to Death themselves for the Testimony of the Truth. Moreover (said
he) the shedding of blood about Religion, is an evident token of Antichrist,
Relig. Vris. p. 192.

Hewardus said, That the best writers of that time did agree in one opinion,
and with Tertullian, Lactantius, Cassidorus and Josephus, etc. That people must
inform men to embrace Religion with Reason, and not compel them by Violence.

Most certain it is, That, that Religion which is defended with Cruelty is not
grounded upon the Word of God.

La^^antius said, If you will with Blood, with Evil and with Torments, defend
the Worship, it shall not thereby be defended but polluted, lib. 5. chap. 20.

Where have thou ever read in thy days (said Menn^) in the writings of the
Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrates for
their Power, against them that would not hear their Doctrine, nor obey their
words, I know certainly said he, that where the Magistrate shall banish with
the Sword, there is not the right knowledge of the Spiritual Word, nor Church
of Christ, it is, Invocare brachium seculare.

King James in his Speech to the Parliament, in the Year 1609 said, That it is
a pure rule in Divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church with Violence
and Blood; and furthermore said, It was usually the condition of Christians to
be Persecuted, but not to Persecute.

King Charles the first in his Book called (...) Page 67. In his prayer to God,
Thou see how much cruelty among Christians is acted under the color of
Religion, as if we could not be Christians unless we Crucify one another.

Page 28. Make them at length seriously to consider that nothing Violent or
Injurious, can be Religious.

Page 70. Sure in matters of Religion, those Truths gain most upon men's
Judgments and Consciences which are least urged with secular violence, which
weakens Truth with prejudices.

Page 91, 92. In point of true Conscientious tenderness, I have often declared
how little I desired my Laws and Scepter should entrench on Gods soveraignity,
which is the only King of men's Consciences.

Page 123. Nor do I desire any man should be subject unto me further then all
of us may be subject unto God

Page 76. The injoyning of Oaths, upon people must needs in things doubtful be
Dangerous, as in things unlawful Damnable.

Page 1. In his prayer, O, never suffer me for any reason of State, to go
against the reason of Conscience; which is highly to fight against thee the God
of Reason and Judge of our Consciences.

Clear up our understandings to see thy Truth both in Reason as Men and in
Religion as Christians.

Page 164. Church affairs should be managed neither with Tyranny Parity, nor
Popularity neither People oppressed.

In his Advice to his Son Charles 2. Your Prerogative is best showed and
exercised in remitting rather then exacting the rigor of the Law, there being
nothing worse then legal Tyranny.

Page 241. Always kept up sollid Piety, and those fundamental Truths, which
mend both hearts and lives of men, with impartial favor and justice.

Page 228. Keep you to true Principles of Piety, Virtue and Honor, you shall
never want a Kingdom.

Page 346. It is indeed a sad state for any man to have his Enemies to be
Accuser, Parties and Judge.

From the before recited Testimonies and Precepts I observe Four weighty and
undeniable Conclusions.

First, That Mercy and Truth, are two of the main Pillars that support the King
and Kingdom.

Secondly, That Obedience to Magistrates ought to be for Conscience sake, and
not for Fear or Wrath.

Thirdly, That no Violence, or Injuries, ought to be inflicted, or done to any
manner of Persons, who makes Conscience of what they do, and lives peaceably up
to what it does require because good Conscience is the bond of true Obedience,
according to the Scriptures, therefore ought to be free and not compelled.

Fourthly, That the Fundamental and good old Laws, are the King and Kingdoms
best security, therefore not to be Slighted, Contemned or Undervalued.

Oh therefore, you that would be accounted Loyal, let your love to the King be
without dissimulation; for if you love him, you will love that which supports
him, and by your Fruits you are, and will be manifest.

Wherefore does the way of the Wicked Prosper, wherefore are all they Happy
that deal very Treacheraosly, Jer, 12.1.

If a man say he loves God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen, 1 John 4.20.

And this Commandment we have from him, That he who loves God, Loves his
Brother also, verse. 21.

It is the great Commandment Christ taught his Disciples, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind,
this is the First and Great Commandment, and the Second is like unto it; Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; on these two Commandments hang all the
Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39, 40.

This is the very perfection of Christian Religion, the certain mark of a true
Disciple.

Charge them that be Rich in this World, that they be not high minded, nor
trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all
things to enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich in good Works, that they
may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Which that every one may
certainly have an earnest of here, and the full enjoyment of happiness with God
hereafter in that Life which shall never have an end, is the breathing desire
of,

William Holgate. A Prisoner in York-Castle, for believing that the Record of
Scripture, and Christ's Command therein recorded, ought to be obeyed.
Written in the 7th. Month 1684.
For Pride and Coveteousness, Ambition, Envy, Revenge, Self-Love, Hypocrisy,
Contempt of Goodness, Forced Opinion, these, and the like, do breed the Worlds
Consussion.
THE END.

