The Third BOOK OF Homers Iliads. Translated by Thomas Grantham, Professor of
the speedy way of Teaching the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Tongues, in
Meremaid-Court in Gutter-lane, near Cheapside, London.



LONDON, Printed by M. I. for the Author, 1660.

To his Noble Friend Mr THOMAS TURNER, Gentleman of GRAIES -- INN.
Sir,
IN ancient times those who escaped ship Vestimenta maris Deo, Hor. Ode 5.
wrack, hung up their clothes in the Temples of their Gods in signs of
gratitude.

Philosophers call Virtues and Vices, the Platonici virtutes, and vitia, vestes
animae nominabant.
clothing of the mind: Achilles has it to Agamemnon; Oh thou, that art
clothed with Impudence! The Scripture has it; Josuah stood before the Lord in
filthy rags, those rags Hom. ver. 150.
were the vices and sins of the people, as Interpreters say: The clothing and
robes of righteousness are often read in * Isa. 61. 10.
Scripture. And the divine Graces are not made only a Clothing, but an Armor:
Put ye on the Helmet of salvation, the Breast Plate of righteousness, and the
shield Ephesians. 6. 14, 16, 17. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
of faith: there is also, a Crown of righteousness. SIR, whatsoever Graces,
Virtues, or Ornaments are in this Translation, I sacrifice them all to you, who
has saved me in a double shipwreck. St. Paul suffered thrice shipwreck, and I
twice: First, a Sequestration from my Parsonage: Then there was an Ordinance,
that no Sequestered Minister should teach School under pain of imprisonment,
there was both my hands tied behind me, and I was in a kind of Hell, I could
not get a drop of water: Sir, in this extremity I received many noble
courtesies from your Brother, and you, and other friends of yours; for the
which the Lord grant ye mercy.

Yours Thomas Grantham.

The Third Book of HOMER'S ILIADS.
The Argument.
When all the Armies were set in array,
Paris all armed stepped out, but run away
So soon as he did Menelaus spy:
Then Hector said, Paris how cowardly
And basely do thou run! Oh scorn to yield,
Fight for fair Helen in this pitched Field.
Then Paris with his Armor, Sword and Lance,
Between the Armies stontly did advance:
Then Menelaus did from his Chariot leap,
And him assaulted in a furious heat,
And drew him to the Graecians all along,
Until that Venus broke the Oxes Thong
Which tied his Helmet to his Throat, and then
He flung the Helmet to the armed men.
Venus does hide him in a Mist unknown,
And quickly in his Chamber set him down,
And Helen told how he was come from fight,
Now to embrace her with a full delight.
The King does then the fairest Helen claim,
And all her wealth, whatsoever with her came.
WHen both the Army was set in array, (...)

The Trojans ran with clamours all the way,
Like to the Cranes, who cold and rain do fly,
And crying to the flowing Ocean high,
Threatening the Pigmeis for to slay and kill,
And in this cruel war much blood they spill.
The Gracians silent all together breath,
Unto the Trojan Army threatening death*
And as the South-Wind-mists do darkness fling
On Mountains, which to Shepherds sorrows bring,
But pleases Thieves, when scarce that any one
Can see so far as men can cast a stone.
Thus like a Whirlwind did a dust arise
Under their feet, which darkened all their eyes:
The Armies closed, then Paris stepped before,
His Bow he held, a Panthors Hide he wore,
A Sword, two brazen-headed Darts he shook,
Provokt the proudest Greek with angry look,
And stately pace: When Menelaus King,
Saw him triumphing such disgraces bring,
He joy'd like to a Lion who does spy
A Heart or Goat before the Hounds to fly;
Then from his Chariot leaped the armed King,
Whom Paris saw and fled; So from a Spring
When any spies a Serpent, he will run,
And pale and wan this Serpent he will shun:
So Paris (like a God in Beauty) flies,
And fearful to the Trojan Army highs.
Then Hector did unhappy Paris scorn,
And wished that his fair face had been unborn;
And told him if he never married were,
That such a spectacle would not appear;
The Graecians shout to see thy fair sweet face,
And cowardice, our Armies to disgrace;
Thou stol'st from Greece a valiant Warriers Wife,
Which to thy Father, and to Troy brought strife:
Thou could not Menelaus wrath sustain,
For stealing of his Wife he had thee slain.
Your Harp and Venus gifts, fair face and all,
Are nothing worth when in the dirt you fall;
The Trojans all are frighted, and a stone His Tombstone.

Had been your Coat, if you had fought alone.
Then Paris said (who was of shape Divine)
Hector I kindly take these words of thine,
Thy heart is like an Ax that cuts an Oak,
And he that cuts learns cunning at each stroke;
Thou art undaunted, yet do not me upbrade,
And scorn my lovely Beauty Venus made;
Honor the gifts of Gods; Who would not take
It kindly if the Gods him fair would make?
But if you will have me fight, then all fit down,
For I fair Helen will keep as mine own,
And fight with Menelans; if he shall
Me overcome, let him take her, and all
Her goods to Greece. We vows and leagues will take,
Never hereafter any war to make.
Dwell ye in gleby Troy, we will take our course (...)

For Argos, where fair women are, and horse.
This saying then, Hector did highly please,
And rushing in the midst he made them cease
From fighting; but the Grecians* flung their darts,
And stones, and arrows, to wound Hector's heart.
Then Agamemnon said with mighty voice,
Grecians leave off to fight and make a noise,
Fair Helmed Hector unto a treaty shows;
Then all the Army ceased from their blows:
And Hector said, Trojans and well-arm'd Greeks,
Paris for whom this strife begun, now seeks
A Peace, and bids you all leave off to fight,
For he fair Helen will keep as his right,
If he shall Menelaus overcome,
He Will keep her and her riches all at home.
Then all the Greeks were silent every where,
And to King Menelaus gave an ear,
Who said, I am sorry that these griefs I see,
Of Greeks and Trojens* but we shall be free;
For either Paris or my self must dye,
Then will the strife be ended presently.
Then bring two Lambs, a black one and a white,
The black for earth, the white for Phoebus bright;
And bring old Priam now a League to make,
For all his sons their Covenants have brake:
Let no man now the Oath of Jove profane,
For young men are unstable and untame;
But let old Priam come, for he does know
Things past and present, that betwixt us go.
Then all the Greeks and Trojans did rejoice,
In hopes of peace at Menelaus voice,
And ranked their Horses; every Soldier round
Put off his Arms, and placed himself on ground;
The place betwixt the Armies was but small,
They were to fight in; then did Hector call
Two Heralds, whom he bad the Lambs to bring
For Sacrifice, and Priam their old King;
But Agamemnon ruling, sent before
Talhithius, to bring a sheep from shore;
Then Iris to white armed Helen came,
Like to Antenor's Wife, the very same:
She was King Priam's daughter, past them all
In beauty; her they Laodi^ce call;
She found her in her house spinning a Web
Double, and shining, and much labored;
It did the Greek and Trojan War contain,
And showed what sorrows Martial men sustain.
Then standing by her, Nymph, come see said she,
Now Greece and Troy in peace united be,
And every man sits leaning on his shield;
But Paris has provoked to the field
King Menelaus, they will end this strife
with Lances, who shall call fair Helen Wife;
Then Helen thought how happy she should be,
If she her Husband's Parents town should see;
White Veils did shadow her with mighty grace,
And tears ran trickling down along her face;
Athra, Pitheus daughter did attend,
And Clymene, whose beauty all commend*
They hasted, and they came to Sceat towers,
Where Priam was, with all his Counselors,
Pantheus, Thymeles, Lampus was there,
Clitius, Hecutaon, all men fear;
Ucalegon, Antenor, these were known
To all the World to be men of renown;
The Voice they spoke like Grasshoppers did ring,
When they in Woods, chirping on trees did sing:
But when fair Helen to the towers came,
All said her Beauty far surpast her Fame;
Trojans and Grecians, none could think amiss,
To suffer sorrows for so great a bliss:
She Is like the Goddesses, she is all Divine;
Yet though in glory she the heaven outshine,
Let her with all her ships return again,
Rather then we these sorrows should sustain.
When all spoke thus, Priam did Helen call,
And said, Dear Daughter, sit and name them all;
Your Husband you may see, kindred and friends,
Not you, but Gods these mighty sorrows sends:
Tell me what man is that so amply spread,
And though some Greeks be higher by the head,
Yet he the fairest of them all I see,
So worshipful, so like a King is he.
Then Helen said, Oh reverend Father-in-law,
And feared, Would I had dyed when I saw
Your Son; of Bed and Brethren I am now bereft,
My dearest Daughter, and my friends are left:
But what is my weeping? I must answer thee,
And tell the questions thou do ask of me;
That Is Agamemnon who does rule, so far,
He Is great, and good, and valiant in all war;
He is my Husbands Brother; woe is me,
My unchaste lusts bring me this misery.
This said, the King did much admire his fate,
And mighty Armies marching in such state;
To Phrygia full of Vines I took my course
One time, to see those brave men ride the horse;
Otreus and Mygdon were Commanders then
Against the Amazons, who did fight like men.
But tell the Phrigians all, they came not near
The number of the black-ey'd Grecians here.
At second sight he did Ulisses see,
And said, dear daughter, pre-thee answer me;
Who Is he, that is lesser by the head, but strong,
Broad-shoulder'd, breasted as he walks along:
Like to a Bell-Wether, or Ram he shows,
That walks before the well white-fleeced Yews.
She answered, That Is Ulisses, who is great
In counsels, and so famous for deceit.
Antenor answered, This is true Madame,
For he to Troy sometime a Legate came
With Menelaus for your sake, and these
I entertained with all things might please.
Menelaus standing did Ulisses pass,
But as he sat Ulisses braver was.
His counsels and his words were very small
When he did speak, yet pleasing unto all.
But when the wise Ulisses up did rise
To speak, he fixed on the earth his eyes;
And as he spoke, he held his Scepter still;
There is none would think he was a man of skill,
Until he heard his words like drifts of snow
Fly all about us, yet was naught in show.
The third he asked was Ajax Telamon;
Who Is that, said he, so bigg of limb and bone,
So high, that to his head there reaches none.
To him the large-veil'd, glorious, fairest Dame,
That ever from the Grecian quarters came,
She said, That Is Ajax Telamon you see,
The Grecian Bulwark he is held to be:
Idomeneus near to him does stand,
And round about him those that bear Command:
My warlike Husband him did entertain.
Within our Court, and all his glorious Train.
The other black-ey'd Greeks to mind I call,
And to you now I could relate them all:
Castor that is skilled in horse, and Pollux strong,
My brethren both, I think came not along:
They fear to come, to fight in war for shame:
And are disgraced at my very name.
Or else I think they are dead. The Heralds then
Brought Lambs and Wine before the Armed men.
Herald Ideus brought a mighty boul,
And golden cups to quench each thirsty soul,
And said, King Priam rise, the Princes call;
Let Us make our Covenant before them all:
Paris and Menelaus now will fight,
And try who to fair Helen shall have right:
Let him that wins her take her wealth away;
We Trojans all in Gleby Troy will stay;
And all ye Grecians then in Greece may dwell,
Which for fair Horse and Women does excel.
This said, old Priams limbs began to shake,
But bad his Men his Chariot ready make;
Which he ascending, with the Reins did guide,
Then straight Antenor marched to his side,
And through the Scean Ports their horse did run,
Until that they unto the Armies come,
And lighting in the midst the King did rise,
So did Ulisses, who was mighty wise.
The Heralds then with a clear voice did speak,
That none these faithful vows should dare to break:
They mix the Wine which both the Armies brings,
And power water on the hands of Kings.
Then Agamemnon drew the knife he put
In his swords sheath, and with it he did cut
The wool from both the for heads of the Lambs,
The Heralds then with execration dams
That break their Vows, the hair they give to all:
Then Agamemnon on the Gods did call:
Great glorious Jove, who Ida always swaies,
And thou, O Sun, that lights us with thy rays:
Ye Earth and floods, and all that punish those
In hell below, whom darkness does enclose
Witness the perjured, keep the faithful Oath,
Which now you see is made between them both:
If Paris now shall Menelaus kill,
Then Paris shall have Helen at his will,
And all her goods he shall in Troy retain,
And we will hoist sail, and hasten home again.
If Menelaus now shall Paris slay,
Then Troy both Helen, and her wealth shall pay:
But if that Priam and his Sons deny
To pay the Fine, if Paris now shall dye;
Then I will fight, and dearly make them pay,
For keeping back what is my due away.
Then he the throat of both the Lambs with knife
Did cut, and left them gasping for their life:
Then Wine they powered out, and Vows did make,
The Grecians and the Tojans all thus spoke:
Oh mighty Jove, and ye immortal powers,
Who first does violate this Oath of ours,
Dash out their brains, let Bastards be their race;
But Jove would not their supplications grace.
Then Priam said, Trojans and Grecians hear,
This cruel fight my heart can no ways bear:
Whether my Son shall Menelaus kill
None knows, for this is as the gods do will.
He mounts the Chariot, takes the Lambs, his Horse
He reins. Antenor with him took his course.
Then Hector and Ulisses measured out
The ground to fight, the Armies stood about,
And cast the Lots, whether of these should fling
His Javeling, then the fields about did ring
With praying to the Gods, and all did pray
The wronged man might the Disturber slay.
Then Hector shook the Helm' that held the Chance,
And Paris first had lot to fling his Lance.
Then all the Soldiers r^nked in a round
Sat with their Horses, and their Arms on ground.
Then Paris armed himself for this same strife,
Who fair hair'd Helen* had unto his wife.
First he put on his Boots, and these made fast
With silver Buttons which would strongly last.
Then he put on his breast plate, this before
His brother Lycaon full often had wore:
Then he put on his Damask sword in field,
And after that his strong and mighty shield:
His Helmet with a plume of Horses hair,
And as he daunced all the Armies stare:
And terribly he showed in this advance,
For he did shake his huge and mighty Lance.
Then Menelaus in an angry mood,
With gallant Armor 'twixt the Armies stood:
Trojans and Grecians all about did gaze,
For both the Armies were in great amaze
To see these men to come so stoutly in,
And dare it out, for they came chin to chin.
Then Paris first did fling his Lance in field,
Which did reflect from Menelaus shield:
Then Menelaus did his Spear prepare
To fling, but first to Jove he made his prayer;
Oh Jove! this Paris wronged me most of all;
Now grant that he under my hands may fall;
And every Guest in after-time shall fear
To wrong his Host, who was to him so dear:
This said, his Lance did pierce through Paris shield,
Stuck in his breast plate, made it for to yield,
And cut the coat his bowels did contain;
But Paris stoopt, or Paris had been slain:
His Helmet also with his sword he struck,
His sword in three or four pieces brake:
Then looking up to heaven, Oh Jove! said he,
There is no God so cruel unto me;
My Sword is broke, my Lance is flung in vain,
I durst have sworn I should have Paris slaih:
This said, he presently did catch his Guest
By the Horse-hair-plume that dangled on his crest,
And drew him to the Grecians all along,
Until that Venus broke the Oxes thong
Which tied his Helmet to his throat, and then
He flung the Helmet to the Armed men.
Then Menelaus did his Lance advance;
But Paris was delivered from that chance
Of death, for Venus in a mist unknown
Kept him, and in his chamber set him down:
And Helen in a tower of great height,
Found with some Ladies there to see the fight.
Then like that Woman old in shape she came,
Who for her spinning was of mighty fame,
And loved of Helen; Helen, come now, said she,
Quickly, for I must needs discourse with thee.
Paris is now returned from the fight,
And in his chamber loves to take delight;
On his sweet beds he is, so fai^, you will say;
He came not from the War, but from a Play,
Or dance; then Helen did know this D^sguise,
By her white neck, her breasts, and sparkling eyes.
She said, Oh thou unhappy Deity,
Why do thou add unto my misery?
What would thou lead me into Phrygia,
Or to my friends in brave Maeonia?
Because that Menelaus did or'ecome
Paris, now therefore thou would take me home.
With all deceits the ways of Gods deny,
And with thy feet never ascend the sky:
Endure sorrows greater then e're came,
Until thou be his servant, or his dame:
But now I am resolved not to adorn
His bed, for this I hold my greatest scorn.
Then Helen said; Wretch, provoke not me,
My hate is more then was my love to thee:
Between the Greeks and Trojans I Will thee place,
There thou shall perish with a great disgrace.
This fearful speech she durst not but obey,
And with her snowy veil did haste away
From all the Trojan Armies, undiseri'd
She escaped away, for Venus was her guide:
They unto Paris house quickly did hie,
The Maidens all their houswiferys did plie:
She mounted to a chamber was above,
Led by the laughter loving dame of Love,
Who set a stool just before Paris face
For Helen, who looked on him with disgrace.
I wish my husband had thee slain in War,
Although thou boast thou do excel him far.
Go fight with him, yet shall my counsel be
Now to forbear, least that he conquer thee.
Then Paris answered Helen, and did speak
These bitter words, My very heart does break.
What if that Menelaus conquered me,
The Gods hereafter may propitious be,
And I may conquer him; Oh! I burn more
Then when I brought thee to the Cranaen shore.
Let us embrace in Bed; Oh! my desire
Of loving burns with a flame-raging fire:
This said, then presently to bed he went,
She followed, and they slept with all content.
Then Menelaus like a wild beast did stare,
To find out Paris, who was held so fair:
And all the Trojans wished that he could find
Paris, for all did hate him in their mind.
The Agamemnon said, Trojans give ear,
And Grecians too, for I shall make it clear,
That warlike Menelaus won the field,
Now Helen with her riches you muse yield;
And pay the Fine that is due, hereafter fame
Shall spread our Acts, the Greeks approve the same.
FINIS.

