GOSPEL MUSIC. OR, THE SINGING OF DAVID'S PSALMS, etc.

In the public Congregations, or private Families asserted, and vindicated,

Against A printed Pamphlet, entitled, Certain Reasons by way of Confutation of
singing Psalms in the letter. Against Objections sent in, in writing. Against
Scruples of some tender Consciences.


By thy loving Brother, N.H.D.D.M.M.S.

Unto which is added, the Judgment of our worthy Brethren of New England
touching singing of Psalms, as it is learnedly and gravely set forth in their
Preface to the Singing Psalms, by them translated into Meter.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1644.

In handling this Question, or Case of Conscience touching singing of the
Psalms found in the Scriptures, being translated into English meter, you have
these 6. generals presented to you.

1. The warrantablenesse of it from the word of God. 2. The unquestiondenesse
of it in all Ages. 3. The ancientnesse of use of it in all the reformed
Churches. 4. The necessarinesse of it with other Ordinances. 5. The usefulness
of it for Gods glory and man's comfort. 6. The unjustnesse of men's exceptions
against it, and their objections answered.
Gospel Music.
1. The warrantablenesse of it from the word of word.
CHristians under the Gospel, and New Testament, have commended, yea commanded
to them the singing of Psalms in public and private, both by precept and
pattern, Ephesians. 5.19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spirirituall Odes, or Songs, (as we translate it) making melody in your hearts
to the Lord. This Apostle having cut the Ephesians short of all vain mirth, The
Greek word (...) is the name of a virtue in Ar. Ethic.
verse. 4. not allowing them such jesting which the wisest moral men counted
virtue*, yet enjoynes them this heavenly music of singing Psalms, as that
which will both glad their hearts ( making, says he, melody in your hearts)
and glorify God (making it to the Lord) So Coloss. 3. 16. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your
selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Odes, or as it is in our
translation, spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.
The Apostle having zealously inveighed against all Jewish ceremonies, chapter 2.
yet here puts home this duty of singing of Psalms, as that which did suit with
a godly man's grace, and Gods glory. Jam. 5.13. Is any afflicted? Let him pray.
Is any merry? Let him sing Psalms. The Apostle does as well command singing as
praying; and shows that singing Psalms is as proper to Christian joy, as
praying is to Christians afflictions. Christ himself sang with his Disciples,
Matthew. 26.30. And Paul and Silas sang in the Stocks, Acts 16. St. Paul says,
1 Cor. 14.15. he will sing with the spirit, that is, by the holy Spirit, in his
own spirit and affections, but with understanding also; that is, in a tongue
understood of him and others in common with whom he sang, as the 16. verse
clears. The Angels vocally do sing, Luke 2.13. The Chore, the Greek word,
Gr. A (...) (...) often applied by the Sept. to David's Psalms. Sir. (...) Sign.
Hymnodiam dice^ canere. The Hebrew word (...) is the Title of David's Psalms
the Syriack word in the Syriack copy, the Hebrew-word in Hutters Hebrew
translation, the matter and occasion show they sang*. In the Revelation we have
often mention of singing, alluding to Moses Songs, and David's Psalms, by
mentioning Hallelujah: Whether you understand the Church triumphant, or rather
militant, both confirm the excellency of singing, these places are as evident
as evident may be, and so far beyond all exception, as that no pretense can
be made against them. They are alleged out of the new Testament, so that there
is no pretense to be made, that they belong to the time of the Law. They are
not only spoken, but practiced by Christ and his Apostles: And their
expressions are so full, that they include all godly singing, by what names or
terms soever they be expressed; whether we distinguish as Jerome according to
the subject, that

Hymnos esse dicendum, qui fortitudinem and majestatem praedicant Dei and
ejusdem sempervel beneficia, vel facta mirantur. Quod omnes Psalmi continent,
quibus Hallelujah vel proepositum vel subjectum est. Psalmi autem proprie ad
Ethicum locum pertinent, ut per organum corporis quid facidum and quid vitandum
sit noverimus. Qui vero de superioribus disputat and concertum mandi, omniumque
creaturarum ordinem atque concordiam subtilis disputator edisserit, iste
spirituale canticum canit. Hieron. in Ephesians. comment. largior. lib. 3. in c. 5.
Psalms are of Moral things, as what we ought to practice, or leave undone.
Hymns of Divine things setting forth the power and Majesty of God, admiring
his benefits and acts of providence. Canticles, Odes, or (as they are here
translated) Spiritual Songs are of Natural things, as of the concent, order,
and concord of the world, and all the creatures, but in a spiritual way, as he
has it in the beginning of his distinction: He that is full of the Spirit
(says he) can take Psalms and Hymns, and Canticles, spiritually.

Or whether we distinguish of Psalms according to the authors (as some do)
that Psalms signify David's Psalms; Hymns, the songs composed by Moses,
Exodus 15. Dent. 31.30. Deborah, Judge. 5. Isaiah chap. 5. etc. Spiritual songs,
are those that are composed of other godly men, touching the benefits of God:
as at the beginning and ending of our singing Psalms there is the Song of
Ambrose, a thanksgiving after the Lords Supper, and a prayer against the Turk
and Pope in meeter by R. W. And many of the pious Ancients penned many
spiritual Songs in Latin and Greek. See Biblioth. Patrum.
Now whether Christians had rather sing these, or those composed by men endued
with the infallible spirit of Prophecy, I leave them to consider. But of this
after.

Or whether we distinguish with Calvin, A Psalm is sung together with an
instrument. A Hymn is a Canticle, or song of praise. An Ode, or spiritual
song, contains praises and precepts, or instructions and exhortations.

Or whether we distinguish as Beza, Zanchie, and the notes in our English
Bibles. That Psalms are those that contain various and mixed arguments, as
Lamentations and complainings to God, narrations of our condition before God,
expostations and reasonings with God, to grant good, or remove evil. These
(they say) the Hebrews call Mizmorim, MIZMOR is the particular Title of many
psalms.
of Zamar to sing. Hymns are (...), Laudative, which properly handle the
praises of God. Therefore the Greek Writers say, Gr. Schol. Chrysostom.
(...): That is, a Hymn is more holy then a Psalm: for the supernall powers,
or Angels do sing Hymns of God to God; but do not sing Psalms. These Hymns
(they say) are called in Hebrew Tehillim, praises, of Halal to praise. Odes, or
spiritual Songs, are peculiar Hymns of some special matter of praise;
shorter in quantity, and of an higher form and strain of Divine Poetry; and
these, say they, the Hebrews call Schirim, of Scur to sing. The word SCHIR is
the title of those short psalms of degrees, which for their excellency and
use, and form, are called Psalms of Degrees some nice criticismes may be made
on the words, by some, but not solid enough to ground a distinction for all
three. The Apostle applies two of the words (...) to all three sorts of
canticles. viz. Psalms and Hymns and spiritual sangs Ephesians. 5.19.


Yet I must tell you by the way, that these words in Hebrew do not make such a
precise difference. For Tehillim is the general Title of all the Psalms.
Mismor the particular Title of most Psalms. Ad Schir the promiscuous Title
sometimes of other Psalms, as well as of the Psalms of Degrees. Nor do the
Greek words make such a distinguishing difference: For a Psalm is of (...), to
sing. And a Hymn of (...), to sing praise. And an Ode, called a spiritual Ode
or Song, by our translators is of the word A' (...), to sing. So that it seems
to me, that the Apostle uses many words to signify that all our singing, of
what sort soever, should be of divine things, and not vain things, to glorify
God, and not to please our foolish fantasies.

But whether we distinguish the one way or the other, we see the Apostles
press the duty of spiritual singing, whether of this kind, or that kind,
whether called of men by this name or that name. In which injunctions the
Apostles are so clear, that very few, since the coming of Christ, that I know
of, have made scruple of the thing. And if any have, of late, they never
mention these places, as if either they did not remember them, or could not
answer them.

2. The unquestionednesse of Singing in former Ages.
Augustine, Aug. Tom. 1. Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 11.
who flourished about 385 years after Christ, makes mention of one Hilarious
(should seem he was a Roman, because he says he was of the order of Tribunes)
who through hatred of the superstitious Priests, was wont to dislike
Ecclesiastical singing of Psalms. Against whom the said Augustine (as he
says himself) wrote a book in the behalf of Ecclesiastical, or
Church-singing of Psalms; which book began thus: They that make mention.

Zanchie that was a famous Writer some 50. years since, says that some argued
against singing of Psalms. He tells us their Arguments, 1. That Elijah derided
the singing of Baals Priests. 2. Christ bids us pray in our secret Chambers. 3.
Hanna is commended for silent prayer, she moving only her lips. 4. The Church
of Rome when it was more pure, did not sing, as witness whereof at this day
there is nor Organs nor singing in the Popes secret Chapel.
Which arguments are so silly, that they deserve no answer: I leave them to
those that scruple at singing to answer; for sure they will find that in that 1
Kings 18. There is not the least intimation that Baals Priests sang. They will
easily say, that private prayer, and singing of Psalms are two distinct things.
They will question if the Church of Rome, while purer, did not sing (which is
doubtful, as we shall see in the antiquity of the practice of singing in all
ages since Christ) whether it will follow that not singing was any part of the
purity of the Church of Rome. If it had, the Popes would not so observe the
omission of it in their more secret Chapel. Sure their Apostle Peter, whose
successors the Pope pretends to be, did sing with Christ and his Apostles at
the holy Supper. And thus you hear all the question that has been made (that
I know of) of singing in all ages, till this age, wherein every old Heresy, is
revived, stripping Christ of all. Anabaptisme that began to oppose Reformation
in famous Luthers time, is risen again, taking away Baptism from believers
children. Antinomianisme, that opposed in worthy Pareus his time, is sprung up
to take away commandments and duties. Familisme in H. N. the author his time,
is sprung up to take away the signs of grace, and set up immediate
revelations. Arminianisme, in Pelagius and Socinus his time, the brood of him,
is sprung up to take away the power of grace, and the condition of faith, to
advance nature and universal redemption. Socinianisme in the time of
Heretical Arrius, is started up again to take away the Deity of Christ.
Epicurisme, as ancient as the time of the Sadduces, is risen, which takes away
the immortality of the soul. Antisabbatarianisme that was rank in the reign
of the Prelates. B. White, D. Heilin, D. Poclington, etc. is now revived, taking
away the Sabbath.

And so the opinion of the Hilarians unlawfulness of singing Psalms, is risen
again from the dead, that before lived in Hilarious his time, to take away this
Gospel ordinance, and sweet solace of the sanctified soul.

But before the great fall of Antichrist, there must be a great falling away of
seeming Christians, as the Scriptures warn us. If we have not a mind to fall
away, let us keep close to the Scriptures.

The Scriptures hold forth to us most clearly this Gospel-musick, or be sure of
it, it had been buried with the Jewish ceremonies, But being Moses taught the
Israelites singing before the Tabernacle was built, Exodus 15. And Christ and
his Apostles enjoin and practice singing after all Davidicall music, and
Temple Hymns were down; and the best reformed Churches ever since have
practiced: let us not lose our sweet ordinance, all little enough to cheer our
souls.

3. The ancientnesse of the use of Singing.
Quo antiquius eo melius.
To make good what I say, that singing of Psalms has been in practice among
all reformed Churches up to the time of Christ and his Apostles; and to begin
at these times, and so ascend: for the ancienter the practice, the more
authority is in the example.

1. At this time the Churches in England, 1643.
Scotland, Holland, Geneva, New England, practice it.

2. In Luthers time, 1540.
above an hundred years since, it was in much esteem with him and godly
persons. He would say to his Christian company when he heard of the threats of
Princes, and Popes, and Bishops against him, Come, come, said he, let us sing
the 46. Psalm, and let them all do what they can.

Rabanus Maurus, 847.
a Commentator on the Bible, who flourished about An.. Dom. 847. commends the
honest plain song, the plain singing of Churches in ages preceding him.

Gregory the great flourishing An. 590. An. Chapter 590.
dislikes not singing, but that men should be chosen to do that only, who
attended so to singing, as to neglect holiness of life, just as our Cathedral
men, who sing the Scriptures, prayers, etc.

For Hieron and Augustine it makes no matter which we put first, though in age
(we know) Hieron was ancienter then Augustine, we look to the order of times
when men likely might write those things we quote; yet that men may not
mistakingly think we mistook, we put Augustine first, as younger in age.

Augustine, 385.
who was made Professor of Rhetoric, and heard Ambrose (as Bucholcerus says)
about 385. after writing diverse books, Aug. lib. de Catechizandis rudibus
Retractat. lib. 2. cap. 11.
commends the Churches in Egypt for their sweet ejaculatory singings, saying,
that not voices, but devotions ascend up to Gods ears. Adding that he would
have their public singings to be such as that all the people might
understandingly say Amen. He wrote also a book (as we have said) against
Hilarious in the behalf of singing.

Hieronymus made a Presbyter (at 20 years of age) about A.D. 353.
353. (so Helvicus) and wrote his Catalogue of Illustrious men, about An. Dom.
392. Canon. Non mediocr. distinct. 5.
(so Bucholcerus) finds fault that in his time they sang no more reverently.
And he is cited to say, Better it is to sing, five Psalms with purity,
serenity, and spiritual cheerfulness of heart, then all the Psalter with
distractions of heart.

Ambrose made Episc. Mediol. 369.
about 369. years after Christ, (as Bucholc. affirms, Lib. 9. Confessionum.
) is said by Augustine to have zealously put on the Western Churches in
singing of Hymns and Psalms. Among whom the Roman Church was then eminent.

Basil the great, 365.
a learned pious man, mightily commends the singing of Psalms (as we shall
hear afterward in the usefulness of it) and therefore no doubt it was the
custom of the Greek Churches in his time, who flourished about 365. years 365.
after Christ. So he in his Com. in Gr. upon the Psalms.

Athanasius advanced singing in the Greek Church of Alexandria, who flourished
about the year 325. viz. then made Episcop. eo loci, which Augustine commends,
and Gregory in imitats 325.
in the Latin Church.

Tertullian, who flourished nearer the Apostles times, says, 194.
that the Christians after their Love Feasts, as Jude calls them, Apologet.
cap. 19. Jude 12.98.
( Tertullian uses the same word) were wont to sing out of the holy Scriptures.

Eusebius tells us, that Pliny the second (about Anno 98.) wrote an Epistle to
Trajan the Emperor, In the time of the Apostles. This Epist. of Plin. is
extant in Eusebius. in hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 33. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2.
cap. 17.
that the Christians being gathered together before day, were wont to sing
together Hymns and praises to Christ as to a God. And the same Eusebius
testifies, that Philo Judaeus did testify the same of the Christians singing,
which Philo Judaeus did, (as Eusebius affirms) live in the time of some of
the Apostles. And assures us also, that the said Pliny and Trajan lived in the
time of the Apostle John, who died not till about 100. years after Christ.

And thus I have brought the practice of the Churches in singing of Psalms, up
to the Apostles times, by the writings of the most godly and learned men of
former ages, whose judgments you have heard approving the goodness of the
practice, as well as their Histories affirming the truth of the fact.

Upon which Zanchie boldly affirms, that singing was an Apostolical
institution. And no wonder he should be bold in this, when the text of
Scriptures we laid down at first, are so evident, from which no doubt the
Churches took their warrant.

4. The necessarinesse of Singing with other Ordinances.
The Churches well knew, that some ordinances are maimed without the connection
of this Gospel Music with them; if we follow the Scriptures, and example of
Christ and the Apostles. How do we celebrate a day of praise for deliverance,
according to the Scriptures, unless we have Psalms and Hymns of praise, as
Moses had, Exodus 15. Deborah had, Judge. 5. David had, 2 Samuel 22.2? See also
Junius on Judge. 5.2.
which Psalms all Israel sang, Exodus 15.1. Psalm. 18. How do we receive the
communion after the example of Christ (which we justly urge for sitting at the
Communion,) if after the administration thereof we do not sing an Hymn or
Psalm? When are we Christian-like merry, if not for receivall of mercies from
the hand of God? And how are we merry according to the prescript, of
Scriptures, Jam. 5. if we sing not? Saints glory in tribulation oft-times, Romans
5.2. so that Paul and Silas sing Psalms in the prison, yea in the stocks. What
kind of Christians then are we, that will not sing at all? Season no duties
with singing? Whereas the Churches in the primitive times, in the ten
persecutions, sugared and sweetened their meetings and duties with singing of
Psalms before they parted, as we heard before. The truth is, devout singing of
Psalms is a savourie sauce to relish every condition and ordinance, that is an
iterated ordinance. For Baptism after once administration, is never to be
repeated. Before Sermon the Churches sing, to quicken their hearts to prayer.
After the communion they sing, to raise them up in praise. Yea I may say, this
spiritual sauce is meat it self. In singing we pray, we praise, we confess,
we petition, we exhort, we meditate, we believe, we joy, we mourn. Singing is
praising, Ephesians. 5.19.20. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and giving thanks
always. It is joying; In the same place, Making melody in your hearts. Psalm.
38. ritle, or first verse. So in Hebr. So Gr. (...).
It is meditating. In the same place, Speaking to your selves. As David
entitles one of his Psalms, A Psalm to bring to remembrance. It is teaching;
Exhorting and admonisting our own souls, Coloss. 3.16. Teaching and
admonishing your selves in Psalms, etc. It is mourning. See David's many
Penitential Psalms. And that 102. Psalm, whose title, or first verse (so in
the Hebrew) is, A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pours
out his complaint before the Lord. When we will be merry in the Lord, we must
sing, Jam. 5.13. But he does not say, but that when we are sad before the Lord,
we may sing; as the Saints have done, as we see in the instances we have given.
To which add the sad song of the Lamentations of Jeremiah for the afflictions
of the Church, and made in curious meetre with great variety (as they that
know the Hebrew can see) which the Jews sung for many years, 2 Chronicles. 35.24,
25. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah (for his death was the
beginning of the ruin of the Church) and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, For 22
years at least, till the captivity in Zedechia his time.
and all the singing men, and singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel, and behold they
are written in the Lamentations. By that we have said of mourning in singing,
it is evident that it is neither incongruous to Scripture, nor to the practice
of the Churches, nor to the natural affections and conditions of men to sing
Psalms upon a day of humiliation. It is most certain also, upon exceeding good
experience, that singing of Psalms has mightily humbled the soul even to
tears. The Psalm after a Sermon sometimes has done that which the Sermon
alone could not do. The Sermon as it were turned the wind into a warm quarter
to begin to thaw the soul; and then the Psalm has been as the breaking out of
the Sunbeams, to make the heart run with melting. As for petitions,
confessions of sins, confession of confidence in God, they are the common
language of Psalms. See the whole Book of Psalms.

5. The usefulness of Singing Psalms.
As for the usefulness of singing Psalms; much may be said. Singing is the
making in a special manner man's tongue to be his glory. Awake my glory, says
David, that is my tongue in singing to glorify God. God has not given speech
to man, but to glorify him too. Nor whistling or histing, to call to one
another, (as the Lord says, he will hiss for a Nation, and Christ says, his
sheep hear his voice, alluding to the whistling of the Shepherd) but for his
glory too. That we may call to one another to go up to the house of the Lord,
or to any other pious business. God has given hearing to hear him in his
Word, as well as men in the world; Speech to pray to him as well as to speak to
men: Sight to consider of his works, as well a man to look upon his own: And
therefore he has given the natural gift of Singing (a Music that excels all
isntrumental) to the end to praise and worship him, every man quickening
himself and others by symphonie, and singing concent together. Singing is the
only active vocal prophesying that is allowed to women in the Church. 1 Cor.
11.5. In which duty she is to keep on her veil (the badge of her subjection to
her husband) that as she might not entice others eyes by the beauty of her
face, so nor their ears by the sweetnesseof her voice. Singing is a great
preparation to prophesying, both extraordinary and ordinary. The story of
Elisha is famous, in whom the extraordinary spirit of prophesying was stirred
up by Music, and his own troubled spirit of grief and unfitness for prophecy
was allayd and sweetened. 2 King. 3.13, 14, 15. And Elisha said to the King of
Israel, What have I to do with thee? etc. And Elisha said, etc. surely were it
not that I regard the presence of Jehosbaphat the King of Judah, I would not
look toward thee, nor see thee. But now bring me a Minstrel. And it came to
pass when the Minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord (that is, the spirit
of prophecy) came upon him. And he said, Thus says the Lord, etc. and so went
on prophesying to the three Kings there met. If this Music being only
isntrumental, made by a private person, and so only civil, did thus move the
Prophet; how much more will vocal Church Music in singing Psalms, instituted
by God, incite graces? Cujus opera, (idest fidicinis) perturbatus ipsius (idest
Prophetae) animus ex praesentia impii regis Israelitarum sedaretur. Et
spirituali carmine compararetur adcaelestia praedicenda, sicut aliorum adea
percipienda. Jun. in 2 Reg. c. 3. v. 13. etc.
But if there was spiritual singing joined with his playing, as Junius
affirms, that Elisha his spirit troubled with the sight of the two wicked Kings
there present, the King of Edom, and the King of Israel, was composed and
sweetened by some spiritual Song of that Minstrel, and so fitted for that
celestial gift or office of prophesying, then is the place more express for
our purpose. And for ordinary prophesying, both preaching and hearing, let
Ministers and Christians confess their own experience, whether holy singing of
Psalms have not much fitted them for duty, and after soaked in that they have
spoken and heard. I knew a very learned and holy Divine that said, Music
fitted his spirit to make a special choice of a fit Text. And Junius says on
that place, but now mentioned, that the music of him that played and sung to
Elisha was in part to make the Kings fit to hear, as to make Elisha fit to
speak prophetically. Many that are not yet brought so home to Religion as they
should, may be brought in to some love with religious duties for the sake of
that sweet one singings of Psalms. The Indians are drawn to the Churches in
New England, by delighting in their singing day, that is, their singing on the
Lords day. If Readiness wicked spirit was often allayd in private by the music of
David (mentioned by the holy Ghost for our observation) David being called the
sweet Singer of Israel, how much more might he be taken with the public
Ordinance, as he was with the prophesyings of the Prophets, as his messengers
also were, 1 Samuel 19.20, 21, 22, 23, 24? Learned Peter Martyr says on this
place, That the Prophets now met in their College sang some pertinent Psalm;
which Readiness messengers being overcome with a divine aw or transe, sang with
them. So he. And why not as some other think that Saul also might sing with the
Prophets, as well as say as the Prophets did, being by God put under the same
aw, and into the same condition as his messengers. If carnal men may be thus
caught with spiritual singing, how much more may comers on in Religion be
drawn further on, and excited in devotion. 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. I will pray with
the spirit, and I will pray with understanding also; I will sing with the
spirit, and I will sing with understanding also; else when you shall bless
with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned The Gr.
is Idiot!
(that is, the private weaker Christian) say Amen. See the Apostle joins
praying and singing together under the same notion. And says that the joint
performance of either in the Church draws all among them to say Amen, that is,
to vote and devote the same desires of soul with the rest of the Congregation
to God.

Singing is such a notable promulgating and setting forth of the name and mind
of God, that it is prophesied that Christ should declare the mind and name of
God under the notion of singing. Heb. 2.12. For which cause he (that is,
Christ) is not ashamed to call them (that is Saints) brethren, saying, I will
declare thy Name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing
praise
unto thee; as you know he did by preaching to, and singing with the Apostles
after the New Testament passover, the Communion, as Moses taught Israel a song
after their Old Testament passover, the seal whereof they received in Egypt,
and the thing signified, partly in Egypt, and partly anon at the Red sea. By
singing we present unto our senses and minds the lively type of heavenly joys
whether to be acted by the Church triumphant in Heaven, or under Heaven at the
great restoration, when the spiritual Pharaohs, the Antichrists of the world,
shall be drowned in the Red sea of their own blood. In three verses of four it
is said three times Allelujah by the Church seeing the fall of Antichrist.
Revel. 19.1, 2, 3, 4. Singing of Psalms according to the Apostles prescript is
a making or acting the Word to dwell richly in us. Colos. 3.16. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another
in Psalms. A filling of us in public with the spirit, or an acting the graces
of the spirit; a prevention of drunken idle songs and mirth in private. Ephesians
5.18, 19. Be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the spirit, speaking to
your selves in Psalms, etc. or by Tho Gr. (...) will bear it, compared with
ver. 18.
speaking to your selves in Psalms.

To burden you with no more of mine own observations touching the usefulness
of singing; I will now refresh you with the notions of others upon this point,
so far as they speak according to the rule.

Rabanus Manrus whose name, and parts, and time you have chronicled before,
says, that into grosser and heavier minds whom bare words do not so easily
move, the sweetness of melody makes some entrance for good things. So he. So
in Saul.

Basil, (...) etc. Basil in Psalm.
of whom also you heard before, says, Whereas the holy Spirit saw that mankind
is unto virtue hardly drawn, and that righteousness is the less accounted of,
by reason of the pronnesse of our affections to that which delights, it
pleases the wisdom of the same Spirit to borrow from melody that pleasure,
which mingled with heavenly mysteries, causes the smoothness and softness of
that which touches the ear to conveigh, as it were by stealth, the treasure
of good things into man's mind. To this purpose were those harmonious tunes of
Psalms devised for us, that which are in ears but young, or touching
perfection of virtue as yet not grown to ripeness, might when they think they
sing, learn. O the wise conceit of that heavenly teacher which has by his
skill found out a way that doing those things wherein we delight, we may also
learn that whereby we profit. So Basil. And experience speaks for it. For when
we can hardly draw young people to other duties, they cheerfully learn and sing
Psalms. And those that are ancient who cannot go abroad to and among the
secular and civil joys of men, can sit at home and praise God with a Pialme.
And every well minded family by singing can make themselves a little Church.
And every Church make themselves a little Heaven.

Hooker says, That musical harmonic if but by voice, consisting of high and
low sounds is of that force, and has such pleasing effects in that very part
of man which is most divine, that some have been thereby induced to think that
the soul it self by nature is, or has in it harmony. A thing which delights
all ages, and beseems all states. A thing as seasonable in grief, as in joy;
as decent being added to actions of greatest weight, and solemnity, as being
used when men most sequester themselves from action. The reason hereof is an
admirable facility which Music has to express, and represent to the mind
more inwardly then any other sensible mean, the very standing, rising and
falling, the steps and inflections every way, the turns, and varieties of all
passions whereunto the mind is subject; yea so to imitate them, that whether it
resemble unto us the same state, wherein our minds already are, or a clean
contrary we are not more contentedly confirmed by the one, then changed and led
away by the other. In harmony the very image, and character even of virtues
and vice is perceived, the mind delighted with their resemblances, and brought
by having them often iterated into a love of the things themselves. Yea
although we lay altogether aside the consideration of dittie or matter, the
very harmony of sounds being framed in due sort, and carried from the ear to
the spiritual faculties of our souls, is by a native puissance and efficacy
greatly available to bring to a perfect temper whatsoever is there troubeld; a
part as well to quicken the spirits, as to allay that which is too eager;
sovereign against melancholy, and despair, forcible to draw forth tears of
devotion, if the mind be such as can yield them. Able both to move and moderate
all affections. The Prophet David therefore having singular skill not in
Poetry alone, but in Music also, judged them both to be things most
necessary for the house of God; left behind him to that purpose a number of
Divinity endited Poems, for the raising men's hearts, and the sweetning of
their affections toward God. In which considerations the Church of Christ does
retain it to this day. Thus far Hooker.

To all which (if not proceeding from a learned man professing Christianity,
but from the mouth of an Heathen) Christian experience may seal to as most true.

Zanchie says, Much and manifold is the use of this Music ( viz. of singing
Psalms) 1. The glory of God is held forth more illustrious, because by this
means the praises of God contained in Psalms, and Hymns are celebrated more
magnificently and gloriously, with greater attention, and admiration of the
auditorie, then if they were recited with a lower voice without singing. Which
was the cause why the Levites in setting forth the great benefits of God to the
people, did do it with sweet harmony. So before the building of the Temple,
when they carried the Ark, they sang with a shrill voice, Let God arise, and
let his enemies be scattered. And when they returned conquerours they also
sung, that thereby the benefits of God might be better understood, more
attentively heard, and more princelike admired. As on the other side, hereby
the enemies were terrified. There is no Prince but thinks himself more honored
by singing forth his praise, then by recital of the bare voice.

2. Use is the manifold profit. 1 Man's spirit is much cheered

by the sweetness of the harmony. As like is delighted with like. For the
mind of man is all harmony, and therefore is much recreated with Music. Which
the Heathens understood in their parables of Orpheus and Arion alluring the
stones after them by the harmony of the Harp, to build Thebans. But those
stories in the sacred Scripture of Elisha fitted for prophecy, and Saul
pacified in spirit by Music, are most certain. 2 The Spirit of God is stirred
up in us by singing. So Ephesians. 5, Be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your
selves with Psalms. And therefore it is apparent that this Music in the
Churches is not only lawful, but necessary.

Add to all, that it is often read that the Angels sang. Isa. 6. They cried,
that is, they sang, Holy, holy, holy, etc. so at Christ's nativitie they sang,
Glory to God on high. Therefore it is a divine and celestial thing. So far
Zanch.

Dr. Ames in his Cases of Conscience, 1. Qu. What use has singing above
ordinary pronouncing? Ans. 1 It carries to the godly mind a certain sweet
delight. Psalm. 104.34. 2 It has in it a more distinct and fixed meditation,
ibid. 3. A more copious and ample profession of godliness, Coloss. 3.16. 4. A
greater communion of mutual edification in singing with others, Ephesians. 5.19.
Qu. 2. Whether singing be more suitable to joy or sorrow? Answ. More agreeable
to joy, Jam. 5.13. But profitably it agrees to the commemoration of past
sorrows, as appears by the penitentall Psalms. As also sometimes to remove
present sorrow, Prove. 25.20.

6. The unjustnesse of men's exceptions against singing Psalms. Their
Objections answered.
The last thing we have to do upon this question, is to answer the objections
against singing of Psalms. And I am sorry to find that godly persons should
make some of the same objections, as profane malignant ministers have; as that
because David's Psalms were put into English meetre by Mr. Hopkins, Mr.
Sternhold (who dobtlesse were godly men, or else the Churches of England newly
refined out of Popery had not used them) that therefore it is not lawful to
sing David's Psalms. As a profane Priest said of late, that the English
singing Psalms were Hopkins his pigges. I say it is a sad thing when Christians
shall join with the enemies of Christ against an ordinance and practice of
Christ, who sang in his language, yea likely in Syriacke, in which he
continually spoke and preached, differing from the Hebrew in which David's
Psalms are penned, as we fing in our language.

The objections are referred to diverse heads: Some to- 1. The matter 2. The
form 3. Translation 4. Some warrants seeming contrary 5. Communion or
fellowship
Of Psalms and singing.

1. From the Matter.

1. Objection is, that it is very doubtful whether Christ or his Apostles sang
David's Psalms, or no.

Answ. 1. We have no warrant of Scripture to say to the contrary, Christians
should assert only what the Scripture asserts, and to deny what the Scripture
denies. 2. The aneient Hebrew copy of the Gospel of Matthew has it, Matthew,
26.30. (...) When they had sung one of the Tehillim, which is the name or Title
of David's Psalms. 3. Under Psalms and Hymns, etc. are comprehended all
Psalms, unless we will under Hymn comprehend especially psalms of praise,
as we showed before. Now David's Psalms are so full of praises, that they are
all called Tehillim praises. Therefore the Apostles in that Ephesians. 5. Coloss.
3. and Matthew. 26.30. uses a Greek word of the same signification; namely
(...), a Hymn. And (...), having sung an Hymn. 4. The Apostles prayed a Psalm
of David, viz. the second Psalm, Acts 4.24.25. And singing is nothing else but
a more deliberate, distinct, pausing, and mediating praying. 5. If they
composed other Psalms, sure they (at least some of them) would have been left
upon record as well as we have upon record lesser matters, as the people
strewing of Palm branches, etc. 6. If they sang not David's Psalms at that
time of the Supper, if they sang any other penned Psalm, either of Moses or
Deborah, it comes all to one. 7. It is said that the most reformed Churches
shall sing the Psalms penned in the Scripture; as the song of Moses, and the
song of David, witness Hallelujah, and Amen three or four times in four
verses, Rev. 19.1, 2, 3, 4. which words are very often in David's Psalms.
Where the Scriptures quote Psalms they would have us take it for granted that
David's Psalms are meant. As Luke 24.44. Act. 1.20.13.35. Therefore they are
meant where is mention of singing Psalms.

2. This is the objection of The certain Reasons against Singing. And of others.
Obj. from the Matter; that the matter of our singing, should be somewhat
immediately dictated to us by the Spirit, or at least we should compose Psalms
by the Spirit: For Paul says, I will sing with the spirit. And Ephesians. 5. Col.
3. Sing spiritual Songs.

Ans. Those places are meant of spiritual songs for the matter, not the manner
of making. Of Paul's singing in his own spirit or mind, yet so as in a tongue
that he might be understood Now to the objection, 1. For the Spirits dictating
of matter presently, sit for singing, we say it is a gift not found in one of
10 thousand Saints, if in any at all. See these times drive mainly at
revelations in all things. Touching Knowledge, Assurance, Practice, and this of
Singing. It is an extraordinary gift if Ministers or Christians can speak
divine Matter pertinently, upon the sudden extemporarily in preaching and
exhorting any length of time. Who then shall be able upon a sudden to speak
matter and form that is meeter, fit for singing. For if men will sing, though
alone, any tune, and not yell out a confused noise, they must measure out their
words to a certain length. And then who can study matter and meeter all in the
same instant, and be devout too? We never read in the Scripture of any such,
but rather the contrary, David penned his Psalms, Moses penned his Song, and
both with exactness and variety of meeter, which argue not sudden rapsodicall
singing. 2. We say that no Christians can sing together, because their
meditations will differ, if not the meeter too, and so make confusion.

2. For Christians deliberate composing the matter of Psalms to be sung in
common, we have no rule in the Scripture to require that. Generally those that
penned the matter of Psalms, were extraordinary men, as Moses, David, Isaiab,
Jeremiah, Habakuk, etc. 2. We read of a gift of praying and preaching, etc. But
we read not of a particular gift given by Christ in the new Testament, to one
above another, to compose the matter or ditties of Psalms. If not, then 3.
there will be a doubt whose Psalms shall be sung, whether those composed by
this brother, or that brother. 3. We prefer man's composall before Gods,
whereas in preaching, the Scriptures is the text. In baptizing and administering
the communion, the Scripture is the form. For praying, the Lords prayer is the
plat-forme. And so by the same analogy David's Psalms are the dittie for
singing. In all to keep to the plat-formes of Scripture. 4. Men are but men. If
in the matter or dittie: (for I do not now speak of meeter) there should be
any unfoundnesse of doctrine, by custom and the music, the people would fall
in love with it, and as Zanchy says very well, there would be no removing it.

If all Churches should have their several meeters for singing, it would not so
tend to the union of Churches, and anticipating of emulations. But if all
Christians should be left to compose several spiritual songs upon all
varieties of occasions, the strong would be forced to spend much time in
metricall composalls, and yet not have one in a readiness suitable to a new
emergent occasion, when the cause and the cheerful mind call for it; and the
weak shall never sing, because they can compose none at all.

For a general close to all that is objected of singing with the spirit, and
worshipping in spirit, Joh. 4. We say, That we may sing David's Psalms, and yet
sing with the spirit. As preaching the text of the Gospel is a ministry of the
Spirit, 2. Cor. 3. And so in using Scripture forms of baptizing and holy
Supper, the Spirit does come in with it; the more we say, or pray, or sing the
words of the Spirit, the more do we those according to the mind of the Spirit.
All what the Spirit suggests, is what it has already written, and for us to
use, as Romans 15.4. Whatsoever was written before time, was for our learning,
that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.

3. Objection from the matter, is this. Is not (say the reasons against
singing) this a confused praising God, when we shall offer to him the
exhortations of praise? This is giving to God his exhortation again, and
leaving the duty undone. Is not this sinful to answer God in his own words?
God commands his people to praise him: Now for us to take those words God
speaks to us, and speak them to God again, and thereby think we have done the
duty, when indeed we leave the duty undone. This is sinful.

Answ. Why may we not as well sing to God what God says to us, as well as pray
that in prayer which God says to us. David did both, Psalm. 27. Thou (Lord)
saydst, seek ye my face: My heart answered, Thy face Lord will I seek. David
thinks he praises God in song, by singing exhortations to praise. Psalm. 136.
See the first three verses, and the last verse. So Psalm. 148. Psalm. 149. Psalm.
150. As Luther said, Praying is the best preparation to prayer; for then we set
upon it in Gods strength. But in meditation in our own strength. So sure
singing exhortations to prayer, is an excellent preparation to sing praises.
And therefore David begins many of his Psalms with exhortations to praise.

2 sort of Objections are from the Form.

1 Obj. Set forms in singing Psalms are invented by men. So the Certain Reasons.

1 Answ. If turning David's Psalms into English Meeter be humane invention when
the matter is purely divine Scripture; how much more may that be said to be
humane invention when the matter and form is composed by you that make this
Objection. 2 By the same Argument you may call composing of Sermons humane
inventions.
2 Obj. From the Form is, That the singing of David's Psalms in our English
Meeter is an imposition imposed by men. So the Certain Reasons.

1 Answ. There was never any Law, or Canon, or, etc. extant that I know to
impose our English Meeter on the Churches. All that is said is in the Title to
the singing Psalms, viz. Set forth and allowed to be sung in Churches, and
private Families to prevent ungodly Balads. Here is no imposition, but only
permission, men may sing them, and not sing them, and yet not be punished. For
in all the prelaticall persecutions, men were never persecuted for omitting to
sing them publicly or privately. 2. That were a far greater imposition, if
(as we have seen instance) men shall compose Psalms or spiritual Songs for
matter and form, and read them to the Church upon the sudden to sing, without
the advice of the Church whether they were orthodox or no, and without their
allowance and leave that they should be used by the Church; and so causing men
to offer up to God instantly that which they did not well know what it was; and
so could not sing with that faith and affection as they ought: doubting what
might follow in the next line, not having any sight of it in their books, nor
any impression of it in their memories, whether it were warrantable or no, to
the great offense of some of the Congregation.
3 Obj. From the Form is that it is Liturgicall, and Cathedral, as in Paul's
and Westminster, etc. So those Reasons.

Ans. David's Psalms sung some phrases in our English Meeter differ much from
Cathedral singing, which is so abominable, in which is sung almost every
thing, unlawful Letanies, and Creeds, and other prose not framed in Meeter fit
for singing. Besides they do not let all the Congregation, neither sing, nor
understand what is sung; battologizing and quavering over the same words
vainly. Yea nor do all they sing together, but first one sings an Anthem, then
half the Chore, then the other, tossing the Word of God like a Tenice-ball.
Then all yelling together with confused noise, Hieron. on 5. Bphes. Aug. Confess.
This we utterly dislike as most unlawful. As Hieronius of old declaimed
justly against it, calling it, Musicam Theatralem, Stage play singing. And
Augustine, A studying of Music, rather then heavenly melody and devotion. And
the gloss quipping it with two verses.

Non vox sed votum, non musica cordula, sed cor:
Non clamor, sed amor, psallit in aure Dei.
Soul vows, not ayrie voice,
Not Art, but heart God hears
Not loud noise, but love joys
Make Music in Gods ears.
3 Obj. from the form. The Prophets, Christ, or his Apostles never praised God
by any form invented by man, but upon all occasions by the powerful operation
of the Spirit. 2 Pet. 2.21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. So those Reasons.

1 Answ. This text is not meant of singing, and expressing what we find penned
in the Word of God; But of the extraordinary inspiration of the Spirit
directing infallibly some few extraordinary men, Prophets, Apostles, etc. to
pen the divine texts of Scriptures. Among which we find in other Scriptures
that they penned some Psalms and spiritual Songs; and sang them themselves,
and there expressly left them to the Churches to sing. Exodus 15.1. Then sang
Moses and the Children of Israel this Song. 2 Chronicles. 35.25. And Jeremiah
lamented Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in
their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel, and
behold they are written in the Lamentations. That is, in the Lamentations of
Jeremiah, penned with great variety of meeter, as they that can but read
Hebrew may see somewhat of it. And what is the meaning of the titles of the
Psalms (which are very Text) To the chief Musician: A Psalm for Asaph: A Psalm
for the sons of Korah: A Psalm for the Sabbath day: A Psalm of degrees, of
which there are many, which being excellent Psalms were appointed to be sung
upon the stairs of the Temple in the beginning of their public worship, and
therefore some translate, Psalms of or for the stairs: I say, what is the
meaning of all these titles of the Psalms, if not left to the Churches to sing?

2 Answ. If only they must sing that can speak as they 2 Pet. 1. last, then
none must sing. For prophecy is ceased, Apostles and extraordinary men cease.

3 Answ. Either the Churches must sing these spiritual Psalms and Songs
composed in Scripture, or else some of their own composing; or none. Not none,
for it is an ordinance enjoined in the New Testament, as you have heard fully
proved. If you sing those of your own composing; they are rather invented by
men, and imposed by men, then the Psalms of David, etc. turned into English
meeter. For in this we sing for matter, and words as near as may be, only that
which was invented and imposed by the holy Ghost.

3. sort of Objections are from the translation of David's Psalms into English
meeter. This is an objection of a later stamp, then the Certain Reasons. Some
say that that translation is full of corruptions. Others speak more grossly,
that it has many lies in it.

Answ. We stand not here to justify corrupt translations. Nor on the other
side may others talk of lies in them, till they know what a lie is. Every
speaking an untruth by mistake is not a lie; but a lie is, to speak false and
to know it, and yet vent it to the deceiving of the hearer. Mentiri est contra
mentem ire, said August. To lie is to speak against ones conscience. And
Mendacem est falsa vocis significatio, cum intention fallendi. Aug. lib. de
mendacium. To lie is to utter a falsehood with an intent to deceive. Dare any
say, that Mr. Sternhold and Mr. Hopkins, etc. that translated David's Psalms
into English meeter, did wilfully mistake, with an intent to deceive the
Churches? Could they have done it, and other learned men never find them out in
their study to deceive? As for corruptions in translating, it should seem
their endeavor was to avoid them as much as they could, much more lying. For
the Title of the singing Psalms says, that their translation was conferred
with the Hebrew. Durst this title be so long printed, if for the general it
had not been true? Would the Churches, and Martyrs have so long used them, if
in some good measure they had not been faithfully done? What can there be done
of men but still it will appear as done by men; namely, imperfect. All
translations that ever were of the Bible in any language either of the Schools,
as Greek and Latin, or of Nations, have many mistake; therefore shall we read
none of them? The Churches knew there were many faults in the old English
Translation of our Bibles; did they therefore ill to read it till they had a
better? So has the last and best English Translations some mistakes known to
the Churches, therefore shall we not use it till we have a more exact? Do we
ever look for perfection before the great restitution of all things? If any do
translate as near as they can, and to the sense, the holy Ghost accepts of it.
The Greek Translation is full of mistakes; yet the Apostles alleges that often
in the New Testament, where they translate near the sense, though they miss in
the phrase. The very Hebrew text it self of the Old Testament, has 800 diverse
readings. And sometimes the holy Ghost in the New Testament takes the one,
sometimes the other, sometimes both. There is one mistake, a gross one in all
the Jews Bibles, Psalm. 22.16. where they put (...) kaari, As a Lion, for (...)
or (...) kaaru for to pierce, which the holy Ghost corrects. Matthew. 27.35. And
in the New Testament in Greek there are above a thousand diverse readings.
Shall we therefore cast away the whole Bible? Often writing and printing will
cause mistakes in any books. God has promised indeed to keep his word to an
iota, to a tittle. But not in this or that particular individual Copy, or
Translation. But in specie, among all we shall find all the truth. So for men,
God does not reveal all minutes of truth to every man, but to all his Churches
in general, of Jews and Gentiles, that we may not be perfect the one without
the other. Now then what will the Objectors do, if they will compose Psalms of
their own heads; must not they follow those Translations they understand? If
so, that they do will not be perfect. I speak not all this, as if against a
better Translation of the Psalms into English Meeter, I do with the reformed
Churches earnestly desire it. But I would not have an Ordinance laid aside
(with scandal to the Brethren) because we cannot have it in perfection.

4. sort of Objections is touching our warrant to sing David's Psalms in English
Meeter.

1. Obj. Whether that be not against it, 1 Cor. 14.26. How is it then brethren?
when ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a
tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Let all things be done to
edifying.

Answ. Touching warrant in general, we have anticipated our answer here, all
along a fore. As for that place, 1 Cor. 14.26. we cannot conceive the Apostle
more to forbid Psalms then doctrines, interpretations, etc. which no rational
man will think to be forbidden. The scope of the Apostle is evidently manifest
to be only to admonish them to do all things in order, and to edification. So
the close of the verse, and v. 27.29.30.31.

Q. But does not this place hold out to us, that one only in the Congregation
should sing, and all the Congregation silently attend?

Anws. Vid. Aretium, vetus Ecclesia non uni omnia imponebat, sed alius legebat,
alius interpretabatur, alius addebat suum judicium, alius preces habebat, alius
canebat, etc. Aret. in 1 Cor. 14.26.
If we suppose that this place should intimate that sometimes, a godly brother
upon some special occasions having composed a spiritual song, the
congregation has given leave to him to sing it in the Congregation, whiles
they silently attended, as at other times to a Sermon, or the public prayer;
yet this cannot infer that always it should be so, or that the Congregation
might not sing together; for the texts alleged in the 1. Head, the ground of
singing, clearly evince that Churches did, and may sing even all the
Congregation altogether.

2 Obj. Touching warrant, is: How we can sing those Psalms that are historical
that belonged to other times and men? And how we can sing those that contain
divine direful imprecations.

Ans. We may (says Doctor Ames) sing those historical ones, by meditating as
we sing to draw thence consolation and confidence according to Romans 15.4. And,
we must to that end, take upon us the person either of those that composed
them, or of them of whom they were composed, that we may think what is said by
them, or touching them, is said some how even to us. And for those imprecating
Psalms, 1. (says he) we may meditate in singing on the formidable dread of God
against impenitent sinners. 2. We may pray in singing that God will hasten his
just judgments on the in curable enemies of the Church; though not against our
private personal adversaries.

3 Obj. Touching warrant is: That in turning David's Psalms into, and singing
them, in Meeter with adding and changing of words, is adding to, if not
diminishing from the text of David's Psalms; on which adding and diminishing is
pronounced a curse. Revel. 22.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6.

Ans. There is no adding, but only explaining; even as we do in translating
the Bible, and in alleging texts in Sermons, applying them to particular
purposes; so that unless you dare say that these are unlawful, you must not
say the other is unlaw The Lord requires no more of us in such using the
Scriptures but to keep to the sense, as is plain a thousand times over in the
Apostles alleging in the New Testament places out of the Old.

The fifth and last sorts of Objections are from communion and fellowship with
wicked men in the duty of singing Psalms.

Ans. If we may not sing in a mixed Congregation, then not pray. For singing
for the most part is but more deliberate meditationall praying. If we may not
pray in a mixed congregation; then we must not have the Word preached (which is
a gathering ordinance belonging to all) blessed to the auditorie by prayer.
Christ prayed amidst unbeleevers. Joh. 11. v. 41.45. Jesus lifted up his eyes,
and said, I thank thee O Father, etc. Then many of the Jews believed on him.
Other places might be alleged but for have. As his giving thanks when he
miraculously fed the multitudes with a few loaves and fishes. And Joh. 12.27,
28, 29. see before, etc. after there was a mixed multitude about him. To
decline praying in a mixed congregation, is to lay a footing for neglecting of
prayer in families, and so to let them live as Atheists. Psalm. 14. As for the
holy Communion, it does intimate us to be, and integrate and seal us into one
body, (the body of Christ, is his Church) It does suppose us to be one lump,
1 Corinthians. 5. one bread, 1 Corinthians. 10. It is an ordinance to give one life to
them that have some already. And therefore in this Ordinance none but supposed
Saints or believers may join with us. But for singing, the sound is natural,
the tune artificial, (in which is no spiritual communion at all) and for the
matter it is common as other places of Scripture to all. Lastly for manner, if
they sing aright with faith and affection, they are meet for Communion therein.
If not, they sing not at all spiritually, and so we have no true fellowship
with them; just as we may say as much of praying. Men may happily cavil against
this answer; but let them rest satisfied till they can show us a word to
exclude the mixed multitude from praying and singing as we have, from
Communions. James writing to the twelve Tribes scattered abroad, Jam. 1.1. bids
them sing Psalms, Jam. 5.13. I may say of this case here, as once was said in
humane ancient stories touching paricide, there was no Law anciently made
against it, because it was supposed never any child would be so unnatural as
to kill his parent. So no casuist or controversy moves this doubt of singing
Psalms in a mixed congregation: therein all learned men are silent, as supposing
none would be so unspirituall as to question it.

To close up all. You have heard what we can say for the defense of the
lawfulness to sing as we do in our English Churches; wherein we concur with
all reformed Churches. As that of Germany, where Luther would call for the 46
Psalm in his troubles; And Zamchie would say, Zanch. on Ephesians. 5. de Music. in
Eccles.
By any means sing the Psalms and Hymns of the Scriptures, for the bringing in
of others will be of dangerous consequence. Of Scotland, where Buchanan was so
taken with it, that he most elegantly turned the Psalms into Latin Meeter. Of
the Greek Churches, of the French, of Holland, of New England; all which have
for that purpose translated David's Psalms into Meeter in their own tongues.
Even as at this day (as I am assured from them that have been ear witnesses)
the Jews in their Synagogues sing the Psalms of David in their own Hebrew
tongue. So that besides all that has been said, we have the custone of all the
reformed Churches of God; and this is not to be despised 1 Cor. 11.16.
, but rather they that yet will not be satisfied are to be put by with that of
the Apostle in another case, If any man seem to be contentious, (as to lay
aside singing of David's Psalms) we have no such custom, nor the Churches of
God. In the same 1 Cor. 11.16.

A Discourse of our worthy Brethren of New England, declaring their grave
Judgment touching not only the lawfulness, but also the necessity of the
heavenly Ordinance of singing Scripture Psalms in Meeter in the Churches of
God. Which Discourse coming to the hand of the Author, after he had finished
his weak Tract, he thought good to annex for strengthening his, and settling the
doubting Christian.
THe singing of Psalms, though it breath forth nothing but holy harmony, and
melody: yet such is the subtlety of the enemy, and the enmity of our nature
against the Lord, and his ways, that our hearts can find matter of discord in
this harmony, and crotchets of division in this holy melody: for, There have
been three questions especially stirring concerning singing. First, what Psalms
are to be sung in Churches? whether David's and other Scripture Psalms, or the
Psalms invented by the gifts of godly men in every age of the Church? Secondly,
if Scripture Psalms, whether in their own words, or in such meeter as English
poetry is wont to run in? Thirdly, by whom are they to be sung? whether by the
whole Churches together with their voices? or by one man singing alone, and the
restjoyning in silence, and in the close saying, Amen.

Touching the first, certainly the singing of David's Psalms was an acceptable
worship of God, not only in his own, but in succeeding times. As in Solomon's
time, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. in Jehosaphats time, 2 Chronicles. 20.21. in Ezra his time,
Ezra 3.10, 11. and the text is evident, in Hezekiahs time they are commanded to
sing praise in the words of David, and Asaph, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. which one place
may serve to resolve two of the questions (the first and the last) at once, for
this commandment was it ceremonial or moral? some things in it indeed were
ceremonial, as their musical Instruments, etc. but what ceremony was there in
singing praise with the words of David and Asaph? what if David was a type of
Christ, was Asaph also? was every thing of David typical? are his words (which
are of moral, universal, and perpetual authority in all nations and ages)
are they typical? what type can be imagined in making use of his songs to
praise the Lord? If they were typical because the ceremony of musical
Instruments was joined with them, then their prayers were also typical,
because they had that ceremony of incense admixt with them: but we know that
prayer then was a moral duty, notwithstanding the incense; and so singing
those Psalms notwithstanding their musical Instruments. Beside, that which was
typical (as that they were sung with musical Instruments, by the twenty four
orders of Priests and Levites. 1 Chronicles. 25.9.) must have the moral and
spiritual accomplishment in the New Testament, in all the Churches of the
Saints principally, who are made Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6. and are the
first fruits unto God. Rev. 14.4. as the Levites were, Numb. 3.45. with hearts
and lips, instead of musical Instruments, to praise the Lord; who are set
forth (as some judiciously think) Rev. 4.4. by twenty four Elders, in the ripe
age of the Church, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. answering to the twenty four orders of
Priests and Levites, 1 Chronicles. 25.9. Therefore not some select members, but the
whole Church is commanded to teach one another in all the several sorts of
David's Psalms, some being called by himself (...): Psalms, some (...) Hymns,
some (...): spiritual songs. So that if the singing David's Psalms be a moral
duty and therefore perpetual; then we under the New Testament are bound to
sing them as well as they under the old: and if we are expressly commanded to
sing Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, then either we must sing David's
Psalms, or else may affirm they are not spiritual songs: which being penned by
an extraordinary gift of the Spirit, for the sake especially of Gods
spiritual Israel; not to be read and preached only (as other parts of holy
Writ) but to be sung also, they are therefore most spiritual, and still to be
sung of all the Israel of God: and verily as their sin is exceeding great, who
will allow David's Psalms (as other Scriptures) to be read in Churches (which is
one end) but not to be preached also (which is another end) so their sin is
crying before God, who will allow them to be read and preached, but seek to
deprive the Lord of the glory of the third end of them, which is to sing them
in Christian Churches.

Obj. 1. If it be said that the Saints in the primitive Church did compile
spiritual songs of their own inditing, and sing them before the Church. 1 Cor.
14, 15, 16.

Ans. We answer first, that those Saints compiled these spiritual songs by the
extraordinary gifts of the spirit (common in those days) whereby they were
enabled to praise the Lord in strange tongues, wherein learned Paraeus proves
those Psalms were uttered, in his Comment on that place, ver. 14. which
extraordinary gifts, if they were still in the Churches, we should allow them
the like liberty now. Secondly, suppose those Psalms were sung by an ordinary
gift (which we suppose cannot be evicted) does it therefore follow that they
did not, and that we ought not to sing David's Psalms? must the ordinary gifts
of a private man quench the spirit still speaking to us by the extraordinary
gifts of his servant David? there is not the least foot-step of example, or
precept, or color of reason for such a bold practice.

Obj. 2. Ministers are allowed to pray conceived prayers, and why not to sing
conceived Psalms? must we not sing in the spirit as well as pray in the spirit?

Ans. First, because every good Minister has not a gift of spiritual poetry
to compose extemporarie Psalms as he has of prayer. Secondly, suppose he had,
yet seeing Psalms are to be sung by a joint consent and harmony of all the
Church in heart and voice (as we shall prove) this cannot be done except he
that composeth a Psalm, brings into the Church set forms of Psalms of his own
invention; for which we find no warrant or president in any ordinary officers
of the Church throughout the Scriptures. Thirdly, because the book of Psalms is
so complete a System of Psalms, which the holy Ghost himself in infinite
wisdom has made to suit all the conditions, necessities, tempations,
affections, etc. of men in all ages; (as most of all our interpreters on the
Psalrues have fully and particularly cleared) therefore by this the Lord
seems to stop all men's mouths and minds, ordinarily to compile or sing any
other Psalms (under color that the occasions and conditions of the Church are
new, etc.) for the public use of the Church; seeing, let our condition be what
it will, the Lord himself has supplied us with far better: And therefore in
Hezekiahs time, though doubtless there were among them, those that had
extraordinary gifts to compile new songs on those new occasions, as Isaiah and
Micah, etc. yet we read, that they are commanded to sing in the words of David
and Asaph, which were ordinarily to be used in the public worship of God: And
we doubt not but those that are wise will easily see; that those set forms of
Psalms of Gods own appointment, not of man's conceived gift, or humane
imposition, were sung in the Spirit by those holy Levites, as well as their
prayers were in the Spirit which themselves conceived, the Lord not then
binding them therein to any set forms; and shall set forms of Psalms
appointed of God, not be sung in the Spirit now, which others did then?

Question. But why may not one compose a Psalm and sing it alone with a loud
voice, and the rest join with him in silence, and in the end say, Amen?

Answ. If such a practice was found in the Church of Corinth, when any had a
Psalm suggested by an extraordinary gift, yet in singing ordinary Psalms, the
whole Church is to join together in heart and voice to praise the Lord. For

First, David's Psalms as has been showed, were sung in heart and voice
together, by the twenty four Orders of the Musicians of the Temple, who typed
out the twenty four Elders, all the members especially of Christian Churches,
Rev. 5.8. who are made Kings and Priests to God, to praise him as they did: for
if there were any other order of singing Choristers beside the body of the
people to succeed those, the Lord would doubtless have given direction in the
Gospel for their qualification, election, maintenance, etc. as he did for the
Musicians of the Temple, and as his faithfulness has done for all other
Church Officers in the New Testament.

Secondly, others beside the Levites (the chief Singers) in the Jewish Church,
did also sing the Lords songs; else why are they commanded frequently to sing,
as in Psalm. 100.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 95.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 102. Title, with v. 18. and
Exodus 15.1. not only Moses, but all Israel sang that song, they spoke saying
(as it is in the orig.) all as well as Moses, the women also as well as the
men, ver. 20, 21. and Deuteronomy. 32. (whereto some think John had reference as well
as to Exodus 15.1. when he brings in the Protestant Churches getting the victory
over the beast with Harps in their hands, and singing the song of Moses, Rev.
15.3.) this song Moses is commanded not only to put into their hearts, but into
their mouths also, Deuteronomy. 31.19. which argues they were with their mouths to
sing it together as well as with their hearts.

Thirdly, Isaiah foretells in the days of the new Testament, that Gods
watchment and desolate lost souls (signified by wast places) should with their
voices sing together, Isa. 52.8.9. and Rev. 7.9, 10. the song of the Lamb was
by many together, and the Aposte expressly commands the singing of Psalms,
Hymns, etc. not to any select Christians, but to the whole Church, Ephesians. 5.19.
Col. 3.16. Paul and Silas sang together in private, Acts 16. 25. and must the
public hear only one man sing? To all these we may add the practice of the
primitive Churches, the testistimony of ancient and holy Basil, is in stead of
many, Epist. 63. When one of us (says he) has begun a Psalm, the rest of us
set in to sing with him, all of us with one heart and one voice; and this,
says he, is the common practice of the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, Thebes,
Palestina, Syria, and those that dwell on Euphrates, and generally every where,
where singing of Psalms is of any account. To the same purpose also Eusebius
gives witness, Eceles. hist. lib. 2. cap. 17. The objections made against
this, do most of them plead against joining to sing in heart as well as in
voice, as that by this means others out of the Church will sing, as also that
we are not always in a suitable estate to the matter sung, and likewise that all
cannot sing with understanding; in all not therefore all that have
understanding, join in heart and voice together? Are not all the creatures in
heaven, earth, seas, men, beasts, fishes, fowls, etc. commanded to praise the
Lord, and yet none of these but men, and godly men too, can do it with
spiritual understanding.

As for the scruple that some take at the translation of the book of Psalms
into meeter, because David's Psalms were sung in his own words without meeter:
we answer. First, there are many verses together in several Psalms of David,
which run in rithmes (as those that know the Hebrow, and as Buxtorf shows,
Thesau. p. 629.) which shows at least the lawfulness of singing Psalms in
English rithmes.

Secondly, the Psalms are penned in such verses as are suitable to the Poetry
of the Hebrew language, and not in the common style of such other books of the
old Testament, as are not poetical; now no Protestant doubts but that all
the books of the Scripture should by Gods ordinance be extant in the mother
tongue of each nation, Observe Reader that this Note, viz.
that they may be understood of all: hence the Psalms are to betranslated into
our English tongue: and if in our English tongue we are to sing them, See Mr.
Mede on 1 Cor. 11.5. where he proves that it is so far from being unlawful for
a woman to sing, because she is not permitted to speak in the Church, that in
singing she ought to speak as being her duty of prophesying. I say this note
being omitted in his place, must be referred thither viz. 10 pa. 9. lin. the
last.
then as all our English songs (according to the course of our English Poetry)
do run in meeter, so ought David's Psalms to be translated into meeter, that so
we may sing the Lords songs, as in our English tongue, so in such verses as are
familiar to an English care, which are commonly Metrical: and as it can be no
just offense to any good conscience to sing David's Hebrew songs in English
words, so neiher to sing his Poetical verses in English Poetical meeter: men
might as well stumble at singing the Hebrew Psalms in our English tunes (and
not in the Hebrew tunes) as at singing them in English meeter (which are our
verses) and not in such verses as are generally used by David according to the
Poetry of the Hebrew language: but the truth is, as the Lord has hid from us
the Hebrew tunes, lest we should think our selves bound to imitate them; so
also the course and frame (for the most part) of their Hebrew Poetry, that we
might not think our selves bound to imitate that, but that every nation without
scruple might follow as the graver sort of tunes of their own country songs,
so the graver sort of verses of their own country Poetry.

FINIS.

