November. 8. 1677.
I do allow the Printing and Publishing of this Book.

Ri. Raynsford.

PLEAS OF THE CROWN.

Or a Brief, but Full ACCOUNT OF Whatsoever can be found Relating to that
Subject.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tonson under Gray's Inn Gate next Gray's Inn Lane;
and Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet. 1678.

THE TABLE.
A.
APPEAL p. 146 The kinds of it. p. 148 How prosecuted. Ibid. Appeal per uxor.
and requisites. p. 149 By the Heir. p. 150 Of Robbery. p. 152 Of Rape. p. 153
The Process. p. 154 The Count. ibid. Abatement of the Writ. p. 155 Pleas in
Bar. p. 156
Approver What. p. 158 Who may be. ibid. In what Cases. p. 159 Of what
Offenses. p. 160 Appeal. 191, p. 192 Approver and Appeller. p. 161 Proceedings
upon Trial. p. 162 After Trial. p. 163 Plaintiff in Appeal Nonsuit. p. 165
Time limited to perfect Appeal. p. 161 Process in Appeal and Indictment. p. 175
Where into County Palatine. p. 176 Arraignment. p. 134 Accessory who. p. 135

B.
BURGLARY. What a Mansion House in Case of Burglary. p. 70 Where without actual
breaking. p. 68 Where opening an inner door. p. 70 With what intent. p. 71 The
Indictment. ibid. Where triable. p. 72 Burning of a House Felony. p. 75 Burning
ones own house with intent to burn another, no Felony, but a great
Misdemeanour. p. 74 Clergy not ousted except it be a part of a Mansion House,
or Barn with Corn. ibid. Burning a stack of Corn where Felony. ibid.
Indictment. ibid.
Bail. Difference between Bail and Main-prize. p. 83 In what cases Bail to be
accepted. p. 84 After Judgment. p. 86 After Examination. ibid. Accessaries no
Bail. p. 88 Bail virtute brevis and ex officio. p. 90 Breaking of Prison. p. 94
What Prison. p. 93
Breach of Peace. Affray. p. 113 What to be done thereupon, and by whom. p. 114
Bridges. p. 119

C.
Offenses wherein is no Corruption of Blood. p. 8 Counterfeiting Coin Treason.
p. 18 Clipping. ibid. Conviction of Felo de se where Traversable. p. 25
Chance-Medley what. p. 26 Commitment of a Justice of Peace, how to be done. p.
81 Common Inns. What persons may Erect. p. 121 Refusing to entertain
Indictable. ib. Champerty. p. 123
Coroner. His power. p. 141 Whether he may enquire of Rapes or breach of
Prison. p. 142 Where the Body cannot be seen, who shall inquire. ibid. His
power concerning Appeals. ibid. To take abjuration. ibid. Clergy, who shall
have it, who not. 182, etc. Where Accessory and not Principal, p. 188
Concealment by Inquest. p. 171 Clergy in Robbery, where. p. 197 No Clergy in
Rape. p. 200 When Clergy allowable. p. 201 Challenge. p. 219

D.
DEodand. 27, p. 28 Demurrer.
E.
ESCAPES, Voluntary, Involuntary. p. 75 Prison, and breaking Prison, what. p.
76 Who may Arrest or Imprison. ibid. Per private Prison, who. p. 78 Per
public Officer, without Process of Law. p. 79 Justice of Peace, where. p. 80
Escape per Officer. p. 97 Evidence to petty Jury. p. 222 The manner. p. 224
What Evidence maintains Indictment. p. 225 Execution and Reprieve. p. 237

F.
Punishment in Forgery. p. 8 Compassing to kill the King, or any of his Privy
Council. p. 17 Felony the kinds thereof. p. 23 Felo de se. p. 24 Per
Infortunium. p. 24 Per necessitatem. ibid. Who shall not be said Felo de se.
p. 25 Conviction of Felo de se, traversable, ibid. Felony in servants the Stat.
21 H. 8. cap. 7. To whom it extends. ibid. Felonious taking quid. p. 57
Felonious carrying away quid. p. 52 What the Goods of another. p. 55
Forfeiture in petty Larceny. p. 58 Manslaughter. Murder. Felony. Treason. ibid.
Felony per Stat. 100 to p. 105 Forcible Entry, p. 116 Forcible Detainer. ibid.
Restitution, where, and by whom. p. 117 Forgery. p. 123 Falsifying Attainder.
p. 234 Forfeiture saved. p. 236
G.
GOal Delivery. Their Power. p. 130

H.
HEeresie what. p. 3 The way to convict of Heresy. p. 4 Homicide ex
necessitate. p. 28 Per Infortunium. p. 26 Things observable in Homicide ex
necessitate. p. 31 Homicide se defendendo. p. 33 Homicide voluntary. p. 35 The
kinds of it. ibid. Highways.
I.
INdictment of Murder, where. p. 45 Indictment of Robbery, the form. p. 61
Engrossing, Forestalling, Regrating. p. 123 Malt not Corn or Grain. p. 123
Justices of Peace. Their Power. p. 136 Where no Jurisdiction. p. 137 Where
they must certify Indictment in B.R. ibid. Where they may enquire of a Felony
within the Verge. p. 140
Indictments. 164 Requisites. ibid. Indictments in Leets and Turns. p. 167
Indictments quashed. p. 172 Proof upon Indictments. p. 175 Judgment in several
cases. p. 231

K.
KING what, and where. p. 11 Killing what. p. 45 Kings Bench Court. Its
Jurisdiction. p. 128

L.
LARCENY. p. 49 Simple and mixed. ibid. By whom it may be committed. p. 53
Larceny complicate. p. 64
M.
MAnslaughter to kill a man who enters into my house claiming Title. p. 33
Manslaughter. 34, p. 46 Malice implied. p. 47 Or expressed. 36, p. 38 Murder.
p. 37 Executing Martial Law in time of Peace, Murder. p. 38 Malice continuing.
p. 40 Misprision of Treason. p. 107 Matters of Religion. Reviling Sacrament. p.
125 Not coming to Church. ibid. Common Prayer. ibid. Consecration of Bishops.
p. 126 Dissuading from Church. ibid. Nonconformity. p. 127 Sending Children
into Seminaries, Poenam. ibid.

N.
NVsances. p. 119
O.
OYer and Terminer. p. 133 The Power. ibid.
P.
PRovocation, what not. p. 37 Who shall be said present and abetting a Murder.
p. 42 Piracy. p. 65 How Triable. ibid. Perjury. p. 125 Principal and Accessory.
177 Accessory before. p. 178 In Manslaughter no Accessory. ibid. Accessaries
after. p. 180 Things observable in their Arraignment. p. 181
Pain fort and dure. 184 Standing mute, two kinds. ibid. The Consequence. p.
185
Pleas. 186 Process upon Appeals and Indictments. p. 175 Where into County
Palatine. p. 176
Pleas to Felony. 205 In Bar. p. 205 In Abatement. p. 204 Auterfoits acquit or
attaint. p. 208
Pardons. p. 211 Pleading the Pardon. p. 213 Process verse. Jury. p. 216
R.
RIOT. p. 115 Robbery. 95, p. 197 Robbery in Booths. p. 199 Robbery in
Dwelling House to the value of 5 s. ibid.
S.
SHERIFF. p. 144 His Power and Office. ibid.
T.
Punishment in Transportation of Sheep. p. 8 High Treason. 9 and p. 16 Who are
capable of being Guilty of High Treason. p. 10 Eldest Son of the King within
the Act of Treason, 25 Ed. 3. ibid. Overt act in Treason. p. 12 Adhering to the
Kings Enemies, what. p. 14 Foreign Treason how triable. p. 15 Treason done in
Ireland. ibid. Treason upon the Sea. ibid. Interpretative Treason what. p. 17
Killing the Chancellor, etc. ibid. Counterfeiting Coin and Clipping. p. 18
Refusing Oath of Allegiance upon second tender. p. 20 Who shall be said Queen
within the Act, 25 Ed. 3. p. 12 Who eldest Son. ibid. Petty Treason what. The
Act against it not taken by Equity. p. 22 Misprision of Treason. 107 Positive
and Negative. ibid. Treason out of the Land, where triable. p. 170 Trespass de
muliere abducta cum bonis viri. p. 165
Trial quotuplex. p. 215 Tales. p. 217 Process verse. Jury. p. 216 Trial per
medietat' linguae. p. 220 Per Battle. p. 230
V.
VERDICT. p. 229 No privy Verdict in Cases Capital. ibid.
W.
WITCHCRAFT. p. 6 Two Degrees. 7 Punishment of the first. ibid. Of the second.
p. 8

Marks for the Authors cited in this Book.
C.P.C. Coke's Pleas of the Crown.

S. T. C. Samford's Pleas of the Crown.

Crom. Crompton's Justice.

Dal. Dalton's Justice.

Co. Lib. 4. Coke's Fourth Report.

9. R. Coke's Ninth Report, etc.

PLEAS OF THE CROWN.
THIS Treatise is divided under these Considerations; 1. Of the kinds of
Offenses. 2. Of the Incidents to those Offenses.


The kinds of the Offenses are distinguished according to the diversity of Laws
by which they are introduced, viz. Offenses
By the Common Law. By Statute Law.


Offenses by the Common Law distinguished according to the degrees of Offense,
Capital, Not Capital.


Of Capital Offenses, they are such 1. As are immediately against God. 2.
Immediately against Man.


Those that are Offenses not Capital by Common Law or Misprisions, may be in
breach of Peace, etc.

Offenses by the Stat.
Capital. Not Capital.
The latter are many, and not here to be treated of.

Now 1. concerning Offenses Capital, that are immediately against Divine
Majesty, which are Heresy, and Witchcraft.

Concerning Heresy, wherein considerable,

I. What is Heresy? 3 Inst. p. 39, 40, 41, etc.


At this day all those former Acts which determined certain Points to be
Heresy stand repealed; and though there be no express Act determining what
shall be said Heresy, yet the Statute of 1 El. c. 1. directing the High
Commission, restraining,

1. To what formerly determined Heresy, by the Canonical Scriptures.

2. To what adjudged so by the four first General Councels.

3. To what expressly adjudged Heresy by any General Council by express words
of Canonical Scriptures.

4. To what so determined.

II. Who to judge of Heresy?

1. The Temporal Judge cannot punish any Person for Heresy by Indictment or
otherwise; but yet he may take knowledge whether a Tenent be Heresy, or no?
tAs where by the Statute of 2 Hen. 4. now repealed, Caesar was committed for
saying, Although he was Excommunicated by the Archbishop, he was not so before
God: and Warner committed for saying, Non Tenetur solvere decimas, and thereupon
imprisoned. In a Habeas Corpus by the former, and special Justification in an
Action brought by the latter, adjudged neither Heresy.

2. All those Statutes that gave power to Arrest or Imprison for Heresy, viz.
2 Hen. 4.15. 2 H. 5.17. 5 R. 2. c. 5. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. c. 6. are repealed
by 1 Eliz.

III. The way to Convict of Heresy.

1. By the Common Law.

1. By the Archbishops and Bishops in a General Synod. 2. By the Bishop of the
Diocese.
2. By Stat. 23 H. 8. c. 9.

By the Archbishop in case of assent or neglect of his Suffragan.

The punishment of the party convict of Heresy.

Upon Certificate of such Conviction, a Writ De Haeretico Comburendo granted,
without which they cannot proceed to any temporal punishment.

But if after Conviction he abjure his Opinion, his life is saved.

But if he relapse after Abjuration, then irrecoverable: But by the Statute 2
H. 5. c. 7. all Statutes which introduced any Forfeiture stand repealed:
Neither did the Common Law inflict any Forfeiture, because the proceedings were
only pro salute animae, and now by the Statute of 29 C. 2. the Writ De
Haeretico Comburendo is taken away.

Witchcraft.
WItchcraft at Common Law punished with death, as Heresy, by Writ De Haeretico
Comburendo.

The Statute of 1 Jac. 12. the only Law now in force against it, and divides it
into two Degrees.

I. Witchcraft in the first Degree made Felony without Clergy, divided into
four Species. 1. Invocation or Conjuration of an Evil Spirit, 2. Consult,
covenant with, entertain, employ, feed, or reward any Evil Spirit to any
intent, although no act done thereupon. 3. Take up any dead Person, or any part
thereof, to be employed or used in Witchcraft Charm, although not actually used
or employed. 4. Exercise any Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery,
whereby any Person shall be killed, destroyed, consumed, or lamed in his or her
Body, or any part thereof (which requires the act to be done, viz. laming,
consuming.)
These and all Accessory before to suffer as Felons without Clergy, because not
specially excepted.

II. Witchcraft in the second Degree. 1. To take upon them by Witchcraft,
Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery to tell where Treasure is to be found: They that
take upon them to do it, though they cannot, yet within this Law. 2. Or where
Goods lost or stolen may be found. 3. Or to the intent to provoke any Person
to unlawful Love; these Clauses come under the word [take upon]. 4. Whereby
Goods or Chattels shall be destroyed (which requires an actual destroying, and
not a bare taking upon them). 5. Or shall use Witchcraft to hurt any Person,
though the same be not effected.


The punishment of these,

1. The first Offense a years Imprisonment and Pillory.

2. The second Offense Felony: but this requires 1. An actual conviction and
Judgment for the first. 2. The second Offense must be committed after Judgment
for the first.


The like in Forgery, Transportation of Sheep, etc.

But the Consequence upon Attainder, viz. Corruption of Blood, and loss of
Dower and the Lands Forfeiture, saved.

3 Inst. p. 47.
And Note, a Saving against Corruption of Blood saves the Descent; and saving
the Land to the Heir prevents corruption of Blood as to that.

Concerning Offenses against men immediately distinguished in the Judgment or
Event, Capital, or not Capital.

Capital, either by Common Law or Statute, and these either Treason or Felonies.

Treason, either High Treason, or Petty Treason.


High Treason.
AND this is thought an Offense at Common Law; yet because there be some
mixture of Introductions of new Treasons by Statutes, would be considered
together.

1. Considering High Treason, it is distinguished into four kinds. 1. That
which concerns immediately the King, his Wife, or Children. 2. That which
concerns his Office in the Administration of Justice. 3. That which concerns
his Seal. 4. That which concerns his Coin.


Before we come to these Particulars, some things to be generally premised.

1. That those that have such disability upon them that disables them to act
reasonably, cannot commit Treason, viz. Non compos mentis, and Infants within
Age of discretion; yet Quaere 3 H. 7.

3 Inst. p. 4, 6.
And therefore if a Traitor becomes Non compos mentis before Conviction, he
shall not be Arreigned; if after Conviction, he shall not be executed.

3 Inst. p. 4, 5.
An Alien Enemy, committing an hostile act, dealt with as an Enemy.

An Alien Army committing any Treason are Traitors within the Law.

2. The Statute of 25 E. 3. reduced and settled all Treasons, and by that means
all Treasons that were before are reduced, and the 1 Ma. reinforced the Statute
25 E. 3. and reduced all new Treasons to the old Standard of 25 E. 3. and so
all Treasons declared between 25 E. 3. and 1 Ma. were abrogate.

3. All Treason includes Felony, therefore if the Indictment want proditorie, a
Pardon of all Felonies discharges it.

Now concerning the kinds of High Treason.

Compassing and imagining the death of the King, Queen, or Prince, and
declaring the same by some open Deed.

I. What is a Compassing the death?

Declaring by an open act a design to Depose or Imprison the King, 3 Inst. p.
6, 12, 38.
is an Overt act to manifest the compassing of his Death.

II. What a King?

1. A King before his Coronation, 3 Inst. p. 7.
a King within this Statute when the Crown descends upon him.

2. A King de facto, Ibid.
and not de jure, a King within this Act, and a Treason against him is
punishable, though the right Heir get the Crown.

3. A Titular King, that is not Regnant; as the Husband of the Queen not a King
within this Act, and the Stat. 1 and 2. Ph. and Ma. c. 10. but the Queen is.

4. The right Heir to the Crown, yet not in Possession, therefore is not a King
within this Act.

III. What the King's Wife?

3 Inst. p. 9.
It extends not to the Queen Dowager.

IV. What the eldest Son and Heir of the King within this Act?

The second Son, after the death of the eldest, within the Act.

The eldest Son of the Queen Regnant within the Statute.

Ibid.
The Collateral Heir apparent, as Roger Mortimer 11 R. 2. the Duke of York 39 H.
6. not Son and Heir within this Act, yet Quaere.

V. What an Overt act requisite to make such comparing Treason?

3 Inst. p. 12.
1. An Overt act must be alleged in every such Indictment, and proved.

2. Compassing by bare words is not an Overt act, as appears by many temporary
Statutes against it, 1 El. c. 6. 13 El. c. 1. but the same set down by him in
writing is an Overt act; yet now it has been adjudged that words are an Overt
act, and the Law taken accordingly.

3. Conspiring the death of the King, and providing weapons to effect it, or
sending Letters to second it; assembling People to take the King into their
power; Lord Cobham's writing Letters to a Foreign King to invade, an Overt act.

Conspiring to levy War no Overt act unless levied, 3 Inst. p. 14.
because relates to a distinct Treason.

II. Treason levying War against the King.

1. 3 Car. 2. c. 1.
Conspiring or compassing to levy War, without a War de facto, no Treason; but
if a War levied, the Conspirators Traitors as well as the Actors: This appears
by the Stat. 13 El. c. 1. that made such Conspiracy Treason during the Queens
life.

2. Raising a Force to burn or throw down a particular Enclosure only a Riot;
but if it had been to have gone from Town to Town, and cast in all Enclosures,
Bradshaw's case; 2 And. p. 4, 5.
or to change Religion, or to inhance the Salaries of Laborers, a levying of
War, because the Enemy public.

3. Joining with Rebels pro timore mortis, and recessed quam cito potuerunt ad
Castles no Treason, 3 Inst. 10.

4. Holding a Force or Castle against the King's Force a levying of War.

III. Treason adhering to the King's Enemies, giving them Aid within the Land
and without.

1. What adhering?

Giving Aid and Comfort to them; surrendering the King's Castle for reward?

2. What an Enemy?

The Subject of the King becoming a Rebel, he that out of the Realm succors
him, this not adhering to an Enemy within the Clause.

3 Inst. p. 11.
An Enemy coming hostilely into England, shall be dealt with as an Enemy
executed by Marshal Law, or ransomed; but a Subject assisting shall be dealt
with as a Traitor.

The Scots invading England in the Queens time adjudged Enemies, though
Scotland then in Amity. Lord Herris Case, 3 Inst. p. 11.

3. Within the Land or without, how that Foreign Treason shall be tried.

1. At Common Law for a Foreign Treason the Indictment and Trial must be where
the Land lies. 2. Per Stat. 35 H. 8. c. 2. yet in Force it may be tried or
inquired of in B. R. or by Commissiion in any County where the King appears;
the King's Signiture may be either to the Commission or Warrant thereof.
Treason done in Ireland is within that Statute, Perrot's Case. 1 And. p. 262.


Per Stat. 28 H. 8. c. 15. Trot. Ab. p. 382.
Treason upon the Sea inquirable and triable by Commission in any County; at
Common Law it must be before the Lord Admiral.

IV. Treason, Violation.

1. The King's Wife extends not to a Dowager, if she consent it is Treason in
her.

2. The Prince's Wife, same Law as before.

3. The King's eldest Daughter then living.

Thus far of Treason that relates to the King's Person and nearest Relations,
wherein generally

1. There must be an Overt act to manifest the Evidence, and word of mouth is
Overt act, as it has been adjudged, vide the Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.

2. That it must be made appear by manifest proof, and not by conjectures.

3. He must be lawfully attaint thereof, either by Confession or by his Peers
in his life time.

And therefore if a Person be slain in open War he forfeits nothing, neither
can he be attaint in such case, but by Parliament.

Thus far of Treasons relating to the King immediately; now follows that which
is interpretative Treason; Killing the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justice of one
Bench or other, Justice in Air, or of Assise, or Oyer and Terminer in their
place, doing their Offices.

1. This extends but to the Persons here named, not to the Lord Steward,
Constable, or Marshal, or Lords of Parliament.

2. It extends to those only during their Office.

3. It extends only to killing, not wounding without death.

But by Stat. 3 H. 7. c. 14. compassing to kill the King, or any of his Council
made Felony.

Counterfeiting the Great Seal or Privy Seal.

1. It must be an actual counterfeiting thereof, compassing to do it no
Treason. 2. Affixing the Great Seal by Chancellor without Warrant no Treason.
3. Fixing a new Great Seal to to another Patent is a great Misprision, but no
Treason; nor a Counterfeiting within this Statute. 4. Aiders and Consenters to
such Counterfeiting are within this Act. 5. The Counterfeiting of the Privy
Sign or Sign Manual no Treason within this Act, but made so by the Statute 1
Ma. c. 6.
V. Treason concerning the Coin.

1. Counterfeiting the Kings Coin, this was Treason at Common Law, and Judgment
only as of Petty Treason.

But whereas Clipping, etc. is made Treason by subsequent Statutes, the
Judgment is to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, because introductive of a new
Law.

Herein considerable,

1. What shall be a Counterfeiting, Clipping, Washing, and Filing of Money for
lucre or gain, any of the proper money of the Realm, or of other Realms, allowed
to be current by Proclamation, not within this Statute, but made High Treason
by Stat. 18 El. c. 1. but without corruption of blood or loss of Dower.

2. What is Money?

This extends only to proper Money of this Realm.

But now,

1 Ma. c. 6. Forging or Counterfeiting Money made current by Proclamation, is
High Treason.

14 El. c. 3. Forging of Foreign Coin not current here; Misprision of Treason
in the Forgers, their Aiders and Abettors.

And Note, the bare forging of the King's Coin, without uttering, is Treason.

The second Offense concerning Money declared Treason is, if any Person bring
into this Realm counterfeit Money.

1. It must be Counterfeit.

2. Counterfeited to the similitude of English Money.

3. Brought from a Foreign Realm, and therefore not from Ireland barely.

4. Brought knowingly.

5. Brought, and not barely uttered here: But if false or clip't Money be found
in his hands, by the Statute De Moneta if he be suspicious, he may be arrested
till he have found his Warrant.

6. He must merchandise therewith, or make payment thereof.

Concerning High Treason made by the subsequent Statutes in force.

5 El. c. 1. Refusing Oath of Supremacy upon second tender Treason, without
corruption of Blood.

Per 5 El. c. 1.
Extolling power of Bishop of Rome Praemunire, by bringing in Bulls, or putting
in execution, or reconciling to the Sea of Rome thereby, Treason.

Bringing in Agnus Dei Praemunire, 23 El. c. 1. Absolving Subjects from
Obedience, or reconciling them to Obedience of Rome, Treason in 27 El. 2.
Priest coming into England, not submitting in two days, Treason. The like for
English men in Foreign Seminaries.

Petty Treason.
IS confined by Stat. 25 E. 3. to three Particulars.

1. Where a Servant kills his Master.

This extends to some other Cases: 1. Servant kills his Mistress. 2. Servant
kills his Master's Wife. 3. Where a Servant upon Malice taken, during his
Service, kills his Master after departure from his Service.


2. Wife killing her Husband.

If Wife and a Stranger kill the Husband, petty Treason in the Wife, Murder in
the Stranger.

If the Wife or Servant procure a Stranger to kill her Husband or Master, the
Procurer accessory only to Murder: But if she procure a Servant to do it,
Treason in both.

3. Ecclesiastical, Secular or Regular, kills Superior.

Note, Aiders, Abetters and Procurers to Petty Treason are within this Act.

This Act not taken by Equity.

C.P.C. f. 20.
Son kills Father or Mother, it is Petty Treason, receiving Meat, Drink, or Wages.

The Judgment in Petty Treason for a Man to be hanged and drawn.

A Woman to be burnt.

Crom. 18.
Whatsoever will make a Man guilty or principal in Murder, will make him guilty
or principal in Petty Treason.

But if the Servant kill the Master upon a sudden falling out, this is not
Petty Treason, but Manslaughter.

If the Servant or Wife be of Confederacy to kill the Husband or Master, and be
in the same House, though not in the same Room, they are principal, and guilty
of Petty Treason, for it is a presence.

Of Felonies.
AND first of Felonies of death of a Man.

Now for Felonies, they are either by Common Law or Statute Law.

Felonies by Common Law of four kinds: 1. Such as are committed against the
Life. 2. Such as are against the Goods of a Man. 3. Such as are against the
Habitation of a Man. 4. Such as are against the Process of Public Justice.


Felonies committed against Life of two Natures.

1. That which is committed against his own Life, Felo de se.

2. Committed against another Man's Life involuntarily. 1. Per infortunium, and
therein of Deodands. 2. Per necessitatem, in Defense of Justice, in defense of
self. 3. Voluntary, without Malice, with Malice.
Felo de se.

1. The Person.

1. As in other Felonies, so in this, the Person that commits it must be of
years of discretion, Compos mentis, otherwise there is no Forfeiture: Therefore
if a Lunatic, during his Lunacy, a Man distract by force of Disease, or Non
compos mentis, kill himself, no Felony. 2. As in other Felonies the death must
ensue within a year and day after stroke.
2. The act may be voluntary, involuntary in some Cases. If A. assault B. and
B. falling down with his knife drawn, A. in pursuit to kill B. by haste falls
down upon the knife, A. is Felo de se, and forfeits Goods.

But if B. was standing on his Defense with his knife drawn, Stam. P.C. 16.
C.P.C. p. 54.
A. runs upon the Weapon and kills himself, not Felo de se.

3. Conviction.

1. If the Body can be seen, then the Conviction before Coroner, super visum
Corporis, not traversable. 2. If not seen, C.P.C. p. 55.
then before Justice of Peace, and then traversable by the Executor or
Administrator.
In the same manner, if enquired in B. R. in same County, traversable.

4. Forfeiture relates to stroke. Villain strikes himself, Lord seizes his
Goods, Villain dies, King shall have them.

Of what?

Joint things in Action, all forfeited, unless in case of Merchants; Joint
things several Moieties forfeited: But Joint Chattels in Husband and Wife, all
Forfeit for Offense of Husband.

Chancemedley Felony of death of another, either involuntary, or voluntary.

Involuntary per infortunium, ex necessitate.

Involuntary per infortunium.

Chancemedley, where a Man doing a lawful act, without intent of hurt to
another, and death casually ensues.

As shooting at Rovers, or at a Bird, or hewing a Tree and the Hatchet-head
flies off, or a Schoolmaster in reasonable manner beating a Scholar, or a
Father his Son, or a Master his Servant.

Doing a lawful thing that may breed danger, and giving warning; Justing by
command of the Prince. Crom. 28. C.P.C. 56.


But if the act be unlawful, then death ensuing Manslaughter or Murder.

Shooting at a Deer in another Park, the Arrow glanceth and kills a stander
by, Manslaughter.

Throwing stones or shooting in the Highway, and death ensuing, C.P.C. 56.
Manslaughter.

But if a man, C. P. C. 57.
knowing people passing by in the street, throw a stone over the wall, Murder.

Playing at Hand-sword without command of Prince, death ensuing, Manslaughter.

So that an unlawful act, without an ill intent, makes it Manslaughter; with an
ill intent, Murder.

And where it is found involuntary per infortunium, causes forfeiture of
Goods; but a Pardon of Course upon Special matter found.

Deodand.

But there is a death per infortunium without the default or procurement of
another; fall from a Tree, or by a Horse or Cart; and the thing that occasions
the death is Forfeited and Deodand; wherein considerable,

1. What forfeited as a Deodand.

C.P.C. 58.
If a man fall from a Cart or Ship in Freshwater, it is a Deodand; otherwise in
Saltwater.

2. If an Infant under fourteen be slain by fall from Cart, Horse, or Mill, no
Deodand; but if slain by a Horse, Ox, or Mill, then a Deodand.

Dalt. Inst. c. 97.
If a man kill another with any Sword, a Deodand.

2. When forfeited,

When found by Inquisition, therefore the Jury ought to find the price; this is
before the Coroner.

Homicide ex necessitate.

This of several sorts:

1. In reference to Justice.

2. In defense of his Person, House, Goods, etc.

Homicide ex necessitate in reference to Justice, of several kinds: 1. In
execution of Justice. 2. In advancement of Justice.


Homicide in Execution of Justice requires certain prescripts.

1. That the Judgment given be by one that has Jurisdiction in the Cause.

If a Justice of Peace give Judgment in Treason, the Execution thereof Murder
in Judge and Officer.

But if he give Judgment of Felony in Treason, Felony in the Judge, but not in
him that executes it.

2. That it be done by a lawful Officer.

Therefore if a Stranger of his own head, or the Judge that gives the Sentence,
Executes, when it is to be done by Sheriff, Felony.

3. That it be done pursuant to Judgment.

Judgment to be hanged, Sheriff beheads him, Felony.

Homicide in advancement of Justice in Causes Criminal, Civil.


1. In Causes Criminal.

If a Sheriff or Bailiff, having warrant to arrest a Person indicted of Felony,
and he will not obey, and suffer himself to be arrested, the Bailiff kills him,
no Felony.

The same if any Person pursues upon Hue and Cry, or otherwise to arrest a
Felon that flies.

If a Felon arrested break away from his Conductors to Goal, they may kill if
they cannot otherwise take him.

But in this latter Case there must be a Felony done.

If a Prisoner assault his Jailer, and he kill his Prisoner, no Felony.

Rioters or forcible Enterers or Deteinors, standing in opposition to the
Justice's lawful warrant, and one of them slain, no Felony.

Keeper or Parker may kill hunter, if they fly or defend themselves.

2. In Civil Causes.

Though Sheriff cannot kill a man who flies from the execution of a Civil
Process, yet if he resist the arrest, the Sheriff or his Officers need not give
back, but may kill the Assailant; so if in the arrest and striving together,
Officer kill him, no Felony.

Now touching all the former Homicides these things observable.

1. There must be no malice colored under pretense of necessity; for if it be,
it alters the Case, and makes it Murder.

2. The Party that did the Fact must be arreigned, and upon Not Guilty pleaded
the Special Matter must be found.

3. Upon this Special Matter thus found, the Party is to be dismissed without any
forfeiture or pardon purchased.

Thus of Homicide ex necessitate in reference to Public Justice: Others there
are that are grounded upon Private Interest, and they are of two kinds.

1. Justifiable, and consequently inducing no forfeiture at all, nor needing
pardon.

2. Excusable, and yet inducing forfeiture.

1. Justifiable and inducing no forfeiture, where a Person comes to commit a
known Felony.

1. If a man come to burn my House, and I shoot out of my House and kill him,
no Felony. 2. If a Woman kill him that assaulteth her to ravish her, no Felony.
3. If Thieves assault me in the Highway, or in my House to rob me, I, or any of
my Servants kill them, no Felony or Forfeiture.
But if the assault in my House were not to rob, but to beat me, etc. there
'twould be only se defendendo, and Goods forfeited, and a Pardon of course to
be granted, because they came not to commit a known Felony; for it cannot be
judged whether he meant to kill me.

If one come to enter into my house, claiming Title, Dal. c. 98.
and I kill him, Manslaughter.

Homicide excusable se defendendo, where though it save the Life, yet the Goods
are forfeited; this requires these things.

1. It must be inevitable necessity, yet in case of justifiable Homicide, as of
a Thief that comes to rob me, or by an Officer resisted in the Execution of an
Arrest, C.P.C. f. 56.
the Party need not give back to the Wall.

But in this Homicide se defendendo, C.P.C. 57.
the Party that is assaulted not excusable, unless he give back to the Wall.

But if the assault be so furious, Dalt. c. 48. C.P.C. 56.
and in such a place that giving back would endanger his life, he need not give
back.

A man fights, and then falls to the ground, then flying not necessary.

2. It must be done in his own defense.

C.P.C. 56.
If A. be assaulted by B. before a mortal wound given A. gives back until he
come to the wall, and then in his defense kills B. this is se defendendo.

But if mortal wound first given, then Manslaughter.

Dal. c. 98. Crom. 26.
If A. upon malice praepense strike B. and then fly to the wall, there in his
own defense kills B. this is Murder.

But if there be malice between A. and B. A. strikes first, B. retreats to the
wall, and in his own defense kills A. this is se defendendo.

If malice be betwixt A. and B. A. assaults B. B. retreats to the wall, and
then kills A. in his own defense; if it be in the Highway he shall be
discharged, if not, se defendendo. Copston's Case.

Thus far of Homicides involuntary.

Homicide voluntary is either ex malitia praecogitata, or sine malitia, the
former Murder, the latter Manslaughter.

1. Who shall be said a person killing?

A man that is Non compos mentis kills another, this is no Felony; the same for
a Lunatic during his Lunacy.

But he that incites a madman to kill another is a principal Murderer.

A man dumb kills another, Felony.

An Infant within years of discretion kills another, no Felony; as if he be
nine or ten years old.

But if by circumstance it appears he could distinguish between Good and
Evil, it is Felony: Crom. 27.
as if he hide the body, make excuses, etc.

But in such Case Execution in prudence respited to get a Pardon.

2. What said Malice?

It is either implied or expressed.

C.P.C. 52.
Implied malice is collected either from the manner of doing, or from the person
slain, or from the person killing.

1. Malice implied in the manner of doing.

Poisoning wilfully any man, implied malice.

If a man do an act that must apparently introduce harm, and death ensue; as to
run among a multitude with a Horse used to strike.

But note, If it were with an intention to do harm, then Murder; if without
such intention, Manslaughter.

The like of throwing a stone over a house among many people, the intention of
doing harm makes it Murder; want of such intention, Manslaughter, because an
unlawful act.

For an intention of evil, though not against a particular person, makes malice.

Killing any person without provocation, Murder.

A. comes to B. who resists and strikes A. kills him, Murder.

A. Distorts his mouth, 42 El. Brames Case.
and laughs at B. who thereupon kills him, Murder.

2. Malice implied in respect of the person killed.

If a Watchman or Constable, or any that comes on his assistance, doing their
Office, be killed, it is Murder, 4 R. Hamdens Case.
though Killer knew him not to be such.

If any Magistrate or Minister of Justice, having a lawful Warrant, be killed,
it is Murder: As where a Sergeant comes to Arrest, 1. Though in the Night. 2.
Though on Sunday. 3. Though upon Arrest he show not out of what Court, or whose
Suit. 4. Though Process Erroneous. 5. Though he show not his Warrant or Mace
where it is not demanded.


9 R. Mackleys Case.
But if Officer do what is not warrantable, as break open a window to arrest,
there if slain, Manslaughter.

Malefactors come into a Park, Parker shoots, they fly, he pursues, they kill
him, Murder in all; for their first entry was with malicious intent.

3. Malice implied in respect of person killing.

A. assaults B. to rob B. who resists, A. kills him, Murder.

Prisoner by Duress of Jailer comes to an untimely end, Murder.

Executing Martial Law in time of Peace, Murder.

Malice express considerable, 1. In the principal in the first degree that does
the act. 2. In the principal in the second degree, that is aiding, abetting,
etc. 3. In Accessaries before Fact.


1. Principal in first degree.

If a person have no particular malice against any particular person, but comes
with general resolution against all Opposers, Crom. 20.
if act unlawful, and death ensue, it is Murder: As if it be to commit Riot,
enter into a Park.

2. If there be malice between A. and B. and they meet and fight, although A.
gives first blow, yet if B. kill him, Murder.

If there be malice between A. and B. A. assaults B. and flies to wall, there
in his own defense kills B. by some Murder, but Quaere.

If there be a quarrel between A. B. A. challenges B. who declines it, but at
length upon importunity, and to vindicate his Reputation, meets and fights, and
kills A. Murder. 14 Jac. Taverner's Case.

If A. and B. fall out upon a sudden, and they agree presently to fight, and
each fetches a Weapon and go into field, and one kills the other, this only
Manslaughter, because the blood never cooled: but otherwise if they had
appointed to fight next day.

A. and B. fall out, A. says he will not strike, but will give B. a pot of Ale
to touch him, B. strikes, A. kills him, Murder.

If A. and B. are in malice, A. challenges the field, B. refuses to meet, but
says he shall go to morrow to such a Town, A. meets him and assaults him, B.
kills him, Manslaughter, and no Murder.

The Child of A. beats the Child of B. who runs home to his Father, and he runs
three quarters of a mile, beats the other Child, and he dies, Manslaughter.

3. If malice be not continuing to death, no Murder.

A. and B. combat upon malice, and are parted, and after they meet and combat
upon the sudden, and one kills the other, by some not Murder, because the first
Malice satisfied.

If the party killed had wounded at first combat the party slaying, Quaere.

A. and B. are at malice, and reconciled, and after upon a new occasion fall
out and kill, no Murder.

4. Tho malice did not rise so high as death, but intended only to beat the
party, yet if malice, it is Murder if death ensue.

A Keeper of Esterly Park finds a Boy stealing wood, and binds him to his Horse
tail; Horse runs away and kills Child, Murder, for it was a deliberate act. Cr.
Car. 131. Holloway's Case.

5. The malice intended to one, egreditur persona, and makes death of another,
this act makes it Murder, and qualifies it in same manner, as if it had had its
due effects.

A. having malice at B. strikes at him, and misses him, Die. 128.
and kills C. this is murder in A. and if it had been without malice,
Manslaughter.

A. having malice at B. assaults him, and kills his Servant, Murder.

A. lays poison to kill B. and C. by misadventure takes it and dies, Murder in
A. contrary if it had been laid to kill Rats, then per infortunium.

A. and B. combat upon malice, C. comes to part them, A. kills C. per ascuns,
Murder in both; and if the falling out were sudden, then only Manslaughter in
him that kills him Quaere.

6. Malice must be of Corporal danger to the party.

2. Principal in second degree, that are aiding and abetting.

1. If two or more come together to kill, rob, or beat a man, or to commit a
Riot, and one of them kills a man, this is murder in all them of that party
that are present aiding or abetting him thereunto, St. P.C. c. 40.
or that were ready to aid him, though but lookers on; otherwise if they came
there by chance.

2. All are said to be present that are in the same House, though in another
Room, or in the same Park, though half a mile distant, and out of view;
therefore if they come to commit a Felony, such persons aiding and abetting
shall be said to be present.

3. A. and B. fall out, and appoint field, A. takes C. his Second, B. takes D.
his Second, A. kills B. this is doubtless Murder in C. Crom. 19. Dal. c. 93.
and it has been held Murder in D. also, for it is a compact; but it seems
otherwise.

4. If A. and B. having malice praepense meet and fight, and C. the Servant of
A. not acquainted therewith, takes part with A. his Master, and kills B. Del.
c. 93. Die. 128. Crom. 100.
this is Murder in A. and only Manslaughter in C. the same Law if C. came in
suddenly and took part with A. and kill B.

3. What malice in Accessory before Fact.

A. commands B. to kill C. with a Gun, he kills him with a Sword, A. is
accessory to this Murder, because killing is the substance.

But if he command B. to kill C. and he by mistake kill D. this is Murder in B.
but A. is not accessory thereunto.

A. commands B. to beat C. who beats him, whereof he dies, this is Murder in B.
and A. is accessory, because death ensued upon the act commanded.

4. What is killing?

Poison, Weapon, Gun, Bow, Crushing, Bruising, Smothering, Strangling,
Famishing, inciting Dogs, laying a Sick man in the cold.

Laying an Infant in an Orchard under Leaves, and he is stricken with a Kite.

St. Dal. c. 93.
A man keeps a Beast used to strike knowingly, and ties it not up, the Beast
kills a man, Felony by some, by others not, but a gross misdemeanour. 3 E. 3.
Cor. 311.

5. What person killed?

It must be a person in rerum natura.

Dal. c. 93.
If a Woman quick with Child take a potion to kill it, and accordingly it is
destroyed without being born alive, a great misprision, but no Felony; but if
born alive, and after dies of that potion, it is Murder.

Ibid.
The like if dies of a stroke given by another in like manner, counsel before
birth to destroy it, and after the Child is born destroyed accordingly, the
counselor is accessory.

6. What a place within the Realm?

Stroke and death in partibus transmarinis not punishable at Common Law, but
before Constable and Marshal.

Stroke and death upon Sea inquirable before Admiral, according to Stat. 28 H.
8. c. 13. But stroke upon the Sea, and death upon the Body of the County, not
punishable at all.

If stroke in one County, and death in another, the party shall be indicted
where death happened.

An accessory in County of A. to a Felony committed in County of B. the
accessory after Certificate of the Conviction and Attainder of the principal,
may be Arreigned in the said County of A. where he was accessory.

7. The party must die within year and day of stroke, poison, etc.

Manslaughter.
KILLING another upon a sudden falling out, or provocation, or unjustifiable
act, Manslaughter.

1. What a sudden falling out?

Two combat and part, and presently come together and fight, C.P.C. 18.
or one presently fetches a Weapon and kills the other, or they presently
fetch them weapons, and go into the field, and one kills the other,
Manslaughter.

Diverse Rioters enter into another house forcibly, and eject the people;
afterward they being in possession, the party ejected, with twenty more, comes
in the night to the house, endeavors to fire it, one within shoots and kills
one of the assailants, and ruled to be Manslaughter, because their entry and
holding with force illegal, and not Murder, because sudden provocation.

So A. claims title to a house of B. A. attempts to enter and shoots at the
house, B. shoots and kills A. adjudged Manslaughter.

Two fall out and fight, Dal. c. 94.
one breaks his Sword, a stranger standing by sends him another, and he kills
therewith, Manslaughter in both.

2. What a sudden provocation?

Two strives for the wall, and one kills the other, Manslaughter.

3. What unlawful act, whereupon death ensuing will make Manslaughter?

If the unlawful act be deliberate, and tend to the personal hurt of any
immediately, or by way of necessary consequence, death ensuing, Murder.

But if either such deliberation or intent of personal hurt be wanting,
Manslaughter.

Two play at Foils, and one kills the other, Manslaughter. Sir John Chicester's
Case.

A man throws a stone at another, which glanceth and kills another,
Manslaughter and not Murder, because no malicious intention to hurt; not per
infortunium, because doing an unlawful act.

There is a particular Manslaughter wherein Clergy is oust, per Stat. 1 Jac. 8.
wherein,

1. He that is ousted of Clergy by that Statute, must be especially Indicted
pursuant to that Statute.

2. It extends to him that actually gave stroke, not to those that are present.

3. Need not Conclude contra formam Statuti.

4. Although the Indictment be special upon that Statute, yet the Jury may find
general Manslaughter. 23 Car. B. R. Page's Case.

Larceny.
WE come to Offenses Capital, which refer to the Goods of any Person, viz.
Larceny, which is of two kinds; Simple Larceny, Mixed and complexed Larceny.


Simple Larceny of two kinds:

Grand Larceny, of value of 12 pence.

Petit Larceny, under that value.

Simple Larceny; a felonious and fraudulent taking away by any person of the
mere personal goods of another, not from the person, nor out of his house, to
the value of 12 pence.

I. What shall be said a Felonious taking, Imports two things:

1. A taking necessarily, the Indictment must be Cepit; if it be Felony,
abduxit Equum not sufficient.

If a person finds goods lost, and converts them, C.P.C. 108.
though it was animo furandi, yet no Felony.

If a man has a bare charge of goods, Felony may be by him committed: As a
Butler that has a Charge of Plate, Shepherd of sheep; the like of him that
has a bare special use, as the guest that has Plate set before him.

But he that has a possession by delivery cannot thereof commit Felony.

A Carrier has goods delivered to him, and carries them away, no Felony.

A Clothier delivers Yarn to a Weaver to weave, he carries or imbezels it, no
Felony.

But this has two Exceptions.

1. If the privity be determined, then it may be Felony.

A. delivers a Pack or Tun of Wine to a Carrier, he opens it, and takes out
Goods or Wine, animo furandi, Felony.

So if A. delivers goods to B. to carry to a certain place appointed, and after
takes it animo furandi, Felony.

2. By Stat. 21 H. 8. c. 7. whereby if a Servant goes away with goods of his
Masters delivered to him above value of 40 shillings, herein 1. Extends not to
Apprentice or Servant within eighteen years. 2. Requires a Delivery.

If one Servant deliver goods to the other, this is a delivery by Master.

If the Master deliver an Obligation, or deliver Cattle to sell, and Servant
receives money and departs with it, no Felony; like if he had gone away with
Obligation.

3. He must go away with it.

Wastfully consuming thereof, no Felony.

4. Now by Stat. 1 E. 6. c. 12. he may have his Clergy. 5. He must be a Servant
at time of delivery, and going away; therefore for imbezelling after Master's
death, Stat. 3^ H. 6. c. 1. is provided. 6. If a Servant receive his Masters
Rents, and go away with them, not within the Statute.


C.P.C. 47.
If a man, seeing a Horse in the Pasture of the Owner, having a mind to steal
him, obtains a Replevin, and thereby has the Horse delivered, this a Felonious
taking.

If A. feloniously take my Horse, and B. feloniously takes him from him, Crom.
34.
B. may be appealed or indicted as of a felonious taking from me. Stat. 33 H.
8. c. 1.

II. What a carrying away?

C.P.C. c. 47.
A Guest takes sheets out of the bed, brings them into Hall with an intent to
carry them away, but is apprehended before this, a taking away.

A. takes horse of B. with an intent to steal him, but is apprehended before he
can get out of Pasture, this a taking away.

A. kills sheep, strips them, Crom. 33.
carries away their skins, Felony; so if he pull of the wool.

III. By whom, and who such a person as may commit Larceny?

An Infant under fourteen years may commit Larceny, Dal. 104.
but prudence to respite Judgment; yet under fourteen burnt in the hand.
Presidents.

A Feme covert may by her own act commit Larceny, and in such case the husband
may be Accessory to the wife (but not e converso) in receiving her.

But she cannot feloniously take her husband's goods; and though she take and
deliver them to a stranger, yet no felony in the stranger.

If husband and wife do both a felony, this is a felony in both, Dal. 104.
and both shall be arreigned for it, though some Opinions to the contrary,
which Opinions are now Law.

If wife commits murder by coercion of her husband, murder in both; but if
theft, no Felony in her; but a bare Command excuses her not.

But if a servant commit theft by coercion of his master, it is no Felony.

IV. What mere personal Goods?

1. If they are in the realty, or annexed thereunto, no Larceny: As Corn or
Grass growing, Apples on Trees, stealing a Chest of Charters, no Felony, though
Chest above value.

Taking Lead off a Church no Felony; otherwise if he leave it a while and then
come and take it.

Taking an Infant Ward no Felony.

2. If they are of a base Nature, as Mastiffs, Dogs, Bears, Foxes, Monkeys,
Ferrets, or their Whelps, no Felony of them; but of Hawks reclaimed Felony may
be.

V. What said the Goods of another?

1. He that has a special property, as Bailiff, etc. they are his goods pro
tempore.

2. He that takes the goods of a Chapel in time of vacation, Dal. 103.
indictable pro bonis Capellae, so bona Parochianorum, bona mortuorum, bona
ignoti, etc.

So to take the shroud off a person buried, C.P.C. c. 47.
and it shall be bona executorum.

But taking of Treasure trove, Wrecks, Waifs and Strays before seizure, no
Felony.

Taking an Obligation Felony, because in action.

Taking fish in a River no Felony, but in a Net, Trunk, or Pond, Felony,
because not at their natural liberty: So of old Pigeons out of the house.

Where a man has property only ratione loci, or privilegii, in things ferae
naturae, Coneys, Deer in my Ground, or Park, or Warren, no Felony.

But if reduced to tameness, and fit for food, as Deer, Coneys, Cranes,
Partridge, Pheasants, he that steals them, knowing them tame, commits
Felony.

So of Swans marked or pinioned or Swans unmarked if tame, kept in a Mote,
Pond, or private River.

Where a man has a property ratione impotentiae in things wild by nature, as
young Hawks in the nest, young Pigeons in the nest, Felony thereof.

Taking of Eggs of Hawks or Swans out of the ground of another, no Felony, but
punishable by Statute.

But taking any thing domitae naturae, as Ducks, Hens, Geese, Turkeys,
Peacocks, or their Eggs; or Domestic beasts, as Horses, Mares, Colts, etc. or
their young, Felony.

VI. When this shall be said a felonious taking.

If A. Crom. 34.
steal goods in the County of B. and carry them into the County of C. he may be
appealed or indicted in the County of C. for Larceny, but can be indicted for
Robbery only in the County of B.

VII. Of value of twelve pence or above.

Nota, West. 1. c. 15.
That in a Grand Larceny it must be above value of twelve pence, if under it
Petty Larceny.

If two steal goods to the value of thirteen pence, grand Larceny in both.

If one person at several times, or at one time steal four pence, Dal. c. 101.
Crom. 30. St. P.C. 24.
at another six pence, at another three pence, in all amounting to above twelve
pence, from the same person, all these put together in one Indictment, amount
to grand Larceny.

If a man be indicted for stealing goods to the value of ten pence, and the
Jurors find specially, as they may, the value but ten pence, it is but petty
Larceny.

And note petty Larceny is Felony, though not of death, and for this he shall
forfeit Goods, or be subject to some Corporal punishment.

Robbery.
COmplicate or mixed Larceny which has another degree of guilt in it.

1. For that it is a taking from the person.

2. For that it is a taking out of the house.

1. Taking from the person.

1. Where the person is put in fear, and then it is Robbery. 2. When not put in
fear, and then it is Larceny from the person.
Robbery is a felonious and violent taking away from the person of another
goods or money to any value, putting him in fear.

1. Violent and putting him in fear; the words of the Indictment run, violenter
and felonice, and that distinguishes him from a Cutpurse.

2. Taking away.

1. An assault to rob without taking away any thing, no Felony.

If a thief, with or without weapon drawn, bid the party deliver his Purse, and
he does it, this is a taking to make it Robbery.

If a thief command to deliver his purse, and he deliver, and then the thief
finding little in it, deliver it back, this is Robbery.

If a thief compel the true man by fear to swear to fetch him a sum of money,
which he does accordingly, and thief receives it, Robbery.

If true man's purse be fastened to his girdle, thief cuts girdle, purse falls
to the ground, no Robbery; but if thief take up purse, though he let it fall
again, Robbery, though he never take it up more.

All that come in company to rob Principals, though one actually do it.

A. B. and C. assault D. to rob him in the Highway, but rob him not, for he
escaped A. rides from the rest in the same Highway, and robs E. Crom. 34.
out of view of the rest, and for this B. and C. arreigned and hanged, Pudseys
Case.
though assented not, because they all came to the end to rob.

3. Taking from the person.

If the true man, seeking to escape, cast his Purse into a Bush, or let fall
his Hat, if the thief take it, it is Robbery.

Taking a thing in the presence, is in law taking it from the person.

If one take or drive my Cattle out of my Pasture in my presence, Dal. c. 101.
this is Robbery, if he make an assault upon me, or put me in fear. But if he
take away any thing from my person without putting me in fear by assault or
violence, no Robbery, and the Indictment runs that he took it from the person
violently and feloniously, Dal. ibid.
putting him in fear.

4. Of what value soever under twelve pence.

Now though Robbery and simple Larceny are both Felony, yet they differ in
these Respects.

Principal and Accessory before are ousted of Clergy, but not in simple
Larceny. Stat. 23 H. 8. c. 1.1 E. 6.12. 25 H. 8.3.4 and 5 Phil. and Ma. c. 4.
Nota, speaks of Robbery in or near the Highway.

2. The form of the Indictment.

An Indictment of Robbery supposes an assault, beating and wounding, and
taking from the person felonice, or at least assault and putting him in fear
felonice and violenter cepit a persona. Other Indictments, though of a taking
from the person, yet not violenter.

3. In case of other thefts, though from person, not felony of death, unless
exceed twelve pence: But here it is Felony of death if never so small.

Nota, Taking a man's goods out of his shop before his face is Robbery, as if he
had taken it from the person; and it is nothing to the purpose though the thief
say, I have right to this, or this is mine, if he have no color.

Larceny from the person, from the House.

Larceny from the person without putting in fear, which may be either by
picking the pocket, or cutting the Purse, which is supposed to be done clam and
secret a persona.

In this Case 8 El. c. 4. if the Indictment pursue the Statute, which is
secretly without the knowledge of the party, clam and secret, he is ousted of
his Clergy.

But if it be under value of twelve pence, C.P.C. c. 16.
then it remains petty Larceny, as before; for the Statute did not alter the
Offense, though it took a Privilege.

Larceny from the person which is neither clam and secret a persona, nor with
putting in terror, nor so laid in the Indictment, nor so found by the Jury.
Dyer. 224.17 Jac. Harman's Case.

Larceny receives another aggravation when it is taken from the person of a man.

Per Stat. 23 H. 8. c. 1.
Robbing any person in the dwelling house of the owner, his wife, children, and
servants being within, and put in fear, oust of Clergy in case of Conviction
and Accessory before.

Felonious taking of goods to the value of five shillings in the day time, out
of any dwelling house or out-house, though no person within, oust of Clergy per
Stat. 39 El. c. 15.

These have a mark upon them as Larceny complicate, and therefore oust of
Clergy.

Piracy.
TO this we add Piracy and Depredation on Sea.

This at Common Law conceived petty Treason, C.P.C. c. 49.
if done by a Subject: but this altered by Stat. 25 Ed. 3. since that Statute
an offense triable by Civil Law till 28 H. 8.15.

The Stat. 28 H. 8. alters not the offense, but it removes only an offense by
Civil Law (and therefore a pardon of all Felonies did not discharge it) and
gives a trial per course of Common Law.

1. It extends not to Accessory: but if Accessory were at Sea, triable per
Civil Law; if at Land, by no Law: for Stat. 2, 3 E. 6. extends not to it.

It extends not to Offenses in Creeks or Ports within the Body of a County,
because punishable by Common Law.

3. Though it give forfeiture of Life, Lands, and Goods, yet no Corruption of
Blood.

4. Pain fort and dure in cases of standing mute.

Note, Clergy est oust per cest Stat. en Felonies, and so in Manslaughters.

Quaere super Lord Co. si ascun offense super altum mare soit felony. 3 Ins.
111.

Burglary.
WE come to offenses against the dwelling or habitation; those of two kinds: 1.
Burglary. 2. Arson, or burning of Houses.


Burglary by the Common Law is, when a person in the night time breaks or
enters into the Mansion House of another, to the intent to commit some Felony
within the same, whether the felonious intent be executed or not.

I. What shall be said in the Night?

By some after Sun set and before Sun rising it is night. Dal. c. 99.

But it seems so long as the Countenance of a man may be discovered it is day.
C.P.C. c. 14.
Coron. 293.

II. What Breaking or Entering?

The entering into a house with the doors open is a breaking in Law, but here
not sufficient without an actual breaking: Therefore if door be open, or window
open; and the Thief draw out the Goods thereby, no Burglary.

But if the Thief break the window, draw the latch, unlock the door, break a
hole in the wall, these are breaking.

And as there must be a breaking, so there must be an entering.

Setting the foot over the threshold, putting the hand, or hook, or pistol
within the window, door.

Turning the key where the door is locked on the inside, an Entry.

In some cases Burglary without actual breaking.

Diverse come to commit Burglary, one does it, the rest watch at the Lanes end,
Burglary in all.

A Thief goes down a Chimney to rob, Burglary. Dal. c. 99.


Thieves having an intent to rob, Ibid.
raise Hue and Cry, and bring Constable, to whom the owner opens door, and when
they come in, they bind Constable and rob the owner, Burglary.

The Thief assaults the house, the owner for fear throws out his money, it
seems not Burglary, but Robbery.

A Thief gets into the house on day time by doors open, Ibid.
lies there till night, then robs and goes away, no Burglary. But if he break
open the door to go out, Burglary:

The Servant opens the window to let in a Thief, who comes in and steals,
Burglary in the Stranger, but Robbery in the Servant.

If A. enter into the Hall by door open, the owner retires into a Chamber, and
there A. breaks in, this a Breaking and Entering.

If Thieves enter (...) through a hole (...) no Burglary.

A. lies in one part of the House, B. his servant in another, between them a
Stair-foot-door latched, Trin. 16 Jac. Edmonds C.
the servant in the night draws the latch, and enters his Masters Chamber to
murder him, Burglary.

III. What a Mansion House within the Law?

The Church a Mansion house within the Law. The Outbuildings, as Barn, Stable,
are part of the Mansion house, and Burglary may be committed in them.

Burglary may be committed in a man's Mansion house, though all persons be out
upon occasion.

So if a man has two houses, sometimes lives in one, sometimes in another.

A shop parcel of a Mansion house.

A Chamber in an Inns of Court, where a person usually lodges, a Mansion house.

But a Booth is not, therefore remedy specially provided per Stat. 5 E. 6. c. 9.

But an Indictment quod fregit clausum ad ipsum interficiendum, no Felony, for
no Mansion house.

A. leases to B. a shop, parcel of his Mansion house, to work in, where B.
works in the day, which is broken, ruled not Burglary, because severed per
Lease.

IV. With an intent to commit some Felony.

If the house be broken and entered with an intent to commit a Trespass, as to
beat the owner, no Felony.

If with an intent to commit a Rape, by some no Burglary, because no Felony at
Common Law; but this seems otherwise, though the Felony be not done.

The Indictment runs, Burglariter and felonice domum etc. fregerunt vel
intraverunt ad ipsum etc. interficiendum, and per Stat. 18 El. c. 7. Clergy
taken away in all Burglaries.

Memorandum, If a Burglary be committed in Middlesex, and the Felon carries the
Goods into Dorsetshire, if Goods be of value of twelve pence it is Felony, and
the benefit of Clergy taken away by 25 H. 8. so that they may try him where he
is taken, and they usually write upon the Margent of the Indictment, that it is
for Burglary in another County.

Arson.
BUrning is a Felony at Common Law by any that shall maliciously burn the house
of another.

Burning,

Setting fire to a house, without burning it, or any part of it, no Felony; but
if part of the house be burnt thereby, it is Felony by Common Law.

Maliciously.

A. intending to burn the house of B. thereby burns the house of C. this is
Felony; and he may be Indicted, That ex malitia praecogit' he burnt the house
of C.

A. maliciously burnt his own house, to the intent to burn others, but burnt
none else but his own, ruled no Felony, but a great misdemeanour; upon which
set in Pillory, and bound perpetually to good behavior. 9 Car. B.R. Hains's
Case.

The House,

Inset house, or Outset house.

If parcel of Mansion house, as Stable, Mill-house, Sheep-house, Barn, no
Clergy: But burning of a Barn, not parcel of a Mansion house, if it has Corn
or Hay in it, Felony, otherwise not.

But Felony not oust of Clergy, unless part of a Mansion house or Barn with
Corn.

Burning the frame of an house by 37 H. 8. attempting to burn a stack of Corn
by 3 and 4 E. 6. made Felony, both Repealed 1 Ma.

But in Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Durham, Felony to burn a
stack of Corn by 43 El. c. 3.

Nota, The Indictment of Burglary Domum Mansionalem; of Arson only Domum.

Escapes.
NOW we come to those Felonies that are the hindrance of bringing a Felon to
public Justice; they are of three kinds in reference to persons that cause it.

1. In the party himself.

Breach of Prison. Escape.
2. In the Officer that permits it, Voluntary, Involuntary.

3. In a Stranger, that is Rescue.

1. Breach of Prison.

At Common Law it seems all breach of Prison Felony; but by Stat. 1 E. 2.
nullus de caetero, qui prisonam fregerit, subeat Judicium vitae vel membrorum
pro fractione prisonae, nisi causa, pro qua capt' and imprisonat' fuit, tale
Judicium requirit.

And herein these things are inquirable: 1. Who may Arrest or Imprison? 2. What
a Prison? 3. What breaking a Prison? 4. What cause that requires a Judgment to
make this Felony?


1. Who may Arrest or Imprison?

1. Why a private person? 2. Why a public Officer?
1. Arrests by a private person, and that of two kinds: 1. Either commanded or
enjoined by Law. 2. Or permitted or allowed by Law.


C.P.C. 55.
Arrests commanded by Law.

1. Persons present at the committing of a Felony must use their endeavors to
apprehend the Offender, otherwise they are to be fined and imprisoned.

St. P.C. 29.
Hence it is that if a Murder be committed in the day in a Town not enclosed,
the Town shall be amerced; and if in a walled Town, be it night or day, the
Town shall be amerced if Offender escape. Stat. 3 H. 7.1.

So it seems if one strike another dangerously, though death has not yet
happened.

Upon Hue and Cry well levied, C.P.C. 52.
every man may and must arrest the Offender upon whom it is levied, by Stat.
Winchester: and want of pursuit thereof is punishable by Fine and Imprisonment.

The manner of levying Hue and Cry where a Felony is committed, or a dangerous
stroke given, is this:

Resort to the Constable, declare the Fact, describe the Party and the way he
is gone, who thereupon is to raise the Town, be it by night or by day, and to
give the next Constable warning, and he the rest.

I aid an Officer that has a lawful warrant in fait, or in Law, Dal. 249.
to arrest a Malefactor.

And in these cases it seems it is in the power of such private person to break
the house, if upon demand he cannot be admitted to take the Offender. 4 Ins.
177.

Videtur sur felony fait and just suspicion ascun puit arrester.

3. N'est punishable licet Constable suffer luy d'escape.

A permissive Arrest per private person.

If a Felony in fact be committed, and a private person suspect another upon
probable cause, he may be arrested, though in truth innocent. And these
probable causes,

Hue and Cry levied, Company with the Offender, Goods in his Custody, Living
vagrantly, Common Fame.

But upon such suspicion he cannot break open the door of a house, but may
enter the door being open.

4 Ins. 179.
The person arrested by either of these means must be brought to the Constable,
and if Constable be not to be found to a Justice, and in case of a Felon known,
put into Stocks or Common Goal till he be brought to a Constable.

Arrest per a public Officer without Process of Law.

Nota, Whatsoever a private person may do in this case, an Officer as a private
person may do.

Now these Officers,

1. Constable.

If complaint be made to a Constable of Felony committed, or of a dangerous
blow given, though the party not dead, in case there be an assault upon the
Constable, or in case there be any other breach of the Peace, the Constable may
imprison the party in the Stocks, in the Goal, or in his House, till he can
bring him before a Justice of Peace.

But if it be a bare breach of the Peace, unless it be in his view, he cannot
arrest the party, but complaint must be made to a Justice of Peace, for the
Constable is but Conservator, not Justice of Peace, unless a Felony be done.

If the Constable see an Affray, and the Malefactor fly into another County
before arrest, he may pursue him and arrest him there, and must bring him
before Justice of the County where arrested.

But if the Escape was after arrest, then he may retake him in another County,
and bring him to the first County.

He may break a door open to take an Offender, where Felony committed, or
dangerous wound given.

2. A Justice of Peace upon complaint may issue out his Warrant to arrest the
party.

1. A general Warrant to search for Felony or stolen Goods, not good.

2. If a Justice has cause of suspicion, he may arrest a common person not as
a Justice.

3. Upon complaint of a Felony committed, and when doubt may be of apprehending
the Offender in assistance of the party suspecting, he may grant his Warrant to
the Constable to apprehend the party, but the party suspecting ought to be
present, because it is his arrest.

But by virtue of such Warrant doors cannot be broke open.

4. But at Sessions the Justices may award a Capias against the person
indicted, and by virtue thereof the Sheriff may break open a door.

A party being apprehended by such Warrant, is either to be Committed, Bailed,
or Discharged.

The Commitment by a Justice ought to be to Common Goal by Stat. 13 H. 6.12.
and the Mittimus ought to be, 1. Under Seal. 2. To contain the Cause. 3. To
have an apt Conclusion, viz. and there to stay till delivered by Law, otherwise
Warrant void.


And note, That a person committed for Treason, Felony, or otherwise, cannot be
discharged till indicted and acquitted, or Ignoramus found, or discharged by
Proclamation by Kings Bench upon Habeas Corpus.

In order to the consideration of Arrests and Escapes, here fit to consider of
Bail and Mainprise in cases of Felony.

1. What Bail is? 2. In what cases? 3. By whom?
Bail.
1. BAIL are Sureties taken by a person authorized, to appear at a day, and to
answer and be justified by Law.

The difference between Bail and Mainprise is, That

Mainprise are only Surety, but Bail is a Custody; and therefore the Bail may
reseize the Prisoner if they doubt he will fly, or detain him and bring him
before a Justice, and the Justice ought to commit the Prisoner in discharge of
the Bail, or put him to find new Sureties: The like may be done by the Justices
in case of inefficient Bail.

If a Justice of Peace take inefficient Bail, and the party appear not, the
Justice finable by Justices of Goal Delivery.

The sufficiency of Bail in respect of number two at least, and those Subsidy
men in case of Felony.

And in respect of the sum, forty pounds at least.

Bail is either a certain sum, or corpus pro corpore, in which case the
Offender not appearing, the Surety shall not be Executed, but Fined. 29 Assis.
44.

2. In what Cases?

1. Generally; To refuse Bail where the party ought to be bailed, the party
refusing the same is finable as a Misdemeanour; and admitting Bail when it
ought not punishable by Justices of Goal Delivery, or punished as a negligent
Escape at Common Law, de quo infra.

2. Particularly; At Common Law Bail in all Cases but Homicide; But now the
Stat. Westminster. 1. c. 15. directs what Cases bailable, what not?

At this day in all Offenses below Felony, the party accused is bailable, unless

1. Ousted by that Statute, or some other Statute.

2. After Judgment be given.

If a person be brought before a Justice, if it appears no Felony committed, he
may discharge him; but if Felony be committed, though it appears not that the
party accused is guilty, yet he cannot discharge him, but must commit or bail
him.

The cases wherein parties not bailable, are

1. In respect of the hainousness of the Offense.

1. In Charge of Treason against the King's Person, counterfeiting the Seal,
Falsifying Money. 2. Arson, or burning Houses. Dal. c. 114. v. rep. sup.
3. In a Charge of Homicide.
1. In case of a Charge of Murder Justices of Peace cannot bail, but King's
Bench may, and do it at discretion, for the Stat. West. 1. extends not to that
Court.

2. In case of Manslaughter, though it be se defendendo, and appear so to Justice
of Peace, they cannot bail the party accused.

If he confess the Fact upon examination, if taken with the manner, if
apparently known or manifested that he killed another.

But if it be a non liquet, and the Charge but Manslaughter, there it seems
they may bail.

Or if he had given a dangerous stroke, till party dead he may be bailed.

But such bailment where Manslaughter or other Felony is committed, must be

1. By two Justices of the Quorum.

3 H. 7. c. 9.
2. After Examination.

St. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 13.
And these be all the persons excluded from bail simply, in respect of the
nature of the offense.

1. All Accessaries before or after any Offense bailable; but if Principal be
attainted, and Accessory indicted, he shall not be bailed until he has pleaded
to the Indictment.

2. Persons indicted of Larceny before Sheriff, if of good name.

3. Imprisonment for a light suspicion, if of good name.

4. Indicted or accused of petty Larceny only.

5. Appeal of Approver after death of Approver.

6. Accused for Trespass, for which a man ought not to lose life or member, and
if bail not taken away by a subsequent Stat. hence also a party indicted for
Burglary or Robbery may be bailed.

2. As bail is ousted in some cases, in respect of the greatness and
consequence of the Offense charged, so it is in respect of the notoriety of the
Offense

For bail is, when indifferenter, whether guilty or no.

But when that indifferency is removed, the Offender otherwise bailable is
become not bailable.

1. If a Person be Attaint by Outlary of any Felony, yet if Defendant comes in
and pleads in avoidance of the Outlary, be it in Appeal or Indictment, the
King's Bench may bail him.

2. If he be convict by Verdict or Confession of any Felony, not bailable.

But if a man be convict of Manslaughter se defendendo, the Justices of B. R.
or Goal Delivery, or special Writ may bail him, but not Justices of Peace: So
if he have a Charter of Pardon.

3. He that becomes an Approver cannot be bailed.

4. He that Abjures cannot be bailed.

5. He that is taken with the manner not bailable, and consequently he that is
taken freshly upon Hue and Cry, Bridges's Case. Justice of Peace fined 40 l.
for bailing such.

6. He that breaks Prison not bailable.

7. Open and notorious thievery not bailable.

But he that is taken for a light suspicion bailable.

But if Presumption strong, or Defamation great, he may refuse to bail him:
This lies in discretion.

8. Those that are appealed by Approvers, unless 1. Approver die. 2. Approver
wave his Appeal. 3. Unless he be of good name.


And the reason hereof, because when the Appealer accuses another, he confesses
himself Guilty, and therefore induces a presumption of guilt in another.

But this concerns not Justices of Peace, because no man can become Approver
before them, because they cannot assign a Coroner; but they may take a
Confession by way of Evidence.

But a bare Indictment or Appeal did not induce such presumption that may
hinder the bailing of a Person otherwise bailable. Westminster. 1. c. 25.

But in Appeals of Death the Court in discretion admit not Defendant to bail
but upon weighty cause.

If the party be acquitted within the year upon Indictment, he is not to be
discharged, but remanded or bailed at discretion, that an Appeal may be
prosecuted against him.

3 H. 7. c. 1.
3. Who may take bail, or bail Offenders?

Bail was taken either virtute brevis, or ex officio.

1. Bail taken virtute brevis, that was either General or Special.

General Writs.

Homine replegiando.

Habeas Corpus.

Writ of Mainprise; this was directed to Sheriff, commanding him to deliver by
the Mainprize of it the party indicted before him.

St. P. C. 77.
But now by Stat. 28 E. 3. c. 9. these Inquests before Sheriff are taken away,
and consequently the Writ of Mainprize.

Special Writ, as where party is convict of Manslaughter se defendendo, Special
Writ to certify.

2. Bail ex officio.

1. The King's Bench, who have a higher Power than any other Power.

1. They may either in case of an Original Suit, by Indictment or Appeal before
them; or upon an Indictment or Commitment returned to them, by Habeas Corpus or
Certiorari, bail where another Court cannot.

In cases prohihited by Stat. West. 1. c. 15. v. 2. Inst. parol viscount and
autres, and parol ne soient replevisable.

2. Justices of Goal Delivery, who may bail in cases where Justices of Peace
cannot, if it be a thing within their cognizance: As a man convict of
Manslaughter se defendendo, or a person convict of Manslaughter that has a
Pardon to plead.

1. Justices of Peace they cannot bail in any case, but where they have
cognizance of the cause; therefore if taken with Process of Rebellion out of
Chancery they cannot bail.

2. The Statutes that give power to Justices of Peace to bail in case of
Felony, are 3 H. 7. c. 3. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 13. upon which two kinds of
bailment.

1. Upon the first Accusation, and that doubtless must be done.

1. By two Justices of Peace, whereof one of Quorum. 2. After Examination taken
concerning the Offense.
^r. 150.
2. After commitment: And though some Opinions be that he may be bailed by one
Justice, yet it seems otherwise; for the Stat. of 1 R. 1. 3. that gave power to
one, stands repealed by 3 H. 7.

3. After Indictment and Process thereupon issued in case of Trespass or
Misdemeanour, or Penal Statute, not prohibiting bail, he may be bailed by two
Justices, whereof one of the Quorum; and by some by one Justice, but this holds
not in case of Felony.

4. The Sheriffs, Baily, or Officers of Indictment before them.

But these are removed from that power, as it seems by the Stat. 28 E. 3. c. 9.
1 E. 3. c. 3. whereby they are not to make Process, but to remove them to the
Sessions of the Peace.

Having considered the person that may arrest and bail, it makes way to
consider the Offenses against such Arrest or Imprisonment, by breaking such
Prison, etc. And herein ensues the second Consideration.

2. What Prison within this Act?

1. Stocks. 2. Prison of the Lord of Franchises. 3. The Custody of any that
lawfully arrests, or the house of the Constable, or other Prison where
detained. 4. The Church, where a person abjuring is. 5. The Prison of the
Ordinary, which is ousted by 23 H. 8. c. 11.
What a breaking?
If Prison be fired without privity of Prisoner, he may lawfully break it to
save himself. 2. If Jailer do voluntarily permit him to escape, Felony in the
Jailer, not in the Prisoner; but if negligent, Felony in the Prisoner, and
Misdemeanour in the Jailer. 3. If Prisoner under Custody be rescued, or Prison
broke by strangers without procurement of the Prisoner, no Felony in Prisoner.
4. Going out doors open, no Felony; for that requires an actual breaking.


4. Nisi con' tale judicium.
1. If A. mortally wound B. and is committed, and he break Prison, and B. then
die, no Felony. 2. If a Felony made by subsequent Statutes, and an Offender
therefore break Prison, Felony. 3. Committed for suspicion of Felony, yet if
Felony done, breaking Prison Felony. 4. If the Offense for which the party was
committed appear not by matter of Record, necessary a Felony be done, else
breach of Prison no Felony. But if it appears by matter of Record, and the
party taken by Capias, if he break Prison, Felony, though no Felony done. 5. If
Felony was done, yet breach of Prison no Felony, unless committed by lawful
Mittimus, de quo supra. 6. The Indictment for the breach must be Special, that
it may appear he was committed for Felony.


5. Tale Judicium requirit.
1. Breach of Prison turns into Felony only, though party committed for
Treason. If a Prisoner break Prison wherein Traitors are, to let out Traitors,
this is Treason. 2. If a Prisoner break Prison he may be Arreigned of that
before he be convict of first Felony.


But a Jailer permitting a voluntary Escape shall not be Arreigned till
Prisoner first attaint; for if Prisoner acquit, Escape dispunishable.

Nota, If a person escapes before arrest, not punishable in him as Felony, but
forfeits Goods when flight proved.

In case a man slain in the day, Offender Escape, Township amerced.

Escape in the Officer, or him that makes the Arrest.

This either in case of Arrest, 1. By a Stranger. 2. By an Officer.


If a stranger arrest a man for Felony, or suspicion thereof, and deliver him
over to four others, they receive him and let him go at large, this an Escape
in both; for the first man should have delivered him to the Constable, and the
latter should not have let him go at large.

And the same Law seems to be for a stranger that has a Prisoner in his
Custody, as for an Officer in case of Escape voluntary, or negligent.

Escape by the Officer.
1. Negligent. 1. Bailing a person not bailable, though ignorant, by one that
has power to bail, a negligent Escape.

But it seems if done by a Jailer a voluntary Escape, because he has no such
power.

2. The ordinary punishment of such negligent Escape. 1. Of the party attaint
100 l. 2. Of the party indict 5 l. 3. Of a party not indicted at discretion.
3. For insufficiency of Jailer, Sheriff must answer for negligent Escapes. 4.
A Jailer de facto, though not de jure, must answer for Escapes. 5. If after a
negligent Escape the Jailer return him upon fresh Suit before he be punished,
it excused.
2. Voluntary Escape.

St. 14. E. 3. c. 10
Has the same Crime that the person permitted to Escape stood committed for,
viz. Treason or Felony.

But this is in the immediate person that permits it; and therefore though
Sheriff must answer for offenses of Jailer civilly, yet he shall not criminally.

3. There must be a Felony really done, and a Commitment by a lawful Warrant.
Dal. 336. Die. 99.
4. If within year Prisoner be acquitted upon Indictment, yet a voluntary Escape
is punishable as Felony, because wife to her Appeal. 5. The Escape voluntary
punishable ut supra, though Prisoner not indicted. 1. An hindrance of a person
to be arrested that has committed Felony is Misdemeanour, but no Felony. 2. But
if party be arrested, and then rescued, if arrest was for Felony, Rescuer
Felon; if for Treason, Traitor; because they are all Principals.

But he shall not be arreigned until Principal be attainted; and if Principal
die before attainder, Rescuer shall be fined and imprisoned.

3. There must be a Felony really done, and a lawful Commitment.



Felonies by the Statute.
C.P.C. c. 14. 3 H. 7. c. 13.
IMagining or conspiring to kill the King, or any of his Council, by any of the
Kings Servants, Clergy not taken away.

1 Jac. c. 12. Witchcraft, de quo supra. St. 25 H. 8. c. 6. revived by 5 El. c.
17.

Buggery with man or beast, without benefit of Clergy.

There ought to be Penetratio as well as Emissio in this.

A Rape.

13 E. 1. c. 34.
This was Felony at Common Law, then by Stat. Westminster. 1. c. 13. made but
Misdemeanour; then by this Statute restored to Felony again.

And hence it is that it is not inquirable in Leet, because though Felony, yet
it lost its nature by W. 1. c. 13.

If a woman be under 10 years, then though she consent, yet by St. 18 El. c. 7.
it is a Rape; if above 10 years, if she consent not, a Rape, though she consent
after.

But in such case of a subsequent consent, the Stat. 6 R. 2. c. 6. gives the
Appeal to the Husband, if not to Father, etc.

Clergy taken away by Stat. 18 El. c. 7. upon Conviction by verdict, or
Confession, or Outlawed.

Taking a woman against her will and marrying her, Felony. 3 H. 7. c. 2.


1. Such Maid, Widow, or Wife must have Lands, Tenements or Goods, or be Heir
Apparent.

2. She must be taken against her will.

3. Extends not to taking a Ward or Bond woman.

Nota, The taking away in one County, and marrying in another, Indicted where
married; and they must Enquire of forcible taking away.

2. Privy to the marriage, but not to the force, not Guilty.

3. Marrying with consent not excusing so long as she is under the force, 13
Car. Fulwood's Case.

All Accessaries before and after made Principals by this Act.

Clergy taken away by Stat. 39 El. c. 9.

5 H. 4. c. 5. Vide 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 1. Clergy taken away.
Malicious cutting Tongues or putting out Eyes, Felony.

Clergy not taken away.

Extends not to cutting off Ears.

8 H. 6. c. 12.
Stealing, carrying away of Records, Felony. And

The Judges of either Bench enabled to determine the same.

Accessaries before made Principals.

5 H. 4. c. 4.
Multiplication of Gold or Silver, Felony.

1 H. 7. c. 7.
Hunting unlawfully in Forests, Chases, or Warrens with painted faces by night,
and rescue, viz. by other their party arrested, Felony.

31 El. c. 4.
Imbezelling the King's Armor, etc. Felony.

Qualifications.

1. Ought to be impeached within a year.

2. Offender loses Lands but during life.

3. No Corruption of blood.

4. Wife loses not Dower.

Subjects passing Sea to serve foreign Prince, 3 Jac. c. 4.
not having taken Oath of Allegiance.

No Corruption of blood: Offender may have Clergy.

Articuli super Cartas c. 2.

Purveyors Felony in certain cases, they may have Clergy.

Wandering Soldiers Felony in certain cases; 39 El. c. 17.
excluded of Clergy.

Soldiers retained, 18 H. 6. c. 19.
as is prescribed in the Act, departing from their Captains without license, 2
E. 6. c. 2. idem Clergy excluded.

Marrying a second husband or wife, the former living, 1 Jac. 11.
except

1. The man under fourteen, or the wife under twelve at time of first marriage,
and not agreeing after first Espousals, may marry a second husband or wife.

2. A man or wife absent above seven years second, marriage no Felony: If
beyond Sea, then notice of life; if in England, 1 Jac. 11.
then without notice.

3. After a Divorce, though a mensa and thoro only.

4. After anullity declared of second marriage by Spiritual Court,

Offenders have Clergy.

1 Jac. c. 31. for going with a Plague sore, but this discontinued.

14 E. 3.10.
Jailer compelling Prisoner, through Duress, to become Appelor, Felony, whether
Appellant be acquitted or not.

3 H. 5. c. 1. obsolete.
Coining, or bringing in and uttering Scotch money; and 2 H. 6. c. 9. payment of
blanks,

Offender has Clergy.

17 E. 3. St. 16. incerti temporis.
Transportation of Silver, or Importation of false money made Felony,

Offender has Clergy.

Exportation of Wool or Woolfells, 18 H. 6. c. 15.
other than to the Staple at Calais.

Stealing Falcons, 37 E. 3.19.
or concealing the same after Proclamation, Felony,

Offender has Clergy.

Congregations of Masons to prevent Statutes of Laborers; 3 H. 6. c. 1.
but this Obsolete because of the Statute 5 El. the Acts to which it relates
are repealed.

Receiving, retaining, 27 El. c. 2.
or maintaining a Jesuit or Popish Priest knowingly,

Clergy excluded.

Egyptians above fourteen years remaining here a month, 1 and 2 Ph. and M. c.
4.
and 5 El. c. 20. takes away Clergy.

Felony refusing to make Abjuration, 35 El. c. 2.
and after Abjuration not to depart, in some case

Clergy excluded.

Dangerous Rogues adjudged to the Galleys, 39 El. c. 4. 1 Jac. c. 7.
and returning without license, Felony, but Offender has Clergy: but branded
Rogue Felony, and no Clergy.

5 El. c. 14.
Forging a Deed after former Conviction.

If a man be convict or condemned of publishing a forged Deed, and after he
forge a Deed, this is Felony.

C.P.C. p. 172.
If the offense were after a former, but before conviction thereof, no Felony,

Clergy ousted.

8 El. c. 3.
Sending sheep beyond Sea after former conviction,

Clergy allowed.

33 H. 6. c. 1.
Servants, after decease of Master, riotously spoiling Goods, etc.

Offender shall have Clergy.

21 H. 8.7.
Servants imbezelling Goods of Master, delivered to them, Felony; but the
Statute that took away Clergy being Repealed by 1 E. 6. c. 12. they may now
have Clergy.

22 H. 8. c. 11.2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. c. 19. 43 El. c. 13.
Cutting Powdike, Felony,

Offender has Clergy.

Detaining persons in Cumberland against their will, and giving or receiving
blackmail, etc.

Felony without Clergy.

Misprision of Treason.
NOW we come to Offenses Criminal, but not Capital; and those of two kinds: 1.
Offenses by Common Law. 2. Offenses against Statutes.


Offenses against Common Law not Capital, are either greater Offenses or lesser.

Greater; and those come under name of Misprision; and those again of two sorts:

Negative, in not doing that they ought, or of Omission.

Positive, in doing some great Misdemeanour they ought not.

The Negative Misprision.

1. Misprision of Treason.

All Treason includes Misprision and Concealing of any Treason, is declared
Misprision only by Statute 1 and 2 P. and M. c. 10.

C.P.C. c. 3.
But this in case of bare knowledge and assent it is Treason, and though Treason
by Statute, yet the concealing thereof is Misprision of Treason.

Every man therefore that knows Treason, must with all speed reveal it to
King, his Privy Council, or Magistrate.

He that receives and comforts a Traitor knowingly, be it a counterfeiter of
Coin or other, is a Principal Traitor, and not only guilty of Misprision.
Abingdon's Case against Opinion in Dyer 296. Conier's Case.

The Judgment in case of Misprision of Treason is Imprisonment during life,
forfeiture of Goods, forfeiture of profits of Land during life.

2. Misprision of Felony is either by Common Law or by Statute.

By the Common Law a concealment of Felony, or procurement of the concealing
thereof.

The Punishment.

1. A common Person Fine and Imprisonment.

2. An Officer, as Sheriff, Coroner, Imprisonment for a year, and Ransom at
King's pleasure by Stat. W. 1. c. 9.

By the Stat. 3 H. 7. c. 1. 33 H. 8. c. 6. one knowing of an unlawful Assembly,
and not discovering it within 24 hours.

Concealment of Jurors, v. Stat. 5 Ed. 3. c. 10.


3. Theft-boot, which is more than a bare Misprision of Felony, and is where
the Owner does not only know the Felony, but takes his Goods again, or other
Amends, not to Prosecute.

But taking the Goods barely no-offence, unless he favor the Thief.

The punishment hereof is Ransom and Imprisonment.

Misprision Positive, or of Commission.
1. Discovery by one of the grand Inquest of the person Indicted, or by
Evidence against them, Misprision, punishable by Fine and Imprisonment, but no
Felony. 2. A person dissuading Witnesses from bringing in Evidence against a
person is no Accessory, but a great Misprision, punishable by Fine and
Imprisonment. 3. Rescuing a Prisoner from Bar of B. R. Canc. B. C. or
Exchequer, a Misprision for which a party shall lose his Hand, Goods, Profits
of Lands, during Life perpetual Imprisonment. 4. If a man strike sitting the
Courts at Westminster, in presence of Courts, like Judgment. 5. If in presence
of those Courts, or before Justices of Assize or Oyer and Terminer, a person
draws his Sword upon any Judge or Justice, though he strikes not, or strike
another, like Judgment. 6. Per Stat. 33 H. 8. c. 12. striking in the King's
presence, drawing blood, loss of hand, perpetual Imprisonment, Fine and Ransom.
7. By St. 14 El. c. 3. forging of Money not current Misprision of Treason. 8.
Stranger uttering false Money made within this Realm, known to be Counterfeit,
3 H. 7.10. 9. A Lord of Parliament departing from Parliament, 3 E. 3.


And hither we may refer Maihem, which though it be a particular Crime for
which Appeal lies, yet it is not Felony of death.

Cutting off the hand, C.P.C. c. 40.
or striking out a tooth, Maihem, but not cutting off the ear.

The Judgment is only Fine, Damages; and therefore if recovery in Trespass, it
is a good bar in Appeal of Mayhem.

Offenses of an Inferior nature are either such as are committed by an
Officers neglect of duty, as Bribery, Extorsion.

Or such as refer to a common person, without relation to Officers, and those
reducible to three kinds.

1. Breaches of public Peace, and therein 1. Of Affrays. 2. Of Riots. 3. Of
Forcible Entries. 4. Barretries. 5. Riding armed.
2. Deceipts and Cozenage. 3. Nusances. Decay of Bridges. Decay of Highways.
Inns and Alehouses.



Breach of the Peace.
AFFRAY,

If weapon drawn, or stroke given or offered; but words no Affray: menace to
kill or beat, no Affrays but yet for safeguard of Peace, Constable may bring
them before Justice.

In Affrays considerable,

1. What a private man may do?

Private persons may stay Affrayers till heat over, and deliver them to
Constable.

If a person hurt another dangerously, Dal. c. 8.
private person may arrest the Offender, and bring him to Goal or next Justice.

2. What by a Constable.

1. Affray in presence of a Constable, he ought to do his endeavor to suppress
it, otherwise finable.

2. If an Affrayer fly to a house, or if made in a house, Constable may break
open house to preserve peace, or take the Offender.

3. If in Affray assault be made upon Constable, he may strike again, or
imprison Offender.

4. Constable may in such cases imprison till he find surety of Peace.

5. It seems if Affray pass, and not in view of Constable, he cannot imprison
without warrant of Justice unless Felony done, or like to be done.

3. What by a Justice?

1. In his presence, the same power that a private person or Constable, and may
imprison till surety of Peace found; the like upon Complaint.

2. If dangerous hurt, Justice may imprison till it appear whether the party
die or live, or bail the party.

The former the better discretion.

Riot.

When above the number of two meet to do some unlawful act, and do act it; but
if they meet and act it not, an unlawful Assembly, in power of Justices to
suppress them, 13 H. 4. c. 7.

A man for safeguard of his house against Malefactors or Trespassers, may
assemble his Friends for his Defense.

But he cannot assemble to prevent a beating threatened in his presence, Riot
recorded by one Justice traversable.

Forcible Entry.

Forcible Entry must be either manifest, furnished with unusual weapons, menace
of life or limb, breaking open doors; contrary it seems of doors only hatched,
Ejecting forcibly the Possessor.

Cum multitudine gentium, one may commit a Force, three at least a Riot.

Forcible Detainer.

Menacing Possessor to go out upon pain of loss of life or member.

Unusual Weapons or Company, refusing to admit the Justice to come in to view
the Force.

Detainer with Force justifiable where party in possession three years; but
though his Possession be lawful, yet within three years actually removed,
though restored by Justices, enables not a Detainer with Force.

But if three years Possession has been by Force, then the last forcible
Detainer punishable, and hinders not Restitution.

If Disseisee within three years make lawful Claim, this an Interruption of his
Possession.

Restitution.

1. Justices B. R. may restore upon Indictment before them.

2. One Justice of Peace cannot restore upon an Indictment before him, nor
Sessions of Peace, unless upon an Indictment found at Sessions.

3. It seems Justice of Oyer and Terminer, or Goal Delivery, cannot Restore.

2. How?

Upon view.

Upon Indictment must be sufficient, adhuc extra tenet.

If Erroneous, may be superseed by same Justice before Executed.

After it is Executed, then Restitution in B. R. upon Indictment quashed.

Restitution stayed By Certiorari. By quashing Indictment. By pleading
thereunto, which is nevertheless Indiscretion.


Barretry.

Riding Armed.

Going Armed.

V. St. 2 R. 2. c. 1. 7 R. 2. c. 13. 2 E. 2. c. 3. Stat. Northampton.

Nusances.
BRidges Public

Are not chargeable upon a particular person, but ratione ten'.

But Common Right repairable by whole Country.

The manner of Repairing directed by Stat. 2 H. 8. c. 3.

Highways.
Highways Provisions.

1. For their enlarging and removing Trees within 200 foot of either side.

5 El. c. 13. 29 El. c. 5. 2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. c. 8.
The charge of repairing Highways lies on common right upon the Parish wherein
they are, unless

1. A Special Prescription cast it on another.

2. Unless the Owner of the Land, in which they are, enclose it, then it must
be cast upon the Owner.

But they that have Ditches on either side ought to scour them, 8 H. 7.5.

Inns, Alehouses, Bawdy-houses, Gaming-houses, Nusances.
Common Inns.
1. ANY person may erect a Common Inn, so it be not ad nocumentum.

1. In respect of their multitude, when there are enough ancient Inns before.
2. In respect of the inconvenience of the place or situation. 3. In respect of
Disorders there committed.
All which are common Nusances, and may be fined and presented.

2. He that erects a Common Inn and refuses to entertain Guests, may be
Indicted for the same.

3. If Common Inns, contrary to Statute, suffer persons to tipple there as
Alehouses, he may be compelled to be bound, or may be suppressed as Alehouse,
or may be Indicted at Sessions.

See for Alehouses, the suppressing of them, and the punishment for tippling
in them, 5 E. 6. c. 25. Jac. c. 9. 4 Jac. c. 5. 7 Jac. c. 10.21 Jac. c. 7. 1
Car. c. 4.

An Ale-house-keeper suppressed for the Offense, 7 Jac. c. 18. 21 Jac. c. 7.
for suffering tippling, or 7 Jac. c. 10. for selling less than is there
directed, or 21 Jac. c. 7. for continuing drinking in another Alehouse, or 21
Jac. for being drunk, cannot be licensed in three years, and if it be, such
License void.

Forgery, Perjury, Champerty.
Offenses not Capital more particularly by Statute.

Forgery by Stat. 5 El. c. 14.

Perjury and Subornation, 5 El. c. 9.

Champerty, Embraceries and Maintenance, 32 H. 8. c. 9.

Engrossing, Forestalling, and Regrating, 5 E. 6. c. 14.

Salt Victual within Statute.

Apples and Cherries no Victual.

Malt seems not Corn and Grain expressly by 5 E. 6.

A Stranger, not Subject, bringing Victual into Realm, may sell them in gross,
but Vendee cannot; neither may any Merchant buy within the Realm, and sell in
gross.

Attempting to inhance the price of Merchandise a kind of forestalling.

Selling Corn in the Sheaf unlawful.

Matters of Religion.
1. REviling Sacrament Imprisonment, Fine, and Ransom. 1 E. 6. c. 1. Rep. 1.
Ma. c. 2. revived 1 El. c. 7.

2. Not coming to Church to hear Common Prayer, by 5 E. 6. c. 1. subject to
Church Censures.

Nota, 3 E. 6. c. 1. settled a Book of Common Prayer, Enjoined the use.

Refusing to use, using other, or disproving it, Imprisonment for six months
for first, for second a year, life for third.

5 E. 6. c. 1. Alters Prayers, but applies Penalties to new Book.

Nota, Rep. 1 Ma. that Rep. 1 Jac. c. 25.

1 El. c. 1. Enacts the use of the Book of 5 E. 6. with some Alterations.

1. Any that refuse it.

2. Use another form.

3. Deprave it, if Spiritual, six months Imprisonment first offense, one years
Imprisonment second Offense, Deprivation third Offense.

If Lay, first Offense twelve months Imprisonment, second offense during life.

Depraving Book of Common Prayer, first offense 100 Marks, second offense 400
Marks, third offense Goods, and Imprisonment during life.

3 El. c. 1. concerning Consecrating Bishops.

Concerning rejecting Church.

1 El. 2. Every Sunday and Holiday super 12 per diem, 23 El. c. 3. 10 l. per
mensem for absenting; and if absent 12 months upon Certificate, bound to good
behavior.

29 El. c. 2. Conviction of Recusancy.

35 El. c. 1. Penalty of dissuading from Church, holding of Conventicles.

Convict to Prison without bail until Conformity.

Nonconformity within 3 months after Conviction, shall abjure the Realm.

Not departing or returning, Felony without benefit of Clergy.

Submitting discharged of the Penalty by this Act.

Relapsing loses benefit of Submission.

Ten pounds per mensem for every person retaining or relieving Recusant after
notice.

C. 2. Recusants not to remove, unless from dwelling.

1 Jac. c. 4. the heir of a Recusant conformable, discharged third part
forfeiture.

Penalty of sending Children into Seminaries.

3 Jac. c. 4 and 5. Penalty for refusing Oath of Supremacy.

1 El. c. 1.

5 El. c. 1.

Of Obedience, 3 Jac. 14.

7 Jac. c. 6.

Kings Bench.
Third Part.
NOW we come to consider of the proceeding against a party for Felony, and
therein

1. Concerning the Jurisdiction of Court wherein Proceedings are to be had in
Capital Causes, and those are principally, 1. Kings Bench. 2. Justices of Goal
Delivery. 3. Justices of Oyer and Terminer and Assizes. 4. Sheriffs and
Coroners. 5. Lord Steward of the Household.


The Kings Bench the Supreme Court of Criminal Jurisdiction. It is a Court of
Oyer and Terminer, Goal Delivery, and Air, in that County where it sits.

By the coming of the Kings Bench into any County, 9 R. Sanchars.
during the sitting thereof in that County, all power and proceedings of Oyer
and Terminer is suspended.

But a Special Commission of Oyer and Terminer may be granted, C.P.C. p. 27.
bearing Test in the Term, and Kings Bench may adjourn, and then they may sit.

Where the Kings Bench proceeds upon an Offense committed in the same County,
there need not fifteen days between Test and Return of Venire facias; but if
they proceed upon a Cause removed by Certiorari, they must have fifteen days.

Goal Delivery.
9 R. Sanchars.
1. JUstices of Peace ought to deliver the Indictments not determined unto those
Justices, and they may Arreign any person in Prison upon them.

2. They may take Indictments against any person in Prison, and so may Justices
of Oyer and Terminer, and herein they have a concurrent Justice.

3. They may take a Panel returned by Sheriff without Precept.

4. They may deliver by Proclamation persons suspected, when there is no
Evidence to Indict them.

5. May award Execution of persons in Prison Outlawed before Justices of Peace.

6. May assign Coroner to Appeal and make Process against Appellors in Foreign
County.

7. May punish those that unduly bail Prisoners, 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 13.

8. May deliver the Goal of persons committed for High Treason.

9. May Receive Appeals by Bill against persons in Prison.

10. By Stat. 10 E. 3. must deliver their Records into Treasury at Michaelmas.

11. Others may be added to the former Commission by Commission of Association,
or their power committed to fewer by Si non Omnes.

12. By St. 2 and 3 Ph. and Ma. c. 18. a General Commission of Goal Delivery
through the County not be a Supersedeas to a Special Commission granted in a
Corporation, parcel thereof.

13. By St. 1 E. 6. c. 7. subsequent Commissioners of Goal Delivery, power to
give Judgment upon such as were Repreived by former Commissioners of Peace,
Goal Delivery, Oyer and Terminer, and others not continued by granting new
Commissions.

If a Prisoner be bailed, he is yet in Prison to be Arreigned before those
Justices, for he is a Prisoner; contrary in case of Mainprize. 21 H. 7.33. 9 E.
4.2. 39 H. 6.27.

4. Ins. 206.
Although their Commission determine with their Session after they are gone,
they may command a Reprieve or Execution. Dyer 205.

Licet soit ad Gaolum deliberandum hac vice uncore poit adjourner lour
Commission. Bro. Jur. 226.

Commission d'Oyer and Terminer, and Goal Deliberand, poit Estoyer ensemble.
Ibid. Bro. Commission 24.

Justices d'Oyer and Terminer, and Goal Delivery, poit enquirer per ambideux
powers, and make up their Records accordingly. 9 H. 7.9. Bro. Jud. 226.

Oyer and Terminer.
1. JUstices Authority must be by Commission, not by Writ, otherwise their
Proceeding void.

2. They cannot proceed but by Indictment taken before themselves.

3. Nota, By good Opinion they may proceed the same day or Session against a
party Indicted. Nota le contrar' ad estre adjudge.

4. Where Offenses are limited to be heard and determined in any Court of
Record, generally it may be heard or determined before them. Quaere for
Gregory's Case contra Die. 236.

5. Others may be added, or their power contracted by Association, or Si non
omnes.

6. One sitting without Adjournment determines the Commission.

7. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or of Peace, cannot assign a Coroner as
Justices of Goal Delivery may.

8. By St. 9 E. 3. they are also to send their Records determined into the
Exchequer.

9. A Supersedeas suspends their power, a Procedendo revives it; the like of
Commission of Nisi prius, etc.

12 Ass. 21.
But it determines not without notice.

1. By showing the new Commission.

2. Proclaiming it in the County.

3. Or Sessions held by new Commission.

10. An Award on the Roll not sufficient to return a Jury, but a Precept under
Seal of Commissioners.

C.P.C. p. 27.
11. And Nota, That a Special Commission of Oyer and Terminer may be granted to
sit in one County to hear and determine Treason, etc. in another, but then the
Indictment must be found in proper County, and the Trial by Jurors of proper
County.

By Stat. 27 E. 1. de finibus Justices of Assise have power to deliver Goals of
Felons and Murderers.

And in case of Counterfeiting Coin, etc. upon Stat. 3 H. 7. St. 2. c. 7. they
may have a Special Commission.

Justices of Peace.
THE Stat. of 18. E. 3. c. 2. gives them power by Commission to hear and
determine Felonies and Trespasses against the Peace.

S.P.C.L. 2. c. 5.
But then there must be a special Clause in their Commission, Necnon ad aud' and
terminand' felonias, etc. Otherwise they cannot do it.

Yet that Clause does not improperly make Justices of Peace Justices of Oyer
and Terminer, because that it is a distinct Commission; therefore a Statute,
C.P.C. c. 14. Dal. c. 20. 118.
as that of 5 El. c. 14. limiting Forgery to be heard and determined before
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, gives not the power therein to Justices of
Peace, but Justices of Kings Bench are Justices of Oyer and Terminer within
this Statute.

By force of general words of their Commissions they may enquire of Murder at
their Sessions; for though by Stat. 6 E. 1. c. 9. and 4 E. 3. Murder and other
Homicides must stay till Goal Delivery; yet the Stat. of 18 E. 3. c. 2. 34 E.
3. c. 1. 17 R. 2. c. 10. has enlarged their Commission and Power.

Yet in respect of Stat. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 19. directs Justices of Peace
to take Examinations in Cases of Homicides and other Felonies, and to certify
them to Justices of Goal Delivery: in point of Discretion they do forbear to
proceed to determine Felonies.

But for Petty Larceny, and other small Felonies, they use to bind over
Prosecutor to Sessions.

Justices of Peace may proceed upon Indictment taken before themselves, or some
Justice of Peace: but cannot proceed upon Indictment before Coroner, By St. 4
E. 3. c. 2.
or Oyer and Terminer; but Justices of Goal Delivery may; and Justices of Peace
are to deliver Indictments taken before them to Justices of Goal Delivery.

Cr. f. 9.
They cannot deliver persons suspect by Proclamation, as Justices of Goal
Delivery may.

In Cases of Felony by Statute limited to be heard before Justices of the
Peace, they may proceed at Sessions, and consequently may bind over Informers,
and certify Examinations at Sessions.

But such Felonies by Statute as are specially limited to Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, or other Justices, and not to them, the Justices of Peace cannot
proceed to take Indictments, as upon Stat. 3 H. 7. c. 18. for contriving to
destroy the King, etc. upon Stat. 33 H. 8. 12. Murderers in Kings Palace upon
Stat. 18 H. 6. c. 12. of razing or imbezelling Records upon Stat. 13 H. 6. c.
1. secret imbezelling goods upon St. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. c. 24. striking in one
City, Dal. c. 20.
and dying in another City.

But in former cases it seems they may take Examinations, and commit the
Offenders, and bind over Prosecutors.

If any Indictment be taken before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Goal
Delivery, or Coroner, they cannot proceed upon them; but upon Indictments taken
before Sheriff in his Turn, they may proceed by St. 1 E. 4. c. 2.

In cases of Treason, Misprision of Treason, Praemunire, regularly Justices of
Peace have no Jurisdiction; yet two things may be done:

1. In any case of Treason, because it is a breach of the Peace, they may upon
complaint imprison Offenders, take Examinations, bind Prosecutors over, and
certify their proceedings into Kings Bench or Goal Delivery.

2. In some cases they are enabled to take Indictments, but not hear and
determine the same, but certify the same into Kings Bench upon Stat. of 5 and
23 El. c. 1. and 1.

1. The Maintainer of the Authority of the Sea of Rome. 2. Obtaining Bulls,
etc. 3. Withdrawing from Allegiance. 4. Bringing in Agnus Dei.
A person brings one before Justice suspected of Felony, and refuses to be
bound to prosecute, may be committed, if it appear he can testify materially.

They may Enquire of any Felony within the County, though within the Verge. Co.
lib. 4.
4 R. Wigg's Case.

Coroner.
CORONER

Has power in three Cases:

1. To take Indictment of Death; but this he can only do super visum corporis,
otherwise void. Hence 1. If Body be interred before he comes, the Township
amerced, and he must digg up the Body; so if Township suffer Body to lie long
to Putrefaction without sending for Coroner: The like of one lying in Prison.
2. If Coroner be remiss, and comes not when sent for, he shall be fined and
imprisoned. 3. He may enquire of flight, and such Presentment not Traversable.
4. If Body cannot be seen, Justice of Peace may enquire thereof.


Nota, The Record of the Coroner of great Authority; if he Record a Confession
of a Felony by Approver, or a Confession of breach of Prison, or an Abjuration,
it shall not be Traversed.

And it seems by some he has power to enquire of Rapes, breach of Prison.

He has Jurisdiction upon Arms of the Sea, where a man may see from side to
side.

2. Concerning Appeals.

Coroner, together with Sheriff, has power in County Court to receive Appeals
of Robberies and other Felonies, but then it must be of a Felony in the same
County: Upon this Appeal they may grant Process till Outlary; St. P.C. 82.
but it seems they cannot send an Exigent, because prohibited by St. 6 M. c. 17.

St. P.G. f. 68.
Such Appeal may be by Bill, and it may be removed into Kings Bench by
Certiorari, but it must issue both to Sheriff and Coroner.

It appears By St. 3 H. 7. c. 1. That an Appeal of Murder by Bill lies before
Sheriff and Coroner.

3. The Coroner alone may take the Appeal of an Approver of a Felony in any
County.

But then he cannot make Process thereupon, but enter it in his Roll, St. P.C.
f. 59.
and send it to the Justices of Goal Delivery, who thereupon may issue their
Process to the Sheriff of the foreign County to take the Appellor.

4. To take the Abjuration of him that acknowledges a Felony done in the same
County, or any other.

And note, That though more Coroners than one in any County, yet any one may
execute any of the powers before.

But the Presentment of him that is first taken stands.

Abjuration dit esse toll oue Sanctuary per 21 Jac. 2 Ins. 629.


Sheriff.
THE power of the Sheriff to take Indictments, was either Virtute Commissionis,
or Officii, which are taken away per Stat. 28 E. 3. c. 9.

His Power and Office in the Turns.

St. P.C. f. 84.
1. His Turn must be held infra mensem Paschae and Michaelis, otherwise the
Indictments there are void per St. 31 E. 3. c. 15.

2. Indictments must be under Seal of the Jury by Stat. of West. 2. c. 13.
indented per Stat. 1 E. 3. c. 17. and the same for Lord of Franchises.

3. Indictors must be of good name, having 20 s. Freehold, or 26 s. 8 d.
Copyhold, otherwise Sheriff punishable by Stat. 1 R. 3. c. 4.

4. The Turn can take no Indictment but of that which is Felony by Common Law,
or of such matters as are particularly by Act of Parliament limited to them,
and therefore an Indictment of Escape void there.

5. Upon any Indictment of Felony before Sheriff in his Turn, they can make out
no Process, but must remand them to Justices of Peace, who have power to
proceed thereupon as if taken before themselves, by St. 1 E. 4. c. 2

The Court Leet in effect has the same Jurisdiction with the Turn; but
Presentiments of Felony before them are to be sent before Justices of Goal
Delivery, 3 H. 4.18.

Appeal.
HAving considered the Courts of Justice, now we come to consider the way of
bringing Capital Offenders to Trial, and that is Regularly by one of these 3
ways, Appeal. Approver. Indictment.


And herein some things are proper to each proceeding, some things are common
to them all, which come to be considered after particulars proper to either
dispatched, viz.

Process.

Arraignment; and therein of Principal and Accessory.

Demeanor of the Party Arraigned; Standing Mute. Confessing. Pleading and
Pleas.
Declinatory, Sanctuary. Clergy.


In Bar, Pardon. Auterfoits Acquit. Anterfoits Convict.


To the Felony.

Trial per Battle. per Jury.
And therein, Process against Jury. Challenge. Verdict.


Per Peers in case of Nobility.

Judgment in the several Cases Capital.

Execution. Reprieve.
Falsifier, Per Error. Per Plea.


Appeal.

Appeals in respect of the manner of proceeding, are of two kinds; By Writ. By
Bill.


Touching Appeals by Bill, they may be prosecuted,

1. In the King's Bench against any that is in custod' Marr', or let to Bail.

They are Sovereign Coroners.

2. In the Court before Commissioners of Goal Delivery against a Prisoner, or
one let to Bail, but not to one let to Mainprize.

But if one of Appellees absent, remove in B. R. by Certiorari.

3. By some before Justices of Peace, quod Quaere 44 E. 3. Coron. 95.

4. Before Sheriff and Coroner, as before; and it may be removed by Certiorari
in B. R. 3 H. 7. c. 1.

5. Before Constable and Marshal, of a Felony done out of the Realm, 1 H. 4. c.
14.

Appeals are in matter

1. Not Capital, as an Appeal of Maihem, which may be commenced in K. B. Goal
Delivery, or before Coroner and Sheriff.

This, though it be Felony, yet it is but a Trespass in Nature and Judgment.

2. Capital; and that either 1. Of Treason, but this ousted per Stat. 1 H. 4.
c. 14. 2. Of Felony; and these of three kinds, Death. Larceny. Rape.



An Appeal of Death is either by Wife or Heir.

1. Of an Appeal of Death by Wife, and therein these requisites; 1. She ought
to be a wife de jure, and not de facto only; and therefore ne onc' accouple a
good Plea. 2. But she need not be dowable; for if she had Eloped, or the
Husband been Attaint; yet she may have an Appeal of his death. 3. She ought to
continue his Widow; for if she marry before, or pending the Appeal, the Appeal
fails for ever; or if she marry after Judgment she cannot have Execution.


2. Appeal of Death by Heir.

1. If the dead have a wife, the heir shall not have Appeal though she die; but
if Wife kill Husband, there the Heir shall have an Appeal. 2. He must be Heir
by course of Common Law; this has these Exceptions: 1. Where Heir is disabled
through Attainder. 2. Where the Appeal is against the Heir, there the Appeal
goes to the next Heir. 3. It must be Heir that was Heir at time of death of
Ancestor; for if he die within the year before, or after Appeal commenced, it
is lost.

But it seems if the Heir having Judgment die, next Heir may have Execution.

4. It must be an Heir Male; Nullus capiatur propter Appellum feminae alterius
quam viri sui: But if be Heir, and Male, though he derive through Females, he
may have an Appeal.

5. A man above Seventy, or an Infant, may have an Appeal; but as Battle waged
and adjudged of late times the Paroll shall not Demurr.

But an Idiot, Monk, Man mute, shall have no Appeal of death nor otherwise.

And Nota, C.P.C. 53.
the Appeal must be within year and day after death by Stat. 3 E. 6. c. 24.
stricken in one County, and dies in another, or Accessory in one County, to
death in another, Appeal brought where party died

Appeal Robbery.

Servant robbed Master or Servant may have Appeal.

But Testator robbed, Executor shall not have Appeal.

Villain shall not have Appeal of Robbery against his Lord, contra of death.

Two joint Owners robbed, Surviver shall have Appeal.

A Woman or Infant shall have an Appeal of Robbery.

If a man be robbed at several times, he must put all into one Appeal.

What omitted is Confiscate.

The Appeal affirms the continuation of the property thereof. If A. rob B. in
the County of S. and go with the Goods in the County of D. an Appeal of Larceny
lies in that County of D. but not of robbery, for that is upon the taking from
the person.

If A. be robbed by B. who is robbed by C. A. may have an Appeal of Larceny
against C.

This Appeal may be prosecuted in a year, two, or three, if there was fresh
suit; and the judging of fresh suit lies in discretion of Court.

And Nota, This, or any other Appeal lies against an Infant, against a Monk,
without naming his Sovereign, against a Feme convert without naming her Husband.

Appeal of Rape.

1. Lies for party ravished.

2. But if she consented to Rape afterward, then by Stat. 6 R. 2. c. 6. it is
given to the Husband; if none, to the Father; if none, to the Heir, whether
Male or Female.

If she be taken in one County, and ravished in another, the Appeal of Rape
lies in County where ravished.

Although by Stat. W. 1. c. 13. whereby Rape was turned into Trespass, forty
days were limited for her Suit; yet it being again made Felony by Stat. W. 2.
c. and no time limited, it may be brought in any reasonable time.

Process.

Count and Plea to the Writ.

Concerning Process in Appeals, v. infra Process in general, because many
things therein common to Appeals and Indictments.

The Count in Appeals.

1. The Plaintiff in his Appeal must mention the place and day, need not
mention the hour; and though day be mistaken, not material upon Evidence.

2. It suffices for Plaintiff to count against Defendant, according to the
construction that the Law makes upon the Fact.

If A. B. and C. present, B. only strike the mortal stroke, he may count
against them all, that they stroke: So in Rapes.

3. An Appeal by Heir ought to show Coment.

4. In Appeals of Rape, felonice rapuit is sufficient with carnaliter cognovit,
vid. 11 H. 4. 1.

5. In Appeals against A. B. and C. A. only appears, he must count against all
per better Opinion.

6. At this day one Appeal against all Perils and Accessaries, and if an
Attaint be against A. and he is attaint or acquit, or Plaintiff nonsuited, he
cannot have another Appeal against B. But if Accessaries in one County to
Felony in another, their several Appeals against Principal and Accessaries.

Writ of Appeal abate.

1. For insufficiency in the Writ, as wanting rapuit, false Latin.

2. Multiplicity of Action, second Writ of Appeal purchased, pending a former
Bill in the County, abates not.

But if first Appeal by Bill was removed into B. by Certiorari, and the
Plaintiff had appeared thereupon, and counted, abates the second.

Null tiel in rerum natura, as one of the Defendants abates.

Pleas in Bar.

Vid. infra un general Title as to Autrefoits, Convict or Acquit.

1. He may plead any thing whereby it appears the Plaintiff is not entitled to
Appeal de quo v. supra.

2. Nonsuit in a former Appeal after Declaration, so of a Retraxit of the same,
the Plaintiff brought an Appeal.

3. Felony against another, who was Attaint or Convict at his Suit.

4. Plaintiff has released to Defendant, but if Appeal against Divorce, a
Release or Retraxit as to one no benefit to the other.

5. If Defendant plead in Bar, he may also plead over to Felony, and it shall
not be double.

1. But in case of Release pleaded, he shall not plead over to Felony, because
repugnant. 2. In case of Villenage pleaded he shall not plead to the Felony,
because Infranchisement; yet if that bar found against him, he may plead not
Guilty; and so in any other case where he pleads in Bar without pleading over,
except in Release.
Approver.
1. WHAT it is to be an Approver?

A person Indicted of Treason or Felony not disabled to accuse before competent
Judges, confessing the Indictment, and sworn to reveal all Treasons and
Felonies he knows, and then before a Coroner entering his Appeal against
participes Criminis in the Indictment within the Realm. St. P.C. 142.


2. Who may be an Approver?

1. A Peer of the Realm cannot be an Approver. 2. A person Attaint cannot be an
Approver. 3. A Woman, Infant, Idiot, Non compos, etc. Clerk, cannot be an
Approver. 4. But a man above seventy, or maimed may, but he cannot wage Battle.
5. Clerk Convict may.
3. In what cases?

1. None can approve but a person Indicted, and therefore if only in Prison
upon suspicion, he may indeed confess the Felony, but such Confession amounts
not to an Attainder or Conviction, though it be an Evidence, and therefore
cannot approve. 2. The Appellee in Appeal cannot be an Approver. 3. The
Appellee of Approver cannot be Approver, for that would be infinite. 4. Though
a person Indicted approve, yet if after Appeal be against him, Approver
cease. 5. He that has once pleaded to the Felony cannot be an Approver, but
shall be hanged, for he is found false.
4. Of what Offenses?

It must be only of the Offenses contained in the Indictment, be it Felony or
Treason, and therefore not of another Offense, nor of an Accessory before or
after to the same, yet his Oath general, therefore as to other Offenses, it is
but a Detection, not an Approvement.

5. Before whom?

Before such Judges only as can assign, as Kings Bench, Goal Delivery, Oyer and
Terminer, High Steward; but not before Justices of Court Baron or County Court.

But it is in the discretion of the Court to suffer him to be Approver, or to
respite Judgment and Execution, till he has Convicted all his Partners.

6. How Demeasned after Appeal?

1. After Felony confessed upon Arraignment, a Coroner assigned and sworn in
Court to discover Offenders.

2. A day prefixed, within which he is to perfect his Appeal before the Coroner,
and in every of these days he must Appeal; for if he fail, and Court record it,
to be hanged.

The limit to perfect his Appeal by 5 E. 3. c. 34. 183 days, but that Repealed
15 El.

3. During time limited for his Appeal, he shall be at large, and have 1 d. per
diem till Appeal perfected.

4. If he Appeal persons beyond Sea, or if Appeal such as are not in rerum
natura, and that appear by Testimony of County, or by Retorn of Sheriff, quod
non fuit invent', he shall be hanged.

5. After his Appeal formed before Coroner, he must repeat it verbatim to
Court; and if he fail thereof, and Court Record it, he shall be hanged.

7. Process in Appeal.

1. In the same County Coroner may award Process to Sheriff till Exigent. 2. If
Appellee be in a foreign County, yet the Judges before whom the Appeal is, may
grant Process, viz. B. R. or Itinerant by Common Law.
And by Stat. 28 E. 3.1. de Appellis, the Justices of Goal Delivery may send
Process into a foreign County, as well to apprehend the Appellee, as a Venire
Facias to try the Issue.

8. Proceedings upon Trial.

The Appellee may put himself upon County, or wage Battle.

If five Appellees, and they wage Battle, he must fight them all.

If two approve against one Appellee, if the Appellee vanquish the first, he is
acquitted against the rest: though Appellor retract his Appeal, or be
vanquished; yet if Offense be within Clergy he shall have it; and so of
Appellee.

9. Proceedings after Trial.

If Appellor convict Appellee, either by Battle or Verdict, the King ex merito
justitiae is to pardon him; and from the time of his Appeal till his Pardon or
Conviction, ought to have wages.

Indictments.
THESE things considerable: 1. Where an Indictment requisite in cases Capital,
where not. 2. What the quality of the Indicator. 3. Of what matters they may
Enquire. 4. Before whom found. 5. What requisite in the manner of them.


1. Where an Indictment requisite for party to be Arraigned at King's Suit.

1. By ancient Common Law, if a man was taken in Larceny with the manner, and
that brought into Court with Prisoner, Prisoner shall be Arraigned thereupon
without Indictment St. P.C.f. 148.

And such was the use of the Manner that had infang Thief, Ibid. f. 29. v. 1 E.
3.17.17 Ass. 99. but this disused.

2. If Trespass be brought de muliere abducta cum bonis viri, and the Defendant
found Guilty: or if in Trespass for Goods the Defendant be found that he stole
them, S.P.C. f. 94.
this in the King's Bench equivalent to an Indictment, and the Defendant be put
to answer Felony.

3. In some Cases upon Appeals by Appellors or Approvers not prosecuting, etc.
Defendant Arraigned at King's Suit, because it carries a presumption of truth;
and therefore if Defendant be both Appealed and Indicted upon a non prosecution
of the Appeal, the party shall be Arraigned upon the Appeal, not the
Indictment. 4 E. 4.10.

Wherein.

1. If Plaintiff in Appeal by Writ be Nonsuit before Declaration, he shall not
be Arraigned at King's Suit.

1. Because not certainty. 2. Writ may be at another Suit, but if it be by
Bill, either by Appellor or Approver, it seems he shall, because the certainty
appears; therefore in the former Case, if there be no Indictment against him he
is dismissed.
2. If Plaintiff release his Appeal after he has commenced it, party shall be
Arraigned at Kings Suit.

But if before it was commenced, then not.

3. If Plaintiff or Approver after Appeal commenced, confess it false, Appellor
hanged, and Appelle discharged, because amounts to a vanquishment.

4. If Appeal abate by Act of Plaintiff, as taking Husband, or act in Law, as
death, Appellee Arraigned at King's Suit; but if it abate by insufficiency in
the Appeal, as by false Latin, Misnomer, or because Plaintiff disabled to
commence Appeal, as Utlary of Felony, or Trespass, or the year or day past, or
Plaintiff not Wife or Heir of Defendant, not Arraigned upon Appeal, but may be
Indicted.

5. If King pardon after Battle joined in Appeal by Approver, no Arraignment at
King's Suit, but Appellee discharged.

And note where Prisoner Arraigned upon the Appeal, C.P.C. 184.
a Cesset Process is entered upon the Indictment.

The return of the Sheriff of Rescue or Escape of a Felon, not sufficient to
put the party to answer the Felony.

2. The second considerable is the quality of the Indictor.

Concerning Indictments in Leets and Turns, v. ante upon Stat. W. 2. c. 13. 1
E. 3. c. 17. 1 R. 3. c. 4. 1 E. 4. c. 3.

There is a general Statute that refers all Indictments, as well in case of
Felony as Treason, 11 H. 4. c. 9. which requires

1. Indictors not to be 1. Persons fled to Sanctuary for Felony or Treason. 2.
Not outlawed. 3. Not Indicted or Attainted. 4. Not by Conspiracy.


2. That Indictors be the King's Liege people.

3. Returned by the Sheriff, as Bailiff of Franchises.

4. Not at the Denomination of any person.

And all Indictments taken contrary are void.

Hence it follows

1. That Prisoner upon Arraignment may plead this matter, or any point of it,
and may plead over to the Felony. Vide Scarle's Case.

2. Though there be twenty of the grand Jury, yet if one was outlawed or taken
at the Denomination of another, it voids the whole Indictment.

By Stat. 3 H. 8. c. 12. Justices of Goal Delivery, or of Peace, whereof one of
the Quorum, in open Sessions may reform the Panel of the Grand Jury, by
putting and taking out Names, and the Sheriff is to return the Panel so
reformed.

But this takes not away former Statute of 11 H. 4. nor alters it.

By Stat. 33 H. 6. c. 2.

Special provision is made for quality of Indictor in Lancashire.

3. Of which things they can Enquire.

Regularly they can Enquire of nothing but what arises within the Body of the
County for which they are returned.

And therefore if an Indictment for scandalous words, or other matter
transitory be found upon not Guilty pleaded thereunto, if upon Evidence it
appear to be spoken in another County, Defendant is not Guilty.

And therefore where stroke was in one County, and death in another, he could
not be Indicted where party died.

But for a Nuisance in one County to another, a Jury in County where Nuisance is
committed may Indict.

But diverse Statutes have introduced alteration of the Law in some Capital
Cases, 28 H. 8. c. 15. Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders and Confederacies
upon the Stat. may be enquired, tried, heard, determined, and judged in such
places as shall be limited by King's Commission to be directed for the same.

A Treason done out of the Land, it has been held that it may be enquired of
and tried where Offender landed; but to amove the Question by Stat. 35 H. 8. c.
2. all Treasons and Misprisions, or concealments of Treasons done out of
England, may be enquired, heard, or determined by Justices of King's Bench, by
persons of the County where Bench sits, or before Commissioners, and in such
Shires as shall be appointed by King's Commission, and by good men of the same
Shires, as if the Treasons, etc. had been done in the same Shires where
enquired.

C.P.C. f. 7.
Upon this Statute.

1. If Bench remove after Indictment into another County, Trial shall be by
persons of first County.

2. The King writing his name to Commission, or putting his sign to the Warrant
sufficient.

3. Ireland is out of the Realm to this purpose.

The Statutes stand unrepealed by Stat. of 1 Ma. c. but the Stat. of 32 H. 8.
c. 4. for trial of Treason in Wales repealed by 1 Ma.

Again, by Stat. 2 and 3 El. c. 24. a man stricken in the County of D. dies in
the County of S. or Accessory in one County to Felony in another County, may be
indicted and tried in County where death was, for Felony committed per
Principal, but it must be laid according to truth.

If Enquest conceal any matter presentable before Justice of Peace, they may
Impannel Inquest to enquire of such concealment, and amerce Concealers by Stat.
3 H. 7. c. 1.

4. Before whom found.

Of this before.

5. The form of Indictments.

1. By Statute.

4 H. 4. c. 2. Insidiatores viarum and depopulatores to be omitted in
Indictments; and if inserted, yet Clergy not thereby taken away.

37 H. 8. c. 8. Indictment what, to be quashed for want of words, viz. gladiis,
baculis, and cultellis.

2. At Common Law:

Want of certainty vitiates, want of year, day, and place.

Indictment for Escape of one taken on suspicion of Felony, without showing
what Felony Mal.

Indictment for receipt of a Felon without showing who secured, Mal.

Indictment for making Alchimy ad instar pecuniae Regis, without showing what
money, Mal.

Indictment quod cepit, or furatus est, without saying felonice abduxit equum,
without saying cepit or carnaliter cognovit, without saying Rapuit, or
Bulglariter, when it should be for Burglariter; or if Felony before Justice of
Peace, without saying necnon ad diversas felonias; if in murder with a Gun,
without saying percussit, Mal.

Indictment supposing the stroke 1. Augusti, death 2. Augusti, and sic felonice
murdravit 1. Augusti, Mal. but sic murdravit modo and forma praed', or praed'
1. Augusti, Bon.

Indictment quod dedit mortalem plagam circa pectus, Mal. but in sinistram
partem ventris circa, Bon.

Indictment de morte cujusdam ignoti, or felonice cepit bona, C.P.C. c. 62.
etc. cujusdam ignoti, or domus Ecclesiae, Bon.

1. Proof upon Indictments.

In case of Treason or Misprision by the Stat. 1 E. 6. c. 12. 5 E. 6. c. 7.
there ought to be lawful Accusers.

1. Eye witnesses upon every Indictment.

An Accuser by hearsay is no lawful Accuser within this Statute. C.P.C. 24.


The necessity of such proof upon Indictment of Treason is not taken away by
Stat. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 11. but only in the case of counterfeiting Coin.

St. P.C. 154.
But these Witnesses need not be present with the Indictor, but they may send to
them in writing.

Process.
NOW we come to those Proceedings that are common for most part both to Appeals
and Indictments. And

1. Of Process.

1. Upon an Indictment or Appeal of death but one Cap. and then Exigent: but in
case of Robbery, then by Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 14. two Capias's, then Exigent; but
this Stat. extends not to death. 2. Indictments or Appeals of Trespass, or any
Felony and Trespass against a person of another County after one Cap. a second
Cap. with Proclamations, shall be granted to the Sheriff of that County wherein
he is supposed to be conversant before an Exigent shall issue per Stat. 8 H. 6.
c. 10. And upon this Statute Process shall go to a County Palatine; and if in
the Indictment he be styled nuper de, and so in several Counties, then second
Cap. shall go to every County.
Principal and Accessory.
IF one present did nothing, but yet came to assist party if need; or if one
hold the party while Felon strike him; or if one present his weapon to the
other that strikes, for they are praesentes, auxiliantes, or confortantes.

But if one come casually, S.P.C. f. 40.
not of the Confederacy, though he hinder not the Felony, he is neither
Principal nor Accessory, although he apprehend not the Felon.

In some cases a person absent may be Principal.

1. He that puts poison into any thing to poison another, though not present
when taken; and so it seems are all those that are present when the poison is
so infused; and consenting thereto.

2. If upon the same Ground, or in the same House, though not within view of
Fact, when many come to do an unlawful act: See before Lord Dacres and Budsey's
Case in Murder and Robbery.

3. By special Act of Parliament, or upon the Stat. 3 H. 7. c. 2. 8 H. 6.12.

Accessory before, he that commands or assenteth to the committing of a
Felony, and is absent when done.

4 R. Blyths C.
1. In Manslaughter there can be no Accessory before, because done without
premeditation.

2. Where Receipt to make an Accessory, must be knowing him to be such.

But if a man be Attaint of Felony in the County of A. the Law presumes notice
thereof in the same County, therefore the receipt of him in the same County
seems Accessory; contrary if in another.

Videtur cognitio requisite in utraque. 3. Receipt of a Felon that has given
Bond to appear at next Session, etc. not Accessory.

4. Relieving a Felon with Money, Victuals, Horse for his Journey knowing,
Accessory; but if he be in Prison, then lawful.

5. A brother receiving a brother may be Accessory, or a Husband his Wife, but
not Wife of her Husband.

2. Where Execution varies from Command.

In person slain; as a command to kill A. and he kills B. or in the nature of
the Offense; as Command to rob as he goes to Marker, and he breaks open House
and robs it, the Commandant is no Accessory.

3. But a command to poison J. S. and he shoots him; a command to rob or beat
J. S. he beats him to death, the Commander Accessory.

4. If A. command B. to kill C. and before Fact A. repents, and countermands
his command, yet B. kill him, A. is not Accessory.

5. If A. poison an Apple, and deliver it to C. to deliver to D. C. not knowing
delivers it, Murder in A. but no Offense in C.

Accessaries after

St. P.C. 41.
1. A receipt of stolen Goods makes not Accessory, unless he receive Thief.

A man may be Accessory to an Accessory: And

The same man may be Principal and Accessory where Felony done by diverse.

6. But sending a Letter in favor of a Felon, instructing him to read,
advising to labor witnesses, not revealing a Felony intended, permitting a
Felon to escape without Arrest, makes no Accessory.

7. Accessory cannot be unless a Felony committed; therefore A. wounds B.
dangerously, C. receives A. B. dies, C. not Accessory.

Arraignment of Principal and Accessory, and things Observable therein.
1. IF Principal be acquitted, C.P.C. 47.139. 4 R. Seyers C.
or be convict only of Manslaughter, or se Defendendo, or before his Attainder
has his Clergy, or be pardoned, or die, the Accessory shall not be Arraigned;
otherwise if after Attainder.

2. If Principal be attaint at Suit of the King, the Accessory shall not be
Arraigned at Suit of party.

3. If Principal stand mute, Accessory not Arraigned.

4. Exigent shall not go out against Accessory till Principal attaint per Stat.
W. 1. c. 14.

5. Where Principal appears not, Accessory shall be put to answer: but he shall
not be tried till Principal attaint or appear, unless he will, for he may wave
the benefit of the Law.

6. If he be Indicted as Accessory to two, and one of Principals appears and is
convict, the Court may, if they please, try the Accessory; and if he be found
Accessory to him that is attaint, he shall be condemned; St. P.C. 47.
if not found Accessory to him, yet he may be afterward Arraigned as Accessory
to the other when he appears.

7. If Principal and Accessory appear and plead a Felony, they may be tried by
same Inquest; but the Princlpal must be first Convict, and have Judgment,
before Judgment against Accessory, and the Jury shall be in Charge, that if
they find principal not guilty, they shall find the Accessory non Cul.

8. If Principal be Erroneously attainted, yet Accessory shall not take
advantage thereof, but be Arraigned.

9. If Murder or other Offense were in one County, and Accessory in another per
Stat. 2 E. 6. c. 24. C.P.C. p. 44


1. If Accessory be in Middlesex, and where the King's Bench sits, and
Principal in another County, King's Bench may try Accessory.

2. Certificate in such case shall be upon a Certiorari or Special Writ, if
need be, formed upon the Matter, and not by Precept, Ibid.
under their Seals, and in their own Names.

High Steward within the Act.

Mute, pain fort and dure.
NOW we come to the Demeanor of the Prisoner upon his appearance.

And thereupon either, 1. He that stands mute. 2. He that pleads. 3. Or
confesses the Fact.


What is said standing mute?

This of two kinds.

1. When he answers nothing at all, and it shall be enquired whether he stand
mute per malice or per act of God.

If it be by act of God, then Felony shall be enquired of, and whether he be
the same person as if he pleaded not guilty.

1. If by malice, or if Prisoner has cut out his own tongue, De pain fort and
dure.
then Prisonner shall have Penance.

2. When he pleads, but not effectually; as when he answers not directly to the
Fact, or concludes not upon the Country, then if the cause be probable, De
pain fort and dure.
he shall be put to his Penance. C.P.C. p. 227.

2. What the consequent of standing mute?

1. In Treason it is a Conviction.

2. After Attainder and ask't what he can say why no execution, standing mute
he shall be Executed.

2. In Appeal standing mute, Judgment against him to be hanged.

4. Upon Stat. 33 H. 8. c. 2. of Felony within Verge, Offender standing mute
Judgment against him.

5. But in other cases of Felony, pain fort and dure, and forfeits Goods.

1. Remanded to Prison.

2. Lie naked in some dark Room with hands and legs extended.

3. Weights increased.

Pleas.
IF Prisoner plead, it is either Declinatory,

1. Sanctuary, Clergy.

2. Or to the Felony: 1. Demurring. 2. Pleading in Bar. 3. Pleading general
Issue.


Declinatory Exceptions.

1. Sanctuary and the Consequents abjuratio ousted by Stat. 21 Jac. c. 28.

2. Clergy wherein 1. Who shall have benefit of Clergy? 2. In what Cases? 3. At
what time? 4. Who the Judge? 5. What the Consequent?


1. Who shall have Clergy, and who not?

1. A blind man shall not have his Clergy.

2. A woman Covert shall not have benefit of Clergy.

Provision by Stat. 21 Jac. c. 6. C.P.C. c. 124.
that for stealing Goods under 10 s. without Burglary or Robbery, etc. he shall
be burnt in the hand for the first Offense.

3. Bigamy ousted of Clergy per Stat. de Bigamis 4 E. 1. but restored to it per
Stat. 1 E. 6. c. 12.

2. In what cases some things permitted in general.

1. Per Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 4. per Cler. Clergy allowed in all Treasons and
Felonies, except Treasons against King; so that after that Statute, there was
Clergy in all Cases except Treason and Sacrilege.

2. Consequently wheresoever Clergy is not allowable, it is taken away by some
Act of Parliament.

3. Consequently where any Felony is made by a new Stat. Clergy is to be
allowed, unless expressly taken away.

4. Consequently whereby any new Act of Parl. Clergy is taken away in any
Offense, the Indictment ought to bring the Case within the Act.

As upon the Stat. 3 and 4 Ph. and Ma. c. 4. the Indictment ought to run
Malitiose; so upon Stat. 8 El. c. 9. it must clam and secret; in case of
Murder, ex malitia praecogit', otherwise Clergy allowable.

5. Consequently a Statute taking away Clergy from Principal, does not thereby
take it from the Accessory before, unless specially provided for.

6. Where Clergy allowable, it is to be allowed though the party be Convict by
Confession, Verdict, or stands Mute, or challenges peremptorily above 35.

3. Particular Offenses where Clergy, and where not.

1. High Treason. 2. Petty Treason.
Principal oust of Clergy if convict by Verdict or Confession per Stat. 23 H.
8. c. 1. revived per 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 10. and per Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 3. the
standing Mute not directly answering, or challenging above twenty.

Not oust of Clergy in Appeals, unless Convict by Verdict or Confession.

Accessory before Fact maliciously, oust of Clergy in all cases per 4 and 5 Ph.
and Ma. c. 4.

3. Wilful Murder of Malice prepense, oust of Clergy in all cases per Stat. 23
H. 8. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 3.

Accessory before maliciously, ousted in all cases per 4 and 5 Ph. and Ma. c. 4.

4. Arson of Houses, or Barns full of Corn, Principal oust of Clergy in all
cases, viz. sur Conviction upon Verdict, or Confession per 23 H. 8. c. 1. upon
standing Mute, not direct answering, challenge above twenty; per Stat. 25 H. 8.
c. 3.

Accessory ousted of Clergy in all cases per 4 and 5 Phil. and Ma.

5. Simple Burglary.

Principal ousted of Clergy if Outlawed, Convict by Verdict, or Confession.

Not ousted if stand Mute, challenge above twenty, or not answering.

Accessory before or after not ousted of Clergy.

6. Burglary, any person being in the House, or put in fear or dread.

Principal oust of Clergy in all cases, viz. per Stat. 1 E. 6. 12. in case of
any Conviction or Attainder; and per 25 H. 8. c. 3. revived per 5 and 6 E. 6.
c. 10. it takes away Clergy where above twenty challenged.

But Accessory not ousted of Clergy for Accessaries before, vide 4 and 5 Ph.
and Ma. 4.

7. Robbery, which has several qualifications with these considerations.

1. In or near the Highway.

2. In the Dwelling House.

1. Putting party, his wife, or servants in fear. 2. Party, his wife, or
servants in house, but not in fear. 3. Neither party, his wife, nor servants in
the house, nor put in fear, where it extends to the value of five shillings.
In Appeals or Indictments against Principal and Accessory, per Stat. W. 1. c.
14. Process of Outlary must stay against Accessory till Principal attaint.

But if it be an Appeal by Writ which is general till Declaration, the
Plaintiff must at his peril distinguish the Process; for if he take his Exigent
against all, he must Count against all as Principals.

An Appeal against diverse, one appears and pleads to the Writ, or in Bar,
which goes to all, Process of Outlary shall stay against rest till Plea
determined.

An Indictment or Appeal may be removed in B. R. by Certiorari, but it must
accord with the Appeal.

Upon an Appeal moved per Certiorari, the Plaintiff is without day; and to
compel Plaintiff to proceed, Defendant may take out a Scire Facias, and upon 2
Nisies or a Scire Feci, and default, Plaintiff discharged.

But the Plaintiff upon such Appeal removed, may have Capias and Exigent.

If Defendant comes in by Capias, and after, appearance make default, a new
Capias; if upon Exigent, a new Exigent; and upon second appearance shall plead
de novo, for the first Issue is sine die.

Arraignment.
1. IN what manner a Person is to be Arraigned?

The Prisoner, all the time of his Arraignment ought to be in Iron.

2. Where Arraignment upon several Appeals or Indictments.

If a man be appealed of Robbery or Death at the Suit of one, he shall be
Arraigned and Tried at Suit of another, because they have several in the
Judgments.

And now the same Law is of an Indictment of Robbery, because by Stat. 21 H. 8.
c. 11. the party is to have Restitution.

But if Appeal by one be not commenced till after Attainder at Suit of another,
he shall not be Arraigned upon the other Suit; but if the first Attainder be
pardoned, he shall be Arraigned upon the second Appeal commenced after
Attainder.

But after Attainder of Felony, he may be Arraigned of Treason for King's
Interest.

By the Common Law, a Clerk convict should have answered all Felonies, and were
acquit or convict at Suit of others. But this was remedied per Stat. 25 E. 3.
c. 4. per Clero, and therefore after that Stat. the Clerk convict and delivered
to the Ordinary, was discharged of all former Felonies whereof he was not
Arraigned before Clergy, and that those, though other Offenses were not, within
Clergy. Dyer 214.

But now by Stat. 8 El. c. 4. after Purgation, and 18 El. c. 7. after burning
in the hand, he shall be put to answer former Felonies upon Appeal or
Indictment.

3. Concerning Arraignment of Principal and Accessory.

1. Who shall be said an Accessory?

1. Who an Accessory Before. After.


1. In Treason no Accessaries, but all Principals; a Procurer before, or a
Receiver knowingly after, C.P.C. p. 138.
is guilty as Principal in High Treason.

2. Where an Act of Parliament makes a Felony, it does incidently make such
Accessory as would be Accessory before or after to a Felony at Common Law, as
in Case of Buggery, Rape, etc.

3. Accessory cannot be guilty of Petty Treason where Principal but Murder.

4. If diverse come to commit an unlawful act, and be present at time of Felony
committed, though one of them only does it, they are all Principals.

So if one present move the other to strike.

And now to pursue the point where Clergy allowable in Robbery.

1. From the Person

Without putting in fear, but clam and secret: by Stat. 8 El. c. 4. Principal
in all cases oust of Clergy, Accessory not oust.

With putting in fear Robbery in or near the Highway.

1. Principal in all cases oust of Clergy, viz. Appeal or Indictment by 23 H.
8. c. 7. Convict 23 H. 8. c. 1. Attaint 1 E. 6. c. 12.

Challenge above twenty by Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 3.5 and 6 E. 6. c. 14.

2. Accessory before oust of Clergy in all cases by 4 and 5 Ph. and Ma. c. 4.

2. From Dwelling House; and this of three kinds:

1. Owner, wife, or servants being in the house, or put in fear, here Clergy
taken away.

1. As to Principal, taken away per 23 H. 8. c. 1. in case of Conviction by
Verdict, or Confession, and per 25 H. 8. c. 3. revived, and per 5 and 6 E. 6.
c. 10.

In cases of standing mute, challenge ultra twenty, not directly answering:
Also to a Conviction in foreign County, if it appear by Examination not to be
within Clergy in the same County.

2. Accessaries before in all cases ousted of Clergy per Stat. 4 and 5 Ph. and
Ma. c. 4.

Note, A Stranger in the house brings it not within Statute.

2. Robbing any person by day or night, any person being in the same house, and
put in fear.

Principals oust of Clergy per 1 E. 6. c. 12. in all cases but challenging
twenty; and by it 5 and 6 E. 6. in a foreign County Clergy upon Examination
taken away.

Accessaries, Clergy taken away per 4 and 5 Ph. and Ma. c. 4. in all cases.

3. Robbing any person in his Dwelling House, the owner, his wife, or children
being in any part of the house, or within the precincts thereof, though they be
not put in fear, and this extends to Booths in Fairs.

Principal oust of Clergy per 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 9. in cases where Offenders
found guilty: Principals therefore in other cases shall have Clergy; as
standing mute, challenge ultra twenty.

Accessaries oust per Stat. 4 and 5 Ph. and Ma. c. 4.

4. Robbery to the value of 5 s. out of any Dwelling House or Out-house
thereunto belonging, though none in the house, per Stat. 39 El.

Principal oust of Clergy in case of Conviction, not of standing Mute.

Accessaries shall have Clergy.

5. Larceny without any of these Circumstances.

Horse-stealing oust of Clergy, per 1 E. 6. c. 12.2 and 3 E. 6. c. 32.
Principal oust of Clergy.

Accessaries ousted in no cases.

31 El. 12. oust Clergy d'Accessary.

But other Larceny, not being Robbery or Cutpurse, have Clergy.

6. In Rape, Clergy oust per St. 18 El. c. 7.

7. Though the Offense were within Clergy, yet if he had formerly been Convict
and burnt in the Hand, the Stat. of 4 H. 7. c. 13. ousts of Clergy, unless he
were a person in Orders, and then he must produce his Certificate presently, or
by a time prefixed.

And see the Stat. 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 14. for the manner of the Certificate of
such Conviction and Attainder.

And though Stat. of 32 H. 8. c. has put men in Orders in the same condition
with others, in reference to Clergy; yet as to this point the Stat. 4 H. 7. the
clause of the Statute 1 E. 6. c. 12. does give a person in Orders his Clergy
the second time in all cases, but 1. challenge above twenty; 2. Outlary.

3. When Clergy shall be allowed.

Now the use is not to put party to challenge Clergy till he has pleaded, and
Inquest thereupon taken.

1. For advantage of party if acquitted. 2. For advantage to King; for
forfeiture if Convict.
2. It may be allowed in Discretion, though party challenge not.

Allowed under Gallows, or where Judgment pain fort and dure given, or where
challenge above twenty, vid. Cr. Jur' 12 page

Allow south Gallows per Just B. R. mesne Goal Delivery mes puit apres Judgment
devant adjournment, Die. 205.

4. The Judge.

The Ordinary is but Minister, the Judge at Common Law is the Judge when and
where to allow of Reading.

In ancient time the Consequent was delivery to Ordinary, either to make
Purgation, or absque Purgatione, as case required.

But by Stat. 18 El. c. 7. now only burnt in the Hand, which has these effects;

1. Enables Judge to deliver him out of Prison; but yet if he see cause, he may
detain him till he find Sureties of good behavior, per Stat. 3 H. 5. c. 1.

If Clergy within year, he is to be bailed or committed at discretion, till
year be past.

2. It gives him a Capacity to purchase Goods, and retain the profits of his
Lands.

But the Goods he had at time of Conviction are forfeit.

3. It restores him to his Credit.

Hob. Rep. Searle's Case.

Pleas to Felony.
DEMURRER.

2. Pleas in Abatement and Ba^

3. General Issue.

1. For Demurrers.

It amounts to a Confession of the Indictment, as laid; therefore if Indictment
good, Judgment against Prisoner, and Execution.

2. For Pleas in Abatement.

St. P.C. 181.
If Prisoner plead Misnomer of his Surname unto an Appeal, it goes in Abatement;
but in case of Indictment he shall be put to answer the Treason or Felony. 1 H.
5.5.


But Misnosmer of the Christian Name goes in Abatement; and if it be confessed
by King's Attorney, as found, Indictment falls. 11 H. 4. Coron. 88.

But then he must give his true Name, and by that Name he may be forthwith
Indicted.

Pleas in Bar.

Auterfoits Acquit.

If a person be acquit upon an insufficient Indictment or Appeal, yet upon a
new Indictment he may be Arraigned upon the same Felony. 4 R. Vaux's Case. St..
P.C. 106.


2. Auterfoits acquit for the same Felony, no Bar to an Indictment or Appeal
of another Felony, etc. though committed before Acquittal.

3. Auterfoits acquit as Principal, no Bar to an Indictment against, him as
Accessory to the same Felony after; but it seems he cannot be Indicted as
Accessory before.

4. In an Appeal of Death or other Felony, Auterfoits acquit, upon an
Indictment for the same Felony, was a good Bar in all Cases; therefore if an
Appeal was pending, Court would cease Arraignment of Prisoner upon an
Indictment till it was determined: Or though no Appeal pending, yet in case of
death, would surcease till year past.

But at this day Auterfoits acquit in an Indictment of Death no Bar to an
Appeal, per Stat. 3. H. 7. c. 1. for the Prisoner notwithstanding the
Acquittal; but in other Appeals that stands Bar to an Appeal.

5. But Auterfoits acquit in an Appeal, Bar to an Indictment of same Felony.

1. Unless Appeal be Erroneous in Substance. 2. Unless Appeal be by a wrong
Person. 3. Appeal be by Battle, and in these cases he may be Indicted again.
6. He that pleads this Plea, need not have Record in poigne, because it goes
in Bar.

7. Though there be variance between Indictment, etc. if it be such as may
admit of an Averment, there it may be pleaded.

Variance in the Name if Conus per un name and auter, variance in day of Felony
supposed to be committed.

Variance in the place, but by Opinion 4 H. 5. acquit of Larceny in one County
no Bar in another.

Auterfoits Convict or Attaint.

1. Where a Bar to the same Felony.

1. Auterfoits attaint a Bar to an Indictment, for the Effect is to obtain the
death of the party; but vid. no Bar in Appeals.

C.P.C. 213.

2. Auterfoits convict by Verdict or Confession of Manslaughter in an
Indictment, and had Clergy, Bar in Appeal, though it be of Murder, 4 E. 45.
^igg's Case.
forfeit the same in both, though differ in degree.

2. Where a Bar to an Arraignment for another Offense.

C.P.C. 107.
1. Auterfoits attaint of Felony no Bar to Arraign him of Treason committed
before Felony for King's Interest.

And it seems if Treason was committed after Felony, C.P.C. 213.
then he shall be Arraigned of the Treason, for the Offense is different.

2. Auterfoits attaint of one Felony bar to an Arraignment of Felony: but this
has these Exceptions:

1. Where the first Attainder is pardoned, S.P.C. 66.107.
there he must be Arraigned of the former Felony, though omitted before.

2. In case of Appeal he shall be Arraigned at every one of their Suits,
notwithstanding he be Attainted at one Suit.

The like it seems upon Indictment of Robbery, because per Stat. party is to
have restitution.

3. Auterfoits convict, and had Clergy after Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 5. had been a
bar to an Arraignment of another Felony, though not within Clergy. Die. 214.

But now per Stat. 8 El. c. 4. after Purgation, and 18 El. c. 7. burning in the
Hand, he shall be put to answer former Felonies not within Clergy.

And note, he that pleads a Plea in bar to an Indictment or Appeal that
confesses not the Felony, shall plead over to the Felony; otherwise if it
confesses Felony, as Pardon or Release.

Pardons.
ARE either of Course or Right, such are 1. For a person Convict of
Manslaughter, or se defendendo. 2. An Approver that vanquisheth Appellee.


Pardons of Grace, some things requisite to their allowance per Stat.

1. Per Stat. 13 R. 2. c. 1. Pardon of Murder, Rape, or Treason must be
especially expressed in the Pardon, otherwise it ought not to be allowed in
such cases.

2. Per Stat. 10 E. 3. c. 2. there must be Surety of good bearing, otherwise
Charter void; but special Non obstante may prevent it.

Matter at Common Law considerable.

1. Charter of Pardon no bar of an Appeal; and if party be Outlawed in
Appeal, and King pardon, he shall have a Scire Facias against Appellor, who may
pray Execution notwithstanding such Pardon; but if ret' feci, and appears not,
that Appellee shall upon Pardon be discharged.

2. Pardon of all Felonies is no bar to Exceptions, if the Felon be Attaint;
yet an Exception of all Burglaries, except the Burglary for which the party is
Attainted.

3. Pardon of all Attainders not good with a Pardon of the Felony.

4. The Pardon of Felony reciting in the Pardon that the party is Indicted, and
he is not, this is void.

5. King may pardon the burning in the hand in Appeal.

Pleading the Pardon.
HE that pleads a General Pardon by Parliament, wherein are Exceptions, must
averr that he is none of the persons excepted.

But of General Pardon by Parliament without Exception Court ex Officio must
take notice.

He that pleads a Particular Pardon, 1. Must show it under Seal. 2. Must have a
Writ of Allowance. 3. If vary, must averr that the same person.


Thus far of Pleas in Bar upon Indictments or Appeals; now we come to Pleas to
the Fact, Not Guilty.

1. Regularly he that pleads any special matter in Bar in Cases Capital, that
confesses not the Felony, notwithstanding the Plea found against him, the
Felony shall be enquired of, and therefore he shall plead over to the Felony.

2. The immediate consequent to this Plea is Trial, and that is either By
Country. Peers. Battle.


1. Concerning Trial per patriam; and therein, 1. Where Issues tried. 2. What
Process against Jury. 3. Before whom. 4. Challenge. 5. Evidence to be given. 6.
Verdict.


Trial.
1. WHERE Tried.

1. For Trial of foreign Treasons and foreign Accessaries, or strokes in one
County, and death in another, v. supra in Indictments.

For Trial foreign Pleas per Stat. 20 H. 8. c. 14. made proper to all, 32 H. 8.
c. 3.

Foreign Pleas pleaded by a person Indicted of Felony, and Triable per County,
shall be tried where party is Arraigned; but it is now in Treason triable in
foreign County by vertute of Stat. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma.

Process against Jury.

1. Justices of Goal Delivery have their Panel returned by Sheriff, without
any Precept, by a bare Award; but Justices of Oyer and Terminer not.

2. Per bon Opinion, Justices of Peace, and Oyer and Terminer, cannot make
their Venire Facias to try any Issue retornable the same Sessions; but Justices
of Goal Delivery clearly may.

3. If several persons Arraigned upon an Indictment or Appeal, and they
severally plead Not Guilty, Plaintiff may take out one Venire Facias, or
several.

4. If Venire Facias be joint, and Challenge by one drawn against all.

5. Though Panel be joint, and Tales awarded, yet Court of Goal Delivery may
after send the Panel to prevent that Encumbrance.

6. In Appeals, if after Issue, Plaintiff tries it not, a Venire Facias by
Proviso may be for Defendant; yet upon a Venire Plaintiff may have a Tales.

Tales.

1. If a full Jury appear not, or be Challenged in Indictment or Appeal,
Plaintiff may have a Tales.

2. Upon Indictment or Appeal, because Defendant may challenge peremptorily,
Tales may be granted larger then principal Panel, as forty Tales, 14 H. 7.7.

3. But succeeding Tales must be less than former, unless the former be
quashed, and then the same number with that which is quashed.

4. If any of Jury die before sworn, a new Tales grantable.

Before whom.

1. A Nisi prius not grantable where King Party, unless prayed by Attorney.

2. Per Stat. 14. H. 6. c. power to Justices of Nisi prius to give Judgment in
Felony and Treason tried before them.

3. Per Stat. 42 E. 3. c. 7. Enquest in Assize and Goal Delivery may be taken
before the Panel returned in that Court, but not in other Cases.

Challenge of Array or Polls.
1. EX part Regis per Stat. 33 E. 1. c. King shall not Challenge without
Cause; but yet he is not compellable to show cause till Panel perused.

2. Ex part prisonarii, the Challenge is either Peremptory, or upon Cause.

I. Peremptory Challenge. 1. Peremptory Challenge not allowable, but when life
of Prisoner comes in question, and therefore not upon Collateral Issues. 2. At
Common Law he might have challenged peremptorily 35 under three full Juries;
and if he challenged above, he should have Judgment to be hanged, 3 H. 7. 12.

But per Stat. 22 H. 8. c. 4. made perpetual, S.P.C. 227.
by 32 H. 8. c. it is reduced to 20; and now if he Challenge above 20, he shall
not be hanged, but his Challenge Overruled, and he put upon his Trial; yet
vid. Statham Coron' contr'.

3. In Cases of Treason and petty Treason, the Challenge of 35 restored per
Stat. 1 and 2 P. and M. c. 10.
II. Challenge for Cause, we mention but 1. Cause of insufficiency per St. 2 H.
5. c. 3. 40 s. per Ann. required in County; but this, as to Aliens, corrected
by 8 H. 6. and ultra in Cities by Stat. 23 H. 8. c. 13. Goods to value of 40 l.
2. Unindifferency.

Indictors not to be of Jury per Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 3.

3. In reference to an Alien, and medietat' linguae, where 1. In no Case
Indicator ought to be de medietat' linguae. 2. In Treason trial per medietat'
linguae rep. per St. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. quaere ad Appeal 28 E. 3. in that
Case. 3. In Appeal an Alien against an Alien no medietat' linguae. 4. Scot no
Alien, to have medietat' linguae. 5. Jurors need not be of same Nation, but any
Aliens. 6. He that will have advantage of Trial per medietat' linguae must pray
it, otherwise he cannot have benefit by way of Challenge. Die. 304.357. 7.
Egyptians excluded from the Trial per 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 4.




Evidence to petty Jury.
1. IN Case of Treason There must be two Accusers or Witnesses per Stat. 1 E.
6. c. 12. and 5 E 6. c. 7. and this stands notwithstanding Stat. 1 and 2 Ph.
and Ma. c. 11. but only in Case of Treason for Counterfeiting Coin.

Those Witnesses must be only by hearsay.

2. In Case of Felony.

1. What allowed as Evidence. per Stat. 1 and 2 Ph. and Ma. c. 13. and 2 and 3
Ph. and Ma. c. 10. the Justices have power to Examine Offenders and Informers.
2. The Examination of the Offender not upon Oath, but Subscribed by him. 3.
Examination of others must be upon Oath. 4. This must be certified by Justices.
1. If it be a small Felony, to Sessions. 2. If it be a great Felony, etc. to
next Goal Delivery.
5. These Examinations, if persons dead or absent, may be given in Evidence.

But Prudence to have the Justice or his Clerk sworn to truth of Examinations.

6. But Examinations taken upon Cause of Divorce for a forcible Marriage, not
allowed to be read upon an Indictment upon 3 H. 7. for same Marriage.
2. By whom.

1. Wife, or her Examination, not to be used for or against her Husband. 2. The
Examination of an Infant of Thirteen, nay of Nine, allowed in some Cases. 3.
One Attaint of Conspiracy, Forgery, or Perjury not allowed a Witness. C.P.C.
219.
4. One duly set on Pillory.
3. In what manner.

1. Evidence for King always upon Oath, but Evidence for Prisoner not upon
Oath; yet no known Law that restrains it: But by some Statutes in some Cases,
Evidence for Prisoner upon Oath, as 31 El. c. 4. 4 Jac. c. 2. The Confession of
the Offender taken upon Examination, Evidence with Oath not of the Informer.
4. Where Evidence maintains the Indictment.

1. If the Indictment be of a Felony at one day, though the Evidence be of
another day, the Jury may find generally against Prisoner, and leave the person
that is interessed in point of time to falsify; or the Jury may find the true
day upon their Verdict, and then the forfeiture shall relate thither.

2. If the Indictment lay the Felony at one place, the Evidence proving the
Fact at another place in the same County, maintains the Indictment.

3. If the Indictment and Evidence differ in specie mortis, then it maintains
it not as Indictment of Poisoning, Evidence of stabbing maintains it not.

C.P.C. 135.
But if the Indictment be of poisoning with one kind of Poison, and the Evidence
of another; or if the killing with a Dagger, and the Evidence is of killing
with a Staff, 9 R. Macks C.
there it maintains the Indictment, for it agrees in substance and kind.

The like of Accessory before, though Poison or Weapon differ.

4. Indictment that A. gave a mortal blow, and B. C. and D. were presents
abettantes, Evidence that B. gave the blow, and A. C. and D. presents and
abettantes, yet it maintains the Indictment.

5. Indictment of A. as Accessory to B. and C. Evidence proves him only
Accessory to B. maintains the Indictment. 9 R. Sanchers.


6. Indictment of Murder, ex malitia praecogit', Evidence of malice in Law, as
killing an Officer without provocation, yet maintains the Indictment.

7. Evidence upon Statute of stabbing, 21 Jac. Evidence that the dead stroke
first, yet Evidence to mantain Indictment, 23 Car' Howards.

8. Two Indicted as Principals, Evidence proves one as Accessory before, he
shall be discharged of that Indictment. 28 H. 8.5.

9. Vid. Stat. 21 Jac. c. 27. Mother endeavoring to conceal the death of her
Bastard-child, shall suffer death as in case of Murder, unless she prove by one
Witness that Child was born dead.

Vide Act. 17 Car. infine, for the further Relief of his Majesty's Army in the
Northern parts, Act continued till end of next Sessions, continued over till
some Act of Parliament for their continuance or discontinuance.

Verdict.
VERDICT in Cases Capital.

1. It must be given, St.. P. C. 165.
and Jury cannot be discharged till it be given.

2. It must be given openly in Court, and no privy Verdict.

3. It may be found Specially, as an Indictment of Murder, the Jury may find
him Guilty 1. Of Manslaughter. 2. Per Infortunium. 3. Se Defendendo.


But then it must find the manner of it, that Court may Judge thereof; so to
the value or manner of the Larceny.

Now we should come to Trial By Battle. Process.


Vide the whole Process there of, C.P.C. 27.

Judgment in several Cases.
I. IN High Treason. In all Cases, C.P.C. 218, 219.
except Counterfeiting Coin, Drawn, Hanged, Entrals taken out and burnt, Head
cut off, Body quartered, and Quarters hanged up. 2. In Counterfeiting Coin.
Drawn and Hanged; but the Judgment of Women in those Cases is Drawn and Burnt.
II. In Petty Treason. 1. For a Man, Drawn and Hanged. 2. For a Woman, Drawn
and Burnt.
III. In Felony. Hanged till Dead, and this cannot be altered by King to
Beheading.
IV. In Petty Larceny. To be Whipped, Forfeits Goods.
V. Death per Infortunium. No express Judgment, yet Forfeits Goods.
VI. Death se defendendo. No express Judgment, yet Forfeits Goods.



Misprision of Treason.

Forfeits Goods, Forfeits Profits of Land, during Life perpetual Imprisonment.

Vide for Seizure of Goods.

1. Not before Indictment. 2. Not removed before Attainder.
1 R. 3. c. 3.

Falsifying of Attainders.
1. BY the Party, by Writ of Error.

2. What others may falsify it?

1. A Purchaser may falsify an Attainder of the Felon by Outlary or Confession
in this point, if he Purchase before Attainder, and after time of Felony
supposed. 2. A Purchaser mesne between the time of Felony committed and the
Attainder, by Verdict cannot falsify in point of Offense, but he may for the
times. 3. If Attainder was by such as had no good Commission, the Party;
himself may falsify Attainder, Cas. Com. Leicest. 4. If the Principal
Attainted, and then Accessory and Principal reverse the Attainder, the
Attainder of the Accessory is eo ipso avoided, and his Heirs may have Mortdanc'
against Lord per Escheat. 5. Attaint of Treason, and then the Treason is
pardoned by Act of Parliament, the Party or his Heir shall falsify Attainder.
6. In Case of Goods
1. Fugam fecit found by Coroner cannot be falsified, though upon his
Arraignment it be found he did not fly; but if Indictment be void or
insufficient, no Forfeiture.

2. A man Indicted before Justices of Oyer and Terminer acquit by Verdict, St.
P.C. 148.
and found he fled, and the particulars of his Goods found, they may be
Traversed.

3. Default till Exigent, though after acquitted, Goods Forfeited; for it is a
fugam fecit in Law.

But if the Indictment, Appeal, or Process insufficient, their Forfeiture
saved; so if it be reversed by Error, or pardoned before Exigent.

Memorandum, Flight or Exigent in case of Petty Larceny, Forfeits Goods.

Execution and Reprieve.
1. EXECUTION must be pursuant to Judgment, C.P.C. 212.217.
and cannot be altered by King, as from Beheading to Hanging.

2. But King may pardon part of the Execution; as in Treason, he may pardon all
but Beheading.

3. It must be done by proper Officer.

4. If a Woman, C.P.C. 17.207. S.P.C. 198.
Convict of Treason and Felony, be quick with Child, she shall have one
Reprieve, but not second time.

Un est trove culp' de Treason, Felony, etc. and Reprieve devant Judgment Roy
Mort' uncore Judgment poit.

FINIS.
Books printed for Richard Tonson.
THE Courtiers Calling; showing the ways of making a Fortune, and the Art of
Living at Court. By a Person of Honor. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Don Carlos, Prince of Spain. By Thomas Otway. Price 1 s.

Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy, with a Farce called The Cheats of Scapin. By
Thomas Otway. Price 1 s.

Antony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy. By Sir Charles Sedley, Bar. Price 1 s.

Circe, a Tragedy. By Char. Davenant, L. DD. Price 1 s.

The Portugal History; or, a Relation of the Troubles that happened in the
Court of Portugal, in the Years 1667 and 1668. By S.P. Esquire Price 3 s.

The Art of making Love; or, Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors. Price 1 s.

A Treatise concerning Statutes, or Acts of Parliament: and the Exposition
thereof. By Sir Chr. Hatton, late Lord Chancellor of England. Price 1 s.

The Life of the Valiant and Learned Sir Walter Raleigh Knight. with his Trial at
Winchester. In Octavo. Price 2 s.

Marches Actions for Slanders and Arbitraments: And also certain Queries, with
the Books cited Pro and Con; very useful for Students in the Law. By J. M. of
Gray's Inn Barist. Price 3 s.

Reports, or New Cases, taken in the 15, 16, 17, and 18th years of K. Charles
I. By Jo. March of Gray's Inn Barist. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Transactions in Chancery, both by Practice and Presidents, with the Fees
thereunto belonging, and also Special Orders in ordinary Cases. By Will.
Tothil, late one of the Six Clerks. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Siege of Babylon, a Tragedy. By Samuel Pordage Esquire Price 1 s.

The Tragedy of the last Age, etc. In a Letter to Fleetwood Shepherd Esquire In
Octavo. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Edgar, or The English Monarch, a Tragedy. Both by Tho. Rymer of Gray's Inn Esquire
Price 1 s.


