A true Copy of the SPEECH, Made BY THE HONORABLE DENZELL HOLLES, ESQUIRE, At
a Conference by a Committee of both Houses of Parliament in the Painted Chamber:

Concerning the Protestation framed by the House of Commons, which was solemnly
made by every member of the same.

Wherein is set forth the Protestation it self, and the reasons inducing them
to make it; Together with their desire, that the Lords would concur with them
in the same zeal and affection for the public safety.

With an explanation upon some doubts made upon the said Protestation.

LONDON.

Printed, M.DC.XLI.

A Speech made by the Honorable DENZELL HOLLES, Esquire, at a Conference by a
Committee of both Houses of Parliament in the painted Chamber, May 4. 1641. in
the presenting of the Protestation.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, having taken into
their serious consideration the present estate and condition of this Kingdom,
they find it surrounded with variety of pernicious and destructive designs,
practices, and plots against the well-being of it, nay, the very being of it,
and some of these designs hatched within our own bowels, and, viper-like,
working our destruction.

They find Jesuits and Priests conspiring with ill Ministers of State to
destroy our Religion: they find ill Ministers conjoined together to subvert our
Laws and Liberties.

They find obstructions of Justice, which is the life blood of every State, and
(having a free passage from the Sovereign Power, where it is primarily seated,
as the life blood in the heart, and thence derived through the several
Judicatories, as through so many veins, into all the parts of this great
collective Body) does give warmth and motion to every part and member, which is
nourished and enlivened by it: but being once precluded, stopped, and seared
up, as the particular must of necessity faint and languish, so must the whole
frame of Government be dissolved: and consequently Sovereignty it self, which
as the heart in the body, is Primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, must dye and
perish in the general dissolution, and all things return, as in the
beginning, in antiquum Chaos.

They find the propriety of the subject invaded and violated, his estate rent
from him by illegal Taxations, Impositions, Monopolies and Projects (almost
upon every thing which is for the use of man) not only upon superfluities, but
necessaries; and this to enrich the vermin and caterpillars of the Land, and
to impoverish the good subjects, to take the mean from the children, and give
it to dogs.

My Lords, If we find these things so, we must conceive, they must be ill
counsels which have brought us into this condition: These counsels have put all
into a combustion, have discouraged the hearts of all true English men, and
have brought two Armies into our bowels, which (as the Vulture upon Prometheus)
eat through our sides, and gnaw our very hearts.

Hinc dolor: sed unde medicina? Heretofore Parliaments were the Catholicon, the
Balm of Gilead which healed our wounds, restored our Spirits, and made up all
the breaches of the Land; But of late years they have been like the Fig Tree
in the Gospel, without efficacy, without fruit, only destructive to the
particular members, who discharge their duties and consciences, no way
beneficial to the Commonwealth; Nobis exitiabile, nec Reipub, profuturum, as
he said in Tacitus; commonly taken away, as Elias was, with a whirle-winde,
never coming to any maturity, or to their natural end; whereas they should be
like that blessed old man, who dies ( plenus dierum) in a full age, after he
has fought a good fight, and overcome all his enemies; as the shock of wheat
which comes in in due season, to fill our Granaries with Corn, uphold our
lives with the staff of bread.

For, Parliaments are our panis quotidianus, our true bread; all other ways
are but Quelques chooses, which yield no true nourishment, breed no good blood.

This very Parliament which has sat so long, has all this while but beaten
the air, and striven against the stream; for I may truly say, wind and tide
have still been against us.

The same ill counsels which first raised the storm, which almost shipwrackt
the Commonwealth, do still continue; they blow strong like the East Wind that
brought the Locusts over the land.

These counsels cross our designs, cast difficulties in our way, hinder our
proceedings, and make all that we do to be fruitless and ineffectuall; they
make us to be not masters of our business, and so not masters of money, which
has been the great business of this Parliament, that we might pay the Armies
according to our promises and engagements.

For, (My Lords) our not effecting of the good things which we had undertaken
for the good of the Church and Commonwealth, has wounded our reputation, and
taken off from our credit.

Is it not time then (my Lords) that we should unite and concentrate our
selves in regard of this Antiperistasis and circumvallation of hurtful and
malicious intentions and practices against us? (My Lords) it is most agreeable
to nature, and I am sure, most agreeable to reason, in respect of the present
conjuncture of our affairs: for one maine engine by which our enemies work our
mischief, is by infusing an opinion and belief into the world, that we are
not united amongst our selves; but that, like Sampsons Foxes, we draw several
ways, and tend to several ends.

To defeat then the counsels of these Achitophels, which would involve us, our
Religion, our King, our Laws, our Liberties, all that can be near and dear
unto an honest soul, in one universal and general desolation; to defeat (I
say) the counsels of such Achitophels, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of
the House of Commons (knowing themselves to be specially entrusted with the
preservation of the whole, and in their consciences persuaded that the dangers
are so imminent that they will admit of no delay) have thought fit to declare
their united affections, by entering into an Association amongst themselves, and
by making a solemn Protestation and Vow unto their God, that they will
unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the counsels, and the Counselors
which have brought upon us all these miseries, and fears of greater; to
prevent the ends, and bring the Authors of them to condign punishment, and
thereby discharge themselves both before God and man.

The Protestation your Lordships shall have read unto you, together with the
grounds and reasons which have induced the House of Commons to make it, which
are prefixed before it by way of Preamble.

The PREAMBLE.
We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house in Parliament,
finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests
and Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more
boldly and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and
danger of the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion in His Majesty's
Dominions established: And finding also that there have been, and having just
cause to suspect that there still are, even during this sitting in Parliament,
endeavors to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most
pernicious and wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots, and Conspiraces: And that the
long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments has occasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And
that diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church;
multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions, Jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and His people, a Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown, and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of Jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force
to bring to pass those wicked Counsels, Have therefore thought good to join
our selves in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions, and to
make this ensuing Protestation.

The PROTESTATION.
I A. B. do in the prefence of Almighty God promise, vow, and protest to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this
Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine; and according to the duty of my
Allegiance, His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; As also the Power
and Privileges of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject,
and every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in
the lawful pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I
may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to
condign punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Counsels,
Plops, Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing
in this present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just
and honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the
three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope, fear,
nor other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

NOte, That because some doubts were raised by several persons out of the
Commons House, concerning the meaning of these words contained in the
Protestation lately made by the Members of that House, viz. The true Reformed
Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against
all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same
Doctrine; The House of Commons did declare, That by those words, was and is
meant only the public Doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as it is
opposite to Popery and Popish Innovations; And that the said words are not to
be extended to the maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline, or
Government, nor of any Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England.

MY Lords, The House of Commons have commanded me to present unto your
Lordships this Protestation: Every member in that House has made it, not one
refusing it; and they have sent it unto your Lordships, with an assurance of
your Lordships concurrence in the same zeal and affection for the public
safety. And it is their desire your Lordships would likewise make the same
Protestation, which I humbly leave to your Lordships wisdoms.

Directions for more orderly making of the foresaid Protestation.
IT is thought fit that the Protestation which the Parliament lately made be
taken by the City of London, in the several Parish Churches, in the afternoon
of some Lords day, after Sermon, before the Congregation be dissolved, by all
Masters of Families, their sons, and menservants, in manner and form
following, viz.

First, That forthwith notice of this intention be given to the Minister,
Churchwardens, and some other meet persons of each Parish in London,
Liberties, and adjacent Parishes, and some of them to give notice to the rest
of the Parishioners. Secondly, That the Minister be entreated (if he please) to
acquaint his Parish in his Sermon, either forenoon or afternoon, with the
nature of the business, more or less, as he shall think fit, for the better
and more solemn taking of the said Protestation; or if the Minister refuse it,
that some other be entreated to preach that will promote the business; or if
neither of these may be had, that some other convenient course be taken by
some well affected to the business, to stay the Parish, and communicate, the
matter to them. Thirdly, That the Minister or Ministers of every. Congregation
first take it in his or their own person, reading the said Protestation in so
distinct a voice, that all present may conveniently hear it, and than all the
Assembly present do make the same Protestation distinctly after this manner,
every man taking this Protestation into his hand. I A. B. do in the presence
of Almighty God freely and heartily promise, vow, and protest the same which
the leading person took, naming the person. Fourthly, That there be a Register
Book wherein every man taking this vow or Protestation subscribe his name, with
his own hand or mark, and that the names be taken of such as do refuse the
fame. Fifthly, That all the Parishioners abovesaid; whether in Town, or out of
Town, be earnestly requested to be present at their own Parish Church in the
afternoon of that Lords day whereon it shall be taken, that every man may take
it in their own place; and if any be necessarily absent, that they may be
desired to take it the next Lords day after, or so soon as may be with
convemency. Sixthly, and lastly, That all whom it does not immediately
concern, be earnestly requested to depart.
FINIS.

