Against Disloyalty, FOUR SERMONS PREACHED IN THE TIMES Of the Late Troubles.

By BARTEN HOLYDAY D. D. Archdeacon of Oxford, and Chaplain to His late
Majesty CHARLES the First, of Blessed Memory.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for Sam. Pocock. 1661.

TO The Sacred MAJESTY of CHARLES the Second of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith; of Sufferings, Innocence and Deliverance
the Rare Example; and for all Princely Virtues above Envy and Imitation.
ROYAL SIR;
DID not Reason teach, that the Foot is Isntrumental to the Head, I should
have Judged it not Duty but Intrusion, to present my Service, though most
Humble, unto Majesty. But at present seeing Zeal a Mistaking Peace-breaker, I
thought it as Necessary, as Seasonable, to set forth the nature of Loyalty and
Rebellion; the one from the Gentleness of Nature and the Blessing of Unity;
the other from the Arts of Darkness and Subtilty. As Remedies these were
Imployd in the Late Times, and may now be made more useful, by being made more
Public. What Speech can be too Just, what Diligence too much in the defense
of our Supreme Father and Country? Was not such the Practice of the Greek
Orator against the Insidiating Macedonian? Was not such the Heat of the Roman
Orator against the Insolence of Marc Antony? Witness their Immortal
Philippiques, the Defense and Evidence of their Loyalty; patterns even to the
Christian, though of a Higher Intitution? And a Blessing, a blessing of Peace
it were, if these Endeavors for the Amendment of these Times, might prove
Christian Philippiques; and, as a wise Glass reflect to some their
deformities; or as the sight of a Lacedemonian servant defiled with Wine, which
preserved the Children from the Defilement. And for such as had rather be the
Sons of Wisdom, then of Belial, they may purify their Passions by their
Judgment, if they will lay aside Persuasions taken up in Ignorance, and not
Blush to be Amended. 'Twas the remarkable censure, upon Obstinate Ignorance, of
that Great Reporter of our English Cases, L Coke. lib. 5. in Caudries case.
Miserable is his case and worthy of Pity, that has been Persuaded before he
was Instructed, and now will refuse to be Instructed, because be will not be
Persuaded. Has it not been the Outcrie of late Zelots, The present Government
must be Obeyed? And is not now their Out-crie, their Conviction? Do they Obey,
what they Profess should be Obeyed? Or, will they make the Royal mercy, by the
Increase of it, and their Abuse of it, the Increase of their Guilt? When they
shall see, what a Prince's Right may Require, and what his Gentleness is ready
to mitigate, in the Ceremonies practiced even in parest Times of the Church
(without which Ceremonies the Worship it self might soon fail, as the fruit
without the coat, though but a paring) shall they not acknowledge any
remission Favor? when the Bounty of our Forefathers endowd the Church with
wealth and Honor, shall any be so unadvised, as to Reject the Piety and
Bounty? shall any be more dangerous and vain, then the Old Roman People, that
once fell off from their Nobility, for not sharing with them in some Honors in
that Commonwealth? And shall they here in a Kingdom be Offered and Despised?
Would they have us believe, they are so far from Pride and Avarice? They must
prove it by better testimony, then their Pretense or Actions yet have done.
When God commanded his people under the Law to repair on the Sabbath to his
Public Worship, or be cut off from his People, shall any under the Gospel
dare a Separation, and be Innocent? Or, think the Jew had more reason to serve
God, then the Christian? Or, shall we under the Liberty and Light of the
Gospel live in a voluntary obscurity, as the Old Christians in a Necessary
Secrecy, under the Persecuting Heathen? shall any think they Imitate our
Savior, that Pretend Truth, but seek Corners; after the Mode of Ignorance or
Deceit? Or shall any put out the Sun, and Light up a Gandle? Or, be lead into
the way of an Ignis Fatuus? Or, shall any believe the Translation of Scripture,
and not the Translator? The Prophet said, The lips of the Priest shall preserve
knowledge: and shall every one now have an Interest in the Office? May we not
see the Turkish Socinian invading Christianity, in the great Doctrines of the
Glorious Trinity, of the Grace and Godhead of Christ our Redeemer, of the
Godhead of the Holy Ghost our Comforter, of the blessed Sacraments, the Seals
of our Salvation, briefly, of all Government and safety amongst men? And is it
not then Wisdom and Holiness for Princes with Speed and Zeal to reform such
Reformers? When the Dove was sent forth of the Arc, she did return, till the
Earth was in part purified: when the Raven went forth, he returned but rather
Toward the Arc then into it. The Dove was a clean bird; she found no rest in
the Flood: the Raven lighted on the outside of the Arc, and on Carcasses
floating in the waters, and was content to stay and feed on the carrion. Oh,
that all, who have fled from the Arc of the Church, would with the Dove, in a
flood of Heresies, return and be taken-in to the Rest, to the Safety to the
Joy, to the Miraculous Change, and Just Thankfulness, under your Majesty's
Wisdom and Mercy. Would they but see the late Blessed Parliament, the
Parliament of Peace, pursuing Peace: Would they but see the General Concord of
Your People, the Glory of Your Virtues; then should there not be found in the
same breast a heart and a heart. But not to make Duty a Trespass, by too Long
an Access, with my Prayers for such men's Change, and for Your Majesty's
Unchangeable Goodness and Prosperity, I shall ever rest

Most Gracious Sovereign, Your Majesty's Old and Faithful Subject, BARTEN
HOLYDAY.

Of Obedience, OR The Royal Plea. A SERMON Preached at White Hall, March 22,
1639. before King CHARLES the FIRST,

By BARTEN HOLYDAY Archdeacon of Oxford, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for S. Pocock 1661.





EXODUS 20.12. Honor thy Father.


AS There is honor due from the creature to the Creator, so is there likewise
from the Child to the Parent: and seeing that Parents are God's deputies, we
may say, that the first duty is the cause of the second. As then the Child owes
his being unto God absolutely, so secondly to his Father; and as a true glass
reflects the face which it receives: so the Parent toward God, so the Son
toward the Father, is never destitute whiles not depraved, of gratitude, a
reflective goodness. Nor is this true only of the natural Parent, but also of
the Civil, the Magistrate; and chiefly then of the chief Magistrate, the
Prince: a King not only being like a Parent, but the first King being a father;
nay, therefore a King, because a Father. A lower exposition of which truth,
though it were a truth, yet were it but a truth in part, and but an inferior
truth. To view it then according to the property, that is, the elevation of
this place, we must understand and confess a King to be a Father; a Subject to
be a Son, and therefore Honor to be by Nature most due from the natural
Subject to the natural King.

All Dominion of Man over Man is from God, and the first of all was delivered
by Generation. Thus Adam had, by the leisure of Birth, a posterity of Subjects;
and as in Paradise, though he was debarred one tree, he was allowed all the
rest: so afterward, though paradise was not admitted him for his Court, he was
allowed all the world besides. Then was a Family a Kingdom, and Eldership
Royalty, except where God for sin prevented the ordinary succession, as in
the special case of Cain; who happily might have been Abels King, had he not
been his murderer. He killed his Subject in reversion, staining himself not
only with his Brothers blood, but also with indiscretion; and probably did not
survive his Father, who lived above nine hundred years. The next derivation of
Dominion, if not in Time, yet in congruity, was by choice. Royalty by Birth was
the sweetest way of Majesty: a King and a Father compounded into one, being of
a temper like unto God, Justice and Mercy. But a King by choice, even the
first, though by divine choice, was turned into a punishment. Indeed the people
chose the King, but God the Man. They would no longer be content with the
invisible Monarchy of God and God dismis'd them to the palpable dominion of
Saul. And though Gods mercy made the next choice, in David, a blessing: yet by
a greater blessing, because a surer, he left not Sovereignty to the perilous
art of Election, but to the safer Innocence of Birth. The laft way, that is the
most remote from purer nature, in deriving Royalty, is by force, a foraigne
force raised by God's judgment, as in the Assyrian against Israel, which
whiles it chastises the persons and destroys their vices, comes like a Father,
though with a rod of Iron. Terror there sometimes is, rather then ruin; and
whiles not properly ruin, but correction, the mercy that proclaims a Father,
claims likewise the obedience due to a Father. Behold with diligence and
content the justice of this debt: behold the special moments of Fatherhood in
Sovereignty: which though a dazzling eye may mistake to be glory and pleasure, a
more fixed discernes to be Care and Danger. Royalty is a duty Toward man,
though not To him; being a duty only to God, who alone can command Kings to
command: but unto man it is only a blessing flowing from that duty. Would you
see the parts of this blessing, behold the partakers of it; behold all that
faithfully enjoy subjection. Owe ye your food to the task of the Husbandman,
and owe ye not Him to the royal providence? which as truly orders Him, as He
his Acres? whiles it neither permitts him to neglect them, nor diminish them?
Does the Merchant more provide for you the softest raiment, such as they wear
in Kings houses, then his Sovereign provides for him Safety and Employment?
What were the Indies without a Court? The Merchant indeed is imployd There; but
Here the Merchandise. The Physician cannot preserve the Body, if he be not
preserved; The Politic Head is the Sovereign Physician of the Body Natural.
What were the Lawyer, nay the Law, without the Lawmaker? And surely Land of
Inheritance might without an Earth-qvake be reckoned amongst our moveable
goods, were it not for a Supreme guardian. If Children were without
instruction, might we sitly call them the issue of the body or rather the issue
of the mind? and, which were News to the Philosopher, add them to the number
of the perturbations? Yet what were their Instructions and all their Rules,
without a supreme Rule? And how could their instructers cherish so many tender
minds, if a more tender mind did not with wisdom and bounty tender them? Thus
is the Pelican ready to empty her own veins to fill her young ones; as if her
life consisted not in her blood, but in her Love. Thus then is a Parent in joyd
in a King; the Subjects sasety being the effect of His Danger; the Subjects
pleasure being the work of his Care. When Jacob in his journey and dream saw
Angels ascending and descending between Heaven and Earth, he said when he
awaked Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not. Shall any in this
World of troubles have the blessing of Peace, a Heaven on Earth, and we not
think on it? And should they not as Jacoh, who did then erect a Pillar, and
pour oil on it, should they not raise a like thankful monument of Grace and
Peace?

And as a Father must thus be acknowledged in a King: so Nature and Gratitude
must present a Son in a Subject; a Son perfected into a Subject. Does the
Son receave a Natural life? The Subject enjoys a Civil one: that is but the
matter, this the Form; the Father but prepares; it is a King actuates. Does a
Son, whiles a Son much differ from a Servant? Maintenance he receives; but
in junctions for the use of it: so that it is the matter rather of service then
choice. But a Subject a little removed from his Fathers charge, enjoyes his
estate as the argument as much of his wisdom, as of his subjection: and so is
no less Honored then Employed Does the Son learn Action from the Father?
yet all his activity is but in the Epicycle of a Family: whereas a Subjects
motion is in a larger Orb. Does a Son enjoy defense by a Father? the joy can
yet but equal the defense: which being but like the petty danger, ends rather
in Quietness, then in Triumph. But the protection of Subjects being an act
Royal of goodness, is by the danger advanced in Love and Honor.

Yet is this more then commandment or desert? And is not the first part of this
duty the Priest's to teach it? Nay, should it not be also the joy of a good
subject to perform the part of a good subject? And this duty chiefly is
obedience; a task for the proportion, as due by the divine will, from the
Subject to the King, as by the Divine power from the Angels to God: his own
prerogative flowing from his Selfe-Right of creating the world; a Kings
prerogative flowing from his derived right and care of preserving the subject.
But as some of the Angels did scarce sooner receive, then break, the Law of
Obedience: so some men by an unhappy imitation of such Angels, are more ready
to slander the weight of their yoke, then to bear it; forgetting, that even
the most easy yoke may gaul only by the struggling in it. Yet such reluctance
might peradventure be neglected, if it disturbed not the supreme Revenue and
Reputation, that being as the blood, this as the soul. Without the first,
there is no strength, without the latter, there is no life; what is it then, to
call a King Defender of the faith, if the means be withdrawn, wherewith he
should defend it? A son owes help and honor to his father: and is a subject
less indebted to his King? Has not God himself included the duty of Love
unto them both under the same commandment? under the same moral, and therefore
under the same perpetual Law? Or is there any whose vnderstandanding is so
unnatural to deny this truth? If not, why should there be any whose affections
should be so unnatural, as not to obey it? Or shall we in an overplus-Charity
mistake our selves into a persuasion, that this duty has not only been
Included, but hitherto also hidden in the obedience to a Father? To
disadvantage a King then either in Estate or Honor, is it not plainly
unnatural? But shall any yet exceed that son of Noah, who though he
revealed, yet never feigned an infirmity of his Father? Has any disloyally
dared to feign that Religion wavers? they foully mistake; as commonly they do.
that are more cuning in other men's lives then in their own; It Is not Religion
wavers, but their Loyalty. Has any feared, that the purity of the Gospel is in
hazard? It is indeed, when a professor of it shall stain his profession of it
which disobedience. Can such blasphemy against Kings (for so the Apostle calls
it, (2 Pet: 2.10.) be called obedience, or rather a Tyranny over Kings? Or
shall we say, the Heart's a good subject, when the Tongue's a Rebel? Obedience
was anciently figured out by the Ear; and so by the Greeks was instructively
called, (...), a submissive attention; and this the Laytie especially from
their science of Heraldry, may remember to be aptly employed in the Helmet of a
Squire, which is fide-long, as with the ear ready for his Commander, whose
arms he carried. Nor is it only attention, but also very considerate; nature
having taught, that the scales of the ears are to be rectifyed by an even
judgment. But now obedience seems to have fallen from the ear to the tongue,
a member, that does not more easily move, then offend. Yet does it proclaim,
that as every Traitor is a fool, so a Traitor in words is a madman; tommiting
what is criminal and Revealing it. The Tongue, especially when it is brought
as an offering to the Lord, should be seasoned according to the Leviticall
command, ( Lev. 2.3.) In all thy offerings thou shall offer Salt; but many bring
either none, or too much; nay, that which was never commanded, only salt;
which is very fretting. Besides, they turn the softness of the tongue into
the hardness of the teeth; and may persuade us, that the Philosophers speak
without a figure, when they tell us, that a man has some dog-teeth in his head.
And as of the teeth some affirm, by way of difference from other bones of the
body, that in the several ages of man's life they grow; we may conclude it to
be true, especially of the dog-teeth. But shall any one think this to be
obedience, and not account themselves free, till they are factious? If a
Subject be a Son, then ought he to be a staff unto his Father, wherewith not
to strike, but to sustain him. But some would deal with Princes, as
Adonibezec once did; they would cut off their thumbs and great toes, the
principal strength of the hands and feet; that so they might neither with
comeliness direct others, nor with sufficiency sustain Themselves. But if
these men would admit reason, it might in point of Conscience be demanded, by
what authority a private person can extend a personal correction beyond the
persons and bounds of his own perambulation? And next may it not be asked, or
rather indeed may it be asked at all, whose parishioner a King is? with safety
and Truth it may be answered, that the charge of such instruction belongs not
to these men, who thus usurp the performance of it. Royalty is still in its
own Peculiar. The task of private persons toward Kings is properly (if not by
special appointment) not instruction but prayer. Before hand then to censure
the heart of a King, which is in the hand of God, and so unsearchable, is by
presumption to make themselves like the Devil, whiles by (pretended)
foreknowledge they would make themselves like God. Are we thus bold with
private men's purposes, or would we have others so bold with ours? How dare then
any that are Subjects sit thus as judges over Princes? Even Elihu's conscience
could question, ( Job. 34.18.) Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and
to Princes, ye are ungodly? Indeed, is not this to pull the Diadem from the
Head, and wear it upon some subject part of the body? This was once done by
the great Pompey; but this which he accounted glory, was by others accounted
treason. Might not such remember the terror of a King, in the Majesty of the
Lion: which of all creatures has the sharpest teeth and the firmest, nay, and
the firmest heart too? more especially might not some remember the Lion
rampant, by which some Majesty is especially expressed; in which posture that
victorious creature is said to possess his vigor, being erect with mouth
open, and claws extended, as ready to tear the prey; presenting thus not only
terror but conquest. They might remember, that, not only the Lion rampant, but
rampant guardant, not only courage but also watchfulness; not only these, but
also the horn, the strength of the Unicorne, are the supporters and guardians
of such united Majesty. But belike these men venture to deal with their
Sovereign, as gross sinners deal with God, whose mercy indeed is over all his
works; and shall their works be therefore the worse, and deserve no mercy?
shall they strive to be as transcendent in their sin as he is in his
forgiveness? surely they cannot but remember, that though the rose a royal
flower, be of dainty touch, yet if touched rudely, it is deeply felt, but with
more speed then ease. The Thistle too, a royal flower, though it has its downy
top, yet it wants not its defensive prickles; and God grant, that this our
royal Carduus may be for ever Benedictus. And would they would take notice of
the virtues of this blessed Thistle, which is so sovereign a medicine against
the giddiness of the brain: it is this will settle it, and make it as quiet,
as if it were mortified. This it is, that makes a good memory; so that if a man
forgets his duty, this will prevent and supply the study or a statute-book.
This is it, that restores hearing; If the ear be grown dull to hear its duty,
this will save the art and whisper of a cane of trunk. This is excellent
against a Canker; Malice it self cannot resist the power of its charity. If
the body be swollen with the treason of poison, this shall abate it to safety;
nay, had one swallowed an adder (unless we shall discredit the Physician) this
shall dispossess him, and without the authority of an Exorcisme. They might
remember the power, the vigor of Majesty in the Eagle, which casts his bill,
but renewes his age. And if they be at last struck into a wise fear of
Majesty, let them be likewise struck into as just a shame with goodness, which
so unworthily is abused. Shall a royal vigilance endeavoring on all
occasions, so prudently to moderate men's affections, be made a reason of any
man's unreasonable jealousy? It Is an unnatural paradoxe in the doctrine of
causes, that evil should proceed from goodness; that the gracious actions of
a Prince should beget ungracious constructions! It Is an essay to treason to
talk inquisitively of Royal affairs; much more to talk ill; and is it not a
cowardly injustice, to speak ill behind one's back; nay, and of him, that does
us good? But is it not the very malignity of Treason, to lay the calamity of a
people upon a Prince? as if all the diseases of the body begun in the Head?
Marcus Antoninus was of the Roman Emperors the best: His Times, if we measure
them by Wars, Earthquakes, Inundations, Plagues, Dearths, the worst; there
being in his time almost nothing wanting either to be expressed, or conceived
(it is the testimony of Aurelius Victor) quo summis angoribus atteri mortales
solent; with whose extreme vexations Mankind uses to be worne-out. But what is
the judgment of that Historian, upon those evils? Does he contrive them into
an argument against Caesar? No, but to the shame of too many Christians, he
tells us, that but for the Emperor, the Empire had sunk. And surely to his
own honor, whiles to the Princes he says of him, that he was Aerumnis
publicis quasi defensor objectus; so that he makes him the Shield of his
people; or, as an atonement between his people and the divine judgment. Shall
a Heathen thus plead like a Son by the virtue of Nature, and shall Christians
become ungracious, whiles unnatural? Even the Stagirite could say, He that
doubts, whether or no he should Honor his Parents, wants not reason, but
punishment. And as Nature teaches us this honor to be due, so God teaches the
weight of this honor, the word is (...) which implies a weighty glory. And it
is but suitable to the weight of glory, (...), spoken of by Saint Paul (2
Cor-4.17.) the reward of such duty. Aptly then does Saint Peter (Epist.
2.2.10.) call Magistrates (...) Dignities, or glories, and evil speeches
against them, Blasphemies. The Apostles words are, (...). Reverence then is due
in Gesture, in Speech, in Obedience, in sustentation. The Rabbines subtly
distinguish between our duty to God, and to our Parents, upon occasion of that
in the Proverbs (chap. 3. v. 4.) Honor the Lord with thy Substance. The Lord,
say they, is to be honored (they mean with an offering) if thou have something;
but thy parents, say they, though thou have nothing; for then thou must beg
for them. How unnatural then were the Times of Henry the Third? wherein that
wise, yet unhappie Prince, was compelled to dissolve his Royal Family; and as
Paris a Monk of those days says, Cum Abbatibus and Prioribus satis humiliter
hospitia quaesivit and prandia. And unhappy Prince, but more unhappy Subjects
(shall we call them so) that made him so? Even Seneca, though a Heathen could
proclaim it, the happiness of Children, to be able by good turns, to
overcome their Parents; Felices qui vicerint, felices qui vincentur, says he.
And does not the Storke, as Saint Ambrose says, cover his Parents with his
feathers, when age has divested them of their own? as if he would raise them to
a new flight? And does he not bring them food to their nest? nay to their
mouth? Where then shall appear such unnatural Sons, such unnatural
Subjects, that dare cast an evil eye upon their Father? Their superlative
Father? Such a Son, says S. Jerome, deserves blindness, it may be added in
another sense, He is blind before he does so, that does so. To sirike one's
Father, was death by the Law. ( Exodus 21.15.) To Curse one's Father, was death
by the Law ( Levit. 20.9.) To be disobedient and stubborn to one's Father, was
death by the Law. ( Deutr. 21.18, 21.) To set light by one's Father, was
punished with a heavy Curse, and all the people were to cry, Amen. ( Deutr.
27.16.) That was the Truth and the Burden of the Curse! Heavy, by the
Generality of it; Just by the Command! The Law then for the Son and Subject
being the same; the duty for both being the same; the curse for both being the
same; where is Love? where is Fear? where is Wisdom? where is Grace? where is
Nature? Are they not all fled from a rebellious breast? Are they not fled as
far, as the Rebel might do, if he considered his guilt?

Or is Sedition yet so confident, as to increase its confidence? and thinks to
disguise it with a Helmet on the head of it? The Church tells us of the noble
Army of Martyrs, which praise God; but that Army was Martyrd; and that Army
never took up Arms. Indeed, had zeal anciently armed it self against
Sovereignty, we had never heard of a Calendar of Saints. But what at this day
would this new zeal reform? would it chastise the Creed, and condemn to Hell
the Doctrine of our Savior's Descent into it? Let them take heed, least they
follow him thither, but without a triumph, yet if to descend thither, be but to
be buried, then have they bestowed a fair Monument on their own forefathers,
professing them to have descended into Hell, and that it is their own hope (if
justice alter not the case) to go thither after them. But why is this anger
against the Creed? Is it because in our Saviors death all was finished? and
therefore after his death no need of a triumph? Admit all to a Redemption was
performed; was therefore a triumph over hell unnecessary? In his death all was
finished; yet after his death a resurrection also was not unnecessary; an
Ascension also was not unnecessary; and how is then a triumph over hell
unnecessary? The Enemy is slain in the field, yet a triumph is not
unnecessary, but just and wise. The ancient fathers nearest the Apostolical
times left us this doctrine, as agreeable to Scripture; and shall we believe
the children of these times, rather then the Fathers of those times? Or because
hell sometimes signifies the grave, therefore here? It Is a loose Logique, that
would have such a conclusion. But what else at this day would new zeal
reform? Would some as unwillingly bend the knee at the sweet name of Jesus, as
at the sacred name of the Lord's Anointed, their anointed Sovereign? The
Name is the Remembrance of Adoration, not the Object; a Name for the
remembrance of his humiliation for us; for whom he did not abhor the Virgins
womb; and for his humiliation even to the death of the cross this name was
advanced to advance his glory. And sure'y in an evil hour should any in these
times seek to abolish in any way the divine worship of our Savior, when as the
Socinian would abolish his divine Nature. Let no man scruple then to bow the
knee to him, who bowed the head for us, and gave up the Ghost. Or is it the
purity of a I innen vesture, which some so fear would defile the purity of the
Priest? Surely in the figure and innocence of that dress, Saint John under the
times of the Gospel did in revelation behold the Son of God. And by what
riddle of change shall that Priestly vesture which was relatively holy in the
Master, become offensive in the servant? Or, is it a Cope, which some fear,
would diffigure the Christian Humility with Levitical pomp? Yet the wise, the
devout Constantine thus did dress the Priests of the Lord, to preserve in the
servant the honor of the Master; to preserve the Worshippers of the true God,
from the jeering eye of the Worshippers of the false Gods; in brief, thus
congruously to express to God their best thanks in his best gifts both inward
and outward. Or, is it an Altar, that is become so conspicuous an eye-soar? Or,
the bowing at it, which raises such indignation? Or, a Rail, which makes this
separation? Alas! and wherefore not an Altar? Shall we fear or correct the
languague of the first Christian Church? And what more frequent in the ancient
Fathers, then the name applied to the Holy Table? Did not the ancient
Christians bow down before it? Nay, even the Bishop, did he not kiss it, the
Royal, the mystical, the Dominical, the Divine Table, or Altar, as the Fathers
call it? Does not our humility then justly express it self at the holy Table
to the Lord of the Table? There let us call on the name of the Lord, who there
especially waits for us to receive our prayers, that we may receive his
especial blessings. Is not our service there an Eucharist? And is not such our
Thanksgiving a Sacrifice, (as the Psalmist call it)? Behold then an Evangelical
Sacrifice, and an Evangelical Altar. Where is then the fear of
Transubstantiation in a Church, that without change condemns such change? And
as the Bread and Wine are sepearated from common use, so for it is proportion
may not the Table too? Though capable it be not of Inherent holiness, yet it
is of relative; in vain else had Moses and Joshua been commanded to put off
their shoes. And if the ground were holy for the presence of the Lord; is not
this truly? Is not this reasonably? A rail then must be granted, or a chancel
denied; for what is chancel (cancelli) but a rail? This is the English, of the
word; and from the ancient and constant situation of the rail, the place has in
all ages and places had the name. Seeing then they allow a chancell, can they
deny a rail? For then by the like reason, we might argue against them; by
saying they are Men, and yet by saying more, that they are unreasonable
creatures. Or, is it a supposed profanation of the Lord's day, that makes some
ready to profane Sovereignty? Is it because the Royal devotion has by an
increase of devotion, denied all public carriage on that day? Nay, all
recreation till the evening of that day? To all that are recusants of our holy
rites? To all that are not attendants of our holy rites, both at the morning
and evening-off' ring? Will they make up their reckoning by the truth of
Arithmetique? Are there not twelve hours in the day, and is not the nineth
thehower of prayer? Be that employed then on the soul, and another left for the
body's repast, wat remains there for recreation, but the few minutes of an
hour? But what does this concern these men, who too often either despising,
or neglecting public devotions, need not make recreation their fear, it being
no part of their allowance. And for the kinds of such refreshment, shall they
in reason be defined by fancy or authority? And where is then this outcry of
profanation? It Is a sad irreverence, without due consideration to look upon
the actions of Princes with a prejudicial eye! And are there not other Fathers
also, the Bishops of souls, whose prelacy, through the pride of disobedient
Sons, makes Envy mask it self with an Humility? Or, are there any Fathers,
to whom honor is not due? Or, may not the morality of this Law, in effect
entitle them to a prelacy? For, what is prelacy, but the honor of this honor?
And what is this honor, but the eminency of providence, acknowledged by duty,
acknowledged by love? Witness the stately Cathedrals and Palaces founded by
the devotion of our forefathers; after Gods honor to the honor of their
solemn devotions and consecrated Persons? It were a matter of more trouble,
then necessity, to repeat in this quarrel, what has been alleged by the
worthies of our Church. I need only add, that singular attestation of Clemens
the Roman Bishop and Martyr, who was as near the Apostles in Holiness, as in
time, or, as Ruffinus calls him, pene Apostolus. Even then great contention
happening among the Christian Corinthians about prelacy, he tells them, in an
Epistle, he then writ unto them, that the Apostles knowing by our Lord Jesus
Christ, (...), that contention would arise about the title of Episcopacy, did
therefore themselves, being endued with perfect foreknowledge, ordain Bishops
in their life time. And for the reprehensions he there bestows on those
stickling Corinthians, I leave such gainsayers to a secret blush and amendment
at the reading of them. We may only sigh out with him, what he adds, your
Schism perverts many, dejects many, makes many doubtful, all sorrowful, (...),
and your sedition ceases not. Shall we call him Saint, or Prophet Clemens? Nor
is this authority liable to the suspicion of Roman art; the Copy comes from the
afflicted innocence of the Greek Church, and from the learned and right worthy
Industry of a Loyal Scot. But if this question shall be decided rather by
experience, then by book, where were Discipline without Prelacy? Could a feeble
Presbytery, though perchance swelling enough, correct a wealthy, a potent
offender? Perchance a Landlord, or a Patron? We might as soon fell an Oak
with a penknife. Nay, who should exclude him from an Interest, and so
unhappily a more unavoidable sway in Presbyterial determinations? Is there yet
any more scruple to disturb peace? And by private doubts, to make public
differences? A moderating there is of the differences about the counsails of
the Lord and Man's end: shall this make some Immoderate? A necessary monition
it is in the quarrels of Religion, that if the mind can not attain to so much
subtilty, as to resolve it self, it much seek to attain so much wisdom, as to
temper it self. But in this particular, a restraint there is not of the
Doctrine, but of the Interpreters, to preserve it from inconsiderate or
unlearned interpretation. Thus license is taken away; thus liberty, thus truth
remains. And has not the Church in former times been driven to the same course
in the same cause? Did not King Charles, the Second, of France, about eight
hundred years since, interpose his authority, when from the case of Godscalk,
the like contention arose between the great Prelates of Rhemes and Lions? And
would not the Roman providence now rejoice in a settled peace between the
Dominicans and his Jesuits? And as authority, so has not the pen amongst them
(witness the curious labors of Arriba, Pennot, Dola, and others) endeavored a
composition, though peradventure with more subtilty, then success? But the
wisest rule in deciding controversies, is it not to order them by the
Scriptures expounded by the most Orthodoxe of the Fathers; and new doubts by
new Concells, as we may learn from the late Instructions of the prudent pen of
our most Reverend primate eminent as well for promoting unamimity, as learning?
Surely to think, that the Divine wisdom would leave the Church without a
Guide, is to make the Divine wisdom inferior to humane, and seems too near
either to Schism or folly; whiles it would make the Church subject to as many
opinions, as Persons. Wisdom then teaches man, that to fight a battle in the
dark, or on a plot of ground not well examined, is never wise, and probably
unhappy. Yet such in this obscurity and warrefare has been the unhappiness of
too many, who not thoroughly versed in this doubt have ignorantly, or desperately
raisd strange conclusions. If then a restraint be put upon such exorbitant
danger, is it to deny truth, or rather to preserve it; whiles it leaves
Instruction, and so Instructers, to the sobriety of the settled article and
rule of our Church? But peradventure an unwillingnesse it is, and a pretended
emptiness of purse (next in value, with many, after the soul) that fills some
unhappily with undutiful repinings. If such there be, I would only remember
them in love and prevention, with the Doctrine of the Jews, and the example of
the Grecians, both very remarkable. The Jewish Lawiers teach us, that their
laytie, what in their Offerings to God, the Priest, and the poor, paid of their
yearly estate a full sixth part; that by their payment, one would not take them
to be Jews. And, for the Grecians, let Constantinople be a witness, where, by
a close-handednesse in an instant war, the Inhabitants confounded their
Empire and themselves; The enemy and destruction plainly acknowledging, that a
small part of the spoil, if seasonably employed, might, have preserved it from
s^oile. Or, do any warrant themselves, by a great mistake of that great rule,
Salus populi lex ssuprema? The safety of the people is the Aim of all Law?
For, if by the people they intend the Body Politic, and so a Body not without
a Head, we grant it to be as true, as ancient. But if it shall signify the
people as distinguished from the Prince, though they take it for a truth in
Democracy, where all are people, they must know, that, in a Monarchy, it is but
Treason. In Monarchy then we must take leave to expound it according to our
Savior's rule, Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Let them
remember themselves, that they be like Doves, without Gall; and we will
remember them how they shall be like Serpents; not in venom, but in wisdom.
Now of all the Eminencies of the Serpents wisdom, the chief is in the
preservation of his Head; which in case of danger, he wrappes about with the
many fouldings of this Body. Indeed, can the Body live without the Head? Thus
then on Gods name let them as well remember as object, Salus populi, and then
be, as they thus should be, Serpents. But for the members of the Body, to rise
against the Head, is it not unnatural? is it not frenzy? Nature teaches them
to be ordered by the Head; and is it not the way of confusion, to disturb
that, by which they should be ordered? But thus it is, when every one will be
his own King; for, what is it else, when every one will rule. It has been the
question of some curious wits, whether in the World there are more Heads or
Feet. For the first, Land and Sea will plead; the waters yielding such a
multitude of heads, and scarce a number of feet. For the second, the I and
pleads by a double number of feet for heads; nay, we may say, innumerable feet
for heads, if we call to witness, the fly, the Emmet, and such minutes of the
Creation. In which doubt if any desire resolution, I think it not to be
examined by the practice of nature, that is, experience, which in this point
admits not a sure scrutiny; but by the wisdom of nature, which by a quicker
way of reason, may thus instruct us; that as there are many effects for one
cause, and more instruments of execution, then of direction; so surely are
there more feet then heads. Let then the Members be content with their
situation, with their duty, with their safety; and let their union be for the
safety of the head for the honor of the Head; without which their own safety
cannot be.

Whence is it then that any Son of Nebat dares make Israel sin against the
God and King of Israel. Is it not from the great sin of pride, that would
advance it self? that makes men look more upon their appetite, then their
duty? But let them remember, that though the Hill may yield the more prospect,
yet it is the Vallie yields the more fruit. Let them remember that inferiors
should with modesty and diligence attend their own charge; the state of
themselves is but in part committed to them, the state of a Kingdom is not
committed to them; And as it is no part of their charge, ^oit shall be no part
of their account. Let them remember the breach of Israel, which did first
wilfully depart from their Sovereign; and afterward unwillingly, whiles
perforce, from their Country: and that afterward in two hundred years, they
had both many more and worse Kings, then Judah had; and were at last seaz'd on
by the divine judgment; to others instruction, but their own Ruin. Let them
remember the blessing of Unity; and under God in his work and glory, our late
renowned Peacemaker James the great. Whom God then has joined, let no man put
asunder: whom God has joynd into one Nation, let neither foreign envy, nor
homebred malignity, put asunder. Unity is a precious diamond, whose grains as
they double, twice double in their value: so that by the quick art of the
jeweller, though a spark of one grain, be worth but six crowns, so many
pounds is but the value of two grains in the same stone; such is the fruitful
Arithmetique of Unity. Let them remember former Times, and states, especially
the smaller, and they shall constantly find that by division, they have been
diminished, if not destroyed; and at the last, made but the Appurtenances of
Empires; and more usually draind, then defended. What were the Greeks, though
once they flourished in Wealth and Wit? Though they withstood the Persians
Insolence, yet were they subdued by the Roman Wisdom, and quite enslaved by
the Turkish Fury. But were they not divided, before they were destroyed? Did
not their Distractions unite their enemies to Art and Victory? Let them
remember the design of Unity in the Convenience of defense. Let the Roman
Provinces be a witness; which though at first they did a little struggle for
mistaken Liberty, yet did not usually their subjection become their purchase?
Fear was before still at the door; and afterward Safety; their terror, a
Potent enemy, by a rare felicity, being turned to their defense. Let them
remember the blessings of our Canaan; would they see Solomon's days, in his
Peace, in his Wisdom? can they behold it more eminently, then in his Temple
and his Fleet? And may they not see here high degrees of such Devotion and
Wisdom, for God's glory, and our Country's safety? And is it not the first, if
not the greatest Act of Wisdom to preserve it self? Let no Son then become
so unwise, so unhallowed, so unnatural, as to ^^t up the hand against his
Father. When Kings are likened unto God, is it not occasionally as well for
their justice, as for their mercy? They bear not the Sword in vain. And if
God's wrath, as his mercy; should be a pattern for Kings, had not all need to
remember, with what exaltation of phrase the Almighty has expressed the
exaltation of his wrath, If I whet my glittering Sword, and my hand take hold
on Judgment, I will render vengeance to my adversaries, and will reward them
that hate me. I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my Sword shall
devour flesh? But Oh, let the softness of nature, the justice of Duty, the
Promise of this Commandment, (which is the first Commandment with promise;
(Ephesians. 6.2.) bend the heart and knee of every Israelite unto their Lord, their
Sovereign Lord, their Sovereign Father; That so they may enjoy the
Commandment in the Promise, by living long in the Land, which the Lord their
God has given them. And let the Anointed of the Lord, the Father of our
Israel, march with the thousands of his people, and with the protection of our
God. Let him be clad with the whole armor of God. Let his Loins be girt about
with Truth, having on the breast plate of Righteousness; Let his feet be shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Let him take the shield of
Faith, wherewith to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Let him take the
Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of God's Spirit. Let him march clad with the
prayers of his People; and let all his enemies perish, O Lord. But let thine
Anointed return in Safety, in Peace, in Honor, to the Honor of thy Name,
and the Peace of this thy Israel, Amen, Amen.

Of Unity, A SERMON Preached before KING CHARLES the FIRST, At Christ-Church
in Oxford, on Whit-Sunday, May 21. 1643.

By BARTEN HOLYDAY D. D. Archdeacon of Oxford, and one of His Majesty's
Chaplains.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for S. Pocock 1661.

Ephesians. 4.3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.


NO Times have, more then These, Pretended the Unity of the Spirit. no Times
have more then these violated the unity of the Spirit. Which Spirit as on this
day vouchsafing to descend to us, we may by the figure and neernesse not
unhappily understand it, and most happily keep it. We may by the Art of this
days Miracle see this Spirit, though a Spirit; the virtue of it, whiles the
resemblance of it; A Resemblance not presented to the mistake of Sleep or
Fancy, but to the Inquisition and Loyalty of the Fie. Was not the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, when this blessed Spirit did abide in the
Society of the Apostles? And may not such a blessing win us to an endeavor,
and such an Endeavor advantage us to keep such a Blessing? That therefore we
may perfect This Task, and by this Our selves, we may with as much Hope as
Desire, of success, behold this Unity, a better then that of the Soul and
body, a Unity of Spirits, the Spirits of Men united by the Spirit of God. We
may behold this Spirit; which, though it informs not the Body, informs the
Soul, not by Nature but by Holiness. We may behold this Peace, whose
perfection passes all understanding: whose comfort yet is in part apprehended
by the Sense, We may behold this Bond, which does not Gird, though Encompasse
us; nay, whiles it Binds us, gives us perfect Freedom. We may behold the
blessing of keeping this blessing: both being received from the Love and
Instruction of this Spirit. We may lastly behold this Endeavor, a greater
Wisdom then a Labor, and be allwaies found either Rejoicing or Endeavoring
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

The Highest Unity is Gods property; Inferior Unity is his work; a work of
wisdom being a Unity in a Multitude; a work of goodness, being the
preservation of a Multitude. Which blessing yet is more frequently found in the
inferior creatures, then in Man; through the defection of the Will from the
Understanding, as afterward through the defection of both from God. Which
degree of Disunion being once made, Unity, which should have been a comfort to
man, became his Task; so that now he must endeavor to be what he should be
and what he was, at Unity as a Creature with the Creator and with the
Creatures. In which work he may Learn Unity from the Creatures, they being
unto him always instruction and sometimes shame, so wisely preserving
themselves into flocks and herds, as if they would advance the Unity of
Instinct above the Unity of Reason. He may learn it from the Body; whose
several parts unite and submit their services to the Safety and Majesty of the
Head. He may learn it from the first Integrity and Abilities of his own Soul:
whose several powers of Motion, Sense, Appetite and Will, were so united in
their obedience to Reason, that they seemed to improve themselves, from the
servants, into the Associats of it. To attain which Unity, as it is Happiness,
so to Desire it, is Wisdom, the way to Happiness. And to attain it, Nature
raises Families, Families Cities, Cities Kingdoms; as Faith erects the
Church, and all these make up the World. Take Unity then out of the World, and
it dissolves into a Chaos, in which Nature it self can not find it self,
whiles it can find neither End nor Way. Yet even this Chaos will be worse then
the first; there being in that the materials of a World, but in this the
Ruins; That was God's work, but This Man's. Take Unity out of the Church, and
Religion becomes Schism, excluding Love, and so leaving the Deity without a
Sacrifice; which since man's creation being relatives, as they can not be
divided without the injury of the Spirit, so can they not be joined without the
Unity of it. Take Unity out of a Kingdom, and it remains a Body rather large,
then sound; nay, which sometimes falls into such a diseased state, that the
unwilling and Sovereign cure, as the Chymiques prescribe is a mummy made of
its own tainted blood. Take Unity out of a City, and it is sooner conquered,
then beseeg'd, the surest and first triumph being not over the walls, but the
men. It Is discord makes the Battery, the Canon but reports it; and easily must
they fall by an Enemy, that fall without him. Take Unity out of a Family, and
Divorce soon enters; which is the unhappy palsy of marriadge, deading the one
side, and grieving the other. Unity then is that, which should be kept: yet as
we must keep it, so we must not mistake it, the only Unity which we must keep,
being the only Unity, the Unity of the Spirit.

There is a Spirit that rules in the air: but this Spirit is but an unruly
one, only working an unhappy Obedience in the Children of Disobedience. And
sometimes it so works, that it may rather seem Flesh then Spirit, swelling man
into a tympany of Ambition; which at last discovers it self to be not
fruitfulness, but disease. Sometimes it works by such potent suggestions,
that, as if it disdaign'd to inform a single natural body, it dares venture to
animate a People, a whole body politic, unnaturally striving to make it an
unnatural body, a body either without a head, or weary of it. Sometimes This
Spirit works most potently by possession, as it dealt with the madman in the
Gospel, that toar off his clothes and lay amongst the tombs; a madman indeed,
that cast away so much as a winding sheet, being so near a grave? And yet may
there be no other Found as unhappy, if not more unhappy; who though they tear
not their raiment, yet esteem not a whole skin, calling danger glory, and peace
sloth? But unhappy Spirits they are, that are more the Enemies, then the
companions of their own bodies! as if they gave them life, only to lead them to
more infamy of death? Unhappy Spirits, that would leave no body behind them to
remember them, or not so much to remember them, as to disclaim them! Unhappy
Spirits, whose union is conspiracy; and whose strength is Outrage! As then the
unity of the Spirit must be kept, so must it be a true unity of Spirit, and
therefore of the true Spirit, that is, the unity of the Spirit of unity This is
that Spirit, whose wisdom teaches us, that though we can not decide many
things, we must not differ in many things; nay, because we cannot decide them,
that therefore we must not differ; not differ beyond opinion, the difference
being but from opinion. This is that Spirit whose perfection teaches us, that
we can here no more attain to a perfection of knowledge, then of Holiness:
that some ignorance in the arguments of Religion implies not an imperfection in
Religion, but a perfection in God: that the Divine Law has indeed God for the
Author; yet various man will be an outward Interpreter. This is that Spirit,
whose providence teaches us, that the Government of the World is like the
structure of it, it being founded upon imparities; the natural creatures
having a Local subordination, the rational having a political, and sometimes
a sacred: which differences as it it the Divine will to appoint, so is it the
Divine power to Compose. This is that Spirit, whose love teaches us, that
though he once appeared in the likeness of fiery Tongues, yet that they took
not their flame from the fire of Hell, but of Charity: that, though they were
divided, it was not to Preach division, but a Gospel: that love is the soul of
the soul, uniting, though not the parts of the natural body, yet the many
bodies, as so many parts, of the mystical body of the Church. If then we would
find the true subject of this Spirit, we must seek the true nature of this
Spirit. Where then we find wisdom withdrawing the will from the quarrels of
the understanding, and more esteeming of Peace, then of opinion, there is this
Spirit; where we find perfection rather Endeavored, then pretended, and the
Divine Law unanimously expounded not by Children, but by Fathers, there is this
Spirit. Where we find providence, that does as willingly maintain, as easily
distinguish just imparities, not more readily acknowledging a diversity in the
Lights of Heaven, then in the lights of the Church, and making those differ in
honor, whom God has made to differ in gifts, there is this Spirit. Where we
find love, more tender then the eye it sees with, looking upon Wife and
Children, as on the Instructive and deputy pledges of God himself; looking on
its Country, as on a feat, though not as pleasant, yet as dear, as Paradise,
being a place not of choice but lot, and so made sweet by the hand of the
Patron; looking upon the Church, as on the type of Heaven, and studying the
Peace of the City of God, the God of Peace, there is this Spirit; there is the
Unity of this Spirit.

This Unity then of the Spirit can not be preserved with a violation of the
Spirit: the Unity of the Spirit must not be preserved with the breach of Peace.
We may not do evil, though good might come there (...) may not do evil, that
good may (...) there of. Not only carnal good from evil does not justify; but
no good, no not a purposed good can make evil good. Royalty then must not down
for the advancement of Religion: Nay, the violation of that is always the
violation of this; in being not glory, but blasphemy for a Rebel to enstyle
himself Defender of the Faith. The old truth was, object ingratitude and ye
object all crimes: and is it not as old a truth, is it not a higher truth,
object Rebellion, and ye object all crimes? It being, in effect, nearer to a
flout, then a truth, to call a Rebel a Christian. Is not Christ our Lord the
Prince of Peace? And can men of blood, the Children of Disobedience, be the
Subjects of that Prince? Shall Christ give the Name, and Mariana the Heart?
Shall Christ Character the forehead, and Junius Brutus the Brain? He is of a
bad profession, and so but a bad Professor, whose profession is Disobedience.
The Pharisie was the precisest Artist in the Devotion of the Jews; his pretense
was the mastering of his passion, his practice was the mastering of his Prince.
Let Saint Paul describe such, and he will call them (...), a most exact sect;
such a sect, as made Paul a Sectary, nay a Persecuutor, till he was Persecuted.
Let Hegesippus describe them, and he will call them a sort of Men zealous,
subtle, busy, covetous. Let their wise Josephus describe them, and he will tell
us, that their authority with the people was so great, (...), that if they
spoke any thing against the King or the High Priest, it was presently believed.
And he will tell us, that they were Enemies to Kings, that they were of power
to disturb their Kings, to raise war, to do mischief, that is to be
peace-breakers with extreme devotion. And he will tell us, how they perplexed
their King Hircanus; how they broke his Son King Alexander; how they awed his
Widow Queen Alexandre: who was glad to be ruled by them, that so she might seem
to rule others; how they occasioned quarrel about the Crown between his Sons:
who to end their difference but to begin their misery, choosing the Roman for
their Judge, found him become their King; and their Country at once with their
Kingdom unexpectedly laid prostrate into a Province. This was the work and
reward of notorious zeal: They sound the power, but the Roman found the plot.
Nay, these were they, who not only thus enthraled their Jerusalem, but at last
destroyed it; whiles they would acknowledge no Lord but the Lord of Lords, the
Almighty: professing that they never feared the destruction of Their City the
destruction of God's City! Yet the World now sees that neither they, nor their
Jerusalem is to be seen, except the ruins of them as a witness! And that
whiles by Rebellion they labored to save their City for God; God has abandond
both it and them to His Enemy, to Their Enemy, Mahomet. There is no art but
must be allowed some Principles, which must be the groundwork of
superstructions: so that the ground of art is not art but nature. And surely in
the Art, in the high wisdom of Monarchy, no more sure, no more necessary, that
is, no more natural foundation can be laid, then this, the sword may not be
drawn nor sheathed without supreme command. And where shall such supremacy be
found, but in a King? Shall persons not anointed be above or equal to the
Lord's anointed? Behold Royalty in the Originals of Nature; Is it not the
power of a Father enlarged? For some then to affirm, that a King, though
greater then his Subjects divided, is less then they, when they are Unised,
what is it but to say, that the Patriarch Jacob had indeed Authority over his
twelve Sons considerd single, but that they when United had Authority over Him?
A most unnatural assertion, and as full of vanity, as of falsehood? Belike,
such new Vtopians would have a Round of Government (as some the like in the
Church) not unlike the motion of a Wheel, in which every spoak becomes
uppermost in his turn. But have we not learned, that a King is the Head, and
the People the Body politic? And has not Nature committed the Peace, and so
the safety of the Body, to the wisdom of the Head, without whose direction,
the motion of the parts is but commotion? Number, which with order is a cause
of Peace, is without it too sure an argument of error; when a people runs into
a tumult, may it be called an Assembly, or a great misrule? Which degree of
disorder, as it commonly begins not without much mistake, so does it go on
with much more mischief. Such was the sedition of the Jews against Paul, when
they cried out, away with such a fellow from the Earth. The mischief was, they
violated his Person: the mistake was, they thought he had violated the Temple;
supposing he had brought certain Greeks into it, and so polluted it. On which
supposal for a while the upvoare was so loud, that the accusation it self could
not be heard: as if the outcry of the tumult had strived to exceed the malice
of it; and did continue with such outrage, that authority armed with the
Soldier was fain to be the violent Peacemaker. Indeed that is usually the
unhappy and necessary conclusion of sedition. Thus Ephraim, who would not be
pacified by words, so provoked Jephtha, that almost a whole Tribe became the
example, as of the fin, so of the punishment. Thus Absolon provoked and
suffered the justice of a Father: whose tenderness, Alas, bewaild his own
Victory and his peace! So that it fares with such firebrarnds of a Kingdom, as
it did with those, that cast the innocents into Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, they
being the surest fuel of those flames! Peace then must be kept, the Bond of
Peace, and the Unity of the Spirit in that bond. Is not this, in the best
extent of this blessing, the Church in the Commonwealth, as some phrase it?
Compare Peace with Unity, and is not Peace the Larger? Is it not the Bond? We
must not then make this bond too short.

Yet has it been the Wit and Mistake of some to make the Church a House, and
the Commonwealth the Hangings, which ought to be fitted to the House. But this
similitude seems to be fitted more to their Aim then to the Truth. And surely
we may admire, that such Authors, the Authors of this comparison, such
overseers, as the overseers of this building, would be so overseen, as to make
that which is narrower, contain that which is larger! Themselves making the
Church to contain only the Good; but the Commonwealth to contain both Good and
Bad! More congruous it had been, though not exact, to have made the
Commonwealth the Outside of the Church; for that had been to grant it to be of
more Capacity then the Church, and to be, what it is intended to be, the
Defense of the Church: the Outside of a building being contrived by art, to
make void the violence of storm and Age. Yet this comparison were not exact;
the outside receiving its form from the house it self: where as the Church
does not give form to the Commonwealth, but receives from it a devout
Defense. Otherwise the Commonwealth should still vary, as the Church: whereas
we see in a long experience, that the Jewish Church and the Christian, though
so different, have yet in their several ages, subsisted and flourished under
the like Outward rule, Monarchique Government. To settle the Church then, as
some now would, upon the flat of a Presbytery, and then to affirm, that it
must give form to the Commonwealth, what is it from such premises, but
dangerously and unjustly to infer the degrading of Monarchy into Popular
Government? We may then more obviously, yet truly liken the Civil State to
Bulwarks, and the Church to a City; for as when the fortifications are won,
the City is soon lost, so when the Bond of Peace, the Laws of a Nation, are
broken, the Unity of the Spirit, the Doctrine of Religion will be quickly
dissolved. But surely the bond of Peace should be made surer: and though by
Practice some have somewhat weakened it; yet have some by Doctrine somewhat
weakened their own practice. Conscience is a new Edition of Man's works and
words, usually presenting them corrected and amended. What the zeal of Knox
was, that is, what his lise was, let his Life witness: What Doctrine his Death
preached, let his friends tell us, who write his Life: and they will tell us,
that but a little before his death, making an exhortation to his brethren of
the Ministry (and such Sermons should like death make deep impression) he bad
them beware of such (and many such, he told them, there were there) as had not
only denied the Royal Authority, but also fallen from the truth, which they
professed: to whom, if they repented not into the way, whence they had erred,
he denounced the destruction of body and soul. A speech that setts forth the
just end of such unjust ways and error: and that justly claims of us a
fidelity of memory, being expressed in the fidelity of Death. What the zeal of
Rollocke was, let his Life witness: what his candor of Loyalty, let his Death
witness: who in an exhortation likewise to his Brethren of the Ministry, did
with Vehemence of Spirit in a dying body, move them to Peace and Obedience to
their Prince; magnifying the felicity of their Times and King, and seriously
advising them to beware, that they cast not down the Church from its height of
happiness. This was the Wisdom and Loyalty of Death; that a man almost in the
point of his own dissolution, should endeavor to keep others in the Bond of
Peace. These men's examples, are to men in some things precepts: and would they
would make these precepts in death their sure examples in their Life. Then
would not the Bond of Peace be so easily broken, or would as easily be united.
In the days of Alexander the Second, King of Scotland there was a marvelous
breach of this holy Bond in an outrage of the multitude, no less Mad then
Cruel, committed upon one Adam then Bishop of Cathnes, whom inhumanely they
burned alive in his own house. A fire of wrath, alas, too cruel! yet not so
cruel, as sometime the fire of zeal! The circuit of that flame was but
domestique; but this sometimes over-runnes a Country. Yet the Motive to this
extraordinary act, was not Episcopacy, his Eminent Order in the Church; but an
Ordinary act of it, his Excommunicating some, for their Contempt and Obstinacy
in not paying their Tithes! They showed themselves to be as destitute of mercy,
as of Justice! They first robbed God, and then killed his Priest? A very
congruous and graceless Method? In which fact, had not their fury been blind,
they might have seen the promise, which they lost in the dishonor and cruelty
toward their Spiritual Father; even long Life in the Land, which the Lord had
given them; and so whiles they had longer paid the Tithes of their estates,
they had longer with duty and sound policy kept their estates. But as this was
a marvailous breach of the bond of peace, so as marvailous was the repair of
it; there being no less a number executed for this crime, then four hundred
persons! A number subtly (as may be suspected) concealed by Buchanan, but
faithfully mentioned by Boethius. And such was then the Justice and devotion of
Scots upon Scots in behalf of a Bishop! And surely it was well, that the
greater part was the wiser: though the worse was too great, being enough to
undo the bound of peace and themselves. And as the fire of wrath is thus wild,
so zeal sometimes yields a worse wildfire. But as in the fire which amongst the
Jews descended and burned up the Sacrifices, that were accepted, the face of a
Lion (as the Rabbines tell us) did appear: which (not to question the truth of
the relation) may usefully seem to have implied the acceptance of all
Sacrifices, by the Messiah, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: So may we not as
truly say, when in the Fires of armed subjects zeal, the face of the Lion, the
countenance of the Prince does not appear, can such be acceptable flames? Can
such be acceptable sacrifices? Obedience is better then such sacrifice!

The Bond of Peace then is like a just man's promise (it is indeed his duty) it
must be kept. To get and Enlarge are probably Acts of Wisdom and power: but to
keep what is gotten and enlarged, implies some accession of Happiness.
Inheritance, though it comes by nature, yet in best Tempers it comes with
wisdom, and does as well Instruct, as Enrich: whiles the mind prevented in the
wisdom of Purchase, employs it self in the wise happiness of preservation. It
was the task of Caesar, to draw the sword: it was the task of Augustus, to
Sheath it: the first was the work of power; the last, of Wisdom: which more
diligently studied how to Bound the Empire, then posterity did to Enlarge it.
And surely though under Trajan (yet happy then also) it was of greater extent,
yet was it under Augustus of greater Happiness: This bringing it to a Height,
the other to a precipice; whence if it moved forward, it was with Ruin, if
backward, with shame. Trajan's felicity then was rather of the Man, then of the
Empire: of Earthly happiness That being the Truest, which we do as well
Bequeath, as Enjoy; good men counting it their best felicity, to make
Succession rather the Partaker of their felicity, then the Admirer. A wisdom
which should as effectually incline a people, as a Prince, to desires of Peace.
And this was that, which in Story, if we will look so far back, has so
renowned the Assyrian Monarchy; which triumphed in power Thirteen Hundred
years, and since in Fame about Twice so long: the length of their felicity
supplying the defects of their story. And this was that in a nearer example,
which unto this age has added such glory to the Scottish Monarchy: which, if
story be not Poetical in Antiquities, has far outlived the Assyrian date,
being now almost two thousand years old! To which rare age that Body of people
never attained by the calenture of Rebellion, but by the sound constitution of
obedience. Obedience indeed was the beginning of their glory; they swearing
Obedience to their first King Fergusius and to his Successors: for so speaks
Buchanan, for all his Dialogue; Fergusio victore domum reverso Scoti ei
posterisque ejus regnum jurejurando confirmarunt. This was a Covenant no less
wise, then large; Obedience being a subtle Victory over Kings; the art of duty
having been ever more powerful then an unreverent sword: This may sometimes
get: but That only can keep. Now getting without keeping is but the prosperity
of Melancholy; the beginning of it being but in a false joy, but the end of it
being in a true sorrow. As then the wise hand, which knows as well how to
keep, as get, is of such moment and praise in civil life; so needs must it be
attended with success and glory in the business of the Church, Which, if it
keep but an Ontward Unity, becomes Glorious; as, if it keeps an inward Unity,
the Unity of the Spirit, it becomes happy. Unity indeed is the Health of the
soudest body, yet uniformity is the beauty of it: which is always the aim,
though not always the success of an exact statuary. Knots, or Crosse-veines
may make the stuff sometimes less obedient to the Edge and Wisdom of the
chizell; and sometimes unhappily ready to cracke-off in the working: yet
conformity of the parts is still in it self the Art and Improvement of
Perfection. If we behold the Church of Rome, shall we deny in it wit and
Success? When as, though it has almost been utterly disolved by some tedious
Schisms; the mere recovery to a Union and continuance, has made it become
Famous, and seem Happy. O then let us learn that Special wisdom, which is to
learn wisdom of an Adversary. Let us diligently Imitate, yet wisely Inverte
the Roman Practice; Let us become happy, and seem Famous; yea, let us become
happy, though we seem not Famous. And seeing that in a private estate, the best
purchase is of Fee simple, whereby one does at once, with the best skill of
Thrift, both get and keep; Let the Art of Unity be made the Study of Conscience.

Indeed without Study this Art is not attaind, not fit to be attaind. Whiles
then the Apostle moves us to Unity, and moves us also to an Endeavor to it, he
bestows upon us as well a Discovery, as an Exhortation, showing us not only
the End, but also the means. Endeavor then is that without which, Unity is
rather Desird, then Attaind; And therefore the Grecians, to show their wisdom
in their Endeavor, bound themselves to true Unity, to concord by an Oath, and
bound themselves to such an Oath by a Law; endeavoring to preserve Peace by a
double bond upon the Soul and upon the Body. The Romans used a like wise
Endeavor, and whiles in a Higher, in a wiser strain, making Concord a Deity;
thus seeking Peace not by an Oath, but by Prayer: an Oath importing their Own
best strength; but Prayer implying the Aid of Heaven. And even thus wise, that
is, thus peaceable were very Heathen; thus peaceable among themselves, though
without grace; thus peaceable by wise Nature very like grace; striving to make
their Peace and their Country of a like circuit. Who then would not study the
nature of Endeavor? Who would not study the Art of Endeavor? Diligence there
must be as in a Right Archer, that makes his arrow as intentive as his eye.
Strength there must be either of Love or War, even such contrary ways
leading to the same Unity: which though in it self impli s Love, yet in the
attaining of it, is especially like Heaven, which is sometimes taken by
violence. Speed there must be: when the Bond of Peace is in danger to slip,
what hand will not be quick, what hand can be too quick to repair it? Skill
there must be; a reciprocal skill! It Is not enough felicity for the most wise
hand to direct the ball, if by the hand that should receive it, it be either
neglected or diverted. That therefore Diligence, strength, speed and skill may
prosper, the Roman deity must be rectified into Truth, concord into God: whose
goodness is ready to make an exchange with us, to give us Peace for Prayer.
The Sabine Women armed only with Love and Intercession conquered two armies,
getting a Victory more famous, then the Sword can win, and more sure then any,
but the Victory of Prayer. Pray then we must for Peace, peace, to Advantage
Prayer, not corrupt it; peace no less holy, then firm, nor more attended with
gladness, then with Innocence. Which if our first parents had not lost, they
had rightly Dressed, and so kept their Paradise; nor had that instant terror
and expression of war, a fiery sword, driven Man from God! Indeed the mercy
of the Judgment drove him to the Fear of God, whiles from the Fruition of him;
and so at last drove him from Paradise to God! But the Divine mercy preserve us
from this way of mercy, from this way of Unity, by preserving us in our
Paradise, and in a Unity with God and our selves. Preserve us in the Spirit; by
which, whiles we cry, Abba Father, we may remember to make Brotherly Love a
part of our Care, as it is of our Inheritance. Preserve us in peace; so
preserve us in peace, that war may be always more Odious to us, then
Necessary. Preserve us in the Bond of Peace; a bond that may holily encompasse
both Priest and people; a bond that may happily encompasse and Unite Nations.
Preserve us in the wisdom of keeping Unity; that neither desperate malignity
may precipitate any, nor mistaking devotion slide any, into destruction.
Preserve us in the Endeavor of this wisdom, the wisdom of preserving our
British Union: which being the happiest Bridge, that was ever raisd over
Tweede; so may it prove as perpetual as the stream, which it embraces. And
that this our Endeavor may prosper, let it Employ and Improve it self by
Imitation. Let us either imitate the blessed tongues, which as on this day
appeared, by a holy Silence (for they were not heard to speak any thing,
though the tongues of Others spoke by Them) or let us imitate the tongues of
the Aposiles by holy Languague. Let the Light of these wonderful tongues,
teach us to speak with knowledge; remembering, that though Joel foretold, that
in the later days the Spirit should be poured upon all flesh, Saint Peter in
the Story of the Apostles Acts, has told us, it was performed in This day's
wonder; so that now the ability of instruction is not to be expected from
Miracle, but from Industry. Let the fire likewise of these tongues, teach us
Charity; and therefore that we never Preach Libel, instead of Reformation. More
especially in Peace let every one for his proportion practice a good Imitation
of the good Constantine; who cast the handwritings of Complaints into the fire,
quenching so with natural flames, the unnatural flames of contentions. In
War, let the Loyal Example of our Forefathers go forth with all our Forces,
Providence being the Bight Wing; the left, Power; and Unity, the Body of the
Army. So shall Treachery, the false Son of Zeal, be as shameful in its Fall,
as in its Rise; and so shall Loyalty, the true Son of Zeal, at last Triumph
in the just defense of the just Defender of the Faith. Which grant we beseech
thee O Lord of Hosts, for thy Sonne's sake the Prince of Peace, and effect it
by the power and Unity of Thy Spirit. To which Blessed and Eternal Trinity in
Unity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be for ever ascribed the Glory
and Comfort of Victory and Peace.

OF Rebellion, A SERMON Preached before the Right-Honourable, the Members of
Parliament assembled at Oxford, At Saint Macis's, May 19. 1644.

By BARTEN HOLYDAY D. D. Archdeacon of Oxford, and one of His Majesty's
Chaplains.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for S. Pocock 1661.

1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.


IT was no less Truth then fancy in the Philosopher that said, could virtue
be seen, it would Beget Love and Advance it not only into Admiration, but
Rapture: as if for a time it would deprive the soul of its Happiness, by
transporting it beyond the apprehension of its happiness. A truth which
teaches us a like truth; That Vice, could it be seen, would by the Eye startle
the soul to a sacred detestation, whereby it would choose rather to fly the
Society of the Body, then not to fly the corruptions of it, which wisdom,
though taught by Reason, is Delivered also and confirmed by grace: which,
intending to set forth the foulness of disobedience, setts-forth Rebellions
the foulest disobedience, expressing it by a Comparison not odious, though of
that which is most odious, With-craft. The occasion of the Instruction was a
Disobedience in omission, by an Earthly King's Neglect of the King of Heaven;
by Fearing the People more then God; by displeasing God to pleace the people.
But the Bounty of the instruction is more Chatholique, extending to Active, All
active Disobedience, intimating this Theological Truth of proportion, that
since He that owes obedience only to God, becomes so guilty only by omission,
more guilty must they be, and by Active disobedience, that owe obedience to God
and Man. So that Rebellion will be as the sin of Witchcraft; this being a
Treason against God, by a commerce with his Enemy; that being a Treason against
him, whiles against his Anointed. View them in their Certainty, in their
Motives, in their Practice, in their Success; and we must acknowledge by the
Fitness and Truth, that this Instruction is not only True but Divine.

Behold the Art, behold the confidence of witches. Is it not a part of their
cunning to Deny their cunning? A part of their wickedness to deny their
wickedness! Proving their Guilt, whiles they Deny it, by Bewitching some to be
their Patrones, that yet would Blush to be their Disciples? Have not some of
learning and gravity thought themselves wise, in thinking Witchcraft rather a
Mistake, then a Crime? And the Black Honor to have been only miscalled the
Black Art? Have they not removed the Residence of this sin from the Will to the
Phansy? And made it a work fitter for the Poet, then the Judge? Have they not
at least made it so, under the Time of the Gospel, thinking This light no more
to permit, then Allow, such work of Darkness? Have they not endeavored to
remove it as far from the Censure of the Law, as from the Time of the Law?
Have they not Eluded Divine Testimony, rather then Received it, against this
Practice, which is a Craft, and would be a Mystery? But do we not know by the
Divine word, that Witchcraft is? And by the Divine Justice, that it is
condemned? Is not the Law, as well as Ender, a witness of such commerce? A
witness against such commerce? And do we not know, that under the times of
the Gospel, Man is of the same Frailty, and Satan of the same Malice? And do
we not not know, that Temptation is not like the Law of Ceremonies, that was to
be Abolished; but like the Law moral, by which both Temptation and sin shall
always be attended? And is not this the unhappiness and vanity of Rebellion?
Have not some Artists made it a businisse rather of Invention, then of State,
bestowing upon every man a Natural supremacy, which might have said Caesar the
toil to have Fought for a Monarchy? Shall not every man in his Family, thus
become a King Adam? And every Son now by a supernatural Devise become an
Elder Brother? A Philosophical Empire, when Individuation shall be Royalty!
When men shall be Kings by the Pole! when to have a Head, is by the Riddle of
Independency, sufficient Right to claim a Crown! What, will not some bolder
Novilist say? Is not my Soul, nay, is not my Body Perfect, being the Work of
the most perfect? and shall I betray my native Absoluteness, to the Infamy of
Relation, to Dependency? Or, if a Fall in our forefathers must be acknowledged,
must it not be acknowledged in All? and so, do I not still retain, though not
the old Supremacy, yet an Equality? As if Nature had made every man a Caesar,
who could endure no Superior; though not a Pompey, who could endure no Equal.
If, say they, men associate themselves into a People, is it not more for safety
then for servitude? and so rather Wisdom, then Duty? Or, if they Humble
themselves into a People, and are content to be the Neck and Shoulders to
sustain a Head, is it not for the Direction and Nourishment of the Body? Who,
say they, is the Author, what the End of Government? Does it not Begin, does
it not End in the People? Begin in their Will? End in their Well fare? What
then shall be Rebellion? shall it be more then a Topicall sin, found indeed
under some Monarchical Meridians? shall it be more then a Conditional sin,
a sin but of one's own making, whiles but by one's own Consent? Thus
Inconsiderate is their subtle Boldness. What Is the Efficient cause of a King?
surely a quaint Question? yet a question, that has been moved; and such a
question, as will find diverse answers. Ask of a Conclave-man, and he will
tell you, the Roman Prelate, attributing to the Triple Crown the Sovereignty
over All Crowns. Ask of the Disciplinarian, and in substance he will tell
you, the People, making Them the Alpha and Omega of Dominion. Ask of the
moderete Protestant, and he will tell you, God: who sometimes conveighs Royalty
by Nature, sometimes indeed by Choice, as sometimes by the Sword. Again they
will ask, what is the Final cause of a King? and they will answer, the Peoples
welfare. Certainly a True Answer; and as certainly an Imperfect one. The
Peoples good is an Inferior purpose of Majesty: the Representation of the
Divine Majesty is the Highest purpose of Humane Majesty. Here God's Majesty
will be seen; though here but as in a glass; yet so God in a King. The
principal use of the Glass is in the principal object seen Through the
Glass, seen beyond the glass. A King is a Servant for the People: but he is
Gods servant. Does not the Law of our Liturgy teach us to teach thus? That He
knowing whose Minister He is, may above all things seek thy Honor and Glory.
And does not the same Law teach us, That we his Subjects duly considering whose
Authority he has, may faithfully serve honor and humbly obey him? And whose
Authority has he, that should thus Humble us? Our own, or Gods? A Minister he
is for the People, but also over the People, whiles also for God. Let none then
Discourse themselves, let none Devote themselves, mock themselves, out of their
Liturgy and Loyalty! And then we shall be not so bewitched, as to deny the
certainty of Witchcraft; nor yet so seduced to a Rebellion against Reason, as
to deny the unhappy certainty of Rebellion. But unreasonable subtilty will
still seem to be reasoning; and at least will Question, when it cannot answer.
And ask it will since there is witchcraft, and therefore a Witch, what a
witch is, and how as seriously to be convicted, as Punished. That a witch is
one, that has power over the Devil, is as Ridiculous, as False; and is not
only an Error, but has been also the cause of Error. That a Righteous man has
power over the Devil, is not naturally true; it is spiritually true. His
victory over the Devil is remotely obtained by the power of prayer, but
immediately by God's power. Humane power is naturally less then Angelical; and
thus the Devil is naturally greater then the Witch, yet the Exercise of this
power is not only by Nature, but also permission. And by permission the evil
Spirit can possess a living body; ca^ form in the air a Shape of bodily
creatures, can delude and satifty the Eye, the Far, the touch. He then that has
a Friendship a sensible Commerce, with this Spirit of Hell, is an Enemy to
Heaven; This is a Witch. And this conversation being evident to sense, the
sense of the Witch, is therefore possibly and occasionally evident also to the
sense of the Witness. Had not this way of Evidence been possible, then had the
Law been void: and had it not been sufficient, then had the Law been unjust.
But witnesses there were for This condemnation, and therefore Evidence from
sense for the Condemnation. Confession also is Legal Conviction; unless
Reason Persuades, that it proceeds not from Conscience, but Disease. And is not
this the state of a Rebel? Who is not one that has power over the Devil; Alas,
he is not his Lord, but his slave! Is he not one, that by the Bondage of
Covenant is more subtily united to the Spirit of Division? Some Difference
there is indeed; but the more difference the more danger. With the Witch the
Devil uses more sensible conversation; with the Rebel, Intellectual; with the
witch he deals in some domestique shape, as if he were manageable to a
Tamenesse. With the Rebel he used artificial Instruments; as the tongue of the
pleader, the brain of the statist, the devotion of the Priest, the diligence of
the Citizen, the wealth of the Merchant, or the pretense of the Diviner; when
he would act somewhat of no less Fame, the mischief; then is he certainly to
be suspected, when he uses creatures most to be suspected. When he employed the
Serpent, he intended not only an Eve or an Adam; 't was not a Person, but a
generation was his aim. When he uses a Rebel of malignity, an old Serpent, 't
is not a Man, no not a Monarch, but 't is Monarchy and a People that he would
Venom to Destruction. Indeed the Serpent is naturally so subtle, that he may
seem not to Imitate, but Surpass the Devil, and as the more expert, to have
given him his name; the Serpent being not usually called a Devil; but the Devil
being usually and aptly called the Serpent. He then that has Commerce with the
Spirit of Rebellion is a Rebel; whose ^^^perties the Law as well Discovers as
Condemns. And such a one is he, that seeks to destroy a settled Monarchy; by
an attempt of as much guilt, as subtilty; a guilt which the known Law as well
makes known, as Detests: that seeks to destroy fundamental Laws on which it is
settled; thus Aiming at destruction and deserving it; Fundamental Laws; which
preserve the Liberty of the Subject, without which the people are not in Peace;
which also preserve the Prerogative of the Prince, without which a Prince can
not be at Peace. These indeed are foundation-stones in the structure of
Government; things that should neither be removed, nor moved. And as these Laws
are Excellent, so also are they Eminent. Laws are like Foundations, and
therefore in some things not like. Similitude there is between them, not
Identity. Thus are they like Foundations, as they Bear up Government; they are
yet not like them, as Foundations are things, which no body can see. Binding
Law must be known Law: promulgation is of the Essence of Law. When Rome first
wondered at a parricide, they consulted upon a Law for his punishment. They were
almost as near a mistake, as a Consultation, and proved more innocent by
chance, then by Intent. They made indeed a Law, or rather enlarged one, whereby
he was condemned to the Culeus: but their Old Law for Murder appointed him to
the last punishment; the Addition by their new Law was not Death, but
Circumstance; The wave, or, the Axe; the keeping in of Breath, or the letting
out of Blood, was not Death; 't was but the Fashion of Death. Thus all Treason
is known by Law that is known. Revelation could not work upon Man, had he not
Reason, wherewith to acknowledge Revelation to be Above Reason. Thus
Witchcraft and Rebellion are alike in their Certainty and conviction; and not
unfitly, being alike from the beginning, in the place of their beginning; not
Hell, but Heaven: There was the first witch, there the first Rebel; only with
this difference; that there they were not alike, but the same; the first witch
there being the first Rebel the abused Excellency of an Angel of Light
bewitching him into the Darkness of Rebellion and Hell.

A like they are in their Motives in respect of God and of Themselves. Sins
they are all ways when we look upon Man; punishments they are also, when we
look upon God. When man too unhappily Loves that which God hates, God sometimes
lets him most unhappily love him that hates him, and, by the worst of mistakes,
to take the Devil for his God; and thus to be so far betwitch'd, as to be a
witch. When man likewise too perseveringly Rebels against God, God sometimes
lets him as perseveringly Rebel against Man, against the Man anointed by God;
his obstinacy against God being Exposed and punished in his obstinacy against a
King. If yet we should wonder, what seeming good can make Man so verily evil as
to become a witch; as the Law tells us what he is; so observation may tell us,
why he is what he is: And indeed we may see him somewhat moved by his Humor:
which though absolutely, being but Natural, it makes him not guilty, inclines
him to the way and fashion of his guilt. Sometimes Melancholy corrupts into
Curiosity, Curiosity into superstition, as the observation of things rather
ridiculous then ominous; which superstition at last turns into Witchcraft;
the mind thus becoming first vane, and then wicked. Sometimes Phlegm putrifies
into sottishness; sottishness into an Innorance or Negelect of all Religion:
which Implety likewise at last is wretchedly perfected into Witchcraft.
Sometimes the Blood is Overheated into lust or Ambition, the false delights of
the Body and mind; for the attaining whereof, with no less Folly then guilt,
it mistakes it self into Witchcraft. Sometimes choler is so whetted by
Poverty, or worse sharpened by desire of Revenge; that choosing rather what is
worst of all, then nothing at all, and sillily less fearing an Immortal Enemy,
then a mortal, takes for its help Witchcraft instead of God. And are not
these the preparatives, is not this the Disposition of the Rebel? Is there not
the Melancholy Rebel, that growing curious, would fain have a taste of
Sovereignty? Like our first parents, that would needs have knowledge of Good
and Evil? though indeed it proved the knowledge of Good and the Practice of
Evil! And does not his curiosity sometimes grow Superstitious; making the
Ephemerides or a Prognostique Rhyme the Scripture of his phansy? With exact
ignorance pointing out the Rising and setting as well of Kings, as of Stars?
Thus changing vanity into Crime? Is there not the Plegmatique Rebel, whose
Sottishness changing into Irreligion, makes him as careless almost of an
Earthly King, as of the King of Heaven! And foolishly think, that he has cast
off Subjection, when he has but changed it; nay, instead of being the Subject
to a King, become the Slave of a Rebel? Is there not the Oversanguine Rebel,
whom Riot makes an Enemy to Justice, as well as to Temperance? Whom Ambition so
blinds, that it sets him in the wrong way to Honor which he seeks, by seeking
to the Devil for it, when as it is only in the Disposal of God and the King?
Is there not the Cholerique Rebel, whom want of means moves into want of Duty,
striving to make a King, as wretched as himself, when he can not make himself
as virtuous, as a King? And is not also sometimes Revenge of more force with
him; then Sovereignty? Is it not sweeter to him, then Obedience, or the
blessing of Obedience, long Life? Or, the best blessing of that blessing, a
good conscience?

View their Practice, and you must needs view their likeness. The practice of
the witch, whether subtle or gross! For, neither knowledge nor sex Excuses
nor morally varies their commerce. Does not the Conjurer undertake and abuse
the knowledge of things on earth, and in Heaven? Is not his pretense a
Government of Spirits, is not his Practice a servitude? Has he not his Circle,
his Fasts, his Prayer? Has he not his Earthen Pot full of persum'd fire, his
book, his Sword? Has he not his frightning Apparitions, his Seals of Servesy,
his Binding of Spirits? Has he not his distinction of Operations, of Purposes,
of Days? Would he obtain Treasure, Fore know Events, get the Victory in
Battle, does he not then consult his Mercurial Spirits? Would he Repair the
Decays of Learning, Advance the poor, cast down the mighty, does he not then
consult his Mercurial Spirits? As for other purposes other Spirits? And do
these Mercurial Spirits sometimes appear like a Bear, or a Dog, or a
changeable colored vesture? And is not the motion of them as the motion of a
glift'ring, or Silver cloud? View the Ruder witch the Conjurer by Roat, and has
she not store of Ignorance, and Zeal of mischief? Does she not Learn to do
Evil, and would she not yet sometimes seem to teach the Devil to do good? Is
she not one that has only wit enough, and conscience enough to Damn her self?
And is not this the Condition and veriety of Rebellion? Is there not the
Seducing and the Seduced Rebel? The one sort full of wit, and both of
willfulness? Do they not profane the knowledge of things Natural and
Divine, making the Stars the servants of their Art and malice? Do they not
Calculate and Attempt the Periods of Kingdoms? And whiles they would seem to
become Rulers, do they not make themselves unruly Servants? Have they not
their Circuit of Activity and Intelligence? Have they not a Devotion, that
sometimes looks like Fasting and Prayer, Exercises not of Sanctity but of
Pretense, if the Body be not Humbled by them, and the Soul Advanced? If they
look as pale with Envy, as with Fasting? If they rise not so high by Prayer, as
by Ambition? Would any invite us to see their Humility? Would any invite God to
see their humility, with what Humility they come into his presence, if they
spare not to tread upon the Crown and Miter? Is this the Holy Trampling under
foot the Lion and the Dragon? Have not such their Earthen Vessel too full of
fire? Perfumed indeed, but with the Incense of Sulphur; making a sinner like
his own Helli, a Habitation of Fire and Brimstone? Have they not their Book,
which they make theirs more by mistake, then by understanding? Being ignorant
commonly of the Language, and too commonly of the sense? A book whose Mystery
poses them, and whose Letter condemns them? whiles they Hate their Enemies,
whom, if not truly Enemies, Nature bids them Love; if truly Enemies, Grace bids
them Love. Have they not a Sword, whose best Commendations were to be Rusty, so
it were not with Blood? Have they not their apparitions, as monstrous as
Jealousy? Have they not their close counsails, as much removed from the eye of
the People, as the China Monarch? As much removed from their understanding, as
the Table of Isis? The Delphian Oracle compared with This, was but an Essay of
the Devill's wit? Have they not the Art of Binding of Spirits? Their Familiar
Spirits? Making them more readily forth coming by commitment, then by
Covenant? Have they not their diversity of Works, sometimes by Flattery,
sometimes by Cruelty, always by pretense? Their diversity of Plots, still
varied according to the News and Degrees of Success? Their diversity of
times, more distinguishing the Calender by Prophesies, then by Months? Have
they not their Mercurial Spirits, for the obtaining of Wealth. Fore knowledge,
Victory? Things that are only disposed by God, though sometimes to the ungodly?
So that they always show the Error of their way, even when they attain the
End of their way! Have they not their Projecting Spirits, for the Repair of
Learning, whiles they destroy the Learned, that should repair it? Mistaking
Zeal for knowledge, and so the affections for the understanding? Their
projecting Spirits for the advancing of the Poor, whiles they compel Hospitals
to become Benefactors to Rebellion! Leav'ning them only to their New Endowment,
Hunger and Cursing? Their Projectors for the casting down of the mighty, though
against the Command of the Almighty, making themselves under God, what God has
made a King, Supreme Governors? And are not these Spirits sometimes like a
Bear, for Cruelty, for Craft, for unquietness? The Bear, that tears the Prey,
and when pursued, least he become a prey, goes backward into his den that the
Hunter rather mistaks, the^ finds the way of his paw? The Bear, whose head or
feet are always in motion? And are not these Spirits sometimes like a Dog?
Whose common distempers are Bloodthirstinesse and madness? A creature that is
the sire of blind whelps, which (as some observe) the more they are, the
longer 't is e're they see! And are not these Spirits sometimes like a
changeable-colour'd vesture, which by the Art of Mixture pleases and cheates
the Eye? View it one way, 't is Azure, not unlike Heaven; you would take it for a
Robe of purity and Peace: View it another way, you will judge it a full Sanguine,
a garment rolled and delighted in blood! And are not these Spirits sometimes
like a Silver cloud? A cloud indeed of more show then moisture; a cloud that is
more ready to bestow his drops upon the Sea, then on the Land? Less
profitably and less naturally upon the Sea, when as it owes it self unto the
Land! View the under-Rebel, the Rebel by Implicit Disobedience, and is he not
solemnly Ignorant, and Devoutly mischievous? Does he not Break All Laws,
whiles he would have some made; seeking indeed to make Law rather then preserve
it? Does he not loose true liberty in the pursuit of mistaken Liberty? Does he
not endeavor to Purify the Church by Sacrilege, counting it not holy, till it
be Poor? Is he not one of so cunning a Conscience, as to conveigh himself into
Slavery and Damnation? Surely Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft!

View them in their Success, and you must needs again view their likeness.
What Is the Success of Both? Is is not Sorrow? Sorrow to see their foolish
loss of Innocence, and their Just loss of safety? Is it not Poverty? Poverty,
that is sometimes a punishment for great sins, and often a Provocation to them?
Is it not shame, which no veil can cover, nor Impudence can Neglect? Is it not
Death? Death, which in most cases is the End of misery, but in these rather the
beginning? Surely Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft! Could any man else
Delight in sorrow? Confidently embrace fears! Leave poverty to his heirs as the
surest Inheritance, which indeed can neither be plundered nor Forfeited? Make
shame his Heraldry; shame; which unhappily is as perpetual as glory! and after
Death lead a life mixed with Death, by the riddle of misery? Yet has not this
been the common Reward and deceit of this sin? Whatsoever has been the
Pretense, has not this been commonly the Reward? Did not the Nobles under Henry
the Third pretend the protection of of the People? Did they not under King
John, calling themselves the Army of God, pretend the Protection of Royalty,
though not of the King himself who (as some sillily tell us) had given away his
Royalty and People to the Pope? Did they not under Edward the Second pretend
the protection of virtue it self? And did not Wiat among others pretend the
protection of Religion it self? Yet did all these pretended protections of
Royalty, of People, of virtue, of Religion, protect them from the common Fate
and Merit of Pretenders? Could then Rebellion still prevail on reason, were it
not a Witchcraft? Behold its success in picture, that is, in its Desolations;
and can the News so much affect, as the Sorrow disaffect? Behold Desolations in
the City, the late Royal City; does it not send out its People, brought up in
Peace, to the Sword? Does it not woefully empty it self of sins by emptying it
self of sinners? Are not its Palaces defamed into Jails? Places of Honor and
liberty changd into places of shame and Restraint? Are not its Churches, where
formerly was sounded the Gospel of Peace, filled with the clamours though not
of Law, yet of War? Are not their streets, where once Joy and Freedom
triumphed, scarce free for a Loyal whisper or a sigh? Are not her Inhabitants
Stripped, though not by Israelites, yet as Egyptians? Have they not lost their
Jewels with their Peace? And could Rebellion thus prevail, were it not a
Witchcraft? Behold desolations in the Country! Is not the Horse almost grown a
stranger to the Plow, and more acquainted with the Music of the Pistol, then
of the whip? The Ox more familiar with the Shambles, then with the york? Has
not the flame licked, if not devoured beautiful habitations? Is not the whole
year become an Autumn, wherein Trees, by unhappy necessity, seem as
carelessely to fall, as formerly leaves? Is not almost every where Baldness
instead of Beauty? As if War meant not to leave felling, till there were no
timber left to helve an Axe! And could Rebellion thus prevail, were it not a
Witchcraft? Behold Desolations in the Universities! Do not the Arts mourn,
as if their former Blackes had not been a token of civility, but of prophesy?
May not Grammar forget congruity in such an Age of Irregularity? Is not
Rhetorique a Soloecisme, betraying its decay of Art, if it bestows words on
that sorrow, which is best expressed by silence? Poetry, though it have rather
Argument then Leafure, may yet fear to be no less posed then Employed,
Invention being prevented and out-gone by Action! Logique, cannot well retain
its Reason, being so over set with Disloyalty and strife? Arithmetrique, that
was once not tired in numbering the stars and Sands, now tain^s with Melancholy
in reckning the slain and captives? Geometry, that was acquainted and
delighted with Holy Architecture, finds now employment but in the Trench and
Bulwark! Astronomy has more Galilaeans still gazing at the effects of her
last Comet, then at all her Stars! The Optiques, as if Injuriously hindered,
weep, that now scarce any thing is seen but by Refraction; which yet may be
increased by our just tears! Masique is so fled or changed, that Harmony, like
Obedience, may only be found in Heaven, or the Heavenly! The Earth, the Water,
the Air, the Fire, are even so Tainted, that Philosophy knows not its own
Elements! and so divided, as if they' would scarce agree to farther
composition? Morality! Looks it not like an old piece of chivalry? The Virtues
and vices being taken for Wanderers and Phansy, for Vtopians Errant? Oeconomie,
may it not fear a famine, and implore your Honorable mercy? If the Plow cease
the Grinders must cease; and the Mourners, if there shall be any, and they able
to go, may go about the Streets! Policy is become of more Practice then
Success, and very like the Italian Masters, of that Craft; being commonly as
Bad and unhappy as Macchiavel and his Borgia! The Physician has not lost his
Art, but Tired it, in the discovery of disease, in the recory of Health; which
always was held Imperfect, and now Feigned! The Law sees the old Enmity of
Man; but not the old Remedy! Divinity is become like profaned Majesty! It had
once Prerogative; now Subsistence is denied! It seemed once to have its part,
whiles on Earth, in Heaven: and surely now it seems to have no part in Earth!
'Twas once the Rule of Reason and Wisdom: 't is now the Servant of Ignorance
and Outrage! The Priest had once a part in most Sacrifices: the Priest himself
is now become the Sacrifice! And could Rebellion thus Prevail, were it not a
Witchcraft? Behold desolations in the Field, a great Aceldama a field of
Blood, a field of Battle! Where destruction is an Art! Where to deface the
workmanship of God in Man is glory! Where Phlebotomy is not Cure, but mischief!
The Blood so flowing, as if the Body were all Vein! Where the Horse and his
Rider strive as much to surpass one an other, as to surpass the Enemy, whiles
in a superexaltation of courage, they seem as greedy of death, as of Victory!
Where the Sword and the Spear, the Instroments of Destruction are destroyed!
Where the Roaring of the Canon, and the Groans of the Wounded are a
Representation and mixture of the most obstinate Terrors Thunder and Hell! And
could Rebellion thus prevail, were it not a Witchcraft? A like then they are,
unhappily a like; both Pernicious, both Diffusive! plagues that invade
Countries and People! Our Neighbor France; if the Confession of a Witch may be
believed, had in it at one time, as B^dine tells us, above a hundred thousand
Witches! A half quarter of the Number had been wonder and plague enough! And
has it not had also thousands of Rebels? Diseases these are, that in our own
Country have over spread Man and Ages! The Records of each Country can witness
against Witchcraft: the Records of our Nation can witness against Rebellion.
Peruse our story for almost six Ages, from the Invasive Arms of the Norman
to these present Intestine, and you shall scarce find the Reign of any Prince
free from the Distress of Treason or War! Not the Cruelty of the Conqueror,
the Prosperity of Henry the Second, the Victories of Edward the Third, nor the
cunning of Henry the Fourth; Not the magnaminity of Henry the Fifth, the
Simplicity of Henry the Sixth the Prudence of Henry the Seventh, nor the
confidence of Henry the Eight; Not the Innocence of Edward the Sixth, the
devotion of Queen Mary, the Justice of Queen Elizabeth, nor the mercy, nor the
Manifold Excellencies of our late and present Sovereigns, have yet preserved
them from the Distress of Treason or War! As if the Wisdom of the Divine
Majesty would in this Life temper the felicity of Humane Majesty with some
distempers! And teach a People, if they be His people, that they are not only
the People of his pasture, but also the Sheep of his hand; that he does not
only Feed them, but Examine them; that when they come into his hand, it usually
is to be Fleeced or Cured, and so is usually not without loss or pain.

But shall we now more nearly see the Provocations to permit Rebellion, in
respect of God? Religion and Conscience will find out sins! Sins in the City;
behold pride of wealth, though often got by a servile hand! Envy at Nobility,
though the proper right of Birth or virtue! Gluttony, a vice in a great
Fortune, a Curse in a small. Deceit in Trade, a secret Theft: Extortion, an
Impudent Theft! Libertinisme; an Independency, proper to the Devill's
Corporation, being never granted by God or Prince! Sins in the Country; behold
pride also there; the Inferior swelling not toward the worth of his
superior, but the vanity! Behold also there a Lay-Non-Residency of the Rich,
which in times of peace, too much neglecting their Habitations, may seem to
have provoked God to Neglect them: and as they have deprived the Country of
Exemplary virtue and of its Native wealth, by carrying up their wealth and
appetites to the great City, their gold, by the Alchymy of Sin, returns
exchangd in Lead and Steel, to lay wast their dwellings! Behold also their
malice, the melancholy of Sin, corrupting the opportunity of blessed
contemplation. into the Curse of Imagining mischief! Sins shall we find also in
the Residences of the Muses? Alas, they have more need of Comfort, then
accusation; yet some would there espy out pride. But can we suppose it in an
estate founded upon piety? 't Were against Justice. Can we suppose it in an
estate founded upon Worth? 't Were against wisdom; worth being most Humble,
when it is most! Some would espy out sloth; which there were rather an
Impropriety, then a vice, being contrary to the nature of Learning, which, like
virtue, delights in Action. But can any eye espy out Coveteousnesse, being
inconsistent with the Liberal Arts? Sins shall we find also in an Army? Yet
there in some behold Rapine, that makes pretense Title and violence possession!
Behold drink and lust, by which valor is wounded without a bullet, and shamed
without Flight! Behold the Day of Divine worship; and happy were it, if the
Body of that worship were at least attended with the due shadow of it. Behold
the injury offered to Gods Honor in his Name, a sin that is most Familiar, and
should be most strange to a profession, that stands so much upon point of
Honor. The great Satyrist called a Soldier a Sacrament, or Oath, because a
sworn Man, or one that had taken the Oath of Fidelity to the Roman General. Yet
without figure he did intend, it should be understood Not without Figure. But
now we must desire, that an Oath and a Soldier may not become the same Thing,
and so unhappily loose a very good Figure! And are there not yet other
provocations, Entravagant both for their Subject and Degree? Is not the
understanding sometimes too Audacious, swelling into Heresy, as against even
the Godhead of our Savior? For which Rebellions against God, does not God
often suffer Rebellions amongst Men? Did not Posa the Jesuit within a Ten
year's Remembrance, raise even the Spanish devotion, though so Saturnine, in
too many, and too great ones, unto Opinions not only against the Schoolmaster
of their Church, Aquinas, and the Fathers of the Church, but with a precise
Impiety against the Apostles creed? Has not their own Vargas (whither under a
Name of Truth, or of Fiction and Safety) discovered the dancer with as great
Zeal, as the Iberian statists have endeavored to cover it with Wisdom? And
yet may we not suspect such Tumult in Religion, to be Represented, if not
rewarded in their Catalonian Tumults? Which without a Fleet may seem to have
brought the Netherlands into Spain? And is not the understanding sometimes too
Humble, falling to an Adoration of humane Wisdom, thereby showing its humane
folly, whiles it would make Men, what God will not make them, Infallible? The
Council of the Amphictyones, that long saved Greece from dissolution, could not
at last save it self from it! It proved Finite, both in the Degree of the
wisdom and the continuance; though it continued sixteen Hundred years. The
great Council of God's own people, were so deserted of God, that they condemned
the Son of God of Blaphemy against God! To overvalew Humane power is likewise
an argument of humane weakness. Whiles our Seas and Cliffes have made us swell
with pride, and stand-high with scorn of a foreign Enemy, have we not
forgetfully divided our selves against our selves becoming like the Waves and
Cliffes, which we would needs be like, one dreadfully dashing against the
other? And are not the affections sometimes dangerously Fixed on the defense of
an old plunder? Nay, the attempt of a New? Impropriations are the outcry of
many; but are they the Care of many? Or is their Restitution wished with as due
Charity, as Zeal? Outcry for the Church must not deserve an Outcry against the
Church. Are the Possessours of them more endebted to the Church, then other
Christians, when they receive no more benefit, then other Christians? Are they
held of the Church, or of the Law? And shall the Highest Assurance, Law, by
which they are held, make the purchase just; and shall the Highest Assurance,
Law, make the possesion unjust? As then Religion tells us, that the blessing of
the restitution concerns a People; so Justice tells us, so Charity not only
toward the people, whom this Spiritually concerns; but also toward the
particular Possessours, whom this temporally concerns, require the Charge of
the restitution, of the people that are partakers of the Blessing? a blessing
doubtless, no less possible, then Admirable? Admit in some latitude of
reckoning, the Number of Impropriations were Four thousand; admit their value
were thrice four subsidies; Wisdom, and Peace, and Time, can contrive the
redemption; and inviting God to bestow on our Nation Pardon and Fame, Eternize
This for the Great, the Holy Council; and This people for the Holy People! But
are there not some more ready to take away, or exchange, what is left? As if
they would teach the living to make a New will for the Dead? Nay, for the
living God? Who has by his own Authority freely annexed Tith to the Priesthood
of Melchizedec, and therefore made it as perpetual, and so as unchangeable, as
that Priesthood. And are not the affections sometimes dangerously changeable,
preferring Innovation and Hope before experience and Safety? Did not this
overthrow the Athenians, though Proud and Subtle! Did they not Obey and Enjoy
for almost five hundred years a Free Monarchy? Did they not afterward impair
their Government and Happiness, by making their Princes, though Perpetual,
subject yet to Account and Censure? And though Fear checked them from farther
vanity for some hundreds of years, yet by new changes to Decennial
Principality, then to Democracy, then to Oligarchy, were they not first
deceived and at last undone? Did not their Trust choose and mistake a Council
of Four Hundred? whom neither Number nor Modesty could restrain from Tyranny?
Did it not afterward mistake Thirty, whose number indeed was less, but not
their Injustice? did they not at last, against the Judgment and Spirit of
their Best Orator, acknowledge the petty Macedonian for their Master, who
would not endure the Renownd Persian for their Lord? Nay, when as they had
indifferently escaped the subtilty of Philip, and the power of Alexander?

Let every one then be Freely subject, be wisely subject to that Advice of the
wise King, Meddle not with them, that are given to Change. A change it is and a
wonder, that Sense should Rule, should Enforce Reason; That the Body should
rule the Head! When in all causes a King is next under God Supreme Governor,
how can a people whether single or united, be the Governor of That Governor?
A great Council may be the Adviser of a Prince; but as the Statute Law of our
Prayer Binds us to Confess before God, it is God that is the only Ruler of
Princes. That Council then is truly Great, that is as Great in Loyalty, as in
Advice; A Council, that writes its story and Honor in its Loyalty; a
Council, that meddles not with them, that are given to Change. And yet there
are two Changes Lawful; whereof the one will always be desired, and the
other Ought to be; one is a Change in a deliverance from distress; Nature
teaches This to be Lawful; Grace farther teaches, that the means must be
Lawful. We must not remove Temporal Evils by Spiritual Evils, misery by
Disloyalty; no, not Spiritual Evils by Spiritual Evils. We must help our selves
not by a violence, against man, but by a holy violence the force of Prayer,
with God. Then will he make the Christian yoke perfectly Christian, that is, an
easy yoke. Gods Wisdom and Justice so order the World, that generally People
under Paganism or Mahometanisme are under Tyrannies; as if the state of their
Bodies Imitated and Expressed the state of their souls. Indeed they are a
People and only by Force: but they that are orderd by the Gentleness of Grace,
generally enjoy the Government of Grace and Peace. If then even Christians feel
grievous miseries, they must in a Justifying of Gods Justice, acknowledge
grievous Sins; and if miseries without amendment, their sins also to be without
due amendment. Which moves to a second change, which ought to be desired,
Deliverance from sin. And if we compare these deliverances, we shall find
the first to be the effect of the second; the Outward of the Inward; God making
the Soul the best Physician of the Body. Against the Mischiefs of
Witchcraft, some relate, that the Toad-stone is of Power: but more wisely,
because more naturally, they avouch, that it is excellently powerful to drive
poison from the Heart, as also to cure Fiery Swellings. A sad, yet an
Instructive emblem of a State; and no less strange in story, then in Virtue.
Crusius the Suevian Annalist tells of one, that by a Rivers side discovered a
prodigious heap of venomous creatures, which for the terror of their noise and
number, might, it seems, have exercised as well a man's Saving faith as his
Historical; and that on the Third day, before which they did not disperse
themselves, there remained only a Snake on a mass of Slime, a dead Toad, and,
near the Place, a precious stone, which being brought away and cleans'd
appeard afterward to be the Effect and Remedy of rank Poison. A strange
experiment of the Divine Love; which out of a Consultation of Venomes, could
produce Health; as out of Corrupt Manners wholesome Laws; and by Divine Art
change Viper into Restorative! O let us then by the Art of Misery, the Art of
Prayer, attempt the like happy, the like wise Wonder! Let us from Sin,
whether our own or Others, grow Holy; from the Degree of Sin, more Holy! Let
the beginning of Grace beget Peace: Let the Progress of it beget Love. Let us
Conjure-downe the Witchcraft of Rebellion, not by Exorcisme but Repentance. Let
us more tremble at Sin, then at the Sword; nay, let us so fear God, that we
may fear only God. So will the Lord of Hoasts become unto us the Prince of
Peace, and bestow upon us the Peace of God: which though in its excellency it
passes all understanding, yet shall its Comforts affect our Affections and
Sense. Which Blessings, O Lord, bestow upon us, that in Unity we may bless
Thee, the blessed Trinity; to which Three Persons and One God, be ascribed the
Glory of Power and Peace, World without end.

FINIS.
OF Absaloms Ambition, A SERMON Preached before the PRINCE His Highness, at
Christ-Church in OXFORD, November 10. 1644.

By BARTEN HOLYDAY D. D. Archdeacon of Oxford, and one of His Majestics
Chaplains.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for S. Pocock 1661.

2 SAMUEL 15.4. Absalom said moreover, O that I were made Judge in the Land, that
every Man which has any Suit or Cause, might come unto me, and I would do
him Justice.


VVHiles the most exellent Angel was content with his own excellency, he
retained it: but when he aimed at Another excellency, he lost his own; and
thus by the strange imposition of mistake, became a Devil, when he thought to
become a God. Which unhappiness of the most happy Angel, that should have
been unto man an example of Terror, is become unto him an example of
imitation: and man, rather then he will not be like an Angel in the Height of
his Attempt, will be like him in the misery of his Fall. And so like unto him
he is in the misery of his Fall, that this Great Sin looked like a defilement
rather of the Spirit, then of the Body. He would needs in Excellency be like
even unto God, by which desire he became unlike him; and aiming to become more
then Man, he became less then Man; this was a second Adam of his own making.
This mere Man thought it no Robbery to be Equal to God; and made his desire no
less Food then Wicked; it being as much without possibility, as without
Reverence. And as this Adam did not dye without Issue, no more did his
Appetite; an Appetite to attain Glory without Goodness; like that of a
deceiving and a deceived Beauty; which fetches Complexion not from the Blood,
but from the Bone. And this false Appetite to false Glory, as in former times
it descended to a Lamech or a Nimrod, men devoted to Kill or Tame Mankind; so
in aftertimes to an Absalom, who was as verily the son of Adam, as of David.
Like David he Fell, but not like David rose again. Like Adam he fell: the Tree
was a Mischief to them both; to the one by the Fruit: to the other by the
Bough; and though Adam's fall was a greater Mischief to Others, Absalom's was
probably a Greater mischief to Himself. Yet since Ruin is Instructive,
affording as well Wisdom, as Melancholy, we may with safety and Delight view
the Person, this Person, Absalom; as singular for his Variety, as for his
Crime. We may view his Diligence, in the promoting of his Plott, though not of
Himself. Much had he done, much had he said; yet more he Does, and more he
says; He said Moreover. We may view his Ambition, yea his Heart, which is at
his Mouth, before his Words; they were ushered with a Sigh, O, that I were made
Judge in the Ladd. A very fit one in his Own Judgment, and therefore probably
the less Fit. We may view the Extent of his Ambition, which with more
impudence then isufficiency, desires that Every man, which has any Suit or
Cause, might come unto Him. This Judge would be a Judge of Judges, a Supreme
One. We may view the Pretense of his Ambition; He would do a Royal wonder;
he would please God and Man; He would do Justice. O the Devotion of Treason!
the Justice of Injustice! that would wrong a King, by seeming to Right a
People! This is the way of Absalom, the Person to be viewed; whose Folly, by
the Art of Example, may make Others wise, Behold Absalom.

A man so excellent, that you may find in him all excellencies, except
Sovereignty and Grace. Would you see the Glory of Birth? In this he did as much
surpass his Brethren, as Saul in stature surpassed the People. Even Solomon,
his brother, was but a younger brother, and in Birth meaner. He was indeed the
Son of a King, but Absalom was the Son and Nephew. Israel and Geshur
conspired to ennoble this Conspiratour. Solomon's Mother was the Wife of a
King, Absalom's Mother was the Wife and Daughter of a King, which doubled Blood
doubled his Spirits, and made the Pulse of his Ambition beat High. Would you
see the Glory of Comeliness? Behold this delicate Imposture of Nature; framed
by Nature, as it were by Art, to Deceive and Please, From the Sole of the Foot
even to the crown of the Head he was without blemish; he was an Absalom. Had
Virtue been to be pictured, it might have been made like Absalom, who was
destitute of that, which he was most like. Would you see the Glory of Age? He
was about the Midst and strength of Man's Time. He wanted nothing to the
felicity of years but the Date of a Coronation. Of this defect indeed in a
sound Body his mind fell sick; which cast him into some convulsions of Treason.
He was mature for Government, had he not been more ready to rule others, then
Himself. Will you see the Glory of Subtilty? He was such a Master in the
Politics, that he seemed to master the Master of them, Ahithophel: whose
Oracle was at His command and Censure. He knew Ahithophel's infirmity, as well
as his Wisdom; his desire of Honor and Revenge He knew, that a reverend
Counsailor might in a possible frailty hooe to have his Wisdom more admired
under a Young, then under an Aged master. He knew Ahithophel had been wronged
in his Niece Bathsheba; though the loss of her Good name was partly
recompensed by a Great. And thus he made him venture to repay sin with
sin, Murder with Treason; and by a new Master to revenge himself on an Old.
Would you see the Glory of Courage? 'Twas Absalom durst revenge his injured
Sister, making blood the price of Lust, redressing a Great sin by a greater.
'Twas Absalom durst revenge himself on Warlique Joab; to make him remember
that he forgot him. He knew him to be a warrior, and dealt with him in a
military way; he fired his feeld of Corn; to let him know, that he had but
changed his flame of Love into the flame of revenge; inviting kim thus by a
discourtesy, to do him a Courtesy with the King. Would you see the Glory of
Hope? He was in the Eye and Heart of the People: he was the Eye and Heart of
the people; their Delight and Life. Their Love to David was grown old like
David; and liking any Innovation, so of their own choice, they would by a kind
Treason, obey his Son, counting it not a Loss, but a Change of Loialty. And
shall we now wonder if such a multitude of excellencies be attended by the
Multitude? If the Glory of Birth, of Comeliness, of Age; if the Glory of
Subtilty, of Courage, of Hope, so daze the eyes of the People, that with Civil
Idolatry they mistake and adore a Rebel for a King? And yet though they would
not see, they might have Remembered the Faults of Absalom, as well as of David,
They might at least have remembered, the Vanity of his Pillar, which indeed he
erected to his Memory; a remembrance rather of folly then of Worth. Absalom
having no Son, a monument of Nature, to preserve his Name, thought to supply
it by a monument of Art, like the Rhodian folly of the Colossus; which though
it was twelve years in Erecting, e're five times twelve was demolished in the
moment of an Earthquake, in Dispatch, Quick; in Fame, Perpetual! Trajans
Pillar was more happy; being after its fall raised again. Shall we say it seems
more happy then Trajan? Whiles of the Memorial of a Heathen, it is made the
Pedestall, of a Christian memorial, the Cross? But Absalom's Pillar has not
by Industry won a more lasting memory, then the Kings dale in which it stood;
or then the Heap of stones over his traitorous Carcass, and that without
Expense or Care. The first Age too, we hear, had pillars, intended Monuments of
Arts and Skill; secured by their constitution of Brick and Stone against Flood
and Fire; but, alas, they fell like those that raisd them, though not so soon.
Their Cement was but frail against Time and the Pickaxe. Indeed, what is Fame
without Virtue, being committed to the ridiculous Eternity of Air or Earth? to
the breath of Report, or to the corruptible materials of Books, monuments
commonly but of rags and gall. And what were Absaloms Abilities, but the
Occasions and Companions of Treason; with which they were at a Peace of Consent
to raise a War.

Behold his Diligence, in his, Preparation; which he makes so visible, that you
must needs behold it. Behold his Chariots and his Horses, which by the Ear
command the Eye to attend them; the Wheel and Hoose seeming as furious, as the
Chariotier and Ambition. Behold his fifty slaves, though not his Subjects,
running before him, occasioning others to run to see them. He would have the
Glory of Majesty, though he had not the Right. He rose early: Guilt is
unnaturally watchful, as Innocence is commonly too Secure. He stood beside the
way of the Gate: He was nearer to the Seat of Justice, then to Justice. He
waited on the People as they came; but it was that they might come and wait on
Him. His Enquiry seemed Love, being about their Cities and Causes. Indeed all
their Cities, that is a Kingdom, was his Aim; and the Main Cause, which he
intended, was his Own. He bids them see, that their matters were Right; when
as his Heart could rightly tell him, that his own were wrong. He flaunderd his
Sovereign of Injustice and Sloth; as that he would not do Justice, no not by
a Deputy. Nor does he here rest; his Tongue could no more rest, then his
Heart. And yet he spoke not in Vanity, but Cunning. This Great Artist knew both
the Rule and Use of silence, When his Revenge intended the death of his brother
A^n non, he spoke neither good, nor bad to him; as if his brother had been
dead already. Yet when his Plott prompted his Tongue, he could work a
Politic Miracle upon Himself, and speak. Silence and Speech are like the
Tongue, to which they belong; which by the Ancients was held Sacred to Mercury,
with them a Deity and a Planet; good with the good and bad with the bad; and
such is the Tongue with a Good or a Bad Heart. Silence, that Hides a Mischief,
is a Mischief; and Speech, that Promotes a Mischief, is a greater Mischief;
and such was the Silence and Speech of Absalom: whose Silence was Murder, and
his Speech Treason. He moved the People to remove David: he moved the people to
Settle Himself in the Throne; even in that Throne from which his Merits should
have expected rather Judgment, then Honor. Full was his Heart, and neither
Nature nor Ambition would let it break. Speak therefore he Must, and he Does
Speak, that which his own subtilty knew to be Folly, had he not spoken it to
the People. To these indeed his Treason, nay his Confession of Treason, seemed
Reformation. Let his own mouth judge him, whiles his Desire says moreover, O,
that I were made Judge in the Land.

The Desire of things needful is natural: the desire of things pleasant is
sometimes lawful, most commonly dangerous: which latter as we must always
suspect, so must we never corrupt the former. We must not corrupt just desires
by unjust means to effect our desires. A sigh then for that which we may not
desire, deserves a sigh. Yet such is the sorrow of ambition: which though it
implies a love of one's self, implies as certainly a vexation of one's self:
which yet a sigh seems to mitigate, though not satisfy; as if the desire and
the sigh would be lost together. But surely ambition is unhappily more
constant: And though it be a vanity, yet in the pursure of it is object is
rather swift then fickle. Thus Absalom's tongue is as ready as his brain; and
since he cannot conceal his treason, he must vary it. A King he would be: He
says, He would be a Judge. His expression is like his intention, nearer to
cunning then to Justice. To wish to be a King, had seemed to aim at the glory
of Royalty: to wish to be a Judge seemed to aim at the virtue. This modest
Traitor would therefore seems to desire to be rather a Deliverer, then a Lord.
And yet he would have his Judicature and the whole Land have the same bounds;
His ambition would not yet discover it self to be boundless. Yet a King he
would be: but how shall he be, what he would be? were he a King he should
command; but as yet he can but entreat, that he may command. A King he would
be; but of whose making would he be? Not of God's making; for he had made
David: whom though he afflicted, he loved; nay, therefore loved, because he but
afflicted him. Nor could he be of David's making: who neither could undervalue
Royalty, being God's favor; Nor neglect a People, being his charge. A King
then he could be made only by the People and the Devil; whiles by the People
and Treason; whiles against the consent of God and David. But have we not now
some that would plead for Absalom? not that they would show their love, but
their power, to make a King. Have we not some, that tell us, that power is
originally inherent in the people? This seems indeed a profound doctrine; and
surely it is as deep as Hell: yet is it as possible, as useful to discover
the danger of this darkness. This doctrine excludes all Kings from original
power giving it so unto the people: when even as naturally they may plead,
that all power is originally in the body, not in the head. For they conceive a
people, as without a King; when as Nature teaches us, that the chief strength,
the directive strength, is originally in the Head; Reason and Sense being
thence derived. Nay, what Power at all the Body has, can not be learned at all
of the Body; it must be taught by the Head: which not proudly, but truly
teaches us, that the members cannot be directed into a wise Society without the
Head. Strength there may be in the Blind: but Strength requires the Eye, and so
the Head, for Direction. The Wisdom of the Head has a natural Supremacy over
the Members; Thus Society is not only a Number of Men, but also an Order. And
the best Order is not where a member is exalted into a head; this is rather
monster, then order. The true head in order of natural birth is elder then all
the members. But have we not some, that make man the voluntary author of
Dominion? the Law the Instrument, and God but the establisher of both? See the
acuteness of this humane wisdom, but see also the oversight of it! If man be
the author of Government, then surely, Government being such a height of
wisdom, must needs have a wise man for the author of it; And which is that
most like to be, a King or a Subject? A King by Government has an acknowledged:
Power and Wisdom: a Subject has thus by his Supposed Choice a Necessary
Obedience. Now can a man supposed so wise, as to be able to choose a King, and
so Free, as to owe Subjection to no man, freely make a Law against his own
Freedom? Surely then, if man shall be the Author of Government, he must not be
a Subject but a King; a King made by the Power of his Wisdom, before he was
made by the power of the People; so that he was a King, before he was chosen
to be a King; and rather Declared to be such, then made such. But these men
intend the People for the Author, as the Law for the Instrument; Since then the
People are a Party to the Deed, who shall be Judge, if Doubt arise? shall such
wisdom as is able to Choose a King oversee such an Inconvenience, as great, as
Endless? Or shall God be the Judge, whom these make the Establisher? Surely if
God shall by man be admitted, to be as well the Judge, as the witness of the
Deed, when doubt arises how shall his Judgment appear? Shall we expect a vote
from a Sinai-Cloud, or from an Angel, or Prophet, as formely among the Jews?
This were not to consult God, but to Tempt him. Unless then Royalty be from a
Greater Authority, than the People, all difference between a King and People
must necessarily be as much without an End, as without a Judge. Royalty then is
Internally from God, the God of Nature, deriving it to man most graciously,
whiles most quietly, by birth. Externally, it may be attributed to the Law,
which does declare the inward Right. So that, the Authority is from God, the
Declaration of it is also from the King, whiles from the Law. For what is the
Law? Is it not Graciously the work of a King? To desire, and so to Accommodate
a Law, is the Act of the People, but absolutely to Grant a Law is the Act of a
King; In which the People's Advise is included not to weaken Regal Right (the
Grant implying Right and Love;) but to set forth as well the People's Duty, as
their Benefit, sweetning and Ensuring Obedience by their Consent, as first by
their Desire. Vainly then do some say, what they but say, that the Fountain
of Power is the People, and that in Princes it is but Derivative. True it is,
it is but Derivative in respect of God; but in respect of Man, that it always
is so, or naturally so at all, is no less ridiculous, then Untrue. That nature
begun Government is Undeniable: which is most purely preserved in Hereditary
Monarchy: so that all other Government is either Unnatural, or Preternatural;
and therefore to derive Government from the People to the King, is as to derive
Authority from the Son to the Father, or to make the River feed the Spring.
Yet do not some now say more than Absalom could either know or use, that
Government amongst Christians is nothing but an Agreement of Politic
Corporations? But can Christians without shame, since not without untruth,
teach thus amongst Christians? Does the doctrine of Christ alter the Right of
Kings? This is a new secret of new State! but no plot for Conversion of the
Great Turk. Does a King, becoming a Christian, forfeit his Kingdom to his
People? or, from a Lord become a Tenant at will? Christ himself taught other
doctrine, when he said, give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's; he did not
add, Till he become a Christian. And furely Constantine lost nothing by such a
Change, his new Christian Subjects did not make their Sovereign their Slave by
fettering him with Covenants. He was indeed God's Officer, but their Ruler. But
Absalom's aim is not Right; it is Glory; though his Humble Cunning will be at
their Command, till it can command: which that he may do, he speaks his
desire, an extent of desire; That every man, which has any suite or Cause may
come unto Him.

Was not this Conspiratour as void of wisdom, as he was full of subtilty, that
would express his desire in that very form, that would Condemn it? Desires he
not that Authority, which Conscience and Allegieance taught both Him and the
People, to be due only to the King? In all Causes and over all Persons Supreme
Government? Love, the Love of Beauty, as the old truth teaches us, is Blind, in
not examining the Imperfections of it self. What Absalom desired, was an
Excellency beyond all the excellencies, which he had without his desire! And
as it was without duty, so was it without modesty. Was it not to challenge to
himself as well so much ability, as so much honor? royalty sometimes passes
by Choice, but not by a selfe-Choise; Nature not allowing a Cause to be its own
Effect. When Moses had, what Absalom but desired, he desired to be eased of a
great Part of the Honor. He was the Chief Judge; but not the only Judge; nay,
in Inferior Judgments not at all the Immediate Judge: To attend a fly, is
rather the business of a Domitian, then of an Emperor. Nature, that has given
the Eagle so excellent a Sight, has given it the wisdom in some things to
neglect the Use of it. What in Natural Knowledge is Perfection, the Knowledge
of the Hyssope, as well as of the Cedar, is in Civil Actions a Weakness; being
to grant a Power and Retain the Use of it. But This Judge would have no
Deputy; Every man should come unto him. He would be so Humble, that he would
Judge the Poor: he would be so Able, that he would Judge the Judge. The
Layman in point of Equity should be as sacred to him as the Priest; and the
Priest as sacred, as the Sacrifice. Nor would he thus descend to the Person,
but to the Business; to any suit, though but for Injury in Words: to any suite,
thoug but for Injury in some Deeds less then some Words. And as his Justice
would thus Descend, so would his understanding Ascend to the Highest Cause. He
promises such Skill and Motion in the Orb of Government, that it seems
natural to him to know the Perigee and Apogee of Royalty. Does the Cause
concern Inheritance? His skilful diligence will both Supply and Surpass the
Counsailour and Survayer. Conveighance and Measure are within His Compass. Does
the Cause concern the loss of Goods? He will, without Errecting a Figure,
give Judgment, and never Consult with Heaven, or seem to consult with Hell in
the business. Does it concern a Maime or Dislocation? He will without thr
Ceremonies of Oribasius his tools, supply Surgerie by Compensation. Does it
concern Life it self? He will make the Defense of his own, but the
Remembrance of the Defense of theirs. He will make the Malefactor more deeply
suffer by Infamy, than by Execution. He only requires the repair of all their
Petitions unto Him; who will comfort them no less with Dispatch, than than with
Justice. But must All come to him! why then this very Traitor is not the
veriest traitonr. His Reason is corrupt: it is not Lost. Though Hell were his
Tutour, yet he hates Anarchie; he cannot find it There; there is a Prince of
Darkness; and so there are Superior and Inferior Devils: which, though they
are unruly, are yet under Rule. He hates Democracy; his humane wisdom knows it
to be Folly, to not the Sword of Authority into a Madman's hand. Though he was
Graceless, he was not witless. He was Unnatural, but not a Natural, nor so
unnatural. He thought it monstrous to make the People a King: to make the
Horse, in whom there is no understanding, to become the Rider. He hares
Aristocracy; He knows that many, though Great, yea become Great, are nearer to
Ruin by Emulation, than to safety by Counsel; Frailty being more common to
man than Virtue: so that not only his Pride but his Judgment approves
Monarchy; which is the best Government and the Highest. Indeed, has it not
Precedence by Divine Right, whiles it does imitate Divine perfection? Regal
power being in Virtue, not only as much, but more than Many? Many stars
making but a Night, whereas one Sun makes a Day. But Absalom, that does justly
prefer Monarchy, does unjustly desire to prefer Himself to it. Yet to
Attain it he uses Eloquence and pretends to use Justice. If they will be
favorable to Him, He will be favorable to Them; he says indeed he will be
Just to them. But he invites them to give him the Power (which is not in their
Power) and He undertakes to perfect it into the Performance of doing Right.
They have the Word of a Reformer for it, and I will do him Justice.

And I will do him Justice? Hope and Silliness are as Commodious for a
Conspiratour to work upon, as Malice and Zeal. But the Union of them is the
most desperate Preparative to Division. Can Greatness want Attendants? Can
Justice then the Greatness of Greatness, though but in Promise, want
Attendents? Will they not press-in like Hopes and Injuries? Justice makes a
King in Virtue like God: it makes a Subject in Happiness like a King. It makes
a man mistake himself to be out of the world, before he is out of it. It makes
him differ from the Angels rather in Place, than in Condition: bestowing on him
whiles on Earth, a Portion of Heaven, content and Safety. Justice is sweeter
then Revenge; delighting Nature without Ruder passion, It makes humane Felicity
like Justice, Unchangeable; and, though it Prevents not Complaint, it satisfies
it. Justice is the Cure of Slander; helping the Infamy of the Innocent, by the
Infamy of the Guilty. It is the Cure of Oppression; whiles it makes the
Oppressed if not by Restitution, yet by Comparison in better state than the
Oppressor; depriving him of his wealth, the Joy of his Oppression. It is the
Cure of Murder, making the slain Live in the Fame of his Innocence, and the
Content of his Friends, whiles they see the Murderer not so happy, as to be
forgotten. But will Absalom do Justice? why then he will Rule according to
Law: he will by Law rule Others, if not Himself. He will then neither
Cunningly Pretend a Law, nor Dangerously Change a Law. He is so Subtle if not
so Honest, as Equally to disclaim Forgery and Innovation. Where there is no
Law, there is no Sin, which is a breach of Law. They shall have the Law
therefore as much in their Eye, as in their Heart: and so to take off the Envy
from himself, be sooner condemned, if Guilty, by Conscience, than by him. And
though by his Rebellion he might seem to dishonor his Father, he does pretend
to honor his Forefathers, whiles he pretends to honor their Laws. It seems,
he thought the Preservation of Old Laws, to be of more moment, than the making
of New; and the Preservation of Laws to be of more moment than the making of
them. Indeed, is it not Folly, that Innovation in Religion should be counted
folly, but Innovation in State should be counted Wisdom! as if Humane Wisdom
and Divine were rather Contrary then Subordinate! Zaleucus the wisest Locrian
made it by Law the hazard of Life, to Propose a New Law, if it proved not as
well to be approved as proposed; whereby they knew but one New Law in Two
Hundred years. It Was certainly an argument of as much wisdom as Constancy!
And as the Natural Body, so the Politic, lasts longest, that is Least
Tempered with. To honor ones Parents; has a Promise of Long Life: to honor
our Forefathers in Honoring their Laws, cannot want the blessing of
Continuance to a Nation; Heaven more delighting to be bountitiful to many, than
to Few, where the Divine wisdom does not specially restrain: God's Jealousy
delighting in Glory, which being the Luster of his Goodness, is in it self as
boundless as his Goodness. Since the beginning of the World the Divine Wisdom
never made but one Eminent Change in the Church; the Ateration of the Jewish
Service into the Christian: the Mosaical Worship not Abrogating, but Perfecting
and Enlarging the Patriarchal. And for the Christian Service, it has not so
properly suffered an Innovation, as a Renovation; rather a Purification, than a
Change: having the same Primitive Metal, though Refined. Since then the Divine
Wisdom makes so rare a Change in so Vast a Time, Humane Wisdom may well fear
in a far less time to make Any at all. Yet if New Laws are to be made, story
and Use might present to our Consideration, if not to our Choice, some Acts the
Monuments of Ancient Law. Such was that Lycian Law, whereby in their Great
Council Votes were differenced according to the difference of men's Interests
in the State. So that a Person, a Town, a City, a County, and consequently an
Order of Men, were not only not forgotten, but proportiond. By which Happiness
of Equity, every one was a Able and wary to preserve Freedom, that Optimacy
could not creep in under the device of Close-Conveighance, audaciously to
enthraule a Government and People. Such was that Theban Law, which excluded
Artificers, and Merchants as unprepared for Government, unless for Ten years
space they had left their trade; thinking them else fitter for Bargain than
for Counsel, and so below the right Splendor and Experience of State. Such
was the Cretian Law, which forbid all Young men to Censure the Laws of their
Country; as the business not of their Search, but of their Reverence, and
thought them to be excluded as much by their Age, as by the Law. But Absalom
will not abrogate established Law, though he Violate it. Justice he will Do:
but will he do it in his own Person? It seems not then either Novelty or
Injustice for a King where he excludes not himself, to be as well the Judge,
as the King, of his People; a Superior Agent being Eased, not suspended, by an
Inferior; no more than the Divine Presence is excluded from a Place, by the
Inferior Presence and Employment of an Angel. Moses did not Loose his
Authority to his Assistants; but Imparted it. The Sun gives Light, though he
enables the Moon to Give Light, and sometimes appears with it in the same
Hemisphere, the Moonelight being not Exstinguished, though Exceeded. Solomon,
when he gave Judgment about the doubtful Child, did neither what was Unjust,
nor unjustly; and showed as True Wisdom, though not as Rare in being the
Judge, as in the Manner of the Judgment. When Jehosaphat set Judges in the
Cities of Judah, his Right was not Diminished, but Diffused; and if we look
back upon the Kings of our Land, we may, by the easy prospective of an
Antiquarie, see them often sitting on the Throne of Judgment. Indeed, though
not in respect of the Kind of the Pleas, yet in respect of Judicature, we may
without Injury or Impropriety, say that every Seat of Justice is the King's
Bench. When therefore a King does by a Law strengthen the Sentence of a Judge,
does he disclaim his Power, or rather Proclaim his Integrity? Whiles he binds
himself to Judge according to Law, does he bind himself from Judging? Has not
Nature made a Father the Judge of his Family? If then sometimes he makes a
Son a Judge between troublesome Brethren, does he thereby make himself not
the Judge of the Family? A Deputation is rather a Proof of superior Right,
than a Destruction. And therefore they observe not their own oversight, that in
effect would have us observe, Royalty and Judicature to be Inconsistent, as if
Contrary, when as sometimes, as in a King, they are not so much as Subordinate.
Is not God, that is the King of the World? the Judge of the World? And is not a
King of Humane Judges the Supreme Judge? But will Absalom do them Justice?
What needs He do it? Will not David do it? Or, is David's blood become not
Royal, because Vriah's was Innocent? Or, does Vriah's blood cry louder in the
ears of Israel, than in the ears of the God of Israel? Can his blood cry
louder than to Heaven? Or is David's Adultery rather Aggravated, than Excused,
by his After Marriage? Are his sins so Hellish, that his Humiliation cannot
Ascend High enough, to fetch a Pardon for them? Or shall the People make an
Absalom and themselves His Judge, whom God has made Theirs? Or, shall we
suppose a New Devise to have been an Old Devise, to Separate a King from his
Person; and so, that Absalom intended to take away David, but to Preserve the
King, by Exchange of David into Absalom? A King indeed and his Person may be
Distinguished, according to Natural and Political respects; but a King and his
Person cannot be Divided. Will ye hear in this point the judgment of very
traitors, who in this point may be happily just Judges, though they seem less
fit? Hear then the Judgment of those Great Ones, that durst take-up Arms
against our Second Edward. Even They, as our Statutes testify, made it treason
in the Spencers, to make this division. And this their just Condemnation of
such Doctrine, has since the beginning of Our Great Council been by Published
command approved by our Great Council No Treason then Can, though it Would, be
so Mathematical, as to separate a King from his Person. But yet would Absalom
do them Justice? Might not some Ifraelite, that had not too unwarily voted
himself to the folly of Treason, and that had as much Observed as Attended
him, till his Expulsion and Persecution of his Father, and, by Ahitophel's
shameless counsel, till his abusing of his Father's Concubines, thus have
argued himself into Safety and a Flight? Shall we from Absalom expect the
protection of our Goods? who destroyed Joab's, with no less Boldness, than
Wrong? and with as much Ingratitude as Boldness? making a Proclamation, in
Fire, of his Impudence and Revenge? Shall we from Absalom expect the Protection
of our Wives, when as he has committed Incest, more in Spite than Lust, making
his Father's Women the Ridle as well as the Subject, of Treason and Filthiness?
which he so acted in the sight of all Isrel, as if he would have all men
believe, that it were not a work of Darkness! Shall we from Absalom expect the
protection of our Lives; when as he betrayed the life of his Brother, whose
blood was the Joy, though not the Wine of the Feast? Shall we from Absalom
expect the protection of our Fame, when as he revived the shame of his Father,
by Imitation? when with a like Malice and Cunning, he Forgot or Conceald his
Father's Virtues? Justice he may Pretend, Intend it he cannot: nay, when he
Pretended Best, he intended Worst. When he pretended a sheep-shearing? it was not
a Fleece, but a Life he intended; when he pretended a salutation of the Lip, he
Intended but Flattery, the Treachery of the Lip; when he pretended a Sacrifice
at Hebron, he Intended to offer-up a King and a Father. Though then he pretend
never so great, so many, so subtle Followers, they rather Discover his
Conspiracy, than Disguise it. Might not some Israelite thus have made his
Meditation his Safety? and, by Arming himself with Loyalty, saved himself,
though not from the Danger, yet from the Guilt of an Army of Rebels?

But will you see the Way and End of this Absalom and his Multitude, which he
scorns to Follow; which he Leads to Evil. See his first Success, his success
in Counsalle; slighting Ahithophel, he does not only Loose him, but Want him:
nor does Ahithophel only loose Absalom, but himself. He looses at once his
Wisdom and his Life; and he, that in his life would not be Ordered by the Law,
was not ordered by it in his Death: in which, by the worst Curse of Death, he
was both the Malefactor and the Executioner. See his next success, his success
in his March: in which, by Delay, he was not so wicked, as he would have been.
His Father, though heavy with Grief, yet made light by Fear, did in his
flight get respite of Distance, and by distance, Counsel, and by Counsel
Courage: by which, Collecting his Army, as well as his Mind, he Prepares for
flight, being not more dejected at his Ascent of Mount Olivet, than he was
raised in Spirit by the field of Ephraim. There he was a Penitent, here a
Warrior; and so ready to fight, that they would not Let him fight. They only
borrow his Spirit, Letting his Body rest. See then Absolom's last success, his
success in Battle. Having rather Persecuted his Father, than Followed him, he
overtakes two enemies, David's Innocence and God's Justice: That overthrew his
Conscience: This his Army. He joins Battle, an unnatural Union, though in
Blood! A Son with a Father! Sin with Sanctity! So fought the Devil with Saint
Michael, who proved as much the Superior in Power, as in Habitation. Absalom's
multitude became quickly not a multitude; not that they grew much wiser, but
Fewer; an Army of their Army, many thousands being slain. Joab and Victory
followed the Chase; Blood and Noise Overfill'd the Country! The Coward Traitor
is met with though in a Wood: no darkness but Hell could be able to hide him:
but this shelter discovered him, though it covered him. He thinks to Fly from
Justice, and Provokes it. Justice is where God is: and Absalom finds it in a
Tree, between whose boughs his beast leaves him embraced and hanged by his
restless head, which was now stayed; When the News first, and then the
News-bearer brought Joab to the sight. The Conspiracy was already wounded in
the People: but now he has Opportunity to strike it to the Heart. Into the
Midst of him then he strikes three darts. Does not the Divine Justice punish in
Number and Measure? Do they not pierce as deep, as his Conscience should have
done? Was there not One for Amnon? One for David? One for the violated Women? A
judgment for Murder! a judgment for Treason! and a judgment for Lust? For
fear of reviving he is left to the Soldiers, to whom it is Life, to take away
a Rebell's Life: and not for honor, but surety, they not only kill him, but
bury him. Into a great pit they cast him, as near Hell, as they could, and
over his carcass threw a very great Heap of stones, the Remembrance and Merit
of a very Disobedient Son. The trumpet sounds a retreat from the Labor of
slaughter: and all return to the joy of Victory or Pardon. Only good David
mournes in the midst of good News. He shows as much sorrow for the death of
Absalom as Absalom should have showd for his sin.

And thus we may see, that the felicity of the most Holy, of the most
Courageous, of the most beloved of Kings, the David of Kings, is either not
perpetual, or not certainly perpetual. He that at his Anointing had all
Israel for his Attendants, did he not now fly with a few? was he not as
wretched as Adam, who was driven out of Paradise? Did not David fly out of
Zion the Joy of the whole earth? was he not more wretched then Adam? He indeed
had a Sword set against him, to keep him out: but David was driven out, and the
sword followed him! He that before had expressed his passion in the melody of
the voice, does he not now express it in the waters of the eye? Did not those
feet now choose nakedness and pain, that once danced cheerfully before the
Arc and the Lord? He that once slew his terrible enemies, the Giant and the
Lion, was he now afraid of what he Loved, his Absalom? And thus may we not see,
that the graces of an Absalom may be consistent with the want of Grace? That
the Excellency of a Rebel is but Ambition and Pretense? That his best
offering, which looks like Divine worship is but the Idolatry of himself? That
Ambition uses Flattery and Hates it; not for the Guilt of it, but the
dejection: it being like Humility, though not it! Ambition indeed is like a
Builder, who in Laying his foundation is feign to stoop, though afterward he
rises by the Scaffold and the Ladder. And thus may we not also see the
Inconstancy of a Multitude preferring Change before Peace, a New Government
before a Good? May we not see the Ingratitude of a Multitude, showing their
Memory to be as bad as their Understanding; yet indeed serving David but as
they served God, Letting his Benefits slip out of their Mind? May we not see
the Outrage of a Multitude; which does Few things that are Good, but Nothing
Well: which does Nothing Wisely, and some things Madly? Yet even thus Ungodly
was the people, that called themselves Gods people. Now Israel became the
Heathen raging against the Lord, and against his Anointed. They now forgot
God, whiles the King; whiles they forgot God concerning the King; who said,
Touch not mine Anointed: so that whom the Oil has touchd the people may not
touch. They neglected Gods command concerning David, as Joab chose to neglect
David's command concerning Absalom: and were as fierce to kill a King, as Joab
was to kill a Rebel. Such was the inconstancy, the ingratitude, the outrage of
old Jsrael: as if they would be prophets, whiles they persecute a prophet! They
would commit a typical treason, and seem to perform God's will, whiles they
violate it, by serving David as their posterity should our Savior, changing
Hosanna into crucify him, crucify him. But O let not our Jsrael become Jewish!
Let it not be a murmuring Jsrael. We are not in a wilderness, unless we make
ourselves the beasts. we are in a holy Land if we will not profane it: in a
Land, that naturally has more honey, then gall; in a Land that has no Aloes
but by commerce. Our hemlocke, as some hold is not mortal; O let not then our
passion, be worse than our weed! If any root shall be pulled up, let the first
be the Root of bitterness. If any branch is to be cast away, let it never be
the Rod, the branch of Aaron: which deserved double honor, both for the
Fruitfulness, and for the Wonder! Let not our Israel become worse then Jewish;
let it not become Heathenish, nay worse then Heathenish. Pilate though a
Heathen, seemed to have been willing to be Christ's friend, but that he feared he
should not then be counted Caesar's friend. But here we cannot fear such a
division: nay, here we cannot admit such a Division. We cannot be Caesar's
friends, if we be not Christ's: we cannot be Christ's friends, if we be not
Caesar's. Since then our God has blessed our Israel with a David, a David not for
his faults but for his Virtues and his Troubles; since he has blessed, us from
an Absalom though not from an Ahithophel; since he has blessed us with the most
gracious Son of a most Gracious Father, a father as much by Judgment as
Virtue above vanity; since he has blessed our Land with a People famous even in
the Midst of our miseries, for Number and Courage; Let us add Wisdom, and by
Wisdom Obedience, and by Obedience Peace, and by Peace Justice; Justice not
from an Absalom, or an Ahithophel, but from our David, and so from our God, by
whom David reigns. To which God of Peace and Lord of Hoasts, Three Persons and
One God, be for ever ascribed Victory and Mercy.

THE END.
Emendations.
PAge 14. line 17. for or, read of. l. 20, f. of r. or. p. 22. l. 4. f. call,
r. calls. p. 30. l. 23. f. o it, r. so it. p. 32. l. 4. f design, r. blessing.
p. 42. l. 12. f. carnal, r. casual. p. 43. l. 27, r. Queen Alexandra. p. 46.
l, 12. r. uproare. p. 61. l. 17. r. Rebellion l. 19. r. Witchcraft. p. 62. l.
23. f. Honor r. Humor. p. 63. l. 15. dele, not. p. 65. l. 14. r. moderate. p.
66. l. 29. r. is not. p. 67. l. 11. r. satisfy. p. 68. l. 9. r. uses. p. 72.
l. 24. r. Phlegmatique. p. 74. l. 3. r. Secresy. l. 12. r. And do not. p. 77.
l. 7. r. leaving. p. 98. l. 4. f. Bone, r. Box. p. 108. l. 14. r. an
acknowledged power. p. 113. l. 26. r. then with. p. 114. l. 14. r. because. l.
24. r. Alteration. p. 118. l. 16. was so able. p. 119. l. 10. r. more then. p.
122. l. 25. f. of the, r. of his.


