ERRATUM.

Page 74. Sect. 7. Line 1. rea^ Uncontradictably.

AN ESSAY Concerning the Sabbath; OR THE SABBATH DAYS REST FROM CONTROVERSY.

Wherein is asserted, That our CHRISTIAN SABBATH Lord's Day, or Sunday is, the
very same day of the Week, which was Anciently observed by the Jews, and
Gentiles, for the Solemn day of their Solemn weekly Worship, before Isreal's
coming out of EGYPT, and after that by the Gentiles.

PREFACED With an INTRODUCTION thereunto, touching the true meaning of Genesis 2.
v, 2, 3. And on the Seventh day God ended his work, and rested that day, and
blessed, and sanctified it.

In parvo magnum. By N. Homes D. D.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1673.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
INgenious, and Ingenuous Candid Reader, I had thought that by this time I had
been (Rude donatus) freed from any further attendance at the Press, having
toyled so much, and so long in that Warfair. But seeing that neither all Men,
nor all pretenders to Learning, are yet satisfied about our Christian Sabbath:
some Hesitating about the time; others about the number; a third sort about the
morality of it: And others, on the other hand, encouraging me to set forth this
Irenicon, I yielded to them their desire: Of which, that I might not be fond,
as of a birth of my Brain, I anticipated it, by following in some degree,
Quintilian's advice, to the Author of any Book (Nonumque prematur in annum; ut
refrigerato inventionis amore tanquam Lector perpenderet) That he should
suppress his Treatise for Nine years, whereby, he cooling the fervor of his
Affectionate love to his own invention, he might peruse and weigh it rather as
the Reader of it then the Author.

This Counsel I have followed half way, my judgment (in Opposition to fond
Affection) leading me thereunto (Quartumque repressit in annum) and suppressed
this Treatise this Four years; and upon the same account as aforesaid, viz. to
prevent doting upon it. But when its Lease was out, it was releast and got
abroad into the World, more to oblige Conscience to a more serious solemnizeing
the Lord's Day; and to mind us of that Eternal (...) Sabbatisme, of which it is
the Typical Representation. A fit Subject for my old Age, and all that are
ancient in days.

Yet let no man Dream that in this Treatise I dote; as if that little Learning
I have had, made me besides my self; or that it is now too late for me to
meddle with Mathematical Numbrings, Measurings, and Revolutions of times, So
that they dare say, I cannot make good the Title of the Book; I think I may as
boldly say, such Confidents endeavor to advance their nescience above another
Knowledge; yea, and indeed, to make rash Censoriousness to ride in Triumph over
sober Consideration. For they judge of things (as we say) unsight and unseen,
and so make their illiterateness (ad hoc) to be the measure of another man's
discoveries. But he only that is Learned is able duly to judge of a Man of
Learning. Nor does God discover all truths at once, Heb. 1.1. nor to all men
alike; to some more, to some less. One Micajah (let me speak it without
boasting my self, but in a way of Apology for my loneliness in this Tenet): I
say one Micajah in 1 King. 22.6. etc. was in the right, when Four hundred false
Prophets were in the wrong. And so was Elijah in the right when the Four
hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal, and the Four hundred Prophets of the Groves
greatly erred. 1 Kings 18. v. 19. etc. And of latter times, one Paphnutius by
his Wisdom and strength of Reason turned a whole Council. (A memorable story).

Men building on false Principles, are sure to err in their Conclusions. For
Example: The Sabbath (say most) is the Seventh day from the Creation. which
(say we) cannot be; because no Mortal Man could ever tell where the Sun first
appeared to the World; N. B.
whether in the East, or in the West, whether at Noon, or at Midnight, whereby
to fix the Beginning and the Ending of the Natural Sabbath Day; that is, The
Natural Seventh day, of Twenty four hours. Besides, no one day so measured out,
could be comensurate, to make an Universal Seventh day to serve all Nations to
begin their Sabbath at the same hour. For the Sun in its swift Course makes in
every hour a new Horizon, and so a new hour to every Nation, according to their
various Situations. So that the Seventh day from the Creation is quite out of
doors, N. B.
and the Seventh day after Six days labor in every Country must be taken into
the room thereof.

In this Essay, as I follow no Common Rode, or plural of Authors, so nor do I
(as if displeased) tread upon any man's heels that has gone before, bearing
Witness to the Divine Authorization and Morality of the Sabbath though on
different Principles. But my greatest care is, least the Reader should not be
as clear in his apprehensions of my expressions, as I am in this Notion
touching the Identity and sameness of our. Lord's Day, or Sabbath with that
from the Creation to Isreal's coming out of Egypt. The Reader therefore, N. B.
that is desirous to understand, is entreated studiously to read the whole, and
then compare and ponder part with part, and then impartially judge of all. And
may perhaps thereby be provoked and be enabled to speak more fully to the Point
then I have done: as a looker on (we say) sees oft-times more then he that
plays the Game. If I have broken the Ice, another may wade further. Truth (say
the Ancients) lies hidden in a quick-Spring-Well; therefore is not drawn out
but by degrees. And every degree gives Light into further Truth; Impossibles
(as deemed) become possible, possibles to appear probable, probables to
evidence themselves demonstrable.

Is it impossible for a Master of Reason to imagine this Supposition; That he
sees Noah in his Ark, and while he there sees him, one while in the upper room
of the Ark, another while in the lower, that still he sees him in the Ark? No
more is it impossible for a man to conceive that whiles he considers the
Sabbath day in the upper region of the time of the natural Sabbath day of
Twenty four hours, to wit in the Evening; or consider the Sabbath in the lower
Region of it, namely in the Morning and beginning of the said day, that still
it is Materially the same Sabbath day, though Formally it became the Jews
Sabbath, as limited by Moses's Administration: And it becomes formally the
Christian Sabbath as it was first stated by the Patriarchs before the Flood,
etc. and afterward stablished by Christ's Resurrection.

I shall conclude with this confidence in the sight of God, that if I have not
promoted the Stablishment of our Christian Sabbath (which was my whole design)
I am sure, it is not prejudiced by

Nathanael Homes.

THE INTRODUCTION Concerning the ESSAY Touching the SABBATH.
CAPITULUM I.
1. The Thesis to be defended. 2. The two Champion Opponents of it named, and
noted. 3. The two Combating-Defendents of it decyphered, and engaged. 4. Some
Auxiliary Forces drawn out to the Battle, by Willet and Weemse etc. as occasion
serves.

1. THE Thesis to be defended by us, and our Assistants is, That those words
Genesis 2.23. And ^n the Seventh day God ended his work which he had made. And he
rested on the Seventh day from all his works which he had made. And blessed the
seventh day, and Sanctified it; because in it he had rested from all his works
which God Created and made; I say those words were spoken by Moses
Historically, narrating what God has actually done, in instituting the Sabbath
at the beginning of the World; and not Proleptically, predicting, or
fore-speaking only what God would do in time to come, in Instituting the
Sabbath; viz. That long after the Creation (as is by some supposed) at the time
of the coming of Manna in Moses's time, ( Ex. 16.) God would Institute the
Sabbath.

2. The two Champion opponents of this position are, Franciscus Gomarus, and
Petrus Hylinus, who have so toyled themselves, to prove the Negative, that is,
to assert a Prolepsis, as is to me a wonder, yea Wonders; to wit, in sweating
themselves in seeking their Prolepsis, so as they cause in me a jealousy, that
they themselves are not cordially persuaded they can clearly find it. Nor is it
possible (says the Law) to prove a mere Negative. Nor was it ever heard of a
Prolepsis of that length of time, viz. of above 2000 years, viz. from the
Creation to the coming of Manna.

3. The former of these two Champions, viz. Gomarus with his Regiment of
Authors, Rivet de Orig. Sabb.
and Arguments against our Thesis does renouned Rivet * encounter, and to good
purpose.

4. To the other, viz. Peter Hylyn I shall reply the less, because Rivetus has
said so much; and Learned Willet and Weemse will say more.

CAP. 2.
1. Rivets strength weakens Gomarus.

2. Rivets Assertion in opposition to Gomarus proved by Thirty Learned
Protestant Authors.

3. The Papists alleged for us.

4. The Fathers alleged for us.

1. OUR first Work then in order to the proving of our foresaid Thesis is, to
mind you of Learned Rivet n="*" De Orig. Sab.
his strong Answer to Gomarus, touching our foresaid Thesis, and the concerns
thereof. For by how much Gomarus his Negative (that God did not Institute the
Sabbath at the Creation) is Invalidated; by so much Rivetus his Affirmative
(that God did Institute the Sabbath at the Creation) is Corroborated. (Sie vice
ersa) By so much as Rivets Affirmative is Confirmed, by so much Gomarus his
Negative is weakened. Now that the (judicious Readers) may in this scarcity of
Rivets answer have so much of it in your eye, as thereby ye may better judge of
Gomarus his and my Treatise, I shall take the pains (though now irksom to my
ancient Body) to give you a Breviat of Rivets Treatise in answer to Gomarus de
origin Sabbath. which is all the Answer I shall give to him, the said Gomarus.

2. To come then to the very point of giving in Rivets Answer to Gomarus,
against his Negative [That God did not Institute the Sabbath in the beginning
of the World] take Rivets grand Assertion, Rivets grand Assertion against
Gomarus.
with the said Rivets Regiment of Witnesses to the said Rivets Assertion, as
follows; viz, That God did from the beginning of the World Sanctify the
Seventh day for his Worship among men, has been (says Rivet) the common
opinion of the Learned which have flourished in the reformed Churches, as the
most Excellent and most Learned Ant. Walleus has showed in his Dissertation
concerning the Fourth Commandment, Cap. 3. Alleging the Testimonies of
Luther, Com. in 2 cap. Genesis of Zuinglius. Com. in 20 of Exodus of Calvin on the
same place, and in his Notes on the 4th. Com. Ex. 20. and Deuteronomy. 5. Where he
does more clearly explain himself. Of Beza in 1 Apoc. of Martyr in Cap. 2. Genesis
and on 4. Com. Bullinger on 12. Chap. of Mat. Zanchie in his Lib. 1. part 3. de
Oper. Creat. Cap. 1. and Decad. 1. Sermon 4. Of Vrsin. in his Exercit. Catachet
upon the Fourth Commandment. Gualter on Matt. Hom. 162. Of Aretius in his 1
Tom. of his Common places. Of Bonaventure Bertram. Of the Judaic. Pol. Cap. 2.
Of Mercer on Genesis 2. Of Anto. Faius in his Enchir. theol. Disp. 47. on the 4
Com. Of Junius on Genesis 2. Of Pareus on the same. Of Zepperus. 4 Book, Chap. 24.
Concerning the Foreign Laws of the Jews. Of Martinius in his Book concerning
the Christian and Catholic Faith. Of Alsted. in his Catechetical Theolog.
Sect. 3. Cap. 6.

To which I add Lambertum Daneum in his Christian Ethics. 2 Book, 10 Chap.
Largely; saying, That the Jews account the Seventh day holy; Yea, before all
Legal Ceremonies, they received it by Tradition from their Fathers, to whom the
Lord had revealed it, and to whom their Sacrifices were grateful, and their
Seventh day well pleasing. Rod. Hospinianum concerning the Jews Festivals;
Chap. 3. We must (says he) hold that the Sabbath was Instituted by the most
excellent highest God, and not long time after in Moses's time, in Mount Sina;
but in the very beginning of the World. Josiam simlerum in Exodus 20. God did,
Moses being Witness, in the Creation of the World, Sanctify the Sabbath, N. B.
and Blessed it. And seeing that the Fathers had their sacred Conventions and
Sacrifices, it is very likely they had also certain set times wherein they did
Convene. And what day did they rather choose then that which was Sanctified by
God himself. Martinum Bucer on John 5. It is very likely, that this observation
of the Sabbath was not first brought in by Moses, but by him a new established.
For the Ancient Fathers had it in use and practice among them. The other
Martin. to wit, Chemnitius, on the Decalogue, Com. 10.2. confesses, That the
observation of the Sabbath was Instituted before the Law of Moses. Conradus
Pelican. in cap. 2. Genesis Cap. 3. says, Blessed out of doubt were the rest of
the days; but that same Seventh day God willed, and taught that it was to be
set up in its place, or kept, and ordered in this, that men might be at leisure
for, or to their Creator, wherein they might diligently apply themselves to the
study of knowing the good pleasure of God, and of calling to mind his benefits;
of admiring the Power, Wisdom, Providence, and Goodness of that chief Workman,
N. B.
and of hearing or Learning from the FATHERS BEFORE THE LAW, or out of the
Sacred Books by Interpreters after the Law was given, what the Omnipotent
requires of us, etc. Wolfang. Franzius in Schola Sacra Disp. Thesis 1.11. It
does appertain (says he) to the Eutaxie or good order of the Ecclesiastical
State, in state of Innocence,
that there should be a Sanctification of a certain, or set time, viz. of the
Seventh day or Sabbath; To wit, God blessed the Seventh day, and Sanctified it,
because in it he rested from all his Works. And he puts, in the Margin of his
Book, these Words, [In the State of Innocence the Seventh day was Sacred.] John
Conrad. Pfeilen. in his Clar. Theolog. page 217. The Sanctification of the
Sabbath was not long, and at last then Instituted in the time of Moses, when
the Decalogue was promulgated in Mount Sinai: But was ordained and ordered
presently after the Creation of the World: But was indeed afterward in the Law
of Moses severely repeated, upon penalty of Death, not to be violated. Henricus
Butingus, Chronol. Page 12. ad annum Mundi primum, The Sabbath is Sanctified by
God, and Celebrated by our first Parents in Paradise, whilst our Nature was yet
perfect. To the same effect Bartafius concerning the Seventh day of the week,
does speak in Verse. Nor does Golartius dissent from him, writing on the same
place. I could also add Tilenus (whiles he was a Soldier in our Camp) on the
fourth Command. These. 3. And Marlorat. in Thesaur. Locor. Commun. More Authors
might be brought; But here are produced THIRTY, from whose judgment I could not
prevail with my self to depart.

3. Among the Papists there are some for the Negative, That God did not
Institute the Sabbath at the beginning of the World; as Abulensis, and all that
follow him. Others are with us, for the Affirmative, That it was Instituted at
the Creation of the World; as August. Stench. Eugub. in Cosmopoeia, on Genesis 2.
Who will not only have it that then, at the beginning of the World that Day was
Sanctified for the use of Divine Worship; But also they had it after that, in
all Ages, in all Nations (or Gentiles) Venerable, and Sacred. So Gilbertus
Genebrandus in Chronolog, ad Annum primum Mundi, The Sanctification (says he)
of the Sabbath; and that it was observed in all the time of the Law of Nature,
N. B.
the Hebrews deliver it to us. And so does Lyranus, Genesis 7. even as he does
some other Legals. And the same Opinion does Jacob. Salianus prosecute in many
Words, in Annal V. Test. ad Annum Mundi 1, Diem 7. ubi Tertullianum (who seems
to think otherwise) he does explain,
concerning the Sabbath, as it is Ceremonially and rigidly observed by the
Jews. Likewise Cornel. a Lapide on Genesis 2. It is manifest, says he, that the
Sabbath was Inistruted a Festival or Holy Day at first, not by Moses, Ex. 20.
v. 3. but LONG BEFORE, to wit, at the beginning of the World. He had said a
little before [He Sanctified it, that is, He Instituted it, a Holy Day, and
would have it to be honored with an high esteem of Adam and his Posterity with
a Sacred leisure and Worship of God.] He adds, That the Fourth Commandment
was a Divine Precept, not natural, but positive. As of the same Judgment he
cites Catharinus, upon the same place. And Emanuel Sa consents: Here, says
he, it appears that the abbath was Celebrated from the very Beginning. Which
thing also Ribera asserts, N. B.
and proves in the Ep. to the Heb. Cap. 4. Number 8.

4. As for the Ancient Fathers, few of them have touched the Question. The
Fathers alleged for us.
Of them that have; some are for the Affirmative (though some other are cited
rather for the Negative) whose words may be referred, not to the denial of that
primaeve Sanctification of the Sabbath, but to the renewing of it, with
addition of Rights and Ceremonies, formerly either unknown, or obliterated.
Tertullian al^edged for us.
Tertullian (whose words are chiefly urged) although having to do against the
Jews, refers the Institution of the Sabbath to Moses (to show that it did
appertain to the Ceremonies of the Law, and therefore to be Antiquated) yet
nevertheless does elsewhere acknowledge, that the Jews do say, That God did from
the beginning of the World, Sanctify the Seventh Day, in resting from all the
Works which he had made. And from thence also Moses said to the People REMEMBER
THE SABBATH DAY. So he Advers. Jud. Cap. 4. Neither does he deny it to be true,
who in his Fourth Book, Chap. 11. against Marcion affirms, as his own sense,
That Christ himself made the Sabbath day, by his Fathers Blessing, to be Holy
from the beginning of the World, and made it more Holy by his own Benefaction.
If some others think otherwise, in favor of the Negative, more and of no less
Authority may be produced for our Affirmative, as Cl. V. Waleus has
Demonstrated, alleging the Testimony of Philo. Lib. 3. de vita Mosis.
Chrysostom Hom. Philo, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Austin, are for us.
10. on Genesis Theodoret. in his Questions on Genesis. Austin. Ep. 86. ad Casul.
And we shall find anon other of the Fathers of the same mind.

CAP. 2.
Rivets first Argument for us by him defended.

1. The Argument, from Genesis 2. ver. 2, 3.

2. Gomarus his answer.

3. Rivets reply.

1. THE Foundation of the whole Affirmative assertion is laid, and that justly,
in those words, Genesis 2. ver. 2, 3. Which are, That the Sabbath was immediately
after the finishing of the Creation of the World, Instituted for Adam and his
Posterity, for the Worship of God. For from that place of Genesis 2. ver. 2, 3. It
is manifest that God blessed the Seventh Day after the Creation, The grand
Question Contro verted
and Sanctified it. Now a Question is moved, Whether he did Sanctify it just
then, or whether he deferred it till long aft^^ ^^^e Creation, viz. for the
sp^^^^ of Two thousand four hundred and fifty three years. So that the sense of
the Mosaical Story should be, That God after his finishing his Six days work,
rested the Seventh. And after Two thousand four hundred fifty three years God
blessed a like day, and Sanctified it to, or for sacred use. And of Necessity
this must be the sense, of those men who do so much disjoyn those words, [ He
Finished, Rested, Blessed, and Sanctified] as that they refer the former words
to the time of the beginning of the World, the later words to the time of Moses
giving the Law. But we stand to it, That all those words which are conjoined by
a Copulative, are not to be torn asunder, to so great a distance. For seeing
Moses discourses of the Seventh day after the Creation (I say the first
Seventh) that is ^^^^nediatly following after the ^^^st six days; It seemed
necessary to us, that the same day which was the Seventh from the Creation, was
the day of Rest, and of Sanctifing it.

The Proposition.
2. The force of Gomarus his answer he gives us in this Syllogism: that which
in Genesis 2. ver. 2.3. is neither expressly asserted, nor is by any circumstances
of that Scripture evinced, that cannot be proved by it.

The Assumption.
But that the Sabbath was Instituted at that very time, when at first the
Creation of the World was finished, is such a thing was in Genesis 2. Is neither
expressly asserted, nor is by any circumstances of that Scripture evinced;

Therefore out of that place of Scripture it cannot be proved.

1. Rivet's Reply. The truth of the Proposition we grant, as clearer then the
Sun; But the truth of the Assumption we deny. And those things that are brought
by Gomarus for the contrary, do not at all eradicate our Assertions, but are
mere suppositions without proof. Namely, That these things, Genesis 2. are not
inserted by Moses, as if at that very time they had been done; but to show that
this History of the finishing of the World, and of the Divine rest on the
Seventh day might be kept in perpetual Memory by the Israelites. So he, As if
both may not be, viz. The thing done, and the memory of it kept in mind also.
For subordinate things are not contrary. This for a taste of the First Argument.

CAP. III.
Rivet's Second Argument for us, That the Sabbath was Instituted from the
Beginning of the World, and by him defended.

1. The Argument from Heb. 4.1. etc.

2. Gomarus his Answer.

3. Rivets's Keply.

Rivets Argument in a Rhetorical way.
1. THE Argument is from the Epistle to the Heb. Chap. 4. v. 1. etc. And is
this; When the Apostle would describe the Spiritual Rest, promised by God, and
would show it was another Rest, different from the Sabbatisme which the Jews
observed according to the Law; And also different from the Rest in the Land of
Canaan ( into which Joshua conducted the People,) he says, those words in
Psalm. 95. v. 11. [^^sware, IF THEY SHALL ENTER INTO MY REST] were pronounced by
David, although the works of God were finished from the Foundations of the
World, where he cites that place in Genesis 2. And shows, That the promise of
Rest made to the Believers, included in the threatening made to the Unbelievers
(of excluding them from the Rest) cannot be understood of the Rest of the
SABBATH, because now the works of God having been finished from the Foundations
of the World, God had rested the Seventh day from all his Works. From all which
follows, That the Rest of the the SABBATH day began (according to the Apostle)
from the finishing of God's Works after the Sixth day. For it shows that men,
even then, entered into that Rest, from the time the World was finished. For in
vain he had said these words [From the finishing of the works of God from the
Foundation of the World.] if THAT SABBATH began after Two thousand years, and
more.

2. Gomarus in answer to this Argument says, That it nothing moves him; not
through forgetfulness of that place of Scripture; nor for want of a solid
answer; but because he could not observe in it, any mention at all concerning
the Sabbath for Rest, and the Worship of God. And adds further, No Argument (he
believes) could be thence drawn, but such as would be absurd and void of any
color of an Argument.

3. To this Rivet replies, These words (says he) of Extenuation and contempt
Gomarus opposes to our words, which we objected as of great moment to the
matter in hand. The Apostles Argument appears to be this. Rivet's Argument in a
Syllogistical way.


God by the mouth of David, excludes Unbelievers from his Rest.

But he does not exclude them from that Rest with which he rested from the
Foundations of the World, after the finishing of the Works of Creation; because
that Rest was now long since past. Nor does he exclude them from the Rest in
the Land of Canaan, because many Unbelievers entered into it.

Therefore, There remains a Third Sabbatisme into which they shall not enter.

The force of our Argument in that, consists, That no reason can be given,
why the Apostle should except that Rest from the Foundations of the World, If
it no ways appertained to men; and if under the rest of God, he did not
understand that which he prescribed to men by his own example, that he might
show that Rest not to be it, of which David speaks; because David could not
promise that Rest which from the Beginning of the World was by Gods Example
Instituted by, or in the Sanctification thereof. Amd thus ye have a touch of
Rivets 2 Argum.

CAP. IV.
Rivet's Third Argument for us by him defended.

1. The Argument from the Piety of the Patriachs.

2. Gomarus his Answer.

3. Rivet's Reply.

1. THE Third Argum. (taken from Reason) was this, The Patriarchs, and other
Believers before Moses, according to their Piety toward God, had their set
times for Religion and Reformation according to their Power. Therefore they
observed the Seventh day of the week for that purpose.

Which may be propounded otherwise, viz as Wallaeus Cap. 3. Dissert.
propounds it. Nullo modo (says he) etc. that is, It is no way likely the
Patriarchs all that while, that Two thousand years and upward ran out, had no
set times, wherein they might remember the benefits of God in the Creation of
Heaven and Earth; N. B.
or that they might give to God a public Worship; or give to themselves and
their Generations outward helps or means toward Piety (when as concerning the
Worship it self which they exhibited, there is frequent mention); or wherein
they might permit a breathing and respit to their Servants, Handmaid, and
Cattle. N. B.
If therefore they had any fixed time, it is altogether Consentaneous to
reason, that they would use that day, of the Sanctification whereof there was
extant so perspicuous a Testimony; and not any other days, of which there is no
footstep to be found in all the Old Testament.

The same thing did Com. in 4 Precep.
Calvin before that insinuate, When God (says he) delivered to the Saints the
Right of Sacrificing, it is not Credible, That the observation of the Sabbath
was omitted. But by reason of the pravity of Human disposition, that which
among the profane Gentiles was utterly extinct, and in the Offspring of
Abraham was almost worn out of use, God renewed by his Law, that the Sabbath
should be honored with an holy and inviolable Observation.

2. Gomarus Answers; That which with Calvin was not Credible, is with Gomarus
not only Credible, but also the consequence, from Godly men's Worshipping to that
day, wherein God rested, or from God's example, is infirm; because nothing
hinders but that they might convene at some other convenient time for their
public Exercise of Religion.

3. Rivets Answer by way of retortion, thus; It is Manifest then (says he)
that among all those that Convened for Public Worship they Convened in a
Convenient time.

The Question now is, Qu.
what is that time? which ordinary day was it? We who have known that God
rested the Seventh day, which the Authors of the contrary Judgment cannot deny;
who also confess, That God prescribed to the People of Israel the Seventh day
for Public Worship, because in it he rested, does seem to us not ill to
Collect, That it is Credible, that the first Fathers were taught of God
concerning the manner of Worship. And from the same God, received the Religion
of that Day. Thus ye have a glance of Rivet's Third Argument.

The rest of Rivet's Arguments for the Original of the Sabbath to have been
from the Beginning of the World I shall omit, and dismiss untoucht, both
because Rivet himself confesses, That they are not of any great moment, if the
Three former and chiefer would not prevail: as also because I here give the
Reader notice that the main of them would be touched in our ESSAY.

CAP. V.
D. Heylyn is Opposed, in the Matter and Substance of the present Question of
the Original of the Sabbath.

1. By Learned Dr. Willet.

2. By Worthy Mr Weemes, both which contend for the Truth, not in single Combat
with every particular opposed, but to assert and corroborate in gross and in
common the main of the Controversy.

1. HEylyn In his History of the Sabbath.
makes the Challenge, That those words, Genesis 2. And God blessed the Seventh
day, etc. are there delivered by way of Anticipation. Anticipations (says he)
of the same nature not strange in Scripture. No Law imposed by God on Adam,
touching keeping of the Sabbath. The Fathers before the Law kept not the Sabath,
etc. So Heylyn, Verba sine rebus.

2. Doctor Willet's Answer.

Willet On Ger. 2. v. 3.14.
in opposition thereunto, on Genesis 2.4. Cites and Asserts as follows. Here we
have the Institution of the Sabbath (says Willet) which afterward was revivd
by the promulgation of the Moral Law. We refuse therefore the erroneous Opinion
of Tostatus, and In Genesis Lib. 1. p. 223.
Pererius (two Popish Authors) who think that this Sanctifying of the Sabbath,
is here mentioned by way of Anticipation, being not Instituted till the time of
Moses. For (say they) every day to man in the state of Innocence should have
been a Sabbath. Neither was there any positive Precept given to Adam in
Paradise, but only that of not eating the forbidden fruit. But in this
affirming they are grossly deceived. 1. Man had now Transgressed before the
Sabbath was Instituted (as after shall be proved). And therefore they do out of
time urge the State of Man's Innocence. 2. If Man had continued in that State,
seeing he was appointed to keep the Garden, and not to live idly, no not in
Paradise; it is most like, that even then he should have kept the Sabbath, as a
rest and Intermission, even from such Labor, as became that place; and as a
Symbol unto him of a further perfection to be attained unto. 3. That the
Sabbath was Instituted now, the Creation being finished, it may appear by the
Fourth Commandment, Exodus 20.11. where this Reason of the Law is given, For in
Six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth etc. 4. It is also evident that the
Sabbath was kept by Godly Tradition before the Moral Law was given, as appears
Exodus 16.23. To morrow is the Rest of the holy Sabbath to the Lord. N. B.
5. Thus the ancient Fathers ( Jerome, Austin, The ancient Fathers alleged.
and Origin) ground the Institution of the Sabbath, upon God's Example in this
place, Jerome. trad. in Genesis 2. Aust. Ps. 80. And Origin thus answers Celsus,
Lib. 6. objecting, If God were weary, that he need to rest; God rested (says
he) that we resting from our labor should celebrate that day.

Thus of Doctor Willet. Of Weemes in Chap. 6.

CAP. VI.
Now for a close, let us hear Learned Weems, speaking punctually and fully to
the Question; in his Exercitations divine Command. 4. p. 229.

QVestion, Whether the Sabbath was from the beginning, or not?

The Lord sets down his Example for Imitation to us, because he rested that
day, that we may learn, That the Institution of the Sabbath was from the
beginning.

Which is contrary to them, who hold, That the Sabbath was not ordained to be
kept, till after the Lord had rained down Manna, Ex. 16.

[The Lord rested from all his Works the Seventh day] were a Reason added to
Moses's Sabbath, when the Law was given, but not to Adams's Sabbath before the
Fall.

But we answer; In the reasons of the Commands there is something Natural from
the Beginning, and something added by Moses, As in the respect of the 5th.
Commandment, this was (Juris Naturae) of natural right, given to Adam, and all
his Posterity, viz. Honor thy Father and thy Mother THAT THY DAYS MAY BE LONG,
that is, live happily here, and then to be Translated to another life; But his
was (Juris Mosaici) of Mosaical right, That thy days may be long in THE LAND
WHITHER THOU ART TO GO: So this was (Juris Naturae) of Natural Right, in the
Reason added to the Sabbath, Thou shall rest from all thy Works, because God
rested from his Works: But this is only (Juris Mosaici) only of Mosaical Right,
That the Sabbath should be a Sign between God and them; and belongs not to
Adam's Sabbath, Ezekiel. 20.10. I brought them out of Egypt, and gave them my
Sabbaths, that they might be a sign between me and them. The Sabbath was (...)
particular Sign to them, of their bringing out of Egypt. And they should
always remember to keep it, because the Lord brought them out of Egypt. The
Sabbath was from the Beginning; but it was accessory to the Jewish Church, that
it was made a Sign; as the Rainbow was from the Beginning (the Reflex of the
Sun in a Cloud); But it was not a Sign to the World until the Deluge.

Genesis, of the Sabbath, or that any of the Patriarcks kept it.

We read nothing that the Adulterous, and Incestuous persons were put to Death
before Judah's time. N. B.
Did the Patriarchs suffer this sin to be unpunished all this time? And is it
probable, that the Holy Men of God, who Sacrificed to the Lord and Worshipped
him, had not a certain time for his Worship determined to them? The Lord
Sanctified the Sabbath as soon as he had rested from his Works, and set up the
Sun, and the Moon Lemaguadim ( which is the Hebrew word used afterward, in the
Law, for the holy Convention) ad stata tempora. i. e. Set appointed times. What
appointed times were then for his Worship, N. B.
if not the Sabbath? For as yet they had none of their Aniversary Feasts.

[That thou may rest, and thy Servant may rest] belonged not to Adam's
Sabbath; For Adam before the Fall was not wearied; and there should have been
no servile Subjection before the Fall. Therefore these words belong only to
Moses's Sabbath.

Although Adam should not have been wearied in dressing of the Garden, yet it
behoved him to rest, that he might exercise himself only in the Worship of God.
And though servile Subjection came in after Sin, yet if Man had not Fallen,
there should have been degrees of Superiority, and Inferiority; And there
should have been distinction of Sexes and dignities, etc.

John 7.22. Christ makes an opposition between two Laws, one of Circumcision,
and another of the Sabbath. And he says, Circumcision is kept, not because
Moses Instituted Circumcision, but because it was from the Fathers: And because
Moses's Law of the Sabbath was given after the Law of Circumcision, therefore
it is that Infants are Circumcised upon the Sabbath, and yet the Sabbath is not
broken.

The Sabbath was given after Circumcision with the rest of the Ceremonies
belonging to it; which Christ especially means here: But the Moral part was
given to Adam before his Fall. He makes Opposition here but between the
Ceremony of Circumcision, and the Ceremony of the Sabbath; The less necessary
Ceremony to give place to the greater. And the Jews say, when a Child was to be
Circumcised upon the Sabbath, yet the morning Sacrifice behoved to be Offered
first, before the Child was Circumcised; and then all the rest of the
Ceremonial Worship in the Sabbath, gave place to Circumcision.

Patriarchs who kept the Sabbath before the Manna was sent down.

It may seem out of Job, That they kept the Sabbath in his time (which was
before the Law was given) It is said, Job had Seven Sons; N. B.
and they went and Feasted in their Houses, every one his day, Job. 1.4. And
then it is subjoyned, Job 1.6. That there was a day when the Sons of God came
to present themselves before the Lord. Now who were the Sons of God here, but
Job's Children? N. B.
who Assembled themselves to worship God, upon the Seventh day.

[God rested] the Seventh day, and Sanctified the Sabbath a^^ set down ((...))
by way (...) Anticipation; because God promised to Sanctify that day
afterward.

This carries no probability with it, that God is said to Sanctify it, because
he was purposed to Sactifie it afterward. For then he might be said to
Sanctify Moriah when he Created it, because afterward he was to build the
Temple there; and to Sanctify the Pascha, and the Pentecost, because
afterward he was to appoint them for holy uses.

FINIS.
THE Sunday-Sabbath's Rest FROM CONTROVERSIES.
CHAP. I. Of the Thesis or Position.
Section I.
THE Thesis or Position]: Our Sunday-Sabbath or Lord's Day is the very same day
of the week, which was anciently observed by Jews and Gentiles, for the Solemn
day of their Solemn weekly Worship, before Isreal's coming out of Egypt; and
after that by the Gentiles.

Sect. II.
The explanation of the Thesis] 1. We call it Sunday. 1. Because it is vulgarly
so called, and best known by the generality of the Nation. 2. Because the Jews
anciently so called it, and observed it, in memorial of God (their Sun Ps.
84.11.
) Creating the World, and that eminentest part thereof the Sun. Exodus ^0.11. If
so long after the Creation, no don't but anciently nea^e^ the Crea^ion.
3. Because the Gentiles of old called it Sunday; though upon an ill occasion;
that they on that day Worshipped the Sun. But it is to our purpose to note the
number of the day, not the iniquity; the observation, not the misapplication of
the day.

. 2. We call it Sabbath. 1. Because many Christians so call it, and own it,
against all Jewish Saturday Sabbatarians. 2. Because the Word ((...)) Sabbath,
signifies rest: which rest for Body and Soul we have mostly on this day. 3.
Because in some way of proportion, the time of our Sabbath day answers to that
of the Jews; both being a Seventh day of the week.

. 3. We call it The Lord's day: 1. Because the Scripture so calls it. I was
(says St. John the Disciple of Christ) in the Spirit on the LORDS DAY Rev.
1.10.
meaning our Sabbath or Sunday, which we call the Lord's day. For surely if
((...)) the Lords Supper does sufficiently distinguish that Spiritual Supper of
the Communion, to all ingenuous men from all common Suppers, then so does
((...)) the Lord's day sufficiently distinguish to all, not wilfully blind,
that special day from all other days. For it follows, 2ly. That we call our
Sabbath the Lord's day, because it was the day of the Lord Christ's
Resurrection from the Dead; wherein he rested from his Sufferings. and we
thereby from our Sins and Condemnation. It Is true, That the day of Christ's
Resurrection is by the same Apostle called the First day of the week Joh. 20.1.
But it is as true, That this same First day was the Jews and Gentiles Sabbath
for Two thousand four hundred fifty four years, viz. From the Creation, to the
reduction of Israel our Egypt; and was the Gentiles Sabbath long after that.
3ly. We call it the Lord's Day, because on that day in every week we solemnly
worship the Lord Christ with the Gospel Worship, which the Lord himself has
Instituted.

Sect. 3.
The probation or proof of the said Thesis] being made good by the orderly
succeeding of the following Chapter, N. B.
the latter strengthening the former; it may be hoped, that according to the
TITLE, there will follow a cessation, and rest of all Controversies about the
Sunday Sabbath, or the Lord's day, either by the Quotidian or Hemerion
Sabbatarians, that pretend no one day, but every day should be as a Sabbath. Or
by the Plurian Sabbatarians, that would not have all days to be Sabbaths; but
would have more then one day in Seven. Or by the Prosabbatarians, that are
wholly for the Jewish Sabbath. Or by the Antisabbatarians that are against the
Jewish Sabbath, in the behalf of the Christian Sabbath. Or touching the
morality of the Sabbath in general. Or touching the warrantrie of Christian
Lord's day Sabbath. Or touching the Scruple, whether to cal^ the day of Solemn
Worship Sunday, or Sabbath day, o^ Lord's day.

CHAP. II. Of the Natural and Artificial day.
Sect. 1.
THE Natural day of Twenty four hours (as it is vulgarly called) is with any
people, the space of time between Sunrising, and Sunrising; or between
Sunsetting, and Sunsetting: called by the Learned the Horizontal day.

Sect. 2.
The parts of this Natural day are two. The one is the Artificial day, that is,
the days Light. The other part is (by relative consequence) the Artificial
night, that is the Nights darkness, belonging to that day. So that the
Artificial day is the whole space between Sunrising and Sunsetting.

CAP. III. Of the ancient beginning of the Natural day.
Sect. 1.
THE Artificial day, or Daylight was anciently before Isreal's going out of
Egypt, counted the beginning, or former part of the Natural day; and the Night
the latter part of the said natural day. This appears three ways.

. 1. In that when the parts of the Natural day are mentioned in Scripture,
before Isreal's coming out of Egypt, the Morning was set before the Night. Genesis
1.16, 17, 18. God made two great Lights, the greater Light to rule the DAY, and
the lesser Light to rule the Night, he made also the Stars. And God set them in
the Firmament of Heaven. And to rule over the DAY, and over the NIGHT, and to
divide the LIGHT from the DARKNESS. Likewise in Genesis 7.4. Yet seven DAYS and I
will cause it to rain upon the Earth forty DAYS and forty Nights. And verse. 12.
The rain was upon the Earth forty DAYS and forty Nights. Item Genesis 8. last.
While the Earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and cold and heat, and Summer
and Winter, and DAY and Night shall not cease.

. 2. Because at what time soever, or hour of the day light the Scripture speaks
of the following Night, it expresses it in this manner, To Night; This Night;
This same Night as belonging to the same day, and not to the following day. See
Genesis 19.34. Where THIS Night is expressed as the Night-darkness, that followed
the day's, Daylight immediately foregoing, as belonging thereunto. So Genesis 26.
24. And Isaac went up from thence to Beersheba and the Lord appeared unto him
THE SAME NIGHT; that is the Night belonging to the immediate preceding DAY
LIGHT wherein Isaac Traveled up to Beersheba.

. 3. When at any hour of the daylight the Scripture mentions Night, it speaks
not of the Night as belonging to the day following, but as belonging to the day
before-going, saying Yester-night, Genesis 19.34. YESTERNIGHT I lay with my
Father. And Genesis 31.42. God has seen (says Jacob to Laban) mine affliction,
and the labors of my hands, and rebuked thee YESTERNIGHT. But when at Night
they spoke of the Day following, they used not to say TO DAY, or THIS DAY, but
to MORROW, or the MORROW AFTER Number. 33.3. They departed from Rameses, in the
first Month, in the fifteenth day of the first month; on the MORROW AFTER the
Passover the Children of Israel went out with an high hand etc. So 1 Samuel
19.11. And Saul sent Messengers to David's house to watch him, and to stay him
in the MORNING. And Michael David's Wife told him saying, If thou save not thy
life TO NIGHT, TO MORROW thou shall be slain: signifying by the morrow another
day, Mat. 6.34. Jam. 4. 13, 14.

Sect. 2.
Yea I might further assert, That after Isreal's coming out of Egypt, the Jews
(mentioned in Scripture) did commonly account the Artificial day, of Day light,
to be the former part of the day, in respect of their Civil affairs, Exodus
13.21, 22. The Lord went before them by DAY in a Pillar of a Cloud, to lead
them the WAY; and by night, in a Pillar of Fire, to give them Light. He took
not away the Pillar of the Cloud by DAY, nor the Pillar of Fire by Night. So
Levit. 8.35. Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation DAY and Night. See also Number. 9.21. So it was when the Cloud was
taken up in the MORNING, then they journyed, whether it was by DAY or by Night.

CAP. IV. Of the change of the beginning of the Natural Day, and the Effect
thereof.
Sect. 1.
WHen the Israelites were come out of Egypt, the NIGHT was made (excepted as
before excepted) the former part of the Natural day. This appears,

. 1. Because a never to-be forgotten Memorial or Memorandum is solemnly put
upon that Night wherein they marched out of Egypt. Exodus 12.42. It is a Night
to be much observed unto the Lord, for bringing them out from the Land of
Egypt: This is that Night of the Lord, to be observed of all the Children of
Israel in their Generations.

. 2. The Israelites were commanded after their coming out of Egypt, to
celebrate the Sabbath from Evening to Evening, Levit. 23.32. N. B.
From Evening to Evening shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.

Sect. 2.
The new beginning of the Week.
Whereupon they so begin their Weekdays also, whereby their Sabbath day was
measured out unto them, to be their Seventh day, otherwise their Seventh day
would not have been proportionable to their six days of labor.

Sect. 3.
A new beginning of the Year.
From hence also their Year had a new beginning. For whereas formerly they
began their Year in the Month Tisri, N. B.
(which consisted chiefly of our September) after all their ingathering of all
their Fruits of the Earth, Exodus 23.16. And the Feast of Harvest, the
First Fruits of thy labors which thou have sown in the Field, and the Feast of
INGATHERING which is in the END of the YEAR, when thou have gathered in the
Labors out of the field: Likewise, Ex. 34.22. And thou shall observe the Feast
of weeks, of the First Fruits of Wheat-Harvest, and the Feast of Ingathering at
the YEARS-END: Now hence forward they were to begin their Year with the Month
in which they had their Freedom from Egypt, Exodus 12. 2. This Month shall be
unto you the BEGINNING of MONTHS, it shall be the FIRST MONTH of the YEAR to
you. Which Month was called in the Hebrew Abib, and by the Chaldee Nisan,
consisting partly of our March, and partly of our April, being with them the
first Month after the Vernal Aequinoctial, that is, after the Spring-Aequality
of the Day and Night. So that from after their deliverance from Egypt, the
Israelites had a new Year, and a new Month, and a new day to begin their year
withal. N. B.
So that although in respect of their Civil Affairs they began their Year,
their Month, and Day as they did before they came out of Egypt; yet in this
New Ecclesiastical, or Sacred Year, they began their Day at Even. All their
Sabbaths and all other their Sacred days, and so also their Weekdays, for
measuring out to them their Sacred days they began at Even. They had the
Evening to be the former part of the Day, Levit. 23.32.

Sect. 4.
To speak a little more particularly to the said Change. That the Artificial
day of Daylight among the Jews, consisted of Twelve hours is evident by
Scripture, Act. 2.15. These men are not drunken as ye suppose seeing it is but
the third hour of the day. (that is, Nine of the Clock in the Morning) so that
Six in the Morning was the first hour of their day. And Mat. 27.45. Now from
the Sixth hour (that is Twelve of the Clock at noonday) there was darkness to
the Ninth hour ( i. e. Three of the Clock in the Afternoon). And consequently
the Twelfth hour was Six of the Clock at Evening, the period of their day. And
proportionably was the reckoning of their Night.

. 1. Now as Moses put back the account, saying, Levit 23.32. From Evening to
Evening shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. And upon that footing of the account
Exodus 12.41, 42. And it came to pass at the end of the Four hundred and thirty
Years, even the the self same day it came to pass, that all the Hosts of Lord
went out from the Land of Egypt. It is a NIGHT to be much observed unto the
Lord, for bringing them out of the Land of Egypt, this is that Night of the
Lord to be observed of all the Children of Israel, in their Generations. I say,
as Moses thus put back the account, to begin the Sabbath Day at the Evening
before, viz. from Six of the Clock that Evening, to continue to Six of the
Clock at Evening of the next ensuing day: So Christ reassumed and brought
forward all that day Light, and put it to the next day, with which, together
with the Night following he made a new distinct day, by rising early in the
Morning of that new-made day; having put an end to the Jewish Sabbath. Mat.
28.1. In the END of the Sabbath (Christ then put an end to the Jewish Sabbath)
when it began (...) to dawn with some Light toward the FIRST DAY of the week;
in which rising, Christ ceased (as Learned Weemse notes, according to Heb.
4.10.) from his own Works, N. B.
as God did from his.

. 2. It Is true (as ye have heard) that this day in the whole Matter, was the
Jews Seventh day Sabbath. But when (as has been explained) Christ had new
formed and bounded it, by restoring its Evening to it, and so making it as a
new day in that respect; then was it called the FIRST DAY of the week; because
it was the primest day of the week, and was the beginning of the Christians new
Measure, and Account of days; opposite to that old Measure, and Account that
Moses delivered to Israel, Lev. 23.32.

CHAP. V. The reason why Genesis 1. Of every days work it is said, The Evening and
the morning made one day, the Evening being put before the Morning; contrary to
our Assertion. CHAP. 3. And. 1. In giving the reason whereof, is set forth the
true Nature of those Six days wherein God Created the World.
Sect. 1.
Isreal's coming out of Egypt, the Evening, which is, as aforesaid the
Artificial Night, was set before the Morning, which is the Artificial Day; both
being the two parts of the Natural Day; Genesis 1.5. etc. The Evening and the
Morning were the First Day, Second Day, Third Day, Fourth Day etc. We answer,

. 1. Those days were Creational days; Not Natural days of Twenty four hours,
measured out by the Sun circling the Earth, once every Natural day: But they
were Creational days, peculiar to the Creation, wherein God did work every days
work, producing Entities out of Nonentities; Habits out of privations; and
rested the Seventh Day.

. 2. They were extraordinary days, not measured out by the Motion of the Sun
(as now) For in the first, second, and third of those days there was no Sun as
yet in being to measure them.

Universal days, that is, when it was day, it was day over the universal World;
when it was Night it was Night every where over the whole Universe, both in
regard of the beginning and ending of the Day and the Night. To make it more
plain, that these were Universal days, let us consider an instance or two.

The Universal day explained by instances in one Day.
The First Day was such a day, as when it began any where, it began every
where. No where then, was it no day: nor any other then the First day of God's
Creation. There was in Nature before, though not before in time, a mixture of
Light and Darkness. Genesis 1.2. But when God had out of it formed the Light, and
made it shine out of that Duskishness, dividing the Light from the Darkness, so
as they should never be both in one Hemisphere, but orderly each succeeding the
other, God then called that Light so divided by the name of Day, that is,
Daylight. And that Darkness so divided he called Night; that is, the Nights
darkness. The full Revolution of both which was the First Day. In this division
of the Light and Darkness, or Day and Night, though the Night was before the
Day in one Hemisphere (that is over one half of the World); And the Day before
the Night in the other Hemisphere: yet in respect of the whole Universe,
neither of them was before the other in time. When the First Day began
somewhere, when it was Night; at the same time that First Day began some
otherwhere when it was Daylight. Every where did the First Day begin at the
same time. The same may be said of the Second and Third Day before the Sun,
Moon, and Stars were Created.

Yea, likewise the Fourth Day, in which the Sun, Moon, and Stars were Created
(if they) moved as soon as they were Created) was notwithstanding an Universal
Day (that so all Seven might in a just proportion of length and number answer
to one another). When it was the Fourth day any where, it was the Fourth day
every where. I say not Daylight every where, but it was the Fourth day
consisting of Daylight, and Night-darkness. A Caution to the Reader.
The Reader must always distinguish between a Day, and Daylight. Now though it
is not revealed in what hour, or time of the Fourth day the Sun, Moon, and
Stars were Created (the whole Fourth Day being allotted by the Divine Story, N.
B.
to and for their Creation) yet this must, by natural necessity, be granted,
That when the Sun first appeared to the World on that Fourth day, it was at
that time, over some part of the Globe of the Earth, making it to be Noon
there, and in all places within that Hemisphere, which were in the same
Meridian with the Sun. So that although on that Fourth Day, Sunsetting was
before Sun rising in some places; and Sunrising before Sunsetting in some
other places; And in some places Noon was before either of the other; and in
some other places Midnight was before them all: yet in respect of the whole
Earth, not one of them was on that Fourth Day before the other: But at the Suns
first appearing, and shining over half the Earth, it was at that very instant
the Fourth Day, as well where it was Sunsetting, or Sunrising, as where it
was Noon. And likewise it was then the Fourth Day also, in the other part of
the Earth, to which the Moon or Stars first appeared. For, neither Sun, Moon,
or Stars appeared to any place on the Third Day, which was the day before they
were made; and the Fifth Day was not then begun. The same may be said of the
Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Day, when either of these days began, it was after
Sunsetting in some places, and before Sunrising in some other places; and it
was then Noon in some places, and Midnight in some other places; yet all are
of, and upon the same Day.

Seeing then these were Universal Days, and so no Man can tell where on Earth
those places are, at which it was Sunrising, or Sunsetting, or Noon, or
Midnight; or when the Sun first shined forth to the World, or when half of that
Fourth-Day, or when it was fully ended: I say therefore these days, these
Universal days, cannot be made the footing of the Account for the measuring out
of our Artificial Day and Night, the parts of the Natural Day. Our ordinary
Seven days cannot derive their Number, and beginning from the said Universal
Days to an hour.

. 4. We answer, That Moses wrote the Book of Genesis, when he had been Inspired
by the appearance of God to him, calling him, and enabling him to that
Miraculous Work of bringing Israel out of Egypt, Exodus 3.2. So that he wrote
that Book after Isreal's coming out of Egypt; at which deliverance their Year,
Month, and Day was changed, Exodus 12.41.42. Levit. 23.32. The Natural Day was
now to begin at Evening (as aforesaid) whereas before that it began in the
Morning (as we have showed.) Therefore, if Moses should now have said, Genesis 1.
The Morning and the Evening was the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,
Seventh Day, putting the Morning before the Evening, he might have seemed
thereby to have disliked the said Change appointed by God as aforesaid, of
making the Evening the beginning of each day, after their coming out of Egypt.

CAP. VI. Of the Reason why the Jews must change the beginning of the Day (as
aforesaid:) and so of the Day from our Sunday, or Lord's Day to the Jews
Saturday (as they commonly call it).
Sect. 1.
THE First Reason was for a Memorial, or Memorandum of their deliverance out of
Egypt as before proved.

Sect. 2.
The Second was, because the Heathens did Dedicate and Celebrate the Ancient
Sunday (that was observed piously to God, before Isreal's coming out of Egypt)
to the Sun, the Heathen I say Dedicated it to worship that Planet on that day.
And for that reason the Lord would not have the Jews to observe it any longer,
but would have them change it.

. 1. Thus God of old, would not have his people use the names of lawful things,
nor mention such names, which the Idolaters were wont to use, Hos. 2.16.17. It
shall be at that day, says the Lord, that thou shall call me ISHI, and shall
call me no more BAALIM. For I will take away the Names of BAALIM out of her
mouth, etc. Why would not the Lord be called Baalim but Ishi seeing both
fignifie the same thing, that is, My Husband, or my Lord? The Reason was,
because Baal was the name that Heathens gave to their Gods. And therefore God
would have the name of Baalim (the plural of Baal) to be utterly removed out of
the mouths of his people.

. 2. For the same Reason he would not have his people to observe the Ancient
Sunday in use before Isreal's return from Egypt, because the Heathen called it
by that name, in relation to their Worshipping the Sun on that day. And
therefore God would have the day changed. This will more appear in the next
Chapter.

CAP. VII. Touching the Ancient Sunday, and the observation thereof, by Jews
and Heathens, before Isreal's deliverence out of Egypt.
Sect. I.
IT IS untradictably probable, beyond all demonstration to the contrary, and with
fair reason on our part, that the ancient Sunday (for solemn Worship of God)
before Isreal's return from Egypt (which Sunday is now our LORD'S DAY) was
observed by the Patriarchs before the Flood, and by them after the Flood, in
honor to the true God who had Created that wonderful frame of Heaven, and in
it that transcendent shining Planet the Sun, whom that is God that Creator,
they of the Patriarchs before the Flood, worshipped on that day, by imitation
of God's resting on the Seventh day of his Creation; which is urged in the
Fourth Commandment as to a Seventh day Sabbath, if not to THE Seventh day
Sabbath, which we now observe, as our Lord's Day: of which more after. N. B.
I note it chiefly here to intimat, that Gods example of resting the Seventh
day at the Creation, has in it, an Argument for Imitation, that his people
should observe that most ancient Sunday of which we speak; that example of
God's resting being then fresher to the Patriarchs and those times by Two
thousand of years, then at the giving of the Moral Law. And the practice of the
aftertimes do much show us, what was the practice of former-times; Men being
very apt to follow their Forefathers in the outward profession of Religion:
And to use those forms of speech relating to Religion, which of old were wont
to be used. The Patriarchs therefore before the Flood, no doubt called and
accounted God to be their Sun in a figurative sense as the Patriarchs that
were after the Flood, and their succeeding Generations did likewise, Number. 6.25.
Aaron and his Sons shall on this wise bless the Children of Israel, saying unto
them; The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make HIS FACE TO SHINE UPON
thee. So, Deuteronomy 33.1, 2. And this is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God
blessed the Children of Israel before his death; And he said the Lord came from
Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he SHINED FORTH from Mount Paran. And
Job (at least as ancient as Moses, if not ancienter) argues with God, that he
would not shine upon the Wicked, and therefore would not oppress or despise
him; that is, would SHINE upon him. And it is a common phrase with David in
Prayer to say, Make thy face to SHINE upon me, or upon us, Psalm. 31.16. Psalm.
71.1. And Psalm. 8. It is the burden or foot of the divine Song. And Psalm. 84.
ver. 11. He calls God by the name of the Sun, The Lord God (says he) is a SUN
and a Shield to them that walk uprightly. And Malac. 4.2. He viz. Christ is
called the SUN of Righteousness with healing in his wings, that is in his Beams.

Sect. 2.
Now as it is true that the Pious Patriarchs of old, in a figurative sense
calling and accompting God to be as their Sun, did call and account their
weekly solemn day of their Solemn Worship of him, by the name of Sunday, or
Suns-day, See before Chap. 7.
or day of the Sun (as aforesaid): So it is as true (which further confirms the
Section next before) that Idolatrous Heathen, of very ancient times, and
downward, in imitation of the Jews Worshipping the true God, their Metaphorical
Sun, did on the said Sunday, worship the Material and Natural Sun, and upon
that account called it their Sunday, or Day of the Sun.

For we know that Idolaters were always the Apes (as Divines call them) of true
Religion. Upon their mis-apprehensions, and mal-applications of divine
Inspirations and Institutions given by God to Godly men, they grounded their
Idolatrous Superstitions. Of many, take but two or three Instances. viz.
Because Abraham (whiles there was no solemn set place appointed of God for
Worship) built an Altar on the Mountain near Bethel, Genesis 12.8. and Chap. 13.4.
and there called on the name of the Lord, the true God, And likewise he
planted a Grove in Beer-sheba and there called on the name of the Lord, Genesis
^1.33.
the Everlasting God: And prepared all things at God's command to offer up his
Son Isaac for a burnt-offering, though afterward he was forbidden the
Execution: Therefore Idolaters planted Groves, Genesis 22.
and Worshipped in High Places, their Idols, and made their Children to pass
through the fire to them; mentioned as high Crimes, throughout the Old
Testament. Even such is the Rise of the highest Idolatry, to wit, of worshipping
of false Gods. That because Godly men Worshipped the true God according to his
divine Inspirations, and Institutions; therefore Idolaters it an inique and
unequel imitation Worshipped their false Gods, according to their own
inventions. And this Idolatry is most Ancient, N. B.
and practiced by Abraham Terah, and Nachor in Chaldea, before they were called
out, Josh. 24. v. 3.
and Converted from it. Genesis 12.31. And Chap. 12.1.
Now to draw down our discourse to the particular point in hand.

. 2. The great and Universal Monarchs Saturnus Babylonicus, and Belus his Son,
and other Potentates of Assyria, and Chaldea having Idolatrously se^ up the
whole Host of Heaven, i. e The Sun, Moon, and Stars to be their Gods; it is not
imaginable that they would Dedicate any other day to the honor of their
greatest God, viz. the Sun, the^^ the day which the Patriarchs before the Flood
Dedicated to God the Creator of the Sun. which does further appear, in that
those Worshippers of the Sun, having robbed God of his Worship, they robbed him
also of his Name. For Nimrod having given to the Sun (his greatest God) the
Name of Baal; ^e afterward assumed that name ^o himself. Jo. Gr. Assyr.
Monarch.
And Belus giving, ^o their greatest God the Sun, ^he name of Jove (the
Contract of Jehovah) the said Belus afterward took that name to himself, and
was called Jove Bell. Idem Biblian.


. 3. And moreover, seeing ^he Idolaters assigned to every of their Seven
Planet-Gods one of the seven days in the week; ^o considering sober man can
^hink otherwise, but that they would Dedicate and Celebrate ^o their greatest
God, the SUN, (whom they called God of Gods, and Lord of Lords) the day
formerly observed and celebrated to the great and true God of Heaven and Earth,
rather then to the Moon and Mercury, or other their inferior Gods. And
therefore nothing can be more probable, then that the Seventh day with the
ancient Patriarchs, was no other but that which afterward was the SUN-DAY,
Sonnes-day, or Day of, or to the Sun, with the Assyrians; and from them was
called Sunday, or Day of the Sun by other Nations also, as the other days of
the week were called by the other names of the Planets, as we do to this day;
viz. Moonday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, all Saxon names
of the Six inferior Planet-Gods. Whereupon, as I said before, this was one
reason why the Lord changed to the Jews the Seventh day from our Sunday to the
Jews Saturday.

CHAP. VIII. Proving that the Heathen Gentiles did of old in all Countries, and
Generations Worship the Sun.
Sect. 1.
HAving showed how, and by what means the Heathen Gentiles of old took
cognizance of the Supereminency of Sunday, or day of the Sun; and hinted that
they on that day worshipped the Sun: Now for Confirmation of it, and to make way
to that which must follow, it is requisite that I should prove [That the
Heathen Gentiles did ^n all Countries and Generations of old, Worship the Sun.]

. 1. The Assyrians with the help of the Chaldeans set up the Idolatry of
Worshipping the Host of Heaven, viz. Sun Moon, and the rest of the Planets
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 9.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And Rabbi Maimonides,
one of the soberest of the Jewish Writers (as some Learned assert) affirms,
That from the days of Enosh, the Stars were Worshipped as Gods. After which
time, the great God was generally forgotten. No man scarcely knew the true God
but Enoch, Methusalah, Noah, Sem. and Heber. De Jol. 1.
Maimonides Maimon.
Some (yea and of the Learned) Quaere, How Maimonides should come to know what
he has said. Genesis 4.26. And to Seth was born a SON and he called his name
ENOS: then began men (says our English Translation) to call upon the Name of
the Lord. But the Learned H. Broughton, Broughtons works in Folio p. 11. p. 64.
p. 219. p. 339. Presented it to King J^^^s in Print.
five times at least, in his Works blame this Translation, and thus Translates
it, Also to Seth was born a Son and he called his name (Sorrowful) Enos. Then
had sprung up profaneness, instead of calling upon the name of the Eternal.
And gives these reasons. 1. At Enos Birth Religion is sorrowfully corrupted,
through Marriage with Cain's House. Enos Sorrowful, and Kenan Lamentable so
called, for Idolatry then arising. For he says in another place of his Works,
That the Ten Fathers or Patriarchs, before the Flood, had names given to them
Consignificant to the time. And 2. Because presently, in the next Chapter save
one, Moses tells us, viz. in Chap. 6. is the declining of the Sons of God, in
Religion; and of the coming of the Flood. And it seems by Nicholas de Lyra,
That the Learned Jews did understand this Scripture of the corrupting Religion
in those times. The Chalde^ Paraphrase likewise Translates (...) The Sons of
Men gave off from calling upon the name of the Lord. And in that Edition in 4o.
Printed at London of that accurate Translation of the Bible, by F. Junius a
Learned Christian, and J. Tremelius a Pious and Learned Jew, Printed at London,
this Text is thus Translated, Tunc coeptum est profanari in invocando nomine
Jehovae, That is, then began men to be Profane in calling upon the name of
Jehovah. And suitable are his notes upon the place. Tunc sub Enoschi tempora
Caeptum est profanari, id est, Alii posteri Schethi, apud quos mansura est
Ecclesia a Caiinitis corrupti, caeperunt prophanare se. In invocando] i. e. in
cultu Dei, vide (inquit) Cap. 5.22, and cap. 6.2. Now this Enos living above
Five hundred years before the Flood, shows us no small antiquity of Idolatry.
2. We answer to the Quaere, That the knowledge of the Planetary Idolatry might
come down to the Ancient Rabbis by sure Tradition. For as Sem lived about an
hundred years before the Flood, when the Planets were deemed to be the
Universal Governors of the World; So he lived long, viz. Five hundred years
after the Flood. Though he lived not to Moses's time, yet did he live till
Abraham was an old Man, if he did not live after Abraham's Burial. Before which
time, the Idolatrous Worshipping of the Host of Heaven, was set up by the
Assyrians and Chaldeans, Josh. 24.2, 3. etc. as aforesaid.

. 2. As the Chaldeans had the Sun for their Supreme God, everlastingly
Governing not only the rest of the Planets, but all things else: even so had
other Nations also, the Sun for their chiefest Governor of the World. For thus
they argued; Si Sol ut placuit veteribus, Dux est, and Moderator reliquorum
luminum, etc. That is, If the Sun (as it was the opinion of Men in ancient
times) be the chief, and Governor of other Luminaries, he alone surmounting in
excellency the other Planets, according to the virtue of whose Motions, the
order of all human affairs is disposed; it necessarily follows that we should
acknowledge the Sun, who governs those, that governs our affairs, to be the
Author of all things, that are brought to pass among us Macrob. in Somno Scip.
Lib. 16. Cap. 2. To the same effect Gloss. mag. in Genesis c. 1. Diodor. Sicul.
Ant. l. 1 c. 2.
To come to particular Nations, The PERSIANS Worshipped the SUN for their God.
For Simeon the A. Bishop of Salucia was Martyred by them because he would not
Worship the Sun. So Vsthasar, Guardian and Educator of Saporis, then King of
Persia, was by him Martyred, because being Converted by the said Simeon,
refused to Worship the Sun, of these things, and see at large in Sozom. Eccles.
Hist l. 2 cap. 8.
The EGYPTIANS likewise Worshipped the SUN Saying, The Sun and Moon were
everlasting Gods, and Governors of all things Eusebius. de preparat. Evang. l. 1.
cap. 9.
. This Idolatry was in Egypt long before Joseph, or Jacob, or any of his
Posterity set footing in Egypt. N. B.
Touching that their Idolatry, worshipping the SUN. See Jer. 43.12, 13. Babylon
shall kindle a Fire in the Houses of the God of Egypt; and he shall break in
pieces the Images of ((...)) Beth-shemesh, that is the House of the Sun. And so
Arias Montan. Translates it. And so does the Sept by (...), That is the City of
the Sun. And touching the Antiquity of that Idolatrous Sun-worshiping in
Egypt, that it was in use there, long before Joseph, or Jacob, or any of his
Posterity were in Egypt, it is evidently held forth to us in Genesis 41. v. 45.
And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zapnath-paaneah; and he gave him to Wife
Asenath the Daughter of Potiphera PRIEST OF ON; which last Clause the Sept.
render ((...)) Of Potiphera the Priest of the City of the Sun, which the vulgar
Latin imitates saying, Sacerdotis Heliopoleos. And this Antiquity of
Sun-worshiping Idolatry is a considerable Notion, N. B.
to strengthen that before, touching the Ancient Patriarchs weekly worship of
God the Creator of the Sun, upon the Sunday. For Truth is ancienter then Error;
and Religious Worship, then Idolatrous. And the brutish Barbarians could not so
much turn Votaries, as to Worship the Sun, without some pattern (which they
corruptly followed) of them that Worshipped the God of the Sun. We know that but
One thousand six hundred years since (which is but as yesterday, to the Ancient
Patriarchs) it was the Heathen Romans opinion, That the Christians rising
before daylight, and singing of Psalms, was but to Worship the Sunrising
Plin. 2. Fox Mart.
. The PHENICIANS also had the SUN for their God. And the Idol in which they
worshipped the Sun was called Heliogabalus Herodot. de vita Imper. Lib. 5.
. Moreover the SUN was the TROJANES God. They had many Gods, but the chiefest
was the Sun and Pallas. The Image of Pallas, they esteemed the Protectress of
Troy, and her Image (called Palladium) to be sent them from the Sun; which they
kept in the Tower, or Temple of Phoebus (that is of the Sun) and there they
adored it. And Pantheus was the Priest of the Sun when Troy was taken Austin de
Civit. Dei. l. 1. cap. 2. and Virg. Aene. Lib. 2.
. Yea the SUN was the GRECIANS God. In Athens their chief City, the place of
giving Judgment, was to be open to the SUN, presuming that the Judge durst not
give a wrong judgment in the face of the SUN, who is said by Homer Iliad. l. 3.
to have ((...) etc.) A revenging Eye, who sees, and hears all things Homer.
Lib. 3.
which is the property of God alone says Plato Plat. de Legibus.
. The Judge of the Court had his Name from the SUN, and was therefore called
(...) q. d. The Sun-Judge. And the Judgment (...), as much as to say The
Judgment of the SUN. The ROMANS, the Posterity of the Trojan Fugitives, did
under several Forms and Names, as of Janus, Apollo, Dydemaeus, etc. Worship
the SUN. Macrob. Saturn lib. 1. c. 17.
The inhuman Nation of the SCYTHIANS, though they acknowledge no other God, yet
they Worship the SUN as God, and offer up to him an Horse, the swiftest of
Cattle, because the SUN is the swiftest of Creatures Boe. ubi de Scythea.
In a word, The AETHIOPIANS, CATHANES, TARTARS, and the rest of the
Pagan-Nations Worshipped the SUN So Boemus writeing of their manners and
Customs. So D. Fr. White.
.

CHAP. IX. Proving that our SUN-DAY or LORD'S DAY was, with the Heathen
Gentiles, the SEVENTH day of the Week, for their solemn day of Worship, and is
continued with us Christians, to be our weekly SEVENTH day of solemn Worship.
Sect. 1.
WE need not spend time and words to prove a known thing, That a Week is a
portion of time, measured out by seven days of the same kind, c1ontinued
without interval. If any of the Seven days be Horizontal, that is from
Sunrising to Sunrising; or from Sunset, to Sunset; or Meridional, that is,
from Noon to noon, or from Midnight to Midnight; then all must be Horizontal,
as the Jews days of their week were, from Sunset to Sunset. Or all must be
Meridional, as the Christians week consisting of Seven days, from Midnight to
Midnight. So that from Saturday to Saturday, from Sunday to Sunday, from Monday
to Monday is a week.

. 1. Accordingly the Nation of the Romans in their Language called the Week
Septimana; that is Seven Mornings. The Saxons in their Tongue called it a
Sennight. The Greeks called it (...), that is, the space of Seven days. And so
the Hebrews call a Week (...), that is a Seven days space.

. 2. And likewise by Scripture account, Seven days, from any set time, is
counted a Week. Laban Genesis 29.27. bid Jacob fulfill her Week, that is the Seven
days of Leahs Nuptials. For that was the usual time in Solemnizing Marriages.
Judge. 14.12. So also is a week measured out by Seven days, Levit. 12. v. 2, 3,
5.

Sect. 2.
Nor need we to mind the difference between A Seventh day (every day of the
week being a Seventh) and THE Seventh day, which is the term, period, and
boundaries of the week.

Sect. 3.
The first main thing we have to prove is, That our Sunday ( which we call the
Lord's day) was the SEVENTH DAY of the week with the Heathen Gentiles. As for
our proof it must be partly by reason, and partly by quotation of Learned
Authors (both Christians and Heathens) whither we must send the Reader, if he
believes not our breviat; for neither can this little Pamphlet brook long
narrations, nor can our Occasions spare time to write them out at large.

. 1. For reason, thus we argue: If Adam being Created the Sixth day at the
close of all God's Works (now entering upon his rest) had not thence learned,
what was a Natural Day, and what was a Week, and how the Seventh day was the
boundary thereof (before he could come to know by experience, what was a
Month, by the Motion of the Moon; or what a Year by the Motion of the Sun;) he
could not have told how for a long time to have measured out his Age. Doubtless
therefore he learned from the Standard of Gods working Six days, and resting
the Seventh, what was a Day, a Week, and the boundary thereof; and thereby
measured out the time of his Life, and so it was kept, and left upon Record for
after Ages. Months and Years among several Nations have much varied: but never
was the Week counted to be more or less then Seven days, N. B.
with any people.

. 2. For Authors: The ancient Beda witnesses, That the Rest on the Seventh day
(Semper celebrari solet) was wont always to be celebrated. Bed. in his
Hexameron.
Likewise Philo-Judaeus makes this bold challenge, Quis Sacrum illum diem per
singulas hebdomadas recurrentem non honorat. Phil. De vita Mosis. Lib. 2.
That is, Who is there that does not honor that SACRED day returning each
Septinary of Seven days. To the same purpose Josephus: Neque est ulla Civitas
Graecorum, aut Barbarorum; aeque ULLA GENS, ad quam SEPTIMI diei, in quo
VACAMUS Consuetudo, minime pervenerit. Jos. contra Ap. Lib. 2.
That is, There is neither any City of the Greeks, or of the Barbarians, nor
ANY NATION to whom the Custom of the Seventh day, in which we REST has not
come. Learned Mercer, commended for such, Heyl. part 1. p. 5.
by Dr. Heylin, was of Opinion (as he says) That the first Fathers being
taught of God, kept the Seventh day holy to (...) Chrysostom Hom. 10. in Genesis
Chrysostom says, Ja^^^c ab initio etc. God has insinuated into us from the
very beginning of the World this Doctrine, instructing us thereof in the Circle
of the Week, THAT ONE WHOLE DAY should be set apart, and laid out for Spiritual
Actions. (f) Aug. Steuchius, speaking of the Seventh day affirms IT TO HAVE
BEEN (in omni aetate, inter omnes Gentes, venerabilis and Sacer) VENERABLE and
SACRED IN ALL AGES, AMONG ALL NATIONS Steuch. on Genesis 2.
And our Book of Homiles tell us, That it is according to the Law of Nature to
have a time as ONE DAY IN THE WEEK, wherein we ought to REST from our Labors.
We will conclude this Paragraph with the Testimony of the most ancient Heathen
Gr. Poets, as Homer the ancientest, Hesiod next, and Callimachus and Linus who
have spoken very hon^^ably of the Creation, and o^^^^ Seventh Day, Their words
are set down at large by Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem Strom. l. 5.
: Eusebeus Eusebius. de preparat. Evang. L. 13. c. 17.
Rivet, Rivet. on Genesis c. 2. and in his De^^ert. de Orig. Sab.
. Now this laudable Opinion of the Sunday (now ou^ Lord's Day) they could not
have from the Books of Moses; for they were not extant in the Greek Tongue,
till Ptolomy procured the Seventy Translators to Translate it into Greek, which
was many hundreds of years after Homer aforesaid. Besides, whiles the Kingdom
of Israel and Judah flourished the Gentiles got not a Script of the Sacred
Scriptures. And the Jews thought it a profaning of Moses's Writings to
communicate any of them to the Heathens. And Mr. John Gregory does prove, Jo.
Greg. his discourse of the Sept.
That before that Translation of the Septuagint, the Gentiles had no light from
the Books of Moses. Therefore (note it well) it must n^^^ follow, N. B.
That the Heathen-Gentiles had that honorable opinion, and spoke so laudably
of the SUN DAY by very ancient successive Tradition, amongst themselves. Now
this Seventh day of which they so well thought and spoke, could not be the Jews
Saturday-Sabbath. For the Heathen utterly disliked it, N. B.
and disdainfully counted it an innovation, brought in by Moses; and therefore
the Poets would commonly have one Lash, or another at it, and never spoke
honorably of it. Therefore it must be the ancient SUNDAY (before Moses's time,
and after that, among the Heathen) that was by the Heathens honored as the
Seventh-day of the Week, the high day of their prime, and solemn Worship every
Week called by them their Sunday; and by us called the Lord's day: Of which
more in the next ^aragraph.

. 3. The Adversaries themselves do grant, that the day of the Sun or Sunday,
was with the Heathen Gentiles the Seventh day, and Sacred with them. But it was
say they the Seventh day of the Month, and not the Seventh day of the Week.
Against which, we must boldly assert the contrary, viz. That the day of the Sun
was the Seventh day of the Week, and Sacred with the Gentiles, and not the
Seventh day of the Month. To warrant this Assertion, we have not only much in
the Authors cited in the former Paragraph, but also in Clemens Alexandrinus,
and Eusebeus, alleging the before named Poets to show particularly, That the
Heathen Gentiles held the Seventh day of the Week Sacred with them. And
moreover in the Greek Calender, there is no mention at all of a Seventh day of
the Month. Had there been any such thing, they that observe therein things of
lesser consequence, would have observed that much more Scalig. De emendat.
temp. de Calendario Attico.
Add that Decree of Miltiades (the last Bishop of Rome that was a Martyr);
who, that he might make a difference between the Observation of Sunday, by
Christians, and the Observation of the same Sunday by the Heathen, decreed,
That all Gentiles that were turned Christians, should not Fast on Sundays, as
other Gentiles did. Binii Council. And Plat. Divita Miltiadis.
For in those times, Sacred days were called by the Heathen Fasts; Because they
abstained from feeding themselves till their Services were ended. Thus of the
proof of the first main thing intended in this Ninth Chapter is, viz. That the
Weekly day, to wit, the Seventh day every Week, with the Gentiles, which they
call the day of the Sun, or Sunday, was the very same day which we call THE
LORD'S DAY. We have already, in several Sections and Paragraphs of the
foregoing Chapters, dropped some proofs of this. But now we shall bring more
particularly, direct and express Testimonies to this point.

. 1. Dr. F. White, and Dr. Heylin (though they were Opposers of the Morality of
the Sabbath) do confess, That Christians of the first ages, because they
observed the Sunday for their Sacred Services bowing in Prayer toward the
East, were upbraided for Worshippers of the Sun; though they neither Worshipped
the Sun as the Heathen, nor called the day, of their Worshipping God, Sunday, as
they called it; but the Lord's day being their Sabbath, or Sacred day of REST
to the Lord. Therefore if Sunday had not been with the Heathen (who were Sun
Worshippers indeed) a weekly day of solemn Worship, there had been no cause of
that upbraiding by the Jews, or Heathen-Gentiles. White of the Sabbath and
Heylin part 2. p. 53.
But we have more approved Authors then these, as it follows,

. 2. Sozomen tells us, That Constantine Commanded Diem Dominicum quem Hebraei
primum Hebdomadae appellant, and craeci Solis deputant a cunctis celebrari.
Sozom. Eccles. Histor. L. 1. c. 8.
That is, Constantine commanded that the Lords day which the Jews call the
First day of the week, and the Greeks depute to the Sun, to be celebrated of
all. Whence it is justly inferred, That Constantine then held, That the Day
which the Heathen-Greeks deputed to the Sun, was the very same which we call
the Lord's day.

. 3. Coeli Rhodignin, tells us, Nos jure optimo, diem quem Mathematici Solis
vocant, Domino ascripsimus, dicavimusque, and illius Cultui totum mancipavimus;
That is, with the greatest Equity we have ascribed, and Dedicated to the Lord,
and wholly given up to his Worship, that day which the Mathematicians call THE
DAY OF THE SUN Coel. Rho. Antiq. L. 13. c. 22.
.

. 4. Bonaventure tells of the pious fraud that Christians acted, to rob the Sun
of its Idolatrous Worship, and transfer the observation of that day to Christ,
His Words are these, Secundum Gentiles, dies Dominicus primus est; Cum
Principio illius diei incipit dominari principalis Planeta Sol: propter quod
vocabant eundem Diem Solis; and exhibebant ei venerationem. Vt ergo error ille
excluderetur, and reverentia cultus Solis Deo exhiberetur, praefixa fuit
Dominica Dies, qua populus Christianus vacaret cultui Divino Bonavent. 3. Did
37.
That is; According to the Heathen the LORD'S DAY is a CHIEF day; when in the
beginning of that day, the Principle Planet the SUN, begins to Rule: For which
cause they called it the Day of the SUN, and gave Worship thereunto. To the
intent therefore, that Error might be shut out of doors, and that reverence of
Worship of the Sun might be given to God, The LORD'S DAY was prefixed, wherein
the Christian people gave themselves to Divine Worship. For a close of this
Chapter we add a Fifth Paragraph.

. 5. Justin Martyr does diverse times in his Works, call the LORD'S DAY ((...))
THE DAY OF THE SUN, as then the Gentiles or Greeks called it. Just. Mar. Apol.
2 pro Christian. and 2. centur.
So also Tertullian, sometimes calls it, Diem Solis; Sunday sometimes Diem
Dominicum, The Lord's day. And in the Edicts of Constantine, Valentinian,
Valens, Gratian, Honorius, Arcadius, and Theodosius (all of them Christian
Princes) our LORDS DAY is commonly called Dies Solis, Sunday.

A DIAGRAM, OR Representation, as to the Eye, of the Sum and Design of the
whole Treatise preceding.
CHAP. X.
THE PREFACE To the said DIAGRAM.
THE Jews (as we have showed were to begin their Sabbath at the Even, next
before the succeeding Morning; And after the immediate Morning or Daylight
preceding. Levit. 23.32. Consequently the rest of the Seven days of the Week so
began: or else they could not measure out the Sabbath to begin as aforesaid. As
also the Jews Festivals, and Solemnities would justle out, or rob one another
of their due time, when diverse come together. As Levit. 23.5, 6, 7, 8. In the
Fourteenth day of the First Month at Even is the Lord's Passover. On the
Fifteenth of the same Month is the Feast of Vnleavened-bread etc. Grotius on v.
32. of that Levittic. tells us punctually the mode of this Mutation. Cum dies
per annum inaequales fint, etc. That is, Seeing that days by the year are
unequal, and in Summer the Sun sets much more slowly, or laterly (as to us)
then in the Winter, the Hebrews begin their Rest on the Sabbath six hours after
the Noontyde.

Now for an example, to the point in hand Let us consider the Measures an^
Mutations of Friday, Saturday, and Sunday in this Diagram.

The Diagram, or Representation
According to the Jews Account.
1. FRIDAY (which was the day of the Week when Christ suffered) i^, as to the
beginning thereof put back to take its beginning at the immediate preceding
Evening of that day, as but now, is afor^ described by Grotius; viz. it began
at the sixth hour after the Noon, or Twelve of the Clock. 2. SATVRDAY
(consequentially) which was the day of the Wee^ wherein Christ lay in his Grav^
did begin at the immediate succe^ding Evening of that Day. 3. SUNDAY therefore
(which was the day of the Week when Christ arose from the Grave) b^gan at
Sunday Evening. And (...) that Evening, with the Day-ligh^ next following make
the Thir^ day. And so in the rest of the day of the Week proportionably.
Thus ye see the Jews Measure and Computation of the Week by Days, by the
Example of the three Days before expressed.

The Parallelogram, what proportion the Christian Account holds with the
Diagram of the Jewish.

According to the Lord Jesus Christ Account.
1. But Christ by his Resurrection, beginning the Third Day, That is, Sunday,
in the Morning, which takes to it naturally the succeeding Evening to make it a
complete day calling, it the Third, Mat. 20.19. Mal. 9.31. -- 10.34 Luke 18.33.
-- 24.7. 2. Now as linck after linck in a Chain, Friday begins that day (of 24.
hours) at Friday-morning. SATVRDAY begins at Saturday Morning.

3. SUNDAY begins at Sunday Morning. And so all the Evenings re-associated with
their Mornings, move forward, and slip into their natural places; the Sun
constantly measuring out a Night to every Day, and naturally makes the Night
the latter part of its race as if the Sun rested after its Labor in the day,
whilst it gives good nights rest to the laboring man.
And now, as the close of the Diagram, ye may behold Sunday-Sabbath, standing
by it self distinguishedly in Mode, Measure, and Order, Thus;

The Jewish Sabbath does consist,

1. Of the Evening which began Six hours after the Noon. At which they killed
their Paschal Lamb. 2. Of the Dark-night: at which time Israel went out of
Egypt. 3. Of the Dawning of the Morning, as they were delivered in the Sea
from Pharaoh in the morning Watch. 4. Of Daylight, as when the Jews stood on
the Shore, and saw their Enemies dead in the Red Sea.
The Christian Sabbath consists of these parts in this Order;

1. Of the Dawning of the Morning, as when Christ arose, Math. 28.1. 2. Of the
Daylight, as when Christ awhile after his rising appeared to the two Mary's,
Mat. 28.9. 3. Of the Evening, as when Christ appeared to the Disciples at
Evening, John 20.29. 4. Of the Night and Darkness, or Dark-night, as when
Christ took his Natural Rest; as sleep he did, as the Evangelists ^estifie.
CHAP. XI. Of the Deductions from the whole of the foresaid Chapters, as genuin
Conclusions from the said Premises.
Sect. 1.
HAving cleared (we Hope) the former Nine Chapters; we now judge (under favor
of the pious Learned) that we may infer these Three Conclusions.

1. That the Morality of the Fourth Commandment is stamped, impressed, and
fixed rather on the Christians Sunday, Sabbath day, Seventh day, or First day,
then upon the Jews Saturday Sabbath.

Note good Reader by the way, that it is no contradiction in the thing, to call
our Sabbath the Seventh Day, if it be called also by our Translators and others
the First Day, as it appears following:

2. The Jews Artificial Sabbath day of Daylight, and the Christians Artificial
Sabbath Day of Daylight were in the same Horizon and materially as to
Daylight the very same, at the very first change of the Sabbath, Exodus 12.42.
Unless we will say, That there is one whole day lost since Isreal's going out of
Egypt (when God Instituted, that the Jews should begin their Sabbath at
Evening) which if admitted, would odd the account, and make an interval in the
Calculation of time since the Creation to this day. They are therefore
Numerically the same day, although variously named; viz. The Seventh day
because it followed our Six days labor; and the First day because the chief
day of the Week from Adam to us; and the chief day of Christ agitating on Earth
for our Salvation, viz. The day of his Triumphant Resurrection. Which in the
Letter of the Original is not called the First day of the Week, but (...) and
(...). Mar. 16.2. Joh. 20.1.1 Cor. 16.2.) That is the only day of the Week, for
the reason aforesaid, yea Christ rose in the end of the Jewish Sabbath between
the Seventh day, and the First day, and so got two names.

3. That both Sabbath days, the Jews and ours, upon several accounts are the
same.

To clear these Three Conclusions, and First of the First, That the Morality of
the Fourth Commandment is fixed rather on our Christian Sabbath, or Lord's
day, then on the Jewish Sabbath; Note well that,

. 1. If it be granted on all hands that THAT of a Religious thing which is
changeable, be Ceremonial, Lasting (as the word imports) but for a time: And
THAT of a Religious thing be Moral, which is never changeds then if any will
seek a Ceremonialty in the Fourth Commandment, they must find it in the change
of the Jews Sabbath, after their coming out of Egypt. And if they will (as
they ought) acknowledge a Morality of the Fourth Commandment, it must needs be
in the Christian Sabbath; observed from the Creation to Moses's time, by Jews,
and Heathen Gentiles; and from that time down to Christ, by the Heathen
Gentiles (as before proved, Chap. 8. and Chap. 9.) And from Christ's time down
to us, by the Christian Gentiles.

. 2. Nor Secondly, did Gods Command, at the Jews coming out of Egypt, to
observe their Sabbath, null or make void the Christian Gentiles Sabbath;
because as it could plead Prescription and Seniority; so it was new stamped by
Christ's Resurrection on that Christian Sabbath (a greater deliverance then
that out of Egypt) and his several appearances on that day of the Week to the
Apostles at their Devotions, Praying over them, and Breathing on them, saying,
receive ye the Holy Ghost (John 20) The Apostles likewise approving the
Churches meetings on that day, and improving those meetings as for Piety, so
for Charity, by Collections for Christians in want. 1 Cor. 16.1.2. So that St.
John in and by his Revelation he received, calls it the Lord's day, Revel. 1.
And since that has been observed by the Chistian Churches for One thousand six
hundred sixty three years, justly concluding that (...) *) The LORDS day, Rev.
1.10.
does as certainly hold out to us our Christian Sabbath, as ((...),) 1 Cor.
11.20.) Does the LORDS Supper.

. 3. We may argue the Morality of our Lord's day-Sabbath (a paribus) from the
like cases in other things. For, why was the Levitical Law called Ceremonial,
and to be observed only by the Jews, but because God appointed them a Religion
and Worship in Types, of Sacrifices, Washings, etc. the Shell and sensible
outside whereof was to be shaken; that is, shaken down and removed ( Heb.
12.27.) but the kernel, and Spiritual meaning of them, touching Justification
and Sanctification by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, etc. was to abide for
ever to the end of this World Heb. 12.27, 28.) Therefore a^ the whole Politia
of the Jews Worship was partly (that is, Extrinsecally in the Letter)
Ceremonial, and partly (Intrinsecally in the Spirit, and meaning) was Moral: So
their Solemn day for Exercise of their Solemn Worship was Ceremonial in that it
might be changed, and was changed to [A] Seventh day for the Jews to observe;
and is Moral in the fixed Standing of [THE] Seventh-day Solemn Worship, observed
by the Christians to the end of this World: to which day (its hoped) the Jews
when convinced, will again change their Jewish Sabbath.

. 4. What Notion then (will some ask) and what value do we put upon the Ten
Commandments delivered by God himself to the Israelites by the hand of Moses,
after the change of the Sabbath, when they were come out of Egypt as far as
the Mount Sinai, Exodus 20? Answer, We look on them in the Matter as altogether
moral Commandments, though in respect of that change of the Solemn Week day of
Public Worship (wherein specially they were read and recited to the Jews) we
look on them as Ceremonial. I mean, Though the time in respect of that change
was Ceremonial, N. B.
yet the Commandments themselves in their Substance are moral. Our Reason is,
Because the Ten Commandments were written (in their Equity) in man's heart from
the beginning; and in their matter were extant in use and Practice, long before
Isreal's coming out of Egypt.

For Example; The matter of the First Commandment, of Faith in God was
commended and commanded, and enjoined all the World over both Jews and
Gentiles. Genesis 15.6. Abraham believed in God, and the Lord ACCOUNTED IT TO HIM
FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS. This Commendation, and acceptance of Faith by God himself
is in Gallatians 3.5, 6, 7, 8. transferred and applied to the Heathen Gentiles;
He therefore (says the Appostle). that ministers to you the Spirit, and does
he it by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of FAITH? Even as Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for RIGHTEOUSNESS. Know ye therefore,
that they which are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham. And the
Scripture foreseeing that God would JUSTIFY the HEATHEN by FAITH, Preached
before the Gospel to Abraham. The injunction of Faith in God upon all men,
according to the intent of the First Commandment, is fully held forth, Heb.
11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God: For he that comes to God,
must believe, that HE IS, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him.

So likewise the Matter of the Second Commandment forbidding all Idolatrous
and false Worship, not Instituted by God, is intimated in times before the
setting forth of the Moral Law at Sinai, and the breach thereof severely
punished or reproved. Exodus 32. While Moses was on the Mount, receiving the Two
Tables of the Law at God's hand, the Israelites make a Molten Calfe, and
Proclaim, To morrow is a Feast to Jehovah, and do then Sacrifice to it and
dance about it. This the Apostlecalls Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. Because though they
pretended the Worshipping of the true God, yet they did it through an
uninstituted and false medium or mean. And therefore are there punished with a
great slaughter. And from the beginning etc. Cain, Abel, Noah, Abraham
Sacrificed. And Laban, yea Abraham, before his Call, are reproached for their
Idolatry, Josh. 24.15.

So also the matter of the Third Commandment touching Honoring Gods Name, in
fearing him, and swearing by it, Deuteronomy. 6.13. was in use and practice long
before the giving of the Law, Genesis 14.22. And Abraham said to the King of Sodom
I have lifted up my hand unto the Lord, the most high God, the Possessor of
Heaven and Earth; That is, he had sworn by the Name of the Lord. So it is said
of Jacob. Genesis 31.53. That he Swear by the FEAR of his Father Isaac, that is,
he Swear by the true God whom Jsaac truly feared; yea the Idolatrous Laban,
Genesis 21 23. And the Heathen Abimelech, Genesis 2. v. 22, 23. practiced obedience
to this Command.

The matter of the Fourth Commandment, touching Sanctifying the Sabbath day is
also in use before the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, as has been
abundantly cleared in the preceding discourse: though that one place, Exodus
16.22, 23. would have sufficiently evinced it, where it is said, And it came to
pass on the SIXTH day they gathered twice as much bread (viz. Manna) And all
the Rulers of the Congregation came and told Moses; in which words is
necessitatedly supposed an observation of the Sabbath preceding. See the
English Annotations on Genesis 2 3. arguing the Point.

The Matter of the Fifth Commandment of due Subjection o^ Inferiors to
Superiors, is also imposed and practiced long before the giving of the Law See
Genesis 3.16. And the Lord said to Eve, Thy desire shall be t^ thy Husband, and he
shall rul^ over thee. And Sarah honor her Husband Abraham with the Title of
Lord, Genesis 18.12 Which was her commendation 1 Pet. 3.5, 6. See further
concerning Subjection and Dominion. Genesis 27. v. 29, and 37.

So is the Sixth Commandment evidently extant forbidding murder, long before
the giving of the Law at Sinai. Se^ Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth man's Blood, by
man shall his Blood be shed.

As for the Seventh Commandment touching Adultery, see the unlawfulness of it
in Judah (the Son of Jacob) lying with Tamar, and the Judgment passed upon it,
Genesis 38.24. See the Dutch, and English Annotations upon it.

Of the Matter of the Eighth Commandment touching Stealing, and the
unlawfulness thereof, See Genesis 31. v. 32. In that Jacob would not justify any
of his Family that had stolen ought from Laban; but would give them up to
punishment. And in v. 39. Jacob made good to Laban any thing that had been
Stolen from him whiles Jacob kept his Flocks.

Concerning the Ninth Commandment forbidding all false Witnessings, it was of
such consequence in the esteem both of Jews and Heathens, viz, Abraham, Jacob,
and Abimilech, Picol, and Laban, that to make sure a^ agreement they called God
(...) Witness, that they spoke tr^^^ by an Oath, Genesis 14.22. Genesis (...) 31.
Genesis 31.53. All which w^^^ long before the giving of (...) Law.

The Tenth Commandment Thou shall not Covet and its Unlawfulness. We have
intimated Genesis 6.2. The Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that they were
fair, and they took to them Wives, of all which they chose. This their Seeing
the beauties of the Daughters of men was their Lust, or Concupiscence: It was a
double, or compound Lust, (...) partly the Lust of the Flesh, (...) partly the
Lust of the Eyes; r^^^tioned there as their great (...) and amplified v. 6. and
th^^^ned in the remainder of (...) Chapter. N. B.
For, Concupiscer (...) an Introduction to the breach of all the Five
Commandments of the second Table, because it is an inordinate and unjust
desire after that which is my Neighbors, without due consideration for it.
When therefore a man does Concupiscentially desire his Neighbors Wife, he is
disposed toward the breaking of the Com^andement against Adultery. When he
desires Concupiscenti^lly his Neighbors Servant he ^s inclined toward the
breach of the Commandment of every ^ne to honor his own Superior, Master, or
Governor. When ^e Concupiscentially desires his Neighbors House, Ox, or Ass,
^e is disposed in his heart toward the breach of the Commandment of Theft.
Lastly, ^^en it is said Thou shall not co^et any thing that is thy Neigh^ours,
it signifies that this Concupiscence will incline and dispose a man to take
away his Neighbors Life, good Name, and Trade, contrary to the former
Commandments. Thus ye see my asserting the Morality of the Ten Commandments
and my Reason for it; and that Morality is to be stamped and fixed rather upon
the Christians Sunday-Sabbath, then upon the Jew^ Saturday-Sabbath. And thus o^
the First Conclusion.

. 2. The Second Conclusion to be cleared (as before named) is, That the Jews
Artificial Sabbath Day, of Daylight, an (...) Christians Artificial Sabbath
(...) of Daylight, were Materia (...) to Daylight) the very self (...) at the
very first Change (...) Sabbath, Ex. 12.42. unle^^^ will say that there is one
(...) day lost, since Isreal's goi^^^ of Egypt, when God Insti^^^ That the Jews
should begin (...) Sabbath at Evening. Which, if admitted, would odd the
Account, and make an interval in the Calculation of time, since the Creation to
this time. Now for the clearing of this Conclusion, Consider, That if we grant
what is before undeniably proved ( Chap. 9th.) That both the Jews and Gentiles
before the change of the Sabbath, observed our Sunday, whose Daylight began
(both with Jew and Gentile) at Sunrising: And at the Institution of that
Change of the Sabbath God commanded the Jews to take into their Sabbath the
next preceding Evening, then either we must say, The Jews Sabbath began the
Evening next BEFORE our Sabbath-day-light began; or else that the Jews Sabbath
began at the Evening AFTER our Sabbath-day-light began. If we say AFTER, then
one whole day is lost in the computation of time. If we say BEFORE, then we have
that we contend for, viz. That the Jews Artificial Sabbath Day of Daylight,
and the Christians Artificial Sabbath of Daylight were Materially (as to
Daylight) the very self same as before at the very first change of the
Sabbath. Thus of the Second Conclusion.

. 3. Conclusion to be cleared (before named) is, That both Sabbaths, the Jews
and ours in several respects and on several accounts are much the same.

1. They are the same Materially, as to Daylight, not only in the same Horizon
of which Jerusalem is the Center point (as was said in the First Conclusion)
but also in that Horizon which encircleth England and Judaea, excepting about
four or five hours, that Daylight begins in Judaea, so much sooner, then with
us in England as is demonstrable upon the Globe.

2. They are the same reputatively; that is, They are reputed and esteemed the
same day of the week in number. For what is the Reason, that the French and
Dutch are said to keep the Twenty fifth day of December for the Feast of the
Nativity of Christ; and yet we English also are said to keep the same Feast on
the Twenty fifth day of December, though we keep it Ten days (Old Style) after
them beyond Sea, that observe (New-Style) Ten days before us? I say what is the
Reason, but because the French and Dutch ever since that Pope Gregory altered
their Year, begin their Months sooner by Ten days then we do: Just so it is in
the Matter of the Sabbath; namely, both Jews and Christians, all of them keep
their Sabbath on the same day of the Week, viz. on the SEVENTH day of the Week;
and that the Reason why the Seventh day of the Week with the Jews comes to be
almost a day sooner then it does with the Christians is, because the Jews began
their Week near a day sooner, this they did formerly before the change of it at
their coming out of Egypt: and sooner then the Heathen Gentiles did, and the
Christians now do.

3. Both Sabbath days the Jews, and Ours, are the same boundarily. For as the
Six days of Man's Labor do bound out the Jews present Sabbath; Six days (says
the Fourth Commandment) Shall thou Labor and do all thy Work, but the Seventh
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: So all the Six days of our Labor are the
boundary of our Christian Sabbath, for after our Six days of our Labor we keep
our Sabbath; not sooner, nor later. And the natural necessity of the thing
constreins. For the Sabbath must either relate to the Six days of God's Work of
Creation, or to the Six days of Man's Labor in his Vocation.

Now it cannot relate to the Six days of God's Work of Creation, and so to the
day of God's Rest; For then, either the day of God's Rest, and the Jews Sabbath
must be the same, beginning in all places at Sunsetting, wherever the Jews
did, or ought to observe their Sabbath: which cannot be, except the Earth were
all a flatt (and not a round Globe) as we see by sense, both on the Globe, and
on the Hills and Mountains of the Earth, how their roundness makes the day
begin successively, over the whole Earth. Or else the day of Gods Rest did at
the first, and still does begin in this computation of a Seventh, sooner in
some places then in other; and so first at one particular place, whiles it was
no where else the day of God's Rest; either of which are so against sense and
reason, that no understanding man can rationally imagine it.

Therefore, the bounding and measuring out of the Sabbath must relate to the
Six days of Man's Labor in his Vocation, as it is directed in the Fourth
Commandment: immediately after which Six days of our Labor follows the Seventh
day for Rest. So that in this respect also the Jews Sabbath, and our Sabbath,
are the same.

The Close.
THus have I Labored, in this small Treatise, with great Ventilations and
Careful thoughts to give rest to others: hoping that upon due consideration of
what has been cleared in the precedent Treatise, touching the Seniority of our
Christian Sabbath before the Law: The sameness in several respects of both
Sabbaths at this day; And that the Crown of Morality is rather Set, Worn, or to
be worn on the head of our Christian Sabbath, then on the Jewish; Our Christian
Brethren of the Saturday- Sabbatarians will be brought off from the Error of
their Opinion, and out of that discomfort, and those encumbrances that attend
the Practice thereof: Which is the Prayer of their hearty well-wishing Friend,

N. H.

FINIS.

