Homer's ILIADS IN ENGLISH.

By THO. HOBBES of Malmsbury.

To which may be added Homer's ODYSSES Englished by the same Author.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1676.

THE CONTENTS.
LIB. I. THe discontent and secession of Achilles. LIB. II. The Dream of
Agamemnon. The tempting of the Army, and the Catalogue of Ships and Commanders.
LIB. III. The Duel of Menelaus and Paris, for the ending of the War. LIB. IV.
The Articles broken by the Trojans. And the first Battle. LIB. V. The first
Battle continued, wherein Pallas strengthens Diomedes to supply the absence
of Achilles. LIB. VI. The first Battle yet continued. The other Gods forbidden
by Jove to assist. LIB. VII. The Greeks enclose their Ships with a Wall and
Ditch. The Duel betwixt Hector and Ajax. LIB. VIII. The second Battle; and the
Trojans stay all night in the Field. LIB. IX. The Greeks deliberate of going
home, but are staid by Diomed and Nestor. And Ambassadors sent with Gifts to
reconcile Achilles, in vain. LIB. X. Encounter of the Scouts by night. And the
surprise of Rhesus. LIB. XI. The third Fight. Agamemnon wounded. The Greeks
beaten to their Camp. Diomed, Machaon, Ulysses, and Eurypylus wounded.
Patroclus is persuaded by Nestor to obtain of Achilles to be sent to the aid of
the Greeks in Achilles his Armor. LIB. XII. The fourth Fight ( Hector having
entered the Argive Camp) at the Ships. LIB. XIII. Neptune encourages the
Greeks. LIB. XIV. Juno by the help of Venus lays Jove asleep, whilst Neptune
assisteth the Greeks. LIB. XV. Jupiter awakes, and sends away Neptune. Hector
chaseth the Greeks again to their Ships, and fireth one of them. The Acts of
Ajax. Which is the fifth Battle. LIB. XVI. The sixth Battle. The Acts of
Patroclus, and his Death. LIB. XVII. The seventh Battle, about Patroclus his
body. LIB. XVIII. The grief of Achilles. And new Armor made him by Vulcan.
LIB. XIX. Achilles reconciled to Agamemnon goes forth to Battle. LIB. XX. The
eight Battle, and the Gods permitted to assist. LIB. XXI. Achilles with great
slaughter pursues the Trojans to Scamander, and takes twelve alive to kill at
Patroclus his Tomb. LIB. XXII. The death of Hector, and lamentation in Troy.
LIB. XXIII. The Funeral-Games for Patroclus. LIB. XXIV. The Redemption of
Hector, and his Funeral.
BOOKS Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
I. THe Complete Vineyard, or an excellent way for planting of Vines in
England, and how to make Wine of their Grapes. By W. Hughs, price 2 s. II. The
Complete Measurer, or a new exact Way of Mensuration. By Tho. Hammond, price 1
s. III. Jesuits Morals. Folio, price 10 s. IV. Bacon's Natural History. Folio,
price 8 s. V. Boccalins Parnassus. Folio, price 8 s. VI. Clarks Praxis Curiae
Admiralitatis. Octavo, price 2 s. VII. A Description of Candia, with an account
of the Siege and Surrender of it. Octavo, price 1 s. VIII. The Deaf and Dumb
Man's Discourse; A Treatise of those born Deaf and Dumb: to which is added the
Rationality of Beasts, particularly of the Elephant, showing the wonderful
understanding of that Creature. Octavo, price 1 s. IX. The life of Des Carts,
Octavo, price 1 s. X. Fleckno's Epigrams of all sorts. Octavo, price 1 s. XI.
Thomas a Kempis Christian Pattern, English, Twenty fours, price 1 s. XII.
Knowles Answer to Ferguson of Justification, price 1 s. 6 d. XIII. Blount's
Academy of Eloquence. Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d. XIV. Hobbes Three Papers to the
Royal Society. Quarto. XV. Sir H. Blount's Voyage into the Levant. Twelves,
price 1 s. XVI. Hobbes Rosetum Geometricum. Quarto, price 3 s. XVII. Sinners
Tears, by Fettyplace. Twelves, price 1 s. XVIII. Drexelius of Eternity.
Twelves, price 2 s. XIX. Greek Testament. Octavo, price 3 s. 6 d. XX. Articles
of Visitation for Norwich, price 2 d. XXI. The Flower-Garden, showing how all
sorts of Flowers are to be ordered; the time of Flowering, the taking them up,
and Planting them again, etc. Being all necessary observations relating to a
Flower-Garden, by the diligence and experience of W. Hughes. Twelves, price 1
s. XXII. Bishop Corbets Elegant Poems. Twelves, price 1 s. XXIII. The Court of
Curiosity; being the most Witty, and Facetious Fortune-Book that was ever
published in English; with a most judicious Interpretation of all Dreams drawn
from the Wisdom and Doctrine of the Ancients; also a Treatise of Physognomy.
All written in French, since Translated (for the excellency of it, into
Spanish, Italian, High Dutch, Low Dutch, etc. now out of French) into English.
The second Edition, much improved and explained. In Twelves, price 2 s. XXIV.
The White Devil, or, Vittoria Coromb^na, A Tragedy, Acted at the Theater Royal.
Quarto, price 1 s. XXV. The old Troop, or, Monsieur Raggou, A Comedy, Acted at
the Theater Royal. Quarto, price 1 s. XXVI. Catalines Conspiracy, A Tragedy,
Acted at the Theater Royal. Written by Ben. Johnson. Quarto, price 1 s. XXVII.
Lux Mathematica. Quarto, price 5 s. XXVIII. Hobbs his Travels. Twelves, prce 1
s. XXXIX. Principia and Problemata aliquot Geometrica ante desperata, nunc
breviter explicata and demonstrata. Autho. Th. Hobbs. Quarto, price 2 s. XXX.
The American Physician, showing all the Virtues and Uses of all Roots, Herbs,
Trees, Fruits, etc. in the English Plantations in America. By W. Hughes.
Twelves, price 1 s. XXXI. Shafto's Great Law of Nature, of Self-preservation.
Examined and Vindicated against the abuses in Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan.
Twelves, price 1 s. XXXII. Calliopes Cabinet opened and reviewed. Wherein all
Gentlewomen, of what quality soever, may know how to adorn themselves for
Feasting, Funerals, etc. With a Dictionary to explain all the Terms in
Heraldry. By J. Salter, price 8 d. XXXIII. A new Collection of new Songs and
Poems. Written by the present Wits of this Age. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. XXXIV.
A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, the Native Country of her Royal Highness
the Duchess of York. Quarto, price 6 d. XXXV. Brevis Demonstratio. The truth
and excellency of the Christian Religion demonstrated by Reason. The Second
Edition, Twelves, price 10 s. XXXVI. The Memoires and rare Adventures of
Henrietta Silvia Moliere, Translated out of French. Twelves, price 2 s. XXXVII.
Waltons Lives: Of Dr. Donn, Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Herbert.
Octavo, price 3 s. XXXVIII. The Primitive Institution, showing the use and
antiquity of Catechizing. By L. Addison; D. D. Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d. Author
of the Present State of the Jews.
These new Books Printed for William Crook in the year 1675.
1. HOmers Odysses, Translated into English by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury. With a
large Preface, concerning the Virtues of Heroic Poetry, price 4 s. 2. The
Jurisdiction of Court-Leets, and Court-Barons, Marshalsey, Py-powder, etc. and
all other Courts; to which is added Choice Writs. By R. A. and T. J. price 6 s.
3. The Third Volume of Mr. Hobbs his Works, in Quarto, price 10 s. 4. The
Golden Rule of Arithmetic made easy. By C. H. Octavo, price 3 d. 5. De
Mirabilibus Pecci Carmen. Tho. Hobbes, price 6 d. 6. Euterpe Revived; being
Epigrams on the most eminent persons now living, price 1 s. 7. Amorous Gallant,
or Love in Fashion. A Comedy in Heroic Verse. By J. B. Gent. price 1 s. 8. The
Mock-Duellist, or the French Vallet. A Comedy Acted at the Theater Royal.
Quarto, price 1 s. 9. The Grounds of Sovereignty and Greatness. In Quarto,
price 6 d. 10. Gees Steps of Ascension unto God, or, A Ladder to Heaven. Twenty
fours.
Books Printed for William Crook for this year 1676.
1. HOmers Iliads, Translated out of Greek into English, by Tho. Hobbes of
Malmsbury* 2. The present state of the Jews, relating all their Customs and
Practices now in use. The second Edition. By L. Addison, D.D. Twelves* 3.
Camera Regis, A short view of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Wall,
River* Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Cu^stoms, Franchises, of that
City. Octavo. 4. A Sermon Preached at the Bishop of Chiche^ster's first
Visitation. By W. Howel, Ministe^ at Fittleworth in Sussex. Quarto. 5. The
Potable Balsam of Life, described by Dr. P. Belon. 6. The Historians Guide, in
two parts, First, the Recovery of lost time, being a Chronology from the
Creation to this time, Translated out (...) Italian. Second, Englands
Remembrance^ being an Account of the Actions, Exploits* Battles, Sieges, etc.
happened in any of hi^ Majesty's Dominions, from 1600 to 1675* Octavo.
ILIAD. LIB. I.
O Goddess, sing what woe the discontent
Of Thetis Son brought to the Greeks; what Souls
Of Heroes down to Erebus it sent,
Leaving their bodies unto Dogs and Fowls;
Whilst the two Princes of the Army strove,
King Agamemnon and Achilles stout.
That so it should be was the will of Jove,
But who was he that made them first fall out?
Apollo; who incensed by the wrong
To this Priest Chryses by Atrides done,
Sent a great Pestilence the Greeks among;
Apace they di'd, and remedy was none.
For Chryses came unto the Argive Fleet,
With Treasure great his Daughter to redeem;
And having in his hand the Ensigns meet,
That did the Priestly Dignity beseem,
A Golden Scepter and a Crown of Bays,
Unto the Princes all made his request;
But to the two Atrides chiefly prays,
Who of the Argive Army were the best.
O Sons of Atreus may the Gods grant you
A safe return from Troy with Victory;
And you on me compassion may show,
Receive these Gifts, and set my Daughter free;
And have respect to Jove's and Leto's Son.
To this the Princes all gave their consent,
Except King Agamemnon. He alone,
And with sharp language from the Fleet him sent;
Old man (said he) let me not see you here
Now staying, or returning back again,
For fear the Golden Scepter which you bear
And Chaplet hanging on it prove but vain.
Your Daughter shall to Argos go far hence,
And make my Bed, and labor at the Loom,
And take heed you no farther me incense,
Lest you return not safely to your home.
Frighted with this, away the Old man went;
And often as he walked on the sand,
His Prayers to Apollo up he sent.
Hear me Apollo with thy Bow in hand,
That honored art in Tenedos and Chryse,
And unto whom Cylla great honor bears,
If thou accepted have my Sacrifice,
Pay the Argives with thy Arrows for my tears.
His Prayer was granted by the Deity;
Who with his Silver Bow and Arrows keen,
Descended from Olympus silently
In likeness of the sable night unseen.
His Bow and Quiver both behind him hang,
The Arrows chink as often as he jogs,
And as he shot the Bow was heard to twang,
And first his Arrows flew at Mules and Dogs.
But when the Plague into the Army came,
Perpetual was the fire of Funerals;
And so nine days continued the same,
Achilles on the tenth for counsel calls;
And Juno 'twas that put it in his head,
Who for the Argive Army was afraid:
The Lords to Counsel being gathered,
Up stood Achilles and thus to them said,
We must I think (Atrides) run from hence,
Since War and Plague consume us both at once,
Let Us think on how to stay the Pestilence,
Or else at Troy resolve to leave our bones.
Let Us with some Priest or Prophet here advise
That knows the pleasure of the Gods above,
Or some that at expounding Dreams are wise,
For also Dreams descend on men from Jove:
That we may from him know Apollo's mind,
If we for Sacrifice be in arrear,
Or if he will for Lambs and Goats be kind,
And to destroy us from henceforth forbear.
Achilles then sat down, and Chalchas rose,
That was of great renown for Augury,
And any thing was able to disclose
That had been, is, or should hereafter be;
And guided had the Greeks to Ilium;
Achilles (said he) since you me command
To tell you why this Plague is on us come,
Swear you will save me both with word and hand.
Of all the Greeks it will offend the best;
Who though his anger for a while he smother,
Will not, I fear, long time contented rest,
But will revenged be some time or other.
Chalchas (replied Achilles) do not fear,
But what the God has told you bring to light:
By Phoebus not a man shall hurt you here,
As long as I enjoy my life and sight;
Though Agamemnon be the man you dread,
Who is of all the Army most obeyed.
The Prophet by these words encouraged,
Said what before to say he was afraid.
It Is not neglect of Vow or Sacrifice
That does the God Apollo thus displease;
But that we do his Priest so much despise,
As not his Child for ransom to release.
And more, till she be to her Father sent,
And with a Hecatombe, and Ransomless,
The anger of the God will not relent,
Nor will the Sickness amongst the people cease.
This said, he sat. The King looked furiously,
And anger flaming stood upon his eyes,
While many black thoughts on his heart did lie;
And to the Prophet Chalchas thus replies.
Unlucky Prophet, that did never yet
Good fortune prophecy to me, but ill,
And ever with a mind against me set
Inventest Prophecies to cross my Will;
And now again you fain would have it thought,
Because I would not let Chryseis go,
The Gifts refusing which her Father brought,
Therefore this Plague was sent amongst us now-
With Clytemnestr^ she may well contend
For Person, or for Beauty, or for Art.
Yet so, to send her home I do intend.
For of our loss I bear the greatest part.
But you must then some prize for me provide.
Shall no man unrewarded go but I?
This said, Achilles to the King replied,
Atrides, that on booty have your eye,
You know divided is, or s^ld the prey
Which never can resumed be again.
But send her home. When we shall have sacked Troy
Your loss shall be repaid with triple gain.
No, said Atrides, that I never meant;
Do You think it is fit that you your shares retain?
And only mine unto the God be sent,
That unrewarded none but I remain?
I thought it reason the Argives should collect
Amongst themselves the value (how they list)
And give it me before they did expect
This Prize of mine should be by me dismis^.
If they will do that, it is well. If not, I Will go
To your, or Ajax, or Ulysses tent,
And take his prize, and right my self will so,
Wherewith I think he will not be content.
But since there is time enough to speak of this,
Let Us ready make a Ship with able Row'rs,
And the Hecatombe, to go with fair Chryseis,
And (to direct) one of the Counselors;
Ajax, Idomeneus, Ulysses, or
Your self may go, Athilles, if you please,
And do the business you are pleading for,
And if you can the offended God appease.
O impudence ( Achilles then replied)
What other of the Achaeans willingly
Will when you only for your self provide,
Go where you bid, or fight with the enemy?
Against the Trojans I no quarrel have.
In Pthia plundring they were never seen,
Nor ever thence my Kin^ or Horses drove,
Nor could; the Sea and great Hills are between.
Only for yours and Menelaus sake,
To honor gain for you we came to Troy,
Whereof no notice (Dogshead) now you take,
But threaten me my prize to take away;
Which by my labor I have dearly bought,
And by the Achaeans given me has been.
And when the City Troy we shall have got,
Your share will great, mine little be therein.
For though my part be greatest in the pain,
Yet when unto division we come,
You will expect the greatest part of the gain,
And that with little I go weary home.
Then farewell Troy. To Sea I Will go again,
And back to Pthia. Then it will be seen
When you without me shall at Troy remain,
What Honor and what Riches you shall win.
Go when you will, (said Agamemnon) fly,
I Will not entreat you for my sake to stay.
When you are gone more honored shall be I,
Nor Jove (I hope) will with you go away.
In you I shall but loose an enemy
That only loves to quarrel and to fight.
The Gods have given you strength I not deny.
Go amongst your Myrmidons and use your might.
I care not for you, nor your anger fear,
For after I have sent away Chryseis,
And satisfied the God, I Will not forbear
To fetch away from you the fair Briseis,
And that by force. For I would have you see
How much to mine inferior is your might,
And others fear to oppose themselves to me.
This swelled Achilles choler to the height.
And made him study what to do were best,
To draw his Sword and Agamemnon kill,
Or take some time his anger to digest.
His Sword was drawn, yet doubtful was his Will.
But Juno, that of both of them took care,
Sent Pallas down, who coming stood behind
Achilles, and laid hold upon his Hair.
Whereat Achilles wondering in his mind,
Turned back, and by the terror of her eyes
Knew her; but by none else perceived was she.
Come you (said he) to see the injuries
That are by Agamemnon done to me?
So great (O Goddess Pallas) is his pride,
As I believe it cost him will his life.
I hither came ( Athena then replied)
To put an end to this unlucky strife.
From Heaven I hither was by Juno sent,
(That loves you both, and of you both takes care)
Drawing of Swords and Bloodshed to prevent.
But as for evil words you need not spare.
For the wrong done you he shall trebly pay
Another time. Hold then. Your Sword forbear.
I must (then said Achilles) you obey,
Though wronged. Who hears not Gods, the Gods not hear.
This said, his mighty Sword again he sheathed,
And Pallas up unto Olympus flew.
Achilles still nothing but Choler breathed,
And Agamemnon thus reviled anew.
Dogs-face, and Drunkard, Coward that thou art,
That hat'st to lead the people out to fight.
Nor yet to lie in ambush have the heart,
And painfully watch in the field all night.
But thou to take from other men their due
(Safe lying in the Camp) more pleasure have.
But fools they are that ruled are by you,
Or else this injury had been your last.
But this I Will say, and with an Oath make good.
(Now by this Scepter, which has left behind
The stock whereon it once grew in the wood,
And never more shall have nor leaf nor rind,
And by Achaean Princes now is born
By whom Jove's Laws to the People carried be.)
You hear now what a great Oath I have sworn:
If ere the Achaeans shall have need of me,
And Agamemnon cannot them relieve.
When Hector fills the field with bodies slain,
And Agamemnon only for them grieve,
They my assistance wish for shall in vain.
This said, Achilles threw the Scepter down
That stuck all over was with Nails of Gold;
And Nestor rose, of Pyle that wore the Crown,
Wise and sweet Orator and Captain old.
His words like Honey dropped from his tongue.
Two ages he in battle honor gained.
For all that while he youthful was and strong,
And with the third age now in Pyle he reigned.
What grief to Achaea coming is, said he,
O Gods, what joy to Priam and his Seed,
How glad will all the Trojans be to see
You two that all the rest in power exceed,
With your own hands shed one another blood!
I elder am, do then as I advise.
For I conversed have with men as good,
That yet my counsel never did despise.
Perithous and Dryas were great men,
And Polyphemus and Exadius,
Such as for strength I never shall see again;
And so were Caeneus, and Theseus.
The strongest of mankind were these, and slew
The strongest of wild beasts that haunt the Wood.
These strong men I conversed withal and knew;
And with them also I did what I could.
With these no other could contend in fight.
Yet they from Pyle thought fit to call me forth
Far off; nor ever did my counsel slight.
Think not therefore my counsel nothing worth.
Atrides take not from him, though you can,
The Damsel which the Greeks have given him.
Forbear the King (Pelides.) For the man
Whom Jove has crowned is made of Jove a limb.
Though you be strong, and on a Goddess got,
Atrides is before you in command.
Atrides, be but you to peace once brought,
To Appease Achilles I will take in hand,
Who is (while we are lying here) our Wall.
To this Atrides answered again,
I nothing can deny of this at all.
But he amongst us thinks he ought to reign,
And give the Law to all as he thinks fit.
But I am certain that shall never be.
He well can fight; the Gods have granted it,
But they nere taught him words of infamy.
Then interrupting him Achilles said,
I were a Wretch and nothing worth indeed,
If I what ever you command obeyed.
I will no more to what you say take heed.
But this I tell you, if you take away
The Damsel which is mine by your own gift,
I do not mean for that to make a Fray
Amongst the Greeks, or once my hand to lift.
Fetch her your self Atrides, but take heed
Against my will you nothing else take there.
Try; that the Achaeans may see how you speed,
And how your black blood shall run down my Spear.
Thus in disorder the Assembly ends.
Achilles to his own Ships took his way,
Patroclus with him and his other friends.
And Agamemnon then without delay
Lanched a Bark, and in go Row'rs twice ten.
Aboard the Maid and the Hecatombe they lay.
Ulysses went Commander of the men.
And swiftly then the Ship cuts out her way.
And then Atrides The Army purified,
And threw into the Sea the Purgament.
Then sacrificed o'th'sands by the Sea side
A Hecatombe. To Heaven went up the sent.
And busy were the people. But the King
Still on his quarrel with Achilles thought,
And how Briseis from his Tent to bring.
For what he threatened he had not forgot.
But sent Talthybius and Eurybates
TO Achilles Tent to fetch Briseis thence.
(Two public servants of the King were these
Ordained to carry his commandments.)
If he refuse (said he) to let her go,
I Will thither go my self with greater force
And take her thence, whether he will or no.
Which, angry as he is, will vex him worse.
The Messengers, though not well pleased, went
Unto the Flee^ of the Myrmidons, and there
They found Achilles sitting by his Tent.
Well pleased he was not. And they silent were,
And stood still, struck with fear and reverence.
Achilles seeing that, spoke first, and said,
Come near. To me you have done no offense.
Go you Patroclus and lead forth the Maid,
And give her to these men, that they may be
To Gods and Men, and to th'unbridled man
My Witnesses, when they have need of me
To save the Achaeans, which he never can.
For what can he devise of any worth?
Or how can he the Greeks in battle save?
This said, Patroclus led Briseis forth,
And to Atrides Messengers her gave.
She with them went, though much against her heart.
Achilles from his friends went off and played.
And sitting with his face to the Sea apart
Weeping, unto his Mother Thetis said,
Mother, though Jove have given me so small
A time of life, I could contented ^e,
Had I not been dishonored withal,
And forced to bear such open injury.
Thetis in th'inmost closets of the Deep,
Sat with the old God Nereus, and heard.
And not enduring long to hear him weep,
Above the Sea like to a Mist appeared,
And by him sat, and stroak'd his head, and said,
Why weep you Child? What is it that grieves you so?
Tell me, speak out. Of what are you afraid?
Come, whatsoever it is let me it know.
Mother (said he) it is not to you unknown,
When we took Thebe, and had brought away
The Captives and the Riches of the Town,
Chryseis sell to Atrides for his prey.
And how her father Chryses came to the Fleet
With Ransom great his Daughter to redeem,
And having in his hands the Ensigns meet
Which did his Priestly dignity beseem,
A Golden Scepter and a Crown of Bays,
Unto the Princes all made his request.
But to the two Atrides chiefly prays,
Who of the Argive Army were the best.
O Sons of Atreus, may the Gods grant you
A safe return from Troy with Victory;
And you on me compassion may show,
Receive these Gifts, and set my Daughter free;
And have respect to Jove's and Leto's son.
To this the Princes all gave their consent,
Except King Agamemnon. He alone,
And with sharp language from the Fleet him sent.
Away the Old Man goes, and as he went,
Against the Greeks he to Apollo prayed;
Who heard him, and the Plague amongst them sent,
Which daily multitudes of men destroyed.
Of which the Prophet, being asked the cause,
Said, 'was for the injury to Chryses done.
I moved to send her back. Then angry was
Atrides, though beside Atrides, none.
And though he too has sent her now away,
Yet what he threat'ned he has brought to pass.
His Officers from me have forced my prey,
And Agamemnon now Briseis has.
And now, if ever, let me have your aid,
If you have helped Jove with word or deed;
(For in my Fathers house you often have said,
That heretofore you stood him in great steed,
When other Gods to bind him had decreed,
Juno and Neptune, Pallas and the rest,
You to him came and from his bonds him freed.
For up you fetched Briareus the best
Of Titans all, whom men Aegaeon call,
The Gods Briareus, with a hundred hands,
And set him next to Jove. No God at all
Then durst to Jupiter approach with bonds)
Put Jove in mind of this, and him entreat
The Trojan hands to fortify in fight,
And to repel the Greeks with slaughter great,
That in their goodly King they may delight,
And Agamemnon count what he has won
By doing such dishonor to the best
Of the Argives, and that has such service done.
Ay me, (said Thetis) would you could here rest
Unhurt, ungriev'd. For I have born you to
Short life. And not far from you is your Fate.
And grievous it is to be dishonored too.
But I to Jove will all you say relate
When I go to Olympus. Till then stay,
And angry though you are, from war forbear.
To Blackmoor-land the Gods went yesterday,
And twelve days hence again they will be there.
This said, the Goddess went away, and left
Her Son Achilles with his Anger striving,
For that he had been of his prize bereft.
And then Ulysses at the Port arriving
Of Chryse, first his Sails he furled, and stowed
Them on the Deck together with the Mast;
And with their Oars their Ship ashore they rowed,
And out their Anchors threw; and tied her fast,
And on the Beach the men descending laid
The Victims in good order on the Sand.
When this was done, they disimbark'd the Maid.
And then Ulysses took her by the hand,
And brought her to the Altar, where the Priest
Her Father stood, and to him spoke, and said,
O Chryses see, Atrides has dismissed
Your Daughter, and this Hecatombe has paid.
By Agamemnon we are hither sent
The same to offer, and to Apollo pray,
That he accept it will, and be content
The Sickness from the Greeks to take away.
This said, he put Chryseis to his hand,
And he with great contentment her received.
Then all with Salt and Barley ready stand,
And Chryses prayed with hands to Heaven upheav'd.
Hear me Apollo with the Silver Bow,
That do in Tenedos and Cylla reign,
And heardst my Prayer against the Greeks, hear now,
And from them send the Pestilence again.
When Chryses had thus to Apollo prayed,
Then prayed they all; and Salt and Barley threw
Upon the Victims; which they killed and slay'd.
But from the Altar first they them withdrew.
And then the Thighs cut off they slit in twain,
And round about they cover them with fat,
And one part on the other laid again.
The Priest himself came when they had done that,
And burnt them on a fire of cloven wood;
And as they burning were poured on black Wine.
Young men with Spits five-branched by them stood.
When burnt the Thighs were for the Power divine,
And Entrails eaten, the rest cut in joints
Before the fire they roasted skillfully,
Pierced through with the Spits that had five points;
And took it up when roasted thoroughly.
When ended was their work, began the Feast;
Where nothing wanting was of what was good.
And having thirst and hunger dispossessed,
And filled with sweet Wine the Temp'rers stood.
Then round the Cups were born; and all day long
Sitting they celebrated Phoebus might,
And magnified his goodness in sweet Song,
And he in his own praises took delight.
But when the Sun had born away his light,
Upon the Sands they laid them down to sleep.
And when again Aurora came in sight,
Again ^hey lanch their Ship into the deep.
A good fore-wind Apollo with them sent.
Then with her breast the Ship the water tore
(Which by her down on both sides roaring went)
And soon arrived at the Trojan shore.
And there they drew her up again to Land,
And every man went which way he thought best.
Achilles yet not able to command
The anger that still boiled in his breast,
No longer would the Greeks at Council meet,
Nor with them any more to battle come;
But sullen sat before his Tent and Fleet,
Wishing to see the Argives beaten home.
Twelve times the Sun had risen now and set,
The Gods to Olympus all returned were;
Thetis her Sons complaints did not forget,
But up she carried them to Jupiter.
Upon the highest top alone sat he
Of the great many headed Hill, and laid
One hand on's breast, the other on his knee.
And in that posture thus unto him said,
O Father Jove, if for you I have done
Service at any time by word or deed,
Repay it now I pray you to my Son
Whom Agamemnon has dishonored.
Short time the Fates have given him to live.
Atrides taken from him has his prey.
Now Victory unto the Trojans give
Till Agamemnon for his fault shall pay.
Thus prayed she. But Jove made no reply.
Nor took she off her hands; but prayed anew
O Jove my Prayer grant me, or deny,
That I may know what power I have in you.
Then Jove much grieved, spoke to her, and said,
'Twixt me and Juno 'twill a quarrel make.
For she before the Gods will me upbraid,
When she shall know the Trojans part I take.
But go, lest she observe what you do here.
I Will give a Nod to all that you have spoken,
That you may safely trust to and not fear.
A Nod from me is an unfailing token.
This said, with his black Brows he to her nodded
Wherewith displayed were his Locks divine;
Olympus shook at stirring of his Godhead;
And Thetis from it jumped into the Brine,
And Jupiter unto his house went down.
The Gods arose and waited on him thither:
But unto Juno it was not unknown
That he and Thetis had conferred together,
Who presently to Jove her husband went,
And angry him rebukt with language keen.
You that still in my absence tricks invent,
What God has with you now in counsel been?
Though unto me you hate to tell your mind.
Juno (said Jove) you must not hope to hear
All whatsoere it be, I have designed.
But what I mean shall come unto the ear
Of all the Gods, you first of all shall know.
But what from all together I shall hide
Ask me no more, I will not tell you, though
My Wife you be. Juno then thus replied.
Harsh Chronides, what words of yours are these!
To ask you questions I Will henceforth forbear,
And quietly let you do what you please.
But one thing I must tell you that I fear.
Thetis I fear has gotten your consent,
For her Sons sake the Argives to oppress.
Suspect you can (said Jove) but not prevent,
Which does but give me cause to love you less.
Though it be true, 'twas I would have it so.
Therefore sit still and do as I would have you,
Lest when my mighty hands about you go,
Not all the other Gods in Heaven shall save you.
Then Juno silent sat with grief and fear;
And all the Gods in the House of Jove did grieve.
But Vulcan the renowned Artificer
Stood up his Mother Juno to relieve.
O what will this come to at last, said he,
If you for mortals thus shall be at odds!
The tumult than the cheer will greater be.
What pleasure can be this unto the Gods?
And though my Mother wiser be than I,
Yet thus much I Will not doubt her to advise,
That with my Fathers Will she would comply,
That no such quarrel may hereafter rise.
For by the roots he can the World pluck up.
Therefore I pray you Mother speak him fair;
He Will soon be pleased. Then filled he a Cup
Of Nectar sweet, and bore it to her Chair;
And to her said, Mother, I pray you hold,
And do no more my Fathers choler move.
I^ you be beaten I shall but behold,
And grieve I am not strong enough for Jove.
^ would have helped you once, when by the foot
He threw me down to Lemnos from the sky.
^ll the day long I was a falling to it,
Where more than half dead taken up was I.
and there by the Sincians I was taken up.
When Vulcan had his History told out,
^is Mother on him smiled, and took the Cup,
And to the Gods he Nectar bore about.
and then the Gods laughed all at once outright
To see the lame and sooty Vulcan skink.
and all the day from morning unto night
Ambrosia they eat, and Nectar drink.
^pollo played, and alternately
The Muses to him sung. When night was come,
^hen gently Sleep solicited each eye,
And to his house each God departed home.
and Jupiter went up unto the bed
Where he at other times was wont to lie
When sleep came on him, and laid down his head
To take repose; and Juno lay him by.
ILIAD. LIB. II.
THe Gods, and Princes of the Argive Host
Slept all night long. Jove only waking lay,
And many projects in his mind he tossed,
To grace Achilles, and the Greeks annoy.
At last a Dream he called. False Dream, said he,
Go, hye to Agamemnons Tent, and say,
Distinctly as you bidden are by me.
Bid him bring up his Army now to Troy;
For now the time is come he shall it take.
The Gods no more thereon deliberate,
But all consented have for Juno's sake,
No longer to delay the Trojan Fate.
Then with his errand went the Dream away,
And quickly was at Agamemnons Tent.
And finding him as fast asleep he lay,
Up presently unto his head he went.
And in the shape of Nestor to him spoke.
Sleep you, said he, Atrides? It Is not fit
For him from whom the people counsel take,
That sleep all night upon his eyes should sit.
But Jove looks to you. Listen then to me.
For it is from Jove that I am to you come.
He bids you lead the Army presently
Up every man to the Walls of Ilium.
For now the time is come you shall it take.
The Gods no more thereon deliberate.
But all consented have for Juno's sake,
No longer to delay the Trojan Fate.
And therefore when you wake forget it not.
This said, the Dream departed. And the King
Believed it as an Oracle, and thought
To take Troy now as sure as any thing;
Vain man presuming from a Dream Jove's will,
Who meant to the Greeks and Trojans yet much woe,
And with their carcasses the field to fill
Before the Greeks should back to Argos go.
The King awak't, and sat upon his Bed,
Puts on his Coat and a great Cloak upon,
Handsome and new; his Dream still in his head;
And then his Silver-studded Sword puts on.
And then he took his Scepter in his hand
Which formerly his Ancestors had born,
And went to the Ships whereof he had command.
And to the Gods with light then came the Morn.
Then Agamemnon bids to Counsel call.
The Cryers called, the Greeks together went.
But first he had with the old Captains all
Consulted what to do at Nestors Tent,
And said he dreamed that one like Nestor spoke
To him and said, Atrides it is not fit
For one of whom the People Counsel take
That sleep upon his eyes all night should sit.
But Jove secures you. Listen then to me,
For it is from him that I unto you come.
He bids you lead the Army presently
Up every man to the Walls of Ilium.
For now the time is come you shall it take.
The Gods thereon no more deliberate,
But all consented have for Juno's sake,
No longer to delay the Trojan Fate.
And therefore when you wake forget it not.
This said, the Dream went off again, and I
How to the assault the Army may be brought*
As far as we can safely fain would try.
I Will first give them advice to go away,
As if there were no hope to gain the Town^
But you must then be sure to make them stay.
This said, King Agamemnon sat him down,
And Nestor rose. Captains of th'Hoast, said he,
This Dream had it been told b' another man,
Feigned and foolish would have seemed to me.
But since the King is The Author (if we (...))
Let us persuade the people to take Arms.
And having said, began to lead away.
And now the People coming were in swarms.
For as the Bees in a fair Summers day
Come out in clusters from the hollow rock,
And light upon the flowers that honey yield;
So to The Assembly did the People flock,
And bristling stood with expectation filled
When they sat down, it made the ground to sigh.
The Lords nine Cryers then amongst them sent
To make them silent, or to drown their cry,
And from the press their chairs to defend.
With much ado at last they silent were.
Then Agamemnon took into his hand
His Scepter (which was made by Mulciber
For Jove to carry when he did command.
Jove gave it afterward to Mercury;
And Mercury to Pelops gave the same.
From Pelops it went down successively
To Atreus, and to Thyestes came.
From him it came to Agamemnons hand,
Who many Islands and all Argos swayed.)
And leaning now upon it with his hand,
Unto the Princes of the Army said.
Servants of Mars, Commanders of the Greeks,
O what great trouble Jove involves me in!
Disgracefully to send me home he seeks,
Although he told me I the Town should win,
And now (when I have lost so many men)
It seems to play with men he takes delight.
What Towns has he destroyed, and will again
Destroy still more to exercise his might?
For both to us and our posterity
'Twill be a great disgrace to go to Troy*
With so great multitudes, and baffled be,
And nothing done again to come away.
If we and they should on a Truce agree,
And one by one they muster up their men;
And we should count how many t^ns we be,
And make one Trojan fill out wine for ten,
Many a Ten would want a man to skink.
So much in number we the Town exceed.
But when upon their many A^ds I think,
I wonder less that we no better speed.
Nine Years are gone; our Cordage spoiled with rain;
Our Ships are rotted, and our wives at home,
And Children dear expect us back again.
Nor know we of the War what will become.
Come then and all^agree on what I say,
Let Us put to Sea, and back to Achaea fly.
We shall not win the Town although we stay.
This said, the Army with applauses high
Consented all (save those that had been by
In Counsel of the Princes of Achaea)
And moved were like to the billows high
That rolled are by some great Wind at Sea.
Or as, when in a field of well-grown Wheat.
The Ears incline by a sharp wind oppressed;
So bowed the heads in this Assembly great
When their consent they to the King expressed.
Then going to the Ships cried Ha la la.
Great dust they raised, and encouraged
Each other to the Sea his Ship to draw,
And cleans'd the way to the water from each bed;
And straight unpropt their Ships; and to the sky
Went up the noise. Then Juno sent away
Pallas. Pallas (quoth she) the Greeks will fly,
And Helen leave behind, for whom at Troy
So many of the Greeks their lives have lost,
And stayed so long in vain before the Town.
And then will Priam and the Trojans boast,
Unless you quickly to the Ships go down.
Go qu^ckly then, try if you can prevail,
With hopeful words to stay them yet ashore,
And take away their sudden list to sail*
And let the Ships lie as they did before.
This said, the Goddess leapt down to the ground,
From high Olympus, and stood on the sand
Where lay the Greeks. Ulysses there she found
Angry to see the people go from Land.
Ulysses, said she, do you mean to fly,
And here leave Helen after so much cost
Of time and blood, and show your vanity;
And leave the Trojans of their Rape to boast?
Speak to each one, try if you can prevail
With hopeful words to stay them on the shore,
And take away this sudden list to sail,
And let the Ships lie where they lay before.
Ulysses then ran to Agamemnons Tent,
And took his staff (the mark of chief command)
And laying by his Cloak to the Ships he went
Amongst the Acheans with that staff in's hand.
And when he met with any Prince or Peer,
He gently said, Fear does not you become.
You should not only you your self stay here,
But also others keep from flying home.
Atrides now did but the Argives try,
And those he see^ most forward to be gone
Shall find perhaps least favor in his eye.
For of the Secret Counsel you were none.
Deep rooted is the Anger of a King,
To whom high Jove committed has the Law,
And Justice left to his distributing.
But when a common man he bawling saw,
He banged him with his staff, and roughly spoke.
Be silent, and hear what your betters say.
For who of you does any notice take
In Counsel or in Martial Array?
Let one be King (we cannot all be Kings)
To whom Jove gave the Scepter and the Laws
To rule for him. Thus he the people brings
Off from their purpose, and to counsel draws.
Then to the Assembly back again they passed,
With noise like that the Sea makes when it breaks
Against the Shore, and quiet were at last.
Thersites only stands up and speaks.
One that to little purpose could say much,
And what he thought would make men laugh, would say.
And for an ugly fellow none was such
Amongst all the Argives that besieged Troy.
Lame of one leg he was; and looked asquint;
His shoulders at his breast together came;
His head went tapering up into a point,
With straggling and short hair upon the same.
Ulysses and Achilles most him ha^ed,
For these two Princes he used most to chide;
And Agamemnon now aloud he rated,
And thereby angered all the Greeks beside.
What is it Atrides (said he) stays you here?
Your Tent is full of Brass; Women you have
The best of all that by us taken were,
For always unto you the choice we gave.
Or look you for more Gold that yet may come
For ransom of some prisoner whom I
Or other Greek shall take at Ilium,
Or for some young maid to keep privately?
But Kings ought not their private ease to buy
With public danger and a common woe.
Come women of Achaia, let us fly,
And let him spend his gettings on the Foe.
For then how much we help him he will know,
That has a better than himself disgraced.
But that Achilles is to anger slow,
That injury of his had been his last.
This said, Ulysses straightway to him went,
And with sour look, and bitter language said,
Prater, that to thy self seems eloquent,
How dare thou alone the King t'upbraid?
A greater Coward than thou art there is none
Amongst all the Greeks that came with us to Troy.
Else against the King thy tongue would not so run.
Thou seek'st but an excuse to run away.
Because we know not how we shall come off
As yet from Troy, must you the King upbraid,
And at the Princes of the Army scoff,
As if they too much honor to him paid?
But I will tell you one thing, and will do it.
If here again I find you fooling thus,
Then from my Shoulders let my Head be cut,
Or let me loose my Son Telemachus,
If I not strip you naked to the skin,
And send you soundly beaten to the Ships
With many stripes and ugly to be seen.
This said, he basted him both back and hips.
Thersites shrug'd, and wept, sat down, and had
His shoulders black and blew, died by the staff.
Looked scurvily. The people that were sad
But just before, now could not choose but laugh.
And, Oh said one t'another standing near;
Ulysses many handsome thing has done,
When we in Council or in Battle were,
A better deed than this is he did none,
That has so silenced this railing knave,
And of his peevish humor stayed the flood,
As he no more will dare the King to brave.
And then to speak Ulysses ready stood.
Where Pallas like a Crier did appear,
And standing by him silence did command,
That also they that sat far off might hear.
Then spoke he, with the Scepter in his hand.
The people, O Atrides, go about
To put you on an act will be your shame,
Forgetting what they promised setting out,
Not to return till Troy they overcame.
But now like Widow-women they complain,
Or little Children longing to go home.
To be from home a month, it is a pain
To them that to their loving Wives would come.
To Sea they'ld go though certain to be tossed
By many a sturdy wind upon the same.
But they have now lain here Nine Years almost;
I cannot therefore say they are to blame.
But certainly after so long a stay
It Is very shameful empty back to go.
Let us at least abide till know we may
Whether what Chalchas said be true or no.
For this we all know and are witnesses
(Excepting only those that since are dead)
When we from Aulis went to pass the Seas,
And by contrary winds were hindered,
That there we to the Gods did sacrifice
Upon an Altar close unto a Spring,
That of a Plane-tree at the root did rise;
And how we saw there a prodigious thing.
A mighty Serpent with a back blood-red
From out the Spring glided up to the Tree,
The boughs whereof were every way far spread.
On the utmost chanced a Sparrows nest to be.
Young ones were in it eight, with the old one nine;
The old one near the Nest stayed fluttering,
And grievously the while did cry and whine.
At last the Serpent caught her by the wing.
And when the Serpent had devoured all nine,
He presently was turned into a stone;
That we might see from Jove it was a Sign
Of what should afterward at Troy be done.
We were amazed so strange a thing to see,
Till Chalchas rose and did the same explain.
This is a certain Sign from Jove, said he,
That he intends to do the like again.
For as the Snake devoured nine birds in all;
So nine years long we shall make war at Troy,
And after nine years Ilium shall fall.
But in the tenth year we shall come away.
This then said Chalchas; and all hitherto
Is come to pass. Therefore Achaeans stay,
Since nothing here remains now to do,
But overcoming the old Town of Troy.
This said, the people made a mighty noise
(Which bounding from the Ships was twice as great)
Sounding of nothing but Ulysses praise.
And up then rose old Nestor from his Seat.
Fie, Fie, (said he) why sit we talking here?
Where are your Promises, and whither gone
Our Oaths and Vows? To what end did we swear?
Where be the hands that we relied upon?
What good will it do to sit upon the Shore,
How long soever be our time to stay?
Hold fast, Atrides, as you did before
The power you have; and lead us up to Troy.
A man or two you safely may neglect,
Though they dissent and secret counsel take.
For they will be able nothing to effect,
Before to Argos our retreat we make,
And know if Jove have spoken true or no.
For when we went aboard to go for Troy,
Jove light'ned to the right hand, which all know
A sign of granting is for what we pray.
Let none of you long therefore to be gone,
Till of some Trojans wife he has his will,
And taken a not unfit revenge upon
The Trojans that have Helen used as ill.
But he that for all this is fiercely bent
On going home, and thinks that counsel best,
And lays hand on his Ship, let him be sent
Down into Erebus before the rest.
But you, O King, think well, and take advice
First into Tribes the Army to divide,
And Tribes again into Fraternities,
That Tribe may Tribe, and Fellow Fellow aid.
The Leaders and the Soldiers then you will know
Which of them merits praise, and which is naught.
And if the Town you do not overthrow,
Whether on us or Jove to lay the fault.
To this Atrides answer made and said,
O Nestor, Father, you exceed all men
In giving Counsel. Would the Gods me aid
With Counselors such as you are but ten,
The Town of Priam we should quickly win.
Nor had we now so long about it staid,
If Jupiter had not engaged me in
A quarrel with Achilles for a Maid.
But if we come but once more to agree,
The evil day from Troy will not be far.
Now take your food that we may ready be,
And able to endure the toil of war.
Let every man now sharpen well his Spear,
His Buckler mend, and give his Horses meat,
And look well to his Chariot every where,
That we may fight all day without retreat.
For we shall fight I doubt not all day long,
And never cease as long as we can see.
Of many a Shield sweaty will be the Thong,
And Spear upon the hand lie heavily;
And many Horses at the Charret sweat.
But he that willingly to avoid the fight
Shall stay behind, or to the Ships retreat,
His body shall be food for Dog and Kite.
This said, the People pleased with what was spoken,
Approved the same with Shouts, as loud as when
Betwixt great waves and rocks the Sea is broken.
Then from the Assembly they return again.
And at their Ships they sacrifice and pray
Each one to the God in whom he trusted most,
That he might by his favor come away
Alive, with whole Limbs from the Trojan Host.
But Agamemnon sacrificed a Steer
To Jove, of five years old, and to the Feast
Called such as in the Army Princes were,
Or held to be for Chivalry the best,
Nestor, Idomeneus, two Ajaces,
And the Son of Tydeus Diomed,
The sixth Ulysses Laertiades,
And Menelaus thither came unbid.
For well he knew his brother would be sad.
About the Victim then the Assembly stands,
And in their hands they Salt and Barley had.
Then prayed Atrides holding up his hands;
Great, glorious Jove, that dwell in the Sky,
O let not Phoebus carry hence the day
Till Priam's Palace proud in ashes lie,
And Hector sprawling in the dust of Troy,
And many Trojans with him. So prayed he.
And Jove was with his Sacrifice content.
But unto all his Prayer did not agree,
Intending still his labor to augment.
When all had prayed, they Salt and Barley threw
Upon the Victim which they killed and slay'd.
But from the Altar they it first withdrew.
The Thighs they slit, and (...) upon them la^d.
And burnt them in a fire of cloven wood;
The Entrails ore the fire they broyled eat,
The rest they roast on Spits that by them stood;
And when they roasted were, sell to their meat.
When the desire of meat and drink was gone,
Nestor stood up, and to Atrides said,
Let us no longer leave the work undone,
Which Jupiter himself has on us laid.
Let Us call the Greeks together out of hand,
That we may make them ready for the War.
Atrides then to the Cryers gave command
T'assemble them. They soon assembled are.
And then the Princes went into the field,
And them in Tribes and in Fraternities
Distinguished. And Pallas with her Shield,
(An undecaying Shield and of great price,
Raised at the brim with orbs of beaten Gold
An hundred, worth an hundred Cows at least.)
With this the Goddess went, to make them bold,
Courage inspiring into every breast.
And now their hearts are all on fire to sight,
And vanished is the thought of their returning.
And such as of a Mountain is the sight
Upon whose top a large thick Wood stands burning;
Such (as they marching were) the splendour was,
And seemed to reach up unto the Sky,
Reflected from so many Arms of Brass
Bright and new polished unto the eye.
As when of many sorts the long-neckt Fowls
Unto the large and flowery Plain repair
Through which Caysters water gently rolls
In multitudes high flying in the Air,
Then here and there fly priding in their wing,
And by and by at once light on the ground,
And with great clamor make the Air to ring,
And The Earth whereon they settle to resound;
So when the Acheans went up from the Fleet,
And on their march were to the Town of Troy,
The Earth resounded loud with hoofs and feet.
But at Scamander's flowery bank they stay,
In number like the flowers of the field,
Or leaves in Spring, or multitude of Flies
In some great Dairy 'bout the vessels filled,
Delighted with the milk, dance, fall and rise.
The Leaders then amongst them went, and brought
Them quickly into Tribes and Companies,
As every Goat herd quickly knows his Goat
Whether it be another man's or his.
And Agamemnon there amongst the rest
Was eminent. Like Jove in head and face;
Belted like Mars; like Neptune's was his breast.
Such beauty Jove upon the man did place.
NOw, Muses, ye that in Olympus dwell,
(For Goddesses you are, and present were,
And all that passed at Troy can truly tell,
And we can nothing know but what we hear.)
Who of the Greeks at Troy commanded men?
The common Soldiers you need not name.
For I should never say them ore again,
Although I had as many tongues as Fame.
Boetia, wherein contained be
Eteonus, and Schoenus, and Scolus,
Aulis, Thespeia, Graea, Hyrie,
Harma, Eilesius, and Mycalessus,
Erythrae, Elion, Ocaliae,
Hylae, Eutresis, Thisbe, Peleon,
Plataea, Aliareus, and Copae,
Coronia, Glisse, Thebe, Medeon,
Onchestus Neptune's Town, Nissa divine,
And Midias, and utmost Anthedon,
And Arne that great plenty has of Wine.
The which in all made fifty Ships. And those
Commanded were by Archesilaus,
And Prothoenor and Peneleos,
And Leitus, and with them Clonius.
The Seamen in each one to sixscore rose.
Aspledon and Orchomenus besides
Did set forth twenty good black Ships to Sea.
Ascalaphus and Ialmenus were guides,
Begot by Mars upon Aslyoche.
The Towns of Phocis, Crissa, Panopea,
And Cyparissus, Python, and Daulis,
And on the brook of Cephisus Lilaea,
And Anemoria, and Hyampolis,
And other Towns of the bank of Cephisus,
Made ready forty good Ships for the Seas,
Ruled by Schedius and Epistraphus
The Sons of Iphitus Naubolides.
The Locrians the lesser Ajax led,
Of King Oileus the valiant Son.
(For he was lower more than by the head
Than the other Ajax Son of Telamon)
A linen Armor he wore on his Breast.
But understood as well to use a Spear,
Or better, than could any of the rest
That in the Army of the Achaeans were.
There went with him from Cynus and Opus,
From Bessa, Scarphe, Thronius, Aygiae,
Tarphe, Calliarus, Boagrius,
Forty good Ships well fitted for the Sea.
The Euboeans were by Elephenor led,
That dwell in Chalcis and Eretriae,
Cerinthus, Dion (that holds high her head)
Carystus, Styra, and in Istiaea.
And by the name Abantes they all go,
Goodmen, and that in battle use the Spear,
And love to pierce the Armor of a foe.
And these on forty Ships embarked were.
From Athens (who Erectheus people were)
Aurora's Son, by Pallas nourished
In her own Temple, in which every year
Many good Bulls and Lambs are offered,
Under Menesteus fifty Ships did pass,
Who for the ord'ring of a battle well
Of Horse or Foot the best of all men was,
Save Nestor, who in age did him excel.
From Salamis came to the Trojan Shore,
And by the greater Ajax governed were,
The Son of Telamon, twelve good ships more,
And lay at anchor to the Athenians near.
Argos, Tyrinthe, Troezen, Asme,
And Epidaurus, and Hermione,
Mases and Aegina, and Eione,
Amongst them all put fourscore Ships to Sea.
Of which there were three Captains, Diomed,
Euryalus, and Sthenelus. But they
By Diomed were chiefly governed.
For him they all commanded were to obey.
And from Mycenae, Corinth, Cleonoe,
And Orthe, and Hyperesiae,
From Sicyon, and Araethuree,
And Gonoessa, and from Helice,
Pellenae, Aegium, and all that Shore,
An hundred Ships were laid upon the Seas;
And with King Agamemnon passed ore,
And his peculiar command were these.
Amongst them he puts on his Armor then,
Proud that he was of all the Hero's best.
For of his own he thither brought most men,
And chief Commander was of all the rest.
From Sparta, Pharae, Messa, Brysiae,
From about Otylus, with those from Laus,
Helos, Amyclae, and from Aygiae,
Went thirty good black Ships with Menelaus.
Which from his Brothers forces stood apart,
And he amongst them heart'ning them to fight,
And breathing courage into every heart.
For to the Trojans he bare greatest spite.
Pylus, Arene, Cyparisseis,
Amphigenia, Aepy, and Thryus,
(Whereat a Ford in the stream Alpheus is)
Elos, and Pteleus, and Dorius.
(Here 'twas the Muses met with Thamyris
The Thracian Fiddler which their Art did slight,
And said their Skill was not so good as his,
And they deprived him both of Art and Sight*)
The number of the Ships those Towns set forth,
In all amounted to fourscore and ten;
And led were by a Captain of great worth.
'Twas Nestor the command had of these men.
From Phene, Ripe, and Orchomenus,
And from Enispe, and from Stratiae,
Tegea, Mantinea, Stymphalus,
And those that dwelled in Parrhasia,
( Arcadians all, and in sharp War well skilled)
Came sixty Ships by Agapenor led,
And every Ship sufficiently filled.
But then the Ships Atrides furnished.
The men of Helis, and Buprasium,
And all the ground enclosed by Hyrmine,
Myrsinus, Olene, Alisium,
Amongst them all put forty Ships to Sea,
Led by Amphimachus and Thalpius,
Diores, and Polyxenus the Son
Of martial Agasthenes, and then
Ten good Ships were commanded by each one.
Dulichium, and th'Isles Echinades,
Sent forty Ships. Meses Commander went
The Son of Phyleus, who for his ease
Lived from his Father there in discontent.
Ulysses also brought out twelve good Ships
From Ithaca, Neritus, Ceph'lonia,
From Same, and from Zant, and Aegylips,
And from Epirus, and Croaeylia.
The Aetolians with Thoas Andraemon's Son
Sent from Pylene, and from Chalcis, and
From Olenus, Pleuron, and Calydon
Sent forty Ships, whereof the sole command
In Thoas was. For Oeneus was dead,
And Meleager; all the Royal race.
Andraemon's Son their men to Troy to lead
By suffrage of the Cities chosen was.
From C^ossus, Gortys (in the Isle of Creet)
Lictus, Miletus, Phaestus, Rycius,
Lycastus, and some others went a Fleet
Of eighty Ships with King Idomenus.
And valiant as Mars M^riones.
And nine good Ships went with Tlepolemus
(That was the Son of mighty Hercules)
From Lindus, Camirus, Ialissus.
For Hercules Tlepolemus begat
On Astyochia whom in war he won,
And for her many Cities had laid flat.
But after Hercules was dead and gone,
Tlepolemus now grown a man, and bold,
Licymnius (his Fathers Uncle) slew
By th'Mothers side, a branch of Mars, but old.
Then cuts down Trees, and rigs a Navy new,
And many men together gathered,
And wandered till to Rhodes he came at last,
And there dwelt in three Tribes distributed.
Fear of his Kindred made him go in haste.
And mightily in little time they throve,
And every day in wealth and power grew,
And favored were continually by Jove.
For daily he unto them riches threw.
From Syme went with Nireus Ships three,
Nireus that was the fairest man of all
( Achilles always must excepted be)
But weak was Nireus, and his number small.
From Casus, Carpathus, and Nisyrus,
Calydnae Islands, and the Isle of Cous
Went thirty Ships. Two Sons of Thessalus
The Son of Hercules commanded those.
And the Pelasgique Argives sent to Sea
From Trechis, and from Hellas, and Halus,
From Pthia, and the Port of Alope,
Commanded by the Son of Peleus,
Fifty good Ships of Myrmidons, which some
Acheans, others Hellens use to call.
But these would not to any Battle come.
For sullen sat ashore their General,
Because Briseis they had forced away,
Which when he won Lyrnessus, was his prize,
And did Epistrophus and Mines slay.
There ^ate he then, but shall again arise.
From Inon, Phylace, and Pyrasus,
From Pteleus, and Antron on the Sea
Went forty Ships with Protesilaus,
Which he commanded while alive was he.
But he was dead. For as he leapt to land
From out his Ship, he was the first man slain
Of all the Acheans by a Trojan hand,
And left his wife to tear her hair in vain,
His house at Phylace half finished.
His Soldiers chose Podarces in his place,
His younger Brother, who at Troy them led.
A Captain good; but The Elder better was.
And they that dwelt about Bo^beis Lake
Iaolcus, Boebe, Pherae, Glaphyrae,
Put all together Ships eleven make.
Under Eumelus there were put to Sea.
From rugged Olizon and Meliboea,
The towns Methone and Thomacia sent
Seven Ships of fifty Oars apiece to Sea,
And Philoctetes their Commander went.
But him the Achaeans left in Lemnos Isle,
In cruel torment bitten by a Snake.
And of his Ships Medon took charge the while.
But better care of him the Greeks will take.
From Tricca then, and from Methone steep,
And from Oechalia (Seat of Earitus,)
Thirty good Ships to Troy went ore the Sea,
By Machaon led and Podalirius,
Two skilful Sons of Aesculapius.
From chalky Titanus Hyperia, and
Astirius, and from Ormenius,
Eurypilus did forty Ships command.
And from the Towns Argissa and Gy^tone,
From Olo^s^on, Orthe on the Hill,
With those that sent were from the Town Elone,
So many went as forty Ships did fill.
And had two Leaders. Polypoetes one,
Son of Perithous the son of Jove,
And gotten by him was the day whereon
He and the Lapiths against the Centaurs strove,
And drove them from the Mountain Pelion.
The other Leader was Leontius,
Whose Father was Capaneus, who the Son
Was of the valiant Lapith Coeneus.
The Aenians and Perrhiboeans bold
Did two and twenty good black Ships set out,
From hollow Cyphus, and Dodona cold,
And other habitations about.
The pleasant River Titaretius,
That into Peneus runs, but does not mix,
But glides like Oil at top of Peneus.
For Titaretius is a branch of Styx.
These Gouneus led. Then the Magnesians sent
From Towns upon the banks of Peneus,
And sides of Pelion mountain eminent,
Forty good Ships under swift Prothous.
These were the Leaders of the Achean forces.
O Goddess tell me now who was the best
In Battle of the Leaders, and whose Horses
In swiftness and in force excelled the rest.
Eumelus his two Horses did surpass
(Though they were females) all the rest for speed.
Their color, age, and stature equal was,
Sprung in Pieria from Apollo's Breed.
That terror drew about as swift as wind.)
Amongst Greeks the greater Ajax had no Peer,
(For now Achilles had the War declined,
Whom none in Prowess equaled or came near,
Nor other Horses could with his compare.)
But at his Ships he discontented staid,
And full of spite which he to Atrides bare,
Whilst on the Beach idle his Soldiers played
At who can furthest throw a Dart or Stone.
The Horses loosly wandered here and there
Amongst the people, and had Riders none,
Or upon Lote and Cinque^oil feeding were.
But the Achaeans to Scamander marched
Swiftly as when a fire runs ore a Plain
Which Phoebus had with a long Summer parched,
And going made the ground to groan again,
As when Jove angry lasheth Arimy,
Which men say of Typhaeus is the bed,
The earth therewith is made to groan and sigh,
So groaned the ground when they to Troy were led.
Then Jove unto the Trojans Iris sent,
Who old and young were then at Priams gate
Assembled with the King in Parliament.
Over their heads stood Iris as they sat.
Her voice was like to that of Priams Son
Polytes, that was watching at the Tomb
Of old Aesuites, there to wait upon
The coming of the Greeks to Ilium.
Old man (said he) you love to hear men preach
As in a time of Peace. But now it is War.
The Greeks no more lie idle on the Beach,
But at your Gates, and numberless they are,
As sands by the Seaside, or leaves in Spring.
And to the City now they bring the War.
Hector to you this counsel now I bring.
Within the City many people are
To aid you come of diverse Languages.
Let them that hither led them lead them here,
Arm, and command them each one as he please.
When she had done, dismissed the people were.
Hector to open all the Gates commands,
And with great clamor Horse and Foot come out.
Before the City a high Pillar stands,
To which the field lies open round about.
And Battiea called was by men;
Which amongst the Gods another name did bear,
Myrinna's Sepulcher. And there again
The Trojans and their Succors mustered were.
The Trojans were by Hector led. The best
In battle, and in number most were these,
With Spear in hand, and Brass on Back and Breast.
The Dardans were commanded by Aeneas,
( Anchises Son; but Venus was his Mother;
Amongst the Hills of Ida got he was)
And joint Commanders with him were two other,
Brave men, Archilochus and Acamas.
And of Zeleia the Inhabitants,
Which of Mount Ida lies at the foot,
And on the River of Aesopus stands,
Under command of Pandarus were put,
Son of Lycaon, and that well knew how
To make an Arrow in the Air fly true.
Phoebus himself had given him a Bow,
And how to use the same none better knew.
The Adrasteians and the men of Apaesus,
Of Pityeia and Tereia Hill.
Were by Adrastus led and Amphius,
Two Sons of Merops, that had mighty skill
In Prophecy, and both of them forbad
Themselves to venture in the War at Troy.
But Fate a greater power with them had,
And made them go, but brought them not away.
The People of Percosia, and they
That dwell upon the Banks of Practius,
Arisbe, Sestus, Abydus, obey
The orders of their Leader Asius
The Son of Hyrtacus, whose Chariot
By Horses great and black as any coal,
And on it he to Ilium was brought.
And of Selleis race each one a foal.
Larissa was Pelasgique by descent.
Under Pylaeus and Hyppothous,
Two stout Pelasgique Leaders these were sent,
Who both the Grandsons were of Teutomus.
The Thracians on this side Hellespont,
Were led by Piros and by Achamas.
Of The Cycons who do these oppose in front
Troezenus Son Euphemus Leader was.
From Amydon that stands on the side
Of Axius the fairest Stream that flows,
The Poeons came. Pyrechmus them did guide,
And armed they were with Arrows and with Bows.
The Enneti in Paphlagonia,
From whence proceeds of wild Mules the race,
Parthenius Brook and the Town Coronia,
Cytorus, Sesamus, and the high place
Of the Erithins, and of Aegyalus
The charge was given to Pylomenus,
And of the Halizons to Epistrophus,
But not alone; joined with him was Dius
Of Alybe, where is a Silver Mine.
The Leaders of the Mysians were Chromis,
And Enomus. Both of them could divine
By flight of Birds, though they foresaw not this
That in Scamander Stream they both should dye,
Slain by Achilles who there massacred
Many a Trojan, many a good Ally,
Which to the Sea the River carried.
The Phrygians from Ascania, far off,
Were led by Phorcys and Ascanius;
And Battle loved. But the Commanders of
The Maeones, Mesthles and Antiphus
The two Sons were of old Pylomenes,
Both of them born upon Gygaea Lake,
(At the foot of Tmolus dwell the Maeones.)
Amphimachus and Nastes charge did take
Of those of Caria, people of rude tongue;
And of Miletus, and the Hill Phtheiron,
And of the Towns that seated are among
The windings of Maeander, and upon
Mount Mycale. And Nastes carried Gold
Unto the Battle, like a Child or Sot;
Wherewith his Life he did not buy but sold.
For slain he was; his Gold Achilles got,
And left him lying at the River dead.
The Succors by the Lycians sent to Troy,
By Glaucus were and King Sarpedon led.
Far off they dwelt, and a long march had they.
ILIAD. LIB. III.
WHen both the Armies were prepared for fight,
The Trojans marched on with noise and cry.
As in the air of cackling fowl a flight,
Or like the Cranes when from the North they fly,
The Army of Pygmaean men to charge,
And shun the Winter, with a mighty cry
Fly through the Air over the Ocean large;
So swiftly marched the Greeks, but silently
Resolved one another to assist.
And such a dust between both Hoasts did rise,
As when upon the Mountains lies a Mist,
Which to a stones cast limiteth the eyes.
(Which good for Thieves is, but for Shepherds not)
So great a dust the middle space possessed.
When they were near to one another got,
Came Alexander forth before the rest.
A Leopards skin he wore upon his Shoulders,
Two Spears in hand, his Sword girt at his side,
Bow at his back, and brave to the beholders;
And any of the Achean host defied.
And glad was Menelaus to see this.
As when a Lion finds a lusty prey,
A wild Goat or a Stag, well pleased is,
And hungry seizes him without delay,
Although by Hunters and by Hounds pursued;
So glad was Menelaus him to see.
And soon as he his person had well viewed,
Armed from his Charret to the ground leapt he.
Assured (as he thought) revenge to take
But soon as Alexander once saw that,
He fled into the throng, as from a Snake
Seen unawares, trembling and pale thereat.
Then Hector him with words of great disgrace
Reproved and said, Fine man and Lover keen,
Ca^oler, that confidest in thy face,
I would to God thou born had never been,
Or never had been married. For that
A great deal better had been of the twain,
Than to be scorned of men, and pointed at
For one that durst not his own word maintain.
O how the Greeks are laughing now to see
That so absurdly they themselves mistook,
Supposing you some mighty man to be
That are worth nothing, judging by your look.
Was It you to Lacedemon passed the deep,
And fetched fair Helen thence (the bane of Troy)
And now when it concerns you her to keep,
You dare not in her husbands presence stay?
For you would quickly know what kind of man
You have bereaved unjustly of his wife.
Neither your Cittern, nor your Beauty can,
Nor other gifts of Venus save your life.
Were not the Trojans fearful more than needs,
You had a Coat of stones by this time had,
A fit reward for all your evil deeds.
This answer then to Hector, Paris made.
Hector, since your reproof is just (said he)
And your hard language (as when helped by Art
A Shipwrights Ax strikes deep into a tree)
Like riggid Steel has cut me to the heart.
If with Atrides you would have me sight,
Ob^ect not Venus favors ('it is unfit
The Gifts of the immortal Gods to slight)
But make the Greeks and Trojans both to sit.
And in the midst set me and Menelaus,
And which of us shall have the Victory,
Helen be his, and all the Wealth she has,
And 'twixt the Greeks and Trojans Amity.
Let this be sworn to, that we may remain
At Troy in quiet, and the Greeks repass
To Argos and Achaea back again.
At this brave proffer Hector joyful was;
And stepping forth the Trojan Ranks kept in
With both his hands of the middle of his Spear.
And to shoot at him then the Greeks begin,
And many took up stones and hurling were.
But Agamemnon with a voice as high
As he could raise it, to the Greeks cried, Hold.
Throw no more Stones, let no more Arrows fly.
Hector to us has somewhat to unfold.
This said, they held their hands, and silent were
And Hector both to Greeks and Trojans spoke.
May you be pleased on both sides to hear
The motion I from Alexander make.
Let Arms (said he) on both sides be laid by,
And in the midst set him and Menelaus.
And which of them shall have the Victory,
Be Helen his, with all the wealth she has.
And let the rest an Oath on b^th sides take
The Pacts agreed on not to violate.
When this was said, then Menelaus spoke.
And both the Armies with great silence sat.
Hear me too then, said Menelaus, who
By Alexander have been most offended.
If you will do that which I advise you to,
The quarrel he began will soon be ended.
Which of us two shall fall in single fight,
Let him dye only, and the rest agree.
Bring forth two Lambs, one black, another white,
To The Earth and Sun a Sacrifice to be.
Another we will sacrifice to Jove.
And let the old King Priam present be,
(His proud Sons think themselves all Oaths above)
That what is sworn he may performed see.
No hold is to be taken of an Oath
Which Young Men make, whose likings change like wind.
But Old-men can foresee what is good for both.
It Is good for both that makes a Contract bind.
These words did to both Armies sweetly sound;
They thought the worst was past; and up they tied
Their Horses; and their Spears stuck in the ground,
With spaces left between them, but not wide.
Then Hector to the King two Heralds sent,
To fetch the Lambs, and Priam to implore
To take the Oath. From Agamemnon went
Talthybius to the Fleet to fetch two more.
Mean while to the fair Helen Iris came,
So like to Antenor's wife Laodice,
King Priam's daughter, that she seemed the same.
Quickly she found her; for at work was she
Upon a double splendid Web, wherein
Many a cruel Battle she had wrought
The Trojans and the incensed Greeks between,
That for her own sake only had been sought.
Come Nymph, said Iris, see one Battle more
Between the gallant men of Greece and Troy.
They fight not altogether as before,
But silent sit, and from their Arms away.
Shields are their Cushions, planted are their Spears;
Paris and Menelaus only fight.
Save these two no man any Armor wears;
And you his Wife are, that has greatest might.
Thus Iris said, and her inspired anew
With love to Menelaus as before.
Then ore her Head a milk-white Scarf she threw,
And out went weeping at the Chamber Door,
But not alone; two Maidens followed her,
Fair Aethre Pittheus child, and Clymene.
And quickly at the Scaean Gate they were,
Where Priam sat; and in his company
Were the old Lords Lampus and Clytius,
And Icetaon, and Ucalegon,
Antenor, Thymet's, and Panthous,
Whence both the Armies they might look upon.
Old men they were, but had brave Captains been,
And now for consultation prised were.
As Soon as Helen came into their sight,
They whispered one another in the ear,
I cannot blame the man that for her strives.
Like an Immortal God she is. Yet so,
Rather than we should hazard all our lives,
I should advise the King to let her go.
Thus said they one t'another. But the King
Called her and said, Daughter, sit down by me,
(Not you, but the Immortal Powers bring
Upon the Trojans this calamity.)
And tell me who that great Achaean is.
I see some higher by the head than he,
But comelier man I never saw than this,
Nor liker to a King in Majesty.
O King (then answered Helen) to whom I
Of all men owe most reverence and fear,
Would I had rather chosen there to dye,
Than to your Sons ill counsel given ear,
Leaving my House, my Child, and Brothers two,
And all my sweet companions for his sake.
But since I cannot what is done undo,
Unto your question I Will now answer make.
The man you point to Agamemnon is,
A good King, and a valiant Man in fight,
And Brother to the Husband is of this
Unworthy woman me that did him slight.
And Priam then the man admiring said,
Happy Atrides, great is thy command,
Whose Soldiers though now very much decayed,
In such great multitude before us stand.
At a great fight I was in Phrygia,
And brought to Otreus and Mygdon aid
Against the Amazons. I never saw
Till then, so many for a Fight arrayed,
As were the Amazons, upon the Banks
Of Sangareus, and yet they fewer were,
Than are contained in the brissled Ranks
Of th'armed Greeks that stand before us here.
Again Ulysses coming in his sight,
Tell me (said he) sweet Daughter, Who is this
He wants the head of Agamemnons height,
But at the Breast and Shoulders broader is.
His Arms lie still upon the ground; but he
In no one certain place himself can keep,
But through the Ranks and Files runs busily,
Just as a (...) runs in a Fold of Sheep.
To this Jove's Daughter Helen thus replies.
Ulysses it is, the old Laertes Son
Of Ithaca; to counsel and devise,
In all the Army like him there is none.
O Helen (said Antenor) you say right;
On your affair he once came into Troy
With Menelaus. I did them both invite
To sup with me; and in my house they lay.
I them compared. When at their Audience
They both stood up, Atrides taller seemed;
Sitting Ulysses won most reverence,
And was amongst the people most esteemed.
And when they were Orations to make,
Atrides words went easily and close.
For little he, but to the purpose spoke,
Though th'younger man. But when Ulysses rose,
Upon the ground a while he fixed his eyes,
Nor ever moved the Scepter in his hand;
You would have thought him sullen or unwise,
That did not yet his business understand.
But when his voice was raised to the height,
And like a Snow upon a Winters day
His gentle words fell from him, no man might
With him compare; so much his words did weigh.
Then Priam seeing Ajax, asked again,
What Greek is that, that taller by the Head
And Shoulders is than all the other men?
And Helen to the King thus answered,
Great Ajax. Who of the Argives is the Sconce,
And he o'th'other side Idomeneus,
Who was the guest of Menelaus once,
And lodged at Lacedemon in his house.
And now I see the rest, and could them name.
But Castor I and Pollux cannot see.
Two Princes are they, and well known by Fame,
And by one Mother Brothers are to me.
Did they not pass the Sea? Yes sure they did
Come with the rest; but are ashamed of me.
And in the Argive Fleet lie somewhere hid,
And will not of my shame partakers be.
Thus Helen said, because she could not tell
Whether her Brothers were alive or dead.
But dead they were; and (where they both did dwell)
In Lacedemon they were buried.
The Heralds now the two Lambs had brought in,
That for their Sacrifice appointed were,
And full of noble Wine a great Goats skin.
Idaeus with the Golden Cups stood near,
And prayed the King to go down to the Plain.
There stay for you the Greeks and Trojans both;
A Peace agreed on is; but all in vain
Unless you also go and take the Oath.
For Paris must with Menelaus fight,
And he must Helen and her wealth enjoy
Upon whose side the Victory shall light;
The Greeks return; and Peace remain at Troy.
These words to The Old man's heart came cold as Ice.
But straight he bad his Coach made ready be.
The Servants made it ready in a trice,
And up into 't Antenor went and he;
And past the Scaean Gate into the Plain.
And when they came near to Scamander Banks,
From out the Coach alighted they again,
And stood between the adverse Armies Ranks.
Then Agamemnon and Ulysses came,
And to the Contract for the Greeks did swear.
And Priam and Antenor swore the same.
The Heralds mix the Wine with Water clear;
And poured water on the Princes hands.
Atrides at his Sword a Knife did wear,
And as he near unto the Victims stands,
Cuts with it from their foreheads locks of Hair,
Which by the Heralds were distributed,
Till every Leader part had of the hair.
The Ceremonies being finished,
Atrides to the gods then made this Prayer.
O mighty Jove, the Monarch of the Gods,
O glorious Sun with thy all-seeing Eye,
O Streams, O Earth, O you that hold the Rods
Beneath the Earth, scourges of Perjury,
Hear me, and be you witnesses of this.
If Menelaus be by Paris slain,
Let Helen and the wealth she has be his,
And to Achaea we return again.
If slain by Menelaus Paris be,
Let Helen with her wealth to Greece be sent
With some amends made for the injury,
To be of the wrong done an acknowledgment.
If such amends the Trojans will not make,
I will pursue the War, and here abide,
Till I the Town of Ilium shall take,
Or till the Gods the quarrel shall decide.
This said, the Victims with his Knife he slew.
And sprawling there upon the place they lay.
Then into Golden Cups the Wine they drew,
And poured it on the Lambs. Then prayed they
Both Greeks and Trojans; Jove, and Powers divine,
Who first to break this peace shall go about,
As poured on the Victims is this Wine,
So they, and their Sons Brains be poured out.
Thus prayed they. But Jove that Prayer did slight.
Then Priam said, To Troy return will I.
It cannot please me to behold the Fight.
For none but Gods know which of them shall dye.
And then into the Charret went again
He and Antenor, and drove to Ilium,
And with them carried their Victims slain.
Then in Ulysses and great Hector come,
And having measured out the Lists, wherein
They were to fight, then the two Lots they drew
For who to throw his Spear should first begin.
And then the Greeks and Trojans prayed anew.
O glorious Jove, whom all the Gods obey,
Let him that of the War the Author was
Be slain, and all the rest firm peace enjoy.
Then mighty Hector shook the skull of brass.
The Lot that was the first drawn out, was that
Which gave to Paris the right to begin.
Then down upon the ground the people sat
In order as their Armours placed had been.
And Paris armed himself, and first puts on
His Leg-pieces of Brass, and closely ties,
That silvered over were at the Ancle-bone.
And then his Breast Plate to his Breast applies.
Lycaons Breast Plate 'twas, but every whit
As just upon him sat, as it had done
Upon Lycaon when he used it.
And next to this his good Sword he puts on.
And then his broad Shield and his Helmet good.
And last of all a Spear takes in his hand.
And in like Armor Menelaus stood.
Then come they forth, and in the Lists they stand.
And one did on another fiercely look.
(The people stupid sat 'twixt hope and fear.)
And when they come were nigh, their Spears they shook.
But Paris was the first to throw his Spear,
And threw, and smote the Shield of Menelaus,
But through the Mettle tough it passed not,
But turned, and bended at the point it was.
Then Menelaus was to throw by Lot.
But first he prayed. Grant me, O Jove, (said he)
That this my Spear may Alexander slay,
Who was the first that did the injury.
That they who shall be born hereafter may
Not dare to violate the Sacred Laws
Of Hospitality. Having thus said,
He threw his Spear, which Paris Shield did pass,
And through his Breast Plate quite, and there it staid;
But tore his Coat. And there he had been dead,
But that his Belly somewhat he drew back.
Then with his Sword Atrides smote his head
Which armed was, and the Sword in pieces broke.
Then Menelaus grieved at the heart,
Looking to Heaven did on Jove complain.
O Jove that of the Gods most cruel art,
Broken my Sword, my Spear is thrown in vain.
Then suddenly laid hold on Paris Crest,
And to the Greeks to drag him did begin,
And Paris then was mightily distressed,
Choakt by the Latchet underneath his Chin.
And to the Greeks had dragged been by the Head,
If Venus to his aid had not come in,
Who broke the string and him delivered.
Atrides conquest else had famous been.
Then to the Greeks the empty Cask he threw.
But Venus snatched him from him in a Mist.
And whither she conveyed him none there knew.
A God she is, and can do what she list.
When Paris to his Chamber was conveyed,
His Chamber which of Perfumes sweetly smelt,
Then puts she on the form of an old Maid
That Helen served when she at Sparta dwelt.
And in that shape went to call Helen home,
That stood with other Ladies of the Town
Upon a Tower. When she was to her come,
She gently with her finger stirred her Gown.
Helen (said she) Paris has for you sent,
And on his glorious bed does for you stay,
Not as a man that came from Fight, but went
To Dance, or from it were new come away.
Helen at this was moved, and marked her Eyes,
And of her lovely Neck did notice take,
And knew 'twas Venus though in this disguise;
And troubled as she was, thus to her spoke.
Venus, why seek you to deceive me still,
Since Menelaus has the Victory?
Though I have wronged him, he receive me will,
And you come hither now to hinder me.
Whither do you mean to send me further yet?
To Phrygia or to Moeonia,
That there I may another Husband get?
You shall not me to Alexander draw.
Go to him you, and Heaven for ever quit;
Grieve with him; have a care the man to save,
And by his side continually to sit,
Till he his Bride have made you, or his Slave.
I will not to him go (for 'twere a shame)
Nor any longer meddle with his Bed,
Nor longer bear the scorns, nor mocks, nor blame
Which from the wives of Troy I suffered.
Then Venus vexed, Hussie (said she) no more
Provoke my anger. If I angry be,
And hate you as I loved you before,
The Armies both will to your death agree.
This said, the beauteous Helen frighted was,
And with the Goddess went, who led the way,
And by the Trojan Wives did quiet pass
Unto the house where Alexander lay.
In The Rooms below at work her women were.
But up went Helen with the Goddess fair.
And when to Alexander they were near,
The Goddess unto Helen fetched a Chair.
Then sat she down, and looked at him again.
You come from Battle. I would you had there,
And by my former Husbands hand, been slain.
You bragged you were his better at a Spear.
Go challenge him again, and fight anew.
But do not though, for fear you should be killed.
But rather when you see him, him eschew,
Lest he should leave you dead upon the field.
To Helen Alexander then replied.
Forbear; though he have now the Victory
By Pallas help; there are Gods on our side,
And they another time may favor me.
Let Us go to Bed, and in sweet Love agree.
Your Beauty never did me so much move,
At Lacedemon, nor in Cranae;
Where the first blessing I had of your Love.
This said, to bed they went, first he, then she.
Atrides then sought Paris in the throng
Of The Trojans and their Aids; but could not see
Nor hear of him the company among.
They would not have concealed him though they might;
But had to Menelaus him betrayed.
So hateful to the Trojans was his sight.
Then stood King Agamemnon up and said,
Hear me you Trojans and your Aids. It Is plain
That Menelaus has the Victory.
Let Helen therefore rendered be again,
And pay your Fine. It Is Right, the Greeks all cry.
ILIAD. LIB. IV.
MEan while the Gods at Counsel drinking sat.
Hebe the Nectar carried up and down.
And Jove amongst them present was thereat,
And sitting had his eyes upon Troy Town.
Then Jupiter puts out a word, to see
What Juno would unto the same reply.
Two Goddesses assistants are (said he)
To Menelaus, but sit idly by,
Pallas and Juno; but on the other side
Venus gives Paris aid, and really
Has helped him when he thought he should have died.
Though Menelaus have the Victory.
But let us now think which the best will be,
To suffer war to make an end of Troy,
Or let Troy stand and make them to agree,
And Helen with Atrides go her way.
Juno and Pallas that together sat,
Grumble and plot; Pallas her spite kept in.
But such of Juno was the choler, that
Had she not spoke, her heart had broken been.
Harsh Jove (said she) what do you mean by this?
Shall I with so much sweat, and labor spent,
And Horses tired, now of my purpose miss?
Do. But the other Gods will not consent.
Devil, said Jove, what hurt is done to you
By Priam and his Sons, that you should so
Fiercely the ruin of the Town pursue?
I think if you int' Ilium should go,
And eat up Priam and his Children all,
And every Trojan in the Town beside,
Man, Woman, Child alive within the wall,
Your anger will at last be satisfied.
Do as you please. It shall breed no contention
'Twixt you and me. But then remember this,
When I to raze a City have intention
That yours, and greatly in your favor is,
To let me do it without Plea or Request;
Since to give you your will I loose my own.
For Ilium I love above the rest,
Though under Heaven be many a goodly Town.
For I by Priam and his people still
Have honored been, my Altars richly served
With Wine and Sacrifices to my will,
Which is the honor to the Gods reserved.
To this the Goddess Juno then replied,
Three Cities I prefer before the rest,
Argos and Sparta, and Mycena wide.
Destroy you may which of them you think best,
If you see cause; I Will not stand in your way.
Or if I do, what mends can I have so?
For since your Power does mine so much outweigh,
It will be done whether I will or no.
But you ought not t'undo what I have done.
For I a Goddess am, and have the same
Parents, of whom you boast to be the Son.
And further of your Wife I bear the name,
Whom Mortals and Immortals all obey.
Then let us not in such things disagree.
But I to you, and you to me give way.
For of our two minds all the Gods will be.
Let Pallas to the Army straight be sent
To make the Trojans first the Peace to break.
And Jupiter to do so was content,
And did (as he was bid) to Pallas speak.
Pallas, said he, down to the Armies go,
Let not this Peace be by the Trojans kept.
When Pallas heard her Father Jove say so,
Glad of the Errand, from the Sky she leapt.
Just like a falling Star, which Saturn sends
To Armies or unto Seafaring men;
Which change of Fortune, commonly portends.
The Goddess through the Air descending then,
Splendid and sparkling on the ground did light.
The Armies that were in the field arrayed,
Both Greeks and Trojans wondered at the sight;
And one unto another next him said,
This bloody War will sure return again,
Or else the Peace be surer made than it is.
But which of the two Jove has not yet made plain,
Who both of Peace and War disposer is.
Pallas the form took of Laodocus
Antenor's Son, and went into the throng
Of The Trojans to inquire for Pandarus.
At last she found him his own Troops among,
That were of Lycaonia the Bands,
And from Zeleia led by Pandarus
To Ilium. There Pallas by him stands
Like to Antenor's Son; and to him thus:
Lycaon's Son, says she, dare you let fly
A Shaft at Menelaus? For I know
The Trojans all would thank you, specially
Paris the Son of Priam, and bestow
Great Presents on you if you should him kill.
Shoot at him then, and to Apollo pray
The God of Archers that he help you will.
And vow a Hecatombe of Lambs to pay,
When to Zeleia safely you come home.
For there your people to Apollo vow.
When this was said, the vain man overcome,
From off his Shoulders takes down his Bow
(Which did a lusty Goats-head once adorn,
Which with a Shaft he killed had among
The Rocks, and taken from his head the Horn,
Which was no less than sixteen handfuls long.
And to a Fletcher gave it to be wrought,
Shaven, and Polisht, and Guilt at the hand.)
This Bow he bent; and lest the Foe should know it,
He crouched down, and laid it on the sand.
But lest the Greeks should rush on him, before
He ready were to shoot, they that stood near,
Before him with their Bucklers stood good store.
And being now delivered of that fear,
From out the Quiver takes an Arrow keen,
And new, well winged to carry mischief true,
Which shot before that time had never been.
But yet his Vow before his Arrow flew.
Phoebus (said he) if I Atrides slay;
As Soon as I shall to Zeleia come,
I vow unto your Deity to pay
Of my first yeaned Lambs an Hecatombe.
Then to his breast he drew the leather string,
And to the Bow returned the Arrow head.
Out leapt the Shaft, and as it went did sing
Amongst the throng, as pleased man's blood to shed.
And (Menelaus) now the Gods you blessed,
And chiefly Pallas that before you stood;
And turned the deadly Arrow from your breast,
About as much as a kind Mother could
From her Child's face divert a busy fly;
And made it on the Golden Buckle fall,
Where of his Breast plate double was the ply.
And though it past through Buckle, Plate and all,
And Girdle which his Coat unto him bound,
The Shaft into his Body penetrated,
And made (though not a great one) yet a wound,
The force it went with being much abated.
Yet out the blood ran. As when Ivory
Is stained with Crimson, to adorn the Cheeks
Of the proud Steeds, and please the Drivers eye,
Many a Cavalier to have it seeks.
The Dame that stained it then holds up the price,
And keeps it by her as a precious thing;
So lovely seems the Color to her eyes,
As to be sold to none but to a King.
So looked his body when the streams of Blood
His Ivory Legs and Insteps did defile.
But Agamemnon stiff with horror stood;
And so did Menelaus for a while.
But when he saw the Arrow Barbs appear
Above the Nerve, his courage came again.
But Agamemnon not yet out of fear,
Did on the Trojans Perjury complain.
Brother (said he) and took him by the hand,
Dear Brother, it is the Oath that has you slain,
Making you thus before the Trojans stand.
But sure I am the Oath cannot be vain,
Confirmed with so great solemnity.
They shall (though late) pay for it with their lives.
(For Jove nere fails to punish Perjury)
Both they themselves, their children and their wives.
For I well know the fatal day will come
To Priam and to Priam's people all.
Jove will his black Shield shake ore Ilium,
And for this ugly action make it fall.
This (Menelaus) is a thing to come.
But what if of your wound you chance to dye?
The Argives straight will think of going home.
How by the Greeks then scorned shall be I!
How proud will Priam and the Trojans be,
When Argive Helen shall be left behind,
And your bones rotting in the ground they see,
Without effecting what they had designed?
Some trampling on you Grave perhaps will say,
Would Agamemnon thus would always vent
His Choler, as he now has done at Troy,
Now gone with empty Ships back to repent,
Leaving his Brother Menelaus here.
Then should I wish the earth would swallow me.
But Menelaus to displace that fear,
Fright not the Army Brother, thus said he.
Not mortal is the wound. 'Twixt me and death
My Armor and the Clasps stood, all of Brass;
Besides a good tough Girdle underneath.
Pray God't be true (said he to Menelaus.)
But we must send for a Chyrurgeon
To mitigate with Lenitives the pain.
Talthybius (said he) call Machaon,
And having found him quickly come again.
Tell him he must to Menelaus come,
Who by a Foe is with an Arrow shot,
Trojan or Lycian, I know not whom,
That with great grief to us has honor got.
This said, the Herald went, and looked about
Amongst the Troops of Tricca which he led.
Nor was it long before he found him out
With many Targetiers environed.
You must (said he) to Menelaus come,
Who by some Foe is with an Arrow shot,
Trojan or Lycian, I know not whom,
That (with great grief to us) has honor got.
It Is Agamemnon calls you. Then they pass
Together through the Host, and hastened
Till they were come where Menelaus was
With many other Lords encompassed.
There Machaon the Arrow first pulls out.
(The Barbs were broken as they came away)
Then took he off his Armor and his Coat.
Then sucked he the wound the blood to stay;
And laid on Unguents to allay the pain.
Mean while the Trojans armed were coming in.
And then the Greeks were forced to arm again.
And Agamemnon's virtue now was seen.
He did not at their coming sleep nor start,
But speedily prepared for the fight,
And of a Chief Commander did the part,
His own Commanders first to disaffright.
His Horses and his Chariot he sent off.
TO Eurymedon the Son of Ptolemy
The Son of Pirus he gave charge thereof,
And bad him with it always to be nigh,
To use when labor tired had his Knees.
Through the great Army then on foot he went,
And where them hasting to the Fight he sees,
He gives them in few words encouragement.
On Argives, and be sure Jove never fights
Against good men for such perfidious knaves,
But leave them will for food to Dogs and Kites,
And to their Foes their wives and children Slaves.
But where he saw the Soldiers negligent,
His admonition was then severe.
Fie Argives, what do you fear? To what intent*
Stand you thus s^aring like a ^^rd of (...)?
Just like so many Deer that had been chased
Ore some great Plain looking about they stay,
So stand you here like frighted Deer amazed,
Till to our Ships come down the Troops of Troy,
To try if Jove will help you there or no.
Thus he commanding went the Host throughout.
And when the martial Cretans he came to,
Where armed stood Idomeneus stout.
( Meriones the Rear led, he the Van)
And Agamemnon lo^k'd on them with joy;
And to Idomeneus thus began.
Of all the Greeks that me assist at Troy
I value you the most, both in the War
And otherwise. And when at Feast we drink,
Other men's Cups by measure stinted are,
But yours, as mine, stands always full to th'brink.
The King of Creete replied, I shall, said he,
Continue still your good Confederate,
As heretofore I promised you to be.
But go, and the other Leaders animate,
That we may with the Trojans quickly fight.
Then woe be to them, sure they are to die
Who of the Gods and Sacred Oaths make light.
Then on went Agamemnon joyfully;
And came to the Quarters of the Ajaxes,
There armed both complete, and followed
With a huge multitude of Greeks he sees,
And ready to the Battle to be led.
As when a Shepherd from a Hill espies
A full-charg'd Cloud march toward him in the Deep,
It seems as black as Pitch unto his eyes,
And makes him seek a shelter for his Sheep;
So black the Squadrons of the Ajaxes,
And horrible with thick and upright Spears
TO Atrides seem, and well it did him please,
And both of them he thus commends and chears.
O Ajaxes expect not I should bid
You hearten up your Army for the fight;
It Is done so well already there is no need.
O Jove, Apollo, Pallas, that I might
Find all the other Leaders such as you,
We should not need from Argos long to stay
Ere we the Town of Priam should subdue
And rifle. And this said, he went away,
And came to Nestor, who was ordering
His Troops and Bands of Horse and Foot, each one
Against the Enemy encouraging.
And with him stood Alastor, Pelagon,
Haemon, and Chromius, skilful men in War.
In The Front the Charrets and the Horsemen were.
The most and best Infantry placed are
(A Hedge unto the Battle in the Rear.)
The middle Ranks were filled up with those,
Upon whose courage he did least rely.
For these would fight because they could not choose;
Since they could neither back nor forward fly.
And Nestor to the Horsemen spoke. Let none,
Said he, before another go, to show
His Manhood or his Skill. But all go on
At once. To single is to weaken you.
Further, If any of you should have need
To mount into another Chariot,
There let him use his Spear; but still take heed
That with the Horses Reins he meddle not.
Our Fathers have before us used these Laws,
And thereby many Cities level laid.
Thus Nestor taught them. Glad Atrides was,
And with great approbation to him said,
O Nestor, that your Arms were but as strong
As is your Mind! But they are decayed by age.
Or could you give your age to some man young,
And with the youngest of the Foes engage.
Atrides (then said Nestor) so wish I.
Would I were as when Ereuthalyon
I slew. But Gods gifts come successively.
I then was young; and age is now come our
But as I am I Will ride amongst my horse,
And as becomes an Old Man, give advice,
While they that may presume upon their force,
With Spear in hand charge on their Enemies.
Atrides passed on to the Athenians
That by Menestheus commanded were.
And by these stood the Cephalonians
Ulysses Bands. Neither of these did hear
The clamor of the Battle new begun,
But stood unmoved, because they did expect
Some greater Troop of Greeks should first fall on.
For this Atrides grievously them checked.
Menestheus (said he) Son of a King,
And you the crafty man Ulysses, why
When you your men should to the Battle bring,
Stand you here shrinking from the Enemy?
You hear the first when there will be a Feast,
And stay for no man. For your Messes are
Greater than other men's; your Wine the best,
And without stint. And therefore in the War
You should strive who should be the first to fight.
But now though ten Troops were before you there,
You would not be displeased with the sight.
These words came harshly to Ulysses ear,
And with a frowning look, What Is this (said he)
Are we not making all the haste we can?
Telemachus his Father you shall see
By and by fighting in the Trojan Van,
And that this reprehension needless was.
But Agamemnon smiling then replied,
(Seeing his Censure did not kindly pass)
Noble Ulysses, I meant not to chide,
Nor to direct you, that so skilful are.
For we are both of us of the same mind.
What Is said amiss I shall again repair.
But let it now away go with the wind.
Then on he went and came to Diomed,
Whom mounted on his Chariot he found
With Capaneus Son accompanied,
And other Lords that him encompassed round.
Ay me, Tydides, wherefore stand you thus,
As if you for some Bridge did look about.
You do not as your Father Tydeus,
Who still before his fellows leaped ou^.
So said they that had seen him at the War,
Which I did not, but take it upon fame,
Which him above the rest preferred far.
But certain it is he to Mycena came
With Polynices to desire their aid
Against the Thebans. And they willingly
Had granted it, but that they were afraid.
For Jove forbad them by a Prodigy.
Then to the Brook Asopus back they went,
Which does the Theban Territory bound.
To Tydeus the Greeks a letter sent
To enter Thebes, and terms of Peace propound.
To Thebes he went, and with Eteocles
He found the chief of the Thebans at a Feast.
And at all manly Games the Prize with ease,
By Pallas help, he carried from the best.
And when for spite they sent out Fifty men
With Maeon Haemon's Son, and Lycophon
To murder him as he went back again,
Slain by Tydeus they were all but one.
For he saved Maeon (warned by the Gods)
Such Tydeus was, but left a Son behind
That less could do, but for words had the odds.
But valiant Diomed Reply declined,
Who gave to Atrides what respect was due.
The other answered him with language rude.
You say, said he, what you know is not true.
We than our Fathers there more manhood showed.
For we with fewer men proud Thebes did gain,
By Jove's help, and Observances divine,
Whilst the Cadmeans for their pride were slain.
How from our Fathers then do we decline?
But straight reproved he was by Diomed.
My friend (said he) are you more grieved than I?
Would you not have the Army ordered?
Atrides both in the loss and victory
Is most concerned. Let us of Battle think,
And down he leapt, as soon as that was said,
In complete Arms, with such a sudden chink,
As might a constant man have made afraid.
As when the Billows of the Sea raised high
By some great wind go rolling to the Shore,
And follow one another to the Dry,
There stopped and broken are, and foam and roar:
So then the Greeks up to the Trojans come,
Obeying each his Leader silently.
(You would have thought them, though so many) dumb,
In glittering Arms, and glorious to the eye.
On the other side the Trojans made a noise,
Like Ews a milking kept off from their Lambs
When in the field abroad they hear their cries,
And they again bleat back unto their Dams.
But did not one another understand;
For few there were whose Language was the same.
Some were of one, some of another Land,
And most of them from far off thither came.
Pallas the Greeks, Mars Trojans favored.
Then Fright came in, with ( Mars his sister) Strife,
Little when born, but grew until her Head
Was in the Clouds; for she grows all her life.
But when the Armies were together near,
Then Man to Man came close, and Shield to Shield,
And mingled in the Front was Spear with Spear,
And horrible the noise was in the field;
Wh^lst some insult, and others groaning dye.
And the earth they stood on covered was with blood.
As when great Torrents from the Mountains high
Pour down into the Valley a great flood;
The Streams through thousand Channels falling roar;
The trembling Shepherds hear it to the Hills.
So much the noise of the Battle the Air tore,
And all the Region with terror fills.
A Trojan was the first man that was slain,
Echepolus Son of Thalysias.
He smote was with a Spear into the Brain;
Antilochus the man that smote him was.
His Armor ratled on him as he fell,
As if some Tower had fallen. But then Elphenor
(To strip him of his Arms that hoped well)
Dragging him off was killed by Agenor.
For whilst in stooping he his Flank unhides.
Agenor quickly his advantage spies,
And pierced him with his Spear through both his Sides.
Then down he fell, and darkness seized his eyes.
And then about his body rose great strife,
And one upon another falling on,
Anthemon's Son, a fair youth lost his life,
Slain by great Ajax Son of Telamon,
And Simoisius called was by name,
'Cause born upon the Bank of Simois,
Whither from Ida both his Parents came
To view their Flocks, lest ought should be amiss.
But had no joy of him. He was unblest
To be the first that came in Ajax way,
Who smote him with his Spear quite through the breast.
There dead he fell, and by the River lay.
As when a man has felled a Poplar-Tree
Tall, straight and smooth, with many fair boughs on,
Of which he meant a Cart-wheel made shall be,
And leaves it on the Bank to dry in the Sun;
So lay the comely Simoisius
Slain by great Ajax Son of Telamon.
At Ajax then a Spear threw Antiphus,
Bright-armed Antiphus, King Priam's Son.
Death the Spear carries, but of Ajax misses,
And deadly wounds the Groin of Leucus bold,
And well beloved Soldier of Ulysses,
Who dragged the dead, but now lets go his hold.
Ulysses angry that his friend was slain,
Went out before the rest, and coming close
To the Trojan front, some fit revenge to gain.
Democoon, King Priam's Son he chose,
(A lawful Son where Nature is the Law)
The Trojans when they saw him look about,
Into the shelter of the Ranks withdraw.
Then soon his Spear Democoon picked out.
And through both Temples forward went the head.
Then heavily he falls, his Armor chinks,
His Eyes with endless night are covered,
And Hector with his Trojans from him shrinks.
The Greeks then shouted, and drew off their slain,
And on the Trojans pressing further were.
But then Apollo cried out amain
From Pergam Tower, O Trojans, what do you fear?
Go on upon the Greeks; no more give way.
Their Bodies neither are of Stone nor Steel,
Nor able are the force of Brass to stay.
No less than you the wounds it makes they feel.
Nor fights Achilles here, but angry lies,
And wishes that the Greeks were overthrown.
So Phoebus. Amongst the Argives Pallas flies,
Through Ranks and Files encouraging each one.
And then Diores slain was with a stone,
By Pyros whom the Thracians obeyed.
Crushed of his Right Leg was the Ankle-bone,
And in the dust upon his Back was laid
Unto his fellows holding up his hands.
Ready to dye he for assistance cries.
Piros comes quickly in, and ore him stands,
And wounds him in the Belly. Then he dies.
But Thoas then slew Pyros with his Spear,
That passed his Breast till in his Lungs it stopped.
Then coming in he drew his Sword, and there
His Belly ripped till out his Bowels dropped,
But to disarm him could not stay, because
So many Thracians about him stood.
Then back retired he, and well pelted was,
Leaving two Leaders wrapped in dust and blood,
One an Epeian, the other Thracian,
And many others lying by them dead.
This Battle was well fought. Although a man
Through both the Armies safely had been led
By Pallas, and protected by her Shield,
He had no want of courage seen that day,
So many Greeks and Trojans in the field
Deprived of Life by one another lay.
ILIAD. LIB. V.
ANd Pallas now t'ennoble Diomed
Amongst the Greeks, with force did him inspire,
Whereby his heart and hands were strengthened;
And on his Shield and Helmet stood a Fire
Bright as the Autumnal Star above his Head
And Shoulders flaming. And straightway he runs
(Set on by Pallas and encouraged)
Into the throng, where were the two good Sons
Of Dares, who was Vulcan's Priest. Well skilled
They both were in the War. Idaeus one,
The other Phegus. These seeing him in the field
On foot, and not far from them, and alone,
Met him; and Phegus threw, but hit him not.
For ore his shoulder flew the Spear in vain.
Then Diomedes threw, and Phegus smote,
Clean through the Breast. When Phegus thus was slain
Down leapt Idaeus from the Chariot;
But durst not by his Brothers body stay.
For if he had, the like Fate he had got.
But Vulcan in a smoke took him away,
Not willing that his Priest should childless dye.
Tydides to the Ships the Horses sent.
To see these two, one slain, the other fly,
To the proud Trojans very hearts it went.
But Pallas then took Mars by the hand, and said,
Mars, bloody Mars, to what end stay we here?
Let Us Neuters be. For I am much afraid
We both shall too much anger Jupiter.
This said, she led him out, and set him on
Scamander bank. And then the Trojans fled
Before the Greeks. Each Leader killed one,
Pressing them at their backs uncovered.
Then Dalius first his Charret turned about,
And open lay to Agamemnon's Spear,
Which in at's Back, and at his Breast went out.
Down fell the Alizonian Charioteer.
Idomeneus slew Phaestus with a thrust,
As up into his Chariot he went*
The Spear at the right shoulder pa^^ed just,
And back again unto the earth him sent.
And Menelaus slew Scamandrius,
That well the Art of Hunting understood.
In The Hills and Woods none was more dexterous.
But Dian', and his skill did him no good.
For Menelaus pierced him back and Breast
Between the Shoulders with a deadly Spear,
And down he tumbled of life dispossessed,
His eyes with endless darkness covered were.
Meriones slew Ph^riclus the Son
Of Harmonides the great Architect
That (but by Pallas) taught had been by none.
But of his Art unhappy was the effect.
'Twas he that built those Ships for Alexander,
That brought with him so much ill luck to Troy,
And to himself, and to his chief Commander;
Not knowing what the Oracles did say.
But he, as from the Fight he fled, was here
Ore taken by Meriones, and slain.
At his right Buttock entered the Spear;
And at his Groin the point came out again.
Meges Pedaeus slew, Antenor's Son,
Though not his Wives, yet was his Wife so kind
TO Antenor, that she bred him as her own,
And looked upon him with a Mothers mind
Him Meges overtaking as he fled
Slew with his strong sharp-pointed Spear, which lighting
Behind upon the noddle of his Head,
Forward he fell the senseless weapon b^^ing.
And then Eurypylus Euaemon's Son
Hypsenor slew, new made Scamander's Priest,
That from him, but not fast enough, did run.
Eurypylus shaved off his Hand at the Wrist.
For at his Shoulder though he aimed the stroke,
The quick Sword finding there the Brass resist*
Slipped down unto his hand with force unbroke,
And there in streams of blood his Soul dismissed.
Mean while Tydides like a man enraged
Ran up and down the field. One could not know
With whom and where he was in fight engaged,
Whether amongst the Greeks, or with the Foe.
As when a Torrent falling from the Hills
Distends it self with fury on the Plain,
And suddenly the River overfills,
Supplied by Jove with mighty showers of Rain,
And bears down the Bridges as it goes,
No fence of Vineyard can against it stand;
But all the husbandry of men orethrows,
And uncontrolled passes ore their land:
Tydides so brake through each Trojan band,
And made them fly before him as he went.
And Pandarus then took his Bow in hand,
And a sharp Arrow from it to him sent.
Which passed through the right shoulder of his Coat
Of Mail, and fetched the blood, and with great joy
Trojans (cried he) no more stand so remote.
For wounded is the stoutest foe of Troy,
And long he cannot the sore pain endure,
Unless my faith in Phoebus be in vain.
Thus said he bo^sting. For he thought 'twas sure
The wound was mortal, and Tydides slain.
Tydides to his Charre did then retreat,
And Sthenelus alighting on the ground
(For sitting he was on the Charret-seat)
Drew out the cruel Arrow from the wound.
And out the blood gusht. Then Tydides prayed,
O Pallas, Jove's all-conquering Child, said he,
If ere you did me or my Father aid,
Within my Spears reach let me this man see,
That with his Arrow me prevented has,
And boasting says, I have not long to live.
Athena to his wish indulgent was,
And to him did more strength and courage give.
Fear not (said she) to go into the throng,
And charge in the thickest of the Enemies.
For I have made thee as thy Father strong,
And taken have the mist off from thy eyes,
That thou may see who Gods are, who are men.
If any God oppose thee, give him way,
Except if Venus thou encounter, then
Spare her no more than Mortals in the Fray.
This said, away the goddess Pallas went,
And Diomed went to the fight again,
And though before he were upon it bent,
His courage now was trebled by his pain.
As when a Shepherd sees a Lion come,
And wounds him slightly as he leaps the Pen;
Then leaves his Sheep, and frighted runs home,
And dares not in the field appear again;
The Lion now made fiercer than before,
Lays all his Sheep one by another dead,
And back again the Pen once more leaps ore:
So raged amongst the Trojans Diomed.
Astyno^s there, and Hypenor died;
One through the Breast he pierced with his Spear;
And the others Head did from his Neck divide
With his broad Sword. And slain he left them there.
And overtook Abas and Poly^ide
Sons of Eurydamas, who could tell what
Upon a Dream should to a man betide,
And slew them both. No Dream had told him that.
Thoon and Xanthus then he followed
Phaenops two Sons, gotten when he was old,
And of them both the vital Blood did shed.
The Estate to strangers came to have and hold.
Then Chromius and Echemon he slew,
Two Sons of Priam in one Chariot,
Whom from the seat unto the ground he threw,
And till he had disarmed them left them not.
But to the Ships he sent away the Horses.
Aeneas seeing how he disarray'd
Before him as he went the Trojan forces,
Sought Pa^darus, and having found him, said,
Lycaons Son, where are thy Shafts and Bow,
And Skill, wherein the Lycians yield to thee?
See you the man that rages yonder now?
Aim a Shaft at him whosoere he be.
For many valiant Trojans he has slain.
(Unless he be one of the Gods above
Neglected by us) 'twill not be in vain.
Shoot boldly then, but first invoking Jove.
Then Pandarus replying, to him said;
It Is Diomed as far as can be guessed.
His Horses, and his Shield I have survay'd.
And pleated Horse-hair hanging at his Crest.
Though it be he, as I believe it is,
Yet sure some God does on his Shoulders sit.
For else of killing him how could I miss,
When I his Shoulder with my Arrow hit?
For I one Arrow shot at him before,
And verily believed I had him slain.
His Armor all besmeared was with gore,
But slew him not. Now here he is again.
I did not on a Charret hither come,
Although Lycaon have eleven new,
With handsome Curtains to each one, at home,
And Horses fit to draw them not a few.
The old Knight too advised me earnestly
That when to Battle I the Trojans led,
I from a Charre should charge the Enemy;
But to his counsel I not hearkened.
(Which I repent.) It came into my head
That when within Troy Walls we should be pent,
My Horses, which were used to be well fed
Would there be useless wanting nourishment.
This made me come without a Chariot,
And march (as far as 'twas) to Troy on foot.
And trust unto my Bow which helps me not,
But fails me as often as I shoot.
For two of them I have already shot,
Tydides and Atrides, and good store
Of blood have drawn from both, though killed no^,
But made them fiercer than they were before.
In an ill hour sure I took down my Bow
To fight for Hector and the Trojan men;
But if I safely to my Country go,
And to my House and Wife get back again,
Let any man that will cut off my Head,
If presently my^Bow I do not burn,
That never yet my hopes has answered.
For why not, when it does not serve my turn?
To Pandarus Aeneas then replied,
No, say not so, but first let us to him go.
For by the encounter soon it will be tried
Whether he be indeed a God or no.
Get up into the Seat, and you shall see
The virtue of my horses on the plain,
And if some God with Diomedes be,
How nimbly they will fetch us off again.
Come take the Whip and Reins in hand, and I
Descend will from the Chariot and fight.
Or if you please, when to him we are nigh
I Will hold the Whip and Reins, and you alight.
No, no (said he) keep you the Reins in hand,
The Horses used thereto will you obey.
To me, it may be, they will restive stand,
And to the Foe themselves and us betray.
Let me alight and meet him with my Spear.
This said, they mounted both; and coming on
Toward Tydides both observed were
By Sthenelus Capaneus his Son,
Who warning to Tydides gave. I see
Two mighty men to fight us coming on,
Of which I know the one Pandarus to be,
The other Venus and Anchises Son.
Come up into your Charret and retire.
But frowning he replied, I Will never do that.
It not becomes the Children of my Sire,
When they should fight to Double nor to Squat.
I loath to sit upon a Chariot,
And as I am I will attend them here.
For of my strength deprived I am not,
And Pallas has forbidden me to fear.
I doubt not but to kill them both, or one.
If both, your Reins unto the two Wheels tie,
And to Aeneas Horses quickly run,
And seize their Reins, lest frighted they should fly.
Then send them to the Ships, brave Steeds, well bred;
Of heavenly race they are, and got by those,
Which Jove to make amends for Ganymed,
Was pleased to give unto his Father Tros.
Anchises privily conveyed to these,
Six Mares, and had a Colt by every one;
Whereof he gave two to his Son Aeneas.
To take these Horses now were bravely done.
While they were talking, the other two came nigh,
And then said Pandarus, O Diomed,
Since my swift Arrow could not make you die,
I come to try now how my Spear will speed.
And as he spoke the Spear flew from his hand
And passed his Shield, but in his Armor staid.
You Are hit, said he, and long you cannot stand.
But Diomed, nothing at all dismayed,
No no cried out, your Spear is thrown in vain.
But I believe before we have done here,
That one of you, if not both, will be slain.
And as he spoke he at him threw his Spear.
Which at his Nose close by his Eye went in,
And struck his Teeth our, and cut off his Tongue.
And out again it passed beneath his Chin.
For Pallas from above it downward flung.
There dead he lay. Aeneas to defend
His body to him came with Spear and Shield,
And 'bout him went, resolved the man to send
To Hell, that should oppose him in the field.
Tydides then took up a mighty Stone
Which two men scarce could bear such as are now.
But Diomedes swinging it alone,
The same with ease did at Aeneas throw,
And hit him on the Huckle bone, wherein
Into the Hip inserted is the Thigh.
And torn was by the rugged stone the skin,
And Tendons broken which the Joint did tie.
Then down upon his knees and hands he fell,
And taken from him was his sight with pain.
That Venus saw him lying thus 'twas well;
Else by Tydides he had there been slain.
For then came Venus down, and with the lap
Of her Celestial Robe him covered,
Lest any of the Greeks should have the hap
To kill or wound him as from Earth he fled.
But Sthenelus remembering well his Order,
Tied his own Steeds up to his Charret-wheels,
And led them out of the tumult and disorder,
And to Deiphilus that was at's Heels,
(His Friend) he gave the Horses of Aeneas
To carry them unto the Argive Fleet.
But took Tydides Horses, and with these
To try went if Tydides he could meet.
But he in chase of Venus now was gone
(Knowing that she a tender Goddess was,
And for the War Commission had none,
Nor had as Pallas any Shield of brass.)
And had when he came to her wounded her.
For through her Robe, though by the Graces made,
Without resistance quickly passed the Spear,
And at her Wrist did her fair Hand invade.
And from the Wound out sprang the Blood Divine.
(Not such as men have in their Veins, but Ichor.
For Gods that neither eat Bread nor drink Wine
Have in their Veins another kind of Liquor,
And therefore bloodless and immortal be)
And Venus screaming then lets fall her Son.
But by Apollo's hand preserved was he,
Conveyed thence in a Mist perceived by none,
For fear he should be by some Argive slain.
To Venus then Tydides whoop'd, and said,
Away Jove's Daughter, from the War abstain.
Go practice how to cosen Wife or Maid,
For I believe if here you longer stay,
(So many such as these mishaps there are)
That you therein will have but little joy,
And troubled be when men but talk of War.
This said, away she went, not knowing where
She was; and great the pain was of her hand.
But Iris from the Fight conducted her,
And set her hard by Mars upon the sand.
For there by Pallas placed he had been.
His Horses and his Charret by him staid
Hid in a Mist by man not to be seen.
And Venus there before him kneeling said,
Dear Brother, let me your good horses have,
To bear me to Olympus from the Fray;
This cruel wound mad Diomed me gave,
And would wound Jove if he came in his way.
Mars presently his Horses to her lent.
Venus and Iris mount into the Seat.
Iris the Reins held, and away they went.
The time they spent in going was not great.
When they were there, Iris the Steeds untied,
And set them up, and gave unto them meat,
Ambrosian meat, till they were satisfied,
Such as immortal Horses use to eat.
But Venus fell into Diones lap,
Her Mother, who embraced her lovingly,
Stroakt her, and said, How came this sad mishap?
Who used you thus? What a rash God was he?
What more could he have done, if he had found
You doing something openly amiss?
It was a man, said she, gave me this wound,
Tydides; and for nothing else but this;
I saved my Son Aeneas from his hand,
My dearest Son, whom he was going to slay.
And now the War is all (I understand)
'Twixt Greeks and Heaven, not 'twixt Greeks and Troy.
Daughter (replied Dione then) it is hard.
For we the Gods that in Olympus dwell
Many from men as ill as you have fared,
And many no less wrongs have put up well.
Otus and Ephialtes Neptune's Sons
In a brass Dungeon once imprisoned Mars,
And kept him in the dark there thirteen Moons.
There like he was to have staid till now, for scarce
Could Hermes set him free with all his Art
And Juno's help. And when to liberty
He was restored, he took it in good part,
Though with his chains he galled was cruelly.
When Hercules shot Juno in the Breast,
Though wounded sore, yet she revenged it not.
And Pluto by the same man shot did rest
Contented, and no reparation got.
But to the house of Jupiter he went,
And got the Arrow plucked out from the wound
By Paeon; who with gentle Plasters sent
The pain away, and made his Shoulder sound.
But though no God of any wound can die,
Yet of Amphitryon the peevish Son
(Who little cares at whom his Arrows fly)
Great mischief often unto the Gods has done.
But Pallas it is that thus has wounded you,
Though with Tydides Spear. Fool as he was
What it is to wound a God he never knew.
Not long such wicked deeds unpunished pass.
Such men when they return from painful War
Shall seldom set their Children on their Knee
Pleased with their half formed words. Let him beware
Lest he provoke some stronger Deity,
And then Aegilia Diomedes Wife
Awake the household with her Lamentation,
And cry, Tydides thou have lost thy life,
O my dear Husband, best of all the Nation.
This said, she wiped the Ichor from her hand,
And straight her hand was well, the pain was gone.
Then Juno by, and Pallas jeering stand.
And Pallas thus to Jupiter begun.
Shall I say what I think? O Father Jove,
Venus some Argive Dame has courting been
To take the Trojans part whom she does love,
And stroaking her, her hand scratcht with a pin.
Jove smiled at this, and then to Venus said,
Daughter, I gave you no command in War.
That charge on Mars and Pallas I have laid.
Of Nuptials and Love take you the care.
While they were thus discoursing, Diomed
Did with great speed and rage Aeneas follow,
To gain his Armor and his Blood to shed,
Knowing he was in th'hands now of Apollo.
Undaunted then, with Shield before his Breast,
And Sword in Hand, struck at Aeneas thrice,
And thrice again Phoebus his rage represt.
But at the fourth time gave him good advice.
Retire (said he) Tydides, and beware
You not your self think equal to the Gods.
They sway the Heavens, on Earth men creeping are.
'Twixt Mortals and Immortals there is great odds.
Tydides then retired a little way,
Not knowing what harm might from Phoebus come.
And Phoebus thence Aeneas did convay
T'a Temple of his own in Pergamum.
There Leto and Diana cured his wound.
And then an Image Phoebus like him made,
And in like Arms, and set it on the ground,
For which the Foes each other then invade.
And there they one another Bucklers hew.
To Mars Apollo speaking, Why, said he,
Mars, bloody, murdering Mars, why suffer you
Tydides at the Battle still to be?
Mad as he is now, he with Jove would fight.
From Venus hand he made the blood run down,
And then at me he flew like any Sprite.
This said, he sat of the top of Pergam Town*
And Mars the Trojan Bands encouraged,
Taking the shape of valiant Acamas.
Who to the War at Troy the Thracians led.
And as he through the armed Ranks did pass,
Children of Priam what do you mean, said he;
Shall the Greeks follow killing us to Troy?
Fallen is Aeneas the great man whom we
Like Hector honored* Come, let us if we may
This good Commander rescue, Thus said he.
Sarpedon likewise Hector sharpened. Where
Are now your Kin you said enough would be
Troy to defend? I see none of them here.
Like Hounds about a Lion off they stand.
We your Confederates the Fight maintain.
The labor lies all upon our hand;
And I my self amongst the rest would fain
Make trial of this mighty man in fight.
At least I shall, as does a friend become,
My peoples courage all I can excite,
Since they are here, and very far from home;
And though from me the Greeks can nothing get,
Neither to carry nor to drive away.
But you to the Trojans have not spoken yet
So much as to defend their Wives in Troy
From being taken in the Argives net,
And plund'red be the stately Town of Troy.
When chiefly you on this your heart should set,
And your Confederates persuade to stay,
And not the fault on one another lay.
So said Sarpedon. Hector therewith stung,
Upon his Charret could no longer stay,
But armed down unto the ground he sprung.
And amongst the Trojan Ranks and Files he goes,
Into their hearts new courage to inspire.
And then they turned their Faces to their Foes.
Nor did the Argives from their place retire.
And then, as when on Ceres sacred floor
The winnowed Chaff lies heapt together white,
So white the Troops of Argives were all ore
With dust their Horses raised had in the Fight.
And then the Trojans boldly marched on,
And Mars to aid them dark'ned had the Field,
As he was bidden by Latona's Son,
When Pallas from the Greeks removed her Shield.
And from the Temple fetched Aeneas out
Alive and whole, and bold, and made him stand
Amongst the Troops, that joyful stood about.
But other work now lying on their hand,
(Made them by Mars and Strife) no time had they
To ask him questions. But encouraged
The Argives were by the Ajaxes to stay,
And by Ulysses and by Diomed.
For of the Trojans they were not afraid.
But as a Cloud that rests on a Hill,
Which in calm weather there by Jove is laid,
Till boisterous winds arise it rests still.
Then up and down went Agamemnon there,
My friends, said he, be bold, and fight like men.
Of one another censure stand in fear.
Of them that do so fewer perish then
Of those that fly and never think upon
The loss of fame. This said, he threw his Spear
And smote Aeneas friend Democoon,
Who was unto the Trojans no less dear
Than if he one of Priams Sons had been.
For with the foremost he was still in fight.
And at his Buckler went the Weapon in,
And through both that and Belt it passed quite.
And mortal in his Belly was the wound,
And with his Armor rattling down he fell.
Aeneas then two Greeks laid on the ground.
The Sons of Diocles, descended well.
For of the immortal and fair stream Alpheus,
Orsilochus a great King was the Son.
And he the Father was of Diocles,
And he Orsilochus got and Crethon;
Brave men, who when they came to man's estate
With Atreus Son, his honor to regain,
To Ilium sailed, and there they met their Fate,
And never to their Country came again.
As when two Lions in the Mountains bred
And Woods obscure, come down into the Plain,
And Sheep and Cattle in the field leave dead,
Until at last by Hunters they are slain;
So fell these two men by Aeneas killed,
And like two Fir-trees straight lay on the Sand.
And Menelaus then with fury filled,
With Helmet on his Head, and Spear in Hand,
Advanced boldly to Anchises Son.
In hope to have deprived him of breath.
And Mars himself it was that set him on
To bring him by Aeneas hand to death.
Antilochus then Nestor's valiant Son
Fearing lest Menelaus should be slain,
Resolved he should not fight with him alone,
And all their toil at Ilium make vain,
Went after him, and overtook him as
They ready were to fight, but nothing done.
Aeneas then as valiant as he was
Retired, eschewing the odds of two to one
And when they had brought off the Bodies slain,
And left them in their fellow soldiers hands,
Unto the skirmish they returned again,
And slew the Prince of Paphlagonians
Pylaem^nes. Atrides threw the Spear
Which near the Shoulder passed into his Neck.
By Nestor's Son slain was his Chariotier,
Mydon by name that did his Horses check,
As he his Charret turning was to fly,
Antilochus him wounded with a Stone
On th'Elbow, and benumbed his Hand, whereby
The sense he had to hold the Reins was gone.
The Reins fell down, and then with Sword in hand
Antilochus divides his Head in twain,
And headlong fell he where it chanced the Sand
Was very deep, and there he did remain
With Head and Shoulders sticking in the sands.
But upright in the Air were both his Hips.
The Horses laid him flat. Which by the hands
Of Nestor's Son conveyed were to the Ships.
Hector saw this, and in came with great cry,
Whom Bands of lusty Trojans followed.
Mars and Bellona marching furiously
Against the Argives to the Fight them led.
Bellona brought in Tumult and Affright.
And Mars a mighty Spear had in his hand,
And sometimes after Hector went in the fight,
Sometimes before, and often did by him stand.
Tydides when he saw him was afraid,
As when a man in haste has lost his way,
And running on is at some River staid,
That Is deep and swift, he runs as fast away:
So he retired. And to his Argives said,
No wonder it is if Hector valiant be;
One God or other always gives him aid,
And near him stands from death to set him free.
Now Mars comes with him like a mortal wight.
Retire. But turn your Faces to the Foe,
Forbearing still against the Gods to fight.
This said he, but the Trojans near were now.
And Hector there had slain two men that sat
Together, Mnestheus and Anchialus,
Both Warriors good. But Ajax grieved thereat
(The greater Ajax, Telamonius)
Darted his heavy Spear at Amphius.
Rich was he both in Lands and Goods, and dwelt
At Paesus. And fought here for Priamus.
But by the Spear which passed quite through his Belt
Upon his Belly took a mortal wound.
And as he fell, Ajax ran fiercely in
To strip him of his Armor on the ground,
And stripped him had, had he not hindered been.
For from the Trojans came a shower of Spears,
Whereof his Shield received not a few.
Then to be hemmed in by the Foe he fears.
His own Spear he recovered and withdrew.
Whilst they in stubborn war thus toyling were,
Unlucky fate Tlepolemus brought on
To charge Sarpedon; and when they were near
Together come, Jove's Grandson and his Son,
Tlepolemus said then, What need had you
Unskilful in the War to tremble here?
Jove's Son men say you are, but it is not true.
No such weak men by Jove begotten were;
But such as Hercules is said to have been
Courageous as a Lion; with few men
In but six Ships this strong Town he did win,
And rifled it, and safe went off again.
But you are weak, your men a great part dead,
And can but little help afford to Troy.
And though from Lycia you were strengthened,
I mean to send you now another way.
To this Sarpedon answered, It Is true
That Hercules sacked Troy, because the Steeds
Laomedon kept back that were his due,
And gave him evil language for good deeds.
But you from me shall present death receive,
For which I shall have honor truly paid,
And you your Soul shall now to Pluto leave.
And this Sarpedon had no sooner said,
Than from their hands their Spears together started.
Tlepolemus clean through the Neck was struck,
And from him presently his life departed.
But from Sarpedon Jove kept such ill luck;
Yet on his left Thigh he received a wound.
For through it went the Spear close by the bone.
Sarpedon by his friends born off the ground
Was placed apart where Battle there was none,
Tormented with the Spear still in his Thigh.
To pull it out they all had quite forgot.
In so great haste they were, the Foe so nigh,
The time so little, and the Fight so hot.
Mean while Tl^polemus his body dead
The Greeks fetched off. The wise Ulisses then
Within himself a while considered*
Whether to charge Sarpedon or his men.
But since by Fate Sarpedon was to die
By other, and not by Ulysses hands,
Athena made him lay that purpose by,
And turn his anger on the Lycians.
Alastor then he slew, and Coeramus,
Alcander, Prytanis and Noemon.
And Halius he slew, and Chromius,
And many Lycians more had overthrown.
But mighty Hector now approached near
In glittering Arms, and brought with him Affright.
But glad Sarpedon was to see him there;
And when he was come up unto him quite,
Himself lamenting thus to Hector said,
Leave me not Hector to the Greeks a prey,
But let my Body in your ground be laid,
Since I my Country must no more enjoy,
Nor my beloved Wife and tender Son.
So said Sarpedon. Hector not replies,
But to the Enemy he passes on;
And as he goes the ground with blood he dies.
Under a Beech sacred to Jupiter
Sarpedon placed was upon the ground,
And gently Pelagon pulled out the Spear;
The pain hereof put him into a swound.
Lost was his sight; but by a gentle wind
And cool, that from the North upon him blew,
He soon recovered both his Sight and Mind,
And all the company about him knew.
To Mars and Hector still the Greeks gave way,
And still their Faces to the Trojans were,
But for to charge none durst advance or stay.
For Diomed had told them Mars was there.
Now tell me Muse, who slain by Hector was?
Trechus, Orestes, Tenthras, Helenus,
(Whose Father Oenops was) and Oenonaus.
And last of all wealthy Oresbius.
In Hyla on Cephissis Lake he dwelt,
The richest pasture of Boeotia,
And known was by the gayness of his Belt.
This slaughter of the Greeks when Juno saw,
She then to Pallas spoke. Pallas (said she)
If we let Mars still play the madman here,
Our word to Menelaus false will be,
That he from Troy return should Conqueror.
Let Us courage take, and try what we can do.
Pallas contented, 'twas agreed upon.
And Juno ready made her self to go,
And quickly the Coach-wheels Hebe sets on.
Eight spokes each wheel had, and were all of Brass,
And fixed round about at th'Axle-tree.
The Axle-tree it self of Iron was.
The Circle Gold, and wonderful to see.
But armed it was above with Pla^es of Bras^.
The Naves on both sides were of Silver white,
With Gold and Silver Wire extended was
The Seat, which had two Silver rings and bright.
In which the Beam of Silver fastened staid.
At the other end the Golden Yoke she ti'd,
And on the Yoke the Golden Reins she laid.
And Juno then no longer could abide,
But to the Coach her self the Horses brought,
From quarrels so impatiently she staid.
Pallas threw off her Robe, and took Joves Coat,
And with the same she there her self arraid.
And then her Breast with Armor covered,
And on her Shoulder hung her frightful Shield,
Wherein Strife, Force, Flight, Chase were figured,
With all the Horror of a soughten field.
And in the middle stood out Gorgoes head.
Then put she on her Golden Helmet, that
Ten thousand men's heads might have covered,
And to the Charret up she went, and sat,
And her great heavy Spear takes in her hands
The Spear wherewith, when she displeased is,
She scatters of proud Kings the armed bands,
Then Juno with the whip was not remiss.
And of it self flew open Heaven-gate,
Though to the Seasons Jove the power gave
Alone to judge of Early and of Late.
And out the Goddesses their Horses drove.
Jove on the highest of Olympus tops
Sitting alone they found, and none him nigh.
The Goddess Juno there her Horses stops,
And spoke unto him thus, his mind to try.
Pray tell me Jove if you contented be,
That Mars thus raging in the Field remain.
For what unseemly work he makes you see,
And of brave Greeks how many he has slain,
While Venus at my grief stands laughing by,
And pleased is Apollo with the sight,
And set him on. But I could make him fly
(But that I fear your anger) from the Fight.
Do It then, said Jove; not you, but Pallas; she
Accustomed is to vex him more than you.
Ju^o took this Commission willingly.
Feeling the whip away her Horses flew,
'Twixt Heaven and Earth, and went at every strain
As far as coming one can see a Ship
That from a Hill looks upon the Main,
So far the Horses of the Gods can skip.
Arrived at Troy, on ground they set their feet,
And Juno there her heavenly Steeds untied
Where Simois does with Scamander meet.
And with Ambrosia Simois them supplied.
Then swift as Doves, to give the Argives aid
They went to where they saw the greatest throng.
There was Tydides, and about him staid
Many as Lions valiant and strong.
And Juno there in shape of Stentor stood,
And spoke as loud as any fifty men.
Argives, said she, Cowards, for nothing good,
Although you make a goodly show. For when
Achilles went before you to the Fight,
Out at their Gates the Trojans durst not peep,
So much they of his Spear abhorred the sight.
But from your Ships you scarce now can them keep.
When Juno thus the Greeks encouraged,
To Diomed went Pallas; whom she sound
Hard by his Horses sitting, wearied,
And cooling in the open air the wound
Given by Pandarus; which with the sweat
Under his Belt afflicted him the more.
And lifting up his Belt, some ease to get,
He from the wound was wiping off the gore.
As at the yoke Athena leaning stood,
Like him (said she) your Father left no Son.
A little man was he, but Warrior good.
Though I not bad him, he went boldly on.
And when to Thebes alone I bad him go
Ambassador, and with the Theban Lords
To sit at Feast, and not provoke the Foe,
And at their Table to forbear harsh words,
Yet he his native Courage still retained,
And them defied at manly Exercises,
And from them all the Victory he gained,
And won, by my assistance, all the Prizes.
But when I you, as I did him, defend,
And bid you boldly with the Trojans fight,
You are afraid, or weariness pretend.
Of Tydeus sure the Son you are not right.
Tydides to her then replying said,
Daughter of Jove, (Pallas I know you are)
It Is not that I am weary or afraid,
That I stand here abstaining from the War,
But in obedience to your own command,
Who gave me leave if Venus in the Wars
I met, to wound her; but not lift my hand
Against other Gods. Now in the field is Mars,
And domineering fights on Hectors side.
And that is the cause why I from fight abstain,
And others by my Counsel here abide.
To this the Goddess then replied again,
Nor Mars nor any of The Immortals spare
That shall advance against you in the field.
And for your safety trust unto my care,
And know you are protected by my Shield.
But first to Mars drive up your Horses close,
And strike the Blockhead with your Spear in hand,
That fights sometimes for these, sometimes for those,
And with the Trojans now you see him stand,
And yet to help the Greeks he promised me
And Juno, but a little while before,
And now amongst the Trojans fights he,
And thinks upon his promises no more.
This said, they mount into the Chariot,
And Sthenelus descending left his Seat.
The Axtree groaned under them. Why not?
A great man he, she was a Goddess great.
And then to Mars directly they drive on,
Who had but newly slain great Periphas,
Of old Ochesius the valiant Son,
And far the best of all the Aetolians was.
Athena then puts Pluto's Helmet on,
Lest she by Mars should be discovered.
When Mars there saw Tydides all alone,
He Periphas forsook who there lay dead;
And turned to meet Tydides on the way;
And when to one another they were near,
Mars making full account the man to slay,
Over the Yoke thrusts at him with his Spear.
But Pallas with her hand the point suppressed,
And made it light beneath the Seat in vain.
Tydides then to Mars a Spear addressed,
Which had he been a Mortal had him slain.
For Pallas in his Belly stuck the Spear,
And presently the same plucked out again.
Mars roared as loud as if in battle there
Fighting had been nine or ten thousand men,
And frighted both the Armies with the noise.
Then like a black Cloud which some Wind makes rise,
He left th'unlucky field and went his ways,
And in a little time was in the Skies.
And sitting down hard by his Fathers Throne,
Showed him the blood that from the wound did flow,
And grievously lamenting made his moan.
Father, said he, do you such work allow?
That we the Gods such harm from Mortals take,
While some for Trojans, some for Argives fight,
And partial be for one another sake,
The fault is to be laid on you by right.
For you brought forth this mad pernicious Maid,
Whose study is her malice to effect,
When by us other Gods you are obeyed.
And this you saw, but never would correct.
'Twas she that on the Gods set Diomed,
Who wounded Venus first, then flew at me.
And there in pain I lien had amongst the dead,
Or crippled been, had not my feet been free.
Uncertain Mars (then Jupiter replied)
Of all the Gods most hateful to my sight,
That quarrel love to make, but not decide.
Thou have thy Mother Juno's nature right,
That often provokes me with her peevish tongue,
And by her order, I think, this was done.
But in this pain I Will not detain you long,
Seeing you are as well mine as her Son.
But had another got you, you had sure
To Pluto and The Infernal Gods be sent.
This said, to Paeon he commits his cure:
And Paeon presenly about it went.
As quickly as the Milk is turned to Curd,
When with a proper Rennet it is mixed,
And with a Housewifes hand together stirred;
So quickly was the wide wound closed and fixed.
Then bathed he was by Hebe, and new clad;
And that he so came off was well content.
Juno and Pallas when they driven had
Mars from the Battle, up to Olympus went.
ILIAD. LIB. VI.
THe Gods to neither side assistance yield,
But on his own hand each man's fortune lies.
Now here now there they skirmish in the field
Betwixt the Streams Xanthus and Simoeis.
And first great Ajax killed Acamas,
And for his fellows opened a door
For slaughter amongst the Files and Ranks to pass,
And caused thereby the loss of many more.
And by Tydides Axylus was slain,
That at Arisbe dwelt near the Highway,
Rich, and the Greeks did often entertain.
But none of them would save him in the Fray.
For slain he was by Diomedes there.
Together with his Squire Calestus,
That by him sat and was his Charioteer.
Euryalus then slew Opheltius
And Dresus. After Pedasus he runs
And Aesepus sons of Bucalion,
Who by Abarbar^a had two Sons,
But he for Father had Laomedon.
And th'eldest was, but not in Wedlock got.
And Twins the Sons were of Bucalion.
But from Euryalus they escaped not,
Nor long they lay there with their Armor on.
Then Polypoetes by Astyalus,
Pidytes by Ulysses, and by Teuc.
Er Areton, and by Antilochus
Ablerus, by Atrides Elateus
Was slain, that the Pedasians led
From the delightful Bank of Satnius.
And Leitus Phila^us slew as he fled.
Enrypylus then slew Melanthius.
And then Adrestus taken was alive
By Menelaus. For his Horses frighted,
Whilst to the Town they labored to arrive,
Upon two Branches of a Tree they lighted,
And brake the Charret pole off at the head.
The Horses loose away ran towered the Town,
As did the rest that from the Battle fled.
Adrestus headlong from the Seat fell down,
And by him with a Spear Atrides stood.
Adrestus then lays hold upon his Knee.
Save me, said he, my Ransom will be good.
At any rate I shall redeemed be.
My Father wants nor Iron, nor Brass, nor Gold,
And any thing to set me free will give,
When he of my condition shall be told,
And that I am your prisoner and live.
This said, Atrides was thereto inclined,
And ready for to send him to the Ships.
But Agamemnon came and changed his mind
Before he had confirmed it with his lips.
Brother, said he, what makes you be so kind
To any of these men? Is it because
You did at home the Trojans faithful find,
And that they had well served Menelaus?
No, no, we must no quarter give at Troy,
Nor spare the Child yet in his Mothers womb,
But utterly the Nation destroy,
And pluck up by the root proud Ilium.
Then Menelaus pitied him no more,
But violently pushed him from his Knee,
Wherewith he backward tumbled ore and ore,
And soon by Agamemnon slain was he.
Then Nestor to the Greeks with voice as high
As he could raise it, cried out, Let none
Yet on the Spoil and Booty set his eye,
But follow killing now, plunder anon.
The dead will stay till back again we come.
The Greeks by Nestor thus encouraged,
Had chased the Trojans unto Ilium.
But that by Helenus was hindered.
For standing near to Hector and Aeneas,
Since all the work, said he, lies on your hand,
And you in Fight and Counsel chiefly please
Both Lycians and Trojans, make them stand.
About them go, and put your selves between
The Gates and them, lest followed by the Foe
They should be by their loving Wives there seen,
And the Argives stand triumphing in our woe.
And when you once have them encouraged,
Aenaeas and my self will with them stay,
And fight against the Greeks, though wearied.
But Hector to the Town go you away,
And bid your and my Mother take with her
The eldest Trojan Matrons, and make haste
To Pallas Temple, and present her there
With the best Robe she has; and having placed
It on her Knee, vow to her Deity
(If she protect our Wives and Children will
And City from this raging Enemy,
And take off Diomed) that you will kill
Twelve Heifers at her Altar. For in fight
He has the great Achilles much outdone,
Who never did the Trojans thus affright,
Although they say he is a Goddess Son.
Then Hector armed leapt down to the ground,
And with two Spears about the Army goes,
Courage inspiring to the Trojans round,
And straight they turned their Faces to the Foes.
The Greeks retiring then no longer fought.
Some God from Heaven descended was they thought,
And to Hector and the Trojans aid had brought.
Then Hector to the Trojans cried out,
Trojans and Aids, said he, be sure to stay
And play the men, whilst I to Ilium
Return, and cause them to the Gods to pray,
And to them sacrifice an Hecatomb.
And as he walked the edges of his Shield
By turns his Ankle and his Neck did smi^e.
Tydides then and Glaucus on the field
Met one another, and prepared to fight.
Tydides speaking first, Brave man, said he,
Who are you? Let me know your Name and Race,
That dares so boldly thus advance on me.
I never yet in Battle saw your Face.
Men mortal to provoke me thus none dare,
But they whose Parents are condemned to woe.
But if some God come down from Heaven you are,
Do what you will I Will not return a blow.
Licurgus Son of Dryas chased the Train
Of Bacchus with a Goad at Nyssa, where
The Maenades threw from them on the plain
Their Ivy twined slaves, and fled for fear;
Bacchus himself leapt into Thetis lap,
Trembling and frighted, and the Goddess kind
Received him and defended from mishap.
But for this act Jove struck Licurgus blind,
Who died soon after. For the Gods above
All hated him. And that is the cause that I
Dare not the anger of the Gods to move.
But if thou mortal art, come near and die.
O brave Tydides (Glaucus answered then)
To what end serves it you to know my race?
As with green leaves, so fares it with men;
Some fall with wind, others grow in their place.
But since you ask me (though it be well known)
My pedigree at large I shall you tell.
Within a Creek of Argos stands a Town
Called Ephyre. There Sisyphus did dwell.
The subtle Sisyphus who Glaucus got.
Glaucus the Father of Bellerophon,
Than whom a fairer person there was not,
Nor valianter in all the Land, not one.
But Praetus sought to take away his Life.
For so enamored of him was the Queen
Anteia, who of Praetus was the Wi^e,
That she a Suitor to him often had been.
But still in vain. For he would not consent.
The fury of her Love then turned to Hate.
And spitefully, she to her Husband went,
And weeping bitterly down by him sat,
And to him said, O King, resolve to die
Your self, or else Bellerophon to kill,
For he attempted has my Chastity,
And would have ly'n with me against my will.
The King incensed, to kill him did intend,
But loath to do it there, he thought it better
Unto the King of Lycia him to send
(Who was Anteia's Father) with a Letter,
Wherein he had declared his cruel mind,
And many ways to bring it to effect.
He ignorant of what was then designed,
The Kings commandment did not neglect.
To Lycia he went, and coming thither,
In favor with the Gods, was honored
And treated like a God nine days together.
Of The tenth his Letter he delivered.
The Letter read, the King him first employed
The terrible Chimaera to assail,
That by the Monster he might be destroyed.
A Lions Head it had and Dragons Tail,
And in the midst the Body of a Goat;
A flame of burning fire was its Breath.
Bellerophon with this foul Monster fought,
And put it (by the aid of the Gods) to death.
The next Adventure that he set him on
Was th'Expedition against the Solymi.
The third when from the Amazons he won
(Those Martial Females) a great Victory.
And as he came from thence the King had laid
An Ambush for him on the way in vain,
Of choicest Lycians whom he destroyed,
That not a man of them returned again.
The King received him then, believing now
That he descended was of Heavenly Race,
And gave him half his Power and Land enough,
And with his Daughters Marriage did him grace.
Bellerophon by her had Children three,
Two Sons, Isandrus and Hippolochus,
And one fair Daughter called Laodamie,
On whom by Jove Sarpedon gotten was.
Her Father by the Gods forsaken then
Lived up and down in the Alean Plain,
And shunned the conversation of men.
At Solym Battle was Isander slain.
But of Hippolochus the Son am I,
And he of Noble Ancestors descended.
To Troy he sent me, and especially
Unto me The Honor of my Race commended,
Than which in Ephyre none Nobler is,
Nor in the Land of Lycia more renowned.
And Diomedes joyful to hear this
Turned his Spears point and stuck it in the ground,
And to him kindly spoke. There is, said he,
Between your Ancestors and mine of old
A mutual bond of Hospitality.
Bellerophon, as I have often been told,
Was by my Grandsire Oeneus freely treated,
And stayed with him twenty days and nights,
And when again he from his house retreated,
They Tokens gave of Hospitable Rites;
Oeneus to him a Belt most glorious,
Bellerophon to him a Golden Cup.
Which I not with me brought, but in my house
When I came thence I safely left locked up.
My Father I remember not. For he
Left me too young when last he went from home.
Henc^ forth my Guest in Argos you must be,
I yours in Lycia, when I thither come.
Mean t^me let us one another Spear decline;
For many Trojans more I have to kill,
Unless I crossed be by some Power divine.
And of the Achaeans kill you whom you will.
And that our Friendship may the more appear,
I will present you with these Arms of mine;
And you to me present the Arms you wear.
This said, they lighted and their hands did join.
But Glaucus surely here bewitched was,
Or cursed by the Gods, that had forgot
His Arms were Gold, and Diomed's but Brass.
An hundred his, nine Beeves the other bought.
Hector was now come to the Scaean Gates.
To him the Trojan Wives and Daughters run
To ask their Husbands and their Brothers Fates,
But to those questions he answered none.
But to the Temples bad them go and pray,
Inquire no more for what you will lament.
Then to the Royal Palace went his way.
For great the danger was and imminent.
On every side within were Galleries
Magnificent, of square well-plained Stones,
With Fifty Lodgings for the Families
(One by another) of King Priam's Sons.
And for his Daughters twelve Appartments were
(In the same Court, but on the other side)
To lodge his Sons in Law when they were there,
Of the same Stone in like form beautified.
Here Hecuba, as she conducted home
Laodice her beautifullest Daughter,
Met her Son Hector that was newly come
In dusty bloody Armor from the Slaughter.
And took him by the hand, and to him said,
Why come you from the fight? Have we the worst,
And you come to solicit Jove for aid,
And after that is done to quench your thirst?
A little Wine will much the strength sustain
Of one that labored has as you have done.
No, no, from Wine (said he) I must abstain,
Lest I forget and leave my work undone.
Besides, to Jove I dare not offer Wine
With bloody hands, lest I should him incense.
But, Mother, go you to Minerva's shrine
With other Ladies, and with Frankincense;
And of the Robes in your perfumed Chest
Take with you that which in your judgment is
Amongst them all the largest and the best,
And lay it down upon the Goddess knees.
And vow that at her Altar you will kill
Twelve yearling Heisers of the best you have,
If at your Prayer condescend she will
Your Children with your selves and Troy to save,
And from the Fight this Diomed remove.
To the Temple presently go you away.
But I to Paris now must go, and prove
If he the advice I give him will obey.
Then Hecuba into the Chamber came
Where many divers-colour'd Vestures lay,
The work of many a Sidonian Dame,
Which then from Sidon Paris brought to Troy,
When thither he from Sparta Helen brought.
Of these, to give the Goddess, she took one
The largest and most curiously wrought,
And that like to a Star in Heaven shone.
And when unto the Temple come they were,
Theano opened the door; for she
( Antenor's Wife) was Pallas Priest. And there
She took the Robe, and laid it on her Knee.
Then prayed she (whilst with a mighty cry
They to the Goddess lifted up their hands.)
Pallas (said she) Daughter of Jove most high,
In whose protection every City stands,
Great Pallas, break the Spear of Diomed,
And overthrow him at the Scaean gate,
That at thy Altar may be offered
Twelve yearling Heisers; and commiserate
The Wives and Children and the state of Troy.
Thus prayed they; But Pallas would not hear.
To The House of Paris Hector went away
That was unto his own and Priams near,
Built by himself the Citadel within,
With all the Art the Trojans understood.
There Hector with his Spear in hand went in,
That was in length eleven Cubits good,
And pointed at the Head with polisht Brass,
Fastened into the staff with a Gold Ring.
Busy about his Armor Paris was,
And Helen work to the Maids distributing.
Here Hector Paris chid. Is this, said he,
The fittest time to manifest your spite
Against the Trojans, when the Enemy
Under our Walls is killing them in fight?
When none but you the cause is of the War
And Tumult, which surrounds the Town of Troy.
I think it would become you better far
To rate those men that from the Battle stay.
Brother, said Paris, What you say is right.
But hear me too. I stayed not behind
Because I to the Trojans bear a spite,
But from their Slanders to avert my mind.
And now my Wife too has persuaded me,
Who of my self was ready to be gone.
Not sure to any side is Victory.
Stay only while I put my Armor on.
Or go. I Will follow you and find you out.
Thus he. But Hector to it nothing said.
And to be gone his Face he turned about.
But Helen saw about to speak, and staid.
Brother (said she) though I unworthy am
To call you so, I would I had been thrown
Into the Sea the same day that I came
Into the world, so many shames to own.
Or that this Husband sensible had been,
As men of Honor should be of ill fame;
But that is not now, nor ever will be seen,
He one day will (I fear) repent the same.
But Brother (pra'ye) sit down and rest a while,
That with the toil of Battle weary are;
The cause whereof am I the Woman vile,
That with me brought to Troy this cruel War.
Unlucky day that brought me first acquainted
With Alexander to our Infamy,
Which through the world hereafter will be chanted,
And make us loathsome to posterity.
Helen (said Hector) now I cannot stay,
The Trojans of my presence stand in need.
But bid you Alexander come away
While I am in the Town, and that with speed.
For hence unto my house I must go home
To see my Wife, my Child and Family,
An't may be never back again shall come,
But by the hands of the Achaeans dye.
This said, home Hector went, and there was told
His Wife Andromache at home was not.
For with the Nurse the Battle to behold,
Into the Tower on Scaea Gate was got.
Then Hector of the women asked again,
Is she gone to some Sister or some Brother?
Or to the Goddess Temple in the Train
Of those that thither waited on my Mother?
To this one of the Women said again,
She neither went to Sister nor to Brother,
Nor to the Goddess Temple, in the Train
Of those that thither waited on your Mother.
But when I know not who informed her had
That the Argives did the Trojans overpower,
With her young Son and Nurse as one that is mad
Ran to the Gate, and up into the Tower.
Then back went Hector passing the same Streets
Through which he went when he came from the fight,
Where in the way Andromache he meets
That now was running home in great affright.
The Daughter she was of Eetion,
Who of Cilicia the Scepter carried,
And dwelt at Thebe in Hypoplacion.
But unto noble Hector she was married.
Now Hector met her with their little Boy
That in the Nurses arms was carried,
And like a Star upon her bosom lay
His beautiful and shining golden Head.
Scamandrius he called was by Hector,
Astyanax he named was in Troy.
Because his Father was their sole Protector,
The people from his Honor named the Boy.
Then Hector smiling looked upon his Son.
And to him weeping said Andromache,
My Dear, You Will by your courage be undone,
And this your Son a wretched Orphan be.
The Greeks at once on you alone will fall,
And then a woeful Widow shall be I,
And have no comfort in the world at all,
But live in misery and wish to die.
Father or Mother they have left me none,
For by the great Achilles he was slain
When he the goodly Town of Thebe won.
But from disarming him he did refrain.
Together with his Arms he did him burn,
And with such Rites as did a Prince become.
And having put his Ashes in an Urn
Buried the same, and ore it raised a Tomb.
The Mountain-Nymphs Daughters of Jupiter
Planted about it many Elmen-trees.
My seven Brothers all were killed there.
In one day by Achilles slain were these,
As they defending were their Kine and Sheep.
My Mother with the Booty he brought hither,
And her he at the Ships did prisoner keep
Until her friends her Ransom had sent thither.
Then to her Country back they sent my Mother,
Who shortly after there fell sick and di'd.
Now Hector you my Father are and Brother,
Husband and Mother. In you I confide.
For pities sake then on this Turret stay,
Lest Fatherless your Son, I Widow be.
And set your armed people in array,
And those that aid you at the Sycamore-tree,
Where to the City easiest is the access.
For there it was the Argives thrice fell on
Led by Idomeneus, and the Ajaxes,
The two Atrides, and Tydeus Son.
Whether they had some God for their Director,
Or had observed some weakness in the place
I know not. And to this replied Hector,
Dear Wife, this might be done. But what disgrace
Shall I be in? How will the Trojans scoff
Both Men and Women, and deride my fear,
If on the Tower they saw me standing off
When others fighting with the Argives were?
Besides by Nature I am framed so,
I am not able to abstain from sight,
But must be amongst the foremost, when the Foe
Invades my Fathers Honor in my sight.
And yet I know the evil day will come,
That Priam and his people perish must,
And utterly destroyed be Ilium,
And all her stately Buildings lie in dust.
Yet am not grieved so much to think upon
The sat of Troy, of Priam, of my Mother,
Or all my Brothers, as for you alone
When by a proud Achaean one or other
You dragged are weeping into Slavery,
And when to Achaea he has brought you home,
To fetch in water you employed shall be,
And made to labor at another Loom.
And one that sees you weeping, there will say,
This Woman was the Noble Hectors Bride,
The bravest man of all that fought for Troy,
And of your tears bring back again the Tide.
But dead may I be first and buried
Before I see you dragged or hear you cry.
And when he thus had said, his arms he spread
The Child to take, who terrified thereby,
And unacquainted with a glittering Crest
And Horses Mayn that nodding at it hung,
Turned his face crying to the Nurses breast,
And with his little arms close to her clung.
Which made his Father and his Mother smile.
Then Hector on the ground his Helmet laid,
And took the Child and dandled him a while,
And then to Jove and all the Gods he prayed.
O Jove and gods, Grant that this Son of mine
No less in Troy may honored be than I,
Nor from his Fathers virtue ere decline,
But hold the reins of Ilium steadily.
That men may say when he has slain his Foe,
And brings with him home his Spoil to Troy,
In Battle he his Father does out do,
And fill his loving Mothers heart with joy,
This said, he gave the Child to Andromache,
Which she receiving hugged, and laughed and cried.
Which Hector with compassion did see,
And thus with gentle words his Wife did chide.
Dear Wife, do not afflict your self for me.
No man can die before his hour is come;
And when it is come, put off it cannot be
By weak nor strong. Therefore I pra'ye go home,
And tend your work, and give your Women theirs,
And sit still at your Spindle and your Loom,
And leave to men these Martial affairs,
And me that have the charge of Ilium.
Then up he takes his Helmet and departs,
And homewards she; but often turned her head.
At home with grief she filled her women's hearts,
And made them mourn for Hector not yet dead.
Nor Paris at his house did longer stay
Than he must needs his Armor to put on,
And up and down the streets went every way,
To see if he could Hector light upon.
As when a Horse in the Stable pampered,
And used to be washed in the River
His Headstal breaks, or be delivered
From that which held him by what means soever;
Then proudly he sets up his Tail and Head,
And bears the Plain, and with the wind he makes
His Mane play in the air dishevelled,
Then to the Pasture known the way he takes:
So from his house went Paris through the Streets
With shining Arms, and Courage at his heart;
And quickly with his valiant brother meets,
Turning from where he and his wife did part.
And first to Hector Paris thus began.
Brother I fear I Have made you stay too long.
No (he replied) your courage no man can
Accuse, but such as mean to do you wrong.
But when you, out of humor, will not fight,
The Trojans that much suffer for your sake
Speak all the ill they can of you in spite.
Which when I hear, it makes my heart to ache.
But now let us go. If ere the Powers Divine
Displace the Achaean Host, and give us Peace,
That freely to them we may offer Wine,
Your quarrel with the Trojans soon will cease.
ILIAD. LIB. VII.
THis said, they went together to the Fight,
For Paris now no more the War declined,
And welcome to the Trojans was the sight,
As to a weary Rower a good wind.
There Paris slew Menesthius, the Son
Of the great Clubman Areithous
Of Arne. And by Hector overthrown
And struck clean through the Neck was Eionus.
Iphinous the Son of Dexias
As to his Charre he mounted to have fled,
By Glaucus through the Shoulder wounded was,
And to the ground again fell backward dead.
When Pallas saw the Argives fall so fast,
She from Olympus leapt to Ilium:
Apollo then to meet her made great haste,
That saw her from his Tower in Pergamum.
And when they were together at the Beech,
He for the Trojans, for the Argives she,
Apollo to her thus addressed his Speech:
Daughter of Jove, what great necessity
Brought you to Troy? Was it to please your mind,
Or give unto the Greeks the Victory?
For well I know to Troy you are not kind.
But for the present be advised by me.
Let th'Armies both give over fight to day,
And fight it out hereafter till they know
What end the Fates assigned have to Troy,
Since you and Juno needs will have it so.
Your Counsel's good (said Pallas) and the same
I thought upon. But tell me how to do it.
For to that end I from Olympus came.
Tell me but how, and I Will consent unto it.
Why then, said Phoebus, Hector I Will excite
In Duel all the Argives to defy;
And they some one will choose with him to fight,
And both the Armies quietly stand by.
This counsel was by both agreed upon;
And known to Helenus by Augury,
To Helenus that was King Priam's Son.
And he to Hector did himself apply.
Hector, said he, will you do that which I
That am your Brother shall advise you to?
Go to the Achaean Army and defy
The best of all the Argives; Boldly go;
For in this Combat you are not to die:
The Gods have told me so, Then never fear.
Then to the Front came Hector joyfully,
With both his hands of the middle of his Spear
To keep the Trojans back and make them stand;
And straight King Agamemnon seeing it,
Unto the Argives gave the like command.
Then on the ground both Greeks and Trojans sit.
Phoebus and Pallas flew up to the Tree,
The high Beech-tree that sacred was to Jove,
In The likeness of two Vulturs, thence to see
How the two Armies looked from above.
As when a West-wind ruffled has the Main,
It black and horrid to the eye appears;
So looked the Greeks and Trojans on the Plain,
Grifly and dark with Helmets, Shields and Spears.
Into the midst between them Hector stepped.
You Trojans and well-armed Greeks, said he,
Since 'twas Jove's will our Oath should not be kept,
But that the War continued shall be
Till either you shall win the Town of Troy,
Or we your Army and your Ships confound,
Fighting till one another we destroy;
I to you Argives somewhat will propound.
The best of all the Greeks are present here.
Let one of them come forth and fight with me,
On these conditions (witness Jupiter)
If by his hand I slain in Combat be,
Let him do with my Armor what he will,
But send my Body into Ilium.
But if Apollo grant me him to kill,
His Armor I will have and carry home,
And in Apollo's Temple dedicate.
His Body to the Ships shall rendered be,
That on his Urn the Greeks may elevate
A Mount of Earth for Passengers to see
Upon the Shore of Hellespont, and say,
Here lies a valiant Greek by Hector slain
Long since, when the Argives were besieging Troy.
My honor thus for ever will remain.
So Hector said. The Greeks all silent were.
For shame the Challenge they could not refuse;
And to accept it every one did fear.
But Menelaus then his Valor shows,
And rising up in anger thus he said,
Women of Argos what a shame is this
That you should all of Hector be afraid!
What now become of all your threatening is?
There, (dust and water, heartless, nameless) sit.
My self I Will arm (for I perceive no odds)
And will this sturdy Champion Hector meet.
For Victory comes only from the Gods.
This said, he rose and armed himself; and there
Deprived of life had Menelaus been
(So much too weak he was) by Hector's Spear,
But that the Princes starting up came in.
And Agamemnon seizing on his hand,
Why Menelaus are you mad, said he,
In fight you cannot against Hector stand,
How much soever you concerned be.
Avoid him in the Field as others do.
Achilles who than you much stronger is,
Strong as he is, considers Hector too,
And cooler grows as often as he him sees.
Therefore, good Brother, sit still at your Troop.
Some other we'll oppose to Hector's might,
That, haughty as he is, shall make him stoop,
And thank the Gods if safe he come from fight.
To this good counsel yielded Menelaus.
Whereat his Servants not a little joy'd,
Came in, and soon by them unarmed he was,
And to the Greeks then Nestor rose, and said,
O how unwelcome will this Story be
To Greece, and Peleus King of the Myrmidons,
Who at his house the names inquired of me
Both of your selves, your Fathers, and your Sons.
If he should know how much you Hector dread,
How often would he hold up his hands, and pray
The Gods to send him down amongst the dead,
And from his body take all sense away!
O that I were as young as I was then
When war was 'twixt Arcadia and Pyle,
And at the Walls of Pheia stood the men
Ready for bloody fight in Rank and File!
Amongst them stood one Ereuthalion,
And of the great man Areithous
Upon his Shoulders had the Armor on,
Who Clubman commonly surnamed was,
Because he used neither Bow nor Spear,
But with an Iron Club the Battles brake.
Lycurgus slew him though he weaker were,
(When at advantage great he did him take)
By craft, not strength. For in a narrow way
He watched him at a turning with his Spear,
And on a sudden took his life away,
So that the Club had nothing to do there.
Then took he off his Arms, and wore the same
In Battle when there was occasion,
But gave them when old age upon him came
To this his Squier Ereuthalion.
Who wearing them our Army did defy,
At which when others trembling stood and shook
Although the youngest of them all was I,
Great as he was, the man I undertook,
And slew him by the Goddess Pallas aid,
The strong'st and tallest that I ever slew,
As when upon the ground he stretched was laid,
The place he covered did plainly show.
If I were now as young and strong as then,
The Greeks for Hector soon a match should find,
Though none of you that are their bravest men
To try your fortune with him have a mind.
Thus Nestor the Argive Lords did reprehend,
And nine of them in number (all that durst
In single fight with Hector to contend)
Armed, and Agamemnon was the first.
And next the strong and valiant Diomed,
And then the greater Ajax, then the less,
Then King Idomeneus, of Creet the head,
And with him his good Squire Meriones,
Who as the God of Battle valiant was,
Besides Eurypylus Euaemon's Son,
And of Andremon the stour Son Thoas,
And wise Ulysses last of all made one.
So many Greeks durst Hector undertake.
Bring in your Lots, said Nestor then, and we
Will in a Helmet them together shake.
And who by Lot our Champion shall be
S^all please us all, but please himself much more
When back again he comes from the fight.
Then brought they in their Lots; which ore and ore
He shook in Agamemnon's Helmet bright.
Mean while the people lift their hands, and pray,
O Jove, let now the Lot to Ajax fall,
Or that on Diomedes light it may,
Or on Atrides our great General.
The Helmet shaken threw out Ajax Lot,
Which th'Herald took and carried about
To the Argive Princes, but they owned it not,
Till to the hand of Ajax it was brought,
Who signed it had, and into th'Helmet thrown.
He took it, and a while considered it;
And when he was assured 'twas his own,
Rose up, and lets it fall before his feet.
And to the Princes said, This Lot is mine,
And glad I am, and hope for Victory.
But send your Prayers up to the Powers divine,
While I put on my Arms; and silently,
So that (at least) the Trojans may not hear.
Or (now I think on it) plain and openly.
For I see nothing that I need to fear.
I am not forced to fight unwillingly,
Nor rashly undertook the enterprise.
For I was born and bred in Salamis,
And hope I am not so weak or unwise.
As Soon as mighty Ajax had said this,
The people looking up to Heaven prayed.
O Jove, said one, grant Ajax Victory,
Or if you be inclined Hector to aid,
Then let their strength and glory equal be.
When Ajax had his Arms put on complete,
He walked away with a Majestique pace,
As Mars goes to the War. His strides were great,
And scornful smiles with terror in his face.
And as he went he shook his mighty Spear,
Which joyfully the Argives did behold;
But by the Trojans looked on was with fear;
And Hector at the heart himself was cold.
But was ashamed back again to fly,
Since he provoked him had into the field.
And Ajax now was come unto him nigh,
As from a Tower looking ore his Shield.
By Tychius of Hyla made it was,
And covered with sev'n fat Bulls hides well tan'd,
And over them an eight of shining Brass,
And at his Breast he held it with his hand,
And threatening said, Hector I Will make you see,
That in the Army many yet remain,
Though from us angry gone Achilles be,
And discontent from Battle now abstain,
That fear not Hector. Do the worst you can.
Ajax (said Hector) I am not a Child
Nor Woman to be threatened, but a Man
That understands the business of the Field,
And can my Buckler bear from ^est to Right,
And have whereon in Battle to rely,
And how to guide my Horses in a fight,
And move my feet to Mars his Melody.
But no such cunning will I use with you.
My Spear I Will send unto you openly.
And at that word the long Spear from him flew,
And pierced his Target to the seventh ply.
But there it staid. Then Ajax threw his Spear,
Which Hector's Shield, Armor and Coat went through.
But Hector shrunk his Belly in for fear.
For else it pierced had his Belly too.
Then from their Shields the Spears they plucked out,
And them no more at one another threw,
But came unto each other close and ^ought.
And like two Lions on each other flew.
And Hector made a thrust at Ajax Shield
Which entered not, resisted by the brass:
But Hector's Shield to Ajax Spear did yield,
Which pierced it through; and so far in did pass,
That grazing on his Neck it fetched the blood.
But Hector not dismayed took up a Stone.
Ajax took't on his Shield and firmly stood,
And with his hand took up a greater one
And rougher, which did Hector's Buckler tear,
And with the weight unto the ground him threw,
But up again Apollo did him rear.
Then both of them (the Combat to renew)
Their Swords were drawing. But the Heralds then
Idaeus and Talthibius came in,
The sacred Messengers of Gods and men,
And put themselves the Combatants between.
Troy's Herald then Idaeus to them spoke.
Good Sons, beloved of Jove, give over fight.
For all men of your Valor notice take.
And now it is late; we must submit to Night.
Idaeus (then said Ajax) let these words
From Hector come, from whom came the Defy.
'Twas he that Challenged all the Argive Lords.
Let him give over first, and then will I.
Then Hector spoke. Ajax since you, said he,
The Gods endued have with Strength and Wit,
Let for to day the quarrel ended be.
Hereafter let the Gods determine it,
And give which side they please the Victory.
For now it is late. To Night we must submit.
That you the Greeks may cheer, and specially
Your own friends, and companions at your Fleet:
And I the Trojans from their fear relieve,
And Wives, that for my safe return do pray.
But come, let us the one another Tokens give,
That Greeks and Trojans seeing them may say,
These two men fought and sought each others death,
Yet parted friends. This said, he to him gave
His Belt with his good Sword and Ivory Sheath;
Ajax to him his shining Girdle brave.
Thus parted, Ajax to the Argives went;
And Hector back into the Troops of Troy;
Who mightily rejoiced at the event
That past all hope they saw him come away.
The Lords conducted him to Ilium,
The Greeks to Agamemnon Ajax led.
And when they all unto his Tent were come,
He for them sacrificed a Bull well fed.
Which flayed, divided, roasted, taken up
The Carvers into Messes cut. This done
King Agamemnon and the Princes sup.
The Chine at Ajax Table was set on.
And when their thirst and hunger was subdued,
Nestor whose counsel still had been the best,
What further was to be considered showed,
And to the Princes all his Speech addressed.
Atrides, and you other Princes know
How Mars with Argives strowed has the Plain,
And sent their Souls down to the Powr's below,
Whose bloody Bodies in the Field remain.
To morrow therefore let us cease from War,
And early in the Morning fetch the dead,
And burn them somewhere from the Ships not far,
That to Argos back they may be carried,
When we depart from hence; that their Bones may
By their own Friends and Children buried be.
Let Us raise a Mount upon the Shore of Troy,
One for them all, for Passengers to see,
And fortify our good Ships with a Wall,
And Turrets in it, and a Ditch without,
Lest unawares the Trojans on us fall,
And Gates for Charrets to go in and out.
Mean while the Trojan Lords at Counsel were
Loud and discordant. Then Antenor said,
Trojans and Aids I pray to me give ear,
For of the worst I greatly am afraid.
Let Menelaus have his Wife again,
And all the goods she brought with her. Take heed;
Against our Oath we shall but fight in vain.
Then let her go, or never look to speed.
Antenor (then said Paris) this is not
The best advice you could have given, or
(If what you say dissent not from your thought)
You are not now so wise as heretofore
Thus much to you. But to the Trojans this.
Her wealth I Will render, with more of mine own.
But my Wife Helen I will not dismiss.
And when he that had said again sat down.
Then Priam rose: Trojans and Aids, said he,
Now take your Supper as you used to do,
And Sentinels set such as careful be;
To morrow I will send Idaeus to
The Greeks with Paris answer, and to try
If they from Battle for so long will cease,
That we may burn our slain men quietly,
And fight again hereafter when they please.
This said, the Trojans to their Suppers went.
Next Morn Idaeus found the Argive Lords
Together met at Agamemnon's Tent,
And coming in; unto them said these words.
Atrides, and you Argives all, I come
With Terms from Paris, and by Priam sent,
On which you may depart from Ilium,
And end the War, if thereto you consent.
The wealth which he with Helen brought ashore
(I would before he brought it he had died)
To Menelaus he will give and more.
But his wife Helen shall with him abide.
Besides, the People have commanded me
To ask you if you will the War suspend,
Until our dead fetched off and burned be,
And after fight till Jove the War shall end.
So said Idaeus. The Greeks silent were
A while. At last Tydides rose and spoke.
Let not the Greeks so much the Trojans fear
As Helens goods, or her herself to take
At Alexander's hands. The hour is come
(As any Child may manifestly see)
That must orethrow the State of Ilium.
So said Tydides, and much praised was he.
Then Agamemnon answered to Idaeus,
You hear what the Argives say. I say the same.
As for the dead men burn them if you please;
They Are good for nothing, I contented am.
And of this Truce let Jove a witness be.
This said, to Jove his Scepter up he heaved.
Idaeus back to Troy went speedily
The Answer to relate he had received.
Mean while the States of Troy in Council sat,
And there their Heralds coming back expected.
Idaeus then went in, and told them that
The offer made by Paris was rejected.
But that a Truce was granted for a day.
Next Morn the Trojans early as they could
Went some to the field to fetch their dead away,
And others to the Hill to fetch down wood.
So did the Argives some to Ida go
For wood, and others to the bloody field.
But could not then distinguish friend from foe.
But by and by the Sun began to guild
Scamander Plain; then washed they off the gore
And dust, and laid their dead men upon Carts.
But Priam had forbidden them to roar,
Or cry outright, though grieved at their hearts.
When they had burnt them, back they went again.
The Greeks too, when they had consumed with fire
And done their lamentation for the slain,
Unto their Ships did back again retire.
But this the Achaeans did at break of day,
And raised one mighty Monument for all.
And the incursion of the Foe to stay,
Their Navy they enclosed with a Wall.
With Turrets high and a great Ditch without,
(Upon the sides whereof sharp Pales they fix)
And Gates for Charrets to go in and out.
And all the day thus toyling were the Greeks.
Mean while the Gods together sat above,
And wondering looked upon this work of men;
And Neptune then addressed his Speech to Jove.
What mortals will the Gods consult again?
See you not what a Wall the Greeks have reared,
And what a ditch about it made, said he,
The same whereof amongst people will be heard
As far as the Sunbeams extended be?
Yet to the Gods they Hecatomb gave none.
Whereas the Walls that I and Phoebus raised
About the City for Laomedon
Obscured by this no longer will be praised.
Then answered Jove. Neptune, I never thought
That such a word would e're have come from you
That have the power to bring their work to naught.
A lesser God might have complained, it is true;
But of your power Aurora sees no bound.
Stay only till the Greeks be gone away;
Then break their Wall, and throw it to the ground,
And hide the place with Sand. Thus talked they.
The Sun now set, and finished was the Wall.
The Greeks went back then each man to his Tent,
And many good fat Beeves they made to fall;
And Wine they had great store from Lemnos sent.
For Ships abundance laden were come in,
Which by Euneus (th'Hero Jason's Son
Got on Hypsiphile) thither sent had been,
For which the Army bartered. Hides gave one,
Another th'Ox it self, another Brass,
One Iron, and another gave a Slave,
Beside what by Euneus given was
To the two Atrides of free gift to have.
When Supper ready was they all sat down,
And all night long the Feast continued,
Greeks in their Tents, and Trojans in the Town.
And all night long aloud Jove thundered,
Meaning no good to the Greeks. Then poured they on
The ground the offered wine, Jove to content.
And no man durst to drink till that was done.
And when they had well drunk to sleep they went.
ILIAD. LIB. VIII.
THe Morning now was quite displayed, and Jove
Upon Olympus highest top was set:
And all the Gods and Goddesses above
By his command were there together met.
And Jupiter unto them speaking said,
You Gods all and you Goddesses do you hear,
Let none of you the Greeks or Trojans aid;
I cannot do my work for you. Forbear.
For whomsoever I assisting see
The Argives or the Trojans, be it known
He wounded shall return and laughed at be,
Or headlong into Tartarus be thrown,
Into the deepest pit of Tartarus,
Shut in with Gates of Brass, as much below
The common Hell, as it is from Hell to us.
But if you will my power by trial know,
Put now into my hand a Chain of Gold,
And let one end thereof lie on the plain,
And all you Gods and Goddesses take hold;
You shall not move me howsoere you strain.
At the other end, if I my strength put to it,
I Will pull you Gods and Goddesses to me
Do what you can, and Earth and Sea to boot,
And let you hang there till my power you see.
The Gods were out of countenance at this,
And to such mighty words durst not reply,
Till Pallas said, Well known, O Father, is
Your mighty Power. But do not us deny,
When we so many Argives falling see,
To show we have compassion, and grieve.
And though in fight we no Assistants be,
Yet let us sometimes counsel to them give,
Lest in your anger they be all destroyed.
Dear Child (said Jove) it goes against my mind.
I would not have my Orders disobeyed.
It Is granted though. For I Will to you be kind.
This said, he set his Horses to his Charre,
Hard hoof'd, swift-footed Horses two. Like Gold
Their Mains profound well-combed shined far.
Then armed himself, and on the whip laid hold.
No sooner had the Horses felt the Whip,
But up they start, and 'twixt the Earth and Sky
The winds themselves with swiftness they outstrip,
And came unto the top of Ida high
To Gargarus, and there Jove took them out,
And hiding them with air on th'Hill sat down,
And as he sat he cast his eyes about
With great content upon the Fleet and Town.
The Argives at their Tents short Breakfast make,
And armed themselves as soon as they had done
The Trojans, for their Wives and Childrens sake,
(Though fewer) armed and made haste to be gone.
Then opened were the Gates, and to the Field
Out came they Horse and Man; and being met,
They Man to Man came up with Shield to Shield,
And Spear to Spear; and on each other set.
Some groaned, some vaunted, mighty was the din
Of those that kill, and those that falling cry.
And this condition they continued in
Until the Sun had mounted half the Sky.
Then Jove took up a pair of Scales of Gold,
And weighed the fates of both the Nations,
And equally suspended them did hold;
But not so equal were their inclinations.
For the Argive Scale sat still upon the ground,
While the other lifted was up to the skies.
Heaven and Earth did then with Thunder sound,
And Jove threw Lightning in the Argives eyes.
Then all the Greeks amazed ran away.
Idomeneus and Agamemnon ran;
Nor either of the Ajaxes durst stay:
Except old Nestor they fled every man.
And Nestor too had fled, had he known how:
For of his Horses Paris one had shot,
And pierced his Forehead just above the Brow
Into the Brain, so that his Chariot
Now useless was, and the Horse troublesome.
Then cuts he th'Harness; but so long did stay,
That Hector now was almost to him come,
And The Old man surely had been cast away,
But that Tydides saw him in this pain,
And terribly to Ulysses cried out,
Whither do you fly Ulysses? Come again,
Help to defend old Nestor; face about.
While he said this, Ulysses still ran on,
Not minding what he said. And Diomed,
To succor Nestor, to him went alone,
And with him stood before his Chariots head,
And said, O Nestor, youthful is the Foe
That comes on, and you now very old,
Your Charioteer not strong, your Horses slow,
Come up into my Charret, and behold
My Trojan Horses how well they can run
When there is cause t'approach or shun the fight.
From Venus Son Aeneas I them won,
A man of much experience in flight:
Send back your Horses, and with mine we'll go
And fight the Trojans. 'Twill not be amiss
To let the mighty Champion Hector know,
A Spear as mad is in my hand as his.
This said, both Sthen'lus and Eurymedon
With Nestor's Horses went to Nestor's Tent:
Nestor and Diomed, both mounted on
Tydides Charret, up to Hector went.
And when they were to one another near,
At Hector Diomedes threw in haste,
And missed of him, and killed his Charioteer;
Clean through his Breast the Spear well driven past.
Down dead he fell, but Hector lets him lie,
And turns aside to seek a Charioteer
The place of Heniopeus to supply.
And Archeptolemus then being near,
(Called up by Hector) on the Reins laid hold.
Then mighty work and slaughter there had been,
And Trojans shut like Lambs within a Fold
In Troy, but that it was by Jove foreseen.
For in a Clap of Thunder Jove down threw
His Bolt at Diomedes Horses feet.
And The Earth with Sulphur flaming looked blew.
Nestor himself astonished was to see it;
Lets go the Reins, and down the Horses fell.
And Nestor then to Diomedes said,
It Is Jove (you see) that does our force repel,
And Hector (for this day) intends to aid.
Another day to us he will be kind,
If he see cause; for no man can him tie,
Nor able is to make him change his mind.
And therefore now our best course is to fly.
It Is true, O Nestor (said Tydides then)
But what a pain then at my heart will lie,
When Hector speaking to the Trojan men,
Shall brag he made Tydides from him fly?
Then should I wish the Earth would swallow me.
Though Hector says so ( Nestor then replied)
Believed by the Trojans 'twill not be,
So many of them by your hand have died.
And at this word his Steeds he turned about.
A shower of Spears then from the Trojans flies,
Who them pursued with a mighty shout.
Then Hector loud unto Tydides cries,
Ho! Diomed, by the Argives honored
Above the most, served with a greater Mess,
And higher Seat, and Wine unlimited,
You will hereafter be esteemed less.
Unmanly Diomed. Fly, Baggage, fly.
You never shall come within the Wall^ of Troy
To freight your Ship with Women here; for I
Intend to send you first another way.
This said, Tydides was a while in doubt
Whether to turn or no and Hector meet,
And thrice to turn his Horses was about,
And Jove thrice thundering turned them towered the Fleet,
Showing that he the honor of that day
Had granted to the Trojans. Hector then
Pursued them close, and roaring all the way,
Trojans, said he, and Aids now play the men.
For sure I am that Jove is on our side,
And give us will the Victory this day.
And fools they are that in their Wall confide;
For through their Trench our Horse shall find a way.
When we are at the Ships let one or other
Have fire to burn them ready, and then fall
Upon the Men confounded in the smother.
This said, he did upon his Horses call.
Xanthus, Podargus, Aethon, Lampus, see
You pay now what you owe me for your meat
Laid in your Mangers by Andromache,
Who always served you with pleasant wheat,
And steeped sometimes (when she thought fit) in Wine;
And very often (though I her Husband be)
Your dinner was made ready before mine
Now, now pursue the Argives lustily,
That Nestor's Shield of Gold I may obtain,
Nor of Tydides Armor must we fail
By Vulcan wrought. If we but these can gain,
The Argives will this very night hoise Sail.
At Hectors speech Juno upon her Throne
Unquiet sitting made Olympus shake.
For moved she was with his presumption,
And looking upon Neptune to him spoke.
Neptune, said she, are you not stirred at this?
You know at Aegae, and at Helice
Their liberality abundant is.
And sure I am you wish them victory.
What! Cannot we who with the Argives side,
If we our powers together join in one,
Drive back the Trojans and abate their pride,
And leave Jove here to sit and chafe alone?
Juno (said Neptune grieved) these words are bold.
I Will not rebel. For we shall have the worst;
And so we have by Jupiter been told.
Thus Neptune and the Wife of Jove discourst.
And now between the Walls and Ships, the place
With Horses and with armed Men was filled,
And crammed were within a narrow space
By Hector that was Master of the Field.
And had not Agamemnon been inspired
By Juno to put courage in his men,
The Argive Ships had certainly been fired,
And never had the Greeks gone back again.
Then amongst the Ships he went, and stayed at
Ulysses Ship, which was the middlemost
Of all the Navy, and the tallest; that
He might be heard to both ends of the Host,
Both to Achilles and to Ajax Tent,
Clad in The Imperial Robe that all might see it.
For these two being the most confident,
Had placed themselves at the utmost of the Fleet.
And with a mighty voice to the Argives cried,
Disgrace of Greece, mere outsides, where are now
Your Brags, that any of you durst abide
An hundred Trojans, and yet dare not show
A Face to Hector who our Ships would fire?
But this was said at Lemnos in your Wine,
Which raised your language than your nature higher;
But cooled now the Battle you decline.
Was ever King afflicted as I am,
O Jove, or lost a Victory so near?
And yet at all your Altars as I came,
My Sacrifices duly paid were,
In hope that I the Town of Troy should sack.
But grant at least, O Jove, that we may come
Our selves into Achaea safely back,
And not be here destroyed at Ilium.
This said, Jove grants them safely to depart.
And from him presently his Eagle came*
And brought the tender issue of a Heart,
And near unto his Altar dropped the same.
The Argives when they saw the Bird of Jove,
Were to the Fight again encouraged,
And who should first repass the Trenches strove.
And he that first came forth was Diomed.
And much before that any of the rest
Had any slain, he killed Agelaus,
Whom with his Spear he pierced from Back to Breast,
When from him he his Charret turning was.
Then Agamemnon came, and Menelaus,
And then the greater Ajax, then the Less.
The sixth the King Idomeneus was,
And with him came his Squire Meriones.
And next Eurypylus Euaemon's Son.
The ninth was Teucer with his Bow unbent.
Hid with the Shield of Ajax Telamon
His mighty Brother to the Field he went,
Which Ajax li^ting, Teucer chose his man,
And having at him aimed, and shot, and killed,
As Children to their Mothers, back he ran,
And hid himself behind his Brothers Shield.
How many were the men he killed thus?
Orsilochus, Ophlestus, Lycophon,
And Melanippus, Daetor, Ormenus,
And Chromius, and last Amopaon.
All those lay dead together on the Sands.
When Agamemnon saw what work was done
By Teucer's Arrows on the Trojans Bands,
He to him came, and said, O valiant Son
Of Telamon, so so your Shafts bestow,
Unto the Argives all an honor be,
And to your Father Telamon; For though
Unto your Mother married not was he,
Yet has he still maintained you as his own.
And if it please Jove and the Powers divine
To make me once the Master of this Town,
Your share shall be the next set out to mine,
And to your honor shall receive from me
A Tripod, and two Horses with the Charre,
Or if you will, your bed shall honored be
With some fair Woman taken in the war.
Teucer to this then answer made and said,
Of this encouragement no need have I.
Since we came forth I have no time delaid,
But done as much as in my power did lie.
Eight Shafts already have gone from my Bow,
And in as many Trojans fixed have been.
Of this mad dog I miss I know not how.
Then took he out another Arrow keen,
And aimed at Hector, but he hit him not,
But wounded on the Breast Gorgythion
Who on fair Castianira was begot,
And of King Priam's valiant Sons was one.
Who falling on his knees hung down his head*
Just as a Poppy charged with fruit and rain,
So had his Cask his Head ore burdened.
And Teucer then at Hector shot again.
And missed again. Apollo put it by.
But Archeptolemus his Charioteer
He missed not. Hector escaped narrowly,
And Archeptolemus expired there
Shot through the Breast. Hector was sorry, but
Lest him* Cebriones chanced to be nigh,
And in his hands Hector the Reins did put,
And from his Charret leapt down suddenly*
And took a heavy Stone into his hand.
Teucer the while again his Bow had bent,
But drawing did so long, and aiming stand,
The Stone from Hector th'Arrow did prevent.
And near the Shoulder on the Breast him struck.
And broken was the Bow-string with the blow,
And his benumbed Arm all sense forsook,
And sinking on his Knees he dropped the Bow.
Then Ajax stepped before him with his Shield.
Mecistheus and Alastor him conveyed
Unto the Argive Ships from off the Field,
Grievously bruised, groaning and dismayed.
The courage of the Trojans now renewed,
They chased the Argives back unto their Wall,
And till the Trenches they had past, pursued,
And Hector at their heels the near'st of all.
As when a Hound pursues a wild Bore,
Or Lion, and presuming on his Feet
Pinches his Hanch or Side, and then gives ore,
Not daring if he turn the Beast to meet;
So Hector chasing them still slew the last.
And many of them had the Trojans slain
Ere they the Trenches and the Pale had past.
But being in they there themselves contain.
And comfort one another all they can,
And to the Gods and Goddesses they pray,
Lifting their hands to Heaven every man,
And Hector then turned off and went his way.
Which Juno seeing, unto Pallas said,
Daughter of Jupiter do you not see
What Greeks one mad man Hector has destroyed?
Shall we sit still in this extremity?
To Juno then Athena thus replied,
Had not my Fathers wits been at a loss,
This furious Hector by the Greeks had died.
But he my counsel always loves to cross.
He has forgot how often his Son I saved
Oppressed by Euristheus tyranny.
For always when his Fathers help he craved,
Down to the Earth from Heaven sent was I.
But had I known as much as I do now,
When for the Dog he went to Pluto's gate,
He had for me till this time staid below,
And by the odious Styx for ever sat.
But now he hates me. And by Thetis led,
He must Achilles honor. But my hope is,
The time will come I shall be favored
By him again, and called his dear Glaucopis.
But make you ready now your Chariot,
While I put on my Arms; that we may see
If Hector will thereof be glad or not,
Or if some Trojans rather shall not be
Left dead for Dogs and Vulturs to devour.
Then Juno to her Charre the Horses brought.
To Jove's house Pallas went, and on the floor
Threw down her long Robe, and put on Jove's Coat.
And then her Breast with Armor covered,
And on her Shoulder hung her fearful Shield.
Then took her heavy Spear with Brazen head,
Wherewith she breaks Squadrons in the Field.
Then open of it self flew Heaven-gate,
(Though to the Seasons Jove the power gave
Alone to judge of early and of late)
And out the Goddesses the Horses drove.
Then Jove to Iris said, Go, to them speak.
Tell them an ill match they will have of me.
I Will lame their Horses and their Charret break,
Unto the ground they both shall tumbled be;
And with my Thunder wounded shall be so,
That ten years after they shall not be well.
For I would have Glaucopis well to know
What it is against her Father to rebel.
But Juno is so used to cross my will,
That toward her my anger is the less.
Then Iris went her way from Ida hill,
And near Olympus met the Goddesses,
And as she bidden was did to them speak,
What fury's this? Whither do you go, said she.
Jove will your Horses lame, your Charret break,
And to the ground you both will tumbled be,
And with his Thunder wounded will be so,
That ten years after you will not be well.
For you Glaucopis he will make to know
What it is against your Father to rebel.
But Juno is so used to cross his will
That he affronts from her can better bear;
But Pallas, at your hands he takes it ill
That you should dare against him lift a Spear.
Iris, her errant done, no longer stayed,
And to Minerva thus said Juno then,
Jove shall no more for me be disobeyed,
By taking part in War with mortal men.
But let One live, and let another die,
As by the chance of War it shall fall out,
And let him do what he thinks Equity.
This said, her Chariot she turned about.
The Horses by the Seasons freed and fed,
The Charret was set up against the Wall.
The Goddesses themselves then entered,
And took their places in the Councel-Hall
With the other Gods. And Jove himself from I Would
TO Olympus came, and lighted from his Charre,
And Neptune from the same his Steeds untied,
And set them up, and of them had a care.
The Charret he set to the Altar near
Covered with Linen fine. Then to his Throne,
His Throne of Gold mounted the Thunderer,
And made Olympus shake as he sat down.
But Juno and Athena silent sat
Together by themselves from Jove apart
And discontent. But Jove knew well for what;
And answer made to what was in her heart.
Juno, said he, and Pallas, why so sad?
Your fight against the Trojans was not long.
And more you had been vexed if it had;
So much for the other Gods I am too strong.
The danger scarce begun was when you fled.
But had you dared the Battle to maintain,
You had been by my hand so thundered,
You never had to Olympus come again.
Juno at this and Pallas grumbling sat,
And Pallas from replying did abstain,
Although no less the Trojans she did hate.
But Juno was not able to contain.
O cruel Jove, said she, what words are these?
Must we unto our friends be so ingrate,
Because we know you can do what you please,
As not the Argives to commiserate?
We are content since you will have it so,
No longer in the War to give them aid:
But let us give them counsel what to do,
Lest in your anger they be all destroyed.
Juno (said Jove) to morrow you shall know
If you will be pleased the Battle to behold,
How many martial Greeks I Will overthrow.
For Hector shall not be by me controlled
Until Achilles be fetched back again,
And at the Argive Ships the Battle be
About the Body of Patroclus slain.
For so it is ordained by Destiny.
And for your anger Juno I not care,
Though to the end of Earth and Sea you go,
(Where pent Iapetus and Saturn are
In horrid darkness) and complain; yet so
I will not for your anger care a jot.
For you are grown extremely insolent.
Thus Jupiter; and Juno answered not.
Then down the Sun into the Ocean went,
Drawing upon the Fields a cloudy Night,
Which gave the Trojan Army no content,
But to the Greeks more welcome was than Light.
The Army Hector called to Parliament,
And led them to a clean place free from blood,
And there they all on foot about him throng.
Hector unto them giving Orders stood
With Spear in hand eleven Cubits long.
Hear me you Trojans and you Aids, said he,
I thought we should have now the Greeks destroyed,
And lodged in the Town with Victory.
But this my hope is by the Night made void,
Nor can we help it. Let us now provide
(For Supper) Beeves and Sheep, and Wine and Bread
From Troy; and let the Horses be untied,
And care be taken that they be well fed.
Then fetch in wood, and fires abundance make,
That with the flame lightened may be the Sky,
Lest the Argives in the dark advantage take,
To go aboard and safe to Argos fly.
Let them imbark at least in haste, and bear
Along with them their wounds uncured home,
That others who shall see it may stand in fear,
And say, This it is to fight against Ilium.
And let great Boys and old Men all night wake
Upon the Walls and Towers, and Guards be set,
And every Wife at home a great fire make,
Lest into Troy the Foe by Treason get.
This (valiant Trojans) let be done to night.
To morrow I shall further order give.
I doubt not but to put these Dogs to flight
By the help of Jove, and Ilium relieve.
But while it is Night have on your Guards a care,
To morrow early arm your selves for fight.
For to the Argive Ships I Will bring the War,
And trial make of Diomedes might,
If from the Ships he drive me shall away,
Or with my Spear I him shall overthrow
And send his bloody Armor into Troy.
To morrow he his strength will better know.
I would I were as certain not to die,
And of old age live still free from the sorrow,
As Phoebus and Athena do, as I
Am sure we shall defeat these Greeks to morrow.
Thus ended he. The Trojans full of joy
Their sweating Horses soon took out and fed,
And some were sent into the Town of Troy,
To bring in Beeves and Sheep, and Wine and Bread,
While others fetched in Wood. Then to the Sky
Arose the pleasant vapor of the Roast.
The Trojans confident of Victory
Sat cheerful at their Arms throughout the Host.
As many Stars as in a Heaven serene
Together with the Moon appear in the Night,
When all the tops of Hills and Woods are seen,
And joyful are the Shepherds at the sight:
So many seemed the Fires upon the Plain.
A thousand Fires, and at each fifty men,
That by their Horses there all night remain
Expecting till Aurora rose again.
ILIAD. LIB. IX.
THus Watch the Trojans kept. But at the Fleet
Distracted was with fear the Argive Host,
And their Commanders; as when two Winds meet,
The Sea between them into heaps is tossed.
And Agamemnon grieved at the heart,
Bad th'Heralds forthwith to The Assembly call
The prime Commanders every one apart,
And not make proclamation once for all;
And some of them himself he summoned.
When met were all the Leaders of the Greeks,
They sat them down with hearts discouraged,
And tears ran down on Agamemnon's Cheeks.
As Springs of Water issue from a Rock,
So fell the tears from Agamemnon's eyes.
And to The Assembly thus he weeping spoke.
My friends what help can any man devise?
Jove told me I should conquer Ilium,
And unto Argos safe return again,
And now deceived me has, and sends me home
With shame when I have lost so many men.
And thus he loves to do to show his might.
Therefore my Counsel Argives all obey:
Let Us hoise our Sails and save our selves by flight;
For we shall never take the Town of Troy.
This said, the Princes long time silent sit.
At last Tydides rising thus replied,
King Agamemnon so far as it is fit
In such a public place I must you chide.
Take it not ill, because not long ago
You me with want of courage did upbraid
Before the Greeks, as old and young well know.
Jove given you has the Right to be obeyed,
And graced you with the title of our King,
But has denied you a courageous Spirit,
Which now is the most necessary thing.
You think too meanly of your peoples merit;
As for your self, if you will needs away,
Go. That Is your way. Your Ships there ready lie
That from Mycene brought you unto Troy,
But leave the rest their fortune here to try.
If none else stay, yet Sthenelus and I
Will not give over fighting till we know
To what side Jove will give the Victory.
The Gods (I Am sure) will favor to us show.
This Speech the Lords commended very much.
Then Nestor rose and to Tydides said,
There is not of your age another such,
For Counsel wise, in Battle not afraid.
None will deny but what you say is right;
But you have not said all you could have done;
And no great wonder, since for age you might
(So young you are) have been my youngest Son.
Yet the advice you given have is best;
I that am elder what wants will supply,
Adding thereto what you have not expressed,
To take from Agamemnon all reply.
For none but such as have no Law, nor Kin,
Nor House, in civil discord can delight.
But let us first our chiefest work begin,
And make the Youngmen keep good watch all Night.
And let them all from you (Atrides) take
Their Orders. For you are our General.
And for the Princes a good Supper make,
And all the eldest Captains to it call.
It best becomes you that can do it best.
For in your Tents of Wine you have good store,
And eas^ier provided than the rest,
So many Ships you have to bring in more.
Hear their advice, and do what you think fit.
Good Counsel now we need the most of all,
Since our insulting Foes so near us sit.
By this nights Counsel we must stand or fall.
Thus Nestor said, and 'twas agreed upon.
The Captains of the Watch then straight went forth;
First Thrasymedes that was Nestor's Son;
And after him six Captains more of worth,
Ascalaphus, and then Ialmenus,
Then Aphyres, and then M^riones,
And Lycomedes, and Deipyrus:
The seven Captains of the Watch were these.
And with each one an hundred Spearmen went
Betwixt the Pale and Wall, and supped there.
And the old Leaders to Agamemnon's Tent,
And by him nobly entertained were.
But when they had an end made of the Feast,
Nestor his Counsel further open laid,
Which formerly had always been the best;
And looking to Agamemnon thus he said*
King Agamemnon I Will with you begin,
And with you end, since you the Scepter bear,
And in your care it lies to lose or win.
You chiefly should good Counsel give and hear.
Hear then what now is my opinion,
Than which a better I think you will not find,
Nor is it now the first time thought upon.
But heretofore I was of the same mind,
When from Achilles you Briseis took,
And I advised you to let her stay,
Though my good Counsel then you could not brook,
But to your own great heart too much gave way,
Dishonouring the man of greatest might
In all the Army, and most honored
By all the Gods, and contrary to Right
Taking the Prize which he had purchased.
So that the business we have now to do
Is how to reconcile him if we can,
What Gifts to give him, who shall with them go,
And with sweet language pacify the man.
This said, Atrides penitent replied,
O Nestor, all you charge me with is true,
And for Achilles sake ('it is not denied)
Jove does the Achaean Army now subdue.
He whom Jove loves worth a whole Army is.
But since I made Achilles discontent,
I Will make amends for what I did amiss,
And send a noble Present to his Tent.
I Will name the Gifts I Will give him one by one.
Seven fire-new Trevets. Talents ten of Gold.
Twenty black Cauldrons. Twelve Steeds that have won
Each one their Prizes, and yet are not old.
A man that has so many and so fleet
I think not poor, but Gold may quickly win,
When I consider with their nimble feet
How many Prizes they have brought me in.
And Women seven, the best of women kind
For Beauty and for works of Houswifery.
And unto these Briseis shall be joined,
And I Will be sworn she goes untoucht from me.
And all this shall be sent him presently.
Hereafter, if we win the Town of Troy,
Let him before the prey divided be,
Come in and carry to his Ship away
As much as it can bear of Gold and Brass.
And twenty Trojan women which he please,
Helen except. But if it come to pass
That safe to Argos we repass the Seas,
My Son in Law he shall be if he will,
And as my Son Orestes honored be;
Within my house three Daughters I have still,
Iphianassa and Laodice,
And fair Chrysothemis, take which he list
And to his Fathers house convey. For I
On settling of estate will not insist,
But of my own do that sufficiently.
Seven Cities he shall have: Pherae divine,
Enope, Ire, and Cardamyle,
And Pedasus that fertile is of Wine,
Anth^ia, Aepia, all on the Sea
Of sandy Pyle; and rich in Sheep and Kine
The people are, and will his Laws obey,
And Tribute pay as to a Power divine.
All this I Will give his anger to allay.
And this content him may if any thing.
Inexorable none but Pluto is,
But hated for it. I am the greater King,
And elder man; he should consider this.
Thus Agamemnon. And then Nestor said,
The Gifts, O King, no man can reprehend.
The next thing to be thought upon and weighed,
Is whom we shall unto Achilles send.
I think that Phoenix ought to lead the way,
Then Ajax and Ulysses, and with these
The public Heralds two, Eurybates
And Odius, and here no longer stay
Than to bring water for our hands, that we
May first send up our Prayers unto Jove,
That our Embassage may successful be.
This said by Nestor all the rest approve.
When water was brought in they washed and prayed;
The Youngmen filled the Temperers with Wine;
And round about the full Cups were conveyed,
And offered up unto the Powers divine.
When they had offered, and drunk what they would,
And parting were from Agamemnon's Tent,
Old Nestor to instruct them how they should
Achilles best persuade, out with them went.
And one by one advised them what to say,
Especially Ulysses. Then they went
Saying their Prayers to Neptune all the way
Until they came unto Achilles Tent.
Who sitting, in his hand had a Guitarre
To pass the time, and sung unto the same
The noble Acts that had been done in War
By the ancient Heroes men of greatest fame.
Patroclus sat before him looking when
He should have done. Ulysses then led in
Ajax and Phoenix. And Achilles then
Leapt up as one that had surprised been.
And them receiving kindly to them said,
Welcome my friends, what ere your business be.
To see you I am not a little joy'd,
Although the Achaeans have provoked me.
And to his friend Patroclus order gave.
A larger Temperer (said he) set up,
For these the dearest friends are that I have.
Pure be the Wine, and give each man a Cup.
Patroclus did so. And sets on a Pot
Upon the flaming fire, and puts into it
A good Sheeps Chine, another of a Goat,
Besides the Chine of a fat Bore to boot.
The Blood boiled out Automedon it takes
And holds it to Achilles to divide,
Who of it many equal portions makes.
Patroclus makes a fire of wood well dried;
And when the flame was spent, the Coals he rakes
Till they lay even; Then the meat he spits
And rostes; and when 'twas roasted up it takes,
And on clean Dresser-boards the same he sets;
And brought (in Baskets) to the Table Bread;
And by Achilles was set on the Meat.
Who when he saw the Table furnished
Over against Ulysses took his Seat.
And bad Patroclus sacrifice, who then
The first cut took and threw into the fire,
And freely to their meat then ^ell the men.
But when of food they had no more desire,
Then Ajax Phoenix jog'd, which was the sign
When to begin, for which Ulysses staid.
Ulysses then filled up his Cup with Wine,
And speaking to Achilles, thus he said.
All health to Achilles. Noble is your fare,
And by Atrides treated well we were.
Your Tables plentifully furnished are.
But that is not it for which we now are here.
Our Ships in danger are to be destroyed;
The Trojans are encamped near our Wall.
Unless you condescend to give us aid,
By Hector they are like to perish all*
Who threatens he will set them all on fire,
And is encouraged to it by Signs from Jove.
To see the morning rise is his desire,
And fears neither Men nor Powers above.
And like a Dog enraged, and looking grim,
Assures the Trojans he our Ships will burn,
And either put us for our lives to swim,
Or never to Achaea to return.
I am afraid the Gods perform it will,
And so to perish here will be our fate.
Rise then; if but a little you sit still,
All you can do for us will come too late.
And then I am assured you will grieve
(When remedy there can be none) in vain:
Therefore, while yet you can, the Greeks relieve;
Your Fathers Counsel call to mind again.
My Son, said he, (when you took leave for Troy)
May Juno and Athena strengthen you.
But this one Lesson take from me. I pray
Remember still your Anger to subdue.
Decline all contestation of the Tongue,
And let your Conversation gentle be.
So shall you win the hearts of old and young
In the Achaean Host. Thus counseled he.
Though you have this forgot, yet now be friends,
And since he sorry is, forget the offense
And take the Gifts he offers for amends,
Which we esteem a worthy recompense.
I Will name the Gifts he offers one by one.
Seven fire-new Trevets. Talents ten of Gold.
Twenty black Cauldrons. Twelve Steeds that have won
Their several Prizes, and yet are not old.
A man that has so many and so fleet
I think not poor, but Gold will quickly win,
When I consider with their nimble feet
What Prizes to Atrides they brought in.
And seven fair Women best of all the kind
For Beauty and for works of Housewifery,
And unto these Briseis shall be joined;
And swear he will, she is from blemish free.
And all this shall be sent you presently.
Hereafter if we take the Town of Troy,
You may before the Prey divided be
Come in and carry to your Ship away
As much as it can bear of Gold and Brass;
And twenty Trojan Women which you please,
Helen except. But if it come to pass
That safe to Argos we get ore the Seas,
His Son-in Law you shall be if you will,
And as his Son Orestes honored be.
Within his house three Daughters he has still
Iphianassa, and Laodice,
And fair Chrysothemis, take which you list,
And to your Fathers house convey her; he
On settling of estate will not insist,
But of his own do that sufficiently.
Seven Cities you shall have. Phaerae divine,
Enope, Ire, and Cardamyle,
And Pedasus that fertile is of Wine,
Antheia, Aepia. All on the Sea
Of sandy Pyle; and rich in Sheep and Kine
The people are, and will your Laws obey,
And Tribute pay as to a Power Divine.
All this he will give your Anger to allay.
And though Atrides and his Gifts you hate,
Honored you are by the other Argives all,
And should have pity of their sad estate,
Who in such numbers before Hector fall.
Whom you may have the honor now to kill;
For now he will your Spear no longer shun,
But stand you in the open field he will;
For amongst the Greeks he thinks there is like him none.
To this Achilles answered, and thus said,
Ulysses* I perceive I must be plain.
For if I be not so, I am afraid
I shall be put to speak my mind again.
But to prevent more importunity,
What once I say I Will do. Those men I hate
Whose Tongues and Hearts I find to disagree,
As much as I abominate Hell-gate.
I will no more persuaded be to fight
By Agamemnon or by any Greek,
Since they my labor do so ill requite,
And they that fight, and fight not fare alike.
For good and bad are equal when they die.
Then for my pain and danger in the Wars,
What more than any other man have I?
With me as with a Bird in the field it fares,
That to her unfledged young ones brings meat.
She has it in her mouth and hungry is,
Yet she forbears and gives it them to eat.
With the Atrides twain my case is this.
In blood by day I lead a weary life,
And sleepless am the great'st part of the night.
And why? That Menelaus may win his Wife
Achilles must against the Trojans fight.
I did so; and from Troy twelve Cities won
Upon the Shore in the Land eleven more,
And all the Prey I sent to Atreus Son,
Wherein of precious treasure was great store.
A small part he divided amongst the Host.
Somewhat he gave for honor to the best;
But to himself made sure to keep the most.
And firm is whatsoere he gave the rest.
From none but me his gift he takes away.
I am content, and let him keep her still.
And her enjoy. But why then came to Troy
Atrides with such strength? What was his will?
Was it not only for fair Helens sake?
What then must no man love his Wife but they?
Yes, all men of their own Wives much should make,
If they have either wit or honesty.
And I love mine as well as he loves his,
Although she be my Captive. But since she
By Agamemnon from me taken is,
Never think (Ulysses) to prevail with me.
He shall not twice deceive me. But provide
(Ulysses) that your Ships not burned be.
I know a Wall, a Ditch pal'd, deep and wide
Is made by Agamemnon without me.
But all this will not Hector long keep out.
But with the Greeks when I went to the fight
He never durst to show his face without
The Scaean gate, save once. And then by flight
He escaped. And since I am no more his so,
To morrow to the Gods I Will sacrifice,
And lanch and lade my Ships, and homewards go.
And you shall see me ere the Sun shall rise
Upon the Hell^spont if you think fit.
And how my lusty Myrmidons can row.
And so (if Neptune please) the Wind may fit,
As in three days we may to Phthia go,
Where Treasure plenty I behind me left:
And now shall carry thither Gold and Brass,
Iron and Women fair, although bereft
Of her that given me by Atrides was.
Tell him all this, and speak it openly,
Lest other Greeks put up the like disgrace.
As for my self, though impudent he be,
He dares no more to look me in the face.
I will no more in Battle or Advice
With Agamemnon join. Let him be glad
He could deceive me once. He shall not twice.
There let him rest. The Gods have made him mad.
I hate his Gifts. And him I value not.
Though he would twenty times as much bring forth
As now he has, or to him shall be brought,
Or all that is at Orchomenus is worth,
Or Thebae that Egyptian Town that can
Send twenty thousand Charrets to the field,
And all provided well with Horse and Man,
Yet so I will not to Agamemnon yield;
No, nor for Gold as much as here is sand,
Till he has smarted for this injury,
Nor any Wife will I take at his hand
Though she should fairer much than Venus be.
Nor though she could like Pallas work, or better,
I Will not his Daughter take. Bid him bestow her
Upon some Prince he thinks more worthy. Let her
For Husband have a King of greater power.
For if the Gods to Hellas bring me home,
Peleus will there provide me of a Wife.
Kings Daughters not a few there are; of whom
I shall choose one, and with her lead my life,
And with my Father live contentedly.
For all the wealth of stately Ilium,
Which they enjoyed in tranquillity
When yet the Argives were not hither come,
And all Apollo's sacred Treasury
Laid up at Pytho is not price enough
The Life of any man though poor to buy.
Horses, and Kine, and Sheep, and Household Stuff
May be recovered, but man's Life can not.
My Mother Thetis told me has my end,
That if I fight against Troy 'twill be my lot
To dye there, but that Fame would me commend.
But on the other side assured me,
That if against Ilium I warred not,
But back to Phthia went, my Fate would be
Long time to live, and after be forgot.
And I advise you and the rest to sail
As Soon as may be to your native Land;
For you will not at Ilium prevail,
Since Jupiter protects it with his hand.
And now go tell the Princes what I say,
That they may better counsel take to save
Their Ships and Men by Sea, because the way
Which now they take no good effect will have.
Let Phoenix, if he will (not else) stay here.
This said, th'Ambassadors were mute, and sorry
They from him could no better answer bear
Than a denial flat and peremptory.
At last unto Achilles Phoenix spoke;
If you, said he, resolved are to be gone
And leave the War for Agamemnon's sake,
In what estate shall I be here alone?
When you to Agamemnon first were sent,
You were a Child and understood not War,
Unable to say clearly what you meant,
Which the first principles of Honor are.
And by your Father I was with you sent
To show you how you were to speak and do.
So that if you to go be fully bent,
You need not doubt but I shall be so too,
And should be though I were as young as when
I Hellas left, and from my Father fled
Amyntor Son of Orminus, who then
A Concubine had taken to his bed.
My Mother, to the end to make her hate
In such a way the old man's company,
Was with me oftentimes importunate
To court her, and I did thereto agree,
And got her love. Which when my Father knew,
He fell into a mighty passion,
And many bitter curses on me threw,
And prayed the Gods I never might have a Son.
His Prayer by Pluto and by Proserpine
Was heard, and I no longer would abide
At home; but crossed a while was my design,
By Friends and Nephews that my purpose spied,
Who prayed me and retained me with good cheer;
Many good Kine they killed and lusty Sheep,
And many Swine were daily sindged there,
And much Wine spent, and nightly watch they keep
By turns nine Nights together; and fires twain,
One in the Court against my Chamber Door,
Another in the Porch they kept in vain.
For on the tenth the Court-wall I leapt ore,
And undiscerned to King Peleus fled
Who used me as a Father would his Son,
His only Son far off begot and bred;
Enriched and gave me the Dominion
Of the Dolopians, who are a part
Of Peleus Realm. Now no man like you is,
Divine Achilles, whom I love at the heart,
And joy that I have brought you up to this,
Though painful to me were your Infancy,
Who not at Feast nor in the House would eat,
If first I did not set you on my Knee,
And into little pieces cut your meat.
And often on my Breast you puk't your Wine.
But since I knew my Line with me would end,
To take you for my Heir was my design
Who in my feeble age might me defend.
Master your heart Achilles. For you know
The Gods, though stronger and more feared than you,
With Incense and with Prayers are made to bow,
Although from men they not receive their due.
For Prayers of high Jove the Daughters are;
Though lame their feet, and squinting be their eyes;
And follow wrath (though she runs faster far)
And to the hurt it does, give remedies,
And cure all those that show them due respect.
But when an angry man they cannot move
That reconcilement always will reject,
They call for Judgment from the^r Father Jove.
Therefore, Achilles, give respect unto
These Goddesses the Daughters of high Jove,
As other mighty men and Princes do.
Had not Atrides to redeem your love
Offered you Presents great, and promised more,
I never had advised you to agree
To save their Ships from burning on the Shore.
Till that were done you could not blamed be.
But since he does so amply make amends,
And chosen has good men to intercede,
Who are of all the Greeks your greatest friends,
Refuse them not the grace for which they plead.
Such was the Heroes custom heretofore,
When one had done another injury,
The damage they had done first to restore,
And then with Gifts and Prayers buy Amity,
But I will tell you how it came to pass
At Calydon long since, not yesterday.
War 'twixt the Curets and the Aetolians was,
These to defend, the other to destroy.
For Oeneus having got his Harvest in,
To all the Gods made a great Sacrifice*
Only Diana had no part therein,
Forgot she was; he did not her despise.
But she in anger sent a great wild Bore,
That wasted and made havoc of his field,
And up by th'roots his goodly Fruit Trees tore.
This Bore Meleager Son of O^neus k^ll'd,
Assisted by the Youth of many a State
That to the Chase with Men and Hounds came in.
Between them then Diana raised debate
About who was to have the Head and Skin.
While Meleager with them went to War,
The Curets never durst approach the Wall,
Although they were the greater number far.
But when with Choler swelled was his Gall,
(Which often happens to a man though wise)
He kept his Chamber and abstained from fight,
Offended with his Mothers injuries,
And of all company eschew'd the sight,
But Cleopatra Con^ort of his Bed,
Child of Marpissa, who (by stealth) was Bride
Of Idas, who at that time carried
For Strength the reputation far and wide.
This Idas Child was Meleager's wife.
But Idas rashly for his dear wife's sake
Against Apollo did engage his life,
And him at Bow and Arrows undertake.
But Cleopatra then surnamed was
Halcyone, that was not so, before
Her Father with Apollo sought, because
She did her Mother's death so much deplore.
With her now grieving Meleager lay,
And angry at the Curses of his Mother;
Who to the Gods continually did pray
Against his life for killing of her Brother;
And from her eyes the tears ran down her Breast,
And often with her hand the ground she smote,
Making to Pluto and his Queen request
To kill her Son; which they rejected not.
Mean while the uproar heard was at the Gates,
And thumping of the Towr's of Calydon.
To Meleag^r then came Priests and States
Entreating him his Armor to put on,
And save the Town, and offered for his pain,
As much good Land (to take it where he would,
One half for Wine, the other half for grain)
As fifty able Oxen labor could.
Then came his Father rattling at his door,
His Brothers, and his angry Mother too:
But he persisted in his will the more;
His dearest friends could with him nothing do.
But when the cry and danger now was nigher,
And on the Towers the Curets mounted were,
And ready now to set the Town on fire,
Then Cleopatra to her Husband dear
Showed The Image of a Town won by the Foe
How butchered are the men, the houses burned,
Their Wives and Children dragged away; and so
Her Husband's heart again to pity turned.
Then went he and repelled the Enemies,
Though what they promised him they never gave.
But that is not it to which I you advise;
But first the ships, and then the Greeks to save;
But not without these gifts to go to War:
For more unto your honor it will be
To give them aid when satisfied you are,
By Agamemnon for the injury.
Thus Phoenix said. Achilles then replied,
Such honor I seek none. Jove honors me,
Since by his will I at my ships abide,
And will do till I dead or strengthless be.
No more molest me for Atrides sake,
But stay with me, and equal to me reign,
And such as are my friends for your friends take,
And do not loose my friendship his to gain.
Stay then this night, and take your lodging here;
My answer to Agamemnon these will carry;
As Soon as morning shall again appear
We'll talk of whether we shall go or tarry.
And as he spoke those words, he winkt upon
Patroclus to give order for his bed,
That he himself prepare might to be gone.
Amongst them then great Ajax spoke and said,
Ulysses come, our labor here is lost;
Let Us carry back his answer, such as 't^s
To Agamemnon and the Argive Host,
Who us expect; since obstinate he is,
And can a thought so savage entertain,
Unkind and unregardful of his friends,
When others for a Son or Brother slain
Can be contented to receive amends,
And let the man that slew him live in rest,
As Soon as they have paid for their misdeed.
But you Achilles harbor in your breast
An everlasting anger without need,
And hurtful to your friends no less than Foes,
For it is but for one maid he took away;
And for her now he seven on you bestows,
And much beside your anger to allay.
Regard your house. We your domestics are,
Nearer than any of the Greeks beside,
And in your honor more concerned by far.
Thus Ajax said. Achilles then replied,
O Ajax, noble Son of Telamon,
I not deny but all you say is well,
But always when that man you mention,
My choler rising makes my heart to swell.
He made me has to the Argives despicable,
As if I were a Fool or Inmate who
Of honor in a Town is incapable,
And with the Public nothing has to do.
Go therefore let Atrides know my mind.
I will no more against the Trojans fight,
Till Hector at my Tents and Ships I find,
And the Argive Fleet be flaming in my sight.
But if he come unto my Ships, I think,
Keen as he is I shall his fury stay.
This said, unto the Gods above they drink,
And then they with his answer went away.
Patroclus then gave order for a bed
With woolly Cov'rings soft and Linen fine
For Phoenix, where he lay ti^l day was spread.
But with Achilles slept a Concubine,
Fair Diomeda whom he brought away
From Lesbos when he had that City sacked,
And in another part Patroclus lay.
Nor he a beautiful Bedfellow lackt
Fair Iphis whom Achilles gave him when
He newly rifled had the Town of Scyros,
And now th'Ambassadors were come again,
And to them store of people flocked, desirous
To hear the news, and Wine unto them brought.
But Agamemnon first inquired and said,
Ulysses, will he save the Fleet or not,
Or is his choler not to be allayed?
And he Achilles answer then related.
The man, said he, retains his anger still.
And now it is greater rather than abated,
And says, to morrow put to Sea he will.
And your Alliance and your Gifts rejects,
And says he would advise us to go home.
Since Jupiter himself the Town protects,
He says in vain we stay at Ilium.
And bids you order take to save the Fleet.
Thus said he, as these know as well as I,
Ajax and both the Heralds men discreet,
Who all the while he spoke were standing by,
And Phoenix too. But he lies there all night,
That ore the Sea together they may go,
If Phoenix will, as soon as it is light;
But forced is not whether he will or no.
When thus Ulysses ended had his story,
All silent were a while and much dismayed
With his denial flat and peremptory.
At last Tydides to them spoke and said,
O King Atrides, we have done amiss
With Gifts and Prayers thus to seek his aid,
That proud before, by this made prouder is.
Let him go when he will. Be not afraid,
But let us refresh our selves to night with Bread
And Wine. For that gives men both strength and heart,
And see your men in the morn imbattelled,
And at the head of them do you your part.
This said, the Princes of the Host admired
The gallant Speech of valiant Diomed:
And every one unto his Tent retired,
With a good will to sleep, and went to bed.
ILIAD. LIB. X.
ALl night the Princes of the Argives slept,
Save Agamemnon, who could take no rest,
But with unquiet thoughts was waking kept,
And casting for his safety what was best.
And frequent as the Lightning flashes are
When Jove is making Rain or Hail in the Skies,
Or somewhere punishing the proud by War;
So frequent then were Agamemnon's sighs.
And when the fires he saw upon the Plain
Made by the Foe, and th'Acclamation
And Shouts he heard, he wondered. But again
When he his Ships and People looked upon,
Then by the roots he plucked off from his Head
Handfuls of Hair, and sighed and groaned more;
And thought it best then to be counseled
By Nestor how he might himself restore.
And rising up his Coat he first puts on,
And to his smooth white feet his Shoes he tied;
And then above his Coat, he cast upon
His Back a great and tawny Lions hide.
And Menelaus too that waking lay
And trembling in his bed all night, for fear
The Greeks that for his sake were come to Troy
Should fall into some great disaster there,
Rose up and to his Brothers Tent went in.
A Spear he had in's hand, and armed was,
Having upon his back a Leopards skin
And on his Head a Helmet good of Brass.
And said to Agamemnon, Brother, Why
So early up? Have you a mind to send
Into the Army of the Foe some Spy?
I fear you will not find so bold a friend
As thither dares to go in the night alone.
Brother (said Agamemnon) you and I
Must better counsel take than we have done,
Since Jove now favors the Enemy,
And takes in Hector's Sacrifice delight.
For so much harm so soon was never done
As he to us has done in one days fight;
Yet nor of God nor Goddess is the Son.
His this days Acts the Greeks will never forget.
But go you to the Princes quickly. Run.
Call up Idomeneus the King of Creet,
And the great Ajax Son of Telamon.
While I call Nestor up and bring him to
The place which is appointed for the guard,
T'instruct the men with what they have to do,
Because his Counsel they will most regard.
For by his Son the Watch commanded is,
And with him we Meriones have joined.
Then Menelaus farther asked him this
(That he might fully understand his mind)
When they are called, what next is to be done?
Must I stay here till you come back again,
Or after you about the Army run?
No, no, said he, where you are now, remain.
But going call upon each one aloud,
And by the name he from his Father takes,
And praise them all, let them not think you proud;
Pain is no shame when it is for our own sakes.
This said they part, and Agamemnon went
To seek out Nestor; whom he found abed,
And all his Armor by him in his Tent,
His Shield, two Spears, and Helmet for his Head,
And Belt of many Colors finely wrought,
Which always he was wont in War to use
When he his people unto Battle brought.
No Labor would he on his age excuse.
Now raised on his Elbow, Who, said he,
Are you that walk abroad when others sleep?
Stay there I say and come no nearer me,
Until your name you tell, at distance keep.
Seek you some Officer or Camerade?
I Agamemnon am, said he, your friend
Whom Jove to bear such miseries has made
As while I live will never have an end;
And in my bed no sleep at all I take
For fear of some unfortunate event.
Unsettled is my Heart, my Limbs all shake,
And in this plight I wandered to your Tent:
And now I pray you, since you waking lie
Come with me to the Watch; for since the Foe
Unto our Wall encamped is so nigh,
They charge us may by night for ought we know.
To this old Nestor answer made and said,
Think not Atrides Jove will all things do
As they are now in Hector's fancy laid?
For harder work he would be put unto
If we Achilles can but once appease.
But go, I Will follow you, and call upon
Tydides and Ulysses if you please,
Ajax the less, and Meges Phyleus Son.
I wish some other man of nimbler feet
Were to great Ajax sent to make him rise,
And to Idomeneus the King of Crete,
Whose quarter from this place a great way lies.
But Menelaus I intend to chide,
That sleeps and leaves the work to you alone.
It Is no fit time within his Tent to abide,
But to the Princes should himself have gone.
To Nestor Agamemnon then replied,
O Nestor, he is often negligent,
And often I have prayed you him to chide.
Yet it is not sloth; but my Commandment
He always looks for though there be no cause.
And yet to night he has prevented me.
For up and armed before me now he was;
And when he came I sent him presently
To call up Ajax and the King of Creet.
And at the Watch we both of them shall see,
Where I appointed have the rest to meet.
Nestor again replied. It Is well, said he,
The Greeks will of him have a better thought,
And readier obedience he will find.
This said, he put himself into his Coat,
And tied his Shoes on, and his Cloak well lined,
And took his Spear in hand. Then on they went
Amongst the Argive Ships upon the sand.
And when they came unto Ulysses Tent,
To call and waken him, they made a stand.
And Nestor with his voice stretched to the height
Called to him by his name. Ulysses straight
Came forth and said, Why come you in the night?
Your business sure must be of mighty we^ght.
O Laertiades, said Nestor then,
Take it not ill. Such is our misery.
But come with us to call up other men,
That we may Counsel take to fight or fly.
Ulysses then returned into his Tent,
And on his shoulder hung his painted Shield;
And with them first to Diomed he went
Whom they found armed in the open field,
His Soldiers sleeping lay about him round,
And on his Buckler each one had his head,
The Butt-ends of their Spears sixth in the ground,
Whereof the points like Lightning glittered.
But he himself slept on a good Cow-hide,
His Head upon a gaudy Carpet laid.
Then Nestor came and standing at his side
Awakt him with his foot and to him said,
Awake Tydides, hear you not how nigh
The Trojans are encamped to the Fleet?
This said, Tydides leapt up suddenly,
And when he raised was upon his feet,
Nestor (said he) unhappy restless man
That aged as you are take not your ease,
When younger men there are that better can
Call up the Argive Princes if they please.
It Is true (said Nestor) I have at my Tent
Sons of my own, and others can command,
Who might upon such Errands have been sent,
But that upon the very brink we stand
Of Life and Death. And since you pity me,
Call little Ajax up, and Phyleus Son.
For young you are, and can do it easily.
Tydides then a Lions skin puts on
Tauny and reaching to his heels, and then
Into his hand he took a heavy Spear,
And out he went and called up those men.
When to the Watch they come together were,
The Captains of the Watch were not asleep,
But all were sitting at their Arms awake.
As Dogs that guarding are a Fold of Sheep
Hearing the noise the Hounds and Hunters make
When in the Woods they chase some savage beast,
And nearer still and nearer hear the cries,
They doubt the worst, and cannot take their rest,
But listening stand and sleep forsakes their eyes;
So watchfully spent they the tedious night,
And ever when of Feet they heard the tread
'Twixt them and Troy, that way they turned their sight;
So much they Hectors coming on did dread.
When Nestor coming by, observed them had,
So, so (said he) brave Lads, continue so,
And give no cause to Hector to be glad.
He and the Princes then together go
(All that to Counsel had been made to rise
Except Meriones and Nestor's Son
Whom they thought worthy with them to advise)
And part the Ditch, and sitting down upon
The place to which they were pursued before
By Hector, who retiring thence lest clear
The ground from dead men's Carcasses and Gore,
Of what they next should do consulted there.
First Nestor spoke. Who dares (said he) to go
Unto the Trojan Camp that lies so near,
And kill, or bring thence some outlying Foe?
Or what they shall resolve upon to hear?
Whether (since they have worsted us) to stay
So near us or retire into the Town.
If this he do and safely come away,
He to himself acquire will great Renown,
And by each one that has of Ships command,
He for his service shall be well requited.
Each one an Ewe and Lamb shall give him, and
He to our public Feastings be invited.
This said, they paused a while, but by and by
Tydides rising spoke. Nestor, said he,
To go into the Trojan Camp dare I.
But 'twould be best some other went with me,
More hope and courage is where there are two;
What one observes not the other may.
A man alone can little see or do,
And single Judgments see but little way.
At these words many with him would have gone,
Ajaxes both the greater and the less
And stout Antilochus old Nestor's Son,
And Menelaus and Meriones.
But most of all Ulysses longed to see
What projects in the Trojan Camp were laid.
For none adventure farther durst than he.
Then to Tydides Agamemnon said,
Tydides, whom I love, now choose your man;
Regard not Birth nor Scepters, but the cause.
Take him that you th^nk best assist you can.
And this he said in fear for Menelaus.
To this Tydides answer made again,
Since of my fellow I the choice must make,
Ulysses I prefer before all men,
And him for my assistant I will take;
So much in diligence he does excel,
And so much care Athena of him has,
That I believe we both should come off well
Though through a flaming fire we were to pass.
Then said Ulysses, Speak no more of me
Nor good nor ill. The Argives know me well.
Let Us go. Two thirds of the night are spent you see,
As any man that sees the Stars can tell.
Then put they on their Arms. And Thrasymed
Gave Diomed a Sword (who had forgot
To bring his own) and to defend his Head
A leather Cap without crest, called a Pot.
Meriones unto Ulysses gave
His Bow and Quiver, Sword and Dogskin Cap
Pleated with thongs within his Head to save
If need should be in Combat, from mishap.
For 'twixt the leathers tough inserted were
Guards of thick felt; of Bores teeth was the brim.
Eleon was the first that did it wear,
But taken by A^tolycus from him.
And given 'twas unto Amphidamus,
Which he to Molon gave that was his guest,
And to Meriones then left it was,
And now upon Ulysses head did rest.
And being both thus armed, forth they went
And by the way a Heron Dexter flew,
A lucky sign and by Athena sent,
As by the sound made by her wings they knew.
Ulysses then unto the Goddess prayed,
Hail Virgin-Daughter of Almighty Jove,
That all my labor see and giv'st me aid,
Now more than ever let me find your love.
Grant me that I some good exploit may do
To vex the Trojans, and come safe from thence.
And then Tydides prayed unto her too.
Celestial Maid that with my Father went
When he Ambassador to Th^b^s was sent
With words of Peace, and coming back achieved
By your assistance and encouragement
Such noble Acts as scarce will be believed,
If you will aid me as you aided him,
O Goddess, I will to you sacrifice
A Heifer, and with Gold her horns I Will trim.
This said, their Suit the Goddess not denies.
When their Devotion now was at an end,
Away they went amongst Carcasses and Blood,
Like Lions that on slaughter love to attend.
Nor Hector and the Trojans idle stood.
But called a Counsel of the Chiefs, and said,
Who Is he will undertake what I Will propound,
And for his pains be honorably paid,
And for his Valor far and near renowned?
I give him will two Horses and a Coach
The best that shall be taken from the Fo,
That will unto the Argive Fleet approach,
And bring me word what they intend to do;
Whether their Ships they guard as heretofore,
Or mean to quit the Siege at Ilium.
And beaten thus haul down their Ships from Shore,
And ere their work be finished go home.
This said, they silent sat. But one there was
Dolon by name, the Squire Eumedes Son
That master was of store of Gold and Brass,
A sorry fellow, but that well could run.
Hector, said he, I Will to the Fleet approach.
Swear now by Jove, and hold your Scepter high,
I shall Achilles Horses have and Coach,
And I for you will be a faithful Spy.
For down to Agamemnon's Tent I Will go,
Where they consult whether to Fight or Fly:
For there their resolution I shall know.
Then Hector held his Scepter up on high.
O Jove, betwixt us witness bear, said he,
No Trojan shall these Horses have but you,
And yours they shall perpetually be.
Thus Hector swore, although it proved not true.
Upon his Shoulder then his Bow he hung.
His Cap of Cat, a Wolfs skin was his Coat.
And when he gotten clear was from the throng,
With Spear in hand he ^ell into his trot.
And first Ulysses heard the sound of feet.
I hear one come, said he to Diomed,
Perhaps a Spy that sent is to our Fleet,
Or one that has a mind to strip the dead.
It Is best to avoid him till he past us be.
And then to follow him and drive him on.
But lest he swifter be of foot than we,
And to the City back again should run,
Rise and be sure to turn him with your Spear.
And when he was a lands length past them go^e
They followed him. And he their feet did hear,
And thought some Trojans had been coming on
By Hector sent to call him back again.
But when they from him were scarce a Spears cast,
He knew then they were Agamemnon's men,
And frighted was; and then his Feet moved fast.
As two Hounds in a Wood obscure and dim
Pursue a fearful Do or Hare, just so
Tydides and Ulysses hunted him
When back into the Herd he could not go.
When Dolon to the Watch was very near,
Athena puts into Tydides head,
That some man else might at him throw a Spear,
And be thereby before him honored.
To Dolon then Tydides spoke and said,
Stay, or my Spear shall make you stay. For long
I am assured you cannot death avoid.
And as he spoke the word his Spear he flung;
And missed on purpose, but it lighted near.
Dolon affrighted pale and trembling stands,
And in his head chatter'd his Teeth with fear.
Then in they came and seized on both his hands.
And Dolon weeping then for Quarter prayed,
Great Ransom for me will my Father give,
For Gold he has enough; and will, he said,
Give any price, when here he knows I live.
Then to him said Ulysses, Do not fear,
Nor think of death. But see you tell me true
Upon what weighty business you are here,
When others sleep, and at a time undue.
Meant you to rifle any of the dead?
Or were you sent by Hector as a Spy,
Or undertook the same of your own Head?
TO Ulysses Dolon then did thus reply.
I was by Hector's promises set on,
And should have had Achilles Chariot
And Horses, if I to the Fleet had gone,
And good intelligence to Hector brought
Whether the Ships be guarded as before,
Or that the G^^eks now beaten mean to fly,
And weary of their labor watch no more.
To this again Ulysses made reply,
And smiling said, It was no small reward
You aimed at. Achilles Horses say ye?
To rule them for a mortal man it is hard.
The Goddess ^hetis Son they will scarce obey.
But tell me further; When you came away
Where you left Hector, where his Horses are,
And where his Arms, where other Trojans stay
To sleep or watch, and whether they prepare
To go into the Town, or mean to abide
Always so near our Ships as they are now.
TO Ulysses Dolon then again replied,
This also I will let you truly know.
I Hector left at Ilus Sepulcher
With other Lords in consultation,
The rest about the Bonfires waking were.
But certain Watch appointed there was none.
But those Confederates that came from far
Slept at their ease all night and watched not.
For that they trusted to the Trojans care,
Having no Wives nor Children with them brought.
Ulysses then examined him again,
How lie the Strangers? Mixed with those of Troy
Or by themselves? Inform me and be plain.
Nothing (said Dolon) but the truth I Will say.
Paeons, Pelasgians, Caucons, Leleges,
And Cars lie by the Seaside on the Sands,
The rest near Thymbra quarter, and are these;
The Maeons, Mysia^s, Lycians, Phrygians.
But there is no need to tell you every thing;
For if upon our Quarters you would fall,
There lie the Thracians new come, and their King
Rhesus by name, and utmost lies of all.
Such Horses yet I never did behold,
Swift as the Wind, and than the Snow more white,
With Silver covered is his Charre, and Gold;
Gold are his Arms and make a gallant sight,
And fitter for a God than man to wear.
But try now whether I say true or no,
And send me to the Ships, or bind me here.
Then said Tydides with a frowning Brow,
Think not to escape though all you say be true.
For if I let you loose, for ought I know
You may return again to Fight or View;
But hurt us cannot if I kill you now.
As Dolon then beginning was to pray
Tydides sword lighted on's Neck so just,
That from his Shoulders fell his Head away
As he was speaking, and lay in the dust.
And from him then they took his Cap of Cat,
His Spear and Wolfes-skin Coat, and Bow unbent,
And in his hands Ulysses took all that,
And to Minerva up his Prayer sent.
Hail Pallas, whom we prayed to for success
Before all other Gods, receive these Gifts,
And us unto the Thracian Tents address.
This said, the Spoils of Dolon up he lifts
And lays them in a Tree; and for a mark,
They near the way laid store of Boughs and Reeds
To find them coming back because 'twas dark.
Then with Tydides onward he proceeds,
And every step on Arms or Blood they tread,
And soon amongst the Thracians they were,
That sleeping lay as if they had been dead,
And by each one his Buckler and his Spear.
Their Horses to the Charret-seats were tied.
Thus in three Rows the Thracians were laid,
Rhesus in the midst; which first Ulysses spied,
And to Tydides speaking softly said,
See there the Horses, and see there the Man
Rhesus, of whom we were by Dolon told.
Untie the Horses; or kill all you can,
And I upon the Horses will lay hold.
Tydides then made by Minerva bold
Amongst them killing went, and never staid
(Like Lion fierce in a neglected fold)
Till he a dozen of them dead had laid.
And whomsoever Diomedes slew,
Ulysses following took him by the Foot
And from the place a little way him drew,
For fear the Steeds not yet accustomed to it
Should boggle, tremble, and refuse to pass.
To Rhesus last of all went Diomed,
And killed him too. So he the thirteenth was.
And panted as he slept; for at his Head
He dreamt Tydides all night standing was.
Ulysses to the Horses went; And now
Seized, and their Heads together tied has.
But for a Whip he made use of his Bow.
And gotten forth whistled to Diomed
To come away, who gave no ear thereto,
But staying with himself considered
What further hurt he might the Trojans do.
To draw away the Charret by the Pole,
Wherein the Golden Arms of Rhesus lay,
Or thence upon his Shoulders bear the whole;
Or whether he more Thracians should destroy.
While thus he studied Pallas by him stood.
Contented be, said she, with what is done.
To go unto the Ships I think it good,
For fear you thither should be forced to run.
Some other God awake the Trojans may.
This said, that Pallas to him spoke he thought,
And from the Thracian Quarter came away,
And on one of the Horses backs he got,
And toward the Ships at full speed then they ride,
Ulysses with his Bow still switching on.
But Phoebus with Tydides Pallas spied,
And angerly called up Hippocoon.
Who when he came and empty saw the ground
Where th'horses stood, and died with blood the field,
And sprawling in their blood the Thracians found,
Ay me, said he, they have my Uncle killed.
The Trojans then in haste and frighted rise,
And at the place in great disorder mere,
And gaze upon the mischief with their eyes,
But they that did it fled were to the Fleet.
When flying they were at the Tree, where lay
The Spoils of Delon, there a while they tarry,
Until Tydides fetched them had away,
And to Ulysses given them to carry,
And mounted was upon his Horse again.
Again Ulysses switch'd them toward the Fleet;
And when they near it were, Old Nestor then
Who was the first that heard the Horses Feet
Cried out, The sound of Horses feet I hear;
I wish Ulysses 'twere and Diomed.
But somewhat else and worse it is I fear;
So many sad mishaps run in my Head.
He scarce had spoken this but they came in.
When they alighted were and welcomed
With Hands and Speeches of their Friends had been,
Then Nestor thus Ulysses questioned.
Ulysses, Glory of the Greeks, said he,
Whence are these Horses beauteous as the Sun?
Won from the Trojans? But that cannot be.
For such amongst the Trojans I saw none,
Though I amongst them were in every fight.
Or given by the Gods? Which may be true.
For both of you are gracious in their sight,
And Jove and Pallas have a care of you.
O Noble Nestor, said Ulysses then,
Gods can give better Horses if they please.
For richer much are they than mortal men.
Tydides from a King of Thrace took these,
Who was come newly to the Trojans aid;
And slain him has, besides a dozen more,
And besides these a Spy that them betrayed,
By Hector sent, your purpose to explore.
This said, Ulysses with much people went
Triumphing, and the milk white Horses drove
Over the Trenches to Tydides Tent.
There sets them up, and Wheat unto them gave;
But Dolon's Spoils astern his Ship he placed,
Preparing for Athena's Sacrifice.
And then into the Sea they went and washed
The sweat from off their Shoulders, Legs and Thighs,
And after bath, and 'noint themselves with oil,
That done, they sit down to their meat and dine.
And being thus refreshed from their toil,
Unto the Goddess Pallas offer Wine.
ILIAD. LIB. XI.
AUrora rising from Tithonus bed
Before both Gods and Men to hold her light,
Eris from Jove the Signal carried
Unto the Argive Fleet of bloody Fight.
And down unto Ulysses Sh^p she went
That was the middlemost and highest of all
That heard she might be to Achilles Tent,
And Ajaxes, that they might hear her call.
At the outsides of the Fleet they quartered were;
For they upon their Prowess most reli'd:
Then Eris with her voice the Air did tear,
And horribly to the Achaeans cried.
Come quickly forth into the Field and fight;
Be bold Achaeans; to the Battle come.
Encouraged thus the Greeks took more delight
In staying at the War than going home.
Fellows, to Arms, then Agamemnon cried,
And to put on his Arms the first man was;
His Leg-pieces he down to the Anckles ti'd
With silver Buckles, Leg-pieces of Brass;
And then puts on an Armor on his breast,
That had been given him by Cinyres
(His ancient acquaintance and his Guest)
Whilst he preparing was to pass the Seas:
For long before the Greeks for Troy set sail,
Their purpose was at Cyprus known by fame,
And thinking such a Gift might him avail,
In kindness to Agamemnon sent the same.
The color was by Pales distinguished,
Ten Black, twelve Gold, and twenty were of Tin:
And in it three black Serpents figured
As if they creeping were unto his Chin.
Their sides like Rainbows looked which in the Sky
Are shown by Jove for men to wonder at.
Then from his shoulder down upon his thigh
He hung his Sword. Studded with Gold was that.
Then took his Shield which finely varied was;
Bossed in twenty places with white Tin;
And round about them were ten Orbs of Brass;
And black the Circle was enclosed within.
There Gorgo painted was with killing Eyes,
And with her standing Terror and Affright:
His Belt of silver was, and to the Skies
Returned back again the glittering light.
Wound up lay on it painted a great Snake,
Which had three heads, and crowned was each one,
And last into his hand two Spears did take,
Having his Helmet on his head put on.
Thus Agamemnon armed was. And then
Juno and Pallas both raised such a sound
(To honor him before the Greeks) as when
A man that is slain falls suddenly to the ground.
Then every one unto his Chariotier
Commandment gave upon the Ditch to stay
And ready be. The foot all armed were,
And forth into the Field were marched away.
But soon again the Horses with them stood.
Then Jove amongst them Noise and Tumult sent;
And mingled was the Morning dew with Blood,
For on that day much blood was to be spent.
Upon a rising ground now Hector was,
Aeneas with him, and Polydamas,
And three Sons of Antenor, Acamas,
Agenor, Polybus, and The Army was.
And Hector with a round Shield at their head.
As when a Star does through the Clouds appear,
And presently again is covered;
Sometimes in the Front was, sometimes in the Rear
Giving command; his Arms like Lightning show.
As Mowers standing one Rank against another,
A field of Barley or of Wheat to mow;
So Greeks and Trojans mow down one the other.
On neither side thought any man of flight,
But like to Wolves on one another fly
In number equal; and gave great delight
To Eris, who (and no God else) was by.
The other Gods stayed on Olympus Hill,
Within whose folds they dwell, and murmured at
Their Father Jove for bearing such good will
To Ilium. But he cared not for that.
And by himself he from them went; and then
Took pride to see the Greeks and Trojans fight,
And look on killing and on dying men,
And of their Arms to see the slashing light.
Now all the while that mounting was the Sun,
The number slain on both sides was the same.
But when the Woodman half his work had done,
And willingly unto his Dinner came,
The Greeks then brake the Trojan Ranks, and on
Fell Agamemnon, and Bienor slew,
Both him and Ocles his Companion
That drove the Horses which the Charret drew.
He lighting and assailing him was slain;
And Ocles had no time his Spear to throw:
For Agamemnon's Spear had pierced his brain,
Passing both through his Helmet and his Brow.
These there he left stripped both of Arms and Coat,
And Antiphus and Isus then drew near,
Both Priams Sons, one legal, the other not,
Upon one Seat, and Isus Charretier.
Once by Achilles taken were these men
As they were feed^ng Sheep in Ida hills,
And for their Ransom were set free again;
But both of them now Agamemnon kills.
For Isus Breast he pierced through with his Spear;
The other with his sword he overthrew,
And seen him had when he was Prisoner,
And that 'twas Antiphus (when stripped) he knew.
As when a Lion with his mighty Teeth
Crusheth the tender issue of a Hind,
Which the afrighted Dam stands by and sees,
And grieveth, but no remedy can find;
And skipping in the Woods for shelter seeks
To save her own life; So the Trojans fled
Pursued by Agamemnon and the Greeks,
And thought not on their fellows they left dead.
TO Hyppolochus then comes he and Pisander,
Sons of Antimachus, a person noted
For having Gold received of Alexander,
And for it in the Common Counsel voted.
And these two Agamemnon took alive.
For by mischance the reins slipped from their hands;
And then they saw it was in vain to strive,
And Agamemnon now before them stands.
Then as they sat together on one Seat,
Save us (said they) Atrides, let us live,
For we redeemed shall be with Ransom great,
Our Father for us what you please will give.
Are you Antimachus his Son, said he,
That gave advice to murder Menelaus,
Contrary to the Laws of honesty,
When of the Greeks Ambassador he was,
And with Ulysses sent into the Town?
You for your Father's evil deed must pay.
Then from his Char Pisander he struck down;
With Breast pierced through upon his Back he lay.
Hyppolochus was lighted and on foot,
And with the sword of Agamemnon slain,
Who cuts his Head off, and his Hands to boot.
And then upon the Trojans pressed again.
And great the slaughter was of them that fled,
And wonderful the Dust that raised was,
And both the Field and Army covered,
Forced up by Troops of Horses shod with Brass.
As Boughs fall in a Wood that is set on flame,
And shaken by the violence of wind;
So fast unto the ground the Trojans came,
When Agamemnon followed them behind.
And many Horses made their Charrets rattle,
Which empty ran about when no man drives.
For they that drove them fallen were in the Battle,
A lovelier sight to Vulturs than their Wives.
But Hector was by Jove set out of sight
Of all this dust and slaughter and disorder:
But Agamemnon still with all his might
Pursuing killed, and to kill gave order.
Then they that were encampt at Ilus Tomb
Retired in haste unto the Sycamore,
Half the Plain over toward Ilium,
And after them Atrides coverd ore
With Blood and Dust. But when the Trojans were
Got back unto the Beech near Scaea gate,
A while they for their fellows stayed there
Who swiftly ran fearing to come too late.
As when a Lion falls in the Night
Upon a herd of Kine, and one must die,
And all the rest are put into a fright,
So Agamemnon made the Trojans fly.
And all the way he went the hindmost killed.
And from their Chars some forward fell, and some
Upon their Backs, and lay dead on the field.
But when unto the Wall they near were come,
Then Jove came down to Ida from the Sky
With Thunder in his hand, and to Iris laid,
Go Iris quickly, and tell Hector I
Command him Agamemnon to avoid
As long as in the Front he raging is,
And let the Fight by others managed be.
But when he Agamemnon wounded sees
And leave the Field, I Will give the Victory
To him, and he shall put them all to flight,
And to the Fleet go killing all the way,
Until the Sun be set, and dark the night.
This said, away she went without delay;
And down from Ida came to Ilium,
And finding him upon his Char, To you
From Jove (said she) O Hector, I am come
To warn you Agamemnon to eschew,
As long as in the Front he raging is.
And let the Fight by others managed be;
But when by Spear or Bow he wounded is
And leaves the Field, he will give the Victory
To you, and you shall put them all to flight,
And to the Fleet go killing all the way,
Until the Sun be set, and dark the night.
Having thus said, she did no longer stay.
Then Hector armed leapt unto the ground,
And with two Spears well pointed in his hand
Exhorting went about the Army round.
Their Faces then the Trojans turn, and stand.
The first that did advance Atrides was.
But tell me Muse, Who first came in his way?
One of Antenor's Sons Iphidamas,
That was brought up in Thrace (though born at Troy)
By Cisseus who his Mothers Father was,
From childhood till to man's estate he came,
And made his Son in-Law. But then, because
The coming of the Greeks was known by Fame,
Was thence, although but new espoused, sent
To th'aid of Priam and his Sons at Troy,
And at Percopa landing to Ilium went,
And now was standing in Atrides way.
First Agamemnon threw his Spear and mist.
Iphidamas then at Atrides threw,
And hit his Belt which did the stroke resist,
For massy Silver was the Belt and true,
And bent the po^nt as if it had been Lead.
Then Agamemnon with his Sword came on,
And smote him on the Neck, and laid him dead.
Thus died Iphidamas Antenor's Son.
And much to be lamented was his case,
That far from his espoused Virgin Wife
Without receiving from her any grace
Should fighting for his Country lose his Life.
He given for her had a thousand Kine,
And promised Sheep and Goats a thousand more.
Now slain, and stripped was of his Armor fine
By Agamemnon and triumphed ore.
But Coon then, Antenor's eldest Son
Incensed by his Brothers death came in,
And pierced Atrides Arm close by the Bone
(Unseen) the Elbow and the Wrist between.
Then cold was Agamemnon's heart with fear,
But gave not over. For as (...) drew
His Brother off, He came on with his Spear,
And with a thrust, beneath his Shield him slew,
And (on his Brother) then cuts off his head.
Thus these two Brothers finished their Fate.
Atrides still the slaughter followed
With Spear, and Sword, and Stones of mighty weight,
Not giving over whilst the wound was warm.
But when 'twas cleans'd, and stayed was the Blood,
So cruel then the pain was in his Arm,
That on the ground no longer stay he could.
Then mounted on his Chariot, he said,
Drive to the Ships. For he was in great pain.
And on the Princes then the charge he laid,
The Fight against the Trojans to maintain.
My friends, said he, it is your part now to stay
The fury of the Trojans from our Ships;
Since Jove not suffers me to fight all day.
This said, the Chariotier his Horses whips.
Which when they felt, away they swift^y went,
And stained with Sweat and Powder of the Plain
Brought wounded Agamemnon to his Tent,
From off the Field bestrow'd with Bodies slain.
As Soon as Hector saw Atrides gone,
Now Trojans, Dardans, Lycians (he cried)
Now charge the Greeks with resolution,
For he is gone on whom they most relied,
And Jove assures me that the day is mine.
This said, like Hounds encouraged by the Hunter
Against a Lion or a tusked Swine,
The Trojans boldly marched to the encounter,
And on them fell with Hector at the head.
And as a downright Wind the Sea, so he
The Argive Ranks and Files disordered,
And them that fled pursued furiously.
But tell me Muse, whilst Hector Priam's Son
By Jove assisted did the Greeks pursue,
And great renown amongst the Trojans won,
Who and how many were the men he slew.
Assaeus first, and then Autonous,
Oplites, Dolops, and Opheltius,
And then Aesymnus, and Agelaus;
Then Orus, and the last Hipponous.
All these were Princes in the Argive host.
But look how many are the drops of Dew,
When into The Air the Sea by Winds is tossed,
So many private Soldiers Hector slew.
And then incurable their loss had been,
And fled had to their Ships the Greeks dismayed,
Had not Ulysses then the same foreseen,
And to Tydides not far from him said,
Tydides, to what purpose stand we here?
Come hither man and stand close to my side.
To let our Ships be lost great shame it were.
Tydides to Ulysses then replied.
Yes, yes Ulysses I will with you bide,
Though we shall take but little pleasure here.
For Jove I see inclines to their side.
This said, he at Thymbraeus threw his Spear,
Which lighting on his left Pap pierced him through.
Ulysses slew Molion Priams man;
Upon the Field unstript they left these two.
And then into the Trojan throng they ran,
(Whilst the other Greeks from Hector swiftly fly)
Like two wild Boars that turn upon the hounds
That know they may upon their strength rely,
And scatter amongst the Trojans death and wounds.
And there two valiant Sons of Merops killed
As they together on one Chariot sat.
This Merops was in Prophecy well sk^ll'd,
And bad them stay, and told them had their Fate.
But the two forward Youths would not obey.
But sed unto the War by Destiny
Unluckily came in Tydides way,
Where by his hand their Fortune 'twas to die.
Hippodama^ was by Ulysses killed
As also was ^ypirichus; and now
None knew who had the better in the Field
But Jove, who looked on from Ida Brow.
And then Agastrophus King Paeons Son
Was by Tydides wounded in the Thigh,
And would have fled, but Horses he had none.
His man that held them for him was not nigh.
Yet fought he amongst the foremost till he di'd.
This Hector saw, and toward Diomed
His Horses turned, and to the Trojans cried,
Come follow me, and they all followed.
And Diomed as soon as he saw this,
Though chill with fear, unto Ulysses said,
To us this plaguey Hector rolling is;
But stand, and let him see we are not afraid.
This said, he straight at Hector threw his Spear,
Which hit his Helmet, but glanced from the Brass,
And never to his tender Skin came near.
This Helmet given him by Apollo was.
But stunned he was, and resting on his knees,
He kept himself from falling with his hand.
Dark are his eyes, nothing at all he sees,
And for a while unable is to stand.
But whilst Tydides on the plain advanced
To get into his hand again the Spear,
Which from the place he aimed at far was glanced,
Hector was mounted, and his Senses clear.
Tydides then upon him looked and said,
Thou Dog escapt an evil death thou have;
And twice been saved by Apollo's aid.
But sure I shall dispatch thee at the last:
For of a God I also have the aid.
But now to other Trojans I Will go on
Such as shall come into my way. This said,
Away he went to strip King Paeons Son.
And then as Diomed was taking from
Agasrophus the Armor of his Breast,
Paris that leaning stood at Il^s Tomb,
To him an Arrow unperceived addressed.
Which hit him on the Foot above the Toes,
And to the ground clean thorough went the Shaft.
Then openly into the Field he goes,
And coming nearer to him spoke, and laughed.
You Are hit, said he, Tydides. Would it had
Been on your Belly, that you might have died,
The Trojans would of that be very glad,
That are so often by you terrified.
Proud boasting Archer (said Tydides) know
If in your Armor you before me stood
To try your Valor and your Force, your Bow
And Arrows would not do you any good.
You value such a Scratch as this too much.
The Weapons of the strengthless blunted are:
Mine is not so; but whom it does but touch,
His Wife lamenting tears her Cheeks and Hair:
His Children Orphans are; and red the ground
Whereon he rotting lies; and Vulters more
Than Women standing by him will be found.
Ulysses then that near him was before
Stepped in* and stood betwixt him and his Foes
Whilst from his Foot the Arrow he pulled out.
(...) to his Charret up Tydides goes,
And lest the Field where he had nobly fought.
And now Ulysses left was all alone,
For from him all the rest were fled for fear.
And then unto himself he made his moan.
Ay me, said he, what now shall I do here?
Though many be the Foes, it is ill to fly
But yet since Jove saves all the rest by flight,
It would be worse if I alone should die.
But why dispute I when I ought to fight?
None but a Coward from the Fight will run.
But he that Honor loves will stand his ground,
And be content with what he cannot shun,
Whether it be to give or take a wound.
While thus Ulysses argued in his mind,
Hector was near him, and enclosed him had
With Ta^getiers before him and behind,
Whereof they had no reason to be glad.
At when the Hounds by Hunters are set on
A wild Boar as he comes out from the Wood,
He whets his Teeth, they from him will not run;
Even so Ulysses amongst the Trojans stood;
Where by him slain first Deiopites was,
And Thoon then and Eunomus he killed;
And after these he slew Chersidamas
As from his Char he lighted in the Field.
Then leaving these, slew Charops with his Spear,
Socus his Brother, Hippasus his Son.
Then Socus to him came, and standing near
Unto Ulysses with a Speech begun.
Ulysses much renowned for Craft and Pain,
This day you either must the Honor wear
Of having Hippasus his two Sons slain,
Or lose your own life wounded by my Spear.
Then threw his Spear and pierced Ulysses Shield.
His Breast plate, and his Coat, and toar his Skin.
But Pallas him preserved from being killed;
For to the Vital parts it went not in.
Ulysses knew the wound not mortal was;
Made a step back, and then to Socus said,
Fool that thou art, that would not let me pass
On other Trojans have thy self destroyed,
I do not think you shall this hour outlive,
But from my Spears sharp point receive your death,
And unto me more Reputation give,
And leave your Soul unto the Powers beneath.
Then Socus turned himself about to fly.
But overtaken by Ulysses Spear,
That pierced him Back and Breast, he fell down dead.
Then scornfully Ulysses did him jear.
O Socus, gallant man at Arms, said he,
By death prevented is your Enterprise;
Your eyes shall not by Parents closed be,
But shall be pecked out by Crows and Pyes.
Then from his Shield and Body he pulled out
The Spear which at him was by Socus thrown.
The Blood then from the Wound did freely spout.
Which when the Trojans saw, they straight came down,
And all together toward him went the Rabble,
Then he retired, and as he going was
Thrice called out as loud as he was able
For help; and thrice was heard by Menelaus,
Who to Ajax said, Ulysses voice I hear,
And like the voice of one that is distressed.
He hemmed in by the Trojans is I fear,
Come let us to him go, and do our best
To fetch him off. For valiant though he be,
I fear unless we aid him with great speed,
He by the Trojans will be slain, and we
Loose a good man, of whom we often have need.
Then up they went, and found him by the Foes
Environed round. As when a Stag is shot
By some young man, he swiftly from him goes
Whilst strong his knees are and his blood is hot.
But when he by the Arrow tamed is,
The Wolves feed on him in the gloomy Wood;
Then comes the Lion and the Prey is his.
About Ulysses so the Trojans stood,
Till Ajax with a Target like a Tower
Came to his aid; then several ways they fled.
Ulysses now no longer in their Power
Was from the Field by Menelaus led,
And mounted on his Chariot again.
But on went Ajax, and slew Pandocus
King Priams Son, and wounded three good men,
Lisander, Pylartes, and Pyrasus.
Then as a River coming to the Plain,
And swelled by Jupiter with showr's of rain
More than the Banks are able to contain,
Bears Oaks and Pines before it to the Main;
So Ajax charged the Trojan Troops. But this
Hector knew nothing of. For far off now
Upon Scamander Banks he fighting is,
And to the ground does many an Argive throw.
There was the noise, there aged Nestor stood,
And there Idomeneus, with their Steeds.
And Hector that the use well understood
Of Spears and Horses, there did mighty deeds.
And yet the Greeks retired not; nor had done
If Paris had not with an Arrow smot
Machaon on the shoulder to the Bone.
Three-sorked was the Arrow which he shot.
And mightily the Argives were afraid
Since now the Foe prevailed, he would be slain.
To Nestor then Idomeneu^ said,
O Nestor to your Charret mount again,
And with Machaon make haste to the Ships.
A Surgeon many other men is worth.
For many other men alive he keeps
By making Salves and drawing Weapons forth.
Then Nestor mounteth and the Horses whips,
Which they no sooner feel than they are gone.
And quickly brought unto the hollow Ships
Machaon Aesculapius his Son.
Mean while Cebriones the Charetier
Of Hector saw the Trojans were distressed,
And to him said, To what end stay we here
Since yonder by the Greeks our Friends are pressed?
It Is Ajax that disorders them, I see,
I know him by the largeness of his Shield.
Now where they fighting are most furiously,
Let us go down to that side of the Field.
This said, he clackt his Whip, his Horses ran
Unto the place where greatest was the Cry,
Ore many a Shield, and over many a man,
That gasping on the bloody Field did lie.
The Horses Bellies and the Charret-wheels
And Axletrees with blood were covered ore
Forced up in drops by the swift Horses heels.
And Hector rushing in, their Battles tore.
But Hector still took heed of Ajax Spear.
And sought in other places of the Field.
But Ajax struck by Jupiter with Fear
Amazed, at his shoulder hung his Shield;
And staring on the Foe a while he stood,
Then turned and softly from them went away.
As when a Lion coming from the Wood
Down to a Pasture on a Cow to prey,
Is hu'd by Dogs and Pesants in the night,
And hungry sometimes goes and sometimes stands,
But cannot have his Will for all his might,
So many Spears are flying from their hands,
And flaming Brands which put him in a fright
(Keen as he is) then sullenly he goes
Back to the Wood and comes no more in sight;
So then retired Ajax from his Foes.
Or as an Ass in spite of many Boes
Is got into the Corn, and there abides
Though they upon him fall with Blows and Noise,
And many Cudgels break upon his sides
(For he the force of Boys but little feels)
He hardly will be driven out though filled,
And now and then kicks at them with his heels:
So Ajax at the last went off the Field
By Hector and the Trojans still pursued
Upon his Shield received many a Spear;
Sometimes his Back sometimes his face he showed,
So that they could not to the Ships come near.
Thus he between the Greeks and Trojans stands
While Spears abundance at him hurled were;
Some in his Shield stuck driven by strong hands,
Some on the ground fell short and fixed were there.
But then Eurypylus Euaemon's Son
That saw him thus oppressed came to his side,
And wounded with his Spear Apisaon
The Liver through; and on the place he died.
But as he stripped him lying on the ground
Was shot by Alexander in the Thigh,
And broken was the Arrow in the wound,
And much increased was his pain thereby.
Then went Eurypylus into the crowd,
And cried out to the Princes of the Host,
Turn and save noble Ajax from this cloud
Of Trojan Spears, or else he will be lost.
This said, the best Commanders to him go
with Spears advanced, and Bucklers turned before,
And place themselves between him and the Fo.
And then again the Fight was very sore.
Mean while Achilles as he sitting was
On high astern his Ship to see them fight
Perceived Nestor and Machaon pass,
And to Patroclus called with all his might,
Come hither friend. Patroclus heard him call,
For he was sitting in Achilles Tent,
And (which was the beginning of his fall)
Immediately rose up and to him went,
And said, Achilles what is your will with me?
Achilles then replied, Patroclus now
The Argives, I believe, will bend the knee.
For their condition never was so low.
But go to Nestor and informed be
Who it is that he brought with him from the Fight.
Machaon by his Back he seemed to me,
But of his Face I could not have a sight,
So many Chars and Horses crossed the way.
This said, unto the Ships Patroclus went;
But at the Ships arrived now were they,
Alighted and gone in to Nestor's Tent:
The Horses by Eurymedon untied
Were cooled by the Seaside in the air,
And of their sweat well cleansed were and dried,
And in the mean time Ecameda fair
That was the Daughter of Arsinous,
And taken by Achilles was when he
Conquered and sacked the City Tenedus,
And by the Greeks to Nestor given; and she
To Nestor and Machaon sets up
A Table with a Black Foot smooth and fine,
And on it set a Basket, and a Cup,
And to each one before him set on Wine.
The Cup with nails of Gold was studded ore;
Four ears it had, and two Doves at each ear,
And those were Gold, and at the foot two more
In posture such as if they feeding were.
Nestor to Troy had with him brought this Cup.
Another scarce could lift it from the Table
When filled with Wine; Though he to take it up,
Old as he was, and easily, was able.
And in the same the Woman made the Drink,
With Goats-milk Cheese, and white flour sprinkled ore,
And left it on the Board full to the brink.
Then quenched they their thirst, and drank no more,
But talking sat, to put out of their thought
Their ill success. Now at the door of the Tent
Patroclus was, and in by Nestor brought,
And prayed to sit, but he would not consent,
But said, Achilles had me ask you who
It is whom you brought with you from the Fight.
And this already I can answer to.
Machaon it is that sits there in my sight.
What need then is there of my longer stay?
Return I will with all the speed I can,
For fear he should some blame upon me lay
Though I deserve it not. You know the man.
What makes Achilles (aged Nestor said)
Of the Argive wounded men to take such care?
He knows not how the Army is dismayed,
Nor yet how many of them wounded are.
Ulysses wounded is and Diomed,
And Agamemnon, and Eurypylus,
And this man whom I with me hither led.
Achilles pity has on none of us;
Although our safety now lie in his hands.
Intends he to sit still till Hector burn
In spite of us our Ships upon the Sands,
And every one of us kill in his turn?
For now my strength decayed is with age.
O that I were as strong as I was then
When War 'twixt us and the Elians did rage,
And we our Cattle fetched from them again,
And slew Itymoneus that took our Kine.
For I then went his Cattle to distrain,
And take amends for those he took of mine.
There he defending them by me was slain,
And all his people from him ran away.
And there we took of fifty Herds of Kine
And of as many Herds of Goats a prey,
As many Flocks, as many Herds of Swine,
And Horses three times fifty, females all
Of color sandy mixed with sparks of light;
And most of them had Foals, and to the Wall
Of Pyle I brought this booty all by night.
My Father Neleus joyful was to see it.
For yet he thought I was for War too young.
Next morn the Criers make the people meet,
(All those to whom the Elians had done wrong)
The Lords amongst them then divide the prey.
Many there were that had been injured,
And with their shares contented sent away,
Though Pylus were not well inhabited.
For Hercules not many years before
Had killed the best of them. And Neleus then
Had twelve good Sons, whereof he left no more
Alive but me. This made the Epeian men
Despise our number small, and do us wrong.
And Neleus now unto himself did keep
The best Herd of the Kine, and from among
The Flocks chose one that had three hundred sheep,
And justly, since so great a loss had none.
For he four Steeds unto the Games had sent
Of value great, which all had Prizes won.
But by Augias his Commandment,
When for a Tripod they prepared to run,
Together with the Charrs were there detained.
The Charretiers related what was done.
And Neleus then the best of the Prey retained;
And every man had of the rest his share.
This done, unto the Gods we sacrifice.
Mean while the Elians for War prepare,
And two days after all together rise,
And forth of the Town went they both Foot and Horse,
And with them Molions two Sons, not yet
Arrived at the age of Martial Force,
And round about the Town Colone sir.
Colone is a Frontier town between
Elis and Pyle upon Alphaeus side;
Passing the Plain they were by Pallas seen.
And she aloud unto the Pylians cried,
To Arms you men of Pyle. Then in the night
We put on Arms, and to the Field we hi'd;
And cheerfully went every one to fight.
My Horses only were conveyed aside.
For Neleus thought I was in War unskilled:
But I at home could not be made to abide,
But with the rest on foot went to the Field,
For on the Goddess Pallas I relied.
Near to Arene falls into the Main
A little Brook. All night by that we lay,
And in the Morn betime we marched again,
And to Alphaeus came in half a day.
And there to Jove his sacred Rites we paid.
To Neptune and Alphaeus each a Bull;
An Heifer to the heavenly martial Maid
We gave; and when the Bands of Foot were full,
Then supt we in our Ranks, and armed slept.
The Epeians still the Town besieging lay;
But seeing the War was now so near them crept,
They rose; then presently began the Fray.
And there the first man that was slain I slew,
Which Molius was Augias Son in-Law.
He wedded Acameda had who knew
As many Medicines as the world ere saw.
Him first I slew, and to his Charret mounted.
Then fled the Epeians scattered here and there:
For he the best amongst them was accounted.
And us they fled I followed with my Spear,
And fifty Charrets took, and at each one
Two men I killed; for like a Storm I went;
Nor had I left to Molius any Son,
If Neptune had not hindered my intent,
That took them up and saved them in a Cloud.
Great honor won the Pyleans that day;
For on the Plains we chased the Epeians proud,
Killing and gathering Armor all the way
Until we came unto Buprasium,
Alesium, and Rock Olere; and there
Advised we were by Pallas to go home.
To Pylus then we went and welcome were.
And thanks were given to the Gods, but most
To Jupiter the greatest God. And then
In general were thanked all the Host,
And Nestor namely above other men.
Thus I behaved my self amongst the Greeks,
Whereas Achilles sitting in his Tent
Neglecting us his own contentment seeks;
Though if our Fleet be lost he will repent.
But, O Patroclus, the advice was good
Menoetius your Father gave you then
When I at Phthia was and by him stood,
By Agamemnon sent to levy men.
To Peleus house Ulysses came and I,
And there we found Menoetius and you.
And you upon Achilles waited nigh,
And Peleus to the Gods sat Cattle slew
In The Court of the grass (a Gold Cup in his hand)
And poured Wine on the burning Sacrifice.
And you then saw us in the Gate House stand,
Though busy you were then to burn the Thighs.
Achilles to us came and led us in,
And made us sup, and Supper being done,
To tell our business then did I begin,
Which was to bring with us to Troy his Son.
Both he and you desirous were to go;
And Peleus then unto Achilles said,
Strive still to be the best, and let the Foe
Be always of your Spear the most afraid.
Then to you spoke your Father, Son (said he)
Achilles is a better man of War
Than you, and higher in Nobility
Of Blood; but you in age before him are.
Give him good counsel therefore and suggest
What Is for his good although he see it not:
He will obey when for himself it is best;
Thus he advised you though you have forgot.
But do it now. For it is not yet too late.
Who knows but you may make him change his mind?
Or if he still continue obstinate,
Or in some Oracle a scruple find,
Or Thetis told him somewhat has from Jove,
Yet let him send his Myrmidons with you,
The Trojans from the Navy to remove,
And give the Achaeans time to breathe anew.
But let him give you his own Arms. Then they
(When like unto Achilles you appear
Leading fresh Forces) fly will into Troy
And rid the Achaeans of their present fear.
This said, Patroclus grieved went his way,
And toward Achilles Tent ran back apace
Passing by where Ulysses Vessels lay.
There were the Altars, there the Marketplace,
There were the Courts of Justice. There he met
Eurypylus with th'Arrow in his wound,
And from his head and shoulders dropped the sweat,
And bled apace, but still his Sense was sound.
Then pitying him Patroclus spoke and said,
Ah poor Commanders of the Achaean Host,
Must we be all so far from home destroyed;
And lie for Dogs-meat on the Trojan Coast?
But say Eurypylus, is there no way
To keep off Hector, but must perish all?
Nothing I know (said he) can Hector stay,
But in our flaming Ships we all must fall.
For all the best of us here wounded lie,
And still the Trojan power grows more and more.
But, O Patroclus, cut out of my Thigh
This Arrow head. For it torments me sore;
And with warm water wash away the blood,
And Salves apply, the same that Chiron knew,
(The best of Centaurs) to be very good,
And taught Achilles, and Achilles you.
For of two Surgeons in the Army, one
As much need of a Surgeon has as I,
And Podaliriu^ to the fight is gone.
Patroclus to him then made this reply.
How can this now be done, Eurypylus,
Since to Achilles I must go with speed
With Nestors Answer? yet to leave you thus
In torture, were but an ungentle deed.
Then in his (...) he bea^s him to his Tent,
And there, upon a many Cow-hides spread
Laid him, and with his Knife to work he went,
And from his Thigh cuts out the Arrow-head.
And in his hands he bruised a bitter Root;
And washed away the blood* when that was done,
He cleans'd the Wound, applied the Medicine to it,
And straight the blood was stopped, the pain was gone.
ILIAD. LIB. XII.
THus was Eurypylus of pain released.
Mean while the Greeks and Trojans fiercely fought,
Nor could the Argive Wall and Trench (unblest,
For on a Hecatomb they never thought)
Though made their Ships and Booty to defend,
Keep Hector and the Trojans long time out.
For very quickly comes to an end
Whatere without the Gods Men go about.
I deed while Hector lived; and angry lay
Achilles at his Tent and would not fight,
And standing were the Walls and Town of Troy,
The great Wall of the Argives stood upright.
But when the bravest Trojans once were slain,
And many Greeks, and burnt was Ili^m
That had almost ten years held out in vain,
And what remained of the Greeks gone home,
Then Neptune and Apollo both devise
The Wall to ruin, and the Rivers all
That in this spacious Mountain Ida rise
Upon this Argive mighty work make fall.
Aresus, Rhesus, Heptaporius,
Aesepus, Rhodius, Scamander, and
Besides these six, the River Granicus,
And Simoeis, upon whose Banks of Sand
Many a Shield and Helmet scattered lay,
And many a Demi-God. These Rivers all
Apollo turned from their wonted way,
Directing them unto the Argives Wall.
N^ne days perpetually they thither run,
And Jove nine days together poured down rain,
To the end the work might be the sooner done.
And Neptune with his Trident from the Main
Before them went and wrenched out the Stone
And Timber which had there been laid with pain
The deep'st of all for the Foundation,
And made it to the Sea all smooth again.
And strow'd again with sand the ample shore.
And made the Brooks in their own Channels run
No otherwise than they were wont before.
But this not yet, but afterward was done.
For Hector had the Greeks with showers of Spears
Constrained to quit their Walls and Towers so high
That rattled terribly about their Ears,
And back unto their hallow Ships to fly.
As when a Lion or a Boar beset
With Hounds, and Hunters, this and that way tries
(Close as they stand) through them by strength to get,
And passing on their Spears prevails or dies,
And as he goes still makes them to give way;
So Hector amongst his friends went here and there
Exhorting them the Trenches to assay.
The Horses when upon the Brink they were
Boggl'd and whinny'd, and refused to pass.
For broad it was and not to be leaped ore;
And to descend into, too deep it was,
And on each side bristled with stakes good store
Fixed by the Achaeans to keep off the Foe,
So that for Horse and Charres there was no way.
But very willing were the Foot to go,
And only to receive command did stay.
And then to Hector said Polydamas,
Hector, and you the Princes of our friends,
We strive in vain to make our Horses pass
Ore such great stakes so sharp'ned at the ends,
Having above our heads the Enemy.
Where (though we could get down) we cannot fight
Though Jove unto our side inclined be,
And to the Greeks should bear as much despite,
As I, that wish their Name were rooted out.
Yet if the Greeks, when we encumbred were
For want of room, should turn and face about,
And set upon us in the Ditch, I fear*
A man of us would not be lest alive
To tell at Troy what is become of us.
But if you mean to have the business thrive,
Then hear my Counsel, Let us all do thus.
Till of our Horse and Charrets we have need
Let Servants hold them to the Trenches nigh,
And we on foot fight; for if Jove indeed
Intend us Victory the Greeks will fly.
Thus he advised; and Hector thought it best,
And from his Charret leapt unto the Sand
Armed as he was; and so did all the rest,
And to their Charretiers they gave command
All in their order near the Trench to stand.
The Trojans in five parts themselves divide.
And Hector of the first took the Command.
But with himself he joined two beside,
Polydamas and stout Cebriones,
And left a meaner man to hold his Charre.
Of all the Trojan Host the best were these.
Of The second Party Paris had the care
Joined with Agenor and Alcathous.
The third commanded was by Leaders three,
First Helenus, and then Deiphobus,
The third was Asius. From Arisbe he
With mighty Horses colored like to flame
Bred on the bank of Sellis came to Troy.
The fourth Command unto Aeneas came;
And he likewise two Seconds had, and they
Two Sons were of Antenor (both well skilled
In War) Archelochus and Acamas.
Lastly, Sarpedon led into the field
The Trojan aids; and he assisted was
By valiant Glaucus and Asterapaus.
For of the Lycians which he led thither
The ablest and the best men he thought these.
And then with Bucklers joined close together
Away they march directly to the Foe,
And to the Combat had a great desire.
The Greeks (they thought) as fast as they could go
Would presently unto their Ships retire*
But Asius would not his Horses leave
And Man, without the Trench, as others did.
Fool as he was himself so to deceive.
Upon his Charret toward the Ships he rid.
But never came Triumphant back again
For all his flaming Horses and his Charre,
But by Idomeneus h^s Spear was slain.
When Hector to the Ships had brought the War
The Greeks had in their Wa^l a Gate whereat
Their Horses to the Field were used to pass,
And Asius with his Charret drove to that.
Which now left open by the Argives was
Their people chased by Hector to let in.
And all his Party with a mighty cry
Marched after him as if they sure had been
The Argives to their hollow Ships would fly.
But were deceived. For at the Gate they found
Two mighty men that like two great Oaks stood
With deep and large Roots fixed in the ground,
That many Winds and Storms had long withstood.
And Lapiths they were both; Leontes one,
The other Polypoetes gotten by
Pirithous. Both saw them coming on,
And staying on their hands and strength rely.
The Trojans led by Asius came on
With mighty noise, Orestes, Adamas,
(This Adamas of Asius was the Son)
Thoon, Iamenas, and Oenomaus,
And ore their heads they held their Shields on high,
For fear of Stones and Spears from off the Wall.
The Greeks within to one another cry
To save the Ships, the Tents, Themselves and All.
But when they saw the Trojans went about
To scale the Wall they roared and frighted were;
But the two Lapiths presently leapt out,
And furiously fell on the Trojans there.
As if two Boars the Men and Hounds withstood,
You Would often hear the Boughs before them snap
While with their bended necks they tear the Wood;
So thick they did the Trojan Armours rap.
For valiantly they fought, in part relying
Upon their strength, and partly on the Showrs
Of mighty Stones perpetually flying
Upon the Trojans from the Wall and Towers
As thick as to the ground fall flakes of Snow
When by a cold wind stirred is the Cloud,
Their Weapons from their hands on both sides go,
And Shields and Helmets crack apace and loud.
But Asius at this vexed to the heart
Then spoke to Jove, and clapping of his thigh,
Ay me, said he, Thou too a Liar art
That made us to believe the Greeks would fly;
Who like so many motly Wasps or Bees
That in the hollow way their Houses build
And for their young resist their Enemies,
Till they repel them or themselves be killed,
Still sharply fight and will not quit the place.
Thus Asius said, but Jove unmoved sat,
And none that day but Hector meant to grace.
And as at this, they fought at every Gate.
I cannot like a God relate it all,
The flaming Stones that from the Trojans flew
With fire divine up to the Argive Wall
On every side. How the Argives no way knew
To save themselves but for the Ships to fight;
And how the Gods that with the Greeks took part
Sat discontent in Heaven and full of spite
To see Jove so severely make them smart.
But for the fight without, 'twas first begun
By the bold Lapiths, though but two they were.
For Polypoetes Pirithous Son
At Damasus threw first a heavy Spear,
And through his Helmets brazen cheeks it went,
And through the Bone into the Brain went on;
And when unto the Shades he him had sent,
He killed Orminus and Pyloon.
And then a deadly Spear Leontes threw,
Which through the body pierced Hippolochus.
And on Antiphates his Sword he drew
And killed him, and then Iamenus,
Orestes, Menon, one upon another.
But whilst they stayed to strip these and the rest;
Hector, Polydamas, and many other
That of the Trojan Army were the best,
Were at the Trench, and stood upon the brink
The Wall to break, and set the Ships on fire.
But as they stood a little while to think
There came a Bird not suting their desire.
An Eagle in his Pounces held a Snake,
And over Hectors Soldiers carried it
Alive, but that could yet resistance make,
And by and by the Snake the Eagle bit.
The Eagle smarting cried and flew away,
And amongst the Trojans lets the Serpent fall,
And there amazed they, and gaping stay
To see Joves Prodigy before them crall.
O Hector, said Polydamas, though you
In Courts and Councils cross whatere I say,
How good soere it for you be and true,
Unless in every thing I go your way,
(Which is not well done, for your Counsel ought
In Peace and War to have their Voices free,
And never give advice against their thought,
But always for the public good to be;)
Yet now I Will tell you, if this Bird be sent
Unto the Trojans as a Prodigy,
It Is not uneasy to foresee th'vent.
For this I think the end of it will be:
As The Eagle in his Pounces bore the Snake,
But could not to her young ones bear it home;
So if the Trojans this attempt shall make,
They Will back unto the City smarting come,
And many good Companions leave behind,
Whom the Argives to defend their Ships will kill.
And this (I think) will any Augur find
That in's profession has any skill.
Then Hector sowrely looking thus replied.
Polydamas, this counsel I like not;
You have a better which you from me hide.
But if indeed it be your very thought,
The Gods have sure deprived you of your Sense,
That bid me not on Jove to set my rest,
But feathered Fowls, that fly I care not whence,
Nor whither, right or left, or East or West.
But we to Jove the greatest God will trust,
That all the other Gods excells in might.
He one B^rd has, that still observe we must,
And that is, For our Country well to fight.
But why are you so much afraid? For though
You never so many see before you slain,
You of your self will have a care I know
And not adventure where you may abstain.
But if you stay or counsel other men
To stay behind, my Spear shall strike you dead.
This said, he led them further on; and then
They all with mighty clamor followed.
And Jove a mighty wind from Ida sent,
Which to the Ships directly blew the dust,
That to the Trojans gave encouragement,
But to the Argives horror and distrust.
Encouraged thus unto the Wall they go
And brake down Battlements, and Posts plucked out,
And Piles that had been planted by the Foe
With Leavers strong they wring up by the Root.
Thus at the Wall the Trojans labored,
And hope they had the same to overthrow.
Before the Battlements the Argives spread
Cow-hides, and thence threw stones on them below.
The Ajaxes then ran from Tower to Tower
Endeavoring to give the Argives heart,
Some with sweet words, and some of them with sour,
According as they each one did his part.
Fellows (said they) you that excel in War,
And you that great strength have, and you that small
(For well you know, all men not equal are)
Now play the men, there is business for you all.
Fear not the clamor of this threatening man;
Endure this brunt, which if you overcome,
As (if Jove hinder not) I know you can,
We'll course him to the Gates of Ilium.
Thus they encouraged the Greeks. And now,
As when great Jove to show his Armory
Upon a Winters day sends down his Snow,
Innumerable are the flakes that fly
And cover Hills and Woods and Pastures green,
And all the fruitful works of Husbandry,
And cover would (but that the Sea comes in)
Both Ports and Shores; for there Snow cannot lie.
The Wall with Stones resounded round about.
Yet Hector never had broken Wall nor Gate
But by the Greeks had still been kept without,
Had not Jove sent (the Trojans t'animate)
His Son Sarpedon. With his Shield of brass
Lined with many folds of strong Cow-hide,
And which with golden Circles strengthened was,
And two Spears in his hand to th'Wall he hi'd.
And as a Lion that had fasted long
Comes from the Hill upon a flock of sheep,
Will try what he can do, for all the throng
Of Men and Dogs that them are set to keep;
So boldly goes Sarpedon to the Walls
With mighty hand the Battlements to tear.
And as he going was to Glaucus calls.
Glaucus, said he, what cause think you is there
That we in Lycia more honored are
Than other men, and looked upon like Gods,
And higher set at Feasts, and better Fare,
And drink best Wine, and more Land have by odds?
Is It not because we foremost are in fight?
It Is not in va^n (they will say) our Princes have
More honor, since they are of greater might,
And their lives venture other men to save.
Glaucus, if we could death eschew and age
By running from the Battle cowardly,
Do You think I foremost would my self engage,
Or ever counsel you to follow me?
You know the ways to death are infinite.
Though we never fight we cannot always live.
Therefore come on and let us bravely fight,
And either honor gain or honor give.
So said Sarpedon. Glaucus him obeyed;
And toward the Greeks well followed they went.
Then Mnesteus was terribly afraid.
For to assault his Tower he saw them bent.
And looked about what Heroes he could spy
On other Towers unto his aid to call.
He saw the Ajaxes two, and Teucer by,
But too far off to hear. For at the Wall
Of Shields and Helmets so great Thumping was
That 'twas impossible to hear him call.
The Gates resounded no less than the Brass;
For fiercely they were fighting at 'em all.
Then Mnesteus to the Squire Thootes said,
Run quickly call the Ajaxes to me,
Both, if they can be spared. I am afraid
Against these men I shall not able be
To keep my place. Keen Warriors they are*
But if they be themselves distressed there,
Let Telamonius of this place take care,
And Teucer use his Bow and Arrows here.
Thootes then unto the Ajaxes ran
Along the Argive Wall, and to them said,
Mnesteus entreats both of you, if you can,
To come unto his Tower and give him aid.
Keen Warriors (he says) these Lycians are.
But if you be your selves distressed here
Let Telamonius of the place take care,
And Teucer use his Bow and Arrows there.
This said, great Ajax said unto the less,
Aeliades stay here a while, till I
Deliver Mnesteus from his distress.
That done, I shall be with you presently.
Ajax and Teucer then together go
Unto the Tower of Mnesteus with all speed,
Pandion with them carry'ng Teucers Bow,
And at their coming found him in great need.
The Lycians like a black and lowering Cloud
Ascended to the Wall and fiercely fought.
The Greeks resist. The noise is mighty loud.
And with a heavy Stone stood Ajax out
That two men scarce could carry, such as now
The Earth brings forth, and with the same he stroke
Epicles on the Helmet such a blow
As Head and Helmet both in pieces broke.
Down like a Diver from the Wall fell he
Headlong, and dead upon the ground he lay.
At Glaucus Teucer lets an Arrow flee
Which through his Arm unarmed made its way.
Glaucus no longer able now to fight,
Leapt from the Wall unseen unto the ground,
For fear, if of his hurt they had a sight,
The Greeks would make a Triumph of his wound.
Grieved was Sarpedon to see Glaucus gone,
But not so grieved but that still he fought,
And fixed a heavy Spear in Alcmaon,
And with the same his life and all plucked out.
Sarpedon then tore down a Battlement,
And wider for the Lycians made the way.
But Teucer then an Arrow to him sent.
But Jupiter to save his Son that day
The Shaft unto his Shield and Belt directed,
So that it passed not unto the skin.
The Shield and Belt together him protected.
And then with Spear in hand came Ajax in,
And with a Push that pierced his Shield clean through
His coming on a little while he stayed.
But with Sarpedon that could little do,
That honor sought. Then to his friends he said,
Ye Lycians what makes you thus remiss?
Can I make way unto the Ships alone?
Strong as I am, impossible it is.
For many hands much better are than one.
This said the Lycians heavier than before
(To please their Prince) upon the Argives lay.
The Greeks within their broken Ranks restore,
And terrible the Battle was that day.
For neither could the Lycians passage make
Unto the Ships and break the Argives Wall,
Nor Greeks compel the Lycians to forsake
The battlements, so fiercely fought they all.
As two men on the Confines of their ground
At two ends of a measure tugging stand,
Contending earnestly about their bound,
And each of them would fain enlarge his land:
So for the Battlement they striving stood,
And wounded one another Back and Breast,
And sprinkled was the Battlement with blood,
Nor was it certain yet who had the best.
But as a woman that is fain to spin
To find her self and Children sorry food,
In one scale Wool, in the other Weight puts in
Till they hang even, so even the Battle stood
Till Hector came, to whom Jove chiefly meant
To give the honor of the Victory.
Then Hector up the Wall the foremost went,
And thence unto his Trojans loud did cry,
Trojans come on, and break me down this Wall,
And set the Argives hollow ships on flame.
This said, he he heard was by the Trojans all,
And straight unto the Battlements they came.
Then Hector at the Gate took up a stone
Great and sharp-pointed; two men such as now
Could scarce have lifted up so great a one:
But Hector with one hand the same could throw;
For Jupiter to him had made it light.
And as unto a Shepherd is a Fleece
Of Wool, that to be born needs little might;
So easily born the stone by Hector is;
And standing at the Gate well fortified
With Planks well joined, and two cross-bars within,
And taking with his right foot back a stride
Out flew the stone and at the Gate went in.
The Gate then roared; the Hinges broken were;
The Bars upon the ground asunder lay;
And pieces of the Planks flew here and there;
And to the Ships now open was the way.
And Hector with a countenance like night
Flew in. And fire appeared in his eyes:
His Armor as he marched shined bright,
And light reflected up unto the Skies;
And two good Spears he grasped in his Fist.
And then the Greeks were mightily afraid;
For none except a God could him resist.
And then unto the Trojans turning said,
Now Trojans to the Wall. And presently
Great numbers of the Trojans that way pass,
And others at the Gate. The Argives fly
Unto their ships. And great the Tumult was.
ILIAD. LIB. XIII.
WHen Jove had to the Ships the Trojans brought,
He left them fighting there, and turned his face
(Thinking The Immortals would no more have fought)
And looked upon the fields and men of Thrace,
And Mysians, and Hippomolgi (men
That live on Milk the goodly Mothers give
Of lusty Steeds, and are more honest than
The rest of Mortals, and do longer live.)
While Neptune from a hill in Samothrace
Looked down and saw the Greeks and Trojans fight.
For thence of Ida hill and all the space
'Bout Troy and the Argive Fleet he had a sight.
And grieved was to see the Argives slain,
And mightily offended was with Jove,
And from the Hill in haste came down again,
On foot; and ever as his feet did move,
Under the same the haughty Mountains shook,
And the thick Woods, and unto Aegae came.
Thither to come four steps he only took.
There stands a Temple sacred to his name,
Of glistering Gold and never to decay.
And there he puts his Horses to his Char.
Long Mains of Gold they had, and swift were they.
And then in Gold himself arrayed for War.
And mounted on his Char ore Sea he drives.
The Whales on both sides from the bottom rise
The^ King to see. The Sea her bosom rives,
But not a drop up to the Axtree flies.
Thus quickly to the Argives Neptune came.
Half way 'twixt Tenedus and Imbrus is
In the deep Sea a Cave, and in the same
(Lest coming back his Horses he should miss)
He sets them up and laid before them Meat,
And tied them there with Foot-locks at their feet,
Strong Locks of Gold, that loose they could not get.
Then up he went unto the Argive Fleet,
And there he found the Trojans like a Flame
At Hector's heels with mighty noise and cry,
Greedy and full of hope the Greeks to tame,
And then in flames to make their Ships to fry.
Then Neptune speaking to the Ajaxes two
In Chalchas shape, You two (said he) can save
The Ships, if you but set your selves thereto.
For of the Foe no fear at all I have
In other parts. Defended they will be
By other Greeks. The danger all is here
Where Hector like a flame you leading see,
That would be thought the Son of Jupiter.
If you but think some God bids you resist,
And stand your ground when Hector comes on,
And cheer your fellows; though Jove him assist,
He quickly from your good Ships will be gone.
This said, he on them both his Scepter laid.
And presently themselves they stronger find;
Their Thighs and Legs and Hands much lighter weighed.
And Neptune suddenly rose from the ground.
Just as a Hawk from off a Rock flies at
Some other Fowl; so quickly Neptune rose.
The lesser Ajax first observed that,
And to the greater d^d the same disclose.
Ajax (said he) this was some Deity
That in the shape of Chalchas bad us fight.
For 'twas not Chalchas I am sure. For I
As he went off had of his Legs a sight,
And of his Feet and Steps. For marks there are
To know a God by from a man. Withal
I find my self much more inclined to War.
Methinks my hands and feet for Battle call.
And so do mine (said Telamorius)
And fain I would with Hector have about.
While they together were discoursing thus,
Neptune behind them busy was about.
Confirming those that to the Ships were gone
A little to refresh themselves. For they
Had long and painful labor undergone,
And heavy at their hearts the danger lay
When Hector and his Troops had passed the Wall,
And of their safety were in great despair.
But Neptune coming soon confirmed them all,
And gave them hope their Fortune to repair.
To Teucer first he came and Leitus,
To Deipyrus and to Meneleos,
Meriones and stout Antilochus,
And standing near addressed his Speech to those
Fie (Argives) fie young men; what shame is this?
Upon your hands I chiefly did rely
To save our Ships. If you be so remiss,
The day is come in which we all must die
By Hector's hands. O strange! I never thought
The Trojans durst to th'Ships have come so near
That heretofore peep out o'th'Town durst not,
But like to Hindes that hide themselves for fear
Of Leopards, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey.
For so at first they did. But you will not fight
For anger that the King had sent away
Dishonored the man of greatest might.
But what though Agamemnon have indeed
Dishonored Thetis Son, must we therefore.
Give over fight? Or rather with all speed
Endeavor all we can to cure the Sore?
But howsoere, you that excuseless ^re,
And of the Argive Army all the best,
And Bodies have and Hearts well made for War,
I needs must reprehend you. But the rest
That weak or wretched are I cannot blame.
Fond men, this negligence may bring forth yet
Some greater ill. Then come away for shame.
For never were the Greeks so hard beset.
Hector has broken both the Bars and Gates,
And now hard by our Ships he fiercely fights,
And with great noise his Trojans animates.
Thus Neptune the dismayed Greeks excites.
At the Ajaxes the Ranks stood firm and close,
Nor Mars nor Pallas could a fault have spied.
They chosen were the Trojans to oppose
Whom Hector led. And standing side by side,
Shield Shield, and Target Target, and Man Man
Sustained, and Spear by Spear assisted was.
So close they stood, and labor all they can
Lest Hector to their hollow Ships should pass.
And Hector with his Troops went swiftly on*
As when a Torrent swelled with showers of rain
Breaks from the hill a round and heavy stone,
It makes the Wood resound, till at the Plain,
Swift as it thither rolled, it rolls no more;
So Hector marching made account to pass
Through the Argive Fleet and Tents to the Seashore.
But at the Ajaxes Battle stopped he was.
And forced back a little to recoile,
Resisted by so many Spears and Swords,
And speaking to his Trojans stood a while,
And Lycians, and Dardans in these words.
Ye Trojans, Lycians, Dardans do not fly.
I know they cannot long maintain the Fight,
If we upon Jove's promise may rely,
Who all the other Gods excells in might.
This said, Deiphobus went toward the Foe,
Holding his Buckler out before him high,
So that it covered him from Head to Toe.
Meriones that on him had his eye,
H^s Spear threw at him, which no harm did do.
For though upon the Buckler sell the stroke,
It carried not th'intended mischief through,
But in the tough Bull-hides the Spear he broke.
Then back unto the throng he went, and sum'd
Both for the loss of the good Spear he brake,
And of the Victory he had presumed,
And went to th'Ships another Spear to take.
The rest fought on, and mighty noise there was.
There Teucer with his Spear slew Imbrius
The Son of Mentor, till the Greeks did pass
The Sea to Troy he dwelt at Pedasus,
And to Medesicaste there was wed.
But when the Argives came to Troy, he then
Dwelt in King Priams Court, much honored
Both by the King himself and by his men.
But now by Teucer's Spear was slain. And as
Upon a Hill a goodly Ashen Tree,
Unto the ground (cut from the roots with brass)
Brings down its boughs; so to the ground fell he.
To strip him of his Arms then Teucer goes;
Which Hector seeing, at him threw his Spear,
And misses him; yet not in vain he throws,
But kills another man that stood him near,
Amphimachus, that newly to the fight
Was from the Ships come back t'assist the rest;
And scarcely of the Skirmish had a sight,
When Hector's Spear he felt upon his breast.
Then to Amphimachus came Hector near,
Meaning h^s Helmet from his head to take.
Which Ajax seeing at him threw his Spear
That hit his Shield, but passage could not make.
Yet with such strength the Spear fell on his Shield,
That backward he was driven from the dead;
So that the Argives bore them off the Field.
Amphimachus to the Ships was carried
By Mnesttheus and Stichius that led
The Athenian Troops. But the Ajaxes two,
One at the Feet, another at the Head,
Bore Imbrius from off the ground into
The throng of Greeks like hungry Lions two
That carry in their Jaws a Goat which they
Had snatched from the Dogs, and were to go
Through many Shrubs to carry it away.
Him they disarmed, and to let Hector know it,
The lesser Ajax cutteth off his head,
And turning round with all his strength does throw it,
And unto Hector's feet 'twas carried.
Now Neptune for Amphimachus thus slain,
Who from his Loins descended, vexed sore,
Went to the Argive Ships and Tents again
To cheer the Greeks, and hurt the Trojans more,
And with Idomeneus met as he went,
That had a wounded friend brought from the fight,
And streightway back again to go he meant
To them that fought and help them all he might.
And Neptune like unto Andremons Son
Thoas, whose Father all the Aetolians swai'd
Like Jove in Pleuron and in Calydon,
Unto Idomeneus then spoke and said,
O King Idomeneus, what is betide
Of the Argive threats that Ilium they would tame?
O Thoas (then Idomeneus replied)
I know not any man that we can blame.
There Is none of us but understands the War,
Nor any that betray themselves with fear,
Nor that for sloth to fight unwilling are.
But Jove, it seems, will have us perish here.
But Thoas, you that always heretofore
Have fought so well, and set on other men,
Still hold that purpose never giving ore.
TO Idomeneus then Neptune said again,
Idomeneus may that man never come back,
But in the Field lie for the Dogs a Prey,
That at this time is negligent or slack.
But now put on your Arms and come away,
And quickly. For although we are but two,
Yet since conjoined force of men not strong
Can do as much as one good man, let us go.
This said, up Neptune went into the throng.
Idomeneus then goes into his Tent
And armed himself, and took in's hand two Spears,
And out again he came like Lightning sent
To men from Jove to fill their hearts with fears.
And scarce come forth, he met Meriones
That to his Tent was going for a Spear,
And speaking to him said Idomeneus,
Meriones my friend what make you here?
What are you wounded that you leave the Fight?
Or bring you me some news? For I to hide
My self from Battle here take no delight.
Meriones then to him thus replied.
O King Idomeneus unto your Tent
I forced was from the Battle to come down,
And thence to take a Spear of yours I meant,
Since on Deiphobus I broke my own.
A Spear then said Idomeneus, there are
Twenty if you had need of them that stand
Upright against the Walls which in this War
I took from Trojans vanquished by my hand.
For when I fight I stand near to the Foe.
And that is the cause so many Spears I have,
And can so many Shields and Helmets show,
And Armours for the breast great store and brave.
Then spoke Meriones; And I said he
Have many spoils of Trojans at my Tent,
But fetched from thence so soon they cannot be.
For close up to the Foe I also went
Amongst the foremost boldly. Which although
The Argives take no notice of, yet you
That how I still behaved my self, well know
Can bear me witness what I say is true.
To him then thus Idomeneus replied,
Meriones, this need not have been said,
I know your courage were it to be tried,
And men somewhere in ambush to be laid
(Where fear and courage are discerned best;
For there it is seen who valiant are, who not.
A Coward's heart still pants in his breast;
And nothing but on death he has his thought;
He cannot without trembling quiet sit,
But dances on his Hams, and changes hue;
And cannot hold himself upon his feet;
And shakes his Chaps. These things a Coward show.
But in a valiant man there is none of this.
He quietly abides without afright,
When in the danger he engaged is;
And longs for nothing but to come to fight)
If you amongst them had been there, I know
None of them such a fault in you had found.
Or if you had been hurt it is sure enough,
Nor in your back nor neck had been the Wound,
But either in your belly or your breast.
But let us no longer talk like children here,
Lest we be blamed. I think it therefore best
You now go to my Tent and take a Spear.
This said, Meriones fetched out a Spear,
And with Idomeneus went to the Fight,
As Mars, when in the Field he will appear,
And with him his beloved Son Affright,
And to the Ephyrians and Phlegyans goes
From Thrace to give one side the Victory;
So with Idomeneus unto the Foes
Meriones went up courageously,
And to him said, Idomeneus where now
Of The left, or right side of the Trojan Host,
Or in the midst shall we our force bestow
To help the Greeks? For now they need us most.
Idomeneus then to him said again,
The middle of the Battle to maintain
There ready stand enough, and able men,
Teucer good Bowman and the Ajaxes twain.
Hector shall there of fig^^ing have his fill
As greedy as he is. Though strong he be
He Will find it hard that way to have his will,
And come unto the Ships with Victory,
And burn them if Jove not with his own hand
Throw in the Brands. He must be more than man,
Whom Ajax is not able to withstand;
Not mortal, such as live by Ceres can,
And may be killed with a Spear or Stone.
For Ajax with Achilles may compare
In standing fight, though able less to run.
In that, Achilles him excels far.
But now unto the Battle let us go
And fall on at the left side of the field,
And try what we are able there to do,
And either Honor win or honor yield.
This said, they went together to the Fight,
And on them presently the Trojans sell.
There was no place for Victory to light,
So close they fought on both sides and so well.
And such a mighty Cloud of dust they raise
As when great Winds contend upon the Plain
Is in dry weather raised from the ways,
While one to kill another takes great pain.
And horrid of the Squadrons was the sight,
That brissl'd was all over with great Spears.
Their Armours, Shields, and Helmets, with their light
Dazzled the eyes, and clamor filled the ears.
Hard-hearted had he been that with dry eyes
Had this affliction of the Heroes seen,
That from the Sons of Saturn did arise,
And but for their dissension had not been.
For Jupiter for Hector was and Troy,
And meant to honor Thetis and her Son;
But not the Achaean Army to destroy.
But Neptune moved with compassion
To see the Argives by the Trojans slain,
And angry with his Brother, secretly
In likeness of a man rose from the Main
T'incourage them and give them victory*
Though they were Brothers, (...) Jove of the two
The Elder and the Wiser was, so that
Neptune against Jove's will durst nothing do
In favor of the Greeks distressed, but what
He thought might be effected privily.
And thus the Saw from Brother unto Brother
Of cruel War was drawn alternately,
And many slain of one side and the other.
And now half gray came in Idomeneus
With lusty Cretans, and the Trojan frighted.
For presently he slew Othryoneus,
Othryoneus that was by Fame invited
To purchase honor in the War at Troy,
And promised, if Cassandra he might wed,
From Ilium to drive the Greeks away.
Which Priam to him granted if he sped.
And in this hope, strutting he went to fight.
There with his Spear Idomeneus him smote.
The Spear upon his Belly just did light.
And down he fell; his Armor saved him not.
Idomeneus insulting ore him spoke.
Othryoneus great praise you will win indeed
If you can do what you did undertake.
Come fight for us; and you shall no worse speed.
For if you for us win the Town of Troy,
Atrides fairest Daughter yours shall be.
Come with me to the Greeks that there we may
Upon the Wedding-Articles agree.
And then to be revenged Asius meant,
And was on foot, although his Horses there
Breathing upon his back behind him went.
And at Idomeneus had thrown his Spear
But that to throw he time enough had not;
Because the other made the greater have,
And with his Spear had hit him in the throat,
And out again at's neck the point had past.
And there as some great Oak or Poplar-tree,
Or Pine cut down, that by a Shipwright must
Be sawed in Planks falls down, so fell down he
Grasping with both his hands the bloody dust.
The Charretier was so amazed thereat
That he forgot to turn his Charre with fear,
And quiet sat. Antilochus saw that,
And going nearer, at him threw his Spear,
Which through his Armor and his Belly went,
And gasping fell to the ground the Charretier.
Antilochus to th'Ships his Horses sent,
And by the Argives now possessed they were.
And then Deiphobus himself advanced
And at Idomeneus he threw his Spear,
Which grazing only on his Buckler glanced
Unto the Argives that behind him were.
For as he saw it come he sunk, and hid
His body all under his Shield of brass.
Yet not from out his hand depart it did
In vain; for with it slain Hypsenor was.
Deiphobus then crowing said, So, so,
Asius does not go unrevenged to Hell.
And though the place unpleasant be, I know
To have such company will please him well.
Antilochus then to the Body came
And kept the Trojans off from stripping it.
Mecistes and Alastor bare the same
Upon their shoulders to the Argive Fleet.
Id^meneus still like a Fury went
To kill more Trojans or himself be killed.
And for the Argives thought his life well spent.
Alcathous then met him on the Field,
Who was a Suitor to Hippodamie
Anchises eldest Daughter, and the best
Beloved by her Parents both was she,
And of her time exceeded all the rest
In Beauty, and in curious Work, and Wit,
And a fit Consort for the best of Troy.
But Neptune now on purpose bound his feet,
And from his Eyes though bright took sight away;
So that he could not fly, nor turn, nor fight,
But fixed stood like to a Post or Tree;
And by Idomeneus with Neptune's might
Pierced through the Armor, and the Breast was he,
And through the Heart, as plainly did appear.
For as he bleeding on the ground did lie,
The beating of his heart did shake the Spear;
And Mars took from him all his Chivalry.
Idomeneus then crowed mightily.
Deiphobus (said he) is it not enough
That for your one man I have killed three?
If not, come on and take a better proof
Of what the Seed of Jove in War can do.
For Jove got Minos, and Deucalion he.
He me, and I whole Ship loads bring of Woe
To Troy, unto thy Father, and to thee.
This said, Deiphobus considered
Whether to stay and meet him hand to hand,
Or see by whom he might be seconded.
And at the Rear he saw Aeneas stand.
For he not much good will did Priam bear,
Who small respect unto his Virtue paid.
To him Deiphobus approaching near,
Aeneas, now (said he) you must us aid.
Your Brother-law Alcathous is killed,
Who oftentimes has fed you with his hand,
And naked will be left upon the field
B' Idomeneus, unless you him withstand.
This said, to Idomeneus they came away,
And with him greedy were to enter fight.
And he as boldly did their coming stay.
Though two to one, they did not him affright.
But as a Boar in unfrequented place,
By Dogs and Men pursued, stands sullenly
Knowing his strength, and locks them in the face
Bristled his Back, and flaming is his Eye;
So for Aeneas staid Idomeneus,
And to his fellows called; Ascalaphus,
Meriones, Antilochus, and Aphareus,
Good men of War, and you Deipyrus,
Come hither friends, said he. I coming see
Aeneas toward me with mighty rage,
A valiant man at Arms you know is he,
And now is in the flower of his Age.
Were I so young, and of the mind I am,
I Would honor win of him or he of me.
This said they quickly all about him came*
Aeneas to repel or kill. Then he
Called Paris to him and Agenor, and
Deiphobus, the Argives to oppose.
And all of them of Trojans had command,
And with their Spears behind him marched close.
As when a Shepherd leads with a green Bough
His Sheep from off the Pasture to the Brook,
Is joy'd to see them follow him; so now
Aeneas in his Troops great pleasure took.
No sooner they were come unto the ground
Whereon Alcathous his Body was,
But close they sought, and hideous was the sound
Of Helmets, Shields and mighty Arms of brass.
And there the two that far excelled the rest
Aeneas and Idomeneus would fain
Have fixed their Spears in one another Breast.
First threw Aeneas, but he threw in vain.
For by Idomeneus declined it was,
And coming to the ground stuck trembling there.
And then threw he and killed Oenomaus,
And pierced was his Belly with a Spear.
Who falling filled both his hands with dust.
Idomeneus pulled out again his Spear.
But to take off his Arms he durst not trust
Himself, so many Lances flying were.
His Limbs and Feet not supple were and light
To throw or shun a Spear. They now were past
Their best, yet good were in a standing Fight.
But could not from the Battle run so fast.
And as he slowly walked off the Field,
Deiphobus that always bore him spite
A Spear threw at him, but him missed, and killed
Ascalaphus Son of the God of Fight.
And on his hands into the dust fell he.
But Mars yet knew not that his Son was dead.
For in the Golden Clouds by Jove's decree
With all the other Gods prohibited
To meddle in the battle, quiet sat.
About Ascalaphus the strife was all,
And first Deiphobus his Helmet gat,
But forced he was again to let it fall.
For in the Arm he then received a wound
Which by Meriones was to him sent,
Who quickly took the Helmet from the ground.
And with it back unto the Argives went.
Deiphobus was by Polites (who
His Brother was) born forth unto his Charre,
And bleeding in his Charre the Town into.
But still upon the Field went on the War,
And Aphareus there wounded in the throat
Was by Aeneas Spear, wherewith his Head
On one side hanging Shield and Helmet brought
Down with him to the Earth. There lay he dead.
And Thoon by Antilochus was slain,
That to him turned his back and meant to fly;
For by the Spear in two was cut the vein
Which all along the Back to the Neck does lie.
And down he fell. Antilochus stepped in
To strip him. But the Foes about him round
Threw at him Spears, but never touched his skin,
Although his Shield received many a wound.
For he was well defended on each side
By Neptune, who unto him bore good will,
Because he never would from the Fight abide,
And amongst the Foes his Spear was flying still.
But as his Spear at ore he aiming stood,
He by Asiades observed was,
Who to him came as near as well he could
And threw his Spear, whereof one half did pass
Clean through Antilochus his Shield, and stuck
Therein; but the other half fell to the ground.
For Neptune him preserved from that ill luck.
So escaped Antilochus without a wound.
And Adamas retired into the rout.
Meriones sent after him a Spear,
Which entering at his hinder parts, came out
Beneath his Navel, and above his gear,
Where wounds most fatal are. Then down he falls,
And like a Cow that by the Horns is tied
By strength of Swains, a little while he sprawls,
But with the plucking out the Spear he died.
And then the Son of Priam Helenus
With a broad Sword in hand all Steel of Thrace
Upon the Helmet smote Deipyrus,
Who there fell down and died upon the place.
The Greeks took up the Helmet at their feet.
And grieved thereat was Menelaus so
That up he went with Helenus to meet
Shaking his Spear. The other draws his Bow.
And on the Breast Plate hit was Menelaus.
But off the Arrow flew like chaff which fan'd
Is from the Corn. But the other wounded was
Just where he held the Bow quite through the hand*
And dragging Hand and Spear himself withdrew
Into the Trojan Troops; where from the wound.
The heavy Spear his friend Agenor drew,
And in a woollen bandage wrapped it round,
Which in his hand a servant held hard by.
And then Pisandrus went to Menelaus,
Betrayed thereto by cruel Destiny.
For to have slain him in great hope he was.
And when they were to one another nigh,
First Menelaus threw his Spear, but wide.
At him Pisandrus then his Spear lets fly.
But passage being at the Shield denied,
Beneath the brazen point in twain it cracked.
Then to him with his Sword went Menelaus,
And he to Menelaus with an Ax,
Which covered with his Buckler ready was.
And on his Helmet crest then fell the stroke.
But he Pisandrus with his keen Sword hit
Upon the Forehead near the Nose, which broke
The Bone, and carried present death with it.
His eyes unto the ground fell in the blood.
Atrides kicked him as of the ground he lay,
Then stripped him of his Arms, and ore him stood
Insulting, and reproaching those of Troy.
Thus, thus (said he) proud Trojans, you will at last
Be taught to quit our Ships, and have your fill
Of bloody War, and pay for what is past.
You thought, ye Dogs, too little was the ill,
Against the Laws of Hospitality
To steal away my Goods, and wedded Wife;
But further will (if in your power it lie)
Deprive the Argive Princes all of Life;
And burn their Ships, although no injury
I ever did you. But I hope we shall
Your greediness of fighting satisfy.
But Father Jove, who (men say) art of all
The Gods most wise, all this proceeds from you,
That to the Trojans false and insolent
More favor show than to the just and true;
So that with Peace they never are content.
Of every thing there is satiety.
Of Sleep, of Love, of Dance, and pleasant Song.
And all men else with war may cloyed be.
Only the Trojans still for fighting long.
This said, the Armor to the Ships he sent,
And amongst the foremost Greeks again he fought.
And there Harpalion unto him went
(Who to Ilium was by his Father brought.
But brought from thence again he never was)
And at him throws his Spear, and hits his Shield
Right in the midst. But through it could not pass;
The stubborn Brass unto it would not yield.
Missing his purpose he the field forsook,
And fearing to be slain looked still about,
Until an Arrow keen him overtook,
Sent from Meriones, that past throughout
From Buttock unto B^adder. Then he sat
Expiring amongst the Trojans his good friends,
And lay like to a Worm benumbed, that
Upon the ground it self at length extends.
The Paphlagonians of him had a care,
And sorry for him carried him to Troy.
His Father weeping followed the Charre,
But how to be revenged saw no way.
And Paris then with anger was possessed,
And amongst the Argives lets an Arrow fly.
For of Harpalion he had been the guest,
And well received in Paphlagonie.
Amongst the Argives one Euchenor was
The Son of Polydus an old Prophet
That knew full well how things would come to pass
Before the Town of Troy, and told him of it.
You must, said he, at home by sickness die,
Or going with the Greeks at Troy be slain.
But for all that the Youngman valiantly
Went with the Greeks; but never came home again,
Though he behaved himself with caution there
In hope to avoid both danger and diseases.
But Paris shot him 'twixt the Cheek and Ear.
And on his Eyes there Death and Darkness seizes.
Thus keenly fought they here; But Hector yet
Knew not the Trojans that were fighting at
The left hand of the Host were so beset,
For if he had perhaps been told of that,
He might have given the Greeks the Victory;
Such courage N^ptune gave unto them there.
And sometimes by his strength immediately
In battle fighting they assisted were.
But Hector yet was where he first made way,
Breaking the Argive Ranks, and Wall and Gate,
Whore of Protesilaus the good Ships lay,
And those of Ajax next unto them sat;
Where low the Wall and sharpest was the Fight.
The Epeians, Pthians, and Ionians,
Boeotians, Locrians all oppose their might
To Hector's, Trojans, Dardans, Lycians.
And led were by good men. The Athenians
By Mnestheus, Bias, Phidas, Stichius.
Meges the leading had of the Epians,
And with him Amphion and Dracius.
Medon and Meneptolemus brought on
The Pthians. Medon was Ajaxes Brother,
And of Oileus the natural Son,
Not gotten by his Wife but by another.
His Wife was called Eriopis. And he
For killing of her Brother forced fled
To save himself to the Town of Phylacie,
Where Meneptolemus was born and bred.
And so the Phthian Leaders were these two,
And amongst the chief of the Boeotians sought
To keep the Trojans from approaching to
The Argive Ships to burn them as they thought.
But Ajax the swift Son of Oeleus
Not all this while departed from the side
Of Ajax Son of Telamonius.
But as two Oxen which the ground divide
Go tugging of the Plow with one consent,
Till underneath their Horns their Foreheads sweat,
So laboring in the field together went
Yoakt, both the Little Ajax and the Great.
But Telamonius was followed
With good Companions, who when there was cause
His mighty Buckler for him carried.
The other destitute of followers was.
For none but Locrians to the War he led,
Who have no use of Bucklers when they fight,
Nor Spears, nor Helmets that defend the Head;
But came to Troy with Bows and Arrows light.
And in a standing Fight durst not abide.
But from behind the Argive Ranks unseen,
They Hector and his Trojans terrified
Incessantly with showrs of Arrows keen,
Whilst from the Front with Spears they plagued were.
The Trojans courage then was so allaid,
That into Troy they all had run for fear,
But that Polydamas to Hector said,
Hector, you are a man uncounsellable.
Because in deeds of Arms you so excel,
You think your self in Counsel too most able,
As if all virtues must in one man dwell.
The Gods to some have given well to fight,
And others with the Muses they have graced;
Others with Dance the people to delight;
And in the minds of others Wisdom placed.
The fruit whereof by many is enjoyed:
It Cities saves, as they that have it know,
Which quickly would without it be destroyed,
But what we are to do I Will tell you now.
The War now lies only on your hand:
For since we past the Wall, some quite give ore,
And armed as they were do idle stand,
And The Enemy than ours that fight are more.
Therefore retire and call the Princes hither,
That it may be determined by them all
Upon mature deliberation, whether
Upon the Argives at their Ships to fall
(If so it please the Gods) or otherwise,
Since Ajax there resolved is to stay,
How with most safety we may hence arise.
For they are in our debt for yesterday.
So said Polydamas, and Hector thought
The counsel not amiss, and straight obeyed.
And armed from his Chariot leapt out,
And standing on the ground unto him said,
Polydamas, stay you, and here detain
The Trojan Chiefs, while to the Fight I go,
And give some Orders there; I shall again
Be with you quickly when I have done so.
He mist Deiphobus and Helenus,
And valiant Adamas Afiades,
And Asius the Son of Hyrtacus,
And went about the field to look for these;
Of which some wounded were retired to Troy,
And some in Battle by the Argives killed.
But found his Brother Paris in his way,
Encouraging his men upon the Field.
And spoke unto him, in ill Language, thus,
Unlucky Paris, fine man, Lover keen,
Where are Deiphobus and Helenus
And Adamas? Where are they to be seen?
And what is of Othryoneus become?
And where is Asius? Now certainly
Down to the ground burnt will be Ilium,
And thou a miserable death wilt die.
So Hector said, and Paris thus replied.
Hector, there was for such words now no cause.
Sometimes perhaps you may me justly chide.
I do not think a Coward born I was.
For since unto the Ships you brought the War,
We with the Greeks perpetually have sought,
But those you miss slain by the Argives are,
Save that Deiphobus was carried out,
And Helenus, both wounded in the hand.
Now lead us on to what part you think fit.
We ready are to do what you command,
As far as strength of body will permit.
This said, his Brother reconciled was,
And both went to where cruelly they fought
About Cebriones, Polydamas,
Orthaeus, Polyphoetes, and about
Phalces and Palms and the Children two
(Ascanius, Moris) of Hippotion,
Who Ilium but the day before come to,
And now to the Battle went by Jove set on.
As when a storm of wind falls on the Plain
The Sea erects it self in ridges white,
And foaming rolls in order on the Main*
So to the Greeks with Helmets shining bright
The Trojans one another followed
In order with their Captains to the Fight,
And Hector like another Mars at The Head
With Buckler round and strong, and Armor bright.
His Buckler he before him held far out,
That covered was his body with the same,
And peeping under it he looked about,
And in that posture to the Argives came.
And at the foremost Ranks went here and there
To try if through them he could passage make;
But fast they stood, nor at it troubled were;
And Ajax seeing it unto him spoke,
Come nearer man. Why think you to affright
The Greeks? we are not so unused to War.
Nor are we driven hither by your might;
But by the hand of Jove afflicted are.
Hector, I know, to burn our Ships you think;
But we have hands as good the Ships to save,
And Troy will^ first, I think, int'Ashes sink.
And shortly, I believe, you will wish to have,
And pray to Jove and all the Powers on high
For Horses that run faster than Hawks fly,
That from the Ships you may go speedily.
This said, an Eagle Dexter presently
Flew over them. And they Jove's Prodigy
Received gladly with a mighty cry.
Then thus to Ajax Hector did reply.
Ajax, you love to prate and brag and lie*
O that the Son of Jove as sure were I,
And had been certainly conceived by
Juno Jove's Wife, and as a Deity
Like Pallas and Apollo never to die,
As I am sure great woe will fall this day
Upon the Argives all and then be killed
If for the coming of my Spear thou stay,
And Dogs and Kites shall eat thee in the Field.
This said, he led away. The Trojans shout.
So do the Argives, and resolved to try
The power of their Foes with courage stout.
The noise on both sides went up to the sky.
ILIAD. LIB. XIV.
NOw Nestor with Macaon drinking sat
And heard the Greeks and Trojans fighting roar,
And to him said, Macaon, hear you that?
The noise is greater much than 'twas before*
Let Hecamede ore the fire set water,
And wash away the blood from off your sore,
While I go hence and see what is the matter.
But at the Wine sit you still as before.
This said, he took up Thrasymedes Shield,
And Thrasymedes (his Son) took up his,
And with a good sharp Spear went to the Field,
And going forth a shameful sight he sees.
The Trojans chasing while the Argives fly,
And down unto the ground was torn their Wall.
And then as when a Wave is raised high
By secret Gales, on neither side can fall,
Until some certain and prevailing Wind
Comandeth in the Air; So Nestor stood,
And with two thoughts distracted was his mind*
Sometimes to go to Atrides he thought good,
And sometimes to the Battle. But at last
Resolved unto Agamemnon goes,
Whilst Shields and Helmets, all the way he past
Resounded in his ears with frequent blows.
And as he went the wounded Chiefs he met,
Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed.
For far off from the Fight the Ships were set,
And close unto the Shore lay at a head.
Only the foremost hawl'd were to the Plain,
And close astern of those was built the Wall.
For with so many Ships they crossed the Main,
That near the Field they could not place them all.
But side by side along the Shore they lay,
And took up all the compass of the Bay.
The wounded men, to look upon the Fray
Helped by their Spears went softly on the way,
Grieved at the heart, and met with Nestor there,
Who with his coming made them more afraid.
And when unto them Nestor was come near
Then Agamemnon spoke, and to him said,
O Nestor, Glory of the Argive Nation,
I am afraid that Hector will make good
That which he promised once in his Oration
Before the Trojans when he boasting stood.
I never will to Troy come back, said he,
Till I have slain these Greeks, and set on fire
Their Ships And now performed it will be.
O strange! Do all the other Greeks conspire
Against me with Achilles Thetis Son,
And therefore are resolved not to fight?
It Is plain, said Nestor, some such thing is done,
Else Jove himself could not with all his might
Have made such work. The Wall is broken down
In which to save our selves we did confide;
And at the Ships they fight, nor was it known,
Nor could it be observed on which side
The Greeks that fighting were, were most distressed,
So thick to the ground in every part they fall.
But let us consult what course to take were best,
If counsel can do any thing at all.
But that we all should fight I Will not advise.
For what can wounded men in Battle do?
To Nestor Agamemnon then replies,
Nestor, since now the War is brought unto
Our Ships, and that nor Wall nor Trench does good,
And much the Argives suffered have who thought
Their Wall for all the Trojans would have stood,
And all our hopes built on it come to naught.
(For though I know Jove once was to us kind,
Yet now I see our ruin he designs,
And pleasure takes in changing of his mind,
And aids the Trojans whilst our hands he binds.)
Let Us all to what I saying am agree.
The Ships that nearest lie to the Seaside,
Drawn down into the water let them be,
And there till Night let them at Anchor ride.
And if the Trojans then give over fight,
We'll fetch away the rest. For it is less shame
A danger to eschew, although by night,
Than needlessly to perish in the same.
Ulysses frowning on him then replied,
Atrides, what a word have you let fall?
You ought of Cowards to have been the guide,
And not of us Achaeans General.
For we by Jove are framed for actions high,
And to atchieve the Wars we undertake
How dangerous soever, or to dye.
And must we now the Siege of Troy forsake,
And after so much labor lost go hence?
Peace, let no other Greek hear what you say.
Who would have said this that had common sense,
And whom so great an Army did obey?
Nor is, in how to fly, your counsel right.
Must we our Ships draw down from off the Shore,
And at the same time with the Trojans fight,
Who now rejoice, but would do then much more?
And we that fight be utterly destroyed?
For they that were at Anchor on the Main
Would go their way the danger to avoid.
Thus by your Counsel we should all be slain.
Atrides to him then this answer gave.
Ulysses your reproof is very smart;
Yet not command but counsel 'twas I gave,
And better I would hear with all my heart.
And so you shall, said Diomed, and though
Amongst you all the youngest man I be,
Be not offended with it. For you know
That born I am of a good family.
For Portheus three worthy Sons begat
(In Calydon and Pleuron they all dwelled)
Melas, and Agrius, and Oeneus that
The other two in deeds of Arms excelled.
Of him my Father Tydeus was the Son,
But in exile at Argos led his life,
And of Adrastus's Daughters married one,
And great possessions had he with his Wife.
And there a rich and noble house did keep.
For Corn and Wine and Fruit he had much ground,
And in his Pastures had great store of Sheep,
And chiefly was for Chivalry renowned.
Therefore my counsel, if you find it good,
You should not for my person take amiss,
Since I dare fight and am of noble blood.
The counsel I shall give you now is this.
Let every man unto the Battle go,
And place the wounded out of the reach of the shot,
That they encourage may against the Foe,
Those discontented men that fight would not.
This said, they went together to the Fight.
Which Neptune spying did not idle stand,
But like unto an aged man in sight
Came in and took Atrides by the hand.
Achilles heart (said he) now leaps to see
The slaughter of the Argives and the flight,
And joys therein, so little wit has he.
May death and shame upon him for it light.
Atrides, do not all the Gods mistrust.
For sure I am you will aided be by some,
And see the Trojans fill the air with dust
As from your Ships they fly to Ilium.
This said, amongst the Greeks he went about,
And loud, as if nine or ten thousand men
Together on a Plain had made a Shout,
He shouted, and the Greeks took heart again.
Now Juno standing on Olympus high
Her Brother amongst the Argives saw with joy
And Jove on Ida with an angry eye;
And in her mind consid'ring was which way
To cosen him. And was resolved at last
To go to Ida to him finely dressed,
And after she had by him been embraced
To bind him fast, in gentle sleep to rest.
Then went she to her Chamber, which her Son
Vulcan had for her made with Door posts high,
And solid Doors, which of the Gods not one
Could open but her self, such mystery
Was in the Lock and Key. Then went she in,
And fast she locked the Door, and there alone
She with Ambrosia cleans'd her dainty skin,
Till not a speck unmeet was lest thereon.
Then 'noints her self with sweet Ambrosian oil,
That as unto the House of Jove she went,
The scent thereof diffused was all the while
Throughout the space 'twixt The Earth and Firmament.
Then combed and pleared she her Golden Hair,
And clothed her self with her Ambrosian Vest,
And many Figures on it embroid'red were,
And with Gold Buttons buttoned at her Breast.
A hundred Tassels at her Girdle hung.
And wore a precious Pendant at her Ear
Of three rich Gems. And over all she flung
A dainty Scar^ by which they covered were.
Then on her tender Feet she tied her Shoes.
And when her self she fully had arrayed*
From out her Chamber presently she goes,
And Venus took aside and to her said.
Sweet child I come a favor to request;
But tell me will you grant it, yea or nay.
I fear you bear me ill will in your Breast,
'Cause I for the Argives am and you for Troy.
And Venus to her answer made and said,
Juno Jove's Sister, do not from me hide
Your mind, which to my power shall be obeyed.
Juno to Venus then again replied.
Lend me Desire and Love by which you tame
Both mortal men and the Immortal Gods.
For to Oceanus I going am,
And Tethys (far from hence) that are at odds.
For when beneath the Earth Jove Saturn sent,
I was by them received and cherished.
But now with one another discontent
They will not come together in one bed.
If by this means I him can get within
Loves arms again, no jar shall them divide,
And I from both shall Love and Honor win.
And Venus then again to her replied,
Juno, Jove's Wife and Sister, your request
Cannot by me, nor ought to be denied.
And as she spoke she from about her Breast
The fine enchanting Girdle straight untied.
Wherein embroyd'red were Love and Desire.
Soothing, and Comfort, that sufficient were
A Heart though very wise to set on fire.
And to her hands she puts it, and said, Here,
Take it. There Is nothing wanting that you need
When you would have a man or God beguiled.
Put it but in your Bosom, you will speed.
So Juno did, and as she did it smiled.
And to the house of Jove then Venus goes.
But Juno ore Aemathia, and all
Pieria, and all the Thracian Snows,
And never on the ground her foot lets fall.
And from the mountain Athos ore the Deep,
And came to Lemnos where King Thoas swaid.
And there she met the gentle God of Sleep.
And took him by the hand, and to him said,
Sweet Sleep, to whom both men and Gods all bow,
If ever with my Will you did comply,
Deny not what I shall request you now.
Diffuse sound sleep a while upon Jove's eye
As Soon as he with Love is satisfied.
And I will thank you for it whilst I live.
And from my hand you shall receive beside,
A Chair of beaten Gold which I Will you give;
Vulcan my Son shall make it curiously,
Together with a Footstool for your Foot.
And Sleep to Juno then made such reply
As if he were afraid and durst not do it.
Juno, said he, if 'twere another God,
Though Ocean the great Sire of them all,
I durst upon his eyes have softly trod.
But not on Jove's, unless he for me call.
Your Order once (like this) I did obey
Before, when Hercules Jove's mighty Son
Went off to Sea after he conquered Troy.
Mean while the strong unruly Winds set on
By you, with mighty Blasts at Sea arose,
And from his best friends hurried him in pain,
And at the last threw him ashore at Coos.
But Jupiter, when he awakt again
The Gods at home he all tossed up and down,
And chiefly would of me have had a sight.
Into the Sea then sure I had been thrown,
But that I fled, and was concealed by night,
Till of his anger blunted was the edge.
For night great power has with Gods and Men
And loath was Jove to break her privilege.
T'encourage him then Juno said again,
Do You think Jove will as angry be for Troy
As he was then for Hercules his Son?
But go. Pasiphae you shall enjoy;
She Is fair and young, and of my Graces one,
And with you as a wife shall always stay.
Content (said Sleep) but I will have you swear
By Styx. Come, on the Earth now one hand lay,
The other on the Sea, that witness bear
May all the Gods below, that Juno will
Give me the Grace Pasiphae to Wife,
And that as Wife she shall dwell with me still,
That love her dearly as I do my life.
Then Juno, as she was required swear
By all the Subtartarian Gods (by name
They Titans and the brood of Saturn are.)
And then together both from Lemnos came
To Lectos, at the foot of Ida Hill,
And ore the Woods upward their way they took.
But out of sight of Jove there Sleep stood still;
And as they went the wood below them shook.
Then Sleep went up into a high Fir Tree,
And there he sat in likeness of a Fowl
(All covered ore with Boughs and Leaves was he)
Called Chalcis by the Gods, by us an Owl.
Juno went on to Gargarus, where Jove
Saw her and met her with no le^s desire
Than when the first time to enjoy her love
Without their Parents knowledge he lay by her.
And Jove then standing by her very near,
What made you from Olympus come, said he,
Neither your Charre nor Ho^ses have you here.
Deceitfully then to him answered she,
I going am upon a Visit now
To th'Father and the Mother of the Gods
Oceanus and Tethys; who you know
Did bring me up. For now they are at odds,
And angry he abstaineth from her bed.
But if I can, I reconcile them will.
The Horses that me brought unharnessed
Attend me at the foot of Ida Hill.
But that I from Olympus hither came,
Was that I would not such a journey take,
And not make you acquainted with the same.
This said, to Juno Jove again thus spoke.
You may, said he, at any time do that,
But let us now with Love our selves delight.
For never yet upon my heart Love sat
For woman or for Goddess with such might.
Not when upon the Wife of Ixion
The wise Perithous I did beget;
Nor when the fair maid Danae I won
That brought forth God-like Perseus; nor yet
(When by Uropa I two Children got,
Minos and Rhadamant both famous men)
For her; nor Semele, when I begot
Bacchus man's joy; nor for Alcmena, when
I Hercules begot my lusty boy;
Nor Ceres, Leto, nor your self till now.
So much I long your Beauty to enjoy.
Fierce Cronides (then answered Juno) How?
On Ida top, for some o'th'Gods to spy,
And tell it to the rest to make them sport?
Then so ashamed of it shall be I,
That I shall never after come to Court.
You have a Chamber without Chink or Hole
Made you by Mulciber my Son, whereat
Neither the Sun nor any living Soul
Can peep. Go thither if you will do that.
And Jove to Juno then again replied.
That Man or God shall see us do not fear;
With such a Cloud of Gold I will us hide,
As to the Sun himself we'll not appear.
This said, within his Arms his Wife he caught
Whilst under them the Earth made to arise
Great store of Saffron, Hyacinth, and Lote.
There pleased Jupiter with Juno lies,
Closely concealed in a Cloud of Gold.
Away went Sleep unto the Argive Fleet,
And speaking there to Neptune said, Be bold,
And help the Greeks a while. Jove cannot see it.
I closed his eyes as he by Juno lay.
He Will soon awake; but help the Greeks till then,
Who now before the Trojans dare not stay.
This said, Sleep went amongst the Tribes of Men,
And Neptune to the Argive Ranks, and cried,
Shall Hector think to get the Victory
Because Achilles is not on our side?
No. Of Achilles little need would be
If every man would his Companion cheer.
But now the Counsel I shall give obey.
Arm every man himself with a good Spear,
And Shield, and Helmet strong, and come away,
And follow me. I Will lead you to the Field.
Hector (though bold) my coming will not stay.
But let the best man take the largest Shield,
And to a weaker put his own away.
This said, well pleased were the Argives all
The wounded Princes armed themselves each one;
King Agamemnon first the General.
Ulysses and Tydides then put on
Their Arms, and every way the Field they range,
Surveying Men and Arms; and all along
Make weak men with their betters Armours change,
And give their heavy Arms to men more strong.
Thus armed all and Neptune at the Head,
Who with a great and long Sword in his hand
^ent brandishing as if it had lightened
To th'Fight they go; no man durst him withstand.
And Hector with the Trojans well arrayed
On the other side came on. And then began
Betwixt the Greeks that had the God for aid,
And those of Troy led by a val^ant man
A cruel fight. And high the Sea arose
Up to the Ships and Tents. And presently
With Alalaes the mighty Armies close;
And up unto the Heavens went the cry.
So loud as now, the Sea did never rore
When beaten 'twas int' heaps by Boreas;
Nor Wind when in the Woods great Oaks it tore
Up by the roots; nor th'Wood when fired it was.
And here did Hector first begin the fight,
And at the greater Ajax threw his Spear,
Which hit him; but upon two Belts did light
Which one upon another lying were,
One of his Sword, the other of his Shield.
Hector was angry that in vain he flung
(For he was in great hope he had him killed)
And now retired backward to the throng.
Then Ajax in his hand took up a Stone,
Of those to which the Greeks their Ships did tie
(For there amongst their feet lay many a one)
And at him as he parted lets it fly.
And as a Top he made it flying spin.
It but a little ore his Buckler slew,
And hit him 'twixt his Buckler and his Chin
Upon the breast, and to the ground him threw.
As when an Oak is overthrown by Thunder
(Which known is easily by the Brimstone-smell)
Men look upon it with horror and with wonder;
So gazed they at Hector when he fell.
And from his hands went out both Shield and Spear,
And Helmet from his head; and with great cry
The Greeks rush on, and in fair hope they were
To gain his body, and their Spears let fly.
But all in vain. For by Polydamas,
Divine Aeneas, and Agenor, and
Sarpedon, and by Glaucus saved he was,
Who all before him with their Bucklers stand.
His friends then from the Battle him conveyed
Unto his Chariot and Charioteer
That close behide the Squadrons for him stayed,
And in his Charre toward Ilium they him bear.
But at the ford of Xanthus by the way
They poured water on his face, and then
In little time, as on the ground he lay,
He breathed and came unto himself again.
Then sitting on his knees he cast up blood;
And backward fell unto the ground again;
Upon his eyes again the darkness stood,
For of the stroke remained still the pain.
The Greeks as soon as they saw Hector gone,
Took heart, and on the Trojans fiercer were.
Then Ajax (of Oileus the Son)
Slew Satnius Son of Enops with his spear.
His Mother Neis was a very fine
Nymph of the River Satnius. Of the same,
Enops upon the Bank sat keeping Kine,
And on her got a Son called by that name.
Him Ajax now struck through the Flank and slew.
Then for the Body there was much ado.
At him Polydamas a Spear then threw,
Which Prothoenors shoulder pierced through.
And on his hands into the dust he fell.
To the Greeks then boasting said Polydamas,
I have not thrown in vain. I know full well
That one Greek or another taken't has
To lean on as a Staff in the way to Hell.
At this the Greeks were grieved, but especially
The heart of Telamonius did swell.
(For Prothoenor slain did near him lie;)
And with his Spear threw at Polydama^,
Who nimbly leapt aside and it declined.
But by Archelochus received it was
Antenors Son, whose death the Fates designed,
Who having on his Neck received the wound,
His Forehead and his Eyes, and Lips, and Nose
Before his Legs or Knees came to the ground.
Then Ajax took his turn, and at it crows.
Polydamas, said he, was Prothoenor
As good a man in your own estimation,
As this man that was Brother to Antenor,
Or Son? For he is not unlike that Generation.
This said he, though he well knew who it was.
Then Promachus, as he drew off the dead
Was killed by a Spear from Acamas.
And in it Acamas then gloried.
Argives, said he, great threat'ners as you are
You vulnerable are as well as we,
And no less subject to the chance of War.
How quiet Promachus now lies you see,
And so I hope ere long you all shall lie.
My Brother not long unrevenged lay.
It Is good you see to have a Brother nigh.
And when he this had said he went away.
Peneleus then went to throw his Spear
At Acamas, but Acamas was gone.
But yet he threw and killed another there,
Iliones of Phorbas the only Son,
A man much favored by Mercury.
The Spear beneath his Eye-brow entered in,
And to the ground fell down the bloody eye.
The Spear went on unto the Brain within,
Then sitting down with both his hands outspread
The deadly Spear yet sticking in his eye,
Peneleus with his Sword cuts of^ his head
Which to the ground with Helmet on did fly.
Then looking up, he to the Trojans said,
Tell this in Troy. And let his Parents mourn.
For Promochus's Wife will not be joy'd,
When we without her Husband shall return.
This said, the Trojans stricken were with fear,
And looked about each one which way to fly.
Now tell me, Muse, Who and by whom slain were
When they pursued the flying Enemy.
Great Ajax first the Son of Telamon
Killed the Mysian Leader Hyrtius
Of Gyrtias the strong and valiant Son.
Antilochus then killed Mermerus
And Phalces. By Meriones were slain
Hippotion and Morys. Teucer slew
Prothon and Periphetes, good men twain.
At Hyperenor then Atrides threw,
And gave him on the Flank a cruel wound,
And where the Spear went in, his Life went out,
And suddenly he fell unto the ground,
And on his eyes sat darkness all about.
But he that far the greater number slew,
The lesser Ajax was, Oileus Son.
'Twas hard to escape when Ajax did pursue;
For of the Argives all he best could run.
ILIAD. LIB. XV.
WHen flying they had past the Ditch and Wall,
They at the Horses and the Charrets stayed
With loss of many men, and looking pale.
And Jove awakt stood and the Field survay'd;
And saw the Greeks pursue, and Trojans fly,
And Neptune with the Greeks, and Hector laid
Upon the Plain, his Friends there sitting by,
And not a little of his Life afraid.
For gasping he scarce able was to draw
His breath, and blood abundance vomited,
Nor knew his friends. When Jupiter him saw,
Offended his condition pityed.
And then on Juno fiercely looked and said,
Juno, I see all this is done by you;
And if you for it with a whip were paid,
'Twould be no more than for your work is due.
Have you forgot how once you swung in the Air,
And had two Anvils hanging at your feet,
Your hand with a Gold Chain tied to my Chair?
Though sorry were the other Gods to see it,
Yet had I any seen but go about
Your Manacles or Shackles to untye,
I from the Sill of Heaven had thrown him out,
And strength'ess made him on the earth to lie.
I was not so much grieved for Hercules
When Boreas set on by you, arose
As he went off from Troy, enraged the Seas,
And at the last threw him ashore at Coos.
But I to Argos brought him safe again.
And this I now repeat that you may try
Whether you likely are to lose or gain,
Abusing our familiarity.
This said, the Goddess Juno struck with fear,
By Earth, said she, and Heaven about i^ spread,
By Styx (which is our greatest Oath) I swear,
And by your Life, and by our Nuptial Bed,
I never did to Neptune speak a word,
To hurt the Trojans, or the Greeks to aid;
But all he did was of his own accord,
By pity only and compassion swayed.
And from henceforward I will him advise,
Seeing what way you lead, the same to take.
Then Jupiter with favorable eyes
On Juno looked, and thus unto her spoke.
Juno, if we were both one way inclined,
Neptune would quickly with us both comply.
Now if your words dissent not from your mind,
Go amongst the other Gods, and presently
Bid Iris and Apollo to me come.
For Iris unto Neptune I will send
To bid him leave the Battle and go home.
To Hector and the Trojans I intend
To send Apollo, to give Hector might,
And cure him of his pain, that he may lead
The Trojans on, and put the Greeks to flight,
That Th^tis Son may see them scattered;
And he shall send Patroclus to the Field,
Who shall the Trojans rout and kill my Son
Sarpedon, and himself shall then be killed
By Hector's Spear. And after that is done
Achilles in revenge again shall fight,
And by his hand stout Hector shall be killed
Under the Walls of Troy, in the Trojans sight,
And beaten be the Trojans from the Field,
Till Troy by Pallas counsel taken be.
Nor till I have performed all I said
To Thetis supplicating at my knee,
Let any God presume the Greeks to aid.
This said, went Juno to Olympus high.
As when a man looks ore an ample Plain,
To any distance quickly goes his eye;
So swiftly Juno went with little-pain,
And found the Gods at Wine together set.
And at her coming in they all stood up.
But Themis forward went and Juno met,
And to her hand delivered the Cup,
And said, You look as if you frighted were
By Jupiter for something. But what is it?
You know, said Juno, that he is severe;
And you shall hear the matter if you list
Together with the other Gods, though bad.
They will not all contented with it be;
But some of them will troubled be and sad.
And grieved was she, though speaking smilingly.
Then Juno went up to her Throne, and sat;
And unto all the Gods spoke angerly,
How! mad (said she) or foolish are we, that
Are thinking how again Jove's hands to tie,
Who careless and unmoved on Ida Hill
Knows his own strength and does our Plots despise.
And therefore what he sends, be it good or ill,
We'll take it patiently if we be wise.
Nor must the God of War on Jove complain,
Or in Rebellion against him rise
Because his Son Ascalaphus is slain.
At this, with both his hands Mars clapped his Thighs,
And to the Gods above complaining said,
Pardon me Gods, I will revenge my Son,
And amongst the Argives go and give them aid,
Though I should lie amongst the dead. Then on
He puts his Armor, and gives order to
Terror and Flight his Charret to prepare,
And then there had been twice as much ado
To Appease Jove anger ere it came to war,
If Pallas had not (for the Gods afraid)
Plucked off his Helmet, and set up his Spear,
And pulled his Buckler off, and to him said,
Fool, Bedlam, What have you no Ears to hear?
You hear what news now Juno brings from Jove.
And if you care not though your self be lost,
Yet let the danger of us all you move.
For Jove will leave both Greek and Trojan Host,
And coming hither seize us one by one,
And never ask who guilty is or not.
Therefore give over vexing for your Son,
For better men than he, by Gods begot,
Already here have been and shall be slain.
The Gods cannot preserve their Children all.
This said, she brought Mars to his place again.
And Juno to their houses went to call
Iris and Phoebus. You must go, said she,
To Jove on Ida. What you are to do,
You will by Jove himself informed be
As Soon as you his Presence come into.
Her message done, Juno resumes her place,
Iris and Phoebus down to Ida fly,
And finding Jove, stood still before his face.
Nor looked he on them with an angry Eye;
For soon they did his Wives command obey.
Then speaking first to Iris, Go, said he,
To Neptune quickly, tell him what I say.
Bid him no longer at the Battle be,
But either go to Olympus to the Gods,
Or to the Sea. If he will neither do,
Bid him consider if there be no odds
As well in strength as age between us two.
He knows that all the other Gods me fear,
And for my coming dares not to stay,
As strong as to himself he does appear.
This said, swift-footed Iris went her way
From Ida hill, and Jove without delay
And swift as any Cloud before the Winds,
Came down unto the Battle before Troy,
And there amongst the Argives Neptune finds,
And going to his side, I came, said she,
To speak with you a word or two from Jove.
You must not in the War a Party be.
He bids you go up to the Gods above,
Or down to the Sea, where lies your own command.
If you refuse, he threatens you with War,
And bids you have a care (...) his hand;
And The Elder is, he says, and stronger far,
Which you your self he thinks will not deny,
Since the other Gods of him stand all in awe.
Neptune to this replying first spoke high.
Good as he is, said he, it is not Law,
Thus to usurp upon my liberty.
For Sons and Heirs of Saturn we were three
Begot on Rhea. Pluto, Jove, and I.
By lot the Rule of the Waters came to me.
To Jove the Government of Heaven fell,
And of the Clouds, and the Ethereal Sky.
To Pluto Darkness, and the rule of Hell.
Earth and Olympus did as Common lie.
Let Jove then with his share contented be,
And not encroach on me. For well it is known
I hold not any thing of him in Fee,
But live as he should do, upon my own.
He should not unto me such language use,
But to his Children that will be afraid,
And dare not what he bids them, to refuse.
Thus Neptune spoke. Again then Iris said,
Neptune, shall I this haughty answer carry
To Jove? And will you that I with it go
As it is? The Wise their minds often vary;
And Fury on the Eldest wait you know.
So she to him. Then Neptune thus to her.
Iris, this word was spoken in good season.
Much worth, I see, is a wise Messenger.
But I was vexed, because thus without reason
(When I his equal am by Birth and Lot)
Jove uses me as if I were his slave.
Well. For the present, cross him I will not
Though I be vexed. That answer let him have.
And further, That if he without consent
Of me, Athena, Juno, Mercury,
And Vulcan, Troy shall spare, our discontent
For the Argives wrong, implacable will be.
And when he this had said, he Fight forbears,
Nor any longer amongst the Argives staid,
But dived into the Sea ore head and ears.
Then Jove unto Apollo spoke, and said,
To Hector go; for Neptune now is gone
For fear of my displeasure; had he stayed,
The Sons of Saturn of our War had known.
'Twas wisely done of him my hand to avoid.
And better both for him and me; but go,
And shaking your great Shield the Greeks affright,
And strengthen Hector and encourage so
That he the Argive Lords may put to flight.
And follow them down to the Hellespont,
And make them for their hollow Ships to fight.
What then is to be done? I Will think upon it.
For I intend not to destroy them quite.
This said, Apollo left his Father Jove,
And down he came to Troy from Ida hill
Swift as a Falcon flying at a Dove,
And Hector on the ground found sitting still,
Not laid, but to his Senses come anew,
And freely breathing, although very weak,
And very well his friends about him knew.
There Phoebus standing nigh did to him speak.
Hector, said he, why sit you here alone?
O kindest of the Gods, said he, you know
That Ajax wounded has me with a Stone,
So that I am disabled with the blow,
And once to day I thought I should have gone
To Erebus with other shadows dim;
With such a force he threw the mighty stone.
Then thus again Apollo answered him.
Hector, I Phoebus am, and hither come
From Jove, against the Greeks to give you aid,
And ever have wished well to Ilium.
Lead to the Ships your Troops. Be not afraid.
Hector at this encouraged was again,
And as a Horse at Rack and Manger fed
Breaking his Headstal scudds upon the Plain,
And high into the Air he holds his head,
His Mane upon his shoulders plays with The Air
And proud is in his Freedom to behold
The pleasant River and the Pastures fair,
To which he had accustomed been of old,
And swiftly to the same is carried;
So swiftly now went Hector to each part,
And in the Field his Troops enc^^raged,
After Apollo once had given (...) heart.
But as when Swains with Curs to chase a To
Go forth into the Field, and with their cry
Rouse a fierce Lion, they the Prey let go
To save it self i'th'Woods or Rochers high,
And both the men and dogs are forced to fly;
Just so the Greeks whilst they in Bodies fight,
They save themselves; but seeing Hector nigh
They troubled were, and lost their courage quite.
Then to them spoke Thoas Andraemon's Son,
Well skilled at distance or at hand to fight
Amongst the Aetolians better there was none,
And few compare with him for Counsel might.
O strange, said he, what wondrous sight is this!
I verily thought Hector had been slain
By Ajax hand. But see he risen is.
Some God or other raised him has again,
He killed us has already many men,
And many more is likely now to slay.
For Jupiter defends him now as then.
But come, let us all my Counsel now obey.
Let us that most pretend to Fortitude
Stay here imbattl'd to receive the Fo,
And to the Ships send back the multitude.
For thither, I think, Hector dares not go:
This Counsel was approved, and then stood out
Ajax, Idomeneus, Meriones,
Teucer, Meges, and such as were most stout,
And one Battalion was made of these
The Impression of Hector to sustain
Till to the Ships the rest retreated were.
And Hector with his Troops came on amain,
Himself the foremost shaking his long Spear.
Apollo marched before him to the field
Concealing in a Cloud his glorious Head,
And carried in his hand a shining Shield
Which whosoever laid his eyes on (...)
'Twas made at first by Mulciber, and then
Given to Jove when he came down to fight
Against the Squadrons of rebellious men,
To make them fly the Field at the first sight.
Expecting Hector close the Argives stand,
And loud and sharp on both sides was the cry,
And many a Spear from every lusty hand,
And in the Air Arrows abundance fly,
And Spears; whereof some flying home did kill,
And others would have done but short they fell.
As long as Phoebus did his Shield hold still,
Many a Soul on both sides flew to Hell.
When shaking it he made the Argives see it,
They stricken were with fear, and suddenly
Their heavy hearts fell down into their feet,
And then they made all haste they could to fly.
And as a Herd or Flock is frighted when
A Wolf or Lion coming on they see,
And no assistance have of Dogs or Men;
So the Argives scattered before Hector flee.
Then slain by Hector was Arcestlaus,
And Stichius who the Boeotians led.
The other a good friend of Mnesteus was;
Both killed were by Hector as they fled;
Aeneas Medon slew and Iasus.
Medon was little Ajax Bastard-Brother,
And lived from his Father Oileus,
By th'instigation of his Stepmother
Eriopis, whose Brother he had slain.
And Iasus the Athenian Leader was,
But back to Atheas led them not again.
His Father was Sphelus Bucalidas.
Mecestes slain was by Polydamas.
Polites Echius slew in the first fight,
And Clonius by Agenor killed was;
And Deiochus by Paris in the flight
Whilst from the Foe each one his Armor takes,
The flying Greeks into the Ditch leapt all,
And there encumbered mightily with Stakes
Were forced to retire within the Wall.
Then Hector roared to the Trojans, saying,
On to the Ships, and let the dead men lie.
I Will be his death whom ever I find staying,
Nor shall he buried be or burned by
His friends and kin, but in the Fields of Troy
Be left for Dogs to tear and haul about.
This said, unto the Ships he drove away
By the Trojans followed with a mighty shout.
Phoebus before them marched, and with his foot
Into the Trench threw down the Earth again,
And made an easy and plain passage through it
As far as one a Spear can well hurl, when
He hurleth for a wager. To the Wall
The Trojans go, Apollo there again
Before them is, and easily makes it fall,
As Children when themselves they entertain
With making pretty things upon the Sands,
Then comes into their heads another toy,
And down they push this with their feet or hands;
So easily Apollo did destroy
The Argives mighty work, and bring the fight
Again unto the Ships. Where now they prayed,
And one another courage did excite.
Nestor to Heaven held up his hands and said,
O Jove, if you the Sacrifice accepted have
Of any Greek before he hither came,
And promised that the Army you would save,
O, at our Prayer now perform the same.
Let us not perish by the Trojans here.
Thus Nestor prayed, and then Jove thundered,
Declaring that his Prayers granted were.
At this the Trojans were encouraged,
And by their hopes interpreting Jove's mind,
Upon the Greeks with greater fury fall.
As when a Wave is thrown by some great wind
Into a Ship, so passed they at the Wall
And to the Ships they went with Horse and Char.
The Greeks into their Ships went up to fight
And with long Spears made for a Naval War
And pointed well with Brass, and shining bright.
The Greeks and Trojans push at one another,
These mounted stood upon their Charrets high,
And higher on their black Ships stood the other.
Patroclus that till now sat quietly
(Because the fight was only at the Wall)
And to Eurypylus his care applied
And Medicines fit to cure his wounds withal.
And sat discoursing with him by his side,
Now when he saw the Trojans were within,
And of the Argives heard the woeful cries,
And saw the fear and danger they were in,
With both his hands then clapped he his Thighs.
Eurypylus, said he, I cannot stay;
For mightily increased is th'affray.
Your wound be dressed by your Servant may.
But to Achilles I must go away.
Who knows but I may win him at the last
To help the Greeks? This said, away he went,
And left Eurypylus, and made what have
He could to get unto Achilles Tent.
Mean while the Victory no way inclined.
Neither the Greeks could make the Trojans fly,
Nor yet the Trojans as they had designed,
Back from the Ships could force the Enemy;
But level hung the wings of Victory
As when two Scales are charged with equal weight
Made by the Art of Pallas curiously,
The Beam lies level in the Air and straight.
And at one time at diverse Ships they fought.
Directly unto Ajax Hector went,
And there sharp fighting was one Ship about.
Hector to burn, Ajax to save it meant.
Here Ajax with a long Spear in his hand
Killed Caletor, Hector's Brother's Son,
As he was coming with a flaming brand
To fire the Ship, and di'd before 'twas done.
This Hector saw, and to his fellows cried,
Trojans and friends defend the body dead
Of Clytius Son, and shrink not from my side.
And as he spoke his long Spear from him fled,
Which (aimed at Ajax) fell on Lycophron,
A man that was to Ajax very dear,
But born at Cythera, and Mastors Son,
That having killed a man durst not stay there,
But unto Ajax fled, and with him stayed,
Till now by Hector's Spear struck through the head
He di'd. Then Ajax to his Brother said,
Teucer, our friend Mastorides is dead.
You know how much we honored him at home.
It Is Hector that has slain him. Where are now
Your deadly Arrows? And what is become
Of ( Phoebus g^ft) your so egregious Bow?
Which Teucer hearing quickly with him was
With Bow and Quiver in his hand, and shot,
And slew the Servant of Polydamas,
That had the guiding of his Chariot
Clitus by name, who while in vain he sought
By driving to where hottest was the fight,
From Hector and the Trojans thanks to have got,
The fatal Arrow on his Neck did light.
Then down he fell. The frighted Horses shook
The empty Charre. Then came Polydamas,
And by the heads the capring Horses took,
And sets Astynous in Clitus place;
And gave him a strict charge to hold them nigh,
But not to come with them into the Fight.
Then Teucer lets another Arrow fly
At Hector, which if it had hit him right,
He never at the Ships again had fought.
But Jupiter was pleased to save him now,
And brake the Bow-string. Then in vain flew out
The Arrow, and into the dust the Bow.
And Teucer to his Brother made his moan.
Ajax, said he, is it not a wondrous thing?
My Bow is started from my hand and gone,
Some God or other broken has the String.
Yet new 'twas made this morning purposely
To last all day. Teucer, said Ajax then,
Cannot you let your Bow and Quiver lie,
And fight with Spear in hand like other men,
And give unto the Greeks encouragement?
No. Though the Gods above should in their hate
To let the Trojans take our Ships be bent,
Yet let us sell them at a lusty rate.
Teucer then laid his Bow up in his Tent,
And armed himself with Helmet and with Shield,
And a good Spear, and back to Ajax went,
And found him where he left him in the Field.
When Hector saw that Teucer's noble Bow
Was useless now, he to his Squadrons cried,
Trojans and Lycians come on boldly now,
For Teucer now his Bow has laid aside.
Jove brake the String. I saw it with these eyes.
For easily it may discerned be
To whom the hand of Jove intends the Prize,
And to whom he denies the Victory.
And now upon our side he is you see,
And from the Greeks their courage takes away.
Then to the Ships let us go courageously,
And let the fear of death no man dismay.
For why should any of us fear to dye?
When for his Country it is, it is no shame.
And if we make the Enemy to fly,
Saved are his Wife and Children, Goods, and Name.
Whilst Hector thus the Trojans did excite,
Ajax unto the Argives spoke, and said,
We must now either put our Foes to flight,
Or make account we shall be all destroyed.
If Hector here to burn our Ships should chance,
Can you go home again (do you think) afoot?
He calls on his men. It Is not to dance,
But fire our Ships if we will let him do it.
For us it is better in close Fight to die
Here all at once, or get the Victory
Than here, God knows how long consuming lie
And peck in vain at a weak Enemy.
Thus Ajax raised the courage of the Achaeans.
Then Hector slew the Son of Perim^d,
Stichius that had command of the Phocoe^ns.
And Ajax slew Laoda^as that led
The Trojan Foot, and was Antenor's Son.
And Otus by Polydamas was slain,
Otus that led the bold Ep^ians on,
And was a friend of Meges. He again
A Spear threw at Polydamas, and mist.
For Phoebus kindness had for Panthus Son,
And with a present wit did him assist
To turn about and let the Spear go on.
And Croesmus there received it on his Breast,
And down he fell. Then Dolops Lampus Son
( Lampus that was of living men the best,
And Grandchild of the King Laomedon)
To be revenged at Meges threw his Spear,
Which passed his Shield, but in his Breastplate staid,
The Breastplate which his Father used to wear
With many Plyes of strong Mail overlaid,
And given was to Phyleus by his Guest
At Ephyre, wherewith in martial strife
From deadly strokes of Spears to save his Breast.
And of his Son it now preserved the l^fe.
But Meges Dolops hit upon the Head,
And from his Crest struck off the goodly Main
Which he but newly then had dyed red.
But Dolops still the Fight did well maintain,
Till Menelaus stole unto his Side,
And struck him through the Shoulder with his Spear.
No longer stood he then, but fell and died,
And both of them to strip him going were.
And Hector then called out to all his Kin,
And unto Menalippus specially,
Who while the Greeks were absent lived in
Percote, and took care of th'Husbandry.
But when the A^give Fleet to Troy was come,
He then returned his Country to defend,
And lived in Priam's house at Ilium,
And proud the Trojans were of such a friend.
And loved he was by Priam as his Son,
And now unto him Hector spoke and said,
Have we for Dolops no compassion,
Or to defend his body are afraid?
Come follow me. We must no longer play
At distance with the Greeks, but either they
Must utterly deface the Town of Troy,
And kill us all, or we them all destroy.
This said, away they both together went
To save the Body of their Cosen dead,
And A^ax with a contrary intent
His Argives to the Fight encouraged.
Argives, said he, to Honor have an eye,
And of your fellows Censures have a care.
For slain are always more of those that fly
Than those that of base flight ashamed are.
This said, though of it no great need there was
Amongst the Greeks, they presently obeyed,
And at the Ships stood like an Hedge of Brass.
But on came Hector not at all afraid.
TO Antilochus then Menelaus said,
Amongst us there is none that better can
Both fight and run. Why should you be afraid
To leap unto the throng and kill your man?
This said, away again went Menelaus.
Antilochus leapt out before the rest
And threw his Spear at Menalippus, as
He coming was, and hit him on the Breast.
No sooner was he fallen to the ground,
Than to the Spoil Antilochus ran in.
As quick as when upon a Deer a Hound
Runs in, that by the Hunter killed had been.
But soon as he saw Hector coming on,
As valiant as he was he durst not stay;
But as some wild Beast that had mischief done
Ere people could assemble, run away.
The Trojans followed him with clamor loud,
And Spears abundance after him they threw.
But he ran on and got into the crowd.
But they unto the Ships the Greeks pursue.
For Jupiter to make his promise good
To Thetis, hitherto the Greeks dismayed,
And in the Battle with the Trojans stood
Until he had performed all he said.
But meant to stay no longer with them, than
To see some Argive Ship with fire to shine,
And then to let the Greeks prevail again.
From the beginning such was his design
In aiding Hector, who now furiously
Went on like Mars, or like fire in a Wood,
With foam about his mouth, and fire in's eye.
And Jove himself came down and ore him stood
To save him when he was hemmed in by Foes,
And honor him, since 'twas his destiny
That not long after he his Life should lose,
And by none but Achilles hand should dye.
Now Hector looking where the best men stood
And armed best, tried first to break in there.
Keen as he was he there could do no good;
So close they joined to one another were,
And stuck like great stones in a Tower or Rock
That of the boyst'rous Winds and Billows high
Which break upon it still endures the shock.
Then Hector other places went to try,
And through he passed. Then as a Wave high grown,
When in foul weather forced by the wind
Under dark Clouds, into a Ship is thrown
The Mist and roaring Sails bring to the mind
Of the poor Seamen nothing but to dye;
So frighted were the Greeks. But forward he
Still went; And as when in the Meadows by
The Rivers side thousands of Kine there be,
And th'Herdsmen see a Lion to them come,
But with a wild Beast know not how to fight,
Some go before them, and behind them some,
The Lion falls on them in their sight
Between both ends, and kills only one,
The rest all fly; So the Argives all before
He^tor and Jupiter dispersed run.
But only one was killed and no more.
And Periphetes 'twas the worthy Son
Of an unworthy Father Copreus, who,
When any labor great was to be done
By Hercules, did from Eurystheus go
As Messenger to carry the commands.
But Periphetes Virtue wanted none.
His Feet were swift, and valiant were his Hands,
A wiser man Mycena had not one.
But slain he was. For as he turned to fly,
He trod upon the edge of his own Shield,
And overthrown upon his Back did lie;
And with a stab of Hector's Spear was killed.
His friends, though many standing by him were,
And grieved to see him fall, did him no good.
For every one now for himself did fear,
And out of Hector's way kept all he could.
The Greeks retreated were no further yet
Than to between the first and second Row
Of the Argive Ships; but forced that place to quit,
Near to their Tents themselves they rally now.
Where Nestor them encouraged again.
Argives, my friends, be valiant now (said he)
And if at any time now play the men.
Of one another Censures fearful be.
Besides, by what you should be moved most,
Your Parents, Children, Wives, and Goods and Land,
Whether you have them still or have them lost.
I you conjure against the Foe to stand.
This Nestor said, the Argives to exite:
And Pallas from them took the Mist again,
That they might see who did, who did not fight
Both at the Ships and elsewhere on the Plain.
But Ajax Telamonius thought not good
To stay with other Argives in the throng,
But up into a Ship he went and stood
With a Ship spear twenty two Cubits long.
As when a man that taught has been to guide
Four Horses at a time, and in his hand
Holds their Reins while they go side by side,
And people on the way admiring stand,
He from one Horse unto another skips,
And makes them run together to the Town;
So Ajax ore the Argives ranged Ships
To save them, and the Tents ran up and down.
And terribly unto the Argives cried
To play the men. Nor Hector amongst his Troops
Could be persuaded longer to abide;
But suddenly as a black Eagle stoops
At a great Flock of Geese, or Cranes, or Swans;
So Hector of the Argive Ships to one
Flew down, and Jove with his puissant hands
Behind him marching always pusht him on.
Then at the Ships the Fight began again,
More cruel than before. You would have said
They had no sense of weariness or pain,
So mightily they all about them laid.
The Greeks were in despair of their return.
The Trojans thought the Argive Lords to rout,
And all the Ships that brought them thither burn.
Thus minded on each side they fiercely fought.
Upon a Shi^ then Hector laid his hand,
Which brought Protesilaus unto Troy,
But never back unto his native Land.
For this good Ship they one another slay.
Arrows and Darts no longer slew about;
But now with Battle-axes of great strength
In one another reach they stood and fought,
And with great Spears and of a mighty length,
And great keen Swords, whereof from dying hands
Abundance fell on either side to the ground;
And covered were with streaming blood the Sands,
That gushed out from many a ghastly wound.
But Hector on the Ship his hand held fast,
And to his Trojans called aloud for Fire.
This day, said he, requites our ill days past.
To burn these Ships. Jove with us does conspire.
And set on fire they had been long ago
(For I would gladly at the Ships have fought)
But that the Senate would not have it so,
And kept both you and me from going out.
But though by Jove then smitten were their hearts,
Yet boldly now himself he leads us on.
This said, the Trojans bravely play their parts,
And with more vigor fought than they had done.
Then on the Deck no longer Ajax stayed,
So many Spears went singing by his head.
For if he there had stood he was afraid
That some unlucky Spear would strike him dead;
And to the far side of the Ship retreats,
Leaving the Deck which fenceless was and high,
And sat upon one of the Rowers seats,
And still upon the Trojans kept his eye.
And thence he from the fire the Ship defends,
And terribly on the Argive Heroes calls
To do their best. We have, said he, no friends
Behind to save our lives, nor better Walls
Than those we made; nor any City nigh,
That can or willing are our part to take.
But far from home in hostile ground we lie,
And hemmed in are by the briny lake;
And nothing can redeem us but our hands.
This said, he looked about him furiously
To see if any durst approach with Brands,
Resolved to kill him that with Fire came nigh.
And many to the Ship with Fire were sent
By Hector; but when they approached near,
Ajax continually did them prevent,
And twelve he killed with his Naval Spear.
ILIAD. LIB. XVI.
THus fiercely fought the Trojans and the Greeks.
And with Achilles was Patroclus now
With tears abundance running down his Cheeks,
Like Springs that from a high Rock streaming flow.
No sooner him Achilles weeping spied
But piti'd him. Why weep you so, said he,
Like a Child running by his Mothers side,
And holding by her Coat would carried be?
Bring you some News that none but you can tell?
Menoetius and Peleus still do live
At Phthia with the Myrmidons, and well.
If not, we both have cause enough to grieve.
Or is it that the Greeks are slaughtered so,
And fall before the Ships? it is for their pride?
Speak what is the matter, that we both may know.
Patroclus sobbing to him then replied,
O Son of Peleus, of all Greeks the best,
Forgive me if in this necessity
I freely speak. They that excel the rest
In Prowess, at the Ships all wounded lie.
Ulysses wounded is and Diomed,
And Agamemnon and Eurypylus,
And cured may be, but stand us in no sted;
Nor does your Virtue any good to us.
O Gods let never anger in me dwell
Like this of yours. If you cannot, who can
The Trojans from the Argive Fleet repel,
And save so many lives? O cruel man!
The noble Peleus sure was not your Father;
Born of the Goddess Thetis you were not.
Sprung from the raging Sea I think you rather,
And that by some hard Rock you were begot.
But if you stand upon some Prophecy,
Or Thetis have forbidden you to fight
From Jove, yet send some Myrmidons with me,
That I may to the Argives give some light.
But in your Armor let me be arrayed,
That when they see me they may think me you,
And back into the City run dismayed,
And the Argives wearied take breath anew.
For long the Trojans have endured the Fight;
And if fresh Enemies they coming see,
With little labor they will be put to flight,
And leave the Argive Tents and Navy free.
Thus prayed he, but against himself he prayed,
And rashly su'd to cast his life away.
To this Achilles answer made and said,
My dear Patroclus what is this you say?
I stand not on, nor care for Prophecy,
Nor yet by Jove forbidden am to fight;
But at my heart it lies grievously,
My equal should oppress me by mere might.
A Town I won, in which we found great Prey.
For my reward the Greeks gave me a Maid,
Which Agamemnon from me took away,
Only because more people him obeyed,
As if I were a man of little worth.
But let that pass. Though once I never meant
My Myrmidons should with the Greeks go forth
To Battle till the Foes were at my Tent,
Yet since the Argive Ships with such a mist
Of Trojans on the shore environed lie,
And the Argives wanting room can scarce resist,
And have the power of Troy for enemy,
Take you my Arms and lead unto the Fight
The Myrmidons. The Trojans shall not see
My Helmet near, to put them in a fright.
If Agamemnon had been just to me,
The Ditches had been filled with Trojans dead.
But now into the very Camp they break;
Nor can resisted be by Diomed.
To save the Ships Tydides is too weak.
Nor can that hateful mouth of Atreus Son
Be heard for Hector, who the Air does fill
With roaring to the Trojans to fall on,
And shouting of the Trojans as they kill.
Yet so, Patroclus, charge them lustily,
For fear the Ships should all be set on fire;
Then lost the Greeks are without remedy,
And to their Country never shall retire.
But now what I shall say give ear unto.
To the end the Greeks may honor me, and send
Briseis back with Gifts, you thus must do.
When you have freed the Ships, there make an end
And come away. If Jove give you success
No longer without me pursue the Fight.
'Twill make my honor with the Greeks the less.
Nor in the slaughter take so much delight
As to proceed up to the Walls of Troy;
Lest by some God or other you be checked.
But having freed the Ships come straight away
( Apollo has for Troy a great respect)
And leave both sides to fight upon the Plain
Till (grant it O ye Gods) there left are none,
But you and I, the Town of Troy to gain.
Thus they to one another talked alone.
Ajax by this time from the Ship was gone,
Forced by the Spears that from the Trojans flew,
And weakened by the hand of Saturn's Son.
For at his head the Trojans always threw,
And forced he was to hold his great Shield high,
And weari'd was thereby his Buckler-hand.
With Spear in hand no Trojan durst come nigh,
But pelting him with Spears aloof they stand.
The sweat ran down his Limbs, nor could he well,
Though mightily for breath he pulled, respire.
Now tell me Muses that in Heaven do dwell,
How came the Ship first to be set on fire?
Thus. Hector with his broad Sword at a blow
The Spear of Ajax chanced to cut in twain
Where to the staff the head was fixed, and so
His mighty Naval Spear he shook in vain.
The head of Brass flew humming to the ground.
This Ajax saw, and frighted was to see
Jove thus the counsel of the Greeks confound,
To give unto the Trojans Victory,
And went his way. Then in the Trojans came
With Brands of flaming fire; and presently
The hind part of the Ship was all in flame.
Achilles with his hand then clapped his Thigh
And to Patroclus said, A flame I see
Rise at the Ships. It Is time that you were gone,
Lest our Retreat should intercepted be.
Away and quickly put my Armor on.
This said, Patroclus first of all puts on
His Boots of War, and to his legs them ti'd
With Silver Clasps; and next of Thetis Son
The Breast Plate good he to his Breast applied
With Golden Stars like Heaven beautified.
His Sword then ore his shoulder he puts on,
With Silver Studs to hang down by his side;
And then his Helmet shining like the Sun
He puts upon his head; and last of all
He took two Spears that fit were for his hand.
But not that which Achilles fought withal.
For that none but Achilles could command.
A great and strong and heavy Spear it was,
Made of an Ash cut down in the woody hill
Of Pelius, and by Chiron given 'twas
To Peleus, his mighty Foes to kill.
Then to Achilles Charre Automedon
The Horses Balius and Xanthus ti'd,
That were by Zephyrus begotten on
Podarge seeding by the Oceans side;
And at their heads he Pedasus did place
(A Horse he took at Thebe in the Prey)
That with them both was able to keep pace,
Though he were mortal, and immortal they.
While by his Charre Patroclus arming stands,
Apace from Tent to Tent Achilles runs,
And calls unto those that had Commands,
To Arm and bring away the Myrmidons.
Then came they and about Patroclus stood
Like Wolves that on a lusty Stag had fed,
And lapping stained the River with his blood,
With Bellies full and hearts encouraged.
When they together were, Achilles then
Appointed who i'th'Field should them command.
To Troy he Ships brought with him five times ten,
From every Ship came fifty men to land.
And then five Bodies he made of them all,
And Captains five by whom they led should be.
But was himself the Captain General;
For of the Myrmidons the King was he.
Of these five Captains one Menestius was,
Who was the River Sperchius his Son,
And by the name of Boro then did pass
His Mother was of Peleus Daughters one,
And Polydora was her name. And she
To Perierus had been married,
And for his Wife reputed constantly
Before she was of M'nestius brought to bed.
The second Bands were by Eudorus led,
The Son of Polymela a fair Maid.
Hermes of her became enamoured,
As at a Dance her Beauty he survay'd.
It was upon Diana's Holy Day
He saw her dancing, and at night he got
Unseen into her bed and with her lay,
And his brave Son Eudorus then begot.
To Echecles she after married.
Her Father Phylas to him took her Son,
And unto man's estate him nourished,
And loved no less than if t'had been his own.
The third Pisandrus led that swift could run,
And had at fighting with a Spear more art
In bloody War than any Myrmidon
Amongst them all ( Patroclus set apart.)
The fourth was by the old Knight Phoenix led.
And of the fifth, charge had Alcimedon.
When they were all together gathered,
Unto them sharply thus spoke Thetis Son.
Ye Myrmidons, said he, remember now,
How all the time I kept you have from fight,
You have the Trojans threatened hard; and how
You said my Mother fed me had with Gall,
And in great tumult bid me let you go,
Or at the Ships upon the Trojans fall.
Lo there before you is the War you crave.
The Trojans are about to burn the Fleet;
Do you your utmost now the same to save.
Let him that brags of Valor let us see it.
This said, the Myrmidons became more keen,
Because they saw the King had changed his mind;
And presently into their Ranks fell in,
And close themselves to one another joined.
As close as in a Wall are laid the stones
By him that means his House shall keep out wind;
So close together stood the Myrmidons.
Helmets with Helmets, Shields with Shields conjoined.
Before them all two good men armed went,
Patroclus and Automedon to th'Fight.
Achilles then returned to his Tent,
Where stood a Chest most beautiful to sight,
Which Thetis gave him when he went to Troy,
Wherein were Carpets, Coats, and Cloaks laid up,
To keep him warm when he a Shipboard lay;
And in the same was kept a dainty Cup.
In which no other man ere drank but he,
Though 'twere to offer to the Gods above.
Nor he himself (such was his nicetie)
Ere in it drank but offering to Jove.
Achilles then with Sulphur scoured the Cup,
And having rins'd it clean with water fair,
And washed his hands, went out and held it up
Toward Heaven, and thus to Jove addressed his prayer.
Pelasgique Jove that far from hence do dwell,
But at Dodona men thy counsel know,
The Selli there thy Prophets fortunes tell,
Though on the ground they sleep, and barefoot go,
That at my Prayer once did honor me,
And broughtest on the Argive Host much woe,
Once more unto my Prayer inclined be.
Though to the Fight my self I do not go,
I thither send my dear Companion.
O Jove now honor him. Let Hector know
Patroclus is a man of War alone,
And not then only when I with him go.
And when he has the Trojans driven from
The Argive Ships, then grant, O Jove, he may
With all his Myrmidons safe hither come,
With all their Arms and make no longer stay.
Thus prayed he. To half of his desire
Jove nodded; but the other half denied.
He granted him to save the Ships from fire;
But at returning safe his neck he wri'd.
Achilles when he offered had and prayed,
Went with the Cup again into his Tent*
And safely laid it up; and not long stayed,
But out again to see the Fight he went.
The Myrmidons now marched orderly.
But when unto the Trojans they were near,
Like Wasps incensed they upon them fly.
As when at unawares a Traveller
Is going by a Wasps-nest near the way,
Which to the common damage stirred has been
And angered by a young unlucky Boy,
Upon the Traveller they vent their spleen;
And all at once with fury on him fly:
Just so the Myrmidons occasion take
Provoked by Agamemnon's injury
To fall upon the Trojans for his sake.
Patroclus yet did further them incite.
Ye Myrmidons* said he, Achilles Bands,
Remember now courageously to fight;
Achilles honor now lies in your hands
The best of Greeks. Let Agamemnon see
The fault he did, and know he was unwise,
How wide soever his Dominion be,
The best of all the Achaeans to despise.
Then on the Trojans all at once they fly.
With them the other Greeks by shouts conspire.
The Trojans when they saw Patroclus nigh
With stout Automedon Achilles Squire,
Their courage fell, their Ranks disordered were,
They looked about which way 'twere best to run.
For they supposed Achilles now was there,
And that his discontent was past and gone.
Patroclus first of all lets fly his Spear
Amongst the thickest of the Foes, about
Protesilaus hollow Ship (for there
The Trojans standing close together fought)
And slew Pyraechmes who from Amydon,
And Axius wide stream the Poeons led.
The Spear passed thorough his right Shoulder Bone.
And when the Poeons saw him fall, they fled.
Not only these he frighted had, but all,
By killing of a Captain of such fame.
Patroclus then upon the rest did fall,
And drove them from the Ship, and quenched the flame.
The Trojans toward Troy retire apace.
Patroclus and the Argives them pursue,
Leaving the Ship half burnt upon the place.
And on the Plain the Fight began anew.
As men see all the Rocks and Woods about
When than the Hills the Mist is gotten higher;
So when the Fire was at the Ships put out,
The Greeks did for a little while respire.
For yet the Trojans did not plainly fly,
But still resisting went, and losing ground.
Here Areilochus was killed by
Patroclus that gave him a deadly wound
Upon the Thigh, just as he turned about.
The Spear went through and passing brake the Bone.
And at the wound his blood and life went out,
And on his face he fell down with a groan.
Thoas by Menelaus on the Breast
Close by his Shield a wound received and di'd.
To Meges Antichus a Spear addressed.
But Meges that his purpose had espied
Prevented him, and with his Spear him hits
Upon the Leg and near unto the Knee,
And all the Nerves thereof asunder splits,
And of the wound he died presently.
Antilochus then slew Atymnius.
The Spear went through his Flank and struck him dead.
And Maris then struck at Antilochus,
But he prevented was by Thrasymed
And slain, pierced through the shoulder with his Spear.
And thus by two Sons of old Nestor slain
The two Sons of Amisodorus were,
And of Sarpedon good Companions twain.
Their Sire Amisodorus kept at home.
The foul Chimaera that had done much harm,
Devouring people which did that way come,
Till she was slain by Bellerophontes arm.
Cl^obulus then pestered in the throng
By little Ajax taken was alive,
But after he was taken lived not long.
For Ajax did him of his life deprive.
For on the Neck he gave him such a wound
With his broad Sword as made it smoke with blood;
And presently he fell unto the ground,
And on his Eyes perpetual darkness stood.
With Swords Peneleos and Lycon pressed
Each other hard. For both their Spears had missed.
Lycon him hit upon the Helmet-crest,
And broke his Sword. One part staid in his Fist,
The other flew. Peneleos him hit
Upon the Neck. The Sword so far went in,
As from the shoulders it divided it,
Save that it hung a little by the skin.
Me^iones pursued Acamas,
Amongst the Trojans that before him fled;
And overtook him as he mounting was,
And with a wound in the shoulder left him dead.
And by Idomeneus the King of Creet
Hit in the Mouth was Eryma^ and slain.
His Teeth all stricken out fell at his Feet,
And by the Spear pierced thorough was h^s Brain,
And filled with blood stood staring both his Eyes,
Which through his nose and mouth he strove to void,
And gasping seeks to cast it out, and dies.
Thus the Greek Lords each one his man destroyed.
And then as bloody Wolves invade the Lambs
Or Kids that by the Shepherds negligence
Are wandered on the Mountains from their Dams,
And kill; for Nature gives them no defense;
So fiercely on the Trojans fell the Greeks.
But they no more trust to their hands but feet.
Ajax to throw his Spear at Hector seeks,
But with him Hector has no mind to meet,
But by the advantage of his skill in War
Knowing of Arrows and of Spears the sound,
To keep aloof from Ajax still took care,
And covered with his Shield often shifted ground.
And though he knew the honor of the day
Would fall unto the Achaeans in the end,
Yet from the Field he went not straight away,
But stayed and fought his people to defend.
And then as Clouds rise from Olympus high,
And through the Air to Heaven tend upright
Before tempestuous winds; so rose the Cry
At the Argive Ships. Then Hector left the Fight.
And after him the Trojans take their heels,
But in the Trench greatly encumbred were,
And many Charret poles they brake and Wheels.
And when they of the Trench were gotten clear,
Filled with affright was every Path and Way.
Thus at the Ships the storm of War gave ore.
The Horses that were loose ran back to Troy;
And to the Ships the Trojans came no more.
Patroclus, where he most disorder found,
Thither he drove, and trod the Trojans down,
And Charret-seats were tumbled to the ground,
And many from their Seats were headlong thrown.
But the swift Horses of Patroclus, which
On Peleus by the Gods bestowed were,
Found no impediment, but leapt the Ditch,
Pursuing Hector, who now was not there.
As when with stormy winds the Autumnal rain
Falls heavy on the Earth, from Heaven sent
When wrested are the Laws by men for gain,
Who from the Gods expect no Punishment,
The Rivers swell; down from the Mountains side
Innumerable Currents headlong run
Roaring and foaming to the Ocean wide;
And washed away is all man's work and gone:
So fled the Trojans. These thus put to flight,
He kept the Greeks from going to the Town,
As they desired; yet gave not over fight,
But 'twixt the Ships and River overthrown
Were many more; for unrevenged yet
Were many Greeks. First Pronous he killed,
Whom with his spear upon the Breast he hit,
Where he was not well covered with his Shield.
The next he slew was Thestor Enops Son
That sat upon his Seat amazed with fear,
And from his hand the Horses Reyns were gone.
Patroclus standing by him with his Spear
Struck him upon the Cheek, and there it stuck
Fast in his Teeth; and over the fore-wheel
To the ground Patroclus fetched him with a pluck
As to the Bank a Fisher pulls an Eel,
And to the Earth he threw him on his Face.
Eryalus then to him went, in vain,
And by Patroclus slain was on the place.
For with a stone he cleft his head in twain.
Epaltes, Erymas, Amphoterus,
And Echius, Pyres, Damastorides.
Euippus, Polymelus Iphius;
He one upon another killed all these.
Sarpedon saw how fast his good friends died,
And that his Lycians ready were to fly,
He them rebuking with a loud voice cried,
Whither do you go? For shame stay here. For I
Intend to meet this man my self and know
Who it is that here so furiously fights,
And lays so many valiant Trojans low.
This said, he from his Chariot alights.
Patroclus seeing that, alighted too;
And presently betook him to the fight,
As keen as on a high Rock Vultures two;
And Jupiter was grieved at the sight.
And to (his Wife and Sister) Juno said,
Ay me, my Son Sarpedon will be slain.
For by the Fates long since it so is laid.
And now my mind divided is in twain,
To snatch him hence and carry him again
To Lycia, or now to let him die,
And by Patroclus fatal Spear be slain.
And Juno then to Jove made this reply.
O Jove, most wilful of the Gods, what say'e?
A mortal man condemned is by the Fates,
And you would now the Execution stay?
Do. But take heed how you offend the State^.
And this I tell you further, if you do*
Your Son Sarpedon from the Combat save,
The other Gods will look to do so too.
For Sons at Troy many Immortals have.
But since you love your Son and for him grieve,
First let Patroclus take away his life,
And then to Death and Sleep commandment give
To carry him from out the bloody strife
To Lycia, amongst his friends and kin,
Who see him will embalmed and buried,
And build a Tomb to lay his ashes in,
Which are the honors due unto the dead.
This Juno says; Jove to it condescends.
And for the honor of his Son so dear
For rain he drops of blood from Heaven sends.
When they were come to one another near,
First threw Patroclus and killed Thrasymed
A valiant man Sarpedon's Charretier.
The Spear into his Belly entered.
Then at Patroclus flew Sarpedon's Spear,
And hit him not, but Pedasus he slew,
The Fore-horse of Achilles Charre, and now
The sprawling Horse caused a disorder new.
The Yoke screeks, and Automedon lets go
The Reyns; whereby the Combatants are parted;
Automedon soon found a remedy;
For from the Charret seat he nimbly started,
And cut the Geers that did the fore-horse tie.
The Horses two adjusted were again;
And then the Combatants the fight renew.
And first Sarpedon threw, and threw in vain.
The Spear just over his left shoulder slew.
But not in vain Patroclus Spear was thrown,
That smote him through the Midriff. Heavilie
Sarpedon then unto the ground came down,
As if 't had been an Oak or Poplar-tree.
Or as a Pine cut down in the Hill, to be
A Mast for some great Ship falls to the ground,
So fell to The Earth Sarpedon heavilie,
And with his Armor made the place resound.
As when a Bull is by a Lion slain,
Under his Paw to the ground he groaning falls;
So groaning fell Sarpedon in great pain,
And to his friend the valiant Glaucus calls,
And to him said, Now Glaucus valiant be,
And set your mind on nothing but to fight.
But first go call my best men all to me,
And to assist me here join all your might.
If of my Arms I stripped be by the Foe,
The shame thereof for ever will abide.
So therefore quickly call the people. Go.
And when he thus had spoken to him, di'd.
Patroclus on the Body sets his foot,
And out again he pulled the bloody Spear,
With pieces of the Midriff sticking to it.
And now away the Horses ready were
To run. For no man was upon the Seat;
But by the Myrmidons they soon were staid.
The grief of Glaucus then was very great
For that he knew not how the King to aid.
For in great pain his Arm was with the stroke
Of Teucer's Arrow at the Argive Wall,
And found no remedy but to invoke
Apollo, and upon him thus did call.
Apollo, whether thou in Troy be now
Or Lycia, unto my Prayer give ear;
For when distressed men unto thee bow,
Thou do from any place or distance hear.
I grievously am wounded in the hand,
The pain whereof up to my shoulder goes.
No longer now can I my Spear command,
When most I need to use it against the Foes.
Sarpedon the brave Son of Jove is slain.
H^s Father of him takes no further care.
But thou Apollo now assuage my pain,
And cure my wound and make me fit for War;
That I may bring the Lycians to fight,
And I with them the Body may defend.
This said, Apollo by his Heavenly might
His wound healed up, the pain was at an end.
The blood was gone; encouraged was his mind,
And Glaucus knew Apollo did it all,
And joy'd such favor with the God to find.
Then out he went the Lycians to call.
That done he to the Trojan Princes goes,
Agenor, Hector, and Polydamas,
Divine Aeneas, and craves aid of those;
But what he said, to Hector spoken was.
Hector, said he, your friends you now forget,
Who from their Country hither came so far
Their lives to venture for your sake. For yet
How to assist them you take little care.
Slain is the King Sarpedon in the sight,
That both with Might and Justice ruled the Land
Of Lycia. Let them not vent their spite
Upon the Body slain; but by him stand.
The Myrmidons else for the Achaeans sake
Of whom we slew so many at the Fleet,
Will in revenge his Armor from him take,
And do unto him other things unmeet.
This said, the Trojans all were on a flame
To be revenged. To Troy he was a Wa^l,
Although he thither as a Stranger came,
He many led, himself the best of all*
And to the Myrmidons they marched away,
Hector himself before them at the head
As angry for Sarpedon's death as they.
Patroclus then the Greeks encouraged,
And speaking first to the Ajaxes two,
Ajax, said he, both you and you, again
Fight gallantly as you are used to do,
Or better if you can. For I have slain
Sarpedon with my Spear, who was the man
That mounted first up to the Argive Wall.
Let Us take his Armor off him if we can,
And make his Fellows some of them to fall.
This said, they into order put their men
Trojan and Lycian; Greek and Myrmidon;
And to the Body slain return again,
And fiercely one another fell upon.
And Jove the place with darkness covered round
As long as they were fighting 'bout his Son.
And at the first the Greeks forsook their ground.
For then there was a noble Myrmidon
Epigeus that King was formerly
Of Budeon, and forced thence away
For a man's death to Peleus did fly,
Who sent him with Achilles unto Troy.
And now no sooner laid had his hand
Upon Sarpedon's Body, but was slain
By a great stone that flew from Hector's hand,
And broke (for all his Cask) his skull in twain.
Down he upon the dead King falling dies.
Patroclus when he saw his friend thus fall,
Swift as a Hawk that at a Stareling flies,
Up to the Foes ran, and amongst them all
He threw a stone, which lighted on the Neck
Of Stenelaus, and the Tendon rent.
And this gave to the Trojan Horse a check;
And back a little Hector with them went
As far as one can for experiment,
Or at a Foe in Battle throw a Spear;
So far back Hector with his Charret went,
The Argives them pursuing in the Rear.
But Glaucus that did then the Lycians lead
Pursued by Bathycles and very near,
Upon a sudden to him turned his head,
And deep into his breast he thrust his Spear.
And down he fell. The Trojans then were glad,
And at the Body fallen boldly stayed.
On the other side the Greeks were very sad
To lose so good a man, but not dismayed.
Meriones then slew Laogonus
Son of Onetor Priest of Jupiter,
And honored like a God in Gargarus.
The Spear him pierced between the Cheek and Ear.
Then at Meriones Aeneas threw
And was in hope to give him his deaths wound;
But he then stoopt, and ore him the Spear flew;
And one end shook, the other stuck i'th'ground.
At this Aeneas angry to him said,
Meriones, as well as you can dance,
My Spear was like your motion to have stayed,
And that it did not, think it was by chance.
To him replying said Meriones,
Aeneas strong and valiant as you are,
You cannot kill men whom and when you please,
Your self are subject to the chance of War
As well as I. And if my Spear fall right
(As much as to your hands you trust) you will die
Like other men, and I win honor by it,
And to the shades below your Soul will fly.
This said, Patroclus came and him reproved.
Meriones, why talk you thus, said he,
Do You think the Trojans can be hence removed
With evil words till many slain there be?
In counsel words may somewhat signify,
But hands in War determine the event.
It Is to no purpose words to multiply.
This said, away they both together went.
And by and by was heard a mighty sound,
As if the Woods were felling on the Hills,
Of men in Armor falling to the ground,
And Swords and Spears on Helmets and on Shields.
Sarpedon covered was from top to toe
With dust and Spears, and so besmeared with blood,
That wise he must have been that could him know,
Though who it was they all well understood*
And busy were about him as the Flies
That buz in Summertime about the Pans
Of Milk. And all this while Jove kept his Eyes
Upon the Battle; and advising stands
Whether 'twere best to let Patroclus die
Upon Sarpedon, slain by Hector, or
Let him go on, and follow those that fly,
And of the Trojans make the slaughter more.
At last resolved he made the Trojans fly.
Patroclus then pursued them up to Troy,
And as he went made many of them die;
And Hector was the first that fled away,
Not ignorant of Jove's Apostasy.
And then the lusty Lycians also fled;
Whose King Sarpedon now in the heap did lie
Stretched out on The Earth amongst the other dead.
And him Patroclus of his Armor strips,
His mighty Armor all of solid Brass,
And sent it by his fellows to the Ships.
Thus slain and stripped Jove's Son Sarpedon was.
Then Jove unto Apollo spoke and said,
Go Phoebus bear Sarpedon from the Fight
A great way off, and let him be arrayed
In an immortal Garment pure and bright.
But in the River clear first wash him clean,
And with Ambrosia anoint his skin.
Let Death and Sleep two Sisters bear him then
To Lycia unto his friends and kin,
By whom his Body will embalmed be,
And Tomb and Pillar set upon his Grave,
Whereby preserved will be his memory,
Which all the honor is the dead can have.
This said, Apollo down from Ida came,
And bare Sarpedon's Body from the Fight,
And far off in the River washed the same,
And with Ambrosia his Body white
Anointed, and with Garments fair arrayed,
Immortal Garments; and into the hands
Of Death and Sleep committed it, who laid
It down again amongst the Lycians.
Patroclus then commands Automedon
To drive to Troy. Not well. For had he then
The counsel of Achilles thought upon,
He had escapt. But Jove knows more than men,
And quickly can take from a man of might,
And to a weaker give the Victory
Whom he himself encourage will to fight,
As now by Jove himself set on was he.
But while Patroclus chased the Trojans thus,
Who fell? Adrestus and Autonous,
Epistor, Melanippus, Perimus,
Pylartus, Mulius, and Echeclus
And Elasus. And taken had been Troy
Now by Patroclus, but that Phoebus stood
Upon the Tower and pusht him still away,
To vex the Greeks and do the Trojans good.
For thrice he mounted and was thrice put back
By the Immortal hand; but when again
He mounting was, Apollo to him spoke.
Retire (said he) Patroclus, it is in vain.
It is not you that Ilium can win,
Nor Thetis Son, a better man than you.
Patroclus at these words great fear was in,
And far off from the Wall himself withdrew.
Now Hector was upon his Charret^seat
In The S^aean Gate, and did deliberate
Whether to make the Trojans to retreat,
And when they were come in to shut the Gate,
Or go to th'Fight. While he consulted thus,
Apollo came and standing by his side
In likeness of his Uncle Asius,
Him sharply did for standing idle chide.
Hector, said he, why stay you here? If I
Exceeded you in strength as you do me,
I teach you would, in such necessity
To quit the Field thus, and unuseful be.
Go. To Patroclus now directly drive,
And doubt not but that by Apollo's aid
You may him of his Life and Arms deprive.
Away went Phoebus when he this had said.
And Hector then returned to the Fight
While Phoebus did the Argive throng dismay.
Cebriones still kept his Horses right
Upon Patroclus. For upon the way
Hector past through the Greeks and killed none.
Patroclus then alighting, with his Spear
In his left hand, in the other took a stone,
And with it killed Hector's Charrettier
Cebriones, King Priam's Bastard Son.
Above his Eyes upon his Forehead just
Patroclus hit him with the knobby stone.
Then from his Seat he dropped into the dust.
Broke was his Skull, his Eyebrows crushed int'one,
And at his feet before him fell his eyes.
Patroclus scoft and said it is nimbly done.
And proudly thus insulting ore him cries,
Oh that we had a man could leap like him,
And set upon one of our Ships were he,
To leap into the Sea and groaping swim!
How satisfied with Oysters should we be!
So quickly down he tumbled to the Plain.
I see that there good tumblers are in Troy.
This said, he ran unto the Body slain,
Himself with his own valor to destroy.
And then unto the ground leapt Hector too,
And at Cebrion^s his Body fought
He and Patroclus, fierce as Lions two
That had a great Stag, slain by chance, found out;
And hungry both, strove who should first be fed.
So sought these two each other to destroy.
And Hector pulled the dead man by the head,
Patroclus by the heels the other way.
Mean while the Greeks and Trojans fighting stood.
As when between two Hills two great Winds fight,
On both sides strongly s^aken is the Wood,
And Boughs beat one another with great might,
And with a horrid noise together clash,
And many lusty Limbs then broken are
Of barky Corme, broad Beech, and lofty Ash;
So did it with the Greeks and Trojans ^^re.
About Cebriones stuck many a Spear,
And many a fledged Arrow from the Bow,
And many Shields by great stones broken were,
While he along in bed of dust lay low,
And quite forgotten had his Chivalry.
Now all the while that mounting was the Sun
The Weapons flew, and men fell equally.
But after noon when half the day was gone
The Argives clearly had the Victory,
And from the Field Cebriones they drew,
And stripped there of his Armor let him lie.
Patroclus then the Trojans chased anew.
And there before the Myrmidons leapt out
Like Mars himself, and thrice nine Trojans slew.
And out again he went; but at that bout,
Upon himself untimely death he drew.
For Phoebus came ( Patroclus saw him not)
Wrapped up in Air, and standing on the ground
Between the shoulders with his hand him sm^t,
That all about him seemed to go round,
And from his head his Helmet then he flung
Into the dust, and foul it was all ore,
And beaten by the hoofs of Horses rung,
That never had been so defiled before
When on Achilles Godlike head it sat.
But Jove to Hector gave it now to wear,
And only then when near him was his Fate.
Moreover Phoebus brake Patroclus Spear,
A heavy Spear well armed at the head,
And plucked his mighty Shield out of his hand,
And left him of his Arms uncovered.
With this Patroclus did amazed stand.
And near unto him then a Dardan came,
And in the back he smote him with his Spear.
Panthoides Euphorbus was his name,
And killed him not, but back ran to the Rear.
For though he well could fight, and ride, and run,
And going first abroad to learn the Wars,
He was by no man of his age outdone,
And had orethrown twice ten men from their Chars;
Yet for Patroclus now he durst not stay,
Although he wounded and disarmed were.
Then to the Rear Patroclus went away;
And after him ran Hector with his Spear,
And at the Belly struck him through the side.
And down he fell. The Greeks were grieved sore.
As when at a small Fountain almost dried
Together come a Lion and a Boar
With equal thirst, and drink they both would fain,
But fight who shall drink first, slain is the Bore;
So now by Hector was Patroclus slain,
Though many Trojans he had killed before.
And Hector then triumphing ore him said,
Patroclus, you thought sure to have stormed Troy.
And in your Ships our women to have convay'd
To Argos with you when you went away.
Were you so simple that you could not see,
That Hector with his Horses and his Spear
Protects the Trojans from Captivity?
Now shall you for the Dogs and Fowls lie here;
Nor can Achilles do you any good,
That bad you ('t may be) when you from him went,
Not to return, till dyed in his blood
You Hector's Coat had from his shoulders rent.
And vain enough you were to promise it.
Patroclus with a feeble voice replied,
Hector, you now may boast as you think fit,
And in your own Ability take pride.
TO Apollo first my death I owe, who threw
My Armor from my body to the ground;
I could have slain else twenty such as you.
And from Euphorbus I received a wound.
To bring me down; you were but one of three.
But hear me and remember what I say,
Hector, you will not long live after me,
And only for Achilles hand you stay.
And at these words he was of life bereft.
His Soul unto The Infernal Regions fled
Lamenting so much Youth and Vigor left;
And Hector to him spoke again though dead.
Patroclus, why do you foretell my death?
Who knows but that Achilles may be slain
By me first, and before me lose his breath?
This said, he pulled out the Spear again.
And presently pursued Automedon,
Who of Achilles was the Charretier;
But he away was carried and gone
By Peleus Horses that Immortal were.
ILIAD. LIB. XVII.
ANd Menelaus understanding now
That slain Patroclus lay upon the ground,
Careful, as of her first Calf is a Cow,
To th'Body went and walked about it round,
Couching his Spear and holding out his Shield,
Resolved to kill him whosoe'er he was
That durst to stand against him in the Field.
Then to him said Euphorbus, Menelaus
Retire, let me advise you, from the dead.
For I am he that gave him the first wound,
That with his Arms I may be honored;
Lest with my Spear I strike you to the ground.
And Menelaus to him thus replied.
O Jupiter, in Lion never was,
Nor yet in Panther, nor in Boar such pride
(Though other Beasts in strength they far surpass)
As in these Sons of Panthus. Though they know,
When Hyperenor proudly me defied,
And spitefully did value me below
All other Greeks, that by my hand he di'd.
And sorry were his Parents and his Wife
Now you succeed will to your Brother's fate.
Be gone then if you mean to save your life,
And quickly, or you will be wise too late.
No Menelaus (said Euphorbus then)
Since you have grieved his Parents and his Wife,
It Is best, I think, to comfort them again,
By making you pay for it with your life.
For though intolerable be their grief,
Yet when they see your Armor and your head
Brought to them home, it will be some relief.
But this by sight must be determined.
This said, he made a thrust at Menelaus,
Which he received on his trusty Shield,
It entered not, resisted by the Brass,
Which bent the point, and passage none did yield.
Then as he backward stepped to get away
He by Atrides on the Breast was hit.
The Spear pressed with his hand not there did stay,
But to his Neck went up and pierced it.
And then the ground he with his Armor knocks;
And dyed was with blood his dainty hair,
Those fine (with Gold and Silver twined) Locks,
Like those that Cytherea's Graces wear.
As when one planted has an Olive sprig
In open place, and where are many Springs,
And stirred by gentle winds it is grown big,
Then comes a storm and to the ground it flings;
So by Atrides fell Euphorbus now.
As when a Lion comes from the Wood
Into the Herd and seizes on a Cow,
First breaks his Neck, then seeds he on his blood
And Bowels, Dogs and Herds men looking on
And hueing him, that dare not to go near;
So then upon Atrides ventured none,
So much the Trojans stricken were with fear.
And now into the hands of Menelaus
Patroclus Armor came; and born away.
Had been, but that by Phoebus crossed he was,
That was a friend to Hector and to Troy.
And in the shape of Mentes gone was then
(Whom now the Cicon Regiments obeyed)
To call back Hector to the Field again,
And overtaking him thus to him said,
Hector, you here Automedon pursue
To take Achilles Horses all in vain,
Which never will be won or ruled by you,
And suffer good Euphorbus to be slain
By Menelaus at the Body dead
Of Menoetiades. Then went his way.
And Hector grieved turned about his head,
And saw how on the ground Euphorbus lay
Bleeding and naked left by Menelaus.
And Hector then enflamed with the sight
Like raging fire did through the Squadrons pass,
And with great cry returned to the fight.
And cold was then Atrides at the heart,
And with himself he thus disputing stands;
If I should from the Body slain depart,
The Greeks would say of me but little good;
But if I stay alone here 'twill be worse
Than any thing the Greeks can of me say.
For he brings with him all the Trojan force.
But wherefore do I thus disputing stay?
Who fights against him whom a God does aid,
Draws on himself a great and certain ill.
My best course then is Hector to avoid,
And let the Greeks say of it what they will.
But if of Ajax I could get a sight,
Then he and I together would not fear
With Hector aided by a God to fight,
And to Achilles the dead Body bear.
Whilst thus unto himself he laid the Case,
The Trojans came with Hector at the head,
And Menelaus then forsook the place,
And going left behind the Body dead.
But often looked back. As when a Lion is
Compelled to leave a Fold by Men and Dogs,
He often looks back, and runs not for all this,
But toward the Wood still slowly on he jogs
Unwillingly; his heart's too big to run;
So Menelaus off went safe and sound.
And then for Ajax Son of Telamon
Looked round about, and amongst his Troops him found
Inciting them to fight. For not a man
But frighted was by Phoebus and dismayed;
And with all speed Atrides to him ran,
And standing at his side unto him said,
Come Ajax, quickly come away with me
To save Patroclus from the Trojans wrath,
That to Achilles carried he may be
Though naked. For his Armor Hector has.
Ajax enraged at this flies to the place
With Menelaus, where Patroclus lay
When Hector from the Field him drawing was,
(Having already snatched his Arms away)
Unto the Trojans to cut off his head,
And give the Body to the Dogs to eat.
But when great Ajax thither came, he fled,
And to the Trojans made a quick Retreat;
And order gave to bear the Arms to Troy,
Achilles Arms, a noble Monument
Of his great deed. But Ajax still did stay,
And with his Shield about the Body went.
As when a Lion, his Whelps following him,
Into the open Field comes from the Wood,
And Hunters meets, he looks upon them grim;
So Ajax looking by Patroclus stood,
And Glaucus then that led the Lycian Bands
To Hector went and frowning to him said,
Though you be thought a good man of your hands
Hector, it is not so I am afraid.
Consider first if you the Town can save
By Trojans only, without other guard,
And of their service how great need you have;
And then how lightly you their pains regard.
What Lycian again will for you fight?
Or how will you defend a meaner man,
That left Sarpedon to the Argives spite
And sport, and from his body frighted ran,
That was your friend and had such service done?
So that if I were won to lead them home,
You Would find a little after we were gone,
The utmost fate of Troy were on it come.
For if the Trojans had as forward been,
As men should be that for their Country fight,
Patroclus body we in Troy had seen,
Fetched from the field, for all the Argives might;
And from the Greeks in change we might have had
Sarpedons Corpse, and brought it into Troy;
And all the Greeks thereof would have been glad,
So great experience of his worth had they.
But you to Ajax never yet durst go.
And when he came to you, you from him ran
Into the throng of the Trojans. And why so?
But that you know he is the better man.
Then Hector frowning on him thus replied,
Glaucus, it is strange that such a man as you
Should so severely without cause me chide;
I thought you very wise, but it is not true.
You say I dare not with great Ajax fight
When I do neither Foot nor Horsemen shun,
But only way give sometimes to the might
Of Jove when he the Enemy sets on.
For he to whom he will gives Victory,
And from the proud their courage takes away.
But to the Fight come with me now, and see
If I be such a Coward as you say;
And do not from Patroclus body make
Some of the Argives to retire again.
This said, he turned and to the Trojans spoke,
Trojans, said he, and Lycians play the men
Whilst I my self in those good Arms array
Which from Patroclus body slain I took.
This said, he from the Field went toward Troy,
And quickly those that bare them overtook,
And gave to them the Armor ^e then wore,
And th'Armour of Patroclus there puts on,
Given by the Gods to Peleus heretofore,
Which he when aged gave unto his Son,
But were not kept by him till he was old.
Then Jove that out of sight in Heaven sat
And Hector in this Armor did behold,
Poor man, said he, he knows not his fate,
Which now is near; and at it shook his head,
And said, Though now these heavenly Arms you wear
Of this great man whom all men else did dread,
Killing the gentle Knight that did them bear,
And so unhandsomely, you will never go
To show them to Andromache your Wife.
Yet now you shall prevail against the Fo.
To please you, since thus shortened is your life.
And as he said it, sealed it with a Nod.
Now Hector having on these Arms and fit,
Into his Breast went in the mighty God
Of Battle, and with courage filled it.
Then Hector like Achilles shining came
To his confederates, and amongst them went
Calling upon the best of them by name,
To give unto them all encouragement,
Mes^^les, and Glaucus, and Thersilochus,
A^teropaeus, and Hippothous
Medon, Disinor, Phorcys, Chromius,
And you the skilful Augur Ennomus,
And you the thousands that to aid me come,
It Is not to muster that you called are,
But to defend the Wives of Ilium
And Babes, against the Greeks that love the War.
Which to prevent, the Trojans day by day
With pay and with free Quarter tired are.
Let Us therefore fight and either die or slay;
For there is no other Traffic at the War.
And he that shall Patroclus body gain,
And (spite of Ajax) fetch it off the Field,
Half of his Armor shall have for his pain,
And I will half the Honor to him yield.
This said, the Trojans on the Argives fell
With all their weight, and made account to gain
Pa^roclus Body. For they could not ^ell
How many Trojans there would first be slain.
And then to Menelaus Ajax said,
I fear we shall no more return from Troy;
And am not for Patroclus so afraid
(That to the Dogs is sure to be a Prey)
As for my self and you; with such a Cloud
Of Trojans Hector thundering comes on.
Go therefore presently and call aloud
To the other Princes. Other help there is none.
Then Menelaus cried out aloud,
O you that have command in the Argive Host,
And diet with Atrides are allowed,
And drink unstinted at the Public cost,
It Is hard to call you every one by name.
But you that hear me come away with speed.
For to us all 'twill be no little shame
To let the Dogs upon Patroclus feed.
This said, first little Ajax running came,
And with Idomeneus Meriones,
Then many more came in; but who can name
The number great that came in after these?
And Hector with the Trojans then came in.
And as the Sea that rolleth to the shore
Which by some mighty wind had driven been;
So to the Fight the Trojans marching roar.
The Greeks about Patroclus body staid,
All of one mind, all covered with their Shields,
And on their heads Jove then a great Fog laid,
And all the place about with darkness fills.
For while Patroclus was alive and served
Achilles, Jove took at him no offense,
Nor thought that to be Dogs meat he deserved,
And therefore urged the Greeks to his defense.
At first the Trojans made the Greeks to fly,
And leave the Body, but they killed none,
So great a Fog upon the place did lie.
Then with his friends again came Ajax on,
Of all the Greeks for person and for might
The bravest man excepting Th^tis Son.
The Trojans when the Greeks refused to fight,
The Body seized, and thought the business done.
As when a Boar pursued by Hounds and Men,
Upon them turns, they scattered are and fly;
So when great Ajax to them came again,
The Trojans scattered let Patroclus lie.
For when Hippothous was in great hope
To drag Patroclus body up to Troy,
And to his Anckle tied had a rope,
Arrived to him was his latest day.
For Ajax now was come unto him near,
And smote him through the Helmet and the Brain,
Which stained with his blood stuck to the Spear,
And down he threw Patroclus foot again,
And with it near unto the body fell
Deprived of life by mighty Ajax Spear,
Far from Larissa where his friends did dwell,
And never for his breeding paid were*
And Hector then a Spear at Ajax threw,
Which he perceiving did a little shun,
A very little it beside him flew,
And killed Schedius Iphitus Son,
That of Phocaeans all was far the best,
And did in well built Panopaea reign.
The Spear sharp-pointed entered at his Breast,
And at his Shoulder out it went again.
And Ajax then the valiant Phorcys slew
That 'bout the body of Hippothous went.
The Spear through Breast Plate and through Belly flew,
And as it passed the Guts in pieces rent.
Then Hector and the Trojan Lords gave way
Retiring from the Argive Lords; and thus
By the Argives coming in, without delay
Stripped were both Phorcys and Hippothous.
And now the Trojans had for want of heart
Been chased by the Argives up to Troy,
And the Argives gotten had on the other part
Without the Gods an honorable day,
Had not Apollo, like to Periphas
Anchises Squire to Aeneas come disguised,
That very wise now grown and aged was,
And standing by his side him thus advised.
Aeneas, cannot you without the Gods
As well as the Achaeans gain the day
By valor, since in men they have no odds?
For Jove had rather you should win than they.
Thus Phoebus said. Aeneas knew 'twas he;
And with a loud voice unto Hector said,
Hector and you who the Commanders be
Of Trojans, or have brought unto them aid,
Oh what a shame it is for us thus to run
Before the Greeks our selves in Troy to hide*
But come, there yet amongst the Gods is one
That has assured me Jove is on our side.
This said, before the Trojans he leapt out,
And with his Spear in hand stood at their head.
And when he made them had to wheel about,
Unto the Body he directly led.
And with his Spear Leocritus he slew
The friend of Lycomed, Arisbas Son;
And Lycomed displeased, at Hector threw,
And hit him not, but killed Apisa^,
Of all that from Paeonia passed the Seas,
He was in battle of the greatest might
Excepting no man but Asteropaeus;
Who angry at his fall went to the Fight.
But now the Greeks about Patroclus stood
So close, with Spears advanced, with Bucklers hidden,
That there Asteropaeus did no good;
For by great Ajax so they had been bidden.
Let none from hence again retire, said he,
Nor any man before the rest skip out,
But stand together till you charged be.
Thus roaring to them Ajax went about.
And thick the Trojans and their Aids now fell,
And with their blood bedewed was the ground.
Nor did the Argives come off very well;
But fewer of them amongst the dead were found.
For standing close, one Shield saved more than one.
Thus keen as fire on both sides fought they here.
And such a darkness was the place upon
As if nor Sun nor Moon in safety were.
But the other places all about had light,
And brightly did the Sun in Ida shine,
And gentle at a distance was the Fight,
And one another Spear did often decline.
But in the middle, where the very best
Both of the Argives and the Trojans stood,
The pain they suffered cannot be expressed
Of restless labor and of loss of blood.
But of Patroclus by the Trojans killed,
Antilochus and Thrasymed knew not,
But fought in other places of the Field,
And that he still pursued the Trojans thought,
When for his body who the same should get,
Now fighting were the Trojans and the Greeks,
And from their Knees and Legs ran down the sweat,
And stained were with blood their arms and cheeks.
As when men set themselves about the skin
Of some fat Bull and stretch it every way,
That th'humour may go out, the grease go in,
Just so Patroclus body tugged they,
Trojans to Troy, and Argives to the Fleet;
And thereupon arose this mighty fray.
If Mars or Pallas had been there to see it,
They had not known on whom a fault to lay,
Though angry they had been; such work was then
By Jove about Patroclus body set
For Trojans and for Argives, Horse and Men.
But to Achilles known it was not yet
That slain by the Trojans was his Favorite.
For now not far off from the Trojan Wall
At a great distance from him was the fight,
So that he thought not on his death at all;
But having chased the Trojans to the Gates
Of Ilium, that straight he would come back.
For well he knew 'twas ordered by the Fates,
Patroclus never should the City sack.
His Mother Thetis often had told him that,
As she before had told it been by Jove;
But quite Patroclus destiny forgot,
Or knew it not, whom he so much did love.
The Greeks and Trojans at the body staid
Together close, and one another killed.
And one Achaean to another said,
'Twould be a great disgrace to quit the Field,
And leave the body of Patroclus thus.
I rather had by The Earth we swallowed were
Than they should have it and crow over us,
And to the Town the noble body bear.
The Trojans likewise the one another cried,
Though every one of us were sure to die
By this man's body, let us here abide.
And then the clamor rose up to the Sky.
Achilles Steeds now with Aut^medon
Upon the Charre without the Battle stood;
But to the Fight he could not get them on.
He to them called, but that would do no good.
And then he flatters them, then threats, then whips,
But for Patroclus grieved they would not go
With the Argives to the Fight nor to the Ships,
But lay down on the ground and wept for woe
That they had lost a gentle Charretier.
Jove seeing them upon the ground thus laid,
And for Patroclus how they grieved were,
Shaking his head unto himself he said,
Poor Steeds, why did I you on man bestow
That mortal is, and you immortal are
And make you also misery to know,
And to participate of humane care?
There breaths not upon the Earth so wide
So poor a thing and wretched as a man.
But Hector on your Charre shall never ride.
For he without my leave do nothing can.
Is It not enough for him that he has got
Achilles Arms to please himself in vain?
Bu^ have Achilles Horses he shall not.
For you shall to the Ships return again,
And safely carry back Automedon.
Though to the Trojans I intend to day
The Victory till setting of the Sun,
And that by darkness parted be the fray.
This said, he strength and courage to them gave.
Automedon then to the Troops of Greece
As swiftly the immortal Horses drove
As flies a Vulture at a flock of Geese.
For from the Foe he quickly could retire,
And easily upon them go again
As often as the occasion should require;
But by his hand no Enemy was slain.
For since he was upon the Seat alone,
He could not both together fight and guide.
But to him came at last Alcimedon
Laertes Son, and stood by th'Charret side.
What God, said he, has put it in your head
Automedon, amongst so many Spears
To be alone knowing your friend is dead*
And Hector now Achilles Armor wears?
Automedon unto him then replied,
Alcimedon, a fitter man is none
Than you are the immortal Steeds to guide,
Since Menoctiades my friend is gone.
Get up then you and the good Steeds command,
Whilst on the ground I with the Trojans fight.
Alcimedon then took the Whip in hand
And Reyns; Automedon did then alight.
This Hector saw, and to Aeneas spoke,
Achilles Horses yonder coming are;
To us, said he, they are not hard to take.
For with them there is no great man of War;
And if we to them go they dare not stand*
This said, Aeneas well contented was,
And forward then they go with Spear in hand,
And shoulders covered well with Hide and Brass.
And Chromius with them and Aretus went,
And made no doubt but both the men to slay,
And then to seize Achilles Steeds they meant,
And with the Charre triumphing drive to Troy.
Vain men that were not sure themselves to save.
To Jupiter Automedon then prayed,
Who heard his Prayer, and great strength to him gave*
And then unto Alcimedon he said,
Alcimedon, keep still thy Horses near,
So that upon my back may fall their breath.
For quiet never will be Hector's Spear,
Until of both of us he see the death,
And set himself upon Achilles Car,
And put the Squadrons of the Greeks to rout,
Or be amongst the foremost slain i'th'War.
This said, he to the Ajaxes cried out,
And Menelaus. Ajax, Menelaus,
The care of him that is dead to others give,
And show your Valor where there is more cause.
Come hither and take care of us that live.
For Hector and Aeneas both are here.
But yet since on Jove's will depends all
Both good and evil hap, I Will throw my Spear,
And let him where he pleases make it fall.
And as he spoke the spear he from him sent,
Which chanced to light upon Ar^tes Shield,
And passing through into his Belly went.
At which he starting fell upon the Field.
And at Automedon then Hector threw.
But stooping forward he the Spear declined;
And ore his head through the empty air it flew,
And shaking fixed it stood i'th'ground behind.
And then the Fight by Mars becalmed was;
But with their Swords they had again fallen on,
But that the Ajaxes two and Menelaus
Came in, that called were by Automedon.
Aeneas then and Hector shrunk away,
And Chromius with them, but Aretus not,
But on the ground without his Armor lay.
Automedon then mounts his Chariot
All bloody, and the Armor by him set,
And said, Though this revenge be very small
For great Patroclus death, it is better yet,
Though this a worse man be, than none at all.
And at Patroclus body now the Fight
Was greater than before and fiercer grown.
For Pallas coming did the Greeks incite,
By Jove himself (whose mind was changed) sent down.
As when to mortals Jove will signify
The Approach of War, or Tempests cold and loud,
To make men leave their work, and Cattle die,
He sets up in the Sky a purple Cloud;
In such a Cloud wrapped up Athena came,
The Daughter of great Jove, and martial Maid,
To the Argive Host their courage to inflame,
And to Atrides, who stood nearest, said,
In voice and shape like Phoenix, Menelaus,
If you let Dogs Patroclus body tear,
That of Achilles so beloved was,
You will be scorned. Go to him, do not fear.
Phoenix, said he, would Pallas strengthen me,
And save me from so many Spears that fly,
Patroclus body soon should rescued be.
For no man for him grieved is more than I.
But Hector fights like a raging flame,
And as he goes Jove gives him Victory.
This said, Athena pleased was with the same,
Because to her he trusted specially,
And strengthened both his shoulders and his thighs,
And made him bold as is a busy Fly
Which beaten off, again upon you flies,
And fears not for a little blood to die.
And to Patroclus then went Menelaus,
And among the throng of Trojans threw his Spear.
It chanced that amongst them one there was,
Pydes Eetions Son to Hector dear,
And at the wine his good Companion.
Him Menelaus with his Spear then slew
Just as he turned himself about to run,
And from the Trojans the dead body drew.
To Hector then came Phoebus, having on
The form of Phoenops Son of Asius,
In Hector's grace inferior to none,
And standing by his side said to him thus.
If you be so afraid of Menelaus,
What other Greek will be afraid of you?
He never yet good Spear-man counted was
Nor is, though Podes now by chance he slew,
And vainly now he thinks alone he can
Bring off Patroclus body from the Field.
This said, unto the body Hector ran.
And Jove then lifted up his mighty Shield,
And in thick Clouds the Mountain Ida wraps,
And dark it was upon the Field as night.
And then with Lightning and with Thunder claps
The Squadrons of the Argives puts to flight.
Menelaus who the Boeotions led,
Hurt in the shoulder by Polydamas,
Of the Achaeans was the first that fled,
And Leitus his Mate the second was,
That was by Hector wounded in the Wrist,
And could no longer use make of his Spear;
But from the battle forced was to desist,
And looking still about him ran in fear.
Him Hector as he running was pursues.
On Hector's Shield then lights a heavy Spear
That thrown was at him by Idomeneus,
But brake in two; and glad the Trojans were.
And at Idomeneus then Hector threw,
Beside him but a little went the Spear,
And lighting upon Caeranus him slew,
Who was Meriones his Charretier,
And with him came to Lyctus all the way
By Sea, and thence he went to Troy by land.
And much good service he had done to Troy,
For fallen had the King by Hector's hand,
And safe had been himself; but now was hit
By Hector's Spear betwixt the Cheek and Ear,
And struck out were his Teeth, his Tongue was slit,
And falling to the ground expired there.
And then Meriones took up the Reyns,
And to Idomeneus cried out to fly.
To little purpose now is all our pains;
You see the Trojans have the Victory.
Idomeneus to th'Ships then drove away
As fast as he could make the Horses go,
As being certain they had lost the day.
And Ajax did the same acknowledge now.
Meriones (said he) and Menelaus,
That Jove will to the Trojans give the day
A man may see that little judgment has,
So manifestly now he fights for Troy.
The Spears thrown by the Trojans never miss,
But on one Greek or other always light,
Ours seldom hit. What cause is there of this,
But that great Jove does for the Trojans fight?
Let Us therefore here consider of some way
To fetch Patroclus off, and then go home.
For to our friends in Greece 'twill be a joy
To see us safe again from Hector come;
Who when they to the Sea their faces turn*
Despair of ever seeing us again,
And think that Hector will the Navy burn,
And that we there shall every man be slain.
O that we had some fit man here to send
TO Achilles Tent; for nothing yet knows he,
That by the Trojans slain is his dear friend*
But it is so dark I no such man can see.
O Jove, give us once more a Sky serene;
Remove this Mist that we may see to fight,
Or if to kill the Argives all you mean,
O Father Jove, yet kill us in the light.
This said, Jove had compassion on his Tears.
The Sun again his glittring Beams displays.
Scatters the Clouds again and th'Heaven clears.
And then to Menelaus Ajax says,
About the Field go Menelaus now,
And seek Antilochus, and bid him go
Unto Achilles Tent, and let him know
His friend Patroclus slain is by the Foe.
This said, away Atrides went. As when
A hungry Lion parts from a Fold,
Having in vain provoked the Dogs and Men
That did him from the expected prey withhold,
Watching all night, when fain he would have fed;
But all the night the Darts about him fly
And flaming Brands which Lions chiefly dread;
Away he goes in the morn unwillingly;
So from Patroclus body parted he
Against his will, thinking the Greeks afraid
Might leave Patroclus to the Enemy,
And to Meriones and the Ajaxes said,
How good a man Patroclus was you know,
And how in our defense his blood he shed,
And therefore valiantly defend him now.
Let not the Foe abuse his body dead.
And when he this had said he went away,
Amongst the Argives peeping here and there,
Like to an Eagle soaring for a Prey
Amongst the Bushes peeping for a Hare;
So he amongst the Argives looked about
Seeking of Nestor's Son Antilochus.
Nor was it long before he found him out
Cheering his men, and said unto him thus.
Antilochus come near and hear from me
Sad news; I would it were not also true,
That now the Trojans have the Victory,
I think it is already known to you.
But further know that slain Patroclus is.
Run therefore to Achilles quickly, and
Tell him the news. It may be, moved by this
To help the Argives with his mighty hand,
He Will to the naked body hither come
(For now Achilles Armor Hector wears).
At this Antilochus was stricken dumb,
And filled were and swollen his eyes with tears.
And there Antilochus no longer staid,
But to Laodocus his Armor gave,
And he the same upon his Charret laid;
For to that end he near unto him drove.
Away Antilochus then weeping went
To carry to Achilles the ill news,
And left to Thrasymed his Regiment.
For Menelaus did the same refuse;
Though of a valiant Commander then
The tired Pylians had the greatest need,
And to the Ajaxes returned again
Where lay Patroclus body, with all speed.
And when he thither came, unto them said,
Antilochus is to Achilles gone.
Although I see not how he should us aid.
How can he, seeing Armor he has none?
Let Us therefore now bethink our selves, how we
Our selves may bear the body from the Field;
And also how we may secured be
Against the Trojans that we be not killed.
Ajax to this replying said, It Is true,
And the advice I Will give you will be right.
Take up the Corpse Meriones and you,
And on your shoulders bear it from the Fight.
We two that are of one name and one mind,
And in the Field together use to be
Will fighting with the Trojans come behind,
Till at the Ships the body lain we see.
This said, Meriones and Menelaus
Up to their shoulders hoyst the body dead.
Whilst toward them the back of Ajax was,
The Trojans with great shouting followed.
Just as a Pack of Hounds pursue a Boar
Wounded by Hunters, running with great cry,
Until he turn; then follow him no more,
But scattered are, and this and that way fly;
So did the Trojans after Ajax run
As long as toward them was not his face.
But when he turned, near him durst stay none,
But stood at a great distance from the place.
Thus fetched they off at last the body dead,
With at their heels of Trojan Spe^rs great showers;
And Argives dropped abundance as they fled,
Like houses in a Twon on fire, and Towers.
As when two Mules in heavy way are set
To drag down from the Hills some mighty Tree
To be a Beam or Mast, it makes them sweat
Before into the Plain it drawn could be;
So Menelaus and Meriones
Sweating and moyling with the body go.
And as a Rock that keeps off the Seas;
So Ajax at their backs kept off the Fo.
The Trojans led by Hector and Aeneas
Pursue the flying Greeks with mighty cry,
As from a Hawk that preys on Birds like these,
A Cloud of Starelings cackle when they fly.
And many of them threw their Arms away,
And that they came to fight had quite forgot.
In and about the Ditch much Armor lay
Of flying Greeks. But done the Fight was not.
ILIAD. LIB. XVIII.
WHilst at the Ships the Greeks and Trojans sought,
Antilochus came to Achilles Tent.
And found him to the Argive Ditch gone out
Presaging in his mind the sad event,
And saying to himself, Ay me what is this?
The Battle to the Ships is come again;
Pray God it be not as I fear it is,
The Greeks are routed and Patroclus slain.
My Mother told me that the best of all
The Myrmidons by the Trojans should be slain.
I bad him not t'assault the Trojan Wall,
Nor fight with Hector, but come back again.
As speaking to himself Achilles stood,
Antilochus unto him weeping came,
The news, said he, I bring you is not good.
I cannot without Tears relate the same.
Slain is Patroclus. On the ground he lies,
And now they fighting are with Swords and Spears
Who shall his Body have with mighty cries
Though naked; for his Armor Hector wears.
At this sad news dark were Achilles eyes.
And up he takes the dust with both his hands,
And throws it on his head; then down he lies,
His Face and Coat sulli'd with dust and sands,
And tore his hair. And then the lovely prey
Of Captive women that had taken been
By him and by Patroclus before Troy
Affrighted from Achilles Tent came in,
And over him they beat their Breasts and moan'd.
On the other side Antilocus was fain
To hold his hands, so mightily he groaned;
Lest otherwise he should himself have slain.
His Mother Thetis hearing him complain,
Though sitting in the deepest of the Seas,
Wept out aloud, and presently her train
About her came of the Nereiades.
Glauca, Thaleia, and Cymodoca,
Nesaea, Speio, Thoa, Halia
And Aemioreia, and Cymothoa,
Melita Iaera, and Amphithoa,
And Doto, Proto, Actaea, Agava,
Doris, Dexamena, Dynamena,
And Callianeira, and Amphinoma,
Pherusa Apseudes, and fair Panopa,
Nemertes, and the milk-white Galataea,
And Clymene there was, and Callianassa,
And Maera, Orithvia, and glorious Amatheia,
And (not to name them all) fair Janassa
With all the rest, and filled the silver Cave,
And beat their breasts, and round ^er stood dismayed.
And Thetis then the account unto them gave
Of her great grief, and thus unto them said,
Hear me Nereides my Sisters dear,
And be acquainted with my misery.
Ah wretched Goddess that I was to bear
The best of all the Heroes; and when he
Was quickly grown up to a goodly height,
Send him unto the War at Ilium
Against the Trojans for the Greeks to fight,
From whence he never should aga^n come home;
But spend his little time of life in woe,
And I can nothing do for his relief.
And now I mean to visit him, and know,
Since he not fights, what cause he has of grief.
This said, she with her Nymphs went from the Cave.
The Sea before them her smooth water tore,
And gentle passage to the Goddess gave,
Till they were landed on the Trojan shore,
Where lay Achilles Ships upon the sand;
And straight up to Achilles Thetis went,
The Nymphs attending on her hand in hand,
And seeing him so gr^evously lament,
She held him by the head, and to him said,
Why weep you thus sweet Child; what is it you ail?
For that which formerly to Jove you prayed
Against th'ingrateful Greeks, I did prevail.
To th'Ships they have been beaten from the Field,
And know in what great need they stand of you,
And have in heaps been by the Trojans killed.
To this Achilles answ'ring said, It Is true
But in my life what pleasure can I find,
Since sweet Patroclus slain is by his Foes,
On whom of all men most I set my mind,
And Hector in his Arms triumphing goes,
Those mighty Arms given by the Gods that day
That you were pleased a mortal man to wed,
To Pelias. Oh had you been away,
And he a mortal woman married!
You had not for your Son been grieved then,
That never to you should return again.
Nor do I wish to live with mortal men
But till I with my Spear have Hector slain.
By what you say (said Thetis to her Son)
Short lived you are. Your own fate then is nigh.
I care not, said Achilles, when that is done
I shall be very well content to die.
For since I never must return again,
And no defense in me Patroclus found,
Nor other good men by the Trojans slain,
I but a needless weight am to the ground.
Oh that Contention lost for ever were
And Choler to the heart of man so sweet,
Which often make the wisest men to err!
In Agamemnon and my self I see it.
But since it is past, let us put it out of mind.
For dead he is, and cannot live again.
And now I Will see if Hector I can find
That has my dearest friend Patroclus slain.
And then let Jove do what himself thinks good.
For Hercules could not avoid his fate,
Who most of mortals in his favor stood,
But di'd by Destiny and Juno's hate;
And so shall I, when my day shall arrive,
Lie still when dead. But now let me gain same
Amongst the Achaeans while I am alive,
And make some Trojan or some Dardan Dame
With both her tender hands to tear her Cheeks,
And sigh, and with her tears her beauty blot,
And know my hand from that of other Greeks,
And when I with the Achaeans am, when not.
And therefore, Mother, dearly as you love me,
Endeavor not to make me here abide.
For from my purpose you cannot remove me.
Unto Achilles Thetis then replied,
Dear Child your purpose I Will not reprehend
Patroclus body from the Foe to save,
Nor that the Argive people you defend.
But now you know your Arms the Trojans have,
And Hector wears them; but shall not long.
The latest of his days is to him nigh.
But go not you into the bloody throng,
Till here again you have me in your eye.
This said, she turned to the Nereiades,
And to them said, Nereiades dive you
To Nereus at the bottom of the Seas,
And all you see has happened to him show.
For I up to Olympus must be gone
To Vulcan (if such favor I can gain)
To get a good new Armor for my Son.
This said, the Nymphs to Sea returned again,
And Thetis to Olympus went her way.
Mean while the Greeks before the Trojans fly
With mighty cries, and never stop^ till they
Were at the Ships, and to the wide Sea nigh.
Nor was Patroclus body rescued yet;
For now afresh the Trojans to them came.
Which did another fiercer fight beget,
And Hector fell upon them like a flame.
Thrice laid he hold upon Patroclus foot,
And forced he was as often to let it fall,
To kill some others. Then again came to it.
But from the Body went not back at all.
No more could Hector driven be away
From the dead body by the Ajaxes two,
Than can a hungry Lion from his Prey
For any thing the Herds-men grieved can do.
And Hector had Patroclus body got,
And gained had thereby a great renown,
But Juno (though the other Gods knew not)
TO Achilles in great have sent Iris down.
TO Achilles straight she came, and to him said,
Up terrible Pelides to the War,
And your beloved friend Patroclus aid;
For at the Ships they fighting for him are.
The Greeks to save his body are in pain.
The Trojans fain would drag him into Troy,
And Hector most of all that has him slain,
And from his shoulders take his head away,
And stick it up upon the Trojan Wall,
Leaving his Corpse a Prey to Dog and Kite.
Th^^k what reproach will then upon you fall*
Lie then no longer here, but rise and fight.
A^hilles then replied* Iris, said he,
Tell me what God o^ Goddess sent you down.
Juno* said Iris, sent me; none but she.
To all the rest my coming is unknown.
And then Achilles to her said again,
Since they have got my Arms how can I fight?
And Thetis bids me from the War abstain
Till she return again into my sight
Who is to Vulcan for new Armor gone,
And here is no other Armor for me fit
But Ajaxes; who, I hope, has it on,
And for Patroclus now has use of it.
We know, said Iris, Armor you have none.
But as you are, upon the Ditch appear.
The Trojans from the Corpse will soon be gone,
And leave it to the Greeks for very fear.
This said, the Goddess Iris vanished.
Achilles rose, and Pallas to him came,
And on him puts her Shield, and on his head
A golden Cloud, from which arose a flame.
As when an Isle invaded is by Foes,
The Citizens to call their Neighbors in
Make Fires, the smoke up to the Heaven goes
By day; by night the Flame, and far are seen;
Upon Achilles head stood such a flame,
And then unto the Ditch he went and shouted,
And farther off Athena did the same
The Trojans when they heard it strait were routed.
As clear as any Trumpet in the Wars,
They heard Achilles voice, and were afraid,
And in disorder turned about their Chars,
But at his flaming head we^e most dismayed.
Thrice shouted he, thrice they disordered were;
And slain were of the Trojans twelve brave men
By their own Chars and Spears encumbred there.
In so much haste they turned to fly. And then
The Greeks the body laid upon a Bed
And Bier, and standing by his side lament.
And tears abundance there Achilles shed,
And that he sent him had did now repent.
The Sun by Juno hastened quenched his fire.
The Argives on the place stay quietly.
The Trojans to without the Ditch retire,
And from the Chars the weary Steeds unty.
Then presently the Chiefs to counsel call
Before they sup, and standing on their feet,
This Apparition so scared them all,
That none amongst them had a mind to sit.
And first unto them spoke Polydama^
Panthoides, Hector's friend; both born one night.
He better Counselor than Hector was,
But Hector beter was than he to fight.
My friends, be well advised now, said he,
It is not safe here on the Plain to stay*
Until the morning light again we see,
So near the Argive Ships, so far from Troy.
Whilst this man absent was in discontent
With Agamemnon, and forbore to sight,
The Greeks were easy Foes; to th'Ships I went
My self, and willingly lay out all night;
But if Achilles hither now should come,
We must not only here fight for our lives.
So proud he is, he will go to Ilium,
And for the City fight and for our Wives.
Let Us to the City go. It Is as I say,
And nothing keeps him from us but the night.
And if he here shall find us when it is day,
Some of us will acknowledge I say right.
And many flying wish when it is too late,
They were within the Walls of Ilium,
Whom Dogs and Kites shall eat without the Gate.
But to my ears may never such news come.
But if you will be ruled all by me,
Into the Marketplace of Troy by night
We'll bring our strength, and soon as we can see,
Stand armed upon the Towers prepared to fight.
Then let him from the Ships come fight at Troy.
And drive about the Walls and do his worst,
And having tired his Horses go away.
Take it he shall not, Dogs shall eat him first.
Then Hector frowning on him thus replies.
Again, said he, I from you must dissent,
Since you to shut our selves in Troy advise.
We have already there too long been pent.
Troy once was counted rich in Brass and Gold.
But since Jove angry was, all that is gone,
In Phrygia and in Maeonia sold,
And little left in Ilium to be won.
But since the Greeks are beaten and dismayed
By the hand of Jove, your fear is out of season,
Nor will you by the Trojans be obeyed,
Nor shall you; though the Trojans thought it reason.
And therefore take my counsel, which is this.
Go now and every man his Supper take
In Rank and File there where he placed is;
And set good Guards, and keep your selves awake.
If any Trojan for his Goods lament,
He may the same upon the Town bestow
In service of the Public to be spent,
Rather than be possessed by the Foe;
And armed in the morn go to the Fleet,
And sharply charge the Greeks by break of day.
And if indeed Achilles there we meet
He were not best oppose us in our way.
For from him I will neither fly nor shrink,
But either honor from him bear away,
Or he from me. Mars common is I think
To them that fight; and slain are they that slay.
This said, the Trojans heard with great applause,
Fools as they were; Pallas had made them mad.
But none of them commend Polydamas,
That given them much better counsel had.
The Trojans presently to Supper went.
The Greeks all night about Patroclus stand.
And there began Achilles to lament,
And on Patroclus breast he laid his hand.
As when a Lion coming to his Den
Misses the tender Whelps he left behind,
He roars, and furiously goes out again.
And through the Valleys hunts, the Thief to find;
Such fierce thoughts on Achilles heart then lay.
And sighing to the Myrmidons he spoke.
Oh, what did I to old Menoetius say!
How vain a promise did I to him make!
I said when we had sacked the Town of Troy,
That I to Opus would bring back his Son
Enriched with his portion of the Prey.
But all we hope from Jove is seldom done.
For both of us have the same Destiny
With our hearts blood to dye the Trojan Plain.
And as he lies now, so shall I lie,
And never to my Parents come again.
But since Patroclus you the first are dead,
Your Funeral I will not celebrate,
Till I have brought you Hector's Arms and Head,
Whose bloody hand delivered your sad fate,
And have twelve of the Noble youths of Troy
Beheaded in revenge. Till then stay here,
Where Trojan Captive women night and day
Bewailing you shall stand about the Biere.
This said, he order gave for water hot,
To cleanse Patroclus body from the gore.
Into a Caldron (said he) water put,
And make a Fire, and set the Caldron ore.
Into a Caldron water then they put,
And made a Fire and set the Caldron ore.
The Flame about it goes. The water's hot.
Then washed from the body was the gore.
And then again they laid him on the Bed,
From head to foot in Linen they him fold,
And on him laid a fair white Coverled,
His wounds first filled with Unguent nine year old.
About the body of Patroclus staid
Achilles and the Myrmidons all night
Lamenting him. Then Jove to Juno said,
You have Achilles brought again to fight
Against the Trojans on the Argives side.
Are they your Children that you love them so?
And Juno then to Jupiter replied.
Harsh Cronides, what words do you let go?
Since mortal men that know much less than we
May to a Friend do good, and hate a Fo,
Why may not I that boast my self to be
The Wife and Sister of great Jove do so,
And make my Foes the Trojans feel my hate?
Whilst Jove and Juno were discoursing thus,
The Goddess Thetis come was to the Gate
Of Vulcan's undecaying famous House
Of shining Brass, with brighter Stars thick set,
That amongst the Houses of the Heaven shone.
But he was at his Workhouse in a sweat,
And at his Bellows swaying up and down.
For Tripods twenty he had labored
With golden Wheels to go and come again
At his command; but had not finished
The Ears and Chains, which he was making then.
And whilst this business Vulcan was about,
Thetis was come and at the Gate did stand.
And Charis Vulcan's Wife then going out
Saw her, and straightway took her by the hand.
Thetis, said she, it is strange to see you here.
Much honored and a welcome Guest you are,
Come in and pleased be t'accept our Cheer.
Then led her in, and brought her to a Chair,
A dainty Chair with Footstool joined thereto,
And then unto her Husband's Shop she hi'd.
For Thetis, said she, you have work to do.
And Vulcan glad, to Charis thus replied.
Is Thetis here that saved me from mishap!
When for my lameness thrown down from the Sky,
Thetis was pleased to catch me in her lap,
When else I had been in great misery?
I wrought for her and for Eurynome
Nine year, and made them many pretty things
Within a Rock encompassed by the Sea,
As Buckles, Clasps, fine Boxes, Beads and Rings,
Which neither Mortal nor Immortal knew,
But only Thetis and Eurynome.
And now to Thetis I must pay what is due,
The Ransom of my life for saving me.
Go you and entertain her well, while I
My Tools take up, and Bellows set away.
This said, the Bellows he took and set by,
But in a Chest his working Tools did lay.
Then with a Sponge he wiped his hands and face,
His brawny neck, and hairy breast, and on
He puts his Coat, and with his staff, apace,
Though haulting goes, and waited was upon
By Maids of Massy Gold, endu'd with Wit,
And Speech, and Strength, and learned in Heavenly Art;
And went to Thetis and did by her sit,
And joyful at her presence was his heart,
And laid his hand on hers, and to her said,
Thetis, so welcome to me there is none.
Tell me wherein you think I can you aid.
And if it can be done, it shall be done.
And then to Vulcan Thetis answered,
No Goddess ever was distressed like me
Whom Jove made subject to a Mortal's Bed,
And Peleus Wife constrained me to be,
Who lies at home decrepid now and spent.
And when I born unto him had a Son,
Of all the Heroes the most excellent,
And of his breeding, care omitted none,
And when he grown was to a goodly height,
He sent was to the War at Ilium
Against the Trojans for the Greeks to fight;
From whence he never shall again come home.
Though yet he live, he takes therein no joy,
And I to comfort him no power have,
Since Agamemnon taken has away
Her whom the Greeks for honor to him gave.
And then my Son no longer would him aid;
And by the Trojans beaten were the Greeks,
And Agamemnon then sent Gifts and prayed,
And by Ambassadors his favor seeks.
Then though to th'Fight himself he would not go,
Yet he his Armor to Patroclus gave,
And Myrmidons t'assist him against the Fo,
And to the Scaean Gate the Trojans drove.
And by Patroclus taken had been Troy,
Had he not then been by Apollo slain,
That unto Hector gave a glorious day,
And th'Armour of my valiant Son to gain.
Which makes me now come hither to request
That you would make new Armor for my Son,
A Shield, a Helmet, Armor for the breast
And for the legs. For those he had are gone.
Then (to her answered Vulcan) do not fear.
Oh that when for him the harsh Fates enquire,
To hide him from them I as able were,
As make him Arms for Mortals to admire.
This said, unto his Shop he went, and bad
His golden serving Statues blow the fire.
For twenty Bellowses in all he had
To blow as he should, and his work require.
And then into the fire he threw in Tin,
And Brass, and Silver fine, and precious Gold;
And to the Socket puts the Anvile in,
And th'heavie Hammer in one hand did hold,
Into his other hand the Tongs he takes,
And forges first a mighty Shield and strong,
And many various Figures in it makes,
And fastens to the same a silver Thong,
And bound the edge about with triple Brass.
The Shield it self consisted of five plies,
And with great art described in it was
The surface of the Earth, the Sea and Skies,
The Sun, the Moon at Full, and all the train
Of Heaven, Pleiades, and Hyades,
Orion, and the Bear men call the Wain
That only never dives into the Seas,
But always to Orion has an Eye.
And in it were two Cities. In the one
Good Cheer and Weddings, and great Melody,
And women at their doors stand looking on
To see the Bridegroom as he passed by,
And lusty youths that dancing with them go,
To Citterns and to Pipes, and Hymen cry,
And turn as swift as Tops upon the To^.
And full of people was the Marketplace,
Assembled at the hearing of a Cause.
A man was slain. And this was then the Case.
One said that he had satisfied the Laws,
The other said that nothing he had paid;
And on this Issue they will both be tried,
And have their Proofs before the Judges laid.
And clamor great of friends was on each side.
The Cryers when they stilled had the cry,
Into the Judges hands their Scepters gave,
And in the midst, of Gold two Talents lie
For him that has the better Cause to have.
Before the other Town two Armies stood.
The Foe resolved was to plunder it.
The Town, to save it, offered half their good.
The other to accept it thought not fit.
Then up unto the Walls the Townsmen sent
Their Women, Children, and their men grown old,
And all the rest out from the City went,
And Mars and Pallas with them, all in Gold,
And taller than the multitude by odds,
Who in respect of them seemed very low.
For men are much inferior to the Gods.
Then they before the Gate to counsel go.
The Enemies themselves in ambush laid
At th'watering place upon the Rivers brink,
And Scouts sent out, which not far from them staid
To tell them when the Cattle came to drink.
And when they were informed they were nigh,
And Shepherds two that did suspect no harm,
They on the Shepherds and the Cattle fly.
At which the other Army took th'Alarm,
And rising up from Counsel, with their Horse
Pursued, and soon they overtaken were.
And then began the Fight. Without remorse
They one another slay with Sword and Spear.
And there Disorder placed was and Debate;
And one born wounded out, another sound,
Another dead was dragged away by Fate
With bloody Coat and Armor on the ground
So lively seemed to the Eye their features
In fighting and in fetching off their slain,
One would have thought they had been living creatures,
And that the Fight had real been. Again
Described was in the same a spacious ground,
And men at Plough, and at each Ridges end
At turning of the Plough about, they found
A man that for them did with Wine attend.
And then again the Plough about they wind,
And laboring to the other end go back;
And as they plough, still what they leave behind,
Though Golden 'twas, to The Eye appeared black.
A wonder 'twas. Besides, in the same Shield
Pourtrayed was a goodly Close of Wheat,
And many Reapers working on the field,
That threw it to the ground in handfuls great;
And Boys that followed took it from the ground,
And put it in the hands of Binders three,
By whom they made were into Sheaves and bound.
Which standing by, their Lord was glad to see,
His Squires not far off standing were aside;
And at a Tree a Cow killed of the best,
A Supper for the Reapers to provide,
And to the woman gave it to be dressed.
And in it a golden Vineyard was portrayed.
The Grapes that on it hung were black, and all
The Vines supported and from drooping staid
With silver Props* that down they could not fall*
A Ditch there was about it black, and on
The same a Hedge, the color of it Tin,
And Path unto it there was only one,
By which the Fruit in Vintage was brought in.
And on it Boys and Girls described were
After a Fiddle played on by a Boy,
That sing, dance, whistle, and full Baskets bear
Of Bacchus gifts unto the house with joy.
And in it was a Herd of Bulls and Kine,
Part Gold, part Tin, and Herds-men four of Gold
That to the Pasture drove them with Dogs nine
T'a sedgy River; where two Lions bold
Upon the horned Herd came from the Wood,
And amongst the foremost seized upon a Bull.
The Dogs went to them near and barking stood.
Then roars the Bull. The Lions tear and pull.
And in the same he pasture made for Seeep
Within a Valley large with Lodges good,
And Folds, and covered Houses them to keep
In safety from the wild Beasts of the Wood.
And in it was a Dancing-place portrayed
Like that which Daedalus had made before
For Ariadne, while in Crete he slay'd,
And on it Dancing Youths and Maidens store
Go hand in hand. The Girls, some clad in fine
White Linen were, and some in Coats well spun
Of glossie Wool, that with the Oil did shine;
And every one a Garland gay had on.
The Boys with silver Hange^s were adorned
And golden Swords, and with their well-taught Feet
Sometimes they dancing ^n a Circle turned,
Sometimes divided in two (...) they meet.
And round about of people stood a throng,
And in the lovely Dance took great delight.
And in the midst two Tumblers sung the Song,
And many wondrous things did in their sight.
With The Ocean then he all environed.
The Shield now done he went about the rest,
And made a Helmet strong fit for his head,
And formed was of massy Gold the Crest,
And Breast Plate shining brighter than the fire,
And Pieces for his legs of ductile Tin.
And when he all had done to his desire,
He from his Forge returned and brought it in,
And in the hands of Thetis puts the same;
Which she received from him joyfully.
Then straightway from Olympus down she came,
As swift as at a Fowl a Hawk can fly.
ILIAD. LIB. XIX.
NO sooner in her Saffron Robe was seen
Aurora, holding light above the ground,
Than at the Ships the Silver-footed Queen
Achilles by Patroclus weeping found,
And with him many of his friends dismayed.
Then in, into the midst of them she went,
And laid her hand on his, and to him said,
My Son, why do you thus in vain lament?
Come, since the Gods have slain him, leave him here,
And take the Arms which I from Vulcan bring,
Such as yet mortal man did never wear;
Which, as she lays them down before him, ring.
The Myrmidons were troubled at the sight,
And turned their backs affrighted at the show.
Achilles wrath was more enflamed by it.
His eyes a fire, and bended was his brow.
Yet when he had them in his hands was glad,
And with great admiration them survai'd.
And when enough beholden them he had,
Unto his Mother he replied and said.
Mother, I see such Arms from Vulcan here,
As none but an immortal could have made,
And presently will put them on, but fear
Lest Flies the body should mean while invade,
And in the wounds some filthy Vermin breed.
And Thetis then replied, Son, do not fear.
For I my self to that will take such heed,
As, that although it should lie here a year,
It shall no worse, but rather better be.
Go you, and the Argive Lords to Council call,
And with King Agamemnon there agree,
And put your anger off before them all;
And spend your choler boldly on your Foes.
This said, she to Patroclus moved her feet,
And dropped Ambrosia into his nose,
To keep his body incorrupt and sweet.
Achilles then went down unto the shore,
And there the Heroes did to Council call
By name, though they were ready there before.
But thither at the news came the Argives all,
Steers-men and Stewards of Provision.
And all the rest to th'Counsel thronging in,
Though but to see the face of Thetis Son.
So long they thought he absent now had been.
Tydides also and Ulysses came,
Though of their wounds they yet not cured were,
Both halting, leaning on their Spears, and lame.
The last of all was Agamemnon there,
Wounded by Coon, nor recovered yet;
But th'Heroes for his coming not long staid.
And when they were together all and set,
Achilles rose, and to Agamemnon said,
Atrides, what great profit got we by
This our unlucky strife about a Maid?
I would it had her fortune been to die,
Before I Siege unto Lyrnessus laid.
To Hector and the Trojans comes the gain.
The Greeks with grief will think on it while they live.
But since it is too late now to complain,
Go forth and orders for the Battle give;
That I may to them go again and see
If at the Ships they mean to stay all night.
I think they will much rather wish to be
Within the Walls of Troy than stay and fight.
This said, the Greeks were glad and courage take,
Assured that Achilles would them aid,
And Agamemnon sitting to them spoke
(Which he excused) and thus unto them said.
'Twere fitter ( Argive Princes) I stood out,
That so my words you might the better hear;
But such a number standing are about,
My voice, though greater, would not reach your ear.
Nor were it fit for me to go about,
And tell my mind to each man in his ear.
TO Achilles therefore only I Will speak out,
But so, if you attend, that all may hear.
I often have, said he, been blamed by
The Greeks for taking from you your fair prize,
When not in me, but Jove the fault did ly,
And in Erinnys and the Destinies,
That did me of my wits that day bereave.
For what can I do when the Gods do all?
Jove's Daughter Ate did me then deceive,
From whom, on Men and Gods great troubles fall.
Her Feet are soft, because she never treads
On The Earth; but when she mischief has to do,
Walks in the Air, and puts it in men's heads,
And sometimes does shrewd turns t'Immortals too.
For Juno, though but of the Female Sex,
That day that Hercules was to be born,
Was able Jove the best o'th'Gods to vex,
And labor of Alcmena to adjourn.
For Jove before The Immortals having said
That he a man that day to light would bring
By whom his Race in Greece should all be swayed,
You jest, said Juno, you mean no such thing.
I Will not believe't unless you first be sworn
That he shall of your Seed in Greece be King,
That of a woman shall this day be born.
This said, straight Jove no fraud imagining
The great Oath took. But after did repent.
And Juno from Olympus lofty head
Leapt down, and to Argos of Achaia went,
And brought the Wife of Sthenelus to bed.
And there was she delivered of a Son,
That was by Perseus of Jove's descent.
Though she but seven months had of him gone.
And then to Thebes she to Alcmena went,
And hindered her that day from bringing forth.
Then up to Jupiter she came again,
And said, This day is born a man of worth,
Eurysteus in Argos fit to reign,
And of your Seed. And Jove in choler then
Took Ate by the head, and swung her round,
And swore she never to Heaven should come again.
And having said it, threw her to the ground
And always after sighed to see the pain
To which Eurysteus did put his Son;
As I do when I see the Argives slain
By Hector, grieve to think what I have done.
But since that Jove has made me to offend,
I for my Error willing am to pay.
Come then, and your assistance to us lend,
And quickly bring your Myrmidons away.
And all that by Ulysses yesterday
I to you promised shall performed be.
Or presently, if you will for it stay,
That you th'atoning Gifts your self may see.
Achilles then unto him thus replies.
As for your Gifts to give them me or no,
Yet only in your choice (Atrides) lies.
But now it is time we to the Trojans go.
To make fine Speeches here is but delay.
But let your men o'th'Field Achilles see
Through Squadrons of the Trojans making way.
The Argives then encouraged will be.
Ulysses then to Achilles answered,
Godlike Achilles, mighty as you are,
Urge not the Greeks to fight till they be fed;
They fasting cannot long endure the War.
And likely it is the Battle will be long;
Especially if Gods both sides assist;
And Bread and Wine is that which makes men strong.
Let therefore now the Argives be dismissed.
Who can, do you think, the toil of Battle bear
From morning unto night, unless he first
With food his heart and feeble limbs do cheer?
He would be heavy, hungry, and athirst.
But he that is with food well satisfied,
Courageous is, and fight will all the day.
His heart and limbs are strong, and will abide
As long as any on the Field dare stay.
Come, let the people now to Breakfast go,
And Agamemnon send the Presents in
Into The Assembly where we sit, that so
By the Achaeans all they may be seen;
And let him take an Oath before us, that
Briseis Bed he never went unto,
Nor all this while has done unto her, what
A Husband to his Wife is used to do.
And you your anger henceforth bridle must.
And you Atrides feast him like a friend,
And for hereafter learn to be more just,
Nor think it a shame for men their faults to mend.
Ulysses (said Atrides) I am joy'd
The counsel you have given us to hear.
For it is but reason all that you have said.
And I with all my heart the Oath will swear.
And let Achilles, though in haste, stay here
With all the rest, that they my Gifts may see,
And Witnesses be to the Oath I swear.
And for the Gifts (Ulysses) presently
Go you your self with good men whom you will,
And bring them from my Tent, and set them here.
For what they are, you well remember still.
The same that by you promis^d from me were.
And you Talthybius provide a Swine,
That we may offer up a Sacrifice
To Jove, the Sun, and other Powers Divine.
This said, Achilles to him thus replies,
Renowned Agamemnon, I think yet
Another time for Feast had better been;
As when in War a pause we intermit,
And whilst yet unabated is my spleen.
We see our friends lie torn upon the ground.
The Greeks to battle and revenge I prompt.
You think my counsel therein is not sound,
And seek with Feasting to divert them from't.
But let us fasting to the Battle go,
And make good Cheer when we come back again,
And have revenged our selves upon the Fo.
For I will neither eat nor drink till then.
For whilst Patroclus mangled lies here,
And they that love him stand lamenting by,
There nothing is that I can think good Cheer
But Slaughter, Blood, and Groans of men that die.
To this Ulysses did again reply,
Achilles, you have not in Greece your Peer,
For Martial worth; yet Elder much am I,
And more have seen; I pray you therefore hear.
The fare of War soon breeds Satiety.
Much Straw there is, but Harvest none, or small.
If Jove once hold the Scales unevenly,
Innumerable are the men that fall.
When then an end of weeping shall we see?
The Bellies of the Argives must not mourn.
They that go to the War must patient be,
And let the dead unto their Graves be born,
And not weep over them above a day.
And we that safe from Fight are come again,
When we are fed can all day fighting stay.
All other Exhortation is vain.
Let therefore now the Greeks to Breakfast go,
Which is the Soldiers best encouragement.
Then all together fall upon the Fo.
And when he this had said, away he went.
And with him took Meges, Meriones,
Theas, Antilochus, and Thrasymed,
And Menalippus, and added unto these
(The Martial Son of Creon) Lycomed.
And brought the Presents from Atrides Tent,
Sev'n Tripods great, and twenty Caldrons bright,
Twelve Horses and sev'n Women with them went,
And fairest of all Briseis made them eight.
Talents of Gold Ulysses weighed out ten,
And took the pains himself to carry that.
The rest was carried by the younger men,
And laid before the Princes as they sat.
Then Agamemnon rose, and by him near
Talthybius attended with a Swine,
From which Atrides clipped a lock of hair,
And lifts his hands unto the Powers Divine.
O Jove (said he) the chiefest of the Gods,
O Sun, and Earth, and Furies under ground,
That in your hands carry The Eternal rods
To punish such as perjured shall be found,
My hand I on Briseis never laid,
Neither for Bed, nor any other cause;
But always in my Tent untoucht she staid,
Nor ever by me once attempted was.
And if herein I told you have a Lie,
Let all the dreadful torments that are due
To such as guilty are of Perjury
Upon me fall. This said, the Swine he slew.
Then out the Stomach of the Swine did cut,
And that Talthybius took in his hands,
And threw't into the Sea the Fish to glut.
That done, Achilles up amongst them stands.
It Is thou, O Jove, said he, that spoilest all.
Briseis at my Tent had stayed still,
Nor had her going from me moved my gall,
But that thou had a mind the Greeks to kill.
This said, the Council he dissolved, and sent
The Achaeans to their Ships to break their fast*
Then every man unto his own Ship went,
And busy were about their short repast.
Mean while the Myrmidons the Presents bear
TO Achilles Ships, and laid them in his Tent,
And thither also brought the Women were.
But th'Horses to the Field his Servants sent.
Briseis, when she saw Patroclus lie
With many ghastly wounds dead on the Biere,
She flung her arms about him and did cry,
And her white Neck, and Face, and Breast did tear,
And weeping over him did thus complain.
O dear Patroclus, whom alive I left,
Now when I to you am returned again,
Ay me, I find you of your life bereft.
How fast my Woes on one another fall!
The Husband which my Parents made me wed,
And three good Brothers of one Mother all
I saw before Lyrnessus Massacred.
And then, Patroclus, you to comfort me,
Told me that I should be Achilles Wife,
And to him married in Pthia be.
But now since you have also lost your life,
I never of my Woe shall see an end.
And then the other women wept and roared,
All for Patroclus, as they did pretend.
But inwardly their own Fate they deplored.
The Greeks again about Achilles stood,
And urged him, ere he to Battle went,
Himself to strengthen with a little food,
But could by no means get him to consent.
My friends, said he, importune me no more
To eat or drink before we go to fight.
My heart within me now is vexed sore.
Fear not, I shall endure from morn to night.
This said, the other Princes from him went.
The two Atrides and Ulysses stay.
And Phoenix and old Nestor at his Tent,
And King Idomeneus, his grief t'allay.
But nothing they could say did any good,
So fiercely he was set upon the Fight;
And looking on Patroclus body stood.
And then afresh lamented at the sight.
Sweet friend, said he, you wont were to provide
Good Breakfast for me when I was to fight,
But since that comfort now I am denied,
In meat and drink I take no more delight.
For greater hurt cannot upon me fall,
Although for want of me my Father die,
While absent from him at the Trojan Wall
For this accursed Helen's sake I lie;
Nor though my Son Neptolemus should die,
Whom I in Scyros Isle lest to be bred,
Not thinking then that here both you and I
Should lose our lives; but that when I was dead
He should by you be to my House conveyed,
And made to know my Servants and Estate.
For Peleus now is very much decayed,
If quite he have not finished his Fate.
When this Achilles weeping spoken had,
The good old men that also had their fears
For those they left at home, were very sad.
And Jove had pity on Achilles tears,
And speaking to Athena, Child, said he,
Your love to valiant men, I see, is gone.
Achilles must no more remembered be.
Behold how for his friend he makes moan,
And takes no food, though the other Princes feast.
Let not his strength by hunger be decayed;
Distill Ambrosia into his breast,
And Nectar. Straight Athena him obeyed.
And swift as any Harpy came away,
And arming of themselves she found the rest.
But that Achilles strength might not decay
She dropped Ambrosia into his breast,
And Nectar sweet, and out the Argives went.
As when from Jove descends a thick Snow,
Which Boreas blows through the Element;
Such of the armed Argives was the show;
So bright their burnisht Arms and Helmets were,
The luster up to Heaven did rebound,
And smiling all about the Fields appear,
And at the moving of their feet resound.
Achilles then his mighty Arms puts on,
And grinds his teeth, and fire was in his eyes,
And hasted to the Battle to be gone;
So much his heart did at the Trojans rise.
First to his legs the Leg-pieces he ti'd
With Buckles of fine silver all along,
And next his Breast Plate to his breast applied,
And on his shoulder then his Sword he hung,
Then up into his hands his Shield he took
Large, strong, and mighty, radiant was the same,
And from afar it like the Moon did look,
Or, as to Seamen, on the wolds a flame,
That sure are of a storm when that they see,
And from their friends to scattered be by wind
To places where they not desire to be;
So then the Buckler of Achilles shined.
And next he puts his Helmet on his head,
Which shined like a Comet in the Air,
So finely Vulcan had it polished,
And made it seem to blaze with golden hair.
And then to try his Arms if fit they were,
He walked about, and thought he wings had worn.
And last from out a Tub he took his Spear
(Which by his Father formerly was born,
And made by Chiron in Mount Pel^on)
Which no man but Achilles now could wield,
Since Peleus strength decayed was and gone.
A fatal Spear to Heroes in the Field.
And Alcimus then and Automedon
The Horses to the Chariot made fast,
And harnest them and put their Bridles on,
And back unto the Seat the Reyns they cast.
With Whip in hand then mounts Automedon,
And after him Achilles not long staid
Yclad in Armor shining like the Sun,
And roughly to his Horses speaking said,
Xanthus and Balius take heed I pray,
A little better of your Charretier,
Than of Patroclus you did yesterday,
Whom dead and stripped you left behind you here.
This said, his sprightly head low Xanthus hung,
Till on the ground his golden Mane was laid.
And Juno humane Speech gave to his Tongue.
And to Achilles then he spoke and said,
Yes, great Achilles, we will save you now;
But know ye, that your utmost day is nigh,
Not by our faults; the Gods will have it so,
And, which cannot be shunned, your Destiny.
And that Patroclus is disarmed and slain,
'Twas not because we lazy were or slow,
But that Priamides might honor gain,
Apollo slew him with his silver Bow.
For we could have gone faster than the wind,
If that could to him any good have done.
The thread of life which for him was designed
Was by the Destinies draw^ cut (...).
This then said Xanthus, but could not proceed.
His Speech the Furies from him took aga^^
Xanthus (replied Achilles) there is no need
For you to prophecy my death in vain.
I know already that I here must die
Far from my Parents; yet I mean to stay
Till I have made the Trojans hence to fly.
This said, his Myrmidons he led away.
ILIAD. LIB. XX.
WHilst with Achilles the Argives armed stand,
And on the Plain the Trojans ready all,
Jove to the Goddess Thetis gave command
The Common Council of the Gods to call.
Then down she came, and calling went about.
Ye Gods, said she, Jove calls you to his house.
And straight the Rivers from their streams came out
All but their Father old Oceanus.
The Nymphs from every Meadow, Spring, and Grove
Up to the Mount Olympus went in have;
And when they come were to the house of Jove,
In Porches round on polished Seats were placed.
And Neptune also having heard the Call,
Leapt from the Sea up to Olympus Hill,
And sitting in the midst before them all
To Jove he spoke, and said, What is your will?
Do You call us hither our advice to hear;
To give the day to Trojan or to Greek?
For I perceive the Battle now is near.
My mind (said Jupiter) you need not seek.
For of the Greeks distressed I have a care.
But on Olympus I intend to stay,
And please my self with looking on the War.
But let the other Gods go down to Troy,
And take which side they will. For else I fear,
Achilles whom the Trojans did so dread,
When in the Battle no Immortals were,
And more enraged is since his friend is dead;
When he has driy'n the Trojans from the Field,
Will then directly go to Ilium,
And overthrow the Wall which you did build,
Before the time (by Fate appointed) come.
This said, the Fight began. On the Argives side
Stood Juno, Pallas, Neptune, Mercury;
And Vulcan taking in his strength great pride,
Went halting amongst them with his legs awry.
On the other side, Mars for the Trojans stood,
And Phoebus, and his Sister Artemis,
Their Mother Leto, and Scamander Flood,
And Venus that of all the fairest is.
And whilst they from the Battle stood aside,
The Argives mightily encouraged were,
And in Achilles presence took great pride;
For long it seemed they had not seen him there.
The Trojans when they saw him shook for fear,
So like to Mars he was, his Arms so bright.
But when the Gods on both sides with them were,
Then all about was filled with affright,
And in the Air heard was Athena shrill
As from the Ditch, and sometimes from the shore,
And Mars sometimes from Callidone Hill,
And sometimes as at Troy was heard to rore,
The Trojans he, but she the Greeks t'incite.
Thus by the Gods from Heaven encouraged
The Armies met, and cruel was the Fight,
And terribly above Jove thundered,
And Neptune shook the Earth on every side,
The Argive Ships, and stately Trojan Towers,
The Plain beneath, and lofty Tops of I Would.
And frighted with it were The Infernal Powers,
And Pluto starting from his ugly Throne
To Neptune cried out his hand to hold,
For fear his dismal dwelling should be shown
To Men and Gods so hateful to behold.
So great a noise the Gods make when they fight.
Phoebus to Neptune now opposed is,
And Pallas stands against rude Mars his might,
And Juno matched is with Artemis,
And Mercury against Latona stood.
But he that Vulcan had to deal withal,
Was the divine and deep swift-running Flood,
Which Xanthus Gods, but Men Scamander call.
Thus were The Immortals matched one to one.
Achilles would have given any good
That he had matched been to Priam's Son,
To Have made to Mars a Breakfast of his blood.
And then Apollo sets Aeneas on
T'encounter with Achilles; and arrayed
I'th'person and the voice of Lycaon
Came to his side, and thus unto him said,
Aeneas, when the Wine was in your head,
I often have heard you of your self say this,
That against Achilles you in fight durst stand.
What say you to him now? See, there he is.
Priamides (Aeneas then replied)
Why would you have me with Achilles fight?
I once already was upon Mount I Would
Keeping our Cattle, by him put to flight;
And thence for safety to Lyrnessus fled.
But he the Town Lyrnessus quickly won
And Pedasus. And then I had been dead
If Jove had not enabled me to run.
For Pallas with him was and made him way,
Striking his Foes before him with affright,
And urging him the Trojans to destroy.
It Is more than Man can do to oppose his might.
One God or other always with him is
To put aside the Spears before they come.
And whom he aims at he does never miss*
And to the mark his Spear flies always home.
But if the Gods unpartial would be,
Although of solid Brass his body were,
He should not easily get the Victory.
Aeneas (then said Phoebus) do not fear,
But pray unto the Gods. Your Mother is
Jove's Daughter Cytherea, as they say,
A greater Goddess by descent than his;
And therefore boldly to him go your way.
His mighty words and threats you must not fear.
This said, he courage breathed into his breast.
Then through the foremost went he with his Spear,
And Helmet of strong Brass with glittring Crest.
Now Juno of his going was aware,
And calling to her the other Gods, she said,
Neptune and Pallas, let us have a care;
I see a danger that ought to be wai'd.
Aeneas yonder with his spear in hand,
Goes to Achilles with a mind to fight.
Let Us keep him off, or by Achilles stand,
And add both to his courage and his might,
That he may know, the Gods of greatest Power
Are on his side, and those that stand for Troy
In virtue much to us inferior,
And dare not in the Field against us stay;
And that we from Olympus hither came
To save him now; hereafter whatsoere
Mischances come he must endure the same,
Since at his Birth they woven with him were.
For if unknown our purpose to him be,
To meet a God will put him into fear.
It Is dangerous Gods as they are to see;
So terrible to mortals they appear.
And Neptune unto Juno then replied,
You are too fierce. A fight between the Gods
I would not have begin upon our side.
Nor does it need; so much we have the ods.
But let us go hence to yonder Mountain top,
And leave the Battle in the hands of men.
If Mars or Phoebus then Achilles stop,
We to the Battle will return again,
And send them to Olympus home with shame,
Amongst other of the Gods at Court to stay,
Well beaten at our hands, disgraced, and tame.
And when he this had said, he led away.
And when he come was to the Castle-wall,
Which was by the Trojans built for Hercules
By Pallas help, to save him from the Whale
That much annoyed the Trojans from the Seas,
He and his Party of the Gods stayed there
Concealed by a Cloud, and looking on.
But Mars and Phoebus with their Party were
Sitting upon the Brow of Callidon.
Thus from the Field the Gods on both sides staid
Consulting how their friends the day might win.
But neither side effectually would aid.
For not a God amongst them durst begin.
Now covered over was the Field with men
Both Horse and Foot arrayed in Armor bright.
The Earth resounded with their feet. And then
Two warriors in the midst stood out to fight,
Achilles and Aeneas the two best.
And first Aeneas with fierce looks went on
With Spear in hand, and Shield before his breast.
To meet him then advanced Thetis Son.
As when to chase a Lion from the Plain
The people of the Town with Weapons rise,
The Lion looks upon them with disdain,
As if he did their multitude despise;
But when a Spear from any of them comes,
He whips himself int' anger with his Tail,
And terribly goes on, and yawns and foams,
To kill, or to be killed if he fail:
So at the seeing of Aeneas Spear,
Achilles did himself to th'Fight provoke.
And when they stood to one another near,
Achilles first unto Aeneas spoke.
Aeneas, why (said he) come you away
So far before the rest? To fight with me?
Will Priam, think you, make you King of Troy,
If by your hand perhaps I slain should be?
No. He is wise, and Sons has of his own.
Or will the Trojans set you out great Lands,
Some to be planted, others to be sown
When ever I am killed by your hands?
But that I hope will never be. You know
How once I made you run down Ida Hill
Into Lyrnessus in great haste; and how
You nere looked back for fear of greater ill;
And how the Town I won, and led away
The women Captives; though 'twas then Jove's will
That from my hands you should escape that day,
You must not look that you should do so still.
And therefore I advise you to be gone,
And in the throng of the Trojans to abide.
For every Fool his harm knows when it is done.
Th^s said, Aeneas to him thus replied,
Pelides, do not think you can me fright,
As if I were a Child, with words of scorn.
For if in evil words I took delight,
I could as many easily return.
We one another Parents know by fame.
Peleus your Father was, A^chises mine.
Your Mother is Divine, Thetis by name;
And Venus mine, of the Celestial line.
And one of them to day must lose a Son.
For it is not words can fetch us off this place.
But if you will know my Generation,
I Will by my Father likewise count my Race.
For first by Jove was Dardanus begot
That ruled the Dardans under Ida Hill
In diverse Towns. For Ilium yet was not.
But at the foot of Ida they dwelt still.
And Dardan Erichthonius begat,
That was the wealthiest of mortal men.
Three thousand Mares he had, and unto that,
As many Foals all feeding on the Fen.
And twelve of these were got by Boreas,
That leapt their Dams in likeness of a Horse,
And ore the ears of standing Corn could pass
And never make them stoop; such was their force;
And run upon the Sea and never wet
Their hoofs, which very wondrous was to see.
And Erichthonius did Tros beget.
And Tros the Father was of Children three,
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed.
But Ganymed was taken up by Jove
(So fair he was) and t'Heaven carried,
To minister unto the Gods above.
The Son of Ilus was Laomedon,
And he Tithonus got and Priamus,
And Lampus, Clytius, Icetaon.
But Capys Son was of Assaracus.
Capys begat Anchises, and he me.
I need not be ashamed of my Race.
Though Virtue l^eth not in Pedigree,
But given is to them whom Jove will grace.
Then let us from reproachful words abstain,
Whereof there is great plenty every where
To serve all men that will them entertain,
That as a man will speak, so he may hear.
What need we like two women in the street,
When they cannot agree, to rail and scoff?
Who, say they true or false, are undiscreet.
For from my purpose you will not put me off
With scornful words, before your force I try.
Let Us therefore here no longer talk but fight.
And as he spoke his Spear he lets fly,
Which on Achilles mighty Shield fell right,
And terribly it made the same resound.
Achilles far before him held his Shield,
For fear Aeneas through it might him wound;
Though Heavenly Arms to mortals will not yield.
But that he thought not on Nor did the Spear
Well driven as it was and strong, pass through.
For of five plies that labored in it were
By Mulciber, it pierced only two,
And those were Brass. There still remained three,
The one of Gold, the other two of Tin;
And stopped by the Brass it could not be;
But coming to the Gold it there stuck in.
And then Achilles threw his Spear at him,
Which flying with great force passed through his Shield,
Where thin the Brass and Hide was near the Brim,
And over him it flew into the Field.
For when Aeneas coming saw the Spear,
He crouched low, and held his Buckler high;
And though the same proceeded but from fear,
It made the Spear above his head to fly.
Aeneas at the first amazed stands.
But when Achilles with his Sword came on,
He stoopt, and from the ground took in his hands,
That near unto him lay a mighty stone,
Which two men, such as now are, scarce could bear,
And hit him had on the head or breast in vain,
That with Celestial Arms defended were,
And by Achilles Sword himself been slain,
If it had not by Neptune been foreseen.
Who speaking to the Gods did thus complain.
O Gods, said he, great pain I now am in
To see Aeneas by Achilles slain,
For harkning to Apollo foolishly;
Who will not help him though he set him on.
But wherefore should we let Aeneas die
Others to please, when he no fault has done?
Let Us therefore save him lest we Jove offend,
Who now the offspring of King Priam hates.
And that Aeneas* Race shall without end
The Trojans rule, it is ordered by the Fates.
This said, to Neptune Juno did reply,
If you Aeneas have a mind to save,
Save him your self. For well you know that I
And Pallas amongst the Gods sworn often have,
That neither of us shall a Trojan aid,
Though Ilium it self were in a flame.
Away went Neptune soon as that was said,
And to Aeneas and Achilles came.
And ore Achilles eyes a mist he spread,
And drew his Spear out of Aeneas Shield;
And to Achilles that he carried,
And laid it at his feet upon the Field.
And then Aeneas lifted by the force
Of an Immortal God skipt to the Rear,
Ore many Ranks of Heroes and of Horse,
Unto the Caucons that the hindmost were.
Where Neptune standing by him spoke and said,
Aeneas, who was it of The Immortal Gods,
That to engage Achilles you betrayed,
That stronger is than you by so much ods?
Henceforth take heed you come not in his way,
Lest by his hand you die. When he is gone,
You boldly on the best adventure may.
For of the rest you slain shall be by none.
This said, he to Achilles went again,
And made the mist to vanish from his eyes.
And round about him looked Achilles then,
And to his feet returned his Spear espies.
And said unto himself, O strange, what is this?
The man is gone, my Spear come back I see.
Aeneas of the Gods beloved is,
And I thought all he said was vanity.
But fare him well. He will not come again,
So glad he is that he has escaped so.
Now I will first put courage in my men,
And then unto some other Trojans go.
Then through the Argive Ranks he went, and said,
No longer of the Trojans be so shy,
But man to man go close. Be not afraid,
Strong as I am, you cannot think that I
Can follow such a multitude and fight.
For neither Mars nor Pallas can do that,
(Though Gods Immortal) and of so great might,
That mortal men cannot resist. Yet what
My strength alone with hands and feet can do,
I think I shall not any thing forbear.
But break their Ranks and make you way clean through,
Nor shall he joyful be whom I come near.
Whilst this Achilles to the Argives said,
Hector no less the Trojans did excite.
Why should you of Achilles be afraid?
With words it is easy against the Gods to fight,
That are too strong to fight with with a Spear.
And to Achilles now I mean to go,
Though Fire his hands, and Steel his body were.
For more by half he says than he can do.
When Hector to the Trojans this had said,
The Fight began, and mighty was the cry.
And then for Hector Phoebus was afraid,
And presently came in, and standing nigh,
Hector (said he) return into the throng.
Take heed. With Thetis Son fight not at all
Now nor henceforth (he for you is too strong)
Lest by his Spear or Sword you chance to fall.
Thus Hector by the God admonished
Into the Trojan Troops retired again.
The Trojans then before Achilles fled.
And by him first ^phition was slain,
Whom the Nymph Neis to Otrynteus bare
In Ida at the foot of Tmolus Hill,
Great Troops he brought unto the Trojan War,
And thought he could the great Pelid^s kill.
But coming on he met Achilles Spear,
The fatal Spear, that cleft his head in twain.
Achilles then triumphed ore him there
Though fallen to the ground he were and slain.
So; Otryntides, die there on the Earth;
Though where runs Hyllus into Hermus deep,
On the Gygean Lake you had your Birth.
This said, he left him in eternal sleep,
For the Argive Charret-wheels to crush and grind.
And after him he slew Demoleon,
A Warrier good, and of undaunted mind,
That of Antenor was a valiant Son
Him through the head with Spear in hand he smot,
And out together came both blood and brain.
H^s Helmet though of Brass, preserved him not.
And after he Demoleon had slain
He with his Spear pursued Hippodamas,
Who from his Charre had leapt unto the ground
Frighted, and now before him running was,
And gave him on the back a mortal wound,
Whereat he blows and roars like any Bull
Brought to the Altar for a Sacrifice,
When young men by the Horns him thither pull
By violence; then down he falls and dies.
Unluckily then in Achill^s sight
Was Polydorus Priam's youngest Son
And best beloved; whom he forbad to fight,
Though swiftest of them all he were to run.
But he the virtue of his feet to show,
Betwixt the Hoasts ran up and down the Field,
Until a Spear Achilles at him threw,
And with a wound upon the back him killed.
Out at his Navil went the Spear again,
And for his Guts to follow made a way.
But Hector when he saw his Brother slain,
Amongst his Troops he could no longer stay,
But going to Achilles shook his Spear.
Then speaking to himself Achilles said,
The man that slew Patroclus I see here.
We must no more each other now avoid.
And sowrely on him looking, said, Come near,
That I may quickly of you make an end.
And Hector to him answered without fear,
In vain Achilles your proud words you spend.
Such words as these may Children terrify.
And I can speak that Language when I list.
And though you be a mightier man than I,
The Victory does not in that consist,
But he shall have it whom the Gods appoint
Though he be weaker, if his Spear fly true.
Which mine may do, and sharp is at the point.
This said, his Spear he at Achill^s threw.
Which back to Hector's feet Athena blew
With soft and gentle breath without a sound.
And straight Achilles thundering to him flew.
But then Apollo snatched him from the ground.
Which is by any God done in a trice;
And in a Mist concealed him from his sight.
And after him Achilles leapt up thrice,
And thrice the Air obscure in vain did smite.
Then whoopt he after him and threatening said,
Dog, an ill death again thou escaped have,
That fighting, to Apollo pray'st for aid.
But yet I shall dispatch you at the last,
If any of the Gods for me appear
But now I must to other Trojans go.
This said, at Dryops straight he threw his Spear,
And sent his Soul unto the Shades below.
To meet Demuchus then he went half way,
That with his Sword came toward him to fight.
Him with a wound in the neck he made to stay;
And with his Sword then killed him outright.
Then by him slain the Sons of Bias were
Laogonus and Dardanus, the one
With his great Sword, the other with his Spear.
And next he killed Tros Alastor's Son,
Who not resisted but fell at his knee,
And begged his life, for being of his age,
Hoping for that he pitied might be.
But that Achilles wrath could not assuage.
He quite mistook his nature like a child.
For cruel was Achilles and hard-harted;
But he sweet-natur'd thought he was and mild.
Whereas he never thought how others smarted.
And then Achilles gave him such a wound
That with the blood his Liver started out.
And there he left him dying on the ground,
And for more Trojan Leaders looked about.
Then coming to him he saw Mulius,
And struck him through the head from ear to ear.
Then with his Sword he killed Echeclus
Antenor's Son that to him came too near.
Then on the arm he hit Demolion.
The Spear stuck in, and forced him there to stay.
Achilles then came furiously on,
And with his Sword he skim'd his head away
Helmet and all. Then Regmus with a wound
Upon the belly he slew with his Spear,
Who from his Charret fell unto the ground.
And after him he flew his Charretier
Areitbous, whilst he his Horses turns.
As a thick Coppice in a windy day,
If set on fire unmercifully burns;
So went Achilles killing every way.
As Oxen from the Straw tread out the Corn,
So trampling went his Horses ore the dead,
That with their Bucklers by the wheels were torn,
And th'Axle-tree with blood was covered
And Spoaks; in part with droppings from the wheels
(For going on the ground the wheels were go^y)
And partly beaten up with th'Horses heels,
And bloody were his hands; and all for glory.
ILIAD. LIB. XXI.
WHen to the River Xanthus they were come,
The Trojans at the Ford half of them passed,
And on the High way fled to Ilium;
The other leapt into the Stream for haste;
And with the winding flood there swimming strive.
As Locusts when by sudden Tier sprung
In swarms unto the River fly and dive;
So they themselves into Scamander flung.
And filled was the Stream with Horse and Men.
Achilles on the Bank-side left his Spear
Set up on end against a Tree; and then
Achilles leapt in with his Sword; and there
He killed as fast as he could turn and strike,
And with their blood the Stream was dyed red.
And grievous 'twas to hear them groan and shrike,
That in the flood were by him massacred.
As when the Dolphins in a River are,
The other Fish scud to the Banks in sholes,
So did it with the swimming Trojans fate,
They fled to th'Banks and hid themselves in holes.
And twelve of them alive Achilles took,
And with their Girdles hands behind them bound,
Then caused them to be led out of the Brook*
And to the Ships conveyed safe and sound;
To slay them at Patroclus Funeral.
Then from the River out he came again,
And Priam's Son Lycaon met withal
That from Scamander flying was in vain.
Whom Prisoner he had taken once before,
When in his Father's ground he was by night
Cutting of Spoak^staves from a Sycamore,
And on him now the second time did light.
To Lemnos first he sent him to be sold,
And bought he there was by Eetion.
Achilles for him had good store of Gold.
But he got loose and home again did run.
And there eleven days he staid; and well
Was entertained in his Father's house.
The twelfth into Achilles hands he fell
Again, that sent him then to Er^bus.
Achilles seeing him without a Spear,
Without a Shield, and nothing on his head
(For he had cast away his Arms for fear
When almost tired he from the River fled)
Achilles grumbling to himself then said,
O strange! These Trojans are stout-hearted men,
That being sent away, will not be staid,
But to the War must needs come back again.
Here Is one I sent to Lemnos to be sold,
And now is come to fight with me again.
It Is strange the Sea could not him from me hold,
That can against their wills hold other men.
But well, I Will give him of my Spear a taste,
And send him to the Earth, that I may see
Whether the Earth or no can hold him fast,
By which are holden better men than he.
Whilst this Achilles said, the man came near,
To beg his life; for loath to die was he.
To wound him then Achilles lifts his Spear.
But under it he got unto his knee,
And with one hand laid hold upon his Spear,
And on Achilles knee the other laid.
And kneeling down before him shook with fear,
And lamentably to him speaking said,
Achilles, I beseech you pity me,
And save my life although 'twere but for this,
That I your Prisoner was. Captivity
At least for life a Sanctuary is.
And when you unto Lemnos sent me had,
You for me got a hundred Oxens price.
And for my Ransom now I should be glad
You would be pleased to take that value thrice.
It Is but twelve days since I came back to Troy,
And all the way had been in grievous pain,
And when I thought I should my friends enjoy,
I fallen am into your hands again.
O how have I so much incurred the hate
Of Jupiter to shorten thus my life!
Or from my Mother comes my hard fate
La^thoe, whom Priam made his Wife?
Al^heus got her, King of Pedasus.
And she of Priam's many Wives was one.
For many more beside had Priamus;
And by her had me and another Son,
And both of us must by you now be killed.
For Polydore you have already slain,
Whilst like a Child he ran about the Field.
And for my self (I fear) I pray in vain.
But what am I that must no Quarter have?
Though by the Father I am Hector's Brother,
That sent the good Patroclus to his grave,
Yet I am nothing to him by the Mother.
Thus pleaded he. Achilles then replied,
Tell me no more of Ransom or of Quarter.
It Is true, I did before Patroclus died,
Suffer some Trojans for their lives to barter.
But now if any of the Trojans fall
Into my hands before the Town of Troy,
And those of Priam's Race the least of all
Must from me hope to get alive away.
But wherefore (friend) should you think much to die?
Patroclus a much better man is gone.
You see how strong and tall a man am I,
And of a noble Father am the Son,
And have a Goddess for my Mother. Yet
At morn, or noon, or night, with Shaft or Spear
I Am sure by one or other to be hit
And lose my life. Why therefore should you fear?
This said, Lycaon's heart and limbs both failed,
And of the Spear let us go his hold, and wide
His hands he spread and his sad fate bewayl'd.
Achilles then his Sword drew from his side,
And gave him on the neck a mighty wound.
The Swords whole breadth into his neck he took,
And presently he fell dead to the ground.
Achilles threw him then into the Brook,
And said insulting, Go now to the deep,
And feed the Fishes that will lick your blood;
Your Mother over you shall never weep,
But to the Sea you go shall with the Flood,
Where to the curled water leaps a Fish,
Upon Iycaon's dainty fat to feed.
And until Troy be by us won, I wish
That the other Trojans may no better speed,
But flying, by my Spear be tossed like Hay
( Scamander shall afford them little aid,
Though to his Stream they Bulls and Horses slay)
Till for Patroclus death they all have paid.
With these his haughty words Scamander grieved,
Contrived how Achilles to repel,
And how the Trojans best might be relieved
That to escape into his water fell.
Achilles then Asteropaeus spied
Pelegons Son the Son of Axius,
Of Axius the River deep and wide
By th'Daughter of King Acessamenus.
And to him with a mind to kill him went
As he was newly come out of the water.
But Xanthus gave him such encouragement
(Because Achilles filled his Stream with slaughter)
That there Asteropaeus for him staid,
And both in right and left hand had a Spear
And never sought the Combat to avoid.
And when they were to one another near,
Who are you (said Achilles) and whose Son,
That in my anger dares approach me so?
For I in Arms encountered am by none
But those whose Parents destined are to woe.
Asteropaeus to him then replied.
Why ask you me whose Son and who I am?
The Forces of Paeonia I guide;
To whom eleven days since I hither came.
Of my descent the Author Axius is,
The fairest Stream that on the Earth does run.
His Son was Pelegon, and I am his.
Thus who I am it is told you, and whose Son.
And now, Achilles, it is time to fight.
This said, from his two hands his two Spears fly
(For both Asteropaeus hands were right)
The one of them his mighty Shield did try
But pierced it not; the plate of Gold withstood.
The other gave his arm a little wound
Near to his elbow, and fetched out some blood,
And so beyond him went and stuck i'th'ground.
Achilles then his Spear with all his strength
Incensed at Asteropaeus threw,
Which missing into The Earth went half its length.
Then from his side his Sword Achilles drew.
Asteropaeus to Achilles Spear
Went back, and at it thrice he plucked in vain;
Then thought to break it; but Achilles there
Was with his Sword, and with that he was slain.
For by the Sword his belly was so ripped,
That all his bowels issued at the wound.
There him Achilles of his Armor stripped,
And ore him crow'd as he lay on the ground.
Lie there, said he; shall Rivers Sons compare
With th'off-spring of the blessed Gods above?
The Issue of a Brook, you say, you are,
But I the Issue am of mighty Jove,
For Peleus my Father was, and his
Was Aeacus whom Jupiter begot.
But greater he than any River is,
Then equal to his Race, their Race is not.
A River great enough you had at hand,
But that you found had done you little good.
For nothing can the Power of Jove withstand;
Not Achelous with his Royal Flood,
Nor The Ocean it self of Waters King,
From whose abundance Seas their water take
And every River, Stream, and Well, and Spring
That goes on the Earth, and every Lake;
Who when they but a clap of Thunder hear,
From Jove some danger presently they dread.
This said, from The Earth he pulled out his Spear,
And left o'th'Sands Asteropaeus dead.
Where Xanthus from his wound shall wash the blood,
And Eels and other fish feed on his fat.
Achilles then pursued those that stood
Upon Scamander Bank amazed at
The fury of the giddy Stream; and when
They saw their Leader killed in their sight
By the hand of terrible Achilles, then
They every one betook themselves to flight.
Then with his Sword he slew Thersilochus,
And after him the stout Astypylus,
And Ophelestes, Mydon, Aenius,
And after these, Mnesus, and Thrasius.
And had shed yet much more Paeonian blood,
But that Scamander at it took offense,
And like a man above his water stood,
And to Achilles spoke his mind from thence.
Achilles, truly you excel in might,
And Acts you do of great iniquity,
And by the Gods assisted are in fight.
But though by Jove you should allowed be
To kill the Trojans, kill them on the Plain.
My Stream so choked is with Carcasses,
I cannot drive my waters to the Main.
I wonder you should do such deeds as these.
Let those you kill be killed openly.
Go therefore from me. Thus Scamander said.
And then unto the River answered he,
Divine Scamander, you shall be obeyed.
But to pursue the Trojans I mean still,
Till I have chased them up to Ilium.
And fight with Hector, if he stay, I will,
And see if his or my last day be come.
Scamander then unto Apollo spoke:
Phoebus, said he, you Jove's commandment slight*
That bad you of the Trojans care to take,
And to defend them all you could till night.
Into the Stream Achilles leaps again.
At which Scamander swelling lifts his Waves,
And out he throws the bodies of dead men,
And from Achilles hand the living faves.
Then throws a Billow on Achilles head.
And heavy on his Shield the Current lay;
And on the ground by no means he could tread,
So fast the River carried him away.
But ore the water hung an Elmen limb
Which he laid hold on. Then fell down the Tree
Into the River. And that saved him,
And served as a Bridge to set him free.
And swiftly then Achilles from him ran.
But after him Scamander sent his water,
Resolved to quench the fury of the man,
And save the Trojans in his Stream from slaughter.
And then as far as one can throw a Spear
Achilles from the Flood obliquely flies
Swift as a Hawk; but yet was never the near;
For still he water has before his eyes.
As when a man makes passage with his Spade
For water to his Garden from a Hill,
The Stream outruns him that the Channel made;
So Xanthus was before Achilles still.
And ever as Achilles turned or stood
To see if any God would by him stand,
Above his shoulders rose the mighty Flood,
And while he starts from's feet removes the Sand.
Achilles then himself bewailing said,
O Jupiter (and looked up to the Sky)
Let some God against this River give me aid,
And any other death then let me die.
But none I know on whom the fault to lay
But my dear Mother, who to flatter me,
Said I should die before the Walls of Troy,
And by Apollo only killed be.
O that I had by Hector's hand been slain,
The best of all the men that fight for Troy!
But now I perish like a silly Swain
Passing a Torrent in a rainy day.
These words Achilles had no sooner said,
But Neptune and Athena with him were;
And on Achilles hand their hands they laid.
Then Neptune said, Achilles, do not fear.
Encouraged by two such Gods as we,
Pallas and I, and that by Jove's command,
Retiring soon you shall the River see.
For ^ear of him you need not hold your hand.
But drive the Trojans all to Ilium
Save those that fly. And having Hector slain
(As we assure you you shall do) then come
Triumphantly unto the Ships again.
This said, unto the Gods again they came.
Achilles boldly waded in the Field,
Where many Bodies dead and Bucklers swam.
With so much courage Pallas had him filled,
And in the water stoutly lifts his knees.
For Pallas now his strength augmented had.
And Xanthus vexed before, when he saw this,
Foamed and roared as one that had been mad;
And cried out for help to Simois.
Brother, said he, assist me here, to stay
This raging man that to Ilium going is.
I am afraid he will take the Town of Troy.
Make haste to help me; and your Channel fill
With water both from Torrent and from Spring,
And stones and trees bring with you from the Hill,
That on this furious man we may them fling;
So that his strength shall do him little good,
Nor Armor, which upon the Field shall lie
Concealed from the eyes of men in mud
And sand enough. Thus bury him will I,
And make his Tomb. The Argives will not find
Where lie his bones. I Will earth upon him throw.
They shall not need, if they should be so kind,
More Monument upon him to bestow
This said, he foamed, and full of bodies dead
He at Achilles a great Billow bowl'd,
Which coming to him covered had his head,
But Juno chanced to see it as it rolled,
And unto Vulcan shrikt in great affright,
Rise quickly (dear child) Cyllipodion,
Xanthus against you coming is to fight,
And to defend your self your Flames put on.
And I will Zephyrus and Notus call
From Sea, that for you shall so blow the flame;
That th'Armour, and the heads of the Trojans all
Shall not be able to endure the same.
Go to his Bank, and burn up every Tree,
And then throw fire on him, and never fear,
Nor by his threats or prayers persuaded be
To cease, until again you from me hear.
And Vulcan then made ready a huge flame.
And first the dead he burnt upon the Plain.
Then to the water with his fire he came
To send it to the Channel back again.
As when a field new moistened is with rain
In Summertime, it is quickly dried again
By Boreas; so soon dried was the Plain,
And burnt the bodies were of the dead men.
And to the River then his flame he turned,
Where th'Elms and Willows, Tamarisks, and Lote,
Sedges, and many other Plants he burned
That in or by the River grew about.
And Eels and Fishes in the water hot
Tumbled and turned their bellies up with heat;
Into such pain by Vulcan they were put;
And Xanthus fainting covered was with sweat,
And then to Vulcan spoke. Vulcan, said he,
No God is able to resist your might.
What are the Trojans or the Greeks to me?
Give over. I Will no longer with you fight.
Thus spoke Scamander, boiling all the while.
As when upon a fire of well-dri'd wood
The grease of a fat Swine is made to boil;
So boiled he, and went not on, but stood
Making to Juno his complaint, and said,
Why does your Son on me more fiercely fly
Than on the rest that do the Trojans aid,
And to be blamed more deserve than I?
Let him give over, and I Will do so too;
And swear besides, if you my Oath require,
That I will nothing for the Trojans do,
Although the Greeks should set the Town on fire.
This Xanthus said; and Juno hearing it,
To Vulcan with a loud voice spoke again,
Vulcan now hold your hand. It is not fit
To Offend a God too much, to pleasure men.
And Vulcan hearing her his fire puts out;
And Xanthus back into his Channel went.
Thus were they parted and no longer sought;
And Juno, though in choler, was content.
And then the Gods amongst themselves fell out,
And one against another stood in Duel,
And Heaven and Earth resounded as they fought.
Giving each other many wounds and cruel.
And up unto Olympus rise the Cry,
Where Jove sat on his Throne in Majesty,
And casting on the Fields of Troy his eye,
Laughed to see them fight that could not die.
Mars first began, and to Athena said,
You, Impudent, that to engage in fight
The Gods amongst themselves are not afraid,
To satisfy your pride and endless spite,
Remember how you on me set Tydide
To throw his spear at me, and openly
Unto my body you the same did guide
With your own wicked hand, and wounded me,
I Will pay you now, which was no sooner spoken,
But Mars his Spear was at Athena's Shield,
Which not Jove's Thunderbolt could ere have broken.
Then took she up a stone that lay i'th'Field,
Great, knobby, black, that had been heretofore
Set there, of some man's land to show the bound.
And with the same she struck Mars ore and ore.
There lay he, and sev'n Acres hid of ground.
And over him insulting, then said she,
Lie there, and know I can you overcome;
And that your Mother glad of this will be
For fighting against the Greeks for Ilium
This said, she from him turned. Then to him went
Venus, and led him groaning from the place.
Pallas (said Juno) see that Impudent
That leads him out, and do her some disgrace.
Then Pallas to her went, and with her hand
Hit her o'th'breast; then both fell on the Plain;
For Mars without her could no longer stand.
Then Pallas over them insults again.
So may, said she, lie all that stand for Troy
As these do here. Had it not been for them,
The War had ended been; we come away;
And Troy destroyed with all Priam's Stem.
This Pallas said, and Juno smiled; and to
Apollo Neptune straightway nearer came.
Why fight we not, said he, since others do?
If we stand still, we cannot without shame
Return to Jove, where scorned we shall be.
Have you forgot how to Laomedon
To work for him, Jove once sent you and me,
And how our wages was agreed upon,
How I built houses for the Trojans all,
As he direction gave me standing by,
Besides, how hard I labored at the Wall,
How fair I made it, and how strong and high,
And how he sent you (Phoebus) to attend
His Herds of Kine upon Mount Ida side,
And when our work and th'year was at an end
How proudly he our wages us denied
And threatened you to bind you hand and foot,
And sell you in some Island for a slave,
And cut off both your and my ears to boot,
And forced we were by flight our selves save?
Yet for his people you have ever fought,
Though by you they deserve to be destroyed,
And will not join with us to root them out.
To Neptune Phoebus then replied and said,
O Neptune, you would think me mad, if I
Should fight with you for such a thing as man.
They are but leaves, now fresh, to morrow die.
And when he this had said, away he ran.
For with his Uncle loath he was to fight.
His Sister then Diana to him came,
That angry was to see him put to flight.
Apollo (said she) is it not a shame
Thus easily to give the Victory
To Neptune? Wherefore carry you a Bow
And Arrows, and to nothing them apply?
Do You carry them like Children for a show?
Let me not hear you boasting any more
That you to fight with Neptune did not fear,
As in my Father's house you did before.
Thus she. But Phoebus did not answer her.
Then Juno angry to Diana came,
Bold-face, said she, how dare you with me fight
That stronger than you are a great deal am?
Do You think that in your Bow there is such might?
I know to women you a Lion are,
And Jove permits you which you will to kill.
But me to overcome it is harder far
Than t'hunt a Stag or Boar upon a Hill.
But since you have a mind to understand
What I can do, I Will let you see it now.
Then both her wrists she seized with her left hand,
With the other from her shoulders took her Bow,
And beats her with the same about the ears,
And laughed to see her wrigling strive to fly.
At last she freed her self, and shedding tears
She fled (leaving her Bow and Shafts to lie
Upon the ground dispersed here and there)
Then forth came Hermes and Latona bright.
And when they were to one another near,
Leto, said he, I will not with you fight
That are Jove's Mistress. Boast amongst the Gods
That you have got the Victory in fight,
And by no other means but the great ods
You have in strength; and I will not deny't.
This said, Latona gathered up the Bow
And Arrows of her Daughter Artemis.
To Jove went Artemis to let him know*
How ill she had been used; and at his knees
She weeping sat. And Jove then made her rise,
And to her said, Dear child, what God was that
That was so rash as t'use you in this wise,
As one that openly had done a fault?
'Twas Juno (then said Artemis) your Wife;
And she it was that was of all the first
To set the Gods amongst themselves at strife.
Thus Jove and she between themselves discourst,
Then Phoebus went into the Town of Troy.
For still he had a care to guard the Wall,
For fear the Greeks the City should destroy.
But to Olympus the other Gods went all,
One part triumphing, the other discontent,
And sat down by their Father Jupiter.
Mean while Achilles fiercely forward went
Killing of Men and Horses with his Spear.
As in a Town on fire the people all
Are busy, and the most of them undone,
So did it with the Trojans then befall;
Some slain were by Achilles, and some run.
Now Priam standing was upon a Tower,
And saw the Trojans by Achilles chased,
And that to turn again they had no power.
And down unto the Gates he came in haste;
And to the Porters order gave, and said,
Open the Gates and let the people in,
That from Achilles hither fly dismayed,
And shut them when you see they are within.
For if that cruel man should with them get
Within the Wall, 'twould be a dismal day.
The Porters then the Gates wide open set.
Then to the Gates the Trojans took their way,
Pursued by Achilles as they fled.
And sure he taken had the Town of Troy,
But that Apollo then encouraged
Agenor to oppose him by the way.
And lest he should be by Achilles slain
He at the Beech-tree near him took his stand
When need should be to bring him off again
Unwounded from Achilles heavy hand.
But when Agenor saw Achilles nigh,
He troubled was, and to himself thus spoke.
What shall I do? if from him I should fly
To Ilium the way that others take,
He Will overtake me and cut off my head.
For swifter much he is of foot than I.
What if I let him on the Trojans tread,
And I some other way to Ida fly,
And hide my self i'th'Bushes there till night?
But why do I discourse thus foolishly?
I cannot pass the Plain but in his sight;
And then I lost am without remedy.
But if I stay and fight with him, what then?
His body is not made of Steel nor Brass,
But mortal is (they say) like other men,
And like to other men but one life has.
His glorious Acts are Jupiters, not his.
This said, he for Achilles coming staid
As when i'th'Woods a Panther rowsed is,
At hearing of the Hounds he is not afraid,
But to the Hunter goes for all his Spear:
And though pierced through therewith will to him fly
Upon the Spear it self; that being near
He either may revenged be or die,
So resolutely then Antenor's Son
Agenor for Achilles waiting staid,
And at him aimed his Spear as he came on.
And lifting up his voice unto him said,
Achilles, Oh, you think this day to win
The Town of Troy. There Is yet much work to do.
For many mighty men there are therein,
And many dangers to be waded through.
They of their Wives and Parents will take care,
And little Babes; but you shall perish here
As terrible and mighty as you are.
And as he spoke, he at him threw his Spear;
Which on his leg below the knee did light,
And with the stroke resounded then the Tin.
But the Celestial Arms were of such might,
That it rebounded back and went not in.
And when Achilles was to throw at him,
Away Apollo snatched him from his sight
Concealed in a Mist obscure and dim,
And carried him in safety from the Fight.
And that the flying Trojans might escape
Achilles hand, and save themselves in Troy,
He took upon himself Agenor's shape,
And put himself into Achilles way.
Achilles then pursues, and Phoebus flies
Along Scamander's Bank upon the Plain,
And kept before him still, but in such wise,
As t'overtake him he might hope in vain.
Achilles thus by Phoebus was deceived
Till from the Town he far was led away.
Mean while the flying Trojans were received,
And thronging got within the Gates of Troy.
For none of them without the Gate durst stay
To ask, who had escaped and who not;
So glad they were of getting into Troy,
That how all others sped they never thought.
ILIAD. LIB. XXII.
THus were the Trojans driven into Troy
Like Deer, and up unto the Wall they went,
And from their bodies rubbed the sweat away,
And with good Wine renewed their Spirits spent,
And to the Wall advancing was the Fo.
But Hector hampered by his cruel Fate
Into the Town of Troy refused to go,
And staid without, before the Scaean Gate.
Then to Achilles Phoebus spoke, and said,
Why do you thus pursue me ( Peleus Son)
That am a God? which but by passion swai'd
You might have known; but rashly you run on,
And only look how you may slaughter men.
For else, why could you not contented be,
When you had pent the Trojans up; but then
Must leave your way so far to follow me,
And cannot kill me; for I cannot die?
At this Achilles vexed was at the heart;
And to Apollo answered angerlie;
Apollo thou the most pernicious art
Of all the Gods, that have me thus misled.
For had I unto Ilium kept my way
I strowed had the Field with Trojans dead
Before they could have entered into Troy.
But by your fraud that honor I have lost
Because the strength of men you need not fear*
But I would make you pay for it to your cost,
If to revenge my self I able were.
This said, to Troy he went a mighty pace,
And mighty things conceived in his mind,
And stretched his legs and knees as in a Race
Good Horses do, to leave the rest behind*
Old Priam first upon him set his eyes;
For brightly from afar his Armor shined
Like the fair Star that does in Autumn rise,
But Agues brings, and is to men unkind,
And called is Orion's Dog. So bright
Achilles in his Armor did appear,
And put the old man Priam in affright,
And made him groan and roar and tear his hair.
To Hector then he cried aloud and said,
Hector come in, come in my dearest Son;
For mightily I for you am afraid,
Fight not against that cruel man alone.
Achilles stronger is than you by ods;
Lose not your life to give him Victory.
Oh that he were beloved by the Gods
No better than he is beloved by me!
He eaten had ere now been on the Plain
By Dogs and Fowl, and I been comforted
A little, for my Sons whom he has slain,
Or in the Islands far hence trafficked.
Lycaon now I miss and Polydore.
They came not into Troy with them that fled.
Their Mother brought me with her wealth good store
To pay their Ransom if they be not dead.
If they be slain, it is then remediless.
Their Parents and the people all will grieve;
But yet their sorrow will be much the less
If Hector still preserved be and live.
Come therefore quickly in (dear Child) and save
The Trojans and their Wives, your self and Wife;
And do not let Achilles the honor have
Alone to have deprived you of life.
Besides, you should some pity take of me
That now upon the very brink of age
The cruel slaughter of my Sons must see,
And Daughters dragged and hurried by the rage
Of the Achaeans into slaverie,
And Chambers torn by the insulting Fo,
And Babes dashed against the ground expiring lie,
Wh^lst into servitude their Mothers go.
And after all this, slain must I be too.
My Dogs will eat me raw, and lap my blood,
And pleased be (not knowing what they do)
That at my Table daily take their food.
When young men slain are by the chance of War,
There nothing is whereof to be ashamed;
But when by Dogs abused and eaten are
White heads and beards, and parts not to be named,
There Is nothing to a man more miserable.
Thus said old Priam tugging his gray hairs.
But to prevail with Hector was not able.
And to him then his Mother spoke with tears,
And from her bosom laid out a Teat,
Hector, if this ere pleased you (said she)
Dear Son, I pray you into Troy retreat,
And have compassion on my misery.
Come in; between you let there be a Wall.
For if you should be slain, your Wife and I
Shall not lament you at your Funeral;
But at the Ships a prey for Dogs you will lie.
Thus weeping he and she to Hector prayed,
And nothing to them answered he again;
But obstinately for Achilles stayed.
And as a Snake rolled up before his den,
With venom fed, when coming toward him
He sees a man, and stirred is his gall,
Looks cruelly; so Hector looking grim
Staid with his Shield set up against the Wall;
And grieving, to himself he spoke, and said,
If I should now into the City go,
Polydamas the first would me upbraid,
That yesternight advised me to do so,
Then when Achilles in the Field was seen.
But his good counsel I refused then,
Which to have followed had much better been;
Lost by my folly are so many men.
And now I fear the Trojans and their Wives
Will censure me, and some man worse than I
Say I have cast away the peoples lives,
Presuming on my strength so foolishly.
So they will say. And therefore better it is
To venture on Achilles, though I die,
A better way I cannot take than this.
For should I lay my Shield and Helmet by,
And leave my Spear set up against the Wall,
And to Achilles thus disarmed come,
And offer Helen to restore with all
The wealth she with her brought to Ilium;
And to the Greeks give half the goods of Troy,
And take an Oath that we will nothing hide,
Nor any thing out of their sight convey,
But bring it forth and faithfully divide.
But whither to no purpose runs my mind?
I will not do it. For it were but in vain.
I never the sooner should his favor find,
But by him so much eas'lier be slain.
I cannot with him talk from Hill nor Tree,
As boys and wenches do. He is too nigh.
And therefore here* I Will stay for him, and see
Whether my Fate it be or his to die.
Whilst yet he spoke Achilles near him was,
As terrible as Mars, and shook his Spear;
As flaming fire relucent was the brass,
Or as the Sun at morning does appear.
Then Hector durst no longer stay, but fled.
Fear nimbly made his feet and knees to move.
Achilles no less swiftly followed.
As when a Hawk is flying at a Dove,
The Dove flies out aside, her self to save;
But by the Hawk again is followed,
That gives not over till the prey he have;
Achilles so pursued and Hector fled,
Keeping the Cart-way still under Troy Wall;
And to the Watch-tow'r came and Sycamore,
And the two Springs that into Xanthus fall,
Whereof the one is always covered ore
With smoke as if upon a fire it were,
And with hot water all the year does flow.
The water of the other all the year
As cold is as the Hail, or Ice, or Snow,
And two fine Washing-places built were there,
To which the Trojan women used to come,
And wash their Garments when they sullied were
Before the Argives came to Ilium.
This way they ran, and swifty moved their thighs.
For 'twas not for a piece of flesh or hide,
Which of Foot-races is the usual Prize,
But for the life of Hector that they vi'd.
As when Race-horses run for some great Prize,
That used to it are, most swiftly run;
So Hector and Achilles now ran thrice
About Troy Wall, the Gods all looking on.
Then (speaking to the Gods) Behold, said Jove,
I Hector see in danger to be slain,
A good and pious man, and whom I love;
And for him now my heart is in great pain.
For he has made me many a Sacrifice
Both in my house on Ida and in Troy;
And now before the swift Achilles flies.
Say, shall he die, or be conveyed away?
Father, said Pallas then, what is this you say?
He Is Mortal, and by Fate condemned is,
And will you now the Execution stay?
You may. But the other Gods will take it amiss.
And Jove to Pallas then again replied,
Sweet Child, it was not seriously meant,
But only said. You shall not be denied.
Do what you please your self; I am content.
This said, Athena glad leapt down to Troy.
Achilles Hector still pursued; and as
A Hound in view pursues all the way
A frighted Hare, so coursed Hector was.
Nor suffered was to double or to squat.
For when he to the Gate ran for defense,
Between the Gate and him Achilles gat,
So that he could not stay for help from thence.
Achilles never would the Wall forsake;
But Hector still upon the Cart-way fled.
As men can neither fly nor overtake
When in a Dream they think it in their bed;
So Hector from Achilles could not fly,
Nor could Achilles Hector overtake.
For Phoebus Hector did with strength supply.
But of him then no further care did take.
Achilles by a sign all else forbad
To throw a Spear, for fear the greatest glory
Some other of the Argives should have had,
And he come after but as accessory.
When to the Springs the fourth time they were nigh,
Jove took his golden Balance up, and laid
In one o'th'Scales Achilles Destiny,
And Hector's in the other; and them weighed.
Hector's was heaviest, and down fell the same
As low as Hell, so much it overweigh'd.
Then Phoebus parted. And to Achilles came
Athena nigh, and speaking to him said,
Achilles, now (I think) we shall not miss
Of killing Hector, but with honor go
To th'Ships, as greedy as of Fight he is.
For sure I am he cannot escape us now.
Phoebus in vain to Jove shall for him pray.
But stay you here and breathe a while. For I
Will to him go and make him for you stay,
And so encourage him he shall not fly.
This said, Achilles leaning on his Spear
Staid where he was. To Hector Pallas came.
So like Deiphobus she did appear
In shape and voice, he took her for the same.
And when she with him was, she to him said,
Brother, you still are by Achilles cours'd
About the Wall of Troy. Be not afraid.
I Will by you stand, and let him do his worst.
Deiphobus, said Hector, who before
Was dearest to me of my Brothers all,
I bound am now to honor you much more,
That t'aid me durst appear without the Wall
When all the rest remain within for fear.
Pallas to Hector then replied and said,
Brother, my Father and my Mother dear,
And friends with their entreaties had me staid,
So dreadful is Achilles to them all.
But I would not. But come, let us go and try
Whether it be our fate by him to fall,
Or his by Hector's hand and Spear to die.
This said, she went before him with her Spear,
Lest he some fraud mistrusting should have staid.
And when they were unto Achilles near,
Hector spoke first, and to Achilles said,
Pelides though before you I have fled
Now thrice about the Wall, and durst not stay,
Yet now to stand I am determined
And fight till either I be slain or slay.
But come, let us first the Gods to witness call
Of what shall be agreed 'twixt you and me.
If by my hand it be your chance to fall,
Your body dead shall not abused be.
I Will take your Arms and send them into Troy.
Your body dead the Greeks shall have again
Entire and not disgraced any way.
Do you the like to me if I be slain.
Achilles sowrely looking said again,
Talk not of Oaths and Covenants to me,
That nothing worth 'twixt Lions are and Men,
And Wolves with Lambs on nothing can agree.
And you and I shall one another hate,
Nor Oaths and Pacts between us will stand good
Till we blood-thirsty Mars shall satiate
Either with Hector's or Achilles blood.
It now behooves you all your Power to show,
And be an able man of War indeed.
You cannot, as you did, run from me now,
Although (I think) you never had more need.
For by Athena slain you shall be here,
And for the slaughter of the Greeks be paid.
This said, he at him threw his heavy Spear.
But Hector stooping did the same avoid.
And ore his head the Spear then harmless flew.
But Pallas quickly snatched it from the sand
Invisibly, which Hector never knew,
And put the same into Achilles hand.
Then Hector to Achilles spoke and said,
Achilles, you have missed. My Fate unknown
Is to you yet. And me to make afraid,
You have devised fables of your own.
Upon my back your Spear shall never fall.
If by it to be slain my fate it be,
It shall be on my breast or not at all.
But how my Spear will speed now let me see.
Oh that it would into your body go!
The Trojans would the War much better bear,
Since from your hand proceeds the greatest woe.
And as he spoke away he sent his Spear.
And on Achilles Shield it lighted just,
But entered not; and other he had none.
Upon Deiphobus lay all his trust.
But when he called Deiphobus was gone.
And Hector then perceived his death was near;
And Oh (said he) the Gods now for me call.
Deiphobus (I thought) stood by me here.
But Pallas 'twas. He Is still within the Wall.
I shall not escape. I see, Jove heretofore,
And Phoebus too, did mean it should be so.
They saved me often, but will do so no more.
But let me somewhat do before I go;
That men may speak of me in time to come;
And not ignoble die. And at that word
He roused up his fainting heart, and from
His side he drew his great and heavy Sword.
As when an Eagle stoopeth to the plain
From a dark cloud, a tender Lamb t'invade,
Or fearful Hare; so Hector went amain
TO Achilles brandishing his shining Blade.
Achilles angry on the other side
Came on, and cruel thoughts had in his mind,
And up he kept his Shield his breast to hide,
And on his head like fire his Helmet shined.
And as he went at every step he trod,
His Plume by Vulcan made of golden hair,
And to his Crest applied, gave a nod,
And ore his shoulders terribly did flare.
As Hesperus at midnight does appear,
The brightest Star that shines in the Sky;
So gloriously the point shined of his Spear.
Thus terribly to Hector he drew nigh.
And viewed his Arms to see which way his Spear
Might with most ease unto his body pass.
But every where entire and close they were,
Save at the neck a little gap there was.
At that he aimed, and with great force he smot
Him with his mighty Spear clean through the neck;
And yet the Spear his windpipe wounded not.
Then down he fell, but able was to speak.
Achilles over him insulting said,
Hector, you thought when you Patroclus killed*
You safe were, and of me were not afraid,
Because you knew I was not in the Field
And like a fool never thought of what a friar
To take revenge he left had at the Fleet.
Who now has brought you to an evil end,
For Dogs to eat, whilst he has burial meet.
Then Hector feebly to him said again,
Let not by Dogs my body eaten be,
But be contented that you have me slain.
My friends at any price will ransom me.
Take Brass and Gold as much as you require;
And to my Father send my body home,
To be consumed in the Funeral fire
By the Trojans and their Wives in Ilium.
Thus Hector said. Achilles answered to it,
Hector you Dog, speak not of Price to me.
If I my self could eat thee I would do it.
But by the Dogs I Am sure you will eaten be.
If they would give me twenty times as much,
Or buy thy body weight for weight with Gold,
And promise as much more, your deeds are such,
Your body shall not at that price be sold.
Nor shall your Mother lay you on a bed,
And over you lamenting stand and howl;
But in the open field you shall lie dead
Until devoured you be by Dogs and Fowl.
Hector replied (though ready now to die)
I knew you had a heart as hard as steel.
But thus much to you I will prophecy,
The vengeance of the Gods you will for it feel,
When one day Paris and Apollo shall,
As terrible and strong as you are now,
Make you before the Scaean Gate to fall.
This said, he di'd; and to the Shades below
Leaving his Limbs, his Soul bewailing flew.
And yet Achilles did again reply,
And briefly to him answered, Now die you.
And when the Gods call for me so will I.
This said, he from his body plucked the Spear,
And laid it by him down upon the place;
And took his Armor off. Then others near
Stood gazing at his stature and his grace,
And wondering at him, the one another said,
We safely now to Hector may go nigher;
His raging fit is very much allayed
Since when unto the Ships he came with fire.
Then spoke Achilles to the Greeks and said,
My Friends, that in the Army have command,
Since by the Gods this great man is destroyed,
And lies before you killed by my hand,
Who did the Argive people more annoy
Than all the other Trojans put together,
Let Us armed as we are go up to Troy,
An see on what they are resolved, whether
They Will quit the City, seeing Hector's dead,
Or still defend the same without him will.
But why should this come now into my head
When unbewail'd Patroclus lies still?
For my Patroclus I must not forget
As long as I am living and can go.
And when I come to the house of Hades, yet
I still shall think upon him there below.
But back unto the Ships we now will go.
And let the youth of Argos Paeans sing,
Whilst thither we in Triumph bring the Fo
With whose great praise the Town of Troy did ring.
This said, he full of spite on Hector flies,
And slits his legs from th'ankles to the heels,
And with a rope them to his Charret ties.
Then drives away; and raised is by the wheels
A Cloud of dust; and in it all the while,
Along the ground dragged was his comely head,
Once glorious, now by the Greeks made vile,
Since to them Jove had him delivered.
Which when his Mother from the Wall beheld,
Enraged she from her head plucked off her ^^ood,
And threw it from her, tore her hair, and squeal'd.
And Priam lamentably sighing stood.
About him were the Trojans shedding tears,
Sighing, and sobbing, and in such affray
As if all Troy had flamed about their ears.
And much ado they Priam had to stay.
For down he lay, and spoke to every one,
Forbear, said he, I will go to this man
(As fierce and cruel as he is) alone,
And move him to compassion, if I can;
And what respect he has to age I Will see.
For Pelius is old as well as I,
That got that mischief both to Troy and me,
To the Trojans all, but me especially.
For he has killed me many a goodly Son,
Which all together make me not so smart,
Nor wounds so deep as Hector's death has done,
Which is alone enough to break my heart.
Oh blessed Gods that it had been your will
He in his Mothers hands and mine had di'd,
That over him we might have wept our fill!
This said, the Trojans wept again and sighed.
Then Hecuba amongst the Wives of Troy
Began her plaint. Hector, my Son, said she,
Oh my dear Son, my glory and my joy,
Why should I amongst the living longer be,
Since you are dead and gone that night and day
The Trojans (men and women) did defend,
And as a God was honored in Troy,
And now are come to an untimely end?
Thus wayl'd his Mother. But Andromache
Knew not how Hector sped without the Gate.
For at a shining figured Garment she
Within an inner Chamber weaving sat.
And given had her Maids command to set
A Trevet on the fire, that Hector might
When he came in, wash off his blood and sweat
Contracted by great labor in the Fight,
Not dreaming of her Husband's death. But when
She heard the lamentation at the Wall,
And outcries both of women and of Men,
She trembling stood, and let her Shittle fall.
And then unto her Maids she called, and said,
Come hither two of you, and with me go.
I hear my Mother cry, and am afraid
To Priam's Sons there happened is some woe.
I Will to the Tower go up my self and see
What it is. My heart is at my mouth. I fear
Lest by Achilles Hector chaced be
Alone, and will be killed by his Spear.
Oh how I tremble! he can never stay,
But out before the rest will always run,
And never unto any man give way,
As if his strength could matched be by none.
This said, out went she like a woman mad,
And panting up into the Tower she hi'd,
Where she no sooner looked about her had,
But saw her Husband to a Charret ti'd,
And by Achilles dragged away, and dead.
And presently she fell into a Swown,
And all the comely Dressings of her head,
Veil, Kerchess, Rubans, Knots to the ground came down,
And Coronet unto her given by
Venus, when she with Hector married.
Her Sister laws that stood about her nigh
Then took her up with sorrow almost dead.
And when again her Spirits to her came,
She wept, and spoke, and stopped and spoke again.
Hector, of women I most wretched am;
And you the most unfortunate of men,
Both born to one and the same evil fate,
You here in Ilium King Priam's Son.
And I in Thebe child unfortunate
Of the unfortunate Eetion.
And you now to the Shades below are gone,
And me a woeful Widow here have left,
And with me my sweet Babe your tender Son,
And cannot (since you are of life bereft)
Do to him any good, nor he to you.
And though he should escape the Argives now,
Yet poverty and woe will him pursue,
And other men his goodly fields will plough.
A Child that is an Orphan has no friend;
And (though with tears) must stoop to whatsoere
To the supplying of his need shall tend
When he his want of Food no more can bear.
So to your friends my Child shall go, and take
One by the Cloak, another by the Coat,
That give him may some Wine for pity's sake,
Enough to cool his lips, but not his throat.
Or else some Son of them that sit at meat
May rate, or give him a good box o'th'Ear,
And bid him quickly out o'th'Hall to get,
And tell him that his Father dines not there.
Then weeping comes Astyanax to me,
That used was by his Father to be fed
With Mutton fat and Marrow on his knee,
And with his Nurse repose on a soft Bed.
But since his Father now is dead and gone,
Astyanax (whom so the Trojans call
Because defended were by you alone
(When you were here) the Trojan Gates and Wall)
Intolerable grief is like to find,
Since at the Ships you dead and naked lie
For Worms to feed on when the Dogs have dined,
While all your precious Garments here have I
Of woman's work, and burn them will, since you
Now never in them likely are to lie,
It Is to the Wives of Troy an honor due.
This weeping spoken made the women sigh.
ILIAD. LIB. XXIII.
THus wayl'd the Trojans then in Ilium.
To Hellespont the Achaeans straight went down,
And when they to their hollow Ships were come
Dispersed themselves each man unto his own.
Achilles only staid his Myrmidons
Upon the place; and thus unto them spoke.
You, Myrmidons my stout Companions,
You must not from your Chars your Horses take.
With Horses and with Chars we first must go,
And for Patroclus weep about his Biere.
And when we have by weeping eased our woe,
Unty your Horses and we'll all sup here.
This said, they wayl'd. Achilles first began;
And thrice about Patroclus Biere they drove.
And Thetis (fallen was so great a man)
Amongst them stood, and tears unto them gave
Which down their Armor fell into the Sand.
Achilles bad him then with tears, farewell.
And laying on Patroclus breast his hand,
Rejoice, said he, Patroclus though in Hell.
For now I to you shall my word make good,
Since hither I have Hector dragged dead,
For Dogs to eat. And to revenge your blood,
Twelve Trojans I will at your Pile behead.
This said, he Hector laid upon his face
I'th'dust before the Biere disgracefully.
The Myrmidons mean while their Arms unlace,
And th'Horses from the Chariots unty.
And then down by Achilles Ship they sat,
Who gave unto them all a Funeral Feast,
And for them flew both Goats and Muttons fat,
And Swine good store, and many a well-fed Beast.
But to Achilles then came in the Lords,
To wait upon him to Agamemnon's Tent,
That he might try with comfortable words
If he could mitigate his discontent.
When they were there Atrides first commands
His Ministers to bring in water hot
To wash the gore from off his face and hands.
Achilles peremptorily said, Not
And swearing, unto Agamemnon said,
By Jove that is of all the Gods most high,
Till I Patroclus in the fire have laid,
And raised him have a Tomb wherein to lie,
And with him burnt these Locks of mine, not hand
Nor face shall washed be by me. But now
Let Us sup. I'th'morning I will give command
That for his Pile we may have wood enough,
That speedily the body we may burn.
And when out of our sight we have it laid,
The people to their business may return.
Thus he advised, and it was obeyed.
The people then in haste to supper went,
And had good cheer, and heartily they fed.
And when their hunger and their thirst was spent,
Into their Tents went every man to bed.
Down went Achilles to the waters side
Attended on by many Myrmidons,
And in a place clean washed by the Tide
He laid him down to sleep upon the stones.
Nor was it long ere sleep upon him crept.
For labored very hard he had that day.
For Hector him in exercise had kept
Running before him round the Wall of Troy.
And then the Spirit of Patroclus dead,
Like him in Stature, Garments, Voice, and Eyes
Appeared to him standing at his head,
And speaking said unto him in this wise.
You sleep, Achilles, and have me forgot,
Though when I was alive you loved me well.
Pray bury me, these Spirits here will not
Let me come in within the Gates of Hell,
Nor let me mix with those beyond the River,
But make me wander 'bout the house of Dis.
Give me your hand upon it, for I shall never
Return, when once my body burned is.
We shall no more together counsel take,
Since by my Fate I taken am away,
And you your self, divine Achilles, make
Account to die before the Walls of Troy.
And then the favor let me have, I pray,
That when my flesh consumed is in the flame,
My bones with yours you will be pleased to lay,
And let the Urn that holds them be the same;
That golden Urn which Thetis gave to you.
We long with one another lived have.
For when Amphidamas his Son I slew,
Unto your house I fled my life to save,
From Opus being little past a boy,
And childishly the quarrel took at ^hess;
And never meant him ill before that day,
And sorry was I for my foolishness.
Your Father to his House then took me in,
Made me your man, and loved and cherisht me,
And since so long we have together been,
Why should not now our bones together be?
Achilles to the shadow then replied,
Sweet friend, what need had you to come from Hell
To tell me this? I for you do provide
That all you say may be performed well.
Come nearer to me that embrace we may
A little while, and one another moan.
This said, his arms he spreads; and then away
Patroclus sunk, and left him there alone.
At this amazed up Achilles starts.
Oh, oh, said he, I see it is certain then,
In Hell there Souls are, though they have no hearts,
But Idols only are, and Forms of Men.
For by me standing was the Soul all night
Of my Patroclus to me dictating,
And wonderfully like him 'twas to th'sight;
And what he wanted told me every thing.
This said, again about the body dead
Achilles and the Myrmidons lament,
And so continued till the day was spread;
But to the Wood then Agamemnon sent
From every part of The Army men to I Would,
Whereof some Axes carried in their hands,
And others Ropes. And with them goes for Guide
Meriones, and, as their Chief, commands.
Ore Hills and Dales then to the Woods they went
Driving their Mules before them all the way;
And lusty Oaks unto the ground they sent,
And cleft them into pieces as they lay.
And those unto the Mules with Ropes they ti'd,
And every one of them took in his hand
Either a heavy Bough or Limb beside.
For so Meriones had given command.
This done, they back descended to the Plain
Fast as they could through Bry'rs and Bushes store;
And quickly at the Ships they were again,
And laid their wood in order on the shore.
Then to the Myrmidons Achilles spoke,
You Myrmidons put on yor Armus, said he,
And Horsemen all your Charrets ready make,
And mount into your Seats and follow me.
When they were ready, foremost went the Horse,
And by a Cloud of Foot were followed.
I'th'midst between them carried was the Corse
With locks of hair thrown on him covered,
Which the sad Mourners from their heads had shorn.
Achilles went himself next to the Biere,
Who for his friend did principally mourn.
When at the place of Funeral they were,
Upon the ground they laid down the Biere,
And quickly in a Pile they heapt the wood.
Then cuts Achilles off his yellow hair,
And from the body at a distance staid,
And toward Greece and Phthiae turned his eye,
And speaking to Spercheius River said,
My Father to you made a Vow, when I
Returned, his hair should unto you be paid,
And to the other Gods a Hecatomb,
And fifty fat Rams at your Spring to slay.
Thus vowed he. But I shall never come home,
But here must die before the Gates of Troy.
Since then my Fathers wish you not fulfill,
Nor I return into my native Land,
My hair now to Patroclus give I will.
And at that word he puts it in his hand.
At this the Greeks a weeping fell again,
And wept had till the setting of the Sun,
But that Achilles spoke to Atrides then,
And prayed him that the people might be gone.
King Agamemnon, will the Greeks, said he,
Be never with lamenting satisfied?
It Is in your power; let them dispersed be
Unto their Ships their suppers to provide,
For we will of the Funeral take a care.
But let the Leaders of the Army stay,
And such as specially concerned are.
This said, Atrides sent the rest away.
And then the wood into a Pile they laid.
A hundred foot it was from side to side;
And on the top the Corpse. Then killed and flaid
Both Sheep and Beeves, and with their fat they hide
Patroclus body dead from head to foot.
And by it laid the Cattle flaid to burn.
To the Biere Achilles went and laid into it
Of Honey one, of Oil another Urn.
And of Patroclus Horses four he slew;
And of nine little Dogs he kept killed two.
And those into the Funeral pile he threw;
And last of all twelve Trojans adds thereto.
This done, again he to Patroclus said,
My dear Patroclus, once again, farewell.
Twelve lusty Trojans on your Pile are laid.
I Am faithful to you though you be in Hell,
But Hector for the Dogs shall be a prey.
But Venus 'nointed him with Oil of Rose,
And so preserved him both night and day,
That not a Dog did on him lay his nose.
Then Phoebus sent from Heaven a Cloud obscure
The place whereon his body lay to hide,
To the end it might the scorching Sun endure,
And not be shrivel'd up nor shrunk nor dried.
And then Achilles a new business finds.
He could not set on flame the new-sell'd wood,
But forced he was to pray to the two Winds
Zephyr and Boreas. Then off he stood,
And to them offered with a Cup in's hand,
And to them vowed a good Sacrifice,
If they from Sea would come, and by him stand,
And blow the Fire until the flame did rise.
This Iris hearing went unto the Winds
To tell them how Achilles to them prayed.
And at good cheer in Zephyr's house them finds,
And fain they would her with them there have staid,
And made her sit; but she refused that.
The Gods, said she, feast at a Hecatomb
In Blackmoor-land, and I must be thereat,
And must make haste, or thither cannot come.
To Zephyr now and Boreas I came
To tell them that a plenteous Sacrifice
Achilles make them will, if on a flame
They Will set the Pile whereon Patroclus lies.
This said, she parts. The Winds arise and roar,
And toss the Clouds before them in the Sky,
And at their feet tumble the Waves ashore
And then upon Patroclus Pile they fly,
And fiercely blow. Inflamed was the Pile,
And whistling at it staid the Winds all night,
Achilles standing by it all the while
Invoking solemnly Patroclus spright.
And The Earth with Wine by Cupfuls watered.
As one that mourns for his eldest Son
That then dies, when he should be married;
So did he for Patroclus sigh and groan.
When in the Sky the Day Star did appear
To show that after him Aurora came,
The Pile and Bodies dead consumed were
To ashes, and extinguished was the flame,
Away the Winds went ore the Seas of Thrace,
And passing shook the waters of the Deep.
Achilles went a little from the place,
And weary laid him down and fell asleep.
And now 'twas day, the Soldiers came again.
Then with their trampling did Achilles wake,
And up he stood and looked about. And then
He to Atrides turned his eyes and spoke.
Atrides, let us first with Wine, said he,
Put out the fire as far as it is spread,
That taken up Patroclus Bones may be
(For where they lie it is soon discovered;
Since in the midst we did his body lay,
But others, Horse and Men at th'outside lie)
That in a Basin of pure Gold they may
Reserved be until I also die.
And though no great Tomb here I have designed,
Yet may the Greeks that stay when I am gone,
When they think good, if they will be so kind
And see cause for it (...) a greater one.
This said, the fire the ^^rst extinguished;
Then down unto the ground the ashes came,
And up Patroclus Bones they gathered,
And in a golden Pan they laid the same;
And back unto the Ships they carried that,
To be reserved in Achilles Tent
Wrapped up within a double Kell of Fat.
And then about the Pile to work they went.
And where the Pile was, that they made their ground,
And Earth abundance on the same they lay,
Till it became a mighty Hill and round.
When they had done Achilles made them stay
And fit o'th'ground to see the games, which lie
Prepared had the Funeral to grace.
Then many Prizes rich he caused to be
Brought from his Ship and laid upon the place,
Brass Caldrons, Tripods, and great Iron Bars,
Horses and Mules, and Cattle of great size,
And goodly Women taken in the Wars.
First for the Horse; he tells each one his Prize.
To th'first a woman that could spin and weave,
Together with a Tripod deep and wide.
The next a Mare of six years should receive
Together with her young Mule by her side.
A handsome Kettle to the third he gave,
Which never on the Fire had yet been set.
Of Gold two Talents was the fourth to have.
The fifth a Cup and Cover was to get.
Then to them spoke. These Prizes here, said he,
Lie waiting for the Horsemen on the Plain,
If any Horsemen in the Host there be
That with their Charrets hope the same to gain,
Come in. Had any else these Games set forth,
The greatest of these Prizes had been mine.
For of my Horses you well know the worth,
And that they are Immortal and Divine,
Which Neptune gave to Peleus, he to me.
But I Will sit out. My Horses shall stay here
Hanging their heads as they do heavily,
Since they have lost their gentle Charretier.
Let any other of the Argives, who
Is of his Horses confident come in,
And presently prepare himself thereto,
And try which of the Prizes he can win.
This said, the Horsemen straight themselves present.
Eumelus first, Adrestus noble Son,
That was for Horsemanship most eminent.
Then Diomed with th'Horses which he won
From Venus Son, when by her saved he was.
Then sitting on his Chariot came forth
King Agamemnon's Brother Menelaus,
And at it Horses two were of great worth.
The one of them Podargus, was his own,
The other Aethe very swift she was
A Female, and for Agamemnon's known,
To whom, when he to Ilium was to pass,
She given was by Ech^polus, who
T'excuse himself of following him to Troy
(For very rich he was and loath to go)
And with his leave in Sicyon to stay.
The fourth with Horses of the Pylian brood,
Was Nestor's gallant Son Antilochus.
His Father careful of him by him stood
Instructing him, and said unto him thus.
Antilochus, you have been taught so well
By Jove and Neptune, young man as you are,
The Rules of Horsemanship, I need not tell
You of the Art, but pray you to take care.
Though you know how about the Gole to wind,
Their Horses somewhat are than yours more swift.
I fear you will in that some damage find;
But none of them know better how to shift.
It Is care not strength makes a good Carpenter,
And Ships at Sea are governed by care;
Force in soul weather little helps to steer.
Best Charretiers are they that best beware.
A man that on his Horses speed relies
May from the high way sometimes drive aside,
But not come in again. But he that is wise
Will always toward the Gole directly guide,
And have an eye on him that goes before.
The Gole I Will tell you (lest you know it not)
A Staff is of a fathom high or more,
Of Oak or Pine that is not apt to rot,
Standing between two great white stones upright,
And for a Monument set up was there
In ancient time of some deceased Wight,
Or formerly there had a Race been there,
And to that purpose served now again.
Be sure you drive your Horses to it close,
And leaning, press a little the inner Rein,
And let the farther Horses Rein go loose.
But let the near Horse to it go as near
As can be; so the Stones you still avoid.
You Will wound your Horses else and Charret tear,
And be ashamed whilst others will be joy'd.
If at the Staff you once but get the start,
In coming back before you shall be none
How good soere their Horses be or Art,
Though they the Steeds were of Laomedon,
Or like Arion all their Horses were,
Adrestus Horse of the Celestial race.
Thus Nestor his good Son instructed there,
And having done returned to his place.
The fifth and last came in Meriones.
Then up into their Seats they mounted all;
And then by Lots determined which of these
Should start the first. TO Antilochus did fall
To start the first. The next to Eumelus came.
The third Lot fell to Atrides Menelaus.
The fourth had on it Meriones his name.
The best, and last to start Tydides was.
Then all arow they stood. Achilles by
Showed them the Gole far off upon the Plain;
And all at once hold up their Whips on high,
And beat their Horses each one with his Reyn;
And loud upon them called to make them run.
Old Phoenix at the Staff was set to stay
And be a witness of what there was done,
And see there were amongst them no foul play.
And swiftly from the Ships they part away,
In clouds of dust up to their breasts they fly,
And to the wind their spreading Manes display;
Their Chars sometimes are in the Air a high,
And sometimes on the ground. The Charret^ers
Sit for all that still fast upon their Seats,
And every one aloud his Horses cheers,
While in his breast his heart with longing beats.
But when about the Gole they turned were,
And coming back again unto the shore,
Then 'twas their Virtue chiefly did appear,
And faster went their Horses than before.
And now Eumelus Horses foremost were,
And Diomed behind him was not far
With his Male Trojan Horses, but so near
As if they would have gone into his Char.
So near they were their heads did on it lie,
And made Eumelus back and shoulders hot
With breathing on them; and the Victory
Had got, or doubtful made at least, had not
Apollo been to Diomed unkind,
And from his hand struck out his shining Whip.
Tydides then again was left behind,
And wept to see Eumelus him outstrip.
When Pallas saw what wrong was to him done,
She puts the Whip into his hand again,
And angry goes unto Admetus Son,
And of his Horses breaks the Yoke in twain.
On one side of the way then went one Mare,
And on the other side the other goes.
Down fell the Pole, and with it he; and tare
His elbows and his eyebrows, mouth and nose.
Tydides in the mean time passed by,
And got before them all a mighty length.
For Pallas to him meant the Victory,
And gave unto his Horses greater strength.
Behind Tydides next was Menelaus,
And next to him Antilochus; and he
Aloud unto his Horses calling was.
Now let us (said he) your utmost virtue see.
With Diomed you are not bid contend,
Whom victor now Athena means to make,
And strengthened has his Horses to that end;
But only Menelaus t'overtake.
Were It not a shame that Aethe but a Mare
Should leave you two such lusty Steeds behind?
But if you now seek how your selves to spare,
I tell you this, and true you will it find,
You shall be slain. Therefore use all your speed,
And when you come into a narrow place,
Leave it to me to do what I see need.
This said, the Horses fearing mend their pace,
And now were close at Menelaus heels.
Then near unto a hollow way they came;
And lest they break should one another Wheels,
Atrides turned aside into the same.
The other after him a little wide
The same way took. Atrides then afraid
That he would enter with him side by side,
Unto Antilochus cried out and said,
Antilochus, you drive too carelessly,
The way's too narrow. Pray a little stay
Your Horses; broader 'twill be by and by,
Lest both our Chars lie broken on the way.
Antilochus then whipped his Horses on
So much the faster, seeming not to hear.
And when they were a little further gone,
Atrides held his Horses in, for fear
Their Chars should clashing overturned be,
And with them they be thrown into the dust,
And to him spoke, reviling. Go, said he,
Of all the men I know the most unjust,
And not so wise as the Argives thought you were.
But yet the Prize you shall not so obtain;
But for it first you shall be put to swear.
And then his Horses he drove on again.
And to encourage them, unto them said,
His Horses cannot keep before you long;
They old are both; strain hard. Be not dismay
For both of you brave Horses are and young.
This said, at highest speed again they fly,
And to Antilochus came up again.
The Argives on the Race now sat to spy
Who foremost coming was upon the Plain.
Idomeneus sat in a place more high
Without the Race, and heard a Charretier
Whose voice he knew unto his Horses cry,
And presently two Horses did appear.
Of one of them the color was bright Bay,
But on his forehead had a spot of white,
And as the Moon at Full round every way,
And from afar conspicuous and bright.
Then to the Greeks he said, Is there no more
That see these Horses coming back but I?
They are not those that foremost were before;
And it is another Charretier I spy.
Eumelus some mischance has had I fear;
And yet about the Gole he turned well.
But now I cannot see them any where.
Perhaps out of his hands their Bridles fell;
No longer would the Horses then obey,
But thrown him somewhere have o'th'field; or born
Him in their fit by violence away,
And have his Charret overturned, or torn.
Stand on your feet your selves and mark him well,
Whether or no it Diomedes be
The Son of Tydeus; for I cannot tell,
He like him is, and I believe it is he.
The lesser Ajax then Oileus Son
With evil words to Idomeneus replied,
The Mares upon the Field are coming on,
But you must talk, though from the purpose wide.
Your eyes are now grown old and less can see,
And yet to talk you love so much the more;
Though at discerning many better be.
Eumelus, as at first, is still before.
Ajax (said he) of all the Greeks the worst
Except at railing, let us a wager lay,
A Tripod or a Caldron who comes first,
Atrides judge, that you may know and pay.
And Ajax then about was to reply;
Nor had the quarrel 'twixt them there been staid,
But that Achilles who was sitting by,
Rose from his Seat, and coming to them said,
Idomeneus and Ajax it is a shame
For you in evil Language to contend,
That others when they do so ought to blame.
Sit down, and but a little while attend.
They Will soon be here. They strive for Victory,
And driving are as fast as ere they can;
Discerned then it will be easily
Which is the foremost, which the hindmost man.
This said, they saw Tydides very near
Plying his Whip; his Horses seemed to fly;
And covered was with dust the Charretier;
And hard it was the track o'th'Wheels to spy.
Then coming in, before the Lords he stopped,
And to the ground leapt from his Chariot;
With sweat his Horses breasts and shoulders dropped.
Then Sthenelus the Prize neglected not,
But nimbly from his place he to it skips,
And by his friends there standing by his side
Sent th'woman and the Tripod to the Ships;
And having done, the Horses he unti'd.
Antilochus next to Tydides was,
That not by virtue of his Steeds but slight
Advantage gotten had of Menelaus
When for them both he found the way too straight.
But Menelaus to him was so near
As is a Charret-horse unto the Wheel,
Which of his Tail does sometimes touch the hair,
And makes the Horse to run that does it feel.
So near unto him was Atrides then,
That was behind once a Coyts cast or more.
But quickly to him he came up again.
For Aethe now ran faster than before.
And had they but a little longer run,
Atrides by Antilochus had passed,
And without doubt the second Prize had won.
Meriones behind was a Spears cast.
Slow Steeds he had and but small skill in Courses.
Eumelus whom Athena overthrew
Came hindmost and before him drove his Horses,
And with his hands behind, his Charret drew.
Achilles moved with pity was at this,
And spoke unto the Argives in this wise.
Although he come the last, the best he is;
It Is fit he have at least the second Prize,
But Diomed the first, that has it won.
And just it seemed in the Argives sight.
And from Antilochus the Prize had gone,
Had he not pleaded for it as his right.
Antilochus then to Achilles spoke,
Though well, said he, in pity you incline
TO Eumelus, yet my Prize he must not take;
I won it have, and it is not yours, but mine.
His Horses good, and Horseman good he is;
And he and they upon the ground were laid
By some mischance; I Am not concerned in this.
He should unto The Immortal Gods have prayed.
But you, that pity him, and at your Tent
Have Gold, Brass, Horses, Women, Cattle store,
May out of that when you think fit content
Eumelus with the value, or with more.
For whosoever means to have the Mare
Must for her with me fight. Thus pleaded he.
Achilles that great love unto him bare,
Was glad, and said, Since you so counsel me,
The Breast plate I will to him give of Brass
That hemmed is all about with shining Tin,
With which Asteropaeus armed was.
Automedon into my Tent go in,
And quickly to me bring the Breast Plate forth.
And then Automedon no longer stands,
But fetches out the Armor of great worth,
And puts the same into Eumelus hands.
Then up Atrides Menelaus stands,
And in his hand the Cry'r a Scepter laid,
And silence to be kept i'th'Court commands.
TO Antilochus then Menelaus said,
Antilochus, what made you me disgrace
Justling my Horses in the hollow way
When there was so much danger in the place,
That 't had been best for both of us to stay?
But you the Princes hear the Cause I pray,
And judge between us both impartially,
Lest any of the Greeks hereafter say
I did to Antilochus an injury,
And from him got the Mare by fraud or might;
And that his Horses than mine better were.
But come, I now know how my self to right.
Come lay your hand upon the Reyns, and swea^
By Neptune, that you did not willingly
And with prepensed malice cross my Charre.
To this Antilochus did then reply,
O Menelaus, since you elder are,
You know our faults upon the sudden rise,
And that beforehand young men study not;
Their Wits are present, but the old are wise.
To do you injury I never thought.
The Mare is yours; and if you please to send
For any thing I have, that too I Will give
Rather than with an Oath the Gods offend,
And out of Menelaus favor live
This said, he put the Mare into his hand,
Then Menelaus looked as fresh and gay
As Dew that on the growing Corn does stand
Then when the Fields are in their best array.
And to Antilochus replied again,
Antilochus I angry am no more.
I see you were by Youth transported then.
But putting tricks upon your friends give ore.
I not so soon forgiven had another;
But you so much have suffered for my sake
Together with your Father and your Brother,
That I can easy satisfaction take.
And now to show I got it not by might,
Take you the Prize, although it be my share.
This said, he took t'himself the Caldron bright;
And yielding to Antilochus the Mare,
Unto Noemon gave her to set up
( N^emon was Antilochus his man)
One Prize remained, which was the double Cup.
Meriones the two gold Talents wan.
Achilles rising then to Nestor went,
And unto him the double Cup he gave.
This Prize, said he, keep for a Monument
Of my Patroclus lying in his Grave.
You shall not for it arm your fists with Lead,
Nor with young men at cast of Spears engage,
Nor shall you on the Foot-race need to tread.
Of all such work you are excused by age.
This said, the Cup into his hand he laid,
Which joyfully he took and thus replied.
Sweet Son, you nothing but the truth have said.
My strength is past, it cannot be denied.
My hands I scarce can to my shoulders raise,
And heavily my feet both rise and fall.
Oh, that I were as young as in those days
When I saw Amarynceus Funeral
Set forth most nobly in Buprasion.
There many Prizes were, and many a man;
But like to me amongst them there was none,
Epeian, Pylian, nor Aetolian.
At Fists the Prize from Clytomed I won;
And wrestling with Ancaeus I him threw,
And Iphiclus, swift as he was, outrun;
And with the Spears I Polydore out-threw,
And at the Horse-race only was outstript
By th'envie of the Sons of Actor two.
For sitting on the Charret they both whipped,
And from me won that Prize with much ado.
Such then I was. But now to younger men
That work I leave. Old age I must obey.
But such I was amongst the Argives then.
And now, Achilles, here no longer stay.
Proceed with other Games your friend to grace.
Your Gift I take, and great content I find
In that you shown have in this public place
Amongst the Greeks you have me in your mind.
Achilles having heard these Praises all
Of Nestor, brought into the place a Mule,
A Prize for him that won at Fist and Ball,
A Mule of six years old, and hard to rule.
As for the vanquished, he assigned to him
A lesser Prize which was a silver Cup,
That crookt and wryed was about the brim.
Achilles then amongst the Greeks stood up.
Atrides, and you Argives all, said he,
Let two men fight for these at Fist and Ball.
The lusty Mule shall for the Victor be;
The Cup for him that in the fight shall fall.
This said, Epeius a huge man stood up,
And that had at this kind of fight great skill,
And seized the Mule, and said, As for the Cup,
Let any one against me rise that will.
The Mule is mine; at this game I am best.
Is It not enough that the Argives value me
In Fight but as a mean man like the rest?
For no man can the best at all things be.
But let him know, whoere with him contends,
I Will break his bones. Which being to him known,
He may about him ready have his friends,
To take him up when I have knocked him down.
This said, Mecestes Son Euryalus,
That won the Prize from the Cadmaeans all
At Theb's upon the death if Oedipus
When celebrated was his Funeral
Presents himself. About him busy was
Tydides wishing him the Victory,
And gave him of strong Leather well-wrought Lace
Wherewith the Balls unto his wrists to tie.
The Champions up their fists together have,
Which when they met so quick and mingled were,
That which was which a man could not perceive,
But how they rattled at their heads might hear.
Euryalus then chanced to look aside,
At which Epeius such a blow him hit
Upon the cheek, that he was stupifi'd,
And could no longer stand upon his feet.
As when the Sea is curled by Zephyrus,
A little Fish leaps up and falls again;
So started at the stroke Euryalus
And fainted. To him went Epeius then
And took him up. His friends that by him stood
Led him away trailing his feet behind,
His neck aside hanging, and spitting blood;
And wandering out of order was his mind.
Achilles other Prizes then brought forth
For Wrastlers; and for him that did the best,
A mighty three-foot Pot esteemed worth
By th'company twelve Oxen at the least.
And for the vanquished a lesser Prize,
A Woman that in many works had skill;
And to the Argives speaking said, Arise
You that contend for the great Tripod will.
Then up rose Ajax, up Ulysses rose,
And having girt themselves stood on the place,
And presently extend their arms, and close;
And one another with twined arms embrace.
As when a Carpenter to keep the wind
Out of a house the Timber bows and pleats,
So were their arms with one another twined,
And each of them keeps fast his hold, and sweats,
And squeezed until their sides were black and blew.
And weary were the Greeks with looking on
When neither Ajax yet Ulysses threw,
Nor he the mighty Son of Telamon.
And Ajax then unto Ulysses said,
Let Us lift each other; and withal him lifts,
And hoped upon the ground to have him laid,
But he then not forgetful of his shifts,
Struck with his right foot Ajax on the ham
So that to turn him Ajax strength did lack.
Then both together to the ground they came,
One on his breast, the other on his back.
And now Ulysses to lift Ajax is.
And from the ground he heaved him, but not high,
And in he clapped one knee between both his,
Then both upon the ground again they lie.
Again they rise, and had not so given ore,
But that Achill^s to them goes, and says,
You both are best; torment your selves no more,
But equal Prizes take and go your ways,
That other Greeks for other Prizes may
Their virtue show. This said, they him obeyed,
And from their bodies wipt the dust away,
And with their Coats themselves again arrayed.
And then Achilles brought new Prizes in,
A silver Temperer that six gallons held,
And by Sidonian workmen made had been,
And all that ere they made before excelled,
And by Phoenicians into Greece was brought
And given to Thoas, and from him it came
TO Eunaeus Jasons Son. Eunaeus bought
Lycaon of Patroclus with the same.
This was the Prize for him that swiftest ran.
A great fat Ox the second was to take;
And half a Talent, Gold the hindmost man.
And then Achilles to the Argives spoke.
Arise, said he, that for this Prize will run.
Then Ajax rose Son of Oileus
The lesser Ajax* And then Nestor's Son
(The swiftest of the Youth) Antilochus.
Arow they stand. Achilles to them shows
The Gole about the which they were to run.
Together then they start; and foremost goes
The nimble-footed Ajax Oileus Son.
But next him and so near Ulysses is,
As from a woman's Distaff comes the thread,
And on his steps trod ere the dust aris,
And breathed all the way upon his head.
The Greeks upon him called all the way
To do his best, and wished him Victory.
Then to Athena did Ulysses pray.
O help me my good Goddess now, said he.
And when almost they ended had the Race,
Then chanced Ajax in the Dung to fall
Of Cattle which had killed been on the place
B' Achilles for Patroclus Funeral,
And filled with Cow Dung was his mouth and nose.
Ulysses on the Temp'rer laid his hands.
And Ajax spitting Dung again arose,
And with his Ox before the Argives stands.
Oh, oh, said he, it is Pallas has done this,
Who as a careful Mother of her Child,
Upon Ulysses always waiting is.
And when he that had said the Achaeaas smiled.
Antilochus th'half Talent took of Gold,
And smiled, and to the Argives said, You see
The Gods still give most honor to the Old.
Ajax in age a little passes me.
Again Ulysses older is than he.
And younger men with these cannot contend
At running of a Race, except it be
Achilles. Whom he finely did commend.
Achilles of that commendation glad
Unto Antilochus replied again;
To your half Talent I Will another add.
That word of yours shall not be said in vain.
Achilles then brought forth the Shield and Spear
And Helmet of Sarpedon (for till he
Was killed by Patroclus his they were)
And said unto the Greeks, Now let me see
Two valiant men well-arm'd contend for these;
And he that first draws blood shall bear away
Th^s Thracian Sword won from Asteropaeus.
The Arms in common they shall both enjoy,
And at my Tent they both shall feasted be.
Up then great Ajax, up Tydides rose,
And came forth armed from the Company,
And looking grimly one to the other goes,
And thrice to one another fiercely leapt,
And Ajax Spear passed through Tydides Shield;
But by the Breast Plate from his flesh was kept.
Good was his Breast Plate, and not apt to yield.
But still at Ajax neck Tydides aimed,
Above his Shield still pushing with his Spear;
At which the people standing by exclaimed;
For then of Ajax life they stood in fear,
And to Achilles cried to part the Fray
Betime, and let them equal Prizes have.
And by Achilles then dismissed were they;
But yet the Sword he to Tydides gave.
And then of Iron he brought out a Sough
Such as at first it from the Furnace came,
The which E^tion was wont to through;
Amongst whose Goods Achilles found the same,
And to his Ship he brought it with the rest.
And said to the Argives, He this Prize shall gain,
That lets us see he throw it can the best.
It will his Plough with Iron five years maintain.
He needs not to the Town for Iron go.
Then Polypoetes and Leontes rise,
And Ajax, and together stand arow;
And last of all unto them comes Epeius.
First threw Epeius, and well laughed at was.
And next to him Leontes threw the same.
Then Ajax threw and did them both surpass.
But when to Polypoetes hand it came,
As far as does a Shepherd throw his Hook
Seeing his Sheep stand still or straggle out,
So far threw he. The Prize his friends then took
And bare it to his Tent. The people shout.
Achilles then brought other Prizes in,
Ten double, and ten single Axes keen,
The which the two best Bow-men were to win,
And said, Now let your Archerie be seen.
And on the Sands erects a Ship-mast high,
And at the top he ti'd a Dove unto't
With slender thread, and said, Your skill now try.
For he that dead the tender Dove shall shoot,
Shall have the double Axes for his Prize;
The single he that breaks the thread shall win.
Then Teucer and Meriones arise,
And Lots they cast which of them shall begin.
And to begin to Teucer fell the Lot.
And first he shot. But should have made a Vow
A Hecatomb to Phoebus, but forgot.
And therefore Phoebus would not him allow
To kill the Bird. But yet he brake the thread,
And toward the ground, it hung down from her feet.
The frighted Dove in The Air hovered,
And mightily the Argives shout to see it.
Meriones then quickly drew his Bow,
(For th'Arrow fitted on it already lay)
And presently to Phoebus made a Vow
Of his first Lambs a Hecatomb to pay.
And seeing how the Dove amazed went
Above his head this way and that way round,
His Arrow keen he quickly to her sent,
Which pierced her through, and brought her to the ground.
The wounded Dove unto a Mast then flies,
And there her Feathers sheds, and hangs her head,
And having sitten there not long she dies.
The Argives gazing at it wondered.
And then Meriones away did bear
The double Axes. Teucer took the rest.
Achilles then new Prizes fetched; a Spear,
And a new Caldron worth an Ox at least.
To throw the Spear then rose the King Atrides,
And after him stood up Meriones
Idomeneus his Squire. Then said Pelides,
There shall be no contention for these.
We know how much you are more excellent
At this than any of the Achaeans here.
Take you these Prizes therefore to your Tent,
And give unto Meriones the Spear,
If you think fit: Atrides was content,
And to Meriones he gave the Spear,
And by Talthybius the Caldron sent
Unto the Ships; and all well pleased were.
ILIAD. LIB. XXIV.
THus end the Games. The Greeks dispersed are,
And every man returned to his Tent,
And busy was his Supper to prepare;
And after they had supt to bed they went.
Achilles all the night slept not a wink,
But on Patroclus worth, and company,
And on their common sufferings still did think,
And lay upon his bed unquietly.
And weeping sometimes laid himself on this,
Sometimes on that side, sometimes on his face,,
And sometimes on his back, and sometimes ris,
And walked upon the shore from place to place.
And soon as ere he saw the morning come,
He Hector to his Charret ti'd again;
And dragged him thrice about Patroclus Tomb,
And then went in, and left him on the Plain
With dust all over hidden, but not rent.
For Phoebus had him covered with his Shield,
That torn his body was not as they went.
The Gods mean while sat looking on the Field,,
And grieved to see Achilles show such spite.
And some of them advised Mercury
To steal away the body from his sight.
To this the other Gods did all agree,,
But Neptune, Juno, Pallas angry were
With Priam and with Troy, for Paris sake,
For that he Venus did so much prefer,
And of the others small account did make.
Thus passed it then. But twelve days after came
Apollo to the Gods in Council set.
And said, Ye Gods unjust, you are to blame.
What Sacrifice did Hector ere forget,
That to his Father, Mother, Wife, and Son
That for his death lament, he must not come,
And buried be, since he is dead and gone,
And have a Funeral in Ilium?
But to Achilles fury you give way,
Whose breast is void of all Humanity.
As Lions on men's Cattle love to prey;
Savage and proud on men so falls he
Ashamed of nothing. Though another man
That had a loving Brother lost, or Son,
When he has wept a while give over can,
And bear the ill that cannot be undone.
But he with Hector's death is not content,
But drags his body at his Chariot,
Not caring how we may the same resent.
He Will find at last 'twere better he had not
Upon the senseless Earth have shown such spite.
To this in anger Juno then replied,
If equal they had been, you had said right,
But that they equal are it is denied.
For Hector was a mortal woman's Son;
Achilles Mother a great Goddess is
Thetis, that nursed was and brought up by none
But by my self. The Gods can witness this,
Who, when I made her noble Peleus Bride,
Came to the Wedding all, and you too then
Were with your Fiddle there well satisfied,
Perfidious God, companion of mean men.
Then Jupiter to Juno spoke and said,
Look not so angerly upon the Gods,
Nor for Achilles honor be afra^d.
'Twixt him and Hector I know well the ods.
But Hector we of Mortals love the best,
I do at least, of all the men of Troy.
He never is behind-hand with my Feast,
But Flesh and Wine pays duly at my day.
But we'll not Hector from Achilles steal;
Nor can, since Thetis for him is awake.
Call Thetis hither* for with her I Will deal
To make him for his body Ransom take.
This said, into the Sea leapt Iris straight
Between the Isles of Imbros and of Same.
The water roared and started at her weight;
And she to th'bottom like a Plummet came.
Where in a hollow Cave the Goddess sat,
Her Sea-nymphs all about her sitting round,
She in the midst bewailing her Sons fate,
That was to perish on the Trojan ground.
And going to her near, Thetis, said she,
Jove calls you to him. She replied, Why so?
What has that mighty God to say to me?
I am not fit amongst the Gods to go.
But well. I go. I dare not disobey.
And on her head then throws she a black hood.
Then up they went, and Iris led the way.
(To let them pass the Sea divided stood)
And being landed leapt up to the Sky,
When Jove in Council and the Gods were met;
Where Thetis was received lovingly,
And next himself by Jupiter was set.
There Juno Nectar, Pallas gave her place.
And Jove unto her spoke. Thetis, said he,
I know your grief, but such is now the case,
You could not from The Assembly spared be.
Nine days amongst our selves we disagree
Concerning Hector's body what to do.
The most would have him stolen by Mercury;
But for your sake I would not yield thereto.
But go you, Thetis, to your Son and say
The Gods are angry and I most of all,
That Hector's body at the Ships does stay
Unransom'd and without a Funeral;
That he release it may for fear of me.
Mean while to Priam Iris shall be sent
To bid him go to Achilles speedily,
And with fair Presents fetch it from his Tent.
This said, she from Olympus took her flight
TO Achilles Tent, and found him sitting there,
Where he Patroclus still lamenting sighed,
And with him friends providing Dinner were.
And killed had a fat Sheep in his Tent.
Then in she went and sat down by his side.
How long, said she, will you your self torment?
Be comforted, and for your health provide;
And take delight in women's company,
For here you know you are not long to stay,
And that at hand is now your Destiny.
And hear what I from Jove must to you say.
From Jupiter I come, who bad me say
The Gods are angry and he most of all,
That Hector's body at the Ships does stay
Unransom'd and without a Funeral.
The Ransom therefore take and let him go.
To which Achilles a short Answer gave.
Let him that will (since Jove will have it so)
The Ransom bring, the body he shall have.
Whilst Thetis and her Son discoursing were,
To Priam Jove swift Iris sent away.
Iris, said he, this Message from me bear
To Priam, and relate what now I say.
Bid him unto Achilles Tent to go,
And carry with him other Trojans none
But one old Squire his Charret to look to,
And bring away the body of his Son;
And honorable Presents with him bear,
Wherewith Achilles may be well content.
And bid him death and danger not to fear,
So good a Guardian with him shall be sent.
Hermes shall guide him to Achilles Tent,
And being there he needs not fear at all.
Achilles will not kill him, but prevent
The hurt that might from others on him fall.
He wants not judgment, care, nor piety,
And pity has for them that to him pray.
This said, flew Iris from Olympus high
To Priam's house, where little was of joy.
His Sons about him weeping sat, and he
I'th'midst involved in his Cloak so just,
That one the impression of his limbs might see,
His head and neck bedawb'd with dung and dust,
Which he himself had thrown upon his head*
His Daughters and his Son^ Wives howling went
About, for Brothers and for Husbands that were dead,
And to the Shades by (...) had been sent.
Then Iris unto Priam coming near
With soft and gentle voice unto him said,
Priam be bold, for no ill news I bear
(For trembling sat he, and was sore afraid)
Jove bids you to Achilles Tent to go
And carry with you other Trojans none
But one old Squire your Charret to look to,
And bring away the body of your Son;
And honorable Presents with you bear,
Wherewith Achilles may be well content.
He bids you neither death nor danger fear,
So good a Guardian with you shall be sent.
Hermes shall guide you to Achilles Tent.
When you are there, past is the danger all.
Achilles will not kill you but prevent
The harm that may from others on you fall.
He wants not judgment, care, nor piety,
And pity has on them that to him pray
In their distress* and at his mercy lie.
When Iris this had said, she went away.
Then Priam said unto his Sons, Arise,
And make a Wagon ready out of hand;
And to a Cedar Chamber down he ^ies,
Where his most precious Household stuff did stand.
And thither called his Wife, and to her said,
Jove's Menssenger to Achilles bids me go
With Ransom for my Son. I Am not afraid.
But what think you? Is It best to go, or no?
At this aloud she shrikt and said, Ay me,
What now is of the wit you had become,
For which so wise you once were thought to be
By men abroad and by your friends at home?
Will you go put your self into the hand
Of him that has your Sons so many slain,
A man that does not pity understand,
Nor says? No, no, he will not from you abstain.
But since the Fates designed had before
His birth, to th'Dogs he should be made a prey
By this hard-hearted m^n* you may deplore
Him here at home, and from Achilles stay.
Oh, that between my teeth I had his heart,
That to revenge my Son I might it eat.
It would no little ease be to my smart,
And less the loss of him I should regret.
For Hector only for his Country fought,
And of his Enemies was not afraid,
Nor did him wrong, but valiant was and stout.
Then Priam to his Wife replied and said,
Nay Wife, since to him I am bent to go,
Dissuade me not, nor ill Bird to me be
Here in my house, and bode me ill. For know,
Whatere you say, 'twill not prevail with me.
If now a Priest or Prophet to me came
And this had said, I thought it had a lie.
But howsoever, come what will, I am
With Hector in my arms content to die.
This said, the Chests he presently unlocks,
And out he lays twelve Robes for womankind,
As many Coats, as many single Cloaks,
And unto those as many that were lined.
And further twelve rich Carpets out he laid,
And when he that had done, he Gold brought forth,
Whereof he laid by ten Talents weighed.
And two great black three-footed Pots much worth.
And unto those he set bright Caldrons four;
And the fine Cup which given him was when he
From Troy to Thrace was sent Ambassador.
So longed he to set Hector's body free.
I'th'Porch then standing many Trojans were,
That sorry for his grief were thither come;
To whom he said, Rascals what make you here?
Find you not cause enough of grief at home,
That you must hither come to trouble me*
As if too little 'twere to lose my Son.
Hereafter you will eas'lier killed be,
Since Hector who defended you is gone.
As for my self, before I see that day,
I hope to be with^n th'In^ernal Gates.
Then with his Staff he drove them all away;
And turning in again his Sons he ^ates.
Paris and Agathon and Helenus,
Pammon, Polites, and Antiphobus,
Agavus, Deiphobus, Hippothous.
These nine he rated, saying to them thus,
Make haste unworthy Sons* I had been glad
If you in Hector's stead had all been slain.
Oh how unfortunate am I that had
So many and so valiant Sons in vain!
Mestor and Troilus both valiant men,
And Godlike Hector. Sure I am accursed.
Since Mars of these deprived me has again,
And now I none have left me but the worst,
Domestic Wolves, the bane of Lamb and Kid,
And good for nothing but to dance and lie.
Why stand you still? Were you not by me bid
The Wagon to prepare? Then out they fly,
And speedily the Wagon forth they bring,
And Yoke well fitted with an iron Pin;
And fixed it to the Poles-end with a Ring,
And Cord nine Cubits long to keep it in;
Which thrice about the Boxen Yoke they wind,
And to the Wagon laid the Ransom in;
And to it then the lusty Mules they bind,
Which by the Mysians given him had been.
That done, King Priam's Horses to his Charre
Were by himself and by Idaeus ti'd,
Of which he always taken had such care,
That while they fed he stayed by their side.
Then Hecuba came to them with a Cup,
A golden Cup of pleasant Wine, that they
The same to Jupiter might offer up
Before unto their Foes they went away.
Here, take this Cup said she, and pray to Jove
That he will let you see a lucky flight
Of that great Bird which he the most does love,
That you may be assured by the sight
That safe you shall again return to Troy.
For if that favor to you be denied
I should advise you by all means to stay.
And Priam then to Hecuba replied,
This counsel (Wife) of yours with reason stands.
Jove pleased is when to him men look up.
For water then he called and washed his hands,
And from his Wife received the golden Cup.
Then looking up to Heaven, O Jove, said he,
Of all the Gods most glorious high and great,
Grant me that I may well received be
B' Achilles at his Tent, and well retreat.
And that thereof I may be confident,
Now show me of your Bird a lucky flight.
This said, Jove presently an Eagle sent,
Of color spotted over black and white.
As wide as is a Princes Gate or more,
So wide her Wings the mighty Eagle spreads,
And as it over Ilium did soar,
The people joy'd to see it ore their heads.
The old man then went up into his Seat,
And through the City to the Plain did pass.
The Wagon wherein lay the treasure great
Before him driven by Idaeus was.
And so far went his Sons, and Sons-in-law;
And then returned again into the City.
When Jupiter upon the way him saw
In this estate he moved was with pity;
And unto Hermes turned his eyes and said,
Since you men's company do most frequent,
And whom you will can quickly hear and aid,
Go and guide Priam to Achilles Tent.
But so as to be seen by none, until
He thither safely come. And Mercury
No sooner understood his Fathers will
But sets himself about it willingly.
And first his Shoes unto his feet he binds
Ambrosian Shoes that over Sea and Land
Bear him as swift and lightly as the Winds;
And then his Rod he took into his hand,
Wherewith he lays sleep on Mortal eyes,
And takes it off again when he thinks good.
Then down to Troy and Hellespont he flies
In likeness of a Youth of Royal blood
When Down begins t'appear upon his face.
Idaeus now and Priam at the brink
Of Xanthus were, and night came on apace.
And there they made their Mules and Horses drink.
Idaeus near them then saw Mercury,
And in great fear to Priam cried, I see
A man (O Priam) coming. Let us fly,
Or to him go and fall down at his knee.
And horribly was Priam then afraid,
His hair with fear upon him stood upright.
Then Mercury unto him came, and laid
His hand on his, and to him said, It Is night;
What makes you be abroad? Do you not fear
Your Foes the Greeks? If any of them knew
That you were with so great a Treasure here,
In what a pitiful estate were you?
For you and he that is with you both are old,
And neither of you can himself defend.
But as for any hurt from me, be bold.
I hither come t'assist you as a friend,
So like, me thinks, you to my Father are.
And Priam then to Mercury replied,
It Is true you say. And yet the Gods a care
Have of me still that send me such a Guide,
So great a man, so comely, and so wise,
That blessed are the Parents you begat.
And Mercury to him again replies,
Indeed old man, you say the truth in that.
But whither bear you your best goods away?
To some strange City till the War be done?
Or are the Trojans all now leaving Troy,
Since killed is the best of them, your Son
That might with any of the Greeks compare?
Tell me, said Priam (pray ye) who are you,
And whence ye come, and who your Parents are,
And how my Son and his hard Fate you knew.
You mean to try me now (said Mercury).
At the Argive Ships I Hector frighted saw,
And how he made the Greeks before him fly,
And how he tossed them in the Field like straw,
Where we stood by with wonder looking on.
Achilles had forbidden us to fight.
His man am I, by birth a Myrmidon,
And stood amongst the rest to see the sight.
My Father is Polyctor, very rich,
But now an old man is and like to you.
And seven Sons he has in all, of which
I am the last. And Lots at home we drew
Which of us with Achilles should be sent
To th'War of Troy. The Lot then fell to me.
And with Achilles in his Ship I went.
And hither come the place of fight to see.
The Greeks by break of day will hither come,
And try if now the City they can win.
Impatient of their stay at Ilium
They cannot by their Leaders be kept in.
Then Priam to him said again, Since you
Achilles Servant are, is Hector yet
At the Argive Ships, I pray you tell me true,
Or cut in joints thrown to the Dogs to eat?
And Hermes unto this again replies,
Nor Dogs nor Fowl upon him yet have fed,
But at the Ships he still neglected lies,
And though he have twelve days now there been dead,
Yet is his body incorrupt, and free
From Worms that breed in other bodies slain.
And though it every morning dragged be
About Patroclus Tomb, does whole remain
And undefac'd, the blood all washed away.
You would admire to see him look so fresh,
And cleansed of the filth that on him lay,
And at his wounds how closed is the flesh,
Though many from the Greeks received he had.
So kind the Gods were after he was dead.
These words of Mercury made Priam glad.
And thus again he to him answered.
Yes, yes, it is good to give the Gods their due,
A thing that Hector never did omit.
And therefore to him they this favor show,
Although his Soul be in the Infernal Pit.
But now to Achilles Tent be you my Guide;
And at my hand this handsome Cup receive.
Again you try me ( Mercury replied)
I dare not take it without Achilles leave.
For of his anger in great fear I stand.
Without a Bribe I Will with you go along
To what place you think fit by Sea or Land.
Though 'twere to Argos; none shall do you wrong.
For sure, so wretchedly I do not look,
But that a man may of me stand in fear.
Then up he leapt, and in his hands he took
The Whip and Reyns, and served as Charretier.
When they were come to the Argive Ditch and Wall,
The Watch that placed was the Gate to keep,
Their Supper to provide were busy all,
And Mercury there laid them all asleep,
Took off the Bars, the Gate wide open laid,
And in the Charret and the Wagon went
With all the wealth for Hector to be paid;
And forward pass unto Achilles Tent,
Built for him by his Myrmidons, and high,
With Fir-trees tall, and covered over head
(To keep it out of danger from the Sky)
With the deep vesture of the flowery Mead
And to it had a great Court pal'd about,
And in the Pale a high two-valved door
For Chars and Wagons to go in and out,
And one great Bar of Fir Tree and no more,
So great that it required three common men
Upon the lofty Gate to set it on,
And three such men to take it off again.
None but Achilles shut it could alone.
This Gate then Hermes open to him laid,
And with the Char and Wagon in he came,
Then leaping to the ground to Priam said,
Old Fath^^, I a God Immortal am
Hermes, and hither sent to be your Guide,
From Heaven on purpose by my Father Jove.
But by Achilles I Will not here be spied.
Gods must not show to men such open love.
But go you to Achilles in, and try
What favor from him at his knees you will find,
And put him of his Son in memory,
And Father. That will work upon his mind.
This said, to Olympus Hermes went his way.
Then to the ground leapt Priam from his Charre;
And going in he bad Idaeus stay,
And of the Mules and Horses have a care.
Achilles at his Supper now was set,
And waiting on him stood Automedon
And Alimus, the Table standing yet;
But supped he had and appetite had none.
His other friends at distance from him sat.
And Priam to them then came in unseen,
And kissed the hands there of Achilles, that
Of many of his Sons the death had been.
As when a man that killed another has,
And to another Prince for safety flies,
Men at him stare; so he amazed was
When he saw Priam stand before his eyes.
The rest admired the comely man to see,
And both on him and one another look.
But Priam then upon Achilles knee
Laid both his hands, and thus unto him spoke.
Godlike Achilles take into your thought
Your Father that an old man is as I,
And into trouble by his Neighbors brought,
And has no friend on whom he may rely.
Yet he has many Intervals of joy,
And thinking on his Son is comforted
With hope to see him back return from Troy.
Undone am I; for all my hopes are fled.
When The Army of the Achaeans landed here,
I by the Gods with fifty Sons was blessed;
Whereof sixteen my Wife did to me bear,
And other women in my house the rest.
But in this War the most of them are lost.
And now by Mars reduced are to few.
And Hector which of all I loved most,
Is lately, O Achilles, slain by you.
His body to redeem I hither come
With precious Gifts, and fall before your knee,
That I may bury it in Ilium.
Upon your Father think, and pity me.
Yet is my case more pitiful than his.
For what calamity can greater be
Than th'hands that have my Children killed to kiss?
This said, Achilles wept. And from his knee,
With his, the hands of Priam gently moved;
And then aloud they both lamented. He
For Peleus, and Patroclus whom he loved,
And Priam for his own calamity,
And through the house were heard to sigh and groan.
Achilles, when his fit of tears was laid,
And eased was his heart, came from his Throne,
And raised the old man that on his knees yet staid,
And to him spoke. Alas, old man, said he,
You much have suffered, and your pain I feel.
But how alone durst you to come to me,
That slew your Sons, unless your heart be steel?
But come, sit down. In vain lamenting is,
The hurt that is done tears cannot take away,
Since so it is ordered by the Gods in bliss,
That men shall live in pain, and they in joy.
Two Barrels in his Cellar Jove has still
Of Gifts to be bestowed on mortal Wights,
One full of Good, the other full of Ill.
And usually to mingle them delights.
For they that only ill receive from Jove
Exposed always are to injury,
And begging up and down the world shall rove,
And both by Gods and Men despised be.
So Peleus at the first received much good,
And did in wealth his Neighbors all surpass,
And with his Subjects in great honor stood,
And joined in Wedlock to a Goddess was.
But after this the Ill unto him came
To leave no Child behind him to succeed,
But only me that so short lived am,
And from him live to vex you and your seed.
And you, O Priam, once were rich, they say,
And all that was in Lesbos did enjoy,
And over all the Hellespont did sway,
And that all Phrygia did you obey,
And with great store of Children blessed you were.
But now you only fights and slaughter see,
And patiently you Hector's death must bear.
He cannot with your tears revived be;
Much sooner you may suffer greater ill.
TO Achilles Priam then again replies,
O Thetis Son, to sit I have no will
Whilst at the Ships my Son unburi'd lies.
But bring him forth that I my Son may see,
And you the Presents I have brought enjoy.
And prosperous unto you may they be,
And safely I again return to Troy.
Achilles angry then, Old man, said he,
Provoke me not. I Will put into your hand
The body of your Son, because to me
From Jove my Mother came with that command.
And very well I know you Priam are,
And that you hither had a God for Guide.
What mortal to the Army come would dare?
Or could have passed the Watch and not been spied?
Or open to you could the Gates have set?
Therefore take heed, and anger me no more,
Lest the command of Jove I should forget,
And without Hector send you out adoor.
This said, old Priam was afraid and sat.
Out went Achilles with Automedon
And A^cimus, his two good Servants, that
He loved the most, Petroclus being gone.
And they the Horses and the Mules unti'd,
And from the Wagon in the Goods they brought,
Only (wherewith the body dead to hide)
They left behind a handsome Robe and Coat.
Achilles then his drudging Maids appointed
To bear the body to some Chamber meet,
And see the same well washed and well anointed,
So secretly that Priam might not see it,
Lest grieved he should something do or say,
That might so far Achilles anger move,
That in his passion he should Priam slay
Forgetting the Commandment of Jove.
And being washed, anointed, and arrayed,
Achilles laid the body on a bed,
Which his two Servants in the Wagon laid.
This done, he to Patroclus spoke and said,
O my Patroclus if you hear in Hell
That Hector's body I have sent to Troy,
Forgive me, since I for it paid am well
With Gifts, whereof what is fit to you I Will pay.
This said, Achilles to his Tent retired,
And sat upon the Seat from whence he ris,
Your Son, said he, is freed as you desired,
And on a bed laid in your Wagon is.
To morrow with him go by break of day.
But let us not our Supper now forget;
For Niobe twelve Children lost, they say,
Yet did she not for that refuse to eat.
Six lusty Sons, six Daughters fair they were,
And killed all, only for saying this,
[ Leto but two, and she did many bear.]
By Phoebus they, and these by Artemis,
The Goddess Leto's Daughter and her Son.
Nine days and nights they lay unburied;
For Jove had changed the people into stone,
And then the Gods with Earth them covered.
Yet Niobe when she had weeping done,
Received food; and now does somewhere lie
I'th'Woulds of S^pylus, and turned to stone
The hurt done by the Gods takes patiently.
Come then old man and lay your grief away,
And for the present think upon your meat,
And weep for Hector when you come to Troy,
For true it is your loss of him is great.
This said, forth goes Achilles, and appoints
A Sheep for supper to be killed and flayd;
Which straight was done, and cut-out into joints,
And pierced with Spits unto the fire was laid.
And, when it was well roasted, taken up.
Automedon o'th'Table laid the bread.
Achilles made the Messes. Then they sup,
And on the meat they laid their hands and fed.
But when of food they had no more desire,
Priam admired Achilles form and face.
Achilles Priam did no less admire,
In his aspect and speech there was such grace.
When on each other they had looked enough,
Priam began, and to Achilles spoke.
Dismiss me if you please (Achilles) now,
That I a little sleep at last may take.
For since my Son was slain, I never slept,
But rolling on the soiled grass have li'n
Perpetually, and for him sighed and wept,
Nor until now touched either Meat or Wine.
Achilles then to th'women gave command
I'th'Porch without to set him up a bed,
With handsome Coverleds of Purple, and
With fine soft Blankets see it covered.
The women quickly his Command obeyed,
And two Beds ready made i'th'Porch without.
Achilles smiling then to Priam said,
Old man I from my Tent must turn you out;
Lest some man should from Agamemnon sent
With counsel come and chance to see you here,
And let him know that you are at my Tent,
And the Redemption of your Son defer.
But ere you go, old man, pray tell me right
What time is needful for his Obsequies,
That I so long may keep the Greeks from fight.
Then Priam to Achilles thus replies.
You know Achilles very well how far
The Hills and Woods are distant from the Town,
And how afraid to go the Trojans are.
We need nine days to fetch the fuel down.
The tenth he shall be burnt and buried.
Th'eleventh a Mount upon him shall be laid.
The twelvth we'll fight again if there be need.
To this Achilles answered and said,
Old man, the time you asked granted is.
So long the Achaeans shall from fight forbear.
This said, in Priam's hand he laid his,
That of his faith he might not stand in fear.
There in the Porch slept Priam and Idaeus.
And then unto his bed Achilles went.
And there he slept, and with him fair Briseis
Within an Inner Chamber of his Tent.
The other Gods and Men slept all the night,
But sleep approached not to Hermes eyes,
But thinking lay on Priam, how he might
Conduct him safely from his Enemies.
Then up he rose, and went to Priam's head
And to him said, Ho, Priam sleep you here?
Since you redeemed have Hector's body dead,
You think you nothing farther have to fear.
Although you for him paid a lusty price,
Yet if alive Atrides find you here,
Your Sons and friends shall pay that value thrice.
This said, he suddenly awakt with fear.
And calling to Idaeus made him rise.
Then Hermes to the Wagon and the Charre
Himself the laboring Mules and Horses ties.
And now into their Seats they mounted are,
And through the Argive Camp then Hermes drove
Unseen till past Scamander ford they were.
Then Hermes left them and returned to Jove.
And now the morning was displayed and clear.
Then sighing on they went to Ilium,
But were by neither man nor woman spied,
Till up into the Tower of Pergamum
Cassandra went, and thence she them discri'd,
And weeping to the people cried and said,
Ye men and women all of Ilium,
If ever you at Hector's coming joy'd,
Run to the Gates; I see him hither come.
Then, man nor woman left was in the Town,
But Hector to behold went to the Gate.
First came his loving Wife and Mother down,
And in the Wagon by him weeping sat.
The people in a throng about him staid
Lamenting and lamented had all day,
But Priam from his Char unto them said,
Trojans, unto the body dead give way.
And when within the house I have it laid,
Then for him weep till you be satisfied.
When this was said, the people him obeyed,
And to make way, themselves they then divide.
Then to the house they brought the body in,
And placed it on a bed. Then Singers by
They set, the lamentation to begin.
Their Song they sung; to which the women sigh.
Then to lament Andromache began.
O my dear Husband you have lost your life
Unhappily, that were but a young man,
And made a wretched Widow of your Wife,
And with me left behind a tender Son
To evil fate begot by you and me.
To see him grow a man I hope have none;
This City first I fear destroyed will be,
Since you are gone that was our sole defense.
TO Achaia now the Wives of Troy must go,
And with them I. And you my Child must hence,
And in vile work employed be by the Fo,
Or you may by some spightful man or other
Be from the Wall or some high Tower thrown
For Hector's sake, that killed has his Brother,
Or Father, or his Son before the Town.
For many of the Greeks has Hector slain.
He went not to the Battle bashfully.
For which the Trojans now are in great pain,
And I your loving Wife especially.
O that you thus should in the dust be laid,
And not give me your hand before you di'd
Without a word upon your Deathbed said
For me to think on. Then the women sighed.
And Hecuba began. Hector, said she,
Of all my Sons to me you were most dear.
And when arrived was your Destiny,
You by the Gods, though dead, beloved were.
My other Sons, when any taken by
Achilles were, beyond Sea carried were
And sold, and made to suffer slavery
At Samos, Imbros, Lemnos, or elsewhere;
But when of life he had deprived you
Because his friend Patroclus you had slain,
About his Monument he often you drew,
Though that could not bring him to life again.
But now he sent it to me has again
As fresh and as well colored as if by
Apollo's gentle Shafts he had been slain,
This said, again the people sob and sigh.
Then Helen took her turn. Hector, said she,
Whom best I loved of all my Brother-laws
(For you were so, since Paris married me,
Though when I married him accursed I was)
Now twenty years it is since I came to Troy,
And never did an ill word from you hear;
And when your Kindred of me ill did say,
You took my part, and made them to forbear.
Since you are gone my joy is at an end,
And in your death I moan my own estate
That now amongst the Trojans have no friend,
Who hate me as the Author of their Fate.
This said with tears, provokt the peoples pity;
But Priam then unto them spoke, and said,
Go Trojans now and fetch wood to the City;
You need not of the Argives be afraid.
Achilles when I parted from his Tent
Eleven days allowed my Son to inter
And fetch down wood without impediment;
So long the Argives should from fight forbear.
This said, to th'Hills with Oxen and with Wains
And Mules they went, and busy were about
This work nine days together and took pains.
Upon the tenth the body was brought out,
And on the top of the great wood-pile laid,
And fire put to it; and all day long it burned
And all the night. When morning was displayed,
Again the Trojans to the Pile returned,
And th'Embers with black Wine extinguished.
His bones then by his Brothers and his Kin
Were from the ground together gathered,
And by them to an Urn of Gold laid in.
The Urn with Purple Robes then covered over
Into a Grave (which soon was made) they laid.
The Grave with many and great stones they cover.
And last of all (because they were afraid
Before their work were done the Greeks would come)
They sent out Scouts on every side to spy.
And ore his Grave in have they raise a Tomb.
This done, away they went, and by and by
To Priam's house they came again, and there
He made a splendid Supper for them all.
Then home they went well pleased with their cheer.
Thus ended noble Hector's Funeral.
FINIS.

