A SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE DENZELL HOLLIS, (Second Son to the Right Honorable
JOHN Earl of Clare deceased) and Brother to the now Earl of Clare. At the
dellvery of the Protestation to the Lords of the upper House of Parliament, 4.
May 1641. Wherein is set forth the reasons that moved the House of Commons to
make the said Protestation. ^o gether with a short Narration of the several
grievances of the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for JOHN HAMMOND, 1641.

A SPEECH AT A CONFERENCE of both Houses in the Painted Chamber, May, 4. 1641.
MY LORDS:
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, having taken
into consideration, the present estate and condition of this Kingdom, they
find it surrounded with variety of pernicious, and destructive Designs,
practices, and plots, against the well (...) after he had fought a good fight,
and overcome all his Enemies, Or as the shocke of wheat which comes in due
season to fill our Granaries with corn, uphold our lives with the staff of
bread. For Parliaments are our Panis quotidianus, our true bread, all other
ways are but Quelques chooses, which yield no true nourishment, nor breed good
blood.

This very Parliament which has sat so long, has but beat the air, and
striven against the stream, I may truly say, the wind and tide has still bin
against us.

The same ill Counsels which first raised the storm, and almost shipwrack't
the Commonwealth they still continue, they blow strong like the East wind, that
brought the Locusts over the land. These counsels cross our Designs, cast
difficulties in our way, hinder our proceedings, and make all that we do to
be fruitless and ineffectuall. They make us not to be Masters of our
business, and so not Masters of money, which has bin the great business of this
Parliament, that we might pay the armies according to our promises and
engagement.

For, my Lords, our not effecting of the good things, which we had undertaken
for the good of the Common weal has wounded our reputation, and taken off,
from our credit.

Is it not time then (my Lords) that we should unite and concentrate our
selves, in regard of the Antiperistasis of hurtful and malicious intentions
and practices against us.

My Lords. It is most agreeable to nature, and I am sure most agreeable to
reason, in respect of the present conjuncture of our affairs: for one maine
engine, by which our enemies work our mischief is by infusing an opinion and
belief into the World, that we are not united among our selves, but like
Sampsons Foxes, we draw several ways, and tend to several Ends.

To defeat then the Counsel of these Achitophels which would involve us, our
Religion, our being, our laws, our liberties, all that can be near and dear
unto an honest Soul in one universal and general Desolation, To Defeat I
say, the Counsel of such Achitophells, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of
the house of Commons, knowing themselves to be specially entrusted with the
preservation of the whole, and in their consciences persuaded that ye dangers
are so imminent, that they will admit of no delay, have thought fit to declare
their united affections by entering into an association amongst themselves, and
by making a solemn Protestation and vow unto their God, that they will
unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the Counsels, and the Counselors,
which have brought upon us all these miseries, and the fears of greater. To
prevent the ends, and bring the Authors of them to condign punishment, and
thereby discharge themselves both before God and Man.

The Protestation your Lordships shall have read unto you; together with the
grounds and reasons which have induced the House of Commons to make it, which
are prefixed before it by way of Preamble.

Then the Protestation was read by Master Maynard.

And thereupon concluded his Message to this effect, That the house of Commons
had commanded him to present unto their Lordships this Protestation, That every
Member in that house had made it, no one refusing it, and that they sent it to
your Lordships, with assurance of your Lordships concurrence in the same Zeal
and affection for the public safety: That it is their desire your Lordships
should likewise make the same Protestation, which we humbly leave to your
Lordships wisdoms, and there made an end of the conference.

FINIS.

