APOKALYPSIS ANASTASEOS.

THE Resurrection Revealed: OR THE DAWNING OF THE DAY STAR, About to rise, and
radiate a visible incomparable Glory, far beyond any, since the Creation, upon
the Universal Church on Earth, For a Thousand years Yet to come, before the
ultimate Day, of the GENERAL JUDGMENT: To the raising of the Jews, and ruin
of all Antichristian, and Secular Powers, that do not love the Members of
Christ, submit to his Laws, and advance his interest in this Design.

Digested into Seven Books: WITH A Synopsis of the whole Treatise. AND Two
Tables 1 Of Scriptures, 2 Of Things, opened in this Treatise.

By DR. NATHANAEL HOMES.

Non prudenter damnant, vel indocti, quod nesciunt, vel docti, quod novum
putant, vel aliqui, quodcunque redarguere nequeunt. LONDON, Printed by Robert
Ibbitson, and are to be sold by Thomas Pierrepont, at the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLIII.

Magnificis, Senatibus, Conciliis, caeterisque terrarum or bis Dynastis,
MONITORIVM IMPERIALE, ex Epistola Constantini Magni, ad Saporem Persarum Regem,
pro Christianis Scripta
DIvinam FIDEM conservans, veritatis luce perfruor; Epistola ex Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. l. 4 c. 9. etc.
and hujus veritatis luce ductus, divinam fidem intelligo. His igitur, ut res
ipsae confirmant, sanctissimum Dei cultum percipiens, hanc colendi rationem,
quasi Magistram me habere profiteor, ad cognitionem sancti Dei. Hujus Dei vim
and potentiam auxiliatrices meorum bellorum nactus, ab ipsa ultima oceani ora
exorsis, universum inde orbem firma and salutari spe erexi, ita ut omnes
Gentes, quae tot tyrannorum dominatu oppressae, dum quotidianis calamitatibus
cederent, prope extinctae essent, mea opera meisque laboribus, ad commodiorem
statum revocatae sint. Hunc Deum, immortali memoria me honorare profiteor; hunc
liquida and pura mente, celsissima in sede locatum, avidissime contemplor. Hunc
humi procumbens invoco; omnem sanguinem execrandum, and odores ingratos, ac
detestandos abhorrens, omnem terrestrem e sacrificio flammam fugiens;
quibusomnibus turpiter pollutus. nefandus, and in explicabilis error MULT AS
GENTES, ET TOT AS FERE NATIONES, AD PROFUNDISSIMA TART ARA PROJECIT. Nam quae,
hujus universitatis Deus, ad humanae providentiae neceslarium usum benignitate
quadam sua in lucem edidit, haec AD CUJUSQUE CUPIDITATEM RAPI nullo modo
patitur; puram solummodo mentem, and animum, omni labe vacantem, ab hominibus
flagitat, quibus ille virtutis, and pietatis actiones ponderat. Bonitatis enim,
and MANSUETUDINIS officiis placatur, complectens Mites, TURBULENTOS aversans;
amans FIDEM coercens infidelitatem, OMNEMQUE CUM SUPERBIA JUNCTUM DOMIN ATUM
PERRUMPENS; arrogantium vim reprimens: QUOS FASTUS EXTULIT DE SOLIO DETURBANS,
humiles and injuriarum perferentes, justis premiis afficiens Eodem modo
JUSTUMETIAM IMPERIUM MAGNI FACIENS, SUIS SUBSIDIIS and OPIBUS COMMUNIT,
regiamque prudentiam, pacis tranquillitate conservat. Minime sane errare mihi
videor, frater mi, si hunc solum Deum profiteor OMNIUM DUCEM, and parentem;
quem multi hic cum Imperium tenerent, insanis erroribus agitati, respuere and
aspernari conati sunt. Sed HORUM TAM ACERBUS EXITUS FUIT, UT OMNIUM MORTALIUM
JUDICIO, ILLORUM CALAMITATES, EXEMPLI LOCO PROPONERENTUR SIMILIA SCELERA PERSE
QUENTIBUS. In hoc numero ILLUM UNUM fuisse arbitror, qui DIVINA IRA, TANQUAM
ALIQUO FULMINE ex hoc loco dejectus, in VESTRAS ORAS DELATUS EST, Valeriani
apud persas Captivitatem intelligit.
patefacto de sua famosa turpitudine, triumpho nostro. Sed illud been cecidit,
quod nostris potissimum temporibus, in ejusmodi SACRILEGOS, tale supplicii
exemplum editum sit. Nam and mihi contigit nonnullorum exitus animadvertere,
QUI PAULO ANTE, POPULUM DEO CONSECRATUM, NEFANDIS EDICTIS PERTURBAVERANT.
Quapropter immortales Deo gratias ago, quod singulari providentia, universum
hominum genus, qui DIVINAM LEGEM COLUNT, AC VENERANTUR, restituta pace,
incredibili laetitia, and voluptate afficitur. Ex quo facile mihi persuadeo,
optimo, tutissimoque statu, omnia collocata esse; cum per eorum castam, and
acceptam colendi Dei rationem, and ipsorum inter se, de divina natura
consensionem, omnes ad se Deus rapere, and colligere dignetur. HUNC PRAECLARUM
HOMINUM COETUM, CRISTIANORUM INQUAM, de quibus omnis est a me suscepta oration,
cum audiam etiam Persidis potissimam partem (quod mihi sane est gratissimum)
EXORNASSE, quanta me putas perfundi voluptate? Tecum igitur praeclarissime
agitur, and cum ill is etiam, quoniam UTRAQUE VESTRUM HAEC FAELICITAS COMMUNIS
EST. Isto enim modo Deum, hujus universitatis Dominum, and parentem, PROPITIUM
ET PLACATUM habebis. Hos igitur, quoniam hac dignitate es, tuae fidei commendo:
Hos cosdem, propter insignem tuam pietatem, tibi in manus trado. Hos, ut DECET
HUMANITATEM TUAM, complectere and ama. Sic enim, and TIBI and nobis, ista tua
fide IMMENSUM BENEFICIVM praestabis.

Annotationes.
EN fidem ponit divinam, non traditiones, nec opera, Religio nis, ejusque
cognitionis fundamentum. Heb. 11.6.
Illa (innuit) sacras Scripturas, lucem veritatis statuente, ductu certissimo,
haud Enthysiasmorum somniis diriguntur fideles Isa. 8.20.
. Inde (inquit) recta Deum colendi ratio, caetera cultuum inventa profligans
and abhorrens, ne in profundissima projiciant tartara. Nesciunt Scripturae, vel
accumulatam adorationem iis alienam 1 Cor. 10.7. collat. cum Exo. 32, 5.6. ubi
Idololatriae accusantur Judaei, festum, Jehovae proclamantes, dum per media
humanitus inventa illum venerantur.
; vel Christianum, nulla in serie venerationis collocatum Exteri vocantur quasi
diceret Anglice extravagants, 1 Cor. 5.12 Ephesians. 2.12
, quo minus Christo, per omnia cultus media constituta auscultaret. Non patitur
divina voluntas vel modum religionis, vel materiam, AD CVJVSQVE CVPIDITATEM
RAPI Matthew. 20.3. and Luke 11.42. Vbi minuta legis (dum instituta) non
praetereunda; quanto minus Evangelii; ut 1 Cor. 11. de Revelato capite, and
crinibus.
; nec religiosum a tantillo cultus instituti ociari. Tria statuit Constantinus,
quasisalutis hominum columnas. Fidem nimirum, purae menti inherentem,
justitiam, and mansuetudinem, actionum omnium moderatrices, praesertim erga
Christianos. Has approbat speciminibus quibusdam, experientiae notis. Deum
scilicet coercere INFIDELITATEM, omnemque cum SVPERBIA JVNCTVM DOMINATVM
perrumpere. Quos FASTVS EXTVLIT de solio deturbat. JVSTVM AVTEM IMPERIVM
magnifaciens, suis subsidiis and opibus communuit. Hunc Deum omnium Ducem, and
parentem, qui hic, cum imperium tenerent, insanis erroribus agitati, respuere
and aspernari conati sunt, tam acerbo perierunt exitu, ut omnium mortalium
judicio, illorum calamitates exempli loco proponerentur, similia scelera
persequentibus. In quorum numero, illum unum fuisse arbitratur (nempe
Valerianum) qui divina ira, tanquam aliquo fulmine, ex Romano Imperio dejectus,
in Persidis oras delatus est. Quod been cecidit, in ejusmodi SACRILEGOS tale
supplicii exemplum. Nam and sibi (ait) contigisse nonnullorum exitus
animadvertere, qui paulo ante, POPVLVM DEO CONSECRATVM, nefandis edictis
perturbaverant. Gratias vero agit Deo immortales, quod singulari providentia
universum hominum genus QVI DIVINAM LEGEM COLVNT AC VENERANTVR reslicuta pace,
and laetitia assicitur. Imo, inquit, cum summa cum voluptate audivisse,
PRAECLARVM ILLUM HOMINUM COETVM (CHRISTIANORVM intelligere se ait) potissimam
partem Persidis EXORNASSE; ex quo VTRIQVE ILLORVM scilicet tam Regi, quam
Christianis COMMVNEM CONTIGISSE FAELICITATEM pronunciat. Sic Constantinus. Quae
omnia, spectatu dignissima, Vos Mundi Magnates, auscultate, nisi faelices estis
illi infelicissimi, quibus, abundanti mundanorum affluentia, vel ocium non est,
vel non animus, divinam perscrutandi veritatem; Aures vestrae seu a
Delatoribus, sive Adulatoribus, vel aliquibus, nescio, quo nomine, Heterodoxis
obthurantur, ne alios audiant narraturos. Sed tandem invicta veritas (pro
dolor) vestros percellet animos, caeterosque, qui aspernantes Constantinianam
Christianorum definitionem [Divinam colere legem, venerarique] illorum
meditantur, minitantque ruinam. Sic fuit ab initio, test Scriptura, Mat.
23.34, 35
Constantino, innumerorumque experientia, and nostra An Deus Sacrilegium
patitur inultum iri? Populum Dei, Populum Deo CONSECRATVM nuncupat, eosque
SACRILEGOS, qui populum illum nefandis edictis perturbaverint. Qua norma,
parique ratione, haud Christianis tantum, verum etiam Judaeis indulgendum est.
Qui ut veterem venerantur legem, Ita in suis primitiis and radice Deo
consecrantur Romans 11.16.
. Quorum massa, ramique, cum Orthodoxum amplectentur Christianismum, ut etiam
Christiani, PRAECLARVS HOMINVM COETVS censendi sunt; Quique potissimum cujusque
regnipartem quam occupant EXORNANT, Communicata utrique FOELICITATE COMMVNI.

Vos itaque, terrarum Dynastae, exoremini, uti perorat Imperator; ut IS TO
MODO, humanissime nimirum excipiendo Christianos, DEVM, hujus universitatis
Dominum and parentem, PROPITIVM, ET PLACATVM HABEATIS. Hos, inquit, ut DECET
HVMANITATEM VESTRAM, complectendo, amandoque, tum vobis, quam NOBIS, ista
vestra fide, IMMENSVM PRAESTABITIS BENEFICIVM.

Been vortat Deus, AMEN, Precatur, NATHANAEL HOMESIVS.

AN Epistle EXPLICATORY and APOLOGETICAL to the READER, touching the
Subject Matter of this BOOK.
THE Frontispiece of the Title, and the Printers specimina, (formerly given
into the hands of our friends) having sufficiently held forth the form of this
Treatise, we deemed it necessary to add one word touching the matter; which,
should seem by the variety of palats to be of a various and strange relish.
Most dis-relishing the least that is said of it as too much; many resenting
all, as too little: The later duly weighing, this to be the great interest of
Saints, and to succeed the grand Catastrophe of all the present turns, and
overturnings of times, and things (pulling down the rotten, that the rubbish
removed, New Jerusalem may be built) The former, as stricken with a pannick
fear, dreading some monster of Heresy abortively to be borne into the world,
or a voluptuous Cerinthianisme to be raised from the dead, to the endangering
of the Articles of our Creed, or Faith. But whosoever will be so wise as to
read the first and fourth Book, before he censure, shall find (beside the
whole current of Scripture in the other) the stream of all sorts of all the
best approved Antiquity of the most pious Fathers ( Greek and Latin) the
choysest ancient Jewish Rabbis, with the picked flowers of their Targums, and
Talmuds, and Orthodox Councils, and Catechismes, etc. to have held with us. And
if he shall peruse the fifth Book, he shall be convinced (I trust) that when
the most learned Adversaries bad objected what they could, and particularly
that of infringement and prejudice to the Articles of Faith, they could not in
the least impeach our Tenet of any such error, or incongruity. And into a like
nothing, I doubt not, will that dream of voluptuous Cerinthianisme vanish,
upon the Readers perusal of the third Section of the third Chapter of the third
Book, Page 372.

And for further satisfaction of the Readers, and mine own spirit herein, I
can comfortably add one grand consideration, viz. Experience. For* the maine
substance of this Treatise was for near one whole year tasted, and tried upon
the palats of very many of the most godly and pious, who were so far from
doubting, and so fully satisfied in their spirits, that their importunity and
encouragements brought this Work into the World, when I had long laid aside
the thoughts of ever traveling with it any more.

The reasons why I began as well in Latin as English, throughout the first
Book, and there rested, were two; First, The many Latin Quotations
necessitatedly attending a work of this nature. But chiefly (if I may speak
freely) the grand concernment of it to all Foreign Nations, (as well as to
us) that hope for future bliss, especially to the now distressed. Jews; To
whom, therefore I would willingly have so communicated it, for their readiest
perusal: But some of my worthy Friends strongly dissuading, mine own ease
easily submitted.

If yet all are not, will not be satisfied, I cannot help it; nor all the
Writers in the World, with whom all men were never satisfied. But this I have
strongly to comfort my self herein, That the Call of the Jews being a Mystery
(Romans 11.25.) and the Resurrection of the Saints, and their change a mystery (1
Cor. 15.51. etc.) both Master-limbs of the body of this Discourse, the fault of
the Readers non-satisfaction may as well (at least) be charged on his dimnesse,
as upon my weakness.

I have no more to add in this mee-displeasing way of Epistolizing, but to
pray and wish to the Well-willers, increase of Divine light: To the
Ill-willers, a better spirit: To the Newter-negligent, diligence to understand:
And to the Learned, searching, and declaring: To all which, AMEN

Is the close of Your Servant in the Lord, NATH. HOMES.

A Synopsis of the main integral parts of the whole Treatise.
BOOK I.
1 Chap. THE General Position of the Saints reigning with Christ a 1000 years,
propounded. 1 Section, That Position expounded.
2 Chap. That Position is not guilty of singularity, or novelty. Sect. 1 The
Hebrew Antiquities, for it. Sect. 2 The ancientest Greek Fathers, for it. Sect.
3 The ancientest Latin Fathers, for it. Sect. 4 Modern Writers of several
Nations for it.
3 Chap. Some preparations in a general way for the demonstration of the said
Position. Sect. 1 Of the Saints living that thousand years. Sect. 2 Of their
reigning that 1000 years. Sect. 3 Or their reigning with Christ. Sect. 4 Of the
thousand years.

BOOK II.
1 Chap. The general Position taken asunder into two parts. 1 How Christ shall
be with his Saints, 2 How the Saints shall reign under him.
2 Chap. Ten several Scriptures out of the New Testament (in relation to the
first part) to prove the visible appearance of Christ, personally, to the
Church on earth, at the time of her Restoration, alleged and explained.
Sect. 1. Joh. 19.37. They shall look on him whom they have pierced; collated
with that in Zach. 12, 10. etc. whence it is quoted. Sect. 2. Rev. 1.7. Behold
he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, etc. Sect. 3. Matthew.
24.30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, etc. Sect.
4. The 2 Thessalonians. 2.1. etc. Now I beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. Sect. 5. Mat. 26.29. I will not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the vine, until that day, when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom. Sect. 6. The 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord
Jesus, etc. Sect. 7. Act. 3.19, 20, 21. Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that, etc. Sect. 8. Mat. 23.38. Your house is left unto you desolate, etc.
Sect. 9. Mat. 24. When shall these things be, etc. Sect. 10. Luke 19.11. to 28.
He added, and spoke a Parable, etc.
3 Chap. Five Scriptures out of the Old Testament, to prove the visible
appearance of Christ to the Church on earth, at the time of her restoration.
Sect. 1. Dan. 7.11. etc. to the end of the Chapter, I beheld then, because,
etc. Sect. 2. Jer. 25.5. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will
raise unto etc. Sect. 3. Zach. 2.10, 11, 12. collated with Zach. 14.4, 5, 6,
etc. Sing, and rejoice, O daughter of Jerusalem, for lo I come, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee, etc. Sect. 4. Mich. 4. v. 1. to 8. In the last
days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall
be established in the top of the mountains, and many Nations shall come, etc.
Sect. 5. Zephan. 3.14. etc. Sing, O daughter of Zion, the Lord has cast out
etc.
4 Chap. A brief Discourse upon Christ's visible appearance to the Elect on
earth.
BOOK III.
1 Chap. The partition of the ensuing discourse, showing that two things are to
be done (in relation to the second branch of the Position before, How the saints
shall reign under Christ) viz. 1 To prove in general, That there is such a
Kingdom yet to be on earth as aforesaid, in the general Position.

2 What this Kingdom shall be in the particulars.

The first is managed by four means, viz. 1 By Texts of Scripture, 2 By
Arguments, 3 By The common consent of all sorts of men, as if a law of nature.
4 By Solution of objections.


2 Chap. Containing many Scriptures, proving that there shall be yet on earth,
before the last judgment, such a Reigning of the Saints, such a visible
Kingdom of Christ, and a glorious state of all things, as is before propounded.
Sect. 1. Larg^ly discussing the 20 and 21. Chapters of the Revelation. Sect. 3.
( falsely so printed for Sect. 2. and sutably the rest to the end of the third
Book) the usefulnes of the Old Testament for the point in hand; wherein many
considerable things for proof are produced. Sect. 4. Gods promise to Adam, Genesis
1. 26, 27, 28. paralleld with Psalm. 8. and that with Heb. 2.5. largely opened.
Sect. 5. Gods promise to Abraham, Genesis 12. Genesis 17. Genesis 18. Genesis 22. paralleld
with other promises, to his posterity, Genesis 26. Genesis 48. And those with the
Apostles explications, and applications, Romans 4 Gal. 3. Heb. 11. largely
opened. Sect. 6. Balaams Prophecy, Number. 24. explained. Sect. 7 Deuteronomy. 3.1. to
10. Sect. 8 Deuteronomy. 32.15. etc. Sect. 9 Nehem. 1.8. etc. Sect. 10 The Book of
Psalms in three heads. Sect. 11 Isa. 2.1. etc. Sect. 12 Isa. 9.6. etc. Sect.
13 Isa. 11. totum. Sect. 14 Isa. 14.1. etc. Sect. 15 Isa. 24, 23. Sect. 16 Isa.
25. totum. Sect. 17 Isa. 33.20, 21. Sect. 18 Isa. 34.1. etc. Sect. 19 Isa.
45.14 etc. Sect. 20 Isa. 49. totum Sect. 21 Isa. 54.11. etc. Sect. 22 Isa, 59.
Sect. 23 Isa. 60. tot. Sect. 24 Isa. 63.1. etc. Sect. 25 Isa. 65.17. etc. Sect.
26 Isa. 66.5. etc. Sect. 27 Jer. 16.14.15. collated with chap. 23. v. 3 etc.
Sect. 28 Jer. 30 and 31 chap Sect. 29 Jer. 32.37. etc. Sect. 30 Jer. 50.17 etc.
Sect. 31 Ez. 28.24, 25, 26 Sect. 32 ( corruptly printed 33.) Ez: 34.11. etc.
Sect. 33 Ezekiel 36. totum. Sect. 34 Ezekiel. 37. tot. Sect. 35 Dan. 2.31. etc. Sect.
36 Dan. 7. All the ch Sect. 37 Dan. 11. and 12 chapter Sect. 38 Hos. 1.10, 11.
Sect. 39 Hos. 3.4, 5. Sect. 40 Joel 2.28. etc. Sect. 41 Joel 3.1. etc. Sect. 42
Amos 9.11. etc, col. with Ob. v. 17. etc Sect. 43 Mich. 4. All. Sect. 44 Zeph.
3.9. etc. Sect. 45 Zach. 2.6. etc. Sect. 46 Zach. 6.12. etc. Sect. 47 Zach.
8.20. etc. Sect. 48 Zach. 10 3. etc. Sect. 49 Zach. 12. All. Sect. 50 Zach.
14.3. etc. Sect. 51 Mal. 4. All.
All which places of the O.T. from Sect. 6. to the end of Sect. 51. are
paralleld with several places of the New Testament.

3 Chap. The inconsiderablenesse, and inconsiderateness of some ancient
Authors verbal glancings, against some of the prooss before alleged. Sect. 1. A
general survey of the Authority of men's words, and writings. Sect. 2. Jeroms
jerkings at the precedent proofs discussed. Sect. 3. The words of Gaius,
seconded by Dionysius Alexandrinus, both falsely fathering our opinion upon
Cerinthus, and weakly credited by Eusebius, examined and confuted, and our
opinion of the thousand years is vindicated from voluptuous Chiliasme.
4 Chap. Places produced out of the New Testament to prove the general Thesis
or Position. Sect. 1. Mat. 24.13. Sect. 2 Luke 1.31, 32. Sect. 3 Luke 21.24.
Sect. 4 Luke 22.28. etc. Sect. 5 Act. 1.6. Sect. 6 Romans 11.25. etc.. Sect. 7
The 1 Cor. 15 21 etc. Sect 8 The 2 Cor. 3. 15. etc. Sect 9 Phil. 2.9, 10. etc.
Sect 10 Rev. 2.25. etc. Sect 11 Rev. 3.21. etc. Sect 12 Revel. 18, 19 Chap.
5 Chap. Containing five Arguments in five distinct Sections to provethe future
glorious state on earth.
BOOK IV.
1 Chap. Containing a Preface to the subject of this Book, which is to show the
judgment of all sorts of men, in favor of our main Position, touching the
future glorious state on earth, viz. in 2 Chap. Of Heathens, 3 Chap. Of
Mabumetans, 4 Chap. Of Jewish Rabbis, 5 Chap. Of Christians.
BOOK V.
1 Chap. Dr. Prideaux his Arguments against the future state of this glory on
earth, answered. 2 Chap. Dr. Pareus his Arguments answered. 3 Chap. Mr. Baylies
nine Arguments answered. 4 Chap. Mr. Hayne answered. 5 Chap. An universal
Argument of the generality of men answered. 6 Chap. Containing our replies to
men's objections, or exceptions against our Arguments.
BOOK VI.
The introduction, laying forth the general heads, of what this future
glorious state on earth shall be, viz. 1 Chap. shows the Chaos preceding, 2
Chap. The Creation constituting, 3 Chap. The Dimensions, 4 Chap. The
Qualifications, viz. Sect. 1. Shows it to be a Sin-lesse condition. Sect. 2.
Sorrow-lesse, Sect. 3. Death-lesse. From which three, do issue those
particulars in the Sect. 4. That there shall be no Humane ruling Majesty's,
Coercive Superiorities, Church Censures, Fears, Wants, Desertions, Labor,
Decay, Procreation of children.
Sect. 5. Temptation-lesse, Sect. 6. A Restoration of all the creatures. Sect.
7 A Time-lesse state. Sect. 8 A perfection of all qualities. Sect. 9 A
confluence of all comforts. Sect. 10 The face and character of Eternity.
5 Chap. The privileges of the said state. Sect. 1. The fulfilling of all
Mysteries and Prophesies. Sect. 2. A superabundant pouring out of the Spirit.
Sect. 3. A wonderful return of prayers. Sect. 4. Those Church-ordinances then
remaining, shall be in a higher Key. Sect. 5. Union of all Saints on earth.
Sect. 6. Honor to all that is holy.

BOOK VII.
1 Chap. The Introduction. 2 Chap. Several Prognostics of the said glorious
state on earth, approaching. Sect. 1. The expiration of some accounts. Sect. 2
The might of the Churches enemies. Sect. 3 The height of their wickedness.
Sect. 4 Wars, and rumors of Wars. Sect. 5 A touch on other Prognostics.
3 Chap. Several Computations, when the said glorious estate on earth shall
begin. Sect. 1 Reusners Sect. 2 Huets, Sect. 3 The Rabbis, Sect. 4 Brightmans
Sect. 5 Alsteds Sect. 6. Medes Sect. 7 Parkers Account. Sect. 8 Clavis
Apocalyp. Account. Sect. 9 The Julian and Jews Account. Sect. 10 Hainlinus
Account.

Some Errata.
Page 23. line 48, put the [,] at God, to the word power, p. 38. l. last save'
four, move [,] from the word opinion, to the next word them, p. 46. 12. l. 3.
r. Commentary, p. 48.. d. l. 8 for being r^are and ib. l. 12. change [.] at
world into [,] p. 52. l. last save three, remove the latter Parenthesis to next
after [9] p. 63. l 10. for Sciences, r. Scions, p. ib. l. 13. from the end of
the p. put out the Paren: at But, and insert it in the third l. following at
believers, p: 66: r. fifth, p: 67. r. s^xth, p: 71: insert) in l: 24. at
Alcoran, ib. p. in l: 36. insert at meaning these words, as some compute, and
in the next l. save one, insert at least, p: 73: insert) at afterward in the
last l: p: 79, l: 30: add to the word John, there, p: 83: l: 8: [.] at clouds,
p: 86:: 1. l: 1. put out) p. 89: l: 10: from the bottom, insert at have, the
word fully, p: 92: in the Marg: for lo, r: illo, and for illit, r. illis, p:
100: marg: l: 10: put at juxta [,] and at simularetur, and at Balaami, and put
out that at is^e, p: 117: l: 16. for counter destruction, r. counter
distinction, p: 119: l: last save one, for sazed, r: saved, p. 124. Sect: 3. r.
Sect: 2, and so accordingly in all the rest of the Sections to the end of the
third Pook, only in p. 232, and 233. Sect: 3. is twice printed, so that the
first is to be read 32 (according to that order the first error, p. 124 put
them in) p. 126. l: 8: put out) p: 133: marg: l: last save one, for Ends. r:
ANDS, p. 145. l 10: r: governors, p: 158: for Act. 12: r: by Ar^ta Eusebius: l:
1: c: 12. p: 179, 15: l: 20: r: have, p: 181: marg. l: 20: for ye, r: yea, p:
201: marg: l: 4: r: (...) That is, p: 220: marg: l: 12: r. (...), p: 232 r:
Sect. 32, p: 342 last marg: (...) ^te r: in the parenthesis says, p: 471: in
the title, for ch: 1, r. ch: 2. And p: 4^3: for ch: 1: r: ch: 3: And p: 475 for
c: 2: r: c: 3: and so 477, 479, 481, 483, 485, 487, 489, There are some other
Errata, which time would not permit to conect. As for the Lat^ne of the first
Book, there was no leas^^e at all to look over any part of it.

In obedience to an Order dated October 6. I have (as my present weakness will
give me leave) perused that which has been brought unto me, written by Dr.
Homes in several Books, concerning the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, and do
returns this as my sense of it.
1 THe Subject (which is the Reign of our Savior, with his Saints on the
earth) is of a transcendent glory in it self, of universal consequence to all
persons and states; of very great seasonablenesse for the present Times. Like a
pe^ce of rich coin, it has been long buried in the earth, but of late days
dug up again; it begins to grow bright with handling, and to pass current
with great numbers of Saints, and learned men of great Authority. As the same
S^at at several seasons is the Evening-star, setting immediately after the
Sun, and the Morning Star shining immediately before it; So was this Truth
the Evening-star to the first coming of Christ, and giving of the Spirit,
setting together with the glory of that Day, in a night of Antichristianisme:
Now it appears again in our Times, as a Morning Star, to that blessed Day of
the second effusion of the Spirit, and the second appearance of our Savior in
the glory of the Father. 2 The manner of handling this Subject in this Book,
appears to be with piety, and modesty, learning, and judgment, industry, and
variety; variety of divine matter, excellent reading, choice Scriptures, and
openings of Scriptures; out of all which arises much present light, many hints
to more light, quickening occasions to further searches, and discoveries; So
that this Book is in one, a well grown Orchard, and a Nursery of Truths. 3 The
opinions which the Doctor holds forth in this Book, cannot be expected to have
a concurrence of all gracious, and judicious Spirits, or a cleernesse in all
particulars, the subject being a Prophetic Truth, approaching indeed, but
still at some distance; yet they all move upon the threefold Hinge of three
principal points, which seem to lie fair and uppermost in the letter of diverse
Scriptures, and have been stamped with the Authority of men eminent in
holiness and learning. These three points are such as cut off all pretense to
the flesh, to sensuality, carnality, contention, from the Reign of Christ,
such as instruct the Saints to a peaceable, patient, and joyful waiting for
the coming of Christ; That when he appears, they may appear with him in glory;
such as being rightly understood, confirm the letter, and highten the
spirituality of the Scripture, giving a distinct and joint accomplishment to
letter and Spirit, each in other; the Letter in this state, having its fullness
in the Spirit, and the fullness of the Spirit taking in the letter. Those three
principal points are these: I The Testimony, and entrance to Christ's Kingdom
shall be the indubitable evidence of our Lords appearance in his own person
(whether this appearance shall be miraculous, the Lord descending to veil, for
a season, his glorified body which being ten thousand times brighter then the
Sun, cannot be seen by mortal eyes, under a meaner form, that it may be
fitted to our natural senses; or whether this appearance shall be mysterious,
the Lord in the same instant of his appearance transfiguring the dead, and
living Saints into a conformity to his glorified body, that in the same
twinkling of an eye, they may see their King, and he may see them in beauty,
eye to eye, their glorified eye, to his glorified eye; or whether both these,
according to those several Scriptures, Mat. 24.30. Act. 1.11. 1 Cor. 15.51. Ph.
3.20, 21.) for these several ends, of conviction to the world, conversion to
the Jews, glorification to the Saints, renovation to the creature. The 2.
principal point in this Book is, That the state of the Saints Kingdom shall be
the resurrection from the dead, and a change in the living Saints, equivalent
to the resurrection of the bodies of those that sleep in the dust. Thus each
particular Saint, and the whole Church, being predestined to be conformed to
the likeness of the image of Christ, shall in this state answer that state of
Christ in his own particular person, between his resurrection and ascension:
which seems to have been his Paradisical state; his soul entering into Paradise
at his death, his body at his resurrection reassumed into the same state with
the soul. The last head is, That there shall be a New Earth, to be the^seat of
this New Kingdom. If the Earth be made New with the Newness of the Spirit; if
that also be spiritulized, then will it be fit for glorified Inhabitants. The
streets of the New Jerusalem are said to be as gold, and glass. Behold the
nature of the New Earth, and the description of its spirituality. It shall be
as pure gold for its solid simple substance, for its shining glory; It shall be
as pure glass, for its transparency, cleernesse, and through-lightsomnesse.

October. 19. 1653. PETER STERRY.

In pursuance of an Order, bearing date the 6. instant, for my perusal of this
Treatise, penned by Dr. Homes, and to report my opinion concerning the same, I
certify as follows;
THat all the Saints shall reign with Christ a Thousand years on earth, in a
wonderful, both visible and spiritual glorious manner, before the time of the
ultimate, and general Resurrection, is a Position, which (though not a few have
besit ated about, and some opposed, yet) have gained ground in the hearts and
judgments of very many, both grave and godly men, who have left us diverse
Essays, and Discourses upon this Subject. And (having perused the learned and
laborious travels of this Author) I conceive that the Church of God has not
hitherto seen this great point so clearly stated, so largely discussed, so
strongly confirmed not only by the testimony of Ancient, and Modern Writers of
all sorts, but by the holy Scriptures throughout, as it is presented in this
Book. Wherein also diverse other considerable points are collaterally handled,
all tending to set forth the Catastrophe and result of all the troubles, and
hopes of such as fear God, as the preface to their eternal bliss. And whereas
some have been, and still are, apt to abuse this Doctrine, by making it an
occasion to the flesh, and of beating themselves in the expectation of a
carnal liberty, and worldly glory; I find that this Author has cautiously
fore-laid, and prevented all such abuses, by showing the exceeding
spiritualnesse and holiness of this state: To which, as none but the truly
holy shall attain, so having attained it, they shall walk in the hight of
holiness. And therefore I judge this Book very useful for the Saints, and
worthy of the public view.

October. 13. 1653. Joseph Caryll.

THE DAWNING OF THE DAY STAR, Largely discussed in Five Books.
THE DAWNING OF THE DAY STAR, QUOTATIONUM quaedam SPECIMINA, nec non Epitome
totius primilibri compendiaria, pro extraneis, praesertim Judaeis, Latin
reddita.
I. BOOK Of the General and maine Position.
LIBER I. De generali and summaria Thesi.
CHAP. I.
The Position propounded.
THe most Sacred Scriptures do frequently in many places affirm, that All the
Saints shall reign with Christ a long time, namely a THOUSAND years on EARTH
( SATAN the mean while being bound) which years are not yet begun, but do ere
long; and from thence are at length to be fulfilled, in a wonderful both
VISIBLE and SPIRITUAL glorious manner, at the RESTITUTION of ALL THINGS, and
their NEW CREATION, before the time of ultimate and general Resurrection.

SAnctos omnes diutine cum CHRISTO regnaturos, in TERRA scilicet MILL annos (
SATANA tunc temporis ligato) nondum incaeptos, brevi incaepturos, indeque
implendos, tam visibili quam spirituali miranda (...) and (...) gloria ante
resurrectionis ultimae generalis Epocham, a Sacrosanctissimis Scripturis passim
asseritur.

SECTION I. The Position expounded,
Saints, I mean all the Elect, from time to time extant before that time,
effectually called, whose characters (that we may know them) in relation to our
Position, are in the Revelation limbed to the life, where both it and they are
deciphered in one and the same table or frame, viz. Rev. 20.4. And I saw
Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them; and I saw
the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
Word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived,
and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

reign with Christ: The first is Beheading, synechdochically signifying all
persecution, either more particularly (as it is here expressed) for the
Witness of Jesus, that is, for asserting the Godhead as well as the Manhood
of Christ, for which many Martyrs suffered in the Arian persecution, soon after
Constantines time; or more generally, for the Word of God, viz. the fundamental
doctrines thereof, for which they suffered before the Arian persecution, in the
heathen-Roman tenfold persecution, and after, in the Antichristian-Roman
persecution, and of late times in several Countries, in the Arminian and
Socinian persecution: or for both.

not worshipping the Beast, no nor his Image. Those that shall reign with
Christ, reverence not either apparent gross Idolatry, or specious refined
(under the notion of prudentials) in divine worship. They dis-regard
Antichrist, root and branch, body and tail.

They receive not the mark of the Beast in their hands, or foreheads; that is,
they yield not subjection to Antichrist, secretly, or openly, neither profess
him, nor contest for him, or for any thing against the truth. All these three
Characters are here given to take in all Saints: For happily some Saints have
somewhat subjected outwardly to Antichrist, but did not worship. Some perhaps
have not subjected, but had not the opportunity or magnanimity to suffer.
Others may be, have subjected or worshipped, and after, repenting, have
suffered.

Revelation, instead of this Negative, Have not the mark of the Beast, they
are said to have the mark of the Lambs Father in their forehead, Rev. 14.1.
etc. They profess the truth of God, with faith in Christ Jesus. They are truly
Saints, and fear the name of God, which is the Cognizance of those that shall
reign with Christ, Rev. 11.15, 16, 17, 18.

Saints shall reign with Christ, as we have said (the Kingdoms of the earth
then being actually and absolutely become the Kingdoms of Christ) the said
Saints on earth visibly possessing the power and dominion over the earth, for a
thousand years, literally and properly taken, and Christ most gloriously
appearing at least at the beginning and ending of that thousand years: though
we cannot yet so demonstratively and infallibly hold forth, that he shall
continuedly be all that time personally present upon the earth. The Devil, the
mean while, all that time, under what names or notions soever, either as a
cunning Serpent, and secret Satanical Adversary, are as an open violent rampant
Dragon, and reviling Devil, shall be wholly, and absolutely confined, and
restrained, in effects, acts, and person, from the Precincts of the Church.

SECTIO I. Thesis exposita.
PEr Sanctos, nimirum Electos intelligo omnes, tum vocatos, tum vocandos,
quorum characteres sub REGNANTIUM notione in Apocaly psi, ad vivum subinde
delineantur. Capite nimirum 20. v. 4. ad hunc modum. Vidi seeds, and sederunt
super eas, and judicium datum est iis; and animas eorum, qui SECURI PERCUSSI
SUNT PROPTER TESTI MONIUM JESU, ET PROPTER SERMONEM DEI, quique NON ADORARUNT
BESTIAM, neque IMAGINEM EJUS, NEC ACCEPERUNT CHARACTEREM IN FRON TIBUS suis,
aut in MANIBUS SUIS; Viventque and regnabunt cum Christo MILL annis. Capite
vero 11. v. 15, 16, 17, 18. ad hunc modum, Septimus igitur Angelus clanxit and
factae sunt voces magnae in Caelo, dicentes, facta sunt regna mundi, regna
Domini nostri, and Christi ejus, qui regnabit in secula seculorum. Tum viginti
quatuor illi senes, qui in conspectu Dei sedent in sedibus suis, prociderunt in
facies suas, and adorarunt Deum, dicentes, Gratias agimus tibi Domine, Deus
Omnipot^ns, Qui es, and Qui eras, and Qui ven turus es; quod adeptus sis
potentiam tuam magnam, and regnum inieris, and iratae sunt gentes, and advenit
ira tua, and praestitutum tempus mortuorum, ut judicentur, and des mercedem,
SERVIS TUIS, PROPHETIS, and SANCTIS, and TIMENTIBUS nomen tuum, PARVIS and
MAGNIS.

denique Capite 14. v. 1. etc. ita depinguntur. Tunc aspexi and ecce, aderat
Angelus stans super montem Sion and cum eo Centum quadraginta quatuor millia,
habentia NOMEN PATRIS ejus scriptum in frontibus suis. EMPTI sunt e terra. Non
sunt INQUINATI mulieribus, SEQUUNTUR AGNUM, etc. Venit hora judicii sui etc.
Cecidit Babylon etc. Beati ab hocce tempore mortui ii, qui domini causa mortui
sunt, etc. Aderat nubes candida, and nubi insidebat quidam similis homini and
Demessa est terra.

Omnes inquam hosce, splendide regnaturos, cum Jesu Christo (quibuslibet
terrarum Dynastiis, actu absolute que in ILLIUS, aliquantisper apparentis
potestatem succedentibus) visibiliter possidentes (ut Dan. 7.27.) Regna,
Dominatus, eorundemque sub toto Caelo amplitudinem mill annis, ad literam
proprie acceptis, Diabolo interea tempor is ab Ecclesiae finibus omnimode
ablegato.

CHAP. II. This opinion is not guilty of Novelty, or singularity.
CAP. II.
Novelty, and singularity, we shall produce approved Antiquity (both before and
since Christ) with a multitude of later Worthies, almost in every age hitherto
congratulating with this truth.



HAnc Thesin (ne statim in ipso limine, tanquam privata cujusdam opiniola, tam
novitatis, quam singularitatis rea, condemnetur) prius quam me demonstrationi
accinxero, numeroso Constipatam satellitio eruditae antiquitatis, tam ante quam
post Christum editae, in medium proferam.

1. SECTION Of Hebrew Antiquities.
Hebrew Antiquities, to be set (for seniorities sake in part) in the Front, we
have diverse: whereof the first is the Targum or Chalde Paraphrase: which took
its beginning from the Jews Captivity in Babylon: where their native Hebrew
tongue grew out of use, so that the generality of them far better understood
the Chalde then the Hebrew. The Targum has many pertinences to the point in
hand, especially if we compare several Copies of it. For there is a Manuscript
Targum, which upon Ester Chapter 1. reckoning up the several Monarchies that have,
and shall be from the beginning of the world unto the end thereof, makes the
computation thus: The first Monarchy was of God. Second under Nimrod. Third,
under Pharaoh. Fourth, under Solomon. Fifth, under Nebuchadnezzar. Sixth, under
the Medes and Persians. Seventh, under Alexander the Great. Eighth, under
Julius Caesar. The ninth, the Kingdom of the Messia, or Christ. Where observe
how the Jews place the Kingdom of Christ in order after the Roman Monarchy,
and to be on earth, as the former were. But least this Copy, being a
Manuscript, and so hidden from the eyes of most, should carry the less
authority with it; let us consult the Targum, that looks all the learned in
the face.

Babylonian Targum, or ordinary Chalde Paraphrase faith upon, Genesis 49.10. That
CHRIST shall come, whose is the KINGDOM and him shall the PEOPLES obey.
Observe the plural PEOPLES, that is the Nations, indefinitly.

Jerusalem Targum expresses, more literally, and universally, The KING CHRIST
shall come, whose is the KINGDOM, and ALL (mark the universality) KINGS
(mark the persons) shall be subject unto him, viz. so (as the same Jerusalem
Targum expounds on the 11. verse of that 49. of Gen.) that those Kings and
Princes, that will not be subject unto him, he shall kill, making the Universe
red with the blood of their slain, and the hills white with the fat of their
mighty men, etc. But these things were not fulfilled at Christ's being on the
earth in the flesh. It was above three hundred years after, ere one King, or
Nation was subject unto Christ, viz. in the time of Constantine the Great,
except some sprinklings of Converts here and there, called Churches; the
Nations and Kings of the earth, either taking no cognizance of his interest, or
else persecuted it, even as to this day they do, even ten parts of the world,
for one that ownes him. Neither has Christ yet taken that material and
sensible vengeance on them, by killing the disobedient, in order to a bringing
in of the rest into a visible subjection to him.

Jonathan in his Chalde Paraphrase of Hos. 14.8. has these words, They
(speaking of the Jews) shall be gathered together from out of the midst of
their CAPTIVITY, they shall DWELL under the shadow of their CHRIST, and the
DEAD shall LIVE, and good shall grow in the EARTH, and there shall be a
memorial of their goodness FRUCTIFYING, and never failing; as the remembrance
of the sound of the Trumpets over the old wine, which was wont to be offered in
the Sanctuary; which things were never yet fulfilled on earth. We forbear to
quote more out of their TARGUM, or Chalde Paraphrase now, because we shall
afterward often cast an eye upon it in our discuss of several Scriptures, that
tend to the PROOF of the point in hand.

CAPITULA of RABBI ELIEZAR the GREAT, because near of the same Antiquity with
the former; his words are these: As I live, says Jehovah, I will raise YOU
(speaking of the Jews) up in the TIME to come in the RESURRECTION of the dead;
and I will GATHER you will ALL ISRAEL.

any MESSIA to be come in the flesh, but refused The MESSIA, Joh. 1.11.
according as it was fore-prophesied, Esa. 53.3. He is despised, and rejected of
men. And the remnant of believing Jews, never since, as yet saw that
particular RESURRECTION of the dead, or that their gathering together out of
the midst of their CAPTIVITY, or that general GOOD in the EARTH. And therefore
according to the Scriptures (of which by and by) these things are yet to come,
before the last and general Resurrection.

Hebrew Antiquities, SINCE the Incarnation of Christ, namely their Two TALMUDS
(their SEDAR OLAM is of the same age near upon, with the Babylonish) something
of which TALMUDS was extant near the Apostles time, if not ancienter, and of
other Rabbis, we shall give you an account in diverse particulars. In Gemara
Sanhedrin, R. Ketina has said in the last of the Thousands of years of the
worlds continuance, the world shall be destroyed, of which it is said (Esa.
2.11.17.) THE LORD ONLY SHALL BE EXALTED IN THAT DAY. And TRADITION agrees
with R. Ketina, even as every seventh year of seven years is a years of
release; so of the seven thousand years of the world, the seventh thousand
years, shall be the thousand of Release, as it is said, AND THE LORD ALONE
SHALL BE EXALTED IN THAT DAY. Likewise That Psalm (namely the 92.) is said to
be a PSALM OR SONG FOR THE SABBATH DAY; THAT IS, THE DAY THAT IS NOTHING ELSE
BUT REST. As also it is said ( viz. Psalm. 90.) A THOUSAND YEARS IN THY SIGHT
ARE BUT AS YESTERDAY. By which it is plain to acute observers, that the
ancient Rabbinicall Jews did clearly understand the Prophecy of Isaiah in
Chap. 2. of the EXALTATION of the LORD (twice there repeated) as meant of the
GREAT DAY, (which some Rabbis call the Day of JUDGMENT, others the Day of
MESSIA, others the Day of the RENOVATION of the WORLD) and of the REIGNING of
CHRIST, which is elegantly and emphatically there limbed in its colors to the
life, as it will more shine forth, when we come to an accurate discuss of that
Chapter.

In Mid^asch Tehillim upon the 90. Psalm. v. 15. We thus read, MAKE US GLAD
ACCORDING TO THE DAYS WHEREIN THOU HAVE AFFLICTED US, That is by the
Babylonians, the Grecians, and the Romans, AND THAT IN THE DAYS OF THE
MESSIAH. And how many are the days of the MESSIAH? R. JEHOSUAS said, that they
are Two THOUSAND years; and it is said, ACCORDING TO THE DAYS WHEREIN THOU
HAVE HUMBLED US: that is according to two days; for one day of the holy and
blessed God are a thousand years, according to that, BECAUSE A THOUSAND YEARS
IN THY SIGHT ARE BUT AS YESTERDAY. The Rabbis also have said, That according
to the TIME to come, the DAY of the MESSIAH shall be one. For God which is
holy and blessed in the FUTURE ( that is AGE) shall make one day to himself,
of which we read, Zech. 14. And there shall be ONE DAY, which shall be
known to the Lord, not day, nor night, and it shall be at the EVENING-TIME
Light. This Day is the AGE or WORLD TO COME, and the QUICKENING OF THE DEAD.

Berachoth, we find this. Benzuma says, It shall come to pass, that Israel
shall not remember their departure out of the Land of Egypt, IN THE WORLD TO
COME, and IN THE DAYS OF THE MESSIAH: (mark diligently how by World to come,
they understand a time on earth, as Paul has it twice, viz Heb 1.6. Heb. 2.5.
THE INHABITED WORLD TO COME. So the Greek; so the sense. For no man could
imagine that heaven above should be put in subjection to the Angels, so as to
need the Apostles Apology there to prevent such an imagination.) And how (say
the Rabbis in that Berachoth) does this appear? By that which is written (in
J^rem. 23.) BEHOLD THE DAYS COME, THAT THEY SHALL SAY NO MORE, THE LORD LIVES
WHICH BROVGHT THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL UP OVT OF THE LAND OF EGYPT, and Which
wise men interpret thus; not as if the name of Egypt should be blotted out, but
because the WONDERS which shall be effected in the DAYS OF THE KINGDOM OF
MESSIA, shall principally be remembered, and their departure out of Egypt less.

seventh, others nearer, in the sixth, but others about the fifth.

The TRADITION of the house of Elijah is, Those Just ones, whom God shall raise
up, shall not return unto dust. But if you inquire what shall be to the Just in
that thousand years, in which the holy and blessed God shall RENEW his World,
of which it is said, AND THE LORD ALONE SHALL BE EXALTED IN THAT DAY: We must
know that the Lord will give them, as it were, the wings of Eagles, that they
may stye upon the faces of waters, Jesch. 40.31. THEY THAT HOPINGLY WAIT UPON
THE LORD SHALL HAVE THEIR STRENGTH renewed, THEY SHALL BE CARRIED UPON WINGS,
AS EAGLES.

Dan. 7.18. The Saints of the most High God, shall receive a Kingdom) Because
the children of Israel have rebelled against the Lord, their Kingdom shall be
taken from them, and shall be given to the four Monarchies, which shall
possess the Kingdom in this world, and shall lead Israel captive, and subdue
them to themselves, Even TILL THE WORLD TO COME, until MESSIAH shall REIGN.

highest heavens after the ultimate day of judgment; for then he lays down
all, and delivers up the Kingdom to God the Father, etc. 1 Cor. 15.24.28. Nor
have these Rabbinicall predictions been ever fulfilled on earth, as experience
can witness. And therefore necessarily they must be in effect, of the same
judgment as is contained in our Position, or Thesis, which for that cause,
cannot be adjudged novel, or singular.

1. SECTIO De Hebraeotum Antiquitatibus.
Targumenica. Targum, seu Chaldaeus contextus, celeberrima inter Judaeos
Paraphrasis, hinc desumpsit originem, quo da Captivitate exolevisset lingua
Hebraica, neque eam amplius intelligerent. Extat ab Onkelo in quinque libros
Mosis; a R. Jonathan in Josue, Judicum, quatuor Regum, omniumque Prophetarum,
excepto Daniele; Et a Josepho Caeco in Caeteros veteris Testamenti libros.
Plura complectitur, quae Synagogae Judaicae faveant, passim tamen eam jugulat,
dum luculentissime de Messia testatur. Guide Mich. le Ja in praefatione, seu
instituti operis ratione. Ad Bib. Reg. Lutetiae edita. Multa sunt apud Targum
(Collatis praesertim exemplaribus) ad nostram Thesin pertinentia. Targum seu
Chaldaea Paraphrasis manuscripta in Ester Cap. 1. ad hunc modum and methodum,
cum temporis tum loci computat Monarchias. Prima Dei fuit. Illa purum putum
Hebraismum prositebatur. Nimrodus alteram tenebat Monarchiam. Pharaonis
Monarchia facit tertiam. Huic Salomonis Monarchiasuccessit. Eam Salomonis,
quinta subsecuta est, nempe Nebuchadnezzaris Magni. Huic Babylonici Tyranni
Monarchiae, sexta successit, nempe Persarum and Medorum imperium. Alexandri
Magni imperium facit septimam. Alexandri Magni, suorumque Satraparum imperium,
Julii Caesaris octava tandem excepit Monarchia. Invadit hanc Julii Caesaris
Monarchiam, illud Messiae regnum, quod nonum est imperium. Haec Jacob Colerus
S.T.D. in Eliae Hutteri in Biblia Ebraea, praefatione. Ita in terris hanc, ut
Caeteras, and post Romanam, Messiae locat Monarchiam.

49. v. 10. Donec veniat Messiah, cujus est regnum, and ei obedient populi.
POPULI (dignum observatu) in plurali, (...).

Targum Hier osolimitanum ad literam magis, and latius seu universalius
exprimit. REX CHRISTUS venturus est, cujus est REGNUM, and OMNES Reges se illi
subjicient. Ita ut quoscunque regum, principumve, illi non subjecturos
interfecerit, ad rubo rem fluminum ex sanguine interfectorum, and albedinem
montium ex pinguedine potentum.

Jonathan in Chaldaica sua paraphrasi in Hos. 14.8. haec habet verba, (...)
etc. i.e. Congregabuntur (Israelitae) de medio suae Captivitatis; in umbra
CHRISTI SUI habitabunt, VIVENTQUE MORTUI, and BONUM ACCRESCET in TERRA; Nec non
erit memoriale bonitatis eorum fructificans and indeficiens, juxta ac memoria
Clangoris tubarum super vino veteri, quod libari solet in domo sanctuarii; Quae
res nunquam interris adhus impletae fuerunt. Multo plus Targum habet, quod (ut
inutilis vitetur repetitio) in ventilationem Scripturarum Thesin probantium,
comperendinamus.

Jonathani Concinit R. Eliezer (qui paulo post Templum secundum floruit.) In
Capitulis Magni illius Eliezer Cap. 34. haec comperimus (...) etc. i.e. Vivo
ego dicit dominus, quod suscitabo vos, in tempore futuro, in Resurrectione
mortuorum, et congregabo vos cum universo Israel IN TERRAM ISRAEL.

Jonathan and Eliezer, ad hodiernum usque diem, ut Judaeis universe, UMBRAM,
imo personam CHRISTI sui rejicientibus (Johan. c. 1. v. 11. Jesch. c. 53. v.
3.) minime impleta fuerint; ita pars illa, quorundam credentium, nunquam vel
revixerunt, aut de praesenti eorum Captivitate sesquimillenaria reduces, BONUM
ILLUD IN TERRA vel Caecutierunt.

TALMUDICIS, Judaicis nimirum, and Babylonicis, a Ducentesimo Nonagesimo post
natum CHRISTUM, ad annum saltem 120m. ascendentibus, reliquisque Rabbinorum
post-natis abunde, si placet, excipiatis.

[ De Talmudicarum aevo Consulite Bucholcerum Indic. Chron. ad annum Mundi
4161. Christi 191. Helvicum Theatr. Histor. seu Chron. ad annum, quod mirum est
Christi 500. Joh. Buxtorf in recensione operis Talmudici, ejus libro de
Abbreviaturis Heb. vulgo annexo. M. Lightfoot in Miscellan, Cap. 7. De Christo
confutante saltem Traditionem Talmudicam, Matthew. 5. Christum ipsum Judaeos
inscitiae arguentem, ex sua ipsorum scripta lege; ca scilicet, ut probabile
videtur, Talmudica, in qua veteris Testamenti authentiam agnoverunt. Ea autem
ratione a CHRISTO dictum est Joh. 10.34. Nonne scriptum est in lege VESTRA?]

1. In Gemara Sanhedrin PEREK CHELEK, ita legimus (...) etc. (...) etc. Id est,
Dixit R. Ketina, in UNO (nempe, ut intelligit, ULTIMO) mundi MILLENARIO
vastabitur mundus, de quo dicitur, and EXALTABITUR DOMINUS SOLUS DIE ILLO
Jesch. cap. 2. v. 11.17. (...) etc. i. e. Convenit Traditio R. Ketinae, sicut e
septimis annis septimus quisque est remissionis annus; ita MILLENARIUS HIC,
remissionis erit, MILLENARIUS, quemadmodum dicitur, EXALTABITUR DOMINUS SOLUS
DIE ILLO and PSALMUS (scilicet 92.) dicitur CANTICUM DE DIE SABBATI, Id est, de
die, qui totus est quies and dicitur (Psalmo nempe 90.) MILL ANNI IN OCULIS
TUIS VELUT DIES HESTERNUS. En (lectores perspicacissimi) veteres Judaei,
Prophetiam Jesch cap. 2. de EXALTATIONE DOMINI bis repetitam de DIE MAGNO, an
Judicii (ut R. Schelomo,) an MESSIAE (ut R. D Kimchi) an RENOVATIONIS MUNDI,
(ut R. Asche etc.) an alio nomine appella^ veris, deque CHRISTI tunc temporis
REGNO, articulatim, ornateque ibidem depicto, apertissime intellexerunt.

Huic testimonio secundum ex Midrasch Tehillim exhibetur, Ubi semper Psalm. 90.
v. 15. laetifica nos pro diebus, etc. sic paraphrastice emphasi non mediocri
legitur. LAETIFICA NOS PRO DIEBUS QUIBUS AFFLIXISII NOS, scilicet per
Babyloniam, per Graeciam and per Romanos, idque Laetifica in diebus MESSIAE,
and quot sunt dies Messiae? R. Jehosuas dixit, quod sunt duo millia annorum
sicut dictum est, (...) SECUNDUM DIES QUIBUS NOS HUMILIASTI i. e. secundum duos
dies. DIES ENIM VNA DEI SANCTI ET BENEDICTI SUNT MILL ANNI, juxta illud;
QUONIAM MILL ANNI IN OCULIS TUIS TANQUAM DIES HESTERNA. Dixerunt etiam
Magistri, quod secundum FUTURUM (quod Paulus (...) imo and (...) Heb. 1.6. Heb.
2.5. appellat) DIES MESSIAE erit una. Deus enim sanctus and benedictus in
FUTURO (nimirum seculo) faciet ei diem unam, de qua dictum est, Zechar. cap.
14. ET ERIT DIES VNA, ET IPSA EST NOTA DEO, NON DIES NEQUE NOX, ET ERIT, AD
TEMPUS VESPERI ERIT LUX. Haec dies est SECULUM FUTURUM and VIVIFICATIO
MORTUORUM.

tertium e libro Berachoth lib. 11. c. 1. ( scilicet (...)) quod sic se habet.
Dixit Benzuma; Futurum est, ut Israel non faciat memoriam exitus ex Aegypto in
FUTURO SECULO, ET IN DIEBUS MESSIAE (vide sis conjunctam Rabbini
interpretationem.) Et quid est hujus rei probatio? Quod scriptum est, (Jerem.
23.) ECCE DIES VENIUNT, ET NON DICENT VLTRA VIVIT DOMINUS QUI ASCEND ERE FECIT
FILIOS ISRAEL DE TERRA AEGYPTI, etc. Dixerunt sapientes, Non quod evellendum
esset nomen Aegypti de loco suo, sed quod mirabilia, quae fient in diebus
REGNORUM (scilicet MESSIae erunt (...) i. e. principale, and Aegyptus erit
(...) i. e. accessorium.

quoto mundi MILLENARIO dictum JUDICII, vel MESSIae, vel (ut appellant R.
Asche, R. Abba, R. Chanan) RENOVATIONIS MUNDI TEMPUS fore, non convenit. Quippe
quod non nulli (longius) in septimum, alii (propius) in sextum, Caeteri
(dignissimum observatu) in MILLENNIUM (circiter) quintum incidere promittunt.
De quinto consulatur. Rabb. Asche.

Quarta hujus seriei antiquitas, ELiae Domo egreditur, (...) etc. i. e.
Doctrina Domus Eliae. Justi, quos Deus RESUSCITASIT ( Resurrectione nimirum
prima, quam Magistri passim, nec non Author libri Sapientiae Cap. 3. v. 7, 8.
agnoscunt) non redigentur iterum in pulverem. Si quaeras autem, MILL ANNIS
ISTIS, quibus, Deus sanctus benedictus RENOVATURUS est mundum suum, de quo
dicitur ET DOMINUS SOLUS EXALYABITUR ILLO DIE, quid Justis futurum sit?
Sciendum quod Deus sanctus benedictus dabit, illis alas, quasi aquilarum, ut
volent super facie aquarum; juxta Jesch. 40.31. Expectantibus Dominum
innovabuntur vires, efferentur ala, instar aquilarum.

ultima primae antiquitatum Hebraicarum; quam R. Saadias ex doctiorum (...),
eximi is) suppeditat. Quippe qui in Danielis cap. 7. v. 18. SUSCIPIENT REGNUM
SANCTI DEI ALTISSIMI fic prophetat (...) and. i. e. Eo quod rebellarunt
Israelitae contra dominum, auseretur ab illis ipsorum regnum, Dabiturque
quatuor hisce Monarchiis, quae regnum possidebunt in HOC SECULO, Captivumque
ducent, subjugabuntque sibi Israelem, usque ad FUTURUM SECULUM, donec
REGNAVERIT MESSIAH.

MESSIAH nequaquam regnaturus est in SECULO, vel duratione in Caelorum
altissimo Continuanda ( 1 Ep. ad Corinth. ca. 15. v. 24.28.) Nec dum in terris,
haec Saadiana vel Caeterorum Rabbinicae praedictiones impletae fuerint;
testanti experientid. Quarum authors, eodem fuisse animo cum n^stra thesi,
netesse est. Quae, vel hac de causa, tanquam novitia, aut singularis condenmari
nequit.

SECT. 2. Of Greek Antiquities.
Greek Companions in this our own Position are diverse. That we over-burden
you not in the entrance of this Treatise, with such things, as are not pleasing
to every Reader, we will present to you only three, each according to his age.
The first is JUSTIN MARTYR, who flourished about the year (after Christ) 141.
so near the time of John the Evangelist (this John living till the hundredth
year after Christ) In that 141. year after Christ, this JUSTIN gave in his
Apology for Christian Religion, in writing to ANTONIUS the EMPEROR. To allow
him a sufficiency of judgment and time to be a famous Philosopher (at that
time so famed) and to write that Apology, we had need to allow him to be fifty
years old, as he himself testifies, and so to suppose him living, before John
was dead; and so long, as he was above one and forty at the time of his
Apologizing. This man for his great learning, renowned with the honorable
title of Philosopher, witnessed to be Godly by his pious Apology in those
bloody persecuting times, and sealed to be so in his death, by the after-name
and fame of MARTYR; I say this man, this great Justin Martyr professed
himself, and many other Worthies in his time, to be of the same mind with
our POSITION. His very words are these, I, and all that are every way orthodox
Christians do know both the future RESURRECTION of the body, and the THOUSAND
YEARS in Jerusalem that shall be re-edified, adorned, and enlarged, as the
Prophets EZEKIEL and ESAIAS and OTHERS do declare. For so Esaias, of this thousand
years, Isa. 65.17. For there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, neither shall they come into their minds, but
they shall find joy and rejoicing in those which I create: For behold I make
Jerusalem to triumph and my people to rejoice, etc. to the end of the Chapter.
But of that, [For the days of my people shall be as the days of the tree of
life] he gives this sense, viz. In these words we understand (says he) that
the one thousand years are pointed at. For as it was said to Adam, In that day
thou eatest of the tree, in that same day thou also shall dye; We know he did
not accomplish a thousand years, We know also that saying [That a day with the
Lord is a thousand yeeres] is to our purpose. Moreover a certain man AMONG US,
whose name is JOHN, BEING ONE OF THE twelve APOSTLES OF CHRIST in that
REVELATION which was showed to him, prophesied that those, that believe in OUR
CHRIST, shall accomplish a thousand years, (mark, those that believe in Christ
shall accomplish a thousand years) at Jerusalem, and after that the GENERAL,
and in a word, the everlasting resurrection, and last judgment of all jointly
together. Even that whereof also our Lord spoke, wherein [they shall neither
marry, nor be given in marriage, but shall be equal with the Angels] being
made the sons of the resurrection of God. For the gifts of Prophecy are
extant with us even till this time.

And as he speaks thus home to our Thesis positively, so he speaks as high
against them, that are contrary minded, negatively, denying them to be true
Christians. His words are these; But contrary-wise I have signified unto thee
(TRYPHO) that MANY, WHO ARE NOT ORTHODOX and PIOUS CHRISTIANS DENY THIS.

IRENAEUS, who flourished about the year 178. after Christ. He was the chief
Minister of the Church at LIONS. He says, he was the hearer of POLYCARP,
which POLYCARP was the Disciple of JOHN. And IRENAEUS had that Agnomination or
post-name for his godly peace making in the Churches. He wrote five Books
against the Heresies of his time, which we have. In the second whereof he
testifies, That to his time the gifts of casting out Devils, and miraculous
healing of diseases continued (which shows that he lived near the Apostles
times, which Irenaeus himself intimates in his fifth Book against Heresies
near the end, That JOHN saw his vision of the Revelation almost in his time.)
TERTULLIAN calls him THE MOST CURIOUS TRIER or SEARCHER OUT OF ALL DOCTRINES. Of
this IRENAEUS the GREAT, in Learning and Godliness, Learned ERASMUS affirms
in his Argument or Summary of the fifth Book of Irenaeus, against Heresies,
that HIEROM asserteth him to be of the same mind with the CHILIASTES that are
for the THOUSAND YEARS. The truth is, whosoever shall read that fifth Book of
Irenaeus against Here Is. with a piercing eye shall find, that Hierom has given
a right judgment concerning him. For Irenaeus there mainly disputing for the
Resurrection of the bodies of the Saints, urges the Prophets for that
Resurrection (who all speak mainly of the first Resurrection of the bodies of
the Saints at the full call of the Jews.) And particularly p. 575. Irenaeus
urges that of Ezekiel Chap. 37. v. 1. to v. 15. for it, (as before Justin
Martyr urged Ezekiel for the one thousand years) which place is evidently for
our position, as we shall see after, when we come to the proof thereof by
Scripture. Li. 5. Page 576. Again he urges (as Justin Martyr did) that in
Esa. 65.22. For as the days of the tree (he puts in, OF LIFE) shall be the
days of them; which is as plainly, as if written with Sun beams, a part of
the Prophecy of the Restoration of Israel, and the New Jerusalem, alleged
by Peter, 2 Ep. 3. Cha. and alluded to by John, Rev. 21.1. In another to place
of the same fifth Book, Page 547.
Irenaeus speaks much of the Saints after their first life here, that they
shall inhabit Paradise, where Adam was placed at his first Creation. And
elsewhere speaking of the Saints possessing the Kingdom of heaven, alleges
that place, Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the EARTH;
which is taken out of Psalm. 37.10, 11. yet a little while, and the wicked shall
not be; Yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.
But the meek shall inherit the EARTH, and shall delight themselves in the
ABUNDANCE OF PEACE. And verse 28, 29. The seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
The righteous shall inherit the LAND, and dwell therein for EVER. Lib. 1. p.
559.
One instance more (for it would be tedious to you and me to allege all)
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; as if one should say (says
IRENAEUS) The wild olive tree is not taken into the PARADISE of God.

Greek Antiquities that we shall allege, is out of Epiphanius, who
flourished about the year after Christ 365.) whose words, after mention of
Athanasius and Paulinus, are to this effect. Moreover (says Epiphanius) others
have affirmed that the OLD MAN should say, THAT IN THE FIRST RESURRECTION we
shall accomplish a certain MILLENARY of years, enjoying the same things as now
we do, namely keeping the Law, etc. By which it appears, that if not
Athanasius or Paulinus aforementioned, some there were, in, or before Epiphanius
his time, that held the substance of our Thesis. Yea, it seems to me, that
Epiphanius himself speaks something favorable of them that held this opinion
by his words presently following, viz. And that indeed it is written of this
sort of MILLENARIES in the Apocalypse of John, and that the Book is received
of very many, even of them that are godly, is manifest; with more to the same
effect.

SECT. 2. De Graecorum Antiquitatibus.
GRaecorum, qui nostrae accinunt Thesi, primus est JUSTINUS MARTYR, in Dialogo
cum Tryphone Judaeo Eyw (...) etc. i. e. Ego autem, and si qui sunt per omnia
orthodoxae sententiae Christiani; and carnis resurrectionem futuram novimus,
and MILL ANNOS in Jerusalem instaurata, and exorna^a, and dilatata, sicut
Prophetae Ezechiel, and Esaias, and alii promulgant sic namque Esaias, de MILL
istorum annorum tempore loquutus est. ERIT ENIM CAELUM NOVUM, ET TERRA NOVA, ET
NON RECORDABUNTUR PRIORUM, NEQUE EORUM ILLA VENIENT IN CORDA: SED LAETITIAM, ET
EXULTATIONEM INVENIENT IN HIS, QUAE EGO CREO, QUIA ECCE FACIO JERUSALEM
EXULTATIONEM, ET POPULUM MEUM LAETITIAM and paulo post [NAM SECUNDUM DIES
LIGNIVITAEDIES POPULI MEI:] In his verbis (inquit) MILL ANNOS arcane designari
intelligimus. Ut enim Adae dictum est, quo die de ligno comedisset, eo die
moriturum etiam esse; scimus cum mill annos non implevisse. Novimus quoque
dictum illud quod DIES DOMINI SIT SICUT MILL ANNI, huc pertinere. Et vir apud
nos quidam, cui Nomen JOHANNES, e duodecim Apostolis Christi unus, in ca quae
illi exhibita est Revelatione Prophetavit; Christo credentes nostro Gr. Paris.
edit. (...) Annos mill Hierosolymis peracturos esse; ac postea universalem,
and (ut semel dicam) sempiternam omnium, unanimiter simul resurrectionem and
Judicium futurum; id quod and Dominus noster dixit quod NUPTUM NEQUE DATURI,
NEQUE ACCEPTURI, SED ANGELIS AEQUALES FUTVRI SINT, utpote filii Dei
resurrectionis. Apud nos enim huc usque etiam Prophetica extant dona.

(...), etc. i. e. E contra vero, eorum qui purae, piaeque Christianorum
sententiae nonsunt, multos hoc non agnoscere tibi significavi. Eos enimtibi
designabam, qui nomine quidem CHRISTIANI dicuntur, sunt vero ATHEI, and IMPII
HAERETICI, quod omnino blasphema and impia and stulta doceant.

IRENAEVS, qui storuit Anno 178. (circiter) post natum Christum. Hac aetate
(inquit Abrahamus Bucholcerus, in Indic. Chronologi) IRENAEVS Ecclesiae
Lugdunensis Episcopus, and Polycarpi auditor, contra Haereticos scripsit libros
qui extant. Dicit alicubise ista scribere, Romanam sedem tenente duodecimo
Episcopo Eleutherio, qui hoc tempore Pontificatum gessit. IRENAEI etiam
temporibus adhuc durasse donum ejiciendi daemonia, et sanandi multos, testatur
ipse lib. 2. adversus haereses. Hujus IRENAEI meminit TERTVLLIANVS eumque
nominat omnium doctrinarum curiosum exploratorem. IRENAEUS aliquoties scripsit
Johannem Apostolum, vixisse usque ad tempora Trajani; Polycarpum vero fuisse
auditorem Johannis, and se Juvenem vidisse Polycarpum senem. Sic Bucholcerus.
Nomen habuit IRENAEUS (ut aiunt) a componenda pace inter litigantes. De hoc
IRENAEO Magno, doctissimus asserit Erasmus in Argumento ejus in Quintum librum
illius Irenaei contra Haereses, Quin and HIERO NIMUS (inquit ERASMUS) alicubi
testatur IRENAEUM sensisse cum CHILIASTIS, cum alias, tum enarrans EZECHIELIS
caput trigesimum. Sed in hujusmodi multis, VETERES cum candore legendi sunt,
etc. Sic Erasmus. In quam de IRENAEO sententiam facile descendent, qui acutiori
oculo perlegerint quintum illius IRENAEI librum contra HAERESES. Ubi plurimum
disputans pro resurrectione corporum sanctorum, eos ipsos urget Prophetas qui
tractant summopere de eorundem, PRIMA RESURRECTIONE, ad plenam Judaeorum
vocationem. Particularius ILLE (ut antea JU. MARTYR pro MILL ANNIS) urget
Ezechielem pro RESURRECTIONE. Nominatim cap. 37. v. 1. ad 15. Quem locum de
Thesi nostra intelligendum demonstratio ejus, 3. nostro libro instituenda,
convincet. Vide sis IRENAEUM. Edit. Bas. in 8. Lat. Anno 1571. ad page 545. and
575.

Epiphanius (qui floruit Anno circiter 365) haec habet verba. (...), etc. id
est, Porro alii dixerunt, senem dixisse, quod in prima resurrectione,
millenarium quendam annorum absolvemus in iisdem versantes, in quibus etiam
nunc, nimirum and legem servantes, and alia etc. Unde liquido constat vel
Athanasium vel Paulinum, vel quosdam extitisse, circa, vel ante tempus
Epiphanii, qui substantiam nostrae Theseos omnino defendebant. Imo mihi palam
videtur, etiam ipsum Epiphanium, ex verbis ejus statim insequentibus, favisse
aliquantulum iis hanc opinionem tenentibus. Verum (inquit) sicut quidam
affirmarunt, hoc dixisse ipsum asseruerunt. Et quod quidem scriptum est de
millenaria hac secta, in Apocalypsi Johannis; and quod apud plerosque liber
receptus est, etiam apud pios manifestum est, etc. Epiph. lib. 3. To. 2. and
juxta Edit Basil lat. A. D. 1578. sub Titulo exemplar Paulini Episcopi. p. 334.
and C. 335. A. and edit Graec. Basil. p. 435.

SECT. III. Of Latin Antiquities.
THe first in Seniority, of Latin, Learned, Godly Ancients, that is for our
Position, in TERTULLIAN, He Apologized for the Christians about the year
after Christ, 180. His words in his fifth Book against Marcion, are to this
effect:

Thou art a Priest for ever. But Ezechias, though he once was, yet he was
neither a Priest, nor for ever, etc. But unto Christ will agree the order of
Melchisedek; because indeed Christ, Gods proper and legimate High Priest of the
Priesthood of the Uncircumcision (then specially constituted in the Nations,
of whom he had more claim to be received) with vouchsafe at last to accept,
and bless the circumcision and posterity of Abraham, when at length they shall
know him.

Lactantius, very largely and learnedly discourses the point, in his seventh
Book of divine Institutions, who lived in the time of Constantine the Great,
three hundred and ten years after Christ, so long since; proving it from the
Scriptures, and withal alleading the consent of Philosophers, Poets, Sybils,
etc. all which to translate into English, would but be tedious to them that
understand only that tongue (besides the increase of charge in Printing.) And
for those that understand Latin and Greek, they have here at hand the mind of
the Author, and his quotations in those languages, whereby to read him, and
them, in their own idiom and phrase. But to give the English Reader a few
summary heads of what is in this large citation of Lactantius, and his
quotations, it shall not be grievous to me, nor unnecessary for him. In his
seventh Book of Divine Institutions, Chap. 1. he says thus. In the fourth
Book (says he) we have spoken of the first coming of the LORD. Now let us
relate his second, which the Jews also acknowledge and expect; because it is
of NECESSITY that he should RETURN to Comfort them, whom before he had come to
call together. In this second Chapter of that seventh Book, Lactantius says
thus; It is ordained by the disposal of the highest God, that this unjust age,
a certain space of times being run, shall have an end, when all wickedness
being extinct, and the souls of the godly called back to a blessed life,
there shall flourish a quiet, tranquil, peaceable and golden age, God himself
then reigning. In his fourteenth Chapter of the same Book, he says, That
Plato, and many others of the Philosophers, whiles ignorant of the original of
things, and of that top of time wherein the World was made, * said that many
thousands of * ages have passed, since this * most beautiful world thus
adorned has existed; As per haps the Chaldeans, who (as Cicero has delivered
in his first Book of Divination) do dream * that they have contained in * their
Monuments four hundred * and seventy thousand years. But we, whom the Divine
Scriptures do instruct unto the knowledge of the truth, have known the
beginning, and end of the World, of which end we shall speak in the end of
this Book, as we did of the beginning in the second. Let therefore
Philosophers know, who number thousands of Ages since the beginning of the
World, that the Sixth thousand year is not yet CONCLUDED or ENDED. But that
number being fulfilled of necessity there must be an end, and the state of
humane things must been transformed into that which is better.

This Lactantius does largely and learnedly prove from Gods making the World in
six days, and resting the seventh, Alleging the Prophet (as it is his
expression) that BEFORE thy EYES, O Lord, a thousand years are but as ONE DAY,
etc.

We have, says Lactantius, often said, That lesser and small things are the
figures, and fore-representations of great things: And that this day of ours,
which is bounded with the rising and setting of the sun, does bear the image of
the GREAT DAY, which a certain circuit of years does determine. After the same
manner, the forming of the earthly, man, did carry before it the formation in
future, of an heavenly people. For, as when all things were finished, God made
man last, upon the sixth day, and brought him into this world, as into an house
well furnished; So now in the GREAT SIXTH DAY, the TRUE MAN is formed by the
Word of God, that is, the holy people is figured unto righteousness by the
doctrine and precepts of God. And as then he was made of the earth, mortal and
imperfect, that he might live a thousand years in this world. (He alludes to
the Fathers before the flood who lived each of them near a thousand years.) So
now the perfect man is framed of this terrestrial world, that being made alive
by God, he may reign in this same world for the space of a thousand years.

And says Lactantius in the fifteenth Chapter of the said seventh Book. As it
is in the Scriptures how, and for what necessity Israel went down into Egypt,
there exceedingly multiplied, but oppressed with an intolerable yoke of
Bondage, God smote Egypt, led his people through the red Sea, but there drowned
the Egyptians, endeavoring to pursue the flying Israelites; so this famous
exploit was a figure of a greater thing to be, which God will bring to pass
in the last consummation of times; namely, that God will deliver his people
from the grievous servitude of the world. But though God then smote only
Egypt, because his people was but one Nation; yet now because Gods people are
over all the world, and every where oppressed by the world, God will smite all
Nations, even all the whole world, and deliver his righteous people that
worship him.

And as then there were certain foresignes by which the the future ruin of
the Egyptians was foreshewn; So at the last shall be prodigious wonders, by
all the elements of the world, whereby may be understood, that ruin to all
Nations is at hand. For so then shall righteousness become rate, and impiety
so multiply, that if there be any good men then extant, they shall be as a
prey to the wicked, etc. Then shall ruin overrun the world. The cause of which
devastation and confusion shall be, because the Roman authority, by which now
the world is over ruled (MY SOUL, says Lactantius, FEARS TO SPEAK IT, BUT I
WILL SPEAK IT, BECAUSE IT SHALL COME TO PASS) shall be taken away from the
earth, and the EMPIRE shall return into ASIA, and the EAST shall have again
the DOMINION, and the WEST shall be made servile. Nor may it be a wonder, that
so huge and massy an Empire so long continuing, and strongly confirmed, should
fall, seeing there is no thing made by man, but may be destroyed by man; even
as the Emperialty was brought down from the Assyrians to the Persians, from
them to the Grecians, and from them to the Romans. Seneca did not ineptly
distribute the times of the CITY of Rome into Ages. The first he said was her
Infancy under Romulus, etc. And her first old age was, when torn with civil
wars, she turned to be twy-child etc. And if these things be so, what
remains but death should follow old age? And that this shall shortly come to
pass, the Sermons of the Prophets under the covert of other names, that all
might not easily understand, do denounce. But the Sibyls do speak it openly
that Rome shall be destroyed, because she hated the name of God, and opposed
righteousness. And Hydospis a most ancient King of the Medes, even before the
Trojan race was set up, prophesied the same.

Says Lactantius Chap. 16. how that shall be, lest any one should think it
incredible, I will declare: first the Regality and chief power shall be
multiplied into many, and cut and minced into crummes. Then perpetual civil
discords shall be sown, and never shall be any quier. TEN KINGS shall stand
up together, who shall not suffer the world to be ruled, but to be ruined.
Then upon a sudden, shall rise up against them a most potent Enemy from the
utmost bounds of the North, who, by means of three of that number (possessing
Asia) extinguished, shall be taken into the society of the rest, and by them
shall be made chief Of them all. This man shall domineer, vex, mingle divine
and humane things, subvert Laws, establish his own, and shall waste, destroy,
and kill. The name and seat of the Empire being changed, there shall follow the
confusion, and vexation of all mankind. And that nothing may be wanting to
the misery of men, a Trumpet shall sound from heaven, according to that the
Sibyl has denounced, giving a manifold lamenting sound; whereupon all shall
tremble. Then from the wrath of God against unrighteous men shall rage sword,
and fire, and famine, etc. Then according to the Sibyls verses, The world shall
be unworlded, etc. scarce the tenth part of men shall be left, etc.

But says Lactantius Chap. 17. I will yet plainlier explain how it shall come
to pass; The conclusion of times being at hand, a great Prophet shall be sent
of God, who shall convert men unto the knowledge of God, etc. And the wicked
shall be destroyed, etc. which he shows in many and sundry particulars.

Then Lactantius in the eighteenth Chapter of the same Book quotes diverse
Authors to that purpose; As Hydaspes, and Hermes, and the Sibyls; out of which
two latter, he does not only mind the maine point he has in hand, but also
allege out of them, that Christ is the Son of God.

And says Lactantius, Chapter 19. of the aforesaid seventh Book; The circle
of the whole earth being oppressed, at which time humane strength shall be
unable to destroy the tyranny of immense power God, moved with the doubtful
power of his people, and with their miserable lamentations, shall forthwith
send the Deliverer. Then shall the midst of heaven be opened in a quiet black
night, so that the light of God descending, shall appear over all the world, as
lightning, which the Sibyls express thus, When as he shall come, darkness in
a black midnight shall be as fire, etc. Of which there is a double reason: In
the night he was borne, and in the night he suffered death: And so after
these, in the night he shall receive the * Kingdom of the earth. This * is
the Deliverer and Judge, * the Revenger, and King, and * GOD, which we call
Christ. And he shall descend, his Angels accompanying him, etc.

After this says Lactantius, Chap. 20. The places of the dead shall be
opened, and the dead shall rise again, and the GREAT JUDGMENT * shall be
performed by God * Christ concerning them; of which Judgment and Kingdom the
Erythrean Silyl thus speaks, When that DAY shall receive its fatal, END, and
the judgment of the immortal God shall come to mortals, then shall come upon
men the GREAT JUDGMENT and the BEGINNING, etc. as it is in that Sibyl.

But, says Lactantius, speaking to this of the Sibyl, Nevertheless all
universally, shall not be then judged of God, but those only which are verst
in the Religion of God.

The Poets (says Lactantius in the 22. Chap. of the aforesaid Book) by
Poetical licentiousness corrupted that which they had received; for in that
they fang, That men having finished a thousand years among the dead, they
should be restored to life again, as Virgil says, When all these souls have
turned the wheel at the forgetful RIVER of death by the space of a thousand
years, God calls forth these (unmindfull) in a great Troup, that they may see
again these places that are upon the unequal face of the earth, and shall
again begin willingly to return to their bodies. Herein their understanding
deceived them (says Lactantius) That the dead shall rise again, not after a
thousand years of their death, but that being restored to life again, they may
REIGN A THOUSAND YEARS WITH GOD. By God Lactantius means Christ, as he openly
explained himself but a little before.

Of which Resurrection (says Lactant. Chap. 23.) the Philosophers also
endeavored to say something, as corruptly as the Poets. For Pythagoras
disputed that the souls of the deceased did pass into new bodies (but
foolishly) as he said himself was made up of Euphorbus his soul; Chrysippus
spoke better (who as Cicero says, established the Porch of the Stoics) he in
his books which he wrote concerning PROVIDENCE, speaking of the renovation of
the World, brings in this, Seeing * things are so, it appears it is not
impossible that we also when we have finished this present life, after certain
wheelings about of times, should be restored again into this very estate in
which we now are. And the Sibyl says thus, It is hard indeed to believe, but
when the judgment of the world, and of Mortals shall come, he shall send the
wicked into darkness, etc. but those that embrace godliness, SHALL AGAIN
LIVE UPON EARTH, GOD GIVING THEM BOTH SPIRIT HONOR and LIFE.

Chap. 24. Lactantius faith, I will add the rest. Therefore (says he) the
SON of the Highest and Greatest God shall come, that he may judge both
quick and dead, according to that of the Sibyl,

Then shall there be confusion of all mortals of the whole earth; and the
OMNIPOTENT himself shall come upon his Tribunal, to judge the souls of quick
and dead, and all the world. But when he shall do that, says Lactantius, and
shall restore the just that have been from the beginning, unto life, he shall
* converse among men a thousand * years, and shall rule them with * a most
righteous Government. Which somewhere the Sibyl proclaims, Hear me, O ye men,
the eternal King does reign, etc.

Then (says Lactantius) They that shall be alive in their bodies shall not
dye, but by the space of those THOUSAND years, shall generate an infinite
multitude, and their offspring shall be holy, etc. And they * that shall be
raised from the * dead, shall be OVER THE DEAD AS JUDGES. But the Gentile
Nations shall not be utterly extinguished, but some shall be left for the
victory of God, that they may be triumphed over by the just, and brought under
the yoke of perpetual servitude. A little before that, the Prince of Devils,
the forger of all evil, shall be * bound with chains, and shall * be in hold
all the THOUSAND * year es of THECELESTIAL EMPIRE, under which, righteousness
shall reign over the world. After whose coming, the just shall be gathered
together from all parts of the earth, etc. and the holy C^^IE shall be placed
in the * midst of the earth, in which the BUILDER thereof, GOD, together with
his just ones ruling,shall ABIDE. Which City the * Sibyl thus points out, And
the City which God made, the same he made brighter then the Sun, Moon, or
Stars. Then all darkness shall be taken away, etc. The Moon shall be as
bright as the Sun, and the Sun sevenfold brighter then it is, etc. The
earth shall abound with fruitfulness, etc. The whole nature of all things
shall joy in freedom from dominion of evil. All beasts and birds, not preying
on one another, shall be at peace one with another, etc. quoting the Poets,
touching the golden Age, showing their error in this, that mistaking the
Prophets (who for the certainty of things, spoke of them as past, though minded
them as to come) they thought they were all past. Alleging also the Sibyls,
that in diverse places affirm, that men shall live a most quiet and plentiful
life, and shall reign together with God, and the Kings of the Nations shall
come from the bounds of the earth, with their gifts, and shall adore and honor
the great King, etc.

These things, (says Lactantius Chap. 25.) are those, which are spoken by the
Prophets that they shall come to pass, whose
testimonies and words I deemed not needfullto set down, because it would be
an infinite work. If any ask when those things shall come to pass? I but now
said above, that that * change must needs be, when * SIX THOUSAND YEARS *
shall be completed, and that chief day of the last con
clusion of them does now draw near. Touching the signs, you may know them by
the Prophets, etc. when this sum of six thousand years shall be complete,
they teach, who have wrote of the quantity of the number of years since the
Creation, according as they have gathered it out of the holy Scriptures, and
diverse Histories; which Writers although they vary, and the sum of their
number differs, yet every man's expectation seems to be not beyond two hundred
years hence. Yea, the thing it self shows that the fall and ruin of things
will be in a short time; * only the CITY of ROME being now in safety, there
seems no cause of fear in any such thing. But when that head of * the World
shall fall, and be * a RUIN instead of ROME, * as the Sibylls foretell, who *
doubts, but the end to humane affairs, and the whole World is now come?

We said (says Lactantius Chap. 26.) a little before, that in the beginning of
the holy Kingdom, it shall be that the Prince of Devils shall be bound by
God. But that same Prince, when the one thousand years, that * is, when the
7000 years shall * begin to determine, he shall be loosed again, etc. and
shall stir up all Nations under the dominion of the just, to war against the
holy City, whereupon innumerable people shall be gathered together, who shall
besiege it. Then shall the last wrath of God come upon the Nations, and
overthrow them unto one man, with many terrible shakings, etc. of the earth,
and other wonderful signs, etc. and infinite slaughters of the wicked; the
just the mean while being hidden. The last judgment upon the wicked Nations
being ended, the just shall come forth of their hiding places, and shall find
all covered with dead carcasses, etc. All the race of wicked men utterly
destroyed. Nor shall there be in this world any more any Nation, but the
Nation of God. Then for seven years, there shall be no hewing down of woods,
etc. And now there shall be no more war, but peace and rest eternal. * And
when the THOUSAND years shall be completely ended, * the World shall be made
new by God; and the heavens shall be folded together, and the earth shall be
changed, and God shall transform men into the similitude of Angels, and they
shall be as white as snow, and shall converse always in sight of the
Omnipotent, etc. At that time shall be that SECOND and pullike Resurrection of
all, in which the unjust shall be cast into eternal torments. This is the
Doctrine of the holy Prophets which we Christians follow. So far Lactantius
near 1400 years since. I thought it too much to write out all the Latin and
Greek for the Learned, seeing they may have recourse to the Author himself.
And I thought it too much to render all the Latin here into English, lest I
should burden the English Reader.

Tu es Sacerdos in aevum. Nec Sacerdos autem Ezechias, ne in aevum, etsi
fuisset. At in CHRISTUM conveniet ordo Melchisedec, quoniam quidem CHRISTUS
proprius, and legitimus Dei antistes, Praeputiati sacerdotii pontifex (tum in
Nationibus Constitutus, a quibus magis suscipi habebat) Cognituram se quandoque
circumcisionem, and Abrahae Gentem, quum ultimo, acceptione, and benedictione
dignabitur. Tertul. l. 5. contra Marcion in Pros. cap. 9.

LACTANTIUS (Tertulliano secundus praeceptor (testanti Bucholcero) crispi
Caesaris filii Constantini, vir disertissimus floruit, Anno post Christum 314.
qui in 7 INSTITUTIONUM DIVINARUM libro, ad Constantium (ut asseritur) scripto,
splendenti tunc temporis tanta religionis gloria, haec habet verba. Ut (inquit
Cap. 1. istius libri) in quarto libro de primo Domini adventu diximus, sic in
hoc, secundum referamus adventum, QUEM JUDAEI QUOQUE ET CONFITENTUR ET SPERANT,
etc. quoniam necesse est ad eos CONSOLANDOS REVERTATUR, ad quos CONVOCANDOS
prius venerat. Dispositione (inquit Cap. 2.) summi Dei sic ordinatum, ut
injustum hoc seculum, decurso temporum spatio, terminum sumat, extinctaque
protinus omni malitia, and piorum animis ad beatam revocatis quietum,
tranquillum, pacificum, a^^eum denique seculum, Deo ipso regnante florescat.
Plato (inquit Lactantius Cap. 14.) and multi alii Philosophorum, cum ignorarent
originem rerum, supremumque illud tempus quo mundus esset effectus; multa
millia seculorum fluxisse dixerunt, ex quo hic pulcherrimus mundi extiterit
ornarus; sicuti fortasse Chaldaei, qui (un Cic. tradidit in lib. de divinatione
primo) quadringenta, septuaginta millia annorum Monumontis Comprehensa se
habere delirant, etc. Nos autem, quos divinae literae ad scientiam veritatis
erudiunt, principium mundi, finemque cognovimus, de quo nunc in fine operis
disseremus, quoniam de principio in secundo libro explicavimus. Sciant igitur
Philosophi, qui ab exordio mundi enumerant seculorum millia, nondum sextum
millessimum annum esse Conclusum, quo numero expleto, Consummationem fieri
necesse est, ET HUMANARUM RERUM STATUM IN MELIUS REFORMARI. Cujus rei
argumentum prius est enarrandum, quo ratio elucescat. Mundum Deus, and hoc
rerum and naturae admirabile opus (sicut arcanis facrae Scripturae continetur)
sex dierum spatio consummavit, diemque septimum, quo ab operibus suis
requieverat, sanxit. Hic autem est dies Sabbathi, qui lingua Hebraeorum a
numero nomen accepit, unde septenarius numerus legitimus, ac plenus est. Nam
and dies septem sunt, quibus per vicem revolutis, orbs conficiuntur annorum,
and septem steilae quae non occidunt; and septem sydera, que vocantur errantia;
quorum dispares cursus, and inaequales motus rerum, ac temporum varietates
efficere creduntur. Ergo quoniam sex diebus cuncta Dei opera perfecta sunt; per
secuta sex, id est annorum sex millia manner in hoc statu mundum necesse est.
Dies enim magnus Dei Mill annorum circulo terminatur, sicut indicat Propheta,
qui dicit: ANTE OCULOS TUOS, DOMINE, MILL ANNI, tanquam DIES UNUS. Et ut Deus
sex illos dies in tantis rebus fabricandis Laboravit; it a and religio ejus and
veritas, in his sex millibus annorum laborare necesse est, MALITIAPRAE.
VALENTE, AC DOMINANTE. Et rursus, quoniam perfectis operibus requievit die
septimo, eumque benedixit; necesse est, ut in fine sexti millesimi anni,
MALITIA OMNIS ABOLEATUR E TERRA, and REGNET PER ANNOS MILL JUSTITIA; SITQUE
TRANQUILLITAS, and REQVIES A LABORIBUS, QUOS MUNDUS TAMDIU PERPESSUS EST. Verum
quatenus id eveniat, ordine suo explicabo. Saepe diximus minora and exigua,
magnorum figuras, and praemonstrationes esse; and hunc diem nostrum, qui ortu
solis, occasuque finitur, diei magni speciem gerere, quem circuitus annorum
determinat. Eodem medo etiam figuratio terreni hominis, Caelestis populi
praeferebat in posterum fictionem. Nam sicut perfectis omnibus, quae in usum
hominis molitus est Deus, ipsum hominem sexto die ultimum fecit, eumque induxit
in hunc mundum, tanqam in domum diligenter instructam; ita nunc sexto die magno
verus homo verbo Deifingitur, id est sanctus populus doctrina and praeceptis
Dei ad justitiam figuratur. Et sicut tunc mortalis aque imperfectus e lerra
fictus est, ut mill annis in hoc mundo viveret; ITA NUNC EX HOC TERRESTRI
SECULO PERFECTUS HOMO FINGITUR UT VIVIFICATUS A DEO, IN HOC EODEM MUNDO
PERANNOS MILL DOMINETUR.

Est (inquit Lactantius Cap. 15.) in arcanis sacrarum literarum, transcendisse
in Aegyptum cogente inopta rei frumentariae principem Hebraeorum cum omnidomo
and cognatione. Cujus posteri, cum diutius in, Aegypto commorantes, in magnam
gentem crevissent, in gravi atque intoler ando servitutis jugo premerentur;
percussit Aegyptum Deus insanabili plaga, and populum suum liberavit, traductum
medio mari, cum discissis fluctibus and in utramique partem dimotis, per siccum
populus graderetur. Conatusque rex Aegyptiorum profugos insequi, Coeunte in
statum suum pelago, cum omnibus copiis interceptus est. Quod facinus tam
clarum, tamque mirabile, quamvis ad praesens virtutem Dei hominibus ostenderet;
tamen prefiguratio, and figura majoris rei fuit, quam Deus idem in extrema
temporum consummatione facturus est. LIBERABIT ENIM PLEBEM SUAM DE GRAVI
SERVITUTE MUNDI. Sed quoniam tunc una plebs Dei, and apud unam gentem fuit;
Aegyptus tunc sola percussus est. NUNC AUTEM QUIA DEI POPULUS EX OMNIBUS
LINGUIS CONGREGATUS, APUD OMNES GENTES COMMORATUR, ET AB HIS DOMINANTIBUS
PREMITUR, NECESSE EST UNIVERSAS NATIONES, id est, ORBEM TOTUM CAELESTIBUS
PLAGIS VERBERARI, Ut JUSTUS ET CULTOR DEI POPULUS LIBERETUR. Et tunc sicut
signa facta sunt, quibus futura olades Aegypti ostenderetur, ita in ultimo
fient prodigia miranda per omnia elementa mundi, quibus imminens exitus
universis gentibus intelligatur. Propinquante igitur hujus seculi termino,
humanarum rerum statum commutari necesse est; and in deterius nequitia
invalescente, prolabi, etc. Ita enim justitia rarescet, ita impietas, etc.
crebrescet, ut si qui tum forte fuerint boni, pradae sint sceleratis, etc. soli
autem mali sunt opulenti, etc. Non fides in hominibus, non pax, non humanitas,
non pudor, non veritas erit; atque ita non securitas, neque regimen, etc. Omnis
terra tumultuabitur; frement ubique bella, etc. Tunc peragrabit clades orbem.
Cujus vastitatis and confusionis haec erit causa, QUOD ROMANUM NOMEN, QUO NUNC
REGITUR ORBIS (HORRET ANIMUS DICERE, SED DICAM, QUIA FUTURVM EST) TOLLETUR DE
TERRA, ET IMPERIUM IN ASIAM REVERTETVR; ET RVRSVS ORIENS DOMINABITVR ATQVE
OCCIDENS SERVIET. Nec mirum cuiquam debet videri, si regnum tanta mole
fundatum, act andiu per tot, and tales vires auctum, tantis denique opibus
confirmatum, aliquando tamen corruet. Nihil est enim humanis viribus laboratum,
quod non humanis aeque viribus destrui possit, quoniam mortalia sunt mortalium
opera. Sic and alia prius regna, cum diutius ftoruissent, nihilominus tamen
occiderunt. Nam and Aegyptios, and Persas, and Graecos, and Assyrios, proditum
est, regimen, habuisse terrarum, quibus omnibus destructis, ad Romanos quoque
rerum summa pervenit. Qui quanto caeteris omnibus regnis magnitudine antestant,
tanto majore decident lapsu, quia plus habent ponderis ad ruinam, quae sunt
caeteris altiora. Non inscue Seneca Romanae urbis tempora distribuit in
aetates. Primam enim dixit infantiam sub Romulo, etc. Haec fuit prima ejus
senectus, cum bellis lacerata civilibus, etc. quasi ad alteram infantiam
revoluta, etc. Quod si haec ita sunt quid restat nisi ut sequeretur interitus
senectutem? Et id futurum brevi conciones prophetarum denunciant; sub ambage
aliorum nominum, ne facue quis intelligat. Sibyllae tamen aperte interituram
esse Romam lequanur, and quidem judicio Det quod nomen ejus habuerit invisum,
and inimica justitiae, ALVMNVM VERITATIS POPVLVM trucidarit. Hydaspes quoque,
qui fuit Medorum Rex antiquissimus, a quo amnis quoque nomen acce pit qui nunc
Hydaspes dictiur, admirabilis omnium (alias admirabile somnium) sub
interpretatione Vaticinantis peuri, ad memoriam posteris tradidit, SVBLATVM IRI
EX ORB IMPERIVM NOMENQVE ROMANVM, mulio ante praefatus quam TROJANA GENS
conderetur.

Quomodo (inquit Lactantius) Cap. 16. id futurum sit, ne quis incredibile
arbitretur, ostendam. Inprimis multiplicabitur regnum, et summa rerum potestas
per plu^imos dissipata, and concisa, minuetur. Tunc discordiae civiles in
perpetuum serentur, nec ulla requies etc. donec REGES DECEMBER pariter existant,
qui orbem terrae, non ad regendum, sed ad consumendum, patiantur, etc. Tum
repent adversus eos, hostis potentissimus, ab extremis finibus plagae
septentrionalis orietur; qui, tribus ex eo numero deletis qui tunc Asiam
obtinebunt, assumetur in societatem a caeteris, ac princeps constituetur
omnium. Hic, insustentabili dominatione vexabit orbem; divina and humana
miscebit; infanda dictu, and excrabilia molietur, etc. leges commutabit, suas
sanciet; contaminabit, diriplet, spoliabit, occidet. Denique immutato nomine,
atque imperii sede translata, confusio, ac perturbatio humani generis
consequetur, etc. Ac nequid malis hominum terraeque desit, andietur e Caelo
tuba, quod hoc modo Sibylla denunciet, (...) Itaque trepidabunt omnes and ad
luctuosum illum sonitum contremiscent. Tum vero per iram Dei adversum homines,
qui justitiam Dei non agnoverunt, saeviet ferrum, ignis, fames, morbus; and
super omnia metus impendent. Tunc orabunt Deum, and non exaudiet, optabitur
mors, and non veniet, etc. His and aliis pluribus malis solitudo fiet in terra;
and erit deformatus orbis, atque desertus, quod in Carminibus Sibyllinis ita
dicitur; (...). Ita enim consicietur humanum genus ut vix decima pars hominum
relinquatur, etc. De cultoribus etiam Dei, duae parts interibunt, and tertia
quae fuerit probata remanebit.

Sed (inquit Lactantius Cap. 17.) planius quomodo id eveniat exponam. Imminente
jam temporum conclusione, Propheta magnus mittetur a Deo, qui convertat
homines, ad Dei agnitionem, and accipiat potestatem mirabilia faciendi.
Ubicunque non audierint eum homines, cludet Caelum; and detinebit imbres, etc.
and quicunque conabitur eum laedere, procedet ignis de ore ejus, atque comburet
illum. His prodigiis etc. convertet multos, etc. peractis operibus ipsius,
alter Rex orietur ex Syria malo spiritu genitus, eversor, ac perditor generis
humani, qui reliquias illius prioris mali cum ipso simul deleat. Hic pugnabit
adversus Propheta Dei, and vincet, and interficiet eum and insepultum jacere
patietur. Sea post diem tertium reviviscer; at que inspectantibus, and
mirantibus cunctis rapietur in Caelum. Rex vero ille teterrimus erit quidem et
ipse, sed mendaciorum Propheta; et seipsum constituet, ac vocabit, et se coli
jubebit, ut Dei filium; et dabitur illi potest as, ut faciat signa, et
prodigia; quilus visis irretiat homines, ut adorent cum. Jubebit ignem
descendere de Caelo, et solemn suis cursilus stare, et imaginem loqui, et fient
haec such verbo ejus. Quibus miraculis etiam sapientium plurimi allicientur ab
eo. Tunc erueve Templum Dei conabitur, et justum populum persequetur, etc. Qui
crediderint, atque accesserint ei, signabuntur ab eo tanquam pecudes. Qui autem
recusaverint notam ejus, aut in montes sugient, aut comprehensi exquisitis
cruciatibus necabuntur, etc. et dabitur illi desolare orbem terrae mensibus
quadraginta duobus. Id erit tempus quo justitia projicietur, et innocentia odio
erit; quo mali bonos praedabuntur; non lex, aut ordo, etc. servabitur, etc.
Itaque quasi uno Communique la trocinio terra universa vastabitur. Cum haec
facta erunt, tum justi, et sectatores veritatis segregabunt se a malis, et
fugient in solitudines. Quo audito, impius Rex, inflammatus tra cum exercita
magno, and admotis omnibus copiis, circumdabit montem, in quo justi morabuntur,
ut eos comprehendat. Illi vero, ubi se clausos undique, atque obsessos
viderint, exclamabunt ad Deum voce magna, and adxilium caeleste implorabunt. Et
exaudiet eos Deus; and emittetregem magnum de Caelo gui eos eripiat, ac
liberet, omnesque impios ferro, igneque disperdat.

Haec (inquit Lactantius Cap. 18.) Ita futurum esse, cum Prophetae omnes, Ex
Dei spiritu, tum etiam vatex ex instinctu daemonum cecinerunt. Hydaspes enim
quem superius nominavi, descripta iniquitate saeculi hujus extremi; pios, ac
fideles a nocentibus segregatos, ait, cum fletu, and gemitu extensuros esse ad
Caelummanus, and imploraturos fidem Jovis. Jovem respecturum ad terram, and
auditurum voces hominum, atque impios extincturum. Quaeomnia vera sunt, praeter
unum, quod Jovem dixit illa facturum, quae Deus faciet. Sed and illud non sine
daemonum fraud subtractum est; missum iri a patre Filium Dei, qui deletis
omnibus malis, pios liberet. Quod Hermes tamen non dissimulavit. In eo enim
libro qui (...) inscribitur, post enumer ationem malorum, de quibus diximus
subjecit, haec: (...), etc. i. e. Cum haec facta fuerint O Asclepi, tunc
Do^^nus, and pater, and Deus, and primi, and unius Dei Creator aspiciens quae
acta sunt, and sua voluntate, cum bonum objecisset temeritati, and errore
revocato, malitiaque purgata, partim aqua nimia diluens, partim igne rapido
cremans, interdum bellis, and pestilentiis extergens, ad statum pristinum
perduxit, and restituit suum mundum. Sibyllae quoque non aliter fore ostendunt,
qua ut Dei filius a summo patre mittatur, qui and justos liberet de manthus
impiorum, and injustos cum tyrannis saevientibus deleat e quibus una sic
tradidit. (...),
(...), etc.
i. e. Quidam a Deo missus Rex ad suos, omnes perdet reges magnos and viros
optimos, etc. Oppresso igitur orb terrae (Inquit Lactant. C. 19.) cum ad
destruendam immensarum virium tyrannidem, humanae opes desecerint, etc.
Commotus Deus, and periculo ancipiti, and miseranda comploratione justorum
mittet protinus lileratorem. Tunc aperietur caelum medium intempesta, and
tenebrosa nocte, ut in orb toto lumen descendentis Dei, tanquam fulgur,
appareat, quod Sibylla in his versibus locuta est. -- (...)
(...)
Haec est nox, quae nobis propter adventum regis, ac Dei nostri pervigilio
celebratur. Cujus noctis du plex ratio est, quod in ea, and vitam tum recepit,
cum pass us est; and postea orbis terrae regnum recepturus est. Hic est enim
liberator, and judex, and ultor, and Rex, and Deus, quem nos Christum vocamus;
qui prius quam descendat, hoc signum dabit. Cadet repent gladius e coelo, ut
sciant justiducem sanctoe militiae descensurum, and desiendet comitantibus
Angelis, etc. Et virius Angeloram tradet in manus justorum multitudinem illam,
quae montem circumsederit; and concidetur ab hora tertia usque advesperum, and
fluet sanguis more torrentis; deletisque copi is, impius solus, flugiet, and
peribit ab eo virtus sua. Hic est autem qui appellatur Antichristus; sed se
ipse Christum mentietur and contra verum dimicabit, and victus efsugiet; and
bellum saepe renovabit, and saepe vincetur; donec quarto praelio, confect is
omnibus impris, debellatus, and captus, tandem scelerum sucrum luet paenas. Sed
and caeteri principes, ac tyranni qui contriverunt crlem, simul cum eo vincti
adducentur ad regem; and increpabit eos, etc. Et damnabit eos, ac meritis
cruciatibus tradet. Sic extincta malitia requiescet orbis etc.

Post haec (inquit Lactantius Cap. 20.) aperientur inferi, et resurgent mortui,
de quibus judicium magnum idem ipse rex ac Deus faciet, cui summus pater, et
judicandi, et regnandi, dabit maximam potestatem. De quo judicio et regno a pud
Erythraeam Sibyllam sic invenitur (...) etc.i.e. Cum dies iste finem fatalem
acceperit, and ad mortales judicium immortalis Dei venerit, venict super
homines, magnum judicium and initium etc. Nec tamen universi tunc a Deo
judicabuntur, sed ii tantum, qui sunt in Dei religione versati, etc.

Corruperunt (inquit Lactantius Cap. 22. dicti libri septimi) Poetae, poetica
licentia quod acceperant, etc. Nam quod peractis apud inferos mill annis,
rursus ad vitam restitui, cecinerunt, Marone ita dicente.

Has omnes, ubi mill rotam voleure per annos,
Lethaeum ad fluvium, Deus evocat agmine magno.
Scilicet immemores, supera ut convexa revisant,
Rursus and incipiant in Corpora velle reverti.
Haec eos ratio fefellit, quod resurgent defuncti, non post mill annos mortis
suae, sed ut restituti rursus in vitam, mill annis cum Deo regnent.

Qua de anastasi (inquit Lactantius Cap. 23.) Philosophi quoque aliquid dicere
conati sunt, tam corrupt quam Poetae. Nam Pythagoras transire animas in nova
corpora disputavit, sed inepte; and seipsum ex Euphorbo esse reparatum. Melius
Chrysippus; quem Cicero ait fulcire porticum Stoicorum; qui in libris quos de
providenti a scripsit, cum de innovatione mundi loqueretur, haec intulit.
(...), etc. i.e. Quod cum ita sit, apparet non esse impossible, and nos cum
vitam finierimus, rursus vertiginibus certis temporis revolutis, in hunc statum
in quo nunc sumus, restitutum iri. Sibyllae etiam dicit haec, (...). etc. id
est, Et enim durum ad credendum, etc. sed cum jam mundi and mortalium venerit
judicium, etc. Impios quidem in tenebras in igne mittet; qui autem pietatem
colunt, iterum vivent in terra, spiritum Deo dante, honorem simul, and vitam
ipsis.

Nunc (inquit Lactantius Cap. 24.) reliqua subnectam, veniet igitur summi, and
maximi Dei filius, ut vivos ac mortuos judicet, testante atque dicente Sibylla,
(...), etc. i.e. Totius enim terrae mortalium confusio tunc erit, cum ipse
Omnipotens venerit in Tribunali, judicare vivorum and mortuorum animas, et
mundum universum. Verum ille cum deleverit injustitiam, judiciumque maximum
feceri t, ac justos qui a principio fuerint, ad vitam restauraverit, mill
annis inter homines versabitur; eosque justissimo imperio reget. Quod alibi
Sibylla vaticinans furensque proclamat; (...) etc. i.e. Audite me homines, Rex
sempiternus dominatur. Tum qui erunt in corporibus vivi non morientur; sed per
eosdem mill annos infinitam multitudinem generabunt; and erit soboles eorum
sancta, and Deo chara. Qui antem inferis suscitabuntur, ii praeerunt
viventibus, velut judices. Gentes vero non extinguentur omnino, sed quaedam
relinquentur in victoriam Dei, ut triumphentur a justis, ac subjugentur
perpetuae servituti. Sub idem tempus etiam princeps Daemonum, qui est
machinator omnium malorum, Cathenis vincietur. Et erit in custodia mill annis
Coelestis imperti, quo justitia in orb regnabit, etc. Post cujus adventum
congregabuntur justiex omni terra, peratoque judicio, civitas sancta
constituetur in medio terrae, in qua ipse conditor Deus cum justis dominantibus
Commoretur, quam civitatem Sibylla designat. (...),
(...).
Tunc auferentur a mundo tenebrae illae, quibus offundetur atque obcae cabitur
coelum; and luna claritatem solis accipiet, etc. Sol autem septies tanto quam
nunc est, clarior fiet. Terra vero aperiet faecunditatem suam, and uberrimas
fruges sua sponte generabit, etc. Mundus gaudebit, and omnis rerum natura
laetabitur, erepta and liberata dominio mali, etc. Non bestiae per hoc tempus
sanguine alentur, non aves preda, sed quieta and placida erunt omnia. Leones et
vituli ad praesepe simul stabunt, etc. Denique tunc fient illa, quae poetae
aureis temporibus facta esse jam Saturno regnante, dixerunt; (Quorum error hinc
ortus est, quod prophetae futurum pleraque sic proferunt, ut enunciant quasi
jam peracta, etc.)

Cedet and ipse mati vector, nec nautica pinus
Mutabit merces; omnis feret omnia tellus.
Non rastros patietur humus, non vinea falcem,
Robustus quoque jam tauris juga solvet arator, etc.
Sic etiam Sibyllae variis in locis. Vivent itaque homines tranquillissimam
vitam, et copiosissimam, et regnabunt cum Deo pariter. Et reges gentium venient
a finibus terrae cum donis etc. ut adorent et honorificent regem magnum, cujus
nomen erit praeclarum etc. universis nationibus, etc.

Haec (inquit Lactantius Cap. 25.) sunt quae a prophetis futura dicuntur,
quorum testimonia et verba ponere opus esse non duxi, quoniam esset infinitum,
etc. Fortasse quispiam nunc requiret, quando ista, quae diximus sint futura?
Jam superius ostendi completis annorum sex millibus mutationem istam fieri
oportere, and jam propinquare summum illum conclusionis extremae diem, etc. De
signis, etc. a Prophetis licet noscere, etc. Quando compleatur haec summa,
docent ii qui de temporibus scripserunt, colligentes ea ex literis sanctis, and
ex variis historiis, quantus sit numerus annorum ab exordio mundi. Qui, licet
varient, and aliquantum numeri eorum summa dissentiat; omnis * tamen
expectatio, non amplius quam ducentorum videtur annorum. Etiam res ipsa
declarat, lapsum, ruinamque rerum brevi fore: Nisi quod incolumi urbe Roma,
nihil istiusmodi videtur esse metuendum. * At vero cum caput illud orbis
occiderit, and (...) esse caeperit, quod Sibyllae fore aiunt; quis dubitet
venisse jam finem rebus humanis, orbique terrarum? Illa est enim civitas quae
adhuc sustentat omnia.

Diximus (inquit Lactantius Cap. 26.) Paulo ante, in principio regni sancti
fore, ut a Deo princeps daemonum vinciatur. Sed idem, cum mill anni regni, boc
est septem millia Caeperint terminari, solvetur denuo, and custodia emissus
exibit, atque omnes gentes, quae tunc erunt sub ditione justorum, concitabit,
ut inferant bellum sanctae civitati; and colligetur ex omniorbe terrae
innumerabilis populus nationum, and obsidebit, and circumdabit Civitatem. Tunc
veniet novissima ira Dei super gentes and debellabit eas usque adunum, ac
primum concutiet terram quam validissime, and a motu ejus scindentur montes
Syriae; and subsident colles in abruptum; and muriomnium civitatum corruent;
and Statuet Deus solemn triduo ne occidat, and inflammabit eum, and descendet
aestus nimius, and adustio magna supra perduelles, and impios populos; and
imbres sulphuris, and grandines lapidum, and guitae ignis, and liquescent
spiritus eorum in calore, and corpora conterentur in grandine, and ipsise
invicem gladio ferient; and replebuntur montes cadaveribus, and campi
operientur ossibus, populus autem Dei tribus illis diebus sub concavis terrae
occultabitur; donec ira Dei adversus gentes extremum judicium terminet.. Tunc
exibunt justi de latebris suis, et invenient omnia cadaveribus at que ossibus
tecta. Sed et genus omne impiorum radicitus interibit; nec erit in hoc mundo
ulla jam natio amplius, praeter solam gentem Dei. Tum per annos septem perpetes
intactae erunt silvae; nec excidetur de montibus lignum, Sed arma gentium
comburentur; et jam non erit bellum, sed pax, et requies sempiterna. Cum vero
Completi fuerint mill anni, renovabitur mundus a Deo; et Caelum complicabitur,
et terra mutabitur; et transformabit Deus homines in similitudinem Angelorum,
et erunt candidi sicut nix; et versabuntur semper in conspect^ omnipotentis,
etc. Eodem tempore fiet secunda illa et publica omnium resurrectio, in qua
excitabuntur injusti ad cruciatus sempiternos etc. Haec est doctrina sanctorum
prophet arum, quam Christiani sequimur. Haec Lactantius.

SECT. IV. Of later Writers, of what Nation or Language soever.
SECT. IV. Scriptorum neotericorum cujuscunque Nationis, linguae, vel
Religionis.
1. PARAGRAPH
IS of the most learned and pious Peter-Martyr, who most soundly disputes for
the general glorious Call of the Jews, yet to come, which is the beginning,
bulk, and primipilarian rank in this millenary Scene of the Churches glory on
earth, as entailed chiefly on them, and with, and for them upon us throughout
all the Prophets; which we after make plain in falling upon them to make good
our maine Thesis in hand.

I. PARAGR.
Doctissimus pientissimusque Petrus Martyr, LOC. COM. Class. 2. Cap. 4. Paragr.
46. Tit. De Judaeis; haec habet verba:

Nunc id superest ut de Judaeis, etc. peculiariter nonnulla dicantur: Nam ista
hominum genera in urbibus, provinciis, and regnis passim feruntur, and una cum
Christianis habitant. De Judaeis cur tollerentur, ab Augustino, inter caeteras
aliquae rations afferuntur. Is de Civitate Dei, lib. 4. and 18. nec non super
Psalm. 58. and alibi, scribit idcirco ferri, quod prae Caeteris hominum
generibus promissionem salutis habuerint, neque sint deploratae spei, cum
subinde nonnulli eorum, licet pauci, ad Christum redeant. Caecitas, inquit
Paulus ad Romanos, cecidit, ex part, in Israel; ac si diceret, minime
universum. Ad haec, subjicit idem Apostolus, Cum ingressa fuerit plenitudo
gentium, tunc omnis Israel servabitur, Et ne fortassis arbitrer is haec (...)
intelligenda, Paulus ea tanquam Mysterium tradit and ad suam confirmandam
sententiam, vaticinium Esaiae Prophetae adducit, Iniquitatem scilicet, a Jacobo
tum auferendam esse. Praeterea nunc inimici Deo scilicet propter nos dicuntur;
verum amici propter patres. Idem Augustinus in quae stionibus super Evangelia
lib. 2. qu. 33. (sitamen sint Augustini ii libri) dum filii prodigi parabolam
interpretatur, filium illum gentes refer ait: Nam in regionem longinquam
discessisse scribitur, quoniam Ethnicitam procul a Deo recesserunt ut idola
public, atque aperta professione coluerint. Filius autem major natu, quo
populus Hebraeorum adumbratur, non ita long abiit. Et licet in paterna domo
non esset, quae est Ecclesia, in agro tamen agebat. Hebraei enim circa divinas
scriptur as versantur, quas non recte intelligunt, nec eo spirituali sensu, quo
eas Ecclesia Christi cognoscit, sed terreno atque Carnali, Unde non inepte
dicunturin agro agere. Non ingreditur hic senior filius ab initio domum patris,
sed postremis diebus ipse quoque vocabitur, and accedet. Affert quoque idem
pater prohac sententia, quod in Ps. 59. prout ipse legit, habetur. Ne occidas
eos, ne obliviscantur legis tuae, sed in virtute tua disperge illos. Orat,
inquit, filius Dei patrem, ne illa gens aboleatur, sed per orbem passim
vagetur. Aliae Provinciae victae a Romany in leges, and ritus eorum cesserunt,
ita ut Romani tandem efficerentur; at Hebraei, quamvis a Romany superati
fuerunt, nunquam tamen in jura, leges, and ritus eorum discesserunt, sua
retinent adhuc ut possunt, vagantur difpersi. Nec legis Dei proisus
obliviscuntur: Non sane quod in illam servandam pre incumbant, sed tantummodo
legunt, and signa quaedam ac instituta retinent, quibus a caeteris nationibus
discernantur. Videtur porro Deus signum iis quemadmodum Caino, quod
interfecisset Abelum fratrem suum, imposursse; ne videlicet, ab omnibus
interficiantur. Neque Christianis haec eorum per orbem dispersio inutilis est;
quia ut rami fracti, quemadmodum ad Romans habetur; nobis ostenduntur. Cumque
loco eorum jam fuerimus infiti, dum eos tam infaeliciter excisos videmus, Dei
gratiam in nos agnoseimus, and eorum aspectu cavere docemur, ut ne ob
infidelitatem, cujus causa illi sunt fracti, nos quoque similiter excindamur.
Alia praeterea est utilitas, quae ad nos ex illorum dispersione redit, quod
nostri libri ab eis servantur sacra inquam Biblia, quae passim circumferunt,
and legunt.

Idem Petrus Martyr, libro dicto, class praedicta; sed Cap. 16. Paragr. 31,
32. hanc suam pr^fer^ sententiam: Videtur autem adhuc dubitandum, utrum Judaei
nostrae tempestatis, qui Christo minime credunt, in hoc faedere inito cum
Abrahamo, and posteris ejus, habeant aliquod jus, ita ut illo contineantur, vel
potius eo intelligantur prorsus exclusi. Hoc ita mihi videtur explicandum. Si
faedus suum habet fundamentum ac substantiam Christum, jam illi ex hypothesi ab
eo sunt alieni. Deinde in faedere isto confiderantur illius Ceremoniae, and
sacri ritus, qui jam post Christi adventum sint aboliti, etiamsi hodie a
Judaeis retinerentur, nihil ad hoc faedus faciunt; imo potius si serventur,
illi adversantur, quod scilicet praecipuae rei faederis, id est Christo
contradicant. Quare actu, and reipsa negamus illos adhuc hodie contineri in hoc
faedere. Quibus non negamus quod illis Paulus dat, scilicet iis cloquia Dei
credita esse. Videmus enim quadam admirabili Dei providentia sacra Biblia apud
eos conservari, quod si non credunt, id non aufert quin suspiciendi sint adeo
praeclaro Dei beneficio adhuc insigniti. Praeterea, o^m ad Romans 11. Vaticinetur
de illis Paulus, quod convertendi sint, ingressa plenitudine gentium, illosque
dicat inimicos propter nos, at dilectos propter patres; and de illis loquatur,
cum jam excidissent de Christo; id quoque mihi videtur illis tribuendum, quod
non sit adhuc exhausta Dei promissio erga illud genus, ex vi enim promissionis
Deus aliquot assidue ex illis vocat, and in posterum creditur before
vocaturus. Rursus agnoscimus cum Paulo, illam bonam olivam cui excisi
inserantur, esse illis propriam magis, quam nobis, quia non modo inseruntur ex
Dei praedestinatione, ut nos, sed Christo secundum carnem, sunt magis proximi,
atque illorum genus quam nostrum est adscitum. Unde Paulus ait, Judaeo primum,
and Graeco. Quibus rationibus de illis loquens Apostolus etiam cum praevaricati
essent, dicebat se admodum dolere de illorum interitu, illorum essent patres,
adoptio, gloria, and testamentum, (...), quae omnia interpretanda sunt non Ita,
ut nunc actu ad faedus pertineant, sed quoad illos, qui ex illorum genere sunt,
in illud cooptandi. Et haec dicta de eorum genere, id est de gente, prout
veteres habuit patres, Apostolos, and credituros, non privatim pro unoquoque
Judaeo, ita ut de incredulis, and obstinatis verificentur. Opera autem Dei sunt
ita comparata, ut facile sese juvent, nullomodo unum alteri est impedimento.
Ideoque Judaeorum excaecatio, licet eis sit peccatum, attamen, qua Dei est
opus, habuit bonum exitum, nempe Gentium conversionem, and conversio Gentium
adjuvabit salutem quae danda est Judaeis; nam illos ad aemulationem provocabit.
Dum vero hoc non fit, expendamus apud nosmet ipsos admirandum opus Dei; adhuc
in tam adversis casibus, adeoque varia and gravi captivitate seu dispersione
perstant, and servantur; sua quantum possunt retinent; in divinis libris
exercent sese, licet prave omnia intelligunt. Profecto nulli antiqui Trojani,
Longobardi, Hunni, aut Vandali, sic sua retinuerunt, ut a cunctis populis,
civili victu, and religione sejungerentur, and suam originem atque historiam,
certis consignatam literis ostenderent, atque sic ubique dispersi, a suis
institutis non discederent. Quod cum in Judaeis accidat, est porro Dei opus
singular, atque nobis non vulgariter commodat. Sunt enim testes nostrorum
librorum; eosque ut suos, and authenticos circumferunt, quod and Augustinus
annotavit. Nisi enim is populus extaret, conficta esse a nobis Ethnict
Philosophi possent suspicari, quae de orb condito, de Adamo, de Noha, de
Abrahamo, Patriarchis, Regibus, and Prophetis credimus, and praedicamus.
Servantur itaque perpetuo hoc tempore a Deo indubitato, ad aliquam futuram
salutem.

2
Next to Peter Martyr, we allege Pareus, who also is much for a general and
glorious call of the Jews, yet to come; which is a maine part of the glorious
future times we treat of. Yea their general Call, is the interest of the
Saints now extant, that such a splendent time shall be; as the Prophets both
of the Old and New Testament abundantly hint unto us, of which more after. For
which time in the quotation adjoined here, out of Pareus, we have not only
his judgment, and solid reasons, but the judgments and reasons of the
learned, godly ancient Fathers presented to us, or us directed to them.

Doctus David Paraeus Ad 11. Cap. ad Romans Dub. 18. ita suam fert sententiam.
Dub. Utrum locus ille Apostoli probet SUB FINEM MUNDI, maxima Copia Judaeos ad
Christum convertendos? Resp. Tametsi in utramque partem sint eruditorum
probabiles rations; affirmans tamen sententia potius retinenda videtur.

1. Quia deserte sic sonat Apostoli oraculum, Post quam plenitudo gentium
introierit, totum Israelem servatum iri. Totus vero Israel, est tota gens
Israelitica. Tota igitur convertetur ad Christum, extra quem nulla est salus.
Nec totus Israel hic signficare potest allegorice totam Ecclesiam ex solis gen
tibus collectam, cui aliqui forte Judaei sese adjungent; sic enim Apostolus non
revelasset mysterium, siquidem quotide manifestum erat, gentes maximo numero,
and aliquos etiam Judaeos ad fidem converti. Nec loqui Apostolum de spirituali,
sed de carnali Israele, ex v. 12. and 14. evincitur.

2. Manifestum est Apostolum voluisse Judaeos peculiari encomio ornare, and
consolatione erigere. At nisi credatur praedicere Israelitarum plenam
conversionem, nihil ad scopum dixisset.

3. Vaticinia, Prophetica, v. 26, 27. allegata, non desigularibus quibusdam
Judaeis, sed de ipsa populi multitudine loquuntur. Origines his addit, ex Hos.
Cap. 2. Israel quaeret, salutem in stigatus dicens apud semetipsum illud
Propheticum; revertar ad virum meum priorem quia melius mihi erat ante quam
modo.

4. Etiam Johanni Apoc. Cap. 7. Videtur revelata fuisse sub extremis temporibus
futura Israelis plena conversio; quando quatuor Angeli prohibentur nocere
terrae and mari donec obsignentur 144000. servorum Dei in frontibus suis ex
omnibus tribubus filiorum Israelis, ex TRIBU Judae 12000. and ex reliquis
TRIBUBUS singulis totidem. Quod O^aculum ad literam de CONVERSIONE JUDAEORUM
plane intelligendum videtur, quoniam Israelitae signati in frontibus ibi
discernuntur diserte a signatis gentibus, populis, and linguis reliquis, verse.
9.

5. Add, quod ex populis antiquissimis soli Judaei in tam variis casibus
Captivitate, and dispersione perstant, and servantur adhuc Civili victu and
religione ab omnibus separati; inde ab orb condito originem, and historiam
suam conservantes. Id haud dubie admittendum, and singular est opus Dei; quod
indubitato arguit hunc populum, ad aliquam futuram salutem conservari.

6. Denique patres complures in hanc sentent^am inclinant, quod ingressa
Gentium plenitudine etiam Judaei sint reversuri ad Christum. Origines sic; Si
pro eo ut introiret gentium plenitudo, caecitas facta est in Israel, pro
omnibus quae fecerunt; sine dubio cum ingressa fuerit gentium plenitudo,
caecitas cessabit. Videatur etiam Chrysostomus, Homil. 12. de verbo Dom. in
Marc. Tom. 2. cum agit de ficu, verbo domini arefacta. Hilar. lib. 11. de Trin.
and sup. Psalm. 58. and 60. Augustinus qu. 148. super Genesin utramque
sententiam refert. Item Ambrosius and Hieronymus in hunc locum. Dionysius
Carth. Totus Israel, i.e. Totus populus Judaeorum salvus fiet credendo in
Christum.

Israelitae abducti (inquit Pareus) in Assyriam Captivitatem, dispersi sunt
atque permixti gentibis toto terrarum orb; nec unquam sunt recollecti in
populum Dei, sed mansit dispersio etiam temporibus Christi, and Apostolorum
hucusque, ut ex Epistolis Jacobi and Petri Constat. Haec Pareus.

3
Lorinus a Jesuit in his COMMENTARY on Act. 1.6. quotes diverse learned and
godly Ancients, as Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Cyprian, Hierom, Chrysostom,
Theophilus, Alexandrinus, Austin, and Bid that understand this question of the
Apostles in this Act. 1.6. Of restoring the Kingdom to Israel, of a temporal
Kingdom. And because says Lorinus, I see all these of that mind, it may be,
says he, understood of such a Kingdom. However (says he) this error in the
Disciples, yet ignorant, being rank among the carnal Jews, might be
tolerated; But the error shall I say, or Heresy of the Chiliasts, or
Millenaries is less to Damasus the Pope condemned Apollinaris upon this
consideration, or by this very name. (Observe, Reader, the wise reason Lorinus
gives of condemning the opinion, what ever the particulars of it were; namely
because the Pope condemned it. A reason to a grounded Protestant, to suspect
that the opinion in whole was unjustly condemned according to that Proverb, It
is good Religion that bad Nero persecutes) before which Apollinaris, besides
heretical Cerinthus (says Lorinus) Papias, Irenaeus Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Nep^s, Lactantius, Sulpitius, and others, I suppose less pertinaciously, were
of this opinion. To which also Austine did once incline. And of others there is
mention Eusebius, Hierom, and our Ribera expounding the 20 Chapter of the
Revelat. From which chiefly the said Fathers are to be thought to take hint of
their opinion, besides the testimonies of the Old Testament, etc. And perhaps,
both the later Fathers, and especially the Disciples of Christ did interpret
the Petition of the Lords Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, and that place in Matthew.
26.29. (Now Reader thou hear Lorinus make a good Confession; And thou will
hear more then this from him as he goes on) I marvelled (says he) when I
read in Tully Crispold, otherwise a pious man, in his manuscript Annotations
upon this place, which are in our Library, thus;

It shall in time come to pass (says Tul. Crisp.) when the TIME OF NATIONS or
THE TIME OF THE GENTILES shall be fulfilled, that the City Jerusalem shall be
restored, and there shall reign the JEWS of the house of David, and the
Priests of the Tribe of Levi shall offer Christian sacrifices, and also legal,
albeit of these (legal ones) they shall offer but a certain, as it were,
image and representation, as now some Christians taste a Lamb in the
Passover. Moreover there shall be Elias (perhaps the PROPER APOSTLE of them at
that time;) The Apostles of Christ nevertheless, then also existing, yea,
CHRIST himself at least sometime appearing, and conversing among them.

That is certain (says Lorinus) That the KINGDOM is to be RESTORED to the
ISRAELITES and JEWS before the end of the world, etc. as you have it in the
Latin.

Lay all together, and you may plainly perceive that Lorinus knew, and could
not deny it, but that in all Ages since the Apostles learned men have been of
our mind touching a glorious state of the Church yet to come before the
ultimate day of judgment.

3
JOHANNES LORINUS e societat Jesu, Commentariis in Acta Apostolorum haec habet,
in versum 6. Cap. primi; scilicet [igitur] illativa (inquit Lorinus) significat
Discipulos (quod mirum simul videri potest) non minus quam cum de passione sua
loquente CHRISTO, primas pro liberis fedes matter illa postulavit, cum Christo
egisset de regno Dei, etc. occasionem tamen accepisse interrogandi de regno
temporali. Hoc mulio probabilius, ut etiam Oecumenius sentit quam ut cum
Chrysostomo de Judicii die, et consummatione seculi. Quid enim his cum
restitutione regni Israel?

Fieri potest, quoniam and alios patres video sequi Chrysostomum and
Hieronymum, Cyprianum, Theophilum, Alexandrinum, Augustinum (cum Beda hoc loco,
Justinus, Irenaeus, passimque) de temporali regno intelligatur, ut quamvis
Discipuli non aliud quam de RESTITUTIONE, seu ut duo illi peregrini
lequebantur, de redemptione Israel interrogaverint, tamen Christus respondendo,
etiam ad FUTURUM SECULUM respexit, quo tandem cognoscetur regnum ipsius non
esse de hoc mundo.

(Verum pace Lorini Apostolus ad Hebr. cap. 2. and alibi, ponit regnum in
seculo ^uturo, in mundo, quamvis non facit ex mundo, ut postea abundantius
disputabitur.)

Sed age, audiamus Lorinum; pergit ad hunc modum. Tolerari potuit utcunque in
rudibus adhuc Discipulis error apud Judaeos carnales vigens, etc. sed minus
ferendus Chiliastarum, seu Millenariorum errorne dicam, an haeresis, cum
Apollinarem, hoc nomine, Papa Damasus damnaverit; ante quem, praeter haereticum
Cerinthum, Papias, Irenaeus, Justinus, Tertullianus, Nepos, Lactantius,
Sulpitius (quamvis hic fuerit aliquando recentior) aliique minus, ut existimo,
pertina citer, idem sibi de [generali] post Mill annos RESURRECTIONE and
TEMPORALI QUODAM REGNO persuaserant.

Quo aliquando Augustinus etiam propendet. De aliis meminit Eusebius, and
Hieron imus, and noster Ribera, exponens Apocalypsis caput vigesimum; UNDE illi
po^issimum ita existimandi ansam sumpserant, praeter veteris Testamenti, quibus
aeque ad illum suum errorem Judaei utuntur, testimonia, and fortasse in hunc
sensum, tum posteriores patres, tum praecipue Discipuli Christi
interpretabantur orationis Dominicae petitionem de Adventu regni, and verba
illa Christi (Matthew. 26.29.) Non bibam amodo de hoc genimine vitis, usque in
diem illum, cum bibam illud vobiscum novum in regno patris mei.

(Been jam confitetur Lorinus sed audiamus ad finem.)

Miratus sum cum legi apud Tullium Crispoldum, pium ^aeteroqui virum, in
manuscriptis notationibus ad hunc locum quae sunt in Bibliotheca nostra;
Futurum olim, quando fuerit impletum, TEMPUS NATIONUM ut restituatur Civitas
Jerusalem; ut ibi regnent de domo David Judaei, atque de tribu LEVI sacerdotes
sacrificaturi CHRISTIANA sacrificia, simul etiam legalia, quamvis ILLORUM
duntaxat quandam seu EFFIGIEM, and REPRAESENTATIONEM, ut nunc Christiani quidam
agnum Paschate degustant; praeterea ut sit Elias (FORTASSE PROPRIUS TUNC
ILLORUM APOSTOLUS) EXISTENTIBUS QUOQUE TAMEN CHRISTI APOSTOLIS, and CHRISTO
IPSO saltem aliquando COMPARENTE, and inter illos VERSANIE, etc.

Illud certum est (inquit Lorinus) RESTITUENDUM REGNUM ISRAEL ac JUDAEIS sub
mundi finem, hoc sensu ut ad Christi spirituale regnum aggregati, transferantur
demum in Caeleste. Siquidem diserte id reperimus apud JOANNEM, PAULUM ESAIAM,
OSEAM, DANIELEM, MALACHIAM, etc. Sic Lorinus, contra nostram Thesin, necnon
secum conflictans, multas authoritates omnis generis, and res pro Thesi profert.

4
Doctor Alsted, a German has written in a Latin Treatise for our Position,
called Diatribe, that is, A Disputation concerning the Apocalyptical THOUSAND
YEARS not those of the CHILIASTS (properly so called) and Phantasticks, but of
blessed Daniel and John.

WILLIAM BURTON.

Author, Work, and Subject. The AUTHOR is of a general repute among us for
learning, as any late Writer, we have received beyond the Seas, these many
years; and the WORK is an explanation of the twentieth Chapter of the
Revelation. The SUBJECT thereof is the assertion of the GLORIOUS KINGDOM OF
CHRIST HERE ON EARTH; a matter, no doubt of great comfort, and consolation to
the Church of God.

I am not ignorant that Apocalyptical Discourses in general are liable to many
censures; and that this divine Prophecy it self is as yet a sealed Book. Yet
receiving my self MUCH SATISFACTION and SETTLEDNESSE of MIND from THIS
EXPOSITION thereof; I thought also Gods people might reap some benefit thereby,
and this is the maine cause I have made it public.

In his second Epistle before the same Translation, he gives us this account
of the History of the opinion of THE THOUSAND YEARS. Let me tell thee good
Reader, That it was the CONSTANT opinion of the Church in the very next age to
the Apostles, that THERE SHOULD BE A RESURRECTION BEFORE THE GENERAL RISING
AT THE LAST DAY, and an HAPPY CONDITION OF THE FAITHFUL UPON EARTH FOR A
THOUSAND YEARS. This we may learn from TERTULLIAN ( against MARCION) and
IRENAEUS, (in his Tractates against all Heresies) and JUSTIN MARTYR in his
Dialogue with TRYPHO the Jew) And so goes on touching briefly out of JUSTIN
MARTYR what we have before largely quoted. And then he adds his own
judgment in these words, I know not (says he) whether so great a Testimony
as this of JUSTIN MARTYR may be brought concerning any opinion among Christians
(if you except the maine Articles of our faith.) And the general consent of
all the ORTHODOX, and in the Age next the Apostles, is no small argument or
prejudice against the contrary opinion, or succeeding Ages. It seemed the
HERETICS of those times, ESPECIALLY, or indeed ONLY, believed it not, and
that for some private respect, because admitting thereof, they must needs also
confess a RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH, and that the same God that is mentioned
in the LAW and PROPHETS is also the FATHER OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. I am sure
CERINTHUS, that ARCH-HERETICK in those days, whom after ages do make the
first broacher of this opinion, is never taxed for it by them, who have
diligently noted his HERESIES. And perhaps if he had any sensual conceit
hereal out (as it seems he had) he was beholding to JUDAISME for it; and he
himself being a JEW, it was not taken notice of in him. But for a HRISTIAN to
have such doting imaginations, it would render him more wild-headed. Yet no man
ought to he blamed for maintaining a TRUTH in a JEWS company, either in THIS
MATTER or any else; if with heed be pass by those gross fantasies which do
blemish the truth. More deservedly may we find fault with DIONYSIUS, and his
followers, the great impugners of this opinion, who when about the end of the
third AGE, the dispute about it grew very hot, to lessen the Authority of the
REVELATION, by the evident and undeniable proofs whereof, the matter in
question was asserted (a foul impiety) they fathered it upon I know not whom,
yet one of the same name, against the manifest witness of JUSTIN, IRENAEVS,
and all the FATHERS before them, who inscribe it to JOHN THE BELOVED DISCIPLE OF
CHRIST, and EVANGELIST. Neither can HIEROME himself be excused, though a very
learned man otherwise, but easy to be deceived, who with the same DIONYSIVS
does (upon an uncertain report) falsely affixe to the opinion, of them who
according to truth believed the THOUSAND YEARS happiness on Earth, the INJVRY
OF CIRCVMCISION, THE BLOOD OF SACRIFICES, etc. which old pieces of JUDAISME, or
perhaps the dreams of some HERETICS being gathered out of a study of
contention and ill will, were patcht to this opinion of the PRIMITIVE CHURCH.
But IF he CERTAINLY knew that the FIRST CHRISTIANS and holy MARTYRS did expect
Circumcision, and Sacrifices in the Kingdom of Christ, how is he to be blamed
that condemned them not for it, but left every man to the freedom of his own
judgment, either to approve or dislike thereof, as Hierom expresses himself
openly.

But what countenance soever this opinion has, or shall find in this age, let
me tell the Reader this one thing; that seeing there are so manifest proo^es of
a GLORIOUS KINGDOM OF THE SAINTS ON EARTH, out of the Old Testament, there
will be not better, or readier way to deal with the Jews in matter of their
conversion, then not to wrest the pla^ne Prophesies of a SECOND and GLORIOUS
APPEARANCE OF CHRIST, to his FIRST COMING, but rather to persuade them, that
they must expect no other MESSIAH, who should fulfill all these promises
(expecting what is to be expected) besides that JESUS OF NAZARETH whom their
Ancestors crucified. And this way is every where almost insisted upon
throughout the whole REVELATION. For whiles we force those most clear
Prophesies concerning things promised in the SECOND COMING, to his FIRST
COMING, the JEWS scorn, and deride us, and are more and more confirmed in
their infidelity. But for the course which I have here set down, I am much
mistaken, if it be not the same which was observed among them by PETER
himself, Act. 3, 19, 20, 21. REPENT YE THEREFORE, and BE CONVERTED, THAT YOUR
SINS MAY BE BLOTTED OUT WHEN THE TIME OF REFRESHING SHALL COME FROM THE
PRESENCE OF THE LORD. AND HE SHALL SEND JESUS CHRIST WHICH BEFORE WAS PREACHED
TO YOU, WHOM THE HEAVENS MUST RECEIVE UNTIL THE TIMES OF RESTITUTION OF ALL
THINGS WHICH GOD HAS SPOKEN BY THE MOUTH OF ALL HIS HOLY PROPHETS SINCE THE
WORLD BEGAN.

TENENT, rather in another man's sense and expressions, then in mine own, being
more willing to learn, then obtrude mine own weaknesses. To this end I have
also collected (He means in his Notes on his translation of ALSTED, put in
the Margin, as I suppose) What some of the most eminent DIVINES of the Church
of ENGLAND, Dr. HAKEWELL, Dr. TWISSE, Mr. MEDE, etc. (that thou might not
think it only an Outlandish toy, or fantasy of yesterday, much less a
savouring of POPERY) have thought, and published concerning this opinion.

Besides the irrefragable judgment of divine TYCHO BRAHE, and with him the
determination of CAROLUS GALLUS, omitted by ALSTED, and not long since one of
the STATES PROFESSORS OF DIVINITY in the University of LEYDEN.

4.
DIATRIBE de MILL ANNIS APOCALYPTICIS, non illis CHILIASTARUM, and
PHANTASTARUM, sed BB Danielis, and Johannis, per JOHANNEM HENRICUM ALSTEDIUM.
Francofurti. 1627.

W. BURTON (cum doct is suis Annotationibus in margin juxia positis) in
nostram linguam vernaculam transtulit.

AUTHORI, tum OPERI, tum etiam SUBJECTO, hoc encomiasticum per hibet
testimonium. AUTHOR eruditione, aequalis censetur aestimationis cuilibet
Scriptorum recentium transmarinorum, mult is abbinc annis transactis. OPUS est
exegesis vigesimi Capitis Apocalypsis. SUBJECIUM ejus est splendentis regni in
terra Christi assertio; res maximi proculdubio solaminis Ecclesiae Dei, and
consolationis. Non me latet Apocalypticos plerumque discursus, multis
obtrectationibus esse expositos, ipsamque hanc Prophetiam etiamnum librum
fuisse obsignatum. Quum vero ego ipse multum ex hac illius exegese
satisfactionis recepissem, statui apud me item Dei populum ex eadem aliquid
fructus posse emetere. Quod sane praecipuum fuit in causa me illam omnium
publicam fecisse.

In EPISTOLA ejus secunda eidem praeposita in hunc modum, opinionis nostrae
HISTORICE rationem reddit. Quam brevibus sic accipite. Liceat mihi bone lector
tibi narrare, perpetuam fuisse opinionem seculi Apostolis proximi
RESURRECTIONEM fore ante ILLAM Die ultimo generalem, beatamque fidelium
conditionem in TERRA MILL ANNOS. Hoc nos edocebunt Tertullianus (contra
Marcion) Irenaeus (contra Haeres.) nec non Justinus Martyr (in Dialog cum
Tryph. Jud.) ut prolixius e Justino nos antea citavimus. Quibus Justini verbis
hanc suam addit sententiam. Nescio (inquit) an tantum, ut hoc JUSTINI,
testimonium pro aliqua Christianorum opinione (exceptis fundamentalibus fidei
articulis) afferri possit. Generalis autem ORTHODOXORUM consensus, seculo
proxime post APOSTOLOS insequenti, non pusillum aestimetur argumentum, vel
praejudicium contra adversam opinionem aetatemque succedaneam. Videtur
HAERETICOS eorundem temporum praecipuos, vel revera solos, huic opinioni non
credidisse, priva^a quadam ratione; ne ILLA concessa Carnis fore
resurrectionem, eundemque Deum, a lege and Prophetis decantatum, patrem etiam
fuisse Domini nostri Jesu Christi, confessionem ab iis extorqueret. Constat
mihi CERINTHUM, tunc dierum Haeresiarcham, quem succedaneae aetates statuunt
hujus opinionis originem, nequaquam de hac, ab iis qui acura^e notarun^ ejus
haereses, perstringi invenimus. Fortasse etiam, si carnales aliquot phantasiae
de HAC RE illi fuerint (ut videtur) ipse Judaeus Iudaismo acceptas refert, quae
in hoc INDIGENA (non mirum) minime animadvertebantur CHRISTIANUM equidem
redderet, minus insanum qui in istiusmodi phantasmatibus deliraret. Nemo tamen
culpandus est, quod veritatem defenderit, in hac a^^ave materia, concomitante
Iudaeo, modo illus mittat chimaeras quae veritatem desormarent. Dignius mulio
DIONYSIUM e jusqueasseclas, maximos hu^c epinioni Antagonistas, increpemus,
qucum expiranti, prope tertiam aetatem, valde efferverat haec disputatio; ad
minuendam APOCALYPSIS authoritatem, cujus evidenti testimonio Quaes ITUM
assereretur librum authori nescio cut supposititio, ejusdem nominis obtrudunt
contra manifestisma IUSTINI, IRENAEI, omniumque PATRUM testimonia, qui JOHANNI
DILECTO CHRISTI DISCIPULO and EVANGELISTAE penitus ascribunt. Nec excusari
possit HIERONIMUS ipse, quamvis alias doctus, sed captus facile, qui simul cum
eodem Dionysio (ex incertiori quadam fama) mendose affigit opinioni illorum qui
juxta veritatem credunt Millenariam in terris faelicitatem, injuriam hanc
circumcisionis, sacrificiorum sanguinis, etc. Quae obsoleta Judaismi fragmenta,
aut forte Haereticorum somnia, ex contentionis studio, seu malevole collecta,
huic Primitivae Ecclesiae opinioni consarcinata fuerunt. Verum enimvero si
exploratum habuerit Hieronimus, primaevos illos Christianos, Martyresque
Circumcisionem and sacrificia in Christi regno expectasse, quantopere
incusandus est quod illos de isto crimine non damnaverit, sed quemque suae
ipsius relinquit voluntati. Quae, (inquit) LICET NON SEQUAMUR, DAMNARE NON
POSSUMUS: UNUS QUISQUE IN SUO SENSU ABUNDET. Hieron. In Hierem. cap. 19. verse.
10.

Quamcunque vero gratiam ab hac aetate inierit haec opinio, hoc unum, lector,
tibi narrem; quod cum testimonia sint adeo manifesta e veteri Testamento de
splendido Christi in terris regno, non faelicior, aut promptior aliqua
suggeratur via, qua cum Judaeis de illorum conversione transigamus, quam ut
Prophetias de inclyto secundoque Christi adventu apertissimas ad primum non
torqueamus. Suadeamus potius eos neminem alium MESSIAM, promissiones illas
impleturum, expectare oportet (expectatis expectandis) praeter JESUM NAZARENUM,
quem Majores eorum crucifixerunt. Hac autem in via ubivis plerumque per totam
Apocalypsin insistitur. Dum enim liquidas illas Prophetias de promissis ad
secundum illius adventum cogimus in primum, Judaei nos contemnunt, ridentque,
magis in sua insidelitate stabiliti. Ea vero ratio quam ipse staetui, ni
plurimum me mea fallat sententia, eadem est omnino, quam apud Judaeos
observavit ipse Petrus Act. 3.19, 20, 21. RESIPISCITE IGITUR, ET CONVERTIMINI,
UT DELEANTUR PECCATA VESTRA, postquam venerint TEMPORA REFRIGERATIONIS A
CONSPECTU DOMINI Et miserit prius praedicatum vobis JESUM CHRISTUM, QUEM
OPORTET quidem caeli capiant, usque ad TEMPORA RESTITUTIONIS OMNIUM, de quibus
loquutus est Deus a saeculo per Os OMNIUM SUORM PROPHETARUM.

Anglicani, Hakewellus, Twisseus, Medus aliique publicarunt de hac opinione, ex
quibus eam, nugamentum aliquod exoticum, hesternamve phantasiam, aliudve
quicquam quod sapiat Papismum, non dijudicares. Sententiam praeterea (Collegi)
irrefragabilem Divini Tycho Brahe cum determinatione (quam omisit Alstedius)
Caroli Galli, nuper Primorum Belgicorum professoris Theologiae in Academia
Lugdunensi.

4.
In the fourth place let us hear Hierome Zanchy upon Hosea; The sum of whose
mind demonstratively held forth is, That the ISRAELITES shall be restored from
their earthly Captivity, unto, and into their own Country, though they were
never yet so restored. See, who can, the quotation in Latin in his own words,
which much conduces to our Position, as we shall see more after.

4.
Hieronymus Zanchius in primum Cap. Hoseae v. 11. Et congregabuntur filii Juda,
and filii Israel simul, etc. ita narrat arguitque. Erit magnus and illustris
TOTI MUNDO dies (liberandi) Jezreelis antea disseminati inter varias gentium
terras. Ergo omnino ascendent, i. e. redibunt a captivitate in patriam suam
Judaeam, omnes Jezreelitae, tam Israel quam Juda. Israelitae non fuerunt
liberati unquam sua terrena captivitate, nec redierunt in patriam, ut patet ex
superioribus. Hoc etiam historiae docent, abducti enim ab Assure in Assyriam and
Mediam, non leguntur ab eo fuisse dimissi. Regno vero Assyriorum Babyloniis per
Merodacum subjecto, in captivitate itidem permanserunt Babyloniis subjecti. Cum
vero postea Deioces, qui primas apud Medos regia dignitate usus est, ab
Assyriorum, Babyloniorumque jugo Medos liberasset, Israelitae multis de causis
fuerunt e terris Medorum, in ulteriores regiones, nempe in Septentrionem, quo
omnis spes redeundi ad suos, illis tolleretur, expulsi, and quidem dispersi.
Qua de re vide^tur Funce. Comment. lib. 1. page 23. Itaque videamus, cum Media,
Babylonia, and Assyria in manum pervenit Cyri regis, facta liberate omnibus
Israelitis redeundi in patriam, solos Jehudaeos, and Benjamin, quae conjuncta
erat cum Juda, and Levitas (qui quoniam noluerunt vitulis sacrificare, expulsi
a Jeraboamo redierunt Hierosolymam, and cum Judaeis se conjunxerunt, ut est 2.
Paralip. 11. v. 13, 14, cap. 13. v. 9.) rediisse, ut est Ezra cap. 1. and cap.
2. Nisi fuissent reliquae Tribus in ulteriores regiones dispersae, illae
potuissent quoque redire. Tempore etiam quo natus est Dominus, SAMARIA cum
aliis terris Israelitarum occupata erat ab illis gentibus, quae eo missae
fuerant a rege Assure, ISRAELITARUM loco, ut est. 2. Reg. 17. Itaque videmus
Israelitas nunquam a captivitate terrena liberatos in patriam rediisse.

5.
Next hear A lapide a late writer, who though a Papist, yet was not so
opposite to the point in hand, and the general conversion of the Jews (as
were our late Bishops in England) but that he would speak thus much for it;
That those words, Hosea 3. v. 5. Afterward the children of Israel shall
return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear
the Lord, and his goodness in the LATER DAYS are to be fulfilled in the end
of the World, at which time the Israelites and Jews shall be converted to
Christ, even as I have said (says Alapide) Apocalypse 11. For then all Israel
shall be saved, Romans 11.26. The Reader that consults with the Latin in the
Margin shall perceive more. 6.

. 5.
R. P. Cornelius Cornelii A lapide in 3. Cap. Hos. v. 5. Et post haec
revertentur filii Israel and quaerent Dominum Deum suum and David Regem suum,
and pavebunt ad Dominum, and bonum ejus in novissimo dierum; haec habet verba.
In fine (inquit) mundi quando sub adventum Antichristi, maxim post eum
occisum, ISRAELITAE and IUDAEI qui ei viventi and regnanti adhaeserant, partim
memores concionum and miraculorum Eliae and Enoch, partim aliorum concio
natorum exhortatione convertentur ad Christum, ut dixi Apocalyp. 11. Tunc enim
omnis Israel salvus fiet, Romans 11.26. Hugo, Lyran, and alii passim. Secundo,
Isidor, and a Castro haec facta putant in incarnatione Christi, scilicet
inchoate; tunc enim pauci ex Israel converti Caeperunt. Errant alii, qui haec
praestita putant in laxatione Iudaeorum e Babylone facta per Cyrum.

. 6.
Rivet also upon the first Chap. of Hosea, does discourse learnedly for the
restitution of ISRAEL, in regard part of them, that is some sprinklings of them
as a certain First Fruits, did return after the Babylonish Captivity. See who
may, the Latin Column.

. 6.
Quaeritur (inquit Rivetus in primum cap. Hoseae) ab interpretibus number ex hac
Prophetia certo colligatur december Tribus nunquam ex captivitate rediisse,
quemadmodum aliae duae post aliquot annos ex captivitate Babylonica redierunt?
Ratio dubitandi est, quod in hoc ipso capite subditur; Et congregabuntur filii
JUDA and filii ISRAEL pariter, etc. and Ezekiel. cap. 37. Sub Symbolo duorum
lignorum in unum coeuntium, vaticinatur, Judam and Israel conjungendos. Et Jer.
c. 50. v. 4. aperte dicit, Venient in tempore illo filii Israel ipsi and filii
Juda simul. Ubi videtur CERTASPES RESTITUTIONIS, etiam DECEMBER TRIBUBUS fieri.
Nihilominus certum est REMpublicam illam DECEMBER TRIBUUM, nunquam postea
coivisse. Et eorum captivitatem and dispersionem in populos, perpetuam fuisse
nec solutam unquam fuisse, eorum captivitatem, quod Josephus ipse Anti. Jud. l.
11. c. 5. agnoscit; dum scribit, Duas tantum tribus per ASIAM and EUROPAM sub
ROMANO degere imperio; december autem Tribus fuisse ultra EUPHRATEM, infinita
hominum millia, quae vix numero erat comprehendere. Nusquam etiam legimus in
Scriptura december illas tribus rediise, quod de duabus legimus, and saepe
praedictum, and postea impletum. SAMARITANI enim, quorum fit mentio saepe in
Evangelio, nullo modo pertinebant ad filios JACOB, quos aliunde missos fuisse,
tanquam novam aliquam Coloniam constat ex 2 Reg. cap. 17. v. 24. Et ideo
Christus Matthew. 10. Viam gentium, cum civitatibus Samaritanorum pro eadem re
habet. In viam (inquit) Gentium ne abjeritis, and in civitates Samaritanorum ne
intraveritis, sed ite potius ad oves perditas Israel. Non tamen negandum est,
multos fuisse ex ali is tribubus, etiam tempore Domini nostri in Juda; sed qui
sub Judaeorum Republica degebant; quod factum fuisse ab eo tempore quo regnum
Israelis divisum sub Jeroboamo, author est Josephus, Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 3. Tunc
ad Rehoboamum Hierosolymis degentem e tota Israelitarum ditione confluxisse
sacerdotes, and Levitas, and quotquot e plebe reliqua erant boni acjusti
patriam suam reliquisse, ut Hierofolymis Deum colere liceret, offensi Jeroboami
tyrannide, qui eos ad vitularum suarum adorationem vi adigere volebat. Quae
confirmantur ex historia 2 Paralip. cap. 11. v. 13, 14, 16. Ex his, and
similibus potest solvi objectio pro restitutione Israelitarum, ducta ex eo quod
multorum ex december Tribubus fit mentio, qui cum Judaeis habitabant post
Captivitatem Babylonicam. Sic Rivetus.

. 7.
Nicolaus de Lyra, goes further then these, affirming that the promise of the
ISRAELITES great return from their dispersion, cannot be meant of the people
of JUDA'S return from the Babylonish Captivity, nor of any other subsequent
temporal salvation, because according to the Hebrew Doctors, and truth, the
people of ISRAEL, as it is contra-distinct from the people of JUDA, are not
returned from Captivity, neither are expected by the Jews to return, till the
coming of Messiah, whom the Jews expect yet to come.

. 7.
Nicolaus de Lyra Part. 2, Part. 3, Part. 4. Ait de captivitate Babylonica
redierunt tantum duae tribus and pauci ex december tribubus qui evaserant manus
regis Assyriorum; and postea habitaverunt in regno IUDAE, and cum duabus
tribubus captivati fuerunt, and redierunt; non tamen omnes, sed plures de istis
and de illis remanserunt in Babylonia, detenti amore uxorum quas ibi acceperant
and prolis quam genuerant, and bonorum temporalium quae acquisierant. Illud non
potest intelligi de reditione Captivitatis Babylonicae, nec de aliqua alia
sequenti salvatione temporali, quia secundum Doctores Hebraeorum, and secundum
veritatem, populus ISRAEL prout distinguitur contra populum JUDA, sicut est
hic, non est reversus de Captivitate, nec a Judaeis expectatur reverturus usque
ad tempus Messiae, quem Judaei expectat venturum, sed quia Judaei, qui
crediderunt ad praedicationem Christi and Apostolorum fuerunt pauci respective,
idcirco melius intelligitur quod dicitur hic, viz. Jer. 30.3. Et convertam
conversionem populi mei ISRAEL and JUDAH de generali conversione Judaeorum ad
Christum In diebus illis. Hoc proprie in Christi adventu completur, cum
duodecim tribus scilicet Evangelio credunt and terram Aquilonis relinquunt, and
Diaboli imperium. Haec Nicolaus.

. 8.
Doctor Mayer on the Epistle of James, touching the twelve Tribes scattered,
etc. v. i. says, That though this Epistle was intended for the two Tribes and
an half of the Jews lately expelled from Jerusalem by Claudius Caesar; the
ten Tribes after their carrying away by Salmanaser never returning to this day
that we read of, yet James might have respect in his writing to the ten Tribes
also, if happily by any means this Epistle should come to any of their hands.

. 8.
Doctor Mayer in Epistolam Jacobi, haec habet verba; Initio hujus capitis nihil
difficultatis inest, nisi quod eos, ad quos scribit, duodecim tribus dispersas
appellat. Si enim Epistola haec institueretur pro Judaeis, nuper per Claudium
Caesarem Hierofolyma expulsis, ut ante praefati sumus; Quaestio oritur, quo
pacto illos diceret duodecim tribus, quae omnes non nisi duae fuerunt cum
semisse; caeteris, a captivitate sua per Salmanasarem, nunquam (uti legimus) ad
hunc usque diem redeuntibus? Respondetur, dici potest Jacobum inter scribendum
ad illas etiam respexisse, si forte ullo modo haec Epistola in illarum manus
perveniret. Sic Mayer.

. 9.
Doctor Prideaux our Countryman, however he be against us about the stating
of the one thousand years (how justly, we shall afterward, God permitting,
dispute the case) has in his Inaugurall Orations, these words: Rightlier
therefore others think, that after the Roman Idol-madnesse is vanquished, and
the Mahumetan blasphemies are taken away from among them, the Jews shall lift
up their eyes to the mountains of the Scripture from whence, by the Spirit
inwardly illuminating, they shall attain light and salvation. This opinion,
which refuses legal rights, as deadly, declines Monarchy, as aerie and
utopian; nor thinks it sufficient to answer to the Apostles MYSTERY, if in any
age, one or other of the Jews come to the Christian faith, neither approves in
that hoped general Call of them, the return of Enoch and Elija, nor does put
before it, that fullness of the Gentiles, but according to the direction of the
Text, sets it after; I say this opinion among the Ancients, Chrysostom,
Hilary, Austin, Ambrose, Hierom, Aquinas, Scotus, Cajetanus, and many others
do embrace; only touching some accessories, now and then every one will
abound in his own sense. They that defend it among the later Writers are P.
Martyr, Grinaeus, Beza, Pareus, and most largely, a Commentator of our own, in
his most learned Hexapla (namely Dr. Willet.) Nor do I see what solidly can
be opposed. Thou will say when the Son of man shall come, shall he find
faith on earth? Doubtless not so frequent in the hearts of justified ones, as
floting upon the lips of hypocrites. For does it seem strange, that among most
Professors not so many sincere ones are to be found, seeing that out of many
that are called, a few are chosen? But, That wicked one (2 Thessalonians. 2.8.) shall
reign so long, as till he be consumed with the spirit of the mouth of the
Lord, at this glorious coming. How then can it be that between the ruin of
Antichrist, and the end of the world, so famous a Call of the Jews should
intervene? Most easily, because the Spirit shall not in a moment make an end of
him, but gradually. And his coming may be said to be glorious, not with the
full majesty of him as present at first; but by certain premised beams of him
approaching. Mean while when and how, that which the Apostle here foretells is
to be fulfilled is not requisite perhaps for us to understand to an inch,
seeing it is a mystery. Nor might I think in the mean space that the Jews
after such a conversion shall make a withdrawing from the Gentiles, but rather
they with them shall integrate themselves into one and the same Church.

Doctor Prideaux Anglus, quondam Theologiae professor Regius in Academia
Oxoniensi, quamvis contra nos contendat de MILL annorum statu and
constitutione (quam just 4. Libro annuente Deo disputabitur) tamen in
ORATIONUM suarum INAUGURALIUM sexta Parag. 7. DE VOCATIONE JUDAE ORUM, haec
habet verba. Rectius igitur alii, post deletam Romanam Idolomaniam; Et e medio
sublatis Mahomatismi blasphemi is, Judaeos arbitrantur oculos ad montes
Scripturae elevaturos; unde Spiritu intus illuminante, lucem and salutem
consequentur. Hanc sententiam quae legalia aversatur, ut mortifera, Monarchiam
declinat, ut aeream sive utopicam, nec sufficere putat ad Apostoli MYSTERIUM,
si QUOVIS seculo, unus vel alter Judaeus ad fidem Christianam accedat, nec
probat in expectanda ista GENERALI VOCATIONE Henochi and Elijae reditum, nec
praeponit istam plenitudinem Gentium, sed, ut textus dirigit, POSTPONIT;
amplectuntur inter Antiquiores Chrysostomus, Hilarious, Augustinus, Ambrosius,
Hieronimus, Aquinas, Scotus, Cajetanus, and COMPLURES Alii, nisi quod de
quibusdam accessori is, non nunabundabit unusquisque suo sensu. Defendunt inter
recentiores, P. Martyr, Beza, Grinaeus, Paraeus, and in Hexapla sua doctissima
Commentator e nostris copiosissimus (nimirum Doctor Willetus.) Nec video quid
solid potest opponi. Filius (inquies hominis cum venerit, number reperturus est
fidem in terra? Non adeo frequentem proculdubio in cordibus justificatorum,
quam natantem in labris hypocritarum. Ecquid enim rarum videtur, inter
Professores plurimos, non adeo multos sinceros inveniri? Cum ex vocatis multis,
pauci subinde eligantur. At tamdiu regnabit (...) (2 Thessalonians. 2.) donec absumatur
spiritu oris domini in illustri illo suo adventu. Qui fieri igitur potest, ut
inter Antichristi excidium, and mundi finem, tam celebris intercedat Judaeorum
vocatio? Facillime, cum in momento spiritus ipsum non conficiet, sed gradatim,
and adventu dicatur illustris, non plena statim praesentis majestate, sed
praemissis appropinquantis radiis. Interim quando and quomodo implendum illud
sit, quod hic praedicit Apostolus, non requiritur forsan ut nos ad amussim
teneremus, quia est mysterium. Nec aestimaverim interea Judaeos post talem
conversionem, secessionem a Gentibus facturos etc. quinimo eos cum illis potius
crediderim coalituros, etc.

. 10.
Mr. R. Maton our Countryman, has also written two Books in favor of our
opinion; the one is called ISREAL'S REDEMPTION, or the Prophetical HISTORY OF
OUR SAVIORS, KINGDOM ON EARTH; That is, OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC, and
TRIUMPHANT; with a Discourse of GOG and MAGOG. The second is entitled thus,
ISREAL'S REDEMPTION REDEEMED, or THE JEWS GENERAL and MIRACULOUS CONVERSION to
the Faith of the Gospel, and return into their own Land; and our Saviors
personal reign on earth, clearly proved out of many plain Prophesies of the
Old and New Testament, and the chief arguments that can be alleged against
these truths fully answered, OF PURPOSE TO SATISFY ALL GAINSAYERS, and in
particular Mr. ALEXANDER PETRIE, Minister of the Scottish Church in ROTERDAM.
The later of these I confess I have not read, but only seen. The former I
have cursorily, and do find that though he apply and press the Scriptures
he alleges, but briefly, yet pertinently and solidly.

. 10.
Magister R. Maton Anglus duos scripsit anglice libros, quorum primum (quem
legi) appellat REDEMPTIONEM ISRAELIS, seu PROPHETICAM HISTORIAM DE SALVATORIS
NOSTRI REGNO IN TERRIS, etc. Secundum (a me nondum perlectum) nominat
REDEMPTIONEM ISRAELIS REDEMPTAM, sive JUDAEORUM GENERALEM and MIRACULOSAM
CONVERSIONEM AD FIDEM EVANGELII; Eorundemque in suam patriam reditum, nostrique
salvatoris imperium in terris personaliter ministratum, etc. In quibus, multos
recenset authors, ut pote Alstedium in Chronolog, cap. 32. and cap. 35. Fran.
Johannem de comb is in compendio totius Theologiae lib. 7. cap. 13, 14. It.
lib. 7. cap. 7. Foxum in Martyrolog. Anglic. * Wendelinum Contemplat. Natural.
cap. 9. sect: 2. and cap. 21. * sect. 2. Johan. Acostam De Temporalib. Noviss.
lib. 3. cap. 11. Down. in 17. Johan. Cum multis aliis, etc. quorum verba hic
describere nec mihi otium est nec animus, ne lector taedio affligeretur.

. 11.
Mr. Archer also an Englishman, has waded farther into the point then we
have, in some particulars (which are not so clear to us) having written (as we
are informed) two Treatises of it. The first is express under his name,
entitled, THE PERSONAL REIGN OF CHRIST UPON EARTH. The other is called,
ZIONS JOY IN HER KING COMING IN HIS GLORY; But doubtful whether his, being
subscribed with this dark name; BY FINIENS CANUS VOVE.

Nostras etiam Archerius altius paulo, (in nonnullis nobis minus
innotescentibus) urinatus, librum scripsit cujus titulus est, REGIMEN CHRISTI
PERSONALE IN TERRIS. Nec non (ut aiunt) alium cujus inscriptio est, GAUDIUM
ZIONIS IN REGE SUO CUM GLORIA VENIENTE.

. 12.
Learned Mr. Meade our Countryman, his Clavis Apocalyptica and Commentarius,
both in Latin and English, is famously known to most that read books.

Twisse his PREFACE does show the METHOD and excellency of Mr. MEDES
interpretation of the Revelation. It will not be amiss to give an account of
that Preface, in the sum of it, that by occasion hereof, other Nations that
understand not English, may have it in Latin, wherein at once is seen much of
Mr. Mede, and of the judgment of Dr. Twisse in our Position.

Many Interpreters (says Dr. Twisse, alluding to Prove. 31.29.) have done
excellently, but Mr. Mede surmounteth them all. A Daearse set upon a Giants
shoulders may see further, and a Wren carried up upon an Eagle till this great
bird be wearied, may with her little wings spin up a little higher. But Mr.
Mede has many notions of so rare a nature, that I do not find he is
beholding to any other for them, but only to his own studiousnesse under Gods
blessing.



As first, in his Clavis Apolyptica, wherein he has drawn together the
homogeneal parts of it, dispersed here and there, yet belonging to the same
time.

2. The Author gave himself to write Specimina, Essays, wherein he goes over
every part of this book (excepting the three first Chapters) taking a general
view of each as he goes.

3. He proceeds to a more full Commentary from the fourth Chapter to the
fourteenth. That which follows thence to the end contains only his former
Specimina.



2. A right accommodation of things to times;

For the first, Mr. Mede excels viz. in observing the Genius of all those. As
in opening the Mystery of the battle in heaven, Rev. 12. and the casting down
of Satan unto the earth, he shows that States and Kingdoms in the Political
world much answer to the condition of the Natural, and so represented in
Scripture. For as the Natural consists of Heaven and Earth, so the Political of
Nobility, and Laity. And as in the Heavens there are Sun, Moon, and Stars, of
lesser and greater magnitude; So in Kingdoms, King, Queen, and Nobles of
several degrees. And as in the Earth there is great variety of Trees, Herbs,
Flowers, etc. So in the people of any Commonwealth is found great variety of
differences. And by this way Mr. Mede does not only wittily please (as others
have done) but solidly convince his Reader, of the true sense, even to
admiration.

For the second, viz. Accommodation of the Prophesies to their proper times (a
point of great skill in history.) I have found that Mr. Medes friends,
acquainted with his studies, would give him the Bell for this, as herein
out-stripping others.

Mede, giving great light:

As first, That between the Sealed Book with seven seals which he calls the
greater, the contents being very large, viz. Comprising the History from the
beginning of the preaching of the Gospel, to the end of the world. Which he
says contains Fata imperii, i. e. the destinies of the Empire; and the little
book mentioned, Chap. 10. which he says contains Fata Ecclesiae the destinies
of the Church. The first contains the seven Seals and Trumpets; for the
seventh seal produces the seven Trumpets. The six first Seals contain the
story of the Empires continuance unto the days of Constantine included; in
whose days, there being a strange Metamorphosis of the Empire from Heathen to
Christian, it is represented, as it were, the ending of the world, and
beginning of a new, which Mr. Mede delivers very judiciously. Then the seven
Trumpets, which are the contents of the seventh Seal, represent the judgments
of God upon the world for standing out against the Gospel, and shedding the
blood of the Saints. First, by the Heathen Emperors, for which cause ruin was
gradually brought upon the Empire (till it was torn into ten Kingdoms.) The
graduall was fourefold, which make up the contents of the four first Trumpets.
2. By the Antichristian world, the degenerated states of Christendom; For
which, the three Woe Trumpets following, contain the three degrees of divine
vengeance on them, 1. By the Saracens in the first Woe Trumpet. 2. By the
Turks in the second (Chap. 9.) 3. By the end of the World, Rev. 11.15.


Mede gives upon Revel. 21.24. Between the NATIONS THAT ARE SAVED, etc. and the
NEW JERUSALEM; where clearly he makes it appear, that NEW JERUSALEM is one
thing, and THE NATIONS THAT ARE SAVED, are another. The Nations that are saved
are those that escape the fire, are saved from the fire at Christ's coming,
wherewith the Earth, and all the works thereof shall be burnt in the day of
Christ's coming, 2 Pet. 3. 2 Thessalonians 1. And the NEW JERUSALEM (says Mr. Mede) is
CHRIST and his RAISED SAINTS, who are called 1 These. 4. The SAINTS WHOM CHRIST
SHALL BRING WITH HIM, who shall shine with a glorious light. In which LIGHT the
other, viz. The NATIONS THAT ARE SAVED (that is, says Mr. Mede all the
faithful servants of God, who shall be found alive here at Christ's coming)
SHALL WALK IN. And I find that through the want of distinguishing these, the
ancient FATHERS, and particularly EPIPHANIUS, have discoursed very wildly
against the glorious Kingdom of Christ, here on earth, yet in just opposition
to the CERINTHIANS, whose guise it was to discourse very carnally of the
glorious Kingdom of Christ. The consideration whereof moved AUSTIN to
relinquish the doctrine of Christ's Kingdom here on earth, which formerly he
embraced, as himself professes in one of his books DE CIVITATE DEI, where he
treats thereof.

Mede has exceeded in merit all others before him in this Argument, so others
after him may go beyond him in some particulars. As Mr. Potter in the true
discovery of the number of the Beast 666. with the diverse mysteries in it,
wherewith Mr. Mede himself was exceedingly taken, even to admiration,
professing it to be the greatest mystery that has been discovered since the
beginning of the world. The same Mr. Potter differs from Mr. Mede in the
explication of the mystery of the two Beasts mentioned, Revel. 13. And I have
seen an excellent Discourse thereupon, but as yet he has not communicated it
to the World.

Twisse) to bless God for bringing us forth in these days of light, not only
in respect of the great Reformation wrought in this Western part of the world,
an hundred years since, and more; But also opening the mystery of the
slaughter of the witnesses, which we have just reason to conceive to have been
on foot diverse years, not only by judicial proceedings in the Martyrdom of
Gods Saints; but by the sword of War; 1. In the Low Countries: Then in
France: After that in Bohemia; Then in Germany (which how long it should
continue Mr. Mede professes to be uncertain;) And now amongst us, The
Preface of Dr. Twisse was Printed 1643.
first in Ireland, then in England, and that by the Antichristian generation,
with so manifest opposition unto truth, and holiness, under a Protestant
Prince (in outward profession) as I think the like was never known since the
beginning of the World. After this strange War, and slaughter of the
Witnesses, which hasteneth to a period; the continuance of it shall be but
three years and an half; in which space of time, they that dwell on the earth
shall rejoice over them, and make merry, etc. because these Prophets tormented
them that dwelt upon the earth. But after three days and an half, when the
Spirit of life from God should enter into them, and they stand on their feet,
great fear should fall upon them which saw them. And a voice shall be heard
from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither. And they shall ascend up to
heaven in a cloud, and their enemies shall behold them. But certainly when that
comes to pass, the same hour there shall be an earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City shall fall. This City undoubtedly is Rome, which Mr. Mede
proves curiously to be at this day precisely the tenth part of the City of
Rome, as it was in St. John's days, when this Prophecy came forth. And in the
Earthquake shall be slain of Names of men seven thousand, which Mr. Mede
interprets of men of quality. It follows THE SECOND WOE IS PAST. Now that
Woe was the plague of the Christian world by the Turks, whereby is signified
the destruction of the Turks, which people I take to be all one with GOG and
MAGOG in Ezekiel, represented there as the great enemies of the Jews invading
the Land of Jewry. And the Hebrew Doctors conceive that War of GOG and MAGOG to
be yet to come.

Turk is Lord of the Land of Canaan already; I grant it. But when the time for
calling of the Jews shall come, which Mr. Mede conceived should be wrought in
a strange manner, by the appearing of Christ unto them, as he appeared unto
Paul at his conversion, St. Paul acknowledging that grace to have been showed
to him First, implying that the same grace should be showed to others after
him; then I say, upon this their conversion, they shall gather themselves
together from all places, toward the Land of Canaan, where shall be the place
of Christ's Throne, in his glorious Kingdom here on earth. Upon which coming of
the Jews into the Land of Canaan, the Grand Seignieur will be moved to raise
all his power, gathered together out of all Nations under him, to oppose them,
and at first shall prevail (as we read Ezeck. 38. Zech. 14.) but in the issue
the Jews shall prevail (as it is in the 21. verse of Obadiah) And Joel 3.12,
13. etc. And Zech. 14.9. So that this implies the calling of the Jews a little
before. And whereas both GOG and MAGOG shall be destroyed by fire, Ezekiel. 39. and
the MAN OF SIN by fire; Mr. Mede was of opinion, that all this is but one and
the same fire, that shall be at Christ's coming, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. and 2.8. Then
follows Christ's Kingdom, etc. the contents of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15.

12.
Clavis Apocalyptica and Commentarius doctissimi NOSTRATIS Medi, Latin tum
Anglice prodeuntes, celebri innotuerunt fama plurimis librorum lectoribus, de
Thesi jam disputata.

Nostras Twissius, simul cum sua ipsius sententia, de thesi nostra, ita nobis
reddit.

Multi Interpretes, (inquit Twissius, allusione facta ad Prove. 31.29.) fecerunt
apprime, Medus vero superavit omnes. Nanus Gigantis humero insistens,
longinquius prospiciat ipso Gigante: Et regulus tergo aquilae innitens, lasso
alite, altius ascendat. Attamen plurimae sunt Medi notiones tam rara natura, ut
quas nondum reperi cuipiam ni su is studiis (benedicente Deo) acceptas referri.

In Clave sua Apolyptica parts Revelationis homogeneas passim dispersas, eidem
vero tempori competentes in unum coegit. Qui (sic dirigente Deo) scriptis
primum speciminibus, quamlibet partem ita peragit, ut universum cujusque scopum
in transitu perspexit. In de ad ampliorem progreditur Commentarium, a 4.
nimirum capite, ad 14. unde, quae sequuntur postea, non nisi sua continent
specimina.

Medus. 1. In animad-vertendo verborum, phrasium, troporum and figurarum
idiomate, and Genio; Utpote, in explicandis praelii mysteriis Apocalypsis 12.
demonstrat Mundum Politicum aptius assimilari Physico, ex ipsa Scripturarum
mente, pari modo adumbrante. Uti enim Physicus seu naturalis ex Caelo constat
and terra; Hac, varia plant arum genera procreante; Illo, solemn, lunam,
stellasque magnitudine diversas continente: Ita Politicus ex nobilibus
conflatur, laicisque, numerosa varietate distinctis. Qua explicandi ratione
Lectores non tantum delectat, sed convincit, genuinum illum sensum admirantes.
Praestat 2. in aptandis Prophetiis, quaque suo cujusque tempori accommodata.

Primam, duorum librorum; Majoris scilicet septem sigillis obsignati, universam
historiam ab incaepta Evangelii promulgatione ad consummatum mundum, and sic
FATA IMPERII continentis. Minoris Cap. 10. ECCLESIAE FATA comprehendentis.
Primus habet septem sigilla totidemque tubas ab illorum septimo editas. Quorum
sex priora historiam amplectuntur Imperii continuati ad dies Constantini,
inclusos. In quibus miranda Imperii Ethnici in Christianum metamorphosis,
tanquam, mundi quaedam dissolutio, initiumque novi repraesentata, a Medo nostro
solidissime nobis exhibetur. Septem deinde tubae intra septimum sigillum
contentae, divina adumbrant judicia in mundum de rejectione Evangelii,
effusoque Martyrum sanguine; primum per Imperatores Ethnicos quorum Imperium ea
de causa, gradatim persequitur ruina (usque dum in december laceratur regna)
gradatione quadruplici in quatuor tubarum prioribus adumbrata. Postea autem per
mundum Antichristianum, cui pro meritis tres Vae. Tubae insequentes triplicem
exitii gradum clangunt inferuntque. Prima per Saracenos primum. Secunda per
Turcas proximum cap. 9. Tertia per mundi finem ultimum cap. 11.15.

Secundam, quam notavi, Distinctionem, magna praeferentem lumina, etc juvamen
pro collustrando Christi regno in terris glorioso dat nobis Medus in c. 21. v.
24. Ubi manifestius nobis indicat, aliud esse Novam Jerusalem, aliud omnino
gentes servatas ad lucem ejus ambulantes. Illam esse Christum, sanctosque a
Christo ex citatos; QUOS SECUM dicitur ADDUCERE (1 These. 4.14.) Has vero
sanctos esse omnes Dei servos, in Christi adventu vivos, ab igne, QUO CAETERA
(adventanti Christo) COMBU RENTUR ( 2 Pet. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 1.) servatos, and
ereptos. Patres quosdam antiquos invenio, qui hanc distinctionem non
observantes, contra gloriosum Christi regnum in terris erratice disputarunt.
Aequa tamen oppositione Cerinthianis, quibus mos erat, carnalius de hoc regno
discurrere. Qua ratione motus Augustinus, pristinam, quam defendisset,
sententiam de illo regno abjecit. Sic illum, quodam de Civitate Dei libro, hoc
regnum tractanti, habemus confitentem.

Medus noster prae omnibus qui praecesserunt, de hoc argumento optime meritus
est, ita quidam succedanei illum etiam in quibusdam superare poterint. Sic
Potterus Nostras adeo supereminuit in computando explicandoque Bestiae numero
666, ejusque mysterio, ut Medus ipse admiratione captus erat. Ille idem
Potterus, a Medo diversus, de utriusque Bestiae mysterio Apocal. 13. optimum
(quem vidi) tractatum de eo conscripsit, cujus mundum adhuc non participavit.

TESTIUM occisione; Quam multos jam annos agitari, fateamur fas est: Idque non
solum ex judicialibus (ut simulatum est) causis in sanctorum Martyrio, sed
etiam furente belli gladio, in Belgio primum, deinde in Gallia, in Bohemia
deinceps, postea in Germania, denique inter nos, in Hybernia prius, mox in
Anglia, (in Scotia tandem, scribenti vero Twisseo nondum extitisset) gladio
inquam Antichristianae prolis, oppositione in veritatem sanctitatemque adeo
manifesta, idque sub principe (ut videbatur) Protestante, ut simile quid
(opinor) a mundo condito ex^itisse nunquam innotuit. Post bellum hoc
prodigiosum, TESTIUMQUE occisionem ad periodum jam festinantem, epocham ad tres
solosannos cum semisse continuari oportet. Cujus temporis intervallo, terrarum
incolae gaudebunt super illis, hilaresque erunt, mittentque alii aliis munera,
quippe quod hi duo Prophetae torserint terrae incolas. Sed post dies tres and
dimidium, cum vitae spiritus a Deo prodiens in illos ingredietur, stabuntque in
pedes fuos erecti, magnus sane metus in eos qui ipsos spectarint, incidet. Vox
autem magna de caelo audietur, quae ipsis dicet, ASCENDITE HUC; ascen dentque
in caelum per nubem, conspicientibus illorum inimicis, Factusque fuerit
proculdubio in eadem ipsissima hora terrae mo tus magnus, quo decima urbis pars
decidet. Urbs haec, certo certius, est Roma, quam accurate probat Medus esse
hodierno die adamussim decimam ejus mensurae partem, quae fuit Prophetante
Johanne. In illo autem terrae-motu occidentur hominum nomina septies mill;
Quae, interpretanti Medo, sunt tot homines nominum, seu famae, terrae-motu
occisi. Sequitur, vaesecundum abiit, quod Christiani mundi plaga ex Turcis
fuit, ex qua Turcarum ruinae omen praesignificatur. Quem populum autumo eundem
ipsum esse cum GOG MAGOGQUE apud Ezechielem, ibidem representatos tanquam
magnos Judaeorum inimicos, Judaeam invasuros; quorum bellum Doctores Hebraei
adhuc esse venturum opinantur.

Turcam jam dominum esse terrae Canaan, Conceditur: verum cum illuxerit ille
dies Judaeorum vocationis, mirum in modum (ut arbitratur Medus) peragendae, ex
Christo iis apparente, quemadmodum Paulo; fatenti illam gratiam sibi primo
exhiberi, quo innuitur eandem ipsam caeteris post se pari modo exhibendam fore;
tunc inquam ratione Judaeorum conversorum, seque ex omnibus mundi plagis
congregantium in terram Canaanensem, locum Throni splendentis Christi in terra
imperantis, Grandis Seignior, ira percitus, omnem ex omnibus mundi sub ditione
sua partibus vim copiarum, ad Judaeos propulsandos coget, initioque
praevalescet, (Ezekiel. 38. Zech. 14.) tandem vero praevalebunt Judaei (Obad. v.
21. Joel c. 3. v. 12, 13. Zech. c. 14. v. 9.) unde constat hic innui Judaeos
ante haec esse vocandos. Quum vero Gog, Magogque per ignem sint perituri Ezekiel.
39. nec non Homopeccati etiam per ignem, Magister Medus ea fuit opinione, unum
eundemque ignem fore, ignem scilicet illum ad Christi adventum 2 Thessal. 1.8.
and 2.8. post quem insequuntur Christi regnum, Caeteraque quae in septima
continentur Tuba. Haec Twissius, magnus ille Arminii Antagonista, and malleus.

. 13.
A GLIMPSE OF SIONS GLORY; OR THE CHURCHES BEAUTY SPECIFIED.

Published for the good and benefit of all those whose hearts are raised up in
the Expectation of the glorious Liberty of the Saints.

Preached by Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, but set forth by his friend.

13.
Sionis gloriae eous, Seu Ecclesiae pulchritudinis specimina.

Per Jeremiam Burroughes, in concionibus suis habita; sed per amicum suum
edita, pro bono, beneficioque omnium, quorum animi in expectanda gloriosa
sanctorum liberate eriguntur.

. 14.
Luther (as we have it in the Epitome in Folio of all his works) expresses
three worlds, the original, or first World; the Legal world, to the end of the
Old Testament; The Evangelical world, ever since the coming of Christ. And he
intimates a fourth, quoting Heb. 13.15. calling it a City (according to
Apocalypsis 21.) As the same Apostle Heb. 2.5. calls it (...), signifying the
state that shall be at the resurrection of the JUST; which Luther upon the
fifth of Genesis, Tom. 1. thus argues. From Abel (says he) We form a strong
argument; If there were none which took care of us after this present life,
Abel being slain had not been enquired after. But God enquired after Abel,
when he was taken away out of this life; he will not forget him, but keep
him in memory, and asks, Where is he? Therefore God is the God of the dead;
that is, therefore the dead also live, and have God taking care of them in
another life. The unworthy Guest ( Matthew. 22.) is excommunicated. And God
enquires not after slaughtered Sheep and Cattle.

. 14.
Lutherus (Epit. in Fol. omnium operum) tres recenset mundos, Originalem
Legalem, and Evangelicum; quartum vero innuens, citato ad Hebraeos 13. ubi 15.
habemus ejus nomen (ut Apocalypse. 21.) (...), idque, ut ad Hebr. 2. v. 5.
(...), statum ad primam justorum resurrectionem significantem; quam Lutherus in
5. cap. Genes. Tom. 1. ita arguit. Ex Habele (inquit) firmissimam conteximus
rationem. Si nullus esset qui curam nostri haberet post hanc vitam, Habel
occisus non esset requisitus. Sed Deus requiret Habel sublatum ex hac vita, non
vult ejus oblivisci, retinet memoriam ejus, quaerit, Ubi sit? Ergo, Deus
mortuorum est Deus; id est, ergo etiam mortui vivunt, and habent Deum curantem,
in alia vita. Conviva excommunicatur; Non requirit Deus oves, and pecora
mactata.

. 15.
The Lord Napier also in his plain discovery of the whole Revelation of Saint
John, has diverse things tending toward our point, especially touching the
time of the fall of Antichrist.

. 15.
Magnus insuper ille Napierus, Dominus de Marchistoun Junior, in sua
Revelationis sancti Johannis Revelatione docta, multa habet nostrae opinioni
conducentia, praesertim de ruentis Antichristi periodo.

. 16.
Likewise the learned and godly Mr. Ephraim Huet, and Mr. Parker of New
England; the first in his book called The whole Prophecy of Daniel explained
by a Paraphrase, Analysis, and brief Commentary; The other in his late
Exposition of Visions, and Prophesies of Daniel, have both of them held forth
many very considerable things which are strong for our Position, as we shall
have particular hints afterward.

. 16.
Docti piique praeterea Ephraim Huetus, and Parkerus, ^^erque Nov-Angliae
nostrates; ille in sua totius Prophetiae Danielis explicatione, per Analysin
Paraphrasin and Commentariolum; Hic in Expositione sua visionum and
Prophetiarum Danielis, multa ediderunt grandia, quae fortiter pro nostra
opinione contendunt, ut infra passim lectoribus innotescet.

. 17.
Besides we have it learnedly and piously with much solidity and gravity
asserted in our Pulpits by famous men, M. T. G. etc. in their elaborate
Lectures.

. 17.
Nec non habemus denique Thesin nostram, docte pieque, multa cum soliditate
gravitateque in suggestula viris celebrioribus, T. G. etc. in elaboratissimis
suis praelectionibus assertam.

. 18.
Thus, I hope, I have said enough to the lovers of learned Antiquity, and
variety of reading (if not too much to the English Reader, who shall dislike
numerous Quotations) to set straight, and lay plain the minds of men, whereby
effectually to deliver, and vindicate our Position, and opinion from the
prejudice of singularity and novelty. Now by the grace of Christ let us gird on
our strength to demonstrate our point by evidence of the divine Scriptures.

. 18.
Ita me spero satis dixisse antiquitatis doctissimae, lectionisque mul tifariae
amantissimis (si nequid nimis Lectori Anglicano cui, numerosae displiceant
quotationes) ad dirigendos, complanandosque hominum animos, ex quo sententia
nostra efficacius tum a singularitatis, tum novitatis praejudicio liberata
asseratur. Jam vero (Christo auspice) demonstrationi Thesis nostrae ex
diuinarum Scripturarum evidentia nosrobore accing amur.

CHAP. III Some preparations for the demonstrating of the maine Position.
CAPUT. III. Isagoge quaedam ad demonstrandam Thesin instruens.
SECT. I. Something of the Saints LIVING a thousand years on earth.
preparations, and have things in a readiness for the demonstration thereof;
namely by giving you some short hints in several small branches our of a ^ext
or two, that there is such a thing, as our Position, in the word of Christ:
Which light once perceived, we shall more willingly travel toward the
Sunrising of further manifestations, and sooner understand the mind of that
System of Scriptures, which after shall be alleged for the proof thereof.

Revelation, verse. 4. the last clause, we have this beam of light: And THEY
(that is the Saints, as before characterised in our first Chapter, and second
Paragraph) LIVED and REIGNED with CHRIST a THOUSAND years.

They lived? Can it be meant only that they lived as immortal souls, in
happiness in the other world? It cannot be. For St. John needed not to teach
the Saints and Churches to whom he wrote Chap. 1. that which Heathens knew,
and taught in their Philosophy (as innumerable instances might easily be
given) that the souls of men were immortal, when their bodies were dead, and
that the souls of good men suffering for well doing, were happy in the other
world. Homer and the Philosophers doctrine of Hades Elysian Fields, etc. reach
fully as high as this. And further, as it is an unknown phrase, by a thousand
years, to signify more then a thousand years, so it is well known, that since
John's time have passed above one thousand and half of years, yea above one
thousand three hundred years since the last of the ten Persecutions wherein
the Martyrs were so slaughtered; or if we will extend their slaughtring further
downward, through the following Arian persecution, and after that the
Antichristian, how shall we pitch the compasses of our account so, as to pick
up a select number of Saints, whose souls were just one thousand years in
heaven before the last resurrection, this being spoken of Saints in general,
and of their state after the full, and final fall of Antichrist, Rev. 19. (the
Chapter immediately foregoing?)

phrase, as to say the Saints LIVED, but the wicked LIVED not AGAIN till the
one thousand years were finished: Because the dead Saints are more alive, then
the dead wicked. For the dead Saints, whiles dead, are alive not only in their
natural souls, but in their spiritual union with Christ who is their life;
and in the graces which the Spirit of life, implanted in them. And the dust of
their bodies are decreed, and preserved by God for an estate called Eternal
life, their bodies being said only to be asleep; And therefore said here TO
LIVE, as if in a sort never dead. But whiles their bodies were dead, their
souls were willing to live again in the body. Not so the Dead wicked, and so
a different phrase is spoken of them. But the sense I am confident is, that the
Saints were made to LIVE AGAIN in the one thousand years (whiles the Dead
wicked lived not again till those one thousand years were ended.) Even as
Revel. 1.18. most evidently, ALIVE, is put for ALIVE AGAIN. The words are
Christ's of himself, now after his resurrection, spoken to John, I am he that
am ALIVE (so the Greek) or LIVING, and was dead, and behold I am ALIVE. If he
had been dead, and now was alive, he was properly alive again. So in the same
sense the dead Saints are here said in this 20. Chap. v. 4. to LIVE, to
signify they LIVED AGAIN. So the Antithesis and opposition here put between
these and those in the next verse, gives it in to me with full evidence. But
the rest of the dead (that is the wicked) says the fifth verse lived not
again (so expressly in the So Sir. and Arab.
Greek until the one thousand years were finished. Whence who that weighs
things well, can infer less then this; that those Saints in the fourth verse
lived AGAIN those thousand years (in which the dead wicked lived not again)
and the Saints had been killed, as it is verse. 4. and Rev. 11. not only
metaphorically, but physically in a great part, down to the total ruin of
Antichrist; and now a Viol being poured out upon the throne of the Beast, Rev.
16. whereupon he utterly falls, Rev. 19. two last verses, the seventh and
last-Trumpet sounding (as it is anticipatedly spoken Rev. 11. but methodically
to the matter, as the cause before the effect) the Saints risen, reign with
Christ both here in this 20. chap. and in that 11. of the Revel. This to be
spoken by the Antithesis, ( Butthe rest of the dead lived not AGAIN.) That the
Saints this while (of the one thousand years) lived AGAIN is further manifest,
in that it is plain here, compared with verse. 12. that the wicked did LIVE
AGAIN at the end of the thousand years. So UNTIL in verse. 5. imports,
explained verse. 7. to end of the 12. verse. thus; When the thousand years are
expired, Satan shall be loosed, and shall go out, and deceive the Nations,
and they went out and compassed the Camp of the Saints (which Saints are all at
that time alive) and the Devil that deceived the wicked is cast into the lake
of fire and brimstone, etc. and I saw a great white Throne, and I saw the dead
(wicked ones) small and great to stand before God. So that in regard it is so
punctually held forth, that at the end of the thousand years all the wicked
formerly deceased, lived again, personally and properly, soul and body being
reunited; I, for my part, cannot infer less, then that the mean while, in
the said thousand years the Saints lived personally and properly, in soul and
body, gloriously reunited on earth.

the rest of the dead lived not AGAIN, carries not so much in it as we have
estimated; because LIVING AGAIN is applied to a contrary thing, and to
contrary persons, as if the sense should be this, The rest of the dead (wicked
ones dead in sin) LIVED not AGAIN, all that thousand years; that is, they
attained not to the state of Regeneration or Conversion by the Word and Spirit,
which seems to be called in the fifth verse, THE FIRST RESURRECTION. All this
thousand years, they continued in an unregenerate estate, whiles the dead
Saints LIVED in soul in glory in the highest heavens with Christ a thousand
years, that is from their death for ever.

Antithesis, and for ours. If it be said by the objectors that the meaning of
contraries is Heterogeneals, as spiritual death in sin, and eternal life in
glory: We reply, it is indeed said so by them, but not proved. That is the
question now in dispute, not to be begged, but to be won from us by argument,
if we must part with our right. It cannot sound in my ears, to say that the
Saints living a thousand years, signifies their living in soul with Christ for
ever after their natural death, seeing it is confessed of all on all sides, that
at the last general resurrection (if the Saints rise not till then) the souls
of the Saints are brought down from heaven to their bodies, and not their dead
bodies to be carried up into heaven to their souls. And that the last
general judgment of Christ, appearing as man, judging men, so as all men may
see the judgment to be just, is not a work of a day, or of a short time. Nor
am I satisfied by any knowledge of the Scriptures that I have yet attained,
that the FIRST RESURRECTION is any where put to signify merely the sole act,
or condition of our first regeneration. I well remember those Texts, Col. 3.1.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above. And Ephesians.
2.5. When we were dead in sins, God has quickened us together with Christ,
saving us by grace, and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and many the like places. But there is mention
only of quickening and rising, and raising. There is mention of SURRECTION, but
not of RESURRECTION, much less of a FIRST RESURRECTION to signify
Regeneration, or the improvement of Regeneration, which the Apostle mostly
intends. Nor do I forget that place Romans 11.15. That the receiving of the Jews
shall be life from the dead. But this is spoken peculiarly of the JEWS, and
of their RESTITUTION to the Church-glory on earth, of which we treat, as well
as of their conversion, as diverse pious learned conceive. Nor does the Apostle
here use the word RESURRECTION, much less FIRST RESURRECTION. I am also at a
great loss how Regeneration can handsomely be clothed with the relation of a
Resurrection or living again, according to Scripture Phrase. For there an
unregenerate man is called a dead man, and sin, a death, and a state of
non-conversion in sin, a lying dead intrespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. And so
in a due and just opposition, the Apostle calls Conversion and Regeneration, a
Quickening, a Rising, a Raising, a Life, but not a Quickening again, a Rising or
Raising again. For an unregenerate man was not alive before, in relation to any
spirituals, which are the things we, and the Apostle speak of. The word
AGAIN, in living again, rising again, according to Scripture and reason
usually import a returning to the same kind of life as was before. The
Scripture says of man in general, when wrought upon by the Word and Spirit,
that he is Re-generated (let the learned heed the Greek) I say Re-generated,
because it alludes to his first estate of glorious generation in innocent Adam,
in the Book of Genesis (as the Greeks call it) But it does not say that the
Regenerating of an unregenerate manis his raising or rising again, or his
resurrection, because a man unregenerated, whiles so, was never alive
spiritually till regenerated, he was never raised before from his fall, till
raised by conversion. Innocent Adam had no infused grace, but only created
perfection of nature.

6. But if some will have these things to seem slight in their eyes, let us
see what may be further added, entreating the Reader all along this Treatise
to take me all together, to look with a general view upon the whole Arch of
the Architecture; in which if there be some lesser and weaker slates or
stones, there are others stronger, and bigger. I am imperfect (whiles in this
world) and so is the Reader too; yet this must not discourage or prejudice us
from building up one another with increase of knowledge in general, or of this
particular point, touching the Saints first resurrection, in a bodily rising
again at the beginning of the aforesaid thousand years, called here their
LIVING i. e. AGAIN, meaning their bodily living again after they had lain in
the grave a long time. For consider this Text, that as this is spoken to the
Saints, as well as the rest of the book, Revel. 1.14. So it is spoken of the
Saints (as we saw before in their several characters (in our first Chapter
and second Parag.) Therefore these were regenerated already, long since, to
whom this first Resurrection is applied, v. 5. v. 6. For so the words clearly
depend (notwithstanding any appearance to the contrary by the late invention of
verses.) And they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years, then it
comes in as a Parenthesis (but the rest of the dead lived not again, until
the thousand years were finished) then it follows, This is the first
resurrection, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection.
For what good coherence could this make to say, The rest of the dead lived not
again until the thousand years were finished; that is (as the objecters
interpret) were not regenerated; This is the first resurrection. I say, what
concinne and apt coherence could this be? unless we will dream that the
rest of the dead were regenerated at the end of the thousand years, when comes
the general judgment, v. 12. Therefore this word First-resurrection can no
way relate to regeneration by the Word and Spirit. Plainly therefore to me
this Text gives a distinct sound, That as the rest of the dead lived not again
till the last resurrection at the end of the thousand years, so the Saints
lived again at the First resurrection at the beginning of the thousand years.

7. It is likewise further considerable, that the Jews are to have a great
share in this MILLENARIE life, this book being full of Representations,
Prophesies, and Promises quoted out of the Old Testament made there to them;
yea and John Chap. 16. mentions that Euphrates is to be dried up, as relating
to their (the Turkish) Antichrist to fall, and they to be restored; and
therefore (though John wrote in the Gentile Greek language) the Churches Song
for her Restoration, and the destruction of her enemies, is set forth to be
in Hebrew four or five times in six verses together, Rev. 19.1. etc. Alleluja,
and Alleluja, Amen. Now as the Restoration of the Jews is mainly looked at
all along, in all the Scriptures that concern the glory of the universal
Church on earth; so it is spoken of as a further and greater thing then the
conversion of their particular persons; namely the dry bones must live, and
become a mighty Host or Army-multitude; and the two dry sticks of Judah and
Israel shall grow into one, as ingrafted Sciences into a stock, and become one
Nation gathered from all quarters of the world into one body, Ezekiel. 37. And
MANY of them that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and
etc. Dan. 12.2. (which cannot possibly be understood of the last general
resurrection, as we shall demonstrate after in its proper place.) And Daniel
himself at the end of one thousand three hundred thirty and five years, after
the ceasing of the daily sacrifice (which falls into the time of calling and
gathering the Jews, now not far off, as after shall be computed) shall stand
in the lotte, Dan. 12. v. last; upon which, and the like expressions Paul in
the 11. of Romans v. 15. says what shall be the RECEIVING (using a more
comprehensive word then converting) of the Jews be, but LIFE from the DEAD?
(he says not life from death as meaning only spiritual life, but) in a
fuller phrase according to the Greek, imports a Resurrection too, of the
deceased believers. And then adds v. 26. That there should come out of Zion
the DELIVERER, and shall turn away iniquity from Jacob; the Apostle then
looking upon it as a thing to come, though Christ had already been come and
gone. And speaks it in relation to the saving of the ALL of Israel, intimating
that the bringing in of the Jews at the RESURRECTION OF ALL THINGS (as the
Apostle speaks Act. 3.21.) would be a very GREAT and GLORIOUS business; so as
all the world should not choose but behold it with admiration. And therefore
this share of the Jews in this MILLENARIE enjoyment, will not endure that this
twentieth of Revelat. verse. 4. should be slighted off with a metaphorical
gloss.

8. For still me thinks, I see more may be dug out of this place, worthy
of consideration; It Is said, The rest of the dead lived not again, as in
relation to the dead Saints in glory, as the Objecters grant. Well, if the
Saints were now corporally dead immediately before these thousand years, then
the REST of the dead, the dead wicked also were then dead corporally; to which
the context speaks further, saying, they lived not again now this thousand
years, as they lived again at the end of the thousand years, verse. 12. at
which time (the Text is plain) they lived again corporally. Why then do any
doubt in the least to understand that the Saints, said to be alive these
thousand years (by way of Anthesis, and Emphasis, for distinction from, and
prelation and privilege beyond and above the rest of the dead wicked ones) are
alive corporally; The Saints are really alive in body in the thousand years, as
really as the rest of the dead, wicked are dead in body before, and in the
thousand years, and alive in body after the thousand years are ended. The
Rest imports a remnant of the same lump, or a kind of the same general. The
Lump or General is that many are dead both Saints and wicked before the
thousand years began. But when the thousand years were begun, all the one
kind, viz. the Saints, then found alive, and all the dead Saints raised to
life, reign with Christ (of which by and by) but the Remnant, or other kind
of the dead, viz. all the dead at the beginning of these thousand years
(whereof thousands were newly killed for their opposition against the Saints in
the last verse of the nineteenth Chapter immediately before) lived not again all
the said thousand years, but still lay corporally dead, as the Saints were
corporally alive; no Satan to molest them all that while, as formerly.

9. For that also is deeply to be meditated in relation to the particular in
hand, That it is evidently added, as an improve meant of the Saints condition
these thousand years (of which we speak) that Satan is bound (all that
thousand years, v. 2.) that he should not deceive, no^ stir up the Nations
against the Saints, till the thousand years were expired, v. 3. v. 7. Now if
the true meaning of the Saints living a thousand years were the glorious
condition of their SOULS IN THE HIGHEST HEAVEN, what need was there in the
least, of any mention of chaining up Satan, and from deceiving the Nations, and
just to that thousand years; the Saints, if in glory that thousand years, being
far above the reach of Tumultuating Nations, yea and Tempting Devils?

10. But in as much as it is added here v. 7, 8, 9. That after the thousand
years are expired, Satan shall be loosed, and shall deceive the Nations, and
gather them together from all quarters, and they shall encomposse the CAMP of
the Saints, and the BELOVED CITY. ( i. e. New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.) it most
necessarily follows beyond all gainsaying, that those Saints, that are here
said to live the thousand years, did live that while on earth. And seeing many
of them at least, that are said here to live this 1000 years are said to be
such that had been beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and this their life is
their recovery from that beheading, let them that can, without blushing, deny
that they were not raised from the dead with a physical resurrection; for I
cannot. If they hope for any help for their denial, from the word Souls, it
will prove but vain, as we shall see after, when we come to canvasse this place
again in answer to objections, in the fourth Book (if not before on other
occasions here and there.) For all we say now, is but an Essay or entrance.

SECT. I. Analecta de sanctis in terra VIVENTIBUS mill annos.
Thesis demonstratione, eam in duas sejung amus parts; minutulae quaedam
dilucidationes de illius toto, e Textu unico, alterove, sunt praemittendae. Ex
iis quippe nos tanquam jubarum scintillationibus per rimam subsentientes,
simile quid, juxta ac Thesin hanc alicubi in sacra pagina extare propensiores
multo solemn versus orientem tetenderimus and men's Scripturarum systematis illam
demonstraturi sagacius subolebitur.

Apocalypsis Capite, verse. 4. hoc aurorat jubar. VIVEBANT Sancti nimirum quos
nuper characteristice inspeximus) and regnabant cum Christo mill illos annos.

VIVEBANT? An sensus ad^o improbabilis Empyraeo obtendatur? Minime. Nequaquam
opus erat Johanni, haec Dei servis, sanctisque Ecclesiarum revelanti (cap. 1.
v. 1. v. 4.) illos visione edocere, quod Ethnicis vulgo innotuit, inque
Philosophia edoctum est. Quippe animas hominum esse immortales, bonorumque de
been meritis interemptorum in futuro seculo fore beatas, documenta cum Poetarum
tum Philosophorum, tam Latin quam G^aece (...), deque Elysio eo (...) and
sublimitatis perspicaciter ascenderunt. Tam ignota est praeterea phrasis per
Mill annos (toties repetitos) plus quam mill annos designari; quam been nota
est haec computatio, nempe jam sesquimille annos a Johanne desuncto, imo mill
trecentos ab ultima december persecutionum, and plures, elapsos fuisse. Si vero,
mulio inferius per persecutiones subinde insequentes, Arianam primo, Papalem
deinde, deducatur computus, ^ubi, miror, bipes ratiocinii circinus figatur,
intra cujus ambitum Sanctos inveniamus in Caelis, MILL solos ante
resurrectionem annos, justissima computi ratione, non PLURES? Quippe quod (ut
supra) de sanctis in genere, idque post totalem Antichristi occasum fore,
prophetatur.

VIXERUNT hic loci, pro REVIXERUNT subrogari constat. Utpote Apocalypse. 1. v.
18. (...), subtitui pro 'A (...), dictat cum Textu experientia (ego (...)
inquit Christus (...), etc.) ita hoc in loco 'E (...) sufficitur pro A (...),
ut comprobat Antithesis. Reliqui vero ex mortuis (...), non revixerunt, donec
consummati fuerint illi anni mill, v. 5. Quis qui dicta librat accurata
rationis bilance, hinc minus hoc infer poterit, Sanctos (v. 4.) Mill istos
annos REVIXISSE, in QUIBUS improbi (v. 5.) nequaquam REVIXERUNT. Beatique
fuerunt in prima illa RESURRECTIONE (v. 6.) in QUA impii non beatificantur;
Indies interfecti ^uissent Physice hi Caelites (v. 4.) vivente Abaddonapolyonte
Antichristiano (cap. 18.24.) Interfectore tandem ISTO (essusa in thronum ejus,
irarum phiola cap. 16. v. 10.) interfecto, cum suo impiorum satellitio ( cap.
19. v. duobus ultimis) REVIVI^CUNT sancti caelites, and REDIVIVI cum Christo
mill annos co-regnant. (Quorum omnium schematismus, and adumbratio,
anticipatione quadam opportuna, impiorum solamen, succincte praemittitur,
capite undecimo,) Haec, etiamque id genus alia ab Antithesi nobis suggeri tanto
magis constabit, quanto accuratior versus quarti cap. 20. cum versu quinto
duodecimoque instituatur collatio. Qua ratione nibil manifestius erit quam quod
RELIQUI MORTUORUM (impiorum scilicet) non REVIVISCENIES (quibus ex diametro
oppo^^^ntur VIVI REGNANTES) physice dicuntur REDIVIVI annis illis MILL
expirantibus. Non REVIXERUNT ((inquit versus quintus) (...), DONEC consummati
sint mill illi anni. Illis vero consummatis, ut canore sonat emphaticum illud
(...), seu DONEC, explicante versu 7. sequentibusque ad verse. 14. (soluto nempe
Satana seductore, ad finem mill annorum, seductisque ab eo gentibus) MORTUI,
tum parvi tum magni STANT personaliter in conspectu Dei (mare Morte, and
inferno, reddente mortuos) ex apertis libris adjudicandi. Eodem ergo sensu quo
volumus unum oppositorum (nempe impios) dici REVIXISSE post mill annos; eodem
ipso fas est dici alterum (nimirum pios) VIXISSE durante hoc millenario,
scilicet proprie personaliter and physice REVIXISSE. Inficias eat qui sana
ratione queat.

5. Quicquid vel specie tenus objici videatur (quantum mihi innotuit) est
praetextus, Antithesin hanc, (sed reliqui mortuorum non REVIXERUNT) non tantum
far ponderis, ut nos putauimus; cum REVIXERUNT, ut oppositum (...) VIXERUNT
contrariis applicetur rebus, and personis, ad statuendam oppositionem
Rhetoricam, non Logicam; unde hic solus (ut aiunt) sensus candide eliciatur,
Reliqui MORTUORUM, scilicet in peccato, non REVIXERUNT, nimirum Regeneratione
spirituali (quae prima dicitur Resurrectio) in mill illis annis; dum mortui,
interea sancti VIXERUNT, nempe cum Christo in Caelis triumpharunt mill illos,
annos id est (ut aiunt) a morte sua in aeternum.

4. contra objectiones militandum est) respondetur: Contrarietates rerum,
personarumque plus suadent Artithesin, quam enervant. Vel si objectantes, sua
verba deserentes, pro (...) contraria substituerint Heterogenea (mortem nempe
in peccato spiritualem, and vitam in gloria aeternam) quae hic opponi volunt;
in promptu est replicatio, Hoc (...) haec quaestio est, non petitione principii
impetranda, sed argumentorum telis (si fiat) impugnanda. Aspere meas obtundit
aures, dicere per sanctos a morte viventes cum Christo mill annos significari
suam ipsorum vitam in Caelo aeternam; quum hoc in confesso est apud omnes,
sanctorum animas (si non antea), ad generalissimam resurrectionem in corpora e
Caelis deduci, haud cadavera sursum eo subvehi, animabus reunienda. Quibus in
terra sponsalibus peractis, judicium quod sequitur generale Christi tanquam
hominis apparentis, homines ut homines dijudicantis, utquilibet humanitus
intelligat fuisse justissimum, unius diei, annive opus esse nequit. Neque
(adhuc quantum ego e scripturarum font hauserim) meo satisfit intellectui
RESURRECTIONEM PRIMAM uspiam poni ad purum putum regenerationis actum
designandum. Been satis memoria teneo, ad Ephesians. cap. 2. v. 5.6. ad Coloss.
cap. 3. v. 1. and id genus alia, progressum sanctificationis promoventia; quae
fateor vivificationis, and suscitationis, and (...) scilicet resurrectionis
una, minime vero RESURRECTIONIS, minus multo PRIMAE, mentionem faciunt. Neque
memoria excidit locus ad Romans 11. v. 15. Dictus vero peculiariter de JUDAEIS,
eorundemque (...), nimirum ASSUMPTIONE ad RESTITUTIONEM magnam; nulla PRIMAE,
vel RESURRECTIONIS mentione facta. Nondum autem invenimus vel repertum est, quo
pacto Scripturarum more, REGENERATIO vel compte vel commode RESURRECTIONIS
notione induatur. Quippe quae non-renatum appellant mortuum and peccatum,
Mortem, etc. Ad Ephesians. 2. Cui justissima Antithesi, Apostolus, Conversionem,
regenerationemque debite nuncupat vivificationem, suscitationem, surrectionem,
vitam; nequaquam vero re-vivificationem re-suscitationem, re-surrectionem, etc.
nuncupat. Eo quod Non-renatus non prius vixisset ratione aliqua spiritualium de
qua tum nos, tum Apostolus impraesentiarum disputamus. Voculae iilae, (...),
re, in compositione [RURSUM] significantes, secundum Scripturas juxta ac
rationem, ad eandem speciem vitae reditum innuunt. Hominem in genere, Evangelio
and spiritu transformatum, Scripturae dicunt RE-GENERATUM, apta systoichosi and
analogia illius in INNOCENTIA Genesis, in libro ejusdem nominis editae: Hominis
vero nonregenerati palingenesiam non dicunt RESUSCITATIONEM vel RESURRECTIONEM,
quum ante eam, nunquam spiritualiter vixit, suscitatusve fuit.

6. Verum si velint aliqui ut haec leviuscula iis videantur, tentemus an
grandiuscula aliquot superaddi possint, quae grandius hosce premant. Sanctorum
(...) VIVERE mill annos in terris, etc. (non regenerationem ex spiritu) primam
dici Resurrectionem, velinde liquet, quod Resurrectio haec, ut Sanctis (cap. 1.
v. 1.4.) ita de Sanctis dicitur, ut characteristice ante descriptis, ut and
olim regeneratis. Ita verborum catena (non obstanti nupera versiculorum
inventione) hoc solum diagrammate explicata, stringit nos credere, Apocalypse.
20. v. 4, 5, 6. Qui securi percussi sunt etc. quique non adoraverant bestiam,
etc. vixerunt, and regnarunt (ut Graece est, legimus) cum Christo mill annos,
reliqui vero [sicut Parenthetice haec sunt perlegenda] mortuorum non
revixerunt, donec consummati fuerint illi anni mill, Haec est resurrectio
prima. Beatus, and sanctus qui habet partem in resurrectione prima, etc. optima
sane cohaerentia. Incongrua autem pessimeque sonans foret altera conjunctio;
Nempe, Reliqui mortuorum non revixerunt donec consummati fuerint mill anni, id
est, inquiunt objicientes, non regenerati fuerint; haec est prima resurrectio.
Ni somniaremus reliquos mortuorum regeneratos fore ad finem mill annorum
adventanti ultimo generalissimoque judicio, v. 12. Prima itaque resurrectio
nequaquam ad regenerationem referri queat. Sed Textus distinctissimum edit
sonum, Quo vitae genere mortuorum reliqui non revixerunt usquedum ad ULTIMAM
resurrectionem, absolutis mill annis; EODEM revixerunt sancti ad PRIMAM
resurrectionem incaeptantibus mill iisdem annis.

7. Neque indignum videatur consideratione, Judaeos fore hujus MILLENARII
participes, ut plurima in hoc libro (nempe Promissiones, Typi, Prophetiae) e
veteri Testamento citata; quin etiam Euphratis exsiccatio cap. 16. Cantilena
Hebrai^e cap. 19. abunde testantur. Quae omnia acutissime recipient grandius
aliquod particulari personarum conversione; RESTITUTIONEM nempe OMNIUM. (ut
summatim praebet Apostolus Actor. 3.21.) per sanctos Prophetas omnes
praedictam; Ossa (particularius) arida reviviscere in copias maximas redivivas,
reducesque in terram suam; Israelitas, Judaeosque, ut duo ligna in unum
coalescere, e medio Gentium in suam patriam reductos, Ezeck. 37. Multosque ex
dormientibus in pulvere expergisci, etc. (quod de ultima resurrectione
intelligi impossible, infra disputabitur) Tandemque ipsum Danielem ad finem
mill trecentorum triginta annorum a cessanti juge sacrificio incaeptorum in
sort sua perstiturum. Dan. cap. 12. v. 2.12, 13. Quibus, s^milibusque locis
Apostolus affine utitur phrasi, ad Romanos 11.15. Quae (inquit) erit Judaeorum
(...) ASSUMPTIO (vox long magis comprehensiva quam CONVERSIO) nisi (...) vita
ex mortuis: (dignum observatu) vitam, non dicit ex morte, quo il lam solam ex
vel a peccato significaret; sedphrasi multo pleniore, vitam dicit ex MORTUIS,
quae resurrectioni physicae plurimum est accommodatior. Quam praecedit
spiritualis, quam concomitatur Civilis a dispersione resurrectio; ut versus
suggerit vicesimus sextus: Ita TOTUS ISRAEL SERVABITUR, veniet ex Sion
LIBERATOR, and avertet iniquitates a JACOB. Qua ratione, omnia quotquot sub
resurrectione sint comprehensa, Apostolus tum temporis conspexit ut FUTURA, ad
TOTIUS ISRAELIS RESTIUTIONEM absoluendam. Haec quidemporle expensa magnam
resurrectionem Apocalypticam cap. 20. v. 4. per nudam Metaphoram dif^lari haud
facile patiuntur.

8. Plura quippe mihi videntur adhuc inde effodienda, meditatione dignissima.
Dicitur hic Reliquos Mortuorum REVIXISSE, haud absque respectu (fatenti
Adversario) Sanctorum in Caelis viventium. Si vero Caelites hi, corpore sint
defuncti immediate ante incaeptum Millenatium (per mortem quippe Caelicolae
evaserunt in Millenum) tum etiam RELIQUI MORTUORUM (par ratio est) eodem modo,
corpore scilicet, fuerunt defuncti, testanti etiam contextu, RELIQUOS nimi^um
eadem ratione non REVIXISSE intra MILL v. 5. qua ad finem MILL nondum
rediviui statim excitantur, v. 12. Constat ve^o ibidem eos post MILL
REVIXISSE, Vi divina excitaros. Ergo manifesta antithesi RELIQUIS opposita,
Sanctos prae RELIQUIS in MILL VIVERE dictum est. Aequeutorumque, alternis
vicibus est realis mors physica, quam vita illorum spiritualis minime est
aequa. Pari intellago ratione, revera Sancti intra MILL Physice VIXERUNT, ut
RELIQVI intra IDEM defuncti post ILLUD revixerunt. Vox ete^^m RELIQVI, non
potest non implicare, quidpiam (qui dicam?) MASSAE residuum, TOTIVS partem,
GENERISVE speciem. Tota generalis massa sunt MOR TVI. Residua pars specifica
altera sunt mortui impii, altera mortui pii, utrique ante illud MILL morte
obeuntes. Incaepto (ut applicemus) MILLENARIO, Sancti omnes in vivis,
caeterique morte excitati, VIXERUNT; Residui vero mortuorum, nempe impiorum,
ante incaeptum illud mill expirantium, toto concu^renti Millenario,
corporaliter mortui, non ut Sanctorum corpora vel physice sunt redivivi. Quin
and Residuum innuit rem partibus suis non functam; eandem cum suo totali metam
non attigisse. Unde quid minus elici videatur, quam dummodo Sancti olim mortui,
jam and naturalis vitae partibus sunt functi, operamque navarunt; quam implii
antea mortui, jam nunc handquaquam attingentes, non functi, minime navarunt.

9. Nec non lectorum meditationi committam Satanae ligationem ne seducat
Gentes, ut augmentum faelicior is in mill annis vitae status promissum.
Apocalyp. cap. 20 verse. 2, 3, 7. Quod sane frigidum satis and jejunum foret
solamen animabus in Caelorum altissimo (si ibidem) triumphantibus; frustraque
nominatum.

10. Ut vice versa Satanam illum post istos mill annos solvendum, exeuntemque,
seducentemque Gentes in quatuor terrae angulis, Gogumque Magogumque
congregantem ad praelium; Sanctorum castra urbemque dilectam circundaturos; sea
ultimo judicio repulsos, arguit (ut videtur) Sanctos illos hic and nunc
VIVENTES in TERRIS versari, inexpugnabili argumentorum necessitate. Illic loci
VIVUNT qui securi percussi sunt, illic curantur percussiones, ut illic loci
vivant. Apocalypse. cap. 20. verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. etc.

SECT. II. Something of the Saints REIGNING this thousand of years of whih we
treat.
Saints are said, Revel. 20.4. not only to LIVE that thousand of years but to
REIGN also; it is partly to distinguish the wicked that were not dead at that
time, who all this while had played the Hypocrites in point of Religion, and
dissembled their Civility and Peace toward men, because of the glorious
dominion and reign of the Church over the whole earth, which they beheld, or
heard of at least afar off. Which wicked ones, though they lived this thousand
of years, yet they did not REIGN, being inwardly slaves to sin and Satan in
heart; and outwardly vassals to the Church through fear of her; and so they
linger out (much ado) a refraining of themselves all the thousand years, till
they be expired, and then Satan being loose, and they seduced by him, muster
themselves together, hoping for mastery, which the sudden coming of the
GENERAL JUDGMENT, does utterly anticipate, and frustrate, as we have it
evidently in the 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12 V. etc. to the end of this twentieth
Chapter of the Revelation.

thousand years, whereof we shall now give you but a glympfe (it being
reserved for the peculiar subject of the fifth Book.) They shall now reign in
Soul and Body, and on earth most gloriously, Dan. 7.26. But the judgment
shall sit, and they shall take away his (the fourth Monarchy root and branch
his) dominion, to consume and to destroy unto the end; And the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is
everlasting, etc. Mark the words, Mark the phrase, and observe the order and
time and place of fulfilling these things, (of which more by and by in the next
Paragraph.) Rev. 14. v. 1. etc. One hundred forty and four thousand are on
Mount Zion with the Lamb, they were redeemed from among men, being the first
fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, they were undefiled; and give glory to God,
for that the lour of his judgment is come, Babylon is fallen. Revel. 5. (which
is, both in the representation in the first eight verses, and in the Song, the
sum of all the Revelation, and state of the Church as some most learnedly
observe) in the tenth verse the Saints sing praise to the Lamb that He makes
them unto God KINGS and PRIESTS, AND that they shall REIGN on EARTH (the self
same words as in Rev. 20. v. 6. only the thousand years are not in Chap. 5.
and on EARTH not express in Chap. 20. Reigning in both places is brought in
with a copulative AND, as an additionall to Kings and Priests to God.) I only
allege these Scriptures now but to give you an hint of the Saints most
eminent reigning in the thousand years in Scripture Language rather then in
mine own words. I shall after, Christ assisting, in a more proper place of
this Treatise, amply discuss these Texts to your content. Mean while the
Reader cannot but see, if he observe well (and he must observe the Scriptures
more accurately then ever, if he will see this truth now in hand) that these
places hold forth a GLORIOUS REIGN of the Saints on earth over the whole earth
in soul and body, upon the fall of the fourth Monarchy, and its two limbs, of
seven and three Horns, ( Dan. 7.24.) Pope and Turk, Rome and Babylon. And by
this a meditating mind may presently divine much of the preeminence of the
Saints state on earth yet to come, above former conditions.

SECT. II. Analecta de Sanctis, hos mill annos in terra REGNANTIBUS.
1 SAncti dicuntur Apocal. cap. 20. v. 4. non solum Vivere, verum etiam REGNARE
mill illos annos, ad distinguendos palam impios illo tempore non mortuos,
religione Hypocritas, candorem simulantes, ob latum Ecclesiae imperium, in toto
terrarum orb; cujus vel gloria eorum oculos, vel ^ama aures, tremore intus
occupante, obtundit. HI dum VIVUNT haud REGNANT, cum totum illud MILLENARIUM
serviant peccato, Ecclesiaeque sint mancipia.

2. Sancti vero ita eodem tempore REGNANT, ut praesens eorum conditio omnes
supereminet ante MILL annos transactas. Cujus faelicitatem hic tangere solum
licebit, cum pleniorem de ea tractatum in quintum librum, ut proprium illius
subjectum, detulimus. Regnabunt (summatim dicere) hos MILL annos tum anima,
tum corpore, in terris gloriosissime. Hanc summam, per parts e quatuor
Scripturarum loc is habemus absolutam; quas jam recensere sufficient. Dan. cap.
7. v. 26. Sed judicium considebit, and dominatus EIUS (quartae nimirum
Monarchiae) auferetur, profligando, and perdendo u^que in finem. REGNUM autem,
DOMINATUSQUE, and amplitudo REGNI sub TOTO CAELO dabitur POPULO SANCTORUM
excelsorurn, cujus REGNUM erit perpetuum, and omnes DOMINATIONES EI SERVIENT,
and AUSCULTABUNT. Cujus testimonii verba, phrases, ordo, locus, and tempus,
observanti animo rem nostram facile comprobabunt. Apocalypse. 7.9. ad finem.
Turba multa ex omnibus gentibus and tribubus, and Lingus (quae unica est in
Caelis) amicti stolis albis and PALMAE in manibus eorum (quarum, vel similium,
in Empyreo nullus plane usus) and clamabant voce magna, Salus a Deo nostro,
etc. Tum me compellavit unus ex illis SENIORIBUS (quam relationem ignorant
Caeli) isti amicti, qui sunt, undeque venerunt? (quos in Caelo si vidisset
Johannes, inutilis fuisset quaestio.) Hi colunt Deum die and nocte, in Templo
ejus, qui proteget eos umbraculo (sic Beza) Greece (...) (phrases ad
beatitudinem Caelestem depingendam ineptae.) Non esurient nec sititient amplius
etc. Agnus pascet eos, ducetque eos ad vivos aquarum fontes, and abstersurus
omnem lachrymam. Quarum rerum, quod ad ipsum Caelum, haud opus fuit Johanni
pignore aliquo, vel narratione. Apocalypse. 14. v. 1. etc. Agnus stat super
Sion, and cum eo centum quadraginta quatuor millia, habentia nomen ejus, and
patris ejus scriptum in frontibus (sancti proculdubio sunt been noti in Caelo
sine notis) Hi sequuntur, (...) Agnum quocunque eat (ideo non sunt in Caelo)
sunt primitiae Deo, and Agno, (ergo Massa in Empyreo adhuc est peragenda.)
Deinde Evangelizatur terrae incolis, tribuite Deo gloriam, nam venit hora
JUDICII SUI, and alius Angelus sequutus est, cecidit Babylon, etc. Trahat haec
qui poterit ad ultimum Christi judicium, statumque beatorum, defendatque si
queat Babylonem urbem illam magnam ante illud tempus non ruituram. Denique
Apocal. c. 5. tum typo, tum cantico (Doctorum observatione) quoddam totius
libri summarium Ecclesiaque restitutae status exemplar, infert, v. 10. (eodem
pene cum v. 6. c. 20.) Sanctos laudantes non tantum quod Christus fecisset eos
Deo Reges and Sacerdotes, sed etiam quod REGNATURI SUNT idque in TERRA.

SECT. III. Something of the Saints Reigning WITH CHRIST this time of the
thousand years.
THis REIGNING of the Saints those thousand years is emphatically expressed, to
be WITH CHRIST, Rev. 20.6. as in Rev. 5.10. The Saints are brought in applying
it to themselves in faith with joy, Thou, O Lamb, have made us Kings and
Priests TO OUR God, and we shall REIGN on earth. So here in this 20. Chapt.
v. 6. it is further Prophetically represented, and promised, That they shall
be Priests OF GOD, and OF CHRIST, and shall REIGN with HIM a thousand years.
The Book (as I may say) exactly answering to the Preface.

2. Now as Christ is said to Reign in that special manner after the full fall
of the fourth and last Monarchy, body and limbs, as if, in comparison, before
that he did not reign; so proportionably the Saints reigning with him at this
time, their reigning is so glorious, as if before that all their reigning was
no reigning.

3. Let us see a small Landscape of all this together in a Scripture or two,
alleged more briefly. For we must adjourne the large discuss of them till
after, unless I should weary my self and the Reader with repetitions and
disorder. Dan. 7. v. 9. etc. to v. 15. The Thrones were SET (so the original)
and the Ancient of days did sit with a most numerous multitude before him, and
the judgment, or Judicature was set. And I beheld then, because of the great
words which the Horn spoke: And I beheld, even till the Beast was slain, and
his body destroyed, etc. and I saw in the night visions, and behold one like
the SON OF MAN (that is CHRIST) came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to
the ANCIENT of DAYS (namely GOD the FATHER) that he might be set before him.
And there was GIVEN to him (namely to CHRIST) THE Dominion, THE Glory, and THE
Kingdom; (so the Greek gives it in emphatically, and the intent of the
Prophet is to point out that Dominion, and that Glory, etc. which the other
four Monarchs had) And ALL PEOPLES, and NATIONS and LANGUAGES should SERVE
him, whose dominion is for ever etc. (that is as long as the world below lasts)
all which manifestly relate to a Kingdom of Christ on earth; compare v. 23,
and v. 27. Thus far the Kingdom is given to Christ (as if in comparison he
had none before) The verse. 17. etc. it is said to be the Saints Kingdom, in
these words. These great Beasts which are four, are four Kings (that is,
four Emperial Monarchies under four races of mighty persecuting Monarchical
Emperors, of four several sorts; namely, First, Assyrio-Chaldean; Secondly,
Medo-Persian; Thirdly, Grecian; Fourthly, Roman) which shall arise out of the
EARTH that is by violence succeed one another in that inheritance of the world:
But the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom (that is, that very
Kingdom of the world, that the other four former Monarchs had) and possess
the Kingdom for ever, and for ever and ever (that is, in all ages as long as
time shall be, as the original signifies;) adding v. 23. etc. to the end of
the Chapter; The fourth Beast shall be the fourth Kingdom upon earth (that is
the Emperor of the Roman Empire) which shall be diverse from all the Kingdoms
(namely in Rule, in Conquest, and Cruelty) and shall devour the whole earth,
and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces (meaning that the Romans shall
conquer the whole world, utterly defacing all Kingly dominion in the same.) And
the ten Horns out of this Kingdom are ten Kings that shall arise (to wit, the
Roman Empire at last is divided into ten Kingdoms, as John has it several
times in the Revelation, as a tendency to the ruin of that Empire, for it
follows here) And another shall rise after them, and he shall be diverse from
the first, and he shall subdue three Kings; (That is, the Eastern,
Saracen-Arabian, Turkish power ascending to a monstrous height of strength,
differing from the former, in Nation, Religion, and Tyranny, shall take away
three of the said ten Kingdoms) And he shall speak great words against the
most High (see the Turkish Alcoran and shall wear out the Saints of the most
High (that is in a great measure slaying so many Christians at one battle, as
the tippes of their right ears filled nine sackes) and think to change Times
and Laws (that is, those of divine institution as appears also in his
Alcoran) and they shall be given into his hand until a time, and times, and
dividing of times (meaning that the Saint^ shall by divine permission fall
under the Turkish power three hundred and fifty years, from his first invading
the Jewish Countries, to his full and final fall) But (says the 26. v. etc.
to the end of the Chapter) The judgment shall sit, and they shall take away
his dominion to consume and to destroy it to the end (that is to say, The
Ancient of days as fitting in judgment judges to vindicate the Saints, and
so gives them opportunity, and virility to deprive the Turk of his Kingdom,
and utterly to consume his power, and strength. And so in the 27. verse, The
Kingdom and Dominion UNDER the whole HEAVEN, shall be given to the people of
the Saints of the most High, etc. (That is the same Dominions of the whole
world below, that the former tyrannical Monarchs usurped, shall now be given
into the hands of the converted Jews, and holy Gentiles adhering to them, to
reign on earth with Christ, to whom these Dominions were delivered in the
former part of this Chapter. This place of the seventh of Daniel has been so
large touching the Saints reigning with Christ on earth; that we shall add but
one or two places more, and that very briefly, Revel. 11.15. etc. The seventh
Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of
the WORLD are become the Kingdoms of our LORD, and of his CHRIST ( or of him
as CHRIST) and he shall REIGN for ever and ever (that is throughout all AGES
from hence forward over the Kingdoms of the WORLD, as if hitherto he had not,
in comparison, reigned over them) And the four and twenty Elders etc. fell
upon their faces, etc. Saying we give thee thanks, O Lord, etc. because thou
have TAKEN TO THEE THY GREAT POWER, and have REIGNED, and the Nations were
ANGRY) which shows this was not at the ultimate day of judgment) and the time
of the dead that they should be judged is come, that is, the Saints should be
vindicated, for so it presently follows, that thou should give rewards to
thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy name;
which what should it be but to reign on earth, as it is both before expressed
in the Preface, Rev. 5.10. and after in the Catastrophe, Revel. 20.4. in regard
of which reigning on earth they may be said to be the FIRST FRUITS to God,
Rev. 14.4. because this is but the beginning of Gods work of glorifying his
Saints. Let us close this Paragraph with Heb. 2.5. etc. to 10. The world to
come (the Greek is the INHABITED world to come) must be put under man (though
not under Angels) according to Psalm 8. (quoted there by the Apostle) which
Psalm relates to Genesis 1.26. where God gives Adam dominion over all the
Creation. But, says the Apostle in his time, We see not yet all things put
under him, only Jesus (as the pledge) is crowned with glory. Therefore say I,
there is such a thing yet to come. Let not the Reader (if I may entreat so
much) despise the allegation of these Texts for the present purpose, which are
little more then barely alleged, only to hint the Saints reigning with
Christ on earth. I desire to engage him upon this request but for a time, till
I come to critically scan (if I may assume so much confidence to my self)
these, and many other places of Scripture. And then upon his serious joint view
of all, all together, if he can be of another mind different from me; let
him, for me, abound in his own sense.

post, and business in hand, viz. the Reigning of the Saints WITH CHRIST at
this time, and in this place aforesaid. Before they reigned but sometimes, over
their corruptions, and Satan's temptations, but never over men; but now totally
and finally over Sin, MEN, and Devils (as we shall demonstrate afterward.
Their living must be after a RESURRECTION, as the word is twice mentioned in
this 20. of Revelation. Though they be made but spiritual Kings and Priests
(as the Objecters will have it) in those words Rev. 5.10. He has made us
Kings and Priests to God; yet how shall the next words be figured off from
their proper sense, where the Crown of Dignity is put upon the head of
REIGNING UPON EARTH? He has made us Kings and Priests unto God. AND (besides)
We shall REIGN UPON EARTH. And as through abundance of confidence, begetting
abundance of joy, the Saints are brought in expressing it in a triumphing song.
And again they praise for the same thing in substance in a song, Rev. 14.3.
And again the same matter in the same manner in effect, Rev. 19. first six
verses. And the reason given is, because the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, and
has avenged the blood of his servants, and the Saints are then extant to
praise for it; and all this must be yielded to be on earth by whomsoever the
rest of the Chapter shall be read out curiously; for whiles the Saints are all
in Heaven (properly so called) Christ needs not (as it is v. 15.) rule the
NATIONS with a ROD OF IRON, or as it is v. 18. etc. Call the fowls to eat the
flesh of Kings, Captains, etc. and of horses, whiles he slayes men with the
sword. But I transgress, in anticipating, if not prejudicing my self in
spending so much time, in touches, hints, and intimations, before I come to the
elaborate scanning of these and other Scriptures.

SECT. III. Analecta de Sanctis in illo MILLENARIO CUM CHRISTO regnantibus.
SAnctos cum CHRISTO regnare his mill annis, tam Canora profertur emphasi, ut
nemo facile surdeat incurius. In praefatione Apocalypsis, cap. 5. praefatam
aliquatenus; in libro cap. 20. libere habemus prenunciatam. In 5. cap. ovantes
canunt, Dignus es, Agne, qui accipias librum, and aperias, etc. quoniam
mactatus es, and fecisti nos DEO NOSTRO reges and sacerdotes, ET (observetur
illud (...) praeterea) REGNABIMUS in TERRA. Mirum, si regnaverint in terra
Christiani, Christo ibidem non regnante. Verum non ita ab effectu sejungatur
causa. Sed vivent (inquit vicesimum Caput) and regnabunt CUM CHRISTO mill
annos.

2. Ut vero Christus dicitur hoc Milleno ita in terris regnare, quasi illum
comparative, non antea, ibidem regnasse, dici videatur, Apocal. 11.15.17. Ita
Sancti pari analogia dicuntur tunc CUM ILLO illic regnaturi, tanquam non
regnantes ante haec videbantur.

3. Videamus jam utriusque mappam. Discutiamus postea, Dan. 7. v. 9. ad v. 15.
Videbam, donec solia posita sunt (ita Textus originalis, it a and vetus
interpres) and ANTIQUUS DIERUM sedit, coram quo myrias myriadum stabant.
Judicio considente libri aperti sunt. Videbam tunc ex quo caepit vox verborum
grandium quae cornu illud (parvum nempe illud ultimum grandiloquum v. 8.)
loquebatur. Videbam usque dum occisa est bestia illa (scilicet decemcornupeta
cum ultimo succrescenti cornu, eradicanti tria. v. 7, 8.) occisa est,
perditurque corpus ejus, traditum incendio. Residui etiam bestiarum ablatus est
dominatus; spacium tamen in vita datur iis us que ad tempus constitutum.
Visionibus videbam nocturnis, quo^ ecce cum nubibus Caeli SIMILIS FILIO HOMINIS
(Christus nempe) Veniebat, deinde usque ad ANTQUUM DIERUM (nempe DEUM PATREM)
pervenit, ut sisteretur ante eum. ETHUIC, Christo scilicet, datur dominatus,
gloriaque ac Regnum ILLUD; Sic Graece habetur emphatice, ad mentem Prophetae,
eundem dominatum, illam ipsam gloriam, idemque regnum, penes olim quatuor
Monarchas, jam Christo dari, ut patet ex sequentibus, ut omnes populi,
nationes, and linguae ei serviant cujus dominatus est perpetuus, etc. id est
nulla, post Christi dominatum and Regnum, sequitur in terris dominatio. Vel
perpetuum dicitur hoc Christi Regnum, quod omni durante seculo est duraturum;
ut sonat origo (...) Quae omnia cunctis ni captis oculis apertissime referuntur
ad visibile Christi REGNUM in TERRA, (expressius v. 23.27.) collatis singulis
quatuor Monarchiis quae praecesserunt ruentibus. HOC Regnum hucusque Christo
datum, quasi nullum illi fuisset antea, jam sanctis datur, utpote cum Christo
regnantibus, v. 17. etc. ad finem. Hae bestiae magnae, inquit unus ex
astantibus juxta Danielem interpres, quae sunt quatuor, quatuor sunt reges e
terra surrecturi, (id est quatuor Imperia Monarchica sanctos persequentia, in
terrarum haereditate invicem succedentia, nempe Assyrio-Chaldaicum,
Medo-persicum, Graecum, and Romanum,) Sed Sancti accipient Regnum, HOC ut
Junius dat emphasin, qui possessuri Regnum ( IPSUM ut iterum dat Junius) usque
in seculum, inque seculum seculorum; Id est, interpretanti Ephraimo Huito,
Sancti Judaei privabunt eas bestias suo dominatu, eundem possessuri, ad
extremum mundi finem. His visis, Danieli optanti veritatem cognoscere de bestia
quarta, ab omnibus diversa, dentibus ferreis, conculcante caeteras, deque
cornibus december in ejus capite, deque ultimo succrescente cornu, a cujus
conspectu ceciderunt tria, ore ejus loquente grandia, gerenteque bellum cum
sanctis, eisque praevalente usque ad ANTIQUI DIERUM adventum, judicium sanctis
daturum, ita responsum est; Bestia illa quarta regnum quartum erit in terra,
quod diversum erit ab omnibus illis regnis; consumet enim totam terram, etc.
(Id est Imperium Romanum diversum regimine, victoriis, and crudelitate a
caeteris, eorundent dominatus and regalia delebit.) Et cornua de^^m ex illo
regno sunt december reges qui exsurgent, post quos exsurget postremus, qui erit a
prioribus diversus and tres reges deprimet. (Id est, ex quarto imperio, nempe
Roma no, surrexerunt december status inferiores ^yrannici, in quos hoc dividitur
impe^^um, hac praeparatione divinitus facta in ruinam ejus, ut opportune jam
cornu Turcicum tres illorum domat, dominaturque absolutissime, ^ejectis legibus
imperialibus Romany, qua ratione a december omnino distinguitur.) Et loquetur
(postremus ille) verba adversus excelsum, excelsique sanctos deteret, adeo ut
cogitet se mutaturum tempora and jus (Id est quam maximas inventas blasphemias
contra Deum promulgabit, crudelique tyrannide, sanctorum debilitabit potentiam,
consulet de mutandis temporibus legibusque divinitus institutis.) Tradenturque
in manum ejus, usque ad tempus, tempora, divisumque tempus. (Nempe Turca ita
dicto conamine praevalebit, ut Sancti ejus dominio trecentos quinquaginta annos
subjicientur.) Sed judicium considebit, and dominatus ejus auferetur
profligando, perdendoque usque in finem. (Hoc est, judicante Jehova, sancti
eripiunt illi reg^um, vim, r^bur, potestatem ejus devastantes.) Regnum autem,
dominatusque, and amplitudo regnorum SUB TOTO CAELO dabitur POPULO sanctorum
exce^sissimi. Cujus regnum erit in seculum, and omnes dominatores ei servient
and auscultabunt. Quibus verbis, quid planius, quid before significari potest,
quam [idem illud sub toto caelo (in ^ERRA itaque) dominium, quatuor Monarchiis
arreptum sanctis exhiberi?] Sic simul cum Christo in terra (...) diu regnabunt
Christiani. A Daniele transeamus ad Johannem Apocalypse. 11. v. 15. etc.
septimus Angelus clanxit and factae sunt voces magnae in Caelo, dicentes facta
sunt regna MUNDI Domini nostri, and Christi ejus, (vel ipsius Christi,
(scilicet Domini nostri Christi, ut Christi) qui regnabit in secula seculorum
(duranti nimirum TEMPORE) TUM viginti quatuor illi SENIORES (ignota in caelis
relatio, ut and numerus) qui in conspectu Dei SEDENT in THRONIS (regnandi situs
and indicium) prociderunt etc. dicentes Gratias agimus tibi domine, etc. quod
adeptus sis, vi scilicet, potentiam tuam MAGNAM (quae parva quodammodo
videbatur antea) and REGNUM inieris, quod initium aliquod innuit, and iratae
sunt gentes. (Lugent homines die judicii non irascuntur.) Et venit ira tua
(puniens scilicet Antichristum satellitesque ejus in terra) and praestitutum
tempus mortuorum (prima nimirum resurrectione) ut judicentur, (qui and quomodo
statim sequitur) dare mercedem servis tuis, etc. (scilicet in Terra, ut probant
sequentia) and perdas eos qui perdunt (praesenti tempore) TERRAM, cujus minima
cura ad ultimum Judicium habenda est.) Tunc apertum est Templum Dei in Caelo,
and visa est Arca pacti ipsius in ejus Templo, and facta sunt fulgura, voces,
Tonitura, and terraemotus, etc. quae omnia magis contra, quam pro statu in
supremo Caelo intelligant^r necesse est. Claudat hunc Paragraphum Apostolus ad
HEBRAEOS 2. verse. 5. etc. MUNDUS ILLE FUTURUS (inquit) homini subjiciendus est,
non angelis (Graece (...) ille habitabilis, seu inhabitatus mundus ille
futurus, duplici emphatico) juxta, inquit, Psalmum octavum, ut concesserat
Deus, Genes. 1. v. 26. quod respicit Psaltes. NUNC autem (dicit Apostolus)
nequaquam HACTENUS videmus quod omnia subjecta sunt ILLI, tantum JESUM illum
(pignus rei) gloria and honor cernimus Coronatum etc.

quandoque, and ex part, tentationibus, nec non peccato, nunquam vero generi
humano. Quibus omnibus dicto MILLENARIO, seu tempore terricolis adhuc futuro,
penitus semperque dominabuntur victores. Vitam eorum fore oportet, ut vita
faeliciter resurgentium futura est; resurrectione ad designandum hunc statum
bis repetita, Apocalypsis cap. 20. Si fiant spiritualiter tantum reges and
Sacerdotes (ut objectores vellent) Apocalypse. 5.10. quo tropi invento
profligabitur sequentium verborum literalis sensus, ET (praeter illud
sacerdotium and regale) regnabunt IN TERRA? Verum ne in taedium incidamus
repetitionum, nec non praejudicium subeat causa, leviusculis grandiorum
anticipationibus, clausa hac sectione, ad ultimam transitur perstringendam.

SECT. IV. Something of the space of time, viz. The THOUSAND YEARS of the
Saints reigning with Christ on earth.
time of the Saints reigning with Christ upon earth is so punctually and
positively set down to be A THOUSAND YEARS, that I know not how, without
perverting the Scripture, to make it more or less. It would seem to me a
presumptuous thing to hear the holy Spirit, to tell John six times over in six
verses together, namely Rev. 20. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. of a ^housand years
precisely, touching the same business, in the several parts and appurtenances
thereof never varying the phrase to a weakening, but four times (of the six) to
a strengthening of it, with mighty emphasis in the Greek) as to say THE or THAT
^AME thousand years, if I the mean while should imagine another number.

thousand years put for any other number, but really for a thousand years, to
encourage me to such a boldness of imagination. That of Peter 2 Epist. Chap.
3. v. 8. in Gods account, is nothing against us.

parts to which this number is applied, are so cemented together, as cause and
^ffect, distinction and opposition, etc. that they mightily strengthen and
prove the just account of a thousand years. Satan is bound a thousand years,
that he should not deceive the Nations, till that same thousand years should
be fulfilled. Then the Sants lived and reigned with Christ THAT SAME thousand
years (so the Greek) But the rest of the dead lived not again, until those
thousand years were finished. Whiles the Holy ones are made Priests of God, and
of Christ, and reign with Christ a thousand years. It is worth our noting by
the way, that instead of adding here Kings to Priests (as Rev. 5.10.) it is
supplied with this, That they reign with Christ a thousand years, so that when
it is said Rev. 5.10. The Saints are made Priests and KINGS to God, their
Kinglyhood is there meant in relation of that which there follows, viz. Their
reigning upon earth, even as (for ought I know yet) all the Saints shall be
able to serve and worship God immediately without the help of any
Administrator, in the old Testament called Priests, in the New, Ministers,
Elders, etc.

TWO RESURRECTIONS. The living of the Saints, (whiles the rest of the dead
lived not) begins with the First-Resurrection. This says v. 5. is the FIRST
RESURRECTION as relating to the second at the end of the thousand years, v. 7.
etc. to v. 14. And when Those thousand years are expired, Satan shall be
loosed, he shall seduce the Nations, and go about to disturb the REIGNING
Saints, and the beloved City, and then appeared a great Throne, and one sat on
it, from whose face the earth and heaven fled away, and the DEAD, small and
great, stood before God, etc.

SECT. IV. Analecta de TEMPORIS spacio; nimirum de MILL ANNIS, quibus Sancti
cum Christo in terris sunt regnaturi. Apocal. cap. 20. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
MILL fore annos, caeteris concurrentibus, ut me latet penitus quomodo mihi
liceat, nisi pervertenti Scripturas, plusve minusve pronunciare. Audax nimium,
ne dicam, stupenda praesumptione, viderer, audito Sancto Spiritu sexies (haud
minus) sexque contiguis versibus dictante, eundem justissime numerum MILL
annorum, de eadem ipsissima re, nunquam variata phrase, nisi quater in majorem
emphasin, (...) in (...) MILL Annos in mill ILLOS annos, si ego interea
fixero intervallum, a MILL alienum.

MILL anni, minus mill annis revera significant, ut ipse eo praesumptionis
contrariae auderem. Aliud plane est quomodo Deus aestimet 2 Pet. 3.8. aliud est
realis computatio, de qua praesens instituitur disputatio, etsi apud Petrum,
MILL anni, mente divina contrahantur in DIEM, DIES vice versa in MILL annos
ibidem prolongatur.

MILLENARIO enumerantur, ita cohaerent tanquam causa and effectus, distinctio,
and oppositio, (...) etc. ut exactissimo numerum MILLENARIUM nobis vo lentibus
nolentibus retinebunt. Primum dicit Johannes Satanam vinciri MILL annos ut non
seduceret amplius gentes, donec consummentur illi (emphatice) mill anni.
Deinde videt Apostolus sanctos securi percussos, bestiamque non veneratos,
VIVENTES and cum Christo REGNANTES ILLOS (iterum emphatice quasi dicat eosdem)
mill annos. Postea dicit reliquos mortuorum non revixisse, donec consummentur
illi (tertio emphatice) anni mill, quibus concurrentibus prima exstat
resurrectio, in qua Sancti (express versu 6.) facti Sacerdotes Dei and
Christi, regnant cum eo Mill annis. Quibus (quar^o emphatice) Mill annis
consummatis, Solvitur Satanas, post quod ultimum sequitur judicium, seu
universalis vel secunda resurrectio, v. 12. Dignum observatu arbitror, quamvis
obiter, e versu sexto, Apostolum postquam dixisset Sanctos fieri Sacerdotes Dei
and Christi, non addere (ut Apocal. 5.10.) fieri etiam reges sed in locum horum
verborum substituit illa [and regnabunt cum eo mill annis.] Unde quid sanius
deduci queat, quam Sanctos fieri reges Deo, cap. 5.10. in relatione (...) EORUM
REGNARE IN TERRA, ibidem dictum fuisse.

4. Nec minimae aestimetur considerationis, ne hunc distendamus numerum, vel
decurlemus, si modo, obsignatam esse mensuram, utrisque illius extremis, libet
animadvertere. Duae quippe RESURRECTIONES, tanquam ambo intervalli limits
figuntur immoti. PRIMA v. 5. ab incepto sanctorum (...) VIVERE and REGNARE;
quam relatione ad SECUNDAM dici necesse est; descriptam, v. 7. ad 14. quoad
rem, quamvis non nominatam; ut omnibus ex charactere notissimam. Consulite
lectores benevoli locum accuratissime, ut hic loci, huic

FINIS LIBRI PRIMI.
PRIMO LIBRO FINEM IMPONAM.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF CHRIST, At least in the Clouds,
TO THE CHURCH ON EARTH.
CHAP. I.
The general Position divided into two parts.

Saints.

For our Position does couchantly, contain these two parts: 1. That Christ
shall then, at least, appear visibly in person, more 2. That the Saints, under
him, shall sensibly, and properly reign over the whole earth most gloriously.




CHAP. II.
Of ten several Scriptures out of the New Testament to prove the visible
appearance of Christ, Personally to the Church on earth, at the time of her
Restoration.

SECT. I.
1. Place John points out Joh. 19.37. They shall look on him whom they have
pierced. Which Scripture is, clearly, quoted out of Zech. 12.10. And I will
pour out upon the house of DAVID, and upon the INHABITANTS of JERUSALEM the
Spirit of grace and supplication, and THEY shall LOOK on him whom they have
PIERCED, and they shall mourn for him (or concerning him) as one mourns for
his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn.

First Fruits (so called Romans 11.16.) that truly then mourned for him whom they
had pierced, Joh. 19.37. Act. 2. And there was some effusion of the Spirit,
Act. 2. but was but First Fruits Romans 8.23. But as the Prophesies of the Old
Testament concerning Christ and his Kingdom are exceeding comprehensive and
extensive; so the fulfilling of them is (as it is Calvin's note) progressive and
successive, in all ages to the last end of all. This small number of those
mourners cannot, in my eye, complete and make up an answerable fulfilling of
that which was promised to the INHABITANTS of JERUSALEM in general, and their
several families of David, of Nathan, of Levi, of Shimei, and ALL THE FAMILIES
THAT REMAIN, as they are expressly named in this twelfth of Zech. verse. 12,
13, 14. Consider it Reader wishly.

Babylon they were already returned, and Christ was not then pierced.

looking on Christ whom they pierced, is to be at THAT DAY, at some notable
day, some most eminent famous great magnificent day, marked out in the Context
with three eminent Characters; 1. is in v. 6, 7. In THAT DAY I will make the
Governor of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of
fire in a sheafe, and they shall devour all the people round about, etc. and
Jerusalem shall be inhabited again, in her own place, etc. The Lord also
shall save the tents of Judah to a Glory, etc. But it was not so with Jerusalem
at the time of Christ's Passion, when the ROMANS possessed it, and THEY, and the
JEWS crucified Christ. The second Character is verse. 8. In THAT DAY shall the
Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them, AT
THAT DAY shall be as DAVID, and the House of David shall be as ELOHIM,
Potentates, and as the ANGEL of God. Or (so as still to keep the increment, and
graduall rising by stops, according to the true intent of the Prophet) The
house of David shall be as ELOHIM, that is, as Angels, and as that Angel or
Messenger of God, Christ, as he is called, Malach. 3. v. 1. latter part of the
verse, and elsewhere several times. Now this was not the excellent state of
Jerusalem at the time of Christ's Passion as the Reader can easily understand by
the four Evangelists, without my amplifying of words. The third Character is
verse. 9. And it shall come to pass at THAT DAY, that I will seek to destroy
ALL the Nations that come against Jerusalem. But the Lord did not do this at
the time of Christ's Passion, nor in many hundreds of years after, nor to this
day. The struggling of the Maccabees came to little; sure enough not to so much
as this Text imports; but notwithstanding (as after we shall hear more of the
Maccabees) Jerusalem was more and more destroyed by the Nations that came
against her. THE ROMANS now at Christ's Passion possessed it, as the four
Evangelists, and the Acts plainly tell us. About forty years after (as Christ
prophesied) TITUS the Roman Emperor destroyed the Temple. Some years after
that, ADRIAN the Roman Emperor destroyed the City. And since that, the TURKS
have miserably possessed it, and subdued and defiled it unto this very day.
Therefore the day, or time of Christ's Passion, or then about, cannot be THE
DAY here spoken of as the principal time wherein the Jews shall look on him
whom they have pierced. St. John speaks of the thing, not of the principal
time wherein this was to be fulfilled. But when they do look on him, etc.
according to the maine meaning of this Text, it must be AT THAT DAY so made
glorious with those Characters; for so it follows v. 10. with an AND, viz. AND
I will pour, etc. AND they shall look upon me. This is the first reason why
this Text cannot look mainly at Christ's Passion or then about. The second
reason is, because we read not that then they had any such humiliations, of
families mourning apart, or jointly, as they did at Hadadrimmon in the valley
of Megiddon, for good King Josiahs death, 2 Chronicles. 35. For those are the
platformes of their mourning, v. 11, 12, 13, 14. of this 12. of Zechary.

looking on Christ whom they have pierced upon the time of the ultimate
general judgment, for these reasons; 1. That were a late and unlikely time of
repentance; Then is not a time of pouring out of grace, no time of gracious
supplications. 2. Then is no time of mourning, but of joy to the Saints. 3.
Then the mourning of the wicked is a graceless, horrid, despairing mourning,
full of slavish fear. But the mourning here mentioned is a mourning out of
much love to Christ, as is intimated in the describing it to be like one
mourning for his only son, yea for his firstborn, yea as good people
mourned for Josiah slain at Megiddo, or Megiddon, as it follows in v. 10. and
v. 11. and 12.
And therefore the likeliest maine time to make out the true meaning of this
Text is the time of the general Call, and conversion of the Jews yet to come,
at the beginning of the Restitution of all things (of which we treat.) Then as
sensibly to see him, as the other things in the Context shall be sensibly
performed. 5. This place of Zechary the 12. v. 10. etc. will appear much more
evident for the personal appearance of Christ, by the second place in the next
Section, being a parallel, yea a quotation of this.

SECT. II.
Of the second place of Scripture for Christ's Personal Appearance at the great
Restoration, viz. Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall
see him, and they also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall
wayle because of him; even so Amen.

Grace be to the seven Churches from him which was, and is, etc. and from the
seven Spirits, etc. and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and
the first begotten of THE DEAD, and the PRINCE of the KINGS of THE EARTH; unto
him that LOVED US, etc. and has made us KINGS and PRIESTS unto God, and his
FATHER, to him be glory and DOMINION for ever and ever, Amen. Behold HE comes
with Clouds, etc. He must yet come, so as to make good all these things to the
Saints, and to manifest yet more his own GLORY and DOMINION.

Zechary 12.10. in the very same maine phrase and words, with addition of more
for explanation, and illustration?

Act. 1.11. (of which more largely after) This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven; spoken when the Cloud (v. 9.) received him, after that (v. 6.)
they had asked of him whether at that time he would restore the Kingdom to
Israel; Leaving his Angels to give them this answer, as he left them at his
sepulcher to inform the comers to seek him concerning his Resurrection Joh.
20.12. etc. Every word almost of this 1. Revel. v. 7. intimates that this
coming is meant of a coming after his Ascension, and yet before the ultimate
day of doom. HE COMES implies a future thing now after his Ascension; HE
COMES in the present tense or time, fairly intimates that it is not intended
of his last Act that ever he will do, which is the ultimate judgment. BEHOLD
implies some eminent coming, and none more eminent then this, for RESTITUTION
OF ALL THINGS. A note above THE DISSOLUTION OF ALL THINGS. It is better says
Christ himself (in the Gospel) to save life, then to destroy it. HE comes
WITH CLOUDS, That is, IN the Clouds. As the Greeks in the same phrase say, A
man with Armor, meaning, A man in Armor. The meaning is out of doubt, that this
coming of Christ shall not be so obscure, as his Incarnation, or as his coming
among the Disciples after his Resurrection; but he shall come conspicuous and
glorious visibly to all upon the earth, which phrase must needs import a proper
ocular sight of him with proper sense; For by faith we see him, though not
visible in the Clouds, 1 Pet. 1.8. EVERY EYE shall see him, must needs signify
more then a sight by faith. Faith and sight are so distinct, as that the
Apostle makes them opposite, 2 Cor. 5.7. Heb. 11. often. Therefore every eye
seeing him, cannot signify a sight of faith only. There needed not any
expression of EYE, or of his being in the Clouds to signify a sight by faith.
We can now see him in Heaven by faith. It is a question whether every eye that
is said here to see him, shall at first sight see him by faith. For EVERY EYE
must see him, and ALL KINDREDS of the EARTH shall mourn. Sure his
Antichristian enemies generally shall not see him by faith, whom he destroys
at his coming, Rev. 19. last; 2 Thessalonians. 2. to make way for the reigning of the
Saints, Rev. 20. EVEN SO AMEN. John did believe, saw Christ by faith, but for
that sight of him in the Clouds, to be visible to him, and all the Kindreds of
the earth he prays, and raises up his faith with an hearty Amen, that so it
shall be. So that by all these things it is most evident, that of a time and
state following Christ's Ascension, John speaks here. Nor on the other side can
this Revel. 1.7. be understood of the ultimate day of judgment: 1. Because it
is the same with Zech. 1.10. and so for the same reasons cannot be meant of
that day of judgment. 2. Because this is set here, as the maine and general
Proposition to the Book of the Revelation, in which the Masterpiece is, to set
forth Christ to come, and set up his Church into a most glorious estate on
earth, before the day of judgment (as we shall see abundantly afterward) and
to make her reign with him on earth. 3. It were very incongruous for John in
the last clause of verse 6. to applaud Christ's DOMINION as to continue FOR
EVER, that is, while times and ages last (as the Greek imports) and in the next
breath in the first clause of the seventh verse, to say he comes to make an
end of his Dominion.
For the ultimate day of judgment is the last act of Christ's Dominion, which
done, Christ lays down all his Dominion, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor.
15.24.28. We may not imagine such incoherencies in John's expression, now most
eminently filled with the Spirit. Therefore I must needs conclude that there is
no such likely time of such an eminent coming of Christ, and appearing to his
Church as this, at the time of Restitution of all things. Something of this
place will be more plain by that in the next Section.

Zech. 12.10. and Revel. 17. and out of both, containing the same sense, and in
the same words, let us draw this argument, as the sum of both. Zechary the
Prophet, and John the Apostle both prophecy in the aforesaid places of one and
the same personal appearance of Christ visibly to the eyes of men on earth
after his Ascension. But this cannot be understood of his appearance at the
ultimate general judgment, because they speak of his pouring out of grace,
and giving repentance to the families of the Jews, and of his Dominion thence
to continue for many ages to the ultimate end of the world. Therefore the said
visible appearance of Christ is yet to be before the ultimate day of
judgment; Which, when should it be but at the conversion of the Jews, and
the throwing down of his apparent obstinate Antichristian enemies, as the
circumstances of the said places before hinted, do clearly evince?

SECT. III.
OF THE third PLACE OF SCRIPTURE for Christ's Personal Appearance at the great
Restoration of the Church, viz. Matthew. 24. v. 30. And then shall appear the
sign of the Son of man in Heaven; and then shall all the Tribes of the earth
mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with
power, and great glory.

1. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man, that is, the Son of man
shall appear for a sign that great things are at hand (as it follows in this
verse, they shall see the son of man and mourn.) 2. The sign of the Son
of man in Heaven. He was before in the highest third Heaven, but now in the
lowest first Heaven, namely of the Clouds, as it follows also in this verse. 3.
And then shall all the TRIBES of the EARTH (intimating Jews as well as
Gentiles) mourn. Why? They shall see the Son of man, that is, as man. How
mourn? Doubtless Christ means, as Zechary meant, and John meant; namely the
Jews, with godly repentance; and his obstinate open enemies with desperation
for the ruin that is coming upon them. 4. Coming IN the Clouds, or UPON the
Clouds. See now what was John's meaning, Rev. 1.7. when he said Christ should
come WITH the Clouds. To this matter with and in is all one. And (which is
considerable) our New Translators concur with us, as by quotation in the
Margin, to make this, and Rev. 1.7. to be parallel places tending to the same
thing.


going away above the clouds. Therefore it must needs be that this must be
fulfilled after he has attended above the Clouds. Then, and not till then,
will it be rightly said and properly fulfilled, that he comes in the Clouds. So
the Angels at Christ's Ascension, Act. 1. After that in v. 9.10. He was taken up
and a Cloud received him out of their sight, the Disciples looking steadfastly
toward heaven as he went up, they say unto them, This same Jesus which is
TAKEN up from you into heaven shall SO COME. It must needs be improper to say
he shall COME IN the Clouds before he be gone above the Clouds; Before he
came at incarnation in the Virgins womb, and in a Manger. But now after his
Ascension above the Clouds he shall come in the Clouds.

ultimate day of judgment, because of that, but four verses after, namely, v.
34. which Christ affirms, with grand asseveration, namely, Verily, I say unto
you, THIS GENERATION shall not pass till ALL THESE things be fulfilled. And
then he seals it, and binds it up in the next verse, viz. v. 35. Heaven and
earth shall pass away but my words (and particularly those words aforegoing)
shall not pass away. A seal does sometimes represent the Writer, as well as
the words of the writing. This does something also explain the former passages
of this Chapter; That heaven and earth shall pass at Christ's coming, that is
in quality, not in substance, says Oecumenius on the 21 of Revel. there shall
be a new heaven, and a new earth, the old passing away (as Isa. 65.2 Pet. 3.
Rev. 21.) but Christ's word for his Personal appearance to his people before the
ultimate day of judgment shall not pass. For this appearance of Christ in the
Clouds cannot, I say, be referted to the ultimate day of judgment, because
Christ says, This generation shall not pass (the Greek is pass away, it
being the same word, as is rendered pass away, as referred to the passing away
of the Heavens, and the Not passing away of his word.) But the maine stick is
in the words, THIS GENERATION, and ALL FULFILLED; That is, the Nation of the
Jews, as a people most distinguishable from all Nations, shall not be
extinguished, in Notion and Nation till ALL THOSE things before spoken, by
Christ, be fulfilled. But if Christ should not appear to them personally
before the ultimate day of judgment, for they must (as the Prophet intimates
Isa. 66.8.) be converted suddenly, at once in a miraculous manner, ordinary
means having not prevailed with them these sixteen hundred years in the
general, and then so by conversion congregate them together again, according
to the tenor of all the Prophets (of which after) in all likelihood, as man
may conceive, the whole Nation of them will be extinguished. They will lose
the memory of their Genealogy (as those at their return from Babylon in less
while, Ezra 2.62.) their language will be lost, their blood and persons
swallowed up by mixture with other Nations; and so appear in the common crowd
at the last judgment, no more distinguished then other Peoples and Nations.

[This generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled] to the
time of the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem of which Christ gave a
touch, v. 2. of this 24. of Matthew. fulfilled, about forty years after Christ's
Passion. But though that of verse. 2. might in part be then fulfilled, yet
little reason is there, from thence to infer, that therefore then ALL things
spoken by Christ, from verse. 3. to verse 34. were fulfilled, Christ in verse. 3.
is put upon speaking to three distinct things, viz. 1. Of the Time, when THOSE
THINGS, viz. the destruction of the Temple and City of Jerusalem shall be. 2.
Of the sign of his COMING mark it) AND 3. Of the END of the world (of which
largely after in its proper place) so that the ALL Christ speaks of from verse.
3. to 34. cannot be imagined to be fulfilled in the SOME things that were
fulfilled at the destruction of the Temple. Christ here assures us that at the
fulfilling of all those things aforesaid he himself will appear in the
Clouds. v. 30. But at the destruction of the Temple Christ did not visibly
appear in the Clouds. Nor did he then send his Angels with a great sound of a
Trumpet to gather his Elect from the four winds, as he promises, verse. 31.
But at his appearing at the sound of the seventh Trumpet at the beginning of
the thousand years, of which we treat, he will so do, which is a thousand
years before the last day of judgment, of which abundantly afterward.

Therefore these words, This generation shall not pass, or pass away, etc.
must signify, that whereas many other Nations have passed away, and been
extinguished, as those seven in Canaan, and many others since; leaving behind
neither name, not thing to keep up their remembrance; this Nation of the Jews
shall not be so extinguished, or annihilated, but shall continue a distinct
Nation, at least in note and name, till all these things be fulfilled
aforementioned from verse. 3. to verse. 34.

Generation is not so proper to signify an Age of people (to which they
usually allow an hundred year, as that word used for it Matthew. 1.1. Our word
here in Matthew. 24.34. more properly by use and derivation signifies a Nation.
And further, it is not said THIS, as pointing to a present Generation, but THE
Generation, indefinitely pointing at the persons and times of many Generations.
All which do much speak for this sense: That the NATION of the Jews shall
not pass away, or cease to be a noted distinct people, till all be fulfilled.
As Christ says after, My word shall not pass away, that is, change, as the
Heavens, and the earth shall pass away, that is, be changed, when that great
Reformation shall come. So the NATION of the Jews shall not pass away to be
changed into another people, or mixedly drowned, as an ingredient among many
others to extinguish their name and Genealogies. But as to this day, so from
hence forward, till that GREAT TIME, their name, kindred, and habitations shall
be distinctly known, at least of all them that are of their own blood. So
that still (as at this day) they shall live, be extant, expect, and profess
they expect Christ's coming, and the sight of all these things to be fulfilled
before their eyes, not a piece, but all.

all things to be fulfilled to the Nation of the Jews before they pass away,
Christ says in verse. 32. and 33. That as by the Figtrees tender branch putting
forth leaves, we may know that Summer is nigh; so when we see all these
things fulfilled, we may discern that the Summer of the great Restoration of
the Elect (verse. 31.) and of all things, for their use, like the world in
Summer is at hand. For when Christ comes in the Clouds (verse. 30.) at the time
here meant, it is Summer, that is, all things are in their prime and
perfection; not Winter, when is the decay and dissolution of all things. I
mean Christ's last coming at the ultimate judgment, is as a Winter, that
destroys all; but his SECOND coming now again, before that day of Doom, is a
Summer. A fit similitude to express the Restitution of all things. That Winter
ends all. But by this sign of Christ's coming in the Clouds the SUMMER is
discerned, and discerned to be NEAR.

Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he COMES, shall find so doing
(that is well-doing (...) in in verse 45.) Verily, I say unto you, he shall
make him Ruler over all his goods. (Greek is, shall set him over all that he
has.) Which phrases, one or other, suit far better to the Saints reign on
Earth, then to any thing of their condition at the last judgment. For then
Christ lays down all his own rule and power, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. and therefore
gives no power of rule to his people.

This generation shall not pass, let me tell you that thus far that Pareus,
and others are of our mind. That though Others understand by Generation the
whole World, yet it better pleases them to understand the JEWISH NATION, as
upon whom these things shall be fulfilled, Matthew. 23.2. Therefore the NATION
shall not pass, but continue scattered, till the end of Ages, when they shall
experimentally find the truth of Christ's predictions, though at present they
do not believe. Thus far they; with which we close this third Section.

SECT. IV.
Of the fourth Scripture for Christ's Personal appearance at the great
Restoration of the Church, 2 These. 2.1. to 9. Now I beseech you brethren by
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him,
that ye be not soon shaken in mind, etc. as that the day of Christ is at
hand; Let no man deceive you, etc. for that day shall not come, except there
come a falling away first, and that MAN OF SIN be revealed, the SON OF
PERDITION, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God,
etc. so that he, as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that
he is God, etc. And now ye know what withholds, that he might be
revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity does already wo^^^ only he
who now lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way. And then shall that
WICKED be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

Kingdom of God, which moved them to ask him, Will thou at this time restore
again the KINGDOM TO ISRAEL? which Kingdom Christ did not deny, but only
then put them off, touching their knowing at present the time, Act. chap. 1. v.
3. and 6. I say then, (when the Apostle wrote this Text) there was an opinion
(though a mistake in it, as touching the suddenness then) that Christ would
come again before the ultimate day of judgment. For this Text speaks not of
the general destruction of the wicked world; but precisely of the destruction
of Antichrist by the brightness of Christ's coming; and so a way, and room is
made for the gathering of the Jews and Gentiles into one universal visible
Church, which is to be before the ultimate day of judgment, according to the
tenor of the Texts of all the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the
Commentary of the Apostles of the New.

Antichrist is meant in this Text. Nor is it material to dispute whether the
Pope or Turk be The Antichrist! For Antichrist is the body, viz. the race of
them that effectually oppose Christ, as Christ; and the Pope and Turk are the
two maine limbs. So that in general they are one in many respects; First in
the rise of their heresy. For Mahumetisme was hatched by the counsel and
advise of Sergius Sergius, Monachus Constantinopolitanus, hereseos Nestorianae
sectator Mahumetum impostorem, and speudo-Prophetam, in Alcorano conficiendo,
and compilando juvit, eumque omnis summam impietatis docuit. Zona. Tom. 3. and
Car. Steph.
a Popish Monck which he gave to Mahomet. Secondly, in Dominion. For Dan. 7.7,
8. There came up a little Horn among the ten Horns of the fourth Beast (which
fourth, was the Roman Monarchy) before which little Horn (viz. the Turk)
having eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth that spoke great things, three
of the ten Horns were plucked up by the roots, which after is explained, v.
24. viz. The ten Horns, are ten Kingdoms that shall arise, And another shall
arise after them, and he shall be diverse from the rest, and he shall subdue
three Kings. So that the Turk possesses three of the ten Kingdoms that
formerly were under the Pope. Thirdly, In their seat mentioned in this Text,
viz. sitting IN or rather according to the Greek ((...)) OVER the Temple of
God, the Pope ceased to be in the Church since the Council of Trent, where he
execrates all the main Gospel Truths. And the Turk is said Rev. 9.1. To be a
star fallen from the Heaven of the Church. But I say they both agree in
sitting UPON or OVER the Temple of God. For as the Pope does by his power sit
over a great part of the Spiritual Temple, namely of Christendom (as they call
it) in which are many believers, he there suppressing the propagation of the
Gospel; so the Turk by his power sits over the Material Temple of God, viz.
the place of it at Jerusalem, there impeding men from embracing the Messiah,
preferring Mahomet as one greater then Christ. Fourthly, in the number of the
name 666. ( Rev. 13.18.) For as the numerall Letters either of the Greek
lateinos or of the Hebrew (both suitable names of the Pope, who is a Latin and
Roman) make up exactly 666. l a t e i n o s 30 1 300 5 10 50 70 200 300 6 50 70
40 200 So the numerall Letters of Maomet, which written in Greek (as R. M. in
his A. C. writes it maometis does (as says the said R. M.) make up just. 666.
m a o m e t i 40 1. 70 40 5 300 10 200 Which number (says the same Author)
agrees to the time of Maomets rising in the East against Christ and the Roman
Empire, which was (says he) in the sixth Century. Fifthly, In the nature of
their name, and the name of their nature, mentioned also in this Text of the
Thessal. For if the Pope be the Son of perdition, that is, actively and
passively, to wit, he does monstrously destroy, and is at last destroyed. So
also is the Turk styled Rev. 9.11. both in Greek and Hebrew by the Holy Ghost.
His name (says John) in the Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, that is
A Destroyer, just as the word Turca (as the said R. M. asserts to be the
opinion of the Learned) is all one with Apollyon or Abaddon, a Destroyer, which
I say is the style of the Turk, Rev. 9.11. (For that Chapter cannot be
understood but of the Turk, as every verse does show to the observing eye.) I
list not to stay the Reader with diverse other agreements between the Turk
(the Eastern Antichrist oppressing the Jews) and the Pope (the Western
Antichrist oppressing the Christians.) They are both effectually Antichrist,
evacuating Christ, as Christ; though the Turk does it more openly, and so does
more apparently merit the entire name of Antichrist, as it signifies Against
Christ. For he expressly advances Mahomet as a greater Prophet, above
Christ, and has made him a new Book of Scriptures, which he calls his
Alchoran. But the Pope acts it more covertly, as some how pretending in some
things to be for Christ, and so may be called, upon an external consideration,
pro-Christ (as (...) anti, Joh. 1.16. signifies For) though indeed he is
against Christ in the effect of his process, viz. in his Headship, opposite to
Christ the only head of his Church, in his Doctrine of Justification by
works, enervating Christ's merits, and his Trentine Anathemaes cursing the
fundamental truths of Christ in the New Testament. But these things we leave,
as not the maine of our present business.

Now says this Text in hand, of the 2 Thessalon. 2. The Lord shall consume
Antichrist with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness
of his coming. And although these two Master-limbs of Antichrist should not
fall together, but that the Pope be first bowed down (as he that by his
imagery, Idolatry, and impurity in his worship of Christ, is the great
stumbling block to impede the Jews embracing Christ, whereby to contend with
the Turk for freedom to own our Messiah) and the Turk be ruined after him,
perhaps at the end of the five and forty years of the Jews struggle with him
Dan. 12 two last verses) yet this text (of the Thessalonians) stands firm,
that Antichrist must fall by the Spirit of Christ's mouth, and by the
brightness of his coming. The Spirit of his mouth is his Word (called Isa.
11.4. The rod of his mouth, and the breath of his lips, with which he shall
smite the Earth and slay, (...) the wicked one, for the settlement of his
glorious Kingdom of peace on earth, as the context in that 11. of Esa. gives it
in) with this word Christ prefaceth and perfecteth the ruin of Antichrist.
That is, first Christ destroys him morally, as he his (...) (as this Text in
the Thessalonians calls him) that is, exlex (as Zanchy renders it) the lawless
one. For he leaves Christ's word, and substitutes his own, viz. Alcoran,
Legends, Traditions, etc. And by them sets up Blasphemy, Idolatry, Heresy,
Impiety, and Tyranny, and that over consciences, as well as bodies. Now Christ
discovering, and discarding, confuting, and confounding these by the breath of
his mouth, viz. his word, he destroys him morally. Secondly, Christ by
animating men by the same Spirit in his Word, to a corporal War against
Antichrist, destroys him Physically, that is with a corporal destruction. By
that Spirit of his mouth he rouseth up men's spirits to take up arms, and fight
down Antichrist with a corporal War. So it is emphatically set forth, Joel 3.9.
to 17.) inserted between two Prophesies, the first immediately preceding, v. 1.
etc. to v. 9. the other immediately succeeding, touching the glorious Kingdom
of Christ on Earth, v. 17. to the end of the Chapter; weigh the place, with
which compare Rev. 17.16. Rev. 18. the whole Chapter, Rev. 19.17. to the end.
In which places the Holy Ghost, with all endeavor (as we may say after the
manner of men) by all circumstances, fitted to humane capacity, sets forth the
corporal War, that must personally destroy Antichrist. (The scruples of men
about those places of Scripture we shall remove, when we come after to the
full discuss of the Quod sit, viz. That there is such a glorious state to
come.) I say Christ shall with a corporal War, excited by his word, destroy
Antichrist personally. For when, notwithstanding that Christ has rendered the
wickednesses aforesaid of Antichrist odious to the generality of the world, and
has dissected and cut them up by the roots with the sword of his mouth, that
they take not with the myriads of men enlightened, yet Antichrist will act as
Antichrist, like himself, opposing Christ in the power of his Gospel, the
purity of his Saints and worship, and the glory of his Kingdom; then I say
shall Christ's word, the sword of his mouth, put the sword of his hand into the
hands of his people; the rod of his mouth shall proceed to the use of his rod
of iron in his hand, Rev. 19.15. And then as the Prophet speaks touching the
corporal destruction of the bodily enemies of the Church, Jer. 48.9, 10. The
Cities of Moab shall be destroyed. Cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently, and cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood. So
that Christ, with this breath of his mouth, prepares, or begins the ruin of
Antichrist. The Greek is (...), that is, shall waste him, as an estate is
wasted; or consume him, as a body by a consumption pines away. But by the
brightness of his coming he shall make a full end of Antichrist (as to the
preparation for his glorious Kingdom on Earth) (...), shall abolish (as Beza
renders it) shall make him a nothing, as the Greek word is often used. Which
brightness of Christ coming to do this, is more closely to the Greek ((...))
rendered, by the manifest appearance of his coming. And so our last Translators
could find the way to render (...) in relation to Christ's Kingdom, by the
word appearance, 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, (...), at, or according
to his APPEARING, and his Kingdom. So likewise 1 Timothy 6.14. Keep this
Commandment, etc. (...) until the APPEARANCE of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Sutably, it is our common phrase to call the day of the appearance of the
star at Christ's birth, Epiphanie. By all that we have said, it is manifest,
that as the first Schene of the ruin of Antichrist is acted by the Spirit of
Christ's mouth; so the second is performed by the appearance of his person, or
else what need that be added, [ AND by the appearance of his COMING.] The
breath or Spirit of his mouth does not make an end of the work, without the
appearance of his coming. As in that of 2 Timothy 4.1. First is his appearance,
and then his Kingdom. For Antichrist must be down, ere Christ shall have an
apparent Kingdom. And Christ must have his Kingdom, before the ultimate day
of judgment, or else he will have no Kingdom; For then it is the Fathers
Kingdom, not his, 1 Cor. 15.28.

Pope shall be destroyed by the breath of Christ's mouth; that will prevail
with Christendom (as they call it) that will be effectual to all the
Christian world that own Christ to be come already in the flesh; to excite
them, seeing his mystery of Abominations (aforementioned) to be discovered, to
pull him down root and branch. But to the Jews, that to this day do not own
the coming of Christ in the flesh, Christ must manifestly appear at least in
the Clouds, as Zech. 12. Rev. 1.7. (of which before) to convert them, as at once
(and so are brought in as a Nation borne at once, Isa. 66.8.) and thereby are
stirred up as one man, to set against the Turk, from whence proceeds his ruin.

These. 2. with obtruding a sense upon it, and devolving it upon the ultimate
day of judgment; as if then were the just time of Christ's destroying
Antichrist by the brightness, or appearance of his coming. For first, this
were to overturne the whole tenor of Scripture, that tells us distinctly Rev.
17.16. of the means of the overthrow of Antichrist, viz. That the ten Horns,
or ten powerful Dominions, Regalities, or Imperialities, shall hate the whore,
and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh (that is
devour or destroy, by an Hebraisme imitating the Hebrew (...), and her flesh,
and not only her spiritual or moral estate) and burn her with fire: And the
manner, and measure, and effect, Rev. 18. Rev. 19. 19, 20, 21. viz. A millstone
cast into the sea, the cessation of all music, mils, and trades, the
extinguishing of all candles, are there used as types and signs of his
destruction, and the wailing of Kings and Merchants. for his desolation are
used to set forth the sequel thereof. And then it is added expressly, that the
Beasts, and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies are gathered together to
make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his Army, and the
Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet, and were cast into a lake of
fire, etc. and the remnant were slain with the sword, etc. and all the souls
were filled with their flesh. All which things shall find neither time nor
place to be acted at the ultimate day of judgment. 2 There is a weighty
consideration in this Text of 2 Thessalonians. 2. to evince that it cannot relate to
the ultimate day of judgment. For then is the destruction of all the wicked of
the world ( Rev. 22.10.) If any of Antichrist, precisely understood, as the
brood of Turk and Pope be then extant, they are swallowed up, and drowned (as
to the enumeration) among the crowd of Hypocrites, who shall then be judged,
condemned, and executed as hypocrites (as often the day of judgment is so
described, Matthew. 7.22. Mat. 25.41. Mat. 24.51.) But our Apostle in this 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. speaks precisely of the distinct destruction of Antichrist as
Antichrist. And therefore mentions him, and his brood, in a singular phrase, as
a single man. In verse. 3. he is called (...) The man of sin. And in the same
verse (...), The son of perdition. verse. 4. (...) etc. That opposer, verse. 8.
(...), That same lawless one. For if I may have leave to speak my notion,
then in precise consideration we may thus distinguish; That as lapsed Adam
with all wicked men (consired in him, Romans 5.) is called the one and only
first man, 1 Cor. 15. And Christ the second Adam, with all true Christians
(reckoned in him, Romans 6.) is called the one and only last man, 1 Cor. 15. So
Antichrist is one middle person, partly a Man, and partly a Beast (as it is often
in the Revelation) in whom all Antichristian men, that are neither openly
wicked without all show of Religion, nor yet sincerely Christians, are to be
reckoned as one with him (as limbs and Trunck make but one body) one
Antichrist. So that as Antichrist is a distinct thing in precise notion, from
the dirty open wicked, so his destruction is distinct before the ultimate day of
judgment. For Rev. 11. 13, 15, 18. Antichrist is destroyed, WHILES Christ has
a Kingdom distinct from the Fathers ultimate Kingdom. And WHEN the Nations
were angry at Antichrists beginning to fall. And Rev. chapter 18. and c. 19. he
falls, before New Jerusalem is set up in Rev. 21. And in c. 20. it is set forth,
as the cause of both, that Christ reigns (at least) in and by his Saints, on
earth, a thousand years. So that the appearance of Christ, destroying
Antichrist is at the beginning of the thousand years. For Christ appears as
well at the beginning, as the ending of the thousand years. At the beginning
for two maine ends; the one for the conversion of the Jews ( Zech. 12. Rev.
1.7.) the other for the destruction of Antichrist, as we have it in this 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. which, though it does not hold forth the last and ultimate general
judgment, yet it holds forth a day of judgment, yea the beginning and
preparation to that day of judgment; setting his sheep (as Matthew. 25.) on his
right hand first, speaking comfortably to them, for a thousand years, to make
them triumph on earth, where they have been trampled on, and after, at the end
of that thousand years, sets the goats on his left hand, condemning them at
that time of the ultimate day of judgment.

SECT. V.
Of the fifth Scripture for Christ's personal appearance at the great
Restoration of the Church.

Matthew. 26.29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom.


Buroughs, for one place, to prove the appearance of Christ personally, at the
thousand years. It is true, says he, this place is usually interpreted in a
mystical sense. But there is no reason why we may not take it in a literal.
And a little before, he said, It is a good rule, that all Scriptures are to be
understood literally, unless it make against the coherence of the Text, or
against some other Scriptures.

Christ's conversing with the Disciples, after his Resurrection. But not so
commonly, for the most renowned Calvin, Marlorat, Grotius, etc. are against
that.

Luke 24.42, 43. that he did drink with the Disciples after his resurrection;
eat he did with them, to show the verity of his Humanity, now risen; but it is
not said he drank, as if he needed it either for concoction, or to allay some
corporal passion of heat.

Peter, Act. 10.41. touching himself, and the rest of the Apostles, We did
eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead; which may signify their
more familiar society with him (as Luke 13.26. We have eaten, and drank in thy
presence) but does not assert Christ's drinking. It is said expressly, We did
eat and drink, not that he did drink. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 15. the body is
raised a spiritual body; And, Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep;
which signifies that after the resurrection of the body there is no need of
drink, though Christ did then eat, to show himself to be true man, and
therefore it is generally conceived that this cup, Matthew. 26.29. was his Sumpto
poculo, renunciat Corporali potioni. Theophyl. En^ rat. in Matthew. 26.29.
last parting cup that he drank in this present world; as never more to
communicate with them in any sort of drinking, till he drank new with them in
the Kingdom of his Father. Quare non videtur loc intelligendum de vino, quod
una cum discipulis biberit Dominus p^st resurrectionem suum. Nam etsi per dies
illos quadraginta, sese illis subinde ostendit, atque etiam cum iis e^it, nulla
tamen potus sit mentio. Nec moris erat apud Judaeos bibere vinum in prandiis ac
caenis quotidianis, sed tantum in solenniotibus conviv^is, Pisc. Schol. in
Matthew. 26.29.
See Piscator on Matthew. 26.

drink after his resurrection some sort of drink or other: Let them stay
their stomachs with this, that it is spoken in this twenty sixth of Matthew,
with a double emphasis upon both Phrases, that (...) I will by no means drink
from hence-forward (...) of this, this same fruit, or kind of the vine,
until, etc. so that beyond all dispute, its evident, that Christ will no more
drink of THIS KIND until that day, when he shall drink it new with them, in
his Fathers kingdom; which Emphasis at THAT day, with the distinction of his
Fathers kingdom, cannot relate to three days after; Christ then still being
in execution of his maine Mediatorship rising again, ( Rome. 4.25.) for our
justification, as he was delivered to death for our offenses.

Adjective, not in the Adverb. For he says not, I will drink it newly, but I
will drink it new; which could not be within three days after, and in the
winter time (when there was need in Judea of a fire in the Highpriests Hall,
Luke 24.55.) at which time, and in so short a space, there could not be made
either new wine, or any mere natural creature new. But at the thousand years
all things are made new, 2 Pet. chap. 3.13. Isa. 65.17. Revel. 21.1.4, 5. The
learned Grotius says (...) Simile est (...) in Apocalypsi Grot. in Annot. in
Matthew. 26.29.
The fruit of the Vine is said to be new, as it is said, New Jerusalem in the
Apocalypse. Now we know that Jerusalem is new (in St. John's sense) in the time
of the thousand years, as appears by collating Revel. 21.1. with Revel. 20.1.
etc. Ev (...) Nempe in regno lo Caelesti and glorioso, seu in convivio illo
Nuptiali ac regio, in quo accumbent Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and una cum
illit, omnes electi ut docet Dominus supra 8.11. Piscat. in Mat. 26.29. Schol.
And Piscator says, That the Kingdom of his Father signifies that Royal
Nuptial, whereat Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Elect shall sit down
together with Christ. And it is said, Revel. 20.4. the Saints lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years. And Mat. 19 28. That they that have followed
Christ shall (so is the right pomting and sense) I say shall in the
regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit on his throne, sit also upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; So Theophyl. points it,
and says, Per rege^nerationem aut^m resurrectionem intellige, which
resurrection of all the Elect defunct, is at the beginning of the the mand
years.
where we have the fruit of the vine new, explained by (...) that is, Another
Genesis, or creation of the world (as Genesis is the name of the Book,
containing the Story of the first Creation) which other Genesis is, whiles
Christ sits on his throne (says this text) before he resign his kingdom to
his Father, 1 Cor. 15. And (says the Apostle, Romans 8.21.) this second Creation
is such as wherein the Creature it self, the whole Creation, as well as the
election of Believers, shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, etc. as it follows, verse. 22. and 23.
That is, the Creatures shall be delivered from the blasting curse by Adams
fall; namely both from the vexation, wrong, and abuse of them by man's sinful
use of them; as also from the vanity, weakness, and emptiness that is in them
for fallen man's sake. Now this Nuptial royal Banquet must be at that Wedding,
Revel. 21. ver. 2. ver. 9. which in order falls into the thousand years
mentioned before, Revel. 20. even as it is express, Revel. 19.7.9. that it
follows the ruin of Babylon, mentioned Revel. 18. throughout the whole
Chapter. The great Et (...) Inquit Theophylactus (...) id est non vulgari,
neque communi, sed novo and singulari modo. loach Cametar. Commentar. in Matthew.
Joach. Camerarius upon that twenty sixth of Matthew, verse. 29, approves of
Theophylacts sense upon this new, and thus recites it; "New, that is says
Theophylact after a new manner, that is "not in a vulgar or common, but in a
new, and singular way. To which let me add what further Theophylact there
adds; Vel etiam (inquit Theophylactus) sic intelligas, Novum poculum,
revelatio, and sacramentorum Dei, hoc est in secundo adventu revelabuntur quae
vere sunt nova, qualia non audivimus uspiam, Theophyl. Enarrat. in Com.
Or else (says he) by New, understand a new Cup, and the revelations of the
mysteries of God; that is in his second coming shall be revealed what things
are truly new; such as we have not any when, or where heard.

Fathers Kingdom; and therefore that place is not so clear for Christ's
Kingdom. To which we answer two ways; 1. That this Kingdom of Christ, in
this text, may be called also his Fathers Kingdom, because the Father gave it
him, Psalm. 2. v. 8. And therefore is Christ called there (in v. 6.) HIS King.
And the Apostles pray to the Father, in the words of this Psalm to maintain
his Son in his Kingdom, Act. 4.24. etc. whereof the glorious state of the
Church in Constantine the Great his time, and other short shinings forth of the
splendour of the Church in succeeding ages, were but types or prefaces. So Psalm.
8.4, 5. What is man that thou art mindful of hem, or the SON of man (the
common style of Christ) that thou visitest him, for THOU have made HIM a little
(time (...) is a little wail. For (...) signifies (say the Critics) a little
space of time. And so is the Greek, Heb. 2.7. See the margin (...) here.
) lower then the Angels, AND (that is to say, after that) have CROWNED him with
glory and honor. THOU have made him to have dominion over the works of thy
hands. THOU have put all things under his feet. All which the Apostle Heb. 2.
v. 5, 6, 7. etc. expounds of Christ, and of the inhabited world to come (as the
Greek is verse. 5.) and says, that when Christ was ascended, yet then all
things were not put under his feet. For all must be so, all (says the Apostle
there, v. 8.) that nothing must be excepted, except as 1 Cor. 15. God himself.
But of this of Heb. 2. abundantly after.

Kingdom of my Father, that is, the Kingdom of God, as it is in the Syriac
(...) that is, it i^ the Kingdom of a God-Christ, or a God-man Christ. For
Father is ascribed in Scripture to the Godhead usually in relation to Christ
incarnate. So that because the two natures are joined as Colleagues in one
person, over this Empire, therefore it is called the Kingdom of CHRIST, and of
GOD. And such a phrase, and upon such an occasion, as clearly relates to the
Kingdom whereof we speak does the Apostle use, Ephesians. 5.5. The words are these;
This know that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, etc. has
any INHERITANCE in the Kingdom of CHRIST, and of GOD. The Heathens never
imagined that vicious persons should enter into their heavenly Elysian-fields,
or the blissfull immortality of souls. And Inheritance more suits to Earth
then Heaven. And lastly, after the ultimate day of judgment Christ has no
Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.28. Therefore this place of Ephesians. 5.5. relates to the
Great Restitution, as plainlier appears by paralelling another place which
fully answers to that of Ephesians. 5.5. viz. Rev. 22.11.15. The words are these;
He that is filthy let him be filthy still, WITHOUT are (...) etc. the dogs, the
whoremongers, etc. when is this? viz. in the time when the Throne of GOD, and
of the LAMB shall be and appear glorious in the Holy City, the New Jerusalem,
verf. 1, 2, 3. twice expressed. There is also the like phrase of calling it the
Kingdom of God, and of Christ, in effect Rev. 12.9.10. And the great Dragon
was cast out, that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, etc. And I heard a
loud voice saying in Heaven, Now is salvation, and strength, and the KINGDOM
OF OUR GOD, and the POWER OF HIS CHRIST. So that Christ as MAN jointly with GOD
does reign in this Millenary Kingdom. And therefore Christ speaks of new
Wine. New in the Kingdom of his Father, before the ultimate ^ay of judgment.
For after that day Christ has no KINGDOM, nor POWER, but lays down all (as
we have often ^epeated it out of 1 Cor. 15.28.) God the Father is then to be all
in all. And therefore that expression so frequent in Rev. 20. The Saints hall
reign with Christ a thousand years, cannot be meant of supernall eternal
glory after the last judgment, because that place but now quoted of 1 Cor.
15.28. affirms, that then Christ himself is said NOT TO REIGN, but to lay
down all, and to be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all; so that then Christ only injoys glory with his Saints, not
reign (as Christ) in glory.

SECT. VI.
Of the sixth Scripture for Christ's Personal appearance at the great
restoration of the Church.

2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom.


Kingdom of Christ here mentioned, cannot be referred to his past Government
of the Church; for it is express in the future tense, now so long since his
Ascension, that he shall judge the quick and dead at his appearance, and his
Kingdom.

Kingdom of Christ here spoken of, signify any Kingdom of Christ after the
ultimate judgment, for then Christ has no Kingdom; as but now, and often
before, was touched from 1 Cor. 15.28.

appears next, to judge the quick and dead Saints, to reward them, and to
destroy the then living incurable, and incorrigible wicked, by a particular day
of Judgment, at the beginning of the thousand years, which is the Preface to
the ultimate Judgment, Christ all that while being busied in executing that
first Sentence of Judicature, ( Matthew. 25.) Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit a kingdom provided for you; according to Revel. 11.15, 17, 18. (of
which much after, compare Revel. 19. three last verses) I say, when Christ
shall then appear, he shall have a Kingdom.

appearance is the same in the Greek, as that 2 These. 2.8. so that Christ must
appear to the inhabitants of the earth, where this his Kingdom is. For the
present, (as it is said, Luke 19.11, 12. by Christ himself) Christ is gone
into a far Country, viz. into Heaven, to take to him a Kingdom; that is, in
the Metropolis Heaven he is to be crowned King of this his Kingdom he is to
have on earth, but he is to return, and then to take account of his servants
in this his Kingdom, and to dignifie the well-doers. Christ must be the fifth
Monarch, Dan. 2.45. Dan. 7.13, 14. I say, Christ is to be the fifth Monarch.
The Jews now have no King, but in the last days they shall have David, (that
is, Christ the Son of David) to be their King, Hos. 3. ver. 4, 5. And Christ
in Acts 1. ver. 3. having for forty days spoken of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God, and thereupon being asked by the Disciples, ver. 6 of his
restoring the Kingdom to Israel, he does not deny the thing, but only refuses
then to tell them the Time when it should be done. But after he tells us by
John in the Revelation, as we shall see abundantly after.

SECT. VII.
Of the seventh Scripture for the Personal appearance of Christ at the great
restoration of the Church.

Acts 3.19, 20, 21. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come, from the presence of
the Lord. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which was before preached unto you,
whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all things,
which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world
began.




Time, and especially times twice mentioned in the Plural, cannot so well
relate to a state after the last Judgment, when time shall be no more, Rev.
10.6, 7. And the Angels swear by him that lives for ever, that there should be
TIME NO LONGER, but in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, the Mystery
of God should be FINISHED.

2 This time or times are said to be spoken of by all the Prophets all the
Prophets since the world began, have not spoken of the last Day of Judgment;
but of the Kingdom of the Messiah they all have spoken, and so much, and so
plainly, that the Apostles minds did much run out upon it, even at the first
appearance of Christ in the flesh, besides their Doctrines afterward in their
Epistles, etc. concerning it. So it seems by Matthew. 20. ver. 20. in the
request of the Mother of Zebedees Children, (that is, two of the twelve
Disciples, ver. 24. entreating Christ, that her two sons might sit the one on
his right hand, the other on his left hand in HIS KINGDOM; and by the strife
among the twelve, Luke 9.46. who of them after Christ's Passion should be the
greatest. The same we have, Luke 22.24. when Christ was ready to suffer. And
by the question of the Apostles, Act. 1.6. touching Christ's restoring the
Kingdom to Israel; (in all which places Christ does not in the least hint any
negative to the thing it self.) And the Jews yet much expect the coming of
the Messiah to restore them, now not long after one thousand six hundred and
fifty. Insomuch that one ancient learned Rabbin on his Deathbed exhorted the
Jews, that if the Messiah did not come about that time,they should embrace the
Christian Messiah, as the true Messiah. And you heard before in the first Book
the hope of the learned Jewish Rabbis concerning that thing, with their
quotations of the Prophets, upon which they grounded that their hope. And to
this day that is a stumbling block to the whole dispersed of the Jews, that
Christ is not yet come, because he yet takes no care (as they think) to
restore and settle them according to the many Prophesies and Promises of the
Old Testament. For this cause therefore Christ will appear (at lest for a time
in the clouds) personally, to convince, and convert, and settle them.

4. One would wonder to see how many of the Prophesies, and Prophets of the Old
Testament, godly and learned Dr. Alsted and this Kingdom of which we speak.
And therefore it must needs be our ignorance if we make a wonder at this point,
questioning whether there be any such thing in the Prophets.

5 Peter also speaking to the Jews in his 2 Epistle does several We have a
more sure word of PROPHECY whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as to a
light that shines in a dark place until the day star arise in your hearts.
Now that the Lord Christ had come in the flesh, finished our redemption, the
effusion of the Spirit had been abundantly fulfilled, the Gospel openly
promulgated to the world, and in part they to whom Peter writes converted, v.
1. and Christ ascended, the Apostle calls it a dark time, in comparison of the
rising of the Day Star (that is the Son of righteousness Mal. 4.) in their
hearts (which cannot be meant of eternal glory after the last judgment) to
which the Prophecy of Old Testament does lead them, to wait for it, till it be
fulfilled. And chap. 3.13. We according to his PROMISE look for new Heavens
and a new Earth, etc. which promise is Isa. 65.17. And by the context there of
inhabiting the earth, cannot be understood of supernall glory after the last
judgment.

Acts that these Prophets speak of? There are four notable things: 1 That
there is now so long since Christ's ascension, a time of refreshing to come for
the Jews (to whom these words were spoken) as well as for others: At which
time their sins should be totally blotted out. For the state of the Church we
speak of, by all we can gather from Scripture, shall be a sinlesse time as to
the Church. 2 That this time of refreshing shall be as proceeding from the
PRESENCE, or ((...)) from the FACE of the Lord, which evidently signifies a
sight of Christ. 3 That God shall send Jesus which was before preached to them.
He had sent him already by Incarnation. But yet notwithstanding, God will
again send him. The Jews had yet many sorrows, therefore he shall be sent
again for their refreshing. And they had their spiritual condition in part
restored, but God will send again for the restitution of all things. 4 It is
said Christ comes for the restitution of all things. Therefore this cannot
signify Christ's coming for the destitution, or dissolution of all things.
And therefore it altogether sounds of an happy time before the all-destroying
last judgment. Restitution signifies restoring; Restoring signifies an
attainment of that perfection that was lost, viz. in lapsed Adam, either in
men, or things, Romans 8.21. etc. The CREATURE it self ALSO shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
For the whole CREATION GROANETH etc. until now, and not only they, but we our
selves also, etc. that have the FIRST FRUITS of the SPIRIT waiting for the
Redemption of our BODIES. Lay all together, that both men and things groan
after this estate; And that the Creatures shall share in it, as it relates
distinctly with an emphasis to the bodies of the Saints, and then meditate
whether it be likely that a supernall state of glory in the highest Heavens is
here meant! No, the New state of things below, the New heavens, and the New
earth which Peter speaks of 2 Ep. Chap. 3. v. 13. quoting it out of the Prophet
Isa. 64.17. is the meaning of this, Romans 8. The Heavens above need no making
New; Nor have they earth in them. The New Jerusalem, to which the Kings shall
bring their honor, comes down from heaven, Rev. 21. So that it is a new state
of glory below.

Act. 3. that in as much as it is said, Until the restitution of all things,
the state of things here meant, must of necessity be before the ultimate end of
the world, as our opponents conceive of the end of the world: Because at the
end of the world according to their opinion shall be the dissolution of the
earth, and no need of the Heavens. If then shall be the restitution of some men
(namely the Elect) to supernall glory, yet that will not amount to the phrase
in the Text, viz. the restitution of ALL THINGS. But the Apostle tells us (as
we touched but now) in Romans 8. That all the Elect, and all the Creation expect
a restitution of all things before the final and total end of all things.

Heaven must contain Christ until the restitution of all things, which
clearly infers, that Christ must come out of Heaven when he shall restore all
things. At the ultimate day of judgment is the destruction of Gog and Magog,
and ten thousands of the wicked, Revel. 20. Again after the ultimate day of
judgment he is not the Magnus Restaurator, the Great Restorer, but is
Subditus, he is himself subject, 1 Cor. 15.28. Therefore before that, he must
come out of Heaven to restore all things. And how? even as it is express in
Act. 1.11. spoken by Angels, and attested by Saint Luke there: This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall SO COME in I LIKE MANNER as ye
have seen him GO IN TO HEAVEN.

SECT. VIII.
Of the eighth Scripture for the Personal appearance of Christ, at the great
restoration of the Church.

Matthew. 23.38, 39. Your house is left unto you desolate, for I say unto you,
ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord.


THis cannot be meant of Christ coming after his resurrection, for it is
plain, that between the time of Christ's speaking this, and his coming with
that acclamation, Blessed is he that comes, etc. there must be a desolation,
their house, or habitation, to whom he speaks, must be left desolate.

Jews, and more keenly to them inhabiting Jerusalem. So the connection, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not; behold,
(mark the connection, or inference) YOUR house is left unto YOU desolate; For,
I say unto YOU, YE shall not see me, etc. Luke inserts, (Chap. 13.35.) Christ's
great asseveration, VERILY I say unto you, ye shall not see me. And expresses
it more fully, that this well-coming of Christ was not hard at hand, as at his
resurrection, in that Luke says, Ye shall not see me UNTIL THE TIME COME
when ye shall say, Blessed, etc. And Luke as well as Matthew gives us, the
Jews not seeing of Christ till that time, with the emphasis of a double
negative (...) that is, ye shall by no means (or manner) see me till that
time; which was verified in that only the Disciples or Brethren saw him at his
resurrection.

3 What this leaving of their house desolate is, our Savior expounds Mat. 23.
Your house is left desolate, for I say unto you, ye shall not see me
henceforth, etc. presently in the next sentence he is recorded to speak in the
twenty fourth Chapter, verse. 1.2. (Chapters being of late invention, nonein the
ancient books either in Greek or other Languages) is that of the buildings
even of all they behold, that is, of the City, and express of the Temple,
there shall not be left there one stone upon another that shall not be thrown
down; so that (as Christ pursues the discourse, verse. 15.) They should see the
abomination of desolation, set up in the HOLY PLACE, (expounded Luke 21.20. to
be the compassing about Jerusalem, with Heathenish Roman Armies. And Luke
19.43. Thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round,
and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground) And in
the sixteenth verse of that twenty third Chapter of Matthew, They in Judea
should fly to the mountains, and he that is in the field shall not turn back
to take his clothes. So that the leaving their house desolate is the
destroying of the place, and face of worship in the Temple, and the grace and
place of the City, for to that at last it amounted in two steps, whereof this
was the first by Titus (the Roman Emperor) about seventy years after the
birth of Christ, destroying the Temple; the second by Adrian the Roman
Emperor, about the one hundred thirty fourth year after Christ's birth,
destroying the City; so that the Jews never sacrificed there any more.
Buchole. Ind. Chron. Ad anuum 134 ut (inquit Bucholce^us) intelligeretur,
Romanae potestati Indaeo^ subj^cere, and politiam Mosaicam cum Metropolis suae
ruina redactam esse in ni^ilum, effusa jam super eam finali perpetuaque
vastitate, arque ita sciretur spem omnem Judaeo^um, DE MESSIAE ADVEN TV (quam
Barcochebas id est stellae filius, juxta ut simulare^ur prophetiam Balaami
iste, Pseudo-Christus, and causa rebellionis hujus in Romanos, inducentis
cladem, p^i^^s indiderat) extinctam, Hierosolymaeque ruderibus obrutam ac
sepultam esle; Adrianus, Christianis, and aliis Gentibus urbem Jerusalem
inhabitandam dedit and mutata veteri appellatione, de suo nomine, Aeliam
nominavit.


4 The word in Greek ((...)) used here in this twenty third of Matthew, ver.
38. to signify left, is in it self of a mild signification, as in Latin
missum facere, and in English, to lay aside a thing; so that it does not in its
own nature signify an utter forsaking, but only a leaving for a time, as the
couched Antithesis show us, viz. left desolate UNTIL, and therefore the same
Christ that is now going shall be (...) coming, and whiles hereafter he is
coming, these Jews of Jerusalem, and of Judea, that before had been angry with
them that had cried Hosanna to him ( Mat. 21.9. to 16.) and anon cry, Crucify
him, should in time to come welcome him with this acclamation, Blessed is he
coming (so the Greek) in the name of the Lord.



Jews, Mat. 23. ult. Christus Judaeos ingratos ita alloquitur, Dico enim
vobis, nequaquam me videbitis ab he tempore usque dum dicatis, benedictus qui
venit in nomine Domini. Quibus verbis Christus indicat Judaeos upsum ^andem
aliquando visuros, non equidem in ultimo judicio, sed ante illud, quia non in
ultimo judicio acclamabunt ipsi Benedictus, etc. (tum enim trepidabunt qui non
fuerint conversi ad ipsum) sed illo tempore quo se ipsis ostendet ut convertat
ipsos ad veramfidem. Alsted in locum, in Diatr. De Mil^an.
who had killed the Prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them (ver.
37.) whose house therefore is to be left desolate. They suffer in that
destruction of the Temple, and City of Jerusalem (aforesaid) who, as to this
time of Christ's speech, would not be gathered under the wings of Christ; so
after his Resurrection did not welcome him with this, Blessed is he that
comes, etc. but belyed his Resurrection, Matthew. 28. refused his Doctrine, A^^.
13.45. and persecuted his Apostles, Act. 4.

Nor can this welcomming of Christ with, Blessed is he that comes, etc. be
referred to the ultimate general Judgment, because then is a time for the
generality, of lamentation, not of acclamation; then no time of conversion of
the Jews to cause this acclamation; but of judging men according to the
condition they are found in.

Upon this text of Matthew. 23.39. learned and pious Doctor Alsted has these
words; By these expressions (says he,) Christ shows, that the Jews a long
time after should see him, not at the ulmate judgment, but before that, for at
the ultimate judgment, they shall not say with acclamation, Blessed is he,
etc.) for then shall they tremble that are not converted unto him) but at that
time wherein he shall show himself to them, to convert them unto the true
faith. Thus Alsted. I add, Nor can this be meant of the Jews seeing him only
by faith. For it is opposed to their not seeing hence forward with bodily eyes
between this speech, and that same until. So that the result of the sense is
the same with, Act. 1.11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have SEEN him go up into heaven.
Or with that Rev. 1.7. every EYE shall see him in the CLOUDS, which now
promised after Christ's ascension is taken out of Zech. 12.10. etc. described to
be a time (at first glimps) of repentance, and pouring out of Spirit, unsuitable
circumstances for the ultimate judgment, as has been most largely before
declared.

Saul, so shall he think it meet to appear yet before the ultimate judgment
to convert the Jews so long blinded, seeing unto this day nothing but
desolation, rather then restoration.

Daniel 12.1. Michael shall STAND UP, that is (say some learned) visibly
appear, which stands FOR the children of thy people (...) rendered For, may be
translated Over, as to say, he should appear over them in the clouds, which is
to be fulfilled says the twelfth verse, one thousand three hundred thirty and
five days, that is years, after the ceasing of the daily sacrifice, at which
time Daniel shall stand in his lot upon earth, verse. 13. So that upon the
result of the whole, the meaning of this 23. of Matthew. is, that Christ shall so
visibly and comfortably come to the Jews, that they shall joyfully and
familiarly, as it were, speak to him, saying, Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord.

Matthew. 23.39. Verba quibus caput hoc concluditur haec sun^ (...) etc. de quo,
ut aliis quibusdam, vere di^i potest, quot Theologi tot sententiae. Alii enim
de visione, non per fidem, qua hic videtur Dominus, sed de ea qua cum ad
judicium venerit, denuo videbitur (quod non paucis placet.) Alii de de ea
intelligunt, qua a Judaeis, qui in prima agnoscere eum noluerunt, tum
videbitur. Quae opiniones cum ab aliis resutentur singulae minori opera hic
defungemur. Cer^e quam praecipue hic amplectuntur, quo nitatur fundamento,
nondum video; Cum praesettim ea de quibus hic agitur, non minori cum gaudio
pronuncianda videantur, quam cum Domino adveneniente Osanna exclamavit populus.
In Iudi^^o autem tribui tetrosem impils, Iudaeis vel in primis, de quibus fuse
ad hunc Evangelistam alibi Chrysostom^s, quis nescit?
Dan. Heinsius the great Greek Critic, I think, well hits the nayl on the head
touching these words of Mat. 23.39. in his Annotations upon them. Surely, says
he, These things here handled, may seem that they are to be pronounced with no
less joy, then when at the coming of Christ toward Jerusalem, the people
cried Hosanna. But at the day of judgment, terror is inflicted upon the
wicked, upon the Jews especially, of which, how largely Chrysostom upon this
Evangelist is, who knows not? By which Heinsius does plainly hint, that he
understands this place of a time before the last judgment, as he that can
compare the margin, may more plainly see.

SECT. IX.
Of the ninth Scripture for the appearance of Christ at the great Restoration
of the Church.

Matthew. 24.3. And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the Disciples came to
him privately saying, When shall THESE THINGS BE, and what shall be the sign
of THY COMING, and of the END OF THE WORLD?


THree things are here inquired into: 1 The signs of the destruction of the
Temple, and City of Jerusalem (which destruction had been hinted, chap. 23.38,
etc. expressed verse. 2. of this Chapter) 2 The signs of Christ's coming again,
which he had intimated chap. 23.39. 3 The signs of the end of the world, which
they knew must in its time follow the other two (the first being the type, the
second the preparation to the third and last.)


first, viz. of signs of the destruction of the Temple and City of Jerusalem,
Christ speaks in the last place (being of a particular and less concernment)
in the 15, 16. etc. in these words, When ye shall see the abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet stand in the holy place (let him
that reads understand) then let them which be in Judea fly into the
mountains. Of which words we spoke upon the occasion of those words in Matthew.
23.38. in the former, viz. the eighth Section of this second Book.

viz. the signs of his second coming (visibly to appear to them) from the
fifth verse to the thirteenth, viz. there shall come, 1 False Christ's deceiving
many. 2 Wars, and rumors of wars, Nations arising against Nations. 3
Persecutions, delivering the true Christians to be afflicted, and to be killed.
4 Scandals, Christians shall be hated of all Nations for Christ's sake, and many
shall be offended, betraying and hating one another. 5 The arising of many
false Prophets deceiving many. 6 The abounding of iniquity, and the decaying of
love.
All these in a great measure are already fulfilled, and much in these our
days, and in these Nations to which we relate.

viz. of the signs of the end of the world, v. 13.14. But he that shall endure
to the END, the same shall be saved. Of the other signs he said they did not
signify that the END was immediately at hand, verse. 6. These signs shall be,
says Christ, BUT the END is not YET. But now he comes to speak of the sign
of the End of the world, viz. that this Gospel of the KINGDOM shall be
preached in all the world. (...) published as by an Herald. And THIS Gospel of
THE KINGDOM, as pointing at this particular of the good news of the Gospel
that Christ should after all these dark clouds of the reign of wickedness,
have a Kingdom on earth. And then (says Christ) shall the END come, which
must of necessity import one of these ENDS, and one of these ways must be
signified by the publishing of the Gospel in all the world: That either the
Gospel should be published in all the world (to Jews and Gentiles) as a sign,
immediately before the End of THIS present world, that is, before the thousand
years of the great Restoration. Or that the full and effectual manifestation
of the Gospel should be in the time of that Restoration in those thousand
years (which Paul calls Heb. 2.5. (...) That inhabited world that is to come,
of which place, much after) as a forerunning sign of the ultimate general end
of the whole world. Let the Reader take which he pleases; For either of them
concludes for us, that after this sign (according as we interpret the sequel)
shall be the beginning or ending of Christ's visible appearance to us on earth.
As it follows verse. 29. Then shall appear the (sign of the Son of man (not
for a mere short sentence of judgment, but) to gather his elect from the four
quarters of the earth. Of which place much in Sect. 3. of this 2 Book.

his next coming, and visible appearing, and the end of the world, and for that
end gives distinct signs of both; then Christ must come before the end of the
world, and visibly appear. But so does Christ clearly distinguish, and
distinctly signify those two as we have showed; Therefore there is yet a time
wherein Christ will come, and visibly appear before the end of the world. At
first we know by the Gospels he came in a state of humility for salvation to
sinners that should believe. The next time he comes in glory to reign visibly
to the comfort of them that do believe, Rev. 20. first six verses. Third and
last time for terror to the wicked, verse. 12. Of that second coming (the thing
now under consideration) Christ having given signs (as has been showed) he
concludes in verse 30. They shall see the Son of man in the Clouds of heaven
with great power and glory; which cannot be meant of the final sentence of the
ultimate judgment, because of that in the 34 verse, bound with an asseveration
and attestation before and behind, Verily I say unto you, this generation
shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my words shall not pass away. Of which 34. verse. much
afterward.

SECT. X.
Of the tenth Scripture for Christ's visible appearance at the great
restoration of the Church.

Luke 19. ver. 11. to 28. He added, and spoke a Parable, because he was nigh to
Jerusalem, and because they thought that the KINGDOM OF GOD should immediately
APPEAR. A certain nobleman went into a far Country to RECEIVE FOR HIMSELF
A KINGDOM, and TO RETURN, and he called his ten Servants, and delivered to
them ten pounds, and said unto them, occupy till I come. But his Citizens hated
him, and sent a Message after him, saying, we will not have this man to reign
over us. And it came to pass when he was returned, HAVING RECEIVED THE
KINGDOM, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he
gave the money, etc. Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained
ten pounds. And he said unto him, well, thou good servant, because thou have
been faithful in a little, have thou authority over ten Cities, and so
proportionable to the rest. But those mine enemies that would not have me
reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me.


Mat. 25.

It is pend by Luke, who wrote the Acts, where he carefully reports Christ's
coming again, just as they saw him ascend, in relation to the restoring of the
Kingdom, of which Christ spoke, and the Disciples enquired after, Act. 1.3, 4,
5, 6, etc. to 12. only says Luke, Acts 3.21. The heavens must receive him for
a time, and then he shall come from heaven, and cause the restitution of all
things, as has been opened.

Allegory; Christ spoke this Parable, because he was night to Jerusalem, and
because they thought that the Kingdom of God should IMMEDIATELY APPEAR. It
does not deny the appearing of the Kingdom, Christ is for it, only he is
against the immediate ((...)) the sudden appearance of it; he must before that
(as is the maine sense of the Parable) go away into a far country, viz. to
Heaven, and leave talents in trust with his servants, giving them time to
employ them; and to be so long absent; that his enemies grow so bold as to send
after him with this high affront, they would not have him to reign over them;
that is (according to the direct sense) Some seemingly professors by his long
absence, should grow quite careless of improving the talents, or gifts of
endowments to his honor; and others by his delay (as they counted it) should
become professed enemies against him.

the diligent Talenters expected, and accordingly acted, Christ went away to
Heaven, not to return no more, but went thither to take to himself a
Kingdom, which phrase, viz. (...) must signify a Kingdom peculiar to
himself, as he is Christ: else how does he take it or receive it to himself?
And being installed into it, he is to return. He had his Kingdom of grace
before he went away, as he often mentions it in his Parables and Sermons;
adding that that his Kingdom was not of this world. And he had the Kingdom of
glory as his triumph over his Kingdom of grace, having finished his conquest
on the Cross. So he needed not to return to receive either of these
Kingdoms. It remains therefore that it is the Kingdom we speak of that he
returns to receive. He went to Heaven (by ascension) to possess the Kingdom
of glory, there to be installed into this on earth: That being the original of
this; or that being the Emperiality, to which this the Tributary, or Province:
Or Heaven being the Metropolis, this below the Territories. Sure enough
express it is, that he went away into a far Country (which can be no other but
heaven, Christ having never traveled bodily out of his own Country.)
Secondly, that though he were before his going a Nobleman, and had the
Regiment, or Government over a Royalty, he had servants, he had the command of
employing them as he listed; And had the power of rewarding or punishing as he
pleased; so that the unprofitable servant that improved not his Talent, he cast
into utter darkness, where was weeping and gnashing of teeth (Matthew. 25.30.)
All which in that Matthew. 25.14. etc. is called the Kingdom of Heaven, that is,
the Kingdom of Grace, as appears in the former Parable of the Virgins, the
same in sense v. 1. etc. Yet thirdly, it is said, this Nobleman went into a
far Country to receive for himself another Kingdom, and to return, verse. 12.
where, as his receiving the Kingdom is put before his returning: So on the
other side, it is said, He returned receiving a Kingdom, verse. 15. Gr. (...)
which Arias renders in redire ipsum accipientem reg^um.
(where his returning is put before his receiving the Kingdom;) so that both
Kingdoms must be here meant, viz. Christ receiving the Kingdom of glory before
his return; and his Kingdom of visible power of reigning on earth after his
return. For merely his Kingdom of glory in Heaven cannot be here understood,
because touching his reigning there, it was in vain, unpossible, and
altogether unlikely for his enemies to send an embassage after him, saying,
They would not have him to reign over them. And merely his Kingdom of grace
cannot be here understood, because that is otherwise expressed under the
comparison of Talents (compare Matthew 25.) And moreover it is here distinctly
set down that he is to go into a far Country, and then actually to receive
another Kingdom, partly before he returned, and partly after he returned, even
as there is a diversity of actions; In that Kingdom of Grace, there is
mentioned only the neglect of improving the Talents; but in this Kingdom of
visible power received after his return, there is an high affront offered,
they send a message that they would not have him to reign. Again, there is
diversity of names. The former are called Servants; The latter are called
Enemies. Add, that there is a different dispensation of justice. The
unprofitable servant is put into a dark prison, but the enemies must be
slain BEFORE HIM. Therefore of necessity here must be hinted the Kingdom of
Christ's visible power. That was it the Jews expected, yea and the best of
them, viz. the Disciples, as we have heard before, and therefore to that Christ
here speaks. And for that Christ did not set up this at his coming in the
flesh, delivering them from the Romans, therefore his Citizens his enemies
hated him, and sent a message after him. They hated him as in relation of
having him to be their visible King, or King of visible Dominion, when they
cried at his arraignment, They had no King but Caesar. And they sent an
embassage after him, when after his death in opposition to that kingly-hood
they were angry with Pilate for writing in the Title set over him, in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

visible appearance, and setting up his visible Kingdom of power on earth, yet
before the ultimate day of judgment; As first, His giving to the improvers of
their Talents, to one the rule over ten Cities, to another the rule over five
Cities. And the Talent of him that had improved nothing, to him that had
improved much, all which, compared with the preface of the Parable, touching
the appearing of the Kingdom, cannot in any thing well relate to the state of
mere supernall eternal glory in the highest Heavens. 2 His causing his enemies
to be slain before his face, suits not to Christ's mere Kingdom of grace,
whose Dominion precisely considered, is in the power of the Gospel. Nor does it
comport and comply with the ultimate day of judgment, when instead of slaying
enemies, there is a making them alive. And instead of punishing them before
Christ's face, there is a sending them away from the presence of the Lord into
eternal judgment. But these extremely well agree with Christ's appearing to set
up his visible Kingdom of power. For then Christ shall destroy his
Antichristian, Jewish, and Gentilish, and mixed Turkish enemies with the
brightness of his appearance, as has been opened upon 2 Thessalonians. 2. in Sect 4.
of this second Book. And shall slay them, corporally, Revelat. 19. latter end.

near Jerusalem, the Jews thought the Kingdom of God would immediately
appear. Doubtless it was far from their thoughts in the captive condition
they were now in, to expect the appearance of the Kingdom of glory in Heaven.
For the hundreds of promises of their deliverance from the corporal captivity
were not fulfilled. And for the Kingdom of grace, these men little minded. And
the better sort, viz. the Disciples and Believers had seen it appear already,
therefore it is the other Kingdom of Christ, viz. that of his visible power
and rule, to deliver them from their corporal enemies, that they supposed
would immediately appear. Now to this, says Christ, It will not immediately
appear, but, I must, says he, first go into a far Country (viz. into
Heaven) and there be instated, and Crowned King, and after that come again,
and actually and visibly reign; the mean while, you to whom I have given
Talents, that is, have endowed with gifts, must employ them, and at my return,
as a sign of my visible actual power, I will take account of you, and cause
mine enemies that oppose my visible reigning, to be slain before me.

receives no Kingdom, but resignes all his Kingdom, Power, and Dominion, 1.
Cor. 15.28.

CHAP. III.
Of five places out of the Old Testament, to prove the visible appearance of
Christ to the Church on earth, at the time of her restoration.

SECT. I.
The first place is out of Dan. 7.11. to end of the Chapter.



four Beasts, that is, the four Monarchies are slain (as it is expounded
after verse 17. The four great Beasts are four Kings) instead of them, Daniel
sees in a vision (ver. 13, 14.) One like the Son of Man, come WITH THE
CLOVDES of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him; which notably agrees with that place last spoken of ( Luke 19.11,
etc.) where it is said, Christ went into a far Country, to receive to
himself a Kingdom, and return. And that visibly (says this of Daniel) with
the Clouds, or in the Clouds, as Rev. 1.7. in way of Preface to this his
Kingdom, Rev. 11. Rev. 20. And (says Daniel, ver. 14.) There was given to him
that was like the Son of Man, DOMINION, and glory, and a KINGDOM, that all
People, Nations, and Languages should serve him. Just as Luke 19.15. (according
to the Greek) he returned receiving the kingdom. When he visibly returned, he
received a Kingdom here below, else why did he return? Add, that here below
he exercised visible destruction upon his enemies; for it is not said, as of
the unworthy Talenter, he cast them into utter darkness, but he caused them to
be slain before his face.

SECT. II.
Of the second place of Scripture out of the Old Testament, for Christ's visible
appearance at the great restoration of the Church.

Jer. 25.5.6. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and PROSPER, and shall
execute JUDGMENT AND JUSTICE in THE EARTH. In his days Judah shall be saved,
and ISRAEL SHALL DWELL safely, and this is his name whereby he shall be
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.


Lord Christ is the person here meant, it being his incommunicable name, Act.
4.12. 2 Cor: 5. last.

Jeremiahs Prophecy, that this relates to the times after Judahs Captivity in
Babylon, Israel having been carried away captive long before.

1. Christ must reign and prosper; That is, must be every way glorious and
successful, so that Judah and Israel shall own him for their King, and call
him, the Lord their righteousness. 2 He shall execute justice and judgment in
the earth; it is not said, he shall preach justice or judgment, or execute it
in heavenly places, but he shall execute it upon, or in the earth. 3. In his
days JUDAH shall be saved, and ISRAEL shall dwell safely, viz. being gathered
out of all Countries, ver. 3.
But the Lord Christ did yet never thus reign. Instead of reigning, and
prospering in the eyes of Israel and Judah, he was as a branch blasted, a thing
accursed, Isa. 53. ver. 3, 4, etc. so that the Jews for the general dis-owned
him, proceeding against him as a Malefactor, guilty of many of the highest
Crimes; and for matters of Justice and Judgment in the earth, he refused to
meddle with the smallest matters, as to give his opinion touching the
Adulteress, or to divide the inheritance. Nor then, nor yet ever did Israel
return from Captivity, and dwell safely: if we might say Judah did, at
Christ's first coming in the flesh, as we may not, because they were then under
the Heathen Roman power as conquered, and tributaries, Luke 3.1.

Nor may any put this off, with Christ's Spiritual reigning, for so he did
always from the Creation, but this is in the future tense, he shall reign, to
signify his reigning so as never before.

SECT. III.
Of the third Scripture ^^t of the Old Testament, for Christ's visible
appearance at the great restoration of the Church.

Zach. 2.10, 11, 12. compared with Zach. 14. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Sing and
rejoice, O daughter of Jerusalem, for lo I come, and will DWELL in the midst
of thee, says the Lord. And many NATIONS shall be joined to the Lord in that
day, and shall be my people, and I will DWELL in the midst of thee; and the
Lord shall INHERIT Judah his portion in the holy Land, and shall CHOOSE
JERUSALEM AGAIN. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of
Olives, and the Lord shall be King over ALL THE EARTH. In that day there shall
be one LORD, and his name one.


ZEchary Prophesied after their return out of Captivity in Babylon, see Zech.
1.1. compared with 2 Chronicles. 36.22. and Ezra, chap. 1. ver. 1. etc. to the end.
Therefore this was not fulfilled in their return, for it is spoken of a future
time to come.

And Spiritually, God did always dwell among his people, and therefore nor can
that be the full meaning of this place.

And when Christ came, and was incarnated, this Text was not fulfilled, for
then many Nations were not joined to the Lord, to be his people; nor so much as
the generality of any one Nation; the Heathen Romans then inherited the portion
of Judah, and filled all Countries with their persons, or powers; and instead
of Christ then choosing Jerusalem again, he pronounced woe against it, and
gave it up to desolation, which accordingly about forty years after Christ's
Passion was fulfilled, Mat. 23. three last, and Matthew. 24.1, 2, etc. Nor was
the Lord King over all the earth, more then he had been before Christ's
Incarnation. Instead of one Lord over all, there were many.

SECT. IIII.
The fourth place in the Old Testament for Christ's personal appearance.

Micha 4. verse. 1, etc. to 8. In the last days it shall come to pass, that
the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
Mountain, and MANY NATIONS SHALL COME, AND SAY, Come, let us go up to the
Mountain of the LORD, and HE shall JUDGE AMONG MANY PEOPLE, and rebuke the
NATIONS afar off, and they shall BEAT THEIR SWORDS INTO PLOW-SHARES, NATION
SHALL NOT LIFT UP A SWORD AGAINST NATION, neither shall they learn war any
more, but they shall sit every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, and
NONE SHALL MAKE THEM AFRAID. In that day I will assemble her that halteth, and
will gather her that was driven out, and her that I have afflicted, and I will
make her that was cast off a STRONG NATION, and the Lord shall REIGN OVER THEM
IN MOUNT ZION, FROM HENCEFORTH and FOR EVER.


NOw, when was ever this since the Creation? much less was it performed at
Christ's Incarnation, when the Jews were under the Roman power, obstinate
against Christ, and scattered to this day.

SECT. V.
The fifth place for Christ's Personal appearance.

Zephan. 3.14. to end of the Chapter. Sing O Daughter of Zion, shout O JSRAEL,
the Lord has taken away thy judgment, he has cast out thine enemy, the KING
OF ISRAEL, even the LORD is in the MIDST OF THEE. In that day it shall be said
to Jerusalem, fear thou not, the LORD THY GOD IN THE MIDST OF THEE IS MIGHTY,
he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; I will gather them that are
sorrowful. Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee, I will
gather her that was driven out, and I will get them praise and fame in every
Land, where they have been put to shame, etc.


NOw, when was Christ ever so in the midst of Judah and Israel, as to do thus?
therefore this is yet to be fulfilled.

CHAP. VI.
The close of the second Book in a general brief Discourse of Christ's
visible appearance to the Saints on earth, before the ultimate Day of Judgment.

Personal visible appearance of Christ, at the setting up of his Kingdom
before the end of the World, because we shall have many sprinklings of this, in
the prosecution of the whole of the point, yet remaining about the Kingdom it
self.

the Kings of the earth, that of all men are drowned in sensuality, shall come
and submit to his Kingdom, Rev. 21. and elsewhere, as we have heard before.

Son of Man, should be as completely and apparently King, as the Kings that
are under him? They have not only Authority by Writs, Warrants, Proclamations,
etc. to punish or encourage by their Officers, but they visibly are crowned,
sit in the Throne, bear the Scepter, and attended upon all just occasions with
a visible power. Then it is all equity that Christ also should not only have
sovereigne Authority, but also a visible power, so as he may visibly appear to
his very enemies, to be King over all the earth.

viz. a providentiall power over all the world: A spiritual efficacy over his
Kingdom of grace, or visible Church, and a visible glorious reigning over all
his true Saints.

with, and over all his Saints; for all shall not be there (according to the
common Tenet) till the Lord Christ has resigned all his power according to 1
Cor. 15.28.) or at least when he has brought all the elect souls to their
bodies by a resurrection, and changed them whom he finds alive at his coming,
and so brought them all to ultimate glory, just then he lays down all his
authority. So that he does not reign with, and over all his Saints in ultimate
glory at all.

Rev. 20. with verse. 8. etc.) And a great comfort to them alive at his coming,
that have waited for him faithfully to the last and worst of the Tragedy of
evil times.

viz. Providential of power, and spiritual of grace. But a word will do well
here, to the last, viz. his visible glorious appearance before the ultimate day
of judgment making all the world sincere, or altogether seeming Saints, and
reigning over them as the alone Monarch. He must as visibly succeed in
government, he four metals ( Dan. 2.) and the four Beasts ( Dan. 7.) both
signifying the four Monarchies ( viz. the Chalde-Babylonian the Medo-persian,
the Grecian, and the Roman) as these four did visibly precede him in
government, Dan. 2.44.45. The God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom, which
shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people,
but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever. And all this comes to pass in that the stone (Christ Jesus)
cut out of the mountain without hands brake in pieces the iron, the brass,
the clay, the silver, and the gold, Dan. 7.13, 14. The rest of the Beasts had
their Dominion taken away. The Son of Man comes with the Clouds, and the
Ancient of days gave him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people,
and Nations, and languages should serve him. So that Christ at his next
appearance is the fifth Monarchy.

Eve of his dominion over the seed of the Serpent, and consequently his succor
of the seed of the woman, how did he anon, and after, and all along the New
Testament begin to act in Types this visible Monarchy? He appears to Moses in a
burning bush, to give a visible sign of his presence to deliver Israel out of
Egypt. And appears to Israel in a pillar of a Cloud, and of fire, sensibly to
signify he was their convoy. They are a Royalty (as Peter calls them) but God
only their Monarch. Moses, and after Samuel, were only Interpreters between
them and their Monarch. And therefore when they rebelled against Moses, it is
reckoned as a rebellion against God. And when they refused Samuel, it is
charged upon them that they refused God to be their Governor. The Arc is
placed amidst the Camp, Numb. 2. as the pledge of God to be their General.
Accordingly they carried the Arc in battle with them (1 Samuel 4.) as having
that opinion of it. So verse 4. The people sent for the Arc of the Covenant of
the Lord of HOSTS, which DWELLS between the Cherubims. And so the Philistims
conceived. For when the Israelites shouted at the coming of the Arc into the
Camp of Israel, the Philistims (verse. 7.) are afraid, and they said God is come
into the Camp. This Arc led them through Jordan, as it did (as it is conceived
by the most learned) through the Red Sea. So when Israel was to re-edifie the
Temple, and to settle in their own land after the captivity, Christ appears as
a Commander of an Army on horse back with troops behind him, Zech. 1. And as
the Son of man sitting in judgment, as a King. Dan. 7. Some will perhaps say
these were types of his incarnation. If that so, in some general semblance;
yet these did more distinctly set forth his visible Monarchy to come. And
therefore his incarnation is made a type or platform of his coming as a
Monarch, Act. 1.11. And therefore as the Prologue to his visible appearance
again as a Monarch to reign as Revel. 20. he appears as a glorious King,
Rev. 1. with all circumstances to set forth the glory of his Royalty: much more
therefore in consideration of all that Christ has said and done in relation to
that in the New Testament, may we expect him to come, and visibly appear at
the setting up of his Monarchy. He tells Pilate he was borne to be a King, and
therefore must be a King: But he would not set it up yet, before his ascension,
Act. 1. He must first go into a far Country, and after that receive his
Kingdom, as we heard before out of Luke 19. Chap. 1. Sect. 7. of this second
Book; He must first ascend up on high, and then he leads Captivity captive,
spiritually, as a Preface to his visible appearance to make the Church
spiritually and Corporally glorious, which the Apostle immediately hints in
that fourth of Ephesians. Until we come to a perfect MAN unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, which by and by after that, in the same
Chapter he calls THE NEW MAN WHICH AFTER GOD IS CREATED IN RIGHTEOUSNESS and
HOLINESS: As alluding to the state of innocent Adam. And therefore as the
first Adam did visibly appear as a glorious Monarch over the visible world, so
shall the second Adam, according to the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine in Psalm.
8. Hebr. 2. being divine Commentaries on Adams Monarchy, Genesis 1. verse. 26, 27,
28. Of which place, God assisting, you shall hear abundantly in the next BOOK.

FINIS LIBRI SECVNDI.
THE THIRD BOOK
PROVING That there shall be a most glorious state of the Church; and of all
things in relation to the Church, and that on earth, yet, before the ultimate
day of Judgment.

CHAP. I. The partition of the ensuing Discourse.
HAving cleared the visible appearing of Christ personally; In the second place
we proceed to the proof of his reigning in this visible Kingdom on earth by
his mystical body, his members, the Saints.

Wherein we have two things to do: 1 To prove, That there is such a Kingdom
yet to be on earth, as aforesaid, in the general Proposition. 2 What that
Kingdom will be in the particulars.


We shall manage the first by four means.

1 By Texts of Scripture. 2 By Arguments, drawn from Scripture. 3 By the
common consent of all sorts of men, as if a law of nature. 4 By solution of all
the maine objections against it.
CHAP. II.
Containing the Scriptures to prove, That there shall be yet on earth before
the last Judgment such a Reigning, such a visible Kingdom of Christ, such a
glorious state of the Saints, and of all things as is before propounded.

THE drift, scope, and sinues of strength, of all which places, fall into this
demonstrative Syllogism. Those things which are prophesied in the word of God,
and are not yet come to pass, must be fulfilled. But the great sensible and
visible happiness of the Church on earth before the ultimate day of judgment
is prophesied in the word of God, both in the Old and New Testament; Therefore
it must be fulfilled that such a state be extant upon earth before the ultimate
day of judgment. The major is granted by all that believe the word of God. The
minor is proved by the ensuing Scriptures.

SECT. I.
The twentieth Chapter of the Revelation fully discussed, with a demonstration
of the true meaning of the one and twentieth Chapter, being the exposition of
the twentieth.

Revelation: It being the manner and method of the Holy Spirit to declare
things, especially of this nature, gradually, as the Church is meet to hear,
the state thereof requires, and the time of fulfilling it draws nearer, and ^o
speaks most and plainliest at last. Many other instances might be given, but
that the subject under hand is vast enought of it self. All these advantages
falling to the share of this twentieth Chapter of Revel. touching the point in
hand, as the Catastrophe, result, and design of all that God has spoken
before in the Old and New Testament, it makes this twentieth of Revel. no less
then a golden key to unlocke the Bible, especially the Old Testament; that we
may look further into other places of Scripture then merely to make moral
observations out of them, and mean while do over-looke the Prophetical intent
of God in them.

Revel. verse. 1. it is said, AND I saw an Angel come down, etc. which AND, or
(as the Translator of the Arab.) furthermore, or as in sense it often signifies,
then, imports that John saw immediately before something in order to this: what
was that? even that which our late invented distinction of Chapters and verses,
puts in Revel. 19. v. 19. I saw (says John) the Beast, and the Kings of the
earth, and their Armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat
on the horse, and against his Army (namely against Christ and his members, or
Saints, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14.) And what was the issue of the War? That John
goes on to tell us in the twentieth verse of this nineteenth Chapter. And the
Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet (that is the Antichrist either
under the notion of humane Imperialty, or of Ecclesiastical Prophecy, or
Teaching) were cast alive into the lake, etc. And the remnant were slain with
the sword of him that sat upon the horse. AND (says John in this twentieth
Chap. verse. 1.) after this, I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the
key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he laid hold on
the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years, etc. which can mean no other thing, but Christ and his Saints
conquest over the Beast, and the false Prophet, and their Armies on earth,
notwithstanding all the power and policy of their seducing Generalissimo, the
Devil. Here then in all, is Christ and his Army, and Antichrist and his Army
conflicting, and they conflict with the Sword, and Antichrists Army is slain
with the sword, and so slain with the sword, that the Fowls were filled with
the flesh of them that were slain, (chap. 19. verse 20.) A strange thing to me
if any should dream these things to be done only Spiritually, or in the world
to come. There proceeded indeed the sword out of his mouth, that is, Christ bid
his Saints to slay them (which before and after ye have explained) but they
were materially, or corporally slain, as the time, weapon, and their burial
in the bowels of Birds challenge that sense; yea, mark further, the Armies
ruin is put in Counter-destruction, or opposition to the ruin of their
Chieftain, or Chieftaines, whose destruction was to be cast ALIVE into the
Lake, therefore the slaying of the Army with the sword, to be devoured by the
Fowls, must signify a Corporal destruction.

Gog and Magog, (which is long after the destruction of Antichrist) verse. 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, etc. of this twentieth Chapter, clearly distinguished from that
destruction of Antichrist by two notable circumstances, including many other
particulars of order, time, place, etc.

. The first Circumstance is, That Gog and Magog war against the Saints,
whiles they are in their enjoyment of their glorious peace, after the said
Saints had reigned a thousand years, ver. 7.8. when they had been partakers
long before, viz. at the beginning of the thousand years of the first
resurrection, as a pledge that they should not dye the second death at the
second Resurrection, ver. 6. after that they had reigned, and as Kings and
Priests, and too with Christ a thousand years, in the same sixth verse none of
which particulars can consist with supernal ultimate glory, when Christ
himself lays down all his power (1 Cor. 15.28.) And after they have enjoyed
this condition a thousand years, then, and not till then begins the
Gogicall-Magogicall war, upon which comes the destruction on Gogmagog, ver.
7, 8, 9. but the war of Antichrist in the nineteenth Chapter is, when the
Saints are in great trouble; their blood had been poured out unavenged till
then, verse. 2. the earth corrupted, ibid. The Nations are till now to be
smitten, and to be RVLE'D with a ROD of Iron, ver. 15. The Wine press of the
fierceness and wrath of God Almighty to be trodden, ibid. with many the like
intimations throughout the Chapter, of the different state of the Church now a
thousand years before Christ came to destroy Gogmagog, as the sequel of the
twentieth Chapter makes the compute.

. The second Circumstance is, That after the thousand years of Satan's binding,
and Antichrists destruction, Satan is again let loose, he seduceth Gog and
Magog, and then the Devil himself (Chap. 20.10.) is cast into the Lake of
fire, WHERE WERE the BEAST, and the FALSE PROPHET, which had been cast in there
formerly, Chap. 19. ver. 20. evidently pointing at the destruction of
Antichrist, as finished long before; the fore-being there of the Beast, and
false Prophet, being made the description of Hell, as sometimes the portion of
Hypocrites is the description thereof.

Revelation is, what he saw, in ver. 4. John saw Thrones, and they that sat
upon them, and judgment was given to them, and he saw the souls of them that
were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and which had
not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands; the meaning of all which you have in the
next Chapter, viz. the 21. for verse. 1. it is said, And I saw a new heaven, and
a new earth; little reason to mention earth, if it had been to describe a state
in heaven above. The place is taken out of Isa. 65.17. (as Peter hints, 2 Pet.
3.13. We according to his PROMISE look for new heavens, and a new earth) I
say, out of Isa. 65.17. where God promises unto the Jews to build new
Heavens, and a new earth, but with all mentions their enjoying of houses and
vine yards. In the second Verse of the one and twentieth Chapter it is said,
John saw new Jerusalem, indeed that on earth is old; but nothing is old in the
highest Heavens, so that nothing there can be said to be new, therefore this
cannot be meant of that heaven. It is express, It comes down from heaven,
therefore it cannot express a state in that supernall heaven, even as it
follows, PREPARED as a Bride; which plainly evinceth that it is not meant of
ultimate glory, where the Church is not prepared (that is done in this world)
but perfected; as verse. 3. it is said, I heard a voice OVT of heaven, to
import, that it was of things not in the supreme Heaven, viz. That the
tabernacle of God is with men, where God WILL dwell with them; which if meant
of the supernall Heaven, would have been expressed in a contrary phrase, viz. The
tabernacle of men is with God; for there is no need of a promise to assure us,
that in the highest Heavens God will dwell with us. Agreeable to which the
fourth verse promises, that all tears shall be wiped away; of which promise,
as in relation to the supreme Heaven there was not the least need, since God
made it but known to the Sons of men that they shall inherit that place: all
sorts, Christians, Heathens, etc. easily know, and believe, that there in that
place are no tears, nor cause of tears; as appears in the Christians Creed,
and the Heathens Doctrines of (...), and their Elysian fields. Every thing in
that Heaven is so good that it cannot be made, (as in verse 5.) new, that is,
better. No need there, of that in the sixth verse (either promise or
performance) to give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of
life. It is enough for God to promise that Heaven, as Paul thought it enough to
say, Phil. 1. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; if we be once
there, we shall not thirst. Even as there (according to ver. 7.) shall be no
striving to overcome, much less to overcome that in ver. 8. Fear and
unbelief, etc. They in the supernall Heaven have overcome all things,
therefore all these demonstrate that this Chapter is of a state on earth, not
of one in supreme glory; of such a state on earth it is proper to say, as v.
7. He that possesses it shall inherit all things; not only Gods presence, but
also all things, though as yet all things are not subject to Christ himself,
Heb. 2.8. and he shall be Gods Son. For if we believe, we now are the Sons of
God, before we come to ultimate glory, then this promised with a shall be, must
signify a suture estate; and on earth, because of other circumstances (as we
are now enumerating) that are inconsistent with glory in the highest Heaven. In
like manner the residue of this one and twentieth Chapter shows, that the
meaning is not of supernall, eternal glory (according to former common opinion
of divines) as ver. 9, 10. An Angel shows John the Bride, the Lambs wife,
viz. the great City, holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God, which
cannot possibly be meant of a state in the highest Heaven; no Angel need tell
John, or he us, that the Church shall be seen in that Heaven when there, it
shall be seen without showing, by all the inhabitants there. Nor is this a
direct, but a cross phrase, to express the state of the Church ascended, by
its descending out of heaven from God. The souls of the elect must descend, to
be united to their bodies on earth, there for a time to inherit all things (as
said before) before their ultimate glory. And for that description of New
Jerusalem by measures, etc. from ver. 11.22. can it mean the spanning of
Heaven, or the measures of the place of ultimate glory? The parts and
particulars are all too short, and to no purpose; we believe more then all in
this Text, without this Text; doubtless this Geometrical, and
Architectonicall Iconi^me, or description is taken out of Ezekiel, from Chap.
39. to the end of the Book, in all the Prophet importing thus much, that Gog
the enemy of Israel shall be destroyed, and they themselves shall be gathered
from their captivity and measures out to them their New Testament estate, that
it shall be more goodly, and glorious, then all their Old Testament state; and
therefore when John has this given to him, in Rev. 21. as an exposition of
Ezech. 39.40, 41, 42, etc. Chapters, it would be but a dark dream to apply it
to supernall eternal glory, which many circumstances forbid; for if it be
meant of that glory, why (ver. 14.) are only the names of the twelve Apostles
to be inserted in the twelve foundations, and not the names also of the twelve
Patriarchs of the twelve Tribes? What need was there to tell us (ver. 11.) that
the place spoken of here has in it the glory of God, and a light like a
Jasper, clear as Crystal? or to mind us, (ver. 17.) that the cubits were
according to the measure of a man? or to warn us, (ver. 22.) that John saw
there no Temple? and for that in ver. 23, 24. That God and the Lamb are the
light of New Jerusalem, and they that are sazed shall walk in it, and Kings
shall bring their glory and honor unto it. I ask any ingenuous man, whether he
can (keeping his reason with him) apply these things to ultimate happiness in
the highest Heaven? Is there a walking, or conversation of life in spiritual
light? Is it not a quiet enjoying, and beholding the unspeakeable manifestation
of Gods special presence? Do Kings and Princes there go and come, and bring
their honor and glory to heaven? Or do they bring (as ver. 26.) the glory and
honor of Nations unto it? Thus take altogether, quarrel not peecely with this
or that fragment, but take the whole entirely; and then tell me ingenuously,
whether this one and twentieth Chapter can mean any thing but a glorious state
on earth before the ultimate Judgment, at which time is rather a destruction,
then an extruction, or building? and therefore this Chapter clearly contains
the admirable state of the Church of Jews and Gentiles for the space of that
thousand years in the twentieth Chapter, the exposition whereof is the work
now in hand, to which we return.

Revelations is, that the Saints reign with Christ a thousand years, or the
thousand years. This number of years is expressed six times in the first
seven verses, twice (...) and four times with an emphaticall Article (...).
Can any judicious man take this merely Allegorically, and not Historically, and
literally? Can he upon good grounds make it to signify less then a thousand
years? It is true, a thousand years in Gods account (2 Pet. 3.) in regard of
his present knowledge of all things, or knowledge of all things as present, and
his eternal entity before, and beyond all things, are but as one day, but
still a thousand years are a thousand years in themselves, how ever they be
as nothing in comparison of God. But can man make a long time and a short time
all one? Are a thousand years to him but as one natural day, or to the Saints
here reigning? surely then the Saints privilege of reigning, or the binding of
Satan for their sakes, will amount to a very small matter. Then on the morrow,
Gog and Magog shall rise against the Saints, for at the end of the thousand
years they shall rise against them. Or can any considering man make these
thousand years to signify more then a thousand years, viz. eternity? the
Scriptures have no such phrase (that I know) And diverse of the Fathers before
the Flood, though in a worse life-cherishing state, lived within a few years
of a thousand. Is there not a notorious eminent punctum, or point of the
beginning, and period of the ending of these thousand years? They begin with
the fall of Antichrist, the destruction of his Army ( Rev. 19.19, 20.) and the
wonderful binding of Satan, chap. 20. ver. 2. And they end with the loosing of
Satan, and the war with Gog-Magog. Is it possible now that any should refer
this to the eternity of supreme glory? therefore as ver. 4. it must needs be
meant of reigning with Christ on earth at least a thousand years, properly
understood, as it is expounded, Revel. 5.10. for all the Saints that are found
on earth at Christ's next coming, never reigned with Christ in heaven; and after
the last Judgment, Christ does not reign as Christ, but lays down all, 1
Cor. 15.28.

John's science with our experience, and see whether we can make these all hold
together, unless we understand them of a glorious Kingdom of Christ on
earth, before the ultimate day of judgment. We will cull out but three
particulars: 1 The resurrection of the Saints, verse. 4, 5. They must so live,
as the dead wicked that while did not live: But the dead wicked did live that
while in soul; therefore the Saints must live more then so, viz. must live
that while in soul and body too. Again the Saints must so live at this first
resurrection, as the dead wicked shall at the second resurrection. But the dead
wicked shall live in soul and body at the second resurrection; therefore the
Saints at this first resurrection live in soul and body. Let the Reader
piercingly weigh the Text, and he shall find these syllogismes little less
then demonstrations. As for the difference of grace and non-grace, that
difference was made before death in the life time of the Saints and wicked. The
second particular is, the casting of the Devil into the bottomless pit, and
shutting and sealing him in it, that he may not seduce the Nations till the
thousand years be finished, verse. 3. The third particular is, the letting loose
of Satan at the end of the thousand years, to seduce all the Nations on the
four corners of the earth, till he gather together an innumerable Army to
encompasse the camp of the Saints, the event whereof is, that that Army is
consumed with five from heaven. After which immediately begins the last
judgment, verse. 7, 8, 9. Now we shall challenge literas omnes, and literatos,
all learned books, and men, when in all the one thousand six hundred and fifty
years of the New Testament bypast, were these three particulars fulfilled.
When did the Saints or Martyrs so rise? For still they have been, and are under
persecution, or sore afflictions, in one or other, or several Nations more or
less? When was Satan so bound, and imprisoned, as that he did not seduce the
Nations? For to this day Lutherans, Protestants, Papists, Turks, Indians,
Jews, etc. are seduced by him in matters of Error and War. And when was there
such an innumerable Army encompassing the camp of the Saints, consumed with
fire from Heaven, upon which immediately followed that day of judgment, when
the Devil is cast into the lake of fire, a Throne is set, and the books are
opened, etc. as it is v. 10, 11, 12?

say, that the time of Satan's binding, that he could not seduce the Nations for
a thousand years (to the making of an happy time for the Church so long) began
three hundred years after Christ, and so ended one thousand and three hundred
years after Christ. For say they, at the end of three hundred years after
Christ the ten persecutions ceased, in which persecution (say they) Satan was
loose to seduce the world. But those persecutions being ceased, the thousand
years of the Churches comfortable condition began. So Mr. Brightman (on Revel.)
and Mr. Fox (in his book of Martyrs) only with this difference, That one of
them inserts within the said thousand, by them laid out, the five months
mentioned, Revel. 9.5. as a so long interruption of their described quiet in
those thousand years; understanding by those five months certain years, that
is, that every day of those five months signifies a year, which, according to
solary months makes the thousand years end an hundred and thirty years lower,
or according to ^unary months, one hundred and twenty years later. Pareus
begins the thousand years of the binding of Satan, etc. at the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus sixty nine years (as he accounts) after the birth of Christ;
At which time (says he) the Jewish Temple and Worship ceasing, the great
impediment of the Gentiles embracing the Gospel, was removed: So that this
while Satan was bound from seducing the Gentiles, or Nation.



beginning of these thousand years, and consequently not in their ending.

1 Not with Mr. Fox, and Mr. Brightmans computation; First, because they
include the ten Persecutions (which lasted three hundred years) within the time
of Satan's beng loose and seducing the Nations, preceding the beginning of their
account of the thousand years, whith ten Persecutions include the Apostles time
and the Primitive purest times; And so by consequence, Mr. Fox, and Mr.
Brightman make those primitive times more corrupt, and more seduced then the
ages following the ten Persecutions, which is contrary to Rev. 11.1. and Revel.
12.1. And contrary to experience out of all antiquity; that in those times the
Church was far more pure generally then ever since. Secondly, because this
compute of Mr. Fox, and Mr. Brightman makes the times following the ten
Persecutions to begin an happy thousand years for the Church, and so to
continue to one thousand three hundred years after Christ. But this is contrary
to experience from all approved antiquity, who does give us a particular
account, that after that little time in the life of Constantine the Great,
wherein the Church had some outward peace and prosperity, anon began the
black-heresie, and bloody-persecution by the Arians, upon the neck of which
followed Pelagianisme, and many other gross and grievous errors and heresies.

2 For the computation of Pareus, that cannot stand, for many strong reasons
that batter it down: For first, the Jewish worship did not cease (as Pareus
affirms) at the destruction of the Temple by Titus, but does continue to this
day. And instead of the exercise thereof in that one Nation of the Jews, it is
practiced by them in their Synagogues in most Nations in Europe, if not
elsewhere also, as our Country-Merchants and Travelers are ear and
eyewitnesses. If by Jewish worship Pareus does mean that particular of it, of
sacrificing, as if that at least ended at Titus destruction of the Temple,
therein also is Pareus mistaken, as most Ecclesiastical Histories, and
Chronologies abet us to affirm. For, say these Records when Titus had
overthrown the Temple, the Jews sacrificed in the City as near the ruins of
their Temple as they could. Yea when Hadrian, or Adrian the Roman Emperor had
destroyed the City, they sacrificed at Mamre, where God appeared formerly to
Abraham. Nor was their zeal to sacrificing so extinguished, when Constantine
the Great beat them from Mamre: For anon after Constantine, Julian the Apostate
the Roman Emperor encouraged the Jews to return to Jerusalem, there to
re-build the ruins, and offer sacrifice, till fire from heaven discomfited
them, which falls far lower then sixty nine years after Christ, namely to about
three hundred and sixty years after Christ: So that this Jewish worship lasted
all the time of the ten Persecutions, in which Mr. Fox, and Mr. Brightman say,
Satan was let loose, and not bound up as Pareus affirms. 2 Within this
thousand years (of binding Satan) computed by Pareus to begin at sixty nine
years after Christ, is found nothing for the Jews, nor their new Jerusalem,
contrary to the scope of all the Scripture (as we shall hear abundantly after)
which clearly drives at this, that the call of the Jews must be a great part
of the glory of that state we speak of, and they the principal partakers
thereof. 3 In all that thousand years which Pareus makes up, beginning at sixty
nine years after Christ, and consequently ending at one thousand sixty nine
years after Christ, all things are found to be in a quite contrary estate to
Satan's binding from seducing. For in those ages were infinite monstrous
Heresies and Apostasies (so well known to the learned that I spend not time to
quote Historians.) For beside the Heresies before touched, there arose within
the said thousand years ( viz. about six hundred and odd after Christ) horrid
Mahumetisme, spread to this day over a great part of the world. About which
time the mystery of Papal iniquity had wrought to a great height: Both
increasing for the general to this day. Both, the one by their Turkish wars,
the other by their massacres, having poured out a sea of Saints blood. Now how
can we say with any show of reason that Satan was bound this while from
seducing the world, when he did so potently prevail? 4 Where are the Learned,
or the Libraries to tell us of the rising, or of the reigning of the Saints, or
Martyrs from sixty nine, to one thousand sixty nine after Christ? 6 If the
thousand years begin at sixty nine years after Christ, and consequently end at
one thousand sixty nine there has been since that a thousand sixty nine to
this year one thousand six hundred fifty two above five hundred and eighty
years, which five hundred and eighty years cannot be counted a little season. It
is said Rev. 20.3. After the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be let
loose a little season: But by Pareus his account of the expiration of the
thousand years at the thousand sixty nine years, Satan since that has been let
loose five hundred and eighty years (as we have said) which cannot be reckoned
for a little season in comparison of the thousand years of Satan's binding (as
is Saint John's sense) for it is above half as much as a thousand years.
Seventhly, and lastly, If the thousand years are so long since expired, where,
and when since that expiration has appeared that after a little season was
gathered together Gog and Magog encompassing the Camp of the Saints (upon a new
seducement by the Devil) and were consumed by fire from heaven, upon which the
day of judgment began?

SECT. III.
The usefulness of the Old Testament to the point in hand, touching the
glorious state of the Church yet to come.

Revelation; Now let us take all the Bible before us, both Old and New Testament
in order, and hear what harmony they make as an Anthem, or Prelude before that
glorious Scene begins. The Old Testament laid down the ground of our hope. The
New Testament now so long since Christ's coming in the flesh carries on our
expectation to look for such a thing. We shall cull out of the Old Testament
those places that (to our best light) are most clear, and have some touches of
explanations out of the New Testament.

Old Testament, because the New Testament in speaking of this visible glorious
Kingdom of Christ to be on earth, refers us to the Old. As Peter in 2 Ep.
Chap. 3. v. 13. refers us to Esa. 65.17. We (says Peter) look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth according to his PROMISE, wherein dwells
righteousness, which promise is that of Esa. 65. Not to repeat things spoken
before, Here is mention of Heavens in the plural. The one Empyrean Heaven is
unchangeable: Therefore Heavens of pure manifestation of Doctrine, of pure
practice of Gospel order, of a new state of the Church, of new peoples added to
it, of a renovation of all things on earth must be understood. It must be meant
of such heavens as God will shake, Heb. 12.26. spoken by a Jew (Paul) to the
Jews (the Hebrews) after Christ's coming, and ascending. At which time of his
presence in the flesh, though he shook down the veil, viz. at his passion,
and gave the Temple a shake by Prophecy Matthew. 24.1.2. etc. which tumbled it
down about forty years after his ascension, yet he had not to that time shaken
down the veil off the Jews heart, 2 Cor. 3. Nor has he to this day, as sad
experience testifies. No nor the Jewish worship in their Synagogues practiced
to this very time. Nor has he set up things so as they must remain, instead
of the things that are shaken. Therefore Peter's promise of new Heavens, wherein
dwells righteousness, is yet unfulfilled. A phrase too short to reach so high
as to advance the commendation of the Empyrean Heaven, as it is impertinent to
tell us, that there shall dwell righteousness, where, we well know, was never
any the least unrighteousness. We expect, and must expect by all circumstances
upon that place, such a fulfilling of that Promise as shall create, or make new
Heavens on Earth, wherein dwells righteousness here below, where formerly has
been unrighteousness. That place only can be said to be made new with the
inhabitation of righteousness, that formerly had no righteousness, or little
left, it being worn out.

In like manner the same Peter, in 2 Ep. chap. 1. ver. 19. speaking of Christ's
Kingdom, referres us to the Old Testament, viz. Numb. 24.17. We have (says
he) a more sure word of PROPHECY, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed,
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the
Day Star arise in your hearts; which is taken out of that of Numbers 24.17.
There shall come a star out of Jacob, etc. out of Jacob shall come he that shall
have dominion, etc. At Christ's Incarnation this Star Christ did arise on some
of their hearts, when the Star guided the Wise men to go to the place of
Christ's birth, and there to worship him, and after, some few gleanings of
people believed on him. But this while he was but as an evening Star; Peter
says now after his Ascension, that the time was yet to come that he should be
a morning Star, a Sun upon the hearts of the generality of the Jews. And it
were strange if any wise man should dream, that at the same instant Christ
should call the Jews, and come to the last Judgment: That in the same moment
the black cloud of the day of Doom should cover the world, and the Daystar of
the Son of righteousness should arise on the numerous peoples of the Jews,
scattered in all Nations. Thus in Act. 3.20, 21. we are referred to the
PROPHETS since the WORLD BEGAN to know, and hope for the visible Kingdom of
Christ on earth, of which we speak. One of which Prophets (to speak nothing
of Acts 3. having spoken so much in the second Book) is Enoch, to whom Jude
also referres us, ver. 14, 15. and quotes his words to supply the loss of his
Book. Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied, Behold, the LORD COMES with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment, and convince all that are
ungodly of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their HARD SPEECHES. Something
is in that, that he is numbered a seventh from Adam, a type at least in that,
that Christ should come in the seventh Millenary, or thousandth of the whole
Age of the world, at furthest. Which seven thousandth is far nearer then
generally we account (as after, God assisting, shall be demonstrated) at which
time, according to the common consent of the Jewish Talmud, and Rabbis, viz.
R. Ketina, R. Schelomo, R. "Kimchi, etc. He shall bring a destruction upon
sin, so as the world shall be refined from the curse, as Gold from the dross,
(...)
and the Lord alone shall be exalted, Isa. 3. And he shall shake the earth as at
a day of Judgment, as Hag. 2.6, 7. and the Lord shall be for a King, or
instead of a King, to, or over all the earth. Then according to Psalm. 90. shall
be a Sabbath of rest, for a thousand years. I give you their own very words,
phrases, and quotations; a sufficient Commentary on Enoch, who says, the Lord
shall come with Myriads of his Saints. Now after his Ascension Jude alleges
Enoch, that the Lord shall come; he does not say he shall go away to Heaven,
but he shall come from Heaven; And how? As a Judge, to convince and punish all
that have persisted to utter hard speeches against Christ, viz. against him
himself, or against him in his Saints; and this must be before the ultimate Day
of Judgment, or else what privilege is it to the Saints) or, how is Christ's
power vindicated before he lay down his power?

Prophets make it, and wonder and talk against it. But we in obedience to
Christ, do search into the Prophets, and as we are enlightened, and led, as
overcome with the truth, so we have, and shall follow.

grounds upon which the Jews build their expectation of the coming of the
Messiah, and in what manner they expect his coming, that so we may join issue
with them in knowledge, hope, and prayer, or otherwise, within our sphere, to
help them forward, and the business it self, against all the opposers
thereof. We all, both Jews and Gentiles, that have been candid enquirers into
the Scriptures have from the beginning looked for his further coming, Heb. 11.
often. By faith they saw the promise afar off, and saluted them (so the Greek.)
And by faith they saw him that was invisible, etc. when he came in the flesh,
the generality of the Jews saw him corporally, but not spiritually, viz. as a
man, not as the Messiah. But the generality of the believing Gentiles saw him
spiritually, nor corporally. The Jews therefore still expect his coming, that
they may see him both corporally and spiritually. And it will be no grief for
the Gentiles, that have seen him spiritually, to see him also corporally. And
though he will not come again to the Jews to be made flesh, yet he will come
again to them in the flesh. And this later will be more glorious then the
former, the greater containing the lesser, radiating more effectually upon the
Jews, to a greater effusion of tears from them, and infusion of the spirit of
Christ's grace into them, Zech. 12. which John prefixeth to his Revelation,
Chap. 1. v. 7. as the end, Catastrophe, and upshot in a great part of that
Revelation, as the fitting of them to entertain Christ's appearance, and to
enter into the New Jerusalem.

But this is not all. There is a third reason why we should look into the
Prophets of the Old Testament, there being the maine, and most Types, and
Visions used in this Book of the Revelation: I will at present give but one
instance, but a most apt one to our business in hand, viz. that in Revel.
20.4. And I saw Thrones, and they that sat upon them, and judgment was given
to them, etc. and they lived and reigned with Christ, etc. which clearly is
taken out of Dan. 7.9. etc. I beheld till the Thrones were set (so it should
be translated Our last Translat. have mistaken in translating it. The Thrones
were cast down. I suppose they therein took Thrones tropically or
figuratively for powers, and so they would make this sense of it, the powers
(viz Monarchical and their appendices) were cast down, But they were not al
down, till after the Judiciary sitting, v. 11. v. 21, 22. Besides (...)(as some
Chalde copies write it) signifies material Thrones whereon the Potentates do
sit, whether we make the noune to be (...) or (...) and (...) to be Hemantick,
signifying, As it were (for the Talmud uses (...) or (...) to signify a
material Throne) or whether we make the noune to be (...) taking (...) for a
radical, so it signifies sometimes, a material place wherein to exercise, or
act a gift, faculty, or power. And (...) (as other Chalde copies write it),
also signifies material Thrones, as (...) signifies a material Throne. So that
every way material Thrones to sir in, are signified by the words in the Text;
even as the next word (...) plainly signifies, were lifted up, advanced, or set
up; so plainly, that I cannot in the least imagine, nor conjecture what show of
reason our last Translators had to render it, The thrones wore cast down. Our
old Translation has it, The Thrones were set up. And most justly: For whether
we suppose the root to be (...) which signifies he lif^ed up, he exalted, or
was made high, or exalted (to Schindler) or whether we make the ^oot to be
(...) or (...), as Pagnin, Arias Montanus, and Hutter affirm, which also
signifies he elevated, he exalted, or he, or it was high or elevated (so Arias
Montanus in Apparat. viz. Dict. Syro-chald.) still our old Translation is
right, The Thrones were set up. And so runs the stream of the most learned
Translators in several languages. Pagnin, and Arias Montanus, Throni clati
sunt. The Latin called Hier^ms, Throni positi sunt, the Syriak, subs^llia
posita esse. The Arab. ecce sides positae sunt. So the Greek Sept. (...).
Ti^dal in his English Translation, The seats were prepared. The best French
Translation Interpretee par Jean Diodati has it les Thrones fuerent poses.
Protestant Bruccioli in his Ital. Translation, Furono portate siede, and in his
Commentary makes his meaning more plain, Throni suro^o essal^ati. The best
High Dutch, or German Translation by Luther is, Stule gesekt wurden, i. e. The
stools or seats were put. And so the last, and best Low Dutch, Stoclen gesette^
werden. So that by all it appears that this was a vision of material Thrones,
and of them set up, set, or settled for Divine power to sit upon, which is
exceedingly confirm^d by verse 10. and 26. where we have the sitting of the
Judgment, or Judicature.
) and the Ancient of days did sit, and I saw, and behold one like the Son of
man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion and glory, and a
KINGDOM etc. And the Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole Heaven was given to the Saints of the most High, etc. Let us
(for the advantage of the general work in hand, and the particular point now
under consideration) weigh these two places together in the semblance of both
Visions, in the circumstances of both, and in the samenesse of intents in both.

. 1 In the semblance or likeness of both Visions in sundry particulars. 1
Semblance; I beheld till the Thrones were set. And why Thrones in the plural?
And for whom? These many Thrones were set (in the Vision) ONE for the Ancient
of days, whose Throne was like a siery flame, v. 9. ANOTHER for the SON OF
MAN, who came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him,
and there was given him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, and all people,
Nations and Languages to serve him, v. 13, 14. THE REST for the TEN THOUSAND
TIMES TEN THOUSANDS THAT STOOD BEFORE HIM, verse 10. viz. The PEOPLE OF THE
SAINTS to whom the Kingdom and dominion, etc. under the whole heaven was given
(under Christ the aforesaid Son of Man) verse. 27. So Rev. 20.4. I saw Thrones.
The Second semblance is, that in Dan. 7. v. 10. where it follows, The
Judgment or Judicature was set, (which confirms that our reading of the
former verse) That is, the Judges sat as in the great Sanedrim, as after in
verse. 26. and 27. The judgment sitting, the Kingdom, and dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven is given to the people of the
Saints of the most high. In like manner in Rev. 20.4. it is said by John, I saw
(says he) those that sat on the Thrones, viz. those that had been beheaded
for the witness of Jesus, and those which had not worshipped the beast, etc.
nor received his mark, etc. Third semblance is in Dan. 7.22. Judgment was
given to the Saints of the most High, and the time came that the Saints
possessed the Kingdom. In like manner, Rev. 20.4. it is said, Judgment was
given to them, viz. to the Saints aforesaid, that having opposed Antichrist,
sat upon the Thrones. As Paul says, 1 Cor. 6.2. The Saints shall judge the
world. Fourth semblance, in Dan. 7.22. it is said, The Saints possessed the
Kingdom ( viz. under Christ, to whom it is first in order given, verse. 14.)
which cannot be at the ultimate day of judgment, when he resignes all, and
therefore the Saints then have no Kingdom subject to them. Just so it is said,
Rev. 20.4. The Saints lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years; which
must be before the ultimate day of Judgment, at which time John says, Time
shall be no more, and Paul says (1 Cor. 15.) there is no more reigning by any,
but by God alone, that then must be all in all. Thus of the Semblance.

. 2 The next thing is the Circumstances, viz. 1 The signal, or note when this
shall be, namely when the Son of man shall come in, or with the clouds, Dan.
7.13. In like manner, the signal, or note is in the Rev. Chap. 1.7. where it
is said (as the general proposition to the whole Prophecy) Christ shall be
seen in the clouds, at his coming to set up this Kingdom, which is explained
according to our sense, Rev. 20. v. 1. That Christ comes down from heaven when
he restraines Satan, and gives this honor to the Saints of reigning with him.
2 The time it self. The time is says ( Dan. 7.25.) after a time, and times,
and half a time of the powerful prevayling of Antichrist (whether ye
understand one limb, viz. the Jewish Eastern, the Turk, called verse. 24. that
same ANOTHER that arises and subdueth three of the ten Kings, or both, viz.
the Western, the Christians Antichrist also, viz. the Pope, expressed in the
ten horns or Kings of his Kingdom, v. 24. it makes no matter, if we mind our
large discourse before of the identity of both.) And sutably in the Revelation
11. it is said, that after the witnesses have Prophesied in sackcloath one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, because the Woman, the Church was
persecuted by Antichrist, Rev. 12.6. for the space of one thousand two hundred
and sixty days, which in verse. 24. is called, A time, and times, and half a
time, because Antichrist had power so long to prevail, viz. two and forty
months, Rev. 13.5. which is all one with the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, or time, and times, and half a time, as here meant in the Revelation; I
say after this time and times, and half a time, it is here said in that Rev.
11.15. That the KINGDOMS of this WORLD were become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ, and of the Saints sharing in this Reigning, verse. 18. The
third circumstance is the order of things in this time, viz. That in Dan. 7. v.
3. etc. to v. 9. There must be four Beasts come up from the Sea, 1 A Lion; 2 A
Bear; 3 A Leopard. 4 A terrible one with iron teeth, and ten horns, and out of
the ten, one little horn, that brake off three of the ten. The four Beasts,
says Dan. v. 17. are the four Kings, or Kingly-hoods, Royalties,
Emperialties, or Monarchies of the world verse. 23. (as by several characters
they are described in that Chapter.) The ten horns of the fourth Beast are,
says Dan. v. 24. ten Kings, that is, ten Kingdoms under him. All these four
Beasts fall, as the maine of the first by the second, and of the second by the
third, so the maine of the third, and the remainder of all the three former, by
the fourth, Dan. 7.19.23. The meaning is, that as the first, the
Assyrio-Chaldean Monarchy, whereof Nebuchadnezzar was the Golden-head, in
Daniels time, Dan. 2. was broken by the second, the silver Medo-Persian, so
this second by the third, the brazen Grecian, and this Grecian, and the
remainders of all the other, were utterly subdued by the fourth, the iron Roman
Monarchy. From this Roman at the time when it was something weakened, by a
dividing of it self now the third time, which was about An. Chr. 799. into the
Eastern and Western Empire, Constantinople being the Royal Seat of
Metropolis of that, and Rome of this, the little horn that sprang out of the
ten, and became diverse from the rest, brake off three of the ten, ( Dan. 7. v.
20.24.) that is, about the year one thousand, Bucholc. Ind. Chron ad an. 1009.
Periodus Judaica inquit Helvic. ad an. 950. circiter.
after Christ, the Saracens took Jerusalem, and have held it to this day. And
about the year after Christ one thousand four hundred and fifty, Mahomet,
alias Mahumete took Constantinople, where Constantinus Palaelogus, the last of
the Grecian Emperors was utterly overthrown Bucholc. Ind. Chron. ad an. 1453.
and inde (inquit) orientis imperium penes Turcas fuit. Sic Helvic. in Chro.
Atque hinc (inquit) imperium orientis prorsus ad Turcas tran^rit.
. So that the Turk plucked up by the roots (that is wholly subdued to him)
three of the ten Roman horns or Kingdoms, to wit, Asia, Graecia, and Syria
(of which Jury was a part) and became absolute Emperor of all the Eastern
Empire Vid. Huet in Dan. 7. v. 8.
. But as for the rest of the ten horns of the fourth Beast, the Roman Empire,
being the fourth Kingdom upon the earth, and diverse also from all the
Kingdoms, it is said it devoures the residue of the whole earth (v. 23.) and
shall tread it down, and break it in pieces. And thus the seven Roman horns,
and the one Turkish Horn subduing three of the ten, shall go on in their
dominions, to enslave the generality of the whole earth; blaspheming God, and
making war with the Saints, until a time, and times, and half a time be
finished, v. 24, 25. And then (v. 26.) the Judgment shall sit, and they, i. e.
the aforesaid judgment, Judicature, or Sessions, shall take away the said
dominion, and shall give it (v. 27.) to the people of the Saints of the most
High. Suitable to this Circumstance of order in Rev. 13. 1. etc. There is a
Beast rising out of the Sea, that is the Roman Emperiality, or Empire,
Antichristed or Papized, that answers to all those four Beasts in Daniel 7.
For this Beast is like a Lion in his mouth, like a Bear in his feet, like a
Leopard in his adorned shining skin, or fair outside: And for his head it is
sevenfold, with ten horns: which ten horns (say the learned) grew all on one
head, viz. the last of the seven heads, said to have ten horns, because so at
first, as we said but now (upon Dan. 7.) but it has for continuance but seven
horns, because the Turk ( the King of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.1. to 12.)
brake off three. Again, as the Beast aforesaid in Dan. 7. must hurt but for a
time, and times, and half a time, or dividing of times: So this Beast in this
13 of the Revelation that contains all four Beasts in Dan. 7. (because it has
the evil qualities, and Tyrannical power of all those four; And from this
one, arises the other with one horn, breaking off three of the others ten)
must continue, and have power to do (mischief) two and forty months (verse. 5.
of this 13. of Rev.) which two and forty months is made all one with a time,
and times, and half a time, Rev. 12.14.

3 The last thing wherein the seventh of Dan. and Rev. the twentieth agrees is,
in intents, viz. to set forth, that the Saints shall yet have a glorious
Kingdom on earth, over which they shall (under Christ) there reign. For
seeing both visions agree in form, and matter, and sense, who can doubt but
they must intend the same thing. In that seventh of Dan. it is often mentioned,
and hinted in sundry passages, that the SON OF MAN must have the same
Kingdom, or dominion, which all the four Beasts had successively, and he must
give it to the Saints, verse. 13, 14. I saw one like the Son of Man, and there
was given him dominion and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, and Nations,
and Languages should serve him: His dominion is an everlasting Dominion ((...)
seculi says Arias, and often signifies but for a long time) expounded presently,
everlasting, that is, shall not be destroyed, that is, by any other earthly
Monarch, as the other four destroyed one another, verse. 17, 18. The four
great Beasts are four Kings (expounded here, and verse 24. Kingdoms) which
shall arise out of the earth: But the Saints of the most High shall take the
Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom (which the other four Beasts had
successively v. 19, 20, 21.) the same is repeated again with applications of
the type or vision, v. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. All which was never yet fulfilled;
nor can the ultimate judgment be a time for it. In like manner, Rev. 20.
Christ comes DOWN from heaven, v. 1. and chains up the Devil, and for a
thousand years. To what end? Not for a state of glory in the highest heavens
above, as all those passages testify: But that the Saints may rise and reign
with Christ a thousand years ( on earth, as it is express, Rev. 5.10. as a
part of the proposition to the whole Revelation; that, and Chapter 1.7. making
up the whole) I say to reign in New Jerusalem, which to that end also comes
down from heaven, Chapter 21.1. and so long to reign, as till Satan be let
loose again to seduce the Nations, that the ultimate judgment begins, verse
7. to the end of the Chapter. So that what dominion the King of the bottomless
pit had Rev. 9.1. etc. to hurt for five months; and what dominion the Beast had
for two and forty months Rev. 13. and both under Satan, while he was loose,
that very same in pure substance, though not in the evil quality, the Saints
must have under Christ. So that where the Saints were hurt, beheaded and
persecuted, even there they must rise, and reign under Christ a thousand
years, v. 4. of this 20. of Rev.

Old Testament, as well as into the New, for this glorious estate of the Church
yet to be on earth. Where note for conclusion of this third Section, That as
God gave the Church in the Old Testament a glorious temporal estate on earth,
as well as a spiritual, viz. That in Paradise on earth, so by the like reason
he will give both to the Church of the New Testament on earth, described in
Revel. 21, etc. as a second Paradise on earth. For the New Testament must not
be inferior, but rather better then the Old, only with this difference, The
Old Testament-Church (being then but in its infancy, had the temporal first,
as a type of the Spiritual. The New Testament Church must have the Spiritual
first, and the Temporal last, being then made completely up, and unto a
perfect man according to the stature of Christ, Ephesians. 4.

SECT. IV.
Wherein the Promise to Adam, Genesis 1.26, 27, 28. paralleled with Psalm the
eighth, as the eighth Psalm, with Heb. 2.5. fully opened, to prove our maine
Position, that there is yet to be on earth a glorious state of all things.

Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness,
and let them have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of the
Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping
thing that creeps on the earth, 27. So God created man in his own Image,
etc. 28. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and SVBDVE IT, and have DOMINION over the
fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and over EVERY LIVING THING
that moves on the earth, Psalm. 8.1. O LORD our LORD, how excellent is thy name
IN ALL THE EARTH, who have set thy glory above the heavens. 2. Out of the mouth
of babes and sucklings thou have ordained strength, because of thine enemies,
that thou might still the enemy, ard the avenger. 3. When I consider thy
Heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have
ordained. 4. What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man
that thou visitest him. 5. For thou have made him a little lower then the
Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor. 6. Thou made him to have
DOMINION OVER THE WORKS OF THY HANDS, thou have put ALL THINGS UNDER HIS FEET,
etc. Heb. 2.5. For unto the Angels he has not put in subjection the WORLD TO
COME, whereof we speak. 6. But one in a certain place testified, saying, what
is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest
him? 7. Thou made him a little lower then the Angels, thou crownest him with
glory and honor, and did set him OVER the works of thy hands. 8. Thou have
put ALL THINGS in subjection UNDER HIS FEET; for in that he has put ALL in
subjection under him, he left NOTHING that is not put under him. 9. But now WE
SEE NOT YET ALL THINGS put under him; but we see Jesus, who was made a little
lower then the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory, and
honor, that he by the grace of God should taste of death for every man.


John fetches in the Notions of the terrestrial Paradise to describe New
Jerusalem, (of which Revel. 21.) or (which is all one) the glorious state of
the Church that it shall have on earth before the last Judgment, Revel. 22. or
else we shall make John to speak impertinently, for in supreme glory is no
need of a river of water, or of streets, or of a tree of Life, or of twelve
sorts of fruit, one for each month, or of leaves to heal the Nations, or to
make him speak untruly, if any would turn it to an Allegory, of a fountain
of Doctrine, or of more and fresh effusions of the Spirit, or of Christ, to
bear any further fruit, he there laying down all, 1 Cor. 15.28.) even so the
Prophet David falls upon a divine meditation of the estate of Adam in
innocence, to compose a Prophetical Psalm of praise, for what God would do
for his people on earth before the ultimate end of the world, as the Apostle
Paul expounds him in the place aforesaid.

Adams fall were irrecoverably lost, in specie, in their proper kind (though
not vertually and equivalently) as man's freedom from corporal death, yet
other things, as this dominion of man over all things was not so forfeited, but
that in Christ first or last it is recovered. And therefore though David knew
full well Adams fall, as appears by Psalm. 51.5. yet looking upon the SON OF
MAN Christ in this Psalm, he holds up his head and heart, and sings out
shrilly this praise, in this Psalm of hope, that this dominion shall be made
good to man on earth to the utmost.

highest Heavens, that there they should have dominion over the Beasts, Fishes,
and Fowls, or over wicked men properly that are then in the infernal Lake,
wholly under the sole power of the Prince of Darkness; and this was not
performed on earth unto David's time, who from his youth, to his end, was ever
and anon in danger of Beasts, or beastiall men, of the Lion, and the Bear, of
Goliath, of Saul, of Absalom, of foreign enemies, etc. Nor was it ever since
fulfilled, but that the Saints (the Members of the SON OF MAN) have been at
the same pass, for the general, with David, or worse, as we have, and shall
hear abundantly.

fulfilled visibly on earth, as says the Psalmist in this eighth Psalm, so as
the enemy and avenger among men must be stilled, ver. 2. And all the Creatures
subdued, as it is in the rest of the Psalm, and both so as that the Saints
mouths may be full of praise, according to the form of this Psalm, and this
must be fulfilled too, visibly on earth, says the Apostle in the said second
of Hebrews, Unto the Angels says he, ver. 5. God has not subjected THE WORLD
TO COME, of which WE SPEAK. No, for they are charged to be in subjection to
Christ, chap. 1. ver. 6. Nor has God said to any of the Angels, sit thou at my
right hand, Mat. 24.14 Luke 2.1 Luke 4.5 Luke 21.26 Acts 11.28 Act. 17.6 Act.
17.31 Act. 19.27 Act. 24.5 Romans 10.18 Hebr. 1.6 Heb. 2.5 Rev. 3.10 Rev. 12.9
Rev. 16.14
until I make thine enemies thy footstool, ver. 13. but this must be fulfilled
on earth, to men in Christ through him. For the Apostles first phrase in that
fifth verse of the second Chapter, (...), is spoken with great emphasis, with a
double emphaticall Article, sounding as we speak in English, THAT SAME world,
even THAT that is TO COME, and yet still meaning a state on earth: for the word
(...) (rendered world) in propriety of signification, signifies the inhabited
world, as men inhabit their dwelling houses ((...) an house being of the
Kindred of the world) and in common use, it is put to signify the world on
earth; yea so used by the Holy Ghost in the New Testament at least fifteen
times, The Greek is, (...) etc. The word (...) being the first Aor. of subj.
mood, (as I conceive) has the signification of a suture. Of this place of
Scripture see more in this third Book, chap. 2. Sect. 10.
and sometimes in those places earth is adjoined, for plainer expression, yea
used so to signify the world on earth in most of the said places, as thereby
to mean the Roman Monarchy; the Romans then ruling the whole earth, when the
Apostles wrote, as in two of those places (viz. Luke 2.1. Act. 11.28.) the
Roman Emperor is expressed by name. Yea lastly, so constantly used in the New
Testament by the Apostles, so to signify as has been said, that it is never
used to signify the supreamest Heaven, even as it would have been most unapt
for such a signification. So that put all the Apostles first phrase in Heb.
2.5. together, and the inhabited world to come can signify no other, but that
the Monarchy on earth in the Apostles time under the Romans should be
hereafter, before the last Judgment, the Monarchy of Christ, or of the Saints
under him. Which the second phrase of our Apostle, viz. of WHICH WE SPEAK,
does more explain and demonstrate. For where did the Apostle speak before of
that world to come, as he intimates in this relative speech, but in Heb. 1.
ver. 6. which being read ingenuously, and with an honest plainness of
interpretation, according to the Greek Our Translators in putting AND after the
word says, do go against common sense, against the propriety of our English,
against the contexture of the Greek, and against the Hebrew text, whence it is
quoted. Is it not against common sense, and the idiom of our English to speak
thus in a recital of another words, He says, or he said AND so and so? What
more ridiculous then for us, about to tell the words of another man then to
make And the first word of the recital. In a History of the Old or New
Testament, it is a common thing to bring in a party with And he said, but in a
quotation it is not tolerable. And it is against the contexture of the Greek,
which plainly runs thus; (...), which as rendered before, runs smoothly; but as our
Translatours render, and place the order of words of the whole verse, they do
with a vain tautalogie, as it were join to says two ENDS, for it runs thus,
AND again he says, AND; Lastly, our Translatours intimate, as if the latter
AND were in the Hebrew, whereas there is no such thing. For the whole place in
Psalm. 97.7, is to to a word thus: Confounded he all they that serve graven
Images, that boast themselves of Idols, WORSHIP HIM ALL YE GODS.
runs thus; But when AGAIN he brings in, or shall bring in the first
begotten son into the WORLD, he says; Whence they that will grant us least,
will yield thus much, that would in Heb. 2.5. must signify the world on earth,
or else they utterly overthrow the Apostles reference there, The world to come
OF WHICH WE SPEAK. But we must by their favor infer more, viz. that in
this, Heb. 1.6. is mention of the same world to come on earth, else how does
the Apostle, chap. 2.5. speak all that [For unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the world to come] in form of a repetition of what he had said
before of the selfsame matter, which he no where before mentions, unless in
chap. 1. ver. 6. viz. BUT when AGAIN he brings in the first begotten into
the WORLD, he says ALSO, or in LIKE MANNER, or LIKEWISE, Let all the Angels of
God worship him; For our Translators have very untowardly, and incongruously
put and placed, AND, between says, and let; as they have needlessly, if not
prejudiciously to the genuine sense of the verse, put And at the beginning, and
altered the order of words of the Greek, which if kept, as we have followed it
in our translating, runs exceeding smoothly. Some dictate to us, that Again
must be referred to says, not to bringing in; I would, if possible, they had
also demonstrated it, to have saved our labor of demonstrating the contrary.
The first AND (seeing they translate it And) would serve one would think to
signify again he says. For more surety they have put two Ands, but it is
safest for us to keep close to the Original (having chap. 2. ver. 5. with many
other texts to hold analogy) which fluently runs (as we said) But when again
he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says likewise, Let all
the Angels of God worship him; As to signify Christ's coming again into the
world to come on earth, after the ruin of Antichrist, and all his adherents,
as we say, the Old and New world, which was distinguished by the Flood ruining
the ungodly, whiles the race of visible Saints still lived. And if all that I
have spoken in the Text and Margin do sufficiently evince, with ponderating
unprejudicated men, that so (as aforesaid) the Text is rightlier read; then the
Quere will be, when did God ever to this day bring his first begotten Son
into the world Again? when the ninety seventh Psalm was pend, Christ had not
been brought in at all in the flesh into the world (even as (...) signifies, as
led by the hand.) And when the Epistle to the Hebrews was pend, Christ had
been brought into the world but once, never since, again. And for the heavenly
Angels of God, they did worship him at his first coming, attending, serving,
and admiring his Incarnation (Luke 2.) Temptation (Mark 1.13.) Resurrection
(Mat. 28.) Dispensation of the Gospel (1 Pet. 1.12,) and Ascension (Acts 1.)
Christ said, he could have twelve Legions of Angels at his command; but (...)
Angel in the Revelation signifies also Men-Angles, that is, Magistrates (as
well as Ministers) so viz. the Angelical Potentates, Kings, Emperors, Judges,
and Powers over men, as the word (...) Elohim ( Psalm. 97.7. quoted by the
Apostle See more, Sect. 10.. 2.
) signifies the same ( Psalm. 82.1.) so that according to the latitude of the
words, and the design of God, all human Principalities, Powers, and Dominions,
must submit to Christ, and his Saints under his conduct, command, or
government, as well as the Angels then shall give him a more visible and fuller
honor; the Saints being made (...) are made able to see it.

But (that we may return to Heb. 2.) this was never yet since Adams fall
performed, viz. man so to be over all visibly on earth, as Adam was over all;
which is David's application in Psalm. 8. of Genesis 1.26, etc. and Paul's
explication in this second of Hebrews, of Psalm 8. Some weeks after I had
pend these things upon Heb. 2.5. compared with Heb. 1, 6. etc. I met with
Master Modes Opuscula (newly set forth) concurring with me in the Grammar, and
sense sense of those places, with his learned reasons, which I have therefore
here inserted in the Margin. (...) ^nim (inquit) Terra est, non caelum. At ubi
(inquies) de hac (...) in praecedentibus locutus est Apostolus, ut dicat (...)?
Aio ab istis verbis v. 6 cap. 1. (...), etc. id est, cum vero ITERUM
introduxerit primogenitum [suum] in orbem terrae, dicit, etc. Quae enim ex inde
ex libro Psalmorum ^d finem usque capitis citantur [de adora tione Angelorum,
de sceptro rectitudinis Dei, de novatione mundi, de hostium sub pedibus
conculcatione] omnia, si Apostolo credimus, ad secundum Christi adv^utum
referenda sunt. Admonitio autem, quae 4 primis versiculis cap. 2. haec excipit,
per parenthelin est legenda; versu demum quinto ad propositum redit Apostolus,
and prolix^^s exequitur quae dehumanae naturae supra Angelos prerogativa
differuerat. Non A^gelis (inquit) subjeci^ (...) de qua loquimur, Sed [and de
quo] ali^ubi ^estatus est, Psalmographus dicens, Domine, quid est ^omo quod
memor es ejus; aut ^^lius hominis, quod visita^? Modico mino^em Angelis fecisti
cum, gloria and honor coronasti cum, etc. Et paulo post, Qui vero modico minor
Angelis factus est Jesus (id est, factus homo, qui natura angelica modico
inferior est) videmus propter mortis perpessionem gloria and honor coronatum.
Confer Phil. 2. v. 7, 8, 9. Arque baec ni fallor, men's Apostoli. Mirabiliter
autem nostri versum illum sextum capitis primi transferun^, ut primo Chri^^i
^aventui accommodent, trajiciendo nimirum particulam (...) acsi scriptum esset
(...) cum scriptum sit (...), cujusmod^ trajectionis exemplum nusquam uspiam
ostendi potest. Et praeterea verbum (...) (praeterquam quod cum (...)
conjungatur) futuri significationem habeat, cum sit Aoristus secund us
iubjunctivi: porro notandum Ps. 97. (unde testimonium illud de Angelis Christum
in secundo adventu adoraturis desumptum est) tam apud Septuagi^ta quam vulgatum
Interpretem hujusmodi Epigraphe praenotatum esse, (...), Psalmus David quando
terra ei restituta est. Quid hoc re^ esse dicemus? An Psalmus quo David Messiam
in resurrectione celebrabit? An quem cecinit postquam ab Absolomo filio pulsus,
Regno ^estitutus est? In Hebraeo hodierno Psalmus (...) est. Sed LXX. aut in
suis exemplaribus reperisse, aut ex traditione mutuatos addidisse vix
dubitandum est; and ut alios alicubi Psalmorum titulos, qui nunc in Hebraeo non
extant. In versione igitur Anglica v. 6 pro [ And AGAIN when he brings in
the first begotten into the world] Corrige [ And when he brings AGAIN the
first-begotten into the world] or shall bring, etc. Sic v. 8. pro [unto the
Sonne] Malim [of the Sonne] ut ante v. 7. [of the Angels] nam eadem sunt verba,
(...) v. 12. ut and apud LXX, sunt qui legendum existiment (...), facili
mutatione. Et ^ta habet Textus Hebraicus in Psalm. 102.27. (...) and Latina
vulgata versio utrobique mutabis eos. Ita quoque in Psalmo legit Irenaeus lib.
4. cap. 6. Ita and Tertullianus adv. Hermog. c. 34.


. 1. This was never fulfilled to the Saints since Adams fall, they in the
general were never thus crowned, Psalm. 8. ver. 5. with glory and honor. Their
enemies and avengers were never thus stilled, Psalm. 8. v. 2. The could never
yet sing this eighth Psalm as a praise for the things done, but only in hope
it shall be done. It is too too apparent before our eyes to this day in the
general state of the universe, that the weeds are ready to eat up, or choke
the corn.

2 And this was not periodically, that is totally and finally fulfilled on Adam
in innocence. For first, David pens this Psalm above two thousand eight
hundred years after, as a Psalm of praise for the Saints. 2 In Adams innocence
there was no enemy and avenger stilled, as Psalm. 8. v. 2. makes mention. 3
Adam, should seem, was a type of things to come, in that the Apostle makes the
eighth Psalm a Prophecy of future events. 4 To Adam in innocence the then
present world of the whole universe was not actually subjected; his actual
dominion was yet within the Territories of Paradise. 5 Much less was the
inhabitable world to come, subjected to him: For he soon fell, and lost his
dominion, which is not yet so actually recovered to the Saints, but that their
enemies are more, and mightier then themselves to this day.


3 Therefore the great knot is, whether this has been fulfilled to Christ! The
Apostle in this second of Hebrews seems to me to say, that the things
aforesaid were not in his time fully fulfilled to Christ himself. For, the
things to be put under Christ's feet is the WORLD, yea (...) the INHABITED
World, yea and (...) the inhabited World TO COME, viz. that was to come after
Paul wrote that. And the Apostle does strongly (as Pareus observes) urge out of
Psalm. 8. v. 8. the universal particle (...) ALL, Thou have put all things in
subjection under his feet for, says he, in that he put ALL in subjection under
him, he left NOTHING that is not put under him. But NOW (says the Apostle) we
SEE NOT ALL THINGS put under him. He appeals (says Pareus) to sense, (...).
But NOW we do not YET SEE all things put under him. viz. NOW that Christ is
ascended, we see not all things put under him. He is to ascend into Heaven, and
there sit at Gods right hand, UNTIL his enemies be made his footstool, Psalm.
110.1. which our Apostle clearly applies to his ascension after his Passion,
Heb. 10.11. Which Until, plainly signifies, that after his ascension, when
Paul wrote, All things were not put under Christ's feet; All his enemies were
not made his footstool; but the Jews and Romans still triumphed over his
cause all along the story of the Acts, and throughout the ten persecutions;
after that the Arian, and since the Papal and Turkish persecution and Tyranny,
triumph over it. What was fulfilled, the Apostle freely and fully expresses,
viz. (...), etc. That is (exactly to the words and order of them) But him that
was made a little while, So (...) and (...) in v. 7. and (...), must be
distinguished; see the margin of your Bibles.
a little lower then the Angels, we see even Jesus in regard of his suffering
of death to be crowned with glory and honor, that he by the free grace of God
might taste of death for every man: As if the Apostle should in length of words
have spoken out thus much.

The world to come is not to be put in subjection to Angels, but unto Christ
(that is the sense of verse 5.) but unto Christ the world to come is to be put
in subjection according to the eight Psalm (as in the application of it in
verse 9. the Apostle expounds it of Christ) But this, says he, is not yet
totally fulfilled; all things are not yet put under him, only we see him, for
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, which is not a
subjection of the INHABITABLE WORLD TO COME unto him; much less of ALL THINGS
therein. The Angels are in Heaven as well as he, and so in place, they as well
as he are above the things below. But Christ must have the inhabited world,
and All things so subject to him, and 'under him as they shall not be to
Angels. So that if we heed the Text, and that which follows, the Apostle tells
us, that in one way and sense, Christ is exalted above all, viz. in his
possession of the highest Heaven, through sufferings. But withal this is in
another place then the inhabited world to come, viz. the world on earth yet to
succeed, and upon another account then the precise formal dominion over it,
viz. to taste of death for every man. And it was in prosecution of a design,
verse 10. viz. to bring many sons to glory, not a perfecting of a thing
finished, viz. of the achievement and attainment of his absolute dominion on
earth, over Turks, Jews, Papists, and Heathens, etc. But this must be, Christ
and his members must have absolute dominion over the world below, in that
estate of it that is yet to come. (...) the habitation of the world is not to
be subjected to the Angels ( Heb. 2. v. 5.) They are but the Churches servants.
It is an estate that is (...) to come after Paul's time, though Christ had
before ascended. But it must be subject to MAN, and the SON OF MAN, v. 6.
God, (...), made him a little lower, and (...), for a little time. Christ, or
Christians were not lower at all then Angels in nature or spiritual condition,
but only in outward dominion and state of life (Phil. 2. Heb. 2.) and that but
for a little time, till the time of that world to come on earth, which must be
before the last day of judgment, for then is not any subjection of any thing
to Saints, or Christ; but he, and so they to lay down all dominion, 1 Cor.
15.28.

SECT. V.
Wherein the Promises God made to Abraham, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. Genesis 15.4, 5, 6.
Genesis 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Genesis 18.18. Genesis 22.18. paralleled with other
promises to his posterity, Genesis 26.4. Genesis 48.19. v. 26. and with the Apostles
explications and applications of those Promises, Romans 4. v. 3. to v. 25. Gal.
3. v. 6. to 17. Heb. 11. v. 8. to 17. are discussed, for the clearing of the
said general Position.

Genesis 12. v. 1. Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy Country,
etc. Verse 2. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee,
and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. Verse 3. And I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee, and in thee all
families of the earth shall be blessed.

Genesis 15. v. 4. Behold the word of the Lord came to Abram saying, This shall
not be thine heir, but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall
be thine heir. And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward
heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou be able to number them: And he said unto
him, so shall thy seed be. Verse. 6 And he believed in the Lord, and he counted
it to him for righteousness.

Genesis 17. v. 1. The Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the
Almighty God, etc. Verse 2. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee,
and will multiply thee exceedingly. Verse 3. And God talked with Abram saying,
Verse 4. As for me, behold my Covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a Father
of many Nations. In the Heb. it is both in the 4. v. and 5. verse. (...) that
is, A Father of a MULTITUDE of Nations.
Neither shall thy name be called any more Abram, but thy name shall be
Abraham; for a Father of many Nations have I made thee. * Verse 6. And I will
make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make Nations of thee, and KINGS shall
come of thee. V. 7. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee, in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant. Verse
8. And I will give unto thee, and thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou
art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an EVERLASTING possession, and I
will be THEIR GOD.

Gen 18.18. Abraham shall surely become a great, and a mighty Nation, and all
the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in him.

Genesis 22. v. 15, 16. The Angel of the Lord called to Abraham, etc. by my self
have I sworn that in blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of Heaven, and as the sand which is upon the
Seashore, and thy seed shall possess the gates of his enemies. ver. 18. In
thy seed all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed.

Genesis 26.4. The Lord appeared to Isaac, and said, I will make thy seed to
multiply as the Stars of Heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these
Countries, and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed.

Genesis 48. ver. 19. And his father (Jacob) refused, and said, I know it my
Son, I know it (that Manasseh is the first borne) he also shall become a
People, and he also shall be great, but truly his younger brother (Ephraim)
shall be greater then he, and his seed shall become a MVLTITUDE of NATIONS Heb.
(...) that is, THE FVLNESSE OF THE GENTILES, whence the Apostles phrase, Romans
11.25. The fullness of the Gentiles shall come.
ver 20. And he blessed them in that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless,
saying, God make thee as Ephraim, and as Manasseh, and he set Ephraim before
Manasseh.

Genesis 49. ver. 26. The blessings of thy Father have prevailed above the
blessings of my Progenitors, unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills,
they shall be on the head of Joseph, and upon the crown of the head, etc.

Romans 4. ver. 11. And Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of
the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised, that he
might be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised,
ver. 13. For the promise that he should be the Heir of the world was not to
Abraham, and his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness of faith.
ver. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the
Promise might be sure to all the the seed, not to that only which is of the
Law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the FATHER OF US
ALL. ver. 17. (As it is written, I have made thee a father of many Nations,
before him ( or like him, as it is in the Margin) whom he believed, even God
who quickneth the dead, and calls those things which be not as though they
were) ver. 18. Who against hope, believed in hope, that he might become the
Father of many Nations, according to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed
be, etc. ver. 22. And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.

Galat. 3. ver. 5. He that ministers to you the Spirit, etc. does he it by the
works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? ver. 6. Even as Abraham believed
God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness, ver. 7. Know ye
therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham,
ver. 8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the HEATHEN
through faith, preached before the GOSPEL unto Abraham, saying, In thee all
Nations shall be blessed. ver. 9. So then they which be of faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. ver. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law. ver. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the GENTILES. ver.
15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it be but a man's
covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereunto. ver.
16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made. He says not, and to
SEEDS as of many, but as of one, and to thy SEED, which is Christ.

Heb. 11. ver. 8. By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place,
which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not
knowing whither he went. ver. 9, By faith he sojourned in the Land of Promise,
as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob, the
Heirs with him of the same Promise. ver. 10, For he looked for a City which
has foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. ver. 11, Through faith also
Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a
child, etc. ver. 12, Therefore sprange there even of one, and him as good as
dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and the sand which is by
the sea shore innumerable. ver. 13. These all dyed in faith, not having
received the Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of
them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers, and pilgrims
on earth. 14, For they that say such things, declare plainly, that they seek a
COUNTRY. (...) Their fathers Country, a country on earth.
ver. 15, And truly if they had been mindful of that Country (viz.
Mesopotamia) from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have
returned. ver. 16, But now they desire a better Country, that is, an HE AVENLY:
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for
them a CITY.


NOte first in the general, That that treasure of Promises of the Old
Testament before recited, how narrow soever they may look to short-sighted men,
as if their eye were intent only upon Jews, Canaan, and men under the Law; the
Divine Apostles, the absolute interpretors of the Old Testament, do in the
places of the New Testament annexed, extend their intent, sense, and meaning,
unto all Nations of the world, in all Countries on earth, and under the Gospel,
and so, as that they were not (in their judgment) then completely fulfilled,
when they wrote; nor yet are, according to their sense, as the experience of
all Generations since does bear witness. The quick-sighted eye, by bare
reading over all the places before collated will soon yield this first assertion
without any more words of debate on our part.

Genesis 12.1, 2, 3, etc. by Gal. 3.8. and Heb. 11.8, etc. Genesis 15.4. by Romans 4.
ver. 3. ver. 9. ver. 18. ver. 22. Genesis 17.1, 2, etc. by Romans 4. ver. 11, etc.

Old Testament Scriptures have in them so many Evangelicall strains, all
harmoniously agreeing to that glorious state we yet expect under the New
Testament; viz.

1 Spiritual, yet visible salvation, delivered in the express term, form
and tenor of a Covenant, and of the Covenant of Grace, that God will establish
his Covenant with Abraham between himself, and him, and his seed after him in
their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be A GOD UNTO HIM AND TO HIS
SEED AFTER HIM, often above repeated, and illustrated and amplified with the
plain expression of Faith, and of righteousness of faith, and of Gods
accounting faith to the believer for righteousness, and of blessing and with
such a blessing as comes only through the one, and only one of the seed of
Abraham.

2 An happy and blessed possession upon the sace of the whole earth, in spite
of all their enemies, yea to the ruin of them that should rise up against
them, saying, that Abraham in his seed should be Heir of the whole world. And
that he would give them Countries, and Nations, and bless those that blessed
them, and curse those that cursed them.

3 A numerous multiplication of the seed of Abraham both of Jews and Gentiles,
who through that salvation should attain to that possession. A multiplication
of them as the sands of the Sea (that washes through all the quarters and
Countries of the world) a multiplication of them as the stars of heaven (that
surround the whole universe) both of them being innumerable. A multiplication
of them into a multitude of Nations, etc. Accordingly of Abraham by Hagar came
Ishmael, of whom came the Ishmaelites, Agarens, Hagarens or Hagarites, Itureans
and Nabeans, etc. Ps. 83.6. 1 Chro. 5.19. See Iunius upon that 1 Chronicles. 5.19.
There came of Ishmael in all twelve PRINCES according to their NATIONS. And
they dwelt from Havilah to Shur that is before Egypt, Genesis 25.16.19. Of Abraham
by Sarah, first, came Esau, who is also called Edom, and dwelt in mount Seir,
from whom came the Edomites, Idumeans, inhabitants of mount Seir. The fourteen
Dukes that came of Esau by his several wives are particularly named by Moses.
Genesis 36.15. to 20. Secondly, From Abraham by Sarah came Jacob, of whom came the
twelve Patriarchs, of whom came the twelve Tribes, ten (as we usually number)
making the Kingdom of Israel, the other the Kingdom of Judah. Of Abraham by
Keturah came (Genesis 25.1, 2, 3.4.) First, Zimran, who gave the name to Zamrans,
in the Region of Cinedocolpites in Arabia Felix. Secondly, Jokshan, of whom was
named Camasa in Syria Palmyrina, alias Palmerene (Jun.ex Ptolom. Geograph.)
Thridly, Medan, of whom was named the Town Madiana in Arabia Felix (Jun.) and
the Country of Madianaea on the South of Arabia (Hieron.) Fourthly, Midian, of
whom came the Midianites (those arch enemies of the Jews, for which God
commanded to vex them) of whom was Balaam, (which gave that wicked counsel
against Israel.) Their maine Country also had from them the name of Madianitis,
in the borders of Arabia petraea. But because also some of them dwelt in the
Countries adjoining to the Ishmaelites, therefore they are sometimes called
Ishmaelites, though of so different an original, as aforesaid, Genesis 37.25.28
Judge. 7.33. and 8.24. Fifthly, There came of Keturah Ishbak, who was the
founder of Laodicea Scabiosa in Suria. Sixthly, Shuah, of whom came the Saccai,
inhabiting the East part of Syria by Batanaea (Jun.) Seventhly Sheba, whose
posterity dwelt in Arabia deserta (Prerer. Jun.) Eighthly, Dedan, of whom came
the 'Dedaneans, who inhabited (as Hieron supposes) in Aethiopia, or in the
Country next to the Idumeans, as it seems to be hinted, Jer. 49.7, 8. or in
Adadi in Syria Palmerene (Jun.) Ninthly, Epha, whose Country is named in Isa.
60.6. and is situated beyond Arabia, called Saba (Hieron. l. 17. in Isa.)
Tenthly Epher, of whom, says Josephus, Africa had its name. Of the rest named
in that of Genesis 25. the Countries are not known, only they are said in verse
6. to dwell Eastward in the East-Country, that is Arabia, or Syria. So that we
see many Kingdoms and Nations, both of Jews and Gentiles, thus far as we have
computed, came out of Abraham's loins, according so the aforesaid promises: and
how many Nations since, who is able to reckon? Now say the abovementioned
Scriptures out of the Old Testament, the multitude of Nations to come of
Abraham are to partake of the Covenant as an everlasting Covenant, God to be
their God; Yea ALL the Nations of the earth to be blessed in ABRAHAM, and to be
blessed IN HIS SEED, often there repeated.

4. The Lord adds in the said Old Testament quotations, an obsignation, or
sealing (if I mistake not) of all the three particulars before mentioned, viz.
Of spiritual salvation; Of an happy possession of the earth; and of a numerous
multiplication in Jews and Gentiles, over the face of whole earth, accompanied
with that salvation, in that their enjoyment of that universal possession. 1 Of
salvation, he gave them the seal of Circumcision, which was a sign and seal
of the Covenant of grace, viz. of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. And
it is said before in that Genesis 17. that this Covenant, or token of the Covenant
should be in their flesh for an everlasting Covenant; because, as in the
substance, God would continue a Seal of his Covenant for ever (till the
Restitution of all things) as the Covenant it self should be for ever; still
the same salvation should be sealed; still the same use of the seal, to
confirm the assurance of faith; still upon the same ground of the tenor of the
Covenant of grace (as we shall see after) only the matter of the seal to be
changed, viz. the Green wax of water to be put in the room of the Red wax of
bloody Circumcision. Secondly, Of that happy possession upon the face of the
whole earth, he gave them the seal of the seven Kingdoms of the whole Country
of Canaan, and that for an everlasting possession, so as still (as it is
annexed) to be their God. For from the time they first entered Canaan, according
to the promise, they were never universally and absolutely expelled out of it;
and shall there keep possession till they be most gloriously restored to the
possession of it; the seed of Abraham, the believing Jews, and Gentiles ru^^ng
there, and over the whole earth, as long as ever there shall be any habitation
on earth, as the Rere of testimonies, yet to march up, shall abundantly
testify. And if any enemies shall rise up against the Nations of Jews and
Gentiles (the seed of Abraham by faith) they shall as surely conquer them, as
they did the land of Canaan. Thirdly, Of their numerous blessed multiplication,
God gives the seal of changing Abrams name to Abraham. He should not be only
Ab-rom, that is, an High-father, but Ab-Rom-Hamon an High-father of a
multitude; even as he changed Sarais name to the same intent from Sarai, my
Mistress, to Sarah, A, or the Mistress.

Abraham extended in their utmost breadth to his posterity, viz. Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasseh, Genesis 26.4. Genesis 48.19. Genesis 49.26. quoted before
at large, all sounding of an universal happy dominion over the face of the
whole earth.

Old Testament Plat-forme, do the excellent Master Builders the Apostles in
the New Testament rear the superstructure, with distinct reference to the
places and particulars of the Old.

. 1. For Salvation, they often express it under the notion of the
righteousness of faith, and of imputing faith for righteousness, and of being
blessed through faith.

. 2. For Possession, it is before expressed by the Apostle, that their leaving
of Mesopotamia, their own native Country, and never returning, though they
might, and after that their sojourning in Canaan so long, as strangers and
pilgrims in Tents, and Tabernacles, though it was promised them for an
inheritance, and doing all this by faith, not seeing the Promise fulfilled by
sense, did argue, that they sought a Country, an heavenly one, a City that has
foundations prepared of God, made and built by God. All which, how can we
better and safelier expound then by the Scriptures; which having told us, Rev.
20. we shall reign with Christ on earth (as the meaning has been proved, even
where Gog and Magog shall after make opposition) a thousand years; In the next
chapter, viz. 21. they show us the place and state where, and how, viz. in the
New Heaven, and New EARTH, in the holy City, new Jerusalem, coming down from
Heaven, where God himself will be with them, and be their God, and all tears
shall be wiped away, with many other Characters, and Circumstances (fully
answering to that before, of Heb. 11.) Which as we have before demonstrated,
cannot be meant of the Highest Heaven, but of a state on earth. The like whereof
we have in 2 Pet. 3.13. that the Saints shall enjoy a new earth, according to
Gods promise; which Promise, extant Esa. 65.17. will not endure to be
interpreted, but of a state on earth, as the branches of it evince.

. 3. For Multiplication, As the generality of the world, Jews and Gentiles,
have according to the flesh come out of the loins of Abraham; so the Apostles
exposition of the Promises holds forth, that the generality of the world shall
be the Children of Abraham by faith, and blessed in THAT SEED of him, viz.
Christ. That they that are of the faith of Abraham, are the children of
Abraham; That God would justify the HEATHEN through faith, according to the
GOSPEL he preached to Abraham; That the sense of that Promise, In thee Abraham
all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed, is, that they that be of faith,
shall be blessed with faithful Abraham; That the blessing of Abraham shall come
upon the Gentiles; That the promise to Abraham, that he should be THE HEIR OF
THE WORLD was not to Abraham, and his seed through the Law, but through the
righteousness of faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end the Promise
might be sure TO ALL THE SEED, not to that only which is of the Law, but to
that also which is of the faith of Abraham, WHO IS THE FATHER OF US ALL.

. 4. For the sealing of all these three likewise in the New Testament, Christ
as incarnated, is called the Mystery, or Sacrament (as some Translate) of
godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. because in his flesh is the glorious representation of
God ( Heb. 1.2.) and the effectual communication of the excellencies of God to
us, by union with him and us ( Joh. 17.2. Joh. 1.16.) Christ, as testified unto
from Heaven, (Mat. 3.17. Mat. 17.5.) is the sealed one, or the sealing to us,
Ioh. 6 27. viz. That he is the only name under Heaven whereby we must be saved
(Acts 4.12.) and he, as the meaning of all types, Joh. 1.17. is the impletion,
or fulfilling of all the Promises to us; take him and take all, 2 Cor. 1.20.
And to the end that we might be more sure of all these, he has change of
names, as a seal, interpreted to that sense, Matthew. 1. Immanuel, that is, God
with us (which the Apostle notably applies to our Salvation, Romans 8.31.) and
Jesus (ibid. Mat. 1.) for he shall save his people from their sins. And thus
Christ is a seal of our Salvation. 2. Again, as Christ the true, or
Antitypicall Abraham, or Isaac, is the everlasting Father of all to be saved,
Isa. 9.6. took our nature on him (Heb. 2.) suffered, and ascended, (Mat. Chap.
27. Chap. 28.) so he is a seal, interest, or assurance that there shall be a
multiplication of them that shall be saved by him, 1. By his FATHER-HOOD,
PATERNITY, or Father-ship, Isa. 53. ver. 10. He shall see his SEED. ver. 11. he
shall see the TRAVEL of his soul; He shall justify many. Heb. 2.11. etc. He
that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are ALL ONE: Behold, I and the
CHILDREN which God has given me, the Children partaking of flesh and blood, he
partook of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power
of death, that is, the Devil. ver. 16. For he took not upon him the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, for it behooved him in all things to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. verse 10. For it became
him FOR WHOM ARE ALL THINGS, and BY WHOM ARE ALL THINGS in bringing MANY SONS
unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through SUFFERING.
And that we might know that Christ is the seal, or interest, by his taking our
nature, not only to save the Jews (as in this second to the Hebrews) but also
the Gentiles; the Apostle discusseth that his taking our nature in another root
(universal to all mankind) viz. Adam, called the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. and
mightily extends it as wide as the ruin that came by Adam, Romans 5. v. 15. If
through the offense of one, MANY be dead, much more the grace of God, and the
gift by grace by one man Jesus Christ has abounded to MANY. verse 18. As by
the offense of ONE judgment came upon ALL MEN to condemnation, even so by the
righteousness of ONE, the free gift came upon ALL MEN unto justification of
life. 2 He is a seal, or interest of the multiplication of believers, by his
suffering, Heo. 2.9. We see Jesus made a little lower then Angels, for, or by
(as it is in the margin) the suffering of death, crowned with glory and
honor, that he by the grace of God, should taste death FOR EVERY MAN. And Joh.
12.32, 33. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw ALL MEN unto me
(this he said signifying what death he should dye.) 3 By his ascension, Act.
1.11. compared with Act. 3, 21. This same Jesus, which is taken up from you
into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven,
whom the Heavens must receive UNTIL the TIMES of restitution of ALL THINGS,
etc.

3 Christ, by reason of relation and union, is the seal or assurance of the
possession, Romans 8. Coheires with him, Ephesians. 2.6. Set in heavenly places with
him.

4 As Christ is the seal, or sealed one of all those three, so also the Holy
Spirit, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, are seals of all those.

The Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. first in general, is a seal of all the promises,
therefore called there, the Spirit of promise, saying, ye were sealed with the
Spirit of promise. For as the promise promises the Spirit, so the Spirit
dictated to the Penmen of the Scriptures to leave us those promises, and the
Spirit brings home and applies those promises to every man's particular heart (2
Cor. 3.3. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.) Secondly, In particular, 1 The Spirit is a seal of
salvation, in the same Ephesians. 1.13, 14. After ye heard the word of truth, the
Gospel of your SALVATION, after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise. 2 A seal of multiplication of Believers. For in that
respect it is also there called (as we hinted but now) the Spirit of promise,
in that it is promised. And how? Thus, that it shall be (Joel 2.28.) poured
upon all flesh. A large promise of innumerable effusions. 3 A seal of the
possession. So in the same Ephesians. 1.13, 14. ye were sealed with the holy spirit
of promise, which is the earnest of your INHERITANCE, until the redemption of
the purchased possession.
The redemption of the souls of the Ephesians was past already; therefore the
redemption of the body (of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.22, 23. saying,
That all the creation, as well as all believers, groan after it) must be meant.
The Apostle calls it in the Greek, (...), The redemption of much business,
which more sounds of a state on earth, then in the highest Heavens. And that
our Coheirship with Christ, Romans 8. the Apostle Paul there says, verse 21, 22,
23. it must begin on earth. And the Apostle John says, We must reign with
Christ on earth, Rev. 5.10. a thousand years, Rev. 20.4. Till Satan be there
let loose, and Gog and Magog thereupon make opposition, verse 7.8, 9.

Next, Baptism is a seal, as of salvation, (as all know) so of the
possession, which that innumerable company of Jews and Gentiles, Exodus 12.37,
38. passing through the Red sea, Exodus 14. should have, if there baptized
believed, 1 Cor. 10.1. etc. wherein God sealed to them among other things, that
his power should be Omnipotent, and his mercy endure for ever (Psalm. 136. v. 4.
v. 13, 14, 15) in bringing them to the land of promise.

Lastly, The Lords Supper does not only in the elements typifie our spiritual
nourishment and cherishment by Christ, but in the posture of sitting signifies
our reigning, and judging with Christ, the whole earth, as ruling and judging
is often expressed in Scripture by sitting, Mat. 19.28. Rev. 4.4. Rev. 20.4. even
as in Luke 22.29, 30. Eating and drinking at a table with Christ, is put as a
sign of a Kingdom, and sitting on seats or thrones, a sign of judicature.

Abraham, both of Jews and Gentiles, to whom God will be their God, and bless
them over the face of the whole earth, in the seed of Abraham, making them
partakers of the righteousness of faith, etc. (as is before more largely
enumerated) that the generality of the whole world shall become believers, and
be the governou of the entire universe. All which must be fulfilled as sure as
God cannot lie.

Salmanazar remain still scattered among the Heathen, not having received, if
ever they heard of the word of faith, the Gospel of Christ. And the two Tribes
of Juda and Benjamin, do not to this day acknowledge the New Testament. The
Turks, Arabians, Hagarens, Tartarians, Persians, Indians, etc. have no
acquaintance with Christ and salvation. We see not yet all Nations under the
Stars, numerous as the sands of the sea, blessed in the seed of Abraham, viz.
in Christ, converted to the faith. Some inhabitants of a few spots of ground
are called Christians; but the most, and mightiest Imperialties or dominions
know not Christ. We see not yet Ephraims posterity (according to Genesis 48.19.
before quoted) to become (...) the fullness of the Gentiles, or to come in as
the fullness of the Gentiles, which phrase the Apostle exactly keeping Romans
11.25. (...), until the fullness of the Gentiles come in, and so all Israel to
be saved, interprets it of the conversion of the world of Jews and Gentiles to
faith in Christ. But alas, for the posterity of Ephraim, they are not delivered
from their captivity temporal or spiritual to this day. Nor is one Kingdom of
ten, over the whole world converted unto the faith. Nor is Joseph's posterity
blessed (according to Genesis 49.26.) to the utmost bounds of the everlasting
Hills, that is (says learned Ainsworth) over the face of the whole earth. Nor
have the Hebrews, since the Apostle wrote to them that Epistle, so named,
attained any Country, or City, that is heavenly, or built by God, being not
converted to this day, as fit for any better condition on earth, or in heaven.
And they must be in a better spiritual condition on Earth (according to the
tenor of all the Scriptures) before they can be received into Heaven. Of which
more after, especially when we come to discuss the 4. Chap. of this Epistle to
the Hebrews.

last general judgment, being every way inconsistent with that time, being no
time then of conversion, or dominion of men, but of confusion of the wicked,
and the subjection of all the good, yea of Christ himself, as Christ to God,
who then is to be all in all, as we have often minded out of 1. Cor. 15.28.

SECT. VI.
Wherein the Prophecy in Numb. 24.16. to 25 is discussed as proof of the
general Position.

Numb. 24. v. 16. He has said ( or he assuredly says) which heard the words
(or oracles) of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the
vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open. Verse
17. I shall see him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not nigh; There shall
come a STAR out of lacob, and a Scepter shall arise out of Israel, and shall
smite ( or smite through) the corners ( or Princes) of Moab, and shall destroy (
Heb. (...)
shall unwall) all the children of Sheth. Verse 18. And Edom shall be a
possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies, and Israel shall
do valiantly. Verse 19. Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion,
and shall destroy him that remains of the City. Verse. 20. And when he looked
on Amalek, he took up his parable and said, Amalek was the first of the
Nations, That is, the first of the Nation warred against Israel, Exodus 17.
but his latter end shall be, that he perish for ever. Verse 21. And he looked
on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwelling
place, and thou put thy nest in a rock. Verse 22. Nevertheless the Kenite
( Heb. Kain (...)
) shall be wasted, until Ashur shall carry thee away captive. Verse 23. And he
took up his parable and said, Alas, who shall live when God does this The
Geneva Notes say, Some read, Oh who shall not perish when the enc^^y, that is
ANTICHRIST shall set himself up as God.
! Verse 24. And ships shall come from the coasts of Chitim, and shall afflict
Ashur, and shall afflict Eber, and he shall perish for ever.


Targum, Talmud, and Rabbis, and of the Greek Septuagint. The man that spoke
this was Balaam, but set down by Moses as a most sure Prophecy, and therefore
shows us what a full manifestation he had from God of this Prophecy, verse 16.
It is not unusual with God sometimes for extraordinary ends to reveal some
particular Prophesies to some men at some certain juncture of time for a
present occasion whiles such men are unregenerate. So to Caiphas, Joh. 11.49,
50, 51. So to the Sibyls (of whom before in the first Book, in the large
quotations of Lactantius.) I say not, that God gives them the spirit of
Prophecy, but that God dictated to them some particular Prophesies; as of this
Balaam, it is said the Lord met him, and gave him a charge what he should say;
and so he was enforced by the power of divine providence to bless instead of
cursing. And of this Prophecy we have some touches and phrases repeated in the
New Testament, 2 Pet. 1.19. Until the day star arise, Rev. 22.16. I Jesus, etc.
am the root of David, etc. and the bright and morning star; yea, and some of
this Prophecy is punctually fulfilled in the Old Testament so long since as
David's time, as we shall see after.

Hebrews admirably assist (for of them there cannot be an apter Proverb, Ubi
been nemo melius.) Let us touch with their pen, a little on every clause; I
shall see him] or see it, (...)
that is the person and thing he prophesies of following, which Sol. Jarchi
expounds, I see the praise of Jacob, and their greatness, but it is not now,
but after a time. Chaskuni adds He prophesies of David, that is of him in
his ultimate generation, Christ, as you shall see the Rabbis by and by, in
their Targum, Talmud, and Treatises harmoniously consent. But not nigh] that is
as Jarchi said before, It is not now, but after a time. And as the Targum or
Chalde Paraphrase expounds it, It is not near, when a King shall arise out of
the house of Jacob, and CHRIST shall be anointed of the house of Israel, and
shall RULE OVER ALL THE SONS OF MEN: Mark that expression. It follows, There
shall come a star out of Jacob.] The Greek translate, shall arise, or shine
forth, which is applied to Christ by Peter in the said 2 Pet. 1.19.
afore-quoted, and by Christ himself to himself in the above cited Rev. 22.16.
Both places being penned since Christ's ascension, and therefore can import no
less then that it is yet to be fulfilled, and that before the ultimate day of
judgment, at which time it is too late, for Christ to shine as a day star to
the Jews, if he shine not to them before; or for the consideration of Christ's
relation to David, when he lays down all relations. But of these things by
and by, in the inferences from the said place of Numbers. Of which it follows;
And a Scepter shall rise out of Israel] that is (says the Chalde Paraphrase) A
King shall arise, the Messiah or Christ shall be anointed, that shall RULE ALL
THE SONS OF MEN. So that Christ must have his Scepter as well as David, and
other Kings. And as his gracious Scepter of righteousness over his people,
Psalm. 45.7. Heb. 1.8. So his powerful constraining destroying Rod, or Scepter
of Iron over his enemies, Psalm. 2.9. Rev. 12.5. which two last mentioned places
are prophetical of future times, not fulfilled (should seem) in the time of
John's penning the Revelation, though that was long after Christ's ascension. And
he shall smite the corners of Moab, or through the corners of Moab.] The Greek
is, He shall break to pieces the Dukes of Moab (...)
; The Chalde is, He shall kill the Princes of Moab, and shall unwal the children
of Seth] which the Chalde excellently expounds, That Christ shall have dominion
over all the children of men. For Seth being the son of Adam, given to him in
the room of Abel, slain; and Kaines posterity being drowned in the flood,
only Seths posterity remaining in Noah, all the world since that may be truly
said to be the children of Seth, as of a secondary Adam, which dominion of
Christ over all Kings and Nations is prophesied in Psalm. 72.11. All Kings shall
fall down before him, and all Nation shall serve him. And in Phil. 2.10. it is
spoken in the future tense (...).
(after Christ's ascension) and of all persons and things, not only of heavenly
or spiritual, but of earthly, etc. To this exposition Sol. Iarchi subscribes.
All the sons of Seth, that is (says he) ALL PEOPLES, which do ALL come of
SETH the son of ADAM THE FIRST. We have one Rabbin behind, viz. Maimony, who
in their Talmud R. Maimony in Misn. Tom. 4. Treat. of King. c. 11. sect. 1.
notably explaines the whole Prophecy of Balaam briefly thus: I shall see him,
but not NOW, that is, DAVID, I shall behold him, but not NIGH, this is THE KING
CHRIST. There shall proceed a star out of Jacob, this is DAVID, and a Scepter
shall rise out of Israel, this is the KING CHRIST, and shall smi^e through the
corners of Moab; this is DAVID, as it is written (2 Samuel 2.8.) And he smote
Moab, etc. And he shall unwal all the sons of Seth, this is the KING CHRIST,
of whom it is written (Psalm. 72.8.) he shall have DOMINION FROM SEA TO SEA. And
Edom shall be a possession to David, as it is said, and all they of Edom became
David's servants, 2 Samuel 8.14. And Seir shall be a possession, this is unto THE
KING CHRIST, as it is said, AND SAVIORS shall come up on mount Sion, to judge
the mount of Esau, and THE KINGDOM SHALL BE THE LORDS. Hobad. v. 21. Thus
Maimony, who has spoken so fully, that I need not but give a light touch on
the rest. Verse 18. EDOM shall be a possession. These Edomites (the posterity of
Esau) became a possession to David, 1 Chronicles. 18.13. After that they are to be a
possession to Christ, Isa. 63.1. Who is this that comes up from Edom, with
died garments from Bozrah? Red with blood sprinkled on his garments, intimating
a corporal destruction of the Edomites by Christ. SEIR also shall be a
possession. Seir, that is Esau, for there Esau dwelt, Genesis 36. Therefore the
Greek render Seir by Esau. So that this clause is all one with the former.
Against whom and the rest of the enemies of the Church, the Israelites (as it
follows) shall do valiantness (as it is in the Hebrew) that is valiant acts
valiantly, which in effect sometimes signifies victories in War (1 Samuel 14.48.
sometimes getting wealth and riches (Ezekiel. 28.4.) Both here meant, as both go
together, in the case of victory in War (though the Chalde expresses rather
the later) which double sense well answers to the name Israel that signifies a
prevailing as a Prince with God and men (Genesis 32.28.) And to Psalm. 60.14.
Through God we shall do valiantness, and he will tread down our enemies. And
Heb. 2.8. God will put all things in subjection under Christ's feet, who was the
son of David, of the seed of Israel. And he shall have dominion] that is, one
of the house of Jacob, as the Chalde expresses it. So Targum Jonathan says,
And a Ruler shall rise up out of the house of Jacob, which Sol. Jarchi opens
thus: And yet there shall be another Ruler out of Jacob, and he shall destroy
him that remains out of the City. Of the KING CHRIST he speaks thus, of
whom it is said (Psalm. 72.) HE SHALL HAVE DOMINION FROM SEA TO SEA: And shall
destroy him that remains out of the City; that is of all Cities, as the
Chalde expounds it, viz. The City of the peoples. Verse 20, 21, 22. are
plain of themselves. verse 23, Alas, who shall live when God does this? The
Chalde explaineth it, Woe to the sinners that shall live when God does this.
Targum Jonathan explaines it thus; when the word of the Lord shall be revealed
to give a good reward unto the just, and take vengeance on the wicked. verse
24, And Ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict Ashur, and
shall afflict Eber, and he shall also perish for ever. The Chalde expounds
Chittim to signify the Romans. The old Latin explaines it by Italy (which is
all one in effect, only the Roman Monarchy was larger then the Imperial Seat
of it in the Kingdom of Italy.) Chittim, or Kitim was one of the sons of
Javan, the son of Japhet, the son of Noah, Genesis 10.4. His posterity inhabited
partly Greece (viz. Macedonia) partly (as Josephus affirms) Italy among the
Romans, as also Cyprus, and Cilicia. All which places also by turns were
sometime of the Greek Empire, sometime of the Roman Empire. By which reasons
Chittim, alias Kitim is sometime taken for the Greeks, sometimes for the
Romans, both which took their turns to afflict the Assyrians, and Eber, that
is the Hebrews, or people of Israel. But the Catastrophe and fatal period is,
that Chittim shall perish for ever.

earth (as they all import a fulfilling there) as it easily appears to a quick
eye reviewing the Premises. This same Star CHRIST has not yet shined upon the
hearts of the generality of the sons of Jacob, as it is expounded, 2 Pet.
1.19. He has not yet as CHRIST, ruled as a King over ALL THE SONS OF MEN,
as the Chalde before expounds the Scepter out of Israel, as the Scriptures
Psalm. 2.9. back it. CHRIST has not yet unwalled ALL THE CHILDREN OF SETH,
that is all the children of Adam (as before made plain.) He has not, that is,
brought them off their own confidences to submit to him, or he has not had
(as the Chalde expounds before) dominion over all the children of men;
according as Psalm. 72. verse 11. and Phil. 2.10. confirm it, viz. That all
Kings shall fall before Christ, and all Nations serve him, and every knee how
and crouch to him. We see to this day for the general, rather the contrary.
CHRIST as KING has not yet (as Maimony excellently out of Psalm. 72.8.) had
dominion from sea to sea, no, nor so much as delivered Israel and Judah to this
day, from their dispersion and captivity under Turk, Pope, Indians, etc. Exempt
from the account but six or seven Nations (and those petty ones) of one fourth
part of the world, Europe; with a spot or two of late Plantations in America;
and the whole world of men are not yet so much as Professors of Christ. Nor
has Christ taken vengeance on them to this day. Kitim, alias Chittim, i. e.
the Roman Empire, is not yet perished for ever, but to this day partly under
the Turk, and partly under the Pope does mischievously, and mightily oppose
Christ.

Christ to have dominion over all the sons of men. Then Christ's Dominion does
utterly cease. And this Text says, that when God does this, who shall live?
plainly signifying, that when Christ does thus as King, and Ruler over all the
sons of men, advancing his Church, and among them as his great design, his
Israel, there shall be a great corporal destruction of the obstinate enemies
of him and them. But the ultimate day of judgment is not the killing, but the
making alive corporally all the wicked that ever were since the Creation.

SECT. VII.
Wherein is produced and explained, Deuteronomy. 30. verse. 1. to the 10. as another
proof of our general Position.

Deuteronomy. 30. (verse 1.) And it shall come to pass when all these things are come
upon thee, the blessing and the curse which I have set before thee, and thou
shall call them to mind among all the Nations whither the Lord thy God has
driven thee. (V. 2.) And thou shall return unto the Lord thy God, and shall
obey his voice, according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy
children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul. (Verse 3.) That then
the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and
will return, and gather thee FROM ALL THE NATIONS WHITHER THE LORD THY GOD
HAS SCATTERED THEE. (Verse 4.) IF ANY OF THINE be driven out unto the OUTMOST
PARTS OF HEAVEN, from THENCE will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from THENCE
will he fetch thee. (Verse 5.) And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the
land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shall possess it; and he will do
thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers. (Verse 6.) And the Lord thy God
will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. (Verse 7.)
And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them
that hate thee, which persecuted thee. (Verse 8.) And thou shall return, and
obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his Commandments which I command thee
this day. (Verse 9.) And the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in all the
work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle,
and in the fruit of thy land, for good; for the Lord will again rejoice over
thee for good, etc.


obeying Gods voice, and keeping his Commandments, so often here inculcated,
is their keeping the Covenant they made with God, chap. 29. viz. As God to be
their God, so they to be his people, and (as it is expressed) after the tenor of
the covenant God made with their Father Abraham, etc. (Gen 17.) which was the
Covenant of grace, as the Apostle expounds Romans 4. even as here is mention of
Gods bringing them out of Egypt, as a pledge on his part, and an engagement on
their part, relating to their redemption by Christ, Hos. 11.1. Matthew. 2.15. And
here amplified by loving the Lord their God with all their hearts, so that it
is upon Gospel terms the Lord treates with them; even as Moses application of
them to the Israelites, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. That the commandment that was
given them was not hid from them, nor far off, neither in the Heavens, to
say, who shall go up, to take it for them, nor beyond the sea, to say, who
shall go over, etc. to take it for them, but it is night^ even in their mouth,
and in their heart; I say, Moses application in those very terms is by the
Apostle, Romans 10.8. called the word of faith.

obey Gods voice, and do his Commandments, viz. believe the Gospel, being
brought unto repentance, (hinted in the words call to mind, and returning, so
expounded, 1 King. 8.46, 47. Isa. 46.8. Lam. 3.21. Luke 15.17) partly by
afflictions, partly by prosperity called blessings, and curses, then the Lord
shall deliver them from all their captivities, when and wheresoever they be.

Moses aims not at this or that particular captivity, among Philistims,
Egyptians, Babylonians, or, etc. that had been to little advantage, to deliver
them from one captivity, to let them fall into another; and there to stick for
ever. The words of the Promise are of a very comprehensive latitude, viz. if
they be driven among all the Nations, ver. 1. or any of them be driven out to
the utmost parts of Heaven, ver. 4. The Lord will gather them from all Nations,
ver. 3. and will fetch them from the utmost parts of Heaven, ver. 4.

latitude, so of a great length; for this gathering of them is promised after
the Babylonian captivity, Ier. 29.1. Jer. 31.10. and after Christ was come in
the flesh, it is delivered as a Prophecy by Saint John's Exposition, Job.
11.51, 52. That Christ should gather together in one the children of God that
were scattered abroad; Of a thing to be done in after times, in the fullness
thereof, compare Romans 11.

fullness of the Promise; they should be so delivered from all captivities,
that all the curses should be on their enemies, and all blessings temporal and
spiritual should be on them; for so it follows, that upon their deliverance
out of captivity, If any of them be driven out (ver. 4.) unto the utmost part
of Heaven, from THENCE will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from THENCE will
he take thee. And (ver. 5.) the Lord thy God will bring thee into the Lana
WHICH THY FATHERS POSSESSED, and he will DO THEE GOOD, and MVLTIPLY thee above
thy fathers; and (ver. 6.) The Lord thy God will CIRCVMCISE THINE heart, and
the HEART OF THY SEED, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, etc. And (ver. 7.) The Lord thy God will put all these CVRSES ON
THINE ENEMIES. And (ver. 8.) thou SHALL RETVRN and HEARKEN TO THE VOICE OF THE
LORD, AND DO ALL HIS COMMANDMENTS. And (ver. 9.) The Lord thy God will make
thee plenteous, or fruitful IN ALL THE WORKS OF THY HANDS, IN THE FRVIT OF
THY BODY, in the fruit of thy CATTLE, in the fruit of thy LAND: (and mark)
FOR THY GOOD. And the Lord will REJOICE over thee for good.

Ten Tribes returned from their captivity. And we do know by the Scriptures,
that many of the two Triles returned not with the rest, 1 Chronicles. 4.21, 22, 23.
(read the place exactly) Josephus in his Antiq. asserteth thus much.
And we are sure by experience to this day, that thousands of them are in
Captivity (as we may say) under the Turkish and Roman Empire, and ten
thousands of them dispersed among the Indians, and Protestant Christians in
Poland, Holland, etc. as Rab. Ben Israel has given us an account in his Book
Spes Israelis, so that the Jews themselves, not only the unconverted, but some
that are converted to Christianity, confess these things never yet to have
been fulfilled, as I my self have been an ear witness from M. Melos, a Jew
of Portugal, converted to the faith.

Jews so delivered, as to have their hearts circumcised, to love the Lord
their God with all their heart, and to obey his voice in the Gospel, as the
Apostle before expounded; or to be blessed with all temporal blessings, or to
have all the curses put upon their enemies.

God must be true, (as the Apostle says) though all men (that deny it) be
liars. The Jews must be called, and the fulnesses of them, and the Gentiles
must be brought in ( Romans 11.26.) by a deliverer that comes out of Sion,
turning away ungodliness from Jacob, to the performance of Gods Covenant with
them, which the Targum (called Jonathans) says, must be performed by the hand
of ELIAS, and by the hand of KING CHRIST; And indeed a few were converted by
John Baptist, and Christ, but the generality of the Jews were in blindness
after that, in Paul's time, Romans 21. Besides, what was the conversion of a few,
to the fulfilling of the all of these promises in their several particulars to
the all of the Jews? As it is said before, If ANY of thine be driven out unto
the utmost part of the heavens, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee;
and the Lord will make thee fruitful in ALL THINGS, and for thy good.

time nor place for these things, as to circumcise hearts, to keep
Commandments, to inherit Canaan, to be blessed with outward blessings, etc.
as is before expressed.

SECT. VIII.
Wherein is alleged, Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 15, etc. to ver. 44. for the proof of the
maine general Proposition.

In Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 15. to ver, 19. are set down the sins of the Jews; But
Jerusalem waxed fat, and kicked, etc. Then he forsook God, etc. they provoked
him to jealousy with strange gods, and they sacrificed to Devils, not to God,
etc. In ver. 19. etc. to ver. 35. is set down the wrath and revenge that God
would exercise upon them for those sins; When the Lord saw it, he abhorred it,
or despised them, because of the provoking of his sons and daughters. And he
said, I will hide my face from them, etc. They have moved me to jealousy, etc.
and a fire is kindled in my anger, and it shall burn, etc. I will heap mischief
upon them, etc. I said I would scatter them into corners, etc. In ver. 35. etc.
to 44. is set down Gods comforting of the Jews, and his terror to their
enemies, ver. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense; their (enemies)
foot shall slide in due time, for the day of their calamity is at hand; and the
things that shall come upon them make haste, ver. 36. For the Lord shall judge
his people, ( or shall plead the cause of his people) So Piscator, Causam populi
sui age^.
and REPENT HIMSELF for his SERVANTS, when he sees that their POWER IS GONE,
and there is none shut up, or left. Ver. 37. And he shall say, where are their
gods, their rock in whom they trusted? etc. ver. 38. Let them rise up and help
you, and be your protection. ver. 39. See now that I, even I am he, and there
is no God with me; I kill, and I make alive; I would, and I heal; neither is
there any that can deliver out of my hand. ver. 4. For I lift up my hand to
Heaven, and say, I live for ever. ver. 41. If I whet my glittering sword, and
mine hand take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and
I will reward them that hate me. Ver. 42. I will make mine arrows drunk with
blood (and my sword shall devour flesh) and that with the blood of the slain,
and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy. Ver. 43.
Rejoice O ye Nations (or GENTILES, as the Apostle renders it, Romans 15.10.)
with his people; for he will avenge the blood of his Servants, and will render
vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful to HIS LAND, and to HIS
PEOPLE.


Sins of the Jews we have known, and those Judgments of God, viz. their
power to be gone, and them to see scattered into corners, we see to this day;
but we never saw or heard these Promises fulfilled, according to their Tenor
here mentioned.

Nations of the GENTILES rejoiced with the Jews, as sharers in the same
general salvation, spiritual and temporal, as this Text imports, according to
the letter here, and the spiritual extent in Romans 15.10. For in Christ, or the
Apostles time (the likeliest time) this was not effected. A few particular Jews
and Proselyte Gentiles (in the Acts) are as nothing, to make up Nations of
Gentiles, or the generality of the Jews, to which comprehensivenesse this Text
amounts. The two great streams ran cross in this manner: Whiles Christ was on
earth, nor he, or his Disciples preached in the way of the Gentiles, but kept
close the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 10.5. And when the Gentiles
received the Gospel, the Jews had refused it, Act. 13.45, 46. The Jews
generally decryed their Christ with Crucify him, Crucify him. And of the
Gentiles no Nation became Christian, till after Constantine the Great his time,
which was above three hundred years after Christ's incarnation, and above two
hundred years after the death of the last of the Apostles. Indeed St. Paul does
in express quotation of the 43. verse. of this 32. of Deuteronomy. in his Ep. to Romans
Chap. 15. v. 10. assert, this must be fulfilled, that Jews and Gentiles must
rejoice in the common Gospel-salvation. But withal he had told you before,
Chap. 11. that at that present the generality of the Jews were under spiritual
blindness, and were so to be, till the fullness of the Gentiles were come in,
and so they continue blind to this very day. So that instead of a reciprocal
rejoicing in one another spiritual salvation, they conceive with great
indignation us to be in an error, and we with equal sorrow, conceive them to
be in an error. And for temporal salvation, both Jews and Gentiles were as
equally interested in the sorrowful defect thereof, in, and after the Apostles
time, both being then under the Heathen Roman slavery, and from thence forward
were the Gentile Christians bloodily persecuted for three hundred years in the
ten persecutions, and after under the Pope, as all the Jews to this day are
either dispersed as a despised people, by and among all Nations, or under the
Turkish slavery, the more is the grief of every good Christian.

These premised (being so apparent) the next promise not yet to have been
performed, viz. of Gods taking a general bloody vengeance on all the enemies of
the Jews (according to the many, and amplified high expressions in this 32. of
Deuteronomy. to that sense) is of it self most manifest. For neither the Romans, nor
the Turks (both the grand oppressors of the Jews, for above this sixteen
hundred years between them) are with any signal sign, or considerable mark,
destroyed with a corporal destruction. As for the destruct on the enemies of
the Jews in the Macchabean wars, it does not in any proportion amount to the
elevation and latitude of these Deuteronomian promises. We know all those
Heroic attempts of the Jews were soon squatted flat, under after-slavery. The
Apostle mentions their sore sufferings in those times, Heb. 11. latter end. Of
those wars we may say as in Dan. 11.32. to 36. The people that knew their God
did exploits, they instructed many (in War, as well as in Religion yet they
fall by the sword. And though they are helped with a little help (little in
time, as well as in strength) yet they fall. And for other victories, wherein
the Romans having captivated Jerusalem, according to Dan. 11.36. the King of
the North and South ( Dan. 11.40.) that is the Saracens and Turks come and lead
that Captivity captive; the Jews all this while do but shift and change their
oppressors, but their oppression is not taken away. At the same rate we may
value the Holy war, as they call it, managed by Kings called Christians,
maintained by a stock gathered first by the order of Templars, next of St. John
of Jerusalem, thirdly, of Knights of Malta, to beat the Turk, and to regaine
the holy land; for the Turk keeps his footing to this day, with inlargements.
Christian Kings have been so busy in bangling with them of their own
Religion, that whiles they divide, that grand Blasphemer most insolently
reigns as the greatest Monarch now on earth.

Deuteronomy is not fulfilled till that come to pass, in Rev. 19.20, 21. That
when the Beast and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies made war against
Christ: the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet, and cast alive
into the lake, etc. And the remnant were slain with the sword, and the fowls
are filled with their flesh; So that according to the intent and terms of this
Text of Deuteronomy. 32. there is an avenging of all the servants of God, viz. of Jews
and Gentiles, and a total corporal ruin of all their enemies yet to be
performed. Of which sort of destruction there is none such at the ultimate
judgment. As it can be of no use to the fullness of Jews and Gentiles, if it
come not before; therefore they must have it before, that they may, as is said
before, jointly rejoice together in each other.

SECT. IX.
Wherein is considered the words of Nehemiah, Chap. 1. v. 8, 9, 10, 11 For
proof of the maine of the general Proposition.

Nehemiah 1.8. Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy
servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the
Nations. Verse 9. But if ye return unto me, and keep my Commandments, and do
them, though there were of you cast out to the utmost part of Heaven, yet will
I gather them from thence, and will bring them into the place that I have chosen
to set my name there. Verse. 10. Now these are thy servants, and thy people,
whom thou have redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand. Verse. 11. O
Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy
servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name, and
prosper thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For
I was the Kings Cup Bearer.


Nehemiah to God in prayer. He plants the footing thereof upon Gods promise,
quoted out of Deuteronomy. 30. v. 1. to 10. (discussed but now Sect. 7.) viz. That
though God should for their sin scatter the whole Nation of the Jews,
consisting entirely of twelve Tribes (for in that mighty body they were, when
Moses wrote that of Deuteronomy) and disperse them among al^ the Nations, and
cast them out unto the utmost part of Heaven, yet that God had promised he
would gather them from thence, and would bring them into the place that he had
chosen to place his name there.

Nehemiah, lays the great foundation of his faith in prayer for the restoring
of the Jews upon that promise of God, delivered by Moses; wherein his
supplication is an exact directory-application, how we should understand that
place of Moses, as a thing not fulfilled to this day.

Nehemiah looks beyond the deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity set on
foot by Cyrus, and beyond the return of the Two Tribes. As whiles he was in
the Babylonish Captivity for so many years, his soul lived by faith on this
promise, that he and the rest of his brethren of the two Tribes should be
delivered; so now that the Two Tribes are returned, he still urges that
promise to perfect the whole work, in what of the latitude and extent thereof,
it was yet unfulfilled. Nehemiah, should seem, was clear in that sense of
perfecting the return of the whole twelve Tribes, and to have a better
settlement in their own land, then this Embryon of imperfection in the present
state of Two Tribes returned did represent; and according to that sense his
faith is strong, and his prayer fervent.

Nehemiah was very right, we our selves being judges. For as the threat was of
the twelve Tribes in one entire body, Deuteronomy. 28. and pressed Chap. 29. So the
promise Chap. 30. is to them all, and touching all Captivities, as it is
clearly held forth in several expressions, both in Deuteronomy. 30, and in this first
of Nehemiah, of scattering them among the Gentiles, or among all the Nations,
or of casting them out to the utmost part or end of Heaven, and of gathering
them thence, and fetching them thence. For if the Jews in any of the
Captivities that were to follow Moses his words, either Philistian, Syrian,
Egyptian, or Babylonian, should stick fast, and never be delivered, Moses his
promise, and Nehemiahs faith and prayer should come all to nothing. And if God
deliver some of them from all these Captivities, and not all of them from all,
and from any other that should follow after, or continue beyond the forenamed
Captivities, Nehemiahs faith, hope, and prayer should not be answered, nor his
desires satisfied, though wrought in him by the extraordinary working of the
Spirit of God.

Nehemiah is confident upon this promise, that his faith, hope, and desires in
this prayer shall be fulfilled, and therefore is he so fervent in urging the
said promise now after the two Tribes had been returned out of Babylon at least
these twelve years (for their return was about the 3514 year from the Creation.
And Nehemiahs journey to Jerusalem which he began with his prayer, was not
till Anno mundi 3527.) The good man had in his eye, not only the building of
the walls of Jerusalem (which was but a small matter in comparison) but the
return of the Ten Tribes also, which had been carried away before into
Captivity into Assyria, and still continued, when Nehemiah prayed, in that
Captivity in Halah and Habor, by the River Gozan, Cities of the MEDES, 2 Kings
18.9. etc. For there still they are in Nehemiahs time, as appears by the
Genealogies of them of the Two Tribes that returned, Ezra. 2. Nehem. 8. Among
whom the Pedigree of the Ten Tribes is not found.

Two Tribes in the greatest part were returned, as an earnest, or first fruits
of the return of the rest, and for assurance of Christ's coming of Judah (where
God continued them till that was done, Christ was born, for time and place,
etc. according to the Prophets.) But this is short of gathering the twelve
Tribes from among all Nations, and from the utmost end of Heaven. The Two
Tribes were brought from Babylon to Jerusalem, which, they say, are distant the
one from the other about six hundred miles. But what is this in comparison of
Media, and Persia toward the North and North-East of the world, the length or
ends of Heaven being counted from the North pole to the South? or what is this
to the gathering of them, and since of the Two Tribes also, in the greatest
part scattered among all Nations (as Rab. Ben. Israel, and our experience do
show) to fetch them from thence?

Nehemiah prayed, believed, and hoped, so we to this day see, that Moses his
promise (urged by Nehemiah) is not the one half fulfilled. But it shall. The
Saints prayers and hopes are not lost, though sometimes long sown, ere they
come up. The Apostles prayer for the conversion of the Gentile Kings and
Nations, Act. 4. was answered in Constantine the Great his time, though three
hundred years after. And the prayers of the Saints under the Altar, Rev. 6.
shall be answered, though now since above one thousand and five hundred years
they are not fulfilled.

SECT. X.
Wherein several places of the Psalms put together into a method, according
to their aspect toward our maine Position, are taken into consideration for
the confirmation thereof.

There are three maine Heads of our Position, most pathetically and
emphatically prophesied, and promised in the Psalms.

1 The UNIVERSAL power of Christ, both conversive, and coercive over the whole
WORLD, and correlatively, the UNIVERSAL subjection of all the WORLD to Christ,
either by consent, or constraint. 2 The JUST TIME of fulfilling this. 3 That
when this is done, the Saints are to ENJOY a Sabbatisme on earth.
first, we have many passages of several Psalms, which, partly in their own
nature, and partly by the Apostles quotations, explications, and applications,
are so curiously wreathed together, that in that posture we shall consider
them.

1 The second Psalm, with a touch of the eighth is the leader; which because it
is so familiar to most Readers, I shall not need to write it out, but only
quote it according as occasion requires. It is all along in matter and style
notably accommodated to our work in hand. It is spoken to Jews and Gentiles,
v. 1, 2. and v. 8. and in those lines it is carried by the Apostles, through
their times, to those in after-Generations, Act. 4.24. The occasion whereof
was, that the Jewish Commonwealth and Government then being mixed with the Roman
power, so that both of them jointly concurring, did put to death Christ, and
persecute the Apostles, the Apostles thereupon convert the second Psalm, with
a part of the eighth Psalm (for I suppose there is recorded but the sum)
into a prayer, and do turn the bent of that their prayer both upon Jews and
Gentiles. They lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou
art God, which have made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is
etc. (as it is Ps. 8.) who by the mouth of thy servant David have said (Psalm.
2. v. 1. etc.) why did the HEATHEN rage, and the PEOPLE imagine vain things?
The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together, against
the Lord, and against his Christ. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus,
both HEROD and PONTIUS PILATE, with the GENTILES, and people of ISRAEL were
gathered together, for to do, etc. And now Lord behold their threatenings, etc.
Both which Psalms are prophetical of our point. The eighth Psalm we opened
before, and now we shall the second, out of both which Psalms (though Luke
records the story but briefly, only giving a touch upon the beginning of both)
the Apostles, no doubt, urged in their prayer, whatsoever was in them pertinent
to their desire of the advancing Christ, there being far apter pertinences to
that in the sequel of those Psalms, then in the beginnings. The sum of their
desire is, that God according to his promise in Psalm. 2. Psalm. 8. would set up
the power and glory of Christ unto a predominancy over Jews and Gentiles,
notwithstanding all their fierce opposition at present. And for a testimony
that God did allow their application of those Psalms as right, and did accept
of their prayer grounded thereon, he fills them with the Spirit, and shakes the
place where they prayed.

Now this second Psalm is not yet fulfilled, not the Apostles prayer upon it
fully answered. It is true, that about forty years after Christ's death, came to
pass that great destruction upon the Jews, their Temple, City, and Country
too, prophesied by Christ, Matthew. 24.1. etc. And within fewer years, Herod came
to a miserable untimely end, Act. 12. as also did Pilate, and after him
successively two and thirty Roman Emperors, as the Ecclesiastical story shows
us M. Fox in his Martyr.
And about three hundred years after the incarnation of Christ, Constantine the
Great, and many of his soldiers being converted unto Christianisme, overthrew
in battle his Antichristian Colleagues, and their Armies that opposed it. But
Prophesies and Prayers, as streams, run on in a current, still growing greater
and greater in accomplishment, till they rest in the maine Ocean, the
fulfilling of the full design of God, according to the entire Platform God
drew forth in the express terms of his Promises. This Psalm therefore
according to that rule was not fully accomplished, when the Apostles turned it
into a Prayer, notwithstanding all the great things that Christ and his
Apostles did, toward the convincing of Jews and Romans, and converting many.
For what needed the Apostles to pray for a further fulfilling of that second
Psalm, if then it had been fulfilled? No, nor is that Psalm in any full
measure fulfilled to this day, the Heathen unregenerate Gentiles, and the
obstinate Jewish people are of the same temper still, and tamper the same
oppositions against Christ. And God has not hitherto so spoken to them in his
wrath, and vexed them in his sore displeasure, as to make them know that he has
set HIS KING upon his holy hill of Sion; nor has he given unto Christ the
HEATHEN for his inheritance, and the UTMOST PARTS OF THE EARTH for his
possession, to break them that are incorrigible with a rod of Iron, and to
dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel, to the making of the Kings and
Judges of the earth wise, to serve the Lord in fear, etc.

Most Kingdoms are yet mere Heathens, and the most of Kingdoms named
Christians are Heretical, or disobedient unto Christ: and Sion it self, where
Christ will mainly manifest his Kinglinesse, is under the Turkish Mohammedan
Blasphemers, as it was under the bloody Heathen Romans, all the time of Christ
and his Apostles; and the Jews, that are a maine part of his Kingdom, are to
this day unconverted.

There must yet come a time, when Christ's anger must be but kindled, and (...)
but as a little, and yet then must ALL they be happy that trust in Christ.
Mark accurately; There must be a time when Christ's anger must be but kindled,
in comparison of the last Judgment, and but as a little time So the Hebr.
(...) and (...) is often applied to time, is for degree ^is in kindle.
, in respect of the speedy event of making All them that trust in Christ to be
happy. Now if you apply this to the time past, since the Apostles made their
prayer upon this Psalm, it is near one thousand six hundred and twenty years,
which you cannot call a little time, much less can you call it a little time
from David's penning of it to this time. And if you look forward to the ultimate
Judgment, then Christ's anger is not only kindled, but it is totally on a
flame, and for ever; the fire never goes out. So that the fulfilling of this
Psalm, must be in a time between our present Age and the last Judgment. It
must be at a time when Christ's anger has but a little time to be kindled, and
anon the Trusters in Christ to be blessed, which must be when the generation,
or succession of the wicked opposers of Christ are perished, who perishing are
not said to be at their journies end, at the ultimate end of the world; but in
the way, in some notable way, or race they ran (in their Generation) in
opposing Christ, as Revel. 19. the three last verses. These wicked ones must
perish, and the trusters in Christ be blessed, at some notable time of eminent
manifestation of Christ, as he is Christ, and King of Sion (which must be
before his laying down of his Mediatorship, and power at the end of all) I
say, at some notable time of eminent manifestation of Christ. For this phrase
in this Psalm, THIS DAY HAVE I BEGOTTEN THEE, is always applied to such
eminent manifestations of Christ, the latter still being greater then the
former. As first in this second Psalm, at the declaring the decree, and
proclaiming Christ to be King, conversively of his Church, and coercively over
all the world of enemies; Secondly, at Christ's resurrection, Acts 13.23. and
33. Thirdly, in relation to Christ's appearance ere long, to all the world, to
set up his visible Kingdom on earth (of which we speak.)

2. For (says the Apostle, Hebr. 1.5, 6.) unto which of the Angels said he at
any time, Thou art my SON, THIS DAY HAVE I BEGOTTEN THEE? And again, I will
be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a SON? But when AGAIN (to give it
you as before, in terms and order of words, close to the Original Thus Arias
does order them. When the Apostle would say, And again, he said in verse 5.
(...) but in this sixth verse he says, (...) which last word is in the second
A^rist in the subj. mood, which sounds future, and so the Syriack (...) But
again.
) He SHALL bring his first begotten Son into the INHABITED world, he says,
let all the Angels worship him. The sense is obvious, That God never owned any
one of the Angels to be his only first begotten Son, but when again he shall
bring his first begotten Son into the world, he has given command that all
the Angels shall worship him, as his only begotten Son. That this text
speaks of Gods bringing his first begotten Son again into the inhabited
world, now after Christ's ascension (when the Apostles wrote that) we have before
largely discussed, Book 3. chap. 2. Sect. 4. and. (id est, sectiuncula) 4. I
only add, be heedfully mindful of the Apostles expression in the future, now
after Christ's coming in the flesh; and that after the general Judgment
Christ, as Christ, shall lay down all his dominion over Angels and men, and
therefore it must be of some middle time between our present generation that
these (...) rendered here Angels, must give Christ, whiles he is Mediator, a
more ample and apparent homage then ever they have done, according to the
glorious state of Christ, and of things at that time on earth.

3. For, this place of the Hebrews, Let all the Angels of God worship him, is
quoted by the Apostle out of Psalm. 97.7. which (word for word according to the
Hebrew (...)
) is, Bow down to him all ye Gods, which (as we said before) comprehends as
all Angels, so all Kings, Potentates, and Magistrates, called by God himself,
Gods, Psalm. 82. ver. 1. ver. 6. and so applied by Christ, Joh. 10.34. Jesus
answered them, Is it not written in your Law, I said YE ARE GODS ((...)) if he
called them gods to whom the Word of God came, etc. And indeed they can
properly bow, or crouch down (as the Hebr. (...) (and the Greek (...)
precisely signify) as the Angels can do it only vertually. And on the other
side, (...) Angel is often used in Scripture, to signify eminent men in Office,
Mal. 4.1. Rev. chap. 2.1. chap. 2. chap. 3. But granting, that the Apostles
design being to prove Christ to be above Angels, does render the Hebrew Text
according to the Septuagint Greek (then a common Translation in frequent use
throughout the world, since the late Greek Monarchy over all) (...) worship him
all ye his Angels: yet this is as true, that as the Apostle closes that his
discourse in that first of Hebrews with a touch of Christ's future dominion over
all Angels, and men on earth, saying, To which of the Angels said he at any
time (quoted out of Psalm. 110.) sit thou on my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstool; so that 97. Psalm does really include and intend our
position in hand, viz. Christ's visible glorious Kingdom over all the world yet
to come. For in the first verse of that 97. Psalm it is said, The Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be glad
thereof. Or, the Lord reigning, the earth SHALL rejoice, and the many Islands
SHALL (...)
be glad (...)
. This LORD is Christ, as the Apostle applies it, Heb. 1.8, 9. Now Christ had
reigned in his ordinary providence and power from the creation to the Psalmists
time, etc. as appeared in overthrowing his, and his peoples enemies, and
preserving his people, in the flood, in the fire on Sodom, in his miracles in
Egypt, Wilderness, and the Redsea, in his victories over the several Nations
in Canaan etc. And after the last judgment it is improper to say Christ
reigns in glory, 1 Cor. 15.28. And Christ never yet so reigned as is described
in this first verse of this 97 Psalm, That ALL the EARTH (without limitation)
shall rejoice at that his reigning, and the multitude of Isles shall be glad.
By Isles, according to an ancient usual Hebraisme and Jewish phrase is meant
all the Nations of the GENTILES, Isa. 41. v. 1. Keep silence before me, O
ISLANDS, and let the PEOPLES or NATIONS renew their strength (...)
. And v. 5. The Isles saw it, and feared, and the ENDS OF THE EARTH were
afraid, Chap. 42. v. 4. The ISLES shall wait for his Law, and so nine times in
this Prophet, three times in Jer. 9. times in Ezekiel. in Zeph. once, viz. Chap.
2. v. 11. The Isles of the Heathen, or Gentiles (...)
. In Genesis once, Genesis 10.5. The Isles of the Gentiles. The reason of the phrase
is, because the Jews dwelling in the continent of Asia, they counted all the
world Islanders, that were divided from them by the Mediterranean Sea. Whence
is that phrase of Isles of the Sea, Ester 10.1. Ahasuerus laid a tax or
tribute upon the land, and upon the ISLES OF THE SEA. And Isa. 24.15. Glorify
the name of the Lord God of Israel in the ISLES OF THE SEA. And Ezekiel. 26.18.
Now shall the Isles tremble in the day of thy fall, yea the ISLES THAT ARE IN
THE SEA shall be troubled: yea to make all yet plainer, it is twice said (viz.
Jer. 2.10. Ezekiel. 27.6.) The Isles of Chittim. By which Chittim is often
understood the Roman Monarchy, as Dan. 11.30. for one instance. So that
according to this sense of this 97 Psame, verse. 1, All the world of Jews and
Gentiles must be glad and rejoice at the reigning of Christ; as it follows in
the sixth verse, The Heavens declare his righteousness, and ALL the people see
his glory; ALL, without exception, which two clauses cannot be aptlier applied
and expounded then by that Rev. 1.7. Rev. 20.1. Rev. 21.1. Christ comes in the
clouds, and every eye shall see him, Christ as the great Angel descending from
heaven, binding Satan, and causing his Saints to reign on earth; New
Jerusalem, a New Heaven, and a New Earth being brought down from Heaven,
wherein (as Pet. 2 Ep. 3. chap. enlarges) dwells righteousness. But ALL
PEOPLE yet never saw that his righteousness and glory. ALL the gods (as in v.
7.) all Kings and Princes, Potentates, Magistrates, and Powers never yet
worshipped him as Christ, but generally in all ages from the Creation to this
day have opposed him as such, both of Jews and Gentiles.

4 But all must ere the last judgment, either sincerely, or seemingly worship
him, Psalm. 22.27, 28, 29. which Psalm is concerning the whole of Christ's
passion, as it is plain, First, by the Title (which is of the Canonical Hebrew
Text.) A Psalm (...)
concerning A jieleth Shahar, that is, the hind of the morning, Christ being
shut in the grave, escaped away in the morning, rising from death. Secondly, by
the application of several passages to Christ's passion, by the Evangelist
Matthew. 27. As that of the DESERTION, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me,
v. 1. That of DERISION'; He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him, let
him deliver him, v. 8. That of PIERCING; They pierced my hands and my feet, v.
16. That of division of his garments, They parted my garments among them, and
upon my vesture cast lots, v. 18. Now this Psalm touching Christ, though in
the first Scene sets forth Christ's humiliation, yet in the second holds forth
his exaltation, verse. 22. I will declare thy name unto my brethren, (which the
Apostle applies, Heb. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.) to Christ's manifestation of his
samenesse of nature with the sons of men, even as in that nature he tasted
death for every man, and at last would declare that salvation to all the world
(which clearly tends to our point.) And v. 27, 28, 29. we have the effect of
his declaring Gods name to the world, viz. ALL THE ENDS OF THE WORLD shall
remember, and turn unto the Lord, and ALL THE KINDREDS OF THE Nations, or
GENTILES (...)
shall worship before him: For the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the
Governor among the Nations, or GENTILES. All they that be fat upon the earth
shall eat and worship. In all which we see the effect, effectual conversion.
The Generality and Universality, in many ALLS. The time in general; viz. It is
to be after Christ's suffering upon the cross: The characters, eat, and
worship, which cannot be understood of the highest heavens. And it has not
been fulfilled on earth according to that effect, universality, and character,
from Christ's passion to this day. Therefore it is yet to be fulfilled on earth.

5 According to Psalm 86.9. ALL NATIONS whom thou have made, shall come and
worship before thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name. A place mightily
considerable. So that so great a promise and prophecy as this, by so great a
Prophet as this, with such a shrill emphasis in the ALL, and in the Act,
worship, and in the degree of the effect, to glorify his name, must not be
ended with flams of humane glosses, but must be really, and truly, and fully
accomplished, though as yet it was never completely fulfilled, as it will be
too late to think of those things at the ultimate judgment, when Christ comes
not for conversion, but destruction. Therefore yet before that final Day of
Doom, this ALL must be brought to ALL THAT of Worshipping, and Glorifying
Gods Name.

6 Just as we have it in that little Psalm the 117. but greatly Prophetical.
Praise ye the Lord ALL NATIONS, praise him ALL YE PEOPLES (...)
How shall all these do this, unless Christ convert all them, but those
refractory ones whom he confounds? Surely therefore this is a Prophecy that God
will in time before the ultimate day of judgment convert generally all
Nations, as Paul extends it, Romans 11.10, 11, etc. to the coming in of the
fullness of Jews and Gentiles, rejoicing together as one Church. Therefore
according to Paul, David had a most comprehensive, and extensive sense when he
spoke these things; and therefore shall be fulfilled according to its true
latitude and elevation, without the mincing distinctions of men's brain. For a
seal of assurance whereof the close of the Psalm has three weighty clauses.
First, That the MERCIFUL KINDNESS of Jehovah to the sons of men is great.
Secondly, The TRUTH of the same Jehovah is for ever. 3 That by faith and hope
in that mercy and truth to see these things fulfilled, we should PRAISE that
JEHOVAH with Hallelujah: which is the word of praise all along the Revelation.

first head contained in the Psalms, touching the universal power Christ shall
have over the whole world, before the last judgment, though most yet rebel
against him: Next we come to the second head, viz. The just time when Christ
shall attain this.

1 That place Psalm. 97.7. Worship him all ye gods, the Apostle tells us, Heb.
1.6. shall be fulfilled, When God shall bring again his Son Christ into the
world, which place, though our Translators render it [ And again when he
brings etc.] as if it were merely a new proof of Christ's superiority above
Angels, is most truly rendered according to our reading, before set down again
and again with reasons to justify it: so that in words and sense it is an
Antithesis, and Auxesis to the fifth verse thus, He says not to any Angel,
thou art my Son, this day I have begotten theee, but instead thereof, he
speaks a thing that does much lessen the dignity of Angels, and more dignifie
Christ above them, Let all the Angels of God worship him; so that the first And
must be turned into But (proper to the Greek (...) as there placed) and that
same Again is not to signify another proof of Christ's superiority above
Angels, but to signify the time when that [of ALL the Elohim, Angels and
Potentates whether of the Spirits in Heaven, or men on earth (both Angels and
Elohim signifying both) worshipping of Christ] shall be fulfilled. For this
has not yet been fulfilled as to the ALL of the Magnificents, and Great-ones
of the earth, who contrariwise for the general have despised, if not opposed
Christ, even as it will be too late and an unseasonable time for them to do it
at the ultimate judgment, when no adoration, or worship is then received from
Christ's enemies, but sentence is given by him upon, and against them. The time
therefore when this shall be fulfilled is, says the Apostle in this first to
Heb. (penned after Christ's ascension) When God shall bring his first-begotten
Son AGAIN into the INHABITED WORLD. When he brought him into the world the
first time by incarnation, ALL the Potentates, and Angels of men, The Scribes
and Pharisees, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, the Roman Emperors, and Senate of
Rome did not worship him, but refused him, and persecuted him, and his members,
most bloodily, for near three hundred years, after whom the Arians, and next to
them the Papacy, took their turns to maintain that stream of blood running
down to our times. But when he shall bring his first-begotten Son again
into the world in his visible royal exaltation, then they all shall worship
him; I say as the Text says, ALL but they that are ruined for their
refractorinesse. The phrase, When he brings again (if the Greek word were
not of a future sense) imports a future thing; as the Hebrew imperative ( Psalm.
97.7.) Worship ye him all ye gods, and the Greek imperative ( Heb. 1.6.) Let
all the Angels of God worship him, in sense is future, that is, They all shall
worship him, as the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the Hebrew copy expressly
renders it in the future (...)
they shall adore, or worship him. As the Angels of heaven do, and ever have
done, and shall more eminently, when they shall be more apparently his
Ministers and servants to dispense his mercy and justice in that sudden great
work (sudden in regard of the greatness) of setting up New Jerusalem, the
great restitution of all things; so the Kings, Princes, Emperors, Potentates,
Powers, and Angels of Churches SHALL WORSHIP HIM. They shall, they must do it
before Christ lays down his power at the ultimate day of judgment 1 Cor.
15.28.) and before they be condemned men (when nothing will be accepted from
them.) They must do it, as a sign, they are brought into Christ, as the intent
of this Epistle is to win the Jews to him.

2.. To this of the time of Christ's universal visible power over the whole
world, the one hundred and tenth Psalm sings excellent harmony, a Psalm so
eminent, that it is quoted no less then seven times in the New Testament, and
so apt for our purpose, that as the two and twentieth Psalm is of the Passion
of Chirst (so expounded, Mat. 27.) The sixteenth Psalm of Christ's Resurrection
(so expounded, Act. 2.) the sixty eighth Psalm of Christ's Ascension, (so
expounded, Ephesians. 4.) So this 110 Psalm is of Christ's Assession or sitting at
the right hand of God till all the world be made subject to him. Every verse of
it almost has something in it of this, as the Chalde, Syriack, Arab. and Rabb.
well expound. The Chalde on those words, The Lord said to my Lord says the
Lord said to HIS WORD, which is the style of Christ in S. Job. phrase; but some
Sy^iack thus: It is a Psalm concerning Christ and his victory over the Devil
(who rules in the children of disobedience, and gathers the Nations together to
oppose Christ's Kingdom.) And upon those words, v. 2. Rod of thy strength] ^oth
say, An iron rod to break the enemies of the Gospel: Moses with the rod of God,
being a type of the Mesria. Some Arab. thus, In the day of thy power, in the
beuaties of holiness.] That is, Thou (Christ) art King of thy holy and
beautiful Church, and of thy Princedome over the Saints shall be no end, (that
is, as Daniels phrase is often, After Christ no Monarch on earth shall succeed.
Christ in that respect also is Alpha and Omega, the first Monarch spiritual,
and the last visible) And upon those words, Womb of the morning, thus, Thou
wast before the w^mb of thy mother, which can be said of no Propher but Christ,
of whom it is said, ^s. 72. Thy Name is before the Sun. R. Isaak Arama in Genesis
47 apud Nebiens. and dicit, Before the morning star, that is, he was begotten
before he shone in the world in the Gospel. Suirably other Rabbis. Ex Ab. Ezra
in Ps. 110 Rabbo. expo^unt de Melchisedech and Abraham, sed dumum est Sion de
Abraham explicare. And upon those words, The Lord has sworn] Iuravit Deus cum
Davide and semine suo. Ex. R. Os^ad. in Psa. 110. De Christo. Sedeas, quia non
adhue est tempus revelationis tuae. And upon the word Priest, Messiah fililus
Joseph qui erat occisus. Now we know the Apostles quotes this Psalm often after
Christ's ascension.
ver. 1. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstool, etc. By the LORD is meant JEHOVAH, as it is express in
the Hebrew. By my Lord ((...)) is meant Christ, who according to his humanity
is David's Son, but according to Deity is David's Lord, as Christ himself
expounds it, Matthew. 22.44. Mar. 12.36. Luke 20.41. Accordingly the Chalde
calls. Christ by the same title, John does, Chap. 1. v. 1. In the beginning,
says John, was the WORD: And says the Chalde on this Psalm, The Lord said to
his WORD. And because Christ is David's Lord, therefore tho Psalmist ( David
himself) infers, that he must rule over David's poesterity, though now for
present, with many others, they be enemies. Sit thou at my right hand, till I
make thine enemies thy footstool. Which phrase cannot with any congruity be
merely spiritually understood: For how can we say Converts are enemies? or if
by conversion his friends, how can it be said they are his footstool? Christ is
upon other terms with men, when once made believers, as that they are one with
him, Ioh. 15. Ioh. 17. Therefore the plain meaning is, that Christ must so rule
over all, that his very enemies must corporally and visibly be subject unto his
power. And this is prophesied and promised for future after his ascension, and
after his first sitting at the right hand of God. But to this day, now after
1600 years since that time, Christ has not ruled over the generality of the
Jews, either the ten Tribes, or two Tribes either corporally or spiritually,
besides Indians, Turks, etc. so as to bring them into any outward
acknowledgement of him. And therefore as yet All his enemies are not made his
footstool, but it remains to be done before the full and final destruction at
the ultimate day of judgment.

3 Sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, is like
that Act. 3.21. whom the Heavens must receive until the times of the
RESTITUTION (he says not DESTITUTION) of all things. And that Rev. 19. last,
Rev. 20.1. He shall slay his incurable Antichristian enemies, and shall descend
from Heaven.

4 The Apostle does yet much more give us light in this thing, Heb. 2.8, 9. In
putting all things in subjection under him, ((...)) he left nothing that is not
put under him. Now (says the Apostle) We see not yet all things put under him;
though the Apostle there confesses that Christ was already ascended. So that
Christ must sit in Heaven, till his enemies be put in subjection under him,
which cannot be at the ultimate general judgment. For before that Christ at
his next coming must receive a Kingdom, Luke 19.11. etc. (which has been
largely cleared before, 2 Book, Sect. 10.) he must (in order of nature) at his
next appearance first have a Kingdom, and then judge, 2 Timothy 4.1. (which also
has been abundantly opened before, 2 Book Sect. 6.) For upon the ultimate day
of judgment he lays down all his authority, 1, Cor. 15.28.

5 The Apostle adds further light to this in his quotation of this of the 110.
Psalm. in Act. 2.32, 33, 34, 35, 36. This Jesus has God (says the Apostle
Peter) raised up, etc therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and
having received of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth
this as you see and hear. For David is not ascenascended into the heavens; but
he says himself, THE LORD SAID TO MY LORD, SIT THOU ON MY RIGHT HAND, UNTIL I
MAKE THINE ENEMIES THY FOOTSTOOL: therefore let the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both
LORD, and THE CHRIST; ((...)) For from hence we may boldly conclude the sense
of the Apostle, that by Christ's ascension not only was the Spirit to be poured
out (as Ephesians. 4. Joh. 7.39.) but the house of Israel must know assuredly that
he was there initiated, enstalled, and entitled to be LORD, and THE CHRIST,
That (as before we opened it, out of Luke 19.11.) Christ went away to heaven,
to return and receive a Kingdom. So that Christ must have, besides his
anointing with his Spiritual power, another Lordship to subdue all his enemies
to be his footstool; and this the house of Israel must know assuredly now
after Christ's ascension, as after his ascension the Apostle there made that
application of the one hundred and tenth Psalm.

But sure enough to this day neither does the house of Israel know this
assuredly, nor are his enemies his footstool; but contrariwise Christ in his
repute, and in his Members, and his Gospel is their footstool.

6 The Apostle carries on this yet further, in 1 Cor. 15. ver. 24 to ver. 29.
Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the
Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and all
power; For he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. The last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death; For he HAS (mark, here he uses the
past time) put all things under his feet; but when he says all things are put
under him, it is manifested, that he is excepted which did put all things under
him. And WHEN all things SHALL BE SVBDVED UNTO HIM (observe now the Apostle
speaks in the future time) then also shall the Son himself be subject unto
him that put all things under him. You see evidently, that in the five and
twentieth verse are quoted the words of the one hundred and tenth Psalm, and
in the twenty seventh verse is quoted part of the eighth Psalm, which is the
reason why the Apostle speaks there in the past time. Not that the things were
then fulfilled when the Apostle pend that, 1 Cor. 15. for presently in the
twenty eighth verse he speaks them in the future; but because it is in the
Hebrew, in Psalm. 8. in the past time, alluding to the type of it in Adam, Genesis
1.26, etc. Howbeit the sense is a Prophecy of things to come, that they shall
be all subject to Christ, as they were to Adam, as this our Apostle applies it,
Heb. 2. (of which before.) These things being premised, let us now see what the
Apostle does comment (in this 1 Cor. 15.) upon that one hundred and tenth
Psalm. First, the Apostle lays it down for a sure Position, in the twenty
fourth verse, that the END OF ALL is not, till Christ has delivered up the
Kingdom to God the Father. 2. He gives us a sign in the same verse, when he
will so give up the Kingdom, viz. When he has put down all authority, rule,
and power. 3. The Apostle proves this out of this one hundred and tenth Psalm,
ver. 1.
FOR (says the Apostle, ver. 25.) he must reign till he has put all enemies
under his feet; which is all one with making his enemies his footstool; and
plainly holds forth to us (by this connection) that, part of Christ's putting
down all authority and power, is to put all his enemies under his feet; which
(says the Apostle) must be so universal, that all enemies (to Christ or his
Members) as well things, as persons, must be comprehended, even Death it self,
as the last of all the rest. 4. That all things were not subdued unto Christ
when the Apostle wrote that, 1 Cor. 15. for in the twenty eighth verse he
speaks of them as of things to come, viz. when all things SHALL BE SVBDVED
UNTO HIM. Christ had before that about eighteen years bypast Christ ascended
about Anno 34. Paul writ his first Epist. to the Corinthians about Anno 52.
risen and ascended, yet notwithstanding the Apostle speaks of putting all his
enemies under Christ's feet, as of a thing yet to come; which does excellently
confirm that sense we give of the Apostles words, Heb. 2. viz. that Paul, and
those of his time did not see all things put under Christ, or subject to him,
though they saw him ascend, and to be ascended.

Nor do we, or have we, now about one thousand six hundred years since that,
seen all things subject to Christ, whereof the Apostle gives us six signs of
assurance; for, says the Apostle,

1 If all things were subject to Christ, then the END comes, ver. 24. 2. The
full end is not till Christ resign up all, viz. the Kingdom, and Dominion,
etc. to God, ver. 24. 3. That before that be done, Death must be destroyed, as
one of the enemies to be put under Christ's feet, ver. 26. By the destroying of
death is not only meant a Moral, or Spiritual destruction of it, that it shall
not prejudice our Salvation, for so it has been destroyed to all Believers
from the beginning of the Promise of Christ, revealed to Eve; but Physically,
that there shall be no more death to the godly, Revel. 21.4. 4. That Death is
the last enemy that shall be destroyed, ver. 26. which is fulfilled to the
godly at the beginning of the thousand years (of which we speak) when all the
Elect deceased, shall rise from the dead, the wicked deceased not rising till
the end of the said thousand years, as before we have touched, and shall be
after demonstrated, at which time Death shall be removed from those wicked, to
the end that they with their companions, that a little before made head against
Christ in his Saints, may receive their final Judgment. But because the
Apostle here mentions Death as an enemy to Christ's Kingdom (for the death
temporal, or eternal of the wicked is a friend to Christ's Kingdom) he must
of necessity mean the abolishing of corporal death from the Saints, which is
performed at the beginning of the thousand years, which placing of Death in
the order and relation of the last of the enemies of Christ, and his Church,
do clearly intimate, that many enemies of Christ and his Saints must be
destroyed before that, which stood in opposition to this All-glorious, and
All-peaceable visible Kingdom of Christ on earth. And as death is destroyed
Physically (as we have showed) so all that submit not to Christ are destroyed
Physically; that is, they cease to be on earth. 5. That Death is not destroyed
till the last Trumpet, ver. 51. and 52. in that, 1 Cor. 15.
Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed in
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the lad Trumpet (for it shall sound)
both the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed So according
to the best Greek Copies, howbeit the common translation holds forth
effectually, what we intend.
Saint John in the Revelation tells us, that the last Trumpet is the seventh
Trumpet (according to the many instances wherein God delights in the number of
seven) so that six (as it is expressed in the Revelation) sounded before this, and
says, That the last end of all is not till the last Trumpet. But there is a
great intervall and space within the time of the last Trumpet, many things
being to be done within that compass; so that at the first beginning of the
last Trumpet the enemy so falls, that the Kingdoms of THIS world become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, that is ((...)) of the Lord his
Christ, in spite of all enemies and their anger, the dead Saints are raised,
and a reward given to them, Revel. chap. 11. ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. (which is a
summary preface, or a prefaciatory sum, to the Catastrophe, or upshot of the
Revelation, to follow unto the end, as touching the Saints) And in Revel. 20.
and first seven verses is expressed, how long this visible Kingdom of Christ
on earth shall be, and consequently so long is the space of the last Trumpet,
viz. a thousand years. But the last end of all, the ultimate period shall not
be till the last end of the last Trumpet, Revel. 20. verse. 12, etc. Now let the
Reader compare and consider all that Paul has spoken in this quotation, of,
and upon the one hundred and tenth Psalm, touching the subduing of all things
to Christ, and the five notes of the time when it must be; together with John's
explication, and confirmation of Paul's last Trumpet, and then let him tell me:
1 Whether these things must not of necessity be fulfilled upon the earth? 2
Whether these things are not yet to come, yet to be fulfilled? 3 Whether they
must not be fulfilled before the ultimate end of all, when Christ resignes up
his Kingdom to the Father?


7 But there is yet one quotation more of this hundred and tenth Psalm,
insisted upon by the Apostle, which gives us further light, in Heb. 10. ver.
11, 12, 13. Every Priest (says he) stands daily in ministering, and offering
oftentimes the same sacrifice, which can never take away sin; but this man
after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, SAT DOWN ON THE RIGHT HAND OF
GOD, FROM HENCEFORTH EXPECTING TILL HIS ENEMIES BE MADE HIS FOOTSTOOL, etc.

Two things are here at first sight evident before our eyes, viz. 1. That the
Apostle quotes the words of the one hundred and tenth Psalm: And 2. That the
Apostle applies them to explain the eminency of Christ's Priesthood above the
Leviticall, in that the Leviticall Priests offered daily, Christ but once; they
oftentimes the same Sacrifice, he only once; they took not away sins, he
did; they stood as Servants, he sat down as Lord, according to Psalm. 110.
ver. 1.


Now observe how this suits to our purpose: For it is express here that Christ
did effectually attain to reign spiritually, in overcoming Sin, and Satan,
witnessed, in making perfect atonement for the sins of all that are
sanctified, and his overcoming death (the wages of sin) And the Devil the
Jailer of death by his Resurrection, Ascension, and Assession at the right hand
of God; whereby in regard of the place, he got above all his enemies: And yet
for all this, to that very hour that the Apostle wrote this, Christ's enemies
were not made his footstool. But, says he, still there he sits from
THENCEFORTH EXPECTING TIL his enemies be made his footstool (as he does to this
day.) Plainly signifying that Christ must have anothergates Regiment, and
Government, another manner or degree of subduing his enemies then that. Which
can be no other, then a sensible visible subduing of them. Which as we on earth
expect, so he in heaven (says the Apostle) sits continually expecting the
same. For his enemies on earth continuing his enemies (under that notion so to
be subdued) are never subject to him spiritually. And further (as the Apostle
minds us) Christ expects that further subduing of his enemies, upon his Fathers
promise made to him, Psa. 110. Now at the ultimate day of judgment there is no
more subduing of any thing to Christ, seeing then Christ lays down all, and he
the same, himself is subject 1 Cor. 15. Therefore this being yet unfulfilled,
must be performed before that day, and according to the sense of the 110 Psalm,
of which all this while we have spoken but upon the first verse. There are
diverse other passages more in this Psalm, that much concur to, and explain
our point.

8 Verse 2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy STRENGTH out of Zion: Rule thou
in the MIDST OF THINE ENEMIES. Mr. Ainsworth, and our New Annotationists
parallel this with Psalm. 2. And withal assert that the Jewish Expositors
generally, do acknowledge the second Psalm to be concerning the Messiah, and
infer, if that, then there is as much reason for this. Now as in Psalm. 2. it is
said, Christ shall rule his enemies with a ROD OF IRON, and break them
(incorrigible) as a Potters vessel, even so in this Psalm it is said the Rod
of Christ's STRENGTH (...)
not of authority or power, which I should wonder if any dare to restrain to
mere spiritual efficacy, especially if we heedfully observe that which
follows, Rule thou (as with that Rod (...)
) in the midst of thine enemies. Now tell me, how does Christ rule
spiritually in the midst of his enemies? And if you grant with us, that a
sensible corporal rule must be here admitted, then cast about, and consider,
that Christ has no rule at the ultimate day of judgment (1. Cor. 15.) And
before that to this day, Christ has not so ruled amidst his enemies in most
Nations. Therefore it is yet to come, before the ultimate day of judgment.

Verse 3. Thy people shall be willing (or Voluntaries) in the day of thy power
(or Army, as Ainsworth asserts) Now Peter assures us that the great day of
Christ is a thousand years (2 Pet. 3.) And we must of necessity yield that
this day of power, must signify a distinct determinated time, and then to be
measured out, when Christ's power shall most eminently appear above any former
appearance. Now whether we take this in a spiritual sense of acting grace after
conversion, or in an Ecclesiastical (as our Annotationists) that Christ's people
shall be assembled unto his Church, whose increase shall be (as it follows) so
abundant and wonderful as the drops of the dew, falling from the womb of the
morning; or in a corporal sense, that men shall be willing to pull down
Christ's Antichristian enemies in the day of his Army, raised up to that end;
and whether we understand it specially of the Jews, by special emphasis his
people, first chosen to be a Church, and after of his blood and kindred, or
generally of all sorts of Nations; when saw we, or our forefathers, since the
Incarnation, that day of power wherein the generality of either sort, in either
of the said senses, were a willing people? But on the contrary, in all ages,
ten for one, are obstinate against Christ, and more especially the Jews. And
therefore that God may be true, this must be fulfilled before that ultimate
day of judgment, which does not mend, but end the incurable enemies of Christ.

Verse 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech. The Apostle hence infers (Heb. 7.) the
exceeding eminency of Christ's Priesthood above that of Aaron. First, In that
Christ was made so by an oath (not so the order of Aaron) which obligation by
the oath of God the Apostle (Heb. 6.) urges upon the Jews, as a great ground
of faith, and that they should not doubt, as he will not repent. Secondly, In
that as Melchisedech, so Christ must be (above the order of Aaron) a Kingly
Priest, a most righteous and peace-bringing King, and that at Salem. Now seeing
Christ, by the oath of God, was made King of Salem (the contract of Jerusalem)
we must expect that infallibly to be fulfilled, according to Psalm. 2. and v. 2.
of this 110 Psalm. He has indeed been at Salem (alias Jerusalem) and there
acted, in his offering up himself visibly, as well as spiritually, the
Priesthood. But he has not since the Apostles writing of that Epistle, acted
any visibility of his Royalty, or Kingly-hood there, which is clear by that in

Verse 5. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath. So that when this Psalm is fulfilled, to exalt Christ according to
the tenor thereof, then the Kings of the earth, that submit not to Christ, must
be stricken through by the wrath of God. But since Christ's Incarnation,
generally, all the Kings of the earth, of all men, have been least subdued to
Christ (their Nobles siding with them) and have acted most opposition against
him, drawing all their peoples into confederacy with them. But says this
Psalm, there must be a day of Gods wrath, wherein he will strike through Kings
that stand out against his Son. And this stroke must be a corporal stroke,
as it follows.

Verse 6. He shall judge among the Heathen, and fill the places with dead
bodies. He shall wound the HEAD (...)
(for it is in the Heb. in the singular number, and therefore ill rendered in
our English Bibles plurally Heads) over many Countries. The words are plain
for a bringing in of Jews and Gentiles into a submission unto Christ, or they
must be slain on heaps. Now hitherto the generality of Jews and Gentiles,
both Kings and peoples, do not yet submit to Christ; nor are they stricken
through, or slain in heaps. And at the ultimate day of doom the judgment is
by fire, not by sword, and unto eternal death, not temporal: And therefore
this yet to come before that day. In fulfilling whereof, the Lord shall wound
that same HEAD over many Countries, that is (as Dr. Alsteds, and Mr. Ainsworths
opinion pleases me well) he shall wound the head of Antichrist, that pretends to
be Head over many Countries (or if we say the wicked Rulers of the world, who
unite under an Antichristian head, it comes to one effect) This head the Lord
must wound, or (to render it nearer the Hebrew (...) transfixit sic, Arias and
Pagn.
) pierce through. So that the Lord will not only wound a part of the
Head-ship, as if it should be healed again (as Rev. 13.) But he will utterly
destroy (as Jael did Sisera, when she pierced his head through, Judge. 4.) the
last and greatest headship of that head, as in Rev. 19. three last verses. And
then,

Verse 7. Christ shall lift up his head: That is, his power shall be visibly
exalted above his Capital enemy, as visibly as his enemies were exalted against
him.

Thus of two of the Heads touching Christ's Kingdom yet to come, deduced out of
the Psalms; Viz.

1 The Universality of Christ's power. 2 The time when to be fulfilled. 3 Now
follows, viz. The Sabbatisme the Saints shall then enjoy.
Psalms, viz. the Sabbatisme which the Saints shall enjoy in the time of
Christ's future visible Kingdom on earth, we have in the 95. Psalm. from verse.
the seventh to the end. (v. 7.) To day if ye will hear his voice, (v. 8.)
Harden not your hearts as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation
in the wilderness. (v. 9.) When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my
works. (10.) Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, it
is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my wales.
(11.) Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

1 This Psalm was penned more immediately for the Jews as it was penned by the
Psalmist a Jew: and is first urged upon them by Paul a Jew, Heb. 3.7. etc. to
the end of the Chapter, by way of exhortation to hear Christ's voice, whereby
they may not miscarry as their forefathers did in the wilderness, and so miss
of entering into Gods rest. Secondly, propounded by the same Jewish Apostle, to
the said Jews now scattered ( Heb. 4. v. 1. etc. to v. 12.) by way of
consolation, that in these words is a clear intimation, and concession that
some of the Jews (though they in the wilderness did not) shall enter into
Christ's rest; which the Apostle collects by a strong consequence thus: The
several premises of the argument from that 95 Psalm he lays down in the 5,
6, 7, and 8 verses, viz. 1. For God says, IF THEY shall enter into my rest.
Seeing therefore it remains that SOME must enter therein, and THEY to whom it
was first preached, entered not in because of unbeleef. He limiteth a CERTAIN
day, saying, so LONG A TIME, as it is said, to day if ye will hear his voice
harden not your hearts; that is, long after the Israelites were entered into
Canaan under the conduct of Joshua, the Psalmist in his time says, to day if
ye will hear his voice, etc. For if Jesus, (that is Josuah, being so written
in Greek viz. Jesus; and Jesus and Josuah are of the same signification) had
given them rest, he would not afterward have spoken of another day. These two
premises being laid down, the Apostle inferres a general conclusion serving
to both, v. 9. viz. There remains therefore (even to the Apostles time, and
by equal reason down to this time) a rest to the people of God. Observe the
Apostle declines the word Jews, or Israelites, and uses a more general word,
including Jews and Gentiles that shall believe, calling them the people of God.
Observe further, that the Apostle expresses the REST that he asserts yet to
remain by (...), a Sabbatisme, as we may say a Sabbathisme, that is a rest
answering to the Sabbath that God appointed to man in the state of innocence.
For by the Apostles argument, God so ordered it from the beginning, that one
REST should aptly typifie another.

2 These things being premised, the maine question hence is, what REST is here
meant? we grant that subordinata non sunt contraria, things subordinate will
well enough submit unto an agreement, in their descending line of order. And so
no doubt but that the Apostle includes herein as the internal spiritual rest
of grace; so also the eternal rest in ultimate glory. ALL the rests mentioned
in Scripture, harmoniously typifying one another. The rest of the Sabbath
should seem by the Apostles method typified the rest in Canaan, and that in
Canaan another rest yet to come, etc. But the precise question is, what REST
most distinctly, and more immediately the Apostle here drives at, and argues
for.

First, For the rest on the Sabbath, the Jews had both past and present;
therefore that cannot be the mind of the Apostle.

Secondly, For the rest in Canaan, that their forefathers had long since, and
in the Apostles time, some remnant of Jews was there, as appears by the
History of the Acts, Chap. 2. Chap. 15. etc.

Thirdly, For the spiritual rest by grace in the state of regeneration, and
actings of faith, hope, joy, etc. the Jews, to whom Paul writes, knew so well,
that the Apostle needed not to use so many arguments to prove it unto them: For
they knew it, partly by the book of the Old Testament, partly by their
sacrifices of Propitiation and Peace, partly by the examples of many Saints,
mentioned with fame in their Bible, partly by experience in many of them I
mean, they being converts, they felt what was the inward spiritual rest,
peace, and comfort by grace, Heb. 6.9. BELOVED we are persuaded better things
of you, and such as ACCOMPANY SALVATION.

3 Fourthly, therefore at first sight one would be apt to think that the
Apostle in this Chapter, must mainly mind the eternal rest in ultimate
supernall glory. But pardon me, that I cannot bring my spirit to believe that
to be the Apostles maine and immediate meaning, for these reasons.

First, the Apostle needed not so much to labor (as in this Text he does by
several arguments) to prove to the Jews, THAT there is a state of ultimate
glory, and an eternal rest therein, being a thing in the quod sit, viz. that
there is such a thing, in a good measure known to the heathen in their
doctrine of (...) Homer brings in the friends of the widows whose husbands were
slain in the Trojan war comforting them with this, That their deceased
husbands souls were gone, (...) to the invisible world of eternal bliss. For
(...).
(mentioned so much by Homer, to signify an happy, and eternal rest) and of
the Elysian fields, so often repeated by their Poets, whom they called their
Prophets, and their Philosophers Treatises of the Immortality of the Soul.

Secondly, none dares say, that all the souls of all them whose bodies fell in
the wilderness (of which the Apostle speaks) went to the Hell of the damned,
and that none of them went to the eternal rest in Heaven; but ought rather to
think, that at least many of them entered into that eternal rest: because the
Apostle says precisely (Heb. 3.17.) (...) their carcases (he says not their
souls) fell in the wilderness, as the Scripture notes it as a mark of Gods
favor, that though Nadab and Abihu were punished with death by fire, yet nor
their bodies, nor clothes were consumed, Levit. 10.5. And though the good old
Prophet were slain by the Lion for his sin, yet he was not devoured or torn
by the Lion, 1 King. 13.18.

Thirdly, the great want the Jews were in, at present, when Paul wrote to them
was, that they, the twelve Tribes, for the most were scattered (as Peter
expressly shows 2 Pet. 1.1. and James, chap. 1. v. 1. more fully) into many
Countries. And hereby they were perplexed from the quiet enjoyment in their
spirits, either spe or re, of any sort of rest. For an outward rest is the
fair opportunity both in hope, and hold, to enjoy all sorts of rests. And
therefore the Apostle striveth so much, with so many arguments, to prove to the
Jews, that now after their dispersion so many hundred years, ten Tribes
continuedly for the space of three Monarchies, and the fourth begun; and two
Tribes, by turns as long, there yet remained to them, according to all the
Prophesies of the Prophets, an external rest yet to come. And therefore as
most parallel, and pat to that, he takes up the comparation, collation, and
parity of the Rest of God after the Creation, and their rest on the Sabbath,
and the rest that many of their progenitors, had in Canaan, as most apt
arguments to hold forth to them, being Jews, an external rest which yet did
remain for them according to the said Prophets, as a thing yet not fulfilled:
But when it shall be fulfilled, then in it they shall have a fuller enjoyment
of their spiritual and ecclesiastical, or Church-peace. Just as Peter spoke
to them ( scattered as aforesaid) not only touching their spiritual rest, and
state of grace, which he allows them then to have in actual possession, when
he wrote to them, by acknowledging their precious faith 2 Pet. 1.1; but also of
the external rest they should have for a thousand years, in a new earth, 2
Pet. 3. and bids them stick to the Prophets, till Christ the Day Star should
arise upon them, being now ascended. Even so Paul likewise in this fourth to
the Hebrews does mainly speak to their outward condition, in which their
Spiritual was involved. And this is more fairly probable, because the
Disciples themselves having seen Christ's Incarnation, Passion, and
Resurrection, with all his singular Doctrines, and transcending Miracles, did
yet notwithstanding enquire, and look for a visible state of rest, Acts 1.6.

4. Upon these considerations there is a strong impression on my spirit, that
though a relative intimation of internal and eternal rest needs not to be
excluded, yet the Apostles maine design is, precisely to hold forth the
eminent external rest that the Jews shall yet enjoy on earth, being gathered
into one Church with the Gentiles, enjoying thereby spiritual peace, so as
becomes an exact preface to ultimate glory; and for that end the Apostle calls
it, (as we said before) not glory, not a state in the highest heavens, but a
Sabbatisme, and ( Heb. 2.) in the inhabitable world; and this he says in this
fourth Chapter does yet remain, and to the people of God. A Sabbatisme
signifies a rest upon a seventh, most likely (as Jude also hints, ver. 14.) in
the seventh and last Age of the world, and its remaining signifies, it is yet
to be fulfilled, and to all the people of God; that is, both Jews and
Gentiles. And further to explain this Sabbatisme, the Apostle minds them that
they had enjoyed a Sabbatisme every seventh day, which was a rest principally
upon account of immediatnesse, to their bodies, though with it a spiritual
rest (out of which weekly seventh was formed their Pette-Jubile, of the seventh
years rest, and their Great Jubilee of the seven times seven years, viz.
beginning at the end of the forty ninth year) and their yet longer rest in
Canaan, which also was a kind of Sabbatisme, for they divided the Land of
Canaan in the So Bucholcerus in his Ind. Chronolog.
fiftieth Jubilee from the Creation ( Anno mundi, 2500.) which was a Jubilee of
Jubiles; and when they returned out of Babylon, where they had been seventy
years, it was about the seventieth Jubilee from the Creation.

Now says the Apostle to the Hebrews in effect thus; You must have a
Sabbatisme, a Sabatticall rest, that must meetly correspond with those former
rests of the seventh day, and of that in Canaan, and of the Sevenths therein
enjoyed, and so to be a corporal rest, and on earth, as the others were. You
have had the seventh days rest ever since the Creation, as God on the first
seventh having finished his Works, rested; and you have had your sevenths of
rest in Canaan; First, your seventh year; then secondly, your Jubilean
seven-seventh: Thirdly, your seventieth Jubilean of seven sevens, and yet there
is another Sabbatisme, or Septenary rest still remaining. Now what Sabbatisme,
Septenary, or seventh of rest can we find out, beside those aforesaid, but the
seventh thousand of years that is the last thousand years of the world,
before the ultimate general Judgment? This the Rabbis ( R. Ketina, R. David
Kimchi, R. Schelomo, etc.) assert with one consent, grounding themselves upon
the Scriptures; their words in sum are these: As every seventh year is a
year of release, so the seventh thousand of years of the world is the time of
the release of the world, according to the ninety second Psalm, ver. 1. or
Title, etc. A Psalm for the Sabbath Day, etc. And Psalm 90. ver. 4. A
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday. And ver. 15. Make us glad,
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein
we have seen evil. And indeed since their desolation, destroying their Temple,
then the City, and at last making their daily Sacrifice to cease, unto the time
of Rabbi David Kimchi, Rabbi Mosche Kimchi, Rabbi Schimschon, Rabbenu Mosche,
Rabbi Mosche Ben-Tafon, R. Meir, R. Menahem, R. Schem-Toff, R. Izhac. R.
Mordechai, Rabbenu Ascher (that wrote upon the Talmud) Rabbi Aharon, Rabbenu
Jaaiof, and several others) is about a thousand years. What these Rabbis say
of this Sabbatisme see after upon Isa. 2. And to settle the Jews more fully in
their expectation of this Sabbatisme, the Apostle calls them off from their
former Sabbatismes, both the lesser of weeks, and of the greater in Canaan,
according to the Prophet Micha, chap. 2. ver. 10. (which was in Hezekiahs time,
being a time of great prosperity in Canaan, Micha 1.1.) Arise ye, and depart,
for this is not your rest, because (mark the reason) it is polluted, etc.
which intimates, that Micha as well as Paul in their Prophesies looked at the
rest that shall be unpolluted, as it is said, Revel. 21. in the new earth shall
be no unclean thing. For suitable to the Prophet Micha, our Apostle in this
fourth to the Hebrews, ver. 10. says, That in the great Sabbatisme on earth,
we shall cease from our work, as God did from his. In words it is in the past
time, but in the intent and meaning it is in future; as if he should say, When
any man has entered into his rest, or shall have entered into his rest, Pareus
says, the Greek (...) is in the Aorist, put for (at least) the present; but
the connection of the context both before and behind is clearly for the future.
For in ver. 9. it is, there remains yet a rest, and in the eleventh verse,
Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest; 1. Lest any man fail of it.
Now for our own works, sins are most properly our own works, because,
says Pareus, they are done by us, and not approved of God; so that then we
Sabbatismum eum agere incipimus, quando apeccatis cessamus, that is, then we
do act this Sabbatisme, when we cease from sin; which the Prophet well
confirms, Isa. 58.13. and chap. 65.2. where he calls sins and sinning, a
doing, or finding our OWN pleasure, a doing our OWN ways, a speaking our
OWN words, a watching after our OWN thoughts. For sins are not (as bodily
labors, or afflictions) either commanded of God, or commended of God, or
intended for the service and glory of God. Now when we shall enter into the
rest (we speak of) in the new earth, we cease from these our own works of
sinning, for into that state no unclean thing shall enter, Revel. 21.
therefore we (though Believers) are not yet entered into Paul's Sabbatisme,
because we do not yet totally cease from those our works.

5. Hebrews, that a Spiritual rest is understood in this Chapter, and such as
into which every Believer at his first believing does presently enter; for
says the Apostle there, We which have believed, do enter into his rest.

To this Pareus says well, Nondum ingressi sumus, sed ingredimur, ut suit
versu tertio. (Par. in 4. ad Heb. ver. 10.) we have not yet entered into his
rest, but we do, as ver. 3. meaning the future, we shall; for so immediately
follows the proof of a rest yet remaining, into which all Believers shall
enter, and therefore Theophylact renders it in the future; so also the old
Latin (from whence Learned men conceive that so it was in the ancient Greek
Copy, according to which that Latin Translation was made, and the Arabian
Translation is in the future, and so is Hutters Hebrew Translation.

It is true, that by faith we presently enter into the rest of Justification of
our persons ( Romans 5.1.) and into the rest of expectation, or hope of
possession of glory ( Romans 5. ver. 2.) But all this will not serve to take in
all the sense of the Apostle in this of Heb. 4.3. because immediately in that
very third verse the Apostle falls upon a proof of a rest (touching which the
Hebrews were not yet satified, and settled in their minds, though of ultimate
glory they doubted not) I say, of a rest yet remaining, and to them that do
believe.

Nor can this be meant of ultimate glory for this reason, because we cannot be
said there in any tolerable sense to enjoy a Sabbatism, that is (as the
Apostles proof clearly drives at) a rest upon, or in a Seventh, viz. in the
seventh Trumpet, in the seventh Viol, in the seventh thousand years of the
world; for if this Sabbatisme, or Seventh, be eternity, then it is there
swallowed up in an infinite, that cannot be numbered. But if this Sabbatisme be
a distinct determinate time, bounded with two Resurrections, the one at the
beginning, the other at the end, then it will clearly stand numerable for a
seventh, but not otherwise. We usually number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. over things
of some semblance in quantity, and quality, to make a Septenarie. If a stream
flows into six Rivers, and then falls into the mainest Ocean, it is not proper
to say, the Ocean is the seventh River, but the continent, or conteiner
swallowing up all. We must have seven Ages complete and ended, as we say in
Leases of Lands, made according to Law; or else we cannot number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. Freehold, or Fee-simple has no number, and therefore as the former
great Ages of the world were distinct on earth by some eminent notes, as they
shall easily find that consult Chronologers; so shall this be as distinct
likewise. The rest of the Sabbath began with Gods rest after the finishing of
his works; the rest in Canaan began with the conduct and Wonders done under
Joshua, etc. so this Sabbatisme of the last thousand years is begun, and
bounded with notable Land-markes; it begins with the binding of Satan, the fall
of the Beast, and with the first Resurrection; and terminated with the loosing
of Satan, the rising of Gog and Magog in arms, and the second Resurrection, so
that great things are acted between the end of the Sabbatisme, and the
beginning of ultimate glory. All this is plain in Rev. 20. to them that will
read and understand.

Yea further; unless this be understood of a pure rest on earth, how shall we
be said to Sabbatise, as is intimated in a Sabbatisme? It is true, in a Sabbath
is signified, and enjoyed a rest: But so we may rest on another day. And every
day a believer has several rests. But we must have according to the Apostle a
Sabbatismaticall rest (a rare word is used by the Apostle, to signify a rare
rest) we must Sabbatise, that is, imitate, or in some proportion answer to
other typical Sabbaths. Imitation and correspondency, relate to known things
foregone, not to after-things never seen. And we rest voluntarily as in the day
of Christ's power, whiles he is in power, from our own works, as God did from
his, not necessitatedly when all other occasions are removed, and an immutable
eternity stamped upon our condition, swallowing up all, and transforming it
into ultimate glory. We must sabbatise our restfull enjoyment in time and place
according to former Sabbatical Rests. Therefore it must be on earth, and a
timeing, not an eternizing. And thus for the Book of Psalms, with parallels
out of the New Testament.

SECT. XI.
Next we come to the Prophet Isaiah, wherein none will doubt, that are truly
acquainted with his most Evangelicall Prophesies, but that we shall find many
clear places for the point in hand.

The word, etc. concerning Judah and Jerusalem. Verse. 2. It shall come to pass
in the last days (...) in the last days.
that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top
(...), that is, In or upon the HEAD of the Mountains
of the mountains, and. and ALL Nations shall FLOW unto it. Verse 3. And many
people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Verse 4. And he shall judge among the Nations,
and shall rebuke many people, Hebr. (...), that is, Many peoples.
and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn war any more. Verse II. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day (all which Verse is repeated again, Verse 17.) Then it
follows Verse 18. And the Idols he shall utterly abolish. Verse 19. And they
shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth for
fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises to shake
terribly the earth. (This whole Verse is again repeated, Verse 21.)

ultimately and plainly concerning, yea for, or in the behalf, or favor of
Judah, and Jerusalem, as the Heb. (...) su per, propter, juxta, secundum. Sept.
(...) Symm. ut refert Nobilius and Drusius, pro. citat. Eus. (...) lib. 2. p.
43. in Hier. pro Juda and Jerusalem.
Hebrew bears, and Greeks and Latins affirm. Though by and by, Verse 6. the
Jews are showed the reason why they should go into afflictions before they
have the deliverance mentioned in this Chapter; Yet when it is said (verse 2
and 3) It shall come to pass in the last days, that many peoples shall say,
come, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, etc. for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and. there can be no less
intended, then that this Prophecy does ultimately concern the Jews welfare,
when they, and the Gentiles converted, shall make one glorious Christian Church
on earth. To this our late Annotationists on the Bible do well consent, and in
some terms fairly hint part of our Thesis. Here (say they, in this second
Chapter of Isa.) begins a Sermon, contained in the three Chapters following,
concerning the RESTITVTION of the Church, principally UNDER CHRIST; which he
both begins, Chapter 2, and after the denunciation of many heavy judgments
inserted, to be inflicted upon the maine body of the Jewish people, for their
manifold gross, and grievous sins, at length concludes with Chap. 4.

Iunius, Piscator, Alapide Grotius, Engl. Annot.
that those promises in the words aforequoted out of this Chapter do relate to
the time of Christ's coming, and do confess the general, that the Jews in a
sublimer sense do understand them of the times of the Messiah. And one of them
steps a little higher, and bids us for that to compare, Dan. 2.35. where all
the four Metals are utterly broken to pieces, and the little stone cut out of
the mountain became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. But I
shall, God assisting, give you a more particular account, viz. that both Jews
and Christians do understand the promises in this Chapter of a visible glorious
estate of the Church yet to be on the face of the earth, before the ultimate
end of the world. Of the latter sort we will name only the famous Piscator,
Alsted and Heurnius. Of the former in brief thus: Their Talmud, Gemara
Sanhedrim pereck. R. Ketina, etc. assert that this world does continue six
thousand years. In one it shall be destroyed, so as to be purified as gold, and
freed from the CURSE, of which it is said, Isa. 2. The LORD ALONE SHALL BE
EXALTED IN THAT DAY. And R. Scelomo (quoting also this second of Isa.) says,
The Lord shall arise, and shake the earth terribly in the day of judgment,
when he shall break the wicked. (It is usual with the learned Jews to call
this glorious time of Christ's visible Kingdom on earth a day of judgment; not
dissentaneous to the wont of Scripture to compellate and compare any great time
of Reformation as a day of judgment, Psalm. 50.1. etc. 1 Pet. 4.17.) And indeed
(as John shows us Rev. 11.) in the beginning of this most glorious visible
Kingdom, there is a beginning of the day of judgment, in that the wicked
alive, that submit not to Christ, are destroyed, and the living Saints have a
reward given them, together with the resurrection of the deceased Saints, which
St. John calls the first Resurrection. R.D. Kimchi says, In that day, in the
days of Messiah, when the Lord shall execute his judgment on the wicked, THE
LORD ALONE SHALL BE EXALTED, Isa. 2. The Lord alone shall be exalted (says he)
is as much as to say, AND THE LORD SHALL BE KING OVER ALL THE EARTH. We might
quote more, but for have and brevity.

Isa.) or nearer the Hebrew, IN THE LAST OF DAYS, or, UTMOST END OF DAYS.
Therefore if the Prophet had looked at no further time then that of Christ's
first coming in the flesh, he would not have called that, the last of days,
since which have passed above one thousand six hundred and fifty years. The
last of days properly signifies those, after which Aeternity next and
immediately follows; As it does after the completing of the thousand years of
this visible Kingdom.

Isaiah, have been fulfilled to this day.

1 Surely that in the second verse, and part of the third, That the mountain
of the Lords house shall be established on the HEAD of the mountains etc. and
peoples shall come and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, etc. has not been hitherto fulfilled and completed. For as yet, neither
the visible power and glory of Christ, nor of his Church (so as for Gentiles to
say, Come, let us go up, etc.) has been established over the HEAD, the Pope of
the seven Hills of Rome, or over the Turk, the HEAD of the four Hills of
Jerusalem or over the height of power and glory of the Hills of the generality
of the PEOPLES, Gentiles, or Nations of the world. The Church at Jerusalem,
such as it was, in Christ's time was in Captivity under the Heathen Roman
Empire, and so continued till the rise of the Roman Bishops, and immediately
after that thraldom, were subdued to the Turks, who keeps them in that
thraldom to this day. The Heathen Romans refused at the first, the Lord Christ
by vote of the Senate, and after persecuted his Church for many years. And the
Turks blaspheme Christ in their Alcoran, and has warred against his Church
from age to age since their rise. And the rest of the world for the generality,
are Indians, Barbarians, and Semi-beasts, that know neither God, nor
themselves, nor what Christ is, nor what a Christian is.

2 Nor was the house of the Lord established in the top of the mountains, that
is upon Zion (the highest of the four Hills of Jerusalem;) For presently after
Christ's death, persecution scattered Christians from Jerusalem, Act. 8. And
within forty years (or thereabout) after Christ's ascension the Temple of
Jerusalem was destroyed, and after a while the City, and for about three
hundred years onward, the Church of Christ was extremely persecuted, by the
Heathen Romans, and anon after ( Constantines time only excepted, or little
more) they were sorely persecuted by the Arian Heretics. So that instead of
all Nations going up to the house of the Lord on the top of the Mountains for
divine worship, Christian Jews and Gentiles were scattered among all Nations.
And though Act. 2. there were a handful of several Nations at Jerusalem, if
they were Gentiles, and not rather Jews, yet this was far from ALL NATIONS
FLOWING to it, saying, Come, let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For the generality
of those very men ( Act. 2.) mocked the Apostles, whiles they taught them the
ways of the Lord. And as at Jerusalem, so in the Countries round about, the
Christians were every where persecuted, as the history of the Acts does all
along give us a particular account.

3 Nor is that fulfilled to this day which is prophesied in the fourth verse;
Christ has not hitherto so judged among the Nations, and rebuked many people,
that they have beaten their swords into plow shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks, so that Nation has not lifted up sword against Nation, neither
learned war any more.

4 Nor has that been yet fulfilled which is in verse 10, 11, 12, etc. to v.
17. That men have so dreaded the Majesty of the Lord that they have hid
themselves; That the lofty looks of men have been humbled, and their
haughtiness bowed down; That THE LORD ALONE HAS BEEN EXALTED. That the day
of the Lord of hosts has been upon EVERY ONE that is proud and lofty, upon all
the Cedars of Lebanon, and Oaks of Bashan that are lifted up, upon ALL the high
mountains and hills that are lifted up, upon EVERY high tower, upon every
fenced wall, upon ALL the ships of Tarshish, and upon all the pleasant
pictures, to bow down, and bring down low all these, so that the Lord alone may
be exalted in THAT DAY. Alas, ever since Christ's coming in the flesh, the
whole world generally has been very high, proud against the Lord Christ;
Antichrist has been much exalted, and the Lord has been least exalted, his
Honor, his Cause, his People have been trampled on. In the time of Constantine
the Great, some little was done in the Roman Empire for a little time, for the
Church of Christ; but anon Arianisme arose, then Papisme mounted up, then the
Beast did arise. The Church is put into a Wildernesse-condition, the witnesses
prophecy in sackcloth one thousand two hundred and sixty years, which are not
yet expired, for they have not yet lain dead in the Grave three days and an
half.

5. Nor is that in the 18, 19, and 20. verses yet fulfilled, That all Idols are
abolished, that God has so shaken the earth, that he has made the inhabitants
thereof to cast away all their Idols, and to hide themselves for fear. The
Territories of the Papacy extending over France, Spain, Italy, part of the
Low Countries, part of upper Germany, part of Polonia, part of the Indies, etc.
are full of Idols, and do openly worship them (as they say) in the sight of
the Sun. The great shake of these is not till the Witnesses have lain dead
in the Grave three days and an half ( Revel. 11.) and then is the great fall
(ibid. ver. 11.) and when those things are shaken down, then the things that
cannot be shaken, viz. pure worship, purely Spiritual, and pure Saints shall
remain unmoved, Heb. 12.27.

is no time of establishing of the mountain of the Lords house upon the top of
the mountain, no proceeding of the word out of Zion, no running and hiding
from the presence of the Lord, for the Sea and Grave, etc. shall give up their
dead. And all good shall be turned into an eternity of absolute glory.
Therefore the time of fulfilling of the Prophesies, and Promises of this second
of Isaiah is yet to come, before the ultimate day of the last general
Judgment. The Diatribae pars 4. of Mr. Mede lately coming forth, and come to
my hands since I penned this eleventh Section, I thought it convenient to
insert into the Margin, at least, his judgment of this second of Isaiah, ver.
2, 3, 4. which I will give you in his own words: HILLS, or MOUNTAINS (says
he) are States, Kingdoms, or Societies of men, which consisting of degrees,
rising unto an height one above another, are compared unto Mountains raised
above the ordinary plain, and level of the earth. The MOUNTAIN OF THE LORDS
HOUSE, is that State, and Society of men, which is called the Church, and
People of God. REGNUM CAELORUM, the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. a Kingdom,
whose, both King, and Kings Throne, have their place, and residence in the
Heavens. These words therefore are a Prophecy, or Prophetical promise of the
GLORIOUS EXALTATION, WONDERFUL ENLARGMENT, and UNHEARD-OF-PROSPERITY of this
Society of men, called the CHURCH, above all States, and Societies of men
whatsoever. The glory and EXALTATION is expressed in the word, THE MOUNTAIN OF
THE LORDS HOUSE SHALL BE ONE DAY EXALTED, ye mounted not only above the lesser
hill; but above the highest mountain, though at this time it were depressed,
and trampled under foot, by the proud enemies thereof. The ENLARGMENT is in the
word, ALL NATIONS SHALL FLOW INTO IT, i. e. though at the time of this
Prophecy it were reduced to a small remnant, yet the time was to come, when it
should not only consist of one Nation of the Jews, as then it did, but of all
Nations under the whole Heaven. The PROSPERITY thereof begins to be described
from these words, ver. 4. THEY SHALL BEAT THEIR SWORDS INTO PLOW-SHARES, etc. i.
e, though the greatest part of JACOB were already captive, and Judah and
Jerusalem in a continual fear, and no less danger of the Armies, and
invasion of the King of Babel, yet the time should one day come, that the
People, or Church of God, should not only be the most exalted state upon the
earth, and the most ample, and universal Dominion that ever was in the world,
but the most peaceable, quiet, and flourishing State that ever was, since man
was FIRST CREATED. This is the Prophecy; But now comes the Question, Whether
this, as we have described it, be, and has already been fulfilled? or whether
if already any ways fulfilled, whether it be not in part only performed, and
the full accomplishment reserved for time to come, etc.? For here the Church is
to be established on the tops of Mountains, etc. so that no other State shall
overtop, or over-looke it, much less trample it under feet. Now whether there
was ever such a time, when this was completely fulfilled, etc. I leave it to
any man's indifferent judgment, who can compare the description of the Prophet,
with the stories of fore past, and present times. In the times immediately after
Christ's PASSION, I think any man will grant the Church then was neither
VISIBLE, nor GLORIOUS. In the time of the PERSECUTING EMPERORS, when the
Church had taken foot among the Gentiles, and the Nations began to flow unto
it, it was a Society indeed VISIBLE, but not GLORIOUS. I am sure it was not in
the TOPS of the MOUNTAINS, but the Imperial Mountain of ROME, not only
over-topped it, but over trampled it under their feet. In the time of
CONSTANTINE, and thereabouts, after three hundred years cruel persecution,
the Sun seemed as it were to break forth of a Cloud, but presently that
glory was eclipsed, and even the visibility of the Church in a manner covered,
with the thick and a Universally overspreading cloud of ARYANISME This ARIAN
cloud was no sooner blown over, but, another great cloud of that
fore-prophesied APOSTASY of the Church begun to arise, whereby the Churches
glory was not only eclipsed, but at length again the visibility thereof
wholly overshaddowed with the thick darkness of Idolatrous ANTICHRISTIANISME,
until after a long day of darkness, it pleased God of late, somewhat to
dispel the cloud, etc. and we hope, when the cloud shall be wholly consumed by
the beams of the Sun of the Gospel, the Church shall become not more visible
then yet it is, but far more glorious then ever hitherto it has been. WHEN THE
FULLNESS OF THE GENTILES ( as St. Paul speaks) SHALL COME IN. For we shall
find in the Prophesies of the Scriptures, that there are two sorts, and times
of the CALLING OF THE GENTILES, First, that which should be in the REJECTION OF
THE JEWS, as St. Paul says, to PROVOKE THEM TO JEALOUSY. [Such a calling as
should be in a manner occasional, that God might not want a Church,] the time
the Jews were to be cast out. So Romans 11.15. The CASTING AWAY OF THE JEWS, is
the RECONCILING OF THE WORLD, i.e. The CALLING OF THE GENTILES. Whence we may
see, that the Apostles were not to preach Christ to the Gentiles, until, being
first offered to the Jews, they refused him And this is that calling of the
Gentiles which hitherto has been many years. But there is a second and more
glorious calling of the Gentiles to be found in the Prophesies of Scripture;
not a calling as this is, wherein the Jews are excluded, but a calling wherein
the Jews shall have a share of the greatest glory, and to have a preeminence
above other Nations, when ALL NATIONS SHALL FLOW UNTO THEM, and walk in their
light; for the calling of the remainder of the world (which is not yet under
Christ) is reserved for the solemnizing of the Jews RESTORATION. This is that
calling, and that time which he calls the FVLNESSE of the GENTILES, conjoined
with the saving of ALL ISRAEL, Romans 11.25. This is that time whereof he speaks
[That if the present FALL of the Jews be the RICHES OF THE WORLD, and their
DECAY the RICHES OF THE GENTILES, how much more shall their FVLNESSE be the
fullness of the Gentiles.] This is that glorious time which the Prophecy of
this text principally, if not altogether intended, which is not yet fulfilled.
While the Roman Iron part of Nebuchadnezzart Image stood, a stone was hewne out
of the mountain without hands. This is the first call of the world hitherto.
At length the time of the feet of the Image coming that the stone smote them,
the wind blows the Image away wholly, and there was no more place found for
any part thereof; which was no sooner done, but the stone which smote the Image
swelled into a great Mountain, and filled the whole earth. This is the time of
the fullness of Christ's Kingdom, the FULLNESS of the Gentiles; This is the
time when THE MOUNTAIN OF THE LORDS HOUSE shall be established on the TOPS of
the MOUNTAINS, namely when the small stone of Christ's Kingdom, which is now
in being, shall smite the brittle feet of the last remainder of the Roman
State, now subsisting in the Popedom, in whom the divided toes of too many
Kingdoms are united, etc




SECT. XII.
Isaiah for our Thesis, is chap. 9. ver. 6. For unto us a child is borne, unto
us a Son is given, and the GOVERNMENT shall be on his shoulders, and his name
shall be called WONDERFUL, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father,
the Prince of peace. Ver. 7. Of the INCREASE of his GOVERNMENT, and peace,
there shall be NO END, upon the THRONE of DAVID, and upon HIS KINGDOM to ORDER
IT, and to ESTABLISH IT with judgment, and with justice from henceforth and
for ever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. Of this place we
shall speak more briefly.

Incarnation, throughout all the process of his Government, until the end of
the ultimate Judgment, as the words from henceforth and for ever do
express; therefore the Reader must not hang down his head, poring only upon
the Birth of Christ, as it is said in the beginning of this text, To us a
child is borne; but must lift up his eyes to the utmost of this glorious
prospect here presented in the close, upon the throne of David, and upon his
Kingdom (he shall sit) to order it, and to establish it, etc. from henceforth
and for ever.

Jewish Rabbis, that say, this text is meant of Hezekiah; we heard but now
that the ancienter Rabbis, and Talmud, and their Targum, or Chalde Paraphrase
following them, are contrary to that, interpreting this text of the Messiah; as
they had an invincible reason so to do, in that the style given to him here
meant, is incompatible, and inconsistent with any but with God incarnate, that
is, Christ Jesus, the true Messiah. And as little reason had those later
Rabbis to interpret this Text of Hezekiah, who was borne a good space of time
before the date of this Prophecy, yea and diverse years before his Father Ahaz
sat upon the Throne. For Hezekiah was five and twenty years old at his fathers
death, whereas Ahaz his father had reigned in all but sixteen years, 2 Kings
16.2. and chap. 18. v. 2.

Messiah before the ultimate judgment. Our late Annotationists make for me a
fair preface, meetly conducing to the true sense of the words, which we
intend: That the deliverances (say they) of Gods people, and the pulling down
of such mighty POTENTATES, whether SECULAR or SPIRITUAL (mark their words) may
not seem impossible, and incredible; the Prophet now proceeds to declare who
it is, and what manner of person, by whom all that has been said shall be
effected, even the Messiah the eternal Son of God, whom God shall raise up
to be the King and Governor of his Church; so they. But we have a more sure
word to confirm this interpretation, Luke 1.31, 32, 33. And the Angel said
unto Mary, etc. Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and
shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of
the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his FATHER
DAVID, and he shall reign over the house of JACOB for EVER, and of his
Kingdom there shall be NO END.

Isaiah and Luke together, and then read, what they spell unto us. Namely,
first, That the meaning of this Text is not of spirituals only, but also of
temporals. The FOR in the beginning premised by Isaiah as a meet inference,
plainly sounds of a proof in this Text, to demonstrate an assurance of the
deliverance of Israel, as is set forth in the fourth and fifth verses (viz.
Thou have broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, and
the rod of his OPPRESSOR, as in the day of MIDIAN Observe Gideons victories
used to signify this deliverance; therefore not only spiritual.
etc. and it shall be, as with battle and blood, so with burning and fuel of
fire.) But these words (if weighed For, close to the Hebrew, the words run
thus. For every battle of the Warrier with noise, and garments rolled in blood,
shall be also unto burning and fuel of fire.
) cannot, without violence, be wrested to signify only spiritual
deliverances, as our Annotationists also affirm with us, whose words upon the
fourth verse are these, Having declared the greatness of their joy, he
proceeds to show the ground of it, their deliverance and freedom from the
straits and thraldom of their enemies, as well CORPORAL as Spiritual.
Therefore this Text is Gods giving security to his people, of deliverance of
them, from temporal, as well as spiritual oppressions, troubles, etc. by
Jesus Christ, after that he has finished the works of his incarnation, by
passion, resurrection, ascension, and assession at Gods right hand, according
to Psalm. 110. of which we have spoken plentifully before. Secondly, That Christ
was invested with these Attributes and Omnipotentiall Properties ((...) etc. as
it is the Hebrew) of purpose to multiply his Princedome, and for peace without
end. The Jews observe, that the close-shut (...) mem in the middle of a word,
as here in (...) (which (...) properly is a final letter) signifies the
stability of the thing spoken of, as open (...) in the end of a word, as in
(...) Nehem. 2.13. (which (...) properly is a middle letter) signifies the
brokennesse of the walls there spoken of: which observation I mention not as a
foundation strong enough for me to build upon, but as a sufficient Narrative,
to declare the opinion of the Ancient Jewish Rabbis concerning the stability
of the Messiahs Kingdom. Thirdly, That the words Princedome, Government, and
for peace, and spoken in a way of Prophecy of what should be added to the
Church above that they enjoyed already, cannot but signify more then
Spirituals. Fourthly, That this is yet more apparent by that which follows
both here, and Luke 1.32. of the Messiahs sitting upon the Throne of DAVID, and
upon his Kingdom, and to establish it with Justice and Judgment (speaking in
the phrase of an excellent politic Government.) It needs not that Christ
should sit on David's Throne, and Kingdom, to Spiritually govern, and keep in
peace his universal Church. Nor needed there a Promise that Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom shall be established with Justice and Judgment, which are low things
to faith, hope, love, joy in the Holy Ghost, and the rest of the Graces of the
holy Spirit. Nor was there need to assert the perpetuity of Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom, that it should be for ever; the Jews having now been a Church so
many hundreds of years. Fifthly, The close, in a way of Gods great engagement,
the zeal of the Lord of Host will perform this, must of necessity signify
something more, then the ordinary thing of Christ's having a Spiritual Kingdom
on earth. What need such high words, solemn protests, and most serious pawning
of the zeal of God (which is love in a flame) to signify the performance of
that which had been long since done, and as an ordinary thing was to continue,
viz. Christ's having a Spiritual Kingdom on earth? Sixthly, Both this of
Isaiah, and that of Luke 1.31. does import; That after there should be an
interruption of the sitting of David's race, upon David's Throne, it should
sensibly appear that Christ should possess that Throne, else why is it here
Prophesied, that the Messiah shall sit upon David's Throne; and that the Lord
God shall give to the Messiah the throne of his father David, and promises
there he shall sit for ever? The whole Earth long before, Genesis 1.26, etc.
compare Psalm. 8. and Heb. 2. ver. 7, 8. being given up to the rule of Christ,
to be governed by his invisible providence, was never interrupted; but in all
Ages Christ has continually powered down his Judgments upon the wicked, as
Peter proves, in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. And the Church was also given to
him from the beginning, Genesis 3.15. compare Romans 16.20. which, without any
possible impediment, he has ever preserved on earth in all Ages ever since, by
his Spiritual power and grace. But the Line of David's race has been broken
off from his Throne, as we shall see presently. Nor has Christ been upon it at
all, in any visible manifestation; therefore this last must be a great part of
the meaning of Isaiah, and Saint Luke, as Piscator expresses it ( In solio
Davidis tanquam haeres regni, and filius Davidis sedebit Christus, confer. 2 Samuel 7.12, etc. so he:) And that to be performed for ever; that is, so as no
visible power must reign after him. Seventhly, Isaiah Prophesies in the time
of the division of the Kingdom of the Jews into Judah and Israel, see chap.
1. ver. 1. etc. And Saint Luke tells us, chap. 1. ver. 33. that this must be
fulfilled by Christ's reigning over the whole house of Jacob, which contains
all the twelve Tribes, made up of Israel and Judah, even as according to
Isaiah, Christ must sit upon the Throne of David, who ruled over both Judah and
Israel. Eighthly, That all these must be so fulfilled, that Christ must appear
to be wonderful and mighty, and to increase in his Government, (as Isaiah
speaks) and to be Great (as Luke speaks.)

Christ since this Prophecy, and see what of this text has been really
fulfilled. Surely this text was not fulfilled in the Jews return from
Babylon, for the ten Tribes did not then return, to make up the house of
Jacob, or the Kingdom of David. And besides, of that prosperity there was
soon an end, in the miseries of the Maccabean Wars, and the Roman Conquest
was over them before Christ was borne.

David, nor any other, deputatively (for him) of that Tribe, the Scepter being
then, and thence to this day departed from Judah. The visible Government (as
the text imports) was not all this time upon Christ's shoulders, the time was
not come, as Christ tells us, Act. 1.6, 7. Act. 3.21. The visible Government
since Christ's coming in the Flesh has been upon the shoulders of the Roman
Emperor, or the Pope, or the Turk. When the time comes that the Government
shall be on Christ's shoulders, he shall reign as David (as Isaiah speaks) and
over the house of Jacob (as Luke speaks) that is, over all the twelve Tribes,
and that for ever; that is, none visibly ruling them after him. But at Christ's
Incarnation, only two Tribes were about Jerusalem and Judea, but under the
Romans visible Government, and for the general, refused Christ's spiritual
Government, Act. 13.46.

8 Nor can this be imagined rationally to be fulfilled in Christ's Spiritual
Spiritual government (if we may so call Christ's giving of Ordinances, and grace
into the heart) extending it self equally to Gentiles, as well as to Jews, if
not more for these one thousand six hundred and fifty years past, to the
Gentiles, what privilege or pre-eminence is given in this to Jacobs House, or
David's Throne, more then to the houses or thrones of Constantine the Great, or
Charles the Great, or of Edw. the sixth, or of Q. Elizabeth, or of the Indian
Sagamores, or of the Turkish Emperors, or Grand-Signiours, or of the great
Chams of Tartar, or, etc. when they, or their Nations are converted, at the
coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles. Besides, who of Believers at the
time of this Prophecy did not know, that Christ's Spiritual Kingdom of Grace
should be for ever, and full of more then Justice and Judgment, viz. of all
the graces of the Spirit? ##

Mr. Medas learned Notes upon this ninth Chapter of Isaiah, collated with Mark
1.14, 15. coming too late to my knowledge to be put into the Text, I could not
forbear inserting it into the Margin, which in sum is this. Galilee was the
third Province of those three into which Canaan or Phalestine was divided in
Christ's time, and was on the North part, remotest from Jerusalem, and divided
into two parts, upper and lower; the upper was mostly the Land of Nephthaly,
wherein was the goodly Metropolis of all Galilee, Capernaum. And this is the
Galilee that was called Galilee, of the Gentiles, either because inhabited by
the Gentiles long time, viz, to Solomon's time, or because Solomon gave twenty
Cities thereof to Hiram, or because it was the outmost of the Land next the
Gentiles. In the lower Galilee was the Tribe of Zebulon (and Issachar) wherein
were the Cities of Nazareth, and Bethsaida near the Sea, or Lake of Galilee,
or Cana (of which, and Christ's first Miracle there, Ioh. 2.) and Mount Tabor.
From Capernaum along the Sea side, through Bethsaida, lay the great rode from
Syria into Egypt, supposed to be that called in Scripture, The way of the Sea.
In Christ's time two of the said Provinces, viz. Judea and Samaria were under
the Roman President Pontius Pilate. The third, Galilee, was under Herod (or
Au^ipas) the Tetrarch: because he had but the fourth part of his Fathers
Kingdom, who beheaded John Baptist, and closed with Pilat when Christ was
condemned. In this Province of Galilee was Christ's conversation principally,
whiles he was on earth, Matthew. 3. ult. Luke 1.26. Act. 1.11. Act. 2.7. Matthew.
4.23. Matthew. 9.35. Matthew. 28.10. For the Messiah was to have his abode
principally in Galilee, according to the Prophecy in Esaias 9.1, 2, 3, etc. The
Land of Galilee, or of Zebulon, and Nephthaly had the hard hap to be first in
that calamity by the Assyrians, 2 King. 15.29. all which Cities there named,
except Ianoah and Gilead, were Cities of Nephthaly, and all Galilee and
Nephthaly are there mentioned, as all carried away Captive to Assyria. In which
calamity Isaiah comforts them with that Prophecy, That they should have the
first and principal share of the Messiahs presence, when he should come. Read
the first seven verses of that ninth of Isa. the meaning being, that Christ
should enlighten the Province of Galilee, or the Land of Zebulon and Nephthaly,
with the glory of his presence. And therefore if this be not a Prophecy of
Christ, I know not what is. Compare Mat. 4. of his dwelling in Capernaum, the
Metropolis of Galilee. The Jews could not see this, but would not believe
because he was of Galilee; Should, say they, Christ come out of Galilee? should
he not come out of Bethlehem? So he should too, and yet was by habitation and
conversation a Galilean. Christians also are to blame for darkning this
Prophecy of Isa. 9. and Matthewes application of it; for my part I am
persuaded, that the four or five first words of this ninth of Isaiah, belong
to the last verse of the former Chapter, as Ierom, and the Chalde refer them;
and that the words following begin a new Prophecy in this manner. (...), etc.
ie. According as the first time that he made vile (or debased) the Land of
Zebulon, and the Land of Nephthaly, so in the latter time he shall make it
glorious. (More of the reading of this text, and Master Medes reasons, the
Reader may there see.) From all (says Mr. Mede) I infer that, 1 Cor. 1.26,
27. God takes the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, etc. For
Galilee, and her inhabitants, in comparison of Judea were reputed ignoble,
strangers, being remote from Jerusalem, and the Temple, and part of the lot of
the ten Tribes which Salmaneser captivated. Howbeit, some of the two Tribes
after their return, especially in the prevailing times of the Maccabees,
settled there, but at length were subdued by the Gentiles, but still dwelling
there, and replenishing that Land with their own people; yet so, as many of
the Gentiles dwelt among them, in so much that in these and the aforesaid
respects, they were despised of those that dwelt in Judea, Joh. 7.41.52. But
Christ the King of Israel, and Savior of Mankind would (as aforesaid) be a
Galilean. The Doctrine he preaches in Galilee is, The time is fulfilled, the
Kingdom of God is at hand, repent ye, and believe the Gospel; which Matthew. 4.
is called the Kingdom of Heaven, which is all one with Kingdom of God. See
Dan. 6.24. The heavens bear rule, that is, God. Luke 15.21. I have sinned
against heaven, and in thy sight, Matthew. 21.15. The Baptism of John, was it
from heaven, or from men. Mark the Exegesis, Luke 15. and the Antithesis,
Matthew. 21. which show God to be meant by Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven, or of
God, is the Kingdom of Messiah, or Christ, Dan. 2, 44. and Dan. 7.13. (read
the places) From which places the Jews call the Messiahs Kingdom, the
Kingdom of God, or of Heaven, because first, it is in this place of Daniel
said, The God of heaven shall set up his Kingdom. And in the other place, That
the Son of Man, (the Messiah) should come in the clouds of heaven; For our
Savior brought not this phrase with him, but found it among the Jews at his
coming, and approved it, in often use of it, Matthew. 13. The Kingdom of Christ is
his Church, or the Christian Church, etc. I must add one thing more for the
understanding of this Kingdom of Christ, which I have hitherto described,
namely, that it has a twofold state; The one Militant, in sufferings; which
is the present state, begun at his first coming; The second state is a
triumphant state, which shall be at his second, in glory in the clouds of
heaven; at what time he shall put down all authority, power, and rule, and
subdue all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. etc. By which, that Mr. Mede
includes the Kingdom of Christ at his second coming to be partly intended, in
Isaiah 9, they may easily perceive, that have heard, and observed other
passages before quoted out of him.


SECT. XIII.
Isaiah is Chapter the eleventh in whole, and throughout, with a brief
collation of the tenth Chapter preceding, and the twelfth following, and
therefore too large to write out. In lieu thereof we shall express the
several passages from whence we deduce any argument.

Judah, that for their hypocrisy in Religion, and their unrighteousness in
their dealings, he will send against them the Assyrian. But then withal it is
threatened, that because the Assyrian would afflict the Jews without
consideration of Gods hand in it, and should manage the rod with insolent
cruelty to the Jews, that God will bring destruction upon the Assyrian for
deliverance of the Jews. The confirmation of this deliverance (as is the
manner of God in the Prophets) has its foundation laid in the sending of
Christ, Chapter 11. The promise whereof, and description of whose person, we
have set forth, and characterised in the first five verses. There shall come
forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, etc. and the Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom, etc. and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, but with righteousness shall he judge, etc. So that
although in Hezekiahs time (wherein Isaiah prophesied, the host of the
Assyrians were destroyed to the number of one hundred eighty five thousand by
the Angel of the Lord (2 Kings 19.35.) And again, in the time of Judahs
captivity in Babylon they were overthrown with a mighty destruction by the
Medes and Persians, Dan. 5.30. yet these are not the ALL of the Threat of this
Prophecy against Assyria, for the Threat is carried on still in Zach. 1.15. to
the end of the Chapter, though at that time Judah was returned. And (to keep to
this our Text of Isa.) according to the length of the foundation of this
Prophecy, must the superstructure be extended, viz. to the coming of Christ:
which coming of him, being not restrictively determined to his first coming in
his incarnation, must be left at large to reach to his second coming at the
great Restoration, as the Text does seem to require, in mentioning his
judging, v. 3. his smiting the earth, v. 4. etc. For we must know (to give you
Mr. Medes notion Alicubi, as near as I can) That the old Prophets for the most
part spoke of the coming of Christ INDEFINITLY, and in GENERAL, without that
distinction of first and second coming, which we have more clearly learned in
the Gospel. For this reason, those Prophets ( except Daniel who distinguishes
those comings, and the Gospel out of him) speak of the things which should be
at the coming of Christ indefinitely, and altogether, which we who are now more
fully informed by the Revelation of his Gospel of this distinction of a twofold
coming, must apply each of them to its proper time. Those things which befit
the state of his first coming unto it, and such things as befit the state of
his second coming unto his second. And that which befits both alike, may be
applied to both.

Which notion of Mr. Mede is the more to be acknowledged, in that it may
appear by many instances from the Creation hitherto, that the grand promises
of great deliverances have their successive and graduall fulfilling from their
first promulgation, unto the end of this world, as daily experience produces
fresh testimonies. Calvin on Isa.
The context says, Isa. 10.24. etc. Thus says the Lord, O my people, that
dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the ASSYRIAN, He shall smite thee with a
rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee after the manner of EGYPT. For
yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger IN
THEIR DESTRUCTION, etc. And in that day his burden shall be taken away from thy
shoulder, etc. Now in Hezekiahs time the Assyrian did not smite the Inhabitants
of Zion, but were smitten by the Angel of the Lord (as before mentioned.) Nor
was the burden of the Assyrian taken away from off the shoulder of the dwellers
at Zion at their return from Babylon, by a destruction on them under whom they
were then in captivity. For the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus their King,
voluntarily to let them return, as we well know the story, in the second of
Chron. Chapter last, and Ezra Chap. 1.

And further, the Apostles do bring down many passages of this eleventh of
Isaiah unto the Transactions of their times, and downwards, applying them to
the coming of Christ, yea to the coming of Christ after his ascension. For
example:

1. First, that in verse 1. There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, etc. is applied by the Apostle, Act. 13. v. 22. etc. to v. 42. to Christ
as the eminent seed of David, of the seed of Jesse, conjoyning a quotation out
of Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: which with other
passages in that Psalm (as has been demonstrated) signifies Christ's visible
Kingdom on earth yet to come. And a quotation out of Isaiah 55.3. Touching the
sure mercies of David. And one other quotation out of Ps. 16. That his holy one
saw no corruption, of purpose to prove that though David himself be dead, yet
Christ lives, to be the sure mercies of David, and to keep off his seed from
seeing corruption, that in him the ever-living seed of David may reign to the
end of this world, and that in some peculiar way, privilege, and relation, and
proportion to David, or else the dint and vigor of Isaiahs, and the Psalmists
Text, and the Apostles Commentary is made to languish. Which privilege,
peculiarity, relation and analogy to David, what can it be, but a visible
Reigning, or Kingdom of Christ? For Christ's Kingdom, purely spiritual, by his
Word and Spirit, what does it more relate to David then to other Christian
Kings and Princes of the Gentiles converted from Heathenisme? or how more over
David's people or Kingdom, more then over all Indians and Heathens, where the
Gospel is spread and received?

2 Again, that in verse the tenth of this eleventh of Isaiah, There shall be a
root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the
GENTILES seek, the Apostle Romans 15.12. draws down to Christ then ascended, and
gives us this sense of the Prophet, That Christ is not only the OBJECT of
faith to the Gentiles, but that the Gentiles shall be his SUBJECTS, he reigning
over them. How reigning over them? Mark curiously the Apostles words, and you
may perceive something. Again (says the Apostle) There shall be a root of
Iesse, and he that shall RISE to REIGN over the Gentiles, in him shall the
Gentiles trust. His reigning, as in relation to David, does not commence from
his Incarnation, but he shall RISE to reign, spoken by the Apostle after
Christ's Resurrection, and Ascension, and rendered (as you hear) by our
Translators under a future notion, He shall rise to reign. Yea follow the
words yet closer, even home to the very doors of the Original, and you will
see (I think) yet more, (...) etc. There shall be a root of Iesse, and he
shall RISE AGAIN to reign over the Gentiles, or stand up AGAIN, to reign
over them. Christ had, before the Apostle penned that, risen the first time,
viz. from the grave of the earth. But now that he has ascended long since up
into heaven, and there as it were had been (in the opinions of most men) buried
in oblivion, and his glory covered, he must rise again from that obscuring
himself from men, to reign over them. Which the Prophet Daniel c. 12. calls
His standing up as a great PRINCE to deliver his people; which shall begin,
says the Angel, one thousand two hundred and ninety days, that is, so many
years, from the ceasing of the daily sacrifice, and shall be five and forty
years in finishing, ere all the Jews enemies shall be thrown down. After which
immediately begins the great Restitution of all things, the Resurrection of the
Saints, Daniel standing up in the lot.

3 So that this Text of the 11 of Isaiah is most clearly to be extended beyond
the Jews deliverance out of Babylon, unto Christ's personal coming, and on the
other side, cannot be confined, stinted and terminated in Christ's first
personal coming, in his Incarnation, but must be carried on far beyond that,
as these arguments following will evince.

First, after the Prophet had in the first of verse this 11 of Isaiah
prophesied of Christ's coming, and verse 2, 3, 1 Arg.
of his qualification with gifts, and graces, then in the fourth verse he
prophesies that Christ with righteousness shall judge the poor, and reprove
with equity, for, or in behalf of the meek of the earth, and shall smite the
earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his mouth shall he slay
the wicked. But Christ did not reprove in the behalf of the meek, nor slay the
wicked at his first coming in the flesh. But it is extended by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. (after Christ's ascension) unto future times, when Christ shall
destroy Antichrist (who was not revealed when the Apostle wrote) whose
destruction is the introduction to the future Restitution, as has been before
demonstrated upon that 2 Thessalonians. 2. etc. in our second Book.

Secondly, when the Prophet had prophesied of Christ's coming, and the
excellency of his person and gifts in the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 verses, 2 Arg.
before he comes to the maine of the Prophecy, whereon I shall chiefly insist,
in verse 10, 11, etc. he inserts between in the 6, 7, and 8 verses, a Prophecy
that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid, etc. meaning the restitution of the creatures from the enmity of the
curse by Adams fall, according to Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. For which (says
the Apostle) not only the Saints, but the creature it self earnestly expects,
and the whole creation groaneth to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, and vanity, to which it is now subject, and to be put into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Which yet never was; nor can it be
imagined to be at the ultimate day of doom, and therefore is yet to come. I
know full well that diverse understand this part of this Prophecy
metaphorically, of men by nature fierce as beasts, to be made tame and loving
by the power of the Gospel at Christ's first coming. Too common a fault in
Writers, through laziness or blindness to take the sent and cry of the
former, and to run with full mouth after them. But if this be a sufficient
argument to assert the sense of a place of Scripture, we can produce both
Jews, and Christians, averring that this place is to be understood literally,
of the change of the nature of the wild Beasts at the restitution (of which we
speak.) The Jews take this according to the Letter, as if the Prophet should
say: In the time of the Messiah the Wolf, the Leopard, the Lion, and the rest
of the wild Beasts shall be made tame, and shall no more hurt just and good
men. And thus much is acknowledged by Alapide upon this place.

Calvin Unde sequitur eum formare ipsis (fidelibus) ingenia, caelesti suo
spiritu, quanquam longius spectat Prophetae oration. Perinde enim est, acsi
promiiteret BEATAM MVNDI REPARATIONEM, etc. Calv. in Isa. cap. 11. v. 6. and 7.
also does in his own judgment assert hence, the change of the nature of
wild Beasts, and the restitution of the Creation as at first. Hence, says he,
it follows that God will form the spirits of Believers by his holy Spirit.
Howbeit the speech of the Prophet looks far beyond this; For it is all one
as if he should promise, that there shall be a blessed REPARATION of the world.
For he describes what was that order from the beginning, before that unhappy
and sad subversion, or disorder befell us, by the fall of man, under which we
now groan, etc. Surely there had been no disagreement between the Creatures of
God, if they had stood in their first and perfect original, etc. Seeing
therefore when Christ shall come, he shall by abolishing the Curse, reconcile
the world to God, the INSTAURATION OF A PERFECT STATE is not impertinently
ascribed to him. As if the Prophet should say, THAT GOLDEN AGE shall return, in
which, before the fall of man, full felicity flourished. Thus Calvin, with much
more to very good purpose to our point, which I forbear to repeat, or quote
other latter Writers Mair, etc.
of the same opinion, because I may have occasion in that kind to speak more
to this Text, upon the WHAT this glorious RESTITUTION shall be. Mean while I
attain what I aimed at, that if some Learned men be opposite to us in their
giving the sense of this place, we have other Learned men to balance them, and
that (as I conceive, grounding upon Divine reason) upon a better account. For
to that the Analogy of other Scriptures concur, Romans 8. ver. 19. etc. Psalm.
8. compared with Heb. 2. fully opened before. To that also agrees that full
enumeration of all the worst, and most hurtful Creatures; whereas a less
reckoning, or a shorter expression would have served, to signify an agreement
among men by the power of the Gospel. Which whiles some so peremptorily defend
to be the full meaning of this place, they had done themselves much right, and
given us some satisfaction, if they had showed us that effect of the Gospel at
Christ's first coming, answerable to the mind of this Prophecy, viz. That it
should exceed that agreement and peace that was in the National Church of the
Jews before Christ's coming, and that since Christ's coming that has been, as
better, so more general. But alas this they cannot do, and therefore we
cannot embrace a sense that cannot be found out. For as Christ himself at his
first coming said, I came not to bring peace, but a sword, and to set those of
the same family one against another; so we know by the Histories of the four
Evangelists, and of the Acts of the Apostles, that great Oppositions, mighty
Tumults, hideous Persecutions followed upon Christ's first coming, and so
continued from Age to Age; the stream of a deep torrent of blood running in
the channel of the Heathen Roman Empire for three hundred years, anon the
black stream of Arian Heresy, and Persecution by it; after that Popish and
Turkish Persecutions, with successive Monsters of Massacres, Bonfires,
Inquisitions, Suspensions, Imprisonments, and deadly feudes and enmities of the
vast generality, against the handful of Saints throughout all Nations. So that
the small gleaning sprinklings, or first fruits, that were reconciled to God,
and to one another upon Christ's first coming, are drowned as i^ were in the
Ocean and sea of enmity, that from thence forward until now remains with
great animosity. And therefore we believe another sense of these words, viz.
That at Christ's next appearance there shall be a general peace between men, and
between the Creatures, and between both, as it follows in the next Argument.

For it follows in the ninth verse, They shall not HURT, destroy, nor so much
as hurt) in all my HOLY MOVNTAINE (observe that also.) And lastly, observe the
confirmation of all, viz. That the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea. Now though there was an increase of
knowledge at Christ's first coming; as a fountain, and spring stream, which,
the further it ran, the larger it was; suitable to Ezekiels Prophecy of the
waters that arose from under the Sanctuary (the Gospel of Christ began in Zion)
and so grew deeper, and deeper; yet from that time, until now, the knowledge
of the Lord has not increased to a sea, to cover all the earth, so as to
drown all iniquity, or opposition against Christ, or Christians, so as to work
men unto that peace, that there shall be neither destroying, nor hurting, in
all the holy mountain. Sure enough it appears by the sacred Story, in the
Gospel, Acts, and the Revelation, and by experience, both leading us down from
Christ's Incarnation to these times, that at least three parts of four of the
whole world has not been filled with the knowledge of the Lord, but have made
opposition against it, hurting and destroying, and that too in the holy
Mountain; whether we take it strictly for Zion, or largely for the Church,
wheresoever seated. Christ was condemned and Crucified, and the Disciples
persecuted, (unto a scattering) at Jerusalem. Jerusalem both City and Temple
are laid wast by the Roman Emperors; the Ten bloody Persecutions by the
Heathen Romans are continued for three hundred years; the Arian Persecution
follows that, the Papal Persecution follows that, the Turkish overtakes
that; and both continue to this day, the Jews joining with them in opposition
against the truth of Christ, both at Jerusalem, and where ever the Church is.
Beside, that vast part of the world in the East, and West Indies, yet know not
the Lord.

Further, it follows in the tenth verse, And in that day there shall be a root
of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the peoples (so the Hebr. (...))
To it shall the GENTILES seek; and his REST shall be glorious. In which words
the Prophet mainly looks at the great call of the Gentiles, as the Apostles
(the best Expositors) have since, to that purpose alleged them, Romans 15.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. Now I say, that Christ was a minister of the Circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers; and that the
GENTILES might glorify God for this mercy, as it is written, For this cause I
will confess thee among the Gentiles (quoted out of Psalm. 18.49.) And again
he says, Rejoice ye GENTILES with his people, (quoted out of Psalm. 117.1.)
And again Isaiah says (viz. in the eleventh of Isa. ver. 10.) There shall be
a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the GENTILES, in him
shall the Gentiles trust, etc. Now as there were few of the Gentiles that were
brought into the faith, when the Apostle quoted and applied these words to this
sense (we heard but now in the former argument, how generally the Gentiles
have, and do oppose the Gospel to this day throughout the world) so the
Prophets close in this eleventh of Isaiah, ver. 10. HIS REST SHALL BE GLORIOUS
Which the Hebrew hightens, being in the Abstract, viz. (...) glory, pure glory.
does more evidently demonstrate that this place of Scripture, as to the maine
intent, is not yet fulfilled. For if we will understand inward rest, the
believing Saints before Christ's incarnation had it, Psalm. 116.7. and often
elsewhere. Yea the Apostles in their troublesome times, 2 Cor. 6.10. so that
there needed not a Prophecy to foretell that which had been in past time, and
was at the present. And if we would understand here eternal glory, yet we
cannot, for two reasons; 1. Because in this tenth verse it is said, Unto the
ensign Christ, the Gentiles shall SEEK, which cannot consist with eternal
glory; no seeking then. 2. Because of that in the eleventh verse immediately
following, And it shall come to pass in THAT DAY, that the Lord shall set his
hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, etc. from
Assyria, Egypt, Pathros, etc. (things inconsistent with the state of eternal
glory) which last words bring us down to the fifth Argument.


The fifth Argument, Isaiah is not yet in the maine intent of the Prophet
fulfilled, is, because of those words in the eleventh verse of this eleventh of
Isaiah, viz. And it shall come to pass in THAT DAY, that the Lord shall set his
hand AGAIN the SECOND TIME, to recover the remnant of his people (which shall
be left) from ASSYRIA, and from EGYPT, and from PATHROS, and from CUSH, and
from ELAM, and from SHINAR, and from HAMATH, and from the ISLANDS OF THE SEA.
Observe diligently, the Lord must set his hand again the second time, to
recover the remnant of his people from the forementioned places; which clearly
infer, as relatives, that God must do it the first time, and then next, the
second time. Now when the Prophet Isaiah Prophesied this eleventh Chapter, the
Lord had not recovered his people from captivity in Assyria the first time, for
the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin had not yet been there captivated the
first time, nor the ten Tribes, for ought we can find. For Isaiah Prophesied
forty years before the captivity of the ten Tribes, and above seventy years
before the captivity of the two Tribes, as Bulcholcerus states the account. You
see before your eyes by the length of his Prophecy, viz. consisting of sixty
six Chapters, and by the many Kings, under whose reign he Prophesied, viz.
Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah (the last of them) that Isaiah prophesied along
time; and we are now but upon the eleventh of those sixty six Chapters. The Two
Tribes were not carried away captive till a long time after Hezekiah, viz. in
the time of Zedekiah King of Judah (2 Chronicles. 36.) between which Zedekiah and
Hezekiah reigned, five or six Kings over Judah. And the Ten Tribes were not
carried away captive into Assyria, till the sixth year of the reign of
Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.9.10. And therefore it seems that Isaiah prophesied the
Prophecy of this eleventh Chapter, when Hezekiah was not come to the Crown,
nor were any of all the twelve Tribes in captivity in Assyria the first time,
and therefore could not be supposed to be delivered thence the first time. But
before this Text can be fulfilled, they must be in Captivity in Assyria the
first time, and be delivered the first time (as it is hinted in the Text, they
had been in Egypt the first time, and been delivered thence the first time.)
Now they were in Captivity in Assyria the first time (as we touched before) in
the ten Tribes, in the reign of Hoshea King of Israel, 2 Kin. 18. And in the
two Tribes, in the Reign of Zedekiah King of Judah, 2 Chro. 36. So here is the
total Captivity of all the twelve Tribes in Assyria the first time: And their
deliverance out of that Captivity the first time (the first that we can
possibly reckon) is set down in the book of Ezra Cha. 1. and Chap. 2. etc.
where for the general the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin returned to
Jerusalem, as is plain by their Genealogies, they were of the two Tribes,
excepting some others that went up that could not show their Genealogies. So
that if we make the most of the first recovery or deliverance, we can put the
emphasis no where, but upon the return of the two Tribes. Nor can we find
where at the soonest, to pitch this great emphasis of Gods recovering his
people the second time, but upon that time when he shall bring back the rest
of the Tribes, viz. The ten Tribes, which were (and still are) in Assyria, from
thence, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and
from Hamath, and from the Isles of the Gentiles.

Thus for the least and soonest Second time we can possibly find out, of
their deliverance out of Assyria, and the parts aforementioned, which is not
fulfilled to this day.

But a greater Second, and of the same length too, is this: This same [Again
the Second time, etc.] may import two considerations: First, Two parts of the
recovery, or deliverance of the All of the twelve Tribes from Assyria; the
first time of the two Tribes, the second of the ten Tribes, of which we have
spoken before. Secondly, Two distinct times of deliverance of the twelve Tribes,
both the two, and of some of the ten, but especially of the Two. Second out of
Assyria, answers to the first out of Egypt, is in my opinion but weak: Because
they must be delivered, according to this Text, the Second time out of Egypt,
as well as out of Assyria. Sol.
And therefore these are co-eve, co-etanean, of the same age, and not
successive. I say Second does import (as appears by history, both divine and
humane, abetted with experience) a Second deliverance of the twelve Tribes
(more or less) from Assyria, as well as from Egypt, but specially this Second
time, centers upon the two Tribes, called by the name of Jews, (of whom Christ
came) as the ten were called Israel. Which as briefly as we can we open thus:

That whereas God brought up the two Tribes from Assyria to Jerusalem by Ezra
(as his book makes large mention) the Jews there continued for about three
hundred threescore and ten years pretty quiet, till that Antiochus Epiphanes
comes up into Judea, enters the City, spoils the Temple, robs the City, and
kills a many of the Citizens as the learned Chronologers quote out of Macchab,
1.1. In which Macchabean wars, the Jews were much wasted and scattered. Yet
after that act of Antiochus, the generality of the two Tribes that were left,
and the sprinklings of the ten Tribes as is supposed, Ezra 2.62. (as many as
came up with them under Cyrus by Ezra) abode there, about a hundred sixty and
six years more (with much trouble in the ensuing Macchabean wars, and the Roman
invasions and domination succeeding them till Christ should be borne at
Bethlehem in Judea, that the Scripture might be fulfilled touching that place
of his birth. But they crucifying Christ, affronting his Gospel with
sacrificing, and persecuting his members, and with all (divine justice therein
most righteously recompencing them) rebelling against the Romans their
Governors, God and men conspired in a further prosecution of this second
scattering (on foot by the Antiochian Macchabean, and Roman wars) Titus the
Roman Emperor some forty years after Christ's ascension, destroying their
Temple, and after him Adrian destroying the City of Jerusalem; After whom
Constantine the Great scattered them from Mamre, and then God himself
scattered them, being about to re-build the Temple (by the encouragement of
Julian the Apostata) by fire from heaven, and wonders on earth. After all
which, the Saracens, Arabians, and Turks invaded their land, and miserably
scattered them, and so they continue (excepting a few Jews in, and about
Jerusalem) to this day dispersed in the Isles of the Sea, or of the Gentiles,
viz. in the West Indies, Italy, Poland, Spain, Portugal, Low Countries, Media,
Persia, Assyria, etc. (as we shall see presently) and in most Countries in the
world, as the Rabbis in their books plainly confess. So that Gods setting his
hand THE SECOND TIME to recover his people out of ASSYRIA etc. cannot be
straightened to the return of the two Tribes under the conduct of Zerubbabel
and Joshua, with Ezra, for this was but the first time. They are again
scattered. And the Ten Tribes as well as the Two, are his people; and the
promise is, Romans 11. of saving all ISRAEL. Therefore the whole work of
restoring all the twelve Tribes now lies on Gods hands to recover them from
Assyria the second time, in this sense also. And he must do it universally,
including the generality of all his people that are scattered, and from all
places, as (says our Text) from ASSYRIA] the common name of the Empire at
their first captivity there. Of which there is abundant mention in the books of
Kings, Chronicles, and Ezra. And there were of the Jews there in the time of
Jeremiah the Prophet, Jer. 44.1. And from EGYPT.] Which likely afterward was
added in part or whole to that Empire, as several times in the reign of
several Kings of Israel and Juda, many Jews were carried thither. Of whose
scattering there unto the Apostles time, see Act. 2.10. And from PATHROS] There
was Pathros sometime belonging to the Territories of Egypt, there being mention
of the Country of the Inhabitants called Pathrusim, Genesis 10.14. whose place or
land of habitation may very fitly be called Pathros, and was a Province of
Egypt. Jer. 44.1. The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning all the
Jews, which dwell in the land of Egypt, etc. Then (v. 15) All the men, etc.
even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt in Pathros answered
Jeremiah, etc. See also Ezekiel. 29.14. and chap. 30. v. 14. And those Pathrusim
were of the lineage of Mitsraim or Egyptus, Genesis 10.14. 1 Chronicles. 1.12. Others
say, it signifies Parthos, the Parthians of the Country of Parthia (with an
easy and usual Metathesis) which Parthia is on the borders of Media. Or (say
others) it may be Petra in Arabia (of which see Esa. 16.1. The land from SELA,
or as it is in the margin Petra) whence Arabia Petrea. Others say, it is a
part of Lybia, inhabited by the Pharusii mentioned by Pliny and Ptolome, and
seated near the Atlantic Sea. Of the Jews being scattered unto the Apostles
times in the said Parthia, Media, Egypt, Lybia, Arabia, we read in Act. 2.9,
10, 11. And from CUSH] that is Ethiopia. Compare chap. 18.1. And from ELAM]
that is Persia. And from SHINAR that is a region in Chaldea, Genesis 11.28. Jer.
51.24. and 35. Ezekiel. 23.16. And of their scattering even to the Apostles times
in Elam, or Persia, and Mesopotamia, which was part of Chaldea, etc. See Act.
2.9, 10, 11. And 1 Pet. 1.1. And from HAMATH] that is, Cilicia in Asia the
less. Of their scattering there, see likewise Act. 2. ibid. and 1 Pet. ibid.
Paul also an Hebrew says of himself, that he was borne at Tarsus a chief
City of Cilicia. And from the ISLANDS OF THE SEA, that is, the maritine
Countries bordering upon the Sea, or any Kingdom on the other side of the Sea
from Judea, as it is a common phrase in Scripture; the Jews not understanding
the nature of other Countries, being no travellours, or Seamen, to leave their
National Church, for the barbarous Countries, as they were in the times of the
Old Testament. So that Islands of the Sea, comprehends all the World beside the
Countries of Judea and Samaria. So that according to this enumeration, and
description, God must set his hand the second time to recover all the remnant
of his people that are left in any of the said Countries. Which is not yet
done, and therefore yet to be fulfilled.

Furthermore, that in the twelfth verse proves that the Prophecy of this
Chapter is not yet fulfilled. And he shall set up an Ensign for the NATIONS
(Hebr. (...) for the GENTILES, that is, The unbeleeving people without the
Church, that had not yet received the word) And shall assemble the outcasts of
ISRAEL (that is, the ten Tribes) and gather together the dispersed of JUDAH
that is, the two Tribes) from the FOUR CORNERS of the EARTH, For first, we see
that this recovering of Gods Elect, the Second time is of the Jews, together
with the Gentiles, which recovering them the second time we never saw yet. At
Christ's first coming at his Incarnation, most Jews and Gentiles held off from
embracing the Gospel; as we see in the story of the Evangelists and Acts of the
Apostles. And soon after Constantines time, and downward, more of both fell
off. And at this day all the Jews, and the most of the Gentiles continue in
infidelity. Therefore this gathering of both is yet to come before the
destruction of all unbeleevers at the ultimate judgment. Secondly, observe how
distinctly the Prophet names, 1 The Gentiles; 2 The outcasts of Israel, that is
of the ten Tribes; 3 The dispersed of Judah that is of the two Tribes,
which was not done at the return of the captivity out of Babylon, or at the
coming of Christ in the flesh, nor to this day. Thirdly, Take notice that the
elect of all Jews, Israelites and Gentiles must be called and gathered
together from the four corners of the earth, that is, from all parts of the
world, which is larger then Babylon, which is not done to this day, but the
Jews and Israelites are still found inhabiting in all quarters of the world,
as Travellours and Seafaring men see with their eyes, and the Rabbis confess
in their books.

And yet further it appears that the Prophecy of this Chapter is not to this
day fulfilled by that in verse 13. etc. to the end of the Chapter. That all
envy between Judah and Ephraim shall cease, and that all other that will not
obey and comply with the Jews in a right Gospel Worship of God shall be
destroyed, viz. The Philistims in the West, and the people of the East, all of
them of Moab, Ammon, Edom, and Egypt, and there shall be a way for the remnant
of the Jews from Assyria, as there was to them at their coming up out of
Egypt. But the Jews in a great part are under the tyranny of the Turk, and the
rest scattered in all Nations, none of their enemies are destroyed, nor do any
Nations comply with them in point of Religion to this very day.

Lastly, Babylon. I my self have heard some of them bemoaning themselves, that
this their last captivity, or dispersion, is longer then ever any before. They
have not hitherto, as it is in that Song verse 4. Declared the name, and famous
facts of God among the peoples, but rather in refusing Christ, have obscured
his name. Nor have they (as verse 5.) praised for the excellent things that God
should do for them in all the earth.

Now let the wise and understanding Reader review all that has been said, and
be judge himself whether the Prophecy of this eleventh Chapter of Isaiah has
been fulfilled to this day. And if not, sure he will not dream of a fulfilling
of it at the ultimate judgment, there being something almost in every verse,
inconsistent with that time, when no government (as described in the first five
verses) is remaining in Christ's hands, 1 Cor. 15.28, etc. No dwelling of the
Wolf and Lamb together (as held forth in verse 6, 7, 8.) No lifting up of an
Ensign, to bring men to a seeking after Christ (as verse 10.) No filling the
earth with the knowledge of the Lord, etc. (as v. 11.) Therefore (as sure as
God is true) this is yet to be fulfilled before the ultimate day of judgment.

SECT. XIV.
Isaiah is, Chapter 14. verse 1. etc. to verse 8. Verse 1. The Lord will have
mercy on JACOB, and will yet choose ISRAEL, and set them in their OWN LAND, and
the STRANGERS shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of
JACOB. Verse. 2. And the (...) PEOPLES shall take them, and bring them to their
place. And the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for
servants and handmaids; and they shall take them CAPTIVE whose CAPTIVES they
were, and they shall rule over their OPPRESSORS. Verse. 3 And it shall come to
pass in THE DAY, that the Lord shall give thee REST-FROM THY SORROW, and from
the FEAR, and from thy hard BONDAGE, wherein thou wast made to serve; That
thou shall (Verse. 4.) take up this Proverb against the King of BABYLON, and
say, HOW HAS THE OPPRESSOR ceased, the GOLDEN CITY CEASED. The Lord (Verse.
5.) has broken the staff of the WICKED, and the Scepter of the RULERS. He
(Verse 6.) who smote the people in wrath, with a continual stroke, he that
ruled the Nations an anger is persecuted, and none hinders. The WHOLE EARTH
(Verse 7.) is at REST and is QUIET, they break forth into singing, etc. The
rest of the Chapter, being appurtenances, illustrations, etc. of this here
presented.

New Translators even in those Episcopal times, which were so adverse to this
our point, do concur with us so far, as to give us the Contents of the Chapter
in these words, Gods merciful RESTORATION of ISRAEL. And they speak well,
and are not alone in their opinion, the stream of Interpreters generally
concurring, that this Chapter intends, Gods joining of Jews and Gentiles into
one Church, which is something to the point in hand in the general.

making of Jews and Gentiles into one Church, one sheepfold (as it is called
John 10.) was fulfilled when the substituted or subrogated Gentiles were
brought in, in the Apostles time (beginning in Act. 10.) But they utterly
mistake, if they so think. For those Gentiles, and downwards, were and are but
substitutions and subrogations of them whiles the Jews fall off, till the
fullness of the said Jews should be brought in, and then, and not till then, is
the fullness of the Gentiles brought in with the Jews into one Church. So that
the FULNESS of the Gentiles is not yet brought in much less the fullness of the
Jews. For as in John the first, Christ coming to his own, his own received
him not. So after they crucified him, and persecuted his Apostles. Whiles in
the Old Testament, Christ called the Jews, the Gentiles hung off. And whiles
he called many Gentiles in the New Testament, the Jews generally fell off. And
although there were some sprinklings of Jews and Gentiles converted in the
Apostles time, and after that many Gentiles; yet what is all that to the
fulfilling of this Text of Isa. 14. I will yet choose ISRAEL and bring them
into their own Land, and the STRANGERS shall be JOINED to them, and they shall
cleave to the HOUSE OF JACOB. For neither in the Apostles time, nor downward to
this day, have the GENTILES (called here Strangers) joined to Israel, or
cleaved to the house of Jacob (Israel and the house of Jacob signifying the ten
Tribes) nor to the generality of the two Tribes, because neither two Tribes,
nor ten Tribes have joined and cleaved to the Lord Jesus. To make plain, and
prove all this that we have said, we will scan first the Apostles discourse
Romans 11. and secondly, the particular expressions of this Text of Isa. 14.

1. The Apostle Paul giving us an account of his time, and downward, Romans 11.
tells us in the 30 verse. As ye Gentiles in times past have not believed God,
yet now have obtained mercy through the Jews unbeleef, even so also have the
Jews now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.
That is, that the Church of Christ (as needs must, whiles he is head) being
continued, at least by vicissitudes of Jews and Gentiles, the Gentiles now,
upon the present falling off of the Jews, being in possession of the Gospel,
may continue the same, throughout the successions of the Church, till the time
of the vocation of the Jews, that the said Jews may be called thereby through
the Ministry, prayers, and examples of the Gentiles. So that the Jews and
Gentiles for the generality, have been since the first mention in the Old
Testament of this distinction of Jews and Gentiles to this day, as two buckets
to a Well, if one were full, the other was empty, thus continually keeping
their vicissitudes, and turns in embracing, or non-imbracing of the word of
Christ, which the Apostle further shows us in that 11. to Romans in the distinct
graduals thereof, giving two to each of them, the two of the Jews thus, 1 There
was their root, or first fruits, or initiation. 2 Their branches or lump, or
fullness, verse. 12.16, and 18.
The two graduals of the Gentiles thus: 1 SOME wild branches; 2 Their
fullness, v. 11. and 25. Then mark the close of the Apostle concerning both,
verse. 25. and 26.
When the FULLNESS of the GENTILES shall come in, then ALL ISRAEL shall be
saved, quoting several Prophesies of the Old Testament to prove the same.
Whence we must necessarily infer these two conclusions, That the conversion of
the Jews and Gentiles heretofore, and downward until now, are still but the
root, first fruits and beginnings, the most persons of the Jews, and most
Nations of the Gentiles to this day not knowing the Lord Christ. 2. That Jews
and Gentiles are not to this day one Church, according to the Prophecy of this
14 of Isa. viz. That the Strangers of the Gentile Nations shall be joined to
the Jews, and shall cleave to the house of Jacob; and according to the stating
of the question by Saint Paul in this 11 of Romans viz. That when the fullness of
the Gentiles shall come in, ALL ISRAEL shall be saved. For let us but ask
experience whether ever these were yet fulfilled to the full of these places?

2 This will be far more plain by a punctual scanning of all the passages in
this 14. of Isa. First, that in the first verse [ I will says the Lord) yet
choose ISRAEL, and have mercy on JACOB] must needs be extended beyond the
return of the Captivity of the two Tribes from Babylon, and beyond the
conversion of a few of them in the Apostles time. For Jacob and Israel, must of
necessity comprehend the ten Tribes, the Prophet Isaiah prophesying long after
the division of the whole twelve into two Kingdoms; two into the one, and ten
into the other. And therefore the Prophet Isaiah well knew the distinction
between Judah and Israel, Chap. 1. v. 1. and uses it in relation to our point,
Chap. 11. v. 12. before opened. And therefore he minds here well enough, what
he distinctly means when he says. Jacob, and Israel, as comprehensive at least
of the ten Tribes, to be delivered as well as the Two. For secondly, when he
says in this same first verse, Strangers shall be joined with them; that is,
with Jacob and Israel, he could not intend to leave out the most of the Jews,
viz. ten for two, to whom those Strangers were to join. Nor was this done at
the return of the two Tribes from Babylon. Then Strangers of the Gentiles
joined not with them. Nor was it done at the joining of the two handfuls, the
one of Jews, the other of Gentiles in the history of the Acts of the Apostles.
For they could no way answer to Jacob and Israel, and Strangers, indefinitly
spoken without limitation.
I have often admonished that the grand prophesied promises, touching Christ's
Kingdom, have their gradual, successive, progressive impletions. Redux Juda,
Juda returning from Babylon was a Type. The conversion of an handful of them
in the Apostles time was but the first fruits, Romans 11. But the fullness of
Gentiles and Jews is yet behind. Thirdly, we never yet saw that in the second
verse. fulfilled, That Christians have been servants and handmaids to the Jews.
in a right religious harmony and compliance. For that must be the sense and
good news of this promise, or else Christians shall have loss, and that in
things concerning salvation. Fourthly, nor did we ever see that also in the
second verse fulfilled that the Captive Jews shall take them captive, whose
Captives they were, and rule over their oppressors. For neither in their
return from Babylon did the Jews take captive their Captivators, but returned
by voluntary consent of King Cyrus; nor at Christ's coming did they take any
captive, but rather were captives under Augustus and Tyberius, Emperors of
Rome, and of Babylon too, as subdued by those Romans, the universal Monarchs
then of the whole world. If any should be of so ayery a fantasy, as to
evaporate this into a figure, that at Christ's coming, the Jews took their
Captivators captive in a spiritual sense, of conversion; let such remember
themselves that Converts are the greatest Freemen, Joh. 8.32. And that for the
Jews then (alas for them) the veil was on them, 2 Cor. 3. So that they were
generally in a spiritual Captivity themselves, like Sampson when his eyes were
put out. And that Dan. c. 12. intimates that the Jews Conquest over their
enemies should be corporal. Neither of which Conquests do we yet see, that the
Jews either corporally or spiritually have subdued them that captivated them.
Fifthly, neither was that in the second verse ever yet fulfilled, That the
PEOPLES or Gentiles should take the Jews, and bring them to their place, etc.
Calvin on this place grants thus much, That this was not done after the Jews
coming out of Babylon; giving this reason, That the Gentiles were so far from
being the conduct, and assistance to the Jews in their return and settlement,
and to contribute their service to them therein, that they did not only trouble
the Jews, but destroyed them from off the earth, quoting Ezra 4.4. Adding that
therefore this must be fulfilled in, through, and by Christ. Thus far Calvin.
But when was this yet ever done by Christ? Surely those seeds in Christ and the
Apostles time, could not be the Harvest here meant, whole Jacob, and Israel
were not then in the land of the Lord. Nor are they to this day. But are for
the general under the dominion of Turks, Romans, Indians, and Countries in
every Nation almost under heaven, rather serving the Gentiles, then being
served of the Gentiles. And therefore this cannot be done till as Dan. 2. that
the little stone Christ, cut out of the mountain without hands, breaks to
pieces the fourfold-mettaled image of all the four Monarchies of the earth.
Whereas yet the Roman Monarchy in great part stands to this day. Sixthly, The
twelve Tribes of Jacob and Israel are not yet (as it is v. 3.) delivered from
their sorrow, and fear, and bondage. They are in bondage being scattered
amongst all Nations. They are in sorrow for that scattering from their own
Country. And are there in fear, being forced to pay tribute for their own
freedom. Nor were they freed from that bondage in Christ's time, being then
Captives under the Romans. Nor from their fear, but for fear of the Romans if
they should own Christ, they crucified him, and put him to death. Therefore
when this deliverance is fulfilled to purpose, it is done as it follows in the
seventh clause and consideration, v. 4, 5, 6, 7 That the Jews shall take up
this Proverb, How has the OPPRESSOR ceased. The Lord has broken the SCEPTER
of the RULERS, and the staff of the WICKED, so that the WHOLE EARTH is at REST
and QUIET, that they break forth into SINGING. But nor Scripture, nor
Histories, nor Experience show us, that ever these things were fulfilled to
this day. And at the ultimate day of judgment will be no meet time for such
work, as every man's own reason will easily prompt. Therefore it is yet to be
done before the ultimate day of judgment.

SECT. XV.
THe fifth place in Isaiah is Chapter 24. verse 23. Then the Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously. R. Kimchi upon this
Chapter has these words, (...), that is, (...) This parasha, or Section is to
be (fulfilled) hereafter, (...). In the destruction of Edom (...) Afterward he
shall remember the salvation of ISRAEL. To understand what he means by Edome,
he bids us (upon v. 16.) Look (...) upon the destruction of ROME mentioned in
the who le book of God.


To these few words, I shall need to speak but few. THEN, relating to that
before in verse 22, 23. fetches its sense from thence. In that day, say the 22,
and 23. verses, It shall come to pass, that the Lord shall punish the host of
the High ones that are on high, and the Kings of the earth upon the earth
(meaning plainly, as the last clause evidenceth, the Gentile-Potentates and
powers) And they (those Gentiles) shall be gathered together as prisoners are
gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison. And after many days
THEY (the Jews says Calvin, giving a strong reason Quum igitur haec ad
sustinendos FIDELES pertinerent, non dubium quin IUDAEIS dicerentur, apud quos
potissimum fides crat, aut potius nusquam apud alios apparebat.
) shall be visited. To which sense touching the Jews the subsequent words also
in the next verse (the Text we are now upon) do mightily concur. The Moon
shall be confounded, etc. when the Lord shall reign before his Ancients. The
original and rise of which then, you now see; That upon the great destruction
of the impenitent Gentile-Potentates and Powers, the Jews (and if you will
include the penitent Gentiles, it shall not grieve us) shall be visited in
mercy; And the Moon shall be confounded, etc. that is, the glory of the Church
shall be such, as the light of the Moon, and brightness of the Sun shall be
nothing to it. At which time, as it follows the Lord of Hosts (in Christ Jesus,
says Diodat) shall reign on Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem (types of the
universal Church) and that in great glory before his Ancientours, who were the
Church of the Jews, by blood, as well as by Profession; Christ being considered
as man, as the local circumstance of Zion and Jerusalem, calls for that notion.

Calvin again clearly intimates in many circumlocutions, that his sense of
this Text is, that Christ (speaking in the future of time after Calvin's time)
shall establish his Church on earth in a most glorious estate. Ego non dubito
quin persequatur Propheta, etc. That is, I doubt not, but that the Prophet
prosecutes the consolation which he had touched in the former verse to this
sense or effect; when the Lord shall visit his people, and shall purge his
Church from their filthinesses, he shall settle his Kingdom, and that so
illustrious, that it shall obscure the Sun and Stars with its splendour; which
kind of speech is usual with the Prophets, as we have already seen. But here
Isaiah speaks of the BODY of the Church, and not only of the HEAD: Seeing
therefore the Lord will ESTABLISH HIS KINGDOM upon MOUNT ZION, so great shall
be the Magnificence thereof in the INSTAURATION of the People, as that the
things that otherwise shone in the sight of men, shall now be as darkness.
Which that he might express to the life, be names these things that above all
are most splendent. The word RULING is improperly drawn (to signify) Gods
vengeance. For although God be said to reign, when he acts the office of a
Judge, yet this speech so comprehending within it, concerning THE KINGDOM of
God in MOUNT ZION, it always has the notation of mercy and salvation. For he
speaks of the RESTITUTION of the Church. Whence it follows that this is not
fulfilled but in Christ. He making a precise mention of Elders or Ancients,
uses a Synecdoche, which is exceeding usual in Scripture. For he takes a
special part of the Church for the whole body of the Church, yet not without a
consult purpose. He calls by the name of Ancients, as well the PRIESTS, as
other RULERS, who were chief over Discipline and Manners, by whose moderation,
and prudence, the rest are to be governed. Under their names he comprehends all
the people, not only because they represent the whole body, as under their
shadow the people was covered, but also that believers might conceive hope of a
future ORDER. For otherwise it would little, or nothing profit, that the
multitude should be left dissipated in manner of a dis-membred body, or
confused Mass. Neither is it impertinently added, BEFORE the ANCIENTS, that
the Jews might know that the power of God should be MANIFEST and ILLUSTRIOUS,
etc. For SO HE REIGNS, that we may PERCEIVE HIM PRESENT WITH US. For if it
should be beyond our COMPREHENSION, no COMFORT would redound to us thereby. For
GLORY, others read GLORIOUSLY, others GLORIOUS. I had rather take it in the
substantive (GLORY) although it makes no difference in the sense. For it
teaches how great shall be the magnificence and glory of God by ERECTING THE
KINGDOM OF CHRIST, in that all splendour is obscured, and ONLY the glory of
Christ must be eminent and CONSPICUOUS. Whence it follows, that THEN at length,
God shall enjoy HIS OWN RIGHT AMONG US, and have his due honor, WHEN ALL HIS
CREATURES BEING GATHERED INTO ORDER, he alone is RESPLENDENT IN OUR EYES. Thus
Calvin, whose words and phrases here, can bear no less then a sense favoring
a visible glorious Kingdom of Christ on earth, though something of it (as he
says) must be comprehended by faith above sense. To which visibility of
Christ's Kingdom on earth, the correlative in 22, and 23. verses answering to
our relative THEN in our Text, of punishing the Kings of the earth upon the
earth, etc. does strongly bear witness.

litterall sense, as to corporal Transactions, not at their return from
Babylon. For then the Babylonians were not punished, nor put in prison. Nor
were the Jews in an outward glorious condition, but as in subjection still to
Babylon, and made a scorn by Sanballat, Tobiah, etc. with the multitude of
their adherents, hindering their building, discouraging their work, raising
lies, laying plots to endanger them. So that they were as long, near upon, in
repairing the Temple and City of Jerusalem, and settling the state thereof from
the first that they began it, as they had been in Captivity. See the book of
Ezra, Nehemiah, and Haggi.
Nor was this Text of Isa. literally, and corporally fulfilled to them, at
Christ's being on earth, being then also under captivity and reproach by the
Romans; See the story of the Evangelists, and Acts.
and to this day in the same condition under them, and all Nations in the
world. Nor has this been yet fulfilled in a spiritual sense from that time to
this day, in that, not one of ten thousand of the Gentiles, admired their
Levitical glory. And their Ancients, the Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and Rulers
of the Synogogues, and People generally opposed and persecuted Evanagelical
glory. And though for a spurt some few favored the Gospel, Act. 1. Act. 2. yet
by and by they universally ( Act. 13.) fell off from this Glory, and so
continued until these our times.



SECT XVI.
Isaiah is that which follows at the heels of this, viz. Chapter 25.
throughout, but especially from v. 7. to the end of the Chapter, with some
passages of the 26 Chapter, being also a Song of praise for the glorious state
of the Church to be; especially those passages, v. 14. v. 19.

The late invention of Chapters, may not hinder our prospect upon the continued
sense of this Chapter, inseparably depending on the former; where in the last
verse the Prophet having said, THEN shall the Moon be confounded, and the Sun
ashamed, WHEN the Lord of Hosts shall REIGN in Mount Zion, and Jerusalem ( etc.
explained before) he now begins this Chapter with a solemn praise to God, for
his preparation to, and manifestation of that his glorious Reign. To give you
the maine passages of the whole Chapter, v. 1. O Lord thou art my God, I will
exalt thee, etc. v. 2. For thou have made of a City, an heap, of a defenced
City a ruin; a palace of strangers to be no City; it shall never be built. v.
3. Therefore the strong people shall glorify thee, etc. v. 4. For thou have
been a strength to the poor, and needy in distress, a refuge from the storm,
a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones, is a storm
against the wall. v. 5. Thou shall bring down the noise of the strangers as
the heat in a dry place, even the heat with the shadow of a cloud, the branch
of the terrible ones shall be brought low. v. 6. And in this Mount shall the
Lord make to all people a feast of fat things, etc. v. 7. And the Lord will
destroy in this mount, the face of the covering cast over all people, and the
vail that is spread over all nations. v. 8. He will swallow up death in victory
and the Lord God will wipe away all tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of
his people he shall take away from off all the earth, etc. v. 9. And it shall be
said in that day, Lo, this is the Lord, we have waited for him, etc. v. 10. In
this Mount shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be trodden down
under him as straw to the dunghill. v. 11 And he shall spread forth his hands in
the midst of them, as he that swimmeth etc. and shall bring down their pride
together, with the spoils of their hands. verse. 12. and last, And the
fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, and lay low, and
bring to the ground, even to the dust. Chap. 26. verse. 14. They are dead, they
shall not live, they are deceased, they shall not rise, etc. verse. 19. Thy dead
men shall live, together with my dead body shall they rise, awake and sing, ye
that dwell in the dust, etc.

Vi^^

1 The Destruction of the enem^^^ ^f the Church, v. 2. amplified more
afterward. 2 The Deliverance of the Church, v. 4. enlarged more in the rest of
the Chapter. 3 The joyful state of the Church upon that their deliverance, and
their joy in it, v. 6, 7, 8, and elsewhere in the Chapter.
All which three parts are, I say, by the Apostles carried down to the state
of the New Testament Church never yet fulfilled. I will give three Instances.

The first Instance.
St. Ioh. in Rev. 7. makes these three parts a state yet to come. v. 1, 2, 3.
you have the Destruction of the enemy. There were four Angels, that had power
in their hands to hurt the four quarters of the earth, both by sea and land, as
soon as the servants of God should be sealed. Those that were to be hurt, were
those that had held the servants of God under tribulation, v. 14. And those
enemies were to be hurt by a storm, viz. by the blowing of the four winds upon
the sea, the earth, and the trees, v. 2, 3. even as the Prophet Isa. in that 25
Chap. v. 4. calls the state of the wicked a storm, and compares it in their
opposition against the godly, to a blast of a storm dashed against the wall,
whose fury the wall stops, breaks, and scatters, so that they are sheltered
that stand under it. So that plainly here is the destruction of the enemies of
the Church prophesied by John, in like phrase and forms of speech, as were
used by the Prophet Isa. in that 25. Chapter. Next, for the deliverance of the
Church, St. John likewise prophesies of it in that seventh of Rev. in the same
figurative speeches as the Prophet had used, viz. That the Lord shall be among
his people, in manner of dwelling (v. 15.) And his people shall hunger no more,
nor thirst any more, nor shall the same light on them (or as it is in the
Greek, fall upon them, that is a way of smiting, blasting, or scorching) or any
heat (v. 16.) For the Lamb which is amidst them shall feed them, etc. and shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes (v. 17.) To which St. Paul speaking of the
resurrection of the Saints, which is before the ultimate day of judgment in 1
Cor. 15. as we have, and shall demonstrate, annexeth this, Then shall be brought
to pass that saying, Death is swallowed up in victory. And again the same
Apostle Paul speaking of the conversion of the Jews 2 Cor. 3. as of a thing to
come after his time, but yet not fulfilled, but shall be fulfilled at the great
Restitution, of which we speak, he uses this expression, and gives forth this
Prophecy in the 15 and 16 verses of that 2 Cor. 3. But even to this day, when
Moses is read, the vail is upon their hearts. Nevertheless when they shall turn
to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away, viz. By the presence of the Lord.
All which expressions of John and Paul, in relation to the Churches
deliverance, are full to the sense and words of the Prophet in that 25 of
Isaiah, viz. This is the Lord, we have waited for him, for in this mountain
shall the hand of the Lord, rest, v. 9, 10. (whereby to signify Gods presence
amongst his people.) And shall be a succor to his people from the fury of
their enemies, as the heat is sheltered off with the shadow of a cloud, v. 3,
and 4. And he will feed them with a feast of fat things, v. 6. And he will
destroy the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all
Nations, v. 7. (therefore among the rest, that is upon the Jews) And (v. 8.) he
will swallow up death in victory, according to the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 15.54.
And chap. 26. of this Prophet, v. 19. compared with v. 14. They shall not rise,
but thy dead men shall rise. Upon this place of Isa. 26.14.19. hear what the
Hebrew Rabbis, the Septuagint, the ancient Jews, and the ancient Greek and
Latin Fathers, say, and hold; R. Solomon says, They shall live that dyed for
thy sake (bringing in the Prophet as speaking to God) (...) etc. that is, The
Royal, Regal, or Kingly decree went forth from thy face or presence, saying, MY
DEAD BODIES SHALL RISE AGAIN The dead bodies of my people, whose bones fell for
my sake, to them there shall be a resurrection. This by way of an Antithesis
answers to that v. 14. above written. The (...) REPHAIM (express in the Hebrew
Text, though obmitted I know not why, in the English, which the Chalde and
Jerome render GIANTS) SHALL NOT RISE AGAIN, but these shall rise again. Thus R.
Solomon. The REPHAIM be interprets of the WICKED (...) that are remiss; namely
(...) Who remit, or slack their hands from the Law. The Septuagint render it
(...). Hieron. vivent mortui tui, interfecti mei resurgent. And that the
ancient Jews did interpret this place of Isaiah touching the resurrection of
the dead, appears by that Gemara Sanhedrim, Cap. 11. The Sadduces ^^kt R.
Gamaliel, whence he could prove that God would quicken or make alive the dead;
he answered them, (...) Out of the Law, Deuteronomy 31.16. (...) out of the Prophets,
Isa. 26.19. (...) out of the holy writings, Cant. 7.9. The Greek and Latin
Fathers likewise interpret this place of the Resurrection of the dead, viz.
Irenaeus, l. 5. c. 15 and c. 34. yea and of the Resurrection of the just.
Tertul. de Resur. c. 3 1. Cyril. and Aug. lib. 20. de Civit Dei, Clemens
Romanus in Ep. ad Cor.
As for the third part, the agreement between Isaiah and John prophesying of
the joyful state of the Church, and their joying in it, he that has but half
an eye may see that it signifies, that great will be the glory of the Church,
when those things mentioned by Isaiah and John shall be fulfilled, and can
signify no less then a glorious restoration of the Church on earth, as all
circumstances concur in both places. Even as, great was the Prophets and the
Evangelists joy, personating, or representing the Church in a way of Songs of
praise. John in the 9, 10, 11, 12 verses of this seventh of the Revelation,
speaks of the Churches triumphing, on this wise. After this (says he) I
beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations
and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands, and cried with a
loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God that sits upon the Throne, and unto
the Lamb. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the
Elders, and the four Animals, or living creatures, and fell before the Throne
on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen, Blessing, and Glory, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God
for ever, and ever, Amen. Which expressions of Praise meetly suit to the words
of our Prophet in the five and twentieth of Isaiah, verse. first, second, third,
and fourth; O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy Name,
for thou have done wonderful things (by faith here praising God for things to
be done, as if done; as the Church does in that seventh of the Revelation) for
thou have made, says Isaiah, of a City an heap, etc. Therefore shall the
strong people glorify thee etc. for thou have been a strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress, etc. And verse 9. It shall be said in
that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us:
This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation. Thus of the first Instance.

The second Instance.
John likewise in the 21 Chapter of Revelation first four verses, applies
those three parts of Isa. 25. (viz. the Churches salvation, the enemies
destruction, and the Churches exaltation) unto a future glorious state of the
Church yet to be upon the earth. I saw, says John there (in a Prophetic
vision) a new heaven, and a new EARTH, (which sounds shrilly of a state on
earth) For the first heaven, and the first earth were passed away; and there
was no more Sea. Pareus confesses New in quality, not in substance, which
plainly condescends to a glorious state of the Church to be on earth; the
highest heaven above being of so much better a substance physically (as the
Philosophers rationally contend) that it needs not to be made better in
quality. Therefore the meaning must be, that the lower heavens, and the earth
below, shall be qualified with freedom from all evil, as to the Church, and
the inhabitants thereof high and low, shall be made better both physically and
morally. The old heaven, and earth, must pass away. The enemies of the Church
must be removed, or converted. Adams curse shall cease ( Romans 8.) and in this
state shall (as in 2 Pet. 3.) dwell righteousness, and absolute pure worship.
And the cessation of Sea, signifies also the removing of all enmities against
the Church far from her. For if it be taken figuratively, it signifies no
more brinish, brackish waters of false doctrine in the Church (as waters
sometimes in Scriptures signifies doctrines) and no more wicked men among the
Church (compared Isa. 57. to the troubled Sea) for there shall be (as John
tells us in this 21 of Revelation) no unclean thing to enter into this estate:
If taken literally, with some acute wits, it signifies that at the time of this
great Restoration, the Sea shall be no longer totally liquid, and fluid, but
at least at top, in most parts of the habitable world crusted over,
consolidated, and compacted to be as a Chrystaline heaven below, to be an
highway for all parts of the world to travel each to other, for spiritual
communion, without any impediment of wind or weather. Then (being a time as of
a New creation) there will be no need of trafficking for riches. Nor shall the
knowledge of the Lord be bounded from the poor Indians, who have not the help,
art, or animosity of Navigation to learn of Christians. Then nor the Egyptiack
Sea, with the seven streams, nor the great Euphrates, etc. shall hinder Jews,
or Gentiles from personal, and spiritual communion, and communication. God
would rather either thus alter, or else dry up all Seas, then the glory and
welfare of his Church should be hindered. To that we have said touching the
meaning of the cessation of Sea, our grave new Annotationists concur thus
far; No more Sea (say they) either literally, for there will need none for
trade: The fire perhaps at the worlds end will dry it up; or figuratively, no
more war against, nor trouble in the Church. The Church shall not be like the
raging Sea, but like the quiet earth. So they. Saint John goes on in the
description of the glorious state of the Church on earth, of which Isaiah
prophesies; I saw, says St. John, New Jerusalem coming down FROM Heaven,
saying, The Tabernacle of God is WITH MEN, and He will DWELL with THEM, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be WITH THEM, and be their God
(all which clearly relate to a state on earth) and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, nor pain. Which words exactly answer to Isaiahs words, in v. 8. of
swallowing up death, and wiping away all tears.

Third Instance. In like manner St. John carries down other passages of Isa.
25. to the times to succeed long after him, not fulfilled to this day. For what
is there spoken in Isa. 25. v. 2. and v. 12. of making the City of strangers an
heap, a defenced City a ruin, a Palace to be no City, an high Fortress into
dust, etc. to the great joy of the Saints, so that they shall sing for joy of
it (Isa. 26.) the same things John applies to the fall of Antichrist, and the
ruin of his nest, viz. the City where he rests, Rev. 16.19. we have it once:
The City of Nations fell, and great Babylon came in remembrance before God. But
in Revel. 18. we have it three times, viz. v. 2. v. 10. v. 18.

SECT. XVII.
UPon the seventh place in Isa. viz. Isa. 33. v. 20, 21. I will only ask this
question of all the men and books in the world; When was that ever fulfilled,
since Isaiahs time, which is here spoken, viz. Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall be taken down; not ONE of the stakes
thereof shall EVER be removed, neither shall ANY cord thereof be broken; But
there the Lord will be to us a place of broad rivers, and streams, wherein
shall go no Gally with Oars, nor gallant ship pass by: I say, when since
Isaiahs Prophecy was this fulfilled? For about seventy years after his
beginning, to prophecy, Jerusalem was taken by the King of Babylon, and the
King and Nobles carried away captive into Babylon. And whereas they returned
again about the year five hundred thirty six before Christ, and enjoyed their
Country a good space of time; yet about one hundred sixty seven years before
Christ, Antiochus Epiphanes, being ejected out of Egypt by the Romans, invades
Jerusalem with a great Army, and spoils and wastes both City and Temple. About
threescore and eleven years after Christ's birth, the Temple was destroyed by
Titus the Roman. About threescore and one year after that, viz. a hundred
thirty and one after Christ, the City was destroyed by Adrian the Roman
Emperor. After these the Saracens and Turks invade Jerusalem and Judea,
possessing it to this day.

SECT. XVIII.
Isaiah is Chap. 34. v. 1. to v. 18. we shall need but touch upon some
passages of so plain a place as this. Verse. 1, 2, etc. Come near ye Nations to
hear, and hearken ye people, let the EARTH hear and ALL that is therein, the
WORLD and ALL things that come sorth of it (observe, this Prophecy concerns
the whole Universe) for the indignation of the Lord is upon ALL Nations, and
his fury upon ALL their Armies, he has utterly destroyed them, he has
delivered them to the slaughter; with many more illustrations, and all for the
sake of Zion, to be avenged of Zions enemies, v. 8. But there was nothing of
this done at the Jews return from Babylon (carried captive thither about
seventy years after this was spoken.) And at Christ's Incarnation, they were
under the Romans power. And to this day under the Turks, who next succeeded the
Romans in dominering over them. Therefore St. John carries this down to the New
Testament, and the later times thereof, unto the ruin of the Antichristian
Nations (that are incorrigible enemies of Christ) whereby to make way for the
glorious Restitution of which we treat, Rev. 11. There was a great Earthquake,
and the tenth part of the City fell, and there were slain of men seven thousand
(a number of perfection, to signify a sufficient number for the design, were
taken off) The Lord takes to him his great power, and destroys them that
destroy the earth. Rev. 19. One sat upon a white horse, called faithful and
true, his eyes were as a flame of fire, etc. and out of his mouth went a sharp
sword, that with it he might smite the NATIONS, and rule them with a rod of
IRON. And an Angel cried with a loud voice, saying, to the fowls, etc. Come,
and gather your selves together, etc. that ye may eat the flesh of Kings, and
of Captains, and of mighty men, and of horses, and of them that sit on them,
and the flesh of ALL men both free and bond, both small and great, etc.

Isa. it is prophesied, It is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of
recompenses for the controversy of Zion. And the streams thereof shall be
turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof
shall become a burning pitch, and it shall not be quenched night, nor day, THE
SMOKE thereof shall go up FOR EVER. Now as there was none of this acted at the
return of the Jews from Babylon, or at Christ's Incarnation, or since; but
that still Antichrist, both Eastern, and Western, dominere over most of the
world: So Saint John in the Revelation, not only in my judgment, but in the
judgment of the old Geneva Notes, and of our New Annotationists too, carries
down these Prophesies of the destruction of the Antichristian world, Rev.
14.11. Rev. 18.18. and Rev. 19.3. where it is said, And the smoke of their
torment ascended up for ever, and they have no rest day nor night, who worship
the Beast, and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name. And
they saw the smoke of the burning of Babylon, and her smoke went up for ever
and ever.

Isa. that in, and upon the desolations of the enemies of the Church, shall
dwell the Cormorant, Bittern, and the Owl, and Raven; which being never
fulfilled to the effect of Isaiahs Prophecy unto St. John's time, he carries
it down (as our New Annotationists consent with me) unto the desolations yet
to be made upon Antichrist, Rev. 18.2. An Angel cried mightily with a strong
voice saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, is become the habitation
of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean, and
hateful bird.

Rome, Chal. v. 9. etc. (...) i. e. The streams of Rome shall be turned into
pitch, and its dust into brimstone, and its land into burning pitch. So the
Chaldee, which Kimchy cites, and approves. R. Kimchi also on verse 16. has
(...) The ruin of Rome. With which passages the Roman Clergy being offended,
leave out in their Editions of those Authors the (...) Rome, and put in (...)
i. e. Cuthith and Javan, that is Grecia.



Idumea the Country of Edom, or Esau, and Bozra the Metropolis thereof, v. 6.
It is easily answered, that though Idumea be named in particular, as a most
intestine Jew-hating enemy, as the manner of unreconciled kindred is, and to be
destroyed among the rest, yet the threats are express in v. 1, 2. against ALL
Nations. Secondly, Moab, and Ammon, and the Ishmaelites, or Hagarens being knit
to the line of the Jews ( Genesis 18. Genesis 16.) as was Idumea the Country of
Esau, they are most fitly held forth as types of the Antichristian enemies of
the Church of the New Testament, Psalm. 83. 6, 7, etc. they all being mothers
children (as Cant. 1.) but not acting as brethren, even as St. John makes the
destruction of those enemies Types and Prophesies of the destruction of
Antichrist, as we heard but now.

SECT XIX.
THe ninth place in Isaiah is Chapter 43. and Chapter 44. being one entire
discourse of the same matter (notwithstanding the division of Chapters.)

In the main and principal design, they treat of the conversion and
salvation, spiritual and temporal of the Jews, which are yet unfulfilled. We
need but touch upon some passages.

It is said Chapter 43. v. 1, 2, 3. Thus says the Lord that created thee O
JACOB, and he that formed thee O ISRAEL, fear not, I have redeemed thee, I have
called thee by name, thou art mine, when thou passest through the waters and
fires, thou shall not be destroyed, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of
ISRAEL, thy Savior, I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Saba for thee.
Which place if we look upon as an history of things done, then it will be
justly queried that though God destroyed Egypt (in the book of Exodus) for
Isreal's sake, yet when dealt he so with Ethiopia and Saba? Therefore generally
and most safely it is referred (as a Prophecy) to future things, answerable to
verse 2. Thou art mine, and I will be with thee in all difficulties. And to v.
4. I have loved thee, and therefore I will give MEN (mark the
comprehensivenesse of the term) for thee. And answerable to verse 5, 6. I am
with thee, I will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West;
I will say to the North give up, and to the South keep not back, bring my
sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. And verse 18, 19,
20, 21. Remember not the former things, behold I will do a new thing, etc. I
will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, the Beasts
of the field shall honor me, because I give waters in the wilderness, etc. to
give drink to my people, my chosen. This people have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my praise. For, this giving Ethiopia and Saba for the
Jews, cannot be understood (as Calvin and the Geneva Notes hint) of the coming
up of Perkaka King of Ethiopia against Assyria, whiles Sennacherib King of
Assyria was coming up against Jerusalem, Isa. 27. for these reasons: First, the
Angel of the Lord going forth into the Army of Sennacherib, and slaying one
hundred eighty five thousand of them ( Isa. 37.36.) was the giving of the
Assyrians, not the Ethiopians, for a ransom for the Jews. Secondly, If that
slaughter of the Assyrians was a ransom for the two Tribes, yet is it nothing
for Israel the ten Tribes, so often mentioned in this Chapter. Thirdly, As we
have no sacred history for it, so no humane probability, that Sennacheribs Army
thus weakened by the Angel, was in a fit condition to war against, and to worst
that Army of the Ethiopians then gathered against Sennacheribs Kingdom of
Assyria, or to overthrow Seba. As it is alike improbable, that Sennacherib
could recruit the old, or raise a new Army speedily enough to encounter with
Perkaka, who was then fully ready for fight. The story concludes Sennacheribs
retreat from Jerusalem otherwise, viz. That he returned and dwelt in Nineveh,
and worshipping in the house of his Idol gods, was slain there by his two
sons, Isa. 37. And in this our New Annotationists concur with us, saying,
That though most understand this of Gods turning Sennacheribs forces against
Egypt and Ethiopia, upon the tidings brought unto him of Tirkakas coming
against him, when he was making toward Jerusalem to besiege it ( Isa. 37.) yet
we cannot conceive (say they) that to be the meaning of the place. For though
it be true that the rumor startled him, and made him think of returning; yet
was it not that, but the fright he took, upon the unexpected blow given in his
Camp, that enforced him to flight, not to invade Egypt, or Ethiopia; which he
was in a sorry case then to do; but to get him home with as much speed as he
could into his own Country, Chap. 31.8, 9. And 37.36, 37. So the
Annotationists very well. But to that they add, I cannot well consent; when
they say That this of giving Ethiopia and Saba for a ransom for Israel, may
well have reference to that remarkable defeat of that vast Army, the greatest
upon record in Scripture, given to the Cushites under Asa etc. For this Chapter
is a Prophecy of things to come, speaking both first and last in the Chapter
in the future tense. If in a touch it speaks in the past tense, in the middle
of the Chapter it is but usual in Prophesies to show their certainty, to
express what shall be, as if done already. And it is spoken of Jacob and
Israel, comprehending all the twelve Tribes, at least the ten, and not the two
only, called Juda, over whom Asa was King: and mentions the ruin of Saba for
Isreal's sake, that they might be delivered, of which we have nothing in past
stories. And if this Chapter be a Prophecy, the story of Asa his victory
abovesaid over the Chushites will not comport with the meaning thereof, Asa
dying many years ( Bucholcerus says above a hundred and fifty) before Isaiah
prophesied.

Isaiahs time fulfilled. At their return from Babylon, none were slain for
Isreal's sake. Nor at the time of Christ's being on earth, nor since the Turk
possessed Judea; for they returned by the voluntary consent of the King of
Babylon. And from the time of Christ's being on earth, and downward, till the
Turk took Judea, the Romans several times (as we have showed before) slew them,
instead of being slain for them, as did the Turks (after the Romans) deal with
them likewise. Nor was the seed of Israel brought from the East, West, North,
and South, and from the ends of the earth to this day. Where still they are
dispersed etc. as it follows in these two Chapters. Nor can these things suit
with the ultimate day of doom.

Egypt, Ethiopia, and Saba shall be destroyed for the deliverance and freedom
of Jacob and Israel, and not only these, but all four quarters of the world,
and the utmost ends of the earth (as it is express in v. 4, 5, 6.) shall be
forced to let Jacob and Israel go free. The Lord will (as it is v. 19.) do a
NEW THING (which must properly signify a thing never done before) to make way
for their return and liberty, as it is express, v. 19. etc. (before set down
at large.) Which wanton wits may endeavor to elude with Allegories and
Phantasmes of their own hatching, which neither can convince a rational
Christian, nor deliver the Jews according to the intent of the Prophet. Who
though before that their deliverance (as in v. 22. etc.) they should not call
upon God, as they ought, but should be weary of the Lord, and should weary the
Lord with their iniquities, and therefore they are given up to the curse, and
to the reproach; yet after these things (as it follows in the 44. Chapter, and
first seven verses, as an Antithesis to their said evil condition) the Lord
promises, and the Prophet prophesies it, that they should have a glorious
condition, saying, Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant, and ISRAEL whom I have
chosen. Thus says the Lord that made thee, etc. Fear not O Jacob, and thou
Jesurun (the name also of the twelve Tribes, Deuteronomy. 32.) I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. I will POUR MY SPIRIT upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. And they shall spring up among
the grass, as willows by the watercourse. One shall say, I am the Lords, and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe
with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. Thus
says the Lord, the KING of Israel, I am the first, and I am the last: Who, as
I, shall CALL, and declare it, and SET IT IN ORDER for me, since I appointed
the ancient people, and the things that ARE COMING, and SHALL COME?

present state of the Jews, as in the latter end of the former Chapter, viz.
sinful, and doleful; you see their names, viz. Jacob, Israel, and Jesurun
(all names of the twelve Tribes) you see what is meant by pouring water upon
the thirsty, viz. pouring out of the spirit; you see what is meant by growing
as willows by the watercourse, viz. by the effusion of the Spirit, multitudes
shall own the Lord; you see what Titles Christ has, of KING of ISRAEL, and of
FIRST and LAST, which are his Titles when he prophesies of his visible Kingdom
to be on earth, repeated several times in the Revelation. Now then deal
ingeniously, and compare the expressions with the Jews condition, for above
these one thousand six hundred and fifty years to this very day, and see then
whether you can indeed, and bona fide, imagine that these Prophesies have been
ever yet fulfilled; or that it is proper, or feisable that they should be
fulfilled at the ultimate day of Doom.

SECT. XIX.
THe tenth place in Isaiah is Chapter 45. v. 14. Touching v. 14. to v. 22. I
will only insert Mr. Medes Notes in the margin, because it came not timely
enough to be put into the Text: Esaiae vaticinium cap. 45. a versu 14. and
deinceps in eodem Adventu (secundo Christi) implendum restatur Apostolus ad
Romans c. 14. v. 11. omnes enim (inquit) stabimus ante Tribunal Christi, scriptum
est enim (nempe in hoc Esaiae vaticinio) vivo ego dicit Dominus, quoniam mihi
flectetur omne genu, and omnis lingua confitebitur Deo. Quod si haec Prophetiae
pars in secundo Christi adventu, in die nimirum Judicii adimplenda restet;
etiam reliqua eodem pertinere necesse est. Est autem Prophetiae initium,
hujusmodi, Sic dicit Dominus, labor Aegypti, and negotiatio Cush and Sabaeorum
VIRORUM MENSURAE (i. e. MERCATORUM (...) sic Targum, quod mensuris utantur;
non, MEN OF STATUR) ad te (O tu captiva, vel O civitas mea) transibunt, and tui
erunt and post te ambulabunt, in compedibus, ad te incurvabunt se, te
deprecabuntur dicentes, Tantum in te Deus est and non est, and alius praeter
ipsum Deus. In Hebraeo enim, omnia haec pronomina sunt generis faeminini, quare
ad Cyrum referri nequeunt, sed ad Jerusalem captivam, de qua in versu
praecedenti mentionem habuit; quemque ad majorem rei evidentiam sic verterem,
ego suscitavi (Cyrum) in justitia, and omnes vias ejus d^^gam. Ipse aedificabit
civitatem meam, and captivam meam [(...)] DIMITTET, idque fine pretio, and
muncre, dicit Dominus exercitum. Tunc sequuntur verba quae paulo ante recitavi.
Sic dicit Dominus, labor Aegypti etc. q. d. parum est quod reaedificaberis and
^emitteris. Imo vero magna re O captiva mea, O civitas mea manet olim
faelicitas. Observandum est enim Dominum, inde a fine versus undecimi
espondere; quasi interrogationi de Fatis filiorum fuorum, juxra quod praemisit,
and ventura interrogate me de filiis meis, and de operibus mamanuum earum
praecipite mihi, nempe ut narrem vobis quae futura sunt. Thus far Mr. Mede. By
which it is most plain that he thinks, and shows for it great strength of
reason, that this place of Isa. is to be understood of a glorious state of the
Church to be on earth, at Christ's second coming.
to the end of the Chapter, but specially verse 22, 23, 24, 25. viz. verse 22.
Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and
there is none else. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my
mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall
bow, every tongue shall swear. 24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness (Heb. righteousnesses) and strength, even to him shall men come,
and all that are incensed against him shall be ASHAMED. 25. In the Lord shall
the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.

Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation, and shall not
be ASHAMED, nor confounded, world without end, for thus says the Lord that
created the Heavens, and formed the earth, he has created it not in vain, he
formed it to be INHABITED (which phrases Not ashamed, etc. and to be inhabited,
extend that everlasting salvation to comprehend a blessed salvation on earth
too) I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth; I said not to
the seed of JACOB, seek ye me in vain, I say, the Prophet having spoken to
Jacob and Israel (names comprehending all twelve Tribes) next he extends his
speech more generally with them to all the Nations of the world. (v. 20, 21.)
Assemble your selves, and come, draw near together, ye that are ESCAPED of the
Nations, Tell ye, and bring them near, Look unto me, and be saved, all the ends
of the earth, etc. as it follows in the words above described at large. So that
by the connection it is evident, that the words above quoted concern both Jews
and Gentiles.

prescript, and precept to all the ends of the earth (which must needs include
Jews and Gentiles) but also a Prophecy and Promise, that all the ends of the
earth shall look to the Lord for salvation, express, in saying, Be ye saved.
And in the 23 verse, I have sworn by my self, unto me every knee shall bow,
and every tongue shall vow; surely shall each one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness, etc. which is the plain language of a promise, and is
confirmed in manner of a promise, with that great confirmation, Gods oath.

viz. the 22 and 23, of looking to God, and bowing the knee to him, the Apostle
applies them twice in the New Testament, to that future submission and
subjection, that all the world shall yield to Jesus Christ, long after his
ascension.

1 The first time is in Romans 14. v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Verse 8. Whether we live, we
live to the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord, whether we live
therefore, or dye, we are the Lords. 9. For to this end Christ both dyed, and
rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead, and living. 10. But
why do thou judge thy brother, etc. we shall all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ. For it is written, as I live, says the Lord, every knee shall
bow to me and every tongue shall confess to God. In which words, 1 It is
plainly held forth, that the Apostle proves Christ's Lordship, or Kingly-hood
over ALL, both dead and living, by this place of Isa. That every knee shall bow
to the Lord. And that as God made Christ a Priest by an oath, Psalm. 110.
emphatically urged by the Apostle, Heb. 7.20. etc.) so he makes him Lord and
King by an oath in this place of Isaiah and so applied by our ^postle in this
14 of Romans to signify the certainty of the thing. 2 That being delivered in
the future tense, it must signify more then Christ's spiritual Kingdom, which
he then had, when Isaiah prophesied. 3 That the Apostles mentioning after
Christ's ascension his Lordship over the dead, and our standing at his judgment
seat, must signify a state (now after Christ is in heaven) yet to come. For he
is not God of the dead, but as they are living in soul, in order to a
resurrection, as Christ himself expounds in the Evangelist. 4 That this must
be a state on earth before the ultimate Doom, in that the Apostle out of the
Prophet asserteth, that all must bow to him, either sincerely, or at least
seemingly, which cannot be so clearly understood to be feisable at the ultimate
day of judgment, which is the final destruction of all, not sincere to
Christ, and the time of Christ's Resignation of all his power 1 Cor. 15. For the
wicked to submit and perish in the same hour were little honor to Christ, and
a short time for all the world to confess to him. 5 That this is a kind of day
of judgment, that is, the beginning, or preface to the great and ultimate day
of judgment, at the beginning of the thousand years, when Christ destroys all
the open obstinate wicked, and sets up the Church into a glorious estate, Rev.
19. latter end. And Rev. 20. first six verses, compare v. 8.9. etc. And at this
beginning, or preface do all believers stand at the judgment seat of Christ
(Revel. 11. v. 15. v. 18. Rev. 20. first six verses) where they receive honor
and rewards of grace and favor. For, according to our Apostle, this bowing,
etc. must be at SOME day of judgment.
But it cannot be at the ultimate final, and therefore before, at the beginning
of the day of judgment, viz. at the beginning of the thousand years.

2 The second time of the Apostles application of this of Isaiah touching
bowing, to the submission of all unto Christ, is Phil. 2, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. Ver.
8. Being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto the death, etc. 9 Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given
him a name which is above every name. 10. That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in EARTH, and things under the
Earth. 11 And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is LORD to
the glory of God the Father. 1 By the quotation of the place out of Isaiah, it
is evident that the meaning of bowing the knee at the name of Jesus, is to
submit to the Lordly and Kingly power of Christ. 2 Every knee (both of things
in heaven, that is of Angels, as they shall in special be employed in
gathering the Church, and setting up the glorious state thereof, Rev. often, and
in earth, that is of all men; and under the earth, that is, at Christ's pleasure
there shall be no sea, Rev. 21.1.) must needs import a state on earth. Which
in the third particular is more confirmed, That every tongue shall confess
that Jesus Christ is the LORD, to the glory of God the Father.


Isaiah intended for salvation of Jews and Gentiles, and as explained by the
Apostle touching submission to, and glorifying of Christ, cannot comport with
the ultimate doom: As they were never yet fulfilled; but rather most knees and
tongues, as of Turks, Papists, Heathens, Socinians, and all profane persons
whatsoever, are against Christ to this day. And therefore these things must
have a time on earth, before the ultimate judgment, to be fairly and
effectually fulfilled.

Isaiah, Viz. v. 24, and 25. I need no more but ask the question, was that
ever fulfilled (which is there spoken) that every knee and tongue shall come
and say (for so is the connection, especially according to the Hebrew Text)
surely in the Lord have I righteousness, and strength? Or that fulfilled
(there also expressed) That ALL that are incensed against the Lord shall be
ashamed? Or that fulfilled (which is the close of all) That in the Lord all the
seed of Israel shall be justified, and shall glory? I say, when ever were these
fulfilled? You have seen that the persons spoken of are, Israel and Jacob,
comprehending all the seed of the twelve Tribes, and all the ends of the earth
of Gentiles, and that the Apostle expounds The Lord by the Lord Christ.
Therefore I may boldly ask, when ever were these fulfilled? Surely to our
sorrow (that are Believers) we see the contrary of all these, in the
generality of all men, Turks, Pagans, Papists, Atheists, Heretics, and
profane persons. And without multiplying words, the very phrases will not
admit of a referring these to the ultimate day of Doom. And therefore must yet
be fulfilled on earth, before that day.

SECT. XX.
Isaiah is Chap. 49. wholly. But I shall need to touch only upon three or four
places of the Chapter, which will give light to all the rest. In general, the
chapter is of the bringing in of Jews and Gentiles into the Church. The Jews
are here named by the general terms that comprehend at least the ten Tribes,
if not the whole twelve: viz. by the names of Israel, ver. 3, 5, 6, 7. and of
Jacob ver. 5. and of the Tribes of Jacob, v. 6. and the preserved of Israel,
ibid. In way of distinction from whom, the two Tribes are called Zion, v. 14.
So that all the twelve Tribes that came of Jacob, are intended in this Chapter,
in the close whereof, as a seal, the Lord styles himself Their Savior, their
Redeemer, the Mighty one of JACOB. The Gentiles likewise are expressly named
in v. 6. viz, I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth; quoted by the Apostle Act.
13.47. to prove the propagation of the Gospel for salvation to the Gentiles.
The concurrence of both Jews and Gentiles in coming in to Christ, is expressed
to the life, ver. 22, 23. Thus says the Lord God, behold I will lift up my
hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall
bring THY sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon THEIR
shoulders, and KINGS shall be thy nursing Fathers, and THEIR Queens shall be
THY nursing Mothers, etc. Add, that the engagement of God that thus he will
call home both Jews and Gentiles, v. 13.15, 19, 18, and 26. is great. Sing O
Heavens, and be joyful O Earth, and break forth into singing, O Mountains, for
God has comforted his people, and WILL have mercy on his afflicted. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb, etc. Yet WILL NOT I FORGET THEE. Behold I have GRAVEN THEE upon
the palms of mine hands. As I LIVE, says the Lord, thou shall surely cloathe
thee with them all (that oppose thee) as with an, ornament, etc. And ALL FLESH
shall know, that I the Lord am the Mighty one of Jacob.



Thy children shall make hasle, thy destroyers, and they that made thee waste,
shall go out of thee. We read no such thing at their return from Babylon, but
that there were the crew of Sanballat, Tobiah, etc. that opposed them. Anon
Alexander the Great the Grecian Monarch enters Jerusalem. After him, Antiochus
Epiphanes, alias Epimanes King of Syria wastes it. After these the Romans
conquer it. And now the Turks ever since possess it.

Thy waste and desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now
be too narrow by reason of the Inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up,
shall be far away. Surely since the carrying away captive of the ten Tribes,
the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah were never full of their own Inhabitants. We
never read, that ever the Assyrians, Babylonians, Cutheans, etc. which the King
of Assyria sent into the Kingdom of Israel (2 Kings 17.24.) were sent for home
again. Nor that ever those CALDEANS that were sent to govern Judea (intimated
in 2 King. 25. were recalled. And for after times (as we have hinted before)
when the Greek went out, the Syrian came in; when the Syrian went out, the
Roman came in; when the Roman went, the Turk came in, and there he is to this
day. These expulsing one another, there has been a constant succession of them
that swallowed up the twelve Tribes. Their wasters and destroyers have been
changed, but have not been sent forth far away from Israel and Judah.

bring the sons and daughters of the Jews in their arms, and upon their
shoulders? If we should wave the litterall sense of settling the Jews in their
own Land, and condescend to a spiritual sense of the generality of the
Gentiles compliance with the generality of the Jews in matters of Religion,
and union into the universal Church, we cannot tell when ever this was done
to this day.

Kings of the Gentiles (as it is v. 23.) and their Queens, have been nursing
fathers and mothers to the Jews, and bowing down to them. Alas, poor Jews!
they have ever since the beginning of the Grecian Monarchy, long before Christ,
down to this very day, been under the awing power of the Gentiles, and mostly
used hardly, and in most places of the world instead of reverence, have been,
and are much villified. Therefore John in Revelation tells us, that this is yet
to come, and to be fulfilled upon earth before the ultimate day of judgment, as
the circumstances of things, and the phrases of the Prophecy necessarily
require, Rev. 21. v. 24.26. And the Kings of the EARTH do bring their glory
and honor (into New Jerusalem) And they shall bring the glory and honor of
the NATIONS into it. And yet so, as there shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, etc.

The captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible
shall be delivered, for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and
I will save thy children, and will feed them that oppress thee, with their
own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood. We know not of
any such thing since the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, in all Histories
divine, and humane, that thus the Jews were saved by such destruction of their
enemies. The Jews indeed soon after their captivity made some attempts, 2 King.
25. v. 25. After that, they made some attempts in 1 Book of Macchab. And after
that, they made several attempts in the time of Titus and Adrian, Roman
Emperors. And since that the Turk has dominered over them, the Kings of the
Gentiles, especially of England, have made some attempts of war on their
enemies, managed by the stock, counsel, and aid of several religious orders
for that end; as of the Templars, Knights of the Rhodes, or of John of
Jerusalem, and of the Knights of Malta, alias Melita. But all these attempts,
have not amounted to Isaiahs phrase, to a full saving of the Jews by the
destruction of their enemies, destroying their flesh, and pouring out of their
blood. But in all these attempts in the end, the Jews party had the worst,
even as Israel and Juda are still dispersed, and those in Judea, are still
under the power of their enemy the Turk. Therefore these things are yet to be
fulfilled, viz. at the fall of Antichrist, Rev. 16.5.6. and Rev. 19. v. 19.20,
21. Thou art righteous O Lord, etc. because thou have judged thus: For they
have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to
drink. And the Kings of the earth, and their armies were gathered together to
make war against him that sat on the white horse, and against his army, and
the beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet, and cast into the lake of
fire, etc. and the rest were slain with the sword, etc.

SECT. XXI
THe twelfth place in Isaiah is in Chapter 54. v. 11. etc. to the end of the
Chapter.

Verse 11. O thou afflicted! tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold I
will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with Saphires.

12 And will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all
thy borders of pleasant stones.

13 And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
peace of thy children.

14 In righteousness shall thou be established, thou shall be far from
oppression, for thou shall not sear, and from terror, for it shall not come
near thee.

15 Whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake.

16 Behold I have created the Smith that brings forth an instrument, and I
have created the waster to destroy.

17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that
shall rise against thee in judgment shall thou condemn. This is the heritage
of the servants of the Lord.

joint relation, and intent, to the glorious estate of Jews and Gentiles
conjunctively, as is intimated, v. 3. etc. Thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles,
etc. when were these ever fulfilled unto Christ and the Apostles days? And
therefore they do clearly carry down these things far beyond the age wherein
they lived upon earth. Saint John prophesies that v. 11, 12. of laying the
Churches foundations with precious stones, that it shall be fulfilled at the
great restoration of the Church (yet after one thousand six hundred fifty and
two) to be fulfilled Rev. 21. v. 18. etc. The building of the wall or New
Jerusalem is of a Jasper, and the City pure gold, the first foundation a
Jasper, the second a Saphir, the third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald,
etc. proportionably all the twelve foundations. So Christ carries down that in
the former part of the 13. verse, All thy children shall be taught of God,
beyond his time, unto after times; Joh. 6.44, 45. That whereas the Jews then
murmured against him, yet the time should come that they should be ALL TAUGHT
OF GOD, quoting this of Isaiah. Which must the rather relate to future times
after Christ's time, in regard of that annexed in that 13. verse of the 54 of
Isaiah, so closely, as that with the former, it makes but one period, viz. ALL
THY CHILDREN shall be taught of God, And GREAT shall be THE PEACE OF THY
CHILDREN; which being not fulfilled unto John's time, he refers it to the time
of the glorious state of New Jerusalem on earth, Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, etc. so that the
time must come that the Jews must not have only pure inward peace, being
taught of God, but GREAT outward peace also, which is further confirmed by that
which follows in the next verses, viz. v. 14, 15, 16, 17, of this 54 of Isaiah,
That in righteousness they shall be established, and they shall be far from
oppression, and from fear, and from terror, that all opposing them shall
fall, and no weapon shall prosper against them, etc. as you have it above
written before your eyes in the first Paragraph of this one and twentieth
Section, which Peter 2 Pet. 3. and John in Rev. Chap. 21. apply (as things not
fulfilled to their time) unto the glorious state of the New earth, that therein
shall dwell righteousness, and no uncleanness, or abomination, shall enter,
but all tears, sorrow, pain, crying shall be removed (as we have often repeated
before.) All which we cannot but expect yet to come (being never yet fulfilled,
but the contrary always extant) and to be fulfilled before the ultimate day of
judgment, there being nor time, nor place for foundations, windows, precious
stones, teachings from God, etc. as above described.

SECT. XXII.
THe thirteenth place in Isaiah is Chapter 59. Verse 19, 20, 21. When the enemy
( viz of the Jews) shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall
lift up a standard against him, and the Redeemer shall come to Zion (or out of
Zion, as the Apostle renders it, Romans 11.26. For if the deliverer come out of
Zion, he comes first to Zion, the preposition 7 having great variety of
significations, as, in, at, according to, or for the sake, etc.) And unto them
that turn from transgression in Jacob (or, as the Apostle renders it, Romans
11.26. shall turn away transgression from Jacoh. The Heb^. is (...) which may
(for ought I know) bear, to be rendered To the end to turn men from: For (...)
with the infinitive mood is in value a future. And (...) the root sometimes is
used transively to turn a thing away, or to turn it from viz. a termino a quo
ad terminum, ad quem (Schindl) or to convert from (Pagn.) And (...) is often
paragogicall, and sometimes put for (...) (as the Masora gives instances.)
Surely the Apostle would not pervert the Text, nor could he err. The Chaldee
renders it near as the Apostle (...) To convert the transgressors of the house
of Jacob. The Septuagint likewise (of the best Edition in Bib. complut. and in
Bib. Reg. and Gallicanis) (...). The Arab. likewise, There shall come a
Redeemer for Zion, who shall turn away wickedness from Jacob.
) As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit that is
upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, etc. from henceforth, and for ever.

recompense the enemies of the Jews according to their deeds, he presently
follows on, with this, that I have now presented before you: So that temporal
and spiritual deliverances are here conjoined, in one and the same Prophecy,
to which in the first verse of the next Chapter he annexeth the glory of the
Church of Jews and Gentiles conjuctively (of which in the next Section.) Now
this present place, the Apostle ( Romans 11.25, 26, 27) referres unto the great
call of the Jews upon the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, both
making one glorious Church; which the Apostle speaks of, as a thing to come to
pass after his time. His words are (that ye may see how fully they answer to
those of the Prophet) Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles come in, and so ALL ISRAEL shall be saved, as it is
written, THERE SHALL COME OUT OF SION THE DELIVERER and SHALL TURN AWAY
UNGODLINESS FROM JACOB. FOR THIS IS MY COVENANT UNTO THEM, WHEN I SHALL TAKE
AWAY THEIR SINS.



SECT. XXIII.
THe fourteenth place in Isaiah is in Chapter 60 (the very next Chapter) the
sum whereof our last Translators have meetly given us in saying, that the
Chapter is concerning the glory of the Church (of the Jews converted to Christ)
in the accession and addition of the Gentiles. The passages of most concernment
to our point are,

Darkness shall cover the EARTH, and gross darkness the PEOPLE; but the Lord
shall arise unto THEE, and his glory shall be seen upon THEE. verse. 3. And the
GENTILES shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising.
v. 4. Thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at
thy side. v. 5. And thine heart shall be enlarged, because, the abundance of
the Sea shall be converted unto thee, and the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee. v. 6. They of Midian, and Sheba shall come, they shall bring gold,
and incense, and they shall show forth the praises of the Lord. v. 7. All the
flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the Rams of Nebaioth
shall minister unto thee, etc. and I will glorify the house of my glory. v.
8.9. Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to their windows? Surely
the ISLES that wait for thee. v. 10. The sons of the strangers shall build up
thy walls, and THEIR KINGS shall minister UNTO THEE. v. 11.12. Thy gates SHALL
BE OPEN DAY and NIGHT, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
Gentiles, and that THEIR KINGS may be brought. For the NATION and KINGDOM that
will not serve thee, SHALL PERISH. v. 14. The sons of them that afflicted
thee, shall come BENDING unto thee, and all that despised thee, shall BOW
THEMSELVES DOWN at the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee THE CITY OF
THE LORD, the ZION OF THE HOLY ONE OF ISRAEL. v. 15. Whereas thou have been
forsaken, and hated, I will make thee an ETERNAL EXCELLENCY a JOY OF MANY
NATIONS. v. 16. Thou shall also suck the milk of the GENTILES, and the breasts
of KINGS. v. 17. For brass I will bring gold, for iron silver, etc. and I will
make thy OFFICERS PEACE, and thy EXACTORS RIGHTEOUSNESS. v. 18. Violence shall
be NO MORE heard in thy Land, but thou shall call thy walls SALVATION, etc. v.
19. THE SUN shall be no more THY LIGHT by day, neither for brightness shall
the MOON GIVE LIGHT unto thee, BUT THE LORD SHALL BE THY EVERLASTING LIGHT, and
thy God thy glory. v. 20. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon
withdraw it self, for THE LORD shall be thy EVERLASTING LIGHT, and the days of
thy MOURNING SHALL BE ENDED. v. 21. Thy PEOPLE also shall be RIGHTEOUS, and they
shall inherit the Land FOR EVER. ( i. e. none after them.) v. 22. (the close of
all) I the Lord will hasten it, IN HIS TIME.

Babylon? If any are so heavy headed, as falling fast asleep, shall dream, that
all these passages concern not a visible glorious estate of the Church on
earth, or that these all are already spiritually fulfilled, let such know that
they would be hard put to it, so to expound this Chap. congruously, and to tell
us the time and manner, and make all handsomely hang together. And therefore
St. John, a surer Commentator, having prophesied in Rev. 20. v. 4. compared
with Rev. 5.10. of the Saints reigning with Christ on earth, and in the 21 Chapter
having given us his vision of a New EARTH, and of New Jerusalem, coming down
FROM heaven (with many more passages of the future glory of the Church on
earth, of which abundantly before, several times) he goes on in that 21 Chapter
to apply many of the passages of this sixtieth of Isa. to that future glorious
estate of the Church on earth, yet to come, after the fall of Antichrist, which
is not (as we see) yet performed. For example; The third verse of this
sixtieth of Isaiah (but now presented before your eyes) is exactly so applied,
Rev. 21. v. 24. And the Nations of them that are saved, shall walk in the light
of it (that is, the light of the glory of God, and the Lamb, as it is in the
former verse) and the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into
it. So that in the 11. and 12. verses of this sixtieth of Isaiah (as you see it
before) is likewise applied to that future glorious state of the Church on earth
before the ultimate judgment, Rev. 21. v. 25, 26. And the gates of it shall not
be shut at all by day; for there shall be no night there. And they shall bring
the glory, and honor of the Nations into it. So the 19. v. of this sixtieth of
Isaiah is in like manner applied in Rev. 21. v. 23. And the City had no need of
the Sun, neither of the MOON TO SHINE IN IT; (Mark, to shine in it, intimating
that though those Planets continue in being, yet there shall be no need of
their shining) for the glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. The same is to be seen in the application of the 20 v. of this
sixtieth of Isaiah in Rev. 21. v. 3, 4. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, etc. and God himself shall be with them, etc.
And shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, etc. And lastly, the application of v. 21. of this
sixtieth of Isaiah is as clearly applied to the same purpose, Rev. 21. v. 27.
And there shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie.

Jews and Gentiles have conjoined in matters of Religion; as in the first ten
verses of this sixtieth of Isaiah? When ever did the Nations of the Gentiles
bow down to the Jews, and those that would not serve them did perish, as v.
11.12? When were the Jews made an eternal excellency, and the joy of many
Nations, as it is in 15 v? when (as v. 21.) were the Jews made a righteous
people to inherit the Land for ever? But as sure, as God is true, these things
must be; And upon earth, as the circumstances constrain. And therefore before
the ultimate judgment.

SECT. XXIV.
Isaiah is in Chapter 63. first six verses, of which in a word.

Christ comes up (as it is revealed to the Prophet) from Edom, with dyed
garments from Bozra, red in his apparel, by treading the Wine Press alone,
treading down his enemies in fury, til their blood be sprinkled upon his
garments.

John in the Revelation Chapter 14, v. 19, 20, and Chapter 19, v. 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16. applies these in the same phrase and figure to Christ's destroying
of Antichrist, to be fulfilled on earth, yet before the last judgment. Another
Angel came out from the al^ar, which cried to him that had a sharp sickle,
saying, thrust in thy sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth,
for her grapes are fully ripe. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the
earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great
Winepresse of the wrath of God. And the Winepresse was trodden without the
City, and blood came out of the Winepresse, even unto the horse bridles, etc.
And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him,
was called FAITHFUL and TRUE, and in righteousness he does judge, and make
war. His eyes are as a flame of fire, and on his head were many Crowns, etc.
And he was clothed with a Vesture DIPPED IN BLOOD, his name is called THE WORD
OF GOD. And the Armies which were in Heaven, followed him upon white horses,
etc. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he TREADS THE
WINEPRESSE OF THE FIERCENESS and WRATH OF ALMIGHTY GOD. And he has on his
vesture, and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS.



SECT. XXV.
THe sixteenth place in Isaiah is Chapter 65. verse 17, etc. to the end of the
Chapter.

Verse 17. Behold I create new Heavens, and a new EARTH, and the former shall
not be remembered, etc. v. 18. But be you glad and rejoice FOR EVER in that
which I create; for behold I creat JERUSALEM a rejoicing, and her people, a
joy, v. 19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the
VOICE OF WEEPING SHALL BE NO MORE HEARD IN HER, NOR THE VOICE OF CRYING. v.
20. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that has
not filled his days, etc. And they shall build houses, and inhabit them, etc.
And plant vineyards, etc. Before they call, I will answer, etc. The woolf and
the lamb shall feed together, etc.



Prophesies of the Apostles, and their applications of the aforesaid Prophecy
of Isaiah. So does Peter, and John apply the 17. verse. Peter in 2 Ep. chap. 3.
v. 12. and 13. comforts the Jews (to whom he wrote, 1 Pet. 1.1.) that before
the ultimate judgment there should be new Heavens, and a new EARTH wherein
dwells righteousness, according to Gods promise, meaning this of Isaiah 65.17.
And John in Revel. chap. 21. refers this same place of Isaiah to the time of
the glorious state of the Church on earth immediately after the fall of
Antichrist. In Rev. 19. the three last verses is Antichrists fall, Chap. 20.
the Devil is bound, and the Saints reign, Chapter 21. is their glorious estate
described, and in part by these words of the Prophet Isaiah, I saw (says John)
a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and the first heaven, and the first earth were
passed away. And adds in verse 17. Nothing that defiles, enters therein. In
like manner the 18. and 19. verses of this 65 of Isaiah are referred and
applied by St. John in Rev. 21. the first five verses, to the glorious state of
the Church yet to come, after the fall of Antichrist. Behold I make all things
new, new Heavens, and new Earth, and new Jerusalem (which is all one, as to say
he creats,) And wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
sorrow, etc. I need say no more of this place to an understanding Reader, of
which Mr. Mead, comparing it with 2 Pet. 3.13. and Peter with it, says, Miror,
etc. I wonder how any man can understand this of a state in the highest heavens.

SECT. XXVI.
THe seventeenth and last place in Isaiah is Chapter 66. v. 5. etc. to the end
of the Chapter. This place of Isa 66. from the fifth verse, etc. Justin Martyr,
in his Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 312. does testify, to belong to the Kingdom of
Christ, that is to be at his second coming: In which words (says he,
commending this place of Isa.) is (...) the mastery of our being again
generated, or made new at the Resurrection, (...) and absolutely of all, who
expect Christ shall appear at Jerusalem, and by well doing study to please him.
Thus Just. Mart. with which Mr. Mead is much taken, and understands him in
those words (...) to mean the Resurrection of the godly.


trembled at Gods word. The effect of his speech there is, that though their
false brethren hated them, and cast them out for Gods name sake, saying, Let
the Lord be glorified (that is, we have done well in casting them out, or let
God appear in his glory to show favor to you, if we have not done well in
casting you out) yet the Lord should appear to their joy (that had been so
hated and cast out for his name sake) and those their false brethren should be
ashamed.

conversion of the Jews, I say, conversion (their settlement will cost longer
time, as it seems Dan. 12. the three last verses) viz. their conversion shall
be as the birth of a child, before the mother is in pain; as the birth of a
Nation at once, which well may be, being to be done by the appearance of
Christ in the Clouds.

because they shall suck the breasts of her consolations; that is, share in her
comforts. ##

The Lord will extend peace to Jerusalem like a River, and the glory of the
Gentiles, like a flowing stream. See a glorious conjunction of Jews and
Gentiles.

corporal destruction of their enemies. As one whom his mother comfort, so
will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem, and when ye see
this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and
the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation
toward his enemies. For behold the Lord will come with fire, etc. For by fire,
and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord
shall be many. Illustrated verse. 24. They shall go forth, and look upon the
carcasses that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not dye, nor
their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh: Which in
the general to be taken literally, is confessed both by Jews and Christians.
Consult our new Annotationists upon the place. See Sect. 41.. 5.. 2.

Jews and Gentiles into union of true religious worship, and beholding of the
glory of God, and that (as the Jewish Doctors expound it) in his destruction of
the enemies of the Church, in the days of the Messiah.

In the 22. verse, we have the height and length of this glorious estate of the
universal Church of Jews and Gentiles on earth. It is no lower then a state of
a new Heaven and a new Earth: And it is to be perpetuated; It is to remain
unalterable; continue (say our new Annotationists) for ever.

phrases and circumstances of the place, as to the Gentiles, nor in the
substance as to the Jews, who remain totally unconverted to Christ, and are
dispersed and despised (to our sorrow) throughout the world. But God must be
true, therefore these must be fulfilled, and on earth before the ultimate
judgment, as every verse does hint unto us. And therefore St. John in the
Revelation Chapter 18, Chapter 19, Chapter 20, and Chapter 21. does apply these
in a way of Prophecy to the glorious state of the Church on earth yet to come
at the fall of Antichrist. I shall give you them in sum and short, because I
have before so often made particular applications of them. Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen. How much she has glorified her self, so much sorrow and
torment shall be given her. Her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning,
and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire. Rejoice over her thou
heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her. And
after these things, I heard a great voice of much people, etc. saying,
Allelujah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God,
for true, and righteous are thy judgementss, for he has judged the great Whore
that has corrupted the earth, and has avenged the blood of his Saints. And
again, they said Allelujah. And the four and twenty Elders said Amen,
Allelujah. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying,
Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. And the beast and the false
Prophet were taken and cast into the lake fire: And the rest were slain with
the sword. But the Saints reigned with Christ a thousand years, in the new
Heavens, and new Earth, to whom the Kings of the earth, and Nations of the
world bring their honor.

John's series and system of Visions and Prophesies, so aptly in phrase and
matter expounding the Prophet Isaiah, of a future glorious state of the Church
on earth yet to come.

Thus of the Prophet Isaiah.

SECT. XXVII.
NExt we come to the Prophet Jeremiah. The first place for our purpose is in
Chapter 16. verse 14, 15. compared with Chapter 23. verse 3. etc. to verse 9.
The words of that in Chapter 16. verse 14, 15. are, Behold the days come,
says the Lord, that it shall be no more said, The Lord lives that brought up
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; But the Lord lives that
brought up the children of ISRAEL from the LAND OF THE NORTH, and from ALL THE
LANDS whither he had DRIVEN THEM, and I will bring them again into THEIR LAND,
that I gave unto their Fathers.

All Lands whither they had been driven, must needs comprehend as well the ten
Tribes, as the two. And the more clearly to hint to us, that his meaning is,
not only of a reduction of them to their own Land, but of their conversion
unto their God, and this not at a petty call of a few of them, but at the great
call of the generality of them all, he subjoyns the bringing in of the fullness
of the Gentiles, verse 19. The Gentiles shall come unto the Lord, from the ends
of the earth, and shall say, surely our Fathers have inherited lies, etc. At
which time of the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles (as their coming
from the ends of the earth fully expresses) All Israel (says the Apostle,
Romans 11.25, 26.) shall be saved.

I will gather the remnant of my flock out of ALL Countries whither I have
driven them, and will bring them again into their folds, and they shall he
fruitful and increase. verse. 4. And I will set up shepherds that shall feed
them. And they shall FEAR NO MORE, nor be DISMAYED, neither shall they be
LACKING, says the Lord. verse 5. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I
will raise unto David, a RIGHTEOUS BRANCH, and a KING shall reign and prosper,
and shall execute justice and judgment upon the earth. In his days JUDAH
shall be saved, and ISRAEL shall dwell safely. And this is his name whereby be
shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. verse 7. Therefore behold the
days come, says the Lord, that they shall no more say the Lord lives, which
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. verse 8. But the
Lord lives which brought up, and which led the seed of the house of ISRAEL out
of the NORTH COUNTRY, and from ALL COUNTRIES whither I had driven them, and
they shall dwell in THEIR OWN LAND.

It is written in the book Berochoth Benzuma says, It shall come to pass that
ISRAEL shall not remember their departure out of the land of Egypt, in the
WORLD TO COME (speaking just as the Apostle Heb. 2.5. (...)) in the days of
MESSIAH (by which last clause you may see what the Rab. means by the world to
come.) And (says the Rabbin) how does this appear? That which is written in
Jer. 23. (says he) will prove it; Behold the days come, and they shall say no
more the Lord lives which, etc. which (says this Rabb.) wise men interpret
thus; not as if the name of Egypt should be blotted out, but because the
wonders which shall be effected in the days of the KINGDOM OF THE MESSIAH
shall be principal, and the Egyptian less.

Judahs reversion, and conversion, but of Isreal's too. And secondly, that they
shall return not only from the land of the NORTH, but from all Countries
whither they were driven; which Countries are mentioned, Act. 2.9, 10.11, and 1
Pet. 1.1. And being compared with ancient and modern Histories, and
experience, do show, that they are now scattered into all parts of the world,
and are so acknowledged to be by the learned Jew, R.M. Ben Israel in his SPES
ISRAELIS. And thirdly, that at the time the Prophet intends, there must be a
sweet compliance between Jews and Gentiles in matters of Religion. And lastly,
that these things must be, when Christ the RIGHTEOUS BRANCH springing from
David, shall be KING, and reign, and PROSPER, and execute justice and judgment
in the EARTH.



SECT. XXVIII.
Jeremiah is Chapter 30. and Chapter 31. This 31 Chap. has been alleged
before Jeroms time, for the glorious state of all things in the thousand years,
of which we speak, Omnes hujusmodi repromissiones jux^a Judae^s and nostros
Judaizantes, in mill annorum regno putan^^^ esse complendae, etc. Hie^. on
Jer. 31. v. 27. and v. 38.
both being one continued discourse of one and the same thing (as the connection
in verse 1. of Chapter 31. plainly shows) In which are many things, which of
themselves upon bare reading of them, without all glosses, show themselves
never to have been fulfilled to this day, since the time of that Prophecy. For
example, mark the words well.

viz. verse 3. Lo the days come, says the Lord, that I will bring again the
CAPTIVITY of my people ISRAEL and JUDAH (naming distinctly both Kingdoms,
containing all the twelve Tribes) and cause them to return to their own land.
Nor was that ever yet fulfilled in verse 8. In that day, says the Lord of
Hosts, I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and
strangers SHALL NO MORE SERVE THEMSELVES of him, but they shall serve the Lord
their God, and DAVID THEIR KING, The Chaldee is very remarkable, (...), That
is, They shall obey the Messiah, or Christ (the Son of David) their King.
whom I will raise up unto them. Nor was that ever fulfilled in verse 10. Fear
thou not, O my servant JACOB, says the Lord, nor be dismayed, O ISRAEL, for lo
I will save thee from a far, and thy seed from the land of their captivity, and
JACOB shall return, and shall be in REST and QUIET, and NONE shall make him
AFRAID: (repeated again, Jer. 46. v. 27.)

So many things in the 31. Chapter were never yet fulfilled, as all that from
v. 1. to 15. concerning their corporal restitution into their own Country, and
their visible peace and glory there.

Nor can these things of both Chapters be referred to the ultimate day of
judgment, as the nature of the things speak loud enough: And therefore they
are yet to be fulfilled before that time.

SECT. XXIX.
Jeremiah is in Chapter 32. verse 37. to the end of the Chapter. Verse 37.
Behold I will gather them out of ALL COUNTRIES whither I have driven them in
mine anger, etc. And I will bring them again into this PLACE, and I will cause
them to dwell SAFELY. verse 38. And they shall be my people, and I will be
their God. verse 39. And I will give them one heart, and ONE WAY, that they may
fear me for EVER, etc. verse 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, that I will not TURN AWAY FROM THEM to do them GOOD, etc. verse 41. Yea
I will rejoice over them to do them good, and will plant them in this LAND
assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul. verse 42. For thus
says the Lord, like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so
will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them, etc.

Countries into their own land, they have not dwelt there safely, they have not
had one way, etc. But since the return but of two Tribes (the ten never yet
returning) Antiochus of Syria, and the Grecians, and Romans, and Turks, have by
a continual succession molested them. And the generality of all the twelve
Tribes are scattered in all Countries to this day. The fulfilling of which at
the ultimate day of judgment cannot be imaginable; and therefore are yet to be
fulfilled before that day.

SECT. XXX.
THE fourth place in Jeremiah, is in Chapter 50. the four last verses, viz. v.
17, 18, 19, 20. The words are these:

Verse 17. ISRAEL is a scattered sheep, the Lions have driven him away; first
the KING of ASSYRIA has devoured him, and last, this NEBUCHADNEZZAR King of
BABYLON has broken his bones. v. 18. Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts,
the God of ISRAEL, Behold I will punish the King of BABYLON, and his land, as I
have punished the King of ASSYRIA. v. 19. And I will bring ISRAEL again to his
HABITATION, and he shall feed on CARMEL, and BASHAN, and his soul shall be
satisfied on mount EPHRAIM, and GILEAD.

God of ISRAEL, but by several passages after, that all the twelve Tribes are
here meant. Now the deliverance of the ten Tribes was never yet performed to
this day.

hostile way, viz. by the destruction of their enemies, namely of Kings and
Kingdoms, expressed v. 18. in relation to which God is called the Lord of
Hosts. But as yet the Kings and Kingdoms, who in a constant succession down to
this day, have been the enemies of the Jews, are not destroyed.

methodicall order, to punish their enemies, successively in time and place, as
successively as they afflicted the twelve Tribes: First, the King of Assyria
had devoured Israel, which can be no other then Salmaneser his taking Samaria,
etc. captive, (2 King. 18.9.) which Samaria was the Metropolis of the Kingdom
of the ten Tribes. And this is the King of Assyria's devouring Israel, Nineveh
being the Metropolis of that Kingdom, whiles called the Kingdom of Assyria, 2
King. 19.36. Then secondly, Nebuchadnezzar, alias Nebuchadrezzar King of
Babylon, came up against Jerusalem (the Metropolis of the Kingdom of the two
Tribes) and took it, and carried away all the considerable persons of that
Kingdom, and all their substance of any value, captive to Babylon, 2 King.
25.1. etc. And this was the King of Babylon his breaking of their bones, called
the King of Babylon, because Babylon then was the Metropolis of the Kingdom of
Chaldea, the Chaldeans then ruling over the Assyrians. And therefore the
Monarchy was afterward called the Assyrio-chaldean. Now as God has punished
some of their enemies heretofore, viz. Nineveh of Assyria, according to the
Prophet Nahum. And Sennacherib their King, and his Host, 2 King. 19. So he must
according to his promise descend in order, with destruction in an hostile
manner upon Babylon, and upon the Kings of Babylon, whatsoever, and whosoever
that Babylon, and those Kings be, in the Scripture name, and notion, and
extended in the promises of the New Testament. And therefore as God did punish
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, with turning him as it were into a beast for
certain years, Dan. 4. And after he punished Belshazzar King of Babylon, and
that City by Darius the Mede invading it, Dan. 5. and Darius the Mede (then
King of Babylon) by Alexander the Greek, and Alexanders successors (then King
of Babylon) by the Roman; and the Roman Emperor (then King of Babylon both old
and new, that is Babylon and Rome) by the Arabian, Saracen, or Turk (the now
King of old Babylon) Dan. 7. so according to the explication and application in
the New Testament, of this promise made in this Text in the Old, God must yet
go on corporally to destroy the Turk, the present King of old Babylon, and the
Roman, that once was the Tyrant of Old Babylon and after that continued to be
the Tyrant of New Babylon, viz. Rome, first by Heathen Tyranny, and after by
Papal and Antichristian Tyranny, down to this day, acording to Prophesies in
Dan. 7. and this must be done by the power of Christ and his Church, ibid. and
Dan. 2. Now neither the Turkish King of Babylon, nor his Kingdom, is yet
destroyed, but rather mightily prospers, and prevails, yea and God is behind
in arrears of judgments with New Romish Babylon for her heathenish ten bloody
persecutions, extending, by intervals, about three hundred years, and has not
given her, her present pay for her late Papal, and Antichristian massacres,
inquisitions, tortures, and blasphemies, as to the matter of destroying the
supreme power, and the Kingdom of this Babylon, according to the amplification
of Revelation 17, 18, and 19 Chapters.

Jews, in succeeding generations, following this Prophecy must so succeed as
to have this success, that ISRAEL and JUDAH may be delivered from their
dispersion, and restored to their own land, and distinctly to their several
quarters there, viz. Carmel, Bashan, Ephraim, and Gilead. One Carmel was a City
of the Tribe of Judah, some twelve miles from Jerusalem Southward. Another
Carmel was of the Tribe of Issachar, about threescore and four miles from
Jerusalem Northward, not far from Prolemais, toward the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, Josh. 19. Jer. 46. Bashan before the Israelites came up from
Egypt to Canaan, was of the Country of Og, but after became part of the portion
of the half Tribe of Manasseh, Numb. 21. Isa. 2.13. Mount Ephraim is between
Jericho and Jerusalem, extending toward the Sea. It was the portion of the
sons of Joseph, Ephraim, and Manasseh, Josh. 13. and 17. And as one half of
the Tribe of Manasseh stuck to Judah, so Ephraim is an usual expression to
signify the Kingdom of the ten Tribes, or Israel, Isa. 7. Isa. 9. Hos. 5.
Psalm. 59. Gilead was a Country that lay between the sea of Galilee, and mount
Gilead, some sixty miles from Jerusalem. It separates the Country of Galilee
from Israel. By this description of the situation, and owners of these places,
it evidently appears, that Gods mind in this Prophecy of Jeremy is, that not
only the two Tribes, but also the other ten, and so all twelve are to be
restored to their own land, though it cost the ruin of all Kings, of all
Babylons whatsoever. But this is not yet fulfilled, as the present, and long
time past condition of those twelve Tribes sadly speak.

Jeremiah must be yet fulfilled on earth: And that before the ultimate day of
judgment (as we said before) the nature of the things necessarily requiring
it. Thus of Jeremiah.

SECT. XXXI.
NExt we come to the Prophet Ezekiel. The first place is in Chapter 28. v. 24,
25, 26. Verse. 24. There shall be NO MORE a pricking briar unto the house of
ISRAEL, nor any grieving thorn, of all that are round about them, that
despised them, and they shall know that I am the Lord. v. 25. Thus says the
Lord God, when I shall have gathered the HOUSE of ISRAEL from the people among
whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them, in the SIGHT OF THE
HEATHEN, then shall they dwell in their LAND, that I have given my servant
JACOB. v. 26. And they shall dwell SAFELY therein, and shall build houses, and
plant vineyards; yea they shall dwell with CONFIDENCE when I have executed
judgments upon ALL those that despise them, round about them, and they shall
know that I am the Lord their God.

the Lord God, and to be their God (twice repeated) that this prophecy shall
be fulfilled.

ten Tribes, as well as to the two, as appears by the several expressions of
Jacob, of Israel, and the house of Israel (twice expressed.)

pricking briar, and grieving thorn are expressed above, to be the adversaries
of the Jews, whereof some are named, viz. Tyrus, verse 1. etc. to verse 20.
Sydon verse 20, etc. to 24. Both there threatened with ruin for being
adversaries to the Jews. Others are but intimated, as verse 24. Nor any
grieving thorn of ALL THAT ARE ROUND ABOUT THEM, THAT DESPISED THEM.

Now mark the matter of the Prophecy, viz. First, Those adversaries must be
destroyed or removed, for the bringing of Israel and Jacob into their own land,
there to dwell SAFELY, and with CONFIDECNE. Secondly, they must be gathered from
all places where they have been scattered. 3 They must be free from ANY
pricking briar, or grieving thorn. And fourthly they must there dwell in their
own land, with full liberty as of their Polity, to enjoy their buildings and
plantations; so of their Piety, to exercise the true spiritual worship of God,
as to sanctify God, or magnify him, and that fifthly, in the sight of all the
Heathen.

Now let the wisest men on earth, that know History, and take notice of the
present state of all the twelve Tribes, show us, whether ever this Prophecy
was yet fulfilled to them! And if not, whether it be possible these things
should be performed at the ultimate day of judgment! And if not, whether we
have not just cause to believe as God is true, that these things shall be yet
fulfilled upon earth, before that day.

SECT. XXXIII.
Ezekiel is Chapter 34. v. 11, etc. to the end of the Chapter. Verse 11. Thus
says the Lord, I will searth my sheep, and seek them out, v. 12 illustrated by
a comparison from a shepherd seeking his scattered sheep. v. 13. God will bring
ISRAEL (for that is the name used all along this Chapter) from the Countries
where they are scattered, to their own land, to feed them on the mountains of
ISRAEL. v. 14 It is amplified, that upon the Mountains of Israel shall be their
FOULD. v. 15. It is further illustrated in prosecution of the same Allegory; I
will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and
bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which was sick; And I will
destroy the fat, and the strong, and feed them with judgment; i.e. as it is in
verse 17. The wicked Rams, and Heegoats: And why? because verse 18. they eat up
the good pasture, and tread down the rest, and drink of the deep waters, and
puddle the rest. And verse 19. says the Lord, My flock eat that which ye have
trodden with your feet: and drink that which you have fouled with your feet.
Therefore thus says the Lord, verse 20, 21, 22. I will judge, between the fat
and the lean, because ye have thrust with side and shoulder, and pushed all the
diseased with your horns, till you have scattered them abroad, therefore will I
save my flock, and they shall be NO MORE A PREY. In the 23. and 24. is set down
the manner and means of that saving them, viz. And I will set up ONE shepherd
over them, and HE shall feed them, even my servant DAVID, he shall feed them.
And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a PRINCE Heb.(...)
among them, or as the Chalde renders it Chalde (...).
a KING. In verse 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. is held forth the manifestation, or
confirmation, and the measure of this deliverance. And I will make with them a
COVENANT of peace, and I will cause the EVIL BEASTS TO CEASE out of the land.
And they shall dwell SAFELY in the WILDERNESS, and sleep in the Woods. And I
will make them, and the places round about my Hill, a blessing, etc. And the
trees of the field shall yield her fruit, etc. And they shall be SAFE in the
land, and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have broken the bands of
their yoke etc. And they shall be No MORE a PREY to the heathen, etc. But they
shall dwell safely, and NONE shall make them AFRAID. And I will raise up for them
a PLANT of renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land,
neither bear the shame of the Heathen ANY MORE.

plainly before your eyes the height, depth, length, and breadth of these
Prophesies, that they are to Israel without limitation, over whom Christ the
Son of David must be Prince or King, and their happiness here prophesied
must be on earth in their own land, with blessings suitable thereunto, yet not
without God in Covenant with them, and they must be delivered from all sorts of
evil for ever; What need I multiply words to the intelligent Reader to prompt
him that these were never yet fulfilled. Let him but read distinctly the places
before quoted, and keep those things together which the Prophet has laid
together, and withal remember what the state of the Jews and Israelites has
been ever since both their captivities down to this day, as we have before
often and largely set forth, and then his own reason will convince him, that
neither these things have yet been fulfilled, nor can they find room to be
fulfilled at the ultimate day of judgment, and that therefore the truth of God
still lies engaged to perform them before that day.

SECT. XXXIII.
THe third place in Ezekiel is Chapter 36. the whole Chapter, especially verse
9. etc. to 37. So long since at least as before Jeroms time, this Chapter also
has been alleged for the glorious state of the Church in the time of the
thousand years, not only by the Jews, but by the learned Christians; so
Jerome confesses in these words, Haec illi (Judaei) expectant in mill annorum
Regno, quando civitatem Jerusalem asserunt extruendam, and Templum quod in
fine hujus voluminis lescribitur, and rerum omnium faelicitatem, etc. Quod and
multi nostrorum, and praeti^ue TERTULLIANI iber, qui inscribitur de spe
fidelium; and LACTANTII Institutionum volumen septimum pollicetur, and
VICTORINI PICTAVIONENSIS Episcopi, Crebrae expositiones. Et nuper SEVERUS
noster in Dialogo, cui Tallo nomen imposuit. Et ut GRAECOS nominem, and primum,
extremumque conjungam, IRENAEUS and APOLLINARIUS. Sic Hieron. in hoc caput
Ezech.


Israel. Not concerning Judah only, containing the two Tribes, but concerning
the ten Tribes also, called Israel; the Prophet repeating it in this chapter,
from v. 1. to 24. at least ten times.

Secondly, Observe the universality of the mercy, in all things, v. 9. to 16.

dimensions of their deliverance, in that promise in the 24 verse, I will take
you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of ALL COUNTRIES, and will bring
you into your OWN LAND. This their reversion from all captivities, and
dispersing.

spiritualizing of them in this their happy condition on earth v. 25, 26, 27.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from ALL
YOUR FILTHINESS. A new HEART also will I give you, and put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes; where you have their conversion
from their sins. The rest of the chapter contains amplifications of those two.

Judah and Israel ever since this prophecy unto this day; and then tell me if
you can, when these things were ever fulfilled.

SECT. XXXIV.
THE fourth place in Ezekiel is in the 37th. Chapter throughout. This chapter
also Jerome confesses has been alleged before his time for the glorious ^tate
of the thousand ye^rs, both by Jews and Christians. Quod si (inquit.) Judaei,
and Judaizantes Christiani, hae^ ad mill annorum voluerunt refer regnum etc.
vide Hieron. in hoc caput.


substance of the deliverance of the Jews. The rest of the chapter sets forth
the notable circumstances of their state being delivered.

The first parable, of the reviving of the dry bones, with the Prophets
Exposition thereof, from v. 1. to ver. 15. does mainly set forth the matter of
their deliverance, viz. that the dry bones signify (as the prophet expresses
it with great emphasis) the WHOLE house of ISRAEL. So that no less then the
twelve Tribes must be the matter delivered.

connection of the two sticks, ver. 15. to ver. 23. the one to have written upon
it Judah, to signify the Tribe of Judah, and his Companions that were of
Israel, i. e. Benjamin, that is the Tribe of Benjamin that clave to Judah in
one Kingdom: The other to have written upon it Ephraim, to signify, as the
Prophet emphasizeth it v. 16. ALL the house of ISRAEL, and both these
integrated into one stick, does signify the form of the deliverance of the
twelve Tribes, viz. to be restored into one entire Kingdom as it was at first,
in David's and Salomons time, etc. and that upon the mountains of Israel, v. 22.

marvelously be brought out of all quarters of their captivity, into their own
Land, as dry ^ones made to live, or dead men to be raised out of their graves,
So verse. 9, 11, 12, 19, 21. 2 Circumstance that they shall have but one King,
and that must be David, that is one of David's ^eed that must needs be (as the
Rabbis do well understand) Christ, or the Messiah the son of David, as
often upon these like places and phrases they express themselves. And he shall
be their Prince for EVER. v. 25. The third eminent Circumstance is, that they,
their children, and their childrens children shall dwell in their own Land FOR
EVER v. 25. The fourth and last Circumstance is, The spiritualizing of this
their happy deliverance in ver. 26, and 27. Moreover (says the Lord) I will
make a Covenant of PEACE with them, it shall be an EVERLASTING Covenant with
them; and I will place them, and will multiply them, and I will set my
sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. And my Tabernacle also shall be
with them; yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

dry bones, as far as the last resurrection, minding more the fitness of the
comparison to that in the simile of the dry bones reviving, and Gods bringing
them out of the graves, then that which is immediately annexed, as ver. 12. O
my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your
graves, and bring you into the LAND OF ISRAEL. Repeated again v. 13, 14. which
things are utterly inconsistent with the last general resurrection or day of
Judgment. And in nature and use of speech among men (as Grotius well notes)
may meetly be applied to deliverance from captivity. Populus in captivitatem
deductus desinit esse populus, ideoque optime comparatur ossibus, aut corpori
mortuo. Sic oppidorum cadavera dixit Sulpitius in Ep. 8. Ciceron. Intelligitur
ergo per spiritum vitalem inditum, libertatis and status restitutio. Grot. in
loc.

Judah's return from Babylon, and explain David their King to be Zerubbabel.
In answer whereto we say only this. 1. These things in this chapter of the
deliverance of all Israel, for matter, and form, and circumstances, as before
set down plainly according to the Text, were in no wise fulfilled at Judahs two
Tribes return from Babylon, under the conduct of Zerubbabel; who though of the
kindred of David, yet no King, nor called a King, nor could he be accounted a
King, whiles they were under the Medio-Persian Monarch. And secondly, Daniel,
and the Apostles in the New Testament do carry down and apply the phrases and
things of this chapter, unto future times, to succeed after them, at the great
and general call of the Jews and restitution of all things. Dan. 12. ver. 1,
2. At that time (viz. after the tyranny of the Roman Empire has been long time
rampant (as had been prophesied by Daniel chap. 11.) Michael shall stand up,
the great prince which stands for the children of thy people, and there shall
be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, etc. and at
that time thy people shall be delivered etc. and MANY of them that sleep in the
dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting
contempt: which things prudently weighed in all the circumstances, cannot be
applicable to the last and general resurrection, or ultimate day of judgment,
as is fully discussed elsewhere in this Volume; but do clearly comport with the
beginning of the business of the great restoration at the general call of
the Jews. See in this third Book, Chap. 2. Sect. 37.. 20.. 5. etc. So likewise
the Apostle Paul applies the phrases and things of this 37 of Ezekiel to the
times of the general call of the Jews; Romans 11.15. If the casting away of the
Jews be the reconciling of the World, what shall be the receiving of the
Jews, but LIFE FROM THE DEAD? So likewise St. John in Revelation chap. 11.11,
to 14 shows plainly, that the witnesses must first rise, and then there was a
great Earthquake, and then the tenth part of the City (of the whore of Babylon)
falls, and thousands are slain: which things can have no fellowship with the
ultimate day of judgment; especially if we mark, that the Earthquake, the
fall of the City, and the slaughter, are mentioned before the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet. Now within the last of the space of which seventh Trumpet falls
the ultimate judgment: and therefore these things belong to the great
restoration, at the ruin of Antichrist, and the call of the Jews, and the
setting up of the glorious Church of Jews and Gentiles: for presently after
(ver. 14, 15.) the seventh Trumpet sounds, and the Kingdoms of the World
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.

Thus of the places in Ezekiel.

SECT. XXXV.
Next we come to Daniel. The first place in this Prophet is in the second
chapter, from ver. 31. to ver. 36.

Medes lately printed Diatribae, pars 4. and his Opuscula, and my pen being
met, I shall give him the way and precedence, as glad of such a
strongly-learned Captain to lead me up in the Skirmish, for the truth now in
hand, against the many opposers thereof. And the rather, because perhaps (such
are the partiall-personalities that act some men's brains) the same truth will
be better accepted from his mouth then from mine. Quo demum (says he Opuscul.
par. 2. p. 20. Arg. 2.
) absoluto, etc. i. e. The fourth Kingdom, (or Monarchy) according to Daniel,
is that upon the dissolution and abolition whereof follows the consummation of
Christ's Kingdom By Christ's Kingdom, which Mr. Mede does ^o often mention, in
these ^is discourses, here quoted, in this. 1. he ^eans (as he expounds it in
other places of his works) CHRIST'S CHURCH, as CHRISTIAN, or the CHRISTIAN
CHURCH OF CHRIST. See before in this third book chap. 2. Sect. 12 S. in the
large marginal note.
. But the Roman Kingdom being once extinct, and abolished, the Kingdom of
Christ shall be consummated; therefore the Roman Kingdom (or Monarchy) is the
fourth.

The major (or first proposition) is most evident from either prophecy of
Daniel. As concerning Nebuchadnezzars dream, thou saw (says he chap. 2. v.
34, 35.) until a stone was cut out without hands, and it smoate the image upon
its feet of iron and clay, so that it brake them to pieces. So the wind carried
them away, and no place was found for them. But the STONE that smote the image
became a great MOUNTAIN, so that it filled the whole earth. That is, Daniel
himself being the Interpreter, in the days of the fourth Kingdom (or
Monarchy) the God of Heaven will raise up a Kingdom (this is, that stone cut
out of the mountain) which shall not for ever be destroyed, and which shall not
be left to another people (as it befell the former Monarchies) but it shall
crumme, and consume all those Kingdoms, but it self shall stand for ever: that
is, the stone of Christ's Kingdom, having now, for many ages past, been cut out
of the mountain of this world; at length when the time decreed of God shall
come, the last parts of this image being cast out, and utterly abolished,
though hitherto it has been but a STONE, and indeed of offense, or stumbling,
shall then grow into an HUGE MOUNTAIN, and shall fill the whole earth.

For the minor (or second proposition) That the Roman Kingdom or Monarchy
being once extinct and abolished, the Kingdom or Monarchy of Christ shall be
consummated, it is easily proved out of the New Testament. For by, or from the
abolition of Antichrist shall the Kingdom of Christ be consummated, 2 These.
2.8. And that wicked one shall be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the splendour or brightness of his
coming; or (as the Syriack) shall kill him with the revelation or manifestation
of his coming. So also it is apparent out of the Apocalypse that Antichrist
shall remain till the sounding of the seventh, that is, the last Trumpet;
which once sounding, there are great voices in Heaven, THE KINGDOMS OF THE
WORLD ARE BECOME THE KINGDOMS OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall reign for
ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. the very same thing which the Angel a little before
(Rev. 10.6.) foretold, That the seventh Trumpet sounding, the MYSTERY OF GOD
SHALL BE FINISHED, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets. But
Antichrist was to rise out of the Roman Empire, 2 These. 2.7. and Revel. 16.
John affirms Antichrist to be one of the seven-headed beast.

The four Kingdoms in Daniel are (says Mr. Mede Diatr: par. 4. p. 361.393.
) twice revealed; first to Nebuchadnezzar, in a glorious image of four metals:
2 To Daniel himself in a vision of four diverse beasts, arising out of the
Sea. The intent of both is, by that succession of Kingdoms; to point out the
time of the KINGDOM OF CHRIST, which no other Kingdom should succeed, or
destroy. Nebuchadnezzars IMAGE of MONARCHIES, Dan. 2. points out TWO STATES, of
the Kingdom of Christ. The first to be while the times of those Kingdoms of
the Gentiles yet lasted, typified by a STONF CUT OUT OF A MOUNTAIN WITHOUT
HANDS, the Monarchical STATUE YET STANDING upon his FEET. The second not to be
until the UTTER DESTRUCTION and DISSIPATION OF THE IMAGE, when the stone
having smote it upon the feet, should GROW INTO A GREAT MOUNTAIN WHICH SHOULD
FILL THE WHOLE EARTH. The first may be called, for distinction sake, REGNUM
LAPIDIS, the Kingdom of the Stone; which is the slate of Christ's Kingdom,
WHICH HITHERTO HAS BEEN. The other, REGNUM MONTIS, the Kingdom of the
Mountain (that is, of the Stone grown into a Mountain, etc.) which is the
state of his Kingdom which hereafter shall be. The INTERVALLUM between these
two, from the time the stone was first hewn out (that is, the Kingdom of
Christ was first advanced) until the time it became a MOUNTAIN (that is, when
the MYSTERY OF GOD shall be FINISHED) is the subject of the Apocalypticall
visions. Note here, that the STONE is expounded by Daniel, to be that LASTING
KINGDOM which the God of Heaven should set up. Secondly, That the STONE was
hewne out of the MOUNTAIN, before it SMOTE the IMAGE upon the FEET, and
consequently, before the Image was DISSIPATED. And therefore that, the KINGDOM
typified by the STONE, while it remained a STONE, must needs be within the
TIMES OF THOSE MONARCHIES: that is, before the last of them ( viz. the Roman)
should expire. Wherefore Daniel interprets, verse. 44. of this second chapter,
That IN THE DAYS of these Kingdoms (not after them, but while some of them
were in being) the God of Heaven should set up a Kingdom WHICH SHOULD NEVER BE
DESTROYED, nor LEFT (as the other were) to another people; but should BREAK IN
PIECES, and CONSUME ad those Kingdoms, and it self should stand for ever. And
all this he speaks, as the INTERPRETATION of the STONE: FOR AS MUCH (says he)
AS THOU SAW THAT A STONE WAS CUT OUT OF THE MOUNTAIN WITHOUT HANDS; AND THAT
IT BRAKE IN PIECES THE IRON, THE BRASS, THE CLAY, THE SILVER, AND THE GOLD.
Here make the full point, for these words belong not to that which follows (as
our Bibles, misse-distinguishing, seem to refer them) but to that which went
before, of their interpretation. But the STONE becoming a Mountain, he expounds
not, but leaves to be gathered by what he had already expounded.

So then [IN THE DAYS OF THOSE KINGDOMS of the Gentiles] signifies, DURING
THEM, and in the latter part of them, as the nature of the thing spoken of
sufficiently argues, which was to destroy the last Kingdom, which had
destroyed, and swallowed the former three; I mean the second swallowed, or
possessed the first; the third, the second; the fourth the third: and so in a
sense, by the destruction of the fourth, the STONE destroys all the rest, as
contained therein. For the stone smites neither the golden part, nor the
silver, nor the brass immediately, but only the feet of iron and clay; and
yet by that blow, was the brass, the silver, and the gold destroyed also, in
as much as they all came by succession to the iron. I add that the dissipation
of the gold, silver, and brass, together with the Iron, may be (...) typi,
the comeliness or convenience of the type; because the parts of the Image in
the type could not succeed one another in time, as the Kingdoms (signified by
them) did; and so the Image appeared to be dissipated all at once, in vision,
though the Kingdoms were not so, save only in the sense aforementioned. Thus Mr.
Mede, to whom I assent almost in all things.

I have other good company to go along with me in this point, upon this
Chapter, but I must first premise some things to make way for them. You have in
this second Chapter of Daniel, from ver. 36. to ver. 46. the prophecy of this
visibly-glorious Kingdom of Christ to be on earth, given by God to
Nebuchadnezzar in a dream of a great Image (ver. 31. etc.) of four Metals in
the four parts thereof; the Head being of gold, the Breast and Arms of silver,
the Belly and Thighs of brass, the Legs and Feet of Iron, but in the feet a
mixture of clay: and to Daniel by the spirit of prophetical revelation to
interpret it according to the true intent and meaning of Gods mind therein.
According to which, in ver. 37, 38. Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzer that he the said
Nebuchadnezzar, is the first part of the first metal, viz. the Head of gold; in
that the God of Heaven had given him a Kingdom (or Empire, viz. the
Assyrio-Chaldean) and power and strength, and glory. Why further he is called
a golden head, we shall annex more conveniently by and by.

In ver. 39. Daniel tells him, that after him shall arise an inferior Kingdom,
which he applies to the Breast and Arms of silver, mentioned before in verse
32. which fitly resembles the Empire that next followed, viz. the Medo.
Persian. Which taking the said golden head, when Darius ( Dan. 5.) took
Babylon, added to it this breast of Empire, with the two arms of Medes and
Persians. And therefore this silver Empie is called inferior, not in respect
of power, authority, or Territory (wherein it was greater, by taking to it
self that of the former, and adding its own) but in manner of Government, as
in relation to the Church, being far more harsh to the Jews (till the last)
then the former: The Jews enjoying golden days (in comparison) under
Nebuchadnezzars Empire; although he was the first, that took the Kingdom from
the Jews; Which is the reason why the sacred story of the Jewish Churches
foraigne State, begins at Nebuchadnezzar, calling him the head; when as the
Empire of Assyria and Chaldea was long before him in being, viz. the Scripture
takes no notice of the Kingdoms of Heathens, or of the world, further then as
they concern the woe or weal of the Church. This Nebuchadnezzar therefore,
beginning the desolation of the Church of the Jews, as to their
Temple-worship, and habitation, in the enjoyment of these in their own Land, is
called the head of that monstrous Image of Monarchy.

In the same 39 verse, Daniel tells him, that after that second Empire of
silver, shall arise a third of brass, which metal (though otherwise not
express) intimates, by the order and proportion of descention, and
degeneration, in calling the silver one inferior to the golden; that this
third brazen one, shall be as much baser and worse (if not more) in the sense
aforesaid, then the second of silver, as the silver was worse then the gold.
And this was to signify the Grecian Empire or Monarchy; Alexander the Great
being the Belly, that possessed it in whole; and his two Commanders, succeeding
him, are the two thighs or hips. For though four at first shared it, yet all,
by their disagreeing and striving, soon fell into the hands of those two;
Whereof one had the Northern moiety, or half, called therefore, the King of the
North: the other the Southern; called thereupon the King of the South; as you
have the matter at large by way of prophecy, Dan 11. to which the best
Histories since do exactly answer. But of this more after, when we come to the
eleventh of Daniel.

In ver. 40, 41, 42.43. Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzar, that the fourth Kingdom,
Empire or Monarchy shall be of iron and clay. Thereby signifying a baser state
then the former, in the sense afore-explained. And this must of necessity
signify the Roman Empire, which next followed the Grecian, conquering it, as
Dan. 9. prophesies; and Histories since, singularly show the performance. In
the days of this Iron Empire Christ comes, ver. 44. Imperante Augusto, natus
est Christus; Imperante Tiberio crucifixus, is known to every Schoolboy that
has learned his Grammar. He came in the time of the Roman Empire; not in the
time of the Grecian, or any of the former. And this Roman Empire is described
by, and called Iron, because it was harder, and hardier to break the former,
and more cruel (as we before intimated) to the Church. Witness the
Vespasian-Titan cruelty, prophesied by Christ, Matthew. 24.1. etc. to come to
pass (as it did) about forty years after Christ's ascension; and so along with
it, and before, and downward, throughout the ten persecutions, for three
hundred years in all, the Roman Emperors successively, most bloodily, and
with variety of torments persecuted the Church in innumerable multitudes, in
all Countries, under their expanse Dominion. This Empire, though (at Christ's
birth) was for a time united (if we may so say) in the twist of the two legs,
or thighs, (as the two brazen hips were at first in the belly) yet a while
after it is divided into Two; two thighs, or legs; and feet with their ten
Toes; and those Feet and Toes are mixed with clay, among the iron: That is, it
was divided into the Eastern and Western Empire; Constantinople being the
Metropolis of the Eastern, and Rome of the Western; and so opportunely fell
into subdivisions, till it answered exactly to these ten Toes, and Saint John's
Beast with ten Horns. And they are mingled with clay, because now the
generality of the Church (as they seemed in outward profession) much
degenerated, mingled themselves with the dirty seed and sons of men; that is,
the Heathen, and men of the world, that were out of the Church (according to
that phrase Genesis 6.2.) that is, the Papacy, or Papal Church (as they pretended
to be) and their issue, incorporated themselves with the civil State powers:
All which can fit to none so aptly as to the Roman Empire. The marriages
between the King of the North, and the King of the South, were both, and all,
of the seed of men: and therefore the mixture aforesaid, is not applicable to
them. As for the division of the Empire, it is divided to this day; the
Mahomitan Turk (in several respects aforesaid, rising out of the Romans,
though otherwise in part a Jew by blood) has the Constantinopolitan Eastern
part; and the Imperial Pontificiall Pope has the Roman Western.

Thus you see how largely Daniel by Gods Spirit of prophetical revelation
shows us the succession and success of the four great Monarchies of the
earth, extending from before Daniel down to us, ^preading themselves over the
face of the earth; and how the latter eat up the former, making it self fatter
and stronger thereby. Now what should be the design of the Heavenly,
Church-loving God, so much to mind matters of State, and worldly Polities; and
in a prophecy to his spiritual, world-slighting Church? surely, a very
considerable one, viz. to the end he might methodically, for their better
capacity, and understanding, prophecy to them of a fifo Monarchy, or Empire,
or Kingdom, bigger and better then any of the former, to follow at the heels,
yea, to tread upon the toes of the fourth; and that by a glorious conquest. So
that as curious wits speak of Quintessentia, the quintessence of beings; so
this shall be the quintessence of what ever was good in all the four
preceding, with an addition of celestial, divine, and infused, and superfused
grace and glory. This fifth Monarchy is immediately under Christ, then the sole
Emperor thereof: And this must as really, orderly, and assuredly succeed
after, and prevail over all the Places, Powers, and Territories of the former,
as they followed and foiled one another. So that this fifth Monarchy must as
really, and sensibly be upon earth, as any of the preceding were, as Daniel
with all might and maine of phrase strives (according to Gods dictating) most
plainly to set forth.

Daniel, to that end, I have very learned and pious men to go along with me,
viz. Mr. Huet, on Daniel, Mr. Parker in his Visions and Prophesies of Daniel
expounded, and Mr. Archer in his personal reign of Christ. You shall hear
them themselves speak, and urge their own Proofs, Reasons and Arguments, that
you may the better see cause to justify them, and not condemn me of
singularity.

Huet is this; The fifth Kingdom is made up of the state of the Jews; who out
of their dead and desolate estate in regard of piety and polity, are awakened
by God, and brought to the embracement of Christian Religion, and to unite into
a Kingdom, who were as dead men under the flourishing state of the Empire of
Rome. But in the declining condition of that Roman Empire, the Jews are to be
awakened by God, and to be re-established into their former Kingdom, with great
glory, and large command, ash us: 1. Such a Kingdom is here intended as was by
the four metals withheld from the Jews, who of all Noah's posterity were the
just heirs of the world. Cham was to be a Servant; and Japhet was to dwell in
the Tents of Shem, as one of his family; Shem being the head of that family.
That such a Kingdom must be here meant, appears in that the Image stands up,
at the instant of the Jews loss of Sovereignty, being made Vassals to the
CHALDEANS by captivity. 2. In that this fifth Kingdom (as it relates to the
Jews, for the Christian Gentiles must by no means be dissevered) began to be
raised up to his greatness, at the time of the battering of the Image. Now had
this Kingdom been merely spiritual, it needed not to have staid for the
overthrow
of the Image before it filled the earth; seeing Christ's spiritual Kingdom
does not overthrow, (but rather set up) civil Government; and the Gospel has
flourished where the Church has been under Tyranny. 2. It is such a Kingdom,
as does break in pieces all the former Metals, viz. smites the feet, and so
demolisheth the Image. Now
the spiritual Kingdom of Christ does rather invest, then dis-robe earthly
Kings and Emperors, commanding obedience to them whether good or bad, as the
Scriptures abundantly mention. This smiting of the feet is left out as a Cipher
by them that interpret it spiritually of the preaching of the word. Consider
then, if this
were meant of the preaching of the Gospel, discovering the vanity of earthly
things, how glorious soever, why should it not rather strike at the more
glorious Metals? Is there any sense, that Christ should declaime against the
base things of the world, and pass by the eminent States? or should we think
that a conviction wrought in Syria-Egypt (as some by these make up the account
of the fourth Metal) should occasion the other States to yield to the
imbracement of the faith of Christ, themselves being strangers to his Sermons?
Sure I am, the conversion of Nations to the faith costs more ado. Or lastly,
dare any say, that our Lord either by his own person, or Apostles did first
preach to the States of Syria and Egypt, before any other Countries? Is there
not clear evidence of the conversion of other Churches, before clay-footed
Syria-Egypt? How then is the stone said immediately to smite the feet, rather
then any other part of the Image? Surely these and the like improbabilities we
fall into, by intending hence Christ's ministry of the Gospel.. 3. Such a
Kingdom is here intended, as was to be continued to the Jews without
alteration. So the Text, it shall not be given to another people, from Daniels
people. But when Christ first came, and brought his Spiritual Kingdom (whiles
to be merely spiritual) he first preached the Gospel to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel; from whom notwithstanding the Gospel was taken away, and
given to the Gentiles. The which Argument is yet more plainly laid down in
Dan. 7. ver. 18. The Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdoms from the
Beasts, and possess it for ever and ever. To which some answer, the words are
to be understood of a strange people. Whereunto I reply; the sense is the same;
another people, or a strange people, are indifferently the same, since all were
esteemed strangers to the Jews, which were not Jews. Others object, it shall
not be given to another people, because Christ will exercise his spiritual
Lordship himself. To which sense I will subscribe, if any show me who did
exercise this spiritual Lordship before the coming of Messiah, For so much the
words sound; That whereas you have been held under the Tyrants of this world
thus long; upon the recovery of your Kingdom, it shall never be resigned to
any, as it has been. Now nothing makes more against them then this. For it our
Lord did assume such a Kingdom as was formerly resigned to others, it cannot
be meant of spiritual regiment.. 4. Such a Kingdom is here meant as must
answer to Daniels scope, in his answer to the Kings dream. But if this
Kingdom be meant spiritually only, then Daniel had missed the scope much. For
Nebuchadnezzar had his thoughts busied about the issue of HIS Monarchy;
according to which thoughts, the dream was directed: and Daniel interpreting
it, undertakes to resolve him fully For in a word Daniel intends two main
points. 1. To comfort the Jews in the loss of their Kingdom and liberty,
showing that after many changes it should be restored to them again. 2. To
convince the King of his Tyranny over them, by which his third Heir should be
nothing the warmer; another should take it from him, a third from him, and a
fourth from him, which at length (maugre all their despite) should be returned
to the Jews in greater glory, then ever they lost it. Now whether the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ ^oth answer this scope or no, I leave to the
judgment of the godly wise.


Thus Mr. Huet, to whom in the general, and maine I fully consent.

Parker on this second of Daniel. The maine controversy (says he) in this
vision, is about the iron feet and legs, and the stone that smote them. The
opinion of some is, that the legs and toes of iron signify the successors of
Alexander, in the Grecian Monarchy; and especially the Seleucidae. And that the
Stone cut out of the mountain signifies Christ at his first coming, and his
spiritual Kingdom. But this cannot stand.

. 1. Because every metal signifies a distinct Kingdom, and the fulness and
complement the^eof, from the beginning to the perfect end. And therefore, as
the brazen belly and thighs are the whole and perfect Grecian Kingdom; so
accordingly, the legs and feet of iron do signify another Kingdom,
distinguished from the Grecian; which cannot be the Seleucidae, and other
Successors in the same Kingdom. For as the golden head signified the whole
Babylonian Kingdom, and the silver breast, and arms, the Persian; so the
brazen belly and thighs, the whole Grecian, including the Seleucidae and the
other Successors. For these make up the integrity, and fulness of the Grecian
Monarchy or Kingdom, as much as the Successors of Nebuchadnezzar make up the
integrity of the Babylonian: or as much as the Successors of Cyrus do concur
to the perfect constitution of the Persian: And so when the Greek Kingdom is
proposed, Dan. chap. 8. ver. 21, 22. it is expressly described as constituted,
not only of Alexander the Great, but also of the Seleucidae, and other the
successors in the same Kingdom.. 2. This Vision must reach to the last days
chap. 2.28. which could not be, if the legs and feet, the extreme, and
utmost part of the image should end in the Seleucidae; for as much as this
Kingdom expired before the birth of Christ.. 3. Because the legs are said to
be of iron, in comparison of the parts and Kingdoms going before, which were
of weaker metals. Whereas the Seleucidae, and the other success^rs of
Alexander, had not the strength of Alexander, c. 8.21.22. Thou wilt-say, the
Kingdom is represented by iron, only in relation to the Church, whereunto it
was more terrible then the former: I reply, 1 As the two first Kingdoms are
represented by unequal metalls, the first of gold, the second of silver, to
note an absolute inferiority of the one unto the other, chap. 2.39. so by
proportion, the two following of brass and iron, to note an absolute imparity
in strength, between the latter, and the former. Wherefore the Iron Kingdom
must be absolutely, and in it self, stronger then the Brazen, and not (only)
in respect of particular exercise and employment of its strength against the
people of the Church. 2. The Iron Kingdom is expressly said to be as iron,
because it bruised all these; that is, the former Kingdoms: and not only
because more terrible to the Jews, ver. 40. 3. Because it is the same with the
fourth beast with the iron teeth, chap. 7. v. 7. which is therefore so
represented, because it devou^ed the WHOLE EARTH, and not the Jews only 4.
Because Nebuchadnezzar, and Haman in the former Kingdoms, were more formidable
to the Jews, then the Seleuc^dae. And therefore there is no reason that in
this respect (only) the fourth should be represented by Iron, in comparison of
the former Kingdoms, as stronger and more terrible then those.
. 4. In the days of these Kings, shall the God of Heaven set up the Kingdom
of his Son: Whereas the Seleucidae, and the whole Greek Empire was utterly
dissolved before the birth of Christ, v. 44.
Neither can the Stone that smote the Image be Christ at his first coming and
his Kingdom immediately following, etc. for the reasons following.

. 1. Because the Kingdom signified by the stone, must break in pieces all the
other Kingdoms: But this Kingdom of Christ
that was, and is between his first and second coming, was not appointed for
the breaking down of all earthly Kingdoms; this being the time of the
Gentiles, Luk 21.24. and for the adversary to reign, and for the Church to be
trampled under foot, Rev. 11.2.. 2. Again, the Kingdom here spoken of, does
break in pieces all other Kingdoms; so that those being utterly extinct, this
alone does stand in place of them ver. 44. Now this state is not to be expected
under the Kingdom of Patience, or before the fall of Antichrist; who fallen,
the Kingdoms of the earth shall become the Lords, and his Christ's, Rev.
11.15.18.. 3. Further, what prerogative, and advancement had it been for the
Kingdom of Christ SPIRITUAL, to have broken down
the Selcucidae, and other Horns of the Greek Empire, as long as another
Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Romans, succeeded in their place, to beat down
the Church, by the Heathen Emperors, and Antichrist, for longer space of time,
and with greater and more terrible persecution then ever before?
Contrarily I affirm, that the legs, feet, and toes of the iron, do
signify the Roman Kingdom. 1. Because it is represented by a distinct
metal, coming after the Brazen belly and thighs, which is the Grecian. For
no other distinct Monarchy came after the Grecian but this, as History does
show. 2. Because it is stronger then all the rest, and breaks them in pieces,
Dan. 2.40. 3. The Iron legs and feet are parallel with the Iron teeth of the
fourth Beast, which signifies the Roman Kingdom, Dan. 7.7. 4. The ten toes
representing the ten Kings are accordingly a character of the Roman Kingdom,
Revel. 12.3. and 13.1. and 17.12. 5. It Is such a Kingdom as must stand to be
destroyed by the Kingdom of the Saints; in the end of time, and therefore can
be no other,
then the Roman Kingdom, yet continuing under Antichrist.


The Stone is the Kingdom of the Saints, as it is interpreted Dan. 2.44.45.
with chap. 7.26, 27.
And that is the Kingdom to be set up at the fall of Antichrist: as it
appears by these reasons. 1. Because it shall be set up to destroy all adverse
Kingdoms in the world, which cannot be expected til about the time of the fall
of Antichrist.
2. It shall not rise till about the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, which is
the time of the fall of Antichrist, Revel. 11.15, 16, 17. 3. Then, and not
before, it shall fill all the earth, ver. 34, 35.44, 45. that is, all Kingdoms
shall be subject unto it, chap. 7.26, 27. compare Rev. 11.15.


Thus Mr. Parker, to whom in the maine and general of his matter I assent.

Archer speak, in his forecited book p. 7. and 8. And then I shall take my
turn.

The fourth Monarchy (says he) was that of the Romans; which because it began
far lower then the rest, viz. more Westward; and yet rose as high Eastward as
the highest of the former, therefore it became a mightier Monarchy then all the
three former. This is expressed in this second of Daniel, by legs of Iron;
because it was the strongest of all, and subdued all under it. But in process
of time, the body of the world which it bore up, being so great, to which it
was a leg; it divided it self into two legs, viz. the Eastern and Western
Monarchy. Which yet, though divided, was as strong as Iron, and held all
Nations under them: But in process of time, fell into feet and toes. The
Eastern Monarchy was swallowed up by the Turk; the Western fell into diverse
Kingdoms. But among these sub-divided Kingdoms, was strength and weakness;
the feet being part of iron, and part of clay: And much mingling there shall be
amongst them, to re-joyne the Kingdoms into one body; some whereof are weak,
and some strong, as iron, and clay: but never shall be, as Iron cannot be mixed
with clay. The Spaniards and Austrians of Spain and Germany, and other Nations
of Europe, some of which are strong, and some weak, have sought by marriages,
and other covenants to mingle and re-joyne themselves into one Monarchy, but it
shall never be; as we cannot mingle iron and clay: But in the period and
up-shot of their Sovereignty and Monarchy, they shall remain distinct
Kingdoms, as Feet and Toes of Iron and Clay, partly weak, and partly strong.

Now in the days of this Roman Monarchy, this fourth Western Monarchy, there
shall be a stone cut out without hands, which shall ruin these Kingdoms
(smiting the Image on the feet of iron and clay) and so swallow up the whole
image; all the foregoing Monarchies being brought under it, and by it, to
nothing: And it becomes a Monarchy over the whole earth, where ever the former
Monarchies had ruled, ver. 35. That is, as it is explained ver. 44, 45. a
Kingdom which that stone shall obtain, set up by the hand of the God of
Heaven. Whereas the other Kingdoms or Monarchies were erected by men on earth,
though permitted, and ordered by God: This Kingdom, or Monarchy shall swallow
up in it all foregoing Monarchies. And this is a FIFTH Monarchy which shall
arise in the world, after the former four, which is meant of a state of
Christ's Kingdom; as appears by several reasons.

. 1. Mark, it is called a Stone, as Christ is the chief corner stone which
the builders refused, 1 Pet. 2. v. 3. etc. to 8.. 2. Again, it is a stone not
in hand, or cut out without hands. Because God shall rear up this Kingdom. As
touching Mr. Archers words of Gods rearing up this Kingdom without hands of
humane help, I cannot insert or assent to, while I stick at that place in
Daniel chap. 12. ver. 1. etc. that when Michael shall stand up to deliver his
people, meaning the great and general deliverance of the Jews from temporal
and spiritual captivity, there shall be a great time of trouble, such as there
never was since it was a Nation, even to that same time; Insomuch that many of
the Jews, before, as it were a sleep in the dust, or as dead men, in their
forlorn, hopeless and helpless condition, shall now at Christ's appearance
awake and stand up for the cause of their deliverance; yet some of them shall
fall off to their everlasting shame. According to which, there is a double
period of time relating to their deliverance, mentioned in the eleventh and
twelfth verses of that chapter; as if it should begin at one thousand two
hundred and ninety years after the ceasing of the daily sacrifice; but they
only should be blessed that wait, and come to the one thousand three hundred
thirty and fifth year, which is forty five years after. But of the full meaning
of this place to this sense, and the demonstration thereof, we shall hear after
in our last place of Daniel. This I confess, and I can freely conceive, that
whereas the Church of Christ is that stone, that Kingdom of Christ (as Mr.
Mede, Mr. Huet, and Mr. Parker, have before well expressed, or hinted) so
Christ's call of the residue of the Church into the state of grace at the great
and last bringing in of the Jews, shall be so immediately and suddenly done,
by Christ himself, by his appearing in the clouds, and such like extraordinary
ways (as in the birth of a Nation at once, as the Prophet describes their
call) that there shall not be used (for ought I know) the Ministry of men's
preaching to that end.. 3. Its duration (says Mr. Archer) that it shall last
for ever, shows that it is meant of Christ's Kingdom. We people (says he)
shall swallow it up, as they have done all other Monarchies. The Babylonian was
left to the Medes and Persians, and this to the Grecians; and the Grecian to
the Romans: But this shall be left to none, but shall be for ever (Dan. 2.44.)
that is, to the worlds end. But the Kingdom at the Worlds end, shall be
Christ's; for at the last end of all, he gives it up to the Father, 1 Cor.
15.24. Therefore till then, and at that time, when ALL ENDS, he has the
Kingdom. Christ's SPIRITUAL Kingdom, and his PROVIDENTIALL were before this
time: Therefore that which is to begin, when these Monarchies end, must be
Christ's Monarchy; wherefore from this prophecy we learn that Christ shall
have a MONARCHICAL STATE ON EARTH, and a VISIBLE KINGDOM as other Monarchs
had, swallowing up, or causing to vanish all other Monarchies (as the latter
Monarchies did the former.)
Thus Mr. Archer, to whom in the bulk and sum, with the explanation before, I
assent.

argument, but only a few words for further explanation of this prophecy.

. 1. Note how aptly and appositely this fifth Monarchy, this Monarchy of Christ
(that is, Christ the Monarch, and the Christian Church, the Saints, his
Monarchy) is compared unto a Stone cut out of the Mountain, etc. We know that
Christ is often called, or typified by a rock, or Stone, Matthew. 16.18. 1 Cor.
10.4. quoted out of Moses, Numb. 20.8. And the Church is compared to an house
built on, or in a rock, Matthew. 7. Matthew. 16. and Zech. 3.7. seven eyes upon
one stone, is (says Junius) the Church built on Christ.. 2. Some stone (as the
Adamant, that cannot be filed) is harder then iron: and an huge stone of any
sort, falling from a Mountain, will break the iron that is under it, much
more the iron that is mixed with clay. So Christ and his Church shall make up a
Monarchy that shall be too hard, and weighty for the fourth, the Roman Empire,
or Monarchy (that brake the rest) to bear: Matthew. 21.42, 44. Did ye never
read in the Scriptures, The STONE which the builders rejected is become the
head of the corner? whosoever shall fall on this STONE (Christ) shall be
broken; but on whomsoever it shall FALL, it will grind him to powder. Zech.
12.3. And in that day I will make Jerusalem a BURDENSOME STONE for all peoples:
all that burden themselves with it, shall be CUT IN PIECES, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it.. 3. It Is said, the Stone
was CUT out of the mountain WITHOUT HANDS, but withal it is said, It SMOTE as
a STONE against the Image; and as a STONE it brake the MATTER of the Iron and
Clay. Whence I cannot conceive otherwise, but though Christ, the Monarch, was
conceived (without man) by the Holy Ghost, etc. and his Church, his Monarchy
both Jews and Gentiles is, and shall be effectually called, and regenerated by
the same holy Spirit, without humane help; yet Christ and his Church shall by a
visible hand of power dash in pieces the fourth Monarchy, the Roman Pope, and
his Armies, Territories, and Powers; and the Turk and his (which sprang out of
the Roman as is before demonstrated) I say, shall dash it in pieces by a visible
hand of power, Dan. 12. Rev. 16. Rev. 19.. 4. The meaning of the continuance of
this Monarchy of Christ for ever, does not signify, as if it should never have
any end, as if Christ should never lay down all his power of regiment (for the
contrary is express in 1 Cor. 15.24.28.) but the meaning is this. 1. That it
shall never be DESTROYED, (verse 44. of this second of Daniel) that is, it
shall not end with a devastation and desolation, as the former Monarchies did.
2. It shall not be LEFT TO OTHER PEOPLE ( ibid. ver. 44.) that is, other people
shall never succeed the Saints, or Church of Christ, to possess this fifth
Monarchy, as another people successively succeeded, and possessed the other
Monarchies by turns; the Medes and Persians took the Assyrio-Chaldean, and so
down-ward. 3. That it shall STAND FOR EVER; that is, (as is explained in that
same 44. verse) this shall continue when the other Monarchies shall be broken
to pieces. 4. That the end of this Monarchy of Christ (so far as it may have
an end) is only formally, of the power or mode of government by Christ; he
resigning his power to God himself (1 Cor. 15.24, 28.) not materially; for the
Saints shall continue for ever, eternally happy under the wing of the
beatificall vision of God himself.
. 5. This visible Kingdom or Monarchy of Christ is to follow the rest in an
immediate order and succession of natural time, and in the same physical
place of, or upon the Earth, as when and where the former (having existed their
term) were exterminated. For if this Monarchy of Christ succeeded only in
eternity in the Empyrean highest Heaven, It can be said no more to succeed the
said four Monarchies (as Daniel would by all means have it) then it succeeded
any other Empire or Kingdom on Earth, especially those that were contemporary
with these four aforesaid Monarchies, yet not subject to them, as some such
there were all the time of their duration This last clause of some Kingdom
extant in the time of the four Monarchies, yet no: subject to them, is also
asserted by Mr. Mede, and it is confirmed by Hist. and exper.

SECT. XXXVI.
THE next place in Daniel for our Thesis is in chapter the seventh throughout.
" From whence (says Mr. Mede Vi^e Mr. Mede Diatrib. par. 4. p. 420.
) as from the mother Text of Scripture the CHURCH OF THE JEWS grounded the
name, and expected the great Day of Judgment What he means by the great Day of
Judgment see by and by at the 2.
with the circumstances thereof; and whereunto, almost all the descriptions and
expressions thereof in the New Testament have reference. For in the Vision of
this seventh of Daniel, we have a SESSION OF JUDGMENT, when the fourth BEAST
CAME to be DESTROYED. Where we see the great ASSIZES represented after the
manner of the great SYNEDRION, or CONSISTORY OF ISRAEL: Wherein the PATER
JUDICII (the Father of the Judicatory) had his ASSESSORES (his Assistants or
Assessors) sitting upon seats semi-circle-wise, before him, from his right
hand to his left. I BEHELD (says DANIEL verse 9.) TILL THE THRONES, OR SEATS
WERE PITCHED DOWN Vulg lat. Donec Throni positi sunt. LXX and Theodot. (...).
The Chal. (...) and fic (...) usurpatum de Sol^o invenies apud Chald, par^p.
Jerem. 1.15. (...) ubi in Hebr. est (...) Sept. (...).
; (namely for the Senators to sit upon;) not thrown down, as we of late have
it. And the ANCIENT OF DAYS (Pater Consistorii) did sit etc. and (subaudi) I
BEHELD TILL THE JUDGMENT WAS SET (that is, the whole Sanhedrim) and the books
were opened. Here we see both the form of judgment delivered, and the name of
judgment expressed; which is afterward twice more expressed; 1. In the
amplification of the Tyranny of the WICKED HORN, ver. 21, 22. which is said to
be continued TILL THE ANCIENT OF DAYS CAME, and judgment was given to the
Saints of the most High; i. e. Potestas judicandi ipsis facta. And the second
time in the Angels interpretation verse 26. But the JUDGMENT SHALL SIT, and
they shall take away the dominion to consume, and to destroy to the end. Where
observe by the way, that cases of DOMINION, of BLASPHEMY, and APOSTASY, etc.
belonged to the jurisdiction of the great SANHEDRIM. From this description it
came, that the Jews gave it the name of (...) The Day of Judgment. And (...)
The day of the great Judgment. Whence in the Epist. of Jude v. 6. it is called,
(...) (the judgment of the great Day.) From the same description they learned,
that the destruction then to be, should be BY FIRE, because it is said verse
9. His throne was a FIERY FLAME, and his WHEELS BURNING. A fiery stream
issued, and came forth before him. And ver. 11. The Beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the BURNING. From the same fountain are derived
those expressions in the Gospel, where this day is intimated or described, THE
SON OF MAN SHALL COME IN THE CLOUDS OF HEAVEN. The son of man shall come in the
GLORY OF HIS FATHER WITH HIS HOLY ANGELS, as it is said here, thousands
ministered unto him, etc. And that Daniel saw one like the son of man coming
with clouds of Heaven, and he came to the ancient of Days, and THEY brought
him, or placed him near him, etc. Hence St. Paul learned, THE SAINTS SHOULD
JUDGE THE WORLD; because it is said, that MANY THRONES WERE SET; and ver. 22.
by way of exposition, JUDGMENT WAS GIVEN TO THE SAINTS OF THE MOST HIGH. Hence
the same Apostle learned to confute the false fear of the Thessalonians, that
the day of Christ's second coming was then at hand; because that day cannot be,
till the MAN OF SIN WERE FIRST COME, and should have reigned his APPOINTED
TIME; for as much as Daniel had foretold it should be so, and that his
destruction should be at the SON OF MAN'S APPEARING IN THE CLOUDS; whose
appearing therefore was not to be till then. This is (...) in Saint Paul (the
appearance, or brightness of his coming.) Which man of sin (says he) Christ
shall destroy at the (...) (appearance) of his coming. Daniels wicked HORN, or
the BEAST, acting in the wicked horn, is St. Paul's MAN OF SIN. But to go on;
whiles this Judgment sits, and when it had destroyed the FOURTH BEAST, the
son of man which comes in the clouds, receives DOMINION, AND GLORY, and A
KINGDOM, THAT ALL PEOPLE, NATIONS and LANGUAGES SHOULD SERVE, and OBEY HIM,
ver. 14. which KINGDOM is thrice explained afterward; as ver. 18. These four
BEASTS (says the Angel) are four KINGS which shall arise. But (viz. when
they have finished their course) the Saints of the most High shall take THE
KINGDOM. Again verse 22. The wicked Horn prevailed, UNTIL THE TIME CAME
THAT THE SAINTS POSSESSED THE KINGDOM. Again verse 27. when the fourth Beast,
reigning in the wicked Horn, was DESTROYED THE KINGDOM and DOMINION and the
GREATNESS OF THE KINGDOM UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN, SHALL BE GIVEN TO THE PEOPLE
OF THE SAINTS OF THE MOST HIGH, etc. These grounds being laid I argue as
follows.

The Kingdom of the son of man, and of the Saints of the most high, in Daniel,
begins when the great Judgment sits. But the Kingdom in the Apocalypse,
wherein the Saints reign with Christ a thousand years, is the same with the
Kingdom of the son of man, and Saints of the most high in Daniel. Therefore
it also begins at the great Judgment Mr. Mede says not, at the ultimate
general Judgment; but at the great Judgment, speaking as Daniel, and other
Scriptures (aforesaid) and the Hebrew Rabbis; calling all the thousand years
the great judgment. And the beg^nning of them the beginning of the day of
judgment. See after at the next.
That the Kingdom in Daniel, and that of the thousand years in the Apocalypse,
are one and the same Kingdom, appears thus. First, Because they begin ab eodem
termino (from the same term) at the destruction of the fourth Beast. That in
Daniel, when the Beast (then ruling in the wicked horn) was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame, Dan. 7 ver. 11.22.27. That in
the Apocalypse, when the Beast and false Prophet (the wicked horn in Daniel)
were taken, and both cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone,
Apocal. 19.20, 21. Secondly, Because Saint John begins the Regnum of the
thousand years from the same session of judgment, described in Daniel, as
appears by his parallel expressions, borrowed from thence.

Daniel says chap. 7.

Ver. 9. I beheld till the Thrones were pitched down, and the Judgment ( i.
e. judices, the Judges) set.

Verse. 22. And judgment was given to the Saints of the most high.

St. John says chap. 20.

Verse. 4. I saw thrones, and they sat upon them.

And the Saints possessed the Kingdom; viz. with the Son of Man, who came in
the clouds.

And judgment was given unto them. And the Saints lived and reigned with
Christ a thousand years. Now if this be sufficiently proved, that the thousand
years begin with the day of judgment,
it will appear further out of the Apocalypse, that the Judgment is not
CONSUMMATE, TILL THEY BE ENDED: For Gog and Magogs destruction, and the
UNIVERSAL RESURRECTION is not till then. Therefore THE WHOLE THOUSAND YEARS
IS INCLUDED IN THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.

Hence it will follow, that whatsoever Scripture speaks of a Kingdom of
Christ, to be at his second appearing, or at the destruction of Antichrist,
must needs be the same which Daniel saw should be at that time; and so
consequently be the Kingdom of the thousand years, which the Apocalypse
includes between the beginning and consummation of the great Judgment.
Therefore that in Luke 17. verse. 20. to the end (where the Pharisees demand of
Christ, when the Kingdom of God should appear? And Christ answers that it
comes not with observation, but as the lightning that lightneth out of the one
part under heaven, shines unto the other, etc.) And that in Luke 19. verse. 11.
etc. to 15. (He spoke a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because
they thought that the Kingdom of God should immediately appear, etc.) And that
in Luke 21. ver. 31. (When you see these things come to pass, know that the
Kingdom of God is at hand. See what went before; viz. The Son of Man's coming
in a cloud, with power and great glory; borrowed from Daniel.) And that in 2 Timothy 4.1. (I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom,) must signify the same
Kingdom that Daniel saw should be at the destruction of Antichrist, and
consequently, the Kingdom of a thousand years; which the Apocalypse includes
between the beginning, and the consummation of the great Judgment. By these we
may understand the rest; Taking this for a sure ground, That this expression of
the Son of Man's coming in the clouds of Heaven, so often inculcated in the
New Testament, is taken from, and has referrence to the prophecy of Daniel;
being no where else found in the Old Testament. As our Savior also calls
himself so frequently The Son of Man, because Daniel so called him in that
Vision of the great Judgment; and that we might look for the accomplishment of
what is there prophesied of in him. It was not in vain that when our Savior
quoted the prophecy of Daniel, he added, He that reads let him understand
Matthew. 24. ver. 15.
. Certainly the great Mystery of Christ is chiefly, and most distinctly
revealed in that Book.

Medes learning, having given him the precedence to speak first, I shall limp
after, and stammer forth my own Notions (such as they are.)

blustering spirits of ## the inhabitants of the four quarters of the World,
in a Sea of Wars, there arises a succession of four Monarchies; each in his
turn ruling the greatest part of the whole earth. This order, or series of the
four Monarchies began with Nimrod, about the year of the world one thousand
seven hundred and eighty eight, and before Christ two thousand one hundred and
eighty three; and has continued to this day. This succession, order, or series
of the four Monarchies, the Prophet according to his vision sets forth in the
third verse, under the name and notion of four Beasts: Which he explaines in
the seventeenth verse, to signify four Kings or Monarchs, that should arise
out of the earth; that is, by earthly means domineer over the greatest part of
the earth.

Beast (ver. 4.) is like a Lion, that had Eagles wings, wherewith he was wont
to lift up himself from the earth, till they were plucked, and then he was
made to stand upon his feet as a man, resting upon the earth; and a man's heart
was given unto him. By all which is meant the Babylonian Monarchy; which was
strong like a Lion, and had wings of celerity and victory, becoming the
Assyrio-Chaidean Monarchy, whereby it was lifted up to an Imperial eminency
above the generality of all the earth. Obadiah ver. 4. Jer. chap. 4. ver. 13.
Those his wings are plucked by Darius the Mede, and Cyrus the Persian, and so
made to stand as a man upon his feet; that is, was brought down to the common
rank of men: And has a man's heart given unto him; that is, the spirit of an
ordinary man; an ordinary, low, boats, peasants, plebeian spirit; not an
Heroic, and Imperial.

Bear, that raised up it self on one side, and had three ribs in its mouth,
between its teeth, and they said thus unto it, Arise and devour much flesh. By
all which is meant the Persian Monarchy; which was ravenously cruel like a
Bear; raising up one dominion, enduring no Mate, or Corrivall; but subdued
first the Medes, then the Babylonians, uniting all into one Monarchy: Between
the teeth of his mouth, of his desires and power, demanding, and snatching more
dominion, he has the three ribs of the Eastern, Western, and Southern parts
of the world by conquest (compare Dan. 8.4.) He arises and eats much flesh,
in his cruel slaughterings, and spoilings in pursuance of his Victories.

is like a Leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a foul, and
had also four heads, and dominion was given to it. By which is signified the
Grecian Monarchy, which was like a Leopard in subtilty, celerity, and rapacity,
Jer. 5.6. Hab. 1.8. Dan. 8.5. The Subtilty appeared in the policy of Philip the
Father, and Alexander the Son, in laying the plot for this Monarchy, slyly
occasioning a quarrel, to fall out with the neighbor Nations. And in the
cunning of Alexander in battle, that would always fight his supernumerous
Enemy in straites, where his said enemy might not have room to bring up more
of his men in fight, then Alexander on his part could display in battle. The
swift celerity appeared in that the Grecians under the said Alexander did so
suddenly (within about twelve years) overrun the greatest part of the world;
as if this Conqueror had flowne upon wings; of whom the proverb was, He came,
he saw, he overcame. And is therefore described in Dan. 8. by an Hee-Goate,
which skips as if he touched not the ground. The rapacity, or ravenousnesse to
devour appeared especially against the Jews, the four heads of this Leopard,
and their Successors exercising matchless cruelty against them; and every
where (as naturally ravenous) more tearing, and destroying; then taking prey.
For Alexander, and the Empire under him, being the Body, his four Captains
that immediately succeeded him in the Empire, were the four Heads, or Rulers (
Dan. 8.8. -- and 11.4.) Cassander head of Macedonia, Antigonus of Asia,
Seleucus of Syria, and Ptolomy of Egypt; all possessing Imperial dignity at
once: By which this Monarchy became a Monster, and monstrous in devouring.

natural Beast, nor Name is found meet to describe him; only he is said to
have ten horns, and iron teeth to devour, and feet to stamp the residue of the
beasts under it. A strange beast, different from all Beasts, and all the
Beasts; but compounded (as John shows, Rev. 13.) of all four. By this
description of Daniel is set forth the Roman Monarchy: which (according to
Daniels words) was dreadful and terrible to all Nations, being exceeding
strong to annoy them all; having such teeth of war, as Scipio, Pompey, Caesar
etc. iron victors. That addition of nails of brass ver. 19. signifies their
Imperial Senate, and Provincial Magistrates, who held fast whatsoever the
iron teeth conquered. The ten Horns are explained by Saint John, Rev. 17. to
be the character of the Roman Empire, and to signify the ten Kingdoms into
which at last it was divided. And the breaking off three of these ten, by the
one Horn that grew up among them, does further notably describe the Body of
Antichrist arising out of the Roman Empire, with its two sides: The Turk, one
Eye, Leg, and Arm; and the Pope the other Eye, Leg, and Arm: Both making
up one Antichristian Body, to keep the world from embracing Christ and his pure
Gospel. I have already largely showed Lib. 2. cha. 2. Sect. 4.. 2.
how Turk and Pope are (generally considered) one Antichristian body: that
they jarre among themselves, it nothing prejudiceth this Notion (no more then
the four heads of the Leopard, prejudiced the oneness of the Grecian
Monarchy, or the ten horns the oneness of the Roman; or the several factions
between the several Popes co-existent at the same time, with mighty factions
of their several sorts of Friars, did null the union of the Roman Antichrist.)
As Herod, and Pontius Pilate, disagreeing in other things, became friends in
that tertio of crucifying Christ; so the Turk and Pope, however they disagree
in other things, yet they are most deservedly called by the same NAME,
Antichrist, and described by the same number of their name: The Turk keeping
off the Jews, and the Pope the Christians (so called) from embracing Christ:
And both their names making exactly six hundred sixty six, of which before, loco
citato. Even as their SEATS are both called by the name of Babylon, both in the
Old and New Testament. Their RISE also being the same, compare Revel. 13. with
this seventh of Daniel, the Pope rising out of the Roman Empire, and the Turk
out of the Pope, viz. out of Popish advise for Religion, and the Popish
Territories for dominion. The Pope taking part of the Roman Empire, and their
Heathenish religion, and the Turk (Mahomet) formed his religion by the advice
of Sergius a Monk (of which largely before) and took part of the Roman
Empire, viz. three parts of ten toward his Territories, as it is in this
seventh of Daniel.

Their END OF DESTRVCTION is also the same, both in time and manner, they
falling immediately one after another, by which the fourth Beast is destroyed,
and much after the same manner, as we may see by comparing Dan. 7. Revel. 19.
and 2 These. 2. and most justly, their EYES and MOVTHES of wit and blasphemy
against Christ being so like, Dan. 7. ver. 8.25. Rev. 13. ver. 5.6. Neither do
they differ in their PRIDE, Dan. 7.20. 2 These. 2. advancing themselves above
all that is called God. not only above Magistrates, but above Christ; the Turk
in preferring Mahomet, the Pope in dispensing with great sins continually
practiced, which Christ threatens, and nulling much of his Word, and
ordinances. They both also concur in TYRANNY, in changing Laws and times,
ver. 25. of this seventh of Dan. and 2 These. 2. Their CRVELTY is also described
as one, in continual making war with, and prevailing against the Saints of
the most high. Compare this seventh of Dan. ver. 21.25. with the thirteenth of
Revel. ver. 7. But it is but for a TIME, which is measured out as the same, in
the general term, viz. A time, and times, and part of a time. So in the twenty
fifth verse of this seventh of Dan. and Dan. 12.7. compared with Revel. 12.
ver. 14. Revel. 13. ver. 5.6. And if we reckon the difference of the
commencement of one thousand two hundred and ninety days, and one hundred and
sixty days, mentioned Revel. 11. and Dan. 12. the account will arise to be
near the same; of which computation (God permitting) more after. For close of
this identity, or likeness, as the Turk pulled off at first three horns of
the ten of the Roman Empire, viz. Syria, Egypt, and Africa; or rather as other
reckon, Syria, Grecia, and Africa; so the Pope arrogates a triple Crown over
the Roman state.

Daniel, I must insert here my thoughts touching the LITTLE HORN; I know the
Learned differ much about it. Not to mention (as if worthy of words, that
impossible opinion, that it signifies Antiochus Epiphanes) the learned Parker,
and others hold, it means the Antichrist of Rome. But learned Graserus and
others understand by it Mahomet, and give very strong reasons for it. The
answers whereto that some give, are not to me sufficient; nor are their own
Arguments for the Roman Antichrist (as to peculiarise that Horn to him) in my
judgment convincing. I have here nor place, nor time (patching in this
seventh. after I was past it in the Copy) to discuss the Question at large,
but I shall propose this expedient to the learned; 1. To consider (as has been
even now, and before hinted, as we pointed in the Margin) that Turk and Pope,
with their successors, are but the maine Integrals of Antichrist. 2. That upon
exact review of what ever is said on both sides touching the little horn, it
may appear that all may handsomely and fairly be accommodated to both Turk
and Pope, if not more appositely to the Turk. 3. That as they that make it a
Roman Horn, may be led thereunto, with fear of omitting any thing that
Prophesies and promises the ruin of that Roman Antichrist; so we must be
jealous of waving any thing that threatens the ruin of this Mohammedan, or
Turkish Antichrist, intended in Revel. 9. by Mr. Parkers own confession, as
after in the sixteenth of Revelations, in the sixth Vial, and elsewhere.
For with me, I confess, it is a rule (which diligent observation, as I have
gone along over all the Scriptures, has irresistably ingraffed into my reason)
That all the Scriptures touching the great Restoration, or Restitution of the
Church to her glorious estate on earth, before the ultimate day of Judgment,
do more directly, and immediately look toward the Jews; consequentially,
inclusively, and mediatly upon the Gentiles. And therefore by consequence do
more immediately threaten the ruin of the Mohammedan Turkish Antichrist, as
their more immediate and cruel enemy, inhabiting all their borders, and next
extend to the Roman Antichrist, taking him in, under the general notion of a
grand enemy to the conversion of Jews and Gentiles unto Christ, and of the
glorious reformation of the Church, and of the pure Doctrine and ministration
of the Gospel conducing to both. Nor does it hang handsomely together (in my
eye) that the little Horn breaking off three of the ten, should be the Roman
Antichrist his conquering three of the Mohammedan Emperors, because the
breaking off three of the ten, was to disjoyn them from the ten, not to reunite
them unto the ten, and so make up thirteen; or to make up the ten to be ten,
for they were ten before, over which the Roman Antichrist ruled, before the three
were broken off. Thus in brief I have in this strait of place modestly
presented my thoughts, which with all my heart I humbly submit to the
judgments of the more learned, that can produce stronger reasons against what
I have propounded.

Daniel of these four Beasts (answering to the Image in chap. 2. of the four
Metals three eating up (as Pharoahs Kine) on another; the next thing that
offers it self to consideration is, who, or what it is that destroys the
surviving fourth. The Thrones (ver. 9.) were set (so we must read it, as we
have proved before; Lib 3. cap. 2. Sect. 3.. 3.
and since Mr. Mede coming forth, has asserted the same with us (as we heard
but now S. 1.) God the Father sits, called the Ancient of days, as out-living
all Empires, and is said to have Garments as white as snow; alluding to the
white of Judges and Rulers, in their white Meniver, importing his
righteousness in judging; his hair is said to be white as wool, noting the
gravity and solidity of his Wisdom; his Throne a fiery flame, and his Wheels
as burning fire; signifying that his sentence of Judgment is swift and severe
in execution, according to his mind and will. The fiery stream issuing out,
and coming forth from before him, notes the continuation of execution, till all
his mind be fulfilled. The thousand thousands ministering unto him, etc.
signify the assession, assent, and assistance of Saints and Angels in that
execution, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.

posture of this Judicature, it follows to the twelfth verse, concerning the
acts of this Judicature. (For take it for a considerable rule, when the Lord is
to do some notable thing for his people, or against their enemies, it is
represented in Scripture in the form of a Day of Judgment, Deuteronomy. 33.2. Job 1.
Psalm. 50. Jude ver. 14.) The Judgment, or Judicature being set, and the Books
being opened (as aforesaid) Daniel beholds till the Beast was slain, and his
body destroyed, and given to the burning flame; That is, the Judicature sat on
purpose to condemn and execute; that is, to destroy the fourth Beast with ten
Horns, the Antichristian Roman Monarchy, divided into seven and three Horns;
opposing Christ's Kingdom with Papal and Mohammedan Heresy and Tyranny; and
this Judicature sits (ver. 26.) to destroy the ten Horns, divided into seven
and three (ver. 24, 25.) and to consume them unto the END, as the connection of
those three last named verses evidently gives in. The meaning is, that upon the
total of the fourth Beast, in both his limbs or parts, of Turk and Pope, in
both his powers, Secular and Religious ( alias irreligious) must be a
continual destruction, till a full end of his ruin be completed. The opening
of the Books signifies an open discovery of this Beast, and of all his Limbs,
and all his impieties, to them that before admired, adored, or obsequiously
submitted to him, and to all others that will come in to the Lord Christ, and
his cause, to give the said Beast a proportionable reward. Observe that it is
said in the ninth and tenth, ver. That Daniel beheld the fourth Beast, till the
Judicature was set, and the Books were opened; and ver. 11. he beheld till the
Beast was slain; which seems to me aptly to set forth, that though a deadly
blow be given to the Beast at the first erecting of the Throne of Judicature,
yet his destruction comes on by degrees, and is not completed till the end of
the striving, mentioned Dan. 12. ver. 1. compared with ver. 11, 12. To
understand this more clearly. This fourth Beast (says the text) is various,
and strange from all the rest (as aforesa^d) It has ten Horns, and among them
came up another little Horn, breaking off three of the ten. All which aptly
may signify these three things. 1. The Roman Empire. 2. The Papacy, rising
out of that. 3. The Turkish state, rising out of both (as has been touched
before.)
Now the two first growing into one (the Papacy swallowing up the Emperialtie)
may be destroyed at the first setting of the Judicature; the third, the Turkish
Dynastie, or power may immediately after begin to fall, and so fall more and
more before the Jews (the Gentiles assisting them) till it be fully down:
which graduall seems to be further hinted in ver. 11. First, the BEAST is
slain. 2. His BODY is destroyed. 3. GIVEN to the BURNING.
Sure enough (to humane reason) it seems probable the Papacy should first
down; whose imagery and idolatry are the great offense hindering the Jews
from turning Christians, and to stand up for their deliverance. In this
graduall destruction of Antichrist (in the general) Mr. Parker on Daniel, does
fully concur with me Mr. Parker in Vis. and Prophes. Exp. p. 32, 33.
. And he goes on confidently thus far further; as to assert that this
graduall ruin of Antichrist shall be in acting, the space of those forty five
years hinted in Dan. 12.11.12. from one thousand two hundred and ninety, to
one thousand three hundred thirty five, which are just forty five years. Of
which computation more after. But

Having seen Daniels vision of the destruction of the fourth Beast; next in
verse the thirteenth he shows us in a further vision, who takes the Kingdom or
Monarchy of the fourth Beast, with an explication of all former passages in
this chapter.

Daniel having showed us in the eleventh verse, that the fourth beast was
slain, and his body was given to the burning, follows on presently in the
twelfth verse, telling us, that as concerning the rest of the Beasts, they had
their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season, and a
time. We Answer: 1. If we keep close to the words of the original, then thus
we must render it (just as there, word for word) And they took away the
dominion of the rest of the Beasts; for Chal. (...) which like materia prima
(as Mr. Mede speaks) accepts of many significations, and stands as a causal in
many places of Scripture, as Psa. 60.11. Isa: 64.5 Isa. 39.1. comp. 2 King.
20.12. (where (...) in I say is turned (...)) are undeniably apparent examples.
length of life was given to them but for a time and season. The words are an
answer to a supposed question that might be put, viz. And what (might some say)
became of the rest of the Beasts? why (says Daniel) they (that is each from
one another, the latter from the former) took away the Dominion of the rest,
residue, or remainder; for it was granted unto them (by the ancient of days
verse. 9.) to live in person and power but for a time, and a season. All which
Daniels vision presents, to set forth antithetically the excellency of this
fifth Kingdom, or Monarchy, that it was free from all such shortenings; and in
that sense to be for ever. Yea, materially in the person and felicity, to be
absolutely for ever. 2. If any hanker, and long after the sense, that our
translation hints, as if the three former Beasts had a kind of life allowed
them, after their dominion was taken away; to give these content, we can give
them this fair answer (which may likewise be handsomely improved as to the
illustration of the ruin of the fourth Beast, and so of the glorious remaining
of the fifth Monarchy) That though the three former monarchies were dis-robed of
their Monarchical paramount Emperiality, the former by the latter, yet those
three (divine providence permitting) had continued unto them some degree of
regality, until some good space of time that the fourth had been in being and
power: which is the more probable.
1. Because, how else could it be said, that the third trampled the second,
and the fourth the third; yea, all the remainder of the former; unless they
had some entiry or being to be trampled. 2. Because the whole Image is broken
by the ruin on the feet of the fourth and last. And therefore probably there
were certain broken limbs of the three former, remaining to be beaten into
dust with the fourth, 3. Because we have some such account given us in the
faithfullest humane Histories.
First, For the Armenians, part of Chaldea, as some learned affirm, had a King
and Kingly dignity even unto the days of the Roman Monarchy. Tigranes King of
Armenia was subdued by the Roman Pompey, and his Country made tributary, and so
stamped under foot. But after a while, even in the reign of Tiberius, the same
Armenia was fortified against the Romans, whom the Emperor rather pacified
(with promises) then subdued with War; who after got the staff so far into
their hands again, that in the reign of Jovinian they were called Friends,
not Vassals, to the Romans. Secondly, For Persia, they had great power in the
time of Antiochus the great, and of his son, Antiochus the vile (of the
Greek Monarchy) down unto, and far into the times of the Roman Emperors.
Of whom Julian lost his life; Valerian went under ransom, and Jovinian put to
the shameful foil, of the loss of four whole provinces. Thirdly, For the
Grecian Monarchy; after the Romans had trampled Egypt; Anthony and Cleopatra
being subdued by Augustus, and their Countries reduced to Provinces: yet after
the Greeks did so far shake off the Roman yoke, as that they withstood diverse
of their stoutest Emperors, viz. Galienus, Aurelian, and Dioclesian. And this
last answer does also well illustrate the prophecy; That whereas something of
the former Monarchies remained in the days of the later, yet the fifth should
leave nothing of the fourth, and so nothing of the former: All being to be
broken in the feet of the fourth; So glorious should the fifth Kingdom be. Now
let the reader take which answer he pleases.

Daniels visions; wherein, he having already showed us (toward the discovery
of the Who, and what, that destroyed the fourth Beast) the posture and Acts of
the Session of Judicature; next he represents to us the person or persons, the
Captain, and his Army that took from the fourth Beast the Roman Monarchy, and
all other Kingdoms, into their own hands of power; and these are, Christ and
his Christians, verse. 13, 14. Daniel saw in the night-visions (fitly signifying
the Antichristian darkness that then clouded the Church) one like the Son of
Man come with the clouds of Heaven. This is Christ, who relatively as a King
and Captain General (as the Scriptures set him forth;) and Mystically as he
is by union of the Spirit, head of his Church, does infer (as soon as he is
come) an Host of Christians at his heels, as part of his Session when he
sits; all which must necessarily be here understood, as the 18, 26 and 27
verses (being of the interpretation of the vision) give sufficient warrant.
verse. 18. But the SAINTS OF THE MOST HIGH shall take the Kingdom for ever,
Zech. 1.8. Heb. 2.10. Revel. 19.11, 12, 13, 14.
even for ever and ever, ver. 27, 28. But the Judgment shall sit, and they (of
the Judgment) viz. as it is in this vision, the Son of Man and his ten
thousand times ten thousand of all Nations, Languages and Peoples that believe
in him, shall take away his (the fourth Beasts) dominion, to consume, and
destroy it to the end. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the PEOPLE OF THE SAINTS OF
THE MOST HIGH, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions
shall serve HIM. Where most evidently, Christ called here the Son of Man, does
as a public person, and a representative, as the second Adam of all mankind
that believe, include and signify all the sons of men that believe; and they
and he are so one mystically by faith, and relatively as a corporation, or
united Emperiality, that it is indifferent to the Holy Ghost to mention HIM, or
THEM to be the Ruler of this fifth Monarchy.

As for that his coming we mentioned but now, Daniel expresses it in the said
thirteenth verse, The Son of man came with the Clouds of Heaven. Upon which
words Mr. Parker says thus; The Son of man is Christ the Head, including
also his Body the Church, as appears ver. 26, 27. He is said to come, and
this is his second coming, in a large sense, comprehending his coming to bear
rule on earth, by setting up his Kingdom, breaking down the enemy, and this is
the space of forty five years; and then his visible appearing at the
Resurrection immediately ensuing, to finish the New Jerusalem begun, in heavenly
perfection. And in this large description his second coming is usually taken in
the Prophets. He is said to come in the Clouds of Heaven; that is, on high,
above the glory, and power of the Kingdoms of the earth, in the supereminent
Majesty of his Kingdom, Rev. 11, 12. Isa. 52.13. Mat. 24.30. Thus Mr. Parker. I
only add this, that by the current and tenor of Scripture this phrase of his
coming in the Clouds, signifies withal, that he shall visibly and really
appear in the natural Clouds, at that his second coming but now mentioned; as
Christ himself, and Saint John expounds the Prophets, Matthew. 24.30. Revel.
1.7. Then shall appear (says Christ, in that twenty fourth of Matthew, ver.
30.) the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of
the earth mourn, and they shall SEE the Son of Man coming in the CLOVDES of
Heaven, etc. And says John (in that Revel. 1.7.) Behold he comes WITH
CLOVDES, and every eye shall SEE him, and they also that pierced him.

come to the Ancient of days, that is, as he is Mediator, to the end to
obtain the Kingdom for his Saints, being removed from the enemy. So the Lamb
is said to approach to him that sat upon the throne to receive the Book. And
he is also said to be brought before the ancient of days; which words, says
Mr. Parker, until better light may shine, I cannot but conjecture (says he)
that they do signify the Saints, who bring Christ near to the ancient of
days, BY IMPORTVNITY OF PRAYERS, for the obtaining of the Kingdom, and
removal of it from the Beast.

Whereupon the Kingdom, with all the dominion, and glory thereof, following in
ver. 14. to the end of the chapter, is given to him; that is, to Christ and his
Saints, as before cleared; The beginning whereof says Mr. Parker, is at the
fall of Antichrist, and the setting up of the Throne of Judgment, as appears
verse. 21, 22, 23.25, 26. and is absolved in heavenly perfection, at the
Resurrection immediately ensuing. So he. The greatness of it is in those words,
that All People, Nations, and Languages should serve him; signifying, that it
is the very same Kingdom, or Monarchy, in place and substance, only the
quality shall be better, and the quantity bigger; these words holding forth
(says Mr. Parker) the universal conversion of the remnant of the earth, who
at the fall of Antichrist shall be subject to Christ, and his Ordinances, in
the hand of his holy people, the witnesses of truth; for which cause they are
also said to be subject to them, v. 26, 27. Isa. 60.10, 12. All that shall
withdraw their ^ecks from such subjection, shall be destroyed.
And this is the first state, or rising of New Jerusalem, the space of five and
forty years, before its completing in the resurrection; which state is
specially described by all the Prophets. The description of the continuance of
this Kingdom of Christ is, that it shall be for ever, as has been before
largely opened.

Archers short argument (I may call it) in matter, is considerable, especially
if put into form, thus.

Christ, the Son of Man, must have a Monarchy on earth, delivered to him by God
the Ancient of days, at the ruin of the fourth Monarchy, to be in his
occupation at his second appearance, and from thence to the end of the world.

But this cannot be meant of his spiritual and providentiall Kingdom, which
he had before the four Monarchies, 1 Cor. 10.1. etc. as after the end of this
world, at the period of the thousand years he has no Kingdom, but resignes up
all to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28.

Therefore this is yet to come; the fourth Monarchy being not yet destroyed;
nor Antichrist, the main, and most part of that fourth Monarchy.

Daniel, the resolution and reasons of learned Master Huet upon the scope
thereof. This Kingdom (says he Huet on Daniel chap. 7. ver. 14.
) is ascribed to the person of the Messiah, which in ver. 22.27. is given to,
and possessed by the Saints. It is Christ's authoritatively; it is the Saints by
delegation and ministry. And such as rule for God, and according to God, are
said to rule with God, Hos. 11, 12. Rev. 2.26, 27. which Kingdom of our Lord
is either merely spiritual and inward, whereof he makes no VICAR, saving his
holy Spirit; and this Regency he reserveth with himself, as a peculiar
Royalty: or else outward and mixed, partly spiritual in the Ordinances of
Worship; and partly civil in Equity and Justice, according to righteous laws,
etc. This admits of Deputation. And the exercise of it may be ascribed either
to God, or Man (the first and second causes never jarring) This is that
dominion here mentioned, whereof the Jews are deprived, by the tyranny of the
Roman Monarchy. Yet now through the glorious appearance of the Deliverer, it is
restored to them again, never more to be wrested from them. This
interpretation, the circumstances of the Text confirm. 1. It is such a
regiment as was resisted by that very People, Languages and Nations, that after
were brought in to serve and obey it, upon the violent breaking to pieces of
all that perseveringly resisted it. But thus the spiritual Kingdom of Christ
is not set up. Ergo. 2. This Kingdom is such as may admit of humane deputation:
viz. that may be exercised by the Saints on earth, ver. 22. Judgment was given
to the Saints of the most high, and the Saints possessed the Kingdom. But
Christ's spiritual Kingdom admits of no deputation; seeing none among men can
give the Spirit, command the Conscience, or move the Will, but Christ alone. So
he. I will add a word, and I have done with this Scripture; and that may be a
third Argument: The dominion here prophesied and promised, is that which was
taken from the Jews. 1. By the Babylonian captivity, wherein Daniel and the
Jews now were; and in a way of comforting him and them, against this their
present desolate condition, these visions, and predictions are given to him;
and upon his sadness at first dark sight of them (frequently mentioned in this
book) they are further explained to him. See more in an exact consideration of
the whole ninth chapter of this prophecy. 2. By the desolations of Jerusalem.
And accordingly Daniel sadly complains in prayer to God in chap. 9. ver. 12.
That under the whole Heaven has not been done, as has been done unto
Jerusalem. And for his comfort it is answered verse. 24. That there were but
seventy weeks to be determined upon the holy City: which now he understood
(ver. 1.2.) that they were near expiration. 3. By the ceasing of the daily
sacrifice, which is expressly mentioned chap. 12.11. as from thence to begin the
account of one thousand two hundred and ninety years, at the expiration
whereof their full deliverance should commence.
Now observe, That therefore the dominion passing away from the Jews, 1.
passed away by Temporal calamities; as in the captivity, and the desolations
of Jerusalem: 2. By the interruption of outward public worship.
But the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, he ruling their hearts by his Spirit,
and they worshipping him in secret with spiritual worship, cannot pass away
from a people by those two things. But contrariwise, as the Jews were a
religious people, and the only Church of Christ, many years after the
captivity, yea, and some hundreds of years after their return, till the
Apostles times; so the Christian Church was most flourishing spiritually, when
outwardly most persecuted, under the ten persecutions, and were feign to serve
God in secret, at dead midnight. Compare the story of the Acts with Rev. 11.1.
etc. and Rev. 12.1. etc. Fox Martyrolog Volum. 1.
all which relate to those times; as Mr. Fox in his Book of Martyrs gives us a
particular account.

SECT. XXXVII.
Wherein Daniel chap. 11. and chap. 12. are collated so far, as they assert our
maine Thesis, touching the GENERAL AND GLORIOUS RESTORATION OF THE CHURCH,
AND RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.

Huet, and Mr. Mede, in the Van, and after them, to my power I shall bring up
the Rear; For they have well cleared, as I conceive, many things, and
corrected some versions, punctations, and obscurities of both these chapters;
which had need enough, before any solid inferences can thence be safely made.
As for any thing considerable in the eighth chapter, (to our matter in hand) it
may be touched occasionally as we go on, with these, and other Scriptures.

The whole eleventh chapter (says Mr. Huet) concerns the state of the Jews
under the three last humane Monarchies, viz. the Persian, Grecian, and Roman.
The twelfth contains the Jews deliverance: the first mention of the Romans is
in the thirtieth verse, of the eleventh chaper; For the ships of Chittim (
alias Kittim) shall come against him; therefore he shall be grieved, and
return, and have indignation against the holy Covenant; so shall he do; he
shall return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant.
Which v. Mr. Huet paraphrastically reads thus: For the Navy of the Romans
shall come against him (Antiochus Epiphanes, alias Epimanes* being rather
furious then fair) for fear of whom he shall be forced to retire from Egypt, and
by the way shall execute his fury upon the Jews, the refractory Jews
assisting him, For (says Mr. Huet in his exposition of this thirtieth verse)
whereas the Romans aid, sent under the conduct of Popilius, are called ships
of Kittim (alias Chittim) it is for that originally they came of Kittim, who
was one of the Sons of Javan, Genesis 10.4. from whom, not only some parts of
Grecia, but all Italy did originally spring, Ancient Records declaring how
Latinus transported the Citians from the Greekish Islands into Italy. The which
is the rather probable, all antiquity concluding the Italians originally to
spring from Graecia. And ships of Kittim are here mentioned, rather then people
of Kittim; 1. For that the arrival of the ships only, in the Haven of
Alexandria, drove Antiochus from Egypt, without any other hostility; the
Soldiers being never landed. 2. For that the history of the Roman greatness,
beginning from these times, the Lord would have his people at once discern the
rise, and ruin of their last and great oppressor; which he does by citing
Balaams unwitting prophecy Numb. 24.24. That the SHIPS of KITTIM should
afflict ASSURE, translating it into a province, and also should afflict HEBER,
the JEWS; sacking their City, and scattering their people on the face of the
earth; and yet in the end shall perish for ever; the Ancient of days casting
this fourth Monster into the streams of fire, and restoring the dominion to
his own people. So that the wise-hearted Jews might know, that when the
Romans came against Antiochus the vile, that their last oppressor was at the
doors, who yet should perish for ever.
But first Antiochus must finish his Scene, who is yet in this vision upon the
stage of power, acting his fury against the Jews, of which a touch in the
former verse; now follows more in v. 31. And Arms shall stand on his part, and
they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily
sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that makes desolate. Which Mr.
Huet thus paraphrastically reads: Wherein (that is as before, in executing his
fury on the Jews) having other power to assist him, he shall defile the holy
Temple, and trample under the strong holds of Sion; and shall destroy the
Ordinance of Gods daily worship, placing in the Temple an abominable Idol,
causing desolation where it comes. Upon which he comments thus; In the which
attempts against Jerusalem, besides his confederates among the Jews, he had
other foreign Captains assisting herein, who indeed were the special actors
of these Tragedies, as Philippus, Andronicus, Apollonius (2 Machab. 5.22, 23,
24.) men of insatiable cruelties; who having taken the Fort of Sion, they
fortifyed it against the Jews, and committed miserable massacres, without
either respect of Sex or age (1 Machab. 1.35.) also polluting the Temple.
First, By the blood of Innocents, slain before the Altar: Which being a
sanctuary of refuge from blood, was polluted by the effusion of it, 1 Machab.
1. ver. 37, 39. compare 2 Chronicles. 23.14. Secondly, By their presence in the
Temple, who were strangers to God and his Religion, Acts 21.28. Thirdly, By
meddling with holy things, and touching the consecrated places and vessels.
Fourthly by disannulling the ordinances of Gods daily Worship, interdicting the
holy Assemblies of the Temple, 1 Maccab. 1.45. and commanded the Jews to
sacrifice in every City, verse. 51. And lastly placing the abominable Idol
Jupiter Olympius, in the Temple, and his sacrifice on the Altar of the Lord,
ver. 54. called there the abomination of desolation. Abomination, by a
prophetical phrase, Jer. 32.34. Idolatry being most abominable to God, Jer.
1.13. And of desolation, because Idolatry brings desolation upon the good Jews
in grief on their spirits: upon the bad that fell to Idolatry in plagues upon
the land. In these sore desolations and destructions by mad Antiochus, a
great trial of men's hearts appeared, as it follows in verse 32. And such as
do wickedly against the Covenant, shall be corrupt by flatteries; but the
people that do know their God, shall be strong, and do exploits. Which Mr.
Huet in his way of paraphrase renders thus; In which trials many of the Jews
shall be corrupted by fair speeches, to deny their religion; but such as are
faithful with God, shall gather courage, and cleave to their religion. Whereof
in his Commentary, he gives us a brief account. Diverse Jews (says he)
revolted from the faith, and joined with him against their brethren, as
Menelaus, who was guide to Antiochus, in robbing the Temple, and was more
outrageous against his Brethren, then the very Gentiles themselves, 2 Macca. 5.
ver. 15. and ver. 23. Jason, who entered the City with a thousand Soldiers, and
made havocke of his Countrymen. Also Alcimus, who contrary to his Oath,
betrayed his brethren, and aided Bacchides, 1 Maccab. 7.5.16. besides
multitudes of inferior rank. In the 33. and 34. verses follows the event:
And they that understand among the people, shall instruct many; yet they shall
fall by the sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil many days. Now when
they shall fall, they shall be helped, with a little help; but many shall
cleave to them with flatteries. Which paraphrase-wise M.H. renders thus; Yea,
such of them as have the knowledge of the law, shall instruct and encourage
their brethren, in these sufferings; yet many of them shall suffer the sword,
fire, bondage, and spoil for many days. Yet in this distress, this shall be
helped by the courage of some zealous of religion; yet among them many of false
and treacherous hearts shall be joined. Which in his Commentary he explaines
thus, Of the Saints of these times, some were put to death by the sword, 2
Maccab. 5.26. Others were cast into the merciless fire, 2 Maccab. 7.5. Others
spoiled of their goods, 1 Maccab. 1.35. And others were sold to the Gentiles
for slaves, 2 Maccab. 5.24. The little help they had (in these distresses) was
the exploite of Mattathias, and his Sons; Judas and his Brethren. Who though
they were but a handful in respect of Antiochus his Army, yet through the good
hand of God prospering their attempts, they were a refuge to their distressed
brethren, and a vexation to their enemies. To whom they gave many onsets, and
many foiles, 1 Macca. 2.24, 25, 44. yet were there many false brethren, as
Alcimus and others.

And SOME of them of understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge, and to
make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for an
appointed time] We have, says Mr. Mede. Clausulam persecution is Epiphanianae,
etc. That is, The close of Epiphanes his persecuting: And therefore he reads
it, points it, and notes it thus: And of those that are understanding (men)
MANY shall fall, for the trial of them, and to make them pure unto the time of
the end; there putting the full stop [.] of the whole five and thirtieth verse:
adding at those words [unto the time of the end] this note [That is to (says
he) the end of the Greekish Kingdome] And accordingly he comments upon it thus;
With this close (says he) of the Epiphanian persecution, the Greekish
Kingdom, according to the reckoning of the Holy Spirit is judged to have its
end; neither beyond that does it come into the account of the prophetical
Tetrarchy, or quaternion of four Kingdoms. And bids us for this to compare
Dan. 8.23. (...). To which let me not inconveniently add this, that our
English renders that of Dan. 8.23. [And in the LATTER time of THEIR KINGDOME]
But Pagnin and Arias, in novissimo regni eorum, i. e. in the last of their
Kingdom.

In the 36 verse the former part, we have (says Mr. Mede Note that in all the
general sense of the verses following of this 11. chap. of Dan. which Mr. Mede
gives of them, as to signify the fourth Roman Monarchy, Mr. Huet also does
concur with him.
) the characterisme of the fourth, to wit, the Roman Kingdom, etc. This verse
in our English is rendered and pointed thus [And the King shall do according to
his will, and he shall exalt himself and magnify himself above every God;
etc.] But Master Mede begins this 36 verse higher, viz. from the last clause of
the five and thirtieth verse: which last clause is reckoned to begin
immediately after the word [end]) thus: [ even to the time of the end (or as
Master Mede) BECAUSE as yet unto an appointed time, a King shall do according
to his pleasure, and shall extol and magnify himself above every God] For says
he, these words (as thus parted, and pointed) are a Transition. And the Article
[H] prefixed to [King] ((...)) is not here (...); commemorative, or
repetitionall of some thing, or person, mentioned before, but in this place
only signifies some certain or eminent thing, or person; as it does likewise,
in Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive; (of which virgin there is no
mention before, yet is it written with that article prefixed) [(...)] And of the
ill placing of Soph Pasuck (the Hebrew full point) in the middle, or ^ody of
the verse, contrary to distinct order and sense see Genesis 23.17. and elsewhere.
In which place of Genesis the full point, put at made sure in our English, or
the Hebrew (...) [round about] which is all one (the Hebrew differing a little
in the order of the words) is contrary to nature. For doubtless the assurance,
and the person to whom the assurance is made, should be put both within the
same period, or full stop. But you see (if you list to turn to it) in the
English translation, which is pointed just according to the Hebrew [ the field
and the cave, and the trees of the field of Ephron were made sure] put in the
seventeenth verse, locked up with a full point. And then the eighteenth verse
begins [Unto Abraham for a possession] Mr. Mede having thus parted and pointed
this six and thirtieth verse of the eleventh of Daniel, he comments upon as
much of it as is before expressed by him thus. The thirty sixth verse, is the
characterism of the fourth, or Roman Kingdom, from the conquering of Macedonia
to the end of Augustus, who as it were with a certain fierceness, and torrent
of fortune, brought into subjection to himself the Gentiles, or Nations, and
their gods Vid. Florum l. 2. c. 7. Patert. l. 1. c. 6. 1 Macc. c. 8.
. See the like phrase also concerning the rising Persian Monarchy, Dan. 8.4.
and touching the Grecian Dan. 11.4. By a prophetical Trope, The Gods of Cities
and Nations are said to be made subject and conquered, when the Nations and
Cities themselves are brought into subjection, over whom those gods were
supposed to be presidents and protectors, ( Isa. 46.2. Jer. 50.2. and 51.44.
and chap. 48.7.) Even as on the contrary (which you may more wonder at) they
are said to serve those Gods (that is politically) who are compelled to submit
their necks to those Nations, whose gods they were, Deuteronomy. 4.28. with parallel
places in chap. 28. verse. 36, 64. and Jerem. 16.13. and 1 Samuel 16.19. upon all
which places, see the Chalde paraphrase. Here only it will be worth while to
consider the solemn custom of the Romans, when they besiedged Cities, of
calling forth in verse those gods or goddesses that were the protectors of
those places, to bring them to be on their side, casting away their tutelarity,
or protection of their enemies. * Formu^am vide apud Macrob. l. 3. Saturnal. c.
8.


In the latter part of the six and thirtieth verse (which Mr. Mede renders
[Moreover he shall speak, or edict stupendous things against the God of Gods,
and shall prevail till the indignation be consummated; for there is made a
decision of the time.]) There is the characterisme of the same fourth, or Roman
Kingdom, from the death of Augustus to the abrogation of Gentilisme; in which
intervall of time, the said Roman Empire crucified Christ, THAT GOD OF GODS
then appearing in the flesh under Pontius Pilate; and exercised the worshippers
of HIM with direful persecutions and butcheries for near three hundred years.

Furthermore, moreover, or hence forth (as Mr. M. renders it) he shall not
regard, nor give any heed to the gods of his ancienters, or the desire of
women; yea, he shall not give his mind to any Deity, but shall magnify
himself above all] is set forth the characterism of the Roman State for the
times following the abrogation of the religion (viz. Gentilisme) of their
Ancienters, and the bringing in Christianisme, by Constantine the Great, and
his Successors. By occasion whereof single-life (contrary to the ancient
institutes of the Romans) begins to be preferred before marriage, and to glory
in its privileges Vid. Sozom. l. 1. c. 9. Eusebius: de vit. Constan l. 4. c. 26.
. But with all, unto the worship of that only true God, to whom they had
engaged themselves with sacred Christian Initiations, taken up in Baptism, they
super-induced new petty-puppet-gods and Idols, whom they worshipped not only
in the same Temple, but at the same Altar.

M. renders thus; For together with GOD (...) Similem praefixi (...) usum
habes, Ezr. 15. Lev. 16.21. Number 9.15.
, ^e shall honor Mahuzzim in his seat; I say with GOD whom his Ancienters
acknowledged not, he shall honor (THEM), with gold, and silver, and precious
stones, and desirable things. For (says M.) these are they whom the holy
Spirit calls Mahuzzim, that is, Defenders, or itular-Deities; with which sort of
titles of deceased Saints, and Angels, the Romans worship them as their
Patrons, Protectors and Mediators between God and men Vide (inquit M.M.)
commen. ^^cas^ad 6, Tub. p. 114 115.
. For the confirmation of which signification I speak of, it makes, that the
Septuagint renders (...) in the Psalms fives times by (...) (a Defender, as
with a Buckler) and the Vulgar latin, so often by protectorem, a protector:
videsis loca.

M. translations) he shall make fortifications common to Mahuzzim, and THE
STRANGE GOD, whom acknowledging he shall abundantly honor; and shall make
them (the fortifications, or Mahuzzim) to rule over many, and shall divide the
land for a reward. Where, says Mr. M. are understood either the Temples of the
Mahuzzim, to be dedicated in common to GOD (whom he had chosen, having nulled
the religion of his Ancesters) and to Mahuzzim, juxta formulam N. or N. whose
relics are wont there to be placed (so that indeed it may be the same with
that which went before, he shall honor Mahuzzim in his seat; that is, in the
seat of God, which his forefathers acknowledged not:) or perhaps the Images
are so called, in which their Deities are visibly set up, as clothed with
coats of Maile or armor of defense. For indeed with the same or the like
similitudes, or Images, with which the Roman represented his petty-puppet gods
and Mahuzzim, he would likewise represent the zealous or jealous God of Israel,
whom he had chosen to himself to worship. And moreover these Temples, or
Images of his Mahuzzim, or if you had rather, those Mahuzzims themselves he
shall make to bear rule over many, and shall divide unto them the Land for a
patrimony, and territory. A known thing.

Moreover, because it adds, as a thing of great moment, to the interpretation
of this prophecy, I would not have it escape the observation of the reader;
That even as by the Jews who had the only true GOD of their Fathers, the Gods
of the Nations were accounted and called strange Gods: So on the contrary by
the Romans, who were the worshippers of false Deities, from the very beginning
of that Nation, the true God was accounted and called the strange God, and
indeed only and solely HE; For as much (as Leo the Great has it in one of his
Sermons) when Rome did domineer almost over all Nations, she served or adored
the errors of all Nations, and seemed to assume to her self great religion,
because it refused no falsity. From this mind proceeded that of the
Philosophers, when Paul preached the Gospel at Athens Act. 17, 18.
, He seems (say they) to be a setter forth, or declarer of STRANGE GODS. And to
the same purpose tended that inscription Ibid. ver. 23.
alleged by the Apostle (...) TO THE UNKNOWN AND STRANGE GOD The word (...)
strange is not in our ordinary Greek copies. But Mr. Mede reads according to
the Greek Scholia whose words are these (...); THEOIS ASIAS KAI EgPOPS, KAI
AIgS THEO AINOSTO KAI XENO That is, The whole inscription of the Altar is this,
To the Gods of ASIA, and of EUROPE, and of LIBYA. To the UNKNOWN, AND STRANGE
GOD. Beza also mentions the same, reciting Philippida his History; with
Pausanias, in Atticis: And Hieron. in Tit. 1.
What say you to this, that Licinius about to enter into that critical, or
deciding battle with Constantine, does expressly by name upbraid him, That
having violated his Fathers Institutes, Ordinances, or Customs, had chosen to
himself (...) a certain strange God to be worshipped by him: But on the
contrary, he himself with his Army did worship (...) his Fathers Gods which
they had left him from their progenitors since their beginning Vid. orat.
Licinii ad militapud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 5. De vita Constant^ni.


And, or but, in the time of the end (as Mr. M. translates) the King of the
South shall invade or set upon him by War, and the King of the North shall rush
in upon him as a whirlwind, with charriots, and horsemen, and mighty ships;
and entering into the Countries, he shall overflow, and pass through. On
which Mr. M. comments thus; But (says he) for so heinous a commixtion and
against GOD, impatient of a Corrivall and an Image, he (the Roman) shall be
punished by the Saracens from the South rushing into his provinces and
snatching away a very great part. Then after by the Turks, a Northern Nation,
who indeed should first assault the Saracens, but having overthrown their
Empire, shall so pass over their borders toward the Romans, that they shall
bring upon the Roman world, a destruction that shall be by far the most
grievous; and greatest that ever has been heretofore; or until the final
destruction
of them, now at the door, enforce it to be taken away.

Note here, and in comparing the next verse, viz. 41. the former part, that the
time of the end, wherein those evils from the South, and from the North shall
lie, and press upon the Romans, are foretold to be the last period of the
Roman State: which is elsewhere defined within the course, or current of a
time, and times, and half a time; in which that King should audaciously
presume to practice so great a wickedness against the GOD OF THE CHRISTIANS,
whose worship not long before he had taken up. For (...) at the time of the end
is of the (...) of the latter times or of the Roman Kingdom, when the King of
the South, i. e. the Saracen shall push at him, and the King of the North, i.
e. the Turk shall come against him, like a whirlewind, etc. Both the Saracen
and the Turk should plunder the Roman Empire within these (...), the latter
times thereof, within this inter-capedo of time happened the invasions both of
the Saracen and Turk: the former about Anno Dom. six hundred and thirty, the
latter Anno one thousand three hundred, or before. See Com. in Apocal. ad Tub.
5. and 6. And of (...) see the Apostasy of latter times, p. 71.

and he shall enter (as Mr. M. translates) into the land of beauty, or renown
(that is into Palestine, or the holy Land. For (...) and (...), are constantly
in this book a description of Palestine, or the Holy Land, see chap. 8. ver.
9. and of this chap. verse. 16, 45.) The latter part of this one and fortieth
verse is [ And many shall be overthrown, but these shall escape out of his
hands, Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon] to wit (says
Mr. Mede) the Inhabitants of Arabia Petrea, which were never yet provincials of
the Turkish Empire. The Inhabitants of Arabia petraea were never to this day
brought under the Turkish yoke. Yea it is granted, to pay to some of them, a
certain annual tribute, that they may not infest with robberies the troops of
those strangers, rambling thereabout, up and down. By which thou may
understand (says Mr. M.) that of the Angel in the one and fortieth verse
concerning the Edomites, Moabites, and the half, or middle part of the
children of Ammon, escaping the hand of the KING OF THE NORTH.

He (viz. the Turk) shall stretch forth his hands also upon the Countries
(viz. of those parts) and the land of Egypt shall not escape; though it should
hold out long, under the Marmalukes, even till the year one thousand five
hundred and seventeen.

But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver, and all the
precious things of Egypt, and the Cushites; That is, the neighboring Nations,
whether of Afric, or Lybia, as in those of ALGIERS, etc. or of the Arabians,
in Scripture called Cushim; these shall be at his steps, that is, at his
devotion.

But tidings out of the East, and out of the North shall trouble him; therefore
he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.
And to that purpose, he shall plant the Tabernacles of his palace between the
Seas, in the glorious mountain of holiness. As (...) and (...). So here (...)
refer to the Holy Land. The tidings from the East, and North, may be that of
the return of Judah and Israel from those quarters. For Judah was carried
captive at the first into the East, and Israel by the Assyrian into the North
(namely in respect of the Holy Land) and in those parts the greatest number of
them are dispersed to this day. Of the reduction of Israel from the North, see
the prophesies Jer. 16. verse 14, 15 and chap. 23.8. Also chap. 31.8. Or if
those tidings from the North may be some other thing, yet that from the East I
may have some warrant to apply to the Jews return, from that of the sixth Vial
in the Apocalypse, where the waters of the great river Euphrates are dried up to
prepare the way of the Kings of the East. So that it is true, that I incline to
apply [ The King of the North's going forth (upon the tidings from the East and
the North) in a fury to destroy: and to that purpose, to plant the Tabernacles
of his palace in the glorious mountain of holinesse] to the Jews return, and
expedition of Gog and Magog into the Holy Land.

Mede, whom the diligent observer may see that he accounts (if I mistake not)
that the Roman and the Turk make up the fourth Monarchy: As before reason
(above alleged) induced me to think, that they both make up THE ANTICHRIST:
which conjunction of them, in both respects, (according to good reason, their
state, and practices in all things being so like) does (I perceive) prevent
many perplexing intricacies, touching the sense of Scriptures.

Medes. Those things concerning the fourth Monarchy in this 11 chap. of Daniel
from verse. 36. to the end of the chapter, do mightily conduce to the unfolding
of that maine passage in Daniel chap. 12. ver. 1. And at THAT TIME Michael
shall stand up for Daniels people, that is, the Jews, to deliver them. For by
a diligent, orderly observation and following of the method and succession of
things in this eleventh chapter, from verse. 36 to the end, we are distinctly
led down, step by step, unto that time, touching it as it were with our foot,
that we cannot well tread further, without an evident taking notice of it, or
to stumble against the sense.

Roman, the fourth Monarchy, in its full latitude; as the last general enemy
of Jews and Christians, and ultimate Predecessor and Prejudicer of Christ's
Kingdom, hindering the setting up thereof, until that time in the twelfth
chapter, verse the first, of Michaels standing up for the deliverance of his
people. Which description of it in the general, holds forth the Tyranny,
impiety, heresy, apostasy, and blasphemy thereof, in all the branches
springing thence. That Empire, as Heathen, being the stock, or body; and of the
same Empire (materially) as divided into the Popish and Saraceno-Turkish part,
are the maine Master limbs. And (which is the wonderful wisdom of God) they
are all set forth by such characters, and in such a dress of language, and
phrases, as admirably comport to every of them, and to each in his several
garb, in a way of singularity, though one at once is mainly intended. Which
observation will easily manifest it self to any understanding, that will
compare their history, and the passages of this prophecy fairly together;
particularly, those in the 36, 37, 39, 41. ver. He shall do according to his
will (viz. leaving all divine rules). And shall exalt and magnify himself
above every God (viz. Kings and Princes, and, God himself, in despising his
word, and setting up his own decrees above it) And he shall speak marvelous
things against the God of Gods (viz. Christ Jesus.) Neither shall he regard the
desire of women (viz. in a way of honorable wedlock.) And he shall rule over
many (viz. Countries) And shall enter into the glorious land (viz. the Country
of the Jews.) etc.

Roman Empire as Heathen; and after, as degenerating into pontifical. From the
fortieth verse to the end of the chapter it is described so far forth, as it
became first Saracenicall, and then Turkish. For the King of the South intends
the Saracens, who next to the Romans were the immediate oppressors of the
Jews; which Saracens were described to be a people of the South. 1. Because of
their rise, who arose out of Arabia, which is Southward from Judea. 2. Because
of their seat; who planted themselves in Egypt ( Alexandria being their
Imperial City of their Souldan) which was also South from Judea. The King of
the North intends the Turk; who next to the Saracens, were the immediate
oppressors of the Jews; the Turk winning from the Romans several Countries of
their Empire. These Turks have the notation of a people of the North; partly
because they arose out of Scythia (being the Natives thereof) which was North
from Judea; partly because they possessed the Country of Syria, which was North
from Judea. Of the Romans oppressing the Jews we heard before, on Chapter 2.
and Chapter 7. and hinted in this, in verse 36. as instruments of Gods
indignation. Which held to the Apostles times, and further, as we shall hear
more after. The Turks joining with the Saracens, beat the Romans out of Judea,
and several other Countries adjacent, but to no advantage of the Jew; the
Jews hereby only changing their oppressor; but not their oppression, into a
deliverance, as has been touched before, upon the 40, and 41 verses in this
chapter.

deliverance of the Jews from these oppressors. 1. From the Roman Empire as
Roman is hinted in verse 36. in those words, till the indignation be
accomplished, for that that is determined shall be done; that is, the time of
Gods wrath against the Jews, is but for a certain term of years. There must
be a deliverance of the Jews, etc. after the period of this misery, as Daniel
has more abundantly declared in the former part of this his book. Their
deliverance from the Roman last Monarchy, so far as it was become
Saraceno-Turkish, is expressed verse 44, 45. But tidings out of the East, and
out of the North shall trouble him, therefore he shall go forth with great
fury to destroy, and utterly to make away with many; and although he shall
plant the Tabernacle of his Palace between the Seas, in the glorious mountain,
yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him. That is, the Jews
rising up in the bordering Countries, lying East, and North from Judea, thereby
become the object of the Turkish fury in their own land. The application of
these rumors from the East, are ill applied to Antiochus, disquieted about the
Parthian wars: And as ill are the reports of the commotions from the North
applied to Judas Maccabaeus his prevailing; as Mr. Huet has learnedly
demonstrated. But that they plainly signify the rising of the Jews as
aforesaid, thereby provoking the Turk, several arguments speak strongly.

. 1. This prophetical book of Daniel has constantly kept, in all the
Chapters preceding ( viz. chap. 2. chap. 7. chap. 8. chap. 9. and chap. 10.)
wherein has been mentioned the misery of the Jews under the four Monarchies
of the world, I say has constantly kept this method to annex a close
concerning the delivery of the Jews; it being the scope of this whole Book to
set forth the Trage-Comedy of the Jewish state, the Ante-Scene, or prelude, to
be sad to the Jews (glad to their enemies;) but the Catastrophe and turn of
the stage, and state of things as glad to the Jews (sad to their enemies;) the
Jews deliverance arising out of their enemies ruin. The Holy Ghost well
minding the sad captivity of the Jews at the time of this prophecy; and
therefore had dear need, upon any mention of their oppressions, and continuance
of them, of some comfort at least, to be presently added. Now unless this
comfort of their deliverance be here hinted, this method is quite broken off..
2. Daniel holds this method in the 12. chapter. For mentioning the Jews
troubles the first verse; hinting them again in the third verse, he spends the
rest of the chapter in discovering their deliverance. This therefore being the
method of the holy Spirit in the mouth of Daniel, from first to last in this
prophecy, it is altogether most improbable that it should be omitted in the
eleventh chapter.. 3. The conversion of the Jews is prophesied expressly to
come from the East, Revel. 16.12. in mentioning the drying up of the great
river Euphrates, that the way of the Kings of the EAST might be prepared.. 4.
It is observed, that at this day the Jews are especially conversant in those
Eastern parts near Judea, hankering after Canaan, for the sake of whose
residence there, the Arabian parts thereabouts, viz. Ammon, Edom, Moab, etc.
are spared by special divine providence, as is intimated before v. 41.. 5. The
enemy himself, for the prevention (if he might) of the return of the Jews
into their own land, pitched (ver. 45.) the Tabernacle of his palace in Judea,
therefore there, and thereabouts especially, shall be the insurrection of the
Jews.
Turkish enemy, he shall (verse. 45.) come to his end, by the said rising of the
Jews to re-possesse themselves of Judea.

For Our Translators render it And. But (...) is often, and must of necessity be
rendered For (as we gave instances before) and most congruously to the sense is
here so rendered.
at that time (says Daniel chap. 12. verse. 1.) shall Michael stand up, the
great Prince, who stands for the children of thy people; and there shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was, since there was a Nation, even to that same
time. And at that time thy people shall be delivered. By which words considered
in their substance, and dependence, we may perceive the necessity of our
opening so much of the eleventh chapter, as has been presented to you. For the
whole of that and this put together, clearly amounts to thus much in express
terms, that at the end of the fourth Monarchy, Christ (most fitly called
Michael, which signifies, who is as God) stands up to deliver the Jews, called
the children of Daniels people, or Nation, and that as well from their civil
bondage, as from their spiritual. Now this cannot be at the ultimate general
judgment. For first, Then are the Jews no more delivered, then any other
people of other nations, who were believers. Which were but a small privilege
to the JEWS, as to them in peculiar. And a small comfort to them now in
captivity; that their full deliverance from captivities under Tyrants should
not be till the last day of the general Judgment. 2. Nor can the Jews then
be so delivered, unless they be first grafted in again by faith (as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 11.) the last judgment being a destruction (not a
deliverance) of all but believers. For which work of making the Jews
believers, the ultimate day of judgment is no time; as the Monarchies of the
earth need not be removed, that Jews or Gentiles may be converted; many
thousands believing in the time of all four. This corporal deliverance
therefore of the Jews, (besides their spiritual) from captivity under the
fourth Monarchy, not having been yet fulfilled, as we see before our eyes, is
yet to come before the ultimate day of Judgment. Which conclusion is further
confirmed, in that this time of the Jews deliverance is a time of the greatest
troubles; defining the quality and NATURE of those troubles, in a way of
analogy and proportion to former troubles of nations (ver. 1.) (though greater
in degree;) and not in a way of samenesse, or semblance to the destruction by
the lake of five, at the ultimate judgment Revel. 20.14, 15. At which time is
not an increase of the troubles of them that are the Lords delivered, but a
putting a total and final end to all their troubles.

They shall be delivered that are found written in the book. Secondly, in the
second and third verses: Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, some to shame and everlasting contempt. And
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. Both which passages
sound much of the last judgment; that is to come: The full answers to which, we
have in a readiness, will demonstrate, that these passages do mightily confirm
the contrary: we cannot but confess that many learned and pious men in times of
more darkness, when few had light, or will to object against any thing that
such men delivered (that were orthodox in the general) did imagine this place
of Scripture to intend the last judgment. But that we must openly oppose that
sense, the reasons of our answers will justify our innocence. Which reasons in
the general do arise from the circumstances antecedent and subsequent, that
inviron those two passages. Whence we thus argue.

. 1. It is said, at the opening of that book MANY of them that sleep in the
dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame, etc.
But at the last judgment ALL shall rise. Therefore this cannot be meant of the
last judgment.. 2. It is said that at this said time, spoken of by Daniel, the
godly (called wise and converters of others) shall awake, though to life, yet
to great troubles, in a time of trouble; which is to continue from their
awakening, to the time of their blessedness (verse. 11, 12.) forty five years.
So that this time shall be a great trying time (verse. 10.) many thereby being
tried, purified, and made white; the wicked on the contrary doing wickedly. But
the godly do not rise at the last judgment to troubles, or trialls. Therefore
this cannot signify the time of the last judgment.. 3. The question is asked
(verse 6.) How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? Observe curiously,
How long shall it be to the END; not how long to the BEGINNING. And how long to
the end of these WONDERS; (meaning, by the relative, those before mentioned;)
not how long to the end of the RESURRECTION. But if the resurrection had been
here meant, it had been by far a more proper and useful question to have
inquired of the beginning of the resurrection, then of its ending: our welfare
depending upon our sharing in the happy beginning of it; which attained, no
matter how long it last, there being no wearisomenesse in happiness. Therefore
this Scripture does not intend the Resurrection, or last judgment.. 4. It is
said (verse. 7.) these things were to be finished, when the Lord shall have
accomplished to scatter the holy people. But the accomplishing of the
scattering of the holy people the Jews (which is by conversion of them, and
repossessing of them in their own Country, as the Prophets all along
afore-quoted have foretold) is on all hands generally confessed to precede the
resurrection, and day of judgment. Therefore the resurrection, or last
judgment is not here to be understood.
Huet on Dan. Glimpse of Sions glory. Parker in Vis. and Proph. of Dan.


1. These times are said (ver. 1.) to be troubleous times, when Michael shall
stand up to deliver his people, the Jews. First, Because the great warlike
oppositions that the enemy shall then make against the corporal deliverance of
them that awake at that time, shall seem but cold entertainment to
new-converts. For their arch-enemy the Turk is then in a great fury,
contending to hold his tyrannical Empire over them. Secondly, because of the
length of these troubles, from their first awakening to their quiet settling;
which will be forty five years ver. 11, 12. So that by reason of both, viz.
the greatness and continuance of these troubles, for so long, many shall (ver.
2.) fall off from that cause to which at first they were awakened, and so they
rise to their shame and contempt before men, not (as yet) in hell torment.. 2.
The book mentioned verse. 1. in which, all, and only they were written, that
should be delivered, must be distinguished. For there are diverse books
mentioned in Scripture, both in the old and new Testament, which cannot be the
same book, because in Rev. 20.12. there is mention of Books, in the plural.
And of another book, ibid. Therefore as to our purpose we must at least
distinguish of a twofold Book of Life. First, there is the book of God the
Fathers eternal election, Phil. 4.3. Help those women, with Clement, and with
other my fellow laborers, whose names are in the BOOK OF LIFE. Now the
writing in this book is unchangeable, 2 Timothy 2.19. Secondly, There is the
book of life of the Lamb, touching things in time, viz. of external vocation,
to an outward embracing the Gospel, and a subjection to the Scepter, and
Kingdom of Christ, unto all appearance of holiness, Revel. 21. ver. 27. And
there shall in no wise (...), Go INTO it (that is the holy City, new Jerusalem,
as it is before in that chapter called) (...) any thing (that is, any creature)
that makes no difference between things holy and unholy, but counts both as
common, and so defiles himself with things, or actions impure; or WORKS, or
MAKES, or DOES an ABOMINATION, or a LIE; but they which are written in the
LAMBS BOOK OF LIFE. The antithesis of which words, distingnishing between them
that are written in the LAMBS BOOK, and those that defile, and make or dot
abominations or leys, does seem to intimate, that they that are free from
outward evil conversation, but in all appearance and likelihood are holy, are
written in the Lambs book: And if any such fall off from this outward good
conversation, and fair-shew of holiness, and degenerate into an evil
conversation, they are put out of the Lambs book. As the Psalmist in Psalm 69.
v. 21. to 29. speaking of those that should have pitied him in his
afflictions, but instead thereof, so far degenerated from their profession,
that they gave him gall for his meat, and in his thirst gave him vinegar to
drink; among other judgments upon them, he prophesies this for one, Let them
be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the
righteous; that is, with them, that at least in all appearance, are righteous.
Which context of giving vinegar and gall, etc. is, in the judgment of our last
Translators, applied by the Evangelist Matthew. 27.48 Mark. 15.23. unto the
degenerating Jews (of professors, becoming persecutors of godliness) offering
Christ upon the cross, vinegar, and wine mingled with bitter myrrh. Even as
one of those curses prophesied in that sixty nineth Psalm v. 25. let their
habitations be desolate, as it was first applied to, and executed upon that
Apostate Judas, according to the Apostles allegation Act. 1. So since upon the
generality of the Jews in their scattering, for their falling off from the
Gospel, so plain a Commentary upon their Law. Suitable to this, it is said in
Revel. 22 verse. 19. If any man shall take away from the words of the book of
this prophecy, God shall take away his PART OUT OF THE BOOK OF LIFE, and out
of the HOLY CITY
, and from the things which are WRITTEN IN THIS BOOK. And thus the generality
of the Jews at present are blotted out of the Lambs Book, whiles fallen off
from the profession of true godliness. And those likewise are blotted out in
the second verse of this twelfth of Daniel, that at first arose in outward
profession for, and in the behalf of the common good cause, at last fell off
to their everlasting shame. But those that are in the book of election, can
never totally and finally fall away. As their effectual regeneration being
once really begun, can never utterly be extinguished. Once in Christ, and ever
in Christ.. For thirdly their awakening out of their sleep in the dust (verse.
2.) signifies no more immediately, and in the general, then the recovery of
the Jews from their dispersed, and despised condition among all Nations,
wherein they seemed before that to lie as dead politically. As afflictions are
called a death, killing, and dying, Romans 8.36.2 Cor. 4.10, 11. 2 Cor. 6.9. And
a poor man, because distressed and despised is (as some learned conceive)
called a dead man, in regard he is put in opposition to the living as meaning
the rich, Eccles. 6.8. As on the other side, the restoration of the Jews from
captivities under men, is compared to the making dead bones to live again (
Ezekiel. 37.) And their outward call thereunto, is likened to a resurrection, Romans
11.15 though the event of both these two prophesies last quoted, does not stay
there in an outward call, and deliverance from captivity, as to the Elect. For
there are two sorts of Jews (as the sequel makes the distinction) that are
outwardly called, and entered into the beginning or preparation to their
restoration; as it follows.. Fourthly, It is said many, not all shall awake,
and of them that awake, some only awake to everlasting life; and the other to
everlasting shame. The meaning whereof must needs be to this purpose: That all
the native or natural Jews shall not be awakened to the general call of the
maine body of them unto their restoration; but some there shall be even or
them, either so naturalized to Heathenisme, or so diabolized to Turcisme, or so
superstitionized to Papisme, at Judaized unto Leviticall ceremonies, that they
shall slight their call, and so their recovery; insomuch that they shall still
sleep in the dust of their earthly miserable condition; till the common deluge
of destruction on Christ's enemies sweep them away, with those to whom they
adhered. And again, of the maine body of them that are awakened, even some of
them embracing true religion, and the cause of Christ with a false heart, and
flagging in the pursuance thereof, by reason of the then present troubles,
shall be cast off by the rest of the Church, and so end in temporal, and at
last eternal shame. Whiles on the other side the generality of the rest of
them that were outwardly called, attending upon that outward call, till they
were inwardly effectually called, and so persevering in the says, and cause of
Christ; shall attain to a threefold life. First, The life of honorable
liberty, never more to be vassalized to other Nations. Secondly, The life of a
most glorious religious Church State; never more to be scattered. Thirdly, At
the end of their perseverance, to the period of the thousand years, to the
life of eternal glory.. 5. So that the resurrection (as some would call it)
here meant, is not a resurrection (to use their word) in a proper sense. That
is, it is not a Physical resurrection, viz. of the deceased bodies out of
their graves; but a metaphorical resurrection of the living. First,
political, of their persons from bondage; and then spiritual, of their souls
out of the state of unbeleefe. The physical resurrection of the dead elect
Jews, is not till that resurrection of all believers, which is at the end of
these five and forty years mentioned verse. 11, 12. and at the beginning of the
thousand years. As the resurrection of all the wicked is not till the end of
the thousand years, as has been before discussed. So that as the said thousand
years of the RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS is bounded with two physical
resurrections, as has been before discussed: So this five and forty years of
the preparation to that RESTITUTION, by stirring up the Jews to stand for
their liberty, till they be settled, is bounded with two resurrections; the
first metaphorical, the second physical, of which more after, when we come to
dispute the time when this RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS shall begin, as is hinted
in the residue of this twelfth Chapter of Daniel from the fourth verse to the
end.
Jews State in that five and forty years is held forth in the third verse, in
two distinctions. First, In a distinction of their glory that are then
effectually brought in. Secondly, In a distinction of their graces.

. 1. The distinction of their glory is, that they that be wise, shall shine as
the BRIGHTNESS OF THE FIRMAMENT; And they that turn many to righteousness,
or justification (for the original is, (...)) shall SHINE AS THE STARS FOR
EVER. The meaning whereof is this; that whereas the greatest glory of the Elect
is reserved to the ultimate day of judgment, when they all shall SHINE FORTH
AS THE SUN IN THE KINGDOM OF THE FATHER, Matthew. 13.43. Yet mean while, at
this particular metaphorical resurrection, the effectually called shall have
great glory, proportionably to their relations. They that are private converts
shall have much glory, but they that are instrumentally public converters
shall have more. The private converts, or Scholars of wisdom, called here
WISE, shall have much honor and glory in the eyes and approbation of their
believing brethren, for their patience and zeal. But the public converters to
bring others to the imbracement of true justification, shall have a greater
degree of honor and glory in esteem among the believing Jews, and other
Churches of God.. 2. The distinction of the graces of the converted Jews is
this that the peoples graces are expressed rather by the name of Wisdom then
by naming any other grace, because blindness of mind ( Romans 11.25.) and a
foolish prejudice in heart (1 Cor. 1. Act. 28.27.) was their chief sin that
formerly caused them to reject Christ, and his Gospel. The Teachers gifts are
named, a bringing many to justification, rather then to sanctification; because
formerly they had chiefly beguiled the people in the point of justification,
crying up the works of the law, as their righteousness (see the rule Romans
9.32. and see the example Act. 15.1.) But did not teach Christ the true
righteousness. as the prophets had often told them, calling him the RIGHTEOUS
BRANCH; and THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. There might be other reasons of this
compellation of their graces. As of calling the peoples graces by the name of
Wisdom; because all grace comes in, in the beams of knowledge, without this no
grace. Though all knowledge is not accompanied with grace: And of calling their
Teachers gifts by the title of bringing many to justification. Because
justification is the door to let in sanctification. Till we are united to
Christ for righteousness, there is no flowing forth of his fullness, for
holiness.
that time in general, that Daniel means, wherein Michael shall stand up to
deliver his people, viz. when the glass of the period of the fourth Monarchy
is run. The time more particularly is in the remainder of this twelfth chapter
of Daniel, compared with other places. But of there, if God permit, afterward.

Thus of the Prophesies of Daniel.

SECT. XXXVIII.
FRom the Prophesies of Daniel, next in order, we come to those of the the
Prophet Hosea, wherein the first conducing to our main Thesis, is in chap. 1.
v. 10, 11. Yet (or for all that, or after that The (...) here put is of a vast
comprehension, i^ the Hebrew language. And therefore may be indifferently
rendered as we express. Only then best when nearest the sense. Learned Grotius
his note is, (...) bis positum apud Hebraeos sape tempora connectit, ita ut
Latin per POST QUAM reddatur optime.
) the number of the children of ISRAEL shall be as the sand of the Sea, which
cannot be measured nor numbered; And it shall come to pass, that in the place
where (or instead of that It Is well our Translators would at least put in the
margin [instead of that;] and had done better if they had turned (...) That,
not where; which That would have served both readings, as the Hebrew word is
often so used, although we rather embrace the Marginal reading, not only for
Grotius his reason, that Illud. (...) valor FRO EO QUOD, and sic multi populi
etiam nunc loquuntur [in the place] in the usual vulgar languages as well as
in the Hebrew, signifies as much as we Englishmen say in our English ideom [in
the room of, or in the stead] and imitating the French we say [in lieu of that]
But principally for this reason; that the Prophet speaking of the unmeasurable
and innumerable multitude of Jews to be brought in to Christ, the Prophet
could not point at this or that particular place where only some of them were.
) it was said unto them, ye are not my people, there (or leave out this there,
not being in the Hebrew) it shall be said unto them, YE ARE THE SONS OF THE
LIVING GOD. Then shall the children of JUDAH, and the children of ISRAEL be
GATHERED TOGETHER, and appoint themselves ONE HEAD, and they shall come up out
of the land; for great shall be the day of Jezreel.

Israel that shall be saved (that the Apostle alleges: Romans 9.27. out of
Isaiah chap. 10. v. 22.) Though few of them (as Isaiah means) comparatively
considered in relation to many past generations, wherein they have lain blind,
and not owned Christ, shall be saved; yet looked upon absolutely, as they are
and shall be exstant and surviving at Christ's next appearance, or general call
of them, there shall be an innumerable multitude that shall be saved. And this
is the intent, and to this pitch are formed the high phrases of the prophet
Hosea, that those of them that shall be called Gods people, shall be as the
sands of the Sea unmeasurable, and innumerable, NOTWITHSTANDING that in former
ages they were cast off, and called of God [YEE ARE NOT MY PEOPLE.]

Vatablus does well hit the nail on the head, when he says upon this place,
(...) erit autem; solent Prophetae, etc. i. e. But it shall come to pass that
the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand, etc. The Prophets
are wont after they have threatened, by and by to subjoyn consolation: Therefore
this Text ought to be understood of believing ISRAEL, the true sons of
Abraham. As if the Prophet should say, this that I spoke before (in way of
threatening) ought to be understood of those that shall remain in unbeleefe.
For otherwise, the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the
Sea, etc. For all the Israelites shall not perish; yea, the number of the sons
or children of the Church shall be exceeding great.

Ten Tribes; ( Hierom says all twelve) our prophet naming ISRAEL and JUDAH
distinctly in ver. 11. And in ver. 4. He sets forth the Kingdom of Israel
(consisting of the ten Tribes) by Jehu their King; threatening for his pouring
out of the blood of the family of Ahab (his predecessor, King of Israel) in
Jezreel, the royal City, where the Kings of Israel dwelt.

number of these ten Tribes (that are to come in, to make up the glorious
Church on their part, in the last times) must not (says our Text) be a small
number, a picking, or gleaning of a few, here, and there, but must be a most
mighty multitude, even as the sand of the Sea, that cannot be measured, or
numbered. A mighty expression.

state to which these Israelites shall be restored, shall not only be a goodly
temporal estate, in their own Land (as it is intimated in the next verse,
viz. the eleventh) but unto a gracious spiritual state of conversion, this
being the introduction to that; so that they shall be truly called Gods
people, and the Sons of the living God; though before they were said [not to
be his people.]

Israel being converted, they with the two Tribes called Judah shall First, Be
gathered together: Secondly, Appoint themselves one Head, in common over them
all; Thirdly, Shall come up out of the Land. Hebrew (...) up out of the earth,
or from the earth, where ever they were scattered. Fourthly, It must be to
return into their own land, even to Jezreel etc. named in the Text. To which
two last steps Vatablus notes well. (...) From the earth (says he) that is,
from under captivity; that is, they shall be delivered from under captivity.
For they that returned from captivity were said to ascend up out of the earth,
or land of their capivity. Oecolampadius also says, that from the land, or
earth, signifies from that dispersion, 1 Pet. 1.1.

some sense, that Christ is here meant to be the Head. But whether this be the
sense of the Prophet I doubt: partly because, by the order of the Text they had
Christ for their spiritual head before, being by his means ( Act. 4.12. Joh.
1.12.) made the sons of God: partly because this Head is but to lead them up
from their dispersion, in opposition to the way-laying Turk, that they may
come into their own Country, there to sit down under Christ's Regiment in his
visible Kingdom. In which expedition whether Christ will be a personally
visable, or a visible personal conductor, I do not know. If he would, I am
apt to think that the struggle against the Jews enemies the Turk, etc. need
not be so long as five and forty years, according to Daniel 12.11, 12. The
Chalde paraphrase says that this Head shall be (...) one Prince, or
Cheifetain: of the house of David. R. Jarchi says David: likely to the same
sense as the Chalde. Grotius says Zorobabel. And Aben Ezra names another. And
Alapide another. And our new Annotations do not speak absolutely that only
Christ is here meant, but cautiously, thus, one Head of the house of David,
Hereby is PRINCIPALLY meant the Messiah Christ, the Head of the Church. So
they. Now it is a true rule, subordinata non sunt contraria. I confess, seeing
after their call to the faith, (for till then they stir not,) they gather
together, and they appoint, and this for their orderly and safe return; I can
think no other to be here meant, then some worthy fit man, to be their
Commander in chief. At the sound of the seventh Trumpet, Christ takes his
Kingdom Revel. 11.15. The last wrestling of the Church against their enemies
to ruin them, is (it seems to me) in the latter end of the sixth Trumpet, Rev.
11.13. And just so is the order of the Vialls, Rev. 16. viz. to destroy the
Beast: see the exposition, Rev. 17.1. and chap. 18. and chap. 19. And then
Satan is bound, and the Saints reign with Christ chap. 23. As for Christ's
spiritual headship, it does as well make other places great in the day of
their call, as it does Jezreel: Of which next.

great shall be the day of Jezreel, which is brought in as a reason, and proof
( Heb. (...) Chalde (...) Sept. (...), Latins all suitable, quia) BECAUSE
great shall be the day of Jezreel; That is, whereas (says God) I took away the
Kingdom of Israel, for the blood shed in Jezreel. 1. Of the blood of Naboth by
Jezabel. 2. Of the blood of Jezabel by Jehu, he doing it extrajudicially, for
his own ends, to establish the Kingdom to himself, and set up, or at least,
continue Idolatry; not for Gods ends, to rule for him, and set up Reformation;
now great shall be the day of delivering Jezreel; that is, of Israel both by a
Synechdoche, a part for the whole, Jezreel being the royal City of Israel: as
also by the notation of the word Jezreel; which Jerome interprets the seed of
God: for such the Israelites shall be through Christ his son, at their great
call. And others interpret, the sowing, or scattering of God (to which our new
Annotations incline (and so Jezreel shall be Israel, viz. they having been
sown or scattered into all Countries as seed into so many fields, should be
brought together in the granary of their own Country, as seed grown up to
ripe corn at the time of Harvest. And so the Chalde renders it, Great shall be
the day of their gathering together. For Israel of a Jezreel a scattering,
shall again be an Israel, a Prevailer with God. I omit many other notations of
the name Jezreel, as rather pursuing matter, and that which is most pertinent.

Mayer; Who having quoted diverse Authors, as Austine, Hierome, Lyra, Calvin,
and Gualter, varying more or less from the literal sense, turns against them
all upon sound reason thus. I see no reason says he) why by Jezreel may not be
understood the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, and their day of conversion said to
be a great day; seeing the first son of Hosea by his wife had his name Jezreel,
that herein he might figure out this Kingdom; which thought it self strong,
but for sin was adjudged to dissipation; yet being by Gods mercy gathered
together again with Judah, under the Gospel, Israel should be as famous and
honorable, as before miserable, and infamous; and the day when this should be
done, should be counted a great day of Jezreel; formerly so called in derision,
but now seriously, they coming to be the seed of God, as it is expressly faid,
they shall be called the Sons of the living God; and therefore I rest in this,
it is here prophesied, that not only some of the Kingdom of Judah, who
returned from the Babylonish captivity, shall embrace the faith of Christ, thus
becoming the sons of God, Joh. 1.12. which began also to be fulfilled in the
Apostles, and seventy Disciples sent out to preach, and in thousands of other
faithful people of the Jews, of whom we read Act. 2. Act. 5 Act. 21. But
moreover it is prophesied of the Kingdom of Israel, so long continuing no
people, that the time shall come, that they shall be enlightened also, and come
up, or ascend to this high honor out of the Land, wherein they have so long
lain dead, as it were; for which, Saint Paul calls their conversion a
resurrection from the dead; and Ezekiel chap. 37. sets it forth by the reviving
of dead bones. And says Dr. Mayer, a little above this, "Here (says he) it
seems plainly prophesied, that not only Juda, but also Israel, even they of
the Ten Tribes, who were formerly divided from the Kingdom of Judah, should
return out of the Land, whereunto they were carried, and then be united under
one King, Christ Jesus, never to be divided any more. And about their uniting
under him, the Prophet speaks so, as that it cannot be understood ONLY OF
SOME OF THE TEN TRIBES, who lived mixed with Judah, but of them that were never
before, after their division, again mixed, till the time here spoken of: For it
is said, They shall gather themselves together; intimating they lived at a
distance, all the time before, and appoint over them one head; intimating that
they did not so till now. And therefore Saint Paul speaks so confidently,
that there shall come a time of their conversion, Romans 11.25. applying
hereunto, Isai 59.20. speaking of the Redeemer coming to Zion, and to Jacob; as
here both are comforted by the like promise. So Doctor Mayer.

Israel, like the sands of the Sea, etc, gathered from all the Earth, and
called the sons of the living God; and they and Judah to put themselves under
one Head, and returning to their own country, are settled in Christ's visible
Kingdom? The Apostle Paul in his time, tells us, Romans 11.25. That even to that
very then, that blindness in part was happened to Israel; so that the
conversion of the fullness of them was to his time, still behind; As in Acts
13.46. and 28.25. we have instances.

Paul, in the same Epistle to the Romans, but two Chapters before, viz. Romans 9.
does cite in Verse. 25, 26. this place of Hosea, Chap. 1. v. 10, 11. But to what
effect, and degree? The Text and Context (if we keep close to that) will
plainly show us. 1. The effect to which Paul alleges it, is to show us, the
riches of Gods glory on the vessels of mercy, in them whom he calls, not only
of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles, as he says in Hosea; and where it is
evident (let some Authors talk what they please that the Apostle in this ninth
to the Romans, minds chiefly the call of the Jews: Insomuch, that he did
suspect others, least they should suspect him to mean only the Jews; For so
the very phrase here [ Not ONLY of the Jews, but ALSO of the Gentiles] does
plainly show. As if the Apostle should say, least any should think by my
discourse, that I mean only the Jews, take notice, That I exclude not the
Gentiles. For most evidently his heart was carried out mainly in this Chapter,
toward the Jews, as ye have it there before your eyes; For Verse. 1. he begins
as passionately affected, for the conversion of the Jews, ready even to wish
himself accursed, for their salvation; and so goes on minding them to Verse. 16.
yea, never mentioning or hinting the Gentiles, but twice in all the Chapter,
and that is Verse. 24. and 30. But concludes the Chapter touching the Jews. And
in the next Chapter, viz. the tenth, he is mainly upon the state of the Jews;
and again in the eleventh Chapter. Add to all, That the Apostle prevents our
drowning this multitude of Israel to be saved, according to Hosea, in our main
comprehension of the Gentiles conversion; in that, presently to the quotation
of Hosea, he adds a citation or two, out of the Prophet Isaiah, that are even
altogether concerning the Jews. 2. For the degree of the present state of the
call of the Jews; When Paul in that ninth to the Romans, quoted this place of
Hosea, it is most evident, that the Apostle did not think that then when he
quoted it, that it was commensuratly fulfilled, according to the
comprehensiveness of the Prophets phrase. For after he had said, Verse. 24. That
God has showed the riches of his glory, even on US whom he has CALLED, not
only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles; he closes up this ninth Chapter
with a Na^rative, how ISRAEL had not attained to the Law of Righteousness,
because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law;
and begins the next Chapter, viz. the tenth, with this, That his desire and
prayer to God was, that ISRAEL might be saved, and closes up that tenth
Chapter, with the complaint that God thitherto had stretched forth his hand to
Israel a gainsaying People, all the day long, all in vain. And the business of
the next Chapter, viz. the eleventh is Paul's prophecy, that in aftertimes All
ISRAEL shall be saved, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come. Therefore
most clearly, Paul's mind in this quotation of Hosea, in the ninth of the
Romans, was not, that it was then fulfilled proportionably to the mind of the
Prophet, in the comparison of the sand of the Sea; but only some first fruits
of Israel were then brought in.


Romans unto the vocation of the Gentiles, what they can, so as they tear not
to pieces the main body of the Text, that (as Calvin and Paraeus note) contains
this vocation of the great number of the Jews and Gentiles, to be not only
unto salvation, but into union; and then let them, if they can, even from
thence declare unto me, when ever yet was this Prophecy of Hosea justly
fulfilled? when did ever any eye behold any considerable number, or
incorporated body of Gentiles, joined, in a Religious notion, as under one
Head, Christ, unto any numerous Body, or Church of Jews? For this the least
that can be made (according to their principle) or nothing can be made of this
Text, and keep the Text entire.

SECT. XXXIX.
WE shall consider only one place more in Hosea, and that is in Chapter 3. v.
4, 5. For the children of ISRAEL shall abide many days without a King, and
without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image or Statue, and
without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim: Afterward shall the children of
ISRAEL return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall
fear the Lord and his goodness, in the later days.

viz. of Israel, twice express in the Text, as once before, verse. 1. Therefore
the Ten Tribes must not be excluded; to which, Lyran speaks well. Post
vocationem, etc. After the call of the Gentiles, is prophesied the FINAL
conversion of the Jews in general; which will more appear by the following
particular. As

viz. 1. They shall many days be without a King, and without a Prince, i. e.
without any Civil Polity, either Monarchical, or Aristocratical, etc. of their
own Nation. Suitably, Grotius well notes, They shall have, not only no King,
but no man of their own Nation, endowed with any jurisdiction. The Sept.
therefore rightly render (...) by (...) a Ruler. And the Chalde by (...) i. e.
And without any that takes, or undertakes the rule over Israel. So that this
while they have, of, and among themselves, no State polity at all. 2. They
shall so long be without a Sacrifice, and without a ((...)) Matizebah; which,
though our English renders Image; yet Hierom, Grotius, and our ordinary
Steptuagint render it ( sihe altari, (...)) without an altar. To justify whom,
therein I have this to say, That Mattzebah signifies a Pillar or Stone, erected
in honor to God, as the root (...) signifies no more, but to stand, or to make
to stand; and the Hebrews put only this difference between it, and ((...))
Mitzbach an Altar; The Pillar consisted of one stone, the Altar of many. The
Pillar was erected for the offering, or pouring out of oil upon it; the altar
was for sacrifice: And therefore were these Pillars lawful, before the
settlement of the Law by Moses. See Genesis 28.18, 22. and 31.13, 45, 51, 52. and
35.14, 20. And the Septuagint there renders this erected stone by (...), a
Pillar. And (to go on with our Text) so long the Israelites shall be without an
Ephod (being part of the Highpriests vestments, worn upon his shoulders; put
here Synecdochically to signify all his glorious Garments, and by them the
Priest himself, even as the Septuagint renders, without an Ephod, (...) without
a Priesthood) and without Teraphim. Its plural, the singular whereof Taraph, in
it self signifies no more then an image in general. And (as Grotius and Calvin
consent with me) is a word of a middle nature, or acception. For as it is used
to signify Labans and Micahs images; so also to signify the image Michol
made; and put in her bed to dissemble David's being there, when he was gone.
Yea, it may here signify (as Hieronymus and Grotius note) the Cherubims. The
Cherubims you know are described Exodus 25. That they had wings and faces, and
were stretched over the Mercyseat, looking one upon another; under which was
the Ark, from whence was the oracle, or answer of God by voice. The Septuagint
accordingly in some Copies is (...), without manifests, in others (...),
without manifestation: And Aquila (as Hieronymus asserts) translateth it (...),
Illuminations: And the Chalde suitable, (...) without them that declare. By all
which, of this second part of their destitution, viz. without a Sacrisice,
without an Altar, or Pillar, without an Ephod, etc. is signified, That so long
also the Israelites should be without an Ecclesiastical polity, a Church
polity, or Public Liturgy of solemn worship: For I cannot imagine (as most do)
that here is intended any thing that is idolatrous, or superstitious, for three
Reasons. 1. Because we see in what a good sense, and to what good sense every
word may be rendered and improved. 2. It is without controversy, that some of
the things named by the Prophet, were in the Old Testament, good, lawful, and
commanded; as the Sacrifice, and the Ephod. Now it is no way probable to me,
that the Holy Ghost would name a mingle-mangle of Piety and Idolatry together.
3. Because these words are intended as a threat, and as an affliction to Israel
for the long time before their deliverance should come: But it would be no
affliction, nor threat, to take away their Idols and Superstitions from them.
But this would be, and has been an affliction to them, that they have lost
both their Political state, and their Church state, and so abide without Civil
Government, and Church Administrations among themselves.


many days must be, as Paraeus well observes, more then Seventy years of days,
whiles the Two Tribes, called Judah, were in the Babylonish captivity. To
which, Jerome himself (though our Adversary in our main position, to whom we
shall shape an answer afterward) I say Jerome himself does rationally concur;
for he speaks and hints an Argument, Judaeorum quidam, etc. (says he) Some of
the Jews expound this Chapter of the Babylonian captivity, in which, for
seventy years the Temple lay wast, and at lost under Zorobabel it was restored
to its former condition. But we refer it to a FUTURE TIME, SEEING NO OTHER
CAUSE CAN BE FOUND why they were forsaken SO LONG A TIME, but their PUTTING TO
DEATH THE SAVIOR. So Jerome. By which words, it appears, he understands this
place of the time that follows after our Saviors passion. Since which, I am
sure, they never had or owned David, or any of David's loins or line, to be
their King. But not to show you men, but demonstration. 1. In their time of
captivity in Babylon, they were not altogether without a King of their own
Nation. For Jehojakim lived many years in the time of that captivity, And it
came to pass (says the Sacred Story, 2 Kings 25.27.) in the thirtieth year of
the captivity of Jehojachin, King of Judah, in the twelsth month, in the seven
and twentieth day of the month, that Evil-Merodach, King of Babylon, in the
year he began to reign, did lift up the head of Jehojachin, King of Judah, out
of prison; and he spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the Kings that
were with him in Babylon, and changed his prison garments, and he did eat bread
continually before him ALL THE DAYS OF HIS LIFE. And his allowance was a
continual allowance, given him of the King, a daily rate for every day, all the
days of his life. Upon which words the Old Genevah notes, and our New
Annotations, say thus. This seven and thirtieth year of Jehojachins
imprisonment, was the five and fiftieth year of his age; so long had
Nebuchadnezzar kept him in prison. And so long were his wife and children in
Babylon, whom Nebuchadnezzar son Evil-Merodach, after his fathers death,
preserved to honor. Thus by Gods providence the SEED OF DAVID was PRESERVED
UNTO CHRIST. Thus they; and they say well. For of Jebojachin, alias Jeconiah,
came Salathiel, a Prince, etc. Jer. 29.2.1 Chron. 3.17. Matthew. 1.12. and so
downward, the Scepter does not utterly depart from Judah, till Shiloh (Christ)
comes. Genesis 49.10. Thus you see they were not altogether without a King in the
time of the Babylonish captivity. 2. Nor without a Priest, in the said time of
that captivity; nor after unto Christ's time. Jeremiah and Ezekiel, who both
lived in the time of that Babylonish captivity, were Priests, Jer. 1.1. Ezekiel.
1.3. And after in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, one of the Kings of the
Grecian Empire, that same famous Mattathias (that stood up for the rescuing of
the Jews against that Antiochus) was a Priest; and Judas Maccabeus was his (on,
1 Maccab. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And chap. 3. v. 1. And unto, and in Christ's time
there were Priests, and Highpriests, and Sacrifices, Luke 1.8. and 2.24.
Matthew. 26.3. Job. 2.13, 14. And abundantly often in all four Evangelists. We
conclude therefore, that it is impossible ^o understand these many days, to
signify the time of Iudahs captivity in Babylon; yea, or (as our New
Annotations would have it) the time since Iudahs return from Babylon, till
Christ's ascension: But these many days must be extended unto the conversion of
the Ten Tribes, as well as the two, yet to come. Dr. Mayer with Calvin On those
words, After that long time they shall have David their King.
, ratiocinatively speaks out our conclusion at length of words, thus. Calvin
(says he) ingenuously confesses, that by David spoken of in the Prophets,
Christ is always set forth; and therefore this long time of the Jews, being
without a King, etc. must be understood of the time immediately foregoing
their embracing the Faith of Christ; and therefore not of the time of their
captivity; for then they had not David for their King. Neither can it be
understood of the time immediately going before Christ's coming, and after their
return; for then they had Princes, and Priests, and Sacrifices. And what
remains then, but to understand it of the time that now is, at the END
WHEREOF the Jews shall turn to Christ! And herein Gualter and Tossartus follow
Ierom.


punctual specisication of the time, in the next verse following, when the
Israelites shall be delivered and saved. viz. It shall be after that (in the
former verse) (...), in (as Vatablus, Grotius, Arias, and Jerome, renders it)
novissimo dierum, that is, the last of days; even as in like manner the
Septuagint, and Chalde render it (...), that is, in the end of days. And
therefore justly does Lyran interpret this last of days to be sub sinem mundi,
i. e. A little before the end of the world. And Rabbi David Kimchi, thus,
(...), etc. "This (says he) shall come to pass in the last times, in the
beginning of the time of salvation, when the children of ISRAEL shall return by
Repentance. And Dr. Mayer thus, It is said that this should be in the last
days, whereby the time of the Gospel is always set forth; all the time before
being counted old, Heb. 1.1, 2. But these Novissima tempora, that is, these are
the newest times (this Latin phrase signifying, the last times) because all
things are new. Yea, and AT THE LATTER END OF THEM the Jews shall be new
creatures, as are all that are in Christ, and then the world shall be
destroyed, and God will make a new Heaven, and a new Earth. If to all these,
you will hear a learned Papist (Alapide) it is worth while; because whiles an
enemy to the truth in Hypothesi, he tells the very truth in thesi. In the
last of days (for so he renders our Text, according to the Old Latin) that is,
(says he) In the end of the world, when a little before, or at the coming of
Antichrist, especially after the SLAYING of him, the ISRAELITES, and JEWS, who
clave to him while the said Antichrist was alive, and reigned, partly by
remembering the Sermons and Miracles of Elijah and Enoch; and partly by the
Exhortations of other Preachers, shall be converted unto Christ, even as I have
said upon the 11 chap. of the Revelation. For then all Israel shall be saved,
Romans 11.25. So Saint Hieronym. Haymo, Albert. Hug. Lyran, and others. Secondly,
I sidore and a Castro, think these things to be done in the Incarnation and
first coming of Christ, to wit, INCHOATIVELY. For then A FEW of Israel BEGAN to
be converted. Others err, who think these things to have been performed in the
relaxation of the Babylonish captivity by Cyrus. Thus Alapide confesses twice
over in his works, the just time of the fulfilling of these things to wards the
end of the world, and at the destruction of Antichrist. But like a Papist, he
blindly supposes, that Antichrist is not yet come; that so his Pope might not
be thought to be Antichrist. But what he has granted, is enough for our
purpose, truth so far prevailing upon a Papist.

i. e. the Israelites, the Ten Tribes, as well as the Two; and the time of
their deliverance, being cleared; next for the close of this Chapter, and our
consideration of this Prophet, comes the deliverance it self, viz. they having
been so long a time humbled by great afflictions; after all, at the time
aforesaid, they shall return and seek the Lord their God, and David their King.
That is, God, and his Son Christ; or, God in his Son Christ. Even as verynear
it their own Rabbis and Hebrew Doctors render it in their Chalde Paraphrase
(...), etc. i. e. After that the children of ISRAEL shall be led by REPENTANCE,
and shall seek the worship of their God; And shall obey Christ, the Son of
David, etc. And thus the learned, pious Christians, viz. The Genevah Notes, our
New Annotations, and Dr. Mayer, understand it, by authority of Scripture. In
the latter days; Hebrew, the end of days, that is, when the world now near
unto an end, they shall seek David their King; that is, The Messiah, Christ,
the Son of David, ( Jer. 30.9. Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. Ezekiel. 37.24. Mat. 9.27. Apoc.
22.16.) And his Kingdom, in which David's Kingdom is promised to be for ever,
Psalm. 72.17. i. e. To the end of the World. For David himself long since is
dead, as the Apostle argues, Acts 13.34, 35, 36. when he would prove that by
David, mentioned Isai. 55. and Psalm. 16. is signified Christ. Nor shall David
return again, till the Physical Corporal Resurrection of the Saints, before
which must precede the Metaphorical Resurrection, that is, the call of the
Jews, at least five and forty years before, as we have before proved upon
Daniel, chap. 12. So this returning of Israel here meant, is not only from
captivity, but from sin; as is plain by that which follows; They shall fear the
Lord, and his goodness. Fear here, as commonly throughout the Scriptures, being
put for all the inward graces, and worship of God in the heart; as to trust in
him, rejoice in him, love him, etc. and that for his goodness, that is, in,
through, and for Christ; who, as he is called the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. And
the Word of God, Joh. 1. etc. so he is the Goodness of God; because God is not,
cannot, in justice be communicative of his goodness unto the lapsed sons of
Adam, but in, and through Christ, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6.

Israel and Judah too, are to this day without a King, without a Prince,
without a Priest, without a Sacrifice (that ceasing, at least, ever since three
hundred sixty and six.) Nor have they instead of those Princes, Priests, and
Sacrifices, sought the Lord their God, and David, that is, Christ their King to
fear the Lord, and his goodness, as has been before expounded. And for the last
day of Judgment, that is no time for Conversions of souls, and reversions from
captivity. Therefore this prophecy in the main of it, is yet to be fulfilled.
Thus of Hosea.

SECT. XL.
NExt we come to the Prophet Joel. The first place in him, is Chap. 2. v. 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Verse 28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will
pour out my spirit upon ALL FLESH, and your sons, and your daughters shall
prophecy; your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.
Verse 29. And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids, in those days
will I pour out my Spirit. Verse 30. And I will show wonders in Heaven, and in
Earth, Blood, and Fire, and Pillars of smoke. Verse 31. The Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that great, and terrible day of
the Lord come. Verse 32. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord, shall be delivered. For in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and in the REMNANT WHOM
THE LORD SHALL CALL.

Peter, in Acts 2. does truly apply part thereof, to the wonderful effusion of
the Spirit there; yet is it not solely applicable to that; nor is the intent
and meaning of the whole, or of any part thereof, wholly fulfilled and
terminated therein. And that I may not be condemned of singularity herein, let
me tell you what others hint to the same effect, though they will not speak out
to my size. That ancient, pious, and most learned Oecolampadius, Public Reader
of Divinity at Basil, above an hundred years since, says upon Verse 28. [ET
ERIT] ubi illa impleri coeperint, ubi Christ us nimirum sanguine suo faedus
nostrum confirmaverit, ubi a mortu is resurrexerit. i. e. The things only
BEGAN to be fulfilled presently after the resurrection of Christ, etc. And that
learned and ingenuous Alapide, upon the same Verse. [POST HAEC] i. e. Post
Christum doctorem, ejusque mortem, and ascensum in coelum, ego Deus effundam
Spiritum Sanctum in Pentecoste, ac DEINCEPS; primo ecclesiae seculo,
visibiliter in Apostolos, and Christi discipulos: SEQUENTIBUS vero SECULIS,
invisibiliter cundem effundam in OMNES, etc. That is, God did promise to pour
out his Spirit after the Ascension of Christ, in the days of Pentecost; and so
afterward; on the first age of the Church visibly, in the succeeding ages
invisibly upon all. So that both these confess upon this first clause, That
this effusion of the Spirit prophesied by our Prophet, was not fully fulfilled
in Acts 2. where the Apostles quotes it. And for those other passages, in Verse
30, etc. I will show wonders in Heaven, and on Earth, Calvin confesses,
Prophetam comprehendere totum Christi Regnum ab initio usque ad finem, etc.
That is, The Prophet here comprehends the whole Kingdom of Christ, from the
beginning, to the end thereof. And this is usual enough. And in other places of
Scripture we have showed, that the Prophets commonly so speak; or so speak in
common. When therefore they speak of the Kingdom of Christ, sometimes they
touch upon the beginning thereof, sometimes also they speak of the end thereof.
But often within one graspe, or comprehension they design the whole course,
race, or process of Christ's Kingdom from first to last: And so the Prophet does
here. Thus Calvin, with much more to that purpose. Alapide likewise on this
thirtieth and one and thirtieth Verse, deals very plainly and ingenuously with
the Text, and with us, opposing those of his own Religion. The Catholics
(says he) think that these prodigious signs came to pass. 1. At the Nativity
of Christ when the star appeared to the wisemen; and the Angels appeared to the
Shepherds. 2. At Christ's passion, when the Sun was eclipsed; the Earth
trembled, the graves opened, the beholders astonished. 3. At Christ's
Resurrection, in the appearance of the Angel, astonishing the Soldier that kept
the Sepulcher and comforted Mary Magdalen, and her company. 4. At the
Pentecost, in the cloven tongues of fire, at which time the Spirit was poured
out.
This Exposition, says Alapide, is probable, but incomplete. Then indeed began
these wonders, but shall be completed a little before the day of Judgment, as
I shall declare by and by. On the otherside, Saint Jerome and Oecumenius (says
Alapide) hold, That these prodigies were acted a little before the destruction
of Jerusalem, by Titus. But lastly, and genuinly, it is certain, That here are
handled the prodigious prognostics that shall precede the day of judgment;
which appears from the beginning of the next Chapter. Thus Alapide. Add one
more; Lyra (says Doctor Mayer) averts that in this thirtieth Verse, The
Prophet passes from the first coming of Christ, to his second; before which,
these signs shall be showed. Thus you see I am not singularly bold to assert,
that this Scripture was not totally and finally fulfilled in that story, Acts
2. And Peter himself tacitly intimates as much in translating the Prophets
(...) afterward by (...), In the last days, which must not exclude One thousand
six hundred and twenty years succeeding, reckoning from Christ's Ascension, but
to our time. And our Prophet drops some passages, which are inconsistent with
perioding at the Pentecost. As Gods pouring out of his Spirit UPON ALL FLESH,
etc. Of which, largely and distinctly by and by; mean while, let me entreat the
Reader to mind what I have prompted to him several times, viz. That Golden
Rule, That Prophesies of this nature touching the Kingdom of Christ have their
gradual, progressive, and vicissitudinous fulfilling, from the first breathing
of them, to the end of the world; as it were from one type to another, till it
come to the Antitype, and full meaning, and managing of the perfection of the
whole, even as the Ark of Noah, might be an occasion of the Ark of Moses; I am
sure signified Baptism, and Baptism leads us to salvation in Christ, 1 Pet.
3.21. Just like Parelia, when we see two or three Suns, or Rainbows, the one
carries up the sight to the other, till at last it be fixed upon the Sun it
self, the substance of all. The Church has its growth, and her eyes is not
able to endure all degrees of light at first. The Infant has but the
glimmering of the light of the fire; afterward it can behold the candle, at
last indures the light of the Sun: And the Sun of the choicest Gospel Light, is
not in its Vertical point and Apoge, in an instant, but by rising, and gradual
Ascension. And thus we have viewed the Text in general.

particular scanning of it, that I may deal faithfully with the precious Word
of God, and with my Reader, and mine own heart; Let us see, and say
ingenuously, what of this Text of Joel has been fulfilled in the Acts, and
what not.

1. These things in part have been fulfilled. 1. The pouring out of the Spirit.
They, in Acts 2.4. ( named in part, and numbered to be about One hundred and
twenty, Acts 1.13, 14, 15.) were all filled with the Holy Ghost. 2. The seeing
of visions. Peter had a vision, Acts 10. And Paul had a vision, and Ananias
likewise, concerning Paul, Acts 9. So had Cornelius, Acts 10. And Stephen, Acts
7. 3ly, The prophesying of their sons and daughters. As Paul did, Acts 27. v.
22, etc. And Agabus did. And Philip the Evangelists four daughters did, Acts
21.8, 9, 10, 11. And afterward John, and Peter, and Jude did prophecy, as the
Revelation, and their Epistles testify. 4. The darkning of the Sun; For before
this notable day of the Lords pouring out his Spirit upon the Disciples, Acts
2. preceded that terrible darkning of the Sun at Christ's passion, Matthew. 27.
For surely all that darkning of the Sun, mentioned by our Prophet, must not be
made more dark by an allegory, or evacuated by a figure; seeing it is set down
as a mark of time, when God is about to do some sensible visible exploit. 5.
That there was a deliverance of some, in some sense in Jerusalem, and at Mount
Zion. There being converted at Peter's Sermon about three thousand souls, Acts
2. which after were five thousand, Acts 4.4. All these five heads of this Text
of our Prophet Joel were fulfilled in part, in the story of the Acts, at, and
upon that pouring out of the Spirit. And in regard of these, Peter had just
reason to apply this Prophecy of Joel to that purpose. Although the stream
were to run to the magnitude of an ocean, in the fullness of its fulfilling; yet
this running first by Peter's door, he might well say these waters were for his
use; and so take up as many buckets, as he needed.
2. In these respects this Text in full was not fulfilled in the Acts of the
Apostles, nor yet is to this very day. For first, This prophecy of pouring out
of the Spirit, and upon all flesh, and upon all sorts, upon old men, and upon
young men, upon Fathers, and upon children, upon Masters and servants, and upon
menservants, and upon maidservants; and unto a variety of gifts (expressed
stylo veteri, in an Old Testament phrase, as most commensurated to the Jews
ears, viz. Of visions, dreams, prophesies,) I say these things, which way
soever ye take, either with these learned, or those learned Interpreters, to
expound them of an extraordinary portion, or giftedness of the Spirit, or of an
ordinary, so as it be in order to salvation, as the last verse constrains us to
extend it; it can intend no less then a plentiful communication of the Spirit,
not only to the generality of the Gentiles, but also (and I should think
chiefly) to the generality of the Jews. But alas, what were five thousand Jews
converted of the Kingdom of Judah, to the generality of them? And then what
were these five thousand, to the generality of the Jews, of all the Twelve
Tribes? And to what does the story of the Acts of the Apostles amount, as to
the fulfilling of this clause of Joel, when by that time it is carried on the
thirteenth Chapter of the Acts the generality of the Jews, give the Gospel a
Bill of Divorce, and send it away? whereupon it went unto the Gentiles, Acts
13.46. So that the next news we hear of it, is in the Epistles of Paul to the
Romans, and to the Corinthians, and Galatians, etc. viz. To the Latin, Greek,
and Galline Galatia minoris Asiae regi^, Phrygiae contermina, a Gallis it a
dicta; qui relicta patria ibi seeds fixerunt. Incolae appellantur Galarae, and
Gallograeci, quod ex Gallis simul and Graecis coal^orint. Steph.
Gentiles, etc. And therefore does Saint Paul in the eleventh to the Romans,
give all the Jews, both of Judah and Israel for gone into utter blindness, till
the fullness of the Gentiles were come in. Which is not yet done to this day, as
we see by experience, both in the thing, and in the effect. Most Gentiles, by
far, being ignorant of the light of the Gospel; and generally all the Jews
(with sorrow we speak it) are obstinate against the light thereof. So that ALL
ISRAEL is far from being saved, whiles the all of the fullness of the Gentiles
is far from coming in. For Mr. Mede has very well approved that account, that
one has made, touching the Christian state, and share of the world, thus; For
one (says Mr. Mede Diatrib. pars 4. p. 82, 83.
) has well observed, That Christianity at this day, is not above the sixth part
of the known world; whereas the Mahumetans have a fifth, and all the rest are
Ethnicks and Pagans. So that if we divide the world into thirty parts,
Christianity is but as five in thirty, Mahumetism as six, and Ethnicism as
nineteen; and so Christianity is the least part of all, and plain Heathenism
has far above the one half of the world; and the better part of the other is
also Mahumetans.
Thus he, with Mr. Medes approbation. I only add this, that even in this
account, I suppose, the Popedom and Papisme (wheresoever it is professed) is
included in Christianity, because in a sort (a sorry one) they acknowledge
Christ; and then the account to this day falls far shorter of the fullness of
the Gentiles coming in; and therefore shorter yet of the Saving all Israel, as
the Apostles phrases are, Romans 11 We have it from day to day before our eyes,
that not one of ten Christians hardly, is more then called a Christian; and not
one Jew of ten thousand bears the name of a Christian. And therefore in this
first branch, this place of Joel is not in the main yet fulfilled. 2. This of
this second of Joel is not yet fulfilled. That at the time the Prophet mainly
means there, must be such wonders in Heaven, and in Earth, as must be
accompanied with blood, and fire and pillars of smoke, and such a darkning of
the Sun, and discoloring of the Moon, etc. As all these things must amount to
the making up of a GREAT and TERRIBLE DAY OF THE LORD: And that in relation to
the destruction of them that believe not, so as to call upon God in faith; as
the last verse intimates, Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord,
shall be saved. And the destruction shall be especially of those unbelievers
that are enemies to the Jews; as the same last verse of this second Chapter,
and the first and second verses of the third Chapter, do evidently hint. For in
Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and
in the remnant whom the Lord shall call. For behold in THOSE DAYS and in THAT
TIME, when I shall bring again the captivity of JUDAH and JERUSALEM, I will
also gather ALL NATIONS, and will bring them down to the valley of Jehoshaphat,
and will PLEAD with them there, for my people, and for my heritage ISRAEL, whom
they have scattered. For by the wonders at the passion of Christ, Matthew. 27.
there was no destruction of any man. At the effusion of the Spirit after his
ascension, Acts 2. There was nothing but consolation, or, at least, admiration.
At the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, according to Matthew. 24. there was the
sad destruction of the Jews, but of none of the Jews enemies. 3. This of this
prophecy of Joel is not yet fully fulfilled, viz. In Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, shall be deliverance AS THE LORD HAS SAID, and in the remnant whom
the Lord shall call. For this was not completed in the few Jews converted in
the Acts, or since, as these Reasons induce me to think. 1. The Apostle Peter,
in Acts the second, quoting Joel, makes not the least mention of this clause.
2. Christ's coming to Jerusalem as a Spiritual Deliverer, in his public
ministration of the Gospel, was before that of pouring out of the Spirit, about
five years; as his disputing with the Doctors was two and twenty years before,
and his incarnation above four and thirty years before. But the deliverance
mentioned according to the Apostles method, yea, and of the Prophets, is after
the pouring out of the Spirit. And indeed follows after, as naturally, as the
effect succeeds the cause: This pouring out of the Spirit, fitting instruments
for the salvation of those ages. 3. The Prophet adds, as the Lord has said.
viz. By his Prophets. But they mainly spoke of the Jews corporal deliverance,
as we have before opened in the discuss of many places. For as for spiritual,
they then had it, and there was no doubt but it should be continued in all
ages, else the Church would be extinct; or Gods Covenant with Abraham and
David, would fail. 4. The Deliverance must be not only in Jerusalem, but in
the remnant whom the Lord shall call: But Christ did not at his being on Earth,
save the generality of the remnant, either corporally, or spiritually. The Two
Tribes were then under the Roman captivity, and they generally refused Christ,
John 1.11. Acts 13.46, 47. and for the Ten Tribes, they, for the generality,
neither saw nor heard Christ, but continued in their captivity in Assyria, etc.
(1 Pet. 1.1. Jam. 1.1.) They were not returned to Zion or Jerusalem; and for
the Gentiles, if any will make them of the remnant, (which is hatsh, being the
greater part of the world) they and the Jews were never yet incorporated in
Religion, as the copulative, And, promises, viz. There shall be deliverance (
in those days, and at that time) in Jerusalem. AND in the remnant whom the Lord
shall call. 5. The Prophet Joel speaks of such a deliverance of the Jews, as
shall be, by bringing down their enemies to the valley of destruction, to them,
though of salvation to the Jews, as the next Chapter, verse. 1, 2, etc. shows.
But this has not been yet fulfilled, as was touched before; neither can it be
fulfilled at the last judgment. For that being once come, there is no
effectual salvation, or invocation, as the last verse of the second Chapter
mentions.


SECT. XLI.
THe second, and last place, we shall touch in this Prophet Joel, is Chap. 3.
v. 1, etc. to the end of the Chapter. For behold, in those days, and in that
time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem. 2. I will
also gather all Nations, and will bring them down into the valley of
Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for my heritage
Israel, whom they have scattered among the Nations, and parted my Land, 3. And
they have cast lots for my people, and have given a Boy for a Harlot, and sold
a Girl for Wine, that they might drink. 4. Yea, and what have ye to do with
me, O Tire, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a
recompense? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily, will I return your
recompense upon your own head. 5. Because ye have taken my silver and my gold,
and have carried into your Temples my goodly pleasant things. 6. The children
also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians,
that ye might remove them far from their border. 7. Behold, I will raise them
^ut of the place, whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompense
upon your own head. 8. And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the
hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a
people far off, for the Lord has spoken it. 9. Proclaim ye this among the
Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw
near, let them come up. 10. Beat your plough-shares into swords, and your
pruning hooks into spears; let the weak say, I am strong. 11. Assemble your
selves, and come all ye heathen, and gather your selves together, round about:
Thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord. 12. Let the Heathen be
wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to
judge all the Heathen round about. 13. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is
ripe: Come, get you down, for the oress is full, the fats overflow, for the
wickedness is great. 14. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for
the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision. 15. The Sun and the Moon
shall be darkened, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining. 16. The Lord
shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and
the Earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the
strength of the children of Israel. 17. So shall ye know, that I am the Lord
your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy Mountain; then shall Jerusalem be holy, and
here shall no stranger pass thorough her any more. 18. And it shall come ^o
pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills
shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a
fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley
of Shittim. 19. Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate
wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have
shed innocent blood in their Land. 20. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and
Jerusalem from generation to generation. 21. For I will cleanse their blood,
that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwells in Zion.


This as it follows close at the heels of the former place, so (notwithstanding
men's chapter-divisions) has it a great coherence with it. Calvin upon this
third Chapter, verse 1, 2. tell us in the general, Confirmat his verb is
Propheta, quod prius docuit de Ecclesiae RESTITUTIONE. i. e. The Prophet in
these words confirms, what before he had taught concerning the RESTITUTION of
the Church. More particularly, let me tell you, That the most (if not the all)
of the former place in the second Chapter, is again mentioned in this third
Chapter; and with four great emphases of connection, both sounding of
confirmation, and explanation of what had been said before, 1. FOR ( Hebrew
(...), Chalde (...), Septuagint (...)) As if the Lord should say, I bring this
for a proof, that I will do as I have said. 2. BEHOLD ( Hebrew (...), Chalde
(...), Septuagint (...)) As much as to say, There shall be some notable thing
done, some grand event, as an eminent sign, that I will be as good as my word.
3. IN THOSE DAYS, and AT THAT TIME (with great emphasis of Pronouns and
Articles, both in Hebrew, Chalde, and Septuagint: Hebrew (...), Chalde (...),
Septuagint (...)) which sound to this effect; That methodically, and in a just
order, when I do the former things, I will do these following also; so that the
plurality and magnificence of exploits shall force the eyes of men to see my
truth, and true performance of all that I have spoken. 4. I will in pursuance
of that deliverance of my people, mentioned in the former Chapter, Gather all
Nations to the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my
people; which amounts justly to thus much for our present observation, That the
famous, remarkable circumstances, as before of time, so here of place, shall be
undeniable witnesses of the substance of my true performance. For as the great
Philosopher says, Many common accidents concurring, may amount to a proprium
quarto modo, to an infallible property; and so to a demonstration. And we know
that circumstances of time, and place, etc. beget in us great credence to a
report, That such a thing was done. Thus for the coherence of this place, with
the former.


Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, signifying the Two Tribes. In the
second verse, and verse sixteen, they are called his heritage Israel, and the
scattered among all Nations; which most aptly set forth the Ten Tribes, who, of
the Kingdom of Israel, became the greatest dispersion among all Nations, far
beyond those of Judah. And the deliverance of both, is so expressed in the
Hebrew, Chalde, and Septuagint, that the words may well be extended to a
spiritual conversion of their souls from infidelity; beside the corporal
deliverance of their persons from captivity; as many Translaters render it. And
for confirmation, observe, That whereas in Hosea, chap. 1. the Lord calls them
(speaking of both the said Kingdoms of the Jews) Lo-ammi. NOT MY PEOPLE, and
Lo-ruhamah, I WILL NOT HAVE MERCY, viz. Whiles they are to be in captivity
(where, for the general, they lost their piety, as well as their liberty, in
not receiving Christ and his Gospel, from thence, to this day.) Behold here in
this Text of Joel, the Lord speaking of their deliverance, expresses it in
relation, and to the effect, of receiving them at their return, as his people,
and to be his heritage, v. 2. For surely, if God did justly, for their great
wickedness, carry them away captive, he had little reason to receive them from
thence, if they were no better, then when they went. Put now all together, and
all plainly spells, that this first clause of the deliverance of Judah and
Israel has not been fulfilled to this day, according to the sense before
demonstrated; which will clearly appear by the rest that follows.

still and tacit deliverance of the Jews, but withal a tumultuous destruction
of their Enemies, that formerly caused their bondage, and withheld their
deliverance, ver. 2. I will gather all Nations, and being them down into the
Valley of Jehosaphat, and plead with them there or my people etc. Which last
clause the Chalde renders (...) etc. And I will take vengeance on them there
for my people, which is much further amplified in ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. etc. The
valley of Jehosaphat is particularly named here, as the place where God will
avenge his people. 1. Because there Jehosaphat overthrew the Ammonites and
Moabites and their Confederates, that rose up against the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 20.22
etc. 2. Jehosaphat signifies pleading or judging, viz. the thing that God will
do upon the incorrigible enemies that yet remain, ver. 12. 3. Because this is
also called the valley of Beracha, that is, the valley of blessing; Because
there Jehosaphat blessed and praised God, first in hope of the said Victory;
Secondly, for help in the said Victory, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. compare ver. 16. 4.
Because this is called the valley of decision or threshing, twice in this
fourteenth verse of this third of Joel, because there God threshed his Enemies
(as the chafe from the wheat) according to Isai. 25.10. and thereby decided
the controversy between the Jews and their Enemies; viz. that the Jews
should have the mastery, not their enemies.
But though the valley of Jehosaphat be here named by these names, yet they are
to be understood in intent and meaning appellatively in a larger sense (as is
most safe) to signify and typifie any eminent place or places, where the Lord
shall overthrow the incurable enemies of the believing Jews. For first, Let
any reasonable Hebrician look into the original, and he shall plainly perceive
that the holy Ghost uses the name Jehosaphat only as a Paranomasia, I will
bring them into the valley (...) and (...) etc. As if we should say in English,
I will bring them down to the valley of Jehosaphat, and there I will
Jehosaphatize them, that is, overthrow them as Jehosaphat did his enemies.
Secondly, Let any rational man judge whether Jehosaphat, as a proper name of a
place in Judea, does signify that there and there only, God will judge the
enemies of the believing Jews, when as their enemies are scated in every place
where the Jews are scattered; and those enemies shall oppose them, and the
believing Gentiles, that shall help in their return, wherever they stir to
that end. Yet I contend not, but that that very place may be one where, of some
notable overthrow of some chief enemies of the Jews: as of the Arabians,
Saracens, and Turks, that shall enter into the Holy Land to hinder the Jews
sitting down, and settling there. Now this clause of the Prophet Joel in this
third chapter, was never yet fulfilled since the first Assyrio-Chaldean
captivity of Israel or Judah. For the Prophet gives us a sign that this is to
be done after the Jews are sold to the Grecians. The Hebrew (...) in its first
original sense and use, signifies to yield up, and deliver up. And so the
Septuagint renders it (...) which most commonly, as the composition of the word
requires, signifies to yield up, or to deliver up into another man's
jurisdiction and power. And this transmitting of the Jews from their Native
Country, to Graecia, seems to be charged upon several Nations, who handed them
from one to another, verse. 2, 3, 4, 5. But the Greeks came not to any
considerable repute, power, and jurisdiction, till above two hundred years
after the beginning of the Second, viz. The Medo-Persian Monarchy. Since which
time, the Jews were never delivered, according to the character of the Text,
viz. By a destruction of their enemies; and to such an effect and degrees, as
that no stranger should pass through Jerusalem any more, verse 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. For we know the contrary by History, Experience, and sight of our own
eyes in our travells.

destruction of the Jews enemies at their deliverance, and the collation of
their happy condition when delivered, will yet further demonstrate, that this
prophecy of Joel, in this third Chapter, is not yet in the main, to this very
day fulfilled.

1. The destruction of their enemy must be very formidable, v. 14, 15, 16, 19.
Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the day of the Lord is
near in the valley of decision; the Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the
Stars shall withdraw their shining. The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and
utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth shall shake.
Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, etc. 2.
On the otherside, the happy condition of the Jews shall be as glorious, as
their enemies destruction shall be miserable; which is interchangably
interwoven within the same verses, the better to mind us, that they both
concur to the same time, and in that method, that the ruins of the enemy, is
the rise of the Jews, Verse. 16. But the Lord will be the hope of his people,
and the strength of the children of ISRAEL. V. 17. So shall ye know, that I am
the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy Mountain; then shall Jerusalem be
HOLY, and there SHALL NO STRANGERS PASS THROUGH HER ANY MORE. V. 18. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that the Mountains shall drop down new Wine,
and the Hills shall flow with milk, etc. V. 20. Judah shall dwell FOR EVER, and
Jerusalem from GENERATION to GENERATION. You see here in this Chapter, a
corporal destruction of all the Nations that irreconcileably oppose the Jews.
You see the happy condition of the Jews following thereupon, to be expressly
both temporal and spiritual; and you see it set forth with most ample
extension, both for latitude and length. Need I now upon things so plain spend
six sentences, to declare this was never yet fulfilled to the Jews, since their
first captivity in Babylon to this day? Surely, if the succeeding Monarchy
punished the preceding, they did withal keep the Jews under their subjection;
and so from Assyrians, to Medes and Persians, from them to the Grecians, and
thence to the Romans, and so to the Saracens and Turks to this time, the Jews
have been more, or less under foreign power, and not a free people; much less
so happy, or their enemies so miserable as has been described. Lastly, If we
mark some references of this third of Joel, made
1. Consider how exactly the thirteenth verse, etc. of this Chapter of Joel, is
repeated and applied, Rev. 14.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. to the ruin of
Antichrist. Put ye in (says Joel in this third Chapter, v. 13.) the sickle,
for the Harvest is ripe; come, get you down, for the press is full, the fats
overflow, for their wickedness is great. And then follows expressly the
destruction of the enemies of the Jews, as we before repeated. Sutably, Saint
John says, in the said place of the Revelation; An Angel came out of the
Temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, thrust in thy
sickle, and reap, for the time is come for thee to reap, for the Harvest of the
Earth is ripe. And he that sat on the cloud, thrust in his sickle on the
Earth, and the Earth was reaped. And another Angel came out of the Temple,
which is in Heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. And another Angel came out
from the Altar, which had power over fire, and cried with a loud voice, Cry to
him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle, and gather the
clusters of the Vine of the Earth, for her grapes are fully ripe. And the Angel
thrust in his sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Vine of the Earth, and
cast it into the great Wine Press of the wrath of God; and the Wine Press was
trodden without the City, and blood came out of the Wine Press, even unto to the
horse-bridles, by the space of one thousand six hundred furlongs. In which
parallel of John and Joel, you see how accurately John extends that of Joel to
the ruin of the Antichristian enemy, and the raising of the Christian Church,
consisting of Jews and Gentiles, yet to come; as it will easily appear to him
that will carefully read this fourteenth Chapter of the Revelation.

2. Compare this prophecy of Joel, touching the valley of Iehoshaphat, and
Gods judging there, with Isa. 66.24. Matthew. 5.22. Rev. 16.16. It seems by that
place of Isaiah, that there shall be a slaughter of the enemy of the Church, at
his great fall, in a more conspicuous place above others (perhaps not the
remotest from Jerusalem) whither the Church (made up of Jews and Gentiles)
shall (to keep Isaiah his words) go forth and look upn the carcases of the men
that had transgressed against God; for which they had been slain. For says
Isaiah) their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they
shall be an abhoring to all flesh. Upon which words our new Annotations say
well, that apparent enough it is, that the execution of Gods wrath on the
wicked, either on the Mountains near unto Jerusalem (as some of the Rabbis
affirm) or in the valley of Jehosaphat, according to Joel 3. or in Tophet in
the vale of Gehinnom, Isa. 30.33. Ierem. 7.31.33. is here described, by a
resemblance taken from dead bodies, that after great slaughter made of them,
lie a long time above ground unburyed, either as deemed unworthy to be at all
interred, or because, in regard of the multitude of them, it cannot suddenly be
effected. The WORM has reference to such Vermin as is wont to breed in, and
feed on dead corpses; on such carcasses especially as lie so long above ground,
until they rot, and become as dung. The FIRE to the burning of such bodies, not
sit now to be stirred, or removed, but to be consumed by fire, in the place
where they lie. And because the putrefying carcasses long time crawle with
worms and magots, ere the flesh be consumed; and it would be a long time of
burning to consume the remainder with fire; therefore it is said, their worm
never dies, and their fire is never quenched; but a long time are an abhorring
to all flesh, viz. that shall behold them. The Lord Christ, as St. Matthew
chap. 5.22. gives it us, speaks of such a place of common execution of
malefactors, Whosoever shall say to his brother, thou fool, shall be in danger
of hell fire; (...) here, as Broughton learnedly disputes, does not of it self
signify Hell. And I add, that it cannot possibly signify here an eternal
punishment in the Hell of the damned; for then it would follow from this Text,
that some sins are venial, and only some are mortal or damnable; because our
Savior says, he that is ANGRY with his brother without a cause, shall he in
danger of the JUDGMENT; and whosoever shall say to his brother, RACHA, shall
be in danger of the COUNCIL; and he only that shall say, THOU FOOL, shall be
in danger of HELL FIRE. But this distinction is cross to all the Scripture,
and therefore, eternal hell fire, or the place of the damned cannot be here
meant. But (to keep to the order and nature of the Greek words) (...) is the
Gehinnom of fire, that is the valley of Hinnom, or the valley of the son of
Hinnom, taking its name from the first possessor. Of the name and situation of
this place, see Josh. 15.8. where it is described to be in the borders of the
lot of the Tribe of Judah; and therefore not far from Jerusalem, even near the
Eastgate, Ier. 19.2. And the sacred history tells us further in the 2 Kings
23.10. and 2 Chronicles. chap. 28. v. 3. and chap. 33. ver. 6. Ier. 32.35, That in
this valley of Hinnom was Tophet: And that there they burnt their children in
the fire, as a sacrifice to the Idol Moloch, after the manner of the Heathens.
Tophet signifies a drum, because they beat a drum to drown the noise of the cry
of their children, when they were cast into the fire. And further, in Ier.
7.33. we have it set forth as a place of the execution of Gods vengeances
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that it shall be no more called TOPHET,
nor the VALLEY OF THE SON OF HINNOM. butthe VALLEY OF SLAUGHTER; For they shall
bury in Tophet, till there be no place. Rabby David Kimchi on Psalm. 27. v. 13.
on these words [The land of the living] says thus, Even as the judgment of
the wicked is called GEHENNA, which was a valley near Jerusalem whereinto they
did cast forth every uncleanness, and dead carkases, and there the fire did
perpetually burn them even into bones, etc. And unto this (says Beza) will
some have it, that Christ alludes in that Matthew. 5.22. before quoted. This name
Geennua, or Gehenna is a compound Hebrew word compounded of (...) Gi, which
signifies a valley, and (...) Hinnom, the name of the ancient possessor of the
place (as we touched before) and suitably (as Tremelius notes and pronounces)
the Syriacke writes and speaks it, Gihanna. Doubtless as (...) JUDGMENT
signified a lesser civil punishment, viz. that inflicted by the JUDGES; and
(...) the COUNCIL signified a greater, viz. that which the SANHEDRIM, or great
Council inflicted; so this Gehinnom of fire must signify the greatest. Not but
that our Savior, by way of parallel, may intend, and leaves the learned
Pharisees so to apply it, that if men did thus gradually punish such faults
according to their degrees; how much more will the most righteous holy God? But
this by the way. Our business now is, to explain by way of parallel the
meaning of this third of Joel, touching the corporal ruining of the Churches
enemies, more especially in some such eminent place as the valley of
Iehosaphat, yet to come. For which purpose we must touch one place more (before
quoted) viz. Rev. 16.12. etc. And the sixth Angel poured out his vial upon the
great river Euphrates, and the waters thereof were dried up, that the way of
the Kings of the East might be prepared. And I saw three unclean spirits like
Frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast,
and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. For they are the spirits of devils,
working miracles, which go forth unto the KINGS OF THE EARTH, and of he WHOLE
WORLD, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty. Behold I
come as a thief in the night, etc. And he gathered them into a place called in
the Hebrew tongue, ARMAGEDDON. This, touching the River Euphrates, and the
Kings of the Earth, would be a little explained, and then we shall the better
understand this Armageddon, and the suitableness of it to our purpose. The
sixth vial (says Mr. Mede) shall be poured out upon the great River Euphrates,
that being dried up, a passage may be prepared for new Enemies of the Beast to
come from the East; that is, for the Israelites to be wonderfully converted to
the pure faith, and worship of Christ, and now seekers for the Kingdom promised
many ages since. That I may take these Kings to come from the East to be the
Jews, two things serve for it. First, That this is the last vial save one; in
the time whereof therefore the Jews must be converted, if at all; or else must
be destroyed with the rest of the enemies of Christ, among whom they remain,
in that great day of universal Revenge and Judgment, which the next vial
shall bring upon them. (Both which, viz. of non-conversion, or general
destruction are flat against all the tenor of Scripture.) Secondly, That place
of Isaiah chap. 11. ver. 15, 16. whence this of the sixth vial is borrowed,
moves me thereunto. And the Lord will destroy (or rather render the Hebrew
(...) like as the Lord has destroyed) the tongue of the Egyptian Sea: And
(rather so) he shall lift up his hand upon the river (Targum, the River
Euphrates) in the strength of his spirit, and shall smite it in the seven
streams, so that men may pass over dry-shod. And there shall be a way for the
remnant of my people, which shall be left by the Assyrians (a plain mark
Euphrates is understood) as it was in that day wherein he ascended up from the
Land of Egypt (a good justification of that translation of the words in the
first clause,) Parallel to which place is that of Zech. 10.10, 11. Which the
Chalde renders thus (...) etc. i. e. And even as I brought them out of the land
of Egypt, so will I gather together their captivity from Assyria, and I will
bring them back to the land of Gilead and of my sanctuary, and it shall not be
sufficient for them: And miracles, and the marvelous great works of God shall
be wrought for them, even as they were wrought for their fathers when they
passed through the sea: and they shall see the vengeance on their enemies, etc.
So the Chal. But what shall we say that Euphrates is, whose waters shall be dried
up? mystical Babylon shall also have her Euphrates, as well as
that ancient Babylon, the Turkish Empire, which shall be the obstacle of those
new enemies from the East, and on that part the ONLY DEFENSE OF THE BEAST.
Neither will such understanding of Euphrates be without example of Isaiah
himself, who chap. 8.7. by the like parable of Euphrates, has expressed the
Army of the Assyrians bordering upon the same River. The Lord shall bring upon
them, or cause to come against them (that is, against the Syrians and the
Israelites) the waters of THE or THAT River (so Euphrates (...) by way of
eminency, or emphasie, is wont to be called) strong and many, the Kings of
Assyria, and all his glory (Targum, his army) etc. compare Jer. 47.2, 3. Behold
waters rise up out of the North, and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall
overflow the land and all that is therein; the City and them that dwell therein;
then the men shall cry, and all the Inhabitants of the land shall howl, at the
noise of the stamping of the hoofes of his strong horses, at the rushing of his
chariots etc. where evidently by the waters of the north are understood the
Armies of the north. Why therefore should not this Euphrates, of the vials, by
the same reason be understood of the Turks; being no less borderers upon
Euphrates before their overflowing, then the Assyrians, the Inhabitants of the
same Tract? To this it makes not a little, that the losing of that great Army
of Horsemen, long stayed at that GREAT RIVER EUPHRATES, Rev. 9.15. signifies
the Turks thence to overrun the Roman Empire, as the series of the Trumpets,
and the apt truth of the matter demonstrate. Therefore by the sixth vial this
Euphrataean deluge shall be dried up: Plainly according to that which is said
Revel. chap. 11. that next after that overthrow of the City, which shall come
to pass in a great Earthquake (agreeing to the fifth vial) the second woe
shall be past, that is the plague of the sixth Trumpet. But by what means
that is to come to pass, and by what Authors, whether by the Jews themselves
(which happily Ezekiel intimates chapter 38. and 39.) who shall possess the
holy Land again; or by some intestine discord, fitly to go before the return
of these; or happily both, but in order, and one after another, or by some other
cause, we cannot certainly say. What ever it be, this let being removed, it is
said A WAY of going to some place, is prepared for these new Christians from
the East; and that (as it seems) to make an expedition against the Beast; to
the ruin of whom, all the Vials serve.

From whence otherwise, or wherefore, from this drying up, should so great a
trembling and fear, at an instant, assail the worshippers of the Beast, yea,
even the Devils themselves, as it seems; that it should minister occasion for
so horrible, and unheard of a preparation for war, as is here described; unless
they, with their whole diabolical band, should fear all extremity, by the
coming of these new Kings of the East? Now this Armageddon, mentioned in this
16. of Revel. v. 16. (of the Hebrew (...) HAR MEGIDDON, that is, The mountain,
mountainous places, or downs, as we said of Megiddon) was the place where good
King Josiah was slain, whence Jeremiah takes the rise and beginning of his
Lamentations, as the ante-scene to the ensuing captivity, 2 Chro. 35.22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27. Where, though it be written (...) MEGIDDO, yet because in Zach.
12.11. it is written in the Hebrew, as above, viz. (...) HAR MEGIDDON, and so
in the Greek, even in that 2 Chronicles. 35.22. (...), therefore the Apostle writes
it Armageddon; The mountainous part adjoining to the valley. By all, Saint John
intimating, That God will yet before the ultimate general judgment, give the
Churches enemies, as they come forth to oppose her, a notable overthrow in some
notorious eminent place. For it is most incongruous with the last general
judgment, to speak of a particular place wherein the grand enemies of the
Church shall be destroyed for her deliverance; even as it is not disagreeable
to Joels close, who concludes upon that destruction at the valley of
Jehoshaphat, that Judah and Jerusalem may have a quiet and lasting habitation.
Thus of the places in Joel.

SECT. XLII.
NExt we come to the Prophet Amos. wherein we shall touch but one place, viz.
The ninth and last Chapter, v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. viz. The five last verses,
parallelled and compared with Obadiah, V. 17, etc. to the end; and with Acts
15. v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Verse. 11. In that day I will raise up the Tabernacle
of DAVID that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up
his ruins, and will build it as in the days of old. Verse. 12. That they may
possess the remnant of EDOM, and of ALL the Heathen, which are talled by my
Name, says the Lord, that does this. Verse. 13. Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that the Ploughman shall overtake the Reaper; and the treader of Grapes,
him that sows Seed; and the Mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the
Hills shall melt. Verse. 14. And I will bring again the captivity of my people
ISRAEL, and they shall build the waste Cities, and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; and they shall also make gardens,
and eat the fruit of them. Verse. 15. And I will plant them upon their Land, and
they shall be NO MORE PULLED UP OUT OF THEIR LAND, which I have given them,
says the Lord God.

Touching these words, that ye may acquit me of privacy of opinion, hear first
what others say upon them. The great Mercer presents to us, Ex Lyr. upon the
13, 14, 15, ver. this, Non possunt haec, etc. i. e. These things cannot be
understood of the restoration of the Jews after their Babylonish captivity,
seeing these things are not spoken of JUDAH ONLY, neither did the people of
Judah remain in their Land, but were dispersed into all Nations. The Prophet
refers this to the CONVERSION OF ISRAEL in the LAST OF DAYS, when they shall
SUBJECT and SUBMIT themselves to CHRIST, and shall WITH ALL THEIR HEARTS ADHERE
to him; at which time MANY OF ISRAEL shall return into their own Land. The
mighty Hebrew Critic, Mercer himself, upon the eleventh verse, says thus,
Post varias comminationes, etc. i. e. Here the Prophet, after various threats,
subjoyns at length magnificent consolations and promises. Which, no doubt,
belong to the TIME AND KINGDOM OF THE MESSIAH, by the confession of all the
SOUNDER HEBREWS, and the TALMUDS THEMSELVES, as Lyranus cites in the Tract
Sanhedrin, cap. Helec. Where from this place, they call the Messiah (...), The
son of lapses or ruins, because he should restore the lapsed ruins, as it is
said in this place. Thus all the Prophets almost end their prophesies, in
predictions of the Kingdom of Christ. So the ending of the Prophet Joel, and of
this Prophet agree in many things. This place also is cited by James, in the
Acts of the Apostles, chap. 15. to prove the call of the Gentiles; then which,
we cannot have a more certain Exposition. By the Tabernacle of David, the
Prophet understands the Kingdom of the House of David, as learnedly the Chalde
paraphrast turns it; that is, THE KINGDOM OF THE MESSIAH, as often in Scripture
Christ is called by the name of David. And in the fourteenth verse, the Prophet
adds other magnificent promises, which also appertain to the Kingdom of
Christ, viz. I will bring back the captivity of my people Israel. The Jews
understand this according to the Letter, of the external bringing back of the
Ten Tribes, and many of ours also are of the same mind, being carried
thereunto by that argument, of which Esdras writes, Esdr. lib. 2. cap. 13. of
the sure return of the Ten Tribes, given in a divine dream, and after expounded
to that sense. Thus Mercer, though he contends also for a spiritual sense,
which we do not altogether deny, but do altogether affirm (as warranted by many
Scriptures) That the external deliverance of the Jews shall be accompanied with
a glorious spiritual vocation of them, and their conjunction with the Gentiles
in matters of Religion. But for a litteral sense, and corporal bringing back of
the Ten Tribes into their own Country, we also mainly contend. To which, Mercer
himself seems not altogether adverse, when upon the twelfth verse [ viz. that
they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the Heathen], I say, when
upon this verse he has these words, These things (says he) can neither be
referred to the times after the destruction of Senacherib (as Aben Ezra
imagins;) nor to the return from the Babylonish captivity: Things much more
ample and magnificent are here promised, then those done at that time. For that
external felicity of Ezekiah was most short; nor, on the other part, do we
read that he subjected diverse of the Gentiles to himself. And albeit it had
been so, in a short time after, the Temple and Judea was destroyed. And after
their return from that captivity, how miserably were the Jews tossed to and
fro by the Persians, Medes, Greeks, and Romans; so that the famous victories of
the Maccabees are not here to be commemorated or connumerated. Therefore
indeed, not so much as according to the letter, or shadow are these things (in
my judgment) to be referred to Ezekiah's, or any other time, then to the
Kingdom of the Messiah. And Aben Ezra, being compelled by truth, confesses
this to be a more plain place concerning the Messiah; in which sense the
Talmudists also have expounded it. To all which, Mercer upon the fifteenth
verse [viz. I will plant them upon their own land] adds this, I will plant
them after the manner of trees, which take deeper root in the earth; as if the
Lord should say, I will give them firm and established seats in their own
land. Thus Mercer: Which words whether they sound not of a temporal
deliverance of Israel, as well as spiritual, let the candid and considering
Reader judge.

Calvin on this place is of the mind, that this promise does intend, that
Israel (according to ver. 14.) shall return from their captivity, but not all,
but only the elect. And that they shall quietly enjoy their own land,
according to ver. 15. without which (says he) all the rest of the prophecy
had been but a mockery: And confesses that this Scripture was never yet
fulfilled according to the letter as to a temporal deliverance. And upon Act.
15. ver. 16. quoting this place, he has these words, Reversi ab exilio,
Babylonico etc. i. e. the Jews returning from the Babylonish captivity, they
were worn out with continual, innumerable calamities, even to utter perishing.
After that, the residue that was left, was much wasted by little and little
with intestine discords. Yea, when God did succor them in this their miserable
condition, the appearance of help then held forth unto them, became a certain
kind of matter of despair. For the Emperiality, or Rule, which the Maccabees
assumed to themselves, was then quite taken away from the Tribe of Juda. Thus
Calvin well. But for his, or Mercers, or Dr. Mayers, or any others flying to a
spiritual sense of this prophecy, upon this ground point black, and
precisely, because it was never yet fulfilled in a litteral; to me speaks no
more in plain English, then as if, because God had never to fulfilled it,
therefore he never would, or could fulfill it for future; which reason I leave
with the unprejudicated reason of the Reader, Quem penes arbitrium est, and
vis, and norma loquendi! Our late new Annotationists say upon the fourteenth
verse [I will bring again the captivity of Israel, etc.] that A new face o^
ALL THINGS shall then appear, when God shall show his cheerful face upon his
people. The full accomplishment hereof is under Christ, when they are planted
in his Church, out of which they can never be pulled after they are once
graffed therein. Let the Reader here have one eye upon these words, to this
day, spoken in the future Tense; and the other, on the present State of Judah
and Israel, on whom this prophecy is not, according to the expressions of our
Annotationists, yet fulfilled. And Dr. Mayer confesses, that this prophecy
cannot be restrained to that deliverance out of Babylon, because though they
built in their own land after this, yet they continued not always there, but
were afterward expelled again by the Romans.

Jacob, the father of all the twelve Heads of the twelve Tribes, and by proper
acception after the division of the Kingdom, was the name of that part which
contained the ten Tribes. Both which parts, viz. Judah and Israel, are the more
necessarily conjoined in this deliverance; because Jerusalem (though in the
Kingdom of Judah) was the public place of the Churches meeting, and of their
solemn divine worship, in common, and jointly to all twelve Tribes; and this
Prophet Amos does expressly prophecy to the Tribes of Israel chap. 1. ver. 1.
[ The words of Amos which he saw concerning ISRAEL] The prophet there
sufficiently hinting to us in the words following, that he did well remember
the distinction of Judah and Israel; for it follows, that Amos saw those words
concerning ISRAEL in the days of Uzziah King of JUDAH, and in the days of
Jeroboam the son of Joash, King of ISRAEL.

all the twelve Tribes (for the generality) and the fullness of the Gentiles,
must be conjoined in a religious Church union, and divine Gospel Worship. So in
ver. 12. The Lord having said in ver. 11. I will raise up the Tabernacle of
David, etc. He adds in the twelfth verse, that they (the said Jews) may
possess the remnant of Edom, and of ALL THE HEATHEN which are CALLED BY MY
NAME; Which Saint James Act. 15.13, etc. to ver 18. does sully and effectually
apply to that sense and end; James answered saying, men and brethren, hearken
unto me; Simeon has declared how God at the first did VISIT THE GENTILES, to
take out of THEM a people for his name; and to this agree the words of the
Prophet, as it is written, after this I will return, and WILL BUILD AGAIN THE
TABERNACLE OF DAVID, and will build again the ruins thereof, and will set it
up, THAT THE RESIDUE OF MEN MIGHT SEEK AFTER THE LORD and ALL THE GENTILES UPON
WHOM MY NAME IS CALLED, etc. in which quotation St. James minding the sense of
the Prophet, rather then his words, and what the Apostle spoke at large, and
most likely in his native Hebrewish language, Saint Luke giving us but the sum,
and in the Greek tongue, following also, for the most, the Septuagints version
of the Prophet, that speech and translation being then most common over the
world, by reason of the late Grecian Monarchy overspread so wide, for near
two hundred and eighty years, expiring not till about forty six years before
Christ) some small differences there may happily be in terms and reading from both
the Hebrew and the Septuagint; But none at all in the main intent and meaning.
For the prophet saying that THEY (the Jews) may possess the remnant of EDOM,
WHICH are called by my name, (Hebr. (...) which may conveniently be rendered by
whom my name is called upon, even by them) this WHICH (Hebrew (...) being of
all Numbers and Genders, as our English which) may either relate to that same
THEY, that is Judah and Israel (who shall possess the remnant of Edom, and all
the Heathen) shall be called by my name i.e. The said Jews, being converted
unto the Gospel shall thereupon be called Christians, and my people, and so
called by my name. And calling upon God in faith, shall thereby be said to call
upon Gods name, or to be those, in, or by whom the name of God is called upon.
Or else this WHICH may be referred to the remnant of the EDOMITES and of all
the HEATHEN, that they, so many of them as shall be converted, and truly
professing godliness, shall thereupon be called Gods people, to wit, Godly, or
Christ's people, that is, Christians, and so called by his name: And calling
upon God with faith in prayer, they shall be those, in, or by whom the name of
God shall be called upon, even in them, or among them. Now which way soever we
refer it, it comes all to one maine sense, intent, and purpose: viz. That
upon the eversion of the incurable enemies of Christ, follows the conversion
of them that submit to Christ; whether they be the Jews, the possessors of
the remnant of Edom, and of all the Heathen; or the Gentiles, the possessed, to
wit, the remnant of Edom and of all the Heathen. Both which being converted,
shall incorporate into one Church, and way of worship. If any Reader be
contented with this composal of these seeming differences, he may jump over the
next sectiuncle, viz. [. 4.)

Hebrew, the Septuagint Greek, and the New Testament Greek; the two former in
this place of Amos, the last in Act. 15.17. then thus, if they will have
patience to hear me to the end.

The diverse readings.

Hebrew Amos 9.12.] (...) that is, that they may possess, or inherit the
remnant of Edom.

Septuag. Amos 9.12.] (...) etc. that is, That the remnant of men may seek
after.

The New Testam. Act. 15.17.] (...), that is, That the remnant of men may
seek, or seek after the Lord.

Thus you have an exact true Scheme of the diverse readings, which is a little
mistakingly set down in Mr. Medes Diatr. par. 4. p. 525. For there is no copy
of the Septuagints, or variae lectiones of them on Amos 9.12. that I know of
(although I have diverse) that have in them (...), or (...), The Lord.

The Reconciliation.

Mr. Mede would reconcile these places thus. 1. That for (...) the Article, he
would read (...) the Lord. And for (...) Edom he would read (...) Adam or Man.
And for (...) that they may possess (...) that they may seek after. And he does
suppose the Septuagint, and the Apostle and Evangelist did follow some such
copy, and upon that ground supplied the word Lord, and altered the word Edom,
to Adam or man; and the word possess, to seek after, and so read, That the
remnant of Adam, or man, may seek after the Lord. To which conjecture or
reading I can contribute a little something: To the first this, that some
copies of the Septuagint have instead of (...) Lord, (...) Me, as relating to
the Lord; Which is not only reported by Nobilius, but I have the like Greek
copy by me. To the second this, That Edom by the Hebrews is used commonly, to
signify the Nations that were not of their Jewish Church; and especially those
under the Roman Monarchy. And therefore the Jesuits have expunged out of the
Hebrew Rabbis Commentaries on the Hebrew Bibles, printed within their reach,
the word Edom oftentimes, as it is to be seen in the edition of Buxtorfes great
Hebrew Bible, with the Chalde and Rabbis, compared with that of Bomberg. To
the third this, That some copies of Jeroms Latin Translation have quaerant me,
may seek after me.

See De Dieu in his Animady. in Act Apostol. And his Animadvers. on Clav.
Apocal.
De Dieu * conveniently salves the matter, and saves the Hebrew text without
any supply or alteration of any one word at all, thus; Act. 15.17. (...) etc.
that is, that the residue of men might seeek after the Lord. These words are
fetched from Amos 9.12. where the Hebrew Text has it thus: (...) etc. which is
wonted to be translated, that they may possess the remnant of Edom, and all
Nations, Gentiles or Heathens, which version of the words seems to me most
harsh to reconcile with this place of the Acts: But not so, if we say that
(...) here is not a note of the Accusative Case, but as often elsewhere of the
Nominative, and we turn it, That the remnant of Edom, and of all the Heathen on
whom my name is called, may possess the restored Tabernacle of David. Neither
is there any doubt with me, but that the Septuagint so took the words: for so
they turn them (...) etc. i.e. That the rest of men, and all Nations, Gentiles
or Heathens may seek after. Which words have no sense, unless thou do supply
in thy understanding, what they are to seek after; to wit, that which but even
now he had spoken of, viz. the Tabernacle of David that was thrown down, but
now restored. Instead of which James does not ill substitute the words (...)
The Lord. For whether thou say that they should seek after The restored
Tabernacle, or after the Lord the restorer, and Master of that Tabernacle,
still thou say the same thing. Add that the Gentiles or Nations should seek
after that Tabernacle, not for its own sake, but for the Lords sake. Here also
must be shown, why instead of (...) that they may possess, the Septuagint
says, (...) that they may seek after. Whether or no, because for (...) that
they may possess, they read (...) that they may seek after? So it is commonly
thought. But let leave be granted to conjecture another matter: This is to be
held as a rule or tenet, amongst all the Orientals, that words which signify
Esse, that is, to be, do also signify fieri, that is, about to be done, that
is moveriad esse, viz. to be moved toward that same esse or being. As (...)
signifies to open, and to let loose; Because loosening is a moving toward
apertion. (...) signifies to possess, and to buy, Because buying is a moving
toward possession, there are hundreds of the same sort. So (...) does not
only signify to possess, but to move toward possession: For example, Deuteronomy.
2.24. (...) Begin, Possess, (...) and conflict with him in war; They could not
actually begin to possess, before they had conflicted and cast out the enemy.
The sense therefore is, Begin to enter upon the possession. And more clearly
ver. 32. (...) which if we render with Pagnin, Begin thou to possess, that thou
may possess his land, is a mere Tautologie; but not so if you render it,
Begin thou to enter upon the possession, etc. So in this place (...) That they
may possess, the Septuagint conceived did signify, not the possession it
self, but the endeavor of possessing, which they happily enough expressed by
a verb of seeking. Nor is it wonder that they translated (...) The remnant of
Edom, by (...) The remnant of men. For perhaps they read it (...) Adam; or
rather, they took the word Edom in this place, as often elsewhere, to be of a
larger signification then to note the people properly so called. For as Isaac
the younger of Rebeckahs sons did typifie forth the Church, so the elder
ESAU, or EDOM did typifie all other men that were strangers from the Church.
Wherefore in the writings of the Rabbis the Roman Empire, especially whiles
overspreading the whole world, was called (...) the Kingdom of Edom; who also
by (...) the Sons of Edom, do understand all Christians. That we said (...)
sometimes notes the Nominative Case, if any should perhaps grant that after
Verbs Passives, but deny it in other Verbs, let him see 2 King. 9.25. Neh.
9.34. 1 Samuel 17.34. 2 Kin. 6.5. Eze. 43.7. Jer. 33.5. where it is so construed
with Neuters. Yea sometimes with Transitives, as Neh. 9.34. Jer. 38.16. Eze.
39.14. Hence it comes to pass that (...) which otherwise of the Accusative
Case, does among the Rabbis with all the Verbs promiscuously make the
Nominative Case, as (...) He did it or he made, or made it.
Plainly therefore both the Hebrew and the Greek, both ways, signify the
conversion of the Jews, and Gentiles first, AL ISRAEL next Romans 11.) into a
cohabitation and Church-union.

Which is very aptly opened, and enlarged in the very next Prophet, viz. the
Prophet Obadiah; and with many of the same words and phrases, with addition of
others, Obad. ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. But upon MOUNT ZION shall be
deliverance, and there shall be holiness, and the HOUSE OF JACOB shall possess
their possessions. And the HOUSE OF JACOB shall be a fire, and the house of
JOSEPH a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in
them, and devour them: And they of the South shall possess the mount of Esau,
and they of the plain, the Philistims, and they shall possess the fields of
Ephraim, and the fields of SAMARIA, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead. And the
Captivity of this Host of the children of ISRAEL shall possess that of the
Canaanites even unto Zarephath, and the captivity of JERUSALEM, which is in
Sepharad, shall possess the Cities of the South; And Saviors shall come upon
mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau, and the Kingdoms shall be the Lords. In
which words, we have such a character of the future happy state of the Church
on earth, harmoniously and beautifully wreathed and inter-woven of Jews and
Gentiles converted unto Christ, as yet never was, but still lies upon the
engagement of Gods infallible truth to be fulfilled. For on the Gentiles part,
here expressed under so many names, they are not all to be destroyed, but
possessed, with a mixed cohabitation of Jews, according to the aforesaid place
of Amos (with which is our present collation this of Obadiah) that there shall
be a REMNANT of Edom, and a REMNANT (for so the grammar of the word carries
it) of all the Heathen, among whom, and by whom the name of God shall be called
upon. And on the Jews part, both the Kingdom of Judah (now as Judah and
Benjamin are called 1 King. 11.13. and chapter 12.20. because of the mixture of
their territories, as the Geneva notes well give the reason) and also the
Kingdom of Israel, must be here understood as sharers in the spiritual
salvation and outward happiness here so laboriously inculcated: else why does
the Prophet use one while such comprehensions in words, as the house of Jacob,
(and that twice) and the house of Joseph? Another while such distinctions and
discriminations in terms, as the captivity of the host of the CHILDREN OF
ISRAEL, and the captivity of JERUSALEM, plainly enough setting forth the two
Tribes and the ten Tribes: and generally the learned agree, that both are here
understood, though severally they fix the footing of their interpretations.
Oecolampadius says on ver. 20. Duplices facit captivitates, etc. that is, the
Prophet makes two captivities. For he gives to Israel the space toward the
North; and then he gives to them that were of Jerusalem, that is, to the Tribe
of Judah and Benjamin, that tract which is toward Egypt. Mercer has it over
and over, that in the 19. verse of this Obadiah is touched the State of Judah,
and in the 20 verse the State of Israel. Hierom says, the house of Jacob
signifies Judah, and the house of Joseph the ten Tribes. And Ephraim, the son
of Joseph, out of which Tribe was the Regality of Samaria, intimates that the
two Kingdoms were to be again coupled or reunited for the devastation of the
Edomites; that is (as it is generally agreed among the learned, both Jews and
Christians) those that are incorrigible Antichristian enemies of the Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus. And then that which is added in the close as the corenis of
this glorious internal and external salvation of all these to be saved [that
Saviors (in the plural) shall come upon mount Zion to judge the enemies, and
the Kingdom shall be the Lords] is of that strength and torrent, that it bears
down before it all limitations of the meaning to their return from Babylon, or
the incarnation of THE SAVIOR CHRIST, whose then was the Kingdom (in kind) no
otherwise then it was formerly, when he ruled the world by his power, and his
Church by his Word and Spirit; whereas this close, THE Kingdom shall be the
Lords, must intend that it shall be answerable to the description from the
seventeenth verse downward, viz. a most holy Kingdom, and withal a most
visible, outwardly large, and glorious Kingdom, and that on earth; all
corporal, incurable, Antichristian enemies sensibly falling before it. Which
is not only my opinion, and sense of these words; Mercer presents to us Ex Lyr.
commenting on this Prophet thus much Odium Esau in Jacob in semine
perseveravit, etc. that is, the hatred of Esau against Jacob continued in the
very seed; therefore the overthrow of them is foretold Isa. 21.34. Ier. 49.
Ezekiel. 35. Amos 1. Mal. 1. This Prophet does excellently handle, and is wholly
in this, That as Christ is the Son of Abraham, and of Israel, and that after
the flesh, and therefore all endued with the spirit are his Brethren, and
belong to the seed of Abraham and of Israel; so all false brethren, that is,
ANTICHRISTS and Hypocrites belong to the seed of Esau. Unto these agrees and
suites whatsoever thou here read against the Edomites. Obadiahs Prophecy is
small in bulk, great in sense, comprehending many things in a few words. He
prophesies in the behalf of Israel, against Edom, prophesying the subversion
of the Edomites, and the GLORY of the true Israel, the Church of Christ; and
that he alone shall reign. He says that on mount Sion shall be deliverance
and salvation, which are more perfectly fulfilled according to the letter, in
the Church (collected of all the faithful) then in mount Zion; because the
state of mount Zion continued but for a time, but the Church abides for ever;
which shall be, we are confident, more eminently famous in the very land of
Israel, when Israel in the LAST TIME SHALL RECEIVE CHRIST. And their possessing
their possessions (or that they shall possess those that possessed them, as he
renders it) shall (he says) come to pass with illustrious glory, after the
LAST CONVERSION OF ISRAEL. It is some-how fulfilled daily in the Elect,
overcoming their enemies with invincible patience; But it is to be fulfilled
more sublimely, and gloriously in the judgment, when the wicked shall openly
before all be judged of the Elect. In special, the house of Joseph is named
(albeit it is contained under the house of Jacob) least for their worshipping
of Calves, and their long captivity, it should be deemed as rejected. Joseph
and Ephraim (of which Tribe was Jeroboam) are the ten Tribes, whose captivity,
say the Hebrews, is not yet discharged. But as it is said in the end of the
Prophet Amos, in the LAST TIME ISRAEL SHALL BE CONVERTED. There are they which
by Esau understand the Gentiles, and by Israel the faithful; whom I contradict
not. There were of the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin among the Apostles. But who
of the Tribe of Ephraim and Joseph were among them, is uncertain. But they on
whom this Prophecy must be fulfilled, must be of all Israel converted; and the
house of Jacob shall be a fire. Who can deny this yet to be fulfilled
hereafter? Apparently it shall be fulfilled, when the world shall be judged.
For it is impossible that this should be fulfilled, seeing as it is here said.
For the Lord has spoken it. ZAREPHA (which others write Sarephta) and SEPARAD
R. Sell. interprets to be France and Spain. But out of all such speeches as
the Prophet here uses, this may safely be collected, that because those
Nations are here named, which most infested the Israelites, namely the
Canaanites, Philistims, and Edomites, that all enemies of the faithful are
here to be understood, which happily is to be fulfilled according to the letter.
ISRAEL being converted in the last times, so that ALL ISRAEL being converted in
ALL LANDS, they all are to be accounted for the Inheritance of Israel; Thus far
he. Oecolampadius likewise, In Monte Sion erit evasio, id est salus, etc. That
is, on mount Sion shall be deliverance, that is, salvation or safety: It Is
certain the Apostles, by the sending of the spirit upon mount Sion, and others
conjoined to the Church, were delivered by Christ at his first coming; and so
we believe that at this day every Congregation of the faithful is delivered.
But we expect a more ample felicity when the Lord shall come again, etc. In the
last times we expect perfecter sanctity; and these of the house of Jacob shall
be Lords of those who before oppressed them. We find not in History that many
of the Jews did bear rule in those Countries, save only that the Maccabees
seized upon certain Towns. BUT THOSE THINGS DO NOT SEEM TO SATISFY THE
PROPHETICAL MAJESTY Majestati ropheticae.
In the last times, that is, when Christ shall come, we shall see the Apostles
and those that have imitated them, to be Judges of the whole Earth: albeit at
this day the Elect are diverse ways afflicted by the Antichristian party, yet
it shall come to pass that they shall be LORDS OVER OTHERS, etc. I am not
ignorant that some, agreeing with the Jews, do think that before the day of
Christ, this KINGDOM SHALL BE ON EARTH. Christ did not tell his Disciples this,
therefore let not us be solicitous of this thing. No farther shone the the
dim light of Oecolampadius touching this truth in those ancient darker times:
Yet hear him presently, almost in the next words, how he does in the general
grant this truth, as a truth worthy to be known on those words, [ And the house
of Jacob shall be a fire, etc.] he says, By the people of Esau, we (says
Oecolampadius) understand the enemies of the truth, who shall be before it, as
stubble to the fire; which began in the preaching of the Apostles, overthrowing
idolatry, etc. But in the day of judgment, when hereafter they shall with
Christ pronounce sentence and condemn them, they shall perish by the word of
God, etc. However the Jews expound it either of times before, or after the
return from B^hell, yet still they have been adversaries, all eit they speak
of an HAPPY AGE FOR A THOUSAND YEARS. Some do think that the just or
righteous Jews shall rise, and dwell upon the earth; but I leave that as
uncertain. But MOST CERTAIN IT IS, that this Prophet does promise to the
people of God in these words, A MOST PERFECT FELICITY. Among the Edomites shall
be no felicity, etc. In these verses, therefore he teaches that the KINGDOM
OF CHRIST SHALL BE MOST AMPLE AND LARGE, and not concluded in so strait a corner
as formerly, etc. And upon the twentieth and one and twentieth ver.
Oecolampadius concludes thus. The Jews say that Canaan signifies all Germany
unto France, and that Sepharat signifies Spain; which things are uncertain by
this description of places. But certainly ALL ISRAEL shall be saved. 'All which
things I plainly refer to the last day. Now compare Oecolampadius, with
Oecolampadius, and see whether he does not in the general grant the point in
hand, and grant it as a thing certain, and to be hoped for. Thus for the
parallel with Obadiah.

Amos, now under our hands, is the time when this must be mainly fulfilled,
viz. At that day (says our Prophet ver. 11.) that is, at some notable day,
namely, when (as in ver. 9.) God has sifted the house of ISRAEL in all
Nations, like as corn is sifted with a sieve, yet not the least grain falls on
the earth; that is the wheat of converted Israel (for the general) shall be
gathered from the chafe of the obstinate in all nations. But alas, Judah and
Israel, all of them for the generality, are yet in their chafe of
non-conversion, and in the straw of all Nations.

Amos is the manner of their state when delivered, viz. All ruins must
bere-built, and all breaches closed up, they must call upon God, as God may own
them for callers upon his name. There must be as all spiritual, so all outward
prosperity for the sanctified use of the Church, in a goodly succession of
seasons for that end; expressed under the notions of the Plowmans overtaking
the reaper, the mountains dropping sweet wine, etc. All their enjoyments must
be perpetuated, so as they must never be pulled up out of their own Land.

Judah and Israel were ever thus delivered since their captivity, and put into
this spiritual and temporal happy condition in a religious conjunction with
the Gentiles to the worlds end? and this must be before the ultimate general
Judgment, as the circumstances of the place importune, and necessitate us to
expect. Therefore this Prophecy of Amos is yet to be fulfilled.

Thus of Amos.

SECT. XLIII.
MICAH, wherein we shall consider only one place, viz. chap. 4. throughout. Of
which note this in general, 1. That this prophecy of Michaiah, is as well
concerning Samaria (the Metropolis of the ten Tribes) as concerning Jerusalem
(the metropolis of the two Tribes) chap. 1. ver. 1. Secondly, That this place
was urged for our opinion before Jeroms time (which was three hundred ninety
years after Christ) which Jerome confesses in these words in Micheam 4.
Sciendum quoque, etc. i.e. we must know (says he) that this Chapter also, and
that like it, out of Isaiah (meaning Chap. 2. Ver. 2. etc.) is referred by the
Jews, and the heirs of their mistake to the Kingdom of Christ and his Saints,
for a thousand years. Thus Jerome; for whose jircking our opinion, you shall see
him anon jirck himself:


In the last days. The Hebrew speaks higher (...) which words differing in
Gender and Number, and (...) properly signifying last) cannot be closely
construed to the Grammar of them, but thus, In the last of days. And so also
Jerome renders it (in novissimo dierum.) So the Chalde ((...).) So the Greek
according to the Septuagint ((...).) So that the state of the Church, here
prophesied, is the last state of the Church, before the end of the world, at
the ultimate general resurrection. And therefore the notation of the time does
undeniably put us upon a looking for such a glorious state of the Church on
earth, as is here described, as yet to come. Observe secondly, that all those
words of the first, second and third verses [That the mountain of the house of
the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, etc. and many
Nations shall say, come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, etc. and he
will teach us, etc. and we will walk in his paths, etc. For the law shall go
forth out of Zion, etc. and he shall judge among many people etc. and they shall
beat their swords into plow-shares, etc. Nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.] I say, that all those words
are, per omnia idem, altogether the same, with Isa. 2. ver. 2, 3, 4. largely
discussed before in this third book, and chap. 2. Sect. II. S. 1, 2, 3, 4.
etc. whether we transfer the consideration of them; only adding here 1. The
notablenesse of the prophecy; which is thus twice mentioned by two famous
Prophets, with so great emphasis, in the same words, phrases, and figures. 2.
The words of the Geneva notes, who assert in the margin, that this Prophecy of
the state of the Church in the last days, relates to the time of Christ's
coming, and to the time when THE TEMPLE shall be destroyed. Which order of
words import, that they meant the time after that destruction of the Temple,
which demolished it about forty years after Christ's ascension. I say the time
after that destruction (for which sense they had good ground from the last
verse of the chap. 3. of this prophet Micha.) But such a time of restoration
of the Church, as Micha here in this fourth chapter describes, was never yet
seen on earth. Therefore it is yet to come. 3. Our new Annotations refer this
to the time intended by Joel chap. 2.28. But that time, we have proved before,
(in this third book chap. 2. Sect. 40.) in the maine of it, is not yet come to
pass. 4. Dr. Mayer on the fourth verse [they shall sit every one under his own
vine, etc. and there shall be none to make them affraid] has these words; And
this (says he) is still to be fulfilled WHEN THIS WORLD DRAWS NEAR TO AN
END, the FULLNESS OF THE GENTILES BEING COME IN, and the Jews who remain yet
blinded, BEING CONVERTED TO THE FAITH OF CHRIST. Wherein the Doctor speaks very
home to the point in hand, in the main thereof. For surely this prophecy is
not, in the chief intent thereof, fulfilled unto this day,


Prosperity, Piety, and Victory; and thou can not with any show of solid
divine reason imagine these things to have been ever yet fulfilled since the
Jews first captivity in Babylon, but remain in future to be performed before the
last universal resurrection.

1. The prosperity is described verse. 4. They shall every man sit under his own
vine, and under his own fig tree, and none shall make them afraid, verse. 6.
In that day I will assemble her that halteth, and will gather her that is
driven out, and her that I have afflicted, ver. 7. And I will make her that
halted a remnant, and her that was cast off, a strong Nation, and the Lord
shall reign over them in mount Zion, FROM HENCE FORTH, EVEN In Hebr. no even,
But it is (...) i.e. And for ever.
FOR EVER. Now when ever was this prosperity made good to them since their
Babylonish captivity, and for so long time as for ever? It is true, two Tribes
returned from Babylon about the year of the world three thousand five hundred
and eighteen, under the Persian Monarchy. A long time it was ere they grew to a
settlement of their City and Temple set up, and their public ministration set
in order, by reason of the opposition and undermining of Sanballat and Tobiah
and their adherents. So that some think they were near as long in attaining
to the said settlement, as they had been in captivity, viz. seventy years. But
if they had been settled at the first of that their return, yet from the year
three thousand five hundred and eighteen, to three thousand six hundred and
forty (about which time Alexander the ( Greek Monarch brought Jerusalem under
subjection to him) are but one hundred twenty two years; after which Alexander,
the Romans immediately subdued them; and after the Romans, the Saracens and
Turks, which is the slavish condition of all the Countries of the Jews to this
day. A mark of remembrance of their subjection to the Greeks, is the Greek
translation of the Bible, called the Septuagint, because it was done by about
seventy Jews, at the command of the Grecian powers. And as plain a Memento of
their Romish subjection is, that Christ was crucified under the Roman Pontius
Pilat. And a sufficient Memorandum of their subjection to the Turks is, that
they possess Jerusalem at this day. So that if we deduct the time of the
Jews trouble under the Persian Monarchy, from their first dismission by Cyrus,
to their settlement; and make the reckoning to begin with that their
settlement, and to end at Alexanders coming to Jerusalem, it will not amount to
above seventy years that the Jews were in peace and quiet, which is no more
then the length of their captivity. If we take into the account the time of
their struggling to be settled; yet all, as I said before, will make up but
sixscore and two years; and what is this, in comparison, to enable the Prophet
to make the close and seal of this part of the Text touching their prosperity,
That the Lord should reign over them of Mount Sion, from hence forth AND FOR
EVER: which must be understood of such a manifest, apparent, visible reigning,
as stands in flat opposition every way to Tyrannical men's, or conquerours
reigning over them; or else the Prophet had told them nothing; he had made this
Antithesis to their captivities under men, in vain, and had expressed this his
reigning in mount Zion to no purpose; seeing God does equally reign by his
power over all the world, and by his spiritual grace alike over believers,
wherever they be one the face of the earth.

. 2. Their piety is charactarised in the fifth verse. For all people will walk
every one in the name ELOHAIU, of HIS GOD, and we will walk in the name of
JEHOVAH ELOHENU, of the LORD OUR GOD for ever and ever. Which words are not
only a promise, but a prophecy, as to signify the piety they should practice,
at the time when the Lord should perform the aforesaid prosperity unto them.
For as for Micha, and his generation of religious men, they were soon dead. And
the generality of the Jews and their Common State, as to religion, now at this
present of Micha's prophesying, were mightily corrupted; and stood heinously
guilty of Ignorance, Idolatry, injustice, oppression, cruelty, and the
falsehood and security of Princes and Prophets, as the first, second, third,
and sixth chapters abundantly testify; expressly reckoning up, and charging them
with those sins, and threatening Gods wrath upon them for that cause. Nor was
that prosperous time, in which they should so serve God for ever, yet come: The
Prophet minding both Judah and Israel of nothing they were to expect at
present, but devastations and captivities (in the forementioned chapters,) if
the ten tribes went not into captivity before that Micahs prophecy was at an
end. Who prophesied (as it is express chap. 1. ver. 1.) in the reign of
Hezekiah, who reigned nine and twenty years (2 King. 18.2.) in the fourth year
of whose reign, Salmanasser besieges Samaria, 2 King. 18.9. and in his sixth
year, took it, ibid. And for after times, ensuing that return of them that was
granted by Cyrus the Persian; from that day to this, they were under a foreign
power, in a constant succession, the hand of the succeeding oppressor being
upon them before the predecessors was taken off: Yea, the following, tearing
them out of the hands of the former, to the great prejudice, as well of their
piety as of their prosperity. In the time of the Maccabees, great profanation
was brought in as a flood upon their Jewish religion, 2 Maccab. chap. 5. chap.
6. and chap. 7. And in Christ's and the Apostles time; first, For the Jewish
religion, we find that the whole body of their law, according to their
interpretations, and the bulk of public worship, according to their
traditions and practice to be exceedingly corrupted, as our Savior lays them
open in the fifth, sixth, thirteenth, fifteenth and three and twentieth chapters
of Matthew. Besides the many Sects mentioned, some in the four Evangelists,
viz. the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Herodians, and others mentioned in
Ecclesiaticall stories, as Assideans, Essenes, and Gaulonites, whose single
several errors were these. The Pharisees held 1. That they were the holy ones,
Of the Pharisees.
and all else vile, Luke 18.11. God I thank thee, I am not as other men, John
7.49. This (...) (rabble of the common) people that know not the law are
cursed. Suitably their common Hebrew phrase was, to call the people (...)
people of the earth. 2. They ascribed many things to Fate, and many to free
will, Joseph. l. 13. c. 9. 3. They held that the souls of good men deceasing
passed by a kind of Pythagorean (...) or transmigration of soul, successively
into the bodies of those good men that were next borne. Thence is that speech
(as the learned conceive) touching Christ risen, that he was John Baptist, or
Elias, or Jeremias, Matthew. 16.14. 4. They stood mainly for Traditions, Matthew.
15.2. Mark. 7.3, 4. Matthew. 9.11. Luk: 18.12. Matthew. 23.5. Therefore our Savior
calls the Pharisees so often Hypocrites, in that one chapt. Matthew. 23.
The Sadduces first, Of the Sadduces.
Denied the resurrection of the body, or any reward or punishment in the world
to come, Matthew. 22.23. Luke 20.27. Act. 23. ver. 6, 7, 8. Concerning their
opinion, that the souls of men were annihilated at their deaths, see Joseph.
de Bell. Iudaic. l. 2. c. 12. Secondly, They denied all the Bible, but the five
Books of Moses; which is the reason why our Savior, Matthew 22.32. waves all
other plainer places of the resurrection, in Job and the prophets, and proves
to them the resurrection out of Exodus 3.6. Thirdly, They ascribed all to man's
free will, Joseph. l. 13. c. 9. The Sect of the Herodians (mentioned Matthew.
22.16.) were a sort of Jews, Of the Herodians.
that complied with the Court of Herod in gross flattery, and a compounded
piety, of Iudaisme and Herodianisme Beza in Mat. 22.16.
. For they Epiphan. Here Is. 20. Theophyl in Matthew. 22.16. and alii.
held, that either THE Herod (that is, Herod the great) was THE Messiah; or at
least, that ^ Herod (v. 9. Herod, Tetrarch of Galilee, alias Antipas, or etc.)
was a Messiah to them; in that the Scepter was then departed from Iu^ah (the
mark of the time of the Messiah's coming) and the then Herod's government so well
pleased them. So that he and his Court concurred with them to crucify Christ,
Mark. 3.6. and they complied with him and his Court, touching the equity of the
Jews paying tribu^e Hieron. in Mat. 22.16.
( Matthew. 22.16.) And in the celebration of Herod's birth say, with
superstitious solemnities. At which Persius, (who flourished about sixty years
after Christ) has a sore jirke in his fifth Sayr. v. 10, etc.

Herodis venere dies, unctaque, fenestra
Dispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae
Portantes violas, rubrumque amplexa catinum
Cauda natat Thynni, tumet alba fidelia vino:
Labra moves tacitus, recutitaque Sabbata palles.
When Herod's Birth-day's come, the Lamps are placed
In ranks, in the oiled window all be-greas'd
By a far mist, which they had spued out,
Though with sweet vi'lets pranck'd and crowned about.
And whiles in a red pan does swim a Thine,
The white stone Pitcher floateth'ore with wine.
But pal'd with fasts thou muttringly do pray
All the Circumcisions Sabbath day On this of Persius learned Lubins note is
this. Herod the Asealonite (says he) reigning over the Jews, they, called the
Herodiens, adored his Birth day as Sabbaths. On which day they put lamps
lighted up in the windows, filled with oil, and trimed with Violets, adorning
also the doors with flowers. The Jews being wont to put on the Eve before their
Sabbath Enneamyxon, a lamp of nine Branches of lights in their window. The
swimming of a Thine or Tunie in a dish or platter of red clay, signifies, that
though the Jews used plain vessels, yet they had varieties, and dainties well
sauced in their Feasts, which is more illustrated by the abundance of wine in
the next verse. And their Feast days are called, Circumcised, or circumcision
Sabbaths, because the circumcised Jews did celebrate them.
.
The sacred Text does intimate that a great number of the country of Galilee
were at the celebration of Herod's Birth day, Mar. 6.21. where you have the sad
event of that merry-making, viz. John Baptist is beheaded; in which the Jews
no doubt had an hand, by that our Savior speaks Matthew. 17. ver. 9. etc. to
14. where he having mentioned his resurrection, and the Disciples thereupon
objected, why then say the SCRIBES Scribe was a name of Office, not of Sect,
and was of any Tribe, as the Jews themselves intimate. There were two sorts ^
Laic. 1. Such as taught to write which we call Scribes or Writing. Masters. 2
Such as drew Deeds and Writings of bargains and sale, which we call
S^riveners. To both these Psalm. 45. ver. 1. alludes. Then thirdly, out of these
that were most expert, there was (...). The Kings Scribes, which we call
Secretaries, 2 King. 12, 10. and chap. 22. ver. 1. And 2 Samuel 20.25.4 (...) The
Scribes of the people, which were much like to our Clerks of Assizes; for
these Scribes were to attend the public Courts, and Consistories; 1 Maccab.
5.42. The second sort of Scribes were Clericks, learned men called (...), that
is, Scribes of the Law, Ezra 7.6. and (...) Lawyers, Matthew. 22.35. Luke 7.30.
and (...) Doctors, or Teachers of the Law, Luk 5.17.
Elias must first come, he answers, Elias truly shall first come, and restore
all things; but I say unto you, that Elias is come already, and THEY (the
Jews, led by those Scribes) knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever
they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of THEM. Then the
Disciples understood that he spoke to them of John Baptist. And by Christ's
speech, that generation in which he was borne, should be called to an account
for all the blood of the Saints shed by the Jews persecution, from Abel down
to the Apostles (which must needs include the murder of John Baptist) Matthew.
23.35. Luke 11.51. And further the sacred Text does intimate, that these
Herodians had held some dangerous leaven of doctrine (though it is not there
expressed) Mar. 8.15.

The Assideans were of two sorts, the (...) Tsadikim, and the (...) Chasidim.
The Isadikim kept close to the letter of the Scriptures, and studied that; The
Chasidim (commonly translated Assidael, Assideans) studied how to add to the
Scriptures. The Tsadikim conformed (outwardly at least) to what the law
required. But the Chasidim would be holy above the Law, D. Kimch. Psalm. 103.17.
Pirke Aboth. cap. 5. The Essenes, first, Of the Essenes.
Held many of the Pythagoreans evil opinions, as a community of goods ( Aul.
Gel. l. 1. c. 10. Laert. in Pythag. Joseph. l. 18. c. 2.) They allowed not
lawful pleasures, ( Justin. l. 20. Joseph. de bello l. 2. c. 12.) they
ascribed all things to fate and destiny, Suid. Joseph. Antiqu. l. 13. c. 9.2
They worshipped toward the sun rising, (Philo. Joseph.) 3. Bound themselves by
oath to preserve the names of Angels, the phrase implying a kind of worshipping
of Angels, Joseph. de bell. l. 2. c. 12. etc. The Gaulonites, Of the Gaulonites.
who had their name from one Judas sometimes called Judas Gaulonites, sometime
Judas Galilaeus, Ios. Antiq. l. 18. c. 1, 2. mentioned Act. 5.37. Held first,
That tribute was not to be paid to Princes, as being a badge of servitude.
Secondly, that they ought to call none Lord, but the Lord of Lords, the God of
Heaven. Thirdly, They forbad sacrifices to be offered for the welfare of the
Roman Empire, and Emperor, which is conceived to be the reason why Pilat
mingled their blood with their sacrifices, Luke 13.1. Oecumen. in Act. 5.37.
Theophyl. in Luke 13.1. For Pilat was not over the Nation or province of the
Galileans; and therefore it must be this Sect that Pilat so punished. And thus
you have had an account of the Jews corrupting of Religion in Christ's time as
Jewish. And as for Christian religion, they did for the generality refuse both
it and him, Ioh. 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. And
so they did after in the Apostles ministrations; rejecting their Doctrine, and
persecuting their persons, Act. 13. Act. 4. and so says St. Paul, Romans 11.
they are to continue in blindness till the fullness of the Gentiles shall be
come in, that then ALL ISRAEL may be saved.

. 3. For the Jews victory, prophesied in this fourth of Micha, it is set forth
in the eighth verse etc. to the end of the chapter, v. 8. And thou O Tower of
the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of ZION, unto thee shall it come,
even the FIRST DOMINION, the Kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.
(That is, thou must have a flourishing estate, at least, as glorious as at
first, in David and Solomon's time,) ver. 10. Thou shall be delivered from
Babylon; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies. (They
shall not only be delivered as by a common providence, but shall be redeemed
as relating to the fruit of a Savior, Luke 3. ver. 30, 31, 32. and v. 38.)
Ver. 13. Arise, and thresh O daughter of Zion, for I will make thine horn
Iron, and I will make thine hoofs brass, and thou shall beat in pieces MANY
PEOPLES. And I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance
to the Lord of the earth. So that the Jews must not only be delivered from
their enemies, but must be the destroyers of their enemies, (that continue
enemies) and that not of a few, but of many peoples. Now when ever had the
Jews since their first captivity, such prosperity, such victory; such a
Kingdom, and such a conquest? Ten Tribes for two, are still by the Jews
confession, in captivity. And the two Tribes, ever since their first return,
have been notwithstanding, under the power of one Monarch or another by an
immediate and concatena^ed succession, 1. The Persian, 2, The Grecian, 3. The
Roman, 4. The Saracen, 5. The Turk.
So that this Scripture is not yet come to pass, and cannot be deferred to the
ultimate general resurrection, as being inconsistent with that time in most of
the branches. Therefore it is yet to be fulfilled before that time.

Thus of Micha.

SECT. XLIV.
Next we come to the Prophet Zephany, where we shall insist but upon one place,
and that is an Eminent one, viz. chap. 3. ver. 9, etc. To the end of the
Chapter.

Jews and Gentiles.

1 Here is prophesied the RESTITUTION of the Jews, both in a way of conversion
unto God, and of reversion into their own Country, unto a glorious Church
State. 2 The VOCATION of the Gentiles, both unto an effectual conversion unto
God, and a most harmonious union with the rest of the Church. 3 The SUBVERSION
of the enemies of the Jews, and of the Church of Christ.
Jews, as to the first part thereof, viz. their conversion, we have it in the
10, 11, 12, and 13 verses. Ver. 10. From beyond the river of Ethiopia my
suppliants (that is, that call upon my name) even the daughter of my dispersed,
shall bring mine offering (That is, shall worship me in a right manner, such as
I shall require) which verse plainly speaks of the Jews, almost in every word;
as in that [ My suppliants beyond the river of Ethiopia,] and (expounding it)
EVEN the daughter of my dispersed there. The Hebrews in their Chalde
paraphrase translate (...) Ethiopia, by (...) India; and elsewhere they call it
(...) Hind and (...) Hid for Hind, which answers to the Latin Indi, Indians;
and to the Greek (...) the Subduer or Conqueror of India; Qui suit Bacchus;
saltem est Bacchi Epithe^on apud Graecos. Sic Graeci appellant Indicum (...).
and to our English, who say India, and Indians: where Rab. Menasse Ben Israel
says, (in his book de spe Israelis) multitudes of Jews are. There are, to
speak distinctly, three opinions touching Ethiopia, and the river beyond it. 1.
That this Ethiopia signifies Egypt, which is beyond the river Nilus, which
rises in Ethiopia, and flows thence unto Egypt. To which A Castro contributes
this, that the Hebrew name, (...) Chus, that is, Ethiopia, does not signify
Ethiopian Sub-Aegyptian, that is, Ethiopia under Egypt, as they call it, which
is now called Abyssia, where Prester John reigns; but Arabia, in which, among
others, the Madianites lived, who in the Scriptures are called Ethiopians. And
for this he quotes Psalm. 74.14. Thou brakest the head of the Leviathan in
pieces (speaking of the drowning of Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the red sea)
and gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting the WILDERNESS, (Hebr.
desolate places,) which the old Latin, Jerome and the Septuagint translate, To
the people of the ETHIOPIANS. For Chus the son of Cham (who gave the name to
Ethiopia) with his sons, viz. Seba, or Saba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and
Raamah, and Sabtecha, Genesis 10.7. fixed his habitation between the Persian and
Arabian gulf, or red sea. This Tract therefore is called Ethiopia, that is
Arabia, in which is the RIVER GIHON, flowing out of Paradise; and the river
TRAJANUS, and the Lake Sirbonides and the Arabian gulf. But by the leave of so
learned a man, it is most certain that both the Ethiopiaes, as Pliny,
Ptolomy, Strabo, Herodotus and letter writers distinguish Plin. l. 5. c. 4. and
c. 8. Ptol. l. 4. c. 7 and 28. Strab. l. 1. Herod. expedit. Xerxis contra
Graecos
, naming them the Eastern and Western Ethiopia; or the Asiaticke, and
Affrican Ethiopia; which distinction of Two the Scripture hints, by their
several characters, neighbors, or circumstances, when they name either, Ezekiel.
29.10. and c. 30.4. Amos 9.7. Nahum. 3.6. Zeph. 3.10. The Affrican again
distinguished into superior, alias interior, and inferior, alias exterior
Ethiopia) I say, all the Ethiopiaes are called in the Hebrew by the name of
Chus. The second Opinion of many other learned, understands here Aethiopiam
sub- Aegypto, id est Ethiopia, under Egypt, in Africa, to wit Abissia, for
this was near to the Jews, and by that name well known to them; and so the
Affricans, and all inhabiting with them, were beyond the rivers of Ethiopia in
respect of Judea and Egypt. And so may be here understood all the Countries
beyond the Sea, viz. the Brasilians, Peruvians, Mexicans and all the West
Indians. The third opinion, which A Castro much favors, understands here the
East Indies unto Iaponia and China: For Tigris and Euphrates are here called
the rivers of Ethiopia; which slide first by, or through Chaldea (where Nimrod
the son of Chus reigned); then by, or through Mesopotamia, and after through
the midst of Arabia, which sometimes in Scripture is called Chus, that is,
Ethiopia; beyond which rivers lies all Asia, and India unto the Sinae. And
therefore as well Vatablus, as the Chalde Paraphrase, inclines to expound this
of the Indians, as if Indian-Ethiopia were here meant; whence the Sabeans are
as well Indians, as the Persians, Arabians, and Abyssines; as Pererius asserts
out of Beroaldus, and Dionysius on Genesis 25. ver. 5. And indeed Seba and
Havilah, the sons of Chus, dwelt toward India; so that Cyril, Theodoret, and
Procopius calls the Country of Sabea, by the name of Indian-Ethiopia. The sum
of all (to draw all three opinions into one harmonious head) is this, that the
Prophet Zephany intends, that all the Jews and Israelites, dispersed into the
remotest Countries over the face of the whole earth, they and their neighbors
there, innumerous multitudes should be converted unto Christ. For the Jews did
deem the Ethiopians the utmost borders of men (according to that, extremique
hominum Morini.) And Christian writers count the more Eastern Ethiopians of the
same rank with the Indians; as they account all to be Indians that are the
remoter people of the world, that live in any wealthy condition. But yet
withal, the wise Prophet expresses that general meaning so, as that neatly
he alludes unto, and minds us of it, as an anchor of hope, the carrying away
captive of the Jews through Arabia, unto Babylon, and dispersing them into all
the Countries of the East; part of whom (as a first fruits) once Cyrus
returned, and sent back to Jerusalem: The lump Christ will restore before the
world ends. Nor does the phrase of [bringing offerings to the Lord] signify
less then the Jews, and yet not prejudice the glorious Christian state of the
Church, integrated of Jews and Gentiles, A Rule how to understand Levitical
phrases, in describing the Christian glorious state to come.
we speak of, as intended by all the prophesies we produce. For take this for a
Rule, for this and all other like places of that nature, though in Moses time
it was taken according to the letter to signify material Leviticall
Sacrifices; yet in after times, not only the Apostles of the New Testament, but
the Prophets of the Old, by offering, and offerings, and sacrifices, and altars
etc. did signify unto us spiritual oblations, compatible and correspondent to
the GOSPEL; Psalm. 50. ver. 14. OFFER to God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows,
etc. ver. 23. Whosoever OFFERS praise, glorifieth me, Psalm. 51.17. The
SACRIFICES of God are a broken spirit. Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer be set forth
before thee as INCENSE, and the lifting up of my hands as the EVENING
SACRIFICE, Hos. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so
will we render the CALVES OF OUR LIPS: with a multitude of more instances,
which might be given. And therefore no wonder if the language of the new
Testament be to the same tune, Romans 12.1. OFFER, or PRESENT to God your bodies
as a living SACRIFICE, Mark. 12.3. To love the Lord with all the heart, and
with all the understanding, etc. and to love ones neighbor as ones self, is
more then all WHOLE BURNT OFFERINGS and SACRIFICES, Heb. 9.22, 23. And almost
all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood no
remission. It was necessary therefore, that the patterns of things in the
Heavens should be purified with these, but the HEAVENLY THINGS THEMSELVES with
BETTER SACRIFICES then THESE, Heb. 13.19. But to do good, and to communicate,
forget not; for with such SACRIFICES God is well pleased, Phil. 2.17. If I be
offered upon the SACRIFICE and service of your faith, I joy. Rev. 8.3. And
another Angel came and stood at the ALTAR having a golden CENSER, and there was
given to him much INCENSE, that he should OFFER IT with the prayers of all
Saints upon the golden ALTAR, which was before the Throne. Thus you see how the
tenth verse sets forth the conversion of the Jews; which is further amplified
in the eleventh verse thus: In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy
doings, wherein thou have transgressed against me. For then will I take away
out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shall be no
more haughty, because of my holy mount. Which is also most evidently spoken of
the Jews, and their conversion, in that the Lord promises to take away their
sins, and in particular, their pride of the Temple, of which they had been
formerly very sinfully proud, Jer. 7.4. and that swelling was not quite down in
our Saviors time, Mat. 24.1. And therefore then this text was not fulfilled.
But when their sins shall be taken away, then the judgment, viz. their shame
shall be taken away, neither shall they be only negatively good, but also
positively. I will (says the next verse) leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. This
last clause of trusting in the name of the Lord, contains the very life and
power of godliness. As for the first clause, whoever can well weigh the
Hebrew, (...)
and will duly consider the precedent verse, and prophetical purpose of this
place, touching the conversion of the Jews, cannot but confess that these
words may as well, and in some respect better be rendered, I will cause to
remain in thee a people that is humble and meek (or poor in spirit) as
Arias, the Septuagint, and the Syriack and Arabic render it; this, and the
rest of this verse aptly answers and stands over against, as a contrary to
their pride in the former verse, and is the ready way to that which follows in
the thirteenth verse. The remnant of Israel, (that is, all the converted, as
well of the ten Tribes as of the two) shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies,
nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth; for they shall feed, and
lie down, and none shall make them afraid: That is, they shall there abide,
because there shall be no danger; and they shall be so holy, because they shall
have grace within, and no temptation from without.

For the second part of the Jews restitution, namely, their reversion into
their own Country in a glorious Church State; we have it in the sixteen,
seventeen, eighteen, and twentieth verses thus; ver. 16. In that day it shall
be said to Jerusalem, fear thou not, and to Zion, let not thy hands be slack,
or faint. Ver. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will
save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will REST IN HIS LOVE (an high and
glorious expression) he will joy over thee with singing. Ver. 18. I will GATHER
them that are sorrowful for THE SOLEMN ASSEMBLY, who are of thee, to whom the
reproach of it was a burden. Ver. 20. At that time I will BRING YOU AGAIN,
even in the time that I GATHER YOU. For I will make you a name, and apraise
among all people of the earth, when I TVRNE BACK YOUR CAPTIVITY before your
eyes, says the Lord. In which words you have the expression of their reversion
into their own Country, in capital letters, as well in sense as writing. And
the Lords being amidst them, more then in his general presence over the earth,
and his rejoicing over them with joy, yea with great joy, as in singing, and
resting in his LOVE, and gathering them into the solemn assembly, and to make
them a name, and a praise among all people of the earth, can signify no less
then a glorious visible Church State, making them a LOVE or SPOUSE unto their
LORD CHRIST.

For the second general head, the vocation of the Gentiles, both unto an
effectual conversion unto God, and a most harmonious union with the rest of
the Church; we have it all, and in full, in verse the ninth: For then will I
turn to the people a pure Language, that they may call upon the name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent. Close to the Hebrew thus: I will convert
in the peoples a pure lip, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, to
serve him with one shoulder. I stand not to dispute it from term to term,
because they that know well the Original, and well mind the sense of the
place, will ease me of that labor, Junius; Mutab^ in populis labium, ut purum
sit, quo invocent omnes nomen Jehova, colendo cum humero uno. Hieron and old
Latin. Reddam populis labium electum, ut invocent omnes nomen Domini, and
serviant ei humero une. The Chalde (...) etc. i. e. I will so convert in all
nations one choice speech, that all may pray in the name of the Lord, that they
may serve him with one shoulder. The Syriack, Then will I restore unto the
Gentiles an elect or choice lip, that all may call upon the name of the Lord,
and worship him in an equal yoke.
but rather, I will speak a word to the opening. It is express, that the
Peoples, Nations, or Gentiles are here spoken of, who upon their conversion
should be exempted from the ruin on Nations in the eighth verse, and should
return with the dispersed Jews in the tenth verse, and their profane lips
should be purified, and their Idolatrous and blasphemous words before their
false gods, should be turned into holy prayers to Jehovah, and they should
serve him not only with one consent of mind, but with one way of practice; as
when many lift as with one shoulder, to move a thing the same way, or draw
equally in the same yokes, fastened to the same chain or traces.

Sing O Daughter of ZION, shout O ISRAEL, be glad and rejoice with all thy
heart, O daughter of JERUSALEM. Verse. 15. The Lord has taken away thy
judgment, he has cast out THINE ENEMY. The King of ISRAEL is in the midst of
thee, even the LORD, you shall not see EVIL ANY MORE. Verse. 19. Behold at that
time I WILL UNDO ALL THAT AFFLICT THEE, and will save her that halteth, and
gather her that was driven out, and I will get them a praise, and fame in every
Land, where they have been put to shame.

Thus you see the full extent, and intent of the text, insomuch as never to
this day can be found a capacious and adequate space of place and time, wherein
to lodge the fulfilling thereof; and therefore waits for its turn to be
performed, by our God that cannot lie, before the ultimate Day of Doom. See
for this, in the first place what others hint, I may say before they are aware,
because the stream of their opinion runs a contrary way. Doctor Mayer thus: I
will turn to the people a pure Language, intimating the conversion of the
Gentiles; but least when Judgments should come upon all peoples by
Nebuchadnezzar, they should despair of any such work to be wrought among
them, he says, My determination is to gather the Nations, to pour out mine
indignation upon them, as meaning that great destructions should BEFORE THIS,
pass through all Countries by the Chaldes, then by the Persians, after that by
the Grecians, and finally by the Romans; last of all which, should the
conversion of the Nations to the Gospel follow. Thus he. Now the destructions
by the Romans is not yet at an end, that Empire (so much of it as is left)
still making great destructions both spiritual and temporal, in Spain,
France, Portugal, Germany, Italy, etc. and much more the three Horns of the
Turkish dominions broken off from that Roman, enslaving the fifth part See the
account cast up before in Sect. 40. S. 2. P. 2.
(or thereabout) of all the world; and therefore by Doctor Mayers words, this
general conversion of the Gentiles is not yet come, so as to convert them (as
he carries on the sense) that are beyond the river of Ethiopia, etc. Calvin,
and our New Annotations say, that This Prophecy is extended unto the time of
the Gospel; when not only the Gentiles shall come into the Church, but also the
Jews shall return into their own Country, that they may make one BODY, with
the converted Gentiles. Thus they. Which when it has been ever fulfilled,
since the time of the Gospel, let them prove that will undertake to assert it:
for we shall by and by give many strong reasons to the contrary; and therefore
according to their supposition, or grant, this is yet to be fulfilled. Alapide
says; Christ took away their pride (mentioned verse. 11.) when having
overthrown their material Temple by Titus and the Romans, he erected his
Church in Sion, transferring believers from that Judaicall Temple unto the
Church, in which as in a School of humility he teaches the Jews lowliness
of mind, and humbly, together with the Gentiles, to submit to the grace of
Christ. Now, when ever, since the overthrow of the Temple by Titus the Roman
(which was about forty years after the Passion of Christ) did the Lord Christ
erect a Church in Zion, and translated the believing JEWS and GENTILES into
it, teaching the Jews there lowliness of mind, and together with the
Gentiles humbly to submit to the grace of Christ. Surely as in the thirteenth
of the Acts we have it in the general asserted, from History of Divine
authority, that the Jews generally refused the Gospel, whereupon it was
transferred to the Gentiles, and there it has continued (according to Romans
11.) down to these times, leaving the Jews in blindness; so we have it
illustrated by particulars from all the most famous Histories and Chronologies,
that long after Titus his ruining of the Temple, the Jews persisted in their
Leviticall Sacrifices, offered in the City upon the rubbish of the Temple,
until Adrians overthrow of the City, and his expelling the Jews thence, in
the year after Christ's Incarnation one hundred thirty four. And again, for
many years after that, being thence expulsed, they persisted in Jewish
sacrificing at Mamre (where formerly God appeared to Abraham) and so continued
until Constantine the Great (who began to be sole Emperor about the year of
Christ three hundred and twelve) overthrew their Altar there, and built in the
room a Church-place of worship for the Christians. And after that Julian the
Apostata encouraged the Jews, out of his hatred to the Christians, to rebuild
the Temple of Solomon, in the year of Christ (says Bucholcerus) three hundred
sixty three, God wonderfully destroyed their work by fire from Heaven. And
from that time to this they have been seen and heard in all Countries where
they are permitted their Synagogues, to worship God after the manner of the
Jewish Liturgy, in singing the Psalms of David according to our Hebrew Text,
and reading the Law and the Prophets, with tripudiations, etc. and do profess
(as I have had it by Letters from their learned Rabbis) that they hope to be
saved by the Law of Moses; all which do sufficiently demonstrate that they are
not yet translated into the Church erected in Sion, since Titus his devastation
of Salomons Temple; so that this Scripture of Zephanie remains yet to be
fulfilled, which I make thus to appear.

1. Observe how many Parties are here mentioned, that must have a share in the
fulfilling of this Prophecy, when ever it be fulfilled, viz. First, The
Gentiles, ver. 9. Secondly, the two Tribes of the Jews called Juda, expressed
in the words, Zion and Jerusalem, ver. 14. and 16. Thirdly, The ten Tribes of
the Jews, called by their name Israel, ver. 14. but all these three parties
have not yet jointly shared in the mercies prophesied to them in this Text,
therefore it remains yet to be fulfilled. 2. Observe the parts, or things to
be shared among those Parties, viz. conversion unto the true God, congregating
of them into a christian Church, and destruction of all that hate them, as you
have heard. Now when did the Gentiles, the people of Judah, and the Tribes of
Israel ever jointly enjoy these three mercies? For, 3. Observe, all these must
at the great time of fulfilling them be extant at once, together; for though in
the discuss I distinguished them into parts, according to their nature and
sense, yet the Prophet according to place and order of sentences did
interweave, and windingly wreath them one within another, to the intent that no
man might separate what God had joined together, but might behold them as a
goodly Coin, that though there be a distinction of the parts, of the
impressions upon it, yet all make but one Image of Caesar. All those parts are
but the several sculptures of one and the same entire character of the
glorious time of the Church, yet before the end of the world; for hitherto, the
said three parties never enjoyed the aforementioned three parts jointly
together; but rather for the most have been visibly to the eye of the whole
world under a contrary condition. For, 4. Observe the high expressions the God
of truth gives forth touching the glory of the state, the said parties shall
enjoy at the said time when this Prophecy shall be fulfilled, viz. That the
Peoples, or Gentiles shall have pure lips, wherewith to call upon the name of
the Lord, as it is in ver. 9. That Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak
lies, nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, ver. 13. That they
of Zion and Jerusalem, and Israel, shall be glad, and rejoice with all their
heart, ver. 14. for it follows (ver. 15, 16, 17.) the Lord shall so take away
their judgments, and cast down their enemies, and instead of them he
himself, as King, will be so in the midst of them, that they shall not see
evil any more; nor shall their hearts fear, nor their hands faint. He will be
so in the midst of them in his might, that he will save them, and rejoice over
them with joy, and that as with singing, and will rest in his love. Now did
ever these things appear in the state and condition of the Church, either of
Jews or Gentiles, since the Babylonish Captivity? surely the contrary has
abundantly appeared down to these days. 1 For their Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical state in relation unto Religion, the Gentiles generally have
been very wicked, and for the most part (the more is their sin) intestine
enemies to the Jews. And for the Jews, whiles the ten Tribes of Israel were
carried away captive, the King of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from
Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvalin, and placed them in
the Cities of Samaria, instead of the Children of Israel, (2 King. 17.24.) of
whose return to their own Country the Scriptures leave no mention. But they
tell us, that when the two Tribes returned, there was a MIXED MVLTITVDE among
the Israelites, (Nehem. 13.3.) That there were many that pretended to be
Priests, who because they could not find their Genealogy, were as POLLUTED put
from the Priesthood ( Ezra 2.62. Nehem. 7.64.) That the people of Israel, and
the Priests, and the Levites, had not separated themselves from the people of
the land, doing according to their ABOMINATIONS, even of the Canaanites,
Hitties, Perezites, Jebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians, and Amorites,
having taken of their Daughters for themselves, and for their Sons, etc. Ezr.
9.1, 2. And though they did repent of this great transgression, and promised
amendment, Ezr. 10.9. etc. Yet they are again greatly guilty thereof, Neh.
13.23. Further, the Scriptures tell us, that some of the two Tribes, of a
slavish spirit, stayed in Babylon to be servants in servile baseness to that
King, when the generality returned, 1 Chro. 4.21, 22, 23. which Josephus
mentions at large. And in the time of the Maccabees, in the time of Antiochus
Epiphanes, of the root of the Greeks, who began his reign about the 137th
year of their Kingdom Which was in the one hundred seventy third year before
the incarnation of Christ, Bucho. Ind. Chron. Ad annum mundi, 3798.
(or Emp^re) there went out of Israel wicked men, who persuaded many, saying,
let us go, and make a covenant with the Heathen that are round about us; for
since we departed from them, we have had much sorrow. So this device pleased
them well. Then certain of the people were so forward herein, that they went to
the King; who gave them license to do after the ordinances of the Heathen.
Whereupon, they built a place of exercise at Jerusalem, according to the
customs of the Heathen, and made themselves uncircumcised, and forsook the
holy Covenant, and joined themselves to the Heathen, and were sold to do
mischeife, 1 Maccab. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Which corruption in the Jews
religion, by the story, seems to be voluntary, as the Narrative precedes the
history of Antiothus his Tyranny. Nor was this only for once, or a spurt, but
again in the second book of Maccabees, together with betraying one another,
and the public welfare, chap. 3 and chap, 4. Come we hence to Christ's time,
and there we shall find at least six Sects of abominable corruptions in
matters of Religion, viz. Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Assideans, Essenes,
and Gaulonites; of whose wicked opinions we have given you a more particular
account before Viz. In this chap. Sect. 43.. 4. P. 2.
. In the Apostles time the Jews for the generality were persecuters of them
that embraced Christ and the Gospel, as we have it all along the story of the
Acts of the Apostles; and among the Christians, there were
Anti-resurrectionists, Judaizers, wicked Apostataes, Idolatrous and profane
Balaamites, and Nicolaitans, etc. as the Epistles of the Apostles, and of
Christ to the seven Churches expressly shows us. For the two next hundred
years after the death of the Apostles was bloody persecution of the Christians
over all the Roman Empire. About the twelfth year of the fourth Century,
Constantine the great stanched that blood, and settled the Church in peace for
the space of about twenty five years, viz. till the year three hundred thirty
seven, at which time Constantine the great dying, by and by horrid Arianism,
and the Arian persecution succeeded. And after that Papisme, and Turcisme, down
to our days. So that from about sixty years after Constantines death, the
Church began (according to the vulgar account) to be hid in the wilderness,
the witnesses to prophecy in sackcloth, and the Beast to have power (...),
Rev. 11. Rev. 13. And secondly, for their civil condition all this while, they
have been ever under the usurpations successively of the Persians, Greeks,
Romans, Saracens or Turks, as we have often repeated. So that all that has
been done in matters of salvation, or outward deliverance, since the return of
the two Tribes from Babylon (the ten remaining there, and still dispersed) have
been but as prefaces, first fruits, and gleanings, in comparison of the full
vintage here described.. 5. Observe certain notes and marks, that this
prophecy is not yet fulfilled. First, That ver. 9. The peoples, or Nations
shall serve the Lord with one shoulder; which in regard of the universality
without restriction, and the immediate connection of Gods Suppliants of the
Jews (as Calvin argumentatively asserts) must signify the unanimity and
conformity of Jews and Gentiles in general, in one way of Gospel worship. But
alas, besides the Jews perseverance in their Judaisme, the Gentiles
themselves, called Christians, do not harmonize into one consent and practice,
but are at too vast a difference, in their Papisme, Lutheranisme, Socinianisme,
Calvinisme, Episcopacy, Presbytery, etc. Secondly, That in ver. 10. the calling
of the Jews from beyond the river of Ethiopia, which is not yet done; the
people of Judah, but especially they of Israel remaining dispersed into the
utmost parts of the earth. Thirdly, That v. 11. and v. 19. Their shame shall be
taken away, and they shall be made a name, and a praise in all lands where they
have been put to shame, and all they that afflicted them, shall be undone.
Instead whereof, the Jews in all lands are under great reproach, and contempt,
and their enemies rather undo them, then that their enemies are undone for
their sakes. Thus of Zephany.
SECT. XLV.
Zechary, who prophesied within two months at the same time that Haggy
prophesied, Hag. 1.1. Zech. 1.1. (and therefore is commonly accounted as a
co-partner with Haggy.) Both prophesying after Judah's return from Babylon, in
the second year of Darius (son of Histaspis.) For Haggai reproves them chap.
1. ver. 2. for not re-building the Temple. And v. 6. declares that the scarcity
upon them was for that neglect. Neither of which could have been rational, if
they had been then in Babylon. Zechariah likewise hints the same time, in chap.
1. ver. 6. in acknowledging that God had then fulfilled the judgment threatened
upon them: And expressly in the 16 verse says; The Lord is returned to
Jerusalem with mercies, and his house shall be built.

Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North, says the Lord. For I
have spread you abroad as the four winds of the Heaven, says the Lord. Verse.
7. Deliver thy self O Zion, that dwell with the daughter of Babylon. Verse.
8. For thus says the Lord of Hosts; After the glory has he sent me unto the
Nations, which spoiled you; for he that touches you, touches the apple of his
eye. Ver. 9. For behold I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a
spoil to their servants, and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent
me. Sing and rejoice O Daughter of Zion; for lo I come, and I will dwell in the
midst of thee, says the Lord. Ver. 11. And MANY NATIONS SHALL BE JOINED UNTO
THE LORD in that day; and shall be my people, etc. Verse. 12. And the Lord shall
inherit Judah, his portion, in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.
Of which words, the introduction preceding in the. 1. leads us into this
sense, that they look beyond the two Tribes, called Judah, unto the return of
the ten Tribes called Isreal.

To come forth and flee from the land of the North, etc. relates to those of
the two Tribes that tarryed behind, when the rest of them returned: I confess,
as to wipe off singularity, I am glad of the bare company in opinion, of them
that are learned; but I had rather have one of their reasons (if they give any)
then an hundred of their names. Oecolampadius speaking for us says, Terram
Aquilonis, etc. that is, the Prophet calls Babylon the land of the North, which
is situated toward the Northern part, Eastwardly. And seeing that others were
dispersed into diverse parts of the earth, according to the four winds, and
others oppressed with other servitude, all that are burdened, are called, etc.
And Pelican likewise voting for us says, the Prophet here foretells a double
gathering of the Inhabitants, and calls unto them: for the dispersion of the
faithful was twofold, one of the people of Judah in Babylon, who are called
together with Nehemiah unto the building of Jerusalem, whom the Prophet exhorts
to go forth out of the province of the Babylonians, and to believe the word of
God, and to restore the divine worship in the Temple. The other was greater,
and more general, of all Israel, whom God had scattered into the four
quarters, or climates of the world. All which the prophet calls and desires to
be congregated toward Zion, etc. But to leave men and words, and come to reason.

1. It Is clear that this place of Scripture is a prophecy of future things, by
the language of it, speaking all along from the fourth verse to the end of the
chapter in the future tense, that these and those things shall come to pass;
and such things, and so, God will do.. 2. And the exhortation in the sixth verse
(the thing in controversy) is expressly there extended not only unto the Jews
in the North, viz. Babylon; but to all of them dispersed in the four quarters
of the world; as they are to this day. Where mark the connection, For I will
gather you from the four winds: making this the meaning of coming out of the
North. Compare also Zech. 8.7. a considerable place, viz. Thus says the Lord
of Hosts, behold I will save my people from the East Country, and from the West
Country; and I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem.
Accordingly the Septuagint reads this of Zech. 2.6. thus, (...) i. e. Ho, ho,
fly from the land of the North, says the Lord; Because I WILL GATHER you from
the four winds of Heaven, says the Lord.. 3. The said two Tribes had been,
even now (when Zechariah preached this Sermon) returned from Babylon into
Judea, near this sixteen years. For (as the best Chronologers cast up the
account) they returned from Babylon in the year of the world 3435. And Zechary
began his prophecy in the year of the world three thousand four hundred fifty
one. A fair time, for the most of the Jews of the two Tribes to take heart to
return, that are mentioned in the beginning of their deliverance by Cyrus, to
have lingered behind the rest, 1 Chronicles. 4. if fear of the Kings sincerity in
dismissing them had remorated them; and to have been encouraged by their
forerunners prosperity in Judea, if any considerable number staid in Babylon
for fear of success. And therefore doubtless by this time most of the people
of Judah were returned. Josephus boldly affirms *, and Sanctius approves the
account, that there returned of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin forty six
hundred thousand, Lib. 11. Cap. 4
and twenty eight thousand, which may appear to have some truth in it, if we
compare Ezr. 2.61, 62, 63, 64, 65. and Nehem. 13.3. And truly the great work
they did in re-building the Temple, repairing the City walls, and their
bountiful offerings at the dedication, speak aloud that they were a very
numerous people. And therefore it is very unlikely that the Prophet in that
exhortation, verse the sixth, should mainly mind a gleaning of a few lingerers
in Babylon.. 4. This exhortation ver. the sixth calling for separation, and to
come out of Babylon, is carried down by the Apostles unto the latter, if not
to the last times of this world. For St. Paul in the 2 Cor. 6.17, 18 brings it
down to his time; which is far beyond any occurrences in Zecharies time; who
prophesied five hundred and eighteen years ( plus minus, thereabouts) before
Christ's birth. And Paul pens this Epistle at least fifty two years after the
birth of Christ (for about that year he wrote his first Epistle to Corinth) his
words are these; Come out from among them, and be ye separate, SAYS THE LORD
(mark his quotation of the old Testament) etc. and I will receive you, and be
a father unto you. Just to the same effect as Zecharie in the said sixth verse.
Come forth, flee from the land of the North, etc. Deliver thy self O Zion,
that dwell with the daughter of Babylon, etc. Lo I come, and I will dwell in
the midst of thee, says the Lord. Thus far St. Paul extends it. But St. John
Revel. cha. 18. ver. 2, 3, 4. extends it much further, and that in a
prophetical way; viz. to the time nearly preceding the fall of Babylon. I saw
another Angel come down from Heaven, having great power, etc. and he cried
mightily with a strong voice saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen,
etc. (i.e. shall surely fall) And I heard another voice from heaven saying, come
out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. Which two last clauses being of a future tense, and
sense, clearly show that [is fallen, is fallen] signifies it shall fall; and
that in regard thereof the people of God must timously come out thence.. 5.
There are high strains annexed to this prophecy, in this second of Zecharie,
which effectually evince that it is not yet fulfilled, as that ver. 5. I, says
the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in
the midst of her. That is, a fence about the Church (consisting of Jews and
Gentiles) of absolute defense to them, and of a devouring offense to the enemy:
And that ver. 8, 9. Thus says the Lord, after the glory has he sent me to the
Nations, which spoiled you. For he that touches you, touches the apple of
mine eye. For behold I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a
spoil to their servants. And ye shall know that the Lord of hosts has sent
me. That is, after this glory of your famous return, and rebuilt Temple, the
Lord has sent me the Messiah, to the Nations that spoiled you, that is, to
your enemies, who in touching you to hurt you, did as it were thrust their
fingers into mine eyes. Therefore I the Messiah will shake mine hands upon
them, as Psalm. 2.9. To break them with a rod of iron; and so to make them a
spoil to their servants, that is, to you whom they rigidly made their
servants. Lastly, that in verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. Sing and rejoice O daughter of
ZION, for lo I come, and I will dwell in the midst of THEE, says the Lord. And
many NATIONS shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and SHALL BE MY PEOPLE;
and I will dwell in the midst of THEE, and thou shall know that the Lord of
hosts has sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit Judah in the HOLY
LAND, and shall choose Jerusalem AGAIN. Be silent, O all flesh before the Lord,
Because he is [awakened concerning the habitation of his holiness (...)
] That is, a joyful time is yet to come, when the Messiah shall dwell in the
midst of the Jews, they dwelling in the holy Land, many Nations being joined
unto the Lord, together with the Jews into one Church, he dwelling in the
midst of them all (for dwelling in the midst is again repeated) so that then
they shall effectually know not only that this Prophet was sent of God to
preach this to them; but also that the true Messiah shall be at the appointed
time sent to perform these things to them; to the putting of all fleshly and
carnal minds to silence, that doubted or disputed against these thing, I say,
to put them to silence by the appearance of Christ, awakened and bestirring
himself in the behalf of his holy habitation, or the habitation of his
holiness; that is, the Church, in her pure state and worship. Now, when were
these high strains, these sublime expressions, ever yet fulfilled? We have a
watchword in the twelfth verse, that we must look for the impletion ^hereof,
far beyond Zecharies time: For though he in his time of this Prophecy saw the
return of the Jews into the holy Land, yet says, The Lord SHALL inherit
Judah, his portion in the HOLY LAND, and SHALL choose Jerusalem AGAIN. Surely
if we keep the prophecy together, as the Lord has laid it, and left it
together, there was never yet to this day, since their return from Babylon that
time, and state of the Church that is here limbed forth to the life, viz. that
the Church should consist of Jews and Gentiles joined to the Lord, and owned by
him, as his people, even while the Jews possess the holy Land, and the Lord
should be as a wall of fire, protecting them, and devouring their enemies, and
making the Jews, of servants to the cruel Heathens, to be the spoilers of
them, etc. and all these things to be carried up to that height of glory, that
all spiritual hearts should sing and rejoice, and all fleshly hearts should
be struck dumb or astonished with silence, We have before repeated (usque ad
nauseam, forie aliquibus) very often, how the Jews ever since the return of
the two Tribes have been little less, or otherwise then in a captive
condition, under three Monarchies; that when the Jews (a few of them) embraced
Christ, Acts second, third, and fourth chapters, the Gentiles were not
converted. When the Gentiles began to be called, the Jews fell off, Act. 13.
Romans 11. That the Maccabean conflict, in regard of the catastrophe and event is
not worthy to be named with this Prophecy. And therefore this Prophecy is yet
unfulfilled; and requires by the circumstances of it, a time of fulfilling
before the ultimate universal resurrection.
SECT. XLVI.
THe second place in Zecharie is in chap. 6. ver. 13, 13, 14, 15. which I need
little more then name. V. 12. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts saying, behold
the man whose name is the BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of his place, and HE
shall BUILD THE TEMPLE of the Lord. 13. Even HE shall build THE TEMPLE OF THE
LORD, and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and RULE UPON HIS THRONE, and
he shall be a PRIEST upon his throne, and the COUNSILL OF PEACE shall be
between them both. 14. And the Crowns shall be to He^em, and to To^ijah, and to
Jedajah, and to Hen the son of Zephania^, for a memorial in the temple of the
Lord. 15. And they that ARE FAR OFF shall come and build in the temple of the
Lord.

Though this second Temple was long since founded, and by this time in great
part raised, chap. 8. ver. 9. and the carrying on of the work to a finishing by
sufficient and able men was now in hand; yet the Prophet here foretells that
the man whose name is the BRANCH (the usual and frequent title of Christ)
shall BUILD the TEMPLE of the Lord in verse. 12. And presently again repeated
with great Emphasis in ver. 13. EVEN HE shall build the temple of the Lord.
And therefore the Prophet in these words, looked far beyond his own time.
Christ builds the Temple, first, in his natural body, secondly, in his
mystical (subordinates are no opposites; but do ray forth a typical
radiation, from the one, successively to the other.) First, In his natural
body, by his resurrection, according to his own exposition, John 2.18, 19, 20.
When his adversaries demanded of him, What sign show thou unto us, seeing
thou do these things? Jesus answered, destroy this Temple, and in three days
I will raise it up. Then said the Jews, forty and six years was this Temple in
building, and will thou rear it up in three days? But he spoke of the Temple
of his body. Secondly, In his Mystical body, the Church of believers; By
communicating unto whom his holy Spirit, he makes them his Temple, and the
habitation of God, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
This mystical Temple was founded long since: but the Prophet here points
mainly to the finishing of it. Or to speak in a juster proportion to the first
and second material Temple; The first mystical Temple, that is, the Church of
the Jews being destroyed at Christ's passion (the veil then being rent, to
signify the tearing down of Jewish worship,) upon his ascension, by sending
the Spirit he began the building of the second mystical Temple, viz. the
Christian Church, Act. 2. etc. and throughout that book. But when this second
mystical Temple shall be finished, (made up in its fullness, Romans 11.25, 26. of
which St. John mainly prophesies in his Revelation) of which finishing Zecharie
here in ver. 15. gives us this sign, That THEN, they that ARE AFAR OFF shall
come and build in the Temple: Which can have no other adequate, and more
certain interpretation then this; that when the Gentiles that are afar off in
Religion, shall in full come in; and the ten Tribes of Israel, that are to this
day afar off in place too, shall come and be built into the Christian Church;
at that same THEN, even at that very time, the BRANCH Christ, that built this
second mystical Temple, shall SIT and RULE upon his THRONE, and he shall be a
Priest upon his Throne, and the Counsil of Peace shall be between them both.
That is, as Christ has sensibly appeared in acting his Priesthood, when he
paid and prayed for his Church, at, and before his Passion In the 17, 18, and 19
chapters of John.
; so shall he as manifestly be seen to act his Kingly-hood, in a glorious,
universal evident peace, flowing from both, in the time of his Kingdom. Else
nothing is prophesied; for mere inward spiritual peace into the hearts of the
Saints had flowed in all ages of the Church before, from his Kingly and Priestly
office, precisely considered as spiritual; and the Saints knew it upon much
experience. But here is prophesied such things, and such effects, as many of
the Church could hardly believe. And therefore there should be crowns to Helem
and Tabijah, and Jedajah, and to Hen for a memorial in the Temple, i. e. They
should be in Zecharies time, hung up in the Temple, to be a conviction, and
condemnation of them that believed not this Prophecy; and to draw men unto
faith to believe the same, as Calvin, Pemble, and Junius expound it. But these
things were never yet fulfilled, as History, and experience show. And the last
universal resurrection will be unseasonable, and unsuitable. Therefore it is
yet to come.

SECT. XLVII.
Zecharie (which we need but touch) is in chap. 8. ver. 20. etc. to the end of
the chapter. Ver. 20. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, it shall yet come to pass,
that there shall come people Heb. (...) Chal. (...) that is, Peoples, Sept.
(...) Many peoples. And so it is express in v. 22.
, and the inhabitants of many Cities. 21. And the Inhabitants of one City shall
go to another, saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of Hosts; I will go also. 22. Yea many people, and strong
Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before
the Lord. 23. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, in those days it shall come to
pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the Nations, even
shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you;
for we have heard that God is with you.

peoples, yea, many peoples, yea, and strong Nations, did ever join with the
Jews in religious worship, as in prayer to God, etc. and that at Jerusalem. As
for those mentioned Act. 2.5. etc. viz Parthians, Medes, Elamites, etc. They
were neither Nations nor Gentiles, but were some certain Jews, who having
been borne in those forenamed Countries, did now for the present sojourne So
the word in the Text. from (...) and (...), is used by the Septuagint which the
Apostles and Evangelists much follow in their new Testament quotations, Genesis
27.44. Son arise (says Rebecka to Jacob) and flee unto Laban thy Brother to
Haran, and (...), and sojourne with him a few days. 1 King. 17.20. O Lord my
God (says Elijah) have thou brought evil upon the widow (...), that is, with
whom I sojourne. In which places the word is plainly taken for sojourning, and
accordingly circumscribed with a short time.
at Jerusalem, for the business of worship, at the feast of the Passover, and
Pentecost. Thus in this fifth verse they are expressly called Jews, There were
sojourning, or abiding at Jerusalem, JEWS of every Nation under Heaven. Ver.
22. when Peter spoke to them, he says to them, Ye men of ISRAEL. And that
none put this off with an imagination that they were Proselytes, that is,
Gentiles converted to Judaisme; let them heed, that Proselytes are named ver.
10. distinctly from Jews, and Jews from them. The strangers of Rome, were
Jews and Proselytes. The truth is, it is most evidently declared to us by the
holy Scriptures, Act. 10. that Cornelius was the first Gentile that was
converted to the Christian faith, next to the conversion of those Jews Act. 2.
and Act. 4. And by that time a few Gentiles more began to hearken to the
Gospel of Christ; the Jews for the generality began to reject the Gospel, and
so to give it a pass to go freely to the Gentiles, Act. 13. In a word, let
opposite men use their wits what they can, ^or their sense to tackle
circumstances together, all will not reach to the sense of this prophecy, as
before expressed and opened by us. The hot ten persecutions for the first 300
years after Christ, hindered effectually the conversions of Nations of Gentiles.
And long before those 300 years were expired, the Jews generally were blinded;
which had seized upon them in Paul's time, Romans 11. (He writing that Epistle
about the year fifty four after Christ's birth, that is, about the twentieth
year after Christ's ascension,) and so they continue to this day.

But God, that cannot lie, has said this prophecy shall come to pass, it
shall be fulfilled; therefore we may boldly expect it before the last judgment,
or universal resurrection.

SECT. XLVIII.
Zecharie is in chap. 10. ver. 3. etc. to the end of the chapter. [3. Mine
anger is kindled (Hebr. (...) has been kindled) against the Shepheards] viz.
Those Diviners of lies, and Dreamers of falsehoods, in the former verse. The
period of this conflagration was at the late return of Judah from captivity,
as the FOR in the next clause imports; [ For the Lord of Hosts has visited his
flock, the house of Judah, and has made them his GOODLY horse in the battle,]
which must needs signify a visitation in mercy; begun in their said return;
but extended to a vast longitude of future times, as the Septuagint ((...)) and
the Chalde ((...) etc.] he shall visit them, he shall make them as his goodly
horse. This their march from Babylon, being but the type, or first-fruites of
their future, final, full deliverance. Which future sense is expressly
carried on in all the residue of the chapter from ver. 5. to the end; all
speaking, (say our Translators) in the future tense. And the fourth verse is
indefinite in the Hebrew, without tense or verb, [ out of him the CORNER, out
of him the NAIL, out of him the BATTLE BOW, out of him every oppressor, or as
in the Heb. (...) EXACTOR OF TAXES.] That is, the house of Judah being built on
the CORNER stone Christ. and so incorporated into the Church, they shall fasten
the NAIL of union with Israel, and together with them, and the rest of the
Church, they shall be the BATTLE-BOW to wound (as in the former verse) and THE
GOODLY WAR-HORSE to tramphe nowne their enemies; so that out from the Church,
as is the close of this verse, shall proceed the EXACTOR OF TRIBUTE, instead of
paying Tribute, to signify the Churches dominion over the world. The rest of
the chapter is so plain for our point touching the visible glorious state of
the Church yet to come, as it sufficiently speaks for it self (to every one
that will understand) by a bare repetition of the words, without any humane
gloss. ver. 5. And they shall be as MIGHTY MEN, which TREAD DOWN their
enemies in the MIRE of the streets, in the BATTLE; and they shall FIGHT,
because the Lord is with them, and the RIDERS ON HORSES ( viz. their enemies in
the former clause) shall be confounded. 6. And I will strengthen the house of
JUDAH, and will save the house of JOSEPH (That is, Manasse and Ephraim,
expressed ver. 7. signifying two of the Ten Tribes of ISRAEL, and by them all
the TEN of Israel, as Judah is named for then, and the other, viz. Benjamin of
the Kingdom of Juda) and I will BRING THEM AGAIN to PLACE THEM (as in v. 10. in
Gilead, etc.) For I have mercy upon them, and they shall be AS THOUGH I HAD
NOT CAST THEM OFF, etc. (compare Hos. 1.10, 11.) 7. And they of EPHRAIM shall
be like a mighty man (commonly in Scripture put to signify the TEN TRIBES,
Isa. 7.2. Isa. 9.21. Isa. 11.13.) Yea their CHILDREN shall see it and be glad.
What shall they see? Verse. 8. I will GATHER THEM, for I have redeemed them, and
they shall increase, as they have increased. 9. And I will sow them (The Chalde
(...), And as (...) I HAVE scattered them) they shall remember me in FAR
COUNTRIES, and they shall live with their children, and RETURN AGAIN. 10. I will
BRING THEM AGAIN ALSO out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria,
and will bring them into the land of GILEAD, and LEBANON (the Cities of Gilead
being part of the lot of the Tribe of Gad; and half of the Country of Gilead,
pertaining to the children of Machir, the son of Manasseh, Tribes of the
Kingdom of Israel, Josh. chap. 13. ver. 25.31. As Lebanon belonged also to the
ten Tribes, an hundred miles from Jerusalem being too remote for Judah to
inhabit) 11. And he shall pass through the Sea with affliction ( Lerom, Arias,
and the Septuagint render the Hebrew (...) in, or by a straight, or narrow of
the Sea; this their passage of great mercy, not enduring the circumstance and
naming of misery) and shall smite the waves of the Sea, and all the deeps of
the River shall dry up; And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the
Scepter shall depart away (of all which see the prophecy of Nahum particularly
prophesying to that.)

Now in the first place review WHO they are here mentioned, that must share in
the fulfilling of this Prophecy, viz. the Kingdom of Judah, and of Israel (all
twelve Tribes) and they united as two walls joined in a coin or
corner-juncture; or as two pieces of timber, nailed or pinned together. So
expressly before.

what they must enjoy, or attain to, viz. the conquest of their enemies in
battle; their domination over them in a way of Government; the Scepters and
Powers of Nations (that are not of the Church) ceasing. And the possession of
their own land. All which being thus plainly and heartily laid together; if any
now that is of a scrutinizing spirit, and a pondering ingenuity, should
transfer to a spiritual sense, I should be extremely filled with wonder.

. 1. Because the main things insisted upon are corporal things, dressed forth in
such language, and circumstantiated with such particulars, as suit not well but
to corporalls. As for example, Battle-Bow; treading down in the mire; the
riders on horses shall be confounded, etc.. 2. Because when there is a touch
here and there of spirituals, it is with such a distinguished way from the
corporals, with an inference from the cause to the effect, as rather to argue,
and prove, and ascertaine them by spirituals, then to draw them unto, and
drown them in a spiritual notion: as to give an instance or two. They shall
tread down their enemies in the street, and fight, BECAUSE THE LORD IS WITH
THEM. I will bring them again to place them; FOR I HAVE MERCY ON THEM. And they
shall be as though I had not cast them off: FOR I AM THE LORD THEIR GOD, AND
WILL HEAR THEM, etc.. 3. Because some passages do parallel their future state in
outward things, to the pattern of their former prosperity, in David's, Salomons,
or the like times: As for example, They shall be as though I had not cast them
off; And, their children shall increase, as they have increased.. 4. Because
some passages the holy Ghost elsewhere applies to a sensible, visible,
material performance. As that in ver. 10, 11. So Grotius applies it, Flumen
cum simpliciter appellatur, intelligendus Euphrates. Ex hoc loco desumitur et
ille qui est Apoc. 16.12. viz. (...) etc. Subticetur quasi. Sensus enim est,
Euphratem tam pervium ipsis fore, quam si ^otus ab aquis destitutus esset, Isa.
11.15. Maris fauces hoc loco designatas Hebrei, quos Hieronymus consuluit,
interpretabantur Bosphorum Thracium, inter Byzantium and Chalcedonem; non male,
si consideres Nabuchodonosori imterium pertin^isse ^tiam ad dextram Ponti oram,
i. e. ad Daeiam. etc vid. Grot. in loc.
of the returning of the Jews from Egypt, and Assyria, over sea, and deeps of
rivers, is applied by St. John, Revel. 16.12. in the pouring out of the sixth
vial, to the Kings of the East, that is, the Jews returning from Assyria,
over the river Euphrates; which river Zecharie must needs mean, whiles he
speaks of their return from Assyria, by the Metropolis whereof, viz. Nineve,
and through parts of that Country Euphrates slides: Which return of the Jews
thence personally, and corporally, Mr. Mede See Mede before on Dan. 11. the
latter end. Particularly on verse. 44, 45. And see him in his Comment. on
Revelation 8.6. Phyal. in 16 Chap. And see our quotation of him in this third
Book, chap. 2. Sect. 41.. 5. p. 309. lin 35.
has asserted both on Daniel, and the Revelation, etc. several times with
clear demonstration. The Jews go further into a literal sense, of a
miraculous drying up of waters that shall lie as an hindrance in their way, as
formerly at the Redsea and Jordan. Which though I assert not, yet the opinion
is not so gross as some conceive. For if their first vocation and awakening
shall be by a miraculous, or extraordinary appearance of Christ in the
clouds, as before has been largely demonstrated, I do not see such an
absurdity as is remote from all reason, that some miracles may be done for
confirmation that God is with them. See and consider well what is said before in
p. 310. lin. 4. and lin. 13. out of Isa. 11.15, 16. Zech. 10.10, 11. compared
with the Chalde.
when, and where, and how this entire prophecy, as it is here woven together,
was ever yet fulfilled? And assert if they can, whether the last universal
resurrection, and ultimate judgment may be a meet time for the fulfilling of
it?



. 1. Oecolampadius is very much for a spiritual sense of this whole prophecy,
afore-quoted; understanding by the War-horse, the Corner, the Nail, the
Battle-Bow, and the strong men, etc. the Apostles, Evangelists, and Pastors of
the New Testament. And at every verse almost he has to this effect, Nos illa
spiritualiter intelligimus; i. e. We understand these things spiritually. But
if he did so understand them, why does he upon the sixth ver. tell us That the
naming there of the house of Judah, and the house of Joseph, is a plain
demonstration that the speech of this prophecy is directed to all the
Israelites? And why does he tell us upon the seventh verse, That the Tribe of
Ephraim, whose captivity was greater, shall be greatlier strengthened; and made
like to a Giant, refreshed with wine, as the Country of Ephraim abounded
therewith? The gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim, Judge. 8.2. being better then
the Vintage of Abiezer. And woe (Isa. 28.1.) to the crown of pride, the
drunkards of Ephraim? For surely in the time of the Apostles and Evangelists, a
great part of the Kingdom of Judah was in Canaan; but Israel was not then
returned. And if any of them were, why must Ephraim be more strengthened then
Judah, or etc. if the sense be spiritual, those from Ephraim, as Jeroboam and
his followers having been far more idolatrous then others? And again, if he
will spiritually understand this prophecy, why does he translate the eleventh
verse to a litterall sense; he shall pass through a STRAIT of the sea, and
tells us, exponunt, etc. they expound this STRAIT to be Propontis? Yea, how does
that speech of his upon the ninth verse, [This is spoken (says he) of the ten
Tribes, who are said to return, when they are converted to Christ.] I say, how
does it agree with the times of the Apostles? from whose age, to this day, they
are not converted, comp. Romans 11.25. with experience down to us. Lastly, how
does his gloss and spiritual sense, and the text agree together in the tenth
verse? The text is, I will bring them again out of the land of Egypt, and
gather them out of Assyria, and I will bring them to the land of Gilead, and
Lebanon, and place shall not be found for them. His gloss is, The Prophet
minds Egypt, and Assyria, because there ISRAEL under-went harder servitude And
he mentions Gilead and Lebanon, because when all Israel went out of Egypt, they
first possessed Gilead; and when Judah returned from Babylon, they entered into
Judea by Lebanon. His spiritual sense is, "we (says Oecolamp.) understand
those things spiritually. For all that have received the knowledge of Christ
are already brought into the holy Land. So he. Now what show of reason was
there for the Prophet to mention so emphatically Egypt and Assyria, yea Gilead
and Lebanon, to signify the ALL of them that should believe of what Nation
soever, to bring them to faith in Christ; seeing most of those things are
obscure to men unconverted, and we have new Testament miracles nearer at hand,
and more particularly pointing to the person of Christ? much less was there
any ground for him to urge the consideration of those Regions and Countries to
the ALL of believers, that already by faith were spiritually entered into the
holy Land. And how does this spiritual sense agree with the Text, That place
shall not be found for them; that is, the place shall not be sufficient to
receive them? For if the said spiritual sense stands good, then the whole
earth should not be capacious enough to receive all that shall be converted,
which is contrary to common sense. Therefore Oecolampadius speaks safelier,
and comes off fairlier, when he says on the sixth verse, these things pertain
(says he) to the times of Christ; not naming which time, whether that of his
first, or that of his next coming; but leaves it large enough to comprehend
both.

. 2. A Lapide likewise will understand by this goodly war-horse, the Apostles
and Apostolical men; on which Christ did, as it were, ride, conquering the
world spiritually. And yet too, he will understand (as he says) Judas
Maccabeus, and his brethren trampleing Antiochus and his Commanders, to
signify this generous horse for battle, here mentioned.

. 3. As for Calvin, though upon the fifth verse he hints mostly a mere spiritual
sense, the Jews, as also the Church militant under the cross, shall be
conquerours, and triumph over all the wicked, partly in hope, and partly in the
effect. For God does wonderfully sustain them, and causes that all particular
believers possess their souls in patience, etc. Yet before and after he
lancheth forth into a further sense; yea, and times too, beyond any that has
yet come to pass. For upon the fourth verse he has these words; From among
the Jews shall be the Corner; that is, those in that people that shall bear
the public Government. And the batttle-Bow, that is, they shall be sufficient
to conquer their enemies. And the Exactor; that is, they shall enjoy the
Empire, or rule over their neighbors, and require tribute of them, instead of
paying it to them. If any ask when this shall be fulfilled? I answer, There
were some preludes of this, when God exalted the Maccabees: But it is certain,
that the Prophet compriseth the whole course of redemption: And upon the sixth
verse. The Jews (says he) could not acquiesce in those beginnings, which
scarcely in the hundredth part did answer to the promises of God. It behoved
therefore to have their minds lifted up on high, that they might hope for more
then did appear before their eyes. And this doctrine is useful for us, because
we are apt to restrain the promises of God to a narrow time; and so whiles we
shut him up in our straits, we cause him not to do what we desire: Therefore
let the example of the return of the people of Israel still be before us;
because the Lord did promise by all his Prophets that their return should be
glorious, and every way plentiful, and the state of the people happy, which
did not appear when the Jews returned into their Country. And therefore it
follows, I will strengthen the house of Judah, and the house of Joseph. In
which Zecharie promises no vulgar thing, when as he says, both peoples ( Judah
and Israel) shall be rejoyned, and so incorporated into one, as before the
breach, when the ten Tribes fell from the two. And in that clause, I will bring
them again, and place them (as it is in our English, or, (as Calvin roads it,)
I will bring them back, and cause them to dwell (...) Hoshbotim, being a
compound word, or Verb, signifying, That God will not only bring back again
the ten Tribes, but will give them a fixed seat in their own Country. Which
last words of Calvin are full to our sense. Our new Annotations say upon the
fourth verse, touching the Oppressor, or Exactor, thus, They shall prevail
against their enemies, and oppress their oppressors, and exact tribute, of
them as Victors do of them whom they have subdued. This best suits with the
context. And this we see partly verified in the history of the Maccabees, and
more fully in, and under the Gospel, the Prophet here comprehending in these
promises the whole and entire, redemption, and deliverance of Gods Church and
people, by, and under the Messiah.

Thus our new Annotations speak, as well for a litterall sense as a spiritual,
and of times yet to come, as well as those past.

. 4. Dr. Mayer has observed a little this interfering of Authors against
themselves, having upon the eleventh verse these words, Some by Judah (says
he) understand the Jews, and by Joseph and Ephraim, the Gentiles converted to
the says, and that no local motion is meant, when he speaks of bringing them
to their place, but only their coming into the Church, etc. And yet (says he)
they apply that which is here spoken, in part, to that which God did for the
Jews in the time of the Maccabees. The Doctor himself does well apply this
prophecy, mainly to a litterall sense: but I had hoped with more coherence.
For if, as he well asserts upon the fourth verse, touching the Corner, it is
there prophesied of the joining together of the two Kingdoms of Judah and
Israel, whereby they should be greatly strengthened; how then does he tell us
after on the same verse, that this prophecy was partly fulfilled in Judas
Maccabeus, and partly (as he intimates, or affirms on the eleventh verse) in
the return of those Jews that fled into Egypt under Ishmael, upon the
slaughter of Gedaliah (2 King. 25. ver. 25, 26.) who returned out of Egypt (as
A Lapide believes Josephus Lib. 11. Antiq. c. 2.
) in the reign of Ptolomeus Philodelphus, the successor of Ptolomeus Lagi, in
the Kingdom of the Greeks; and that the pride of Assyria was brought down when
Alexander subdued both Persians and Assyrians: And the Scepter departed from
Egypt in the days of Cleopatra, their last Queen (with whose love Antony was
so entangled) whose dominions Caesar conquered; but not her, because she slew
her self, that she might not come into his hands? I say how do these things
hang together in an handsome harmony? For all these things do nothing conduce
to the reunion, and re-dintegration of the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel
into one body, being never yet done, since their division in Rehoboams time, to
this day.

. 5. For the further clearing whereof, let us speak distinctly some thing to
all the three last mentioned particulars; especially to that of Judas
Maccabeus, who has so taken the eyes of most Interpretors, that they cannot in
commenting on this Chapter look off from him, putting the maine stresse of
Interpretation upon his History. First, For that particular, Of the returning
of those Jews from Egypt, that fled thither upon the occasion of Ishmaels
slaying Gedaliah; It is not probable that many returned. When they went they
were but the gleanings of a captivity, (2 King. 25.) And Dr. Mayer confesses,
that in Egypt, whiles they were there, Ptolomeus Lathurus slew of them thirty
thousand; and those that did return were of the Kingdom of Judah, which
nothing concerns Israel. And the time of their return was long before Christ,
at least two hundred and fifty years. Now the sacred Text tells us plainly, that
the Scepter should continue to Judah, distinctly (as divided from Israel) till
Christ should come. Since which it departed; but never returned either to
Judah, or Israel, or to both jointly. To the second particular, of bringing
down the pride of Assyria, and the Scepter of Egypt, the former by the
Greeks, the latter by the Romans; we say that it nothing favors the sense and
intent of this prophecy; which speaks like all the rest of the like
prophesies, which threatening the ruin of the Jews enemies, always declare to
what end and issue, namely, for the raising of the Jews. Thus all along this
Chapter, ver. 4. I have punished the Goats, FOR the Lord has VISITED his
flock, the house of Judah, and has made them his goodly horse in the Battle.
V. 5, 6. They shall tread down their enemies, and I will STRENGTHEN the house
of Judah, and SAVE the house of Joseph. And so in the eleventh verse now under
consideration (compared with the twelfth verse) The pride of Assyria shall be
brought down, and the Scepter of Egypt shall depart away. To what effect? It
follows, and I will strengthen them, that is, the Jews. The question
therefore is, What advantage accrewed to the Jews by the Grecians beating the
Assyrians, and the Romans the Egyptians? Surely, no more but this, the Jews
changed their oppressors, but not their oppression, which continued upon them
under the Roman yoke to Christ's time, and hundreds of years after, till the
Saracens and Turks began to take their turn of oppressing them, which they
have perpetuated to this day. To the third particular, Of the story of the
Maccabees; we confidently affirm that this contributed little or nothing to
the fulfilling of this prophecy, which so emphatically foretells, ver. 6. the
saving of the house of Joseph, and bringing them again to place them; and the
making them of EPHRAIM (ver. 7. etc.) to be like a mighty man, and gathering
them from Egypt and Assyria. For, of what Tribe soever Judas Maccabeus, and his
brethren were, whether of Levi (as their fathers Priesthood imports 1 Macc^.
2.1.
, if in those corrupt times it were kept within the line) or what other Tribe,
clear it is by frequent expression throughout that Maccabean story, that they
were the Inhabitants in and about Jerusalem, of the quondam Kingdom of Juda,
and not of the ten Tribes of Israel (which never returned from captivity to
this day, as the Jews confess) that made up the Army that did those exploites.
Besides we may not forget what Mercer said, page 313. lin. 14. And what Calvin
said before to the same purpose in the same page 313. line 40. viz. That the
story of the Maccabees is not worthy the naming, in comparison of the
deliverance that God intends by these prophesies; that war being occasion of
bringing the Jews into a lower condition, viz. that the Scepter departed from
Judah The glory of the history of the Maccabees Book 1. cha. 16. (where ends
their exploits) sets in a cloud. The history of the second book of Macca. is of
the acts done in the same times of the first; only with this difference, that
the history of the first book extends to 40 years, that of the second only to
14. And for the third book of Macca. as Junius and Grotius have it, it is in
nature first; being (it seems) the relation of what was done at the beginning
of all, in the first year.
. And therefore Dr. Mayer does a little correct himself after, and pretty well
make up the matter, if he will be taken in our sense. Because (says he) thus
(that is, in the three particulars before mentioned) the things here prophesied
of, were but done in part, their perfect accomplishment is to be looked at in
Christ; no Ephraim or Joseph having this made any way good unto them, before
his coming. So he. Which coming being taken at large, as comprehending not
only his first coming, but also his second appearance, viz. in the clouds to
convert the Jews, does well mend the matter: Or else nothing is said to the
full meaning of the Text. For since Christ's coming, Judah and Israel (as we
said) have not been united, nor is the pride and Scepter of them that rule over
them brought low, etc. Thus have I been drawn on by occasion of the false
lights that have dazzled this Text, to enlarge my discourse upon it, far beyond
all purpose or expectation. But it is an old truth; Non sunt long a quibus nihil
est quod demere possis.

That is not of too long a size,
Which none can well epitomize.
SECT. XLIX.
Zecharie is Chapter 12 throughout; which is so full for a glorious visible
State of the Church on Earth; and so plainly demonstrating it self, never yet
to have been fulfilled, that I shall but little more then name the particulars.

Israel, as for Judah. And therefore, as with Judah is often mentioned
Jerusalem (part of their Territory) ver. 2. ver. 5, etc. So with Israel,
expressed in the first verse, are mentioned after ver. 13, 14. the Families of
Levi, and of Simeon, etc. which were of the ten Tribes. Now till any one show
us that ever these prophesies were fulfilled both to Judah, and Israel since
their captivity, we must conclude they are yet unfulfilled.

Judah had returned from Babylon, near twenty years since; yet in ver. 6. the
Prophet points at another returning, to a re-inhabiting of Jerusalem, in her
own place, even in Jerusalem. And this to be done at a notable day; Of which we
know nothing in Scriptures, Histories, or Experience, as to a notable
fulfilling thereof, since Judah's first return to this day: And therefore must
be expected as yet to come.

that God did make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all that besieged her? When
Alexander M. with his Army, about one hundred and eighty years after this, came
to Jerusalem, though he came as a Conqueror, yet he entered, and was received in
all peaceable manner, with reciprocal, high respect between him and the
High Priest. When after him, about one hundred forty three years (as the
account is cast up, 1 Maccab. 1.20.) Antiochus Epiphanes came against Jerusalem
with his Army, he prevailed against it, and miserably spoiled it, and the
Temple, and slaughtered the people, 1 Maccab. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. When after him
about seven years, Antiochus Eupator came up against Judea and Jerusalem, he
prevailed against both, partly by power, and partly by policy, and threw down
the walls of Zion, 1 Maccab. 1. ver. 17. ver. 48, etc. to the end of the
chapter. About ninty eight years after him, the Roman Pompey takes Jerusalem,
and the Temple, sending Aristobulus the King of the Jews bound to Rome, and
subdued the Jews to the Roman power Buchol. Jud. Chron. Ad an. Mund. 3909.
About six years after (which was about fifty six years before the birth of
Christ) Gabinius the Roman invading Syria, and then Judea, he there conquered
Alexander King of the Jews (Son of Aristobulus) in a maine battle; slaying 3000
Jews, and taking as many prisoners Josephus.
. As for the History after Christ, it is more familiarly known, that Titus the
Roman Emperor about 70 years after the birth of Christ, destroyed Jerusalem,
both City and Temple; as likewise did Adrian the Roman Emperor after him, about
the year after Christ's birth 133. and so Rome successively held it, til the
Saracens and Turks wan it away from them, holding it to this day. So that I
renew my question, When since the return of Judah, was Judah and Jerusalem a
cup of trembling, to any enemy that ever came against it in that space of time?
And upon the same ground of history, but now summed up, I may put unaswerable
questions upon most of the chapter following, as, When since their return, was
ever Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all people of the earth, to cut them all
in pieces that shall burden themselves with it, as it is prophesied in ver. 3?
Or when, as in ver. 4. has every horse been stricken with astonishment, and
his rider with madness? Or when, as ver. 5. Could the Governors of Judah say
in their heart, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, under God, shall be my strength?
Or when, as in ver 6: Have the Governors of Judah been like a Hearth of fire
amongst the wood, and like a Torch of fire in a sheafe, devouring all the
people round about, etc? Or when, as ver. 7. and 9. Has the Lord so saved the
tents of Judah, and defended the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that he that was
feeble among them was made as David, and the house of David as ELOHIM, and as
the ANGEL of JEHOVAH; and has sought to destroy all the Nations that come
against Jerusalem? But mind the breviate of history before recited, and look
upon the State of the Jews at this day, and remember the account we gave before
of the Maccabees in the former Section, and we cannot but expect the
particulars yet to come. And upon the same grounds, adding the history of the
carriage of the Jews toward Christ, penned by the Evangelists, and the
context in the ninth verse [At that day it shall come to passe] viz. at the
time that the former part of the chapter shall be fulfilled, with a collation
of Revel. 1.7. and Matthew. 24.30, We may as boldly quere, when were those things
ever yet fulfilled, mentioned in the 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 verses, That God
would so pour out upon the house of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
the spirit of grace and supplication, that they shall look on him whom they
have peirced, and mourn for him with great bitterness, each family mourning a
part? which cannot be imagined to be fulfilled by the Jews, before Christ was
peirced. Which is the argument of two Jews of late, with one of which I had
conference; that they expect the Messiah yet to come,
to convert their Nation, because they must see him with a penitent eye after
he is pierced. Nor was it fulfilled upon the obstinate Jews, who beholding his
passion, derided him, or persisted in impenitency. Nor upon the eleven
Disciples, who fled when he was led to suffering. Nor did they pierce him. Nor
upon those mourners, Act. 2. for they saw him not when they mourned; nor did
any of these sorts of mourners aforenamed, mourn with their families: Nor did
they see him in the clouds, and thereupon mourn for him, as it is express in
those places of Mat. 24, and Rev. 1. before quoted.

because the Circumstances of it so require.

SECT. L.
Zechariah is in chap. 14. from verse. 3. to the end of the chapter; which has
been anciently, before Jeroms time (as he confesses) urged both by Jews and
Christians, for the glorious time yet to come, of which we treat. And to me it
seems so full for it, that I know not what considerable thing can be rationally
said against it. As for quibling Jerome (I grudg almost here to call him Saint
Jerome, because in his notes on this place, instead of demonstration, he jeers,
and that very obscenely) we shall talk with him after, and most justly arraigne
him, upon his own confession.

Then shall the Lord go forth, and sight against those Nations, as when he
fought in the day of (...) Kerab. which word as it signifies conflicting, so
also beginning, or approaching near; and may be aptly so rendered and applied
here (according to the sense that most understand) to Gods assisting the Jews
in the beginning of their Wars, as against Amalech, and Og, etc. when they
approached near toward Canaan. Which words, as that same [THEN] minds us,
points at the after times following that Coming up of all Nations against
Jerusalem to Battle, rifling, ravishing, and captivating it; which ruin was to
come to pass in long process of time after this Prophecy, as it is hinted in
the future expression of the first verse, the Prophet having dispatched in the
thirteenth chapter next before the Prophesies that did belong to the time of
Christ's passion, ver. 1. and v. 7. of that 13. chap. For it was a long time
after Christ ere all Nations (confining our all, to the all of the four
Monarchies) did so miserably ruin (mark the phrase) Jerusalem. For the Romans
did it not the first time, till seventy years before Christ's incarnation: they
did before that, some hurt to the Country, as we said before, but did not
miserably ruin Jerusalem. Nor the Romans the second time, till one hundred
thirty three years after the said incarnation. Nor did the Saracens of Asia
till the year one thousand and nine (thereabouts.) But however, let the reader
fix the depredation, and devastation of Jerusalem, by all Nations since
Zecharies Prophecy where they will, yet we are at a loss, and all our books
cannot help us to tell when, yet to this day, The Lord went out to fight all
those Nations, that fought against Jerusalem, as he did at first when he
overthrew Amalech, and Og, etc. as the Jews approached near Canaan. Surely we
have had a sad account to the contrary, in the very next preceding Section,. 4.
in a short, but full Chronology, from Zecharie to this very day. And a mere
spiritual notion will not help us out, seeing the Text expounds it self, That
the Lord will go out, and fight against the Nations that spoil Jerusalem;
how, or in what manner? As he fought at first, when the Jews approached
Canaan, or (to keep to our common translation, as when he fought in the day of
battle. Which exposition needed not to be added, if a spiritual sense had been
mainly intended. Which if it were, yet that is not to this day fulfilled; that
the enemies of Jerusalem are either converted by grace, or confounded in hell.

shall stand upon the MOUNT of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the East
etc. which shall cleave in the midst. And ver. 5. Ye shall flee to the VALLEY
OF THE MOUNTAINS, which shall reach to Azal, etc. as ye fled from the
EARTHQUAKE in the days of Uzziah, and the Lord shall come and ALL HIS SAINTS
with him? Or how can that be taken in a spiritual sense in ver. 7. That there
shall be a distinct ONE day, and known to the Lord, that shall not be day nor
night, but the evening shall be light? Surely, if the light of the time of the
Gospel must bemeant, as some will, it is no distinct time, nor one measured
day of a round number of years, be it of few or many, for it has been now
above one thousand six hundred and twenty years, since the first preaching of
Christ, continued to this day, which has been as well known to us, as to the
Lord? And how should that in ver. 9. be comelily, and completely clothed, and
covered with a mere spiritual notion, That the Lord SHALL be King OVER ALL the
earth? And at THAT day he must be the one, and only Lord, and his name one?
For the Lord from the beginning has been King of power, and King of grace;
secretly ordering, and sanctifying whom, and wheresoever he listed, over the
face of the earth. Therefore this same shall, must import his yet future visible
Monarchy, before which all must so fall down, that they cast away all their
Idols, seeming Deities, and different forms of worship, and adore him alone
with one uniforme way of worship according to his will; which thing to this day
is desired, being never yet enjoyed. And as difficult it is, if not impossible,
with clear reason, to fasten a spiritual sense upon the rest of the chapter.
That all the Land shall be turned, or compassed AS A plain (pervious and
profitable for habitation) FROM GEBA TO RIMMON, SOUTH OF JERUSALEM. So that it
shall be lifted up or exalted (in the opinion of men) and inhabited in her
place, FROM BENJAMINS GATE unto the place of the FIRST GATE, unto the CORNER
GATE, and from the Tower of HANANIEL unto the KINGS WINE. PRESSES. And men
shall dwell in it, and there shall be NO MORE utter destruction, but Jerusalem
shall be SAFELY inhabited. And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will
smite all the people that fight against Jerusalem; THEIR FLESH SHALL CONSUME
AWAY WHILE THEY STAND UPON THEIR FEET, and their EYES SHALL CONSUME AWAY IN
THEIR HOLES, etc. And so shall be the plague of the HORSE, of the MULE, of the
CAMEL, of the ASS, and of all the BEASTS that shall be in these Tents, as THIS
PLAGUE. ^oo wonderful and industrious a circumstantiating of all places,
plague, things etc. to signify mere spirituals.

Jerusalem that is left, shall go up from year to year to worship the Lord, and
to keep the feast of Tabernacles. But we did before give a rule, and proved it,
that even in the Old Testament as well as in the New, the most Gospel Truths are
sometimes clothed with Jewish language, and Leviticall phrases Lib. 3. Cha. 2.
Sect 44.. 2. P. 330. See also Just. Martyrs excellent Note in this third Book,
Chap. 3. Sect. 2. S. 3. and P. 2.
. Nor indeed is there any Gospel expression scarcely in all the New Testament,
that is not dressed forth with one or more Tropes and figures. As Come to me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, etc. Matthew. 11. And a bruised reed he
shall not break, etc. Matthew. 12. Christ being no Porter, nor Christians reeds,
in a literal sense. Beside for the words of Zecharie themselves, there is no
more expressed but go up, and once a year, and at the feast of Tabernacles; as
to signify our deliverance from the Egypt of the world; as Israel going out of
Topal Egypt, first pitched in Succoth, that is Boothes; And in memorial of that
deliverance, praised God yearly in the feast of Boothes. As we hereafter shall
often congratulate our LORD with HALELUJAHS for our deliverance from the
Egyptian world, frequently prophesied in the Revelation. To this day we pray in
hope; but then, when the great restoration of the Church, and Restitution of
all things is come, we shall praise with joy. And whoever will not, shall be
plagued with temporal plagues, ver. 17, etc. For all that then will exist in
peace, must be holiness to the Lord, they and their imjoyments, ver. 20.

Material expressions, and corporal circumstances will not awaken some men, but
they will fall asleep, and dream pleasant dreams of all figurative meanings,
and will not sensibly see the visible glory here prophesied; then I would
entreat them to tell us their dreams, from point to point upon every Verse,
when all Nations obstinately at enmity with the Jews were spiritually
destroyed? when the rest that came in to close with them, did jointly with them
own the LORD as King over all the Earth, in one way of worship? when was
Jerusalem safely inhabited, as free from spiritual evils? And how could the
Horse, and the Mule, and the Camel, and the Ass, and all Beasts, be spiritually
plagued?

A Lapide applauds Jerome for his spiritual interpretation of this prophecy.
Quocirca vere S. Hieron hic ad verse. 11. haec inquit, etc. that is, Therefore
Jerome says truly upon the eleventh verse, the Jews and our Chiliasts dream
these things, shall be literally performed; but let us interpret Jerusalem to
be the Church, which walking in the flesh, yet does not live according to the
flesh, whose freedom is in Heaven, etc. So he; and yet within a very few lines
after the same, A Lapide has these words. Dico ergo, etc. that is, I say
therefore according to the Letter, it is here signified, that Jerusalem is to
be taken by Antiochus Epiphanes, and to be restored by the Maccabees. Which,
how untruly it is asserted, we have before demonstrated; only, we allege this
to instance how A Lapide falls from his spiritual to a litteral sense. Mr.
Calvin whiles mighty much for a spiritual sense of this prophecy, has to this
effect on those words in the third verse [The Lord shall go forth and fight
against those Nations, as he fought in the day of battle.] Zechary (says he)
tells the Jews, Certamen saepe vobis fuit, etc. i.e. You have often fought with
the strongest enemies; they have been conquered, and that when you have been by
far unequal in number and power. Seeing therefore the Lord has so often, and
so many ways cast down your enemies, why shall ye not hope for the same thing
from him; So he. Our new Annotations have many touches of a spiritual sense;
but many also for a literal, expressly or implicitly. On the second verse this,
Here the last destruction of Jerusalem seems more plainly described then before.
On the third verse this, As when he fought in the day of battle; that is, not
slightly but earnestly, as he did for Gideon, and diverse others, Judge. 7.22. On
ver. the fourth, Gods coming to defend his Church, shall be conspicuous and
glorious. On ver. the fifth, the very Jews themselves shall be afraid at the
presence of Gods appearance. It were needlessly tedious to recite the many
passages more they have, to the same effect, though they are very considerable
to our purpose, seeing the Reader knows where to find them.

SECT. LI.
Zechary we come to Malachi, where we will consider but one place, viz. Chapter
4. but that throughout, verse 1. For behold the day comes that shall burn as
an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble;
and the day that comes, shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it
shall leave them neither root nor branch. Verse. 2. But unto you that fear my
name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing in his wings; and ye
shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. Verse. 3. And ye shall tread
down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet, in the
day I shall do this, says the Lord of Hosts. Verse. 4. Remember the Law of
Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the
statutes and judgments. Verse. 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet,
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, Verse. 6. And be
shall turn the heart of the Fathers to the children, and the heart of the
children to their fathers, least I come and smite the Earth with a curse.

second coming of Christ, (as you may see in the Margent Paties Graeci and
Latini. Cyril. Theodor. Remig. Haymo. Albert. Hugo. Lyra. Chrysostom. Euthym.
Beda. Anselm. Hippol. lib. de Consum, s^culi. Cypr^ tract. de Sina. and Sion.
Ephrem. tract. de Antich. Prosper in dimidio temp. c. 13. Tertul. lib. de
anima. c. 35. Justin Mart. Dialog. contr. Tryph. Nyssen. lib. Testim. contr.
Judaeos. Augustinus, 20. Civit. Dei. Greg. 11. Moral. Andreas, Ambros. Rupert
and Arethas in Apocalyp. c. 11. Scholastici. Thomas in Matthew. 17. A Lapid. in
hoc cap. Malach. etc. Translatores. Septuag. in An^iq. exempl. Arab. quorum
utrique vertunt Elijam Thesbiten. Neoterici. Oecolamp. M. Mede. D. Mayer --
Sibyllae -- Tum quoque caelesti curru devectus inibit -- Terras de caelo
Thesbites, signaque trina -- Ostendettoti mundo vitae pereuntis -- Omnes Judaei
communi eorum sententia.
) to the number (if we should name all) as amounts (as Calvin confesses) to
the major part, that we shall go free from wonder, novelty, or singularity in
holding the same. Especially, if the Reader will take notice, that those that
incline to the other interpretation of Christ's first coming, as Calvin, our New
Annotations, etc. do ingenuously confess, that the things of this Chapter shall
not be completely fulfilled till the second coming of Christ. Jerome (our great
adversary) though on this Chapter he inveighs against the Jews and Judaizers,
for their expecting Elijah to come in person; yet (as A Lapide also has noted)
upon Matthew, chap. 11. verse. 14. and chap. 17. ver. 11. he clearly teaches,
that Elijah must come in person; which A Lapide endeavors to reconcile thus;
Because the Jews do yet expect the first coming of the Messiah, and that Elijah
in person shall be the forerunner of that his first coming. Therefore Jerome on
this Text reproves them; but Jerome yields that Elijah in person shall be the
forerunner of the Messiahs second coming Sunt qui propterea Johannem Heliam
votari, quod quodam modo IN SECUNDO SALVATORIS ADVENIU, JUXTA MALACHIAM
PRAECESSURUS EST HELIAS, and venturum Judicem nunciaturus: Sic Johannes in
primo adventu fecerit. ET UTERQUE FIT NUNCIUS, VEL PRIMI ADVENTUS DOMINI VEL
SECUNDI. Ierom in Matthew. 11.14. -- Ecce apparuit illis Moses and Elias, cum co
loquentes] Scribis and Pharisaeis tentantibus se, and de caelo signa
poscentibus, dare noluit, sed pravam postulationem con^utavit responsione
pindenti. Hic vero ut Apostolorum AUGEAT FIDEM, DAT SIGNUM DE CAELO, Elia inde
DESCENDENTE quo conscenderat, and Moyse ab inferis resurgente. ^erom on Matthew.
17.11.
. Thus Jerome. For my part, I shall endeavor rather to demonstrate, then (as the
manner of most is) to dictate, what I assert in the matters of this prophecy.

That this Chapter is of a state of the Church under the New Testament, I need
not labor much to prove; Malachy being the last Prophet of the Old Testament:
And that V. 2. of this Chapter of the rising of the Sun, etc. is applied to
Christ. John 1.9. Calling him the true light that lightneth every one, etc. As
that V. 5. of this Chapter touching Elijah, is applied by Christ, Matthew. 17.13.
in part to signify John Baptist, his harbenger.

to be a day that shall BURN AS AN OVEN, which shall burn up the proud and
wicked as stubble, leaving them neither root nor branch. Now observe.

1. This cannot be extended to the ultimate day of judgment, at the universal
resurrection of all the wicked, then cast into the lake of fire, Revel. 20.12,
etc. to the end of the Chapter; for these Reasons. First, Because at this day,
if not according to the order of the prophecy, after this dreadful and burning
day, in this first verse of the fourth of Malachi, Christ the Sun of
Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings, to them that fear his
name; and they shall GO FORTH, and shall GROW UP AS CALVES OF THE STALL, Ver.
2. Now this cannot be at that universal resurrection, and ultimate judgment;
at which time Christ has done healing, has finished his mediatorship, and
resigned up all his power to God the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and
the elect have done growing. Secondly, Because ver. 5. an Elijah must be sent
BEFORE THE COMING of the GREAT and DREADFUL day of the Lord; who shall turn the
heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their
fathers. Which is not a work to be done at, or near-upon that ultimate
judgment; but then he that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; then is a time of destruction, not of
conversion. Thirdly, Because it is added in the last verse of Malachi, That
Elijah must come, and shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children,
LEAST the Lord come, and SMITE THE EARTH WITH A CURSE. Now at the ultimate
judgment, there is no other smiting and cursing of the Earth, but with that
judgment it self, it swallowing up all other evils. And whether all parents or
children be converted, or not converted, that ultimate judgment will be ^ure
to come for the elects sake. As concerning who this Elijahs is, we shall
dispute it particularly by and by.. 2. On the other side, this prophecy cannot
be cut so short as to terminate in Christ's first coming. For then was no
dreadful day of the Lord so burning as a fiery oven, to burn up the proud and
wicked doers, root and branch. Christ's coming is set forth in Matthew. 21.5.
according to Isa. 62.11. Zech. 9.9. compared with Matthew. 11.29. Phil. 2.7, etc.
in all meekness, meanness, lowliness, and lowness. And although there were
wonderful days at his incarnation or birth, ( Luke 2. Matthew. 2.) at his
passion. ( Matthew. 27.) his resurrection, ( Matthew. 28.1, 2, 3, 4.) at his
ascension, ( Acts 1.) and at his mission of the Spirit, Acts 2. Yet these were
not THE great and dreadful day in the singular number, they being many: Or if
we call them DREADFUL, especially that of the resurrection and passion; yet
these days destroyed none: For it is observable, what Christ says, He came to
heal or help, not to destroy. And therefore though he cursed the fig tree to
warn men, yet with all his power and miracles, he never killed or crippled any
man; being infinitely injured, he revenged not; but rather healed Malchus, and
his enemies wounds and maladies. Yet see by this time, how straightly and
strongly we are butted and bounded with these two Paragraphs, that we cannot
fall so short as Christ's first coming; nor launch forth so far as to the
universal resurrection of all the wicked at the ultimate judgment.
upon the beginning, entrance, or prelude of the whole day of judgment,
containing a thousand years (as Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 3.) and bounded out
exactly ( Revel. 20.) with two physical or corporal resurrections, as we have
before amply opened Book 1. Cap. 2. Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4.
This we shall endeavor to demonstrate by these Arguments.

1. That burning of all the proud, and of all evil doers as stubble, leaving
them neither root nor branch, Ver. 1. And that trampling them under the feet of
the Saints as ashes, Ver. 3. must rather be referred to such a time set down in
the Scriptures, as most aptly answer to those particulars; then left at random
to the imaginary times in men's brains, of which we never read nor heard to
agree to their character. But these things do most harmoniously concord with
the times of the last ruining of the Antichristian enemies of the Church,
before the raising of it to her great restoration, and restitution of all
things, Rev. 18. wholly, and Rev. 19.11. to the end of the chapter, compared
with Rev. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Therefore thither are these things to be referred.
I hope the very setting down of the words will convince the ingenuous Reader;
where after a large and particular description with all manner of corporal
circumstances of the BURNING of Babylon, Rev. 18. There follows alike iconism,
or corporal characterism of the ruin of the rest of the Churches enemies by
fire and sword, Chap. 19. I saw Heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he
that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, in righteousness he does judge
and MAKE WAR. His eyes were as a FLAME OF FIRE, etc. and he was clothed with a
vesture DIPPED IN BLOOD, etc. And the ARMIES which were in Heaven followed him
upon white horses, etc. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword; that with it
he should smite the Nations. And he shall RULE them with a ROD OF IRON; and he
treads the wine press of the fierceness of the WRATH OF ALMIGHTY GOD, and he
has on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD
OF LORDS. And I saw another Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the FOWLS that fly in the midst of Heaven, Come and
gather your selves together unto the SUPPER of the Great God, that ye may eat
the FLESH of KINGS and the FLESH of CAPTAINS, and the FLESH of MIGHTY MEN, and
the FLESH of HORSES, and of them that sit on them; and the FLESH of ALL MEN,
both free and bond, both small and great. And I saw the BEAST and the KINGS of
the Earth, and their ARMIES gathered together to make WAR against him that sat
on the horse, and against his ARMY. And the BEAST was taken, and with him the
false Prophet, etc. these both were cast alive into the lake of fire, burning
with brimstone. And the REMNANT were SLAIN; and all the fouls were filled with
their flesh. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the keys of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand; and he laid hold on the Dragon,
etc. which is the Devil, and bound him a THOUSAND YEARS. And cast him into the
bottomless pit, that he should not deceive the Nations no more, till the
THOUSAND YEARS SHOULD BE FULFILLED; and after that he must be loosed a little
season. And I saw Thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment was given unto
them; and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus; and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither
his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in heir
hands, and they LIVED AND REIGNED WITH CHRIST A THOUSAND YEARS. But the rest of
the dead LIVED NOT AGAIN, until the THOUSAND YEARS WERE FINISHED. In which
words (opened laboriously before, in Book 1. Chap. 2. Sect. 1, 2, 3. and
several times else where) we have a burning and trampling, as in war, both to
purpose; destroying bond and free, great and small (answerable to root and
branch) set on foot by the metaphorical sword of Christ's mouth, his word,
prophesying and commanding the destruction of the Antichristian enemy; out
executed materially, with physical fire and sword, if so many material
expressions, and corporal circumstances can set it forth; ending in eternal:
and all this before the raising and reigning of the Saints at the beginning of
the Thousand years, and a full thousand years before the general execution of
all the wicked, body and soul in hell fire. For most emphatically it is said
in ver. 7, etc. to the end of the twentieth Chapter of the Revelation, that
after the THOUSAND YEARS WERE EXPIRED, that Satan were loosed, and had
deceived the Nations, that then he was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, WHERE THE BEAST and FALSE PROPHET ARE, or WERE, viz. before; in chap.
19. ver. 20. And with the Devil, the dead wicked, raised, and judged according
to the books there opened, are cast also into the lake of fire. Whether this
corporal destruction, as to means, be ordinary or miracu^ary, it alters not the
case. But to dream of a spiritual destruction by the Word, and to be set forth
by fire and war; and in a continued speech that sounds of nothing but
opposition against Christ to the very death, cannot appear to my best reason,
any better then a mere chimaera and imaginary fiction. And the rather, because
slaying of men, to the giving of their flesh to the fowls of the air, is
emphatically distinguished from casting the other ALIVE into the lake of fire;
as this casting of those alive into the lake of fire, is distinguished from the
general damnation in hell fire, in the last verse of the twentieth chapter.

. 2. That in the second verse of this fourth of Malachie [unto you that fear
his name, shall the son of righteousness arise with healing in his wings]
cannot be more fitly applied then to that 2 Pet. 1.19. The whole context runs
thus, Ver. 16. We have not followed cunningly devised tables when we made known
unto you the power and COMING of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, but were eye witnesses
of HIS Majesty. Ver. 17. For HE received from God the Father, honor and glory,
when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory. THIS ^S MY
BELOVED SON in whom I am well pleased. Ver. 18. And this voice which came from
heaven we heard, when we were with HIM in the holy Mount. Ver. 19. We have also
a more sure word of PROPHECY, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, a^
unto ^^^gh that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the DAY STAR
arise in your hearts. Peter in his first Epistle chap. 1. v. 1. writing to the
Jews (being their Apostle Gal. 2.7. as Paul was of the Gentiles, Romans 11.13.)
holds forth to these Jews in the words before quoted three things. 1. That all
along there he speaks of Christ. 2. That there is a twofold coming of Christ,
the one past when he wrote this second Epistle, viz. when he came at first in
the flesh, receiving that testimony by voice from heaven, Matthew. 17.5. before
mentioned in ver. 17. of this 2 Pet. 2. The other to come, held forth in a word
of Prophecy in this v. 19. which when it is fulfilled the day ((...)) shall
dawne, and the Day Star ((...)) shall arise, etc. 3. That this Day Star is
Christ, both by the contexture of Peter's speech before, being all of Christ, and
by the sense of the Day Star, which is the Sun; as the Moon, etc. is the
night-star, Psalm. 136.8 9. So that M^lachies Sun of Righteousness, arising
with healing in his wings (that is, in his beams) and Peter's Day Star shining
into the hearts of men, is all one. And lastly, by the Antithesis put between
the word of prophecy, named only a light shining in a dark place, as a
candle, or small star in the night, and the day star making full day; no person
being to be exalted above the word of the prophets but Christ, which Sun or
Day Star, when he shines with a full body upon the whole periphere or compass
of the Moon, his Church, he makes her full of light, that before had much
darkness mixed with her light. 3. The Apostle Peter holds forth to the Jews in
the continuation of his speech to them, When this Day Star shall arise in their
hearts, viz. when it shall shine in the generality of them; that is, that
Christ shall be effectually made known to the lump of the Jews (as Paul Romans
11. calls the Nation or body of them yet unconverted but in after time to be
converted;) so that the ALL OF ISRAEL (as is Paul's phrase there) SHALL BE
SAVED. And further that he shall with a dawning of the day, remove the long
night of their afflictions. For as for a spiritual shining by some grace in
the hearts of a few Jews, the Apostle acknowledges that to be now done
already, ver. 1. But this was but by or through a light shining in a dark
place. But hereafter when the day dawns, the Sun the Day Star shall arise in
their hearts: And this by the process of his speech shall be at the great
destruction of the enemies, and the restoration of the Church Chap. 3. For
mark the proceed of the Apostles discourse closely woven together; The Apostle
having mentioned an adherence to the word of Prophecy UNTIL the day dawn, and
the Day Star arise, etc. (which words plainly point at a time to come for the
fulfilling of it) he busies himself in nothing but in advancing the true
divine prophesies, dictated to holy men of God by his Spirit, and the
interpretation thereof according to the public tenor of the Prophets and
Apostles, ver. 20, 21. and declaiming against false Prophets, and false
Teachers, damnably teaching, and seducing the people chap. 2 throughout; I say,
he busies himself in nothing but in these two, till he return in the third
chapter to exhort the Jews afresh to be mindful of the words of the Prophets,
and consonantly of the words of Christ and his Apostles according to those
prophesies ver. 1, 2. To what end? Why now (as he declares himself
particularly) to observe the time when this prophecy shall have an end, that
the day may dawn, and the Day Star arise. Which (says he, ver. 3, 4, 5.6, 7.)
though some through wilful ignorance sooffe at the promise of CHRIST'S COMING,
yet be it a thousand years off, and more, all this to God is but as one day:
And when that time is come, that day shall be a thousand years. So that though
it seem long to men, yea, so long to impenitent men, as if he would never come,
yet he will be sure to come, and that suddenly, as a theife in the night, and
formidably to the wicked, as in form of a day of Doom, the Heavens passing
away, and the Elements melting and the works of the EARTH dissolving. But not
so to the Church, not so is the state of the Church, expressed with a keen
antithesis, NEVERTHELESS ( q. d. notwithstanding those high words, and huge
deeds. WE (believers) according to his PROMISE (that divine ancient promise so
particularly expressed Isa. 65.17, 18, 19, 20, etc.) look for new Heavens, and
a NEW EARTH, wherein dwells righteousness. Which cannot be the description of a
state in the highest Heavens, which were never worn old, nor made of earth,
nor without the inhabitation of righteousness. So that the result of Peter's
discourse is, that that Sun of righteousness, or Day Star shall rise and
radiate at the time of the dissolution of the power of the wicked, and the
restitution of all things for the glory of the Church on earth. Our often
touching upon this 2 Pet. 3. before, makes us speak so sparingly of it now.

. 3. That coming of Elijah (in the fifth verse) before this great day, must
signify an Elijah yet to come, either personally, or personatedly. For though
Elijah is said to come in part, personatedly in John Baptist, representing him,
by the similitude of his zeal in doctrine, and austerity of life, Matthew.
17.12. yet Elijahs coming is not totally, nor mainly fulfilled to this day. He
must yet come again either (as we said) personally, that is, he himself
individually in his own person; or else personatedly, that is, (if I may so
speak) specifically, represented by one of the like kind and degree of parts
exactly like unto him; viz. mighty in spirit and action, to do as aforesaid in
this context, to convert the heart of the Fathers to the children, before that
great day before mentioned yet to come, where he shall ( Matthew. 17.11.) RESTORE
ALL THINGS. That this truth may find the better entertainment in men's
apprehensions, I will for the most wave my obscure self, and sentence herein,
and present it in the words of diverse learned men wherein they urge their own
reasons for it.

. 4. The Scribes of and among the Jews (the clerick Classis of them, very
learned men in their generations, by office Expounders of the Law, Ezra. 7.6,
9. Luke 5.17. and 7.30.) asserted after John Baptists death, from this very
Text of Malachie, that Elijah was to come, Mat. 17.10. From them grounding on
that Text some of the twelve Disciples (after Christ had chosen them, and
endowed them with wonderful gifts, Matthew. 10.1, 2. etc. and had showed them
his transfiguration on the mount Mat. 17.1, 2, etc. to 9.) take up the same
Tenet, as worthy of consideration touching the coming of Elijah, and presses
it upon our Savior, in the same Mat. 17.10. the Lord Christ in answer to them
first does clearly acknowledge at that time, a good while after John Baptists
death For John Baptist was beheaded An. 32. after Christ's birth, and Christ's
transfiguration was An. 33. Buchol. Ad An. 32 33.
, That Elijah SHALL COME, and asserts it with a TRULY, as our Translators render
it, as indeed in sense so it is. And then Christ adds that when he comes, he
SHALL ((...)) restore all things. Which makes one maine objection, that John
Baptists time on earth, was not the ALL of Elijahs coming. Besides Christ
speaks of Elijahs coming so long after John Baptists death, in the present
tence ((...)) comes, as intimating that he is still coming, or yet to come.
So that as Christ comes twice, once past, another to come; so with a
proportionable decorum, his Harbenger comes twice, both times to usher in his
Master. The one is past in John Baptist, the other is to come, in him that is
still called and expected by the name of Elijah, as we shall see more by and by.

. 5. Of the Christians likewise long since Christ's ascension there are many men
of fame for piety and learning, both ancient and modern, that do not only
assert, but argue, expressly or couchedly, for the coming of Elijah, yet to be
fulfilled.

1. Tertullian (who flourished about the year one hundred and eighty after
Christ) in his Book concerning the Resurrection asserts, Quis inimicos Christi
jam subjecit pedibus ejus secundum David Psalm. 110? Quis coelo descendentem
Iesum talem conspexit, qualem ascendentem Apostoli viderant? Nulla ad hodiernum
tri bus ad tribum pectora cae^iderun^, ^g^oscentes q^e^ pu^ugerunt N^mo adhuc
EXCEPIT HELIAM. Nemo a^huc fugit Antichristum. Nem adhuc Babylon ^xitu^^ flevit
Tertu^. lib Ve Resur^ect. ^.22. Et ^cce mutam ^obis Heliom THESBITEN Sed ^nim
Metempsychosis illorum est revocatio animae jampridem morte functae and in
aliud corpus iteratae, HELIAS aut^m non ex decessione, sed ex translatione
venturus est; nec corpori restituendus, de quo non est exemptus, sed mundo
reddendus, de quo est translatius, non ex post liminio vitae, sed exsupplemente
prophetiae, idem and ipse and sui nominis, and sui bominis. Tertul. lib. de
Anima Cap. 35.
that Elijah after his time was to come, by the same reason that his coming is
a positively set down in Scripture to be a sign of Christ's second coming, as
any other signs. Some of his words are these, who has subjected Christ's
enemies under his feet, according to David (Psa. 8. Psa. 110.)? who has seen
Jesus so, or such a one, descending, as the Apostles saw him ascending (Act. I.
II.) There is no Tribe, with Tribe to this day smiting their breasts,
acknowledging him whom they have pierced, Zech. 12.10, etc. Matthew. 24.30. Rev.
1.7.) No man has yet RECEIVED ELIJAH ( Mal. 4.5. Mat. 17.11.) No man yet has
fled from Antichrist, Rev. 12.6. etc. he means from the persecutions of
Antichrist; for he was not in his time risen to that power as to persecute, nor
till long after. And (says Tertullian) no man has wept over the ruin of
Babylon, Rev. 18.9. etc. He goes on in another place thus, And behold I will
send you Helias the THESBITE. But indeed their Metempsychosis, or transmeation
of souls, is the revocation of a soul that having long since finished the
death (of that body to which it was united) is re-insta^ed in another body. But
Helias is to come, not from a departing out of this life (by death) but from
his Translation; neither is he to be restored to the body from which he was
never exempted, but to the world from whence he was translated, not by a
returning from death to life, but by supplement of the prophecy; the very same
man, and he himself, of his own name and humane nature. When Tertullian
says, THEIR Metempsychosis, he means the Philosophers, to whom he wrote that
book, and in particular the Pythagorean Philosophers, whom in the context of
the forecited place he mentions.

Quod dixit Dominus Heli as quidem venturus est, and re stituit omnia, id est
eos, quos persecutio Antichristi contur baverit August. Quest. Evang. c. 21.
Tom. 4. operum.
2. Augustine (who was Presbyter of the Church of Hippo about 391. after Christ)
affirmed the coming of Helias upon the words of Christ, Matthew. 17.11. because
he was to restore the ruins which the persecution of Antichrist should make
upon the Church. Some of his words are these; That our Lord has said, HELIAS
SHALL COME AND SHALL RESTORE ALL THINGS, that is, those whom the persecution of
Antichrist shall make desolate. Now Antichrist was not risen in John Baptists
time, and therefore John Baptist could not be that Elijah. And in Austins time
Antichrist had not done wasting; yea, the papal Antichrist had not at this time
of Austin, begun (hardly) to waste the Christian Church. And therefore he so
argued for Elijah yet to come.

(...) Theodoret in Malach. 4. v. 5. -- v. 6.
3. Theodoret likewise (who flourished about four hundred years after Christ)
argues for the future coming of Elijah (calling him Elijah the Great) from our
Text in Malachi the fourth, upon these grounds; That he must teach the Jews
Christ's coming, and persuade them to be integrated into one Church with
believing Gentiles. Which we see not yet done to this day.

Mr Mede on Mar. 1.14, 15. Diatr. par. 4. p. 1. etc.
4. Mr. Mede likewise is of the same judgment, and upon very good reason; with
the argument whereof he excellently closes this point thus; those words Mark.
1.14, 15. [ Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying, the time is
fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand, repent ye, and believe the
Gospel.] I say these words are a narration of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ his first beginning to preach, which they describe first by the time
when; Secondly, By the place where; Thirdly, By the sum of what he preached.

The time when, After that John was put into prison. The place where, Galilee;
Jesus came into Galilee. Lastly, The sum of what he preached, The time is
fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand, repent ye, and believe the
Gospel. In which Sermon there are also some parts to be considered, which we
shall more conveniently distinguish when we come to handle it. Mean while let
us begin with the three parts or circumstances already named, in order. And
first, of the first, The time when, After that John was cast into prison] Our
Savior began not his solemn preaching till his Messenger John the Baptist, who
was sent to prepare his way, was cast into prison. This circumstance is
elsewhere precisely noted in the Scripture so that we cannot doubt but there
is some matter of moment therein. For St. Matthew tells us, as St. Mark does,
Now when Jesus had heard, says he, that John was cast into prison, he departed
into Galilee; and then it follows, from that time Jesus began to Preach, and
to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. So St. Peter, Act. 10. when
he came to preach the Gospel of Christ to Cornelius, was careful to mention
this circumstance of time, as well as the other of place. The word, says he,
which God sent unto the children of Israel preaching peace by Jesus Christ (he
is Lord of all) That word (I say) you know which was published throughout all
Judea, began from Galilee after the baptism which John preached. Lo here the
place, where? Galilee, and the time, after that John had done, as in my Text.
All which argues this circumstance of time to be one of the marks of the true
Messiah; as namely, that this Jesus was the Lord whom they looked for, who was
to send a messenger before him, the voice of a crier in the wilderness, to
usher his preaching and prepare the way of his Gospel, as was prophesied in
Esaias and Malachi, and the Jews at that time expected. Which was the reason of
that scruple of the Disciples in the Gospel when they saw our Savior and
Elias, whom they supposed should be his forerunner, appear in glory, both
together in his transfiguration Why then, say they, do the Scribes say, that
Elias must first come? Our Savior tells them, that John the Baptist was that
Elias the forerunner of the Messiah, according to those words of his father
Zechary; And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest; for thou
shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his way. Namely, (as the
Angel told him) in the power and spirit of Elias, Luke 1. For this reason, as
our Savior was not conceived, nor born, till six months after John, so he
began not his prophecy till John had done, that so the Scripture might be
fulfilled, and John be his forerunner and the messenger both in one and the
other: John's beginning to baptize, and his casting into prison, was between
Christ's prophecy and his. And lastly, to conclude the illustration of this
circumstance, John was not only a forerunner of our Savior in his nativity,
and prophecy, but also in his passion and suffering: For so our Savior
himself expressly says Mat. 17.12. Elias is come, and they knew him not, but
have done unto him what ever they listed; even so also shall the Son of man
suffer of them. Now the observation, or if you will the consideration, I will
make upon this circumstance shall be this, If that Messiah according to
prophecy were to have a Harbinger to prepare the way for his coming, and the
holy Ghost in the new Testament thought this circumstance so needful to prove
the verity thereof, as so curiously to note it in the History of his Nativity,
Preaching, and Suffering; It would be considered (seeing the coming of Christ
is two fold, the first and second) whether the same prophecy imply not that
there should be an Harbinger as well of his second coming as of his first; as
well an Elias to prepare the way for his coming in glory to judge the world, as
there was at his first coming in humility to preach the Gospel, and suffer for
the world. And Elias I mean, to be the Harbinger of Christ to the Nation of the
Jews, before his second coming, as John Baptist was at his first. For to the
Jews alone is this Elias promised, and not to the Gentiles, and John Baptist
we know (the Elias of his first coming) preached to them alone. It is well
known that all the Fathers (unless S. Hierome somewhat staggered) were of this
opinion: and why we should so wholly reject it as we are wont to do, I can see
no sufficient reason. For if the Fathers erred concerning the person and other
circumstances of this Elias, yet it follows not but the substance of their
opinion might be true. As we know also they erred concerning the person,
quality, and reign of Antichrist, and yet for the substance the thing was true.
Our Savior rejected not the tradition of the Scribes concerning the coming of
this Elias, when the Apostles objected it, though it were mingled with some
falsehood, but corrected it only; for they looked for Elias the Thisbite; but
our Savior admits it only of Elias in Spirit, not of Elias in person; so
yielding it true for the substance, though erring in circumstance; so should we
do in the like case: For he that throws away what he finds, because it is
foul and dirty, may perchance sometimes cast away a Jewel, or a piece of
gold, or silver: so he that wholly rejects an ancient Tenet because it has
some error annexed to it, may unawares cast away a Truth; as this seems to be
of an Elias to be the Harbinger of Christ's second coming: And that for these
reasons. First, Though the prophecy of Esaias, The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight, alleged
by all the four Evangelists, and by John himself, seems appliable only to the
first coming of Christ; yet the other out of Malachi (expressly quoted by St.
Mark, and by our Savior Mat. 11, though elsewhere alluded unto) seems by
Malachi himself to be applied not only to the first coming of Christ, but also
to his second coming to judgment. For in his last chapter speaking of the
coming of that day which shall burn like an oven, wherein all the pround, yea,
and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble, and it shall burn them up,
leaving neither root nor branch, etc. he adds, Behold (says the Lord) I will
send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of that great and terrible day
of the Lord, and he shall turn [or restore] the heart of the fathers to their
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come, and
smite the earth with a curse. If you will not admit the day here described to be
the day of judgment, I know scarce any description of that day in the old
Testament, but we may elude. For the phrase of turning, (or as I had rather
translate it, restoring, as the LXX. (...)) the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, the meaning is, that
this Elias should bring the refractary and unbeleeving posterity of the Jewish
nation to have the same heart and mind their holy Fathers and Progenitors had,
who feared God, and believed his promises; that so their Fathers might as it
were rejoice in them, and own them for their children; that is, he should
convert them to the faith of that Christ whom their Fathers hoped in, and
looked for, lest continuing obstinate in their unbelief till the great day of
Christ's second coming, they might perish among the rest of the enemies of his
kingdom. Therefore the Son of Syrach in his praise of Elias the This bite
paraphraseth this place after this manner: who wast ordained (says he) an
(...) or type (for so it may be turned) for the times to come, to pacify the
wrath of the Lords judgment before it break forth into fury, and to turn the
heart of the Father unto the Son, and to restore the tribes of Israel, Eccles.
48.10. which explication also the Angel warranteth, Luke 1.17. in his message
to Zachary concerning his son, He shall go, says he, before the Lord in the
spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children,
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just (this is instead of reducing the
hearts of the children to the Fathers) to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord.

For the better understanding of this first reason we must know, that the old
Prophets for the most part spoke of the coming of Christ indefinitely and in
general, without that distinction of first and second coming, which we have
more clearly learned in the Gospel. For this reason those Prophets (except
Daniel, who distinguishes those comings, and the Gospel out of him) that
speak of the things which should be at the coming of Christ indefinitely and
all together: we who are now more fully informed by the revelation of his
Gospel of this distinction of a twofold coming, must apply each of them to its
proper time: Those things which befit the state of his first coming unto it,
and such things as befit the state of his second coming unto his second: And
that which befits both alike (as this of an Harbinger or Messenger) may be
applied to both. My second reason for the proof hereof is from our Saviors
own words in the Gospel, Mat. 17.10, 11. where his Disciples immediately upon
his transfiguration asking him, saying, Why then say the Scribes that Elias
must first come? Our Savior answers, Elias truly shall first come (...) and
shall restore all things: These words our Savior spoke when John Baptist was
now beheaded, and yet speaks as of a thing future, (...), Elias shall come and
shall restore all things. How can this be spoken of John Baptist, unless he be
to come again? Besides, I cannot see how this restoring of all things can be
verified of the ministry of John Baptist at the first coming of Christ, which
continued but a very short time, and did no such thing as these words seem to
imply; for the restoring of all things belongs not to the first, but to the
second coming of Christ, if we will believe St. Peter in his first Sermon in
the Temple after Christ's ascension, Acts 3.19. where he thus speaks unto the
Jews, Repent (says he) and be converted for the blotting out of your sins,
that the times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that
he may send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you, whom the heavens
must receive until the times of the restitution of all things, which God has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. The word is
the same (...). If the time of restoring all things be not til the second
coming of Christ, how could John Baptist restore all things as his first? If
the Master come not to restore all things at his first? surely his harbinger,
who is to prepare his way for restoring all things, is not to be looked for till
then. These are the reasons which have induced me to think that the opinion
which the Church has had, as far as I know from her infancy, of an Elias
which should be the Harbinger of Christ's second coming, has some matter of
truth in it. But that this Elias should be Elias the Thisbite who was taken up
unto heaven, I confess I believe not any more, then that he should be slain
by Antichrist, as some fable. For that which the Prophet says, Behold, I will
send you Elijah the Prophet, proves no more that it should ^e Elijah in person,
then that which is said of Messiah (And David my servant shall rule over them)
proves Christ should be David in person. It is much more like, if it be one
that comes again, it should be John Baptist himself, who was the Harbinger of
the first coming: That as Christ himself the Master had two commings, so
should his Harbinger have; and as it shall be the same Christ which comes the
second time that came the first, so should his Harbinger be the same. And to
this both the words of the Angel to Zachary the father of the Baptist, and the
words of our Savior in the place before quoted, would not be unappliable. The
second coming of Christ is the time of the resurrection, and in that respect it
would not be unsuitable for the Harbinger thereof to be one risen from the
dead. But as for Elias the Thisbites coming I find no ground at all, but the
contrary. Howsoever though I compare probabilities, I will not determine any
thing, lest some perhaps should say, that while I reject old fables, I coin
new ones: I rather conclude, Cum Elias venerit, solvet nodos; when that Elias
comes, he shall dissolve hard questions. Thus far Mr. Mede.

6. Thus we see according to the judgment and reason of learned pious men,
Elijah must come, a little before the second or next coming of Christ, when
shall begin the great restitution of all things. But we never heard of any
Elijah, or of any great Prophet of the Jews converting, or endeavoring the
conversion of the Jews to the true Messiah, since the deceasing of the
Apostles. But they continue still blinded, according to Romans 11.25. and
therefore this Elijah is yet to come, and consequently, this Prophecy of
Malachie is yet unfulfilled. Thus much of proofs out of the Old Testament.

CHAP. III.
The inconsiderablenesse, and inconsiderateness of some ancient Authors
verbal glancings against what we have alleged for our general Thesis in the
fore quoted places of Scripture taken into consideration, whereby it is cleared
that they are justly to be condemned in their own way, and out of their own
words.

SECT. I.
A general Survey of the authority of men's words, or writings.

Humane Writers, we are not to be moved more then with wind; as the Apostle
calls such dictates, wind of Doctrine, and names them Children, that will be
tossed to and fro with the blasts thereof, Ephesians. 4.14.

as many of equal qualifications on the other side. But if we produce more,
then upon this account purely the former are out-weighed. We quoted before in
our first Book (it being the very business thereof) a multitude of all sorts
of learned men of our judgment. And in the next, viz. the fourth Book, we
shall quote as many more as will amount to little less then will signify our
opinion to be even ^he voice of the Law of Nature in all men. And for this
particular fourth Chapter of Malachie, we mustered up before In the 2.. of this
present 51. Section.
very many of the learned, that held on our side, that it prophesied of Christ's
second coming, where we brought you also Calvin's confession, that the All of
that mind, were the major part of Commentators.

compos) both being a kind of revelation. But if an hundred men should affirm
a thing in words, without evincing Arguments, the Heathen would soon answer;
Socrates is my friend, and Plato is my friend, but a greater friend is truth.

SECT. II.
JEROMS jerkings at the precedent proofs, discussed.

[ Erom (who flourished about three hundred and ninety years after Christ) in
his Commentations on the Old Testament, gives many jerks at the opinion of a
glorious time of the thousand years, and at the proofs thence alleged by
learned Jews and Christians, upon as Is. 54.1, etc. to 12 -- chapter 60. ver. 1 --
chapter 66.22. Jerem. 31.27. to 39. Ezech. 16.55. chap. 36. to ver. 12. chap. 37
ver. 15. chap. 38. chap. 39. Micha 4. Zach. 14. to ver. 10. but therein Jerome
confesses against himself, that that opinion was ancienter then himself, and
that those places were so long since urged for proof thereof.

Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins ran that way; See our first Book.
and therefore wise men much wonder how Jerome raised, and rubbed himself to
that animosity and boldness, to swim against the stream, unless he could
have brought in a tide of over-mastering demonstrations.

Ecclesiastical men and Martyrs were against him. And we may perceive that his
objecting that the expectation of Oblations and Sacrifices were mixed with
their opinion, was no demonstration upon his Conscience, he only saying so, not
peremptorily condemning it (to which should seem he was prone enough, if he
had been as free in his spirit) but rather permitting men of that fame, therein
to abound in their own sense. For, 1. His own words on Jerem. 19.10. [Then
shall thou break the bottle in the sight of the men] are these; Et conteres,
etc. Perspicue non de Babylonia, sed Romana dicitur captivitate, post
Babylonios quippe, and urbs instaurata, and populus reductus in Indaeam, and
^bundantiae pristinae restitutus est. Post captivatem au^em quae sub Vespasiano
and ^ito; and postea accidit sub Hadriano, usque ad consummationem seculi,
^uinae Jerusalem permansu^ae sunt; quanquam sibi Iudei auream, atque gemmatam
Jerusalem restituendam putent; rursumque victim. (...), and sacrificia, and
conjugia Sanctorum, and regnum in ter^is Domini salvatoris. Quae l^cet non
sequ^mur, tamen d^^mar^ (...) p^ssumus; Quia mul^i ECCLESIASTICORUM VIRORUM ET
MARTYRS ista dixcru^t. Et ^^usquis^que in suo sensu a^und^t, and Domini cuncta
judicio reserventur. Quomodo autem vas fict le, and test^ceum si ^tactum ^u^^
it, in actiquam speciem non potest reformari, si^ et populus Judaeorum, and
Jerusalem subversa, statum pristinum non habebune, Hieronymus in I^rem. 19.10.
This is evidently spoken, not of the Babylonian, but of the Roman captivity;
for after the Babylonians, both the City is rebuilt, and the people brought
back to Judea, are restored to their ancient abundance; but after the Captivity
that happened under Vespasian, and Titus, and after that under Hadrian, the
ruins of Jerusalem shall remain unto the end of the world, although the Jews
imagine that a golden, and gemmed Jerusalem shall be restored unto them; and
that again they shall have oblations, and Sacrifices, and the marriages of
Saints, and the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior upon earth. Which things,
though we follow not their opinion, yet we cannot condemn, because many
Ecclesiastical men, and Martyrs have said the same. And let every one abound
in his own sense, and all be reserved to the judgment of the Lord. But look
how a Potters vessel of earth, if broken, cannot be again formed into its
former shape, so the people of the Jews, and the City of Jerusalem being
subverted, they shall never have their ancient state. Thus Jerome, in which
words observe; 1. That all we asserted in the former. is here represented to a
syllable before your eyes. 2. That his argument he urges against the Jews
restoration after their Romish destruction, is as weak as the earthen bottle
whereof he makes the foundation of it. For he overstretcheth the Prophets
comparison, who therein intended only a total or universal dispersion of the
Jews, but not a final destruction; this selfsame Prophet elsewhere, and of
the rest the most in all the old Testament (as we have largely discussed)
prophesying, and describing to the life the glorious restoration of the Jews,
yea, and of the Israelites too. And as Ierom formally urges the argument; he
does seem to ground himself upon the impossibility of that restoration, as of
re-forming a broken earthen bottle; and so with a byblow smites our hope of the
resurrection, because that may seem to men impossible: But believers must not
go upon that ground in dispute. It is a like easy for God to do, as to say,
witness his fiat, let it be so, in the creation. Yea, the comparison it self
prompts a possibility and probability; that as after a broken earthen bottle is
mellowed and mouldered again into clay, may be new formed into a bottle: so
after the deep desolations of the Jews, they shall be restored again, as the
Prophet Daniel chap. 12. v. 2. gives it us, in a like comparison; and the
Apostle after him, Romans 11. v. 15. viz. of bodies turned to dust or clay,
reviving to life, which metaphors are higher then the new-forming of an earthen
broken bottle.. 2. Collate with Jeromes words, the words of that most ancient,
pious, and learned Justin Martyr, in his very discuss of the future glorious
restoration of the Jews and of the universal Church, and that in his
Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, (...). Justin Mart. in Dialog. cum Tryph. p.
340. Ed^t. Graec. Lat. Pa^is. A. D. 1636.
and we shall find that Ierom did wrong in saying they expected again Jewish
Oblations and Sacrifices. Justin Martyrs words are these, For he is the
excellent chief Priest and eternal King, CHRIST himself, as the Son of God,
in whose coming again, ye may not think that Isaiah, or others of the Prophets
did teach that the Sacrifices of blood, or Oblations should be offered upon the
Altar, but true, and spiritual praises with thanksgivings. For indeed we do
not in vain hope in him, neither are we seduced from those that so teach. Thus
Justin. In which words you see clearly the opinion of the religious learned
Ancients, Jewish Prophets etc. (of whom Justin speaks in the Plural) that
their opinion, yea, and faith, and hope was contrary to the sense that Jerome
would put upon them.. 3. Jerome himself has confessed the same sense with us of
diverse places before alleged for our opinion, as on Hos. 3.4. Book 3. chap.
2. Sect 39, on Mat. 11.14. on Mat. 17.14. etc. Book 3. cha. 2. Sect. 51.
Margent, and elsewhere.. 4. Hear Mr. Medes answer to all Ieroms speeches
against us, on those places of Scripture before quoted. 1. Sed fidem tuam
Hieronyme! qui cum Dionysio tuo Alexandrino etc. i. e. But O thy faithful
dealing O Ierom! who together with thy Dionysius Alex. do fasten upon the
opinion of the Millenaries, that the injury of circumsicion, the blood of
Sacrifices, and the rest of the legal Ceremonies, are again to be restored
after their supposed death; Indeed those things which Jews, or perhaps
Heretics out of Iudaisme dreamed concerning their Millenarie, you odiously
dash upon the Christians. But has this becommed your candor? Yea, thou Ierom
no more but thy self being judge, do bewray thy crimination to be false. For
so thou writest on Jer. 19.5. Post captivitatem quae sub Vespasiano, that is,
After the captivity which happened under Vespasian and Titus, and after under
Hadrian, the ruins of Jerusalem, are to continue to the end of the world;
albeit the Jews do think that there shall be restored unto them a golden and
gemmed Jerusalem; and that again ethere shall be oblations and sacrifices, and
the marriages of the Saints, and the Kingdom of the LORD our SAVIOR upon
earth, which although we follow not, yet we cannot condemn, because many
Ecclesiastical men and Martyrs have so said. These are thy word O Jerome. But
prithee tell me; did those Ecclesiastical men and holy Martyrs say, that
circumcision and sacrifices should at the time of Christ's Kingdom be restored?
take heed of saying so. For certainly they taught the contrary, as may be
confirmed out of Justin Martyrs Dialogue with Trypho etc. or if thou had
certainly known they had so believed, would not thou have condemned them
without any demur? Thus Mr. Mede.


SECT. III.
Of the words of GAIUS, seconded by DIONYSIUS ALEXANDRINUS, both falsely
fathering our opinion upon CERINTHUS, and injuriously mingling therewith, such
impieties as our souls abhor; yet so far credited by EUSEBIUS PAMPHYLIUS,
therein too credulous, as that they are alleged by him for history without
putting any check upon them. (...), etc. Eusebius. Pamphil. lib. 3. cap. juxta
Graec. 26. and 27. juxta la^motas in Irenaeo. and juxta Aug. cap. 24, 25
In the discuss whereof, our Opinion of the THOUSAND YEARS is VINDICATED from
VOLUPTUOUS CHILIASME.

THE whole story is this. About the same time (viz. of the Sect of the
Ebionites) we learn that there was one Cerinthus, an Author of another
Heresy. Gaius, whose words we have aforealleadged, in the controversy carried
about in his name, writes thus of him. CERINTHUS also by revelations written
as of a great Apostle, brought unto us certain monstrous things, faining them
to have been revealed unto him by Angels; that the Kingdom of Christ after the
resurrection, should become earthly; that in Jerusalem our flesh again should
serve concupiscence, and the lust of the flesh. And being wholly set to seduce,
as an enemy to the word of God, he said there should be the term of a
MILLENARIE feast allotted for marriage. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in his
second Book, after he had remembered the Revelation of Saint John received by
tradition of OLD, he reports of this man CERINTHUS, thus; CERINTHUS which
founded the Cerinthian Heresy, gave his figment a name, for the further credit
thereof. His kind of Doctrine was this, he dreamed the Kingdom of Christ
should become earthly, and set upon those things which he lusted after, now
being covered with his flesh, and conpassed in his skin, that is, the
satisfying of the belly, and (...) eum quae sub ventre sunt, with meat, with
drink, with marriage. And that he might the more colourably bring his devilish
devices to pass, he dedicated thereunto Holy Days, Oblations and slaughter for
Sacrifices. So far Dionysius. But IRENAEUS in his first Book against Heresies
lays down certain more detestable opinions of his. And in his third book he
reports an history, worthy the memory, as received by tradition of Polycarp,
saying, That John the Apostle on a certain time entered into a Bath, to bathe
himself; and understanding that CERINTHUS was therein bathing himself, John
started aside, and departed forth; not abiding to tarry with him under the same
roof, signifying the same to his company, and saying, let us speedily go
hence, lest the Bath come to fall, wherein CERINTHUS, the enemy of the truth,
batheth himself. Thus Irenaeus. And thus you have heard at full Eusebius his
report of the whole matter.

To prepare, and make way for an answer whereunto, let the Reader take notice,
that if Cerinthus did say that the Kingdom of Christ after the resurrection
should become earthly, yet we say not so; though we affirm that the Church
shall be resident on earth for a thousand years after the first resurrection
(as it is called Rev. 20.) that is the resurrection of all believers (as it is
explained Rev. 11.) For the true Church of believers has been on earth from
the creation to this day, and yet, as believers not earthly, but the spiritual
body of Christ. The holy Angels and Christ Jesus have conversed on earth, and
yet they were not thereby earthly. And if Cerinthus said, That in Jerusalem our
flesh again should serve the concupiscence, and lust of the flesh, etc. Yet
our souls abhor any thought thereof.

But indeed Cerinthus, for ought we can find by diligent search into the
ancientest and most approved antiquity, did not say any such thing; nor did he
meddle with our opinion at all in the particulars thereof. And therefore we
have more cause to suspect Eusebius, Gaius, and Dionysius to be guilty of too
light credulity, then to accuse Cerinthus of that we cannot groundedly charge
him withal. We deny not Cerinthus to be an Heretic (as the Ancients call him)
holding diverse great impieties: But we cannot believe Eusebius, Gaius, and
Dionysius, that he was guilty of those things they charge upon him in relation
to our opinion.

To this purpose, hear Mr. Medes Opuscul: Lat: Ad rem Apoca: spect. par: 2^ p:
55.
answer, An non hinc merito quis suspicari possit Gajum istum, etc. i. e. May
not one justly hence suspect that same Gaius to have been one of the number of
the heretical Alogi Alogi are according to the signification of the word, men
without the word, or without reason. And therefore by the Ancients often called
Brutes, and charged with denying the word of God both the axiomatical, in the
etter, and the substantial viz Christ in the flesh:
, which Alogi, or Alogians denied, says Epiphanius (...) Dei, THE WORD OF GOD,
and therefore they ascribed to Cerinthus, as well the Gospel of John, as the
Apocalypse? The time does altogether agree to that; For Theodotus the Champion
of the Alogian Standard, was cast out of the Church by Pope Victor; and Gaius
flourished in the time of Zephirus, who next succeeded Victorius.
Nevertheless, the words of Gaius (...) etc. lo^: citat: 1. hujus Sect. 3.
may be taken in that sense, as if he had said, Cerinthus had feignedly
fathered upon the great Apostle, I know not what Apocalypses (beside that one
and only Apocalypse) out of which feigned Apocalypses that forging fellow
endeavored to prove that after the resurrection, the Kingdom of Christ should
be earthly, wherein men should serve the lusts of the flesh, and the
inticements of carnal pleasures. But what ever was the mind of Gaius, it is
very likely he was deceived concerning Cerinthus. For if this had been the
Heresy of Cerinthus, how could it be that Justin, Irenaeus, Melito,
Tertullian, and Hippolytus should be ignorant of it; of whom, Irenaeus and
Tertullian have purposedly numbered up the Heresies of Cerinthus? but of that
heresy, deep silence. How therefore came it to be known to Gaius?
Nevertheless it seems that the words of Gaius, an obscure fellow, gave
occasion to Dionysius Alexandrinus, Eusebius, and many others, in the heat of
contention with the millenaries, to doubt of the authority of the Apocalypse.
Thus Mr. Mede.

Gaius and Dionysius, and the story of Eusebius alleging them, are not to be
weighed in this matter. My reasons are,

. 1. If Eusebius, and Dionysius, yea, and Gaius himself doubted of the au^henty
of the Apocalypse in opposition to our opinion, of the glorious state of the
Church with a visible, yet spiritual glory for a thousand years yet to come,
they must needs be misled thereunto by mistakes, untruths, and false reports.
For there is no just reason to doubt of the divine authority of the book of the
Revelation, Nor is there any thing in our Tenet, unbecoming that divine book,
nor dissentanious therefrom, but is more evidently held forth there then in
any other book of the Scripture. 2. Irenaeus and Tertullian, and I add
Epiphanius naming Cerinthus, and particularizing his heretical opinions, have
not one word of his holding any thing of our opinion. Iren. lib. 1. ca. 25.
(quoting in Marg. Eusebius. l. 3. cap: 25:) and Iren: l: 3: c: 3:
1. Irenaeus mentions Cerinthus, and his wicked opinions, and wickedness
twice, yet has nothing of his holding our Tenet, either in the same words with
us, or in others of any proportion; although Erasmus or Grineus, or both in
their marginall notes do well mind what Eusebius had said quoting the place.
All that Cerinthus held, as Irenaeus reports the matter was, Cerinthus autem
quidam in Asia, etc. i. e. And there was one Cerinthus in Asia, who taught that
the world was not made by the first chief God, but by a certain power that
was exceedingly separated and distant from that principality who is over all
things; Et ignorante eo, quiest super omnia Deo. He alleged that Jesus was
not borne of a Virgin (for that seemed impossible to him) but was the son of
Joseph and Mary, like as other men. But could do more, (or was more potent, by
his righteousness, prudence, sapience above all; and after his baptism Christ
descended upon him in the figure of a Dove, from that principality which is
over all, and then declared the unknown Father, and perfected his virtues; and
in the end Christ fled away from Jesus, and Jesus suffered and rose, but Christ
being impassible, impatible, or unpassive, continued in his spiritual
existence. And there are that heard Polycarp say, that because John the
Disciple of Christ going into a Bath in Ephesus to be washed, saw Cerinthus in
the Bath, he the said John ^eaped out of the Bath unwashed, saying, that he
feared least the Bath should fall, whiles Cerinthus an enemy of the truth was
in it. And this is all Irenaeus says of Cerinthus or his opinions. Tertul. De
prescrip. adver. A^reticos cap: 48.
2. All that Tertullian has concerning Cerinthus and his opinions is this.
Carpocrates praeterea hanc tulit sectam, etc. i. e. Furthermore Carpocrates
brought forth this Sect. He says that there is one principal power in the
highest; by this the Angels, and Powers, or Virtues were brought forth. Which
Angels being far distant from the supreme virtues or powers, did create that
world in the inferior parts. That Christ was not born of the Virgin Mary, but
was begotten of the seed of Joseph, as a mere man. Indeed he was better then
others in the adorning of righteousness, and integrity of life: He suffered
among the Jews, only his soul was received up into heaven, because he was
more constant and stronger then others. Whence he would collect, that there are
no resurrections of the body, only he retained the In the ordinary copies it is
teniata a^imarum sola salute: But Junius in his notes on Tertul: says,
legendum censceo retenta animapum sola salute. Vocem autem illam retenta
latinius repoui monuit oporicre.
salvation of souls. After this man, CERINTHUS the Heretic broke out
teaching the LIKE THINGS. For he also says, that the world was ordained by
them (those Angels aforesaid.) He publishes or declares that Christ was born
of the seed of Joseph, contending that he was only a man, without the divinity.
Giving forth also, that the law was given by Angels. And tells us that the God
of the Jews was not the LORD, but an Angel. Thus far, and no further
Tertullian of Cerinthus and his opinions. Epiphan: l. 1. contra ^aeres. Tom 2.
Haeres. 28.
3. Epiphanius speaks more largely, because he mentions not only Cerinthus,
but his heretical succeeding race, and does not only relate, but confute their
Heresies; yet has not Epiphanius one word from first to last of his or their
holding any thing of our Tenet. Cerinthus porro rursus, a quo Cerinthiani
dicuntur, etc. Furthermore (says Epiphanius) Cerinthus, of whom are named the
Cerinthians, did out of this bestiall spawn of these creepers, bring again into
the world a poison. But nothing more, almost, but the aforesaid Carpocras.
Indeed he brings forth into the world the same mischeivous poisons. For he
vomits out against Christ the same calumnies as did the said Carpocras; as that
Christ was begotten of the seed of Mary and Joseph. And likewise that the world
was made by Angels. For this man varied nothing from the former, in the
introduction of his Doctrine, saving in this only, that in part he to as
addicted to Judaisme. He also asserteth that the Law and the Prophets were
given by Angels; and he that gave the Law, was one of those Angelis that made
the world. This CERINTHUS lived in Asia, and there made the beginning of his
preaching. Now let us speak of this man, that he also preached, That the world
was not made by the first and supreme power, but from them above, and the
supreme God there descended upon Jesus (after he was of ripe years, having
been begotten of the seed of Joseph and Mary) Christ, that is, the holy Spirit,
in shape of a Dove at Jordan, and revealed to him, and by him to his posterity
the unknown Father. And thereupon after virtue or power came upon him from them
above, he did wonders. And that when he suffered, that which came from above,
fled away again from Jesus. That Jesus indeed suffered, and rose again. But
Christ that came upon him from above, fled away again unhurt upward from Jesus,
that is, that which came descending in the shape of a Dove. And that Jesus was
not Christ. But this man also erred, as all you that are the friends of truth
do plainly see. For he says, the Lawgiver was not good, whose Law he seems to
obey. And it is plain he obeys it as seeming good. How then did one that is
evil give a good Law, etc? But the man is mad, who enters upon such things.
Furthermore, my dear friends, this is one of them that caused trouble before,
or in the presence, or times of the Apostles touching circumsition ( Act.
15.34.) And this is one of them that resisted Peter touching his going to
uncircumcised Cornelius, Act. 11. 2, 3. These things were then handled and
moved by this aforesaid false Apostle Cerinthus. Even he and his Companions at
another time raised sedition at Jerusalem, when Paul returned with Titus, Act.
21.27, 28. etc. compared with Gal. 2.1, 2, 3. These are they that Paul calls
false Apostles, deceiful workers, transforming themselves into Apostles of
Christ. For they use the Gospel according to Matthew in part, not wholly. But
for that speech of generation in the flesh, they bring that testimony out of
the Gospel. It is sufficient to the Disciple, that he be as his Master. What
therefore say they? Jesus was circumcised, be thou also circumcised. Christ
walked according to the Law; do thou likewise. But they refuse Paul, because he
was not obedient to Circumcision; ye reject him, because he said, As many of
you as are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace; and if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. This same Cerinthus also being a
fool, and a Master of fools, rashly durst further say, that Christ suffered,
and was crucified, but was not yet risen again. But shall rise when the
universal resurrection of the dead shall be. Therefore with them their words
and opinions are unconstant; against this Paul disputes 1 Cor. 15. etc.
Therefore every way Cerinthus is easy to be reprehended, and they that are
deceived by him Thus ye have the whole of what Epiphanius speaks of the
particulars of Cerinthus his opinions.

Cerinthus held no wanton voluptuous chiliasme; nor spoke he any thing at all
of the Millenaries, though Tertullian, and Irenaeus lived above an hundred
years nearer to Cerinthus his time then did Eusebius. And therefore wise men
cannot but wonder that Eusebius should tell us such stories. And wonder the
more, because Epiphanius, on the other side, (that gave himself ten times more
to inquire into opinions then Eusebius) flourishing about 30 years after
Eusebius his death Eusebius: dyed about the year 339. and Epith. flourished about
the year 365.
does neither himself find any such opinion held by Cerinthus or his Sect;
nor does he mention it as reported by Eusebius, or his Gaius, or Dionysius, or
any other. And thus (praise to Jehovah) of the places in the Old Testament.

CHAP. IV.
Of the places in the New Testament, proving our general Thesis, viz. That
there shall be yet before the ultimate general Judgment, a most glorious
visible state of the Church on earth for many years, wherein the Saints shall
reign and triumph over all their enemies, and there shall be a Restitution of
all things, like as a new Creation.

SECT. I.
Of our New Testament proofs, we have occasionally opened so many, and so much
to explain the Prophets, that we have greatly anticipated our selves, and
happily made our work so short in this, that hence there is no fear of
tediousness to the reader.

Matthew. 24.13, 14. But he that shall endure to the end shall be saved. And this
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto
all Nations, and then shall the end come. That antitheticall BUT, points at a
time immediately following the universal transcendent impieties of the wicked
world, mentioned verse. 10, 11, 12. which by the Apostles in their Epistles * is
often prognosticated to be as the night, 2 These. 2.3. 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Timothy 3.1.
Compare 2 Timothy 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.1. Compare 2 Pet. 3. ver. 3 and ver. 12.
preceding the Sunrising of that glory of which we speak. The end here
mentioned must needs be the end of the world, not of Jerusalem, as we have
before analitically demonstrated on this twenty fourth of Matthew, p. 102.
Sect. 9. And this end must be of the wicked world; that is, of the world as
wicked, not of the world as a world, or material substance: else why does our
Savior mention enduring; and of preaching the Gospel for a witness to all
Nations? For when the time of the aforesaid glorious state of the Church
throughout the whole earth is come (called the restitution of all things, Acts
3.21.) there will be no putting of men to be saved, upon enduring, or
suffering, they now are saved, and glory has dispelled suffering. And
consequently there will be no need of making the Gospel a testimony against all
Nations, to which at this time all that survive shall altogether submit, as to
all appearance. The end therefore here intended is the end of the world as a
sinful world, then to be turned into a glorious Kingdom, as well as the
world, formed by the Gospel, preached in all the world, to all Nations; to
which, at which time Christ shall gloriously appear, and radiat upon it on
earth, as we have largely demonstrated on the thirtieth verse, etc. of this
twenty fourth of Matthew, p. 82. Sect. 3. etc. The sign immediately antecedent
to this end (to be transformed into that glorious beginning) I say the sign,
prognostic, or causal sign, is the preaching of the Gospel in all the world
to all Nations, which is a glorious prelude; This radiant Sun softning all good
generous plants to a flowing of sap into the flowers of Gods Garden, or
fruit trees of his Fortward, though it hardens the dead earth into stones, to
be trampled and broken by the prancings of victorious judgments upon them, as
other Scriptures (before opened) abundantly enlarge.



1. That such an end must be here meant as cannot be applied to the destruction
of Jerusalem, but to the time immediately before the end of the world, because
there was little or no salvation, temporal or spiritual to them surviving at
the destruction of Jerusalem; and therefore our Savior advises the Jews in
the sixteenth verse, etc. at this time to fly, not to endure to the end of
those troubles, even as many years before the Gospel was fled from Jerusalem,
Acts 8.1, etc. and generally from the Jews, Acts 13.46. Romans 11.25. even as
they witnessed the said departure, in their continuance in their Jewish
sacrificing, from Titus his destruction to Adrian, and from him to Constantine,
and from thence to Julian his time (as we have often before recited.) Besides,
the evils here set as marks of the end, are the same the Apostles make of the
approaching of the end of the world, for which compare the ninth, tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth verses of this twenty fourth of Matthew, with 2 Timothy 3.1,
2, 3, 4. 2. The Gospel must be preached in all the World. so as to be a
witness to all Nations; Gr. (...) The Gospel shall be preached IN all the
INHABITED world for a witness to all the GENTILES. A thing may be said to be
proclaimed TO a whole town, if declared but in the Market place; or to a whole
Province or County, when it is done in the chief City. But this preaching must
be in the whole inhabited world, wherever men inhabit; as Jonah preached in
every street of Nineveh, laboring three days in that work in that one City;
and this preaching must be such, and so much as will justly amount to a
witness to them, viz. a witness to convince them beyond all excuse, that the
Gospel was preached to them. 3. That it is here said, THIS Gospel of the
Kingdom ((...) shall be preached in all the world; so that by this emphaticall
expression is given to us a clear distinction between THIS Gospel and the THE
Kingdom; insomuch that Christ's mere Spiritual Kingdom cannot be here
understood. The Gospel is the Law of the Kingdom; the Saints are the Subjects,
or matter of that Kingdom; the Gospel comes from Heaven; the people of the
Kingdom are, (...) in the inhabited world; converted by that Gospel out of
all Nations, as our Text holds forth. The preaching of the Gospel is the
antecedent sign of the coming and approaching of that Kingdom. But the
antecedent cannot be the consequent, or the sign be the thing signified; nor
can the cause be the effect. Besides Christ saying, he that indures to the end
shall be saved, is antithetically put in opposition to both sorts of evils
immediately before recounted viz. not only to false Doctrines, but to cruel
persecutions; and therefore a corporal as well as a spiritual salvation must be
here meant: and these to be performed on earth, viz. in the inhabited world,
just where the Gospel preached, converted them, and where they endured to the
end: And unto which, Christ does gloriously appear FROM heaven, ver. 30, etc.
to make up the splendour of that state on earth we here speak of.
Now all these things cannot be fulfilled at the ultimate general judgment;
nor are they hitherto fulfilled, and therefore they remain yet to be
fulfilled: which Mr. Mede solidly amplifies on Jer. 10. ver. 11. thus. Hitherto
(says he) we have spoken of the accomplishment of this prophecy, for so much
as is already past, now let us see what that is, which we expect as yet to
come; for though in regard of former times, when Ethnicisme was so large, and
the worshipers of the living God so small a scantling, the extent of the Church
be now at this day a goodly and large portion of the world; yet if we consider
the number of Nations yet Pagans, or not Christians, it will seem too scant, as
yet, to be the accomplishment of this and other prophecies, concerning the
largeness of Christ's Kingdom, before the end of the world. For one has well
observed, that Christianity at this day is not above the sixth part of the
known world; whereas the Mahumetans have a fifth, and all the rest are
Ethnicks and Pagans. So that if we divide the world into thirty parts,
Christianity is but as five in thirty, Mahumetanism as six, and Ethnicisme as
nineteen; and so is Christianity the least part of all, and plain Heathenism
has far above the one half of the known world; and the better part of the
other is also Mahumetans. And though Christianity has been embraced in former
times, where now it is not, yet is it now spread in those places where in those
times it was not. And therefore all laid together, we may account Christianity
at this day as large, I think, as ever it was since the Apostles time. But that
this is not that universal Kingdom of Christ, that flourishing and glorious
estate of the Church which yet we expect and hope for, my reasons are these:
First, These frequent places of Scripture, which intimate that the Lord should
subdue all People, all Kingdoms, all Nations, and all the ends of the earth
unto himself, and that all these should one day worship and acknowledge him,
Psalm. 22.27. All the ends of the world shall turn unto the Lord, and all the
kindreds of the nations shall worship before him, for the Kingdom is the
Lords, and he is governor among the Nations. And Psalm. 47. Clap your hands all
ye people, for the Lord is a great King over all the earth, he shall subdue
the people under us, and the nations under our feet. And again, God is King
of all the earth, and reigns over the Heathen, Psalm. 66. Make a joyful noise
unto God, all yee-lands; through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies
submit themselves unto thee; a^ the earth shall worship thee, and sing of thee;
they shall sing unto thy Name. The whole Psalm. 67. which we read every day, is,
as it were a prophecy and prayer for this great kingdom, That the way of God
may be known upon earth, and his saving health among all the Nations, let the
people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee: Then shall the earth
yield her increase, etc. God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth
shall fear him. And Psalm. 89. All nations whom thou have made, shall come and
worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorify thy Name, for thou art great
and do wondrous things; thou art God alone. And Isa. 2. which is a prophecy
of Christ's Kingdom, it is said, That the Idols, the Lord shall utterly
abolish; or as some read, the Idols shall utterly pass away: So Esaias 54.5.
speaking of the amplitude of the Church of the Gentiles, Thy Redeemer (says
the Prophet) the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall be
called. Certainly, this constant style of universality, implies more then this
scantling, which yet is small, being but one of the least parts of the whole
earth. Secondly, The same conclusion may be gathered from 1 Cor. 15.25, 26.
compared with Heb. 2.8. Christ must reign (says St. Paul in the first place
quoted) till he has put all his enemies under his feet; the last enemy which
shall be destroyed is death. Hence it follows, that Christ shall subdue all
his enemies, whereof the Prince of this world is the chief, before the last
rising of the dead; for the subduing of death, that is, the rising of the dead,
shall not be before the rest shall be done; the vanquishing of death being the
last act of Christ's reigning; which done, he shall yield up the Kingdom unto
his Father. In the other place Heb. 2.8. the Apostle speaking of the same
thing, alleges that of Psalm. 8. Thou have put all things in subjection under
his feet, (and then adds) for in that he put all in subjection under him. But
now (mark it) we see not all things put under him. If any say, that the
Apostle speaks here of the Kingdom of Glory in Heaven, and not of the Kingdom
of Grace on Earth; I reply first out of the former place, that he speaks of
such a subjection, whereof the rising of the dead shall be the last act of all,
and which shall be before he yields up the kingdom to his Father. But neither
of these can be affirmed of the kingdom of glory, but the contrary, viz. The
rising of the dead is at the beginning, and not at the end of the Kingdom of
glory; and so is also his yielding up of his kingdom unto his Father. Secondly,
I reply out of this place, that the Apostle speaks of that kingdom and
subjection of the earth, or state of the earth, which was to come. For so he
speaks, v. 5. Unto the Angels he has not put in subjection (...), the earth,
or state of the earth which shall be, (...), of which we speak. Here he affirms,
that (...) is that, of whose subjection he means. If then (...) sign^^^s
only the earth', and the earths inhabitants, and is no where in the Scripture
otherwise used, I cannot see how this place can well bear any other
exposition. First then to confirm this, (...) is the same which the Hebrews
call (...), for so the Septuagint renders it, whose use of speaking I doubt not
but the Apostle follows. But (...) most constantly signifies the habitable
earth, or the earth with the things that live and dwell therein; whence the
Septuagint, though they commonly render it (...) yet sometimes they render it
(...) the earth; sometimes (...) that which is under heaven. Therefore with
the Septuagint (...) is (...), the earth, and that which is under the heavens.
If this suffice not, we may yet consider, that (...) is a participle of the
feminine gender, and therefore understands (...) quasi (...), the earth which
is inhabited. Lastly, wheresoever elsewhere this word is found in the New
Testament, it is most expressly used of the earth and inhabitants thereof. In
the beginning of this Epistle we read, Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid
the foundations of the earth, (...), and the heavens are the works of thine
hands, Mat. 24.14. This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached, (...) over
all the earth, and then shall the end come, Luke 2.3. Then went a decree from
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed, (...) The rest behind are far
more express; but I leave them to your own leisure, and will only add this
one thing, that our English rendering in this place of the Hebrews, (...), the
world to come, makes it not only ambiguous, but seeming to mean the Kingdom
of glory: But we shall find that the world in that sense is always (...), and
(...), but no where in all the Bible, (...). And so I leave this, with
submission to the judgment of others. My next reason shall be from that we
read in the Revelation, where the Church, by the conquest of Michael, set free
from the Dragons fury, is said to escape into the wilderness; that is, into a
state, though of safety, peace, and security, yet of hardship, misery, and
scarcity; for it seems to be an allusion to the Israelites escaping the
tyranny of Pharaoh, by going into the wilderness. In this wilderness, or
place of hardship, scarcity, misery, and much affliction, the Church must
remain (says St. John) a time, times, and half a time; or, as he elsewhere
speaks, 1260. days; that is, a year, years, and half a year, and when
this time shall be expired; that is, as learned Divines think, when so many
years shall be ended as those days are, taking the beginning of our reckoning
from Michaels Trophee; then says our Apostle^ shall the kingdoms of the world
become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. Whereby it should seem, that the Church is yet in
the Wilderness, and that the promised happiness of the ample and flourishing
glory thereof before the end of the world, is yet to come. My last reason shall
be from Romans 11. where St. Paul speaking of the future restoring and calling
of the Jews, says it shall be when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in; I
would not (says he) that ye should be ignorant of this Mystery, etc. ver.
25. Now because the Jews are not yet called, it follows, that the fullness
of the Gentiles is yet to come; and what should then this fullness be, but the
fullness of the Gospels extent over all the nations of the world; which our
Apostle, ver. 15. calls life from the dead? for if the casting away of the
Jews, be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be,
but life from the dead? As if the Church of the Gentiles were as yet half
dead, if it be compared with that glorious vigor and accession which shall
come unto it, when the Jews shall be again received into favor. In brief,
the fullness here spoken of, is either a fullness of grace, a fullness of
extent, or a fullness of time. A fullness of time only it cannot be, because
our Apostle says, this fullness shall enter in; namely, shall enter into the
Church of Christ; but this I see not how it can be spoken of a period of time.
As for a fullness of grace and spiritual gifts, that was greater when St. Paul
spoke then ever it was since; and therefore if it be meant, it must be yet to
come. And for the fullness of extent, it was as large for the number of Nations
in the Apostles times, as it is now in ours, (for as for the American
Christians, they are only so in name, being forced only to seem so by the
Spaniards;) whatsoever fullness then the Apostle here means, is yet to come.
I will add only one thing more, and so end this point; some think that St.
Paul in this place has reference unto that speech of Christ, Luke 21.24. where
he foretells; That the Jews should fall by the edge of the sword, and be led
captive into all nations, and Jerusalem should be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles should be fulfilled, or
accomplished. But it seems to me, that the fullness of the Gentiles, and the
fulfilling or accomplishment of their times should not be the same, howsoever
they may be co-incident. It should rather seem that our Savior has reference
as to a thing known unto the Prophecy of Daniel, where the times of the
Gentiles, or the times wherein the Gentiles should have dominion, with the
misery and subjection of the Jewish Nation, are set forth in the vision of a
fourfold image, and four beasts, which are the four Monarchies, the
Babylonian, Persian, Greek, and Roman. The first began with the first captivity
of the Jewish Nation, and through the times of all the rest they should be in
subjection, or in a worser estate under them. But when their times should be
accomplished, then says Daniel, The Saints of the most high God shall take the
kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever and ever; that is, there shall be
no more kingdoms after it; but it shall continue as long as the world shall
endure. Three of these Monarchies were past when our Savior spoke, and the
fourth was well entered. If then by Saints there are meant the Jews, which we
know are called the holy people, in that sense their country is called the holy
Land, and their City in the Scripture, the holy City, viz. relatively; then is
it plain enough what Daniels and our Saviors words import; namely, a glorious
revocation and kingdom of the Jews, when the time of the fourth Monarchy
which then remained, should be expired and accomplished. But if here by the
Saints of the most High, are in general meant the Church, yet by co-incident
of time, the same will fall out on the Jews behalf; because St. Paul says,
that at the time when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, the Jew shall
be again restored. For a conclusion; the last limb of the fourth Monarchy is
in Daniel, The horn with eyes, which spoke proud things against the most High,
which should continue a time, times, and half a time; that is, a year,
years, and half a year. In the Revelation it is, the beast with so many
heads and horns, full of names of blasphemy, which was to continue forty two
months; the same period with the former, which was expressed by times and
years; and the same time with 1260. days of the Churches remaining in the
Wilderness. When these times, whatsoever they be, shall be ended, then is the
period of the times of the Gentiles, and of the Jews misery, whereto our
Savior seems to refer in the Gospel. Then by St. Paul, shall the fullness
of the Gentiles enter in: Then, says St. John, shall the kingdoms of the
earth be the Lords, and his Christ's: Then says Daniel in the former place,
chap. 7. shall the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven, be given to the people of the Saints of the most High,
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and
obey him.

SECT. II.
The second place in the New Testament is, Luke 1. ver. 31, 32. And behold thou
shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name
Jesus. And he shall be GREAT, and shall be called the son of the Highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the THRONE of his FATHER DAVID; and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no
end.

Isa. 9.7. (before discussed *) of giving to Christ the throne of his father
David, which is not yet fulfilled. For, Page 182. l. 3. chap. 2. Sect. 12 S. 5.
etc.


Phil. 2.7, 8. and that from his birth to his ascension, saving but to a few,
radiating for a minute in his transfiguration to three of the Apostles ( Matthew.
17.1.) and his appearing to the rest of his Disciples after his Resurrection,
and ascending up in their sight, Acts 1. And therefore though these words are
spoken by the Angel, upon occasion of his Incarnation, yet are they not applied
by the Angel adequatly to set forth his state of Incarnation, but rather
antithetically extended to carry the mind of Mary, etc. far further, as
thus; That though this Jesus shall be conceived in thy womb, a mean woman (in
comparison of the visible glory of the royal races of Princes) yet this Jesus
shall be no mean person, but shall be GREAT, and shall be called the SON OF
THE HIGHEST, and shall have the THRONE of his father David, and shall REIGN
over the house of JACOB for ever, etc. which things were never fulfilled all
the time of his Incarnation, to the day of his Ascension. Nor was that the time
so much as of the full revelation of them; but when the Apostles taking hint
from these words of the Angel, and the like places of Scripture, asked our
Savior, ( Acts 1.6.) a little before he ascended, Will thou at this time
restore the Kingdom to ISRAEL (comprehending all the twelve Tribes, as does
the house of Jacob in the text) our Savior denied not the thing, but the
revelation of it that time, saying (verse. 7.) It is not for you (viz. now, the
words (...) etc. are in the present tence) to know the times, or the seasons,
which the Father has put in his own power. But about seventy years after
that his ascension, God gave the full revelation of it to Christ, to show it by
an Angel unto John, who might write it to the Churches, Revel. 1.1. so that

first coming, viz. in all the time of his Incarnation, from his Birth to his
Ascension, he was not in the throne of his father David, he was in the Manger,
in the Mountains, more destitute then the Birds and Foxes, in a Crown of
Thorns, in garments of scorn, on the Cross, in the Grave, and at last in
Heaven, but never all that time in the Throne of David. The Romans all that
time, and diverse hundreds of years after, reigned over the Jews, Christ not
having any thing of David's visible corporal government (which was the notion
of David's government, the High Priest bearing that which outwardly might be
called Spiritual) yea when it was offered unto Christ, to be made a King, and
to divide the portions between the Brethren, he refused it. Therefore,

which shall be for ever, that is, after which no Kingdom on earth succeeds (as
often has been expounded) was not yet begun. For after Christ's ascension, from
that day to this, other Kingdoms on earth over the Jews did succeed, viz. the
Romans, Sarazens, and Turks. Why the mere spiritual Kingdom of Christ
cannot be here understood, we have already given unanswerable reasons (as we
conceive) before, when we paralleled this place with Isa. 9.7. Page 184. l. 1.
and why this Kingdom cannot be in Heaven at the ultimate end of the world,
the reason is at hand; because then Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God
the Father, when he shall have put down ALL rule, etc. and the son himself
shall be subject to him, etc.

SECT. III.
The third place in the New Testament for the said visible glorious state of
the Church on earth yet to come, before the universal Resurrection, is in Luke
21.24. And they (the Jews) shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be
led away captive into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the times, ( Gr. (...) opportunities) of the Gentiles be
fulfilled ( Gr. (...) filled up.

OBserve first, that our Savior speaking of the two Tribes, that had been now
returned from Babylon above five hundred years, that they shall be led away
captive in all nations, must of necessity mean another, and a more dispersing
captivity, (following that) which was begun by Titus, Son of Vespasian (the
Roman Emperor) burning both Temple and City, selling an hundred thousand
Jews, besides the slaughter of eleven hundred thousand, about forty years
after the ascension of Christ, as Bucholcerus, and Josephus affirm; prosecuted
by Aelius Adrianus (the Roman Emperor) about an hundred years after Christ's
ascension, at which time the said Aelius Adrianus buried Jerusalem in its own
rubbish, and gave it to other Nations and Gentiles to inhabit, calling it
after his own name Aelia; promoted yet further by the Saracens, making fearful
desolations in Judea about a thousand and nine years So Bucholcerus, Ind.
chron.
after the Incarnation of Christ, and at last this scattering of those two
Tribes into all Nations is perfected by the Turks dominion over them, from
about the year one thousand three hundred after the Incarnation of Christ to
this day, whereby they are dispersed (as our Merchants and Travellours find
them) into all Countries and Nations; therefore the deliverance of the Jews
which is to follow this scattering, intimated in the word until, is not yet
fulfilled, and till then the glorious state of the Church on earth to be made
up of Jews and Gentiles cannot exist, as we have often heard before out of the
Prophets.

Observe next, that the Jews must continue thus scattered into all Nations,
UNTIL the opportunities or seasons of the Gentiles be filled up, or completely
made up; which was not done in Paul's time, Romans 11.25, 26. for as it is there
added, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, ALL ISRAEL SHALL BE
SAVED by a Deliverer that shall come out of Sion, turning away ungodliness
from Jacob, according to covenant; which as it is no opportune business for
the ultimate Judgment, so it has not had its opportunity hitherto to be
fulfilled upon earth; as it is apparent before our eyes in the Non-conversion
of the Jews, and the non-preaching of the Gospel to all Nations of the
Gentiles, before discussed. See before in this third Book, chap: 4. Sect. 1.


Observe lastly, that this trampling of Jerusalem by the Gentiles is computed
by the Holy Ghost, Rev. 11.2. to continue forty two Months, that is (verse. 3.)
one thousand two hundred and sixty days, that is, years, to commence from the
time that Antichrist should have that same (...) (as some Copies read it) i. e.
power or authority to do, or act, as Antichrist; as Antichrist grown up to
act. Or (...) (as other Copies read) that is, power or authority to make war.
Now if we take the eldest account, viz. from his power to act or do; this
cannot well commence higher then from the removing of HIM THAT WITHHELD and
LET the revealing of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.6, 7, 8. That is, the laying low
of the Roman Emperor, Anno Dom. 410. by Alaricus King of the Goths taking and
spoiling Rome, and exposing her by this weakening, to future depredations by
the Vandals, etc. And therefore the most learned Elias Reusnerus boldly takes
the beginning of the compute of the 42. Months from that same time; which if
granted, infers that these 42. months, or 1260. days of years, that is,
1260. years, then taking their beginning, are not expired till the year 1670.
Reusner gives us both the brief of the History, and the exact account, in his
Isagoge Historica, at the year 410. of the Infancy of Antichrist. Roma Victrix
(inquit) and Domina orbis ab Alarico Gothorum Rege capta, and direpta ( Sc^^at.
lib. 7.^.10.) a quo tempore, auctoritate ejus plurimum imminut^, ipsa exposita
est pari deinceps praedae atque di^eptioni Vand^lis, Herulis Longobardis,
aliisque Germaniae Gentibus, quae in Italia, Gallia, Hispani^ and Britannia
ex^tarun^ diversa regna. Ab hac imperii Romani inclinatione sublato e medio
(...), Paulus Apostolus, 2 These, 2. Ordiendum esse innuit tempus Fil^i
PERDITIONIS, qu^m Dominus confecturus fit spiritu oris sui. Recte erge hic
initium figitur XLII MENSIUM ANGELICORUM regni bestiae (septicipitis (Apoc.
13.) and decicornis, potestatem magnam, ab infernali Dracone mutuantis, and
horribiles contra Deum blasphemias eructantis; hoc est, Papatus Romani, per
septem occidentis regna, Italiam, Hispaniam, Britanniam, Galliam, Germaniam,
Hungariam, and Poloniam diffusi: a quo tandem posteriora capita quinque per
Agnum Dei (Apocal. 17) divelluntur, quae in december regna specialia resurgunt,
nempe Germaniam, Bohemiam, Hungariam, Poloniam, Sueciam, ^aniam, Norvegiam,
Scotiam, Angliam, and Franciam; in quibus hodie contabescit regnum Pontificis
Romani. HORUM MENSIUM FINIS INCIDET in Anno Christi 1670. Sic Elias Reusnerus,
Isag. Hist. De Infantia Antichristi ad annum Christi 410.
If we take the younger or latter account, viz. from the power of Antichrist to
make war, and fix the beginning thereof (with the greatest probability, as to
that, among the learned) upon Pope Hildebrand, alias Gregory the seventh, who
was the first (says Helvicus) That excommunicated the Emperor, and arrogated
to himself the power of appointing and setting up the Emperor, enfolding (as
Reusner carries on the story) the Roman Empire in all manner of seditions and
civil Wars, excommunicating Henry the fourth, Caesar; making him attend
barefoot at his Palace gate in sharp winter, arming the Nobility of Germany
against him, absolving them from their allegiance; I say, if we fix the
beginning of Antichrists power to make war upon this. Hildebrand, then it
will be far longer ere the 1260. years will be run out; the said Hildebrand so
ruffling in his power not till about the year of Christ 1070. to which if we
add 1260. we make up a far larger reckoning then the former, and so much
farther from fulfilling; whereas this our context affirms, ver. 28. that when
that time of trampling shall be fulfilled, the Jews redemption draws nigh.
Which must be fulfilled before the ultimate Judgment (the time of that
Judgment being inconsistent with these things) or else it cannot be fulfilled
at all. Therefore as sure as God cannot lie, this is yet to be fulfilled.

SECT. IV.
The fourth place is in Luke 22.28, 29, 30. Ver. 28. Ye are they which have
continued with me in my temptations. Ver. 29. And I appoint unto you a
kingdom, as my father has appointed unto me. Ver. 30. That ye may eat, and
drink at my Table in MY Kingdom, and sit on Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes
of ISRAEL.

Non est a litera seu propria scripturae significatione recedendum, nisi
evidens aliqua necessitas cogat, and scripturae veritas in ipsa litera
periclitari videatur. i.e. We are not to depart from the Letter, or proper
sense of the Scripture, unless some evident necessity compel, and the truth of
the Scripture seem to be endangered. Now there is no such necessity lies upon
this Text to recede from the litterall sense thereof. For by a litterall and
Proper interpretation of this Text, neither is the truth of this, nor of any
other place of Scripture, nor of any of the Articles of our faith in the least
endangered, as we shall see more abundantly when we come to answer objections
against our Thesis. Mean while take notice, that there are many grave, godly,
learned men, not only in our Nation, but in other Countries, who while they
do not yet take up this opinion as their own, do yet notwithstanding
ingeniously confess, that it is a very harmless opinion.

. 1. Therein is promised, as a peculiar reward to them that had endured
temptations with and for Christ, that he has appointed to them a kingdom,
yea, HIS kingdom, ver. 29, 30, with which, let the studious reader diligently
compare Revel. 11.18. Rev. 20.4. which tribulations or temptations all Converts
that live on earth to any maturity of age (to profess their godliness in life
and conversation) do more or less undergo on earth, Act. 14.22. And
therefore it is here promised that they shall be rewarded on earth, as we have,
and shall abundantly demonstrate. But if there be no such estate to be
fulfilled upon earth, but only a state of glory in the supreamest Heaven, then
all the Elect dying in their infancy (to whom also the Kingdom of Heaven
belongs, Mark. 10.14.) who never endured any temptations, etc. shall have as
much privilege (viz. the fullness of ultimate glory) as those that have
endured most and longest in temptations; which seems contrary to the Text,
which holds forth a peculiar eminent prerogative, to them that endure
temptation, with, and for Christ: compare Rev. 20.4.. 2. Christ appoints unto
them a kingdom, as his father appointed unto him a kingdom: But the father
appointed unto Christ no kingdom in ultimate glory, in the supreamest heavens
(which as on all hands it is agreed, follows the ultimate judgment) for then
and there Christ lays down all his Kingdomship, Kingship, or reigning, 1 Cor.
15.24. and 28. And it is most improper to say, the Saints, the Members reign,
when and where the head Christ himself (a^ Christ) does not reign. Besides,
reigning in and over a Kingdom, implies by an inference from relations, that
some are subjects to them in that Kingdom, being brought under subjection to
them; but in the highest heaven there is nothing made subject to them. If the
Angels ministration be not at an end when the Church is perfected in glory, yet
they are said only to be servants for the Church, but not subject under the
Church, at their command, being subject under Christ alone, Heb. 1.6.13, 14.
But if Christ, according to that fore-quoted place, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. does then
lay down all his power and authority, we cannot understand how the service of
Angels should be thence-forward continued; but in the glorious estate on earth
the Saints have all the Creatures, and men that truly believe not, subject to
them, according to the many Prophesies before alleged and opened. As for the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, believers were in that in all ages by past, and
therefore that could not be the meaning of this Promise, and Prophecy given
forth by our Savior in this text. Besides, the Spiritual kingdom of Christ
is the kingdom of patience (as Saint John often intimates) where the Saints
endure those temptations Christ mentions, and so cannot signify the kingdom
of reward which Christ promises to that enduring.. 3. Eating and drinking are
unsuitable expressions, to signify supernall eternal ultimate glory, but very
suitable to express Christ's glorious Kingdom ou earth yet to come, as we have
before opened Book 2. chapter 2. sect. 5. p. 91.
4. By the order of the words the Saints must first be in the Kingdom, and
then sit on Thrones and judge the Tribes of Israel. But in the Spiritual
kingdom of Christ they had not so done, nor does Christ's speech relate to
past, but future; and in the supreamest ultimate glory there is nothing to be
judged, neither persons nor things. 5. Christ promising emphatically that the
Saints should sit on Thrones in HIS Kingdom, cannot be applied to the
supreamest ultimate glory, in which Christ has no Kingdom, but lays down
all, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25.


Therefore this Kingdom here meant, is yet to come before the ultimate
Judgment, and the state of glory is to succeed that.

SECT. V.
The fifth place in the New Testament is, Acts 1.6. and 7. When they were come
together they asked of him, saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore again
the Kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them, it is not for you to know ( or
as it is in the Greek, it is not of you to know) the times, or the seasons
which the Father has put in his own power.



Spiritual kingdom in the height of it by John, and Christ's ministry, in a
New Testament exaltation had been now in being these four years past before
the putting of the question in the text; and the Apostles were fully informed
of the state of ultimate glory, by the tenor of all the Scriptures, yet they
expect another kingdom, viz. one to be restored to ISRAEL, yea to the TWELVE
Tribes of Israel, for as much as at present only the two Tribes were at, and
about Jerusalem, and they under the power of the Romans, the other ten being in
captivity in foreign Nations.

thing, but only the manifesting of it, and at this time; even as he speaks in
the present tence, IS not, not it SHALL not:

Acts 3.21. largely opened before, page 96. Sect. 7. page 165.. 3. and 2 Pet. 3.
(discussed Book 3. chap. 2. sect. 51.. 2.)

John the Apostle in several Visions, the thing and the time thereof, Revel.
1.1. the particulars whereof we have abundantly discussed upon several
Chapters of that revelation See before on Revel. 20. in 1 Book, 3 chap. Sect.
1, 2, 3. and 4th. on Rev. 1. p. 80, etc. on Rev. 5. p. 73, etc on Rev. 7. p.
204. on Rev. 9. p. 49. and 87. on Rev. 10. p. 67. and 96. on chap. 11. p. 58.
72 91. on chap. 12. p. 94. on chap. 13. p. 87. on chap. 14. p. 67, 73, 74. on
chap. 16. p. 309. on chap. 17. p. 88, etc. on chap. 18. See Book 3. c. 2. S.
45. S. 3. P. 4. on chap. 19. See p. 62. and 74. and 89. and 56. and 58. on
chap. 20. See again, p. 116, etc. and p. 55, 56. and 66, etc. and 226. on chap.
21. See p. 116. on chap. 22. see p. 94. and see after in this third Book, Chap.
4. Sect. 12.
, and shall more hereafter,**.

Lastly, if Christ had here meant either his Spiritual kingdom, or the
kingdom of ultimate glory, he would not have been shye to declare those unto
them, having been always free to preach and manifest them from time to time to
all his Disciples. See John 14. etc. to the end of the seventeenth Chapter, and
often elsewhere.

SECT. VI.
The sixth place in the New Testament is, Romans 11.25, 26, 27. verse. 25. For I
would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery (least ye should
be wise in your own conceit) that blindness in part is happened to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles come in, verse. 26. And so all Israel shall
be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, verse. 27. For this is my Covenant
unto them, when I shall take away their sin.

Roman, or any Gentile Christians ignorant that blindness is happened to the
Jews but in part, and for a time, least they should be wise in their own
conceits; that is, applaud themselves, and despise the poor Jews, for their
blindness touching the Messiah, as most do, most sinfully to this day.

Mystery is, that after the time that this partial blindness is over, which
is to period when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be converted and brought
in, ALL ISRAEL shall be saved, according as it is written, viz. Isa. 59.20.
which place we have before opened, with some short collation of this, Romans
11.25, 26, 27. See page 219. Sect. 22.

A^sted (a learned Professor, or public Reader beyond the Seas) has upon this
text of Romans 11. these words, Apostolus hoc loco docet, etc. That is, The
Apostle teaches us in this place, that the Jews should so long remain in
their blindness and calamities, as till the fullness of the Gentiles should
come in; that is, till the rest of the Nations should flow in unto the Gospel;
for then it shall come to pass that all Israel shall be saved; and this the
Apostle calls a Mystery, and that not unfitly. For this is that Prophetical
secret so often pressed by the Prophets, of which Paul would not have the
Gentiles ignorant, least they should despise the Jews, as cast off for ever.
Thus Alsted.

Prideaux in his Oration of the calling of the Jews (Sect. 6.7.) argues
notably, No sense or interpretation to become or fill up such an Apostolical
Phrase, as to name the saving of Israel a MYSTERY, but universalem, sive
nationalem Judaeorum conversionem; that is, The universal or national
conversion of the Jews. And says he, Accommodatius ad textum, qui talem
urgent vocationem; that is, They speak more accommodatedly and suitable to the
Text, who urge such a conversion. And a little after reckoning several
opinions about the fullness of the Gentiles, and the salvation of the All of
Israel, he says, Rectius igitur al^i post deletam Romanam Idolomaniam, etc.
That is, therefore others rightly think that after the Roman Idol-madnesse is
extinguished, and the blasphemies of Mahumetisme removed out of the way, the
Jews shall lift up their eyes unto the Mountains of the Scriptures, from
Whence the Spirit inwardly illuminating them, they shall attain light and
salvation. And after, the Doctor argues several things about it, and brings in
a great roll of ancient and modern Writers of the aforesaid opinions.

Maton gives another touch upon this Mystery, viz. who comparing Isa. 66.8.
with this text of Romans, to explain the saving of all Israel upon the coming
in of the fullness of the Gentiles, says thus; The saving of all Israel at that
time must be a very famous and wonderful thing, because as it is in that
sixtieth of Isa. ver. 8. it shall be done with such a trice, as if a Nation
were borne at once, and it is fitly called by the Apostle, a Mystery.

Romans 11. is only to apply the place to our present purpose, in these four
observations. ##

1. That the Salvation the Apostle speaks of, must be of All Israel, of Israel
the ten Tribes as well as of the two, and of the generality of all twelve that
shall be surviving at the time of fulfilling this Prophecy; the salvation of a
few hundreds of Israel, or of the all of Judah, will not adequatly answer to
the comprehensive phrase of the text; but neither of these has been yet
fulfilled, as our eyes are witnesses. 2. That this salvation of the all of
Israel must be, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in. But we
see not yet the manner, or the means in any forwardness; the Gospel is not
yet promulgated to many and mighty Kingdoms of the Gentiles, in the East and
West Indies, or under the Turk, Persian, and Tartar; much less has the
matter, the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles been fulfilled. But on
the contrary, Antichrist both Eastern and Western is yet standing, and
standing in the way, and standing stiffly to oppose the salvation of the
fullness of Jews and Gentiles, he being upheld by the Kings, and Potentates,
and powers of the earth, who hereafter shall hate and ruin him, Revel. 17.16.
and therefore this is not yet fulfilled. 3. The fulfilling of this Salvation of
all Israel may not be made less, or laid lower then the unfolding of a great
Mystery, both in regard of the time, manner, and measure; the saving of a few
Jews now and then, here and there, is as a nothing to fill the mouth of this
text, I mean to fulfill the words thereof; but this is so far from
fulfilling (which if done, above all would convincingly unmaske the Mystery)
as that generally all the Jews, and most of the universe of Gentiles are very
ignorant of this Mystery. 4. That the fullness of the Gentiles, and the all of
Israel must meet in effectual conversion, and center into a blessed union with
the universal visible Church; For this text, and the thing therein contained,
must be fulfilled, As it is written, and thus written; That there shall come
out of Zion a Deliverer, etc. and must be fulfilled according to Gods ancient
Covenant. Now we have abundantly heard the Prophets made very plain to us,
touching the Deliverer, and the future integration, and incorporation of Jews
and Gentiles into one and the same universal visible Church; and touching the
Covenant of God with the Patriarchs touching the matter, manner, and measure of
their deliverance; and therefore neither is this fulfilled to this day.
And therefore we conclude that this text is not yet fulfilled, but ^ust
according to the truth of God be fulfilled, and that before the ultimate
general Judgment; for that is not a time for conversion of any, but of
destruction of all unbeleevers.

SECT. VII.
The seventh place in the New Testament is, 1 Cor. 15.22, 23, 24 25, 26, 27,
28. verse. 22. For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. verse. 23. but every man in his own order; Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. verse. 24. Then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when
he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and power. verse. 25. For
he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. verse. 26. The last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death. verse. 27. For he has put all things
under his feet; but when he says all things are put under his feet, it is
manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him. verse. 28. And
when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

Page 166. P. 6. and p. 167. and 168.
, as worth while for the reader to consider: especially seeing that is
premised, we have the less need to be large now, and so shall omit the
repetition here of several considerable things there asserted.

M. M. On this place has these words; first, he analyseth upon them in
general thus; Every one must rise in his own order, Christ the First Fruits,
after they that are Christ's; therefore not the Martyrs only: then comes the
end. What presently after his coming? No, but when he has delivered the
Kingdom to God the Father (meaning the ultimate end.) And when shall that be
that he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father? When he shall have put
down all rule, and authority, and power: for he must reign till he (that is,
God the Father) has put all his enemies under his feet; which will be fully
accomplished (where he plainly minds, as aforesaid, the ultimate end) when
the last enemy shall be destroyed, which is death. And when all things shall be
thus subdued unto him, shall follow unutterable glory, the height of
happiness: so he. Which last clauses must warily be understood with this
distinction; That the destruction of Death as an enemy to the Saints, and
Christ's visible Kingdom on earth, of which we speak, is the beginning and
introduction to Christ's and the Saints reigning in that Kingdom. For that
Kingdom, and the thousand years of glory to Christ, and happiness to the
Saints on earth, begins with the resurrection of the deceased Saints, Revel.
11.11, 12, etc. and Rev. 20.4, 5. (often explained before.) But the putting an
end to death, in the raising of the wicked unto the ultimate general
Judgment, that it may no longer be an enemy to Gods ultimate design of
punishing the said wicked, body and soul, with everlasting punishment, is
indeed the end, or period of Christ's reigning, Revel. 20.12. Secondly, our
Author Commenteth on the general of this place of 1 Cor. 15: thus; Paul's words
(says he) do clearly prove, that the reign of Christ as Man (of which alone
we treat) does neither begin before his second coming, nor extend it self
beyond the last resurrection; and therefore cannot without a palpable
contradiction be taken for the time when he shall give up his Kingdom to his
Father; or for the time that now is. Betwixt which, and his Kingdom, our
Savior in my conceit has put an irreconcilable distinction, calling this, not
the time of a Kingdom, but a time of temptation, See a little before in this
fourth chap. Sect. 4. on Luke 22.28, etc.
that is, a time of persecution for righteousness sake, that thus fulfilling
the rest of the afflictions of Christ for his bodies sake, which is his Church,
they may at last wholly, and together in body and soul reign with Christ; but
their bodies as yet shall be captive in the Grave. Or, shall the Saints that are
found alive at his coming be exempted from that his Kingdom? For if he shall
reign till then, and then give up his Kingdom to his Father, they are
exempted. But if, as our Apostle shows here, his reigning begins not til his
coming (viz. his second coming) then at that time the living and dead in Christ
shall wholly, and altogether reign with him on earth. 3. In particular our
Author Paraphraseth on that clause, After they that are Christ's, thus; These
words (says he) do show, that there is some distance of time between the
Resurrection of them in Christ, and other men; or else it had been easy for
the Apostle to have said, They that are dead, or they that are in the Grave.
And if there shall be a precedence of time, then no doubt it shall be such a
precedence of time as may bring some advantage, and honor to the Saints; and
therefore not of a few hours, or days, but of a more notable continuance of
many years. For if Christ shall descend for no other purpose, but to call men
to Judgment, as there would be no need of distinction of time, so there could
not well be any priority of time to distinguish their resurrection, because in
that act both good and bad must be assembled before him at the same time; and
the wicked doubtless should then be raised as soon to see his coming, as the
just to meet and accompany him there.

To all this I have now but a few words to add (my former discuss, p. 166.
excusing me here) and that is this; That the Apostle in this text hints to us
three Physical resurrections; 1 The Resurrection of Christ, which the Apostle
says is past, verse. 20. and there, and ver. 23. calls it, the first fruits of
the Saints Resurrection, 2 The Resurrection of the wicked also, called the end,
verse. 24.
which also follows the second at a distance ((...)) as the gleaning does the
harvest; and this succession is that which the Apostle calls (ver. 23.) order,
each to rise in his own order, and it is a very distinct order; for as there
has been now above one thousand six hundred years since Christ's resurrection,
and yet the Saints are not risen; so it will be a thousand years between the
resurrection of the Saints and the wicked, as Saint John asserts, Rev. 20. (often
and much insisted upon before.) And as at the resurrection of the Saints, death,
as to them shall be destroyed, so at the resurrection of the wicked, life to
them shall be destroyed, their living being worse then death, and therefore
called the second death, which over the Saints shall have no power, because of
the blessed life they are restored to, Revelations 20. and first twelve verses.

SECT. VIII.
The eighth place in the New Testament for the glorious state of the Church yet
to come before the ultimate general Judgment, is 2 Cor. 3.15, 16, 17, 18.
verse. 15. But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their
heart. verse. 16. Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall
be taken away. Verse. 17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of
the Lord is there is liberty. verse. 18. But (or, and, or truly) we all with
open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord.

Jews.

1. What their present Spiritual condition was in Paul's time, viz. That even
to that day when Moses was read, the veil was upon their heart. In verse. 13.
the Apostle had said, Moses did put a veil over his own face, that the
children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is
abolished, according to Exodus 33.32, etc. to the end of the Chapter, where you
have the thing, manner, and the end thereof. So that hereby are signified two
vailes, (the one typifying the other) one upon the thing beheld, another upon
the beholders; so that through Moses (representing the ministration of the
Leviticall Law) the Jews could not look unto Christ (representing the
ministration of the Gospel.) For says the Apostle, 1. There was a veil of
material types, viz. of Blood, Sacrificing, Washing, etc. covering and
concealing the shining, that is the Spiritual meaning, and Gospel glory of
Moses Law. 2. The veil of sense, upon, or over the hearts of the Jews, that
whiles they made use only of their senses, to discern the things of Moses Law,
their apprehension was terminated at that which was only sensible, not reaching
to that which was spiritual; and so the Divine Evangelicall meaning was kept
from entering into their hearts, and so they rested in the material gross
service, and made no spiritual conclusions and applications concerning Christ.
And this says Paul is the condition of the generality of the Jews to this
day. Compare Romans 11.25. especially Romans 9.31, 32. asserting there, that the
Jews attained not righteousness, because they sought it not by faith (viz. in
Christ, the sense and sum of the Leviticall Law) but AS IT WERE (he says not
really, or altogether, but as it were) by the works of the Law, because in
resting on the outside, and acting of Leviticals, they turned those Leviticals
(in their true intent and meaning Evangelicall) into works of the Law. As if a
man rest upon the opus operatum, the labor, and mere deed done of the
Evangelicall duty of prayer, praise, etc. he turns that duty into legal. 2.
What their future spiritual condition shall be at the time of their call, viz.
when their heart is turned to the Lord (the Pariphrasis of Conversion) the
veil shall be taken away; to wit, both vailes. 1. That veil of Jewish worship,
that as de jure it was taken away in the authority of it, upon rending of the
veil at Christ's Passion; and defacto in practice as to the sacrificall part,
at the destruction of the Temple by the Roman Titus, and Adrian, and fire from
Heaven in the time of Julian, so also it shall be taken away, as to the Jews
esteem, in the whole Mosaicall Liturgy thereof. 2. The veil of sense over
their hearts shall be taken away; so that by the Divine Illumination of the
Spirit they shall look through and beyond sense, and carnal reason (thence
derived) unto the spiritual mind, and meaning of all the Law of Moses, viz.
unto the Gospel, and Christ Jesus, who is the spirit thereof; which is plainly
expressed in the following words, now the Lord is that Spirit. That is Christ,
as God is that Spirit, Joh. 4.24. and Christ, as Christ is the sum and marrow
of the spirituality of the Gospel (as the Gospel is of the Mosaicall Law) and
he has the spirit above measure, and sends the spirit to enlighten, and
enliven, and allure them to the embracement of him. For Lord in the New
Testament phrase often signifies Christ, and Spirit often signifies spirituality,
and the spiritual sense, and way of the Gospel, and the communication of the
efficacy of the Spirit, as many instances might be given, but for tediousness.
It is added, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; That is, when
the Lord is spiritually in the heart, there is spiritual liberty; that the
Jews shall neither look at, nor rely upon the Letter, Character, or outward
acts of Judaicall services; to which sense, and (from thence) carnal reason
held them in a kind of bondage, as thinking the command bound them, and the
threat awed them, mainly to that. The Law indeed obliged them to an actual
performance of all the material Leviticall services, whiles in force, but even
then it was their sensuality, and carnality that held their apprehensions in
bondage, and within those stinted bounds that they could not look further, so
that for want of the addition of Gospel knowledge, faith, godliness, etc, they
could not see afar off. But were short sighted, as Peter's phrase is. But
where the spirit of the Lord is in the heart by grace, there they will find a
liberty of apprehension, to look to the spirituality of all worship; a liberty
of action, to act more with the inward graces, then with the laboursomnesse of
the body; and a liberty of confidence, to rely upon the object, the things,
viz. Christ held forth in the Gospel, and not on the outward for me of worship.
3. What their estate both corporal and spiritual shall be from that time
forward till ultimate glory comes, when the veil is taken away, and that
liberty restored in lieu thereof, viz. it shall be very glorious, when WE ALL,
both Jews and Gentiles, with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
spirit of the Lord. The Verse is not to begin with But, as an Antithesis, or
opposition to that before, but with an And, as a Prosthesis, or addition of a
further degree of attainment; so the Greek ((...)) well bears, and so the
sense requires; for at present there was never an ALL of Jews so beholding,
and so transformed. Nor were the converted Gentiles yet so glorified with that
divine Metamorphosis (as the Greek signifies) And the Jews must not be
excluded, because the Apostle a Jew, speaks in the first person plural, We,
including himself: and the converted Gentiles must not be excluded, because he
writes these things to the converted Gentile Corinthians. So that this verse is
knit on the former rather as an ex^gesis, and auxesis, an illustration and
amplification, then as an antithesis, or opposition to the former verse, It is
true, that this last verse is part of an Antithesis to the Jews blindness,
but not to their spiritual sight and liberty; but then that Antithesis began
higher a good deal, viz. ver. 16. Nevertheless when it shall turn to the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away, etc. and so the Apostle falls first upon
the discourse of the Jews future spiritual condition, and then from thence
ascends higher in the last verse to their and our future visible glorious
condition, which on earth is to follow that spiritual condition. For the
plain sense of the whole is as if the Apostle should have said; The poor
Jews at present are blindfold for the general, with a double veil (as before
explained, as they are to this day.) But when they shall be converted, those
vailes shall be taken away (though to this day they are not.) Now the Lord is
that Spirit, and wherever he is in any of our hearts, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, there is liberty, liberty of spiritual sight, and liberty of Gospel
worship, freeing us from the numerous burdensome Leviticall considerations,
and observances, and performances; so that we do see Jesus Christ (the sum,
spirit, and quintessence of all divine Laws.) And, or furthermore, we all with
open face, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, we are transformed
into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, or,
(as the Greek (...) well bears, and our Translators assent in the Margin) by
the Spirit the Lord; as if the Apostle speaking of an higher matter, would
speak in an higher phrase meet to correspond to that matter.
Now as the two former verses are not yet fulfilled to the Jews, as to
conversion, so nor is this last to Jews or Gentiles (though converted) as to
that transformation it here expresses, meaning at the great restoration; to
which this text has, I conceive, a special eye.

coherence of this verse with those going before, which plainly is this; that
whereas the whole precedent discourse of the Apostle is concerning the general
call of the Jews, from under that universal vayling that was upon them;
mentioning the liberty they should attain to (which liberty is a word so
comprehensive, that it is used by the Apostle in part, Romans 8.21. to describe
that great state of the restitution of all things) the Apostle cannot be
conceived to contradict that discourse, or to detract from it, but rather to
heighten it. Even as it is agreed on all hands, that confess the general call
of the Jews, that then will be a most glorious time on earth. And accordingly
the Apostle mentioning before liberty in the seventeenth verse, here in this
eighteenth verse he adds to it glory, and in relation too unto the Sons of
God, so as to make up that glorious liberty of the Sons of God, which the
Apostle gives forth in that, Romans 8.21. as the description of the restitution
of all things.

substance of the text, scanning it almost term by term; which though, we
deny not, includes conversion and sanctification by way of a necessary
supposition, yet it transcends higher into a large prospect of the great
Restoration. For, 1. There is a great emphasis in the WE ALL, even as the
Apostle, Romans 11.26. having said, Blindness in part is happened to Israel
concludes, but all Israel shall be saved. So here having said, ver. 13. The
children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is
abolished; now he asserts, but we all with open face beholding the glory of the
Lord, etc. are changed, etc. For it were wonderfully strange, if the Apostle
wholly discoursing before of the conversion of the Jews should make his
conclusion an exclusion of the conversion of the Jews. As on the other side
(as we said) the Apostle writing this to the Gentil-Corinthians, and at last
draws up all into an ALL WE, must needs include all converted Gentiles, and so
the time of conversion of the generality of both must imply a glorious time,
according to all the Prophets before opened. 2. Although the word to behold be
in the present tence, yet it is in a participle ((...)) beholding; noting a
continuance of time, and action in that time, and so in effect signifies a
future. Even as in common speech in our, and other vulgar Languages we
express a future by a present, v. g. we are now (say we) miserable, but dying
in the Lord we are happy. 3. Beholding as in a glass. The Greek is all but one
word (expressed immediately before) to signify beholding, and beholding in a
glass; and therefore seeing our Translators were pleased to be so
over-punctuall in following the composition of the word so close (the Apostle
intending only an open clear sight, as the next words with open face show, as
the use of the word is, to signify the apprehending of a thing with a full
imagination) they might have dealt fairly, to have expressed what glass the
composition of the word signifies, which is there as much express, as glass;
for surely glass is not here intended as a sight-darkning glass, as a glass
window is some darkening to our eye, in looking through to the object, Cant.
2.9. but a light reflecting, or a bright-representing, yea lively presenting
glass, as Spectacles, Perspectives, and Looking-glasses manifest the object
more plainly. And if we should pursue the Metaphor in the notion of a
Looking-glass, which is most ancient, and more to the proper Idiom of the
composition of the word, it would rather brighten, then obscure the state the
Apostle means, and we expect; for first, a Looking-glass infallibly supposes
the person nearly present. 2. It represents the person plainlier. 3. By
reflection and refraction it makes all shining glory as that of the Sun,
Fire, Diamonds, etc. the more to return their radiation upon us with a
sparkling glare. All which notably suit to set forth Christ's presence, and our
extraordinary beholding of him, in the time of the Churches glory on earth, as
the cause thereof. We cannot see then perhaps the Deity immediately, but we shall
then Behold that Suu of the Godhead, ( Psalm. 84. 11.) in the glorious Body of
Christ (as the Apostles phrase is) as in a Crystal Lantern. If Moses face so
shone by his standing forty days and nights under the beams of a vision of
God ( Exodus 34.29.) how much more gloriously shall the Body of Christ radiate,
not only by his presence with God in the utmost glory above one thousand six
hundred and fifty years, but principally by his Hypostaticall union with God
himself; the time being then fully come, for him fully to radiat ( Malac.
4.2.) according as his transfiguration had prefaced ( Matthew. 17.) how glorious
it should be. If Stephens elevated soul, through the operation of God, saw (he
being now on earth) the Son of God in heaven, standing at Gods right hand (to
give way whereunto, the heavens were made to open) and Stephens face appeared
like the face of an Angel, Acts, chap. 6. and chap. 7. how gloriously shall
Christ shine, and we be radiated upon, into a glorious aspect and hue, or unto
transformation into glory, at the time we contend for? At present, we see
darkly through the glass of material Ordinances, and the dim eyes of
imperfect and mixed graces, (1 Cor. 13.12.) though in comparison of Moses
veiled, God may be said now, (as in 2 Cor. 4.6.) to shine upon our HEARTS in
the FACE of Christ; but hereafter upon the appearance of Christ, at the coming
in of the fullness of the Gentiles, and the call of the Jews into one
universal visible Church, God will shine forth most gloriously through the
WHOLE PERSON of Christ, upon OUR WHOLE PERSONS, so that we shall be like him in
glory, Phil. 3. 21. and we shall know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. we shall
put off all corporal imperfections, and shall apprehend him as well perfectly
by our senses, as by our graces, as will appear more by that which follows.
For, 4. We shall behold him with open face, or unvailed countenance, or
uncovered, or unmasked persons (as the Greek comprehends all) and this being
spoken indefinitely, and unlimitedly, either to the beholder, or thing beheld,
it is safest to take in both, answerably opposing the two vailes before; so that
1. All we Jews and Gentiles, that shall partake of this glorious state on
earth, shall behold with uncovered senses, with uncovered reason, with
uncovered graces. Our eyes and minds shall not be held, as Luk 24. that our
Fantasy should pierce no further then sense, or that sense should apprehend
extraordinary things in an ordinary notion. And our reason shall not be
covered, nor cumbred with error, and mistakes, and sensible desires; and our
graces shall not be blindfold with inordinate carnal affections. 2. Christ
shall be beheld as altogether uncovered, he shall not be covered as to be seen
only in Aenigmaticall expressions (as the Apostles phrase is in the Greek, 1
Cor. 13. 12.) or in typical seals, as in receiving the elements of the Holy
Supper, we are said to show his death till he comes, (1 Cor. 11.26.) or in the
heavens (as now he is) or in a personal state of humiliation, as when he was
on earth, in afflictions, and sufferings; but he shall be wholly uncovered, to
be seen as he is, in his great glory (in that time of the Churches
restoration on earth, at his appearance) as it is here said in the next
particular. 5. Beholding the glory of the Lord. At his first coming we beheld
his ingloriousnesse, Phil. 2. Isa. 53. After, at his transfiguration, some two
or three saw a glimps of a prelude of his glory. After that, a few saw, at his
ascension, his entrance into supreme glory, Acts 1. But here WE ALL, Jews
and Gentiles in general, whosoever, and how many soever converted unto Christ,
shall behold (...) THAT SAME glory of the Lord. 6. And so behold as to be
changed into the same image. A wonderful, and efficacious beholding, which
shall transform the Embryon of the new Creature, conceived in the womb of the
Soul, into the glorious Image of Christ, by beholding him in his glory, in
this state on earth. The divine Plants of God in this new Paradise on earth,
shall so see the Sun of righteousness, that they shall blossom, and flower,
and fructify into like colors, stripes, an rays, as are in that Sun. We must
(as the Greek (...) signifies) be Metamorphosed, from our corrupt and
inglorious image into the glorious Image of Christ. So this text. So again the
same Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. The introductory both of the discourse,
and of the thing leading to this change, in verse fifty one, begins at verse.
22. which we have laboriously opened before but in the seventh Section
immediately preceding. To which add this memorandum, that Paul expressly treates
there only of the resurrection of Believers, as that at Christ's next coming:
When, says the Apostle, we shall not ALL sleep, but we shall ALL be changed.
The dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality;
then death is swallowed up. And this change is said to be glorious, verse. 49.
As we have borne the image of the earthly, so we shall bear the image of the
heavenly Adam, viz. Christ. Which suite to our present text in this, 2 Cor.
3.18. That we shall so behold the glory of Christ, that we shall be
Metamorphosed, transformed into the same image. By which parallel ye perceive
what the Apostle means by this transformation into the same glorious Image,
viz. to our glorious state on earth at the first resurrection of the Saints, at
Christ's next coming. At our first conversion, we have some spiritual inward
change. Of this our Apostle made mention before in this, 2 Cor. 3. viz. verse.
16. in that phrase of turning to the Lord. And verse. 17. in those words, where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But in that clause in the last
verse, of Metamorphosing into the same Image, some greater thing must be
intended. For, 8. It follows, we must be changed into the same Image from
glory to glory; which sounds of a future. For, from glory to glory, must
signify more then a process from one degree of grace to another (as it is
intended in Psalm. 84. from strength to strength; and Romans 1.17 from faith to
faith,) for though that be the beginning, and touched verse. 16. and 17. of this
2 Cor. 3. yet here the Apostle drives at the (...) the exaltation of a Saint to
his height, and must import that the former glory is suitable to the latter
glory; which is true of personal glory on earth, at Christ's next appearance,
that it is like to the latter, viz. ultimate glory, both glorifying the whole
man; whereas the glory of our imperfect sanctification does glorify only the
inward man, and that too but in part. There is also a difference in the cause,
as it is in the last clause, viz. 9. By the Lord the Spirit (as we touched the
Translation before) whereby it is plainly held forth, that whereas our inward
glory of Sanctification in all the process thereof, is from the inward power
of the Spirit of the Lord, our personal glory of soul and body at the said
coming of Christ, is from his personal presence, transcendently, and
efficaciously radiating on our persons to a change, and filling the earth with
the beams of his glory.


Now weigh all together, and see whether the whole mind of this text can be
terminated in our conversion, and sanctification, or can be wholly extended to
ultimate and supreamest glory! Or can be fixed upon that unsuitable time of
converting Israel, at the day of the ultimate Judgment! And if not, then it is
yet to come before the ultimate general day of Doom.

SECT. IX.
The Ninth place in the New Testament for the glorious state of all things on
earth at Christ's next appearance, is Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. God has highly exalted
him (Christ) and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, and things in the earth, and thing
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is
the Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Esa. 45.14. and it self, See page 113, 114. and p. 215. l. 1.

earth (express in the Text) when it shall be fulfilled; but this is not yet
fulfilled. For, 1. All things on earth do not submit to Christ (which is the
sense of bowing the knee.) But on the contrary, an hundred for one are openly
against Christ, so that as the Apostle says, Heb. 2.8. We see not yet all
things under him. And Heb. 10.13. the Apostle says long after his Ascension
that he still sits in heaven, expecting till his enemies be made his
footstool. 2. All things under the earth, viz, the infernal Spirits do not
universally and actually subject to him; that is, they are yet permitted of God
to act against Christ's Kingdom; but they must be made universally, and
actually to forbear opposing Christ's Kingdom, Revel. 16.17. The seventh Vial
is poured out upon the air; that is, upon the Prince of the air (the Devil)
and on his retinue. How? Why Christ shall bind him for a thousand years, etc.
Revel. 20.1, 2, etc. 3. Much less to this day does every tongue, or the
generality of all tongues, confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, TO THE GLORY
OF GOD THE FATHER; when as most either do not name him, or name him
profanely, or blaspheme him. 4. Paul tells us in another place, viz Romans 14.10,
11. (discussed also before touching the meaning See page 214. but by mistake
printed, p. 116. vix. it is in lib. 3. cha. 2. Sect. 19. S. 2. P. 1.
) That this bowing to Christ is not fulfilled till Christ shall sit in
Judicature on his Seat of Judgment; but this begins not till the first
Resurrection, Rev. 20.4, etc. compare it with Revel. 11.15, 16, 17, 18. mean
while Turk, and Pope, and Heathens extremely domineer.


Romans 14. and Phil. 2. as yesterday; but judicious Calvin long since did assert
from the collation of both places together, that this genuflexion, and
submission to Christ is not fully fulfilled till Christ's next coming.

confession and submission to the glory of God the Father, but a silent bearing
of Judgment by them that despised Christ, and so Christ resignes his kingdom.

SECT. X.
The Tenth place in the New Testament of the glorious state of the Church yet
to be on earth, is in Revel. 2.25, 26, 27, 28. ver. 25. Hold fast till I come.
Ver. 26. And he that over-cometh, and keeps my works unto the end, to him
will I give power over the Nations. Verse. 27. And he shall rule them with a rod
of Iron, as the vessels of a Potter they shall be broken to shivers, even as I
have received of my Father. Verse. 28. And I will give him the morning Star.

English Translation the former part of the twenty seventh verse be read with a
Parenthesis, yet not so in Stephanus his best Greek edition in Folio, nor in
Bezaes Greek or Latin, nor in our former English Translation. The continued
speech in the third person throughout the twenty fifth and twenty sixth verses,
and former part of the twenty seventh verse, and the distinguishing turn to
the first person in the latter part of the twenty seventh verse, makes it
plain enough that these Promises are made to the Believer that keeps Christ's
works to the end; even as Christ goes on in the twenty eighth verse, promising
him the said Believer, that he will give him the morning star. So that it is
the said Believer, that shall under Christ, by the donation and assistance of
Christ, have power over the Nations, and rule them with a rod of Iron, till
they be broken as a Potters vessels, to whom he will give the morning star.
That which perhaps made our last Translators put in the said Parenthesis, was
the agreement of the words they included, with those Psalm. 2.9. (quoted by them
in the margin) spoken of Christ. But it is a sure rule, Subordinata non sunt
contraria, subordinate things are not contrary; and that other, Qui facit per
alium, facit per se: That he who causes others to do a thing, does it
himself. If Christ by his Saints overpower the Nations, and rules them with a
rod of Iron; Christ himself over-powers the Nations, and rules them with a rod
of Iron. That which the Carpenter works with his tools, the Carpenter is
accounted to work, or do. In this respect it is said in Dan. 7. ver. 13.4.
That the Kingdom which is to succeed the four Monarchies is given to Christ.
And verse. 22. and 27. it is said to be given to the Saints.

Psalm. 2. Page 158. and 159.
and on 2 Pet. 1.19. P. 360. P. 2, etc.
Suitably our new Annotations confess, That hold fast TILL I COME (ver. 25.)
signifies till Christ's second coming, GENERAL, or SPECIAL. Power over the
Nations, signifies to JOIN WITH CHRIST IN JVDGING THE NATIONS, etc. And that
giving the morning star signifies Christ's giving the FULL FRVITION OF
HIMSELF. We shall further give the explication of this Scripture in the
application thereof. Which application is,

That this Scripture is not yet fulfilled, as may appear in the distinct
consideration of each particular thereof.

1. It is express in the twenty fifth verse, Hold fast TILL I COME, spoken by
Christ near an hundred years after his Incarnation. But Christ never came
since that. 2. It is said in ver. 26, 27. That to them that hold fast till he
comes, he will give POWER OVER THE NATIONS, to rule them with A ROD OF IRON,
and to BREAK THEM IN PIECES as a Potters vessels. Which words import a
Corporal breaking, not a Spiritual; as the Iron Scepter of force is
distinguished from the golden Scepter of the Word. Now this was never yet
fulfilled in the general, but rather contrariwise hitherto, the Nations break
the Saints, and Churches, as we have often given a large account from History,
and experience. 3. That of Christ's giving the morning star, what can it be
but the appearance of Christ again? especially to the Jews, according to 2
Pet. 1.19. before expounded. For as the converted Gentiles Spiritually
considered are said to be, not in the night, but in the day, 1 These. 5.5. The
unconverted Jews are in the night, and in the dark, Romans 11.25. Therefore this
morning Star, the Sunnerising (mentioned to this very particular, Malac.
4.2.) must of necessity signify Christ's personal appearance; which Christ
has not yet fulfilled to this day. Therefore yet to come.
And this text must be fulfilled before the ultimate general Judgment,
because then is a total destruction, not an appearance for conversion of them
that are found in unbeleefe. Then is the Saints full enjoyment of utmost glory,
not their striving with the Nations. Then Christ lays down all power (1 Cor.
15.) therefore does not put power into the hands of his people.

SECT. XI.
The eleventh place in the New Testament is, Revel. 3.21. To him that
over-cometh will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also over-came,
and am set down with my Father in his Throne.

reigning with Christ on EARTH? As it is by and by added, chap. 5.10. which the
four Animals, and twenty four Elders express in a Song of praise to Christ;
Thou have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall REIGN ON EARTH.
On which our New Annotations confess; That this may signify the PROSPEROVS
TIMES OF THE CHURCH UNDER CHRISTIAN KINGS AND EMPEROVRS, Dan. 7.27. (which
place, as we have largely before demonstrated, Page 126. S. 4. and p. 127, etc.
Again, p. 249 Sect. 36. etc.
does plainly signify the glorious state of the Church on earth yet to come)
Psa. 37.11. But the meek shall INHERIT THE EARTH, Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the
meek, for they shall INHERIT THE EARTH. Thus they; which must signify a State
to come, as the expression is in the Future tence, and experience shows us
that in past times the meek have not (in the general) INHERITED the earth,
but in all Ages have been sorely disturbed and distressed. That state of
Christ's Kingdom has not yet come, for it follows in this text, deeply to be
considered, that,

own Throne, but upon his Fathers Throne: the highest heaven of glory, should
seem, is the Fathers Throne, as it is often expressed in the Old Testament, Psalm.
11.4. Isa. 66.1. etc. And there Christ is now, Coloss. 3.1. but the time is yet
to come (according to the future expression of the text long after Christ's
Ascension) that Christ must have a Throne of his own, on which, together with
him, those that overcome shall sit.

Rev. 20.11, etc. to the end of the chapter, Christ lays down all his power,
1 Cor. 15.24, 28.

SECT. XII.
The Twelfth and last place in the New Testament, which we shall urge for this
particular under consideration, is Revel. the 18. and 19. chapters.



1. Note that ver. 2. of the eighteenth Chapter, where it is said, Babylon is
fallen, is fallen; for whether we understand New Babylon figuratively so
called, viz. Rome (described by her seven Hills, and seven sorts of Government,
and the ten Kingdoms under the seventh, Rev. 17.9, 10, 11, 12.) or old Babylon,
properly so named, viz. where the Jews were held captive, neither of them
since this Prophecy are so fallen, as is described in the following Verses of
this Chapter (of which by and by) but still the Popish Antichrist possesses the
one, and the Turkish the other, and both in the ruff to this very day. 2. Nor
is that in the fourth and sixth verses yet fulfilled, wherein the People of God
are commanded saying, Reward her, even as she rewarded you, and double unto her
double, according to her works, and the cup which she has filled, fill to her
double; for the people of God have not yet rewarded her (either old or new
Babylon) single, but as ver. 7. She glorifies her self, and lives
deliciously; yea and oppresses the people of God. 3. Nor is that yet
fulfilled, verse. 8. That her Plagues have come in one day, viz. Death, and
Mourning, and Famine, and utter burning. But she (both elder and younger)
stands in great glory to this day. 4. Nor is that yet fulfilled, ver. 9. That
the Kings of the earth that have committed (Spiritual) fornication, and lived
deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, seeing the smoke
of her burning. But generally they rejoice with her, and for her glory in which
she is at this day. 5. Nor is that yet fulfilled mentioned from verse eleventh
to the end of the nineteenth, of the mourning of the Merchants over her
destruction by fire, standing afar off, crying, Alas, alas. But contrariwise
they flock to her, trade with her, and admire her glory. It is true, the
Goths and Vandals have conquered new Babylon, and spoiled her (as we mentioned
before) but not she, nor old Babylon is yet totally destroyed by fire, that
there should be no Candle seen, or Millstone heard in them (ver. 20. and 22.)
but both flourish with great glory in their dominion over the people of God. 6.
Nor is that in the twentieth verse yet fulfilled, that the holy Apostles and
Prophets have yet, since this Text was penned, ever rejoiced in the destruction
of either Babylons; but both Babylons do yet triumph in their own prosperity
and power over the Nations; and among them, over many Saints, verse. 7. yea the
rejoicing of the Apostles and Prophets over Babylons destruction, does signify
(one would think) the triumph of the Church over their enemies on earth, at
the first Resurrection (of which we have so largely spoken before) For when
else possibly can the Prophets and Apostles rejoice over the destruction of
Babylon?
For so it follows in the nineteenth Chapter and first seven Verses (spoken
over four times) Hallelujah, that is (as it is englished in verse the fifth)
Praise ye God; which praise is given to God by the four Animals, and twenty
four Elders, and of a great multitude. Why? because Gods Judgments are
righteous and true. Wherein? Because he has judged the great Whore which did
corrupt the earth, and has avenged the blood of the Saints at her hand. And he
the Lord God Omnipotent reigns, and the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his
Wife has made her self ready.

1. Which last clauses clearly relate to the first Resurrection, wherein all
the Saints rise; so that the ruin of Babylon, and the raising of the Saints
immediately concur with the sorrow of the one, and the triumph of the other.
But these have not been fulfilled to this day; as the contrary face of things
gives evident testimony. 2. Nor is that fulfilled from the eighth verse of the
nineteenth Chapter, to the end of the Chapter, of the glory of the Church, of
the glorious appearance of Christ, and of the corporal destruction of all
whatsoever that take part against Christ, and his Church; largely discussed
before, more then once out of this Chapter.
But these things as sure as Christ is the Truth, and the faithful witness
(Joh. 14.6. and Revelations Chap. 1.5.) must be fulfilled, and before the
ultimate general Judgment; for after that Christ is no King, (as verse. 16.)
After that he rules not the Nations with a rod of Iron, (verse. 15.) After that
there is no giving the flesh of Kings, Captains, etc. as meat to the Fowls of
the Heavens (verse. 19.) I say, he is none of these, does none of these, 1 Cor.
15.24, 28.

Therefore it must be fulfilled at the first Resurrection, and reigning of the
Saints in the twenty, and one and twenty Chapters, largely opened before.

CHAP. V.
Containing several Arguments to prove the QUOD SIT, That there is such a
glorious time (aforesaid) yet to come, before the ultimate judgment.

SECT. I.
on earth, and there to destroy all long, fierce Tyrants, and Persecutors of
his Church, then still he will so punish them: But Antichrist (consisting of
Pope and Turk and their adherents, as afore-demonstrated) have been long time,
and still are fierce tyrants and persecutors of the Church. Therefore that
Antichrist will God yet punish and destroy upon earth.

viz. that God has been wont etc. note briefly. 1. The Scripture sets forth
the destruction of the Egyptians on earth by ten plagues, and their drowning in
the red sea, for their long and fierce tyranny over the poor Israelites for
about 300 years, Exodus the first fifteen chapters. 2. The Scripture notes the
ruin on earth that is brought upon the first (that is the Assyrio-Chaldean)
Monarchy for that Nebuchadnezzar (who is the head of the monstrous persecuting
image Dan. 2.) having slain the Nobles, he carried, away captive to Babylon
the whole land of Judah, in all the considerable things, and persons thereof, 2
King. 25.2 Chron. 36. And having them there, commanded them to worship his
Idol golden Image, upon pain of being put into a fiery oven, which he
executed on Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3. For in the reign of
Nebuchadnezzars Grandchild, viz. Belshazzar (son of Evil-Merodach, the son of
Nebuchadnezzar) the Assyrio-Chaldean Monarchy is swallowed up of the
Medo-Persian Monarchy, Dan. 5.28, 29, 30, 31. Thirdly, The Medio-Persian
Monarchy, treading in the same steps of cruelty to the Church, or worse, as the
sixth chapter of Daniel, and the whole books of Ester and Nehemiah give us a
full account, is swallowed up of the Grecian-Monarchy, according to Daniels
vision, cha. 7. of the fulfilling whereof we have a large account in the Books
of Maccabees, Quintus Curtius, Josephus, etc. The Grecian Monarchy, following
the same rode, invading Judea, and at length most miserably corrupting, and
depopulating the parts and places of their worship, and cruelly, putting to
death thousands and ten thousands of the Jews (as Heb. chap. 11. and the books
of Maccabees relate at large) it is at last swallowed up of the fourth and
last, that is, the Roman Monarchy, according to Daniels Visions, and
Prophesies, Dan. 7. Dan. 8. and Dan. 11. This fourth Monarchy of the Romans not
differing from the former in cruelty (unless in exceeding them) concurring in
putting to death Christ, and his Apostles (as the New Testamament gives us
hints) and lengthning, and increasing their cruelty for three hundred years
with variety of horrid torments executed on the Christians over the world,
reaching even to our England; the Lords divine justice ever since that has
been pouring out a Vial of wrath upon it, though it is not yet totally
consumed. Pilate, and two and thirty Emperors next succeeding came to untimely
ends (as Mr. Fox in his Book of Martyrs, gives an excellent account.) About the
year three hundred and twelve, Constantine the Great, rising up in behalf of
the Christians, slew his Colleagues, and their Armies that had so persecuted.
About the year One thousand after Christ the Saracens tear from the Romans part
of their Empire, in particular, Judea. ( Drechs. Cedr. page 582. Bucholc. Ind.
Chron. ad annum one thousand and nine.) About three hundred years after, viz.
Anno one thousand three hundred the Turks by their addition to the Saracens
making a mighty Empire, rend three Horns of the ten on the head of the Roman
Beast from him, that is, so many great parts of his Empire (before largely
explained, leaving him but seven ( Bucholc. Jud. Chron. ad annum one thousand
three hundred. Huet on Dan. etc.) I may not here be so tedious as to descend
to, and dilate on all particulars, how God has punished the German persecutors
with above twenty years wars by the noble King of Sweden; The Spanish
Inquisition-cruelty, with the wars of the Netherlands, the revolt of Portugal,
and the French wars in Catalonia. The French massacres, with annual bloody
Insurrections among themselves. The English persecutions, and Marian Bonefires,
and High Commission cruelties, with several Invasions, the Barons-wars, the
Tway-King-conflicts, and the late vials of blood. Thus of the Antecedent of the
major Proposition. For the Consequent and sequel of it, it is founded upon the
unchangeablenesse of God, being immutable in his Counsel, immutable in his
purpose, immutable in his controversy against, and his justice upon the same
ways of sin; immutable in his power, and immutable in his goodness to his
Church to quit it from the hands of the wicked. And upon the warrant we have
from the word of God, so to infer from Gods unchangeablenesse, that because God
has delivered his Church and people, and that by destroying the wicked enemies
thereof, therefore we may expect he will so do for future. So the Apostle
Paul is confident, 2 Cor. 1.10. So the Apostle Peter infers, and that from
several examples, 2 Pet. second Chapter, first nine verses, and many other
places might be alleged, but for brevity.

minor Proposition: 1 That the Turk and Pope have been long time, and still are
fierce persecutors of the Church of God; we need not insist upon the proof
thereof, having so often before repeated their history and Chronology; and the
eyes and ears of the present generation are witnesses, so that both of them are
healing and growing up again to their Zenith, Apoge, or Achme, I mean very
high, notwithstanding the many cuts and wounds (aforesaid) given them by divine
vengeance. So that the Turk has slain as many Christians in one battle, as the
tips of their right ears being cut off, have filled nine sacks, as Mr. Fox
gives us the story in his Martyrologie. And daily he mightily enlarges his
Empire whiles the Christian Kings, and Emperors, and Nations, Popish, and
Protestant, are bangling one with the other. And for the Pope, his eldest son
the house of Austria, and his Catholic Kingly Son of Spain is now higher
and more Monarchical then he has been these many years; so that his unholy
Holiness the Pope, and his Crew in their late Jubilee at Rome, sang their
Magnificat, and Te Deum, that All Christendom was theirs, excepting a few
minute spots, and obscure corners of a few peevish Protestants. Now the
Catastrophe of these must be, according to the full Tenor of the Argument, the
stream of all Prophesies, and the examples of the three former Monarchies, a
total ruin of them.

SECT. II.
Constantine the Great his Reign. Therefore God will yet again give the Church
a general rest upon earth.

minor, or second Proposition is plain by History, Experience, and that which
has been said in the former Argument, and therefore there is no need of
speaking more to that.

major Proposition, the Lord from the beginning has given his Church several
typical first fruits, laying the foundation of all upon his own example, in
resting from the Creation the seventh day, and thereupon gave them a seventh
day every week, the seventh year of every seven years; and the Jubilee being the
last year of seven seven years, wherein to rest from labors, morgages and
servitude, as a type and taste of the rests he would give his Church from other
troubles and afflictions upon earth; notably argued by the Apostle upon those
grounds, Heb. 4. throughout that Chapter, largely opened before. And according
to these types, so has the Lord practiced toward his Church from the
beginning. 1 After about One thousand six hundred and fifty years of
afflictions upon the Church from the Creation, by the murder of Abel (Genesis 4.)
by the ungodliness of men, and their hard speeches against God in the time of
Enoch ( Jude v. 15.) and the ungodliness of the world in the time of Noah
before the Deluge (2 Pet. 2.5.) God gave a rest to the Church in the Arc of
Noah, the name of that good man typifying, and ordered by providence unto that
end, to signify rest, of viz. from toil ( Genesis 2.29.) 2 After the flood new
troubles to the Church began to spring up. Nimrod assumed to himself to be a
Monarchical Tyrant over men, called therefore a Mighty Hunter, that is (as the
Learned expound) a Man-hunter. The beginning of his Monarchy was Babel, Genesis
10. 8, 9, 10. After this, the building of the Tower to prevent Gods future
judgments ( Genesis 11.) brought confusion of Languages, which proved a great
affliction. After that there was great trouble by the Wars taking Lot prisoner,
etc. Genesis 14. and by the firing of Sodom, Genesis 19. But at last God sent Isaac
(signifying Laughter, and a type of Christ) all the time of whole life there
was a time of great Tranquillity. This peace perioding, many troubles arose in
Jacobs time, by Esau, Laban, Simeon, and Levi, and the selling of Joseph: But
Joseph being advanced in Egypt, the Country of Goshen, there was provided as a
Land of rest for the Church for many years, Genesis 28. etc. to the end of that
Book. Joseph being dead, and forgotten of the Kings of Egypt, great
afflictions are heaped upon the Church in hard labor with much rigor,
persecutingly putting to death their male Infants, causing them to groan and
cry to God in much anxiety of Spirit, Exodus the three first Chapters. But at
length God brought them out from that place, and persecution, and gave them
freedom forty years in the wilderness. After this, they had sore Wars with the
Canaanites, but at last rest in Canaan. I should be too tedious to dilate upon
their rest in returning to Judea, after seventy years Captivity: Upon the
spiritual refreshing the Saints had for a time, after the Maccabean, and other
troubles, which wars and troubles lasted about four hundred years, from
Malachi to the beginning of the New Testament. Upon the rest the Church had
after those persecutions Act. 8.1. which rest is emphatically mentioned, Act.
9.31. And upon the rest they had before the life time of Constantine, after
three hundred years in the ten Persecutions, which distinction of ten, was by
pointing and distinguishing them by some lucida intervalla, some rests, and
respites, between each of them, till Constantine gave them a greater rest,
lasting for about forty years.

Heb. 4. that God having given several rests on earth to the Church, after
which, ever and anon by turns fresh trouble sprang up, therefore yet there
remains another notable rest on earth to the people of God; which rest
mentioned in that of Heb. 4. is not merely spiritual, or totally supernall
glory, as we have laboriously argued before upon that Chapter. And there is also
a Prophecy inferred upon their state in the Wilderness, touching the Churches
rest upon earth, Rev. 12.

SECT. III.
Philo Judaein in his Book (...), and experience witness. But the Church
considered in general, in all countries, has been for many years past even
till now under great extremities; Therefore God will take an opportunity to
deliver it. The full confirmation of both premises, may be sufficiently picked
out of the two former arguments. The conclusion follows of it self.

SECT. IV.
Chron. 15.4. particulars, see in the joint prayers of the Church in Egypt,
Exodus 2.23, 24. under the Judges ( Judge. 6.6, 7. Judge. 10.10. to the end of the
chapter) under the pious Kings, Asa (2 Chronicles, 15.18. to the end) Jehoshaephat,
(2 Chronicles. 20.12. to 31.) Hezekiah (2 King. 19.1. etc.) Josiah (2 King. 22.19.)

Act. 4.24. The Saints and Churches in their convenings have prayed for the
fall of Antichrist, and all opposers of the Church, for the conversion of the
Jews, and the restoration of the Church to her glory on earth, witness the
several prayers in the Scriptures, and experiences of the prayers of Gods
people in all their convenings, as the antientest Saints alive have been ear
witnesses.

Psa. 50.15. Mat. 7.7. Ioh. 14.13, 14. Luke 18.1. etc.) of hearing his peoples
prayers. For though God defer long (as it is in that parable, or comparison,
Luke 18.1. etc.) yet he will be sure to answer, as he did that prayer, Act.
4.24. though it were near three hundred years before he eminently performed it,
to wit, in the conversion of Constantine the Great, and of his followers.

SECT. V.


I might enlarge much upon the proof of the premises of this Syllogism, but
for brevity; it being high time to shut up this third Book. When the Lord
intended Israel should conquer Canaan, he put a valor into their heart, and
sent before among their enemies the Hornet of fear, and the Moth of decay and
weakness, Ex. 23.27, 28. Deuteronomy. 20.21. Josh. 24.12. Isa. 50.9. Isa. 51.8. when
the two witnesses are about to stand upon their feet to the terror of all their
enemies, there shall a breath of life, of resolution, and boldness for that
end, enter into them, Rev. 11.11. Before the thirty years of the late German
wars against that tract of Antichrist, and the Churches enemies, the Lord sent
eminent signs appearing many days over the Country, as Christ prophesied
there should be such prodigies and prognostic signs over Jerusalem (which had
been an arch-enemy to Christ) before the destruction thereof, Mat. 24. which
accordingly came to pass, as Josephus largely relates. There is mention also
in that 24. of Mat. of Earthquakes before the destruction of that Jewish
Antichristian Jerusalem. As before, when the Prophet Amos prophesied the
destruction of the enemies of the Church, viz. of the Syrians, Philistims,
Tyrians, Edomites, and Ammonites, he emphatically sets down, that that
prophecy was committed to him two years before the Earthquake, as if that
Earthquake were a kind of seal to his prophecy that it should come to pass,
Amos 1.1. etc. And it is prophesied that before the fall of the Antichristian
enemies, and of their nest, the great City, an Earthquake should precede, Rev.
11.13. And we are assured by good information that of late years there have
been diverse terrible Earthquakes in the Popish Dominions. How the Hornet and
Moth have been among the enemies of Christ, terrifying and weakening them, both
abroad, and at home, I leave the wise Reader to make up of his own observation.
As also what a spirit of resolution and action there is in all wise good men,
against real Antichrist and Antichristianisme. I say real, for I utterly
disavow those whimsies of Phantasticks, that call every thing Antichristian
that soders not to their dreamed opinions, nor centers with their interest.

Finis Libri tertii.
THE FOURTH BOOK
Holding forth the judgments of all sorts of men, almost of all Nations,
whether learned, or unlearned, viz. HEATHENS, MAHUMETANS, JEWS, and CHRISTIANS,
confessing more or less, our general THESIS.

CHAP. I. Containing a Preface to this Book.


1 What I mean by those four sorts before named, viz. I mean by Heathens all
those that acknowledge not any part of the holy Scriptures, that is, eo nomin^,
under that notion of the holy Scriptures, or Word of God, dictated by the holy
Spirit, and penned by holy men extraordinarily endowed with that Spirit. By
Mahumetans, I mind all that adhere to the Doctrine of Mahomet, viz. Turks,
Arabians, Saracens, who yet acknowledge some pieces of the Old Testament. By
Jews, all know whom I understand, who do acknowledge entirely all the Old
Testament. By Christians, I here intend all that are so named, whether they are
so sincerely, or but seemingly, as Papists, Protestants, Lutherans, Calvinists,
etc. who acknowledge the total of all the Books of holy Scripture both in the
Old and New Testament. 2 That I must be brief in my Collections in this large
field, ^ounded out in this fourth Book, contrary to my intention and
disposition, Modern Writers, I presented to the Reader in the first Book: And
partly by the urgency of time, our friends longing for it; and this present
gallopping age (outrunning rule and reason) needing it; who boldly presume they
have in part entered upon the possession, before indeed they do in any measure
know the thing, much less the time, which yet is many years off. particular
clause which those four sorts shall assert; but he must mind my general
intent, viz. that directly, or indirectly, in whole, or in part, expressly or
intimatedly, such passages fall from their mouths, as argue they had some light
more or less, by some means or other touching our general Thesis, in the
summary bulk, and main matter thereof.
CHAP. II.
Containing the passages in Heathens, in favor of our opinion, in our
aforesaid Thesis.

Heathens in their Doctrine touching the Immortality of the soul, reserved in
the other world for happiness; in their description of the Elysian fields
(their state of bliss on earth in the next world) in their discuss of (...)
i. e. The state of men in the World to come, yet unseen; and their professed
expectation of the Platonic year (however they mis-dream the computation)
wherein (as they say) all things shall return to their primaeve perfection;
And their Tenet of Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of souls, passing from one
body deceasing, into another next living, and so are clothed with diverse
corporal shapes till they attain the perfectest, do speak in substance, a
glorious state of man on earth after the Resurrection. It is wonderful to read
in History how earnestly some of them have sought death, being ravished with
the desire of enjoying the state of the immortality of souls, upon their
Philosophers description of the glory of it. Their Elysium or Elysian fields,
they so named (...), from the dissolution of the soul from the body. For (say
they) it is the place which good men's souls inhabit after they are freed from
the bonds of the body, full of happiness, and feated in the Fortunate Islands
etc. And it was the great comfort, says Homer, (of which learned Broughton
takes notice) that the friends of the Greek Captains slain in the Trojan war
gave to their surviving wives, that the souls of their husbands were gone (...)
( subintellige (...)) to the house of Hades, that is, to the world unseen, that
is, to the other world of bliss, yet not visible to us. Of the Platonic year,
restoring all things to their primitive perfection, we had something before in
our first Book, in Lactantius his Quotation and Rectification of the opinions
of Heathens. And if any be not contented with that, and our necessitated
brevity here, but are restlesly further inquisitive; I refer such to Plato
himself, and to the Platonists, viz. Ficinus, and other zealous Commentators,
and followers of him. But that Metempsychosis added and joined to all these,
did complete them up (being fairly interpreted with meet allowance to
Heathens) into a system or body (in the maine sense) of our opinion, casting
up, as the high way leading thereunto, a resurrection, or reunion of souls
with their bodies. Pythagoras says, that the soul of Euphorbus, a noble
Trojan, slain in the Grecian wars against Troy, transmigrated itself into his
body. Ovid Ovid Metam. l. 15. Fab. 3. (juxta Bersmani editionem) etc.
sets forth a brief of all, with great eloquence and learning, after his way.

O Genus attonitum, gelidae formidine mortis,
Quid stygia, quid tenebras, and nomina vana timetis?
Materiam vatum, falsique pericula mundi?
Corpora sive rogus flamma, sive tabe vetustas
Abstulerit, mala posse pati non ulla putetis.
Morte carent animae; semper priore relicta
Sede, novis domibus vivunt, habitantque receptae.
Ipse ego (nam memini) Trojani tempore belli,
Panthoides Euphorbus eram; cui pectore quondam
Haesit in adverso gravis hasta minoris Atridae.
Cognovi clypeum, laevae gestamina nostrae,
Nuper Abanteis, Templo Junonis, in Argis.
OMNIA MUTANTUR, NIHIL INTERIT, ERRAT, and ILLINC
Huc venit, hinc illuc, and quoslibet occupat artus
Spiritus, etc. Which I shall give you in English.
O men whom horrors of cold death affright,
Why fear you Styx, vain names, and endless night,
The theme of Poets, and feared miseries
Of a false world? If funeral flames surprise,
Or age does pine your bodies; they nor grieve,
Nor suffer pains. Our souls for ever live.
Though evermore their ancient houses leave,
Yet live in new, which them as guests receive.
In Trojan wars I (I remember well)
Euphorbus was Phanthous son, and fell
By Menelaus lance. I knew my shield
Born on my left arm in Mars his field.
(Believe me you may) for this again
At Argos late I saw in Junos Fane.
ALL ALTER, NOTHING FINALLY DECAYS,
Hither, and thither still the spirit strayes,
Guest to all bodies. Out of beasts it flies
To men, from men to beasts, and never dies. Nihil est toto quod perstet in
^^be-Cuncta fluunt, omnisque Vagans formatur imago. Corpora vertuntur; nec quod
fuimu^ve sumusve-cras erimus. Id est (inquit Commentator) (...)

As Pliant wax each new impression takes,
Fixed to no form, but still the old forsakes,
Yet is the same: So souls the same abide.
Naught in this circled world is fixed, we view,
Each fading form at last is formed anew.
So change our bodies without rest or stay;
Nor what we yesterday, nor what to day,
We were, or are, hereafter we shall be, etc.
They that can read Heathen Poets, Philosophers, Orators, Historians, etc. in
their own languages, shall find aboundings of this, what hope they had of a
glorious bliss on earth in the next world. Or they that will read but Morneys
trueness of Religion (translated into English) shall receive satisfaction
enough in these things. The holy Scriptures themselves take some notice of the
minds and meaning of the heathens in these things. We will note but two places.

Matthew. 14.1, 2. At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
and said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the
dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him, or (as it is
the Margent) mighty works are wrought by him. We might here again take
occasion to repeat the Gentiles Theology, viz. Pythagoras and Platoes, and
others doctrine of their ((...) and (...)) The change of the state of souls,
passing into bodies, the change of bodies into better forms; and as the
New Creation of both, and might produce much out of Plato in l. 10. Poli; In
Timaeo; In Phaedro; Cum concinna (ut ait Chemnitius) interpretatione cum
amantium.
Plato, August. de Civit. D. l. 22. c. 18. ex varronis libris.
Austin Lactant. l. 7. Ex Chrysippi Stoici libro de providentia.
Lactantius, and Joseph de bello Judaico, cap. 7
Josephus to that purpose. But brevity pulls me by the ear; and therefore I
shall only note that, which indeed is the main, expressed in this Scripture
with that great emphasis, That John the Baptist being risen from the dead,
THEREFORE mighty works are wrought by him! where plainly to me, this Scripture
with an intentive eye, takes notice, that Gentilisme, or the doctrine of
Heathens (whence Herod had his opinion) did hold that the souls of good men
deceased, after their return to their bodies, did put them into a far better
condition on earth then they were in before. For we read not that John Baptist
did in his life time work any miracle, or mighty work at all. But we have a
text to the contrary, Joh. 10.41. But now that he is risen from the dead, as
Herod conceived, he judged that he was very able to work miracles on earth.
This collection of mine, by good providence, I found seconded by Great
Chemnitius, that most pious and learned man, and by our received New
Annotations. Chemnitius his words are Credidit insuper ipsum. etc. i.e.
Furthermore Herod did believe that John Baptist, that before his death wrought
no miracle, now as if made more divine, and by reason of the sanctity of his
former life, he could do those works which did surpass humane power. Our New
Annotations on the Bible say thus. He is risen from the dead; Sir. from among
the dead. Some note here Herod's opinion of John's sanctity, as concurring with
the Pharisees, who thought that the Holy did easily return to life again. See
Josephus Antiq. l. 18. cap. 2. The meaning is as if Herod had said, HE HAS
MORE POWER NOW, THEN EVER HE HAD; For John wrought no miracles. John 10.41.
Thus our New Annotations.

Else what shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not
at all? why are they then baptized for the dead. The Apostle here takes notice
of the opinion of the Heathens, that they had a dim hope of the Resurrection,
in that they washed the bodies of such as were deceased to lay them trimly and
decently accommodated to that end among the dead. For if the dead rise not
(says the Apostle) why will they do it, that wash over the dead, or pour
water over, or upon the dead; that is, wash the dead, as the Greek very well
bears. For (...) (both in the Text) are equally of the middle voice, as of the
passive; both being in terms and syllables, the same in the Greek. And then if
in the middle voice they may well be rendered actively, as before we have rendered
them. And so the Syriack renders them actively (which Beza highly approves.)
And for justification of our rendering baptizing by washing, we have good
warrant from Mar. 7.4. where the Greek word Baptism, is rendered washing, viz.
of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and tables, as the nature of the things
there mentioned, necessarily require it to be so rendered. Yet if any will
contend for a passive signification, then says learned Beza, there will be a
verbal nown included in the verb it self, (as is common among the Hebrews)
and so this Text must thus be translated, What shall they do, that is, What
shall be done to them who are washed with a washing over the dead; that is,
with a mortual (as Plautus speaks) or funeral washing, or a sepulchral
washing, or a washing belonging to them that are dead. It seems by that phrase
of heathen Roman Platus, and other passages of others of them, as, Tarquinii
corpus bona faemina lavit, and unxit; that is, A good woman washed and anointed
the body of Tarquin, that the Heathen were wont to wash the bodies of their
dead; which they had learned of the Patriarchs and Jews, mentioned in their
Talmuds, and practiced in Act. 9.37. Now says the Apostle to the Corinthians,
who formerly were heathens; why do the heathen wash their dead, if they expect
no more of the welfare of such bodies in another world, then of the bodies of
beasts. Others bring (I confess) other Interpretations. But I leave them to
learned Beza, and our New Annotations, who have elaborately confuted them.
Only I add this word, That baptizing with blood in suffering persecution (an
unknown phrase in Paul's Epistles) cannot be here meant (as some would) because
it will not have the force of an argument on them that doubted of the
Resurrection. For, to such, out of doubt, suffering for Christianity (newer
then the doctrine of the Resurrection) was as doubtful, if not more doubtful,
then the Resurrection it self. Such would be ready enough to say, That it is
their stubbornness and pride; or at least their valor and honor etc. (as in
Duels) not to be mastered by their adversaries, that makes men dye for that
Religion; else if they preferred life, they would keep it whiles they had it,
and comply, or conceal their Religion. Indeed for Paul to satisfy himself,
and his fellow-beleevers that they were in jeopardy every day for the Gospels
sake, upon the ground of hoping for a Resurrection, is something. But to them
flatly denied the Resurrection, with whom he disputes, he must urge Extra
scripturian, or Scripturelesse arguments, viz. customs of men, etc. in several
Nations (as touched before) to convince them. For surely they that doubt of the
Resurrection, doubt of the Scriptures, that so often as well in the Old
Testament as in the New mention the same. But of this in the fourth Chapter of
this Book. Out of the Heathen Sybils, for the glorious state on earth, yet to
come, we had many of Lactantius his quotations in our first Book. And we had
not need make repetitions when haste to prevent our friends fear of our
tediousness, will not permit me to insert all I would assert.

CHAP. III.
Next we come to the MAHUMETANS, viz. the SARACENS, TURKS, and ARABIANS,
touching their opinions of the future glorious state on earth yet to come.

Tradition received among themselves: That they, last of all, shall be subdued
by the children of ISAAC. So Purchase in his Pilgrimage (that large and
laborious History) informs us; and pious and learned Mr. Huet on Daniel takes
it up as credible.

Alcoran, according to the English Edition they say Pref. to the Alcoran.
That Jesus Christ a great Prophet, borne of the Virgin MARY, a Virgin both
before, and after her delivery, conceived by the divine inspiration, without a
Father, shall come again on earth at the end of the world, to confirm the
Law, etc. That Chap. 2. of the Epitome of the Alcoran.
believers after the Resurrection shall enjoy the immense pleasures of
PARADISE, wherein flow many Rivers; and shall there find all sorts of fair and
savoury fruits, etc. Which particular is there sometimes much illustrated, and
often repeated; in all (that mine eye in a cursory reading, took notice of) to
the number of thirty times To Chap. 3. twice, 4. thrice. In 5.10.13.14.15, 16,
18, 19, 20, 21. 22.35.42.48. twice. 52.56.64.69.76, 78, 81, 83, 88, 99.
. That this happiness then on earth, is better then that now Chap. 4.
. That that happiness on earth shall have communion with the happiness in
heaven Chap. 3.48. and 89.
. That there shall be no evil Chap. 19.74.
. There the possessors shall praise God Chap. 35.
. Shall enjoy the great grace of God Chap. 42.
. That when JAGOG and MAGOG shall come running from the eminent places of the
earth, then shall the day of judgment appear Chap. 32. Chap. 21.
. That all men shall one day be assembled before him, to be judged; a THOUSAND
YEARS being BUT AS ONE DAY before him Chap. 43.
. That the coming of JESUS the Son of MARY, shall be a sign of the
certainty of the day of judgment Epit. Alcor. lat. cap. [Creatoris rerum ordo
number in margin. 8.]
.

Alcoran according to the Latin Edition (for I find more in that then in the
English Edition, not only upon report, but by the Epitome of the Alcoran in
Latin translated out of the Arab. into Latin by Robert Ketenensis an
Englishman) I say in the Latin Edition of the Alcoran I find a discourse of
the duration of the world to seven thousand years, six of which much past. Of
the signs of the day of judgment. Ibid. number. in Marg. 60.
Of the returning of all mankind, and creatures to God. That God will raise the
dead, and make them to return to him Ibid number. in. Marg. 33
. That good men shall be in Paradise as Coheirs with God Ibid. number. in Marg.
60.


Theology of Mahomet, translated into Latin by Hermannus Nellingunnensis, in
Quarto, and conjoined in my Copy, with the said Epitome of the Alcoran, There
is a large description of the Paradise (which good men shall enjoy on earth
after the Resurrection) setting forth both the quality and continuance of it.
Touching the quality, Paradise is there described by gold and precious stones,
not altogether different from some phrases in the Prophets, Isa. chap. 54. and
Revel. chap. 21. And by Trees and Rivers, not utterly dissonant from Revel. 22.
The account of the continuance does something differ. The day thereof (says
that Treatise) is a thousand years; The year thereof, four hundred thousand
years. Possibly the thousand years intend the limited felicity on earth; the
four hundred thousand years, the eternal in ultimate glory. And then the said
Tract of Theology goes on, saying, They that possess this estate, shall be
all perfect in STATURE; to wit, in the STATURE OF ADAM; and in FORM viz. in the
FORM OF JESUS CHRIST, never suffering any increment, or decrement. They shall
have all sweet contentment, and all at their pleasure, without difficulty, or
delay.

That the day of judgment shall continue a long time. Three Trumpets shall be
sounded. At the last, all shall be gathered together to Jerusalem.

Turks had; of the future state we speak of. If they err in the manner of
their discourse, it is no wonder, being such Barbarians, as I may say, in many
respects. We have in substance confessed by them, what we contend for. A wise
man has been sometimes clothed in a fools Coat. We told you before we should
not justify all the words, the Heathens, Turks, and Jews should speak of this
point. Yet let not this (as Mr. Mede says, touching the rubbish mixed in the
Fathers, and others touching this opinion) make us cast away the substance of
gold. The Turks you see in part (and I might have showed you more) sometimes
speak in substance according to Scripture. And sometimes they speak in effect
touching our point against themselves; wherein they are to be regarded. As in
that touching Jagog and Magog (who are they themselves) and touching Jesus
Christ, his coming again to confirm the Law, and to be the pattern of our
perfection at the Resurrection, and not their Mahomet. And that the children of
Isaac shall at last overcome them. Great is the power of truth, and it shall
prevail; as Cardanus said, and in a demonstration thereof, as he professes,
he wrote the disgraceful story of his own birth and life.

CHAP. IV.
Containing the Doctrine of the Jewish Rabbis, concerning the state of the
godly after the Resurrection, and the Scriptures they allege for their
Doctrine.

R. Menasse, Ben Israel. In his Treatise, De Resurrectione mortuorum, libritres.
As for the Rabbi himself, in the first Book, he does very orthodoxly assert
abundantly out of many Scriptures of the Old Testament, and the consent of some
Rabbis therein the Resurrection. I will touch one, because according to his
allegation, the inference thence naturally flowing looks more particularly with
favor on our Thesis. Moreover (says he Ibid. lib. 1. cap. p. 13. 101.
) Jacob (in Egypt) would be buried with his Fathers (in Canaan) and Joseph
commanded his brethren, that when they should depart out of Egypt, they should
carry his bones with them. All which are of that nature, that by them it easily
appears, that they believed the soul to be immortal, or else that care had
been ridiculous. Yea it had been ridiculous, if they had not hoped for an happy
estate among the godly in their bodies upon the earth at the Resurrection. Else
they needed not take any regard of places on earth, near the faithful, or etc.
of this inference as allowed by the Rabbis see after in this Chapter.

That men that were monsters here, shall rise again without all
monstrousness, because else their monstrosity would terrify the minds of men,
etc. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 5. p. 163.
which reason argues a conversing of men on earth after the Resurrection. 2
That the dead shall rise clothed. Ibid. 2. c. 6. p. 164, 165. etc
Thus, says he, R. Meyr in Tract Sannedrim, asserted when Cleopatra put it as
a Question to him, (...) etc. He gives his answer in sum thus, If the
Wheat-corne sown in the earth, does not need for its putrefaction so many
wrappers, as it springs up with, yet it arises out of the earth with a blade,
and ear; How much more convenient is it that pious and good men for decorum
sake shall rise clothed with garments? And in the Jerusalem Talmud it is said,
under the name of R. Natan (...) etc. with the same vestiment with which a man
is buried shall he rise again, according to that ( Job 38.14.) He is changed
as a lump of clay, and stands as a garment.) To the same effect R. Johanan (in
Beresit Raba) and R. Irmihah. These things I do not take time to dispute,
whether true or false; but this I infer, that those Rabbis that believed
this, must needs thus think, upon this ground, that there should be an happy
estate of good men on EARTH at their resurrection. Howbeit for mine own part,
if you will needs presently know my inclination what to think herein, remember
that Adam and Eve being both naked in innocence (and our estate at the
Resurrection shall not be more imperfect) they were not thereby obnoxious
either to sin or shame. 3 How the world shall be able to contain all that
shall be raised, and particularly the land of PALESTINE, Ibid. l. 2. c. 10. p.
186, 187. etc
all the JEWS? To which the Rabbis answer, That there are now many Tracts of
the world, which are not habitable, but either are at present unknown, or if
known, yet through too much heat, or too much cold, are not inhabited. Which
things shall not be so at the Resurrection. For then all parts of the whole
Earth shall be known, and all shall be made habitable. And for the capacity of
PALESTINE, or the Holy Land promised to the ISRAELITES, as the place of their
entertainment, this Isaias excellently explains, Chap. 54.2, 3. Sing O barren,
etc. Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth the Curtains of
thine habitations; Spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.
For thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on thy left; and thy seed
shall inherit the Gentiles, and shall make the desolate Cities to be inhabited.
By the place of the Tent (says the Rabbin) is meant Jerusalem, and by the
Curtains of her Tabernacle, are meant the Cities of the Holy Land. Moreover,
faith the prophet, those Curtains shall extend themselves too far. In which
matter this Prophet agrees with the words of Zachary (Chap. 9. v. 1.) That
Jerusalem (as the Rabin renders it) shall be extended unto the gates of
Damascus, and Hamat with Tire and Sidon shall enter into the borders of the
Holy Land, even as the Chalde Paraphrase does expound: which also may be
confirmed out of Jeremiah (Chapter 31. v. 38.) Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that the City shall be built to the Lord, from the Tower of Hananeel,
unto the gate of the corner. And the line shall go forth over against it, upon
the hill Gareb, etc. Thus the Rabbis to this question; by which it is apparent
they expect a glorious state on earth at the resurrection. Fourthly, he gives
this as the last reason of the resurrection (the rest being not so pat to our
purpose, Ibid. l. 2. c. 10. p. 186, 187, etc.
I mention not) Because (says he) if they only that shall be alive at the
time the rest should rise, shall enjoy the salvation, and deliverance of the
Lord, and the FELICITY OF THE DAYS OF THE MESSIA, then many should be most
unjustly dealt with, viz. they that have suffered much, and that unto death for
godliness sake, etc. This reason is as alleged by R. Menasse, so asserted by
R. Arisba (in his Commentaries called Agadot) and assented unto by R. Isaac
Abravanel. This reason is good, but because not pertinently driven home to my
purpose, as touching making Saints to triumph where they have been trampled; I
quoted it I confess, rather for the sake of a By-expression as more direct to
my Thesis; viz. That the Saints at the Resurrection shall enjoy the felicity of
the days of the Messia, which days unless they be fulfilled on earth before
the ultimate universal judgment, I know not how they should in the ultimate
glory, when Christ shall lay down all Kingdom and power, and God must be all
in all, 1 Cor. 15.24.28.

Rabbis, viz. with the whole state of the world to come, immediately following
the Resurrection.

1 In the first Chapter are presented to us three several opinions of the
Rabbis touching the meaning of the phrase (often in Scripture) the world to
come. Some understanding the world of separated souls; others that world that
shall follow a certain term of time, after the time of the Resurrection.
Others, that World that begins at the very hour of the Resurrection. Which
third opinion, says learned R. Manasse, is to me most probable. Of this
opinion was R. Moses Gerundensis in a contest against R. Moses Egyptius, who
held the "first of the three opinions aforesaid. And Gerundensis opinion in sum
was this, That the world to come is that which immediately follows the
resurrection of the dead, into which all that live piously, probously and
honestly, being raised, shall be brought in soul and body conjoined, to enjoy
indefinentlie, and without end the reward of their labors. With this compare
the prayer which the men of the Great Synagogue composed, whose words are
these, (...) etc. That is, There is no proportion with thee, O Lord our God, in
this world; There is none besides thee, O our King, in the world to come; none
besides thee, O our Redeemer in the days of the Messiah, and who is like to
thee in the resurrection of the dead. Which words thus rendered, close to the
Hebrew (without ^aking liberty of neoterick phrase) may conveniently be thus
explained, That in opposition to this life in its mighty length throughout all
ages (first named) they put the World to come of the Eternal state, set in the
second place. And lastly, they name the days of the Messiah at the
resurrection of the dead, as intercident between both. For plainly they here
speak in the two last of a World to come ((...) as they speak, and that with an
emphasis) And therefore the days of the resurrection of the dead, and of the
Messiah (at this coming, are according to their sense all one: With this well
concurs that in the Sanhedrim, That no man of those that deny the resurrection
shall partake of the world to come; giving this reason (...) etc. i.e. Who ever
denies the resurrections of the dead, by this very thing there cannot redound
to him a share in the resurrection from the dead. Consonantly R. Abraham Bibag
in his book called Derech Emuna l. 3. part. 4.
proves by several places of Scripture, that The hour of the resurrection of
the dead, and the continued and perpetual life which shall follow, is called
the world to come. For although oftentimes the same name is given to the world
of separated souls, yet properly, and more rightly is understood the world of
the resurrection of the dead. I insist not upon the application of these to our
purpose, being I have hinted sufficient before in this [Section] and we shall
anon hear the Rabbis come nearer to us, and carry the matter up to the very
achme, and top of their prospect of light.

2 In the next, the second Chapter of the said third Book, the Rabbis speak
out plainly and freely what before we struggled for by deduction, whiles their
speeches were darker. It shall not be grievous to us (as much haste as we are
in) to translate much of this Chapter, and those that follow of the said third
book out of the Latin and Hebrew, whiles the things much conduce to the truth
in hand, because the Book it self, is not to be had. The head or sum of this
second Chapter is, That the RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD, shall be conjoined unto
the DAYS of the MESSIAH. This, R. Menasse Ben Israel 1 Learnedly proves out of
the books of Moses, and the Prophets; And secondly, brings the stream of
learned ancient Rabbis consenting thereunto. It is apparent, says he, out of
Moses by that song of his, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 35, 36. to v. 40. To me belongs
vengeance, etc. their foot shall slide in due time. For the Lord shall JUDGE
his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he sees that their power
is gone, etc. See now that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me, I
kill, and I make alive. See here (says Menasse) the day of the coming of the
Messiah, and the day of the resurrection are conjoined. As for the Prophets, it
is manifest (says he) out of the second Chapter of Isaiah; It shall come to
pass in the last of days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, etc. and all Nations shall flow unto
it. And many people shall say, Come let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord,
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, and he shall judge among the Nations, etc. and they shall
beat their swords into plow-shares. The Prophet here teaches (says R.
Menasse) not only temporal good things, but also spiritual, which shall come
to pass, when the Messiah shall come. For then all Nations with unanimous
consent (even as Zephany also foretells) adhering to the God of Isaac and Jacob,
and embracing his Doctrine, shall serve him with one kind of worship. Then all
shall enjoy a quiet, tranquillous, and most happy life, because the earth then
shall not be infested with any noise of Arms. And all those wars which before
were stoutly waged by reason of the difference of Religion, shall then cease.
The cause ceasing, the effect cease. After the Prophet had spoken of the time
of the Messiah, presently he proceeds to those things that are to follow, viz.
to the day of judgment, and the resurrection of the dead. For, says he, the
day of the Lord shall be on every one that is proud and lofty, etc. upon all the
Cedars of Lebanon, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, and upon all the ships of
Tarshish, etc. No doubt (says he) but by (...) THE DAY OF THE LORD, the
Prophet signifies the day of judgment (as we shall afterward demonstrate)
which otherwise is called the day of resurrection of the dead; for then the
dead are judged, called also the day of the Lord, because a day of admiration.
Nothing then that is ordinary shall be done, but all above nature, etc. He
alleges likewise for the said head of this Chapter that in Isa. 23.14. They
shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the Majesty of the Lord, etc. And
Isa. 49.14. etc. But Zion says, the Lord has forsaken me etc. Can a woman
forget her sucking child? Psal^ 72.16. And they of the City (so Menasse renders
it) shall flourish as the here out of the earth. Thus far we have shown by
Scripture (says he) that the resurrection of the dead, shall be conjunctive to
the coming of the Messiah; next it remains to be proved, that the Ancients were
of the same opinion. It is to be noted what reason they give, why the
Patriarchs so much desired to be buried in the Holy Land, which was no other
then this, That they that are there buried shall FIRST RISE So in Beresit.
Raba-Paras. 74 and 66. and Semot. R. pur. 32.
. From whence is inferred, That the resurrection of the dead, to the coming of
the Messiah is annexed in time. The same is found also elsewhere In the
Jerusalmy de Kilaym. And so Semuel in Gemarah de berahot.
. (...) etc. i.e. This world does not differ from the days of the Messiah, but
in the subjecting of Kings. In Zoar Paras. voyera Elar.
is manifestly and clearly expressed (...) etc. i.e. The blessed God shall first
build the Temple and order, and dispose the Palace, and build the City, and
then the dead shall be raised out of the dust. The Cabalists do sound their
opinion on the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 147.2, 3. The Lord builds up
Jerusalem, he gathers together the out casts of Israel, he heals the broken
in heart, and binds up their wounds.

3 In the next, viz. the third Chapter of that third Book, the Rabbin solves
this Question, Whether within the aforesaid times shall be the end of the world,
or after the resurrection of the dead? This Question (says he) may easily be
resolved, by that we have said in the former Chapter. For when the sacred
Scripture treats concerning the days of the Messiah it always calls that
time, (...) i.e. the end of days. So Genesis 49.1. Gather your selves together,
says Jacob to his sons, and I will tell you that which shall befall you, (...)
in the end of days. Upon which R. Moses Gerundensis commentating says, where
ever there is speech concerning the end of days, it is to be understood of the
days of the Messia. Jacob would have told his sons what should befall them in
the days of the Messiah, but God inhibited him. The like phrase is in Balaams
speech, in Numb. 24.14. etc. Come I will advertise thee, what this people shall
do to thy people in the end of days. I shall see him (says he, speaking of the
Messiah) but not Now, I shall behold him, but not nigh; There shall come a Star
out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall arise out of Israel, he shall strike through
the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Seth. Note that the time
is by him called the end of days. Therefore he says, I see it, but not nigh.
Again when he says, he will destroy or demolish the children of Seth, he
means the inhabitants of the whole world. From whence it does appear that that
is to be understood of the Messiah. He, the said Rabby alleges many other
places for that phrase, the end of days, to be taken for the days of the
Messiah yet to come, as Isa. 2.2. Jer. 30.24. Chap. 31.1. Ezekiel. 38.16. Hos.
3.5. Mich. 4.1. Dan. 10.14. And because (says R. Menasse) our deliverance is
deferred to so long a time hence, and distant from us, therefore David makes
that vehement complaint, Psalm. 89. v. 49. O Lord where are thy former loving
kindnesses, which thou swarest unto David in thy truth, etc. But I am not
ignorant (says Menasse) that they that dissent from us, do make a double
coming of the Messiah, and so do expound those places far otherwise. But I have
no list (says he) at this time, to dispute with any, concerning that thing,
but simply and heartily to hold forth the opinion which the Hebrews profess.
From what has been said, two things (says he) do necessarily follow; One,
that the redemption of Israel shall be extended unto the end of the world. The
other that that same end shall come, before the resurrection of the dead. And
because that end shall take its beginning in the days of Messiah, therefore
there is a necessity that a NEW WORLD SHALL BEGIN FROM THE RESVRRECTION OF THE
DEAD, therefore it is called (...) The world to come. Dan. 12. v. ult. Go thy
way unto the end, and rest, and awake in thy lot, in the end of days. The same
is to be collected out of the saying of the Ancients In Gemara Abodae, Zarae
cap. 1. cap. 6.
(...) etc. It is pronounced in the School of Elia (not the Thesbit, but of
some Rabbin) that the world shall continue six thousand years. In two thousand
is the void or empty time (that is the time until Abraham, being void of Moses
Law.) In two thousand is the time of the Law. In two thousand are the days of
the Messiah. So that as it is read elsewhere In Sebet. Jeudah.
It is not said that the Messiah shall come in the end of four thousand years,
or in the beginning of five thousand years, but only that the days of the
Messiah shall be two thousand years, that is, that within that space the
Messiah shall come, about the beginning, middle or end. Which last words (say
I) are very considerable by us Christians. For within that space Christ is
come, and will come
again.

4 In the fourth Chapter are declared the opinions of the ancient Rabbis,
concerning the term and end of the world. In the Talmud we read (...) etc.
The world shall endure six thousand years, in one it shall be destroyed; upon
which many comment thus, The ELEMENTARY and TERRESTRIAL world shall endure six
thousand years, and in the seventh thousand all shall return to their ancient
chaos, of which they were made. And after that a New world shall exist. And
that likewise after it has stood six thousand years shall also relapse to its
former Chaos. And then the revolution of the world shall endure for nine and
forty thousand years. And after that, the heavens and the earth shall be
annihilated It seems by this, that what the doctrine of Mahomet said of 1000
years and 49000, was learned of these Rabbis.
. All this they think to be shadowed forth partly by the six days of the
Creation; because, according to the Psalmist ( Psalm 90.4.) A thousand years in
the sight of the Lord are but as yesterday. Partly by the Law and the
Commandment, That six years the land should be tilled, in the seventh it
should rest; and in the fiftieth the Jubilee should be celebrated. As for my
opinion (says R. Menasse) I think, That after six thousand years, the world
shall be destroyed upon one certain day, or in one hour; that the orbs of
heaven shall make a stand, as unmovable; that there shall be no more
generation, or corruption; and all things by the resurrection shall be
renovated, and return to a better condition. And this (says he) out of doubt,
is the opinion of the most learned Aben Ezra, who commenting on that place of
Isaiah (Chapter 65.17.) Behold I create new heavens, and a new earth, etc.
says thus, (...) etc. i.e. Rather we are to say, that the Heavens are
expansed, and that God will make new the air to be singular good, etc. and
then also shall there be added to the earth a fresh vigor, whereby it shall
be made New. According to which verdict of Aben-Ezra, (says Menasse) There is
a total, and universal reforming, or new-framing of the world. And although the
Text has it, New Heavens, yet there is no necessity, nor does the sense
require it, that we should understand New Heavens, to be meant of other
Heavens, diverse from these now in being, but only that there shall be a
certain Instauration, and Reformation of them into better. And whereas before,
the Ancients said, that after six thousand years, the world shall be destroyed
in one; the meaning is not, that after six thousand years should be nothing,
how can it be measured by ONE? Again, the word Destroy does not signify a
total annihilation, but only a ruin, or lapsing of things. Therefore from
those words cannot be concluded that the world shall be reduced to nothing; but
as R. Hasday thinks (...) etc. i. e. Nothing else can be gathered from the
aforesaid speeches, but that there is a CERTAIN NECESSARY ETERNITY OF THE WORLD
IN SPECIE, or KIND, that is, that the world be not plainly consumed, and turned
out into nothing, but still be turned into a better world. Accordingly, R.
Huna says concerning R. Joseph Galilean, even those heavens of which it is
written, I create new Heavens, are already created in six days in Genesis. And
suteably in that 65. of Isa. 17. speaking of creating a new earth, he does not
say merely (...) new, but with an additional of an emphatical article (...)
this same earth New. So that as Psalm. 102.25, 26. The heavens and the earth
waxing old as a garment, are CHANGED, as a new dressed garment. And to the same
purpose the Ancients speak Par. 30.
Noah (say they) saw the New world, yet at that time the world was not
altogether destroyed, but renewed; according to Psalm. 102.26. The sum is,
That the world shall not be destroyed for a thousand years, but in one day, or
punctum of an hour, the earth shall suffer a mighty change, and upon that
change immediately shall follow the resurrection of the dead, and a new world.
Even as it is in Zoar Parasah Toldoth Ishac.
(...) From the hour of the resurrection of the dead, the world shall remain
stable. And Lactantius Firmianus intimates that he had received it from a
Cabalist, that the term of six thousand years being consummated, the state of
all humane affairs, shall be formed into a better condition.

5 In the fifth chapter is held forth by the Rabbis what kind of ruin there
shall be of the world before the great restoration of it yet to come. And
concerning the Jews war with GOG and MAGOG All the Rabbis (says Menasse Ben
Israel) agree in this, That theISRAELITES after their return into their own
Country at the time of their redemption, are not to enjoy a full and perfect
tranquillity, and peace, until the last war with Gog and Magog shall be
finished. For it shall come to pass (says he) that after the Israelites shall
return into Palestine, that Nation of Gog and Magog shall come to invade, and
possess that Country, and that with an huge multitude of men, and infinite
forces of soldiers, with the same hope and mind, to recover the Kingdom, and
Empire to themselves, as the Goths and Vandals accompanied with a multitude of
vile persons subjected unto themselves most puissant Kingdoms, and triumphed
over them. And although perhaps they may be persuaded, that Monarchy of the
Jews to be erected not without the singular divine providence of God, yet
happily they may think that it shall continue but for a time; and so may
conclude that it will be as possible for them to subvert, and subdue it, as it
was for Nebuchadnezzar and Titus Vespasian formerly to overthrow and enslave
it. With this hope, and confidence, those Nations (of Gog and Magog) shall with
an armed power, invade the Holy Land, and having again expulsed thence the
Israelites, they shall endeavor to subjugate them under their power. All which
may be confirmed by diverse places of Scripture. 1 By Ezekiel, Chap. 37. where
the Prophet treating of the gathering together, and restititution of the Ten
Tribes, and of the other Two, signified by the Two sticks, in which the names
of Judah and Ephraim were written, and declaring that all those Tribes shall be
conjoined, and shall have David to be their King for ever, etc. he by and by
subjoyns in the 38. Chapter, that this people shall be broken, and exceedingly
troubled by Gog and Magog. Therefore he begins the 38. Chapter thus; Son of
man, Set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, etc. And prosecutes the
reason, Verse. 14. Therefore Son of man prophecy, and say unto Gog, Thus
says the Lord God, In that day when my people dwells safely, shall thou not
know it? And thou shall come from thy place out of the North parts, thou, and
many people with thee, all of themriding upon horses, a great company, and a
mighty Army. And thou shall come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to
cover the land, it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against
my Land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee. O
Gog, before their eyes. Therefore (says Menasse) this war being ended. THERE
SHALL BE A GREAT CHANGE OF ALL THINGS. For then (says he) in my opinion,
shall be THE END OF THE WORLD, Indeed then shall be an end of this world. viz.
the beginning of the days of the Messiah, but not the ultimate end of the
world, as that in the 21, 22, 23. and 24. verses quoted by R. Menasse, plainly
shows, viz. sword. pestilence, blood, hailstones, etc. of which there is no use
at the ultimate end of the world. And in the next Chapter, viz. the 39. of
Ezekiel the Prophet describing the destruction of Gog, says v. 2. that he
should not be totally destroyed, but only part, viz. only the sixth part, as
some will. The other five parts shall be reserved (as Vatablus expounds) to be
destroyed at the end of the thousand years of the Kingdom of the Messiah, Rev.
20: 7. Besides Ezekiel in the next Chapter, viz. the 40 etc. to the end of the
Book, describes a glorious state of the Jews on earth, after the destruction of
Gog and Magog. And therefore the Prophets former description of their
destruction cannot be at the ultimate end of the world: As the restoring of
the Temple of the Jews described in that 40. Chapter of Ezekiel. etc. to the end
of Book, following the destruction of Gog is a Type of New-Jerusalem. As Mr.
Mede asserts, and Dr. Twisse approves. Mede Diatr. pars. 4. page 546.
as it is related in the 20. Verse. etc. The fishes of the sea, and fowls of
heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things, etc. shall shake
at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places
shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground, etc. verse 21, 22, 23, 24.
to the end of the Chapter. Secondly, It may be confirmed out of Joel, Chapter
3.1, 2. Thirdly, out of Dan. Chapter 12.1. etc.
Who this Gog, and Magog are, it is not stated by the Jewish Rabbis. Mr. Mede
says ( Diatr. pars. 4. p. 546.) The Turk is Gog and Magog; and Dr. Twisse
highly approves it. But the Jewish Rabbis deliver their mind uncertainly. I
know (says R. Menasse) that others by the war of Gog and Magog, do understand
the Antichristian age that shall be at the end of the world. Hence Augustine
says ( l. 20 De Civit. Dei c. 1.) Gog is the Devil, and Magog the Army of
Antichrist. Ambrose thinks Gog to be the Goths, who invaded, and everted many
of the Roman Provinces ( l. 20. De demonstr. Evangel. cap. 3.) Eusebius (says
he) did think ( l. 5. c. 13. or 23.) Gog to be the Roman Emperor, and Magog
his Kingdom and Empire. Pliny asserteth ( l. 5. c. 23.) That there is a City
of Cava Syria; which he calls Bombices or Bombice, and Hierapolis, that is
called by the Syrians, Magog. The Hebrews (says he) know indeed that Magog is
of the posterity of Japhet, but which is that Nation at this day, they do not
know.

6. In the sixth Chapter, we have the RESTORATION, or RESTITUTION of the world
(in the days of the New world) punctually described (as they say) to the life,
by a parallel with the six days works of the first Creation, viz.

In the first day was created light, which was (says R. Menasse) according to
the opinion of the Ancients a supernatural light Beresit. Raba. Paras. 3.
. So in the Restoration of the World, there shall be an extraordinary
transcendent light, according to Isaiah, Chap. 60. v. 19. The Sun shall be no
more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto
thee, but THE LORD SHALL BE UNTO THEE AN EVERLASTING LIGHT, and thy God thy
glory. On which words Isaac Abravanel comments thus (...) etc. Thou shall have
no need of solary light, or light of the Sun by reason of the divine light.

On the second day was created the Expanse (as the Hebrew (...) calls it) or
Firmament (as we call it according to the Greek) which (says R. Menasse)
according to the opinion of the learned signifies the Region of the air. So
this (as we said before) in the New world shall be purged, or refined from all
noxious exhalations (by which is signified, says Ahen Ezra the New heaven;)
And all evil spirits and Devils, whose seat was in the Air, shall be removed
thence, according to that in the Tract of Aboda Aboda Zara. cap. 5.
(...) etc. i. e. Hell shall not be in the new world. But the blessed God at
the day of judgment shall draw forth the Sun out of its sheath, and torment
the wicked. So Malach. 4.1. it is said, Behold the day comes that shall burn
like an oven. And Zach. 13.2. I will cause the unclean spirit to pass out of
the land.

In the third days work, the dry land appeared, and the plants were created,
which after were cursed for Adams sin. Therefore in the New world the earth
shall be amended, and a better efficacy and virtue shall be instilled into it
for germination, according to Aben Ezra: thence in Siphra, it is said by the
Ancients on Levit. 26.4 (...) etc. i. e. The earth shall give her increase, not
in the manner it does now, but as it did in the time of Adam. Likewise we read
in Semot Semot. Raba. paras. 15.
(...) etc. i. e. It shall be that the trees shall yield their fruit every
month, according to Ezekiel. 47.12.

In the fourth day was created the Sun, Moon and Stars. These also shall be
renewed; For the light of the Sun (the fountain and original of all
celestial light) shall in a mavelous manner be augmented, as in Semot we read
Semo. R. par. 12.
(...) etc. i. e. The blessed God will cause that the Sun shall shine forth
nine and forty parts of more light, as it is said Isa. 30.26.
, The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Sun shall be sevenfold more, as the light of seven days.

In the fifth day were created the Fishes and Fowls, and the great Leviathan.
"By which is understood (says Menasse) according to "the opinion of the
Ancients, it taken literally, That God will prepare in the world to come all
curiosities for the just.

In the sixth day were created all Animals void of reason; and last of all
Adam, of the dust of the ground, yet most perfect in all respects and that
without conjunction of male and female. The Rabbis further say, that his body
was full of light, or lightsome, and was of a goodly stature. Therefore out of
doubt when Adam shall rise again, for he (says the Rabbi) shall be raised
first, he shall rise according to his first form and stature: Yea moreover his
body shall then be far more lightsome diaphanous, or transparent; According to
that of the Ancients In Midras a-Nehelam in Paras. Veycra Elau.
, (...) etc. i. e. R. Levi says, The soul whiles it is in its glorious
estate, sustaines it self with a superior light, and is clothed with it,
when it shall return to its body in the world to come, it shall return with the
same light, and then the body shall shine as the splendour of heaven, accordinng
to that of Dan. 12. They that understand, or the intelligent, shall shine as the
brightness of heaven. And because (says R. Menasse) in that New world SIN
SHALL HAVE NO PLACE, as we shall demonstrate in that which is to follow)
therefore by good consequence, the body shall always remain in the same
glory, and splendour, and so the whole world to be restored into the same state
wherein it was, before sin entered.

Mean time note that this renovation of the Lord shall (in my judgment) differ
from the state of the first Creation. 1 This world was made of nothing; but
that to come, not of nothing, but of the things already created, being endowed
with a new disposition, and better quality. 2 At first, this world was made in
seven days. But the other shall be new-formed in one day. 3 This world began
with night, the other shall begin with day, according to that in Zechary
Chapter 14.7. At evening it shall be light.


There are, that will have all that we have hitherto said to come to pass in
the time of the Messiah; and to that, they think, does belong that saying of
the Ancients (...) i. e. prepared to come. But if any rightly weigh what the
Ancients have said, (as was before hinted Viz. In cha. 2. of the third Book of
R. menasse, is the whole matter at large.
) especially that in Midras a-Nehelam, he shall find that these things are to
be understood of the New world which begins with the resurrection from the
dead. The sum of which matter is this: That unto the coming of the Messial
(say the Rabbis) is knit on (as immediately subsequent) the resurrection from
the dead. Now it is worth the weighing what space there may be of the former,
to the beginning of the latter. Observe this.
In the Sanhedrim Chap. 11. diverse opinions are propounded. R. Eliezer makes
the space to be four hundred years. R. Elhazar Ben Hazaria makes it to be
seventy years. R. Elhazar forty years. These all differ, and yet were not
altogether rash in their opinions. For R. Eliezer computed according to the
time of the Egyptian Captivity, four hundred years. R. Elhazar Ben Hazariah
according to the Babylonian Captivity, seventy years. And R. Elhazar forty
years, according to the time of the Jews peregrination in the wilderness. And
all three of them each to confirm his own opinion, bring that of the 90. Psalm
v. 15. Make us glad, according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and
the years wherein we have seen evil. (For the Rabbis affirmed before, that
after the Jews shall be brought back by the Messiah to their own land, they
shall be very much troubled by Gog and Magog, of which space of time, I
conceive, is the present dispute among these Rabbis but now quoted) In Midras
a-Nehelem we find it written, (...) etc. i. e. THAT THE CONGREGATING or
GATHERING TOGETHER OF THE
CAPTIVE (Jews) shall ANTICIPATE or PRECEDE THE RESURRRECTION OF THE DEAD THE
SPACE OF FORTY YEARS. And (says R. Menasse) if this last opinion be received
and delivered by the Ancients, it may be soundly admitted, because it implies
no contradiction, nor does it contain any difficulty Thus R. Menasse out of the
Rabbis. But I think that it is near the matter in the sacred compute of the
holy Scripture. Dan. 12. v. 11, 12. if carefully computed and compared with v.
1. Touching the troubles at the time when Michael shall stand up to deliver his
people; together with v. ult. touching the resurrection of the dead.
. Thus we hear why R. Menasse would refer the glory before spoken, rather to
the New world, then to the days of the Messiah. Now hear him go on in this
sixth Chapter, and that in a way of condiscention of referring it (if any will)
to the days of the Messiah. If, says R. Menasse, it so seem good to any, he
may refer the glorious things aforesaid in some sort unto the times of the
Messiah, because both times are connexed the one on to the end of the other, as
we showed before. Again, because the end of the resurrection is, that the raised
may enjoy the happiness of that age; therefore they may be taken for one and
the same time.

Those admirable verses of the Kingly Prophet David, Ps. 104. do not a little
serve to our purpose, as they seem to me, viz. v. 27, 28, 29, and 30. All wait,
or hope upon thee. Thou give them their meat in due season, etc. Thou hidest
thy face, they are troubled: Thou take away their breath they dye, and return
to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are CREATED, and thou
RENEWEST THE face of the earth. Where the Prophet says, that after death, the
soul the second time returns to the body, and then the earth is renovated.

7 In the 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. Chapters these questions are put and resolved
chiefly; 1 Whether then shall be the day of judgment? To which the Rabbis
answer is, out of many Scriptures, and allegations of Antiquity; That after the
world shall be made new, and the dead raised, then shall be a day of judgment.
In part God judged before the living, in the war of Gog and Magog, EXCEPTING A
THIRD PART OF THEM So that according to the Rabbis also a part of Gog and
Magog as was said a little before, are reserved, who in all probability, are
they, that shall make head at the end of the thousand years, Rev. 20. v. 7.
, And after he shall come to judge the dead. 2 Whether then shall be the
restoration of the place and parts of worship, and a settlement of the
fruition of the holy land? To which it is answered, yea. 3 Whether there shall
be the use of food, and prolification? to which Gerundensis answers, that then
shall be no other then a spiritual life, though some other Rabbis are of
another mind. 4 Whether they that are raised shall dye any more? To which the
Rabbis is negative.

Thus far you have heard the opinion of the Jews concerning the glorious state
on earth yet to come, in the general vote of their Rabbis, laid together by R.
Menasse Ben Israel. Next hear learned Mr. Mede give you the sum of them,
Diatriba, pars. 4, page 461. Though the ancient Jews (whilst they were yet the
Church of God) had no distinct knowledge of such an order in the Resurrection
as first and second, but only of the resurrection in gross, and general, to be
in die judicii magni; yet they looked for such a resurrection, wherein those
that rose again, should reign some time upon earth according to that
Apocalypse 5.10. we shall reign on earth, as appears by Wisdom 3. from the
first to the eighth verse, inclusive; where it is expressly said, That the
souls of the righteous which were departed, should in the time of their
VISITATION shine, and that they should judge the Nations, and have dominion
over the people, and their LORD SHOULD REIGN for ever. See the place, and
consider it. This opinion is also here and there dispersed in the Chalde
Paraphrase, and in the Talmud, as of ancient tradition; and in the opinion of
the Jews at this day; who as they look not for the Kingdom of the Messiah
until Dies judicii magni (the day of the great judgment) so they expect that
their forefathers (at least such as were just and holy) should arise at the
beginning of the same, and reign in the land of Israel with their offspring
under the MESSIAH. I can hardly believe (says Mr. Mede) that all this smoke of
tradition could arise, but from some fire of truth anciently made known unto
them. Besides, why should the Holy Ghost in this point, speak so like them,
unless he would induce us, mutatis mutandis, to mean with them? In fine, the
second and universal Resurrection with the state of the Saints after it, now so
clearly revealed in Christianity, seems to have been less known to the
ancient Church of the Jews then the first, and the state to accompany it.

Jews touching the glorious state on earth yet to come, with the Prophecy of
Tobit or Tobias about to dye, concerning the twofold Captivity of the Jews, and
the last state of things, according to the most exact Hebrew copy Not that of
Munsters, tempered and patched up out of the Greek and Latin Translations. But
that most ancient Constantinopolitan copy (purely Hebraising) set forth by
Paulus Fagius. So that this Copy differs something from that in Greeke^ and
that we have in English, formerly annexed to our English Bibles. Should seem
this Copy we allege, was originally in Chalde, and was translated most
faithfully by some Jew that was singularly learned in the Hebrew Dialect. We
shall with the Translation, give you a taste of it in some main parts, in the
Hebrew.
. That we intend, is in the Prophecy of Tobias, according to this said copy in
Chapter 14. v. 3. etc. And it came to pass when Tobias was old, that he called
his son Tobias, together with his six sons which were borne to him, and
said unto him: My son, thou know that I am now spent with old age; Take
heed therefore after my death, that thou stay no longer at NINEVE; For certain
it is, and clear to thee, that it shall come to pass that the Prophecy of
the Prophet JONAH shall be confirmed. Wherefore take thy sons, and all that
thou have, and go into the Land of the MEDES; for THERE shall be peace unto
the appointed time.

But the rest of our brethren of ISRAEL (...) who are in Jerusalem, all of them
shall (...) go into exile, and Jerusalem shall be for, (...) or into heaps
For so, and in the very same words the Prophet Micha had now prophesied about
the beginning of Hezekiah, in which time Tobias was carried away into
Captivity. See Jer. 16.18. Micha 3.12.
, and the mountain of the (...) House for, or into high places of a Forest,
(...) and shall remain desolate for a little (...) time. (...)

And then shall the children of Israel go up and rebuild it, and also the
Temple; but not according to the former structure; and (...) they shall remain
there MANY DAYS, UNTIL A (...) CERTAIN SERIES OF AGES BE FULFILLED In the
Greek it is (...) Till the seasons of that age or world be fulfilled.
.

Then shall they again go forth into a Captivity, (...) by far the greatest
they were ever in Those words Then again they shall go into Captivity by far
the greatest they were ever in, are left out of the Greek Copy, either by
mischance, or of purpose, because it savoured of our opinion which the times
then, when it was expunged likely in Jeromes time, could not bear it. And
therefore Jerome even for that cause left out, not only that clause, but also
two whole Paragraphs in that place, to the utter routing of the coherence of
the sense; even as he translated the whole, exceeding perfunctorily, by his own
confession. For in his Prologue to that his Translation, he says Because the
Chalde tongue is near in kin to the Hebrew, finding a ready man of speech in
both languages, I snatched the labor of one day, and what he expressed to me
in Hebrew, that by a notary I expounded in Latin.
. But the blessed (...) Holy God, shall remember them, and shall gather them
(...) from the four quarters of the world.

Then shall Jerusalem, the holy City be restored, with a beautiful and
excellent structure; as also the Temple shall be built, with a famous
structure, which shall not be destroyed, nor demolished for ever, as the
Prophets have said. Then shall the Gentiles be converted to worship the Lord,
and shall cast away the graven Images of their gods, and shall give laud and
praise to his great name. The horn also of his people shall be exalted before
all Nations, and all the seed of ISRAEL shall celebrate and glorify his great
Name. Then shall his servants, that serve him in truth, be glad; all that do
righteousness and godliness shall rejoice, and triumph before him.

If all that I have produced touching the Jews suffrage for the glorious state
of all things on earth yet to come, be not sufficient for some (though perhaps
I have quoted too much for others) let such read the Chalde Paraphrase on the
Bible, if but in the Latin Translation; the Rabbis (at least as quoted in
Mercer) on the minor Prophets; Petrus Galatinus; Buxtorfs Jewish Synagogues,
and the fourth book of Esdras; of which last, Mr. Medes censure is worth the
hearing, especially in that it relates to the point in hand. Whereas you say
(says he, in answer to Mr. Haines) that the Jews since Christ brought in this
opinion of the Roman to be the fourth Kingdom that so they might the better
maintain their expectation of the Messiah yet to come, because that Kingdom
was yet in being; I say it was affirmed, whosoever first affirmed it, without
all ground, authority, or probability; the contrary also being easy to be
proved; viz. that the Jews were of this opinion before our Saviors time, as
appears in Jonathan Ben Uziel the Chalde Paraphrast, and by the fourth Book of
Esdras; which whatsoever the authority thereof be; is sufficient to prove this,
being written by a Jew (for it is, says Picus, the first of their seventy
Books of Cabala) and before our Saviors coming, as appears by many passages
of Messiah expected, and yet to appear within four hundred years after that
supposed time of Esdras. Certainly he that writ it meant no hurt to the
Christians, as will easily appear to him that reads it, and finds the name
Jesus, and so often mention of the Son of God. "Which I note, in case you
should rather think it written after Christ. The ancient mention thereof is by
Clemens Alexandrinus, Anno 200.

CHAP. V.
Of the Vote of Christians (at least so named) concerning the glorious state of
things yet to be on earth before the ultimate judgment. Delivered not only in
short passages here and there sprinkled in their Works, but in their great
Councils, and forms of Catechismes, for the grounding of people in Religion.

Papists in the point now under consideration; we gave you some instance before
in the first Book out of Lorinus a learned Papist his quotations of some of his
own Religion: And out of learned A lapide (though a rank Papist) confessing
much of this point in his Commentary on Hos. 3. v. 5. as his own judgment,
quoting many Fathers, etc. to countenance his opinion therein; add now out of
him on Hos. 1. Chapter upon the tenth verse [And the number of the children of
Israel shall be as he sand of the sea, which cannot be measured, nor numbred]
he has these words, Dico ergo, etc. I say therefore (says A lapide) this
Prophecy began to be fulfilled by Christ who preached in person both to Jews
and Israelites as Matthew. 4 15. and after by Philip, Peter, and John, Act. 8.
Add that daily many of Israel shall be converted. And at last in the end of
the world ALL THE ISRAELITES shall be converted, as says the Apostle, Romans
11.26. And THEN shall this Prophecy of Hosea be perfectly fulfilled. So S.
Jerome, and Christopherus a Castro. And that by Israel must here be understood
as Gentiles, so the natural Israelites, converted unto Christ is the common
exposition of the Fathers, and Schoolmen Ita (inquit A Lapid.) S. Hier. Cyril.
Ruffinus Haymo. Hugo. Albertus. August, l. 22. Contra Faustum, cap. 89. and
saepe alibi. Cyprian. lib. Testim, contra Judaeos cap. 19. Tertul. lib 4 contra
Marc. cap. 16. Irenaeus lib. 1 cap. 4 Prosper lib. 2. De vocat Gentium cap. 18.
Primas. Anselm. and S. Thom. in Romans 9.
. And upon v. 12. [ And the children of JVDAH and the children of ISRAEL shall
be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, etc. For great shall be
the day of Jezreel] A lapade has these words, Then the Natural Jews, and the
Israelites shall be converted unto Christ. Ita (inquit A Lapid.) S. Hieron.
Haymo. Alber. Vetab. Arias. a Castro.
They shall (I say, says Alapide) be gathered into one Church of Christ. By
Israel and Judah are fundamentally understood the true Israelites, and those of
Judah which shall be converted unto Christ; symbolically and mystically the
Gentiles tobe coverted unto Christ. And touching the great day of Jezreel, that
is the Day of the Messiah, of which the Sibyl sang Apud Virgil. Eclog. 4.
Incipient magni procedere monises
[ Then shall proceed the magnificent months, etc.] As the Platonists called
the time of the revolution and return of all things to their pristine or first
perfection, THE GREAT YEAR; So Christ brings the GREAT YEAR, when he repairs
and reduces all things to their primaeve orlinal felicity. Again the day of
Jezrreel signifies the Arm of God. So all these days of Jezreelare days and
works of the mighty arm of God (so Arias.) And lastly, The great day of Jezreel
shall be the day of the Resurrection "and Judgment. (So Cyril.) Add to these
things of Alapide, That "diverse of the Popish Schoolmen, viz. Aquinas, Scotus,
and Cajetan hold many things of our Tenet, according to Dr. ^rideaux his
quotation of them.

Lutherans (beside what Luther hinted in our first Book, touching Abel, and the
Saints bodies after death) Note the words of famous L. Osiander upon the
twelfth of Daniel, touching the computations of the times of Michael (Messiah)
his delivering the "Jews: I think (says Osiander) these years will fall in
with that time, "in which the Popedom of Rome shall bodily be overthrown.

viz. the choice Gre^k, and Latin Fathers, and later learned pious Authors, I
have alleged so much in our first Book, that I shall now add but some culled
and picked flowers out of several goodly Gardens asore omitted, to make up the
sum of the conclusion; That our Thesis in the main is little less then as it
were the voice of the Law of nature in all men.

1 Take in the first place (as worthy to carry the col^urs) Mr. Medes Diatrib.
part. 4. p. 455, etc. p. 485. etc. p. 490. etc. p. 462. etc.
summary, and pithy account *, especially for Antiquity (set forth long after I
was a good way entered into this work.) Touching the question of the thousand
years, you may see I have demonstrated them to follow the times of the Beast,
and of the false Prophet, and consequently the time of Antichrist. And if the
Apocalypse be canonical Scripture, it must needs be granted there is such a
time to come, or we must deny either Rome which now is, to be Babylon, or the
Beast to be Antichrist, or Antichristendome, which those who opposed the
ancient Chiliasts, found so necessary, as forced them (having no other way to
avoid their adversaries) directly to deny the Apocalypse to be Scripture; nor
was it readmitted, till they thought they had found some commodious
interpretation of the thousand years: And yet the Apocalypse has more humane
(not to speak of divine) authoriy then any other book of the New Testament
besides; even from the time it was first delivered. But we see
what the zeal of opposition can do. Justin Martyr alleged.
This Dogma of the thousand years, regnum or Kingdom, was the general opinion
of all orthodox Christians in the age immediately following the Apostles, if
Justin Martyr say true (of whom see at large in our first Book) and none known
to deny it but Heretics, Irenaeus a^leadged. See his words at length by and by
at
that denied the Resurrection,
and held that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob was not
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the reason Irenaeus maintained
it in his Book ( contra omnes hareses) against all heresies; and ^er^u^^an
against the Marcion^^es, Chapter 3. Eusebius who sound out one Gaius, to father
it upon Cerinthus, deserves no credit. He was a party, and one of those which
did his best to undermine the autherity of the Apocalypse. Not did any know of
any such Gaius, but from his relation. And if there were any such, he should
seem to be one of the Alogi; who denied both Jesus, Gospel, and Apocalypse, as
is testified by Epiphanius. And their age jumps with the age which Eusebius
affignes to Gaius. Yet I deny not, but some might maintain very carnal and
intolerable conceits about the ( Regnum) Kingdom of a thousand years, as the
Mahumetans do about their Paradise. But these are not to be imputed unto those
Primitive Fathers, and Orthodox Christians. The censure of Ferom.
S. Jerome was a chief Champion to cry down this opinion, and according to his
wont, a most unequal Relator of the opinion of his adversaries; what credit
he deserves in this, may appear by some fragments of those Authors still
remaining, whom he charged with an opinion directly contrary to that which
they expressly affirmed. And yet when he had stated it so, as it must needs be
Heresy and Blasphemy whosoever should hold it, he is found to say, he durst
not damn it, because multi virorum Ecclesiasticorum, etc. i.e. because many
Ecclesiastical men, and martyrs said the same things. Comment. on Jer. 19.10.
So that S. Jerome is a man of no faith with me, when he describes the opinion
of his adversary, which whatsoever it were, he would set it forth as odious as
possibly he could. He was a man that cared not what he said, so it might
disparage his adversary. This appears sufficiently in the cases of Vigilantius
and Jovinian. Yea but he lived the same time. Answ. So do we with those we
differ from, and yet we see the experience daily, that scarce any one will
relate the opinion of his adversary heartily. Yea, but I cannot deny that
Lactantius was for the abounding of meats, and the satiating of the belly and
appetite, etc. Lactantius cleared.
But what if I can? His words only are these; ( lib. 7. cap. 24) Tunc, inquit,
qui erunt in corpore vivi, etc.i.e. Those who then shall be alive ( viz. he
means at Christ's second coming) shall not dye, but for those thousand years
shall generate an infinite multitude, and their offspring shall be holy, and
dear to God. But those that shall be raised from the dead (he means at the first
resurrection) they shall be over the living in manner of Judges. And then
presently adds; The said Regnum, or Kingdom, to be the thousand years of a
celestial Empire, in which righteousness shall reign throughout the world.
But of satiating the appetite, etc. I find no word, unless you think it must
needs follow upon the taking away the curse off the creature, and the
restitution thereof to the perfection it lost through man's sin. For
Lactantius means no more, but that such as then lived, should live the life
that Adam should have done in Paradise, had he not sinned. But those that
should then rise from the dead, should live in a far more heavenly, and
Angelical condition, even the life of the blessed spirits in heaven. But S.
Jerome is wont to relate the opinion, as if those, who rose again, should
generate, and give themselves to feasting and gormandizing. You say that Saint
Austin intimates, that some held some such carnal Beatitude. I answer, so he
intimates that some did not, and that himself was once of that opinion, and
that to hold so, was tolerable. His words are De Civit. Dei l. 20 c. 7.
Quae opinio esset ut cunque tolerabilis, etc. i.e. which opinion however would
be tolerable, if any spiritual delicacies or dainties should, in that Sabbath
be given to the Saints by the presence of the Lord (Christ.) For we also
sometime have thought the same. But where can I show Cyprian to be a Chiliast?
Cypriar. Headged.
He shows himself plainly to be such (to such as know the mystery of that
opinion) In his book of exhortation to martyrdom, in the Presace whereof he
speaks thus. Desiderasti Fortunate charissime, etc. i.e. Thou have desired,
most dear Fortunatus, that in regard the weight of persecutions and pressures
is now incumbent upon us, and the insesting time, to be in the end and
consummation of the Antichristian world, now begins to approach, that I should
compose some encouragements out of the holy Scriptures, to prepare, and
corroborate the minds of the brethren, whereby I might animate the soldiers of
Christ unto the heavenly and spiritual combat; Six thousand years are now
almost completed; if the Devil shall sinde the soldier of Christ unready,
etc. But he that thus expected that the coming of Antichrist should be at the
end of the six thousanth year, which he supposed then near at hand, did yet
think the world should last seven thousand years, viz. a thousand years after
the destruction of Antichrist, as appears by his eleventh Chapter, in these
words Quid vero in Maccabaeis, septem fratres, etc. i.e. What mean the seven
brethren in the Maccabees, most like in condition of birth and virtue, making
up the septenary number of complete perfection? Even as the first seven days,
according to divine disposal, so the seven brethren adhering in martyrdom,
Irenaeus alleged at large, lib. 5. c. 28. c. 30. coutra Heref.
do contain seven thousand years, that a lawful sum may be made up. This, to
him that knows Chiliasme, is plain Chiliasme; which Irenaeus will make plain,
Quotquot diebus hic factus est mundus etc. i.e. Look in how many days this
world was made, even in so many thousands of years it ends. ^or if the day of
the Lord be as a thousand years, and in six days were sinished the things that
were made, it is manifest that the end of them is in the six thousanth year.
When Antichrist reigning three years and six months shall devastate or lay
waste all things in this world, then shall THE LORD COME FROM HEAVEN IN THE
CLOUDS IN THE GLORY OF HIS FATHER, casting HIM, and those that obey him into
the lake of sire; but procuring, or bringing with him unto the just, the times
of the KINGDOM; The great Council of Nice alleged for our opinion
that is, a Rest (that is, the great SABBATH) the seventh day sanctified, and
restoring to Abraham the promise of the INHERITANCE, etc. Add to all as MOST
REMARKABLE, That the GREAT COUNCIL OF NICE, called by Constantine the Great,
besides the definition of faith, and Canons Ecclefiastical, did set forth
certain ((...)) Forms of Ecclesiastical doctrines, according to which all
Teachers in the Church were to frame their discourse, and direct their
opinions. Some of these ((...)) Forms of Ecclesiastical doctrine, are recorded
by Gelasius Cyzicenus in his ( Historia Actorum Concilii Niceni) History of the
Acts of the Council of Nice. Amongst these there is this Form, for the
Doctrine of the state of the Resurrection.

(...) (Cap. 7.18) (...) (P^ 27.13.) (...) (Mat. 5.5) (...) (^^a. 26.6) (...)
The world was made more minute or less ( i.e. imperfecter or viler) because
of foreknowledge: For God foresaw that man would sin. Therefore we expect
NEW HEAVENS; AND A NEW EARTH, accrding to the holy Scriptures, when shall shine
forth the apparition or appearance and Kingdom of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. And THEN as Daniel says (Chap. 7.18.) The Saints of the
most HIGH SHALL TAKE THE KINGDOM; and there shall be a pure earth, holy, a land
of the living, and not of the dead, which David fore see^ng by the eye of
faith, cries out (Psalm. 27.13.) I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in
the LAND OF THE LIVING; A land of the meck and humble. For blessed (says
Christ, Matthew. 5.5.) are the meek, for they shall POSSESS THE EARTH. And the
Prophet s;aith (Isa. 26.6) The feet of the meek and the humble shall tread upon
it. 1. Judge by this (notwithstanding fifty years opposition) how powerful the
Chiliastical party yet was at the time of that Council. By some whereof, if
this Form were not framed, and composed, yet was it thus moderated (as you
see) that both parties might accept it (every man's interpretation being safe to
himself) as being delivered in the terms and language of Scripture. 2 Judge
whether in my explication of the state of the Thousand years, I have not kept
within the compass of this Form, and not swerved one jot therefrom. This you
see was the opi^^on of the whole Orthodox Christian Church in the age
immediately following the death of S. John (when yet Polycarp, and many of the
Apostles Disciples were living) as Justin Martyr expressly affirms. A Testimony
absolute, without all comparison, to persuade such as rely upon authority, and
antiquity; even as you have seen the same opinion continued throughout the next
age following that. And therefore it is to be ADMIRED that an opinion once so
generally received in the Church, should ever have been so cried down, and
buried. But those times which extinguished this, brought other alterations into
the Church beside this, and perhaps something in lieu of that, and relating to
it, (which perhaps few observe, that have knowledge enough of the rest) namely
that this opinion of the FIRST RESURRECTION was the real ground, and mother of
prayers for the dead, so anciently received in the Church, which were then
conceived after this manner, THAT THEY MAY HAVE THEIR PART IN THE FIRST
RESURRECTION. See Tertullian, who first mentions them. The reason was, because
this having part in the first resurrection, was not to be common to all, but to
be a privilege to some, namely of Martyrs and Consessors equipollent to them,
if God would so accept them. Moreover the belief of this Prerogative of
Martyrs in the first resurrection, was that which made the Christians of those
times so joyously desirous of Martyrdom. These things will perhaps seem
strange, but will be found true, if examined. And yet may not seem so strange
to considering minds, if they take notice that even so near to us as in King
Edward the sixth his time, in comparison of those ancient times, though now an
antiquity in parallel with later times, this our opinion of the glorious state
on earth yet to come before the ultimate judgment, was given to that age as a
Catechismal fundamental, King Edward the fixth his Catechism alleadges for our
opinion.
to be drunk in by all that should receive the true Christian, or Protestant
Religion. For the Author of the Catechism set forth in that King Edward the
fixth his time (and by that King authorized May 20. in the last year of his
reign) explicates the second Petition of the Lords prayer thus; Q. How is that
Petition, Thy Kingdom come, to be understood? A. We ask that his Kingdom
may come; for as yet we see not all things subject to Christ; we see not how,
or that the stone is cut out of the mountain;
without humane help, which BREAKS INTO PIECES, AND REDVCETH into NOTHING THE
IMAGE DESCRIBED BY DANIEL; how, or that the only rock, which is Christ, does
POSSESS, AND OBTAIN THE EMPIRE OF THE WHOLE WORLD given him of the Father. As
yet Antichrist is not slain; whence it is that we desire, and pray, that at
length it may come to pass, and be fulfilled; and that Christ alone may reign
with his Saints, according to the divine promises; And that be may live, and
have dominion in the world according to the decrees of the holy Gospel; and not
according to the traditions, and laws of men, and the wills of the TYRANTS of
the World. God grant (says the Reply of the Questionist) that his Kingdom may
come most speedily. In Mr. Fox his Martyrologie, you shall find in the
examination of Mr. Philpot, that the Bishops, when they came, brought this
Catechism with them; but what special relation it had to him, I know not, nor
is ought there mentioned about it. The Kings Letters before it, begin thus, Cum
brevis and explicata, etc. Whereas a compendious and plain way or form of
Catechism, written by a learnedman, was presented unto us, we committed the
perusal, and trial thereof to certain Bishops, and other learned men, etc. And
in the same Catechism concerning the end of the world, The Question being put
thus; The end of the world the sacred Scripture calls the consummation and
perfection of the MYSTERY OF CHRIST, and the RENOVATION OF ALL THINGS; So the
Apostle Peter speaks 2 Ep. Chap. 3. We expect new heavens, and a new earth
according to Gods promise, wherein dwells righteousness. And it seems agreeable
to reason, that the corruption, mutability, and sin, to which the whole world
is subject, should at last cease. Now by what means, or ways of circumstances
those things shall be brought to pass, I desire to know of thee? Answ. I will
declare as well as I can; the same Apostle attesting: The heavens, in manner of
a stormy tempest, shall pass away; and the elements estuating, shall be
dissolved, and the earth, and the works therein shall be burnt. As if the
Apostle should say, The world (like as we see in gold) shall be wholly purged
with fire, AND SHALL BE BROVGHT TO ITS UTMOST PERFECTION; which the little
world man imitating, shall likewise be freed from corruption, and mutation.
And so for man's sake, for whose use the great world was at first created, being
at length RENOVATED, or made new, it shall put on a face that shall be far more
pleasant, and beautiful. All which is understood of a stare and time on earth
before the ultimate judgment For the next Question following in that Catechism
is concerning that. Q. Deinde autem quid superest? But after that, what
remains A. Ultimum, and generale judicium, the ultimate and general judgment,
for Christ shall come, etc.

2 Touching certain parts and circumstantials of our opinion, as that there
shall be yet before the ultimate end of the world, a glorious time of the
universal call of the Jews, was the judgment of Chrysostom, Orat. de vocat.
Judaecorum, Paragraph. 7.
Hilary, Austin, Ambrose, and Jerome, whom, for that, Dr. Prideaux quotes, and
consents with them *. And touching the coming of Elijah before the next coming
of Christ, was the general opinion of the Fathers, as Dr. John Alsted quotes
and asserts.

3 Of later Writers touching parcels of our opinion we might quote many; 1
Wendelinus in his natural Contemplations. 2 Hieron. Zanchius on Hof. 3. 3
Functius his Chronology. 4 Rivetus on Hos. 3. 5 Peter Martyr in his Common
Places, Class. 2. cap. 4. and cap. 16. 6 Pareus on Romans 11. Explicat. dubiorum.
Johannes de Comb is compend.
Totius Theolog. Lib. 7. cap. 13. Alphonsus Conradus Of Mantua in his
Commentary on the Revelation, does superabound upon the main point. I will give
you but some few special touches in his Commentary on Rev. We may see, says
he, that diverse hold, that between Christ's coming in the flesh, and coming
in Majesty, there is a middle coming of spiritual power and force, to destroy
the great Antichrist, and to reform the Church. This coming, they say, shall
be in the end of the sixth Millenary or thousand years, of which coming they
make Enoch, and Elijah the forerunners. They say, that Antichrist shall be
destroyed by their preaching, and his Kingdom abolished. After which
downfall, peace shall be granted to the Church, and Satan shall be bound, so
that he shall not be able to disturb the tranquillity thereof. Now this
peace, and happy progress of the Church, they say, shall last for the whole
seventh Millenary, till the last time of her troubles by the persecution of the
Nations Gog, and Magog; because of Satan, who they say, shall then be at
liberty, stirring them up against the godly. These words quoted by Dr. John
Alsted, in his Treatise of the thousand years, inferres this; From hence it
appears (says Alsled) that our opinion concerning these thousand years is no
new, and unheard of thing. As for Alsonsus Conradus his own opinion, hear a
little of that. First in his Preface; This one thing perhaps (says he) may
offend the ears of some, because I seem to promise a more plentiful peace to
the Church, then that likeness of the cross will allow of, in which, in this
world, the Church must be made conformable to Christ its head. But let them
bethink themselves, that this is not so contrary to the Scripture, that it
should be objected against me, or laid to my charge as fit to be reckoned in
the number of those which are termed either impious or absurd. Especially when
as I cannot perceive, by what means that happiness which John writes, the
Church shall enjoy, Satan being bound, can be made good, except we acknowledge
some rest of the Church, her enemies being overthrown, which I think indeed
ever happened, as often as the enemies of Gods people have been removed out of
the way. Now because the enemy, John tells us shall be removed, is more
dangerous then all that ever yet infested Gods people; it ought not to seem
strange to any one, if, he being once overcome, the Church enjoy a more
plentiful peace then usual. Secondly, in his Comment on Rev. 20.1. God being
about to bestow (says Alsonsus) a more plentiful peace on his Church, then
heretofore, it suffices not him to have removed out of the way the BEAST, and
those Kings of the earth, with an horrible slaughter, except also he restrain
Satan, the beginner of all these mischiefs; so that he may not raise any more
those usual strifes among them. Wherefore the Angel comes down from heaven,
who repressing the fury of Satan, shuts him up as long as he pleases, not to
have the Churches peace to be taken away. So he shuts him up for a
thousand years, i.e. for that whole time that he will not have the Churches
peace disturbed. So far Alsonsus. 9 There is a touch also in Matthew Cotterius
(in his Contin. and demonstr^expos. of the Revelat. on Chap. 20.) of this
thousand years, of which we speak; only he begins his thousand years a
hundred and odd years too soon. At which time (as Alsted well observes) is but
the Praeludium. 10 Add to these the words of John Piscator, an Author of
esteem, common among us, in his Comment on the Revelation. The happiness of
the faithful who shall live upon earth after the downfall of the Papacy, is
their great security from the hostile invasions of the wicked for a thousand
years. The singular happiness of the Martyrs of Christ who before those
thousand years endured persecution, is their resurrection, which shall be
before the general Resurrection. And in a Treatise he wrote before his death,
of which Dr. John Alsted had the perusal, the said Piscator wrote much more of
this our point, which the said Alsted transcribed, as he confesses, into his
Treatise of the thousand years. Give me leave to borrow but a little more of
your patience, and I will give you much in few words. Many Writers of the
former, and this present age have published many things concerning Elias the
Artist, who is to come of the Lion of the North, who is near at hand. Of a
fourth Northern Monarchy. Of a great Reformation. Of the conversion of the
Jews, etc. See Theophrastus Paracelsus. Michael Sendivogius in his Treatise of
Sulphur. Stephanus Pannonius. of the circle of the works and judgments of God,
where, among other things he writes thus: It shall come to pass that the pure
Gospel shall be preached to the Americans, before the end of the World. That
nothing is more sure, then that the reformation of the East, and South drawing
on, some famous Emperor, whose types were Constantine and Theodosius (both
entitled the Great) shall openly show himself, and granting liberty of
Religion to them who profess the name of the holy Trinity, shall do some great
matter in the world for the glory of God, for the re-building up of the Church,
and for the downfall of Antichrist. The Eastern Christians fired with the zeal
of Christ shall make their way into ASIA it s^^e, and provoke the Jews to
jealousy, Romans 11. And the spiritual baby^on shall be a prey to all Nations. A
resining of the Soldiers of God, whereof is mention, Zech. 13.8, 9. i.e.
Temptations and trials shall go before this Reformation, that the light of God
may arise out of the cross of Christ. This Treatise was published An. Dom.
1608.11. John Dobricius in the year 1612. did set forth a notable Treatise
entitled (...) ( i.e. The Interpretor of times) wherein, both out of the holy
Scriptures, and from the new Star which happened 1604. and the great
conjunction of the Planets, many things are discoursed of concerning the
Reformation, and future happiness of the Church. Of this Dr. John Alsted takes
notice, as very considerable. 12. Peter du Moulin also has something of our
point in his first Book entitled, Du combat Christen, i.e. of the Christian
combat. But I will hold you no longer with quotations, but will give you the
conclusion, wherein I will draw all that I have said in this fourth Book to
this short Argument. That which is generally confessed by all sorts of Rational
men in all Nations, is a truth. (See the Law of nature for a proof: Datur Deus,
There is a God; Parents Colendi, parents are to be reverenced, ut tibisic
alteri, do as thou would be done by, and a thousand such which are confessed
by all men, because truths of the Law of nature in all men.) But that there
shall be a glorious time on earth for good men, before the ultimate judgment,
is confessed by the generality of all men, of all sorts of men; therefore it is
a truth, that there is yet such a glorious time to come, before the ultimate
and most general Judgment.

Finis Libri quarti.
THE FIFTH BOOK
Containing the Dispute of the Learned touching the point aforesaid. Wherein
their ARGUMENTS against it are fairly solved, and their REPLIES to ours are
heartily discussed.

CHAP. I.
WHerein Doctor Prideaux his Arguments are taken into consideration, and
answered. Which we premise, because he disputes more exactly according to
rule; and is a later Writer, and so has the marrow of former Objectors.

SECT. I. His first Argument propounded and canvased.
binding of Satan (says he) and the Reigning of the Martyrs, spoken of by
Saint John, are concurrent in the selfsame thousand years. But the years of
binding Satan, are long since past. Therefore the Reigning of the Martyrs is
not to be expected as yet to come. The first, viz. the major Proposition is
granted (says he) by the Defendants. And I do in the name of the rest
confess it. The second, viz. the minor Proposition he thus endeavors to
prove. It is proved (says he) from the end of the imprisonment of Satan, Rev.
20. v. 3. namely, that HE shall not seduce the Nations any more, until the
thousand years be finished. He does not say that he should not tempt, should
not act in secret corners and ways, should not make his DEPTHS his refuge, or
that he should not make drunk the inhabitants of the earth, by his Vicar the
Beast, under the visar, or pretense of Devotion, or of a Church, but that he
should not in an universal war, by the open enemies of Christ, compel men with
force and arms to Paganism, and to (as it were) abjured Idolatry and
Superstition. But this kind of binding of Satan came to pass after the
laughter of the last of the ten persecutions, when Constantine was advanced to
the Empire, about the three hundredth year after Christ. Therefore those
thousand years of which we speak are, now past above three hundred years since,
and are not to be expected as to come.

Constantine, Arianisme, under which the world groaned: Apostasies under
Julian: Devastations, and horrid butcheries under the Goths and Vandals, and
Saracens; so that no man of a sound mind will say that Satan was then bound,
and that the Martyrs then reigned. But I answer (says the Doctor) 1 The Arians
did not seduce the Nations, that with open force they rooted out Christianity.
But with patched deceits they oppressed the Orthodox. 2 As for Julian, he was
a little cloud that was soon over. 3 And for the Goths and Vandals and
Saracens, they were more hurtful whirlewinds and storms. 4 But as they
invaded, they always found some Emperors, or Kings that were Patrons or
Nurses of the Church, whose power the enemies felt, or else embraced their
Religion. The Church then sighed under a correcting calamity, but not under an
oppressing Majesty, as before in the Emperial persecutions. It was free from
trampling domesticke Princes, but not from foreign enemies, insulting as
occasion was. The persecution was not universal, but particular; not
continual, but by turns.


Sect. 1.] we answer by denying the minor Proposition. That whereas he there
affirms, that the years of the binding of Satan are long since past, we
utterly deny it. And to his proof whereby be would uphold, and back the said
minor Proposition by us denied, I will answer first in general, to the whole
lump of what he has said. Secondly, In particular to each parcel he has
spoken, that deserves an answer. My general answer is in the words of
judicious and learned Mr. Mede, which somewhere in his works I cast mine eye
upon, and are to this effect; That there is "a wide difference between the
DETHRONING of Satan, Rev. 12, 9. " and the IMPRISONING of Satan, Rev. 20. v. 1,
2, 3, Some time after I had penned the copy, I found the place in Mr. M^de,
viz. in his Diatrib. part. 4. p. 458. Where his words in terminis, are these;
As for the Author of the Analyticall Table of the Apocalypse, he differs from
me wholly in the twentieth Chapter, and follows Mr. Brightman. My difference
is in these particulars, I hold but one (Millenium) Millenary time, and that to
begin at the destruction of the Beast; He holds two, one beginning at
Constantine, another at the destruction of the Beast. 2 I deny that ever yet
Satan was tied up; much less at the time of Constantine. It is one thing to be
dethroned, and thrown down from Heaven, (that was ^t the time of Constantine)
Another thing to be bound and close Frisoner, and not so much as peep out of
his Dungeon. See my Synchronismes Clav. Apocalyp. part. 2. Synch. 4. page 22,
23. Thirdly, I take the Resurrections both of them, first and second to be
proper and real; He metaphorical. 3 He seems to appropriate the second
(Millenium) Millenary space of time (which I think the only) to the glory of
the Jews only; I extend it to the whole Catholic Church of the Gentiles.
Satan was Dethroned, and cast down out of the Throne of Majesty and
Emperiality by Constantine the Great, overcomming the wicked persecuting
Emperors, and so stopped the process of the ten bloody heathen persecutions,
and put a period to them. Though anon after Constantines death within the space
of thirty years a new persecution begins, viz. Constantius his son cherishes
the Arians, and banisheth the Orthodox. But to imprison Satan in the
bottomless Pit, there binding him with a great chain, and shutting him up in
the said Pit, and setting a seal upon it, that he should not deceive the
Nations any more for a whole thousand years, must of necessity signify a full,
and entire restraint of Satan from all manner of deceiving the Nations; or else
all those mightily emphatical expressions of fast-securing Satan, are to no
purpose. The Martyrs would have little glory of reigning, if only heathen open
universal persecution were staid; but others should break in upon them. And the
Church should have little notice of the binding of Satan for a thousand years.
Now all the particulars of Doctor Prideaux his Discourse to uphold his lapsing
Minor Proposition, is to that effect, that long since Satan was Debroned from
his Monarchical Emperial Majesty, so that since the fall of the Heathen Roman
Monarchy by Constantine, he never had any universal Pagan Monarch, to manage a
general persecution against all Christianisme, or Christianity whatsoever. All
which conceit of the Doctors is nothing to the fulfilling of the Revelation,
Chap. 20.1, 2, 3. where the devil must be bound not only as (...) Satan, an
open adversary, and a public devouring Dragon; but also as (...) as a Devil,
a Calumniator, and secret deceiver, and a cunning Serpent, after the form of
his deceit of old toward Eve. And therefore upon this account all the Doctors
Fabric falls to the ground, as weshall see more in our particular answer.

1 He said that the words Rev. 20.3. are, Satan shall not seduce. It is not
said (says he) that Satan shall not tempt; shall not act in secret corners,
and ways. It is not said, he shall not make his Depths his refuge; to which we
answer, 1 To the Greek word (...) rendered in English to deceive; but the Doctor
to seduce; it signifies to wander, or make to wander in a point of Religion, or
to turn aside by an opinion from the right truth, and to mistake ones way in
point of judgment. And therefore the Critics in Greek say, it is taken from
Travelers that are in wrong way, going by guess. From it the Planets have
their name, which move excentrically. And the Greeks and Latins hence call a
deceiver (...) Planus. The Scripture applies this word to a mistaking of a
false Christ for a true, Matthew. 24.4. Mark. 13.5. or to take the true Christ
for a false, Joh. 7.12. others said, He deceives the people; or to a teaching
of false doctrine, or receiving false doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.13. Seducers shall
grow worse, deceiving, and being deceived; yea it is applied to a mistaking, or
mis-conceiving of ones own spiritual condition. So in 1 John 1.8. If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves. And 1 John 3.7. Let no man deceive you,
(viz. about your spiritual condition) He that does righteousness, is
righteous; he that commits sin is of the Devil. Add Tit. 3.3. We were
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures. Where it is applied to a
deceiving by way of temptation, to follow sin and pleasures. In all these
places the Theme or root is the same with that of S. John Rev. 20.3. viz. (...)
or (...). So that you see that the word is used to signify far more things,
and things that are not so gross and worldly, as to seduce to an open war as
the Doctor would limit it, viz. any kind of spiritual deceiving. 2 To that
clause, that it is not said he shall not tempt: we answer. By that which
follows, the Dr. means effectual tempting; when an active tempting becomes a
passive temptation or temptednesse. Now we must say that herein also the Dr. is
mistaken. For we have Scripture, that the state of the Church for the thousand
years will be such, as wherein shall dwell only righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. And
into this estate shall in no wise enter that thing, whatsoever it be, that
defiles, or works abomination, or makes a lie. So that there will be no
temptation passive, viz. no temptation received by any of the Church, and
therefore we cannot conceive that the Devil will actively tempt, viz. attempt.
3 To that of the (...) the depths of Satan, and his secret ways, and corners
of cunning; we answer, That besides that of the signification of (...), that it
signifies all manner of mistakes, open or secret; and therefore Satan is bound
from both; we add, That to be gulled with the Depths of Satan, in a spiritual
self-deceiving way, is worse, then those that seduce to a gross fact, which a
man will sooner see, and condemn. So Christ asserteth Publicans and Harlots
enter heaven before Pharisees. And God joys more over one sinner, then over
ninety nine that are righteous in their own eyes. Therefore sure Satan's binding
must signify his limitation from the greatest hurting. And therefore though in
the time of the Church of Thyatira among the then present and past things of
the Rev. Chap. 2.18. to 25. the Christians were gulled with the Depths of
Satan; yet in all that which is said of the future estate of the Church, after
the fall of Antichrist, the binding of Satan, the settleing of the Jews, of the
descending of New Jerusalem, not an hint, that I know, of Satan's prevailing by
open or secret ways, for the whole thousand years. And to answer to all the
three particulars altogether, our Answer is, That the first, second, and third
verses of the twentieth of the Revelation, has so many emphatical expressions
of the full binding of Satan, that as we said of necessity we must understand
Satan's full restraint, both from secret, and open prevailing on men for the
thousand years, namely, that an Angel comes down from heaven, has the Key of
the bottomless Pit, and a great chain in his hand, lays hold on the old
Serpent, Dragon, or Devil Satan, Bound him for a thousand years, cast him into
the bottomless pit, shut him in, and set a seal upon him. And is all this
ado, and all these high expressions only to signify Satan's restraint that he
seduce not to open War, but not from secret and cunning seducing to errors
and false doctrine, and tempting to sin? Sure then this might have been
expressed in fewer words. Then is this strong text made weak. Then is Satan
fast and loose; In the bottomless Pit, and out; chained and not chained;
sealed and not sealed. He is bound from a lesser endangering, not from a
greater. He is bound from the effect, viz. War, not from the cause, viz. erring
in judgment about matters of Religion. 2 To the next particular Paragraph of
the Doctors proof of the minor, viz. that it is not said, that the Devil
should not make drunk the inhabitants of the earth by his Vicar the Beast,
under the vizzard of devotion, or Church; I say to this, beside what we have
said already, to anticipate this objection; I add that herein, it seems to me
the Doctor has forgotten some most evidently plain Texts. For all along the
Revelation until the very time of the utter ruin of Antichrist, there is
express mention of the Devils making the Nations drunk by his Vicar the Beast
with the wine of spiritual fornication, i.e. of departing from Christ to
worship Idols; or to embrace false worship. And with all, it is expressed, that
this is the cause of the ruin of the Beast, the Harlot, the Vicar of Christ.
So expressly, Rev. 14.8. verse. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, because she has
made the Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, Rev.
17.1, 2, 3. I will show thee the judgment of the great Whore, with whom the
Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth
have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Rev. 18.2, 3. An Angel
cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the Great is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the habitation of devils. For all Nations have drunk of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Rev. 19.1, 2. Ye have the same thing
more plainly without figures, A voice of much people, saying, Allelujah to the
Lord for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
Whore which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, And in the latter end
of this same Chapter, is a full end of the Beast, and false Prophet, viz. cast
into the lake of fire. Observe, First, That in one of these places, viz. Rev.
17.2. There is mention only of wine of fornication, to signify the sin of
spiritual adultery, viz. Idolatry. In opposition to this, to signify the
judgment due to this sin it is said, the Wine of the wrath of God. So Rev.
14.10. Rev. 16.19. For this cause in the other two places, Rev. 17.2. Rev.
18.3. the phrases to signify both sin and judgment are put together, Wine of
wrath of fornication; to the end that we might carry along with us, in our
minds, that all the time of the Harlot, she made the Nations drunk, and
therefore all that while wrath hung over her, till it fell down upon her, and
brought her to unter ruin, as we see the fulfilling set down Chapter 19.
latter end. Secondly observe, that in opposition to this making the Nations
drunk with the wine of spiritual fornication, is added presently after the
ruin of that drunken-making Harlot, Chap. 19. ult. That in Chap. 20.1. etc.
Satan is bound, cast into the Pit, and sealed, that he may seduce, or deceive
the Nations no more, till the thousand years be finished. Ye see then how
clearly this passage of the Doctor is answered: and that that in Rev. 20. verse.
3. must mean that Satan should be bound that he should not, by his Vicar, make
the Nations so much as drunk with the wine of her fornication of Idolatrous
doctrines. For as Pareus expounds, As wine is pleasant to the eye and taste; so
Antichrist did make the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth take down his
doctrines of departing from Christ, and embracing of Idolatrous worship under
pretense of Religion, devotion, and Church. See Pareus on Rev. 14.17.18. before
quoted; and so Pareus brings up the Reere, full against the Doctor. 3 To that
clause wherein the Doctor does undertake to give the sense of Satan's not
seducing the Nations, to signify, That he shall not in an universal War, by
the open enemies "of Christ, with force and Arms compel men to Paganism, and
to, as it "were, abjured Idolatry and Superstition; I say to this clause, and
this exposition therein; besides what has been said, we add, First, That by
this opinion Satan's binding must begin at Constantine the Great. And that Satan
should no more so seduce the Nations to an universal War, with force of Arms
to compel men to Paganism, till the time of the rising of Gog and Magog to
War (for so the Doctor does after expressly declare his sense) I say, that by
this opinion of the Doctor, Satan is still bound ever since the time of
Constantine, 310 years since Christ, which make above a thousand years, viz.
one thousand three hundred and forty, and upwards. So reckon but to this day,
and Satan is bound above three hundred and forty years above the thousand
years, so precisely limited by the Apostle John, Revel. 20. And yet still shall
be bound, according to the Doctors opinion, till the War of Gog and Magog,
which will be a thousand years more, and the last thousand before the ultimate
judgment. So Satan shall by this account be bound I know not how much above
two thousand years, contrary to St. John. Note secondly, That by the Dr. from
Constantines time down-ward, to this day, Satan was not bound in his efficacy
upon his instruments, but only the shape and manner of the actings of his
instruments were changed; so the system and method of the Revelation expressly,
Rev. 13.1.12. in 1 verse, he arises out of the Sea, and has seven heads, and
ten horns, and the Dragon gave him his power, and verse 11. and 12. He comes
up out of the earth, and has two horns like a Lamb, and spoke as a DRAGON,
and he exercises all the power of the first Beast, and causes the earth and
them that dwell therein to worship the first Beast. So that ye see the devils
power the same; still the Dragon acts effectually, only the shape of his
instruments is changed. And therefore the continuance of the Beast in power is
computed two and forty months; i.e. One thousand two hundred and sixty years.
And the Dragon is said to persecute the Woman, the Church, and endeavored War
after Constantine for the space of One thousand one hundred and sixty years,
Rev. 12. For so long she flies and abides in the wilderness. Now if the Beast
has power One thousand two hundred and sixty years beginning presently after
Constantines time, within eighty years, where then shall be place found for
the thousand years of binding Satan, presently after Constantine? For Satan is
not bound, as long as Antichrist is in power, who is in power to this day.

S. 2. afore] great objections against this opinion of his, of the thousand
years next to Constantine, and of his interpretation of Satan's binding to be
only from open general War; to all which he endeavors to answer. But he
answers not satisfactorily to me. For first in general, we answer to that he
objects of Arrianisme, after Constantine; Apostasies in Julian, and
Devastations by Goths, Vandals, and Saracens; that these make not up the all
that may be objected against the binding up of Satan from Constant. M. and
down-ward for a thousand years. For mark what P. Simpson in his History of the
Arian and Eutychian Persecution, taken out of Sozom. Lib. 1. cap. 14. offers to
our consideration. It is this. The care, says he, that Constantine had, to
dis-burthen persecuted Christians of that heavy yoke of persecution that
pressed them down so long, was not only extended to the bounds of the Roman
Empire, whereunto Constantine was Sovereigne Lord; but he was careful also to
procure the peace of Christians who lived under SAPORES King of Persia, who
vexed Christian people with SORE and GRIEVOUS persecution; so that within his
Dominion, more then sixteen thousand were found who had concluded their lives
by Martyrdom, of whom were diverse persons of great rank (which are there
named.) While Constantine was meditating the relief of the Christians in
Persia, the Ambassador of SAPORES King of Persia came to Constantine, who
granting their Petitions they came about, sent them back to their King Sapores
with a letter of his own, wherein he entreats Sapores to be friendly to
Christians, The copy of this Letter, Mr. Fox gives us, Book of Mart. V. 1. p.
127.
in whose Religion on nothing can be found, that can justly be blamed. And
withal wishes Sapores to consider the miserable life and death of Valerian,
the eighth Persecutor among the Romans: And what good success God had given
him, the said Constantine having been a friend to the Christians. Now what
effect this Letter took in Persia, the History mentions not; but this is
mentioned, that a little before the death of this Constantine M. (which was
about 341 years after Christ, for he began to reign 310 after Christ, and
reigned 31 years) he intended to make war against Sapores King of Persia; and
in the way to have been baptized in Jordan; but he falling sick in Nicomedia,
was baptized at the Suburbs of Bithynia. Thus the History of P. Sympson
aforesaid. By which you may see, how well Satan was bound, from the time of
Constantines suppressing the ten Persecutions, supposing that the Doctors
narrow distinction of binding Satan, had been right, viz. only from seducing
to open persecution, etc. You see, how thirty years after Constantines
beginning to reign, and at least twenty within the beginning of the Doctors
thousand years of Satan's binding, as he affirms, there was fore persecution
in Persia. A considerable passage, enough to overthrow all that the Doctor
affirms in this his argument of the thousand years, and his interpretation of
binding Satan. Secondly, we come punctually to his particulars. 1 Of the
Arians he says [S. 2. 1.] they seduced not the Nations with open force to
root out Christianity, etc. To this we answer, In what did the Arians differ in
their manner of persecuting from the heathen Emperors persecution,
notwithstanding the Doctors nice distinctions of Arians not seducing Nations
with open force to a rooting out Christianity, but only by patched deceits
"they oppressed the Orthodox? For take but a taste of the times between the
death of Constantine M. about Anno three hundred and forty after Christ, to
Julian, about Anno three hundred and sixty (of whom by and by, being a distinct
head of the Doctors Reply) I say take but a taste out of the said History of
the Arian persecution, and other good Authors, and then see what difference you
can make between the heathen Emperors persecuting, and the persecutions under
the Arian Emperors and favorers of Arians. Constantinus M. left three sons,
Constantius, Constans, and Constantinus Junior. Constantius governed the East
parts of the Roman Empire; the other two the West. Constantine junior after
three years was slain. Constans reigned thirteen years, Constantius five and
twenty years. Now this Constantius was infected with Arian herisie by an Arian
Priest, a Courtier, advanced thither by Constantia, the sister of Constantine
junior. But whiles the other Emperor of the West, viz. Constans, was yet alive:
Arianisme could not get that head, because when Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople, and Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, and many other Bishops,
were unjustly persecuted, falsely accused, and deposed, etc. under Constantius
(tainted with that opinion) in the East; Constans in the West succored them.
But after thirteen years, Constans being slain, now Arian Constantius rules
all. Now Arian persecution mounts up, I think as high for the time, as the
heathen persecution. For Constantius by instigation suitable to his Arian
opinion against the Orthodox, sends a Commander of War with five thousand
armed men to surround the place where Athanasius was, to the intent to kill
him. But by disguise he was conveyed through them away from danger. Under
this Constantius, Georgius, an Arian Bishop, was seated in Alexandria, in the
room of Athanasius, whom Sebastianus furnishing with armed Soldiers, see how
he acts, A fire was kindled in the Town, the Christian Virgins were stripped
naked, brought to the fire, and commanded to renounce the faith. To which when
the sight of the fire prevailed not, he caused their faces to be gashed, etc.
that their familiar friends knew them not by face. Thirty Bishops of Egypt and
Lybia were slain in the sury of this Arian persecution: And fourteen B. B.
more, (whom Theodoret names) were banished in this persecution (of whom, some
dyed in the way, others dyed in banishment.) And forty worthy Christians were
scourged in Alexandria with wands, because they would not communicate with the
Arian Wolf Georgius; some of the pieces of which wands stuck in their flesh,
and others dyed of their pains. The like cruelty the Arians practiced in
Constantinople, Paulus, B. thereof, being banished to a little Town in
Cappadocia, called Cucusus (where at length he was strangled by the Arians)
Macedonius being placed in his room (a notable heretic, See also Theo bid.
says the story) used no less cruelty, in compelling the Christians of
Constantinople to communicate with him,
then (mark our Historian the like whereof ye have in Socrates Lib. 2. cap.
24.) was used of old to compel Christians to sacrifice to the Idols of the
Gentiles. See how our Historian affirms flatly contrary to the Doctor. Now
judge by this little of the rest. Was not here violence? Was not here
extirpation of Religion, as much as in the ten heathen persecutions, proportion
for proportion? And is this the binding of Satan? Is this the glorious time of
the thousand years so extolled by St. John? Is not here a seducing of the
Nations by force? For this made the generality of the vast Empire to turn
Arians. The Orthodox being oppressed, yea suppressed in a great part, and the
rest seduced; just as in the ten Persecutions. And what difference is there
between an Arian, and an Heathen, save only the Arian is the worse, sinning
against more light? And thus was the state of things for the first twenty
years, yea for the second twenty years within the Doctors thousand years of
binding Satan. 2 Next we come to the second particular, which the Doctor
affirms, viz. of Julians time: Julian, says he, was a little cloud, soon
over: But by the favor of so learned a man, all things considered, this was no
little cloud, nor so soon over: For according to the best Chronologers Julian
reigned three years, in which time he played such monstrous pranks against the
Church of Christ, and so seduced the world to Idolatry and impiety against God;
that it is not possible for me, and many more, to imagine that now was the
thousand years concurrent of Satan's binding, that he should not deceive, till
the thousand years were ended. For do but take the state, of things in Julians
time in a brief sum, as it is set down in the History of the Arian
persecution, many worthy Authors more concurring (which we shall but name as we
go, at every considerable point) and then judge. Julian, says the said History
of the Arian persecution,reigned three years. He was brought up a Christian,
but being perverted by Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher and Magician (a sign
Satan is not now bound) manifests his affection toward Heathenish superstition
by opening the doors of the Temples of the Heathenish gods, which Constantine
M. had locked up; and encouraged men by his example to offer sacrifice to the
gods of the Heathen. He debarred the children of Christians from Schools, and
learning, from use of war, and from places of government, or trust, as from
Collectours place, etc. He exceedingly burdened them with Taxations. And when
they complained to him, he mocked them, saying, your happiness is increased
hereby, according to the speech of Christ your Lord, Blessed are they that
suffer persecution for righteousness sake. For thus far we may compare also
Socrat. lib. 13. and 14. And Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 4. and
cap. 15. But to go on, our Historian further tells us, That in the Market
places this Julian set up his own Image, with the Images of the heathen gods
round about it, that so all that reverenced the one, might reverence the other,
and e contra they that reverenced them not, might be judged to despise the
Emperor. (See also Theod. lib. 3. cap. 16.) when he distributed gold to his
Captains, and Warriors (as the manner was) he had this trick by himself, viz.
to have an Altar near his Princely Throne, and coals burning upon it, and
incense upon a table near the Altar, to this end that who so came to receive
his money, might cast incense upon the Altar, and so be drawn into his
Idolatrous Rites. (Compare Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 17.) In Antiochia and the Region
round he dedicated all the Fountains to the Heathen Nymphs or goddesses, and
caused all the victuals sold in the Shambles to be sprinkled with heathen
Holy Water, that Christians (as he intended) might eat and drink of Idolized
things, or starve. Juventius and Maxentius, two worthy Warriors using to
reprove the Emperor for his Heathenish superstition, he punished with death.
Under his government, he permitted many outrages against the Christians. In the
Town of Sebast, the Sepulcher of John the Baptist was opened, his bones burnt,
and the ashes scattered abroad. (Compare Ruffinus lib. 2. cap. 28.) At Gaza and
Ascalon, many Preachers were killed, holy Virgins had their bellies ripped up,
and after filled with barley, and their bodies cast to swine to be eaten.
Cyrillus, a Deacon in Hierapolis of Phaenicia, who had in Constantines time
broken in pieces the Images of the Gentiles, was taken by the people, his belly
ripped, his liver drawn out of his body, and chawed with the teeth of his
barbarous enemies. (Compare Theod. lib. 3. cap. 6.) Marcus Arethusius had his
body overlaid with honey, and hung up alive against the Sun in Summer, to be
vexed with flies and wasps. (Compare Theod. lib. 3. cap. 7.) In Alexandria many
Christians were slain, for discovering the abominations of the Pagans,
especially sacrificing to Mythua the bloody sacrifices of reasonable creatures.
(Compare Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 3.) In the Country of Phrygia, and Town of Miso,
Macedonius, Theodulus and Tatianus for breaking in pieces Images, were broyled
upon hot grates of Iron. (Compare Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 15.) The Inhabitants of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, anciently called Maza, the Inhabitants for the most,
being Christians, having formerly in other Emperors times, overthrown the
Temples of Jupiter and Apollo, and Fortunas Temple yet remaining, they now
throw down that in this Julians time, Julian was so highly displeased with
them, that he rased the name of Caesarea out of the roll of Cities, and
exacted of them three hundred pound weight of gold, made their Ministers serve
in war, and threatened to put many of the people to death, but God prevented it.
(Compare Ruffinus lib. 2. cap. 33.) Also he enquired at the Diabolical Oracles
of Apollo and Daphne what should be the success of his enterprises. The
answer given was, The dead hinded that Apollo could give no answer. Lastly,
Julian gave liberty to the Jews to return to Jerusalem to build their Temple,
and to offer sacrifices according to the Law of Moses; and this he did merely
out of hate to Christianity: Which God testified against, by mighty
Earthquakes, fire, and tempest of wind, etc. (For this last and considerable
particular, compare Ruffinus lib. 1. cap. 37, 38, 39. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 20,
21. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 20. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 22.) Thus you have his story.
Now Christians judge, whether this time of Julian be, as Doctor Prideaux
affirmed, a little cloud, and whether soon over, thus lasting three years! Can
it be imagined that so much impiety, and so long, can consist with the state of
the thousand years spoken by John in such high terms, Rev. 20? can these
consist with Satan's binding, and Saints reigning? An hour of an Eclipse of
the Sun in a clear day is wonderful. And half an hours rain makes it not
to be said a dry day. But the Doctor would have the times past. So Mr. Mede
says, Men would feign have the witnesses lying in the grave to be past; and
some said the Resurrection was past, to cast off fear, but let the Saints stick
to Scripture. 3 The last particular of the Doctors reply is, touching that of
Goths, Vandals, and Saracens. See it before S. 2.. 3. how he minceth their
outrages, and boasts of their checks. First, for the Goths and Vandals, let but
Bucholc. in his Index, Chron. a faithful man, speak as it were in a word, in
comparison of all that might be spoken. Anno three hundred seventy eight,
after Christ (which was seventy years within the Drs. thousand years) the Goths
desired Valens the Roman Emperor to send them some Bishops or Doctors to teach
them the true Christian Religion; Valens sends them Arrians who laid in their
hearts the principles of Arrianisme, and as it were for a recompense, that
Valens was after slain by the said Goths. This alone is an ill sign of the
thousand years of Christ and Christians Reigning then. But see moreover Anno
four hundred and ten years after Christ, which was a hundred years within the
Drs. thousand years, the Goths invaded Italy under Alarichus their Leader. From
whence, to the crowning of Carolus Magnus (which was about seven hundred
seventy one after Christ) are about three hundred and seventy years; others say
four hundred (all within the Doctors thousand years.) All which time, Italy
(and the Churches there) was never at rest, (sed humanorum malorum extrema
omnia passa est. Atque ecclesia Dei quae paulo ante constituta per Constantinum
inde per annos centum in aliqua esse dignitate ac potentia caeperat, maximam ex
omni part jacturam labemque contuaxit) but suffered the extremest evils and
defilements. Anno four hundred thirty and six (still within the Drs. thousand
years) The Goths made fearful troubles (taking holds, etc.) in Gallia, or
France. And secondly for the Saracens, lo in Anno seven hundred and thirty
years after Christ (still part of the Doctors thousand years) three hundred and
eighty thousand Saracens, in an hostile way had been in Gallia, how long before
I know not. This was four hundred and odd years within the Doctors thousand
years. Anno one thousand and nine years after Christ, near three hundred years
before the end of the Doctors thousand years, the Saracens invaded Jerusalem,
destroyed the Temple, etc. Anno one thousand ninety six years, which is above
two hundred years before the Doctors thousand years end (beginning at
Constantine, three hundred years after Christ, as he computed) the Saracens
having, as we said, invaded the Holy land, thence sprang the Holy war of many
Christian Princes, and innumerable of Christian people warring with the
Saracens, which (as Pucherius, Gul. Tyrius, Blondus, and the Writer of the
French and German affairs, and Bucholcerus show) cost an innumerable of
Christians blood. And the Saracens continue there to this day, and shall (says
Daniel chap. 12.) till a time, and times, and half a time be fulfilled. Now if
I had time to be tedious in all particulars to apply all to the Doctors
assertion of the Goths, Vandals, and Saracens, wherein would appear any show
of the Doctors thousand years of binding Satan in this space, sc. from
Constantines time? etc. 4 But the Doctor gives many distinctions in the close
of his Argument viz: (See before at S. 2. 4.) To the first, That the Church
sighed or groaned "under a correcting or afflicting calamity, but not under an
oppressing "Majesty, as before in the ten persecutions of the R. Emperors; we
thus answer: First, did not the Church suffer in Constantine M. his time, in
Persia, under their King to the slaughter of sixteen thousand? was not there an
oppressing Majesty, as we showed at large before? and so continued there till
the death of Constantine M. and after to Theodosius. 2 Was not Constantius an
oppressing Majesty, when he sent five thousand soldiers to kill Athanasius?
And Georgius, an Arian Bishop was furnished with soldiers, whereby to
persecute with torments the Christians; (as we showed at large before) and
under him Macedonius an Arian Bishop (says the Author of the
Arian history) used no less cruelty in compelling Christians to communicate
with him, then was used of old, to compel Christians to sacrifice to the Idols
of the Gentiles. And is not Arianisme, denying the Godhead of Christ, as bad,
or worse then Heathenisme, being a Blasphemy, and against the evident
Scripture, which the Heathens have not? 3 Was not Julian an oppressing Majesty;
when the History of the Arian persecution says, he gave no mandate for
persecution, because he would not honor the magnanimity of Christians? But was
not his punishment intended and acted by him upon Caesarea, an act of a violent
oppressing Majesty? And further, is not this a rule received of all for truth,
He that does not forbid evil when he may, commands it? See, Julian permits
all cruelties as aforesaid. And when he was petitioned for relief, he scoffed
at the petitioners, and the Scriptures. See more in the History of the Arian
persecution. By this we have said, the Doctors second distinction of another
manner of Persecution, is also overthrown, viz. "That though the Church in this
space, was not free from foreign enemies, yet free from domesticke Princes
trampling it. And here with the former we may take in opportunely another
distinction, or limitation put in the head of these distinctions by the Doctor,
viz. As Goths and Vandals, etc. invaded, so they always either felt the power
of some King or Emperor, as Patrons and Nurses; or else they embraced their
faith. To both we answer, Were the Saracens and Turks to this day repelled, or
converted? How did they feel the Princes power, whom they conquered? And are
they not blasphemous Mahumetans to this day? And did not the Goths and Vandals
prevail for near four hundred years, (as we showed before) in Italy to the
utter devastation of the Church almost? And what conversion had the Goths, etc.
unless a perversion to Arrianisme, by those Arrians, Valens the Emperor sent
them, as we showed before? And lastly, how were those Princes Nurses, who though
they opposed foreign Princes to defend their dignity, yet mean while
persecuted at home, being Arians, as Valens, or etc. and the Christian Princes
that went against the Saracens into the Holy Land, were Papists, of whose
persecutions, Fox, and many Ecclesiastical Histories make large mention. As to
the Doctors third distinction, "That the persecution in the Doctors thousand
"years was not universal, but particular: We answer, If the Dr. means an
absolute universal persecution over the face of the whole earth (where ever
were any Christians) and at the same time; then when ever was Satan so loose,
according to the Doctors opinion? But if the Doctor means by universal, a
persecution in most Kingdoms of the World here and there, and ever and anon,
in the space of the Doctors thousand years, (where ever were any Christians)
then we shall prove this, if not more, to have been so, all the time of the
Doctors thousand years. For example, of Persia. We spoke before something of the
same Persia; we add, that Mr. Fox in his Book of Martyrs, 1. Vol. page 127. of
his Edit. Anno 1641. having spoken of the persecution in Persia in Constantine
M. time, and the copy of his letter, goes on to show us, and that by particular
instances of terrible persecutions in the same Persia after Constantine M.
time, viz. in the time of Theodosius his reign. Theodosius 1. was in Anno three
hundred seventy eight after Christ. Helvic. Theodosius 2. in Anno four hundred
and eight. Theodosius 3. Anno seven hundred and five. Take either, or all, all
are within the Doctors thousand years. And this persecution was so notorious,
that the Roman Emperor at this time sent Ambassadors for deliverance of some
of the Martyrs. So in Fox ibid. Then for the Roman Empire, of Goths and Vandals
invading Italy, Anno seven hundred seventy one after Christ, there almost
ruining the Church with all manner of calamities for four hundred years, ye
heard before; also of the Saracens invading Gallia, Anno seven hundred and
thirty after Christ: and of their going into Judaea, Anno 1009 years after
Christ. After which War continued with Christian Princes for diverse hundreds
of years, not repelled as yet. And as it was a good while after Constantine was
Emperor, ere he had stayed the bulk and rage of the tenth persecution, many
suffering almost in all Constantines time in several Kingdoms, under the Roman
Empire, (See Mr. Fox) so after Constantines time, down all along the Doctors
thousand years, more, or less, in most Kingdoms under the Roman Empire. See
Mr. Fox, or any Chronology, which for avoiding tediousness, we omit as to
particulars. So that from within the Doctors thousand years a long time, The
two Witnesses have Prophesied a great part of their one thousand two hundred
and sixty years in sackcloth. The Woman has fled into the wilderness. The
Beast has power, and the Dragon has endeavored the ruin of the Woman, Rev.
11. Rev. 12. Rev. 13. And is not this universal persecution all the Doctors
thousand years? surely there were so many particulars as made up an universal.
To the Doctors last distinction, "That it was not continual, but by turns, or
vicissitudes; First, we retort this upon the Doctor: He says, that Satan "was
loosed before Constantine M. time. Yet then the persecution was but by turns,
witness the number of ten. 2 After the time of Constantinus M. time, which was
about three hundred thirty six, some say, three hundred thirty one, where, or
when was there any eminent stop for at least diverse hundred years in the Roman
Empire. As all this while from the beginning of Constantines M. down, those
several hundreds of years, the persecution in Persia continued. 3 In the
Revel. in the time of Satan's being loosed, ye shall find it prophesied of
some little interruption of the full tide of persecution; yet then is Satan
loosed. To close our answer, the Doctors whole Argument is not so proper and
demonstrative, but it may be retorted. Satan's binding and Saints reigning
concur. But the Saints have not yet reigned; no not in the pict thousand years
of the Doctors; but errors, persecutions, wars, etc. pressing down the
Churches, as ye have heard, have that time abounded, by Arians, Julian, Goths,
and Vandals, Saracens, and Pope, and Papists, and Socinians, and Turk, and
tyranical Kings and Princes to this day; ergo this is not the thousand years of
the binding of Satan. And therefore if this the Doctors thousand years be past,
farewell they. Carnal and low Saints, seeing the sorrowful preface, wish and
study to make them past. Higher Saints seeing the joyful possession, believe
the plain Scripture that they are yet to come. The Saints must reign with
Christ, says our Text, Rev. 20.4. But in heaven Christ reigns not with them,
therefore upon earth, Rev. 5.10. But they have not yet reigned. For before
that, Antichrist must down in the West; the tenth part of the City must fall.
2 The Jews must be called. 3 Satan bound, that he deceive no more, till after
the thousand years; surely therefore the world must be altered from that it is
now, before that.

SECT. II. The Doctors second Argument,
WHich he asserts (he says) from those periods, in which the event has
dictated to the more circumspect, that Satan was loosed. There are four
periods (says he) more famous then the rest; First, in the year one thousand
after the birth of Christ, in the time of Pope Sylvester the second. At which
time the manifestation of Antichrist was promulgated in France, preached at
Paris, divulged over the world, and believed of many. Second period is
terminated by Pope Benedict the ninth) whose time, in and out, and in the
Papal chair, Reusner puts in the year Anno one thousand thirty two, to one
thousand forty six years, or thereabout) in which time, all, both Eastern and
Western, cry out, Satan is loosed. Third period takes its beginning in the
destruction of Jerusalem, in the time of Pope Hildebrand (called Gregory the
seventh) and placed Anno one thousand seventy three, by Reusner. The life,
acts, decrees of which Hildebrand seemed so mischievous, and hellish, to the
Divines and Historians of that age, that they were out of all doubt, that the
mystery of iniquity in the Revelation then attained its (...) highest
increment, and perfection of age and strength. Fourth, and last, is terminated
in Pope Boniface the 8. and is the beginning of the Ottoman family (which time
Reusner and Bucholcerus and Helvious put about Anno one thousand three hundred)
but draws its original beginning "from the government of Constantine the Great.
Of this Boniface the eighth, it was common to say, He entered in as a Fox, lived
as a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. So that from hence forward the Western
Antichrist on one hand, and the Eastern Mahumetan on the other, rushing in
with open robberies, show that Satan is loosed, setting both of them on fire,
which ever since more or less burning, as yet (as we feel) are not
extinguished. All this is in Doctor Prideaux his major Proposition. But (says
he in the minor) It is agreed among many (as I have intimated before in our
first Argument) and the events of things agree to it, that the years of the
binding of Satan, did run down all the time of the said terms I have
described, of which this last is most conspicuous; therefore this last opinion
should at least outweigh the rest, viz. that Satan was all that time bound.
We answer first in general, by denying the minor. And as he refers us to his
former argument for proof, so we refer you to our answer to it for refutation
of it. As he urges the argument of many, so we have, and shall balance
against them the agreement of very many famous men on the contrary. Howbeit we
go by divine rule, and reason, not by humane vote. And as the Dr. argues, so
we shall take up some passages in the Doctors argument, to overthrow his
argument, and his distinction he gives by way of exposition to that his
argument. For in the close of this argument, he, fearing lest some viewing the
said four periods should object (as he expresses) that in these four terms
appears rather the licentionsnesse of Satan, then the binding of Satan
distinguishes thus. We must (says he) hold, or keep in mind (which before we
inculcated) That Satan invades the Church, either with open butcheries by
Tyrants raging with the sword, or with occult hypocrisy under pretense of
piety. Now as Satan being bound, the Papal Apollyon (his Vicar) was not
wanting, strenuously to supply his place; so he being loosed afterward, the
Turk in the Ottoman family came in, to make up the band or legion. Now I say,
to overthrow the minor, and this his distinction, we will take up some passages
in his argument against him.

1 He confesses that in those four periods, the event has dictated to the
"more circumspect observators, that Satan was then loosed. Set this "against
the Doctor, and his many that agree that Satan was then bound.

2 He confesses that Pope Silvester the second, in his first period of events,
sitting in the Papal chair, exercised Tyranny. And that in him Antichrist was
openly manifested to the world. Now this we oppose, first to his minor, That
this can neither consist with the binding of Satan from seducing, or deceiving
the Nations, according to the sense of the Greek word before expounded, upon
the third verse of the 20 of Revel. and the antithesis between the state of the
Church whiles he is bound, Rev. 21.22. Chapters, and the state of the loosing,
from 11. Chapter, the end of the 19. Nor can it consist with the reigning of
the Saints, Chapter 20.4. compared with Rev. 21.27. ( And there shall in NO
WISE enter into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works
abomination, or makes a lie, where Antichrist is excluded, but they which ARE
WRITTEN IN THE LAMBS BOOK.) So that only the Saints have the dominion, and the
glory as it is in 24. and 26. verses (The Kings of the earth dobring their
glory and honor to it, and the glory and honor of Nations unto it) therefore
it cannot be imagined that Antichrist shall now tyrannise, especially seeing
in his time he has most of the Kings of the earth in a string, so that in time
of his Dominion and Tyranny, they cannot be free to bring their honor and
glory to it; but when they shall hate the Whore, and burn her with fire (Rev.
17.16. executed Rev. 18.19.) Then Chapter 20. the Saints shall reign; so that
Chapter 21. Kings shall bring their honor to it.

2. We oppose this to his distinction in the close of his Argument, that if now
Antichrist was made manifest throughout the world, and exercised tyranny over
men; how does the Doctor apply this time and state of the Church to Satan's
occult hypocyisie, and pretended impiety invading the Church?

3 The Doctor confesses that in the second of his periods, one William
Senones, A. B. (by the confession of C. Baron) held forth this Position to Pope
Alexander the third (whom Reusner puts in Anno 1061.) that Satan was then
loosed in perniciem totius ecclesiae, to the destruction of the whole Church.
And the same was preached by Glaber Rodolphus, and Wickliffe, etc. Now these
cannot consist with the Doctors argument or distinction of occult hypocrisy.
Yea it is inconsistent with Satan's binding, and the Saints reigning (as is
explained before.) Surely when Satan is bound, and the Saints do r^igne, there
shall be none permitted to ruin the whole Church, so grossly, that not only
Protestants, but Papists shall take notice of it, and cry out against it.

4 The Doctor confesses that in his third period of events was the destruction
of Jerusalem. Pope Hildebrand sat in the chair, whose life, acts, and decrees
seemed so mischievous and hellish, both to Divines, and Historians, that they
did not at all doubt, but that the mystery of iniquity in the Revelation had
now attained its highest perfection, maturity, or strength: And if so, was
their vote, how can this be consistent with the Doctors Argument, that Satan is
now bound in any tolerable sense? Is this the glorious promise, Rev. 20. of
binding Satan, and of the Saints reigning, that mean while Antichrist shall
arise to his utmost maturity? at least Divines, and his Historians had great
reason to think so. Satan's binding is a restraint, and from seducing the
Nations, as well as from butchering the Nations, Revel. 20.3. therefore it does
not permit the full growth of the Devils greatest instrument, Antichrist. And
this also does somewhat blunt the edge of the Doctors distinction; for if
Divines and Historians then took such notice, and declaimed against Antichrist,
how can it be truly said, He invaded with such occult hypocrisy? Besides
remember the destruction of Jerusalem.

5 The Doctor confesses that in his fourth period of Events which is also
within his thousand years of binding Satan, was Pope Boniface the eighth, of
whom was this common Proverb, He came in as a FOX, lived as a LION, and dyed
like a DOG. Now in the word Fox was hinted his occult hypocrisy, and in LION
was intimated his open violence, which overthrows the Doctors distinction; and
adds thus much more in answer to the Doctors minor proposition of his
argument, that in the time of the binding of Satan there is no LION over the
Church, but Christ, with whom the Saints reign, Rev. 20.4. called the Lion of
the Tribe of Juda, Chapter 5. There is no Lyonish man to roar over the Church,
to hurt it in the least. They that make less of that Isa. 11.6. then others
do, conclude so much thence. And if the roaring Lion the Devil be chained, then
sure the Nations shall not be seduced to play the Lions to hurt the Church.

minor Proposition of this second Argument of Doctor Prideaux, and the
distinction annexed, viz. by giving you some touches of the History of the
four periods of Events which the Doctor has named. We did in our answer to
the Doctors first Argument give you a considerable account of the History of
these times, viz. of the first thousand years from Constantine M. beginning to
reign, which the Doctor calls the thousand years of binding of Satan. We
showed you the grim bloody face of those times in Persia, under Sapores; In
Judea, under the Saracens, and throughout the Roman Empire under Constantius
and Julian, Roman Emperors, and under the Goths and Vandals invaeders and
wasters of the Church for near four hundred years; so that the face of these
times could not look like the face of the thousand years, of which John speaks,
shall be filled with so much glory. But now we will add some few things in
relation to the particulars the Doctor mentions, which he would varnish over,
that they might not bewray that Satan was then loosed.

1 For the first period in Pope Silvester the second his time, Reus^er tells us
in his Chronology, That this Silvester the second, being a Magician, gave
himself to the Devil, by whose help he attained to the Popedom: And being
about to dye, he confessed it, and commanded that his hands and tongue, etc.
should be cut off, and the trunk of his body to be put into a Chariot to be
buried, where the horses (no man driving them) would carry him. The horses
without any driver (unless the Devil) drew him to the Temple of John Lateran,
and there he was buried. So Reusner: which was but an ill sign that Satan was
now bound, as the Doctor affirms, when he could so prevail on him who was the
chiese Ruler over all the Churches. Add that in the time of this period was
some persecution, as Bucholcerus notes, viz. That Adelbert the Bishop was
martyred for preaching the Gospel. Also about this time Basil the Grecian
Emperor sends a great Army against the Bulgarians, conquers them, taking two
Cities, and returns home Conqueror. Now war, according to the sense of the
Doctors concession, should be inconsistent with the time of Satan's binding.

2 For the second period, in the Popes following to Pope Benedict the ninth,
which makes about thirty years, there were many Wars between the Papistical
Kings and Princes, and Civil Wars in their own Dominions, and many Councels
and Synods about fasting days; and holy days as C. Baron confesses in his
Annals, which no ways comport with the binding of Satan.

3 For the third period, in Pope Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand, of
him you may read in his Tragical story (as Mr. Fox calls it) in the Book of
Martyrs page 226 Vol. 1. of the last Edition, very largely. The brief sum of
whose wicked life Reusner in his Chronology, and Armacanus de success. and
statu Ecclesiar. cap. 3, 4, 5. give us in these words. He was covetous,
sacrilegious, a notorious hypocrite, under pretense of sanctity, he led a most
wicked life. He brought in single life, cut off the bonds of wedlock, and made
way for fornications, adulteries, and other most filthy vices. He filled the
Roman Empire with all seditions, and civil Wars. He excommunicated the
Emperor, Henry the fourth, took away his Title of King, so that the said
Emperor barefoot, in sharp Winter attended at the Popes door for absolution,
which the Pope denied him. All this under a pretended accusation of the said
Emperor of Simony. This Hildebrand also absolves the Nobles of their fealty to
the said Emperor, and arms them against the Emperor. Now are these impieties,
and hurly burlies, consonant to the time of Satan's binding? No considerate man
can imagine it. Here is not only hypocrisy, but the violence of the sword.

4 For the fourth period from Gregory the seventh, to Boniface the eighth,
which makes above two hundred years, were so many great wars, wicked
Councels, horrid heresies, and impious practices, as clearly vote this time not
to be the time of binding of Satan. Pope Paschalis the second spends the whole
course of his life in War. A Council is called in Paul's, London, under Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury to remedy the Sodomy of Ministers. The Trecensian
Synod is called, investing the Popes with power over the Sun, And forbidding
Ministers marriage. Pope Eugenius the third makes war against Rome, and Rome
wars against him. A war or two there is in this time about the Holy Land, to
the end to weaken the Kings of the earth, that they might not curb the Pope.
The heretical doctrine of Transubstantiation springs up. Frederick the second
(Emperor) buys his absolution of the Pope for twelve hundred thousand ounces
of gold. I will name no more, for brevities sake, that I may hasten a dispatch
of this point. These are enough to demonstrate Satan was not now bound; yea and
to overthrow the Doctors distinction that Satan is now bound from open
Butcheries: You hear the contrary. As also to overthrow that of his
distinction, that Satan is bound, when he acts by the occult hypocrisy of his
Instruments. You see in the foregoing history hypocrisy and open cruelty go
together. And almost all open War and persecution begins in hypocrisy, and
pretense of piety. The Saracens and Turks War for their Mahomet: The Roman
Emperors persecuted in the ten persecution, and warred against Constantine
under a pretense of piety; that the Christians were against their Idol
Religion, yea so after in Constantines and Julians time, persecution was under
pretense of Religion. And if the Doctor confesses in the close of his
distinction, that when Satan is bound, that yet then his Vicar the Papal
Apollyon shall strenously supply his place; what binding of Satan is this? what
benefit has the Church by this, whether it be destroyed by open hostility, or
under pretense of piety? Surely the Church kept more pure, under open
persecutions, then otherwise. See Rev. 12.1. compare Histories.

SECT. III. An answer to Doctor Prideaux his third Argument.
IT is drawn (says he) from the state of the Martyrs beheaded, all that
interval of time, in which we (says he) put the binding of Satan, viz. white
robes were given to them, saying, rest yet a little while, Rev. Chap. 6. They
are sealed, and do wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. Chap. 7.
They protest against the beast, and for that cause are slain, and live again
in their successors, and ascend up to Heaven, Chap. 11. They appear in the
company of the Lamb, erecting his standard in mount Sion, Chapter 14. They
triumph over the Beast, Chapter 15. They sing Hallelujah, and are guests of the
nuptial Supper, Chapter 19. And here in the 20. Chapter they are set in
Thrones, and power of judging is given to them, because they were smitten, and
had not worshipped the Beast, from whence they live with Christ, and reign a
thousand years. And therefore howsoever they were esteemed, or used in the
world, yet indeed they live and reign with Christ, who has made them Kings
and Priests: In the same manner Kings, as Priests. But Priests spiritually,
therefore so only Kings. For as Christ's Kingdom, so the Apocalyptical
Kingdom of Christians, is not of this world.

To this Argument we shall answer brieflier, s^. first to the Antecedent, or
first Proposition.

1 That in all those places there is something that crosses the Doctors sense,
so that the things named by him, did not import the binding of Satan. Rev. 6,
The Red horse verse 4. takes away peace, and makes men kill one another. The
^ale horse verse 8. was called Death, and hell followed it. And to the thing
the Doctor alleges, That the souls should rest, this is added as a reason,
till their brethren, and fellow servants should be killed; of which is meant
Chapter 11. The 7. of Rev. is a Chapter proleptically inserted to support the
Saints in the midst of the approaching evils; as at that period there
mentioned; as in most Chapters of the Revelation some things are inserted of
comfort to that end, from their future condition when Satan shall be bound,
and the Saints reign, although this shall not be fulfilled till the seventh
Trumpet begins to sound, Chapter 10.7. Then indeed shall be fulfilled the
mystery of God, as be has declared to his servants the Prophets. To whom
little or nothing of the ultimate day of judgment was manifested, which indeed
is no mystery. But the abundance of the suture visible glory of the Church is
to most a mystery; so that this Chapter is but a preoccupation: As the same
sealed persons are brought in, Chapter 14. Though presently in Chapter 16, 17,
18, 19. the world is filled with judgments. So that the Angels in this seventh
Chapter, v. 1. are ready with their judgments only suspended, while this
comfort is communicated to the one hundred forty four thousand, that is, to
the universal Church, who are verse 14. but (...) coming, or about to come out
of tribulation, not come out. They were washed before in the blood of the Lamb,
ever since their believing, but that was from sin; but they are not yet come
out of great tribulation, but that shall be ere long. So that that which
follows to the end of the Chapter cannot now be applied to their persons, viz.
That they shall hunger no more; nor the Sun light upon them any more; And God
shall wipe away all tears, which are spoken in the future Tense as of things to
come. And it cannot be applied to their future state in heavenly glory: For the
Heathens, that knew but the immortality of the soul, never dreamed of hunger,
or thirst, or fear to befall good men in the world to come. Nor did the
Philosophers think that the Sun did shine above the highest of the orbs of
the material heaven. Therefore there is no probability in the least that this
is a description of everlasting glory, but of a state on earth, where the Sun
has smitten, and there has been hunger and thirst, and have been tears. So
that still I mind you, this Chapter is but a parenthesis of comfort put there
by way of anticipation. For it is put between the sixth and seventh Seal,
between which must be a methodical succession. The sixth Seal is in chapter 6.
which is most terrible, obscuring heaven, shaking the earth, terrifying the
sons of men. And the seventh Seal is in Rev. 8. verse 1. In which eight
Chapters whiles Christ intercedes over the prayers of the Church, in regard of
some slain, as it is in Chapter 6. The seven Trumpets appear in order to sound
at their time, Rev. 8.6. etc. so that the calamities of the world go on in the
world, upon earth; and from hence forward till Antichrist be down. As for the
11 Chapter, it is plain that it is but the summary of all that which John
prophesies, of the more Ecclesiastical state of things in his ensuing Book of
the Revelation, as in the former he had prophesied of the more Political. I say
a summary: For there is set down the more pure state of the Church, v. 1. and
more corrupt, verse 2. And of the two witnesses in sackcloath; one thousand two
hundred and sixty years, and their lying dead in the grave three years and a
half, as well as rising and ascending. And there is Babylon falling, viz. The
tenth part of the City, etc. as well as Babylon trampling and triumphing over
the Witnesses. So that unless we will jumble all into a confusion, this 11.
Chapter is but the summary of what follow; in the whole book of the Revelation.
And in the 12 Chapter there is as much for the loosing of Satan as for binding.
For the 13 Chapter, it plainly sets out the time of Satan's power, (...) two and
forty months, or a thousand two hundred and sixty days, viz. years, which
power he has not when his master Satan is bound, as we have, and shall hear.
For the 14, and 15. Chapters, the Churches triumphant songs of victory over the
Beast, are but in hope of a thing to come; Another Parenthesis of comfort
proleptically inserted. For before and behind their song, in Chapter 15. is
mention of the Angels having the seven last plagues to fulfill the wrath of
God, viz. The pouring out of the seven Vials, as it follows Chapter 16. I need
go no further in my Antithesis to the Doctors instances.

2 We answer to his Antecedent, or first Proposition, that if indeed as Doctor
Prideaux would have it) from the 6. Chap. of Rev. to the 20. Saints are in
their reigning condition, and Satan is bound according to St. John's true
intent, Rev. 20. what means all that while, all that ado against the enemies
of the Church; of seven Seals, Chapter 6. and 7. of seven Trumpets, Chapter 8.
of seven Vials, Chapter 15. and 16. and in 17. is described the sin and the
judgment of the Whore; and in Chapter 18. the manner of her utter destruction;
and Chapter 19. the destruction it self. And then, and not till then in
Chapter 20. S. John speaks of binding of Satan, so as the Saints may be said to
reign indeed. After which no Seals, Trumpets, or Vials; only there is a
proleptic, or anticipation of the ultimate day of judgment, mentioned verse
11. of Chapter 20. because it is the period of the thousand years, but the
state of times in Satan's binding, and the Saints reigning is after described in
Rev. 21. and 22. Chapters.

3 We answer to his said Antecedent, or first Proposition; That by the Doctors
tenet and proof, that Satan is bound from Rev. 6. to Rev. 20. (for he says,
that the beginning was in Constantines time that the Saints began to reign; And
John tells us, that the thousand years do end at the ultimate day of
judgment, Rev. 20.) it will follow, that from Constantine M. which the Doctor
puts in three hundred years after Christ, to the day of judgment is but a
thousand years. For the Doctor in his stating the question, confesses that the
thousand years must be taken properly and precisely. But we, and most Nations
do compute from three hundred years after Christ, to this year, one thousand
three hundred fifty three; and yet the day of the last judgment is not come.
No nor the War of Gog, and Magog, which precedes it. No nor the fall of
Antichrist and Babylon, which precedes that, etc.

Next we come to answer to the Argument, or Consequent, or last Proposition.

Proposition it self, That therefore all this while the Saints reigned; we
say, that though they reigned over sin, which is no more privilege then
every Saint has had since the beginning of the world; yet they reign not on
earth over their corporal enemies as the fifth Monarchy, or power, which is
the mind of the Scripture, as we have before abundantly proved.

2 To his first proof, viz. [So are they Kings, as they be Priests. But they
are Priests spiritually.] Therefore etc. We say to the major, and minor, ten
Millinary years that they shall be Priests on earth, therefore jointly they shall
be Kings on earth. And they shall in body sensibly offer up sacrifices on earth
of praises and Hallelujahs, Rev. 11. Rev. 14. Therefore they shall in the body
sensibly reign on earth. The notion is changed, but the place and thing is the
same. Therefore it is said, Rev. 5.10. He has made us Kings, and Priests unto
our God, AND we shall reign on earth; And Rev. 20.4. shall reign with Christ
a thousand years. The time and place shows what reigning it shall be, even
such as to whom Kings and Nations shall bring their honor, Rev. 21. But in
heaven the Saints enjoy, but not reign with Christ, because Christ as Christ
does not there reign, as we have often minded you out of 1 Cor. 15.24.28.

3 To his second proof, or proof of proof, My Kingdom is not of this world. We
answer, It may be IN the world, though not OF the world. Compare John 15.19.
The Church of Christ then was in the world, yet then not of the world. 2 Not of
the world, signifies, not in the state of the unregenerate world; but now at
the time we speak of, the world shall be Churched; the quality of men shall be
pure, prime Saints. 3 Not of the world to act in a wordly manner, viz. to fight
with the sword, which was the occasion of that speech, but shall act in a
spiritual glorious manner; the Word and Spirit in them, the impression of glory
on their bodies, and the shining of graces in their souls, the formidable fall
of their former enemies, the special manifestation of Christ, the gradual
harmony within themselves, and their high sanctity of conversation, shall be
enough to make any couch and crouch, and seem to be very holy, if not so
indeed. 4 Keep we to the very terms of the Text ( John 18. verse. 36.) namely
((...)) THAT my Kingdom that is mine, is not of THIS SAME world; and we shall
perceive that they look toward Christ's peculiar Kingdom, of which we have
treated all this while, to be erected in that world, which the Apostle calls
in Heb. 2.5. ((...)) THAT, even THAT SAME INHABITED, or habitable world to come.

SECT. IV. Doctor Prideaux his fourth Argument.
THe Doctors fourth Argument, That the dignity of reigning is not attributed to
the Martyrs themselves, but only to their souls, which are dignified with the
title of the first Resurrection; therefore to extend these things to the
persons, or to any other Resurrection then that from the deadly opinions of
Antichrist, in which the rest lay dead, seems to be far from the scope of the
Prophecy. Neither do those things move us which are urged of the dissenters,
viz. that souls are here taken synecdochically, for souls and bodies united;
and the first Resurrection to signify the union of the soul with the body,
because this tropicall speech is exceeding slippery on which to establish an
uncertain opinion, nor to be admitted, where no inconvenience follows in
keeping to the letter, as Augustine admonishes us.

Reigning is attributed to the Martyrs themselves; and soul must of necessity
signify the persons, and resurrection, the union of body and soul. For first
in verse 4. those words WHICH had not worshipped the Beast ((...)) is in the
masculine gender. But souls in the feminine. Again, The rest of the dead
((...) verse 5.) are in the masculine, in Antithetical opposition to ((...))
those that were beheaded. Furthermore it is said verse 4. (...) they lived,
which signifies, they lived again. 1 Because so it signifies Rev. 2.8. Christ
was dead, and (...) is alive. 2 It is spoken in antithesi to that verse 5. of
this 20. of Revel. The rest of the dead (...) lived not again. Now the souls
of these were never dead, according to the Doctors judgment; and all that
which the Scriptures hold, the immortality of the soul. Finally observe that
the souls of them that were put to death in the ten Persecutions, have reigned
above a thousand years. Now the Doctor understands precisely a thousand years,
as we heard before; therefore some reigning of their persons is meant, which
cannot be in glory at the ultimate day of judgment, where neither the person
of Christ reigns with the Saints, nor they with him. And the thousand years
period, with the general Resurrection at the ultimate day of judgment, Rev.
20.9. etc. is confessed by most; therefore the reigning of souls a just
thousand years cannot be meant; many having been martyred ever since Stephen.

That to understand a proper Resurrection, is not besides the scope of the
Prophecy. For first, this first Resurrection is prophesied for future, v. 6.
to those that had long since risen, not only from Idolatry, but from sin in
general, and sealed it with their blood, or other sufferers. 2. The Doctor
himself in contending for a metaphorical, viz. a spiritual resurrection, does
therein depart from the letter, contrary to his own rule. For no absurdity
follows, by adhering to the letter; but will, if we forsake it, as before we
have abundantly proved. 3 Those that rose from Antichrists opinions, arose not
till Antichrist was manifest, which the Doctor puts in Anno one thousand years
after Christ. Nor did they arise all at once, but in successive ages: therefore
how do they reign a just thousand years, in the time of Satan's binding,
according to the Doctors opinion and account aforesaid; yea or according to any
other account?



SECT. V. Doctor Prideaux his fifth Argument answered.
THe Doctors fifth Argument is inconsiderable, and not worth the time of
answering, it being from mere authorities of mere men, and some of the worser
sort, viz. Papists, and Jesuits, holding that the thousand years are past.
Indeed, says Mr. Mede, many hope that it is past, and so the death of the
Witnesses. And Papists, and Episcopal men, are loath we should expect a better
time then that under them; But we have store of learned, godly Authors to
oppose the Doctors Author, on Rev. 20.4. See Pareus his Confession of all the
Fathers, p. 1115. And we have the Scriptures (as we have showed) to assert that
they are yet to come. And one Scripture out-weighs all the men of the world.
Antiquitas sine veritate est vetustas erroris. Tertul.

SECT. VI. The Doctors sixth Argument answered.
THe sixth and last Argument (says the Doctor) heapeth up certain
inconveniences, which lie heavy upon this interpretation, judgment, or
opinion of the Chiliasts.

1 For, says he first, it brings in another Resurrection of the bodies then
that universal one, in the ultimate judgment; which is besides, if not
contrary to the Apostles Creed; and the doctrine of Paul, who delivers that all
(including himself) without exception are then (at the ultimate day of
judgment) to be changed, and to put on immortality in the place of mortality;
which he repeats under a certain distinction of the first and second
Resurrections, but to be fulfilled at the sound of the Trumpet of God, the
Archangel sounding it, 1 Cor. 15, 16, 17. 1 Thessalonians 4 15. So the Doctors first
inconvenience. To which we answer (before we name any more.) And first to the
first clause, of another resurrection of the bodies. We answer; It brings not
in another resurrection of the Saints bodies, who rise only once, viz. at the
first resurrection. Howbeit if God would raise the same bodies twice as those
in the Prophets, and those at Christ's passion, and Lazarus, etc. why should man
oppose. To a second clause, that it is beside the Apostles Creed, if not
against it: we answer, We would feign know against what article of that Creed
this offends? If the Doctor means against that of the Resurrection; We say,
the Creed does not de^ermine the time or order, or distinct worship of persons,
or degrees of men's rising from the dead; as indeed all the Creed is so
general* that a man may in a sort believe all, and yet be unregenerated. To
the third clause, that it is beside, if not against the doctrine of Paul, etc.
Answ. first those verses of 1 Cor. 15.1.16. and 17. are nothing to the Doctors
purpose, viz. If the (...) rise not, then is not Christ risen; and if Christ be
not raised, your faith is in vain, ye are yet in your sins. This is nothing
to the Doctors purpose. But supposing by the Doctors words in his argument he
intended verse 51, 52. Behold I will show you a mystery, we shall not all
sleep, but we shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, a^ the
last Trumpet (for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorrupti^le, and we shall be changed.) For this corruption must put on
incorruption, and this mortal, put on immortal^ty. To this we answer; That
w^^rant, that not only the Ma^tyrs, but all the Saints shall rise at once, and
that a thousand years before the rising of the wicked at the last day of
judgment: it is evident, by comparing Rev. 11. verse 11.18. etc. with Rev.
20.4 and 12. We are apt to call only great sufferers of persecution Martyrs;
but the word in Greek signifies Witnesses, and all Saints witness, and are
called the two Witnesses, Rev. 11. yea all Saints suffer more or less;
therefore St. John names not only them that were be^eaded, but all that seared
Gods name, Rev. 11.18. Now what inconveniences does this infer, that Christ
will according to Mat. 25. first put the sheep on his right hand? And we say
long before, he put the goats on his left hand; for every man that dies
notwithstanding this, ha^h but one resurrection. But the Doctor says, This
must all be done at the sound of the last (i. e. seventh) Trumpet. We confess
it a^ follows upon the sound of the last, or seventh Trumpet. But the Saints
rise, Rev. 11.15.18. at the beginning of the time of the last Trumpet. The
wicked rise at last the end of the period of the seventh Trumpet, viz. one
thousand years after, without the sound of any Trumpet, Rev. 20.12. Of the
space and business of the last Trumpet, and of this, 1 Cor. 15. we spoke
abundantly before: therefore now to be brief. We further answer to this clause
of the Doctor, That all the time of the state of the thousand years, is justly
by the Learned Jews in general, called the day of judgment. For at the
beginning of the thousand years the Devil is chained, and the open wicked upon
earth are destroyed, and the Saints that were dead, are raised, and they alive
are changed; and in the whole space of that thousand years they reign on
earth, at the end whereof the wicked that were dead do rise, and are judged.
And what is judgment and justice, but suum cuique tribuere, to give to every
one his own? And this while, as at the beginning of it, the Saints only are
mentioned by Paul, in that 1 Cor. 15.51, 52, 53. (the wicked are excluded in
verse 50. as incapable) so the dead Saints are to be raised, and the living
Saints to be changed, and that into an immortal state of body. The Doctors
quotation of 1 Cor. 15. and 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. touching a certain kind of
distinction of the first and second resurrection, under which Paul (he says)
repeats the state of things from first to last, of the last Trumpet, confirms
what we have said, and overthrows the Doctors scope. For first, as touching 1
Cor. 15. you may remember how largely we discussed before the 23, 24. especially
if I give you but a touch what I then said, viz. The Apostle mentions an ORDER
in the resurrection of all men; the word (...) signifies as order, so also a
troop, a legion, an army, and he adds in his own order, ^^oop, ^egion or
army; Order, implying succession one after another. The Apostle distinguishes
the whole Resurrection from first to last into three, orders, troops, legions,
etc. First, Christ, whom he calls (...), the first, and first fruits in the
plural, because he is the representative of all men that believe, as verse 47.
All men included are in two. 2 (...) AFTERWARD they that are Christ's at his
coming. And this is to this day one thousand six hundred forty and eight; so
much is contained in this (...), Afterward. For, says Mr. Mede ( Diatrib,
part. p. 473) (...) Afterward (used in 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. and 1 Cor. 15.23.) notes
a distance of time of above a thousand and half of years. 3 THEN comes the
end, Greek, (...) after that, or afterward comes the end, which in analogy to
the distance of the first fruits from the lump; and to other Scriptures which
we have abundantly alleged, and opened, I say, which Afterward must contain
a thousand years. As for that, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17. it goes thus far with 1
Cor. 15. First, that Christ one thousand six hundred fifty and three years
since rose; next comes with a shout, with the sound of the Trump of God.
Secondly, that they that are dead in Christ, rise (...) first. After that (...)
we that are alive shall be caught up. Now here is no mention of the rising of
the wicked which is against the Drs. omne gatherum. If he will have it intimated
in the last (...) AFTER THAT; When we are caught up that are alive. This is
expressed after the resurrection of the dead in Christ, and signifies a great
distance of time after, as we have showed before; and so this also will be
against the Doctors Altogether. Thus of the Doctors first inconvenience.

2 The second Inconvenience the Dr. names that arises from our opinion in the
point in hand is, that it prorogeth the end of the world at least a thousand
years, with an indefinite augmentation, contrary to diverse texts of Scripture,
by which the Learned have collected the consummation of the world to be nearer;
as it is to be seen largely in Cornelius Alapide on Rev. 20. First, we answer,
As the Doctor did before beg, the question in saying, [A slippery tropicall and
an uncertain opinion.] So now again in saying, [Contrary to many T. we
prorogue] whiles the Doctor does not dispute these things out. Secondly, we
stand upon nothing more then plain text, without sophistication, or
allegorising contrary to the scope of the pace, as far as possible, or light
can lead us. Thirdly, That the consummation of the world does gloriously begin
at the beginning of these thousand years, as we have demonstrated out of
several texts; and so it rather hastens then prorogues. Fourthly, turning to
Cornelius Alapide on this 20. of Rev. according to the Doctors direction,
thinking to find some great matter, I found only this of that business, That
he says, we approach very near the end of the world; First, because we see the
Gospel preached almost to all the world. Secondly, the Saint Vincent, who dyed
one thousand four hundred and eighteen, did confidently preach this, and that
by the command of Christ, as it is in the History of his life. Thirdly, that it
is a constant oracle among the Turks, that Mahomets sect is to endure a
thousand years, which years are now near expired. Fourthly, so is the
Prophecy of St. Malachy A.B. of Hibernia; whose life St. Bernard did write.
Thus you see what Cornelius Alapide says; and what stuff it is. Two arguments
out of the Popish legend. Another from the Turks Alcoran, or Tradition. The
other intimates a Scripture, viz. that Mat. 24.14. But there is no Almost. I
would the Jesuit said true, that almost. It is not yet preached to the vast
Kingdoms and places of China, of the Turk, of the Indians, of the Tartars,
etc. We do indeed grant that the consummation of the world is near, and we said
so but now. But that we set it backward, or forward, beside Scripture; neither
the Doctor, nor his Alapide has proved it one jot. Nor can it seem less then
some kind of contradiction, for the Doctor to say, we do prorogare ultra
mill, adminimum, annos indefinito auctario. That we do prolong the time at
least a thousand years, with an indefinite argument. For if it be for a
thousand years, how is it indefinite? If indefinite, how is it for a thousand
years? And Alapide confesses it is uncertain when the world shall end. Ibid.

Third Inconvenience, the Doctor urges is, That this opinion in our point
feigneth a state of the Church militant in, or at the coming of the Lord (in
adventu Domini) triumphant and tranquillous, contrary to Luke 18.8. When the
Son of man shall come, shall he find faith on earth? Answer, we do not say
that the Church shall triumph at the very first appearance of Christ (which is
to call the Jews) yea we have said the contrary on Dan. 12. that for five and
forty years, will be a time of trouble to the Jews, after their call, and before
the triumph comes. But when Christ has once appeared to destroy all the
Churches enemies, the Church shall triumph, and be tranquillous many years, as
we have seen innumerable places in O. T. and just a thousand years according to
St. John in Rev. compared with Dan, etc. of which before. That place of Luke is
evidently of the weak faith; not of no faith of true believers, at the sight of
the great troubles that are the sad Antecedent to the joyful Comedian
Cat^strophe of the Churches deliverance, as Dan. 12. and Rev. 11. to the end of
19. set it out. But when Christ comes, it is at a pinch to raise their faith,
and after to settle that their triumph on earth. As he appeared in incarnate;
when the Saints faith was low, as we see in Nathanael: And at the
Resurrection, as we see in the two Disciples, Luke 24. and in Thomas, John 20.
But when manifest, he raised them high. So at his next coming.

Fourth Inconvenience is (says the Doctor) it does interpose at least a
thousand years between the ruin of Antichrist, and the dissolution of the
world; which Antichrist, Paul foretold, should be destroyed with the bright
coming of our Savior, and by the breath of his mouth. We answer, first, That
if he means before the last dissolution at the last judgment, even so does St.
John most emphatically interpose. Compare Rev. 19. the two last verses, with
Chapter 20.4 compared with v. 12. And so methodically, and exactly Antichrist shall
be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's first coming. His breath of his mouth,
viz. his Word and Spirit, having made the Kings of the earth to hate the Whore.
Secondly, we answer, that at Christ's appearance; at the beginning of the
thousand years, there is a kind of dissolution of the world, 2 Peter 12.13.
compared with Isaiah 65.17.

Fifth Inconvenience is, That this opinion (as the Doctor affirms) inventeth
such an assumption of bodies, as the Papists feign of the blessed Virgins; or
brings down from heaven souls to be united to bodies, that perhaps they may
get children, possess earthly things, and be subject to other conditions of
mortal men. We answer, first, for the Drs. assumption of bodies, feigned by
the Papists, the Dr. does not tell us what he means, and we cannot divine what
the Papists may dream. This arrow does not appear, ergo, we need not hold up
our buckler. Secondly, for the bringing souls down from heaven to the body
upon earth; what wonder is this more then the returning of the soul of Lazarus,
and of those at Christ's Passion, and those in the Prophets, to their bodies on
earth, especially seeing they that return in the other world to their bodies
upon the inhabitable world for that time of the thousand years ( Heb. 2.5.) is
to a glorious estate. Indeed unless we can overthrow a world of places which
we have urged, this must be granted. Thirdly, For their begetting children at
that time, We do not affirm it. But if we should, I know not what grand
Inconvenience would follow, seeing Adam once might have done it without sin,
or carnality of mind, when his soul came new out of Gods hands, which are more
glorious then heaven; and the Virgin Mary so conceived Christ. And the Apostle
Heb. 2. implies, our state then shall be as innocent Adams was. All earthly
things that the Saints then shall enjoy, shall but increase their happiness, not
sin, or carnality in the least. That shall be fulfilled, Matthew. 19.29. If the
full of happiness in glory shall fill all the senses with joy and comfort
suitable to that place; why may not the Preface upon earth proportionally? But
the Doctor objects but with a fortasse, perhaps. Fourthly, for their enjoyment
of earthly things; though the things be earthly, yet the Saints shall enjoy
them in a spiritual manner, under a spiritual notion, and to a spiritual
end, as Adam in innocence. For fifth, of being subject to the condition of
mortal men: I do not know that they that are Saints shall dye in that thousand
years, or any more; seeing they that are alive shall only be changed.

6 The sixth and last Inconvenience the Doctor urges is, as he says, that
this opinion does raise up again Papisme at the end of the world, viz. then
for men to dye with the rest of the enemies of the Church in the Gogican War,
which Papisme the 19. of the Revel. concluded as extinct. We answer to this
objection, that it is of no consequence, whether it be granted or denied; We
do not raise Papisme, nor do I know any that do. And though S. John concludes
the utter downfall of Antichrist, Rev. 19. that he shall never reign more,
yet Chapter 20.9. he shows that secret hypocrisy of all Nations, shall break
out, and endeavor to beset the Church, and then comes the ultimate day of
judgment.

CHAP. II. Answering Doctor Pareus.
THus of your Dr. Prideaux his Arguments against our point, in answer of whom
with the same labor we have answered the maine Arguments of Pareus, on
Revelation 20. verse 4. For the Doctor did follow, and take much out of Pareus;
Those we have not spoken to, that are most material, that the Doctor did not
touch upon, them we will now touch.

SECT. I. First Objection. Rev. 20.5.
THat that Resurrection is not a corporal Resurrection, but a spiritual. And
that because it is called the First Resurrection. For this cannot be the first
corporal Resurrection, because before this there arose corporally, the Son of
the widow of Sarepta, raised by the Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 17.22. The Son of
the Sunamitish widow by Elisha, 2 King. 4.35. The Son of the widow of Naim
raised by Christ, Luke 7.11, 12. etc. The daughter of Jairus raised by Christ,
Luke 8.55. of Lazarus raised by Christ, John 11.44. Those at Christ's Passion,
Matthew. 27. Tabitha by Peter, Act. 9.41. E^tichus by Paul, Act. 20.10.

Answer to this, thus, First by this argument, Christ shall not be the
first fruits of them that sleep. Secondly, by this argument, the opinion of a
spiritual Resurrection from Antichristianisme cannot be here admitted, because
by the same reason, that cannot be called the First resurrection, because many
of them aforementioned were raised before Antichristianisme was in being.
Thirdly, that raising of them was no general Resurrection of any sort of
godly, or ungodly. But this in the Revelation is general of all Saints.
Fourthly, the T. intends that risen, they shall reign, and reign a thousand
years. But the other mentioned by Pareus soon died and did not reign in John's
sense. Fifthly, John had marked these out, verse 3, that they had had a
spiritual Resurrection already.

SECT. II. Second Argument of Pareus.
TO the First Resurrection is opposed First death. But the First death was
spiritual, viz. Sin, Romans 5. therefore the first Resurrection meant here, is
spiritual.

Answer first, spiritual death and life are sin and grace. But these not
expressed here; but first and second Resurrection, living and dying again. The
first death is when all dye corporally, some naturally, some violently, as the
godly by Antichrists persecution. So in Rev. 6.9. the souls under the altar,
and the beheaded in this 20. Chapter, verse 4. And wicked by Gods judgments,
Rev. 19. two last. Now the first Resurrection is of Saints, Rev. 20. is here in
ver. 4. Second, of wicked in verse 12. which is their second death, as S. John
calls it, verse 14.

The rest of Pareus his objections to this point, are upon a false supposition,
that only the Martyrs shall rise, therefore need no answer. Beside, we have
given much in answer to him before in the end of the first Book. Thus of Pareus,
next of Mr. Bailey.

CHAP. III.
MR. Bailey his Arguments come next (for I put the best disputant first, who
being answered, we shall have less reason to spend time upon the weaker.)

SECT. I. Mr. Baylies first Argument.
HE that remains in the Heaven unto the last judgment, comes not down to the
earth a thousand years before the last judgment. But Christ remains in the
Heavens unto the last judgment. Therefore Christ comes not down to the earth
for a thousand years before the last judgment. The major (says he) is
unquestionable. The minor is proved. First, from the Article of the Creed, from
that; he sits at the right hand of God, from thence he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead. Secondly, from Act. 3.21. Thirdly, from John 14.2.3.

We answer first to the major. First, we have not yet asserted, that Christ
shall come down on the earth. But we have showed out of several texts a very
great probability, that Christ will at least appear in the clouds, that men,
and especially the Jews may look upon him, etc. as Zac. 12.10. 2 At the
beginning of the 1000. years is the beginning of the last judgment, as we
showed before. 2. To the minor where Mr. B. affirms that Christ shall remain in
the Heavens unto the last day of judgment; We answer, it is false. For after
he was ascended up to the right hand of God; he is so near to Paul, that he
calls to him, saying, Paul, Paul, etc. And Paul replies, Who art thou Lord? And
Christ replies, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. And Paul replies, Lo what
will thou have me to do? And the Lord replies, Arise, go into the City, and it
shall be told thee, Act. 9.4, 5, 6. And verse 10. Christ in a vision speaks to
Ananias to go to Paul. Ananias objects, and Christ replies. At last he goes,
and verse 17. speaks to Saul thus, putting his hand upon him; Brother Saul, the
Lord, even Jesus that APPEARED unto thee in the way ( Greek (...) s^en of
thee.) And 1 Cor. 15.5, 6, 7, 8. As SEEN of C^phas, and the twelve, etc. after
the Resurrection, so after the Ascension seen of Paul, v. 8. Now by the same
reason he may appear again to convert the Jews (for that must be some sudden
business, Isa 66.8. as a Nation borne at once) etc. before the ultimate day of
judgment. And Paul's conversion by Christ's appearance in the clouds was the
first fruits how Christ would convert the Jews, as is Mr. Medes note on 1 Timothy
1.16. Read the place.

1 To the first proof of the minor from that Article of the Creed; First, we
say, that Article does not prove Mr. Baylies intent, in that it does not
assert, that there Christ shall fixedly sit for ever until the last judgment,
but only that thence he shall come to judge, which he may do, if mean while
he descends on weighty occasions, which finished, he ascends again, and there
he abides till he descends to the last judgment. Secondly, we have showed
before that the day of judgment begins at this one thousand years, and
continues to the end. The beginning is the morning of the day of judgment; the
end the evening of the day of judgment. And all the same day of judgment, as
it is in Peter, 2 Epist. 3. Chap. And we have also showed how in this time all
the parts of a day of judgment are acted. The last day of which thousand years
we all along have called it the ultimate day of judgment. And how long this
ultimate day may be, this evening of the Millenary day, we cannot tell. One of
our opposites said, that it must be a long while, that Christ judges as man,
and judges men as men, and therefore the ultimate judgment must be a long
time.

2 To the second proof, viz. out of Act. 3.21. we have already largely showed,
that that place is very full, and home for our opinion. See our second Book,
page 96. But because Mr. Bailey will undertake to urge some special
particulars; we will answer particularly to them. First, He urges, That the
time here understood is that, when all things spoken by all the Prophets are
performed. But all things spoken by all the Prophets, are not performed till
the last day of judgment. He backs this with Romans 8.21. compared with verse
18. and 23. where (says he) The restitution of the creatures to their desired
liberty, comes not before the redemption of our bodies, and the glory to be
revealed on the whole Church at the last day. To which we answer, Mr. B. in
most of these Propositions refers which in our English peremptorily to all
things. But the Greeks is plainly this, (...) etc. and is duly rendered thus,
Whom the heavens must receive until the TIMES of restitution of all things;
WHICH TIMES God has spoken, etc. And so the Arabecke; Christ must be received
of heaven unto THE TIMES which shall confirm the perfecting of all the
speeches, which times God has spoken of, etc. And plain reason is most fair
for this reading, of referring which to times, not to all things, because all
the Prophets of the Old Testament generally for the most part have spoken of
the TIMES of restitution; but have not spoken of all things that are to be
fulfilled; witness many things in the New Testament which the Apostles tell us
were hid in old time, and St. John's six first Seals, Trumpets, and Vials show
as much. As also the binding of Satan. And therefore that speech of Mr. B. That
the time of the performing of all things which any of the Prophets have spoken,
cannot possibly exist before he last judgment, is a false proposition, because
some of the Prophets whole Prophesies in the Old Testament (for them Peter then
must needs mean) have been fulfilled already. As the Prophecy of Jonah, the
utmost of which was the resurrection of Christ, which was a time of restitution
of our Head, but not of all things by our Head. Add that it is said, Here the
TIMES of restitution of ALL THINGS, which are distinguished from the ultimate
day of judgment, which is a time of dissolution, and destruction of things: To
which RESTITUTIO^ is quite opposite. And TIMES are in the plural, as well as
THINGS. And therefore a precise ultima^e day of judgment in Mr. B. sense is
not particularly pointed out. But that ALL THINGS MUST HAVE their TIMES to be
restored: As the Saints for a thousand years. And restitution imports a state
once had, and lost, not a state altogether new, and different as that in
heaven. And therefore, Psalm. 8. and Heb. 2. do refer to such a state as Adam
had. For Romans 8.18. to 24. which Mr. B. quotes for proof, That the time of
fulfilling all things, which any of the Prophets have spoken, cannot possibly
exist before the last judgment; I say, his quoting this eighth of Romans to
confirm this Proposition, Mr. Bailey taking the last judgment for the ultimate
day of judgment, overthrows himself. For in these thousand years is revealed
the glory IN US, Romans 8.18. Mark the phrase, in us. And in verse 19. Then is
the manifestation ( viz. to all the world) of the Sons of God, which in
heaven is hid from the world. And verse 19.20, 31, 22. Then in those thousand
years, the creature IT SELF, and whole creation, according to their groans
shall be delivered from the vanity, and travel, and pain it is now in, into
the liberty of the Sons of God; which cannot be at the ultimate day of
judgment, when comes the dissolution. And then in that thousand years most
properly is it said in verse 25, And not only the CREATURES, but OUR SELVES
ALSO shall have the redemption of our bodies; it being a condition proper in
place and nature for bodies. The second thing that Mr. Bailey urges out of this
third of Act. 21. is, That the time here spoken of is, when the Jews, to whom
Peter spoke, were to be refreshed by the Lords presence. But that shall not be
before the general Resurrection. To which we answer: This is a begging of the
question; we have showed that ((...)) from the face, or appearance of Christ,
shall the Saints in this thousand years have a great refreshing, especially
here meant of the Jews in general, who then must be called, and so enjoy this
refreshing. For at the ultimate judgment, and general Resurrection, will be
too late a time to call them. The third thing Mr. Bailey urges out of this Act.
3. is this; The time when God does solemnly before men and Angels declare the
absolution and blotting out of the sins of all his people, is not before the
last day. But this is the time whereof the Apostle Peter speaks in the present
place as appears by verse 19. That your sins may be blotted out, when the time
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. To which we answer as
to the minor Proposition; First, that Peter here speaks of the blotting out the
Jews sins; and those sins were refusing and crucifying Christ, Act. 2. And
these are blotted out when Christ appears, and they repent at sight of him, and
own him; and this is before the last day of judgment, Zach. 12.10. Rev. 1.7.
as we have before demonstrated out of these places. As for all those words Mr.
Bailey heaps up, of solemnly before men and Angels, declare the absolution, etc.
they cannot be inferred from this text. As the word refreshing is but a low
word to signify the absolutest, highest happiness. And the last day is a late
time to blot out the sins of the Jews, when they are not yet converted, nor
shall then be, but by the appearance of Christ unto them, Zach. 11. Rev. 1.

3 The third and last proof of Mr. Baylies minor Proposition of his first
Argument, That Christ remains in the heavens till the last judgment, is in
John 14.2. and 3. To which we answer, Christ does not in the least there
intimate that he would not come again till the last judgment, as Mr. B.
understands the last judgment. And it is very plain, that Christ will first
come again, and receive them to himself before he carry them into the mansion
in the highest heavens; if Mr. Bailey will needs understand those mansions only.
Howbeit there is no expression of Heaven. And the Greek is, prepare a place,
without any article of emphasis. And the Fathers house is large, Ephesians. 3.14,
15. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. There is Bethel, even where
God in special appears; which special appearance is in the person of Christ.
And lastly where ever Christ is with us, we are with him, so as that for that
time is heaven to us; therefore the Apostle Paul, desiring a state in the world
to come, Phil. 1.23. calls it a being with Christ, not heaven. So that yet
still it remains to be proved, that Christ shall not appear to his people,
before the ultimate day of judgment; or that Christ has no place of
refreshing his people for a time before the ultimate day of judgment, but
only the highest heavens, after the ultimate day of judgment.

SECT. II. Mr. Baylies second Argument.
B. opinion for many generations, has so allegorised upon all the Prophets,
speaking of the state of the Jews, and of the universal Church to be on earth,
before the ultimate day of judgment; that I confess I was thereby for a long
time kept in the dark, so that I could make no use of the Histories and
Prophesies of the Old and New Testament in relation to these things, but only
here and there, by way of moral observations and allusions.

Christ sits at the right hand of God till the last day, therefore he comes not
to reign on earth a 1000 years before the last day. To which we say, that this
argument thus far has been argued and answered in effect in the first
argument; yet because there are some fresh proofs, we are contented again to
answer it, and to discuss them; And for answer, we deny the Antecedent, taking
the last day in Mr. Bailyes sense, for the ultimate day of judgment. But if we
take the last day; for that day in 2 Pet. 3. which shall be a thousand years,
then Mr. Baily concludes nothing against us. But Mr. Baily will prove the
Antecedent, that Christ does sit at the right hand of the Father, till the last
day, meaning the ultimate day of judgment, viz. the evening of our last day.
For so I suppose he means: his proof is his major Proposition, in Ps. 110.1.
Christ sits at the right hand of God, till ALL his enemies be made his
footstool. Whence he assumes this minor; But all his enemies are not made his
footstool till the last day. For till then, Satan, death, and all wicked men
are not fully destroyed, therefore etc. To this major Proposition out of Ps.
110.1. Mr. B puts in a word of great consequence to serve his own turn (which
in divine arguing from a text is very foul play) viz. the word ALL. For as it
is not in our English Translation, so nor is it in the Hebrew text, where it is
only, (...) thine enemies indefinitly. And the Apostle having an infallible
spirit to know the mind of the Scriptures, quoting this place, Heb. 10.13.
renders it, that Christ sits there expecting, (...) etc. putting no ALL in; But
suppose it be said ALL, all his enemies, this is sufficiently fulfilled, when
Christ overcomes all; all his enemies are so subdued, yea visibly in
themselves, or in their effects, that they shall never hurt the Church more,
which shall come to pass when the Jews are settled (at the beginning of the
thousand years) as many Scriptures before showed. And to speak according to St.
John in the Revelation, then as in Chap. 19. Antichrist, and all his adherents
shall down; then as in Chapter 20. Satan shall down: then as in Chapter 21,
Sin shall down. And for death this is destroyed, Chapter 20. For if all the
Saints then live and reign a thousand years, then is this a state of
immortality of their bodies. And for the ultimate day of judgment, then is not
a destroying of death, but a reviving of the worst death, sc. the second death
to the worst of men, so that the wicked live only to dye that death, Rev.
20.12. to the end. It is said that the last enemy of the Saints, that is
destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 11. Because so St. John names the enemes in order;
First, all, the wicked, Rev. 19. Then the Devil, Rev. 20.1. And last of all,
death, v. 4. and all these orderly at the beginning of the thousand years, at
the beginning of the seventh Angels sounding his Trumpet, I say, at the
beginning thereof. And to make all our answer plainer, When it is said, All
shall be under Christ's feet, the meaning is not, that all shall be annihilated:
For after the ultimate day of judgment, there shall be ( viz. in hell) sin,
and devils, and wicked men, and the greatest death, viz. the second death, i.
e. eternal condemnation; therefore the meaning must be, that all shall be so
under Christ's feet, that they shall no more mischief the Church. Satan shall
not seduce them; Sin shall not touch them; Death shall not dissolve them. But
at the end of the thousand years, Satan, and the hypocrites in the corners of
the world shall begin to make an head, and this immediately draws down Christ
to the ultimate day of judgment, who raises all the dead wicked, and takes
them, and the wicked that are then alive, and passes everlasting condemnation
upon them, Rev. 20.7. to the end of the Chapter.

SECT. III. Mr. Bailyes third Argument.
ALL the godly at Christ's coming from heaven, do rise immediately to a
heavenly glory; ergo, none of them do arise to a temporal glory for a
thousand years upon earth.

Answ. We might deny that we call the Argument, you call it the consequence,
because Mr. Baily does not say to glory in heaven, much less the highest
heaven. For their state on earth a thousand years is not only an heavenly
glory, but the state is called Heaven, Rev. 21.1. etc. 2 Pet. 3. But that we
shall fix our answer upon, will be the denying of the Antecedent, and
expounding of the proof Mr. Baily brings for proof of the Antecedent, 1 Cor.
Chap. 15. verse. 22.1 These 4.14. Matthew. 25.31. Joh. 6.39.40.44. Heb. 9.28.

1 To the two first, we answered before. For the third place of Matthew, it
concludes nothing to the said Antecedent. For Christ separates the sheep from
the goats notably at the beginning of the thousand years, when the open wicked
then alive generally perish, Revelation 19. and all the Saints alive are set in
a glorious condition, Chap. 20.

2 To the fourth place, viz. in Joh. 6.39.40.44. I will raise it up at the last
day; We answer, this does not infer any thing in behalf of the Antecedent. For
lo, this thousand years is truly the last day. For (as it is in 2 Pet. 3.)
before it are the last days, in which men shall say, Where is the promise of
his coming. And it is after said, A thousand years are as one day with the
Lord; and then after that by way of exposition, he says, We expect new
heavens, and a new earth. All this in 2 Pet. 3. The beginning of the thousand
years is the morning, and daylight of this last day. And the last end is the
evening and night: So that in the morning of this last day, they that are
Christ's are raised; and as soon as raised, their everlasting life begins; for
they dye no more for ought I know.

3 To the fifth and last place, we answer, It does not infer the Antecedent.
The words in that Heb. 9.28. are, Unto them that look for him shall he appear
the second time without sin unto salvation. All that Mr. Baily says upon
this place, to stretch it to his end is, That Christ has but two times of
coming to the earth; First, in weakness to dye upon the Cross. Second time
in glory, to give everlasting salvation without distinction to all believers,
who look for his coming. To which words of Mr. Baily we say, That it does not
follow infallibly, that because the Apostle there names two commings, by reason
of the Antithesis of a second state in opposition to the state of humiliation,
that therefore there is no third time of his coming. Mr. B. now confesses a
second coming of Christ to the earth. And it were nothing contrary to
Scripture if we should say, that after his second coming at the beginning of
the thousand years he shall come again the third time to universal and
ultimate judgment. But we contend not in this, as in relation to our
particular point here in hand, but shall conclude our answer with this, that
all that can be inferred from this place is only this, That whereas Christ
appeared with sin upon the Cross, i. e. He was reputed a sinner by men, and
our sin imputed to him by God, and was so was made a sacrifice for sin ( Isa.
53.2 Cor. 5. v. ult.) At his next appearing, his second appearing after this,
as the Apostle reckons, he shall appear in no such garb, under no such
opinion, or notion, but most glorious, which is truly performed at the
beginning of the thousand years, at which time begins the salvation of them
that look for him.

SECT. IV. Mr. Bailyes fourth Argument.
THe conceit of the thousand years makes Christ's Kingdom to be earthly, and
most observable for all worldly glory: But the Scripture makes it to be
spiritual, without all worldly pomp. Neither does the word of God make the
Kingdom of the Mediator of two kinds, and of a different nature, but one,
uniform, from the beginning to the end. Luke 1.32. The Lord shall give unto him
the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever. And 1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he has put all things under his
feet. Here this is but one Kingdom, and one way of ruling; a Kingdom merely
spiritual, and no wise worldly, Luke 17.20. The Kingdom of God comes not
with observation, neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there, but the
Kingdom of God is within you. And John 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this
world: If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight; but now
is my Kingdom not from hence, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost Ephesians. 1.20. He
raised him up from the dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly places,
and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all to the
Church. Then Mr. Baily concludes with this untrue speech. The Millenaries make
his Kingdom to appear in Armies and Battles, in feasts and pleasures, in
worldly pomp and power, and will not have his Kingdom to stand in ANY of that
spiritual power, which since his ascension he has executed on Principalities
and Powers: which is a false speech, if intended (as it appears) of all
Millenaries, and so of Protestant Millenaries. And it is an answer sufficient
merely to deny what he does simply affirm without proof. If any shall say
(that we may give a word of answer to this aspersion, and rid our hands of it)
that Battles and Armies at first shall be remotio impedimenti, to beat down
Turk and Pope, and all their obstinate adherents, as it is in Dan. 12. Rev.
17.16. Rev. 19.19. to the end, that so these enemies being beaten down, the
Kingdom (we speak of) might be set up; it does not therefore follow, that it
is asserted, that this Kingdom does consist in these; or if it should be said,
that to all the spiritual glory and power, and pleasures, they shall have added
all outward comforts in a sanctified manner, as Adam had, as the Apostle, Heb.
2.6. in a quotation out of the eighth Psalm, as the eighth Psalm is quoted
out of Genesis 1.26. sets forth this Kingdom in its peace and comfort to be like
that of Adam in innocence; does it therefore follow that its ave red that this
Kingdom consists in these, as in its essentials? They marbee additionals and
circumstantials Isa. 65.16. to the end; and Matthy 19.29. yet not be the
fundamentals, and essentials, much less can it be truly imagined, that any
Protestant, so indeed, would say as Mr. B. affirms, that this Kingdom, of
which we speak, does not stand in any of that spiritual power, which since
Christ's Ascension he has executed on Principalities and Powers. Sure the
spiritual power shall continue there, though it does not exercise it self on
Principalities, etc. when they have submitted; only I make this exception, If
Mr. Baily means a Classical Presbyterian power, I think there shall be none at
all.

I say the less to these foul aspersions in this place, because I have so
abundantly anticipated my self before, where I have ripped up the whole mystery
of all this iniquity. In the third Book, Chapter 3. Section 2. beginning at
page 369. Jerome is brought in jerking at the Millenaries to the same tune, as
does Mr. Baily: But he is (I think) as soundly, and justly jerked for his
injustice (more scholastico) as ever any Libeller was by the Lictor, or Bedle
of the Magistrate. There, for his fables, you have it retorted upon him, that
by his own allegation, he intimates that the opinion of the thousand years was
ancienter then his time. And his own words are brought against him, wherein he
confesses that many Ecclesiastical men and Martyrs, have said the same things
that he spoke against. And therefore he confesses that he cannot condemn
them, even when he had reported them far worse then ever they spoke. Ye
have there likewise Justin Martyr brought, effectually disproving Jerome. Add
to all ye have there, Mr. Medes taking Jerome to task. In the same third Book,
third Chapter, and third Section; ye have the particulars of the aspersions
discussed, and their Authors disproved. They are fathered upon Cerinthus by one
Gaius, seconded by Dionysius Alexandrinus, simply believed, and reported by
Eusebius. But by the best Antiquity, Cerinthus is quitted, Gaius doubted of,
and suspected, Dionysius blamed, and Eusebius reproved. And to make these
things good against them we produce Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius. And
to conclude, we give you there Mr. Medes answer to the said Gaius, Dionysius,
and Eusebius. Thus we have repeated the more, lest some should not take the
pains to read the fore-quoted places.

But let us leave the tail of the Argument, and wound the head and heart of
it, and then the heels will easily fall.

1 To the major Proposition, and first to the first clause, that [The conceit
of the thousand years makes Christ's Kingdom to be earthly] We answer, It no
more it makes earthly, then to say, the Church of Christ on earth makes the
Church of Christ earthly, because all this while it has been on earth; which
notwithstanding is called heavenly, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22. Again the Angels
businesses are with the Church on earth, and about earthly things in relation
to the Churches welfare ( Heb. 1. Dan. 10.) yet it follows not that they are
therefore earthly. To the second clause of the major, It makes Christ's Kingdom
most observable for all worldly glory. Answer, Though this Kingdom shall have
observable for outward glory, according to Rev. 21. Kings and Nations shall
bring their honor to it, yet it does not follow, that we say it shall be most
observable for that. But for the special manifestation of God, and the Lamb,
and all the spiritual beams irradiating from them, Rev. 21. dispelling all
uncleanness and spiritualizing every thing; so that though they enjoy the earth
upon earth, yet not in an earthly manner. Sure then shall that be much more
verified in 1 Cor. 10.31. and Phil. 3.20. Their conversation is in heaven and
do all to the glory of God.

2 To his minor Proposition: First, to the first clause [But the Scriptures
makes it to be spiritual, without all Worldly pomp.] I Answer words are as they
are intended. In English pomp, and vanity are much of the same sense. But if by
pomp, Mr. B. means outward glory, Christ has promised it abundantly in many
places of the old Testament (before alleged.) And also in the new Testament,
in many places, of which before; and particularly in Rev. 21. throughout. To the
second clause of his minor [Neither does the word of God make the Kingdom of
the Mediator of two kinds, and of a different nature.] We answer, As all
orthodox Divines do distinguish the Church of the Mediator, into visible and
invisible, yet do say (and Mr. B. can see it as well as I, that they do not
distinguish the Church into several kinds) so it is in this. As
notwithstanding that in Heb. 1.1. The Church, and Word are still of the same
kind and nature in Essence. To the third clause of his minor [The Word makes
the Church one, uniform from the beginning to the end.] We answer. This word
Uniform, is variously used by Prelates, and Presbyters, which variety does
arise from Diocese and Classes. But we think if we distinguish of an internal,
and an external form, we shall satisfy the objection. The Church is one
Uniforme Church in the internal form, which is union in, and with Christ, and
through him with one another, Ephesians. 4. And yet this does not hinder the Church,
in several ages to have several external forms. In Adams standing, it was
outwardly most glorious, as well as inwardly perfect. In the ten Fathers time
before the Flood, it was in Families, with a mean outward glory. In the time of
Tabernacle made by Moses, and of the Temple built by Solomon, it had a world of
glorious types, and abundance of pomp, i. e. outward glory. In the New
Testament in the first 300 years it was mean; in Constantine M. etc. a great
deal of outward glory. But again of late times in many places very mean; yet
still we truly confess one universal Church, in kind, nature, essence, and
internal form; why therefore should it make an objection, that when Christ's
time shall come that is greater then Constantine the Great, then Moses, then
Solomon, then Adam, that HE shall make the Church as internally, and
spiritually most exact, so externally glorious. If there be any outward glory
on earth, it shall not be in the hands of the four Monarchies, or any part
thereof, but in the hands of the Saints, considered as the Church, not as the
world: For then the world shall be Churched. Christ, not Bishops, Christ's
Spirit (not their Liturgy, or Letany, or Collects) shall Church her, and give
her an Hallelujah for her safe delivery, and fulfill, that neither the Sun of
worldly power, nor the Moon of worldly things shall fright her any more. For
that Psalm is meant of the Church.

3 To his proofs of the minor, viz. That the Scripture makes the Kingdom of
the Mediator to be spiritual, without all worldly pomp, and that neither, does
the word of God make that Kingdom to be of two kinds, and of two different
natures, but one, and uniforme, from the beginning to the end; I say, that
proof he brings for this, will be too short by many rounds, to reach all this
pomp of words, in which he dresseth forth his minor Proposition. Let us
examine his proofs by particulars, First, that in Luke 1.32. The Lord shall
give him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever. Now we ask the question, Does this make out all the strains
of Mr. B. minor? Nay we have largely showed this place, mightily confirms our
opinion, and overthrows the contrary. See before Book. 3. Chap. 4. Sect. 2.
page 383. etc. I am loath to spend time and pains in repetition, and so to
swell this Treatise with unnecessaries. I will only ask Mr. B. where, or when
yet was fulfilled this same [SHALL]? And WHERE is DAVID'S THRONE now? And how
does Christ reign over the HOUSE of JACOB in any part, or in any manner, in
inward and outward glory? To his second proof, 1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign
till he have put all things under him. We answer first by a question, does this
place prove all the clauses of his minor? Is here one word, to say that in
Christ's Kingdom there is but one way of ruling, that there is but one
Kingdom, merely spiritual, and in no wise worldly? Yea does not this Text
speak the contrary, when it faith, all his things (as Mr. B. alleges it)
must be put under his feet. Surely this intimates a great alteration of the
world, that the world shall submit to Christ for the good and service of the
Church, as many places in the Old Testament, do gloriously enlarge. Mr. B.
quips us with a Socino-remonstration. But sure it is plain Familisme to turn
plain places into Allegories. To the third proof in Luke 17.20. [The Kingdom
of God comes not with observation; Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo
there, for behold the Kingdom of God is within you.] We answer first, That
these words were spoken to the Pharisees, ibid. verse. 20, to them it should not
come with observation. 2 To them enquiring after another state of Christ's
Kingdom, mean while over-looking, and neglecting its present state, whiles
Christ was personally with them, and opposing him. No wonder, therefore that to
such hypocrites so acting, Christ would not discover the glorious visible state
of his Church to come. 3. The word ((...)) observation, it signifies
Divination, or Augury. Bud. And the Apostle applies the Theme, (...) to reprove
the Galatians for observing days, and months, and years, and times; therefore
Chemnitius says truly, it signifies a scrupulous, superstitious observation.
And often in the New Testament it is put to signify (in the Theme) a captious,
insidiatory, malicious observation, to carp, and catch, Luke 6.7. Chap. 14.
verse. 1 Chap. 20. verse. 20. The great learned Philosopher, a Natural Greek (and
therefore knew his own tongue) in his Rhet. l. 2. uses it for observing a fit
time to revenge. Now the Pharisees were exquisite at both sorts of observation,
viz. superstitions, of washing, etc. and insidiatory. See Luke 20.20. They
watched him (it is the same Greek word) and sent forth spies, etc. This being
the efficacy of the Greek word, and this being the spirit and temper of the
Pharisees; no wonder that Christ says to them, the Kingdom of God, does not
come with such observation, or to such observers. But fourthly, we answer, that
Christ does not deny, but that his Kingdom may be perceived, and beheld by a
serious and sincere observaton. As first his Kingdom of the ministration of
the Gospel. So that there shall be no need to say, Lo here, or lo there (is
the Kingdom) while the Kingdom of God is AMONG YOU, verse 21. q. d. you might
see it as well as others, if you were sincerely willing to see it. Our
Translators render it, The Kingdom of God is within you. But most improperly;
for sure the Kingdom of God was not within these Pharisees, who (most likely)
put this question to Christ insidiatorily. Beside, the Greek (...) commonly
signifies among, or on this side, or on that side, or in the middle, or amidst,
and so Beza, and the Hebrew, and our Syriack copy have it. And Beza says, it
answers (...) apud vos among you. And his words on this place and phrase is
very considerable to our purpose. This particle (...) says Beza signifies,
that so the Kingdom of God was among them, that by no means could it lie hid,
but was obvious to the beholding of all, as John speaks, Chap. 1. v. 27. But
perhaps it does declare that they had it not only near them, but also within,
that is, they had the Messiah within their houses; so that but for perverse
opinion, etc. they might acknowledge him. There are some says Beza, who had
rather render it WITHIN you, as if it were, signified there, that the Kingdom
of Christ were spiritual, not earthly, etc. which opinion however it is true,
yet perhaps it is not sufficiently accommodated to this place. Secondly, For
Christ's more glorious, and more conspicuous Kingdom, at his next appearing, he
says, verse 22, 23, 24. and 25. to his Disciples, Go not after men that say
here, or there it is, in this, or that corner; for as the lightning that
lightneth out of the one part under heaven, shines unto the other part under
heaven; so also shall the Son of man be in his day. But first he must suffer
many things, and be REJECTED OF THIS GENERATION: which plainly signifies his
next coming after his Ascension. Lay all together, and you will see how little
Mr. B. gets out of this place for his minor.

To his fourth proof thereof, Job. 18.36. [My Kingdom is not of this world, we
have answered largely before.]

To his fifth and last proof of his minor, [Rom. 14.16. The Kingdom of God
consists not etc.] we gave a full answer, when we answered the closing up of
this his Argument.

SECT. V. Mr. Bailyes fifth Argument.
it is upon earth, first a mixed multitude, of elect and reprobate, good and
bad. Secondly, A company of people under the cross, and subject to various
temptations. Thirdly, A company that has need of the Word and Sacraments, of
Prayer and Ordinances. Fourthly, That has Christ a high Priest within the
veil of heaven interceding for them. But the Doctrine in hand changes the
nature of the Church, and makes it for a 1000 years together to consist only of
good, and gracious persons, without all trouble, without all Ordinances,
without any need of Christ's Intercession. For the first, of mixedness, see Mat.
13.40.24.11. Luke 18.8. These places declare the mixture of the wicked with the
godly in the Church to the worlds end, and most about the end. For the second,
of Crosses, See Psalm. 34.20. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, Matthew.
5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, and are persecuted, Act. 14.23. By many
tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Romans 8.17. If we suffer
with him, we shall reign with him. 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will be godly, must
suffer persecution. For the third, of Ordinances, see Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.26.
For the fourth, of need of Christ's Intercession, see 1 John 1.8. and Chapter
2.1. Heb. 9.24.

Answer, first to the major: Mr. B. himself cannot but confess, that it is
not simply, and absolutely true: For if Christ will judge the whole world, upon
the earth; on earth shall be the place of Judicature, and bodies must be in a
place; for at heaven the wicked shall not be, to receive sentence, and only
the Saints at last are caught up into the clouds, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. And Christ as
man, must judge men, as men, and so have time to make his judgment apparently
just to all men's reason; and so (as some of the Presbyterians confess) must
take up some considerable time: And at this time the Church shall be separated,
crosses shall cease, the wicked shall not persecute, etc. Then it follows that
the major is not absolutely true, That all the time the Church is on earth, it
shall be subject to the four aforesaid particulars. Now we have often and justly
said, The day of judgment begins at the thousand years.

minor we say, that it is false to say, This Doctrine of the thousand years
does alter the nature of the Church. Nature imports substance, kind, essence.
But Mr. Baily knows the rule, Magis and minus non variant speciem, i. e. More
and less do not al^er the kind. And sure Mr. B. has preached that common
true Divinity, that heaven does perfect our condition, our knowledge, graces,
souls, bodies, and communion with God, not alter them in kind, nature, or
essence. And so the Church, which consists of particular Saints, is thus
perfected.

major. There is not one place that concludes his major, that That must be the
continued condition of the Church whiles it is on earth. We will give a touch
upon each place.

1 For mixedness, Mat. 13 40.24.11. Luke 18.8. First, to that Mat. 13 40. the
words are plain for us, viz. [ As therefore the tares are gathered, and burnt
in the fire, so shall it be at the end of this world. Its not said, the end of
the world, but of this world. And not only so, but in Greek (...), This series
of ages. And more yet, it is (...) the perfecting. (3 As in Acts) The
restitution. no word to properly signify an end; But it implies an end, the
end of consummation, not of consumption, of perfection, not of destruction. And
in opposition to this, the Apostle Heb. 2 calls the state of the thousand years
(...), which must signify a state on earth; so that this of Matthew is
fulfilled at the beginning of the thousand years, when the wicked are so
destroyed at the beginning of them, Rev. 19. last. Secondly, To that Matthew.
24.11. Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. Iniquity shall
abound, etc. We say it is most express there, that these things are to be
before the propagating of the Gospel to all the world. So verse 13. and comes
between that verse 11, 12. and the end of the world, verse 14. So that the
thousand years is the fruit of the Gospel spread to all the world; and so
brings a cessation of seducement, Rev. 20. Thirdly, To that Luke 18.8.
Nevertheless shall he find faith? We say, here is no touch of the ultimate end
of the world. The coming of Christ, is that his appearance in the thousand
years, which Mr. Ba^ly and others being ignorant of, they beg the contrary, and
lay it for a principle on which to build their argument; and so they beg that
[That the Saints shall not have a time of all peace on earth:] The meaning of
the place is for us, viz. Christ will avenge his elect, as in shorter
captivities, in Egypt and Babylon, so in this longer. But before that, the
times shall be so full of troubles, that it shall be as Dan. 12. compared with
Rev. 19. latter end As always was before all deliverances by Christ; As at
Egypt; At Babylon; At Christ's coming in flesh. So that good men's faith shall
be very low.

2 For Troubles and Crosses, Psalm. 34.20. Matthew. 5, 4. Act. 14.23 Rom 8.17.2
Tim. 3.12. To this we answer, first, That there is no mention here at all, of
all the times of the world to the ultimate end thereof. Secondly, All
particular Saints do fulfill this in their lives. Thirdly, That this is that we
say, and mainly assert, that because the Saints have been abused on earth,
therefore shall they be righted, and honored on earth, according to Psalm. 37.
to 11. and 29. and 34. and Matthew. 5.5. And the state called Heaven in that Act.
14.23. is expounded of this thousand years, Rev. 21. there is the beginning.
And our reigning with him in that Romans 8.17. is expounded to begin in this
thousand years, Rev. 20.4.

3 For continuance of Ordinances, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.26. It is easily fully
answered, That if that state in the thousand years prove a sinlesse condition,
the Saints being perfected as it is in that Ephesians. 4 verse 12. It can be no
grief to Mr. Baily, or any else, that Ministries of Repentance, praying for
wants, Discipline for Delinquents shall cease. And if then Christ COMES and
appears, as 1 Cor. 11. what matter is it, if the Lords Supper shall cease. But
we do not hereby intimate all Ordinances shall cease: Adam had some in
Paradise, and shall have some in glory, viz. To sing Hallelujahs, praises to
Jehovah.

4 To the need of Intercession, First, I say, Mr. B. should have done well to
have proved that any did deny the continuing of Christ's Intercession till he
lays down all, 1 Cor. 15.24. Secondly, His places, 1 John 1.8. c. 2. v. 1.
Heb. 9.24, is true while we have sin. But 't would not be a selfe-deceiving
(as S. John calls it) for a soul to say in heaven above, he is without sin.
So nor upon earth in the thousand years, if so Christ makes our condition. And
when we are without sin, we need not Christ's active Intercession for
conversion, or confirmation, in regard of weakness of grace; yet I know not
but that Christ's presential Intercession shall continue till all the Churches
enemies be utterly cast into hell, and the Saints attain their highest
happiness in heaven. But that it may cease as in regard of the sins of Saints,
at the thousand years I doubt not, if that prove a sinlesse condition, as that
place quoted by Mr. Baily Heb. 9.24. to the end of the Chapter, does seem to
me clearly to affirm. For verse 24.25, etc. Christ entering heaven, having
dyed once, in the last verse it is said, he shall appear the second time without
sin unto salvation; that is, as not making atonement for sin. And this
second coming is next after his Ascension, and that is at the calling of the
Jews, at the beginning of the thousand years, as we have before proved: And
this salvation must be a thing beyond the state of grace we are now in;
therefore most likely it shall be our sin-lesse condition. We shall be as Adam
for inward perfection, for or (...) I know: and the Apostle hints at it, Heb.
2. verse 7. etc. As we ^^^e showed before.

SECT. VI. Mr. Bailyes sixth Argument.
secret, and hidden, not only to men, but to the very Angels, and to Christ
himself as man, Mark 13.32. But of that day, and that hour knows no man, no
not the Angels, neither the Son. But this Doctrine makes that day openly
known, and tells the time of it punctually. For they make the thousand years
to begin with the one thousand six hundred and fiftyeth year, or else with one
thousand six hundred ninety five, and the day of judgment to be at the end of
the thousand years.

Ans. First, There is a difference between a day to an hour, and between about
such a year. Secondly, M. Baily cannot but know a difference between Christ on
earth, and Christ in heaven. Christ had not Commission to send so much of the
Spirit whiles he was on earth, as when he was in heaven. So Ephesians. 4.8. compare
Joh. 7.39. and Act. 2.1. etc. In like manner, if the Deity did not communicate
to Christ's manhood, whiles on earth, the time (for nescience is not a sin) yet
its plain the Deity did communicate it after Christ was in heaven, Rev. 1.1.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which GOD GAVE UNTO HIM to show unto his
servants. And accordingly John shows it us, Chapt. 11. Chapt. 12, Chapt. 13,
Chap. 19. Chap. 20. Lastly, Mr. Baily confutes himself as he propounds his
argument: For he says our Doctrine makes the day open^ when we say, The day
shall be either one thousand six hundred and fifty, or one thousand six hundred
ninety five. Surely this is not to make the day so certain, or the year. For
(says the Philosopher) qui indefinite, etc. He that answers indefinitely,
answers nothing. Beside we cannot for our lives count so exactly, but we may
miss at least one year, if we did absolutely pitch on any one account that
were never so right in the footing. For my part, I shall affirm what is most
probable about the account, when I come to the seventh and last Book.

SECT. VII. Mr. Bailyes seventh Argument.
THe reward of the Martyrs is everlasting life in the heavens, promised to them
at Christ's coming to judge the just and unjust, therefore it is not temporal
in an earthly Kingdom of a thousand years. The Antecedent is proved, Matthew.
5.10. 2 Timothy 4.6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. which without doubt is not before
the last judgment; else the Martyrs would be in a worse case then the souls
of other Saints continuing in heaven, enjoying the Trinity, yea a punishment to
them, being brought down to the earth to return^ to a body, not like to the
glorious body of Christ, nor yet unto these incorruptible, immortal,
spiritual bodies, which yet are promised to the least of the faithful at
their resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. But unto such a body that eats, drinks, sleeps,
fights, delights in fleshly pleasures, and converseth with beasts and earthly
creatures, in such a Paradise, whereof the Turkish Alcoran, and the Jewish
Talmud does speak much: But to a godly soul is very tastelesse, and to a soul
that has been in heaven exceeding burdensome. Answ. first, We deny the
consequence of the Argument: For Gods rewarding his people on earth, does not
anticipate heaven; nor the reward in heaven, cut off the rewards on earth. See
Mat. 19.29. shall receive an hundred fold, and shall also inherit eternal
life. And this in (...) in the New Creation, as the word signifies. And when
they sit on Thrones, according to Dan. 7.22. which is according to our Text of
Rev. 20.4. Secondly, we say that those places Mr. B. brings for the proof of
his Antecedent, do prove our assertion, viz. of an happiness of the Saints on
earth, as well as in heaven. As that in 1 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. For verse 8. it is
said, At that day; and particularly at Christ's appearing. To understand which,
see verse 1. And remember our arguing upon those words, Shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. Compare Rev. 19. latter end,
with Rev. 20.3, 4. Likewise that which Mr. Baily urges out of 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7,
8, 9.10. plainly proves a reward on earth, as well as in heaven. It is a
RIGHTEOUS thing, etc. It is mercy to the Saints: but righteousness chiefly
appears upon the wicked that are punished: And this appears more to all the
world being done on earth. To you that are troubled, REST WITH US: The Apostle
aims at a Rest first on earth (compare Heb. 2.5. and Chapter 4. verse 9.) Rest,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from HEAVEN, Not in Heaven: And the
flames of fire are express, Rev. 17, 16. and Chapter 18. verse 8, and 9. and
Chapter 19, two last. Lastly, It is said in that 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. They shall be
punished from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. But
Christ has no power in heaven at the ultimate day of judgment, but then lays
down all. 1 Cor. 15.24. As for Matthew. 5.10. there is no mention of the place,
but in the word Heaven, not expressing which of the three heavens (as Paul
distinguishes.) Now St. John calls the ^^te of the thousand years Heaven, Rev.
21.1. And in this place of Matthew. 5.10. The adjoining the word KINGDOM to
Heaven, clearly imports a state on earth; For in heaven above, nor Saints, nor
Christ have any Kingdom at the ultimate day of judgment. Ye see now how
truly Mr. B. says, without doubt, the reward in these places is not till the
last day of judgment. As for M. B. words, The Martyrs would be in worse case,
etc. They are grounded on a mistake: For all the Saints, both the deceased and
living shall then share in the same glory on earth. For those words, It would
be a punishment, etc. These all flow from ignorance of what the Scripture has
said in this point, viz. that their bodies shall in the thousand years be
immortal, and glorious, and conformable to Christ's body, as we have showed
before. For that Mr. Baily concludes of fighting in the thousand years, etc. let
him affirm; it when he can without contradicting himself, he affirming it a
time of all corporal pleasures; and when we affirm it. And for Turkish
Alcoran, and Jewish Talmud, we have nothing to do with any thing, but what we
are convinced is according to Scripture. But it is the Scottish manner to
dispute by branding with reproaches. But sure their contrary opinion tends to
Familisme.

SECT. VIII. Mr. Baylies eighth Argument.
Millenaries supposes the restoration of Jerusalem, and of the Jewish
Kingdom after their destruction by the Romans. But the Scriptures deny this,
Ezekiel. 16.53.55. When I shall bring again the captivity of Sodom, and of
Samaria, and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of thy
Captives, etc. The Jews (says Mr. Baily) are never to be restored to their
ancient outward estate; much less to a greater, and more glorious Kingdom.
Jerusalem was to be re-builded, and the spiritual glory of the second Temple
was to be greater then the first: And in the end of the same Chapter, the
restitution of the Jews after the Babylonish Captivity by virtue of the New
Covenant is promised: But the outward estate of that people was never to be
restored to its ancient luster more then Samaria or Sodom: As Amos speaks of
Samaria, Chap. 5. 2. The Virgin of Israel is fallen, and shall no more rise:
And Isa. says of Jerusalem, The transgression thereof shall be heavy, and it
shall fall, and not rise again; According to the prophecy of Jacob, Genesis
49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come: Importing
(says Mr. Baily) that the Tribe of Judah should ever have some outward visible
rule, till the coming of Christ in the flesh: but thereafter, the Scepter, and
Power of the Church shall be only spiritual, in the hand of Shiloh, the
Messiah: He was the substance and body of all these types, the restoration of
Jerusalem, and the erecting of the Monarchy in Judah.

Answ. The Scripture does not deny the restoration of Jerusalem; but affirm
it, and that most strongly, as we have showed in many places, and particularly
in Daniel in several places, and specially in Chapter 7. To his proof Ezekiel.
16.53.55. and his gloss upon it, "That the Jews are never to be restored to
their ancient, outward estate, much less to a more glorious Kingdom; First,
let us read this place of Ezekiel close to the Hebrew. The Hebrew, word for
word, runs thus, verse 53. (...) etc. AND I will bring back (not when I shall)
the captivity of them, the captivity of Sodom, and her daughters, and the
captivity of Samaria, and her daughters. AND the captivity of thy captivities
in the midst of them. It is, not THEN, but AND. Again verse 55. (...) AND thy
Sisters, (Not WHEN, but AND) thy Sisters Sodom, and her Daughters shall
return to their former estate or antiquity; And Samaria and her Daughters
shall return to her antiquity, or former estate; YOU SHALL RETURN to your
antiquity, or former estate. No THEN, etc. but naked by the verb alone (...)
you shall return. And thus not only I read, but Calvin, the old Latin,
Vatablus, Junius, Jerome, Arias; yea so the Greek Sep. Sir. Arab. and Chalde
read it. But then the question is, whether the intent of the speech be not
Ironical, to signify they should never return; supposing that there shall
never be any restitution of Sodom. Answ. First, Learned Vatablus does not so
understand it, but reads it, and conceives it a positive promise. And expounds
Sodom, and her daughters, or villages, per Idumaeos and Moabitas qui originem
duxerant a Lot qui habitabant in Sodomis, i. e. by the Idumaeans, and Moabites,
who originally came from Lot, and dwelt in Sodom. And bringing back their
captivity, he expounds to be the asserting of their liberty by Christ; and
therefore not only the Jews, which are parties, understand this as a
Prophecy: And by Sodom and her daughters, they understand the Moabites, and
Ammonites, which were the offspring of Lot, which dwelt at Sodom; But
Christians so understand it. And of Christians, not only Vatablus, but
Alapide, with many others, as Alapide shows with much variety of reading.
Secondly, There appears nothing in the words or points of an Irony. Thirdly,
The mention of Sodom does not intimate it, because Samaria is joined with it.
Now we have heard the Prophets abundantly asserting that the ten Tribes shall
be restored. And also that All whole Canaan (the Country of the twelve Tribes)
shall be again the possession of the Jews, whereof Sodom was a part, and near
the heart of the Country, as you may see in your ordinary Maps. Note further
that Sodom signifies (...)) as Alapide shows, i. e. the five Cities, of which
see Genesis 14.2. with their villages, of which five Cities Zoar is one, escaping
the fire upon the prayer of Lot, Genesis 19. therefore no wonder if this of the
Country of Sodom be restored. And further, that the Moabites and Ammonites
were near neighbors, and they were carried away captive by Salmanasar, as
Alapide and others observe, therefore their return in their posterity may well
be expected. Fourthly, Observe that verse 54. between these two places, is put,
That thou may be ashamed, etc. Mercy after correction makes a soul most
ashamed; but if quite given up to utter ruin, how is it said verse 61. That
thou may be ashamed; yea and that thou may remember thy ways, and be
ashamed? Fifthly, That verse. 61. plainly sounds of a positive promise. Thou
shall receive thy elder and younger sister Sodom and Samaria, and I will give
them unto thee for daughters, not by thy Covenant (of law, of ceremonies) but
by my New Covenant.) So that according to the new Evangelical Covenant, the
posterity of that of Sodom that remained, and Samaria, shall be incorporated
into one Church with the Jews at their restoration. Upon these last
considerations well might Alapide say, To read the said 53. and 55. verses
Ironically, Non convenire cum sequentibus, i. e. does not agree with that which
follows. Now what will Mr. Baily say to this? most likely he will fly to his
distinction in the close, viz. That their spiritual glory should be restored
after their Babylonish Captivity, but not their outward National glory; Answ.
But we have heard abundant of plain texts to the contrary, namely that they
shall be restored to their outward National glory, of which more in the sixth
Book, in the Quid sit, i. e. What this state of the universal Church (of which
we speak) shall be. Thus of Mr. Bailies first proof out of Ezekiel. 16.53.55.

2 To the second proof, viz. that in Amos 5.2. The Virgin of Israel is fallen,
and shall rise no more: It must be understood conditionally (as absolute for
conditionalis often used in Scripture; as of Nineveh, etc.) some conditional must
be understood, or some limitation be supplied. The Chalde says, It shall not
rise (...) in one year, i. e. not quickly after: For they were long in
captivity, or not suddenly at least, when their great restoration shall be
which is yet to come; for they shall be striving five and forty years, Dan. 12.
or else this condition, or limitation, Israel shall not rise a Virgin, viz.
pure in repute as before she fell into Idolatry; For it cannot be said now that
she was never defiled, therefore mark, though verse. 1. this is spoken of (...)
the house Israel, which is of the masculine gender; yet verse 2. The verb (...)
is of the feminine gender, and agrees with (...) Virgin: or this condition, or
limitation, that she her self cannot rise, therefore in Hebrew it is Nipthla,
lo tosaph Kum, she is fallen and cannot add to rise. And that which follows
intimates the same, viz. she is forsaken in her own land, and there is none to
raise her up, i. e. No humane help shall do it: but God did do it in the
return from Egypt and Babylon, so shall he at last. Some such condition or
limitation must be found out; first, because of the context; for it follows
verse 3. God will have respect, and show mercy to the Tenth of them. And verse
4. comes in with a [For] For thus says the Lord to the house of Israel, seek
ye me and ye shall live; repeated, verse 6. enlarged verses 9.10. Seek him
that strengthens the spoiled against the strong. Secondly, Because of the
Analogy with many places that are clear for the restitution of Israel.

To his third place out of Isaiah, of the fall of Jerusalem; It is a gross
mistake; For all that is of it, is in Isa. 24.20. spoken of the Earth, not
Jerusalem: but presently is mentioned the restitution of the Jews, verse 23. As
for Mr. Bailies fourth place, in Genesis 49. it is of no validity to the thing he
intends, but in his imagination.

SECT. IX. The ninth and last Argument of Mr. Baylie.
Millenaries lay it for a ground, that Antichrist shall be destroyed, and fully
abolished before the thousand years begin: But (says Mr. B.) the Scripture
makes Antichrist to continue to the day of judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Then shall
the wicked one be revealed and destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming,
which is not before the last day, as before is proved. See also Rev. 19.20. The
Beast was taken, etc. compare with it, verse 7. Let us be glad and rejoice, for
the marriage of the Lamb is come; Antichrist is cast alive into the Lake at the
Marriage of the Lamb. No living men are cast into Hell before the last day: And
Christ's Marriage with his Church is not solemnized with a part of the Elect,
but with the whole body, at the general Resurrection.

2 Ans. There is no such thing in 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. as that Antichrist shall
continue to the day of judgment, unless Mr. B. agree with us, that the day of
judgment begins at the thousand years, whereat indeed is Christ's appearing.
That Master Baily says, Christ shall not come till the last day of judgment,
that Master Baily has not yet proved: that in 19 of the Rev. v. 20. and in v.
7. we grant; but Mr. B. gloss upon it, we have no reason to receive, which
was this; That no living men are cast alive into hell before the last day of
judgment. This Mr. B. has not proved, we have a text to the contrary, even
that of M. B. quoting Rev. 19.20. which is at the beginning of the thousand
years: compare Chap. 20.1, 2, 3. But Mr. Baily faith, this was done immediately
before the Marriage of the Lamb. An. we grant it. And this is in the beginning
of the thousand years. But Christ solemnizeth his Marriage (says Mr. B.) not
with a part of his Elect, but with the whole body. Answ. We grant it. And this
shall be at the beginning of the thousand years. At which time all the Elect
shall rise.

CHAP. IV.
Prideaux, and Pareus, and Mr. Baily against our Point: Next we should come to
answer the Objections of the Book called, Christ's Kingdom on earth, opened
according to the Scriptures, set forth by T. HAYNE, 1645, if they were worthy
the writing out. Indeed I expected much, but found very little: for in his
first Chapter he has three Arguments to prove, That Christ's Kingdom is long
since begun. But in his stating the Question (as he pretends) he never
distinguishes of Christ's several forms of his Kingdom, viz. invisible, and
visible, but speaks of Christ's Kingdom, as of one only form, whereupon these
three inconveniences to himself do follow.

1 That in all his Arguments, there is not one conclusion that does distinctly
conclude against our point; viz. to conclude (as he should) therefore Christ's
visible Kingdom is begun already upon ear^.

2 That his three last arguments conclude in effect, that Christ had no
spiritual Kingdom in the Old Testament; for he says, Christ began to be King
when he sent out his Disciples with that Commission, in Mat. 28.20. If then
only Christ began to be King, then was he not King before that; but Christ told
Pilate the contrary before that.

3 That he contradicts himself; First, In this P. 1. he says, That at all
times Christ rules, has an absolute Kingdom in the world, with many other
expressions of the same effect; yet P. 4. he by three several arguments would
prove when and what year Christ's Kingdom began. And P. 5. at such a particular
time Christ's Kingdom was at hand, long since. Secondly, He contradicts
himself in this, that P. 1. He affirms Christ's Kingdom is to be for ever,
quoting Heb. 1.8. making no distinction upon it, and yet P. 2. He confesses,
that Christ shall at the last judgment resign his Kingdom to the Father,
quoting 1 Cor. 15.24. making no interpretation to explain, or reconcile these.

By this you may see that his arguments were not worth the writing out, much
less the answering.

CHAP. V.
Containing an Answer to an UNIVERSAL ARGUMENT, or to the ARGUMENT OF THE
UNIVERSALITY, or generality of men that oppose.

many; yea of most Disputants, that are contrary minded, to rivet it faster, as
mine ears in part can witness. The Argument is from 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17. The
Lord himself shall descend from Heaven, etc. And the DEAD IN CHRIST shall rise
first. THEN WE which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the CLOUDS, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall be EVER WITH THE
LORD. Now say they, how can this consist with the Saints reigning on earth a
thousand years? For if they must reign there a thousand years, what need they
be caught up into the CLOUDS? or how, if they reign on earth a thousand year,
are they said to be EVER with the Lord, especially if there they be (as some
say) subject to mortality at last?

Answ. Mr. Mede has so learnedly, and appositly discussed this place for our
use in this particular, that his Dilucidations thereon will suffice for a full
answer. It is not needful (says he) that the resurrection of those which
slept in Christ, and the rapture of those which shall be left alive, together
with them into the air, should be at one and the same time: For the words in 1 Thessalonians 4. v. 16, 17. (...), and (...) first, and then, or afterward, may admit
a great distance of time, as 1 Cor. 1.15.23. Everyone (or, all mankind) shall
rise in their order, Christ the first fruits (that is, first) (...) afterward,
they that are Christ's, at his coming. Here (...), afterward, notes a distance
of time of above a thousand and a half of years, as we find by experience.
Suppose therefore this rapture of the Saints into the air, be to translate
them to heaven, yet it might be construed thus, The dead in Christ (that is,
for Christ, namely, the Martyrs) shall rise first, afterward (...) ( viz. a
thousand years after) we which are alive and remain, shall together with them
be caught up in the Clouds, and meet the Lord in the air, and so (from
thenceforth) we shall ever be with the Lord. Thus Tertullian seems to
understand it, who interprets (...) or as it is in verse 14. (...), of Martyrs;
namely, such as dye propter Christum, for Christ, by means of Christ, through
Christ for Christ's sake, taking (...) as noting the cause or means of their
death; so Piscator expounds the like speech, Ap^c. 14.13. Blessed are the dead,
which die, (...), id est, propter Dominum, for the Lord; Beza, qui Domini causa
moriuntur, which dye for the Lords sake. 2 If thus, to restrain (...), or
(...), seem not so fully to answer the Apostles scope and intention, which
seems to be a general consolation to all that dye in the faith, viz. a fruition
of Christ; then may we give it the largest sense, and yet say, that it is not
needful that the Resurrection of those which dyed in Christ, should be all at
once, or altogether; but the Martyrs, first in the first resurrection; Then
(after an appointed time) the rest of the dead in the last resurrection;
Afterward, when the resurrection shall be thus complete, those which remain
alive at Christ's coming, shall together with those which are risen, be caught
into the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and from thenceforth be
eternally with him. And so the reason why those which Christ found alive at his
coming, were not instantly translated, should be in part, that they might not
prevent the dead, but be consummate with them. 3 Both these interpretations
suppose the rapture of the Saints into the clouds, to be for their present
translation into heaven. But suppose that be not the meaning of it; for the
words, if we weigh them well, seem to imply it to be for another end; namely,
to do honor unto their Lord and King at his return, and to attend upon him
when he comes to judge the world; Those (says the Text) which sleep in Jesus,
will God bring with him: He says not, carry away with him. Again, they, and
those which are alive, shall be caught up together in the Clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air, to meet the Lords coming hither to judgment, not to follow
him returning hence, the judgment being finished. Besides, it is to be noted,
that although in the Hebrew notion, the air be comprehended under the name of
heaven, yet would not the Apostle here use the word heaven, but the word [aire]
as it were to avoid the ambiguity, lest we might interpret it of our
translation into heaven. If this be the meaning, then are those words [we shall
ever be with the Lord.] thus to be interpreted; after this our gathering
together In T. More sc. his coming, etc. or gathering.
unto Christ at his coming (so the Apostle calls this rapture, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1.)
we shall from henceforth never lose his presence, but always enjoy it, partly
on earth, during his reign of the thousand years, and partly in heaven, when
we shall be translated thither. For it cannot be concluded, because the Text
says, the Saints after their rapture on high, should thenceforth be ever with
the Lord; Therefore they shall from thenceforth be in heaven; for no heaven is
here mentioned. If they must needs be with Christ there, where they are to meet
him; it would rather follow, they should be ever with him in the air, then in
heaven, which I suppose none will admit. And otherwise the Text will afford no
more for heaven, then it will for earth; nay the words [he shall bring them
with him] make most for the latter. 4 I will add this more, namely, what may
be conceived to be the cause of this rapture of the Saints on high to meet the
Lord in the clouds, rather then to wait his coming to the earth. What if it
be, that they may be preserved during the conflagration of the earth, and the
works thereof, 2 Pet. 3.10. That as Noah, and his family were preserved from
the deluge, by being lift up above the waters in the Ark, so should the Saints
at the conflagration be lift up in the clouds unto their Ark, Christ, to be
preserved there from the Deluge of fire, wherein the wicked shall be consumed?
There is a tradition of the Jews sounding this way, which they ascribe unto
Elias, a Jewish Doctor, whose is that Tradition of the duration of the world,
and well known among Divines, Duo millia Inane, duo millia Lex, duo millia
dies Messiae, viz. Sex mill annos duraturus est mundus. He lived under the
second Temple, about the first times of the Greek Monarchy; so that it is no
devise of any later Rabbis, but a Tradition anciently received amongst them
whilst they were yet the Church of God. I will transcribe it, because it has
something remarkable concerning the thousand years. It sounds thus: Traditio
domus Eliae. Justi quos resuscitabit Deus, non redigentur iterum in pulverem.
(He means of the first and particular resurrection, before the general, which
the Jews acknowledge and talk much of. See Wisdom Chapt. 3. ab initio ad
finem, verse 8.) Si quaeras Mill annis is it is, quibus Deus Sanctus Benedictus
renovaturus est mundum suum ( de quibus dicitur, Et exaltabitur Dominus solus
in die illo, Es. 2.11.) quid just is futurum sit; sciendum quod Deus benedictus
dabit illis alas quasi aquilarum, ut volent super facie aquarum: unde dicitur
(Psalm. 46.3.) Propterea non timebimus cum Psalm. 46.3. (...) mutabitur, i. e.
changed, though we there translate it movebitur i. e. moved.
mutabitur terra. At forte (inquies) erit ipsis dolori seu afflictioni. Sed
occurrit illud (Esa. 40.31.) Exspectantibus Dominum innovabunt vires,
efferentur ala instar aquilarum. The Hebrew words are in Gemara Sanhedrin, etc.
(...) The Tradition of the house of Eliah. The just whom God shall raise (viz.
in the first resurrection) shall not return to dust. But if you ask, what
shall happen to the just in those thousand years, wherein the holy and blessed
God shall renew this World ( whereof it is said, Esa. 2.11. And the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day) you must know, that God shall give them the wings
as it were of Eagles, to fly upon the face of the waters; for it is said
(Psalm. 46.3.) Therefore shall we not fear, when the earth shall be changed.
But you will say, Perhaps it will be to them a pain and trouble; but we are
otherwise taught by that in Esa. 40.31. They that wait upon the Lord, shall
renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, etc.]

CHAP. VI.
Jews what it shall be.

Prideaux his exceptions (besides those before to his own Arguments discussed)
are first, That the Revelation is not a representation of a continued story.
That computations are not demonstrative. To which we answer; First, Either the
Revelation is a continued History, or else it is no Revelation, as Rev. 1.1.
and 4.1. and so we may make quidlibet ex quodlibet, what we will of it.
Secondly, It answers to Daniels Prophecy, and that is a continued History of
future times. And thirdly, Doctor Prideaux himself makes it so, in presuming
to determine the binding of Satan to be past. Fourthly, Some anticipations
there are in the Revelation, as we have showed; but they do no more overthrow
the confirmation of the order of things, then in Genesis, or other Books of
Scripture, in which are many anticipations. Fifthly, Mark the order of
continuation. In 6, 7, 8 Chapters are the seven Seals; then out of the seventh
Seal, seven Trumpets, etc. all which methodically carry on the continuation,
as Mr. Mede has demonstrated. And for the computations, they are so noted in
their beginnings, and endings, that we can with more certainty compute our
conclusion, then the Doctor does the contrary.

Pareus his exceptions, do but idem saxum volvere, tumble over again the same
stone. That which we have before laid down will sufficiently refute him, and
Mr. Hain, and other Replicants.

Finis Libri Quinti.
THE SIXTH BOOK
Holding forth particularly, WHAT this GLORIOUS State on Earth shall be, of
which we have treated all this while, in the former five BOOKS.

THE INTRODUCTION, Laying forth the general Heads, of this Book, touching the
WHAT of this Glorious Time.
Quod sit, THAT there is A Glorious state of all things yet to be on Earth
before the universal judgment (of all the quick and dead.) Next we are to
declare the Quid sit, WHAT the said glorious state shall be.

viz. of the That, and What of this aforesaid state, we could not pick the one
from the other, nor explain, and demonstrate the meaning of the former,
without a scruteny into some passages of the later, where we found them so
intermixed. Howbeit, we insisted upon them no further then to a proof of the
literal meaning of the place, reserving the distinct and larger discuss for
this Book.

In this WHAT, are to be considered these five Heads.

Chaos, Of the glorious state aforesaid, yet to come, and to be on earth before
the ultimate judgment. II The Creation, Of the glorious state aforesaid, yet
to come, and to be on earth before the ultimate judgment. III The Dimensions,
Of the glorious state aforesaid, yet to come, and to be on earth before the
ultimate judgment. IV The Qualifications, Of the glorious state aforesaid, yet
to come, and to be on earth before the ultimate judgment. V The Privileges. Of
the glorious state aforesaid, yet to come, and to be on earth before the
ultimate judgment.
CHAP. I. Touching the Chaos.
Chaos we mean the preparation to this estate; or the manner of the beginning
thereof: That as in the old and first Creation, the Chaos was the evening of
the world, with which it began, (as the Rabbis before quoted, Lib. 4. Chap. 4.
use to speak) so this second, or New Creation (as it is called, Isa. 65.17. 2
Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.1) begins with an evening. And as after that, as an
Antitypicall memorial of the finishing thereof (celebrated on the Sabbaticall
seventh day) the Church of the Jews in all ages to Christ's time, began their
Sabbath in the evening; so this Sabbatisme (of the glorious state of which we
speak as it is called Heb. 4. before largely explained) shall begin, and have
its Ante-scene, or Prelude in a kind of evening. Now as the evening taken in
that largeness, as Genesis 1. in the first part, has some light, and sometimes a
glare of the Sun at its last withdrawing (though the day has been dusk and dim
all before) and receives for a farewell, a reflection of the beams darted
backward upon the clouds, with a twy-light following it; but in the latter part
it is dark: So in this evening, in the first part thereof, there shall be some
manifestation of the Son of Righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
Call of the Jews ( Zach. 12.10. Rev. 1.7.) and the setting them on foot to
contend for their liberty against the Turk, and all Antichristian enemies. But
in the latter part of this evening, after that Christ has rowsed them up to
that contest, there shall be a darkness of great troubles, ( Da. 12.1.) And
these troubles it seems by the two last ver. of that 12 of Dan. may last 45
years before the Jews with the Gentiles, come to their glorious enjoyments at
the resurrection of all the Elect deceased, and the change of the believers
then alive. But when that evening and night is passed over, the Righteous shall
have the DOMINION in the morning, Psalm. 49. v. 14. which learned Junius
interprets of the Saints happy estate in the morning of the resurrection, which
S. John Rev. 20.4. calls the first Resurrection, as we have before
demonstrated. For at the last ultimate end, when CHRIST lays down all his
rule, and power, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. we cannot imagine that Christians may be said
to have Dominion.

things are wrapped up in obscurity, and all glorious persons, (their Masters)
Kings, Princes, and Potentates are couched and crouched down as beasts in
their dens, and lie like dead men; and none of all these things, or persons
survive, but whom, and what God will permit to escape fire, or death etc.) So
this glorious state shall begin, as to the preface or preparation, with a
setting, and dark eclipsing of all the worldly glory of former times, things,
and persons, viz. of the four former Monarchies, root and branch, with all
their impertinent appurtenances, that stand in the way to hinder Christ's
glorious Kingdom on earth, Dan. 7. Rev. 11.18. and 19. Chapters, etc. of which
abundantly before. And we have seen it far more by experience, since this
subject was diverse years bypast preached and asserted. Wonder not therefore at
the pullings down of humane glories to this day, and the many scuffles about
them, almost over the whole World. The sum of worldly pomp is declining
toward Sunset, the shadows grow long, it begins to be duske upon all Secular
splendour. The night comes on, great storms will arise; but though they may be
universal on the Jews for the said five and forty years, because universally
they have for above five and forty scores of years refused the Messiah; yet,
likely, the tempest on the Gentiles that have owned Christ, may but drive along
by coasts, falling here and there, by succession, they having suffered much
already for Christ's sake by Heathens, Turks, Papists, and falsely named
Protestants.

Malac. 3. verses 2, 3. and thereupon Christ is nearer, and readier for their
full deliverance and acceptance, verses 4.5.17.

day star, the Sun. So at the end of these dark troubles, yea for the ending
of them, Christ the Son of Righteousness shall appear, Malach. 4.2. (mark
the method of that Prophet after that Chapter 3. v. 2, 3.) compared with 2 Pet.
1.19. (all which places are largely discussed before.) So that when the said
troubles are at the highest, then Christ will appear most gloriously for the
destruction of the causers of all those troubles, even all the enemies of the
Church: of which appearance of Christ, and destruction of the enemy, see Dan.
7.13, 14. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Rev. 19. verse 11. etc. to the end of the Chapter,
where they are lively characterized, most worthy the Readers perusal. Upon
which destruction on the enemies by the presence of Christ, the glorious time
of the thousand years begins, and that with the resurrection of all the Elect,
as most methodically it follows after that in Daniel, as a close of all the
troubles mentioned in the whole Prophecy, Chap. 12. the two last verses; and
does methodically follow that in the Revelation, as the blessed Catastrophe of
all the confusions in that whole Prophecy in Chapter 20. the first six verses.
So that next in an immediate order of nature follows the New Creation, Chapter
21.1. of which in the next Section.

CHAP. II. Touching the New Creation.
THe Chaos being made, the Creation of all particulars follow; which
New Creation is mentioned both in the Old and New Testament, Rev. 21.1. John
sees a New Heaven, and a New Earth. How so, unless created new? For the
alteration is such, that the old heaven, and earth seem as it were to pass
away. So that this New Heaven and Earth is that which Peter and the rest that
believed with him, (2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 13.) did expect, that all the former being
dissolved, there should be New Heavens, and a New Earth according to Gods
PROMISE. Now where is that promise but in Isa. 65.17. Behold I create New
Heavens, and a New Earth, so that the former shall not be remembered, or come
into mind. In all which places the expression of earth demonstrates that it is
a state on earth, besides many circumstances annexed in all the said places
(before discussed in our third Book) the word Heaven being no opposition to it,
which from Genesis 1. to the end of the Revelation is often used to signify those
Heavens of the Air, clouds, etc. which are appurtenances of the Earth, which
Paul calls by intimation the first Heaven (2 Cor. 12.2.)

Creation of this New World, are created therein the appurtenances of it, viz.
1. New Jerusalem. Immediately after the Creation of a New Heaven, and a New
Earth, St. John sees ( Rev. 21.2.) the holy City, NEW JERUSALEM, coming DOWN
FROM GOD out of HEAVEN (and therefore signifies a state on earth.) And the
Prophet Isa. in that 65. Chapter, verse 18. having mentioned the creation of
the New Heaven, and the New Earth, immediately adds that the Lord says, Lo, I
create Jerusalem, viz. into a happy condition (of which by and by.) 2. The
Inhabitants of this New World, and New Jerusalem, are no less then created.
First, If there were no more then the conversion of the Jews, as the
preparation to this new state, especially they having been so long opposite to
Christ, this were no less then a Creation. A Miracle is a kind of Creation.
And the Schoolmen say, That though Conversion be not a Miracle properly, yet
it is more then a miracle. Let me give my vote in this reason, because
Conversion is out of resistances, of man's stubborn mind and heart. Miracles
are wrought on non-resistances. And in this is Conversion more then Creation,
because Creation is out of matter that has a disposition of submission to the
will of the Creator. But man's unregenerate will, whiles such, is obstinately
opposite. But no man will doubt, but that a Resurrection is a Creation. Now the
Scripture compares the conversion of the Jews to a Resurrection. Ezekiel. 37.5.
etc. Dan. 12.2. Romans 11.15. In all which places, the Call of the Jews is
metaphorically called a Resurrection. For it is a raising from spiritual death,
to spiritual life, from sin to grace; and from Civil bondage, to Civil
liberty, as the Scripture often mentions. But secondly, The Inhabitants are
further multiplied and perfected by a Physical Resurrection, of all the
deceased Saints, Rev. 20.4. and a Physical mutation of the living Saints. 1
Cor. 15.51, 52. So that as the Apostle says in that Chapter, verse 44. and
Phil. 3.21. They shall have spiritual bodies (needing nor meat, nor drink,
etc.) and made like to Christ's glorious body (as we have several times
discussed before.) Now a real, Physical Resurrection of bodies, and such a real
physical change of them are no less then a Creation. Is it not fully a
Creation to make men of dust? Is it not a creation to change flesh and blood
into a likeness to the radiating Sun? Just so is it inthese things. 3 The
Qualifications of places and persons are created: As first Righteousness,
being one of the qualifications, is also created. In 2 Pet. 3.13. in that New
Heaven, and New Earth, made New by creation (as the quotation of it out of Isa.
65.17. demonstrates) there dwells Righteousness by virtue of that Creation,
(Grace being nothing else but divine created qualities) even as in that 65. of
Isa. it is express, that God will create in Jerusalem other excellent
qualifications, which we shall presently name. Sutably, Peter, in that 2 Epist.
3. Chap. v. 13. having mentioned the New Heaven, and Earth, adds, as an
appurtenance to it, wherein dwells righteousness; and all by virtue of a
Creation, as the Apostles referring to Isa. 65.18. plainly speaks. And from
both places, John has this in his vision, Rev. 21. verse 1, 2, and 27. That
into this New Heaven and Earth, and holy Jerusalem, all new (as we showed) by
Creation, there shall in no wise enter any thing that defiles; as in the first
creation, all that God made was good, yea exceeding good. Genesis 1.31. Secondly,
There shall be created in this New state, the qualification of peace, Isa.
57.19. I CREATE the fruit of the lips, PEACE, ^EA^E to him that is afar off (by
captivity, or otherwise) and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will
heal him. Peace, peace, doubled, signifies very great, absolute, perfect peace,
as that time shall be a time of an universal perfection. Thirdly, Of this New
state there shall be another qualification, viz. joy, or rejoicing, and that
by the means of the New creation (for it is creation, we now look at, not the
qualifications themselves, which is the business of the third Head, in the
next Section) Isa. 65.18, 19. Be you glad, and rejoice for ever, in that which
I CREATE, for behold I CREATE Jerusalem a REJOICING, and I will rejoice in
Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping, or crying shall be
no more heard in her. All which are spoken as a parcel of the glorious state of
the New Heaven, and Earth, and New Jerusalem. Consonant to St. John's
description of the New Heavens, and New Earth, and of holy New Jerusalem (Rev.
21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) That there is the voice of triumph from Heaven, saying, The
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them etc. And God shall
wipe away all tears, etc. and there shall be no more sorrow etc. because he
that sat upon the Throne said, Behold I MAKE ALL THINGS NEW, write, for these
things are true. 4 There shall be at that time created a desence upon, or over
the Saints, over the Church, and over all their glory, so that their glorious
enjoyment in that glorious estate on earth, shall not be subject as formerly
to any invasions, subversions, interruptions, or diminutions from any power on
earth, or in hell, Isa. 4. verse 4, 5. When the Lord shall have washed away the
filth of the daughters of Zion, then the Lord will CREATE upon every dwelling
place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies a cloud of smoke by day, and the
shining of a flaming fire by night (alluding to the pillar of fire that lead
Israel in the wilderness) for UPON ALL THE GLORY SHALL BE A DEFENSE. So that
what ever shall be hereafter affirmed in this our sixth Book according to the
Scriptures, touching the excellency of the RESTITUTION, or glorious state of
all things yet to be on earth, shall be an established estate, that no enemy
shall be able in the least to remove or molest.

But why do the Scriptures call this RESTORATION or RESTITUTION a Creation?
Surely because of the great likeness (if not samenesse in kind) with the
first Creation, as to the Physical notion thereof, both in regard of matter,
manner, parts, and end.

1 As for matter, as the immediate Creation, viz. of the Chaos, was of nothing;
so mediate Creation, viz. of particulars out of that Chaos was of nothing such,
nothing so, or no such thing, as into which it was created. So that as the
first sort of creation was of absolute nothing; so the second comparatively, or
equivalently of nothing. For what was the confused clouded Chaos toward the
forming of light, life, and beauty, etc? Even so in this New creation, the
world shall be asit were resolved into a Chaos again. All things shall be in a
most confused and forlorn condition, men shall be stripped of humanity, the
earth shall be an Aceldoma, and Golgotha, all things full of unparalleld
troubles, as our Savior describes, Matthew. 24. And lo then shall Christ appear
most gloriously to new-create all things as it is in that same 24. of Matthew. Just
as we find it Prophesied throughout the Old Testament, in most of the
Prophesies before discussed, as Hos. 3 4, 5. Dan 12.1. etc. that Christ shall
restore all things in the most desolate, and Miserable times. Most suitable
matter, for that efficient, who is to work upon it. The best cause to work
upon the worst matter. He that is All-things, yea more then All-things, the
All-sufficient Almighty, to work upon those nothings; who can work better on
that worst, then the best of creatures can upon the best and most prepared
things. For materiam superabit opus, the workmanship shall exceed the matter.
So that as God alone was able, and did educe out of those nothings, Genesis 1.
this beautiful Fabric of the world; so Christ Jesus our Lord shall out of
those worse-then-nothings create this glorious new world of which we treat.

2 For manner also, it is a Creation, in that like the creation of the first
world, the main parts of this New shall be made in an instant. It is true that
the Philosophers say, that generation is ex nihilo tali, and in instanti, of a
nothing so, and in an instant: as plants of seeds, birds of eggs, beasts of
their Semen; as are likewise the bodies of men. But this Philosophical
Generation notwithstanding, in the first part, viz. that it is of that which is
nothing so, is far below the lowest, namely, Mediate Creation: in that
generation is by very many previous dispositions, and various successive
preparations of the matter, gradually bringing those bodies to their kind;
whereas Creation, even mediate creation in one act brings forth every thing
perfect at once. As for the second part of their description of generation,
that it is done in an instant; that is, the form is introduced in an instant;
I think (excepting men's souls) it is a mere tradition and fable, grounded upon
another fiction of wit, that material forms are substances, which being
believed in the Schools, has brought in with it a many inextricable knots, as
how the forms of the Elements remai^e in the mixed body, compounded of them;
how the form is educed out of the power of the matter, as they affirm, and
yet the form is a substance of a different nature from the matter, and is a
distinct coordinate essential principle in specie: How a sword killing an
horse, or the like, drives out one form, and brings in another, or else there
were more then one form before, or else matter may subsist without a form,
etc. whereas creation, yea mediate creation introduces all forms of things,
yea and of men too, in an instant: As we see in the First Creation in every
days work. It was but said, Let it be so, and presently it was so. And so,
proportionably, will it be in the New Creation, that by parts Christ will do
great things suddenly; First, The call of the Jews shall be on a sudden, Isa.
66.8. Who has heard such a thing? who has seen such things? shall the earth
be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a Nation be borne at ONCE? For as
soon as Zion traveled, she brought forth her children. Secondly, The
appearance of Christ shall be on a sudden, Matthew. 24.27. As the lightning
comes out of the East, and shines even to the West; so also shall the
coming of the Son of man be. Thirdly, The change of believers, surviving at
Christ's coming shall be in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15.51.
Behold I show unto you a MYSTERY, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
CHANGED in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Fourthly, The resurrection of
the deceased Saints at Christ's coming shall be in like manner, Ibid. 1 Cor.
15.52. We shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump. For the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible
( viz. never to dye any more) and we shall be CHANGED, viz. all in the same
moment.

3 This glorious state of all things on earth yet to come, is as a creation in
regard of parts. That as the whole creation is in Genesis 1. distinguished into
six days work; so this New creation shall be perfected (though not in that
successive order of time, but rather, as I conceive at once) in all those
things that are enumerated to be the workmanship of the six days works. You
had the opinion of the Rabbis in this, before. In 4 Book. 4 Chap. 3 Sect. 6
Pat. f. 428.
Mine is this, First, For light; answerable to the extraordinary LIGHT created
on the first day (for the Sun and Stars were not extant till the fourth
day.) The light of the Church at this time shall be a supernatural light, above
any created light, according to Isa. 60.19. The Sun and Moon shall be no more
light, but THE LORD shall be unto thee an EVERLASTING LIGHT. Suitable to St.
John's Vision, and Prophecy, Rev. 21.23. The City had no need of the Sun, or
of the Moon, for the GLORY of GOD did lighten it, and the LAMB is the light
thereof. For it God shall be the Churches Sun, Psalm. 84.11. as he is likewise
light it self, 1 John 1.5. yea dwells in unspeakable light, 1 Timothy 6.16. And
Christ is prophesied to be the Sun arising on the Church, Malach. 4.2. That
he comes (as the Apostle says) 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. with a brightness; yea (as
Christ himself promises) his coming shall be as lightning shineing from the
East to the West; yea with GREAT GLORY, Matthew. 24. verse 27. and verse 30. then
will their special presence or manfestation be a transcendent light to the
Church, which must be supernatural, far above any created, either that which
was made the first day, or after contracted upon the fourth day, into the body
of the Sun; as the waters, extant the first day, were couched into the
Channels of the seas on the third day. For both these were created. But the
light of the Church now shall be elucidations and emanations from the Deity,
overcomming, and as it were drowning the glory of the Sun, etc. And therefore
though the Sun and the Moon, and Stars that now receive their light from the
Sun, shall in that New creation be extant, existing in their Orbs, yet they
shall not be there to give light to the Church. Both these are distinctly
mentioned in both the fore-quoted places; Isa. 60.19. The Sun shall be no
more thy LIGHT by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give LIGHT unto
thee. Observe, it is not said, they shall not exist, they shall not be; but
they shall not be for the light of the Church. Just so Rev. 21.23. it is not
said, the being of the Sun and Moon shall be nulled, or annihilated, but
there shall be no NEED of the Sun, nor of the Moon to SHINE in New Jerusalem.
And the reason is, because God and the Lamb shall lighten it, and be the light
and glory thereof. So that though according to the creation of the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars, in the fourth day, those lights, with the rest of the universe
shall be perfected in this New creation, Isa. 30.26. The light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as
the light of seven days, in the day the Lord binds up the breach of his
people; yet not used for a light to the Church at that glorious time. For then
there shall be no nights, and days, as is intimated in that 60. of Isa. verse
19. before quoted (mark it well) The Sun shall be no more thy light by DAY,
etc. but the Lord shall be unto thee an EVERLASTING light, i. e. perpetual,
without interruptions by vicissitudes of nights succeeding the days, and for
ever. But it is express in Rev. 21.25. St. John having said as before quoted in
the 23. verse, There shall be no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon; he
adds in this 25. verse, The gates of the New Jerusalem shall not be shut at
all by day; for there shall be NO NIGHT THERE. And if we should suppose that
the motion of the heavenly orbs, and all the planets, and fixed Stars, which is
the only cause of night should cease at this glorious time of REST, seeing
that all motion (as says the Philosopher truly) is for rest, which these
heavenly bodies never had since their creation, whiles the Plants have had
theirs in the Winter; the Sons of men in the night, on the seventh day, and
in the grave, the Wilde-beasts in the day, etc. And it is recorded as the most
glorious time, when the Sunn and Moon stood still, (Josh. 10.12, 13, 14. There
was no day like that before it, or since that;) And if we should conceive that
it is not contrary to that text of Isa. 30.26. The light of the Moon shall be
as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevefold greater, etc. to
understand it as well, if not rather of the extension of those bodies of light,
then of the intension of their beams of light (their very bodies being called
lights, Genesis 1. And the sevenfold intensivenesse and strength of the beams
might be an affliction) and so the little globe of the earth would not be of
bulk to interpose, and eclipse the sight and prospect of any Star from view,
and looking upon the rest, especially on the magnified dimension of the body of
the Sun; so that there should be a continued natural light round the world;
yet all these should be but for a comely ornament, not a natural concernment
to the Church, because the paramount presence and elucidation of God and the
Lamb should be their light; suitable to their paramount condition, swallowing
up, as it were, all other glories, as the said text of Isa. 60.19. Rev. 21.23.
hold forth. So that as the world began in the first Creation with an
extraordinary light; so at the end of this world, in the New creation there
shall be a supernatural light. And thus of the state of it in regard of light,
in parallel with the first and fourth days work in the first Creation.
Secondly, As on the second day was created the Firmament (as our Translators
render it, following the Greek) alias the Expanse (according to the Hebrew)
that is, at least, the whole element of the air; so in this New creation, it
shall be re-created anew, that is perfected; that there shall be no noisome
fumes, or vapors, or any other noxious exhalations, fiery, or watery, etc. to
cause sickness, death it self being now swallowed, up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.
And all sorrows removed, Rev. 21.4. And the air shall not be an habitation for
devils over the Church, as formerly (for which he was called the Prince of the
air, Ephesians. 2.2.) But the devil shall be chained up, Rev. 20.2. and every
unclean spirit shall be removed far away from the Church. Zach. 13 2.
Thirdly, For the rest of the days works of Creation, as in them were created
the dry-land, the Plants, the Fishes, and Fowls, and Animals, etc. So in this
New creation there shall be a perfection of all those then in being; (for of a
resurrection of irrationals I know nothing) and they shall be freed, and set at
liberty from all danger, and hardship. Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 8.19, 20, 21,
22. I speak now short to these things, because I am not yet come to the
qualifications of this future glorious estate, into which this Head would
sometimes feign draw me; but I will not be anticipated.

4 This future glorious estate on earth is a creation, in regard of the end,
viz. that as man was created last of all, most perfect in soul and body, as
the subordinate end next under God, for which God made it, viz. that man might
have the possession and use of all, and dominion over all, Genesis 1.26. So in
this New creation, Christ restores all things to their perfection, and every
believer to his; to that end, that all believers, being raised, or changed (as
before described) may jointly and co-ordinately rule over the whole world, and
all things therein, next under Christ their Head. I say, All, and not apart
only (as some unwarily publish.) And I say jointly, not one part of the Saints
to usurp authority over the rest (as many dream.) And co-ordinately, All upon
equal terms; not some Saints to rule by Deputies, made of the rest of the
Saints, as the practice of men seem to interpret. And all to be true Saints,
not seeming. Thus we read in Dan. 7. verse 14. and 27. And Rev. 20.4. And Chap.
21. verse 24.26. Study the places well, and you will easily pick it out.

CHAP. III. Measuring out the DIMENSIONS of this glorious estate to be on
Earth, before the ultimate universal Judgment.
Creation of it; we come next to the Dimensions, Quantity, or Extent of the
glorious Kingdom of Christ on Earth, yet expected, viz. That as the other
four Monarchies did over spread all the inhabited world (as it is said of
Nebuchadnezzars Assyrto-Chaldean Monarchy, Dan. 2.37. that he was King of
Kings, and that WHERESOEVER THE CHILDREN OF MEN DWE^T, the Beasts of the field,
and fowls of the Heaven, GOD HAD GIVEN INTO HIS HAND, and had made him RULER
OVER ALL; and of Caesar's Roman Monarchy, Luke 2.1. That there went out a decree
from him, that ALL THE WORLD should be taxed:) So this fifth Monarchy of the
Saints reigning on earth under Christ, must be as large as those Monarchies, as
large as the whole world for ample Dominion, though not for sincere conversion;
That is, the generality of men in the time of this Kingdom being converted
into true Saints, they shall rule over all the whole world of men, swallowing
up the other former Monarchies. So that if there be remaining a secret seed of
hypocrisy in ^ome, which shall at last, (God so foretelling, Rev. 20.8.)
break out in the Gogican War at the end of our THOUSAND years, shall yet mean
while all men, all the time of the thousand years, shall be demurely subject to
the Dominion of the Saints. Touching the latitude and largeness of this
Holy-Kingdome, read Dan. 2.34, 35. The stone cut out without hands smote the
Image on his feet that were of iron, and of clay, and brake them to pieces.
Then was the iron, the clay the brass, the silver, and the gold broken in
pieces together, and became like the chasse of the Summerthershing floor, and
the wind carried them away, so that NO PLACE WAS FOUND FOR THEM; and the stone
that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and FILLED THE WHOLE EARTH. Dan.
7.26, 27; And the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his (the
preceding Monarchies) Dominion, etc. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom, UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN, shall be given to the
people of the Saints, etc. And Rev. 10.7. St. John having said, In the days of
the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall BEGIN to sound, the mystery of
God shall be finished, he goes on in the 11. Chapter, verse 15. saying, The
seventh Angel sounded; and there were great voices in Heaven saying, The
KINGDOMS of this WORLD are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever. That is, no Monarchy shall ever be on
earth after his. Add Isa. 2. (In the second verse, etc. whereof, ye have the
propagation of the Gospel of Christ's Kingdom, and men's obedience to it) In the
11 verse, repeated again verse 17. ye have the Lord Christ exalted, and his
overthrowing all worldly powers prostrate before him, in these words, The lofty
looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed
down, and the LORD ALONE shall be exalted. Which words (though covertly, for
fear of provoking worldly Monarchs) are alleged by the Jews to the same
end, as you have heard before at large. To the same effect of the largeness of
Christ's Kingdom is that notable place in Isa. 24. verse 21, 22, 23. In that
day it shall come to pass, that the Lord shall punish the Host of the high
ones, that are on high, and the Kings of the earth, UPON EARTH, and they shall
be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut
up in the prison, and after many days they shall be visited. Then the Moon
shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall REIGN
IN MOUNT SION, and in Jerusalem, before his Ancients gloriously. His Ancients
are, his ancient people the Jews. And as the material Sun and Moon shall be
then nothing in comparison of the light of Gods presence, as afore-shewed; so
the metaphorical Sun and Moon (for the same Scripture may have two
subordinate senses, Rev. 17.9, 10.) I say the metaphorical Sun and Moon of
higher and lower humane Majesty's shall be confounded with shame. So Jacob (a
Prince in those times) and his wife are called by the name, and interpreted to
be the meaning of that name of the Sun and Moon in Joseph's dream, ( Genesis
37.9.) even as we had but now in that 24 of Isa. both name and thing, metaphor
and meaning expressed. And by the same rule, and proportion we may admit of
others annexing a metaphorical sense to that Revelation, 21. verse 23, 24. that
in Christ's Kingdom to come upon earth, there shall be no need of the Sun or
Moon, i. e. of Emperial, Royal, or Princely Potentates, to keep the peace; as
we have expounded it also in a litteral sense of the obscuring of the glory of
all the Stars by the paramount glory of Gods presence For God and the Lambs
presence shall be in stead of, and more then the Sun and Moon in both senses.
One, both learned and godly, does likewise to the same purpose, apply Hag.
2.21, 22. By shaking heaven, and earth once more (says he) the Prophet seems
to mean (in part) that there shall be a change, not only of the customs of
the people, which are the Earth; but also of Kingly powers, and humane
Majesty's, which are the Heavens. Which place of Haggai, the Apostle applies to
the Kingdom of Christ, Heb. 12.26, 27.28, 29. of which application, though
part may comport with the Kingdom of Christ as spiritual (which has ever
been) yet the rest seems to ^ooke as far as Christ's Kingdom to come on
Earth. For since Haggais, or Paul's time, God never so shook the material
heavens of Orbs and Stars, or the metaphorical of Royalties and Majesty's, that
the Kingdom succeeding (as the Text plainly intends) could not be moved. Even
as the close, exhorting to serve God acceptably, because he is a consuming
fire, is most like to Peter's exhortation, 2 Pet. 3. to be holy in
conversation, because after the destruction of the world by fire, we shall have
new heavens and a new Earth. The place seems to allude to, and to Prophecy
from Gods shaking of Mount Sinai, that as at that time God shook his people out
of Egypt, and separated them by divine Laws from all the Nations of the earth
to be a Royal Church by themselves; so he will shake all the world of high and
low ones, when he sets up his last kingdom, viz. Christ's visible kingdom on
earth, and therewith makes all new. For (says my Author) that same [Once more]
signifies the removing of all former old things in Earth, and Heaven, viz. of
Customs of People, and Crowns of Kinglyhoods, and makes all new with
sanctity, and spirituality, in the quality, though men and creatures shall be
in substance extant upon the earth, according to their species or kind, and
his Sovereignty in paramount glory ruling all. Just as Zachary has it, Chap.
14. verse 9. And the LORD shall be KING over ALL the EARTH: In that day shall
there be ONE LORD, and his name one. That is (as some learned expound) There
shall be no more Lords, but the Lord Christ, and his Dominion shall be greater
then ever any was. Which the Prophet Malachy does notably surveigh Chap. 1.
verse 11. in these words; From the rising of the Sun, even to the going down
of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, etc.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Qualifications, or Qualities of this Kingdom of
Christ. Viz.
Negatively, it is a State that is, Sinless, Sorrowless, Deathless,
Superiorless etc. Temptationless. Timeless.
Positively it is the Restoration of the Creation, Perfection of all
Qualities, Confluence of all Comforts, Preface to Eternity.


With several other Qualifications, by a natural, and necessary consequence
flowing from these.

SECT. I. It is Sinlesse.
deceased Saints should be raised, and the living changed, to enjoy this
glorious state on earth in Christ's Kingdom, with the least tincture of sin,
either of their own, or others. This were to bring the deceased Saints to
their loss. And the changed state of the living would not be freed from sin,
which would be their greatest sorrow; which (as the next Section
demonstrateth) cannot consist with this glorious state. It would be a misery
(not a felicity) for the souls of the deceased to come out of supernal glory
into a body of sin; or for them, or the changed, to be mixed with the society
of graceless men. A mere regenerate estate, not yet perfect, lamented that
condition, so long since as Lot, and David, 2 Pet. 2.7. Psalm. 120.5. yea the
latter complained of society with men of fair outsides, flattering with their
lips, and eating bread at his Table, but were not right at heart. And our
Savior warns his Disciples, as of a danger, that they should be among men
that outwardly seem to be sheep, but inwardly were Wolves: which this glorious
state will not admit. So then, the huge augmentation of this Kingdom, or fifth
Monarchy, shall not (as in worldly Monarchies) cause pollution and corruption.
This shall be Status optimus maximus, the biggest and best state that ever was
or shall be on earth, all suitable to a resurrection. The places of Scripture
asserting the sinlesseness of this time are very many and very clear; so that I
need but repeat them, to convince the ingenuous Reader.

1 Adam we know was created sinlesse, according to the Image and likeness of
God, to have Dominion over all, and to rest on the Sabbath; now this state of
Adam is applied by David Ps. 8. to a future state of man, which the Apostle
Paul accommodates to our estate and rest in the inhabited world to come, Heb.
2.5. and Chap. 4. verse 9. as we have before demonstratively expounded those
places. If there be any difference, it is in this (as the Apostle sets it forth
1 Cor. 15.) that our estate shall be better then his. 2 Number. 30.5, 6, 8. The
Lord thy God will bring thee into thine own land, and the Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and thou shall return and obey the voice
of the Lord; and do AL HIS COMMANDMENTS. Which was spoken of, and to the Jews,
long since deceased, being never yet so fulfilled to them, or any of that
Nation succeeding them, and therefore according to the truth of God, must be
fulfilled to all the elect of them, and of their posterity. 3 Isa. 11.6. The
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. and they shall not hurt, etc. For the
earth shall be FULL OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE LORD, AS THE WATERS COVER THE SEA:
which, whether we understand of men, or beasts, it argues a restoration to an
estate like that of innocent Adam. And the reason adds the glory of the cause,
as the thing is a most glorious effect, That this innocent time shall follow
upon an ocean of divine knowledge. 4. Isa. 59.21. This is my Covenant, my WORD
AND MY SPIRIT SHALL NEVER DEPART from thee for ever. 5. Isa. 35.8. There shall
be an highway, and it shall be called the way of holiness, THE UNCLEAN SHALL
NOT PASS OVER IT. 6. Isa. 60.21. Thy people shall be ALL RIGHTEOUS. 7. Jer.
32.40, 41. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good. But I will put my fear into their heart, that
they shall not depart from me. Yea I will rejoice over them to do them good,
and will plant them in this Land assuredly, WITH MY WHOLE HEART and WHOLE SOUL:
See this great promise must be fulfilled, when the Jews are settled in their
own land. 8. Ezech. 36.23. to verse 30. I will gather you from all Countries,
and bring you into your own land, and I will sprinkle clean water upon you,
and you shall be clean from ALL YOUR FILTHINESS, etc. and I will save you
from ALL YOUR UNCLEANNES. 9. Ezekiel Chap. 44.9. speaking of the glorious state
of the Church in the last days, adds, Thus says the Lord, no stranger
uncircumcised in HEART shall enter into my Sanctuary. 10 Dan. 12.3. At the time
that Michael shall stand up, and deliver his people, they that be wise shall
shine as the BRIGHTNESS OF THE FIRMAMENT, and they that turn many to
righteousness, AS THE STARS FOR EVER AND EVER. Which is to come to pass before
the last universal resurrection, and ultimate judgment, as we have before
demonstrated. 11. Zeph. 3.13. The remnant of Israel SHALL. NOT DO INIQUITY, nor
SPEAK LIES, neither shall a DECEITFUL TONGUE be found in their mouths; which
words relate as the context before shows, to a state of the Church in the last
days on earth, as the thing demonstrates that it was never yet fulfilled. 12.
Zach. 14.20.21. Upon all shall be holiness to the Lord. 13 Malach. 4.1. etc.
The day comes that shall burn as an oven. And all that are proud, and do
wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day comes that shall burn them up,
says the Lord, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. All these
places, and others, have been demonstratively cleared to relate to the time
following, upon the Call of the Jews, and their settlement. All which laid
together, make up a sinlesse condition.

Cor. 15.52, 54, 55, 56. it is said, When this corruption shall put on
incorruption at the sound of the last Trumpet; then, O death where is thy
sting? The sting of death is sin. But thanks be to God that gives us victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Now as we have before proved, there is a vast
space, viz. of a thousand years of the whole term of the last Trumpet, before
the universal ultimate Resurrection. 2 In 2 Cor. 3.18. it is said, When the
Jews shall have both vayles taken away (as we have before opened) viz. that
on Moses, namely his form of worship, and that on their hearts, viz. their
unbeleef, instead of the remainders of sin, they shall with open face behold
the glory of the Lord, being transformed into the same image from glory to
glory. 3 St. Peter likewise asserts, 2 Pet. 3.13. That after the dissolution of
this present vain sinful world, there shall not only be New Heavens, but
also a NEW EARTH, wherein dwells RIGHTEOUSNESS. Proving it out of Isa. 65.17.
(for those words be repeats.) This is spoken to the Jews, and concerning their
share in the future happiness on earth. And that dwelling of righteousness
there, must signify an eminent and absolute degree or else it will not
surmount the present state of the Chuch, in which, as such, dwells much
righteousness. But I need not struggle about this with most knowing men, who
incline to understand this place of a perfection, as absolute as that in the
supreamest Empyrean heaven. 4 Let us add but one place more, viz. That in Rev.
21. v. 1. etc. and verse last of that Chapter, in a continued description of
the glorious state of the Saints on earth yet to come; And (says St. John) I
saw a new heaven, and a new EARTH, and I saw the holy City, New Jerusalem,
coming down FROM GOD OUT OF HEAVEN. Behold the Tabernacle of God is WITH MEN
etc. and there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that DEFILES etc. but
they that are written in the Lambs Book. Every verse of this Chapter, as before
we gave a particular account, has something in it incompatible, and
incompetible with the supreamest heavenly estate.

hypocrites, called Gog and Magog, that shall at last break out, and go about
to oppose the Church, though in vain, their opposition and subversion
concluding in the same moment, Rev. 20.8? We answer according to that light
we have attained, that most probably they shall not be in, but without the
Church. Rev. 22.15. Without shall be dogs, evil men, and such as make, and
love a lie. The Heathens (as appears by Homer Iliad. 8.
) did use to call the place of outcast men (...) Tartaros, alluding likely to
some dismal remote place of the earth, as Tartary is from us, and from
Jerusalem. The Apostle takes up that word in 2 Pet. 2.4. and makes a verb out
of it (...) Tartaro^ to signify the putting of men into an Hellish solitary
place. So that most likely the unregenerate shall be as remote from the Church,
as Tartary is from Jerusalem, and the Christian Church; as far, as it were,
from Hell to Heaven. The Church now being as in an Heaven on earth, the
false-hearted spawn of future Gog and Magog shall be remote on earth, near
their future Hell. To which that place of Gog and Magog, Rev. 20.8. does
contribute some proof, in that it says, that Gog and Magog shall be fetched
up against the Church by the Devil, from the FOUR QUARTERS OF THE EARTH.

degenerating of any believers, so no more regenerating of any unbeleevers.
There is a judiciary sentence peremptorily passed to this purpose, Rev. 22.11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and be which is filthy, let him be
filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still, and he that
is holy, let him be holy still; That is, They shall be so still. In order to
which it follows, WITHOUT are Dogs, etc. that love, and make a lie: And I come
quickly, and my reward is with me. The appearance of Christ at the preface to
thi^ thousand years will be, as it is represented in the Preface to the
Revelation, Chap. 1. among the Churches, viz. that then are, or have been
Chu^ches: Therefore it behooves Churches, and all Professors to beware they be
not sound as the Foolish Virgins, that never had the oil of regenerating grace
in the vessels of their hearts; and the oil of sound principles in their
heads, by which they made the blaze of Profession, is spent, i. e. they have
lost their principles, and so being unready at Christ's coming, they come when
(as Jerome says well) the doors are shut.

SECT. II. It is Sorrowlesse.
sinlesse; next with good dependence we assert, it is a sorrowlesse condition.
For sorrow came into the world by sin, therefore sorrow shall go out of the
world with sin. So the Apostle does connect and couple them (1 Cor. 15.55.) O
death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? i. e. There is then no
sin (which is that sting) therefore no sorrow, which formerly did tend to
death, and end in the grave. But let us take the Scriptures in order, for the
sorrowfulness of this state and time we speak of. 1 Adams state was a
sorrowlesse condition; therefore so shall the state of the faithful at this
time be, as we have often recited the parallel, Genesis 1.26. with Psalm. 8. Heb.
2. Psalm. 95. Heb. 4. out of which 95. Psalm. the Apostle proving a rest, to
remain yet on earth for the people of God; the word in the Hebrew is (...)
which comes from the same root whence Noah's name is prophetically given him, to
foretell the comfort that should come to the Church by him, even the rest in
the Arc in the time of the Flood, Genesis 5.29. At which time the earth by water
was purged of the Churches enemies. Answerably the Apostle in a way of parallel
in 2 Pet. 3. mentioning that purgation by water, infers another purgation by
fire, after which we are to expect another rest, or restoration, and that on
earth, where was, and shall be that purgation, which the Apostle, Heb. 4.
descanting upon Psalm. 95. renders the sense of that Hebrew word, verse. 9. of
that 4. to the Hebrews by (...) a Sabbatisme, a Septenary rest. As if he
should say, It shall be a Sabbath of Sabbaths, or above all Sabbaths, or the
period, and perfection of all Sabbaths. That as we rest on a Sabbath, or
seventh day from our weekly work (as God did from his) and the Jewish servants
every seventh year rested from their service: And every seventh of seven times
seven years all their land had rest; so in the seventh Millenary of the world
the whole universe shall have a rest. The Church shall have full Dominion over
the whole world. For in those places of Psalm. 95. and Heb. 4. being mainly
spoken to, and concerning the Jews, cannot be meant of the Sabbath of Gods
resting, once and for ever past; or of their weekly, or of their
Septenary-anniversary, or of their Jubilean, or of their Cananitish Sabbath, or
of an internal spiritual Sabbath, or rest of mind and conscience; for all
these the Church of the Jews had enjoyed. Nor could the Apostle think it
needful to prove that an internal rest, which all moral Heathens, that believe
the immortality of the soul expect, does yet remain. And therefore the Apostle
must mean that rest which was proper to cure the then present dispersed, and
distressed condition of the Jews, continued to this day: That as God has
given them the weekly rest, and the Septenary-anniversary, and the Jubilean,
and the Canaanitish, so he would give them at last, a Millenary rest on earth,
a rest longer and better then ever they had. For much is couched in those
words, Heb. 4.9. (...), etc. Therefore there is yet left, or there remains a
Sabbatisme, or a kind of Septenary or Sabbatical rest forth people of God.
Mark every word. Therefore] viz. because God rested on the seventh day in the
beginning; after that, gave them a seventh weekly and yearly rest, and a
seventh of seven times seven years rest, and a rest in Canaan, and after all,
the Lord spoke of another rest to come; Therefore there remains a rest.
Remaineth] or is yet left, notes and imports something not extant before in
specie, in its prime, but only in types, but is next to come in order in its
native kind and verdure. And ((...)) a Sabbatisme (a word never used but here
on this occasion) imports a limited time (not an everlasting unlimited
duration) even as Adam lived near a thousand years, and had rested so long, if
not longer, in Paradise, without sin, or sorrow, if he had not hearkened unto
the Diabolical temptation. And [to the people of God] which written to the
Hebrews, must include them (so often called by God in the Old Testament my
people) and so must necessarily signify, that this rest is for the Jews
jointly with the Gentiles, when the Jews shall be the people of God by faith,
as now the believing Gentiles are, as the Apostle disputes, Romans 11. 2 The
Prophet Isaiah also sets forth this sorrowlesse time, Chapter 2. verse. 2, 3, 4.
And it shall come to pass in the LAST DAYS, etc. Many people shall go, and
say, Come let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord; for he will teach us his
ways and we will walk in his paths, and he will judge among the Nations, AND
THEY SHALL BEAT THEIR SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES, AND THEIR SPEARS INTO PRUNING
HOOKS; NATION SHALL NOT LIFT UP SWORD AGAINST NATION, neither shall they LEARN
WAR ANY MORE. In which words observe, that as there is intimated internal
spiritual peace, so external corporal peace is openly expressed, to come to
pass, not only to the Jews, but to all Nations, which was never yet
fulfilled since Isaiahs time, as this description cannot consist with the
ultimate judgment. 3 Another place is in Isa. 9. verse 6. Christ shall be
called the PRINCE OF PEACE, of the increase of his Government, and PEACE, THERE
SHALL BE NO END, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to establish
it, etc. from henceforth, even for ever: Which place most plainly speaks of
external peace, as well as of internal, and for a long continuance, and does
belong to the time we speak of (as is before demonstrated) which Christ has
not to this day fulfilled, but rather has brought a sword, then external
peace. Therefore the fulfilling of the sense of this Prophecy is yet to come.
4 Isa. 11. verse 1. etc. A rod of the stem of Jesse, etc. with righteousness
shall judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek, etc. He shall
slay the wicked etc. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. They shall not
hurt, nor destroy in all the holy Mountain. For the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, etc. The envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the
Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah
Ephraim, etc. All which, taken together, do most plainly relate to the time
we speak of, (as is before proved.) But this was never yet fulfilled since
Isaiahs time: And therefore these high expressions are to be fulfilled at the
glorious time we discourse of. 5 Isa. 14.1, 2, 3. We have these high promises,
The Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in
their own Land, and the strangers shall be joined unto them etc. And the
people shall take them, and bring them to their place, etc. And the Lord shall
give them REST FROM SORROW FEAR AND HARD BONDAGE. Observe both to what
persons, and what time these high expressions relate, before largely opened,
and we shall easily conclude this Text was never yet fulfilled, and therefore
according to the truth of God, must be fulfilled before the ultimate day of
judgment; for with that time this Prophecy cannot agree. 6 In Isa. 25.8. we
have it plenissime and planissime, most fully and plainly, That in that day
(viz. of the great restoration of the Church, and ruin of their enemies,
verse 5, 6.) The Lord will WIPE AWAY ALL TEARS FROM ALL FACES. And the rebuke
of his people shall he take away FROM OFF ALL THE EARTH, for the Lord has
spoken it. Which was never yet fulfilled, and therefore is yet to come at the
time we treat off, as has been before demonstrated. 7 Isa. 54.13, 14. is also
very high in expressions, Thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great
shall be the peace of thy children. In righteousness shall thou be
ESTABLISHED, thou shall be far from oppression, for thou SHALL NOT FEAR; and
FROM TERROR, for it SHALL NOT COME NEAR THEE. You see the expressions are
exceeding high, and they are evidently spoken concerning external rest, as well
as internal: and we see it by experience, that this place was never yet
fulfilled, therefore it is yet to come, as we have cleared it before. 8 In Isa.
60.14. etc. it is thus written, The Sons of them that a^flicted thee shall
come BENDING TO THEE, and all that despised thee, shall BOW THEMSELVES DOWN AT
THE SOLES of thy feet. Whereas thou have been forsaken, I will make thee an
ETERNAL EXCELLENCY, violence shall be NO MORE heard in thy land. The days of
thy mourning shall be ENDED. Which place relates to our Thesis, as is before
demonstrated. The expressions are far too high for us, to acknowledge they have
been fulfilled; therefore we must expect them yet to come before the ultimate
day of judgment; for that will be no fit time for this Prophecy. 9. Isa.
65.19. is likewise very full to the particular in hand, though in few words,
viz. I will joy in my people, and the voice of weeping or crying shall be NO
MORE HEARD IN HER. Let the Reader judge whether this was ever yet fulfilled.
10. Isa. tells us Chap. 66.12, Thus says the Lord, I will extend peace to her
(the Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles) as a river, and the glory of the
Gentiles like a flowing stream. I leave it likewise to the Reader to consider,
whether he has not reason to expect this as yet to come. 11 We come to the
Prophesies of Jeremiah, Chap. 23.3, 4. I will gather the remnant of my flock
out of all Countries, etc. and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed; Which
expressions are a great deal too high, for our knowledge of Scripture, of
history, or of experience to acknowledge them to have been fulfilled to this
day. And therefore our faith must be on God for the fulfilling of them, and
that before the ultimate day of judgment, as the nature of the things require.
12 We have in the same Prophet Chap. 30. verse 10. Jacob shall return, and
shall be in rest and quiet, and none shall make him afraid. 13 Place is in Jer.
46.27, 28. to the same effect. 14 Place is in Ezekiel. 28.24. There shall be no
more a pricking briar unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all
that are round about them. 15 Place Mich. 4.1, 2, 3. The same with Isa. 2. v.
2, 3, 4. Its added here in verse 4. They shall sit every man under his own
vine, etc. and none shall make them afraid. 16 Place, Zeph. 3.13, 14, 15. They
shall feed, and lie down, and none shall make them afraid. Sing O daughter of
Zion, rejoice with all the heart, the Lord has taken away thy judgments, he
has cast out thine enemies. The Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall not
see evil any more. This, and all the rest have been proved to mean the time
intended in our Position.

Matthew. 19.29. Shall receive an hundred fold, and inherit eternal life; of the
large opening of this place see before in the third Book. 2 That in 2 Thessalonians.
1.7.9, 10. To you REST (as Heb. 4.) when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed FROM
HEAVEN, his enemies being punished from the presence of the Lord (as Chap. 2.)
and from the glory of his POWER. Rev. 7.16, 17 They that are sealed, etc. serve
him day and night ( in HIS TEMPLE) he that sits on the Throne shall dwell
among them. They shall hunger no more; for the Lamb in the midst of the
Throne shall feed them, and wipe away all tears from their eyes. 4 Rev. 21.4.
St. John speaking of the state of the Church in the thousand years, says, God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
sorrowing, nor crying, nor pain. Every verse of this Chapter, shows it cannot
be meant of everlasting happiness in the highest heavens. Let the close of
this Section be to encourage us to patience: Patience in perseverance, and
patience in sufferance. Now is Christ's Kingdom of patience: But anon his
Kingdom of peace. Twice it is said of the present state of sufferings. Here is
the patience of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. and 14.12. Once it is said, Keep the
word of patience, Rev. 3.10. But after a while comes the Kingdom of peace,
therefore Christ seals up all the Bible, and all the Revelation almost with
this Rev. 22.11, 12. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still; He that
is holy, let him be holy still: and behold I come quickly, and my reward is
with me. Then in the last verse save one, sc. 20. Surely I come quickly, Amen,
Amen. Then to that end John's prayer closes all, as I close, in verse 21. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

SECT. III.
sorrowlesse condition. Next follows it shall be a deathlesse condition. The
Elect once raised at the beginning of the thousand years shall dye no more,
much less those alive and changed. For if those alive shall not prevent them
that are asleep (given by the Apostle as an answer to an Objection against this
Resurrection) much less shall they that are alive (being the pattern to whom
the dead are promoted) be sent to death as to give place to the Elect dead
that are raised. And if all the Elect are raised, to what end or use shall they
dye that are alive? If it be the privilege that the other Saints shall be
alive at Christ's coming, why shall they dye, when here, in soul and body they
may behold him, which is a fuller enjoyment? If this time of Christ's appearance
at the beginning of the thousand years be the Kingdom of Saints, the prefacing
beginning of their full happiness; then it must not be taken from them, by the
old misery of death. If all the Elect, dead and alive, must reign on earth a
thousand years, as we have proved, then there must be no death to cut this time
shorter. They do not reign, if subject in the thousand years to that great
enemy Death. Nor do any of them live a thousand years, if by succession they
dye in that thousand years. If there shall be no more sorrow, nor cries, nor
pains, as we heard before, how then can this Man-eater death continue? If
sin be gone, why should death remain?

Isa. 25.8. He ( i. e. the Lord, mentioned in the former verses) will swallow
up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away all tears from off all
faces, and the rebuke of his people, etc. We before demonstrated, that this
place belongs to the glorious time we speak of, sc. when the Jews are called.
And you see how full it speaks to the thing, of the removal of death. Calvin
confesses that this is under Christ's Kingdom, and adds, under Christ's
universal Kingdom. And sure Christ, as Christ, has no Kingdom in heaven after
the ultimate judgment, nor universal now. 2 Another place is in Hos. 13.14. I
will ransom them from the power of the grave; And I will redeem them from
death. O death, I will be thy plagues, O grave, I will be thy destruction.
Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes. Which place is evidently spoken to
Ephraim, the ten Tribes, verse 12. therefore this cannot relate to the return
of the two Tribes from Babylon. And it is as evident that more then a spiritual
deliverance of a man's soul from death in sin, is meant, in that here is joined
deliverance from the grave with deliverance from death: And twice a mention of
grave. But much ado there is with some, that would feign make this Text a
continuation of the Prophets minatory speech in the former Chapter. But the
words are plain words of mercy; and a Prophecy of mercy quoted by Paul, not
only that God can do such a thing, as in the Text, but that he will do it.
Again, how common is it for the Prophets in their preaching, mifericordias cum
minis mifcere, to mingle mercies with minatories. So that they may as well say
almost, that the 14. Chapter is a continuation of threatenings. It is frequent
in this Prophecy to make threats and comforts so take their turns, Chap. 1.
Chap. 2. etc. And to me it is plain and evident, that (as it is noted in our
English Translation) at verse 9. begins a Sermon of mercy, and so is continued
to the end of the 14. verse. It is said in verse 9. O Israel, thou (not I) have
destroyed thy self. Thou have brought thy misery on thy self. But I will be
thy King, where is any other to save thee in all thy Cities? So plainly,
according to Heb. And for experience the Lord tells Ephraim, that the King they
desired, and had, could not save them. And therefore God was their only saving
King, and therefore was not pleased in giving them a King; and in anger did he
take away Kings from them, because of their confidence in them: but this taking
them away would make way for their embracing God for their King, according to
that which follows in the ensuing promises. As for verse 12. The iniquity of
Ephraim is bound up, and hid; Hiding as well sounds of justification, and
pardon of sin, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.7. as of punishment. And for the 13. verse,
close to the Hebrew thus, Sorrows of a woman in travel will come upon him (viz.
Ephraim) He an unwise Son (...) If vid. Schindl.
if he shall stay long in the breaking forth of children, i. e. in the
straitness of the womb, i. e. If by repentance he do not help himself out of
his sorrows. But however verse 14. I, says the Lord, (if Ephraim be unwise,
and helps not himself, yet I) the Lord will ransom them, etc. as aforesaid.
Sure enough these words are plain for the point in hand, even as both those
two places aforesaid are several times quoted in the New Testament, and
applied to a state that is to be before the ultimate day of judgment. 3 For 1.
both places seem to me, to be touched in 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. As our new notes on
the Bible concur with me: For in the 54. verse seems to be quoted, Isa. 25.8.
For the Apostles words are plainly the same with Isaiah, Death is swallowed up
in victory. And in 55. verse seems a quotation of Hos. 13.14. For the Apostles
challenge is plainly according to Hosea, O grave, where is thy victory?
Secondly, The Apostle makes application of the fulfilling of these Prophesies
to be, at the time we speak of, sc. of the visible glory of the Church on
earth. For which observe these particulars, First, The Apostle mentions our
restitution to our state in the first Adam, by Christ the second Adam, v. 49.
compared with Psalm. 8. As Psalm. 8. with Genesis 1.26. to which end, the visible
glorious state of the Church is set out by having a Fountain, and Tree of life,
alluding to Paradise. Rev. 22. All which import a state upon earth. Secondly,
That the Apostle mentions the time to be, at the sound of the last Trumpet,
importing other Trumpets to sound first; so that the last Trumpet is the
seventh, as John numbers them, (not hid from Paul. Now from the beginning of
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, so many things follow (as we have several
times demonstrated) that there must of necessity be a state of the Churches
visible glory before the ultimate day of judgment. For when Rev. 11.15. the
seventh Angel sounded, then First, There was an Earthquake, v. ibid. Secondly,
A proclaiming that the Kingdoms of the earth are the Kingdoms of Christ, v.
15. Christ shall reign for ages of ages till time be no more, ibid. Fourthly,
Saints sing praise for it, v. 16, 17. Fifthly, Christ takes to him his great
power, and now reigns, v. 17. Sixthly, Nations are angry at it, v. 18.
Seventhly, The Saints are raised and rewarded, v. 18. Eighthly, A destroying of
them that destroyed the earth and care is taken of the earth, v. 18. Ninthly,
The Temple of God is opened, and the Arc discovered, v. 19. Tenthly,
Lightinings and thundrings, and earthquakes, and great hail, v. 19. All these
here, beside that in Rev. 20. Rev. 21. Rev. 22. From the beginning of the
seventh Trumpet to the end of it. Now let any ingenuous man judge by these ten
particulars, whether they are consistent with heaven above; and whether they
must not necessarily import a state on earth? So that the Apostle here in this
1 Cor. 15. mentioning the raising of the Saints, the clothing of them with
incorruption, and the changing of them that are alive, and quoting those two
texts of Isa. 25.8. and Hos. 13, 14. to be then fulfilled, does clearly import
a state on earth, of a visible glory of the Church when the Jews shall be
called. For the said Prophesies mainly had an eye to the restitution of the
Jews. As the Apostle extends them to Jews and Gentiles, attained by Christ. And
speaks in this Chapter all along of the resurrection of Saints (which John,
Rev. 20.5. calls the first Resurrection) and does not speak of the general
Resurrection of the wicked. 3 Add to the three former places, to prove that
this time we speak of, shall be a deathlesse condition; another most evident
place, sc. Rev. 21.4. I have diverse times demonstrated, that this Chapter
cannot be meant of everlasting glory in the highest heavens. And once I run
over the whole Chapter to that end. And now you may cast your eye upon 1, 2, 3.
verses, which lead to the fourth now quoted. New heavens, because the old pass
away. But the highest heavens, are never old, nor pass away. And a New earth,
which cannot import Heaven. No more Sea. This in no wise can belong to a
description of glory in the highest heavens. I saw New Jerusalem, the holy City
coming down from God: OUT of Heaven, not going up to Heaven: The Tabernacle
of God is with men; and he will dwell with them. Then it follows v. 4. God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. So that the taking away of all tears, as is here
expressed, is the same with Isa. 25.8. And in both places the taking away of
death, and of sorrow, are conjoined. 4 So that in Revel 7. the last verse,
relates to the same place of Isa. 25.8. And intends fully the taking away of
death, though not so fully mentioned. 5 The last place to prove this deathlesse
condition is Rev. 22.2, 3, It is evident that this 22 Chapter relates to the
same state, as Chapter 21. witness, not only v. 14, 15. But v. 1, 2. of the
Fountain of water, and Tree of life, which signifies a state on earth. Now in
relation to our Point, by reason of their partaking of the Tree of life, it is
said in v. 3. There shall be no curse, i. e. No death. For that was the
original curse to Adam, if he did eat of the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil. If he did not, he might have eaten of the Tree of life, and lived for
ever: He should never have dyed, but been translated. So now shall it be in
this State.

Deathlesse time: A kind of beginning of immortality. If men say the contrary,
it is by presumptuous interpretation, and with a bold [THAT IS:] But these
places speak so plain down right, that I must leave them, as I find them,
and not dare to alter them. If any one intimation in other Scriptures may be
found, they must, for ought I see, be accommodated to these. The plainer must
make the darker comply.

To deal faithfully with you, There is only one considerable place that I know
of, relating to the time I speak, that has something of an intimation of
mortality to be in these times, and that is Isa. 65.20. It clearly relates to
the time we speak of, v. 17. Behold I create New Heavens, and a New earth, etc.
which Peter refers to this time, 2 Pet. 3.13. in relation to the promise in
that Isa. 65. Now the 20. verse our Translators have rendered thus. There shall
be no more an Infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days
[For the child shall dye an hundred years old] but the sinner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed. Now as far as I can see into Languages, and the
context, these words [For the child shall dye an hundred years old] may be
more fitly translated [That the child should dye an hundred years old.] For
the word (...) in the Hebrew is exceeding often used (yea and so rendered by
Translators) to signify [THAT] as we have here rendered it. As for turning
shall into should, it is not worth the mentioning before a Grammarian, that
knows that (...) so rendered, will infer that the verb speak subjunctively. Now
read the words, so easily altered in the English, and without the least
violence to the native acception of the Hebrew, and the meaning will be quite
contrary to any intimation of the mortality of the Saints in this glorious time
of the thousand years. For according as we have translated, the sense will
run clearly thus, There shall be no more thence (or from that time, viz. of
the beginning of the thousand years of the New Creation) an infant of days, or
an old man that has not filled his days, that the child, or young man should
dye at an hundred years old. So that here is no mention of the mortality of the
Saints, but of their immortality. Which (for further clearing of the Text) may
be made out two ways.

1. Thus, He that is an hundred years old in those days, is but (...) (as it
is in the Text) but a youth, or young man (as our old Translation renders it.)
For as a youth has but the tenth part of that age which many men live in these
days: So an hundred years are but the tenth of this Millenary time of life to
the inheritors thereof. Again, as in the first age of the world, wherein Adam
lived, one of an hundred years old was but a young man to one at his full age
in those days, as Genesis 5.4. Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat
a son. But Adam after that lived eight hundred years, so all his days were
nine hundred and thirty (near a thousand) Even so in this Millenary age of the
New creation, one of an hundred years old, is but a young man, to the thousand
years that he shall reign with Christ on earth. So that the sense of the
Prophet may fairly be taken to be this, That in the time of this New creation
(the thing, a type, at least, of the highest glory, and the time a preface of
eternity) as the young man must not have his days cut off; so the old man must
fulfill his days. And how are both these accomplished in this New creation,
but by both their living on earth a thousand years, old and young, all Saints
reigning on earth a thousand years. When I speak of old and young, you must
understand those Saints that are found alive at Christ's coming, which anon
after are changed; for all the deceased Saints are raised to an equal
perfection, and absolute maturity of age and nature; even as the other are
changed into the same exactness, though at Christ's first appearance different
in age, etc. So that we may well understand the Prophet to allude to the age of
the first Adam, that if in a sinful state his age at a hundred years was but
as it were youth, his whole age amounting to near a thousand years, how much
more shall the Saints, by means of the second Adam, live a thousand in a
sinlesse condition?

2 It may be congruously made out, that the Prophet in this Text intends
rather the immortality of the Saints, then their mortality thus: There shall be
no more THENCE an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his
days; that the child, youth, or young man should dye an hundred years old, OR
the sinner an hundred years old should be cursed. Thus we read the whole verse
to the tune or sound of (...) THAT, as before we rendered it, turning our
English but in the latter clause into Or, the Hebrew being the conjunction
[(...)] which (as Mr. Mede says, being like materia prima, capable of
innumerable forms of significations) may well be so rendered here. And then the
sense will be this; that at that time of the New creation (which St. John
says shall be a thousand years) there shall be neither he that shall naturally
dye in his infancy; nor he that shall naturally dye in his riper age, before he
has made up his full days; nor he that shall be a sinner, whereby his days
should be violently cut off.

3 If it may better please some, they may read it to this sense; That at that
time, and that glorious estate, though the old sinner shall be cut off, yet no
Saint, either young or old shall dye at all. All these ways of reading the
text, in favor of the immortality of the Saints, the word [THENCE] does much
animate and justisie. As if the Prophet should say thus; out of this New
Creation, for the duration thereof, there shall no such person be found, that
shall be mortal, though all the transgressors, the enemies thereof, that are
without it, shall be cut off at its very beginning; even as we have largely
amplified before upon sundry occasions. But if we lanch out into the context
(as we intimatedly promised before) to wade into the depth of the precedent and
subsequent coherence, or dependence of this text, our reading of the words, and
rendering of the sense of it, for the immortality of Saints will be made much
more perspicuous. First, it is said in v. 17. Behold I creat new Heavens, and a
new Earth, (alluding, no doubt, to the first Creation of the world in glorious
perfection, and Adam in innocence, who should never have dyed, if he had never
sinned.) And the former shall not be remembered, ( viz. for their meannesse by
reason of man's sin) Nor (as it is in the Hebrew) ascend upon you. That is, the
imperfections of the former state of things should not touch them, when they
should attain this New; one of the main imperfections of the former state being
mortality, it being the sad memorial, and effect of dolefull-sin. Therefore
the removal of this the Prophet must mainly mind. 2. It is said in verse 18.
Be you glad, and rejoice, (...) age to age, or for ever, in that I create:
which cannot consist with death, or death with it, which quenches natural joy,
which every thing has in its natural being, and moral joy, which it has in
the enjoyment of its well-being. 3. It is said in verse 19. I will (says the
Lord) rejoice in JERUSALEM, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping
shall be NO MORE heard in HER, nor the voice of crying. Now if sorrow must be
gone, that it shall be no more, then, I think, there shall be no more death.
4. In the 20. verse it self, It is strange that according to our English, there
should be mentioned the death of Saints, and not the death of the wicked, of
whom it is said only, the sinner an hundred years old, shall be accursed. And
what does this Atheistical creature care for that, as long as he may live and
enjoy his sinful pleasure on earth, therefore according to our reading, in the
third and lowest sense at [ 2] the sense must be, that of the Saints, nor
young, nor ^^old shall be incomplete in their years by death; but the sinner at
an hundred years old (which is much for him to live) shall be accursed, that
is, he shall dye, sc. be mortal. So first, The Antithesis. Secondly, The story
of Genesis 2. The curse was, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye, i. e.
be mortal, liable to death. And this thing death, is that which strikes a dart
through the liver of a wicked man. The fear of this to him is worse then that
of hell. For he seldom fears hell, till he sees death. If he were sure he
should not dye, he says in his heart, a pin for hell. Fifthly, It is said in
verse 22. They shall not build, and another inhabit (which is, whiles mortality
reigns) mark the reason: For as the days of a tree, are the days of my
people. And many sorts of trees live a thousand years. (It is a promise, and
therefore to be taken in a favorable sense.) And surely trees in Paradise at
least so long lived, as Adam once eating of the tree of Life, continuing in
obedience. But at this time is all obedience, and here is the tree of life,
Rev. 21. And sixthly, it follows in this 22. verse of this 65. of Isay. And
mine elect shall LONG enjoy the works of their own hands. How do they enjoy
them long, if no longer then heretofore in the reign of mortality? It is a
promise; and a promise is to be interpreted in favor of the Promisee, as a
Lease in favor of the Lessee. All these plainly to me justify my reading of
this Text, to cast out mortality, from the Saints. And that I may the less
seem presumptuous and singular in this; and withal add something for
illustration, give me leave to show you other famous Translations to the same
tune. First, The Arabic renders this 65. of Isa. 20. thus; Neither shall there
be any more a young man imperfect in age, nor an old man that shall not fulfill
his time. For the young man shall fill up an hundred years: But the SINNER that
after an hundred years dies, shall be accursed. Observe, This Translation casts
out mortality from the Saints, and applies it to Sinners; only (as it were) by
not regarding the common pointing of the Hebrew; by which points, oft-times, we
suffer much; as Arcanum punctationis has abundantly demonstrated. 2 The
seventy Greek Translators, translate much to the same effect, (...), etc.
Neither shall there be any more one that is not ripe ( sc. in age) nor an old
man that has not fulfilled his time. For the young man shall be an hundred
years old; but the sinner that dies a hundred years old, shall be also
accursed. Observe here, as on the Arabic. 3 The Chaldee Paraphrase also
favors our reading, though it does a little differ from the Arabic and Greek
(...) etc. And there shall not be any more an infant of days, and an old man
that fills not his days, because the youth that offends at the age of an
hundred years, shall dye; and he that transgresses in the age of an hundred
years shall be banished: which reaches thus far to our purpose, to signify
that the sinners, not the Saints, shall dye at this time of the glorious
visible state of the Church But do not I stretch the sense of the Chaldee
Paraphrase? To answer this, and to give you a further account of the sense of
that place according to the opinion of the Church at Geneva, and of the
Rabbis; hear the great Critic Ludovick De Dieu his Animadversions on the
place, bringing in his report of their opinions, those things I have before
asserted, with an addition of his own thoughts upon the place. Video
Genevenses, etc. I see (says he) they of Geneva do refer this same (...)
THENCE to time, translating, De la en avaunt, that is, From henceforward. But
Rabbi D. Kimchi refers it to Jerusalem, saying, (...) THENCE, that is, (...)
from Jerusalem, whom Vatablus and Junius follow, and I think ought to be
followed. I for more safety, according to the Heb. (...) with (...) referred it
to both, in that both time and place concur to the thing.
Moreover the Genevenses, or they of Geneva translate the rest, as if the sense
of the Hebrew were this, At that time so great shall be the length of men's
lives, that he that is now an old man, shall then be counted as an infant. And
I see the Hebrews, as R.D. Kimchi, and Sol. Jarchi in their Commentaries, yea
and Jonathan in his Chalde Paraphrase to take the sense of this place to be,
That no man at that time shall be carried out of Jerusalem to burial, who is
but a boy, no nor an old man, unless he has filled up his days; that is,
has lived to that length of life WHICH MEN HAD BEFORE THE FLOOD, etc. Thus far
De Dieu his report of others, viz. The Genevenses, the Hebrews, and the Chalde
Paraphrase; which how closely they concur with us before, I need not multiply
words to open the intelligent eye. Next for De Dieu his own opinion upon the
place; it is true, that he looks upon those hopes of the Jews (to use his own
words) to be but dreams, wherein they do imagine such a marveilous Kingdom of
the Messiah, and such a most happy life of the Jews AT THAT TIME ON EARTH. But
whiles he turns us quite about, we are but AS WE WERE; for he speaks but
tantamount, the same in effect which has been already affirmed. His words are
these; Nos haec spiritualia esse novimus, etc. That is, we know that these
things are spiritual, and so we interpret, There shall not exist from thence
any more an infant of days, and an old man that fills not up his days; that
is, At that time, there shall be another manner of the state of the world, then
there is at present. For in this world many dye Infants; others as it were old
men, of sixty or seventy years of age, few finish their just space of life, to
attain to an hundred years old: But THEN there shall be the same condition of
all, whether of young or old, for all shall fully make up their days. The
Prophet proves it, For the child shall dye an hundred years old; that is, A
child shall not die a child, but shall fulfill the due space of his life. But
the sinner an hundred years old shall be accursed; that is, A child will be
happier in the Kingdom of Christ, then an old man in the Kingdom of the
world. For a child in the Kingdom of Christ SHALL ATTAIN A BLESSED, OR
BEATIFIED PERFECTION OF LIFE. But the sinner in the Kingdom of the world shall
be accursed, even whiles he SEEMS to have attained to a perfection of life.
Thus De Dieu for his own opinion. By which (supposing our consent to all he
says) how far has he carried us from where we were? He says he knows these
things of the Messiahs Kingdom shall be spiritual. We say so too. The
efficient, the form, or manner, the end shall be spiritual, and the enjoyment
shall be spiritualized. But men's souls and bodies shall not be altered in
kind, then they were not men. And the earth shall be earth; or else how is it
called a new Earth? An earth, though renovated. And upon this must Christ's
Kingdom exist, for he shall have none in the supreamest heavens after this on
earth, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. And he confesses that in the Kingdom of Christ shall
be happiness. I say no more, let the Reader judge of the rest.

viz. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to dye; therefore men in the
thousand years must also die. To which we answer, First, It is not said to all
men, but only to men. Secondly, All men are not appointed to die. So the same
Apostle expressly in 1 Cor. 15.51. we shall not all dye (that is the meaning of
sleep) but we shall be changed. Thirdly, Note the distinction of times. It is
true in that 9. of Heb. 27. that before the judgment, men ordinarily die. But
when the judgment comes (which begins at this thousand as we proved before,
because the living wicked are destroyed, and the dead Saints are raised, and
rewarded) I say when the judgment comes, there is no more death, but changing,
1 Cor. 15.1 These. 4. There is yet behind one objection, sc. The last enemy
that is destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.26. as if this Text did argue for death
in the thousand years; but it does not. For we answer, Though that be the last
enemy, yet that is not the last thing done in the seventh Trumpet, or thousand
years: but death is destroyed to the Saints at the beginning of the thousand
years; as we have largely showed before. For verse 23,24. is said every one
shall rise in his own order. Christ first, AFTERWARD ( viz. above one thousand
six hundred and fifty after) they that are Christ's; AFTER that comes the
ultimate end, sc. after a thousand years. As he destroys the death of sin at
the beginning of the sounding of the last Trumpet, v. 52. sc. the seventh Rev.
11. So after the sound of it many things are to be done, before the ultimate
judgment, Ibid. sc. as before showed. At the ultimate judgment death is not
destroyed to the wicked, but reinforced in a worse kind or degree, Rev. 20.14.

SECT. IV.
THe future glorious state on earth, shall be such, as wherein there shall be
No humane ruling Majesty; No Church Censures, No superiority of persons; No
fears; No wants; No desertions; No painful labor; No decay; No procreation of
children.

Sinlesse, Sorrowlesse, Deathlesse, being comprehensive, and as it were
fundamental to the rest, do flow many other particulars, which I shall
distinctly refer to each of these three several heads: But they flow from a
three jointly, as much as the three heads are conjoined, and depend one upon
another by a natural connection; Sin it self being almost formally internal
sorrow, as it is a departing from God, or an eclipse of communion with him, as
well as it is the cause of external sorrows; on the other side sorrow is as it
were no sorrow without sin. For as the sting of death (that great sorrow to
nature) is sin; so sin, either in the cause, or in the concomitance, is the
sting of every sorrow; this either raising sad applications that for such or
such a sin, these sorrows befall us; or rousing, and awakening selfe-vexing
passions, that we bear our sorrows with double sorrow, and dismal discontent.
And so as in a Triangular correspondence, in Death meet the lines both of sin
and sorrow. For had we not sinned, we should not dye, as without some sorrow,
we cannot dye. But I say for more distinctnesse, and to hint the more immediate
rise of each particular qualification, I shall refer them severally, to their
several heads.

First, If this be a sinlesse condition, then there will be no need,

Majesty's, or Magistracies to punish Politic offenses. In this state dwell
all righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. Here the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb; Men and
beasts shall be all at peace, with all peace one with another. The Locusts
(says Solomon Prove. 30.27.) have no King, yet go they forth all by bands,
Grace then perfected, shall be more exact then Nature. Every subject of this
Kingdom shall have the Law so perfectly written in his heart, as shall cause
him exactly to walk in the same. Kings shall submit, and do homage to New
Jerusalem, but not rule over it, Rev. 21.24.

Secondly, No need of Church Censures (though the form of this New-created
state is mostly set forth Church-like, Church-wise, in manner of a Church
state, Rev. 21.) For here shall be no defect in love, or want of order, or
mistakes in judgment, or any weakness in grace, for these were sin; and how
unpossible it is for us to conceive sin to be extant at this resurrection, and
glorious change of believers, we have before demonstrated. Besides all that, in
the text it self, Rev. 21. even in that mention of this glorious state under a
Church form, it is express in verse 27. That there shall in no wise enter any
thing that defiles, etc. that is, that shall deserve censure.

Thirdly, No Superiority of one Saint over another, as to precedence,
subjection, or dependence under any notion. If Christ shall give to some any
preeminencies of endowments, internal, or external, or both, yet will it not
thence follow, that they shall have a supremacy of power over the rest. Christ's
special manifestation of his presence, shall be the one and only immediate
superiority, the Saints among themselves being a joint coordinate body, Dan.
7. v. 14. compared with v. 27. For this cause St. John (as the Learned
conceive) has a vision of the Saints sitting round the Throne, Rev. 4. even as
they shall all sit on Thrones, Rev. 20.4. Subjection even of Eve to Adam came
in by sin, Genesis 3.16. Therefore when sin goes out, Liberty from that subjection
comes in. Consult Romans 8.21. for there is much to this particular, if well
extracted which I leave to the wise Reader, as also the inference of many other
particulars which are deducible from this Sinlesse head.

Sorrowlesse condition, then it will follow, 1 There shall be no fears (for
fear, says St. John, has torment.) And how often before have the Prophets
Prophesied, that the Heirs of this estate once possessing it, shall fear no
more. 2 No Wants, viz. No hunger, nor thirst, says St. John Rev. 7.16. No want
of light, etc. Rev. 21. The state is no less then a new better Paradise, Rev.
21.1. etc. 3 No Desertions (one of the greatest sorrows.) For God is
extraordinarily present, and manifested in his presence. Now the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he dwells with them (Rev. 21.4.) which must be with a
speciality above a mere state of grace, or else nothing new is promised to New
Jerusalem. Therefore it is added, verse 23. The Deity shall be so present, as
that the glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. 4 No
painful labor. This was Adams sorrowful punishment for sin, therefore it
must have no being here. In a word, whatsoever is, or causes sorrow, cannot be
here admitted.


Adam was happy in Paradise in his own person, whiles he had no children. And
now that the Fullness of the Gentiles are come in, and the ALL of ISRAEL are
saved ( Romans 11.) at the time when this glorious state on earth shall be, to
what end, or use, should there be procreation of more children? Besides if this
were granted, then a great part of the seed of the Elect should neither be
raised, nor changed, nor reign on earth a just thousand years; but would come
too late to attain to these three. Our Saviors words I think will rivet all
fast, That at the resurrection, there shall be no Marriage (without which there
can be no lawful and honorable procreation of children, and therefore
Marriage was plighted between Adam and Eve in Paradise by God himself) But all
the Elect shall be in that respect (...) like, or equal to the Angels, who
propagate not their kind.

SECT. V. The future glorious state on Earth shall be Temptation-lesse.
Adam and Eve, who though they were in a Sinlesse condition, yet that while
were liable to temptation. Our condition at this time is set out by a parallel
to answer to Adams condition, Heb. 2. Heb. 4. Romans 5.1 Cor. 15. But in a more
eminent way and degree. If in somethings, now a believers condition is better
in Christ then that of Adam, sc. in our nearer union with God in Christ, Heb.
2. And in a non-possibility of falling totally, Gal. 3.19. Our Covenant is in
the hand of a Mediator, then much more shall our condition be better at this
first resurrection; Adam could be tempted, and fall in Paradise; we shall
neither fall, nor be tempted to fall. We must be conformable to Christ's
glorious body after his resurrection, Phil. 3.21. Christ was tempted before his
resurrection, and he overcame. But after he was not tempted, so we shall not.
If we might be tempted, this were not a sorrowlesse condition. It was a part of
Christ's great humiliation that he was tempted, though he could not be prevailed
against. If wicked men, the instruments, shall not be near to tempt them, then
nor Satan the Author. So the Text Rev. 19. The wicked are removed, Chap. 20.
Satan is removed, bound up that he should not seduce the Nations any more;
which phrase would be weighed more then it is. I have before showed in our
answer to Doctor Prideaux, That the word (...) signifies any the least
temptation. And now I add that for ought I know (...) may fitly be rendered,
Satan shall not to that end wander up and down among the Nations. The Greek
may bear it. And the context speaks for it. For were all those expressions and
acts, sc. laid hold on, and bound him, cast him into the pit, and sets a seal,
only to that end, that he might not seduce? If God had only laid his command,
it had been enough to restrain his acting, as when Christ commanded him out of
the possessed. Rather therefore the meaning is, that he might not have so much
as the liberty to peragrare Gentes, to wander up and down over the Nations. It
must not be with him as in the days of the Churches afflictions, Job. 1.7. and
1 Pet. 5.8. Now he is held chained, cast down, sealed, that he may not wander.
(...) the active is to wander as planets, that compass the Earth. And (...)
the middle voice signifies to wander from place to place, viz. (...) (as the
Greek Critics give instance) obire multa loca, to travel over much ground. And
Christ says, Now is the hour of temptation, and the Kingdom of patience.
Then the Kingdom of perfect peace, purity, and exultation, Rev. 11. Rev. 20.
Rev. 21. The Serpent then shall only eat his dust, Isa. 65.25. in opposition to
Genesis 3.14. And the devil that abused his body shall be shut up. Now shall be
fulfilled that promise, Romans 20.16. The God of PEACE (mark Gods title) shall
tread Satan under your feet, etc. Now that Satan is in the pit, he must be
under their feet, while the Saints stand on their feet on earth; Satan must be
under them; As all things under Christ's feet, Heb. 2. As for Satan's utter
prevailing, that was subdued when the Apostle spoke those words, For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3.8. Observe it is said works, etc. therefore now Satan himself
must be under their feet, as that text speaks, Romans 16.20. now is to be
fulfilled perfectly that Heb. 2.8. etc. All must be subject to Christ: And he
must destroy death, AND HIM THAT HAD THE POWER OF DEATH, WHICH IS the Devil,
verse 14. So that that time that is a Deathlesse condition, is a Devil-lesse, a
Satanlesse time. And as in Rev. 20.7. the letting loose of Satan, and Satan's
tempting go together; so by an Antithesis, Satan's binding, and his
Non-tempting, go together, verse 3. Indeed it is said so frequently in the
Revelation, that at the seventh Trumpet at this first Resurrection, when Christ
reigns, and the Saints with him on Earth, that their business shall be to joy,
praise, triumph, and sing Hallelujahs, Rev. 5. Rev. 7. Rev. 14. and Rev. 19.5.
or six times in the beginning of that Chapter, that it cannot enter into the
thoughts of the purest reason, that there should be any sad songs of Satan sung
to the ears of a Saint; Sin and temptation are more sad then death to a Saint,
and therefore if the lesser sorrow, and death shall be gone at this time, then
much more temptation. If nothing that defiles shall enter into this state,
then not the unclean spirit, as Christ calls him. O glorious time! when there
shall be no disposition within, nor temptation without to sin; but so full of
God and happiness in manifestation of Christ, that there shall be no thoughts,
but in relation to him. The souls of the Elect shall not return to their
bodies to be tempted; that were their loss. And the living Saints are changed,
therefore to a state of grace, beyond that now which at present is liable to
Temptation.

SECT. VI. The next Quality is the RESTORATION OF ALL THE CREATURES.
AS Isa. 65.17. it is said, there must be New Heavens, sc. a New Church State,
so a New Earth, a New natural politic state of persons and things. For there
is mention of plantings, and enjoying of them. And verse 25. of the Wolf
dwelling with the Lamb, etc. and that dust shall be the Serpents meat, no
devouring or hurting. So the close, They shall not destroy, nor hurt in all the
holy Mountain. Of this of the Wolf, etc. we spoke once before largely on Isa.
11.6, 7, 8, 9. which Lactantius takes literally. See before, and after the
Text, it is intended for the time we speak of. And the reason of all is, For
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Sea. Knowledge signifies often all spirituals, and here imports that there shall
be such an abundant manifestation of Gods presence, that all whether taken
literally, or metaphorically, shall be as in Paradise, before Adams fall. So
Psalm. 8. makes Genesis 1.26. A Prophecy, or Type, or both, of what man shall
enjoy in after times. And Heb. 2. applies Psalm: 8. to the time we speak of. And
Heb. 4. applies Gods resting the seventh day to a Sabbatisme on earth yet to
come. So the 2 Pet. 3. and Rev. 21.1. apply the New Heavens, and New Earth to
the said time; and call it the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven. And the addition to the glory of this New Jerusalem shall be a luster
of all creatures, materials of building shall be like all manner of precious
stones, and men shall be like Angels, Kings honoring the Church. No sea, sc.
to devour, but adorn, and comfort man; if it be not in a great part crusted
into a crystal body like heaven above, consolidated for men to travel upon and
come together, and to shine, to add an inlightning to the earth for more glory.

Add to all this that of Romans 8.18. As vox naturae, THE VOICE OF NATURE, for
our point full to our purpose, though (it may be) not heeded for this purpose.
For Peter gives us a good item, when, being about to speak of the New Heavens,
and New Earth, 2 Pet. 3. He tells us in v. 3. That before that, shall be
scoffers and slighters of this opinion of Christ's coming; they will be as
heedlesse as men were before the renovation of the world by Noah's flood, Chap.
2. And then having spoken of the New Heavens, etc. according to Gods promise,
verse 13. then in the 14. verse, he exhorts men to be diligent, to be found
blameless, etc. As, says he, Our beloved brother Paul speaks of these things
in all his Epistles, which unlearned, and unstable men wrest. So that in Peter's
judgment many things of this New Heavens, and New Earth, and of this glorious
time are in Paul's Epistles, but being (as Peter hints,) profoundly delivered,
are not understood by many, but perverted (as we see at this time.) Well, let
us understand Paul better then so; In that Romans 8. verse 18. etc. The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us; mark, REVEALED, and IN US. It is a bringing
down glory to us, into us. Then it follows (verse 19.) The earnest expectation
of the creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. Mark, It is
here plain, that the natural creature is meant, not the spiritual new
creature, viz. the regenerated souls. They are the Sons of God. And these two
are contradistinct. And mark further, that it is said, It waits for the
manifestation of the Sons of God; whereas glory in the highest heavens is an
hiding of them from the Creation, and would disappoint it of its expectation;
which must not be, because that expectation and waiting is the instinct of the
creature: And that is so much, as that it may not be in vain. By that a tree
grows to his period of age, be it in never so many hundred years, etc.
Accidentals of wens and warts, winds and weathers, do not eradicate his
instinct. The curse is accidental to the creature, not of the essence; the
creation still by instinct looks for his former state in Adam; and therefore as
notwithstanding nipping winter, the creature every spring has its petty
resurrections, as types and pledges of the great, as the little Jubilee of the
great: So its expectation (by instinct) shall not fail of the great
Restoration. And this accidental, the Apostle argues in the next verse, sc.
20. The creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly sc. not essentially,
of its essential frame, but by reason of him who subdued it under hope; i. e.
The creature was made substantially glorious, essentially exceeding good; and
then after Adams fall (which that it was the same day, or suddenly after his
creation, I cannot yet believe; Divines best reasons are not to me convincing.
I cannot think that God would make such an excellent piece to be like a
bubble, or spark. Though in the third Chapter of Genesis is presently mention
of Adams fall; and Chapter 4. of Adams two sons, yet Adam was an hundred and
thirty years old when he had his third son, sc. Seth.) I say then after Adams
fall it was subject to vanity, i. e. fading, and unconstant with changes, by
Winter and Summer, by him who subjected it, sc. by Gods curse on the creature,
not in anger to it, but as a punishment to man, whom as a Lord, they should
have served. But God subjected it not for ever to that condition, but under
hope. As he cursed man not forever, but gave him a promise of salvation by the
seed of the woman Christ, that the Serpents head shall be bruised scrooched.
And so as man by distinct hope waits, and God is mindful of that promise
above four thousand years after, Romans 16.10. So the creatures have an instinct
of hope impressed on their essence, that they shall be restored. And here is a
promise for it in this 8. of Romans verse 21. That in perfection they shall serve
their Lord, viz. Man being restored to his perfection by the man Christ Jesus.
There is a shadow of this instinct in all plants, sleeping birds, etc. in that
they live in Winter in secret, and every Spring put forth in hope, as the
Apostle speaks, that the time is come. And if that be not the time, then at
next Winter they retire again, and wait another Winter. Just as men did
rationally, Luke 24.21. we hoped that this had been he, etc. And Act. 1. Mr.
Will thou then at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel. If not, they must
wait longer. And as men distinctly, so the creation instinctly: For the promise
is sure to both. Verse 21. The creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. (See
again, the creature and the sons of God are two distinct things.) To
understand the mind of the words, note first, that Bondage imports, the
creature came into this condition, not from its original essence, and first
constitution, but accidentally, and violently, by man's corruption, sc. the Fall
in Adam. Secondly, Note that corruption is of three sorts.

1 In a physical or natural respect as now the natures of all the creation are
corruptible, dissolvable, fading, as in Autumn, Winter, or other periods, or to
be corruptible with malignant qualities, as the elements of air, water, etc.
and plants grow unwholesome, etc. The Stars to be ecclipsed, clouded, and
stained with malevolent constellations, blasting, and hurting things below, and
all to the defacing of their glory, and dis-service to the Saints. 2 In Civil
respects or uses; They are worn and wasted, and wearied, and bruised, for the
use of man; As Land, Cattle, Plants, etc. 3 In a spiritual respect; so by the
sin and corruption yet remaining in the best of men they are made to serve
for sinful uses, not only by the wicked, but sometimes by the Saints; as when
they are used to superfluous superabounding banqueting, or to please our pride,
or the vanity of our minds, etc.
Now to be delivered from this corruption into the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God, imports, That as the Saints shall now be advanced to the full
liberty of the Sons of God, sc. they shall be no more under the bondage of
infirmities of nature, or Satan's temptations, or the imperiousness of sin, or
the violence of unjust men, but shall be naturally, civilly, and spiritually,
free from having, receiving, or doing any hurt, their state shall be a full
liberty, and a glorious one; so all the creatures of the whole creation shall
partake of the same liberty thus far.

1 They shall be delivered from the corruption and fading that adheres to their
nature. 2 They shall be delivered from the violence done to them by men. 3 From
their sinful use. 4 Shall be delivered to their right owner, viz. to the second
Adam, and his posterity who shall only use them well. As man shall not sweat
and toil in labor which was the curse on Adam after his fall, and therefore
now to be taken off; so man shall not oppress and grieve, and discourage the
creature. How plain then is this Text, of the Restoration of the Creation, to
them that will understand; And this was never yet fulfilled, but spoken to
Saints, as yet expecting it, verse 22.23. The creature groans, and travelleth
in pain till now, sc. under the corruption before explained, and not only they,
but we our selves, who also have the first fruits of the Spirit, groan within
our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. See,
creature, and the Saints are still distinguished. The Text is spoken to them
that have the spirit, yet still they groan with the whole Creation for a
restoration of all, as for a thing not yet come to pass. And this cannot be
in the supreamest Heaven. The Creation cannot groan for that. Nor can it groan
for a dissolution at the last day of judgment, therefore let the wise
understand these things.
Lactantius says, of this Restoration, When the thousand years come, the
world shall bring forth fruit alone; and the Rock shall distill dew, and no
creature shall live upon prey. The dog shall not hunt, and the child shall not
be afraid of the Serpent. I add; If in these corrupt times the Beast knows
his Master, sure then all creatures shall be most kind to Saints, and Saints
shall know more perfectly all the creatures, and be more kind to them. The
lowest of this state, as I have often told you, and proved, shall be according to
that of Adams innocence; and therefore as all creatures came tamely before
Adam, and Adam gave them all names, Genesis 2.19. so all now shall be tame toward
man. And if after that in that corrupt time of the old world. Noah and the
creatures were saved together in one Arc, then now also shall all the
creatures in their kind enjoy the liberty of the Sons of God, as we heard
before in Romans 8.

Adam in innocence saw Eve, and knew she was his wife; and yet without sin. In
the Transfiguration Moses and Elijah are known. The Disciples know Christ
risen. And Lazarus after he was raised. Then in the intent and meaning, Dives
shall see Lazarus in Abraham's bosom. And some Jews shall see Abraham, and
Isaac in the Kingdom, and they themselves cast out; therefore Saints much more
shall know one another. We shall know Christ, and so all the members of Christ.

Creation. And to what end? That the Saints may enjoy all in their perfection;
that all things in their perfection may be restored to their right Owners. Jure
in equity, all now, is ours that believe, 1 Cor. 3. the three last verses. But
then de facto in act, Rev. 21.7. They shall inherit all things. Till then the
great ones of the earth take almost all from the Saints. As in Dan. 7. first
eight verses, the fourth Beast took all. But at the time we speak of it, shall
be that Dan. 7.27. And the Kingdom, and Dominion and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most High. Which relates to the time we speak of, as has been proved.

SECT. VII. A Timelesse state.
THe next Quality is, That when this visible glorious state of Church shall
come, TIME shall be no more, Rev. 10.6. Time is a Quantity; But no more time
refers also to Qualities. Note two circumstances of this assertion. First, It
was spoken after the sixth Trumpet had sounded, Rev. 9.13. therefore this looks
toward the seventh Trumpet, viz. to the time of the Churches visible glory.
Secondly, It is spoken ( Rev. 10.1.) by a mighty Angel coming down from
Heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a Rainbow about his head. His face as the
Sun, His feet as a Pillar of fire, and had in his hand a little book;
therefore this was spoke in relation to the time of Christ's appearing; for He
comes down from Heaven, and clothed with a cloud, at his appearance, Chap.
1.7. And the Rainbow signifies that he comes as the Angel of the Covenant,
Mal. 3.1. Rev. 4.3. Sun is also the description of Christ's coming, Rev. 1.
verse 16. and Malach. 4.2. so his feet, as Pillars of fire, Rev. 1. And the
little Book, Chapter 5. And a mighty Angel sc. Michael, Dan. 12. i.e. Who is
as God, called Gods-fellow, Zach. 13.7. Phil. 2.8. All these signify the
manner of Christ's appearing; Which appearance is at the seventh Trumpet, Rev.
11.15. And here, after he had cried, and caused the seven thunders, he swears
Time shall be no more; therefore this of Non-time, refers to this time of the
Churches visible glory. Now Christ's swearing it, and with such solemnity
standing on the Sea, and Earth, and lifting up his hand to Heaven, swearing by
himself, who lives for ever, and made all things, does import some great
matter. I may import these five things.

1 Most likely there shall be no more motion of the heavens, which is the cause
of time. The stars shall rest. Isa. 60.20. Rev. 21.25. 2 There shall be no more
changes, Tempus edax rerum, Time makes old, and at last dissolves. Time causes
Summer and Winter; and so causes much alteration in all bodies; and the
alteration of men's bodies, much reflects on their spirits. Now there being no
more cause of changes, there shall be no more changes. However the Elect, once
for all, at Christ's appearing at the beginning of the thousand years, are
raised, or changed to an essential perfection; therefore no change from better
to worse. 3 For if no more time, then Eternity is begun, and therefore all must
stand fixed in their perfection, like Eternity; not well to day, weak to
morrow; cheerful to day, and melancholy to morrow; but the Saints shall be
stable, and all things stable about them; Friends, creatures, etc. shining in
beams of love, and standing in a straight line of constant service. All things
that can pass away, all old things, and all that can wax old are gone, and
all become new, Rev. 21.1-4, 5. As New Jerusalem, comes out of Heaven; so it
shall be like Heaven; No change: No other Alpha and Omega, first and last, but
Christ himself, so is the close, of former things gone, Rev, 21.6. Now he is
the everlasting God, before all, and after all, and still the same, Heb. 13. The
man that changes changes first, and chiefly in his head, Eccles. 12. His hair
white. His eyes dim. His cheeks wrinkled. But our head cannot change. There
shall be no sad remembrance, that we were so happy, but now we are worse, but
our Motto is semper idem; i.e. Always the same. 4 No more time, signifies,
There shall be no more time for abusers of time. No time for the things that
have caused sorrowful times to the Saints. There shall be no more time, for any
kind of evil to the Church. Which is added to this All-New condition Rev.
21.4. As there shall be no place, so no more time for any sorrowful, or
sorrow-making things, or persons, or mutable matters, Christ will not allow
them an hour, nor a minute in the Church. Dives had his time: Their glass is
run. Christ's hour is come: The Son of righteousness arises, the dark must
be gone. 5 This imports, that the happiness of Saints shall not be given them
by measure of time. Tempus est numerus motus, Time is measured motion. Saints
shall not be happy so long, and no longer. This thousand years is the prelude
to everlasting infinite glory. Saints shall not need to wish, saying, This is a
happy condition if it would hold. So that as miseries shall not have the least
time allowed them on earth; so the Saints mercies shall not be measured out to
continue only so long, and no longer. The thousand years are the preface, and
then Magog stirring at last, gives Christ occasion to give them the Saints
everlasting infinite enjoyment. So that in the glorious state of the Church
shall be no measuring it out by time, as so long to continue, and no longer. It
shall be a thousand years happy on earth. But then it is not said shall be an
end. But this is swallowed up of a greater. Of this stability of things at this
time, see further in Isa. 33.6. (spoken in relation to the call of Jews, etc.)
wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of times, and strength of
salvation, and the fear of the Lord thy treasure. As grace shall not period
with time: And God cannot period with time; so, nor the Churches condition.
Isa. 60.19. The Sun shall be no more thy light, by day, nor the Moon thy
brightness by night, but the Lord shall be thy EVERLASTING LIGHT, and thy God
thy glory, (which applied to Church state in the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 21.23)
It follows, Isa. 60.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy
Moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and the
days of thy mourning shall be at an end. Rather then the Sun and Moon shall
play fast and loose with the Church, they shall not Move. There shall be no
more Sun set, or change of the Moon; No measuring out Saints happiness by
times.
SECT. VIII. The next Quality is, That at this time there shall be a perfection
of all qualities, both natural, and spiritual in the Saints.
No measuring by fading time; so now we affirm no stinting to an infirm
degree. Now there shall be no lower degree then a freedom from all
imperfection, Zach. 12.8. Its spoken of this time, see verse 12. viz. When the
Jews shall see Christ, and mourn, and repent, and be filled with grace. Then
verse 8. He, that is feeble shall be as David. And the house of David as God
(better rendered as Angels. The Hebrew is Kelohim. Elohim often signifying Angels,
and here is an Incrementum, so that the last must be highest;) then it follows
as the Angel of God. Hebrew is emphatical Hamaleak the name of Christ, Malach..
3. The sense then is, They shall be as Christ's, how strong the feeble shall be,
viz. as strong, firm and sublime, in perfection as David. And how shall David
be? As an Angel. Yea as Christ. Suitable to 1 Cor. 15. We shall be conformable
to Christ. And Phil. 3.21. Our bodies like his glorious body. And 1 Cor. 13.12.
Know as we are known, our graces shall be as Rivers in the Ocean, Isa. 11.9.
So that as our perfection cannot period, so nor last by vicissitudes, as now,
sometimes up, sometimes sink; but shall be still at full height.

SECT. IX. A Confluence of all Comforts, in the injoyers, and enjoyed.
Pet. 1. (who in 2 Epist. 3. Chapter speaks of this glorious time) I say as it
is said, 1 Pet. 1. verse 3, 4, 5. He has begotten us again to a lively hope,
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ to an inheritance incorruptible, RESERVED
IN HEAVEN, for you, who are kept by the power of God ready to be REVEALED in
the LAST TIME; so now in this Heaven (as it is called, Rev. 21.) the
inheritance is kept perfect to us, and us in it. Of this see all the 35.
Chapter of Isa. We did before demonstrate that, that Isa. 34. relates to this
time we speak of. And this 35. Chapter is but a part of the same discourse. As
the form, viz. the 34. Chapter is of the ruin of the Churches enemies, and
the delivery of the Church; so this 35. Chapter is a description what the
Church shall enjoy, Viz. (verse 1.) The solitary places shall be glad for them,
and the Desert shall rejoice, and blossom like a rose. (Verse 2.) The glory of
Lebanon shall be given to it. The excellency of Carmel, and Sharon shall see
the glory of the Lord. (Verse 3.) Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm
the feeble knees. (Verse 4.) Say unto them that are of a fearful heart; be
strong, fear not, behold your God will come with vengeance, he will come and
save you. (Verse 5.) The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the deaf
ears unstopped. (Verse 6.) Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the
tongue of the dumb sing, for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and
streams in the desert. (Verse 7.) The parched ground shall become a poole, and
the thirsty land, springs of waters. In the habitation of Dragons shall be
grass and rushes. (Verse 8.) An highway there shall be, and it shall be
called the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it. Fools shall
not err therein. (Verse 9.) No Lion shall be there, nor ravenous beast shall
go up thereon, but the redeemed shall walk there. (Verse 10.) And the ransomed
of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon
their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow, and sighing
shall fly away. Ye see how all happiness is upon the possession, and the
Possessor. The possession shall not be defective and unserviceable, and the
Possessour shall not by any impediment be hindered of his enjoyment. All the
Injoyers and Enjoyments shall be varnished with beauty, environed with peace,
enlarged with liberty, perpetuated with stable equability.

1 Varnished with beauty. As Homer says of the Golden Sea, because of the
beams of the Sun raditing upon it; so the Church, and all the Churches
enjoyments shall be gilded with beams, gilded with beams of Christ's glorious
presence. At this time Christ shall arise as the Sun, Malach. 4. (as we have
showed) compared with 2 Pet. 1.19. And because he arises, and shines on the
Church, therefore the Church shall arise and shine, as the Sun rising in the
East, looks on the Moon, and makes it at the full in the West, Isa. 60.1, 2.
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. Darkness on the earth, and people thereof, but the Lord shall rise upon
thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. This shining is inward and
outward. For as the Church shall shine in her self, with Gods beams. So verse
3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising. And verse 6. They from Sheba, etc. shall bring gold, and incense, and
shall show forth the praises of the Lord. Accordingly, Rev. 21, as the Church
is glorious in her self, so from without, verse 24. The Nations of them that
are saved shall walk in the light of the Church, which God shines on it, and
Kings shall bring their honor unto it. As is the glory of the Sun in its
ascending over every Horizon; is the glory of the world. In the inside in the
life of all things. In the outside in the light and luster on all. So shall it
be with the Church. If in this time (as Isa. 30.26.) At the day the Lord
binds up the breach of his people, the light of the Moon shall be as the
light of the Sun, etc. So gloriously shall God manifest himself to the Church,
that all glory shall her condition be. As New Jerusalem is new decked, etc.
Rev. 21. So all her buildings, walls, streets, gates, etc. (according to Isa.
54. verse 11.) are compared to gold, and all precious stones, which comparison
of glorious gold, and precious stones, etc. import all manner of glory of the
Church. If our bodies shall be conformed to Christ's glorious body; so every
bodily thing shall have the highest perfection that it was created in. And the
best jewels and treasures shall not be appropriated to Heathens, Atheists,
Popish, Hypocrites, or graceless Kings, and Princes, and Potentates. But if it
may add to the Churches glory, they shall be brought to the Church as right
owner.

2 Environed with peace and safety. Christ the King and Prince of peace. Heb.
7. Isa. 9. Creates peace for all his subjects far and near, Isa. 57.19. sc. As
inward peace: So outward too: Isa. 65. last, No preying on one another, no
destroying, no hurting. So Psalm. 72.3.7. See the Title, sc. A Psalm for
Solomon, sc. Solomon the Great, sc. Christ. The Mountains shall bring peace to
the people, and little hills by righteousness. In his days shall the righteous
flourish, and abundance of peace, as long AS THE MOON INDURES. See by this,
what Solomon is meant. Mountains and Hills signify that Emperors, Princes,
Dukes Lords, etc. shall no longer, as Mountains shadow the Church, by
oppression, or that men shall not make mountains, and hills holds, and
garrisons to subdue the Church. Isa. 11.6. There shall be peace between Man and
all creatures between Children and Aspes, the Wolf and Lamb, Cow and Bear; of
which (say two learned Authors) there is both a spiritual and litteral sense.
All men with their great power, glory, wits, policies, and potency, shall be so
tame as a child may rule them, and all creatures shall be restored as in the
day of Creation. Calvin upon this 11. of Isa. 6. says, That the Prophet aims
at a further thing then we are aware of. For it intimates (says he) a
restoration of all things as at the first creation; and so goes on in many
words. See, learned men consul^o handling this question, are lost in
Allegories: but when they are off of that question, sincerely weighing the
places of Scripture tending to it, then it drops from them ere they are aware.
So Calvin here. So Pareus on Romans 8. is against Pareus on Rev. 20.

3 Enlarged with liberty. It is the great year of Jubilee, even in the opinion
of the Jews. As it is freedom from all evil, as we have showed, so a freedom
to enjoy all good. They shall have the waters of life, the comforts of the
Gospel free for their use, Rev. 22.17. and enough for all. And the Tree of
life, Christ free for all to enjoy him fully. Verse 2. And the Gates of the
Church are always open, freely for all Saints to enter, Rev. 21. They shall
be as free in all enjoyments as in heaven; for this is an Heaven.

4 Perpetuated with stable equability. Now they fully enjoy him that is the
first and last (with an even continuance) the heavens and earth must be as one
as he pleases, Isa. 48.12, 13. And this his Title of Alpha and Omega, Christ
makes his preface, Rev. 1.17, to the glorious Catastrophe, Rev. 20.4. etc. to
the end of the Bible. Now the substance of all eternity is entered upon. Christ,
the everlasting Father, the eternal God, the everlasting Spirit, and Covenant,
etc. must now appear in a perpetuated stability of all perfect Church glory to
all the Elect. Magog shall not interrupt, but occasionally promote the Churches
eternal bliss. Therefore now let not our hearts be unstable in hope, nor our
affections unstable in love, nor our judgments unstable in principles, nor our
practice unstable in duties, and ordinances. Remember the evil of the foolish
Virgins. Remember the good precepts and promises of Christ, as a warning us
before his coming (now at hand) Rev. 22.7.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. v. 7. I
come quickly, blessed is he that keeps these sayings of this Prophecy.
Verse. 11. Let him that is righteous, be righteous still. 12. Behold I come
quickly, and my reward is with me. I am Alpha and Omega; sc. I make no other
end, or beginning, but happiness in, and with me. 14. Blessed are they that
keep his commandments, that they may eat of the Tree of life, and enter the
Gates of the City of the Church. Without shall be Dogs. They that are found out
of it, shall go for Dogs. 16. I Jesus have sent my Angel to testify these
things to the CHURCHES. 17. He that testifies these things says, Surely I
come quickly; then John concludes as I, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

SECT. X. This state will have the face and character of Eternity.
IN the three last Qualities of this state of the Church; sc. First, No more
time. Secondly, A perfection of Qualities, natural and spiritual in the
Saints. Thirdly, A confluence of all comforts in the injoyer, and the
enjoyment: I say in regard of these three, This state of the Church will have
the face, a semblance of Eternity, the property and character of Eternity. For
the idiom, and peculiar of Eternity is to give a man all parts and degrees of
his comfort at once, throughout every moment of Eternity. In Time is
succession, where is the beginning, middle, and the end; The embrion, augment,
and the highest perfection that that comfort will amount to; but in Eternity, a
man is as happy the first moment as ten thousand years after, if there were any
time in Eternity. So here proportionably, the Saints bliss after Christ has
begun the compleatnesse of this estate shall be as full at first, as at last.
The difference from a state in Time, is as in these comparisons. As the Summer
Sun rising, ascending, and setting, differs from the heavens continued into
one whole Sun, whereby it would be always day, and always glorious Summer;
And as a River differs from a Sea of sweet waters, the River exists by
succession, the Sea is still the same fixed; So in this state we speak of,
Every enjoyment, and injoyer, shall be as full at first in perfection and joy
as at last.

CHAP. V.
THus of Qualities, now we come to Privileges, sc. That which Saints had
before, either in common with others, or in an ordinary degree, they shall now
have in a way of special Privilege, and pre-eminence.

SECT. I.
First Privilege, The fulfilling of most things that before were but foretold.

Mysteries and Prophesies, which before they had but in the Word, now they
shall have in the thing.

1 For Mysteries. See Rev. 11.19. The Temple of God was opened, and there was
seen in his Temple the Arc of his Testament. This clearly relates to the time
we speak of, as it is evident in verse 15. The seventh Angel sounded, etc. And
the Temple of God was opened in Heaven. By comparing this with Rev. 21. verse
22, the thing is plainer, And I saw no Temple therein; but the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb was the Temple. And this also relates to the same time.
See verse 1. I saw New Heaven, and New Earth. Verse 2. And I saw New Jerusalem.
This Prophecy plainly foretells of a kind of Temple in those days, of which
we speak. In Ezekiel. we have much of the measures of the Temple. So Ezekiel.
Chapter 41. and 42. etc. clearly relating to a New Testament time by St. John's
exposition, Rev: 21. And Malachy tells us, Chap. 3. verse 1. The Lord will
suddenly come to his Temple. And John says, Rev. 7.15. The Saints serve God
day and night in his Temple. Chap. 11.1. The Temple is measured. Chap. 14, 15,
17. Angels come out of the Temple. Chap. 15.5. The Temple of the Tabernacle of
the Testimony in heaven was opened. Chap. 16.1.17. Voices come out of the
Temple. And in the Text we alleged Chap. 11. v. 19. The Temple of God was
open, and the Arc was seen. Now what is the meaning of all? Surely a Temple
equivalently they shall have; But no Temple properly, as it is said, Rev. 21.
v. 22. I saw no Temple; But God and the Lamb was that equivalent Temple, yea
that super-eminent Temple. And the presence of God in Christ shall be such
with them; that (as Rev. 11.19.) that spiritual Arc shall not be hid, as was
the material Ark in the Old Testament Temple, but shall be seen. In the Ark was
the Table of the Law, and the Pot of Manna. Christ the end of the Law, Romans
10.4. And Christ and his word is the Manna. Rev. 2. The Arc was in the holiest
of Holies which was seldom seen, and only when the High Priest went in. But
now this spiritual Arc in this glorious time is commonly seen. Observe, That
the Arc typified Christ and his Word; As the Temple was a pledge of Gods
presence, as before that the Tabernacle was: So that the meaning is, That now
Gods presence shall be such in, and through Christ to his Church, that the
glory of Christ, and the mystery of his word, shall be far more plain unto
them. There shall be no material Temple; but there shall be the equivalent
Temple, the Antitype, Gods presence in Christ gloriously manifest. And his Word
more open and plain then ever since the New Testament. All mysteries relating
to this time, foretold, shall be revealed. Now shall be fulfilled that Dan.
12. Knowledge shall be increased. And that Isa. 11. The earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea. All that men had
before in the ear, now they shall have in the eye; their science shall be
turned to experience.

2 All Prophesies relating to the best of Times of the Saints welfare shall now
be fulfilled. The Saints shall not have these things only in types, visions,
or knowledge, but in possession, and happy enjoyment. The Revelation is the
sum of all the Prophets. This is declared to John by Christ, Rev. 1. sc. in a
representation. And therefore it is said, Rev. 22.6. The Lord God of the holy
Prophets sent his Angel, to show unto his servants the sayings of the Prophecy
of this Book. The intent and meaning is, That the Lord God that spoke by the
Prophets, and spoke of these things by the Prophets, sent by his Angel to
explain those things delivered by the Prophets concerning these times of which
we speak. Now this Book of the Revelation, though it be far plainer then the
Prophets, yet it is not fully and wholly plain to us, therefore called A sealed
Book, that Christ must open, Rev. 5. This opening is by the events, Rev. 6.
etc. which will be completely done in this visible glorious time of the Church,
as we may perceive by the light now at the dawning before the Sun of
righteousness does arise. Christ is the Yea and Amen of all the promises, 2
Cor. 1.20. therefore when he appears again, all will appear fulfilled. As the
woman of Samaria said, Joh. 4. so it shall be, sc. when the Messiah comes,
which is called the Christ, he shall tell us all things; yea restore all
things, Act. 3. Therefore is Christ called the WORD of GOD, and the Heir of
all things, because he will declare and perform all things.

Bolton says of everlasting glory in the highest Heaven, shall be
proportionably true now, in this thousand years. We shall perfectly understand
all Physical, or natural, and spiritual things, what is the number of the
Heavens; The essences of the creaures; How we shall know and behold God in
Christ, etc: And then shall be fulfilled all the prayers of Saints put up for
the welfare of Church and Saints from the beginning of the world; Then shall
Sem and Japhet dwell together; Then those prayers that gave God no rest till he
made Jerusalem a praise, shall be answered, and all the glorious things that
have been spoken of the Church, the City of God shall appear in their colors,
and be given in, in great glory: As it is said, she is the Lords portion, Deuteronomy.
32.9. His pleasant portion, Jer. 12.10. His inheritance, Isa. 19.25. All people
are the work of his hands, but his Church is his Inheritance. Again the Church
is called the Dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. His love, his dove, his
undefiled, all fair, etc. Cant. often. His Treasure, and peculiar treasure, Ex.
19 5. The Lords house of glory, Isa. 60.7. Yea His glory, Isa. 46.13. and THE
glory of God, Jer. 3.17. Nay the Throne of his glory, Jer. 14.21. Nay the
Crown of his glory, Isa. 62.3. Nay the Royal Diadem, Ibid. Again the Church
is called, The ornament of God, the beauty of his ornaments, the beauty of his
ornament in Majesty, Ezekiel. 7.20. Yea the Church is called Christ's body, Christ's
fullness presented without spot, Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 5. Now all these in the thousand
years must be fully fulfilled, Rev. 21. throughout.

SECT. II.
The Second Privilege is, A superabundant pouring out of the Spirit.

Saints ever since they believed, have had the Spirit in some measure, sc. as a
Spirit of Adoption, and Sanctification; so these are in Romans 8. viz. v. 10. and
v. 15. But now they shall have it in a more exceeding abounding manner, and
measure, both for gifts and graces.

Joel 2.28. Afterward I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions, and also upon the servants, and upon the
handmaids in those days, will I pour out my Spirit. I did before in the Quod
sit, prove, First, That this did relate to the time we speak of. Secondly,
That that pouring out, Act. 2. was but the first fruits, sc. Spirit was
abundantly poured out but upon some few.

And Dan. 12. verse 2, 3, and 4. it is prophesied of this time, Many of them
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, etc. and they that be wise
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. And knowledge shall be
increased. The demonstration of this place to belong to this time we speak of,
you have heard before.

SECT. III.
The third Privilege; A wonderful return of prayers.

ISaiah 65.24. It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer,
and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear. That these words are within the
body of a maine Prophecy, of the visible glory of the Church in the time we
speak of, we have abundantly proved before. And you your selves may see, by
weighing verse 17. before sc. I create New Heavens, and a New Earth, etc.
(compared with 2 Pet. 3.) and 25. after: The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb,
etc. they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all the holy mountain. And this same
verse, sc. 24. which I urge, Mr. Archer also urges to the same purpose, in his
Book of Christ's Reign on Earth, page 31. saying, That at this time there shall
be a full and present answer to all their prayers. At this time, the reversion
of all the prayers of all former ages will come into the Churches hands; the
effect of all those will flow in upon the Church unto a sea of happiness. And
if this Church at present makes any prayers, they shall have a present answer.
The Text says, Before they call. The Hebrew is rendered both by the Latins,
Greek, Sir. and Arab. Before they cry out. So that before they pray as men in
extremity, or distress, God will answer, which is plain by that which
follows: For whiles they are speaking, even in their hearts, whiles they are
but thinking prayer, their desires shall be fulfilled. Mr. Bolton says, that
whiles the Saints are but thinking the desire of moving from one place to
another, from one company of Saints and Angels to another (whether in heaven,
or on earth, or both, for most probably, heaven and earth in common shall at
last be the Sea of bliss, both being made equally glorious) they shall move
thither even in an imperciptible time, that is, very suddenly: Now every thing
must be completed in its prime; and therefore whatsoever requests the Saints
may then make as comporting with that state, it shall be (to use Christ's words
which then must be fulfilled to purpose) But ask and have. It is true, this
state shall be a state of perfection, but it does exist on this side the last
loosing of Satan, the rising of Gog and Magog, and the ultimate general
judgment; What requests the Saints may then make we cannot affirm. But sure if
they make any, they shall be without sin or sorrow (as before we have largely
intimated.) The word prayer in Scripture comprehends praises, and praises,
prayers; as David calls his Psalms Thillim, Praises, though they contain many
Prayers. That in this state the Church shall abound with praises the Revelation
does often hint, as Rev. 11. Rev. 14. Rev. 19. And even as Christ lays not
down his Mediatorship till the end of the thousand years in diverse respects
(of which before) so perhaps the Saints may make some kind of prayers; As, for
the exercise of their communion with God; the use of their graces, the
receivall of reciprocal impressions, for the continuation of their present
state (though God has assured them it shall not fail) prayer being the
conduit of the fluxive River-like flowing in of it; And for the finishing of
their present state to the utmost supernal eternal glory. I tenderly propose
these things wherein my light is dim. Most probably Adam in innocence should
have spoken to God in some way of prayer. And the Angel made a request to
Christ, Dan. 12.6. But I cease.

SECT. IV.
Upon those there former Privileges follows this, that in this glorious time
the Churches Ordinances shall be in an higher Key, either in Quality, or Degree.

Cor. 15.) and he appearing in his glory to the Church, as the great ordinance
of Ordinances, shall by special communion with the Church, manifest to it the
mind of God. So that as God spoke to Adam in Paradise, and gave him the
Ordinance of that seal, the tree of life; so here is this second Paradisian
state of the Church, there shall be a special manifestation, and communication
of, and through Christ, who is the maine tree of life, Rev. 22. The Saints
shall have such manifestations of the presence of God through Christ, that now
mainly is that fulfilled, they shall be all taught of God, as Adam was
instructed in Paradise.

praise to God, Rev. 11. Rev. 14. Rev. 19. Praise is as well an injunction as
Prayer, and as formerly, Fasting was an extraordinary worship in misery; so now
praise in time of all mercies.

meditation (which is an enjoined Ordinance) I say their meditation and
contemplation of God, shall be as a vision of God, or sight of his face, Rev.
22.2, 3, 4. In the midst of the street, and on either side of the river was the
tree of life, yielding fruit (the participation whereof comes not in without
meditation, acting or receiving) and there shall be no curse there, but the
Throne of God, and the Lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve him
(which sure must be by meditation, minding what they do) and THEY SHALL SEE
HIS FACE. So that their meditation and contemplation of God, shall be as in a
continual vision of God. Glorious sights cause meditation, and meditation
takes in the glorious representations.

They shall have the word for inspection, Rev. 22.14.19. and admiration, to see
all revealed, and all fulfilled. They shall be taught of God to know the full
mind of that word, and they themselves shall see with their eyes that
fulfilled, which out of the word, they heard with their ears. So that their
Joshua, sc. Jesus shall say to them according to their experience, Nothing has
failed of all that God has spoken. They shall have the effect of sublime
purity and glory of Discipline, sc. Angelical order, Rev. 21.12. sc. 4. Gates,
and three Angels at every gate. So that verse 25. Though the gate be never
shut, yet, verse 27. no unclean thing shall enter in, which is the cream and
quintessence of the effect of all Discipline. In sum, As then the labor of
the body in moving shall be more excellent, a labour-lesse labor, a pain-lesse
labor, a pleasant labor; so the worship of the mind shall be without
irksomenesse; So full of grace, that all actings of grace shall be heavenised
into all sweetness.

SECT. V.
The fifth Privilege, Union of Saints throughout the world.

UNion of heads, and union of hearts, sc. unity in judgment, and unity in
affection, Zach. 14.9. The Lord shall be King over all the earth. In that day
there shall be one Lord, and his name one. Is he not King now? Yea, but not so
actually, visibly and absolutely before the eyes of all (many great wicked ones
yet domineering) as he shall be then. Is not his name now one? yes in it self,
he is the God of truth. But by men's pretenses that he favors this way, and
that way, men intimate of him several names, as Papist, Lutheran, Calvinist,
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent. But then it shall be clear, which is the
only way of truth. And so God shall have one name; because, as Zeph. 3.9. They
shall serve the Lord with oneness of consent, all being of a pure language. So
that their judgments being one, and consequently their practices one, great
will be the oneness of affections, as Isa. 11.13. The envy of Ephraim shall
depart, Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim. If so great was
the union of Saints in the first fruits, Act. 4.32. how much more when the
whole lump is fully perfected; surely their union shall be as that in Paradise
before Adam fell. The history of dissension now, is grievous to Saints;
therefore on the contrary, how sweet will the mystery be in the enjoyment of
Union.

SECT. VI.
The sixth Privilege, Honor shall be given to all holy things, sc. to
Religion, and religious men.

reproach of his people, as in other things, so in Religion. This is Gilgal the
Great, to roll away the reproach from Israel. In the day when the Jews shall
be converted, ten shall take hold of one Jew, Zach. 8.23. therefore it is said
diverse times in the Revelation, sc. Rev. 14.1. Rev. 22.4. The Saints shall have
the name of their Father in their foreheads. They shall be no more ashamed of
their Religion, then of their faces. Though the Church kiss Christ, sc. dearly
embrace him, yet shall she not be despised, Cant. 8.1. Hebrew, I will find
thee in the streets, I will kiss thee, and also they shall not contemn me.
Public profession, and embracing of Christ shall not be despised, as it is
spoken in the very same Chap. of Canticles, where is handled the call of the
Jews. So Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy Nurses. Rev. 21. Kings shall bring
their honor to the Church. Isa. 60.13. The glory of Lebanon, etc. shall come
to beautify my Sanctuary, and I will make the place of my feet glorious.
Christ the head, the Church the feet. And there Christ walks, Rev. 1. And that
Christ will make glorious before all, though formerly men trampled. Yea Zach.
9.16. The Church shall be as the stones of a crown lifted up. Not as stones in
the street, but of a Crown. Not of a Crown falling, but of a Crown lifted
up. Zach. 12.5, The Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, my strength in the Lord of Hosts. We know that of
late days, governors have put all the reproachful names upon the Saints, and
Churches of the purest judgment and profession; as Faction, Schism, Puritans,
etc. But the time is at hand, they shall be convinced, and shall know that
Saints are the best men, the interest and stay of Kingdoms.



Finis Libri Sexti.
THE SEVENTH BOOK
Containing an Essaie, Touching the time, when this future Glorious state of
the Church on Earth, for a Thousand Years, probably, shall begin.

CHAP. I.
The Introduction, unfolding, and cutting out the Work for this BOOK.

Lubrious est hic locus, this is a point wherein my Pen may soon slip; and as
soon will sleight-spirited (...) carp, and over-austere Cato censure. As for
the extremous multitude (whose Motto or Character is, Hosanna to day, and
Crucify, to morrow) they will deifie if a man hit right, but infinitely
vilify, if he mistake. But the ingenuous prudent, will neither reckon me a God
for the first, nor cipher me into less then a man for the second. The best of
men, in such a labyrinth, and less, have mistaken. Upon this ground I take my
trip, Christo duce, the Lord being my Leader.



1 To give the Reader several Prognostics, showing, indefinitly, that this
glorious state of things is not far off. 2 To cast up the several
Computations, found in the Scriptures, pointing at a determinate time, when
(most probably) this state shall begin.


CHAP. II.
HOlding forth the several Prognostics, that the Glorious time we speak of,
is not far off; but now approaches, especially in the introduction thereunto,
viz. The Call of the Jews.

SECT. I.
The first Prognostic. The expiration of Accounts.



1 The One thousand two hundred and ninety days (that is, years) foretold,
Dan. 12.11. which were to run out (says Huet on Daniel) from the ceasing of
the daily sacrifice, etc. before the Preface to this glorious state begins, are
now almost expired. For if the daily sacrifice ceased about the year of Christ
367. For in that year (says Alsted in his Chronolog.) in the Reign of Julian
Apostata, the preparations to re-edifie the Temple at Jerusalem were utterly
demolished; And we add thereunto the said One thousand two hundred and ninety
years; we shall easily perceive (if we credit our common Account, making this
to be the Year of Christ 1653.) that the said One thousand two hundred and
ninety years are almost expired.

2 The two and forty months, wherein the Beast, Antichrist, should have power
(as some Greek copies read it) to do (that is, as he pleases, as Mr.
Brightman expounds) Rev. 13.5. which are allone with One thousand two hundred
and sixty days, Revelation, chap. 11. verse 2. and verse 3. both signifying
(by the consent of the generality of all learned Protestants) One thousand two
hundred and sixty years, are now near their period. For if (as Reusner asserts
Elias Reusner, Leorin, Isagog. Historic. in Infantia Antichristi, Ad annum 410.
) these two and forty months began, when the Hinderer (the Roman Emperor) was
removed (2 Thessalonians. 2.6.) by the Goths, that now the Roman Bishop was free from
all impeding his will, and pleasure, in the year of Christ (according to our
common Account) 410. And we add thereunto the said One thousand two hundred
and sixty years, the termination of the said One thousand two hundred and sixty
years are not far off. I might annumerate many other accounts; but I will not
so mis-spend time, nor anticipate my self in my intended design of
computations in the next Chapter. These two here named may suffice to give the
Reader a taste, yea the first fruits of many Computations now not long hence
about to determine, whose periods immediately precede the beginning of the
preparation, or introduction ( viz. the call of the Jews) to the glorious time
we speak of.

SECT. II.
The second Prognostic, The might of the Churches Enemies.

Isa. 59.16. to the end of the Chapter, and the whole ensuing Chapter, viz. the
sixtieth; alleged and demonstrated before to relate to this glorious time we
speak of. Read the place (it is too large to write out) and you shall there
find it Prophesied, that when the Lord should see that there was NONE TO HELP,
that then his own arm should bring salvation; that then the Redeemer shall
come to Zion. That then the Church should rise and shine because her light was
come and the Gentiles should come into her light. That her GATES SHOULD BE OPEN
CONTINUALLY, NOT SHUT DAY NOR NIGHT, AND KINGS SHOULD MINISTER UNTO HER. THAT
THE SUN SHOULD BE NO MORE HER LIGHT, BUT THE LORD SHOULD BE HER EVERLASTING
LIGHT (which St. John Rev. 21. applies to the glorious time we treat of) with
many more passages in those Chapters of Isaiah to the same purpose. Add to
this place of Isaiah, that in the Revelation, Chap. 18. verse 7. and 8. How
much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her; for she says in her heart, I sit A QUEEN AND AM NO WIDOW, AND
SHALL SEE NO SORROW; therefore shall her plagues come IN ONE DAY.

Turk prospering mainly; the Popish party prevailing exceedingly, and the
rather because the Protestant Nations are only busy in beating one another to
pieces most sadly, whence most impious corruptions abound among these, as
horrid and bloody persecutions among those (fresh broken out again in the
German Empire, and in the Kingdom of France, etc.) so that Antichrist boasted
in their late Jubilean solemnity, all was his, and the Church precisely
considered, and Religion, every way goes to wrack; and no remedy of Laws or
Arms appear, I leave the Reader to resolve! To which end I would have him
weigh what briefly I have hinted, and surveigh thoroughly the present state of
things, and enlarge his meditation upon it, and then he will easily be enabled
to conclude whether the universality of all be not most corrupt and unsavory,
and daily putrefying more and more, and whether the salt wherewith they should
be seasoned and preserved, has not lost its savor, and then wherewith shall
any of those things be salted. And whether (as Psalm. 11.3.) if the foundations
(Political, says Mollerus) be destroyed, a David may not justly cry out, what
can the righteous do?

SECT. III.
The third Prognosticke, The height of the enemies wickedness.

Prognosticke we have in Genesis 15. verse 13, 14, 15. and 16. God said to Abraham
know of a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not
theirs, and they shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred
years, etc. But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again, FOR THE
INIQUITY OF THE AMORITES IS NOT YET FULL; whence it appears, that the fullness
of the iniquity of the Amorites, is a Prognostic of the Churches great
deliverance out of Egypt; so that when that should be full, these shall be
delivered. Whence we infer by the rule of Proportion, that when the iniquity
of the universality of the wicked on earth shall be full, that then shall the
universality of the Elect have their grand deliverance upon earth. This
Prognostic (that the Reader may see my inference to be good) I will show you
in other places of Scripture, which apply it immediately to the deliverance we
treat of. In Isa. 14. the first three verses most evidently (as we have before
demonstrated) relate to the Glorious state on earth we drive at. To which is
annexed the Prophecy of the Churches triumph over Babylon (as the necessary
Appendix thereof) with great assurance, and much elocution and emphasis, verse
4. etc. to the end of the 18. verse. Now what is the Prognostic of their fall,
but the height of their wickedness in oppression, pride, etc. So verse 4, 5, 6.
Thou shall take up this Proverb against the King of Babylon, and say, How has
the oppressor ceased? The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, and the
Scepter of the Rulers. HE WHO SMOTE THE PEOPLE IN WRATH, WITH A CONTINUAL
STROK; He that ruled the Nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hinders.
And verse 12. etc. How art thou FALLEN FROM HEAVEN, O LUCIFER, Son of the
morning. FOR thou have said in thine heart, I WILL ASCEND INTO HEAVEN, I WILL
EXALT MY THRONE ABOVE THE STARS OF GOD, AND SIT UPON THE MOUNT OF THE
CONGREGATION, I WILL ASCEND ABOVE THE HEIGHT OF THE CLOUDS, I WILL BE LIKE THE
MOST HIGH; thou shall be BROVGHT DOWN TO HELL. So our Savior also testifies
to this Prognostic, Matthew. 24. After the signs to come to pass, whiles the
end was not yet, but were only the beginnings of sorrow, verse 6. verse 8.
Christ adds other signs that should more nearly precede, and point at the
end: And amongst many direful signs, he gives this, INIQUITY SHALL ABOUND,
after which the Gospel being preached to all the world as a witness to them,
THEN SHALL THE END COME, verse 9. to 15. To the same purpose, Rev. 18. verse 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen (that is, shall fall, as
certainly as if already fallen) etc. FOR HER SINS HAVE REACHED UNTO HEAVEN.

height, and the Antichristian parties sins, (I mean all that oppose Christ
by what names, or titles soever, by what way or means, or manner soever) are
not come to the full, I leave the well-principled, sound, sanctified, spiritual
soul to judge. Turcisme and Papisme is now worse then ever, by how much more
they have of late prevailed, and have sinned against greater light, and are
more encouraged by the enmities, and impieties among Protestants. The Arminian,
and Socinian party, with their Articuli perpendendi, Advancements of man's will,
Disputes against the Deity of Christ, with some questionings of the Holy Ghost,
have struck in with the Antichristian party, and joining (in effect at least)
their forces with them, have greatly enlarged their Quarters. The Lutherans
still as obstinately as ever, if not more obstinately, since against more light
shining in sundry disputes, destroy the humanity of Christ, by their doctrine
of Consubstantiation. The learned of the Jews (poor souls) are now more
obstinate against Christ come in the flesh then ever. And for Protestant
Nations, or Peoples, I am utterly astonished in my thoughts, and distressed for
words to express their unparallelable Apostasies. The revolt among Professors
is general. Their blasphemous words against God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, the
Holy Scriptures, and consequently against Salvation, Heaven, Hell, the
Immortality of the Soul, and all Fundamentals are nefanda so wicked, that they
are not to be mentioned (though I could distinctly) lest I should leave some
stain upon some pious soul, that may read this Treatise. Their many wicked
practices are suitable. Community of women, swearing, drinking, etc. And these
practiced by principle, as the way to destroy the flesh. By this means many
Jesuits, false Prophets, false Teachers, and damnable Seducers are encouraged
(as the mutter abroad is every where) to creep in amongst them. All Religious
worship is decried as flesh and form. The wicked profane are extremely
encouraged, the comers on in Religion offended, and beaten off. And the very
knees, and hearts of true Saints are made feeble and ready to faint. And all
this account is brought in as the return of all the marvells of mercies, and
miraculary deliverances that God has given them. Whiles Politicals have been
recovered, Religion has been lost. And whosoever will not be high in these
enormities, is scorned as low. The Nations (called Protestant) mind conquest
rather then conscience. Hellish Heresies break out in Print, from beyond, and
on this side the Seas. The profession of most of those Countries is come to
look like dirt, gain being their godliness; Their words and promises but
lies, and flatteries: And self is now the great God that rules all. And of
all these I would I could not give so true an account as I can, with admiration
of Gods patience the mean while. I have nor list, nor cause maliciously to
inveigh against Protestant Nations, but out of grief of soul, and to
prosecute the point in hand, I have given these few hints.

SECT. IV.
The fourth Prognostic; Wars, and rumors of Wars, etc.

THis Prognosticke our Savior gives us Matthew. 24.6, 7. in answer to that
question put to him by the Disciples, verse 3. saying to him, Tell us when
shall these things be? And what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end
of the world? But withal he gives us this caution, that these wars and rumors
of wars are a remoter sign, adding to this sign verse 6. That the end is not
yet. And verse 8. That they are but the beginnings of sorrow. But Daniel brings
this sign (as it may comprehend all great and remarkable wars, viz. those the
Jews shall have with their adversaries, the Turk, etc.) nearer to the end,
Dan. 11.44, 45. compared with Dan. 12.1. viz. at that time of the Jews wars
aforesaid, Michael shall stand up to deliver his people; though the work of
that deliverance, in those wars will, it seems, by verse 12.13. collated, take
up the time of five and forty years.

Now I leave all knowing men to judge whether we have not Wars and rumors of
Wars, whiles most (if not all) Nations of the Gentiles, viz. England, Scotland,
Ireland, France, Spain, Italy, Netherlands, or Low Countries, Denmark,
Portugal, Sweadland, Helvetia, or Switzerland, Poland, Muscovy; The huge Empire
of the Turk: The vast Indies, etc. are either in the practice, or posture, or
preparations and expectations of War. There is wanting but the driving, and
fall of this storm of the Gentiles Wars on the Romish Western Antichrist; and
next the Jews taking up arms against the Turkish Eastern Antichrist;, and
then the Work, or thing signified (of which those rumors of Wars are a sign)
will be doing, at least in the Preface and preparation. Which last War some
think is not far off, in regard of their great Mathematicians wonderful words
to that end; their abundant pursing up of gold, their writing letters to each
other in several Countries to that purpose; their late change of their letter,
for concealment of their messages by writing: The professed expectation of some
of their Learned of the Messiah to come in the year 1656. or thereabouts.

SECT. V.
Giving a touch upon several other Prognostics, viz.

THe more we shall see Monarchy to fall, Dan. 2.34, 35. the oftener there
appears strange signs in the Heavens, following the great tribulations upon
earth, Matthew. 24.29.30. And the louder is heard vox populi, the voice of the
generality of Gods people in their discourses and prayers, that Babylon is
falling, and the Lord Christ is about to reign, Rev. 19. first six verses: the
nearer we may expect the approach of this Glorious state on earth.

How much of these things have, or do appear already, I leave wise men to
recall to mind, and consider.

CHAP. III.
Containing several Computations of time, searching when this glorious state on
Earth shall approach.





SECT. I. Elias Reusnerus Leorinus his Account.
Rome (says he El. Reus. Leorin. in I sagog. Hist. De Antich. Infant. ad Ann.
Chr. 410.
) having been Conqueresse, and Mistress of the world, being now in the year of
Christ 410. taken, and spoiled by Alarick King of Goths (according to Socrat.
l. 7. cap. 10.) from which time, her Authority being much diminished, she is
exposed to the like depredation by the Vandals, Heruls, and Longobards, and
others of the German Countries, etc. from this declining of the Roman Empire,
HE THAT WITHHOLDETH (2 Thessalonians. 2. verse 6.) being removed, is the time of the
SON OF PERDITION to begin. Rightly therefore is here fixed the beginning of the
Angelical two and forty months of the Kingdom of the seven headed beast with
his ten Horns ( Rev. 13.) borrowing great power from the infernal Dragon, and
belching out horrid blasphemies against God; that is the Roman Papacy, etc. The
end of these two and forty months will fall into the Year of Christ, 1670.

Reusner, Antichrist will be down within these twenty years, and something
less, even as much less, as more then 1650. is past.

SECT. II. Mr. Ephraim Huet his Account.
taking away of the daily Sacrifice, and the placing of the desolating
abomination (says he, Ephr. Huet. in his Paraphr. Analys. and Com. on Dan.
Chap. 12.11.
having demonstratively confuted other Interpretations) is to be applied to the
action of our Lord, who by his death did put away all Jewish Sacrifices, and
also by an Army of Idolaters did destroy Jerusalem, placing Idolaters therein,
who after also did set up their Idolatries. True it is, our Lord did jure, viz.
in right, destroy all sacrifices by his own Sacrifice, being the fullness of
all their shadows; but facto, that is actually, after his death, diverse years,
and by diverse steps, and degrees. For after the sacking of Jerusalem by Titus,
Who also destroyed the Temple according to the general vote of the learned
Historians and Chronologers, therein fulfilling Christ's Prophecy Math. 24.1.
etc. according to the judgment of most learned Divines.
the Jews yet inhabited the City not yet demolished, and continued their
superstitions with great, both power, and zeal. For first, Afterward in the
Reign of Adrian the Roman Emperor, the Jews rebelled upon this quarrel; The
Emperor had built, and dedicated a Temple in Jerusalem to Jupiter Olympius,
the which the Jews stomaching, made head, and in the end were overcome by the
Emperor, and dispersed, and the City named Aelia, and he gave it into the
possession of the Gentiles. Secondly, Yet did they continue their old
superstitions in the Country, so that whereas there was an Altar built under
the Oak Mamre (where the Angels appeared to Abraham) and the Merchants that
came to the Faires were forced to sacrifice thereon, otherwise Traffic was
denied them; Constantine the Great demolished the Altar, and built there a
Church for Christians. Thirdly, and lastly, in the days of Julian the
Apostate, and professed enemy of Christians, in contempt of the Christian
faith, he gave license to the Jews, to build the Temple, and to renew their
Jewish worships. Yea so large was their patent, that all were interdicted any
let, or stoppage; and the charges of this service to be allowed out of the
public stock. Upon which grant they attempted the building of the Temple,
not wholly razed down before; wherein they were affronted by a special hand of
God. A fearful Earthquake in the night destroyed all their works, and all
their tools were consumed by a sudden fire, Ammianus Marcellinus in his History
of the life of Jul. ( l. 23. c. 1) says, That certain fearful flaming balls of
fire issuing forth near unto the foundations, and making many terrible
assaults, consumed sundry times the workmen, and made the place unaccessable,
and by reason that this element still gave the repulse, the enterprise was
given over. Socrates Scholast. in his Hist. 3. Book, Chap. 20. according to the
Greek but 27. according to the English, adds, that there came fire from Heaven
that burned their Tools, etc.
so that they were forced to desist from their work. In which their blind
zeal they were affronted by that zealous Bishop of Jerusalem, Cyril, who
admonished them of this Prophecy, and after no disswasion would avail, he
openly professed, That now the time was come, which our Lord foretold, that
there should not be left one stone upon another which should not be cast down,
which accordingly came to pass that night, by the immediate hand of God, in
this earthquake and fire. Now understand we the utter actual abolishing of the
Jewish sacrifices to be here intended, and not the time of the Lords sacrifice;
for that the daily sacrifice continued long after, and also the abominable
Idolaters were not placed in Jerusalem, until their dispersion by Adrian. And
if liberty of conjecture be granted, I should think, that as Jupiter Olympius,
with his Greekish worshippers, is called the desolating abomination, Chap. 11.
verse 31. So the Romans are here an Army of abominables, for their return to
the same Idol, whose Temple Adrian built, and whose Idolatries the Romans
embraced, as being amongst them the chief, and father God. The beginning of
this One thousand two hundred and ninety years being at the final remove of the
Jewish sacrifices, fell out under the reign of Julian. Thus Mr. Huet.

Julians reign. For he puts the utter ceasing of the daily sacrifice in the
year of Christ 360. Whence three Errots will follow. 1 That Julian was not as
he supposes sole Emperor at that time; but after that, he began his reign as
sole Emperor, viz. in the year of Christ, 361 says Helvicus. 362 says Dr.
Holland in his Chronol. on Ammianus. 363 says Dr. Alstedius. 365 says the
Translator of Eusebius. 2 That however it was diverse years after Julians
beginning to reign, that the daily sacrifice ceased by the aforesaid
miraculous obstacle, they that account least, put it in the Year of Christ 363.
So Dr. Holland ibid. and Helvicus in his Inden Chronolog.
others more, of which presently. 3 If we grant this ceasing of the daily
sacrifice in manner as aforesaid, to have been fulfilled in the year of Christ,
360. Then if we add 1290. the time of the expiration of the whole is past, and
so the call of the Jews should be past, which experience decries.


Daniel) follow low those Chronologers and Historians, who remove that ceasing
of the daily sacrifice in Julians time, to a further year of Christ; viz. 1
Alsted; who in his Chronologia mirabilium, puts it in the year three hundred
sixty seven. His words are, Ann. 367. Terrae motus ingens totum fere, etc. That
is, In the year three hundred sixty seven, an huge earthquake shook almost all
the world; A deluge destroys Nicea, and many Islands; A mighty hayle at
Constantinople beats down prostrate unto the earth many men, and destroys
them. MOREOVER THE TEMPLE OF JERUSALEM REEDIFIED BY JULIAN THE APOSTATA, falls
down, and is burned by fire from Heaven. Thus Alsted. 2 Functius in his
Chronology puts this Earthquake, Inundation, etc. in the year three hundred
sixty nine. 3 And unto these Accounts, approved Historians seem to consent,
whiles they put this story of the ruin of the reedificating, or preparation
thereunto long after the beginning of the reign of Julian.
As Ammianus begins his two and twentieth Book (consisting of sixteen Chapters)
with the story of Julians sole Emperiality ( Constantius being dead) but
mentions not that preparation to re-edifie the Temple of Jerusalem, till the
first Chapter of his three and twentieth Book. Socrates Scholasticus likewise
tells us of the creating Julian to be Caesar, in the second Book, and two and
thirtieth Chapter of his History according to the Greek (the seven and
twentieth according to the English) but mentions not the business of Julians
inciting the Jews to sacrifice, and for that end (because they refused to
sacrifice any where else, but at Jerusalem) encouraged them to re-build their
Temple there, until the twentieth Chapter of his third Book, according to the
Greek; the seventeenth Chapter according to the English.

Daniel, by adding thereunto three hundred sixty seven, or three hundred sixty
nine years, will, according to these grounds, expire about seven or eight years
hence.

SECT. III. The Rabbis Account.
THe Account of the Hebrew Rabbis you had before, Book 4. Chapter 4.. 3. in 3.
at the latter end, noted in the Margent with that is, Page 425. and 6. of the
same Book, Chap. and. marked also in the Margent with with the addition of
these words [Observe this] that is in Page 429. It were pity so to abuse time
and labor, both yours and mine, as to repeat here again what there you have
at large. And therefore I entreat the Reader to a work of such ease, to have
recourse thither, if he deem the knowledge of their dark and indefinite
account worth the knowing.

SECT. IV. Mr. Brightmans Account.
MR. Brightman, on those words in Rev. 13.5. [ And there was given to him (the
Beast) a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies; and power was given him
TO CONTINUE, or (as our Translators put it in the Margent) TO MAKE WAR, forty
and two months] does give in his account in these words. So much (says he) of
the Honor of the Beast; now of his blaspheming and doing; of which it is first
said, that there was power given him; And then follows the execution thereof;
In blaspheming, at the sixth verse, and in doing at the seventh. It is indeed
profitable for us to understand that these horrible impieties do invade the
world, not by the blind force of Fortune, but by the most just judgment of
God, who does thus take vengeance of our sins; And above the rest, of the
contempt of his truth among men. The power to blaspheme, is that freedom from
error, which the Pope of Rome challenges to himself, and to his state; and
which men of a blind and perverse mind do willingly grant unto him. What
blasphemies may not he broach unto the world, each of whose Decrees and
Doctrines are held for Oracles!

The power of doing here (says Mr. Brightman) is an absolute, most lawless
and lustful power, to do what a man will, without being brought Coram, to
give a reason of his doing to any other. In which regard the power of the Pope
of Rome, is notable before any other. For so do the decrees ordain. No man
shall judge the FIRST SEA, etc. For the JUDGE shall not be judged, either of
the EMPEROR, or of ALL THE CLERGY, or of the KINGS, or of the PEOPLE. Again,
God would have all the causes of men to be ended by men, but be has reserved
the Government OF THIS SEA to his own arbitrament, so as he will have no
question of any thing he does. Yet more, The whole Church throughout the world
knows, that the most holy Church of Rome has RIGHT TO JUDGE OF ALL MEN; and
that NO MAN MAY LAWFULLY JUDGE OF HER JUDGMENT. Causa 9. and 3. This is called
the power of doing, for excellencies sake; being such as no Emperor has, who
do not refuse to be contained within the bounds, and to be tied with the bonds
of Laws, and to have all their actions ordered by the rule of that which is
equal and good. As for the words, Aretas reads [And there was power given
him to make War] and so do Montanus, and the Edition of Plantin; The Vulgar
reads it [power of doing] absolutely. So do Th. Beza, and the rest of the
Greek copies; which reading is made good, by the like use of this word in the
like matter in Daniel [ He shall cast forth the truth upon the earth, AND SHALL
DO, and succeed prosperously] Dan. 18.12. So verse 24. [ And he shall prosper
marveilously, and SHALL DO.] So in Chap. 11.28. [ He SHALL DO, and shall
return into his own Land.] In which places a certain free, and sovereigne
power of doing is signified, which should not be afraid of any man's judgment.

The time of doing is (says Mr. Brightman) two and forty months, which is the
same space that the Temple remains measured, the two Prophets mourn, and the
woman byeth hid in the wilderness, Chap. 11.2. and 12.6. FROM WHICH TIME, THE
BEGINNING OF THESE MONTHS IS TO BE ACCOUNTED. The Church is banished; the
Prophets put on sackcloath, and the Beast, or Antichrist is born into the
world, all at once; namely in that first time of resting, which the Church had
from public persecuters, about the year three hundred. But as we said before,
shall there be the same end of all these together? Shall the Beast be deprived
of all power of doing, as soon as the Woman shall return out of the
Wilderness? Against this, many things may be said; As first, That the Beast
makes war with the two Prophets, after the two and forty months be ended, and
overcommeth them; which declares that there is no small power of his yet
remaining, as we have showed, Chap. 11. verse 7. Moreover there remains yet
far more deadly war that shall be waged against him a long time, after those
months, as we shall see Chapter 16. Lastly, If there be the same end of the
months in respect of the Beast, which is of the woman, how shall he have power
to do two and forty months, when as he shall lie sick a great part of them;
yea, he shall be, as it were, slain by means of his wounded head? This space
of time does seem therefore to contain the whole time of the tyranny of
Antichrist; yet so, that the time of his wound, whiles it is sore, be taken
away from it. Now we have showed, that this time of his crazinesse is defined
within the time of the Goths * Kingdom, verse 3. which lasted for an hundred
and forty years. If we shall therefore take away these years from the months of
the Woman's lurking, we shall find that at the end of this lurking, namely at
the year 1546. thirty seven months
only, The count is self, according to Mr. Brightman. and ten days of
Antichrists Kingdom, when it was in vigor, were passed over. Five months
therefore, and twenty days are wanting hereto; which if we reckon from the
year 1546. the last end of Antichrist shall expire at the year 1686. or
thereabouts. For so we shall learn out of other Scriptures, that he shall
perish utterly about that time. It may be that his destruction may come
sooner, then this term of years defines; for I do not cast the account
accurately at this time; neither do the Historians number the years so
faithfully as they ought; but he shall not be suffered to go beyond the
furthest space that I have set down.

But perhaps these months are not the space from the first beginning to the
last end of the Beasts, but only the former years of his Kingdom, which may
be many enough to lay him open, so as he may be revealed to all men. And by
this interpretation, as he begins together with the months of the Woman, and
the Prophets, so he takes his end also with them. This opinion is confirmed by
the War with the Saints, in verse 7. which, we have showed, fell into the
end of these months, Chap. 12.7. And by this interpretation, the Beast is said
to have power of working two and forty months, for the greatest part of these
months: Because that little respire of time wherein he should keep in his
horn, because of his wounded head, is little to be reckoned of, in respect of
the whole number. Let the Reader, if he please, remember, that whereas Mr.
Brightman thinks Antichrist was wounded by the Goths, noted before at *
according to Rcusner, expressed before in his Account Sect. 1. the Goths wounded
the Emperor and Empire, not the Pope, and Popedom; but the said Popes and
Popedom rather got head and beart and health and strength by the Goths
wounding of the Empire, which granted, Mr. Brightmans knot is quite removed,
touching the five months.
Neither is his power, which shall be afterward, like that of his former
time, as experience shows at this day; wherein we see the Popes power to be
made to languish, and to be weakened much, from the time of his professed, and
pitched battle; that is, from the Council of Trent. So that his power is now
almost none at all, to that which it was in former ages. This latter is more
simple, in which regard I like it better. Thus Mr. Brightman.

Now according to this account. Antichrist shall be fully down about seven and
twenty years hence.

SECT. V. Alsteds Account.
HE gives it you Alsted XII. Chronologia Epocharum Propheticarum.
in this sorme, and the words, as near as I can translate, and imitate him for
your best understanding.

THE APOCALYPTICAL VOLUMNE, or COMMENTARY. Syngramma Apocalypticum.

Three times seven mystical Characters Hierogly phicater septem.
The threefold state of the Church. The Kingdom of the Beast. I. The 6 former
of the 7 Seals contain the time from the the 35 year of Christ to the 606
year. I. For a Time, from the year of Christ 35 to the year 606. I. The ancient
Beast, or the primary solely. II. The six former of the seven Trumpets from the
year of Christ 606. to the year 1517. 1 Alternative or vicissitudinarious. II.
For Times, from the year 606. to the year 1517. II. The ancient or primary, and
secundary. III. The six former of the seven Phials from the year 1517. to the
year 1694 The seventh Trumpet and seventh Phial. 2 Happy on earth for a 1000
years. III. For Half a Time, from the year of Christ 1517. to the year 1694.
III. The ancient Beast alive again. 3 Most happy in Heaven.

They that are inquisitive to know how he gives a particular account of these
Periods, may, (if they understand the Latin Tongue, or by the help of such
friends) look into Alsted himself in the forecited place, or into Mr. Mede in
English, Diatrib. par. 4. p. 453. whither I refer them, lest I should be
needlessely tedious to my friends that fear the prolixity of this Treatise.
Which therefore I prevent all I can.



SECT. VI. Mr. Medes Accounts.
Diatrib. Par. 4. Page 87. he gives us this Account. Having said, Page 83.
Though Christianity has been embraced in former times, where now it is not,
yet it is now spread in those places, where in those times it was not; so that
all laid together, we may account Christianity at this day as large, as ever
it was in the Apostles time; yet that this is not THAT UNIVERSAL KINGDOM OF
CHRIST, THAT FLOURISHING and GLORIOUS ESTATE OF THE CHURCH, WHICH WE YET EXPECT
and HOPE FOR, my Reasons are these; I say, Mr. Mede having said these things in
page 83, and in page 84, 85, 86, having given several of the said reasons;
then in the said 87. page aforequoted, he adds, My next reason (says he)
shall be from that we read in the Revelation, where the Church by the conquest
of Michael set free from the Dragons fury, is said to escape into the
Wilderness, i.e. into a state, though of safety and peace, and security, yet
of hardship, misery, and scarcity. For it seems to be an allusion to the
Israelites escaping the Tyranny of Pharaoh, by going into the wilderness. In
this wilderness, or place of hardship, etc, the Church must remain (says St.
John) a time, and times, and half a time, or as he elsewhere speaks, one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, i.e. A year, years, and half a year; and
when this time shall be expired; that is, as learned Divines think, when so
many years shall be ended, as those days are, taking the beginning of our
reckoning from Michaels Trophe; then, says our Apostle, shall the Kingdoms of
the world become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15. whereby it should seem, that the Church
is yet in the wilderness, and that the promised happiness of the ample, and
flourishing glory thereof before the end of the world, is YET TO COME. Thus Mr.
Mede, wherein because he gives us but an indefinite account, we will present
you with another, which he mentions, in which is determinately expressed a
certain time.

Mede in the same Treatise of his (afore-cited) page 496, etc. presents to us
this account; That most learned Lord Primate of Armagh, by his indefatigable
industry, and no small charges, having some few years since gotten that
admirable Monument the Samaritan Pentateuch, Mr. Medes good opinion of the
Samaritan Penteteuch.
or Five Books of Moses (which may be presumed to be that which they received
from the captived ten Tribes, when they first learned from them to worship the
God of Israel, 2 Kings 17.27.) I found a strange difference in it, touching the
years of the generations before the birth of Abraham, both from our Septuagint,
and our Hebrew Bibles. Before the Flood, by diminishing the generations of
Jared, Methusalah and Lamech, it comes short of us. After the Flood (for the
most part agreeing with the Septuagint) it much out-reckons us. To be short, it
exceeds in the upshot our Computation three hundred and one years. So that the
Birth of Christ falls according to it in the year of the world 4254. The
Account it self.
Agreeable whereto the six thousand years of the Creation would be complete in
the year of Christ 1746,* and consequently Antichrists two and forty months, or
one thousand two hundred and sixty years would begin in the year of Christ 486.
which is presently after the deposition of Augustulus, in whom the Empire of
Western Rome expired.



Mede says, It came into my mind (says he) to try by the Samaritan
Pentateuchs account of the Genealogies before, and after the flood (falling
short of our account in the former, but superabounding ours in the later) how
near the six thousand years of the world would be by that Computation; I found
it would be Anno Aerae Christianae, i.e. in the year of Christ 1736, which is
just the very year when the one thousand two hundred sixty years of the Beasts
reign will expire, if it be reckoned from the Deposition of Augustulus the last
Roman Emperor. And he gives you the particulars, thus;

Depositio Augustuli, etc. i.e. the Deposition of Augustulus in the year of
Christ 476. In the year of the Kingdom, or reign of the Beast 1260. The total
sum is 1736. From the Creation of the world to the Birth of Christ, according
to Scaliger 3949 Add four years wherein he anticipates the beginning of
Nebuchadnezzar, for of the rest I alter nothing 4. The exceeding of the
Samaritan Chronology above the Jewish 311. And thus from the Creation to the
Incarnation will be years 4264 Add the years of Christ, when the times of the
Beast, or of the Apostasy shall expire, if we draw the Account from the
Deposition of Augustulus, viz. years 1736 And the total sum will be years
6000



SECT. VII. Mr. Parkers Accounts.
footing of his Accounts are those places of Scripture in the Prophet Daniel,
and in the Revelation of S. John. viz. ##

1 That in Dan. 12.11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be
taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate set up, there shall be
years 1290. 2 That in Dan. the same Chapter verse 7. It shall be for a time,
and times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the
power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished. That is, says
Mr. Parker, by collating it with Rev. 12. v. 6. compared with v. 14. years
1260. 3 In Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon
thy holy City, to finish the Transgression, and to make an end of sin; that is,
says Mr. Parker, years For (says Mr. Parker) This Prophecy seems not to be
understood of the times between the Babylonian Captivity, and the Passion of
our Savior, the Lord Christ, or the destruction of Jerusalem, for several
reasons, chiefly these, I Because in no place of all the New Testament, is this
Prophecy used against the Jews, to prove the Messiah already come in the
flesh. 2 If the restoration of the City, verse 25, be understood of the
material Jerusalem, after Nebuchadnezzars captivity, it must begin in the first
of Cyrus; And then from that time the seventy weeks of years, will fully and
entirely expire long before the birth of Christ. 3 That same cutting off of the
Messiah, here spoken of, is clearly and expressly joined with the destruction
of the City, said to be done in one week, viz. to be accomplished in the last
seven years; as it is in verse 26, 27. whereas Christ suffered above thirty
years (if not sorry) before the destruction of marcrial Jerusalem. 4 and
lastly, Those phrases in our 24. verse (before quoted for the footing of the
account in hand) viz. To finish the Transgression, and to purge iniquity, and
To make an end of sins, and To bring in everlasting righteousness, are most
MANIFEST CHARACTERS OF THE TIME OF THE END, as shall be showed. For my
judgment is, that these seventy week of years are limited, and cut out for the
restoration of the spiritual Jerusalem, namely the Church of Christ, from the
spiritual Babylon, and the servitude of Antichrist, and must end in the entire,
and full purgation thereof, from Antichristian defilement, and from the course
of other moral transgressions, I Because those effects characterising the end
of these years, viz. The consuming of transgression, and the bringing in of
everlasting righteousuesse, verse 24. are effects to be accomplished in the
Christian Church at the fall of Antichrist, Isa. 1.25, 26, 27, 28. And Chap.
27. v. 9. Rev. 21.28. 2 In other Prophets, the restoration of the Christian
Church from the Babylon of Antichrist is in like types proportionably
represented. Isa. 10, and 11, and 13, 14. Jer. 50.51. Apec. 14.6, 7, 8. and 16
19, 15.7. 18, 2, 10, 21.3 The straiss of times, v. 25. and the destruction of
the City v. 26. do fitly agree to the Antichristian persecution. See Chap.
8.24.11.13.4 The effects of the last weeks are parallel with Antichristian
persecution, described Apoc. 11. For as the Christian Church in both places is
signified by the holy City, Apoc. 11.2. with Dan. 9.26. and streights of time
are said in both places to go before the last afflictions, Apoc. 11.3.5.7.
with Dan. 9.25. So the last afflictions are also proposed with marvelous
agreement; There three years and half of Tyranny over the conquered Saints (
Apoc. 11.8, 9.) in the end of persecution; Here half a week of years; that is
precisely three and an half, cut out for the same end. There War immediately
preceding the foresaid triumph, Apoc. 11 7. Here in like manner. 5 Because from
the beginning of the second half of the last week, or of the three years and
half, a Prince is said to cause the sacrifice, and oblation to cease, v. 27. A
phrase attributed to Antichrist, Chap. 8.11. and 11.31. there said to take away
the daily sacrifice. And many other reasons there are to the same effect, and
purpose.
490. 4 In Dan. 8.13, 14. How long shall be the vision concerning the DAILY
SACRIFICE, and the TRANSGRESSION of DESOLATION, to give both the Sanctuary, and
the host to be TRODDEN UNDER FOOT? And be said unto me, unto 2300 DAYS, then
shall the Sanctuary be cleansed. That is (says Mr. Parker) Years 1150.
Which Mr. Parker makes out thus: There are numbered two thousand three hundred
mornings and evenings. Now by taking one morning and evening, for one full day,
which are half of two thousand three hundred, there are eleven hundred and
fifty remaining.

footing of Mr. Parkers Accounts. Now to the Account it self. There are two
ways (says he) to accommodate the (aforesaid) years, viz. Either the very
dark and weak beginning of the signs of the Popes Kingdom, do set the
terms of beginning to the years; or else the more evident, open, and perfect
state thereof.

1 The weak and dark beginning of the signs was before the year four
hundred, as about the year of Christ 360, or 390. etc. But we will speak no
more of this account made by Mr. Parker, writing it above twelve years since,
because that Account is since that, expired, viz. in the year of Christ, 1649.
This Prophecy being yet unfulfilled.

2 Way of accommodating the aforesaid Texts, laid for the footing of the
Account, according to the commanding, effectual, and open state of the Popes
Kingdom properly so called, and the more perfect state of the signs thereof,
is thus,

Unto Years 570 600 710 1370


Add 1290 1260 1150 490
Years.

And they will end in the Year 1859.

1 (To open this Account) one thousand two hundred and ninety may begin (says
Mr. Barker) in five hundred and seventy, according to the round Number. For
then, upon the coming in of the Longobards into Italy, began the evident and
open state of the Pope, Kingdom. So expressly Machiavel in his History of
Florence, l. 1. Coeperunt hoc tempore Pontifices Romani majori esse in
dignitate, quam antea fuerant, etc. which for the English Readers sake I will
translate, The Roman Popes (says Machiavel) at this time began to be in
greater dignity, then formerly. Anon after they had scarce any dignity and
estimation, but that which they procured unto themselves by their sanctimony of
life, and by doctrine, before the time of the Longobards. But again, WHEN THE
LONGOBARDS CAME INTO ITALY, THAT IT WAS RENT INTO VERY MANY FACTIONS, THE PAPAL
POWER BY THIS THEIR INVASION, WAS MUCH AUGMENTED, etc.

2 The one thousand two hundred and sixty years may fitly begin (says Mr.
Parker) in the year 600, according to the round Number. For then began Gregory
the Pope to deforme the Church with Rites and Superstitions. Alsted Chron.
Mist. Iniq. And indeed the Historical use of Images began about the year 400:
But the solitary Images of Saints began not to be set up in Temples, before the
year 600. Perk. Then began Gregory the Pope to command a Litany for the
invocation of Saints, to be sung publicly. Then (says Perkins) of a
commemoration of Saints, was made an invocation of them. About the same year
Gregory the Pope contended about the Primacy, with the Patriarch of
Constantinople. And about six years after the year 600, the Pope was made by
Phocas, Univerful Bishop. And then first was the privilege confirmed to the
Church of Rome, of primacy over all Churches; Alsted. Lastly, from about this
time the Pope began to send forth his Emissaries for the subjecting of the
people of Christendom unto his Papal Authority.

3 The eleven hundred and fifty (being the half of the two thousand three
hundred (by taking one morning and evening for one full day) may begin (faith
Mr. Parker) most fitly at the year 710 because then Antichrist began publicly,
and in open Councels to authorize WORSHIPPING OF IMAGES, and to establish the
same, and the INVOCATION OF SAINTS, and to maintain the same, by CONSTANT
PERSECUTION. Alsted Chron. c.de Concili is. Sigen. de Regno Ital. contur.
Magdeburg.
Then began also the Pope to exercise POWER AND DOMINION OVER KINGS AND
EMPERORS. Sigon. Baldus
And from this time forward he ceased not to pursue the Emperors of the East,
in favor of Idolatry, until such time as he had utterly cast them out of
Italy, and established his own Kingdom in the Empire of the Francks Platina.
Onuphrius.
.

4 The four hundred and ninety years, or seventy weeks of years may begin
(says Mr. Parker) at the year 1370, because from that time began the time of
Wickliffe, who with his followers were pronounced and persecuted by the Pope as
Heretics, giving him the name of Heresiarcha, i. e. The Prince or chief of
Heretics. So that all the numbers in this second way, will precisely end in
the year 1859.



SECT. VIII. The Account of Anonymus, the German Doctor, Author of Clavis
Apocalyptica, or the Prophetical Key.
Clavis Apoc. p. 25, 26.27, etc.
, That the one thousand two hundred and ninety years in Dan. 12. v. 11. began
with the last abominable desolation of the Temple at Jerusalem in the year of
our Lord 365: and the Apocalyptical one thousand two hundred and sixtieth year,
with the invasion of the Roman Empire by the Goths in the three hundred ninety
fifth, and that both together do expire with the one thousand six hundred
fifty fifth year, which is now shortly at hand. And that in the 1655 year of
Christ shall expire the 6000 year of the Creation of the World.

That this present 1650 year of Christ is the five thousand five hundred ninety
ninth since the Creation of the World. But if we do well consider the
Chronological numbers, expressed in the Scriptures, it will evidently appear
that in this present 1650 year of our Lord, does expire the five thousand nine
hundred ninety fifth year since the Creation of the world; and the six thousand
year of the world will end with the 1655 year of our Lord. According to the
vulgar supputation of years; the 1655 year of our Lord will be the 5604 years
since the Creation of the World. Unto these add the years which either by the
Chronologers have been omitted or made too few, or left our, viz. First, ONE
YEAR whiles the Flood lasted. Secondly, SIXTY YEARS, until the birth of
Abraham. Thirdly, TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN YEARS of the sojourning of the
Children of Israel IN EGYPT. Fourthly, ONE HUNDRED YEARS, from their going
forth out of Egypt, until the building of the Temple of Solomon. Fifthly,
ELEVEN YEARS of Zedekiah, the last King of Judah. Sixthly, SEVEN YEARS in the
times of the Kings of Persia. Seventhly, TWO YEARS, which Scaliger, Helvicus,
and Calvisius do refer to the supputation of years since the Birth of
Christ, all amounting to three hundred ninety six years He demonstrates these
396 years to have been omitted, or lessened in our common Account thus, 1 The
ONE YEAR while the Flood lasted, by Genesis 7.11. and Chap. 8. v. 14. according to
the supputation of Functius, Reusnerus, Partilius, and other 2 The SIXTY YEARS
until the birth of Abraham, because he was not born in the seventieth year of
Terah; for Terah dyed in Haran, Genesis 11.32. when he was 205 yeerold.
Immediately after the death of Terah, Abraham departed out of Haran, Genesis 12.
v. 4. Act. 7.4. being old 75 years. From thence it does follow that Abraham was
borne when Terah was old 130 years. 3 TWO HUNDRED FIFTEEN YEARS of the
sojourning of the children of Israel in Egypt, by that in Exodus 12, v. 4c. and
41. where we read these words, the sojourning of the children of Israel, who
dwelt in Egypt was 430 years; which common supputation does derive from the
time of Abraham's calling, when he was 75 years old, Genesis 12.4. in this manner
following. Until the birth of Isaac, Genesis 21.5.25 Years. Until the birth of
Jacob, Genesis 35.26.65 years. Jacob was old when he went into Egypt, Genesis
47.9.130 years. Which make up 215 years. But to say, The children of Israel
dwelt in Egypt only 215 years, is against the clear Text, which does not speak
of the Fathers, but of the children of Israel, not of their pilgrimage, but of
their sojourning and bondage, not without and within Egypt, but only in Egypt.
Abraham indeed went down into Egypt, Genesis 12.10. but sojourned there not long,
and was not in any bondage. Isaac came not at all into Egypt, being forbidden,
Genesis 26 2. Jacob was 130 years old before he went down into Egypt (Genesis 47.9.)
So that those 430 years of the sojourning of the children of Israel who dwelt
in Egypt, etc. before recited olt of Ex. 12.40. and mentioned also in Gen 15.13.
in these words, God said unto Abraham, Know assuredly that thy seed shall be a
stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall
afflict them 400 years, must begin their supputation from the 130 year of
Jacob, and his entrance into Egypt, unto which must be added 215 years. That
ONE HUNDRED YEARS from the Israelites going forth out of Egypt, until the
building of the Temple of Solomon must be added to the common Account, is thus
demonstrated: Era vulgaris does reckon in this period of time 480 years,
according to the letter of the Text, 1 King. 6.1. But by the book of Judges,
and other books of Scripture, it does appear that they were about 580 years,
which keeping the Doctors own words, and matter, I shall set down in a plainer
method and manner thus, 1 In the grosser sums thus, The Israelites were in
the wilderness sorry years (Deuteronomy. 1.3. Act. 13.18.) Joshua was seven years in
winning and dividing Canaan (Josh. 14.10.) Until Samuel 450 years (Act 13.20.)
Under Samuel and Saul forty years (Act. 13.21.) Under David forty years (1
King. 2. (...).) Under Solomon three years (1 King. 6 1.) which six sums make
up just 580 years. 2 In particular sums thus, Forty years Israel was in the
wilderness under Moses. Seven under Joshua (as we said before. Eight under
Cushan (Judge. 3.8.) Forty years under Othniel (v. 11) Eighteeen years under
Eglon (v. 14.) Eighty years under Ebud (v. 30) Twenty under Iabin ( Judge. 4.3.)
Forty years under Deborah and Barak (Chap. 5.31) Seven years under the
Midianites (Chap 6.1) Forty years under Gideon (Chapter 8.28) Three years under
Abimelech (Chapter 9.22.) Three and twenty years under Tola (C. 10.2) Two and
twenty years under Iair (v. 3.) 18 years under the Philistimes. (Chap. 10.8.)
Six years under Iephtha (Chap, 12.7) Seven years under Ibzan (v. 9) Ten years
under Elon (v. 11) Eight year under Abdon (v. 14) Forty years under the
Philastines (Chap. 13 1) Twenty years under Sampson (Chap. 16.31) Forty years
under Eli (1 Samuel 4.18) Forty years under Samuel and Saul (Act. 13.21) Forty
years under David (1 King 2.11) Three years under Solomon (1 King. 6.1) All
which four and twenty particular sums make up four hundred and eighty years 5
The ELEVEN YEARS of Zedekiah (the last King of Judah) that are to be added, are
thus demonstrated. The vulgar supputation is reckoned from the bu^^^ing of the
Temple (by Solomon) to the destruction thereof (by Nebuchadnezzar) 417 years.
But by this Account 11 years will be unjustly cut off, because that vulgar
account begins the Captivity of Babylon in the last year of Iechoniab who was
King immediately before; instead whereof, it should, upon good ground, be
referred to the eleventh year of Zedekiah, at which time the Temple was
destroyed ( Michael Mestlinus quest. 7. Chronol. page 67. etc. Reusnerus de
supput. Annorum mundi, page 38. Johan. Piscator in suo Chronol. Indice page 15.
with others.) 6 THE SEVEN YEARS in the times of the King of Persia that are
omitted by the common Account, but to be supplied by true Account are SIX YEARS
of Cyrus and ONE YEAR of Xerxes the second (of which sce Mestlinus Quect.
Chron. page 35.38.) 7 And lastly, the TWO YEARS added by Scaliger, Calvisius,
and Helvicus, he leaves us to them, to demonstrate to us.
I say, add them to the common Account of five thousand six hundred four to be
the age of the World, in the 1655 year of our Lord, and it will be manifest the
six thousand years since the Creation will expire with the 1655 year of our
Lord.

German Doctor (who ever he was) deals fairly. For as he brings the end of
the World nearer then our common Account, by Three hundred ninety six years; so
he gives his reasons, and Scriptures, and his particulars, of which he makes up
his additionall Account of years that are expired, of which, we that have
believed the common account, were not aware.

whole of his account (differing from the common Computation) that it amounts
to the value of above three hundred years, they will easily be persuaded to
acknowledge that the thing is very well worthy of all learned men fitted that
way, to look into all Computations, Sacred and Divine; and thoroughly to examine
how indeed, and according to truth, the matter stands.

materials, but in forming and making up the general Account, as we have
heard, especially if we consult the Margin.

six thousandth year of the World does expire in the year of Christ 1655, and
that the Jews account of the lasting of this world shall be but six thousand
years, and then comes their restoration from their present dispersion, we can
expect no more then, in the said 1655 year, but the call of the Jews, who from
that time shall strive with the Turk, and all enemies of the Jews conversion
five and forty years, Dan. 12. before their settlement, before which Call I
expect the fall of the Roman Antichrist.

SECT. IX. The Julian, and the Jews Account.
Julian Account was brought in by Scaliger, not without precedent of an ancient
Author, and the approbation of the learned of our age. It is compacted of two
Circulations, the one of the Sun, the other of the Moon, and of an Indiction.
The Circulation of the Sun is the space of twenty eight years, in which
compass of time, the Festivals, and days of the week return into the same
order, and course they were at first. The Circulation of the Moon is the space
of nineteen years, in which compass of time the New Mons return to the same
time as at the beginning of this Circulation. The Indiction (so called from the
appointment or command for the Roman Lustra, or sacrifical solemnities) does
contain a System of years to the number of fifteen (in which space three Roman
Lustra did pass over.)

Julian Account, the end of this world is brought far nearer, then our common
account, either of the Year of the World from the Creation, or of the Year of
Christ since his Nativity do report. Of which in particular, seeing other
Chronologers give an annual account, and it is something wide from all the
preceding computations, my great haste shall be silent. For it is sufficient
for our present purpose to know in general, that all the most learned do not
consent that the end of this world is so far off, as our common account does
make report.

Much less so far off as the Jews Account would make us believe, who write
above two hundred years short of our vulgar Computation, of which judicial
account, Helvicus says thus, The Judicial period was made by R. Hillel Hannasi
about the Year of Christ three hundred forty four which at this day the Jews do
use for their Epoch or Computation from the Creation, but perperam, corruptly;
For it is not an historical, but a mere artificial Account, and begins far
short of the true beginning of the world. Of which see Scaliger Cannon, 277.
etc.

SECT. X. Johannes Jacobus Hainlinus his Account.
THis laborious and learned Author In his Sol Temporum, sive Chronologia
Mystica. His said book in fol. bears date Tubingae 1646.
tells us, That the end of all things is at hand, and that between 1650 and
1697. wonderful things shall come to pass, viz. Then shall end, and be taken
off the divine wrath, yet, alas for them! abiding upon the Jews. Then shall be
fulfilled the entire secular week, or the double-square number of the Septenary
of years. Then shall be the One thousand two hundred and ninety days in Dan.
12.11. fulfilled; and the One thousand three hundred thirty five years in verse
12. And then shall be the change, by the sixth, and last great day of the
world, after which is expected the lasting Sabbath.

And in the close he says the several Accounts of the age of the world do
differ several hundreds of years the one from the other.

Jamque opus exegit, spes exspes, auspice Christo.
Inde Deo summo, gloria summa datur:
AMEN
FINIS TOTIVS OPERIS.
A Table of the Scriptures quoted and explained in this Treatise.
The meaning of the Marks of Reference. P. Signifies Page. B. Book. C. Chapter.
S. Section.. Sectiuncle.. Paragraph. L. Line. * Signifies a set Discourse on
that Scripture. When there is no [*] there are only short explanations and
applications of that Scripture, giving some light thereunto.


Genesis.
CHap. 1. throughout explained and spiritually applied by the Rabbis to the
New Creation. Page 428 * Verse 26, 27, 28, paralleld with Ps. 8. Heb. 2.5. 131
And Verse 26.73 Chapter 12. v. 1, 2, 3 Paralleld with Chapter 26.4 Chapter 15. v. 4, 5, 6
Paralleld with C. 48. v. 19 and v. 26 C. 17. v. 1, 2, 3, 4 Paralleld with To.
4. v. 3. to 25 Chapter 22. v. 18 Paralleld with Gal. 3. v. 6. to 17 Chapter 26. v. 4
Paralleld with Heb. 11. v. 8. to 17 p. 137. etc. Chap. 49 V. 1. the Rabbis
note on it, p. 424 Chap. 49 V. 10, 11, p 5, p 6 Chap. 49 V. 26. p 145, 7
Leviticus.
Chap. 10. v. 5.173 br. 2
Numbers.
* Chap. 24. v. 16. to 25. p 146 Particularly of v. 17. See p 125 2
Deuteronomy.
* Chap. 30. v. 1 etc. to v, 10, p 150 * Chap. 32. v. 15. to 44. p 153
Judges.
Cha. 7.33. p 140 3
1 Kings.
Chap. 13. v. 18. p. 173 br. 2
Nehemiah.
Chap. 1. v. 8. etc. to v. 12. p 155
Psalms.
* Psalm. 2. throughout, paralleld with Psalm. 8 p 158 * Psalm. 8. throughout,
paralleld with Genesis 26.27, 28. and Heb. 2.5. p 131 And v. 4.5 p 94 and 95 *
Psalm. 22. v. 27, 28, 29 p 162 Psalm. 27.13 p 437 Psalm. 37. v. 10, 11 p 15 Verse.
28, 29 p 15 Psalm. 49.14 497 * Psalm 86.9 162 Psalm. 90. v. 4 and v. 15. p 8, p
175, l 3 etc. * Psalm. 95. v. 7, to end p 171, 3, etc. * Psalm. 97. v. 7 p 160.
and p 163 * Psalm. 110. throughout, p 164 2, and p 168, etc. p 169, 8 etc. *
Psalm. 117. all, 163 Psalm. 147.2, 3. The Cabalists note on it p 423
Isaiah.
* Chap. 2. v. 1. to 20. p 177 etc. p 125 Verse 11 p 7 Verse 17 ibid * Chap. 9.
v. 6, 7. p 182, 183, 184. See the Margin Chap. 10.24 p 187 br. 1 * Chap. 11.
throughout, p 186 And particularly v. 4 p 88 br. 1 * Chap. 14. v. 1. to 8 p 187
* Chap. 24, v. 23 p 201 Chap. 25. all of it, 203 Chap. 26.6 437 * Chap. 33.20,
21 207 * Chap. 34. v. 1. to 18 208 Chap. 40. v. 31 10 * Chap. 43. and Chap. 44
210 * Chap. 45. v. 14. to end of Chap. 213 * Chap. 49 throughout 216 Chap. 53.
v. 3.7 * Chap. 54. v. 2, 3 p 420 2 Verse 11. etc. to end 218 Chapter 58.13. p 175,
l. 11 from the bottom * Chap. 59. v. 19, 20, 21 219 * Chap. 60. totally, 220 *
Chap. 63.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 222 * Chapter 65. v. 2. p 175. l. 11: from the bottom
Verse 17. etc. to end of the Chap. 223, 12 Chap. 66. v. 5. etc. to end of the
Chap. 224 And particularly of v. 8.83 90 * Verse. 16. p 307, 5, 2
Jeremiah.
* Chap. 16, verse. 14, 15. paralleld with Chap. 23. v. 3. etc. to v. 9.226
Chap. 19. v. 10. Book 3. Chap. 3. Sect. 2 3. 1 Chap. 23. v. 3, 4, 5, 6 p 226,
S. 27. l. 1 Verse 7, 8 10 * Chap. 25. Verse 5.6.108 * Chap. 30, Chap. 31.
totally, 228 * Chap. 32, v. 37. to the end of Chap. ibid Chap. 48.9, 10.89 *
Chap. 50. v. 17, 18, 19, 20 229
Ezekiel.
* Cha. 16.53, 55. A large discourse p 488 Sect. 8 * Chap. 28. v. 24, 25, 26 p
231, 488, 2.489, etc. * Chap. 34. v. 11. etc. to the end of Chap. 232 * Chap.
36. throughout 233 * Chap. 37. the whole Chapt. 234 And of particular verses,
viz. v. 1, 2, etc. to v. 15.14 And of v. 21, 22 63 Chap. 38. Verse. 8, 9.52
Daniel.
Of the Book of Daniel, and parts and method thereof in general p 281 1 and 2 *
Chap. 2. v. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 236 * Chap. 7 throughout, p. 248, S. 26 etc. and
p 126, etc. Verse 9. to 15.69 * Verse. 1^. to the end of the Chap. 107 Verse 17
70 Verse. 18 11 Verse 23 Page 70 Verse 24 68 Verse 26 67, 71 Verse 27 70, 72
Chap. 8.23 264, 3 Chap. 11. v. 40 155 l 1 * Chap. 11. Chap. 12. First, in
general of the All of them. Secondly, in particular of the latter part of 11
Chap. and former part of the 12 261, etc. Of Particular verses of the 12 Chap.
viz. v. 1.101 10 Verse 2 63 Ver. 12 88, and 497 V. 13 63, 88, 497
Hosea.
* Chap. 1. V. 10, 11 287 Chap. 3. v. 4, 5.293, and of v. 5. p 41 Chap. 14.8 6
Joel.
* Chap. 2. v. 28. etc. to v. 34 297 * Chap. 3 throughout 303 Of particular
verses, as of v. 9. etc. to 17 88 Of v. 12, 13 52
Amos.
* Chap. 9. verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. p 311. S. 42. etc.
Obadiah.
* V. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. p 317, l. last save two
Micha.
* Chap. 2. v. 10. p 175, l 20 * Chap. 4. throughout, p 322, S. 43, l 1 * Chap.
4 v. 1 etc. to 8.109
Zephan.
Chap. 3 V. 14. to the end of the Chapter 110
Haggai.
Chap. 2.6, 7 125
Zechary.
* Chapter 2. v. 6. etc. Book 3. Chap. 2 Sect. 45 V. 10, 11, 12 109 * Chap. 6. v.
12, 13, 14. Book 3, Chap. 2, Sect. 46. * Chap. 8. v. 20, etc. to the end. Book
3, Chap. 2, Sect. 47. Chap. 9.1 421 Chap, 10. v. 3. etc. to the end, Book 3,
Chap. 2. Sect. 48. * Chap. 12. v. 10, 11, 12, 13 14 78 And Chap. 12.
throughout. Book 3. * Chap. 2, Sect. 49. Chap. 14 from v. 3. to end, Book 3
Chap. 2. Sect. 50. * V. 1, 2 p 52 V. 4, 5, 6, etc. 109 V. 7 9 V. 9 52
Malachie.
Chap: 4. throughout, Book 3, Chap. 2. Sect. 51.
Matthew.
Chap. 5. V. 5 p 15, 437 V. 10 * p 487 l 1, etc * V. 22 p 308, l 20 Chap 13. V.
40. * p 484 * Chap. 14. V. 1, 2 Chap. 19, 28, 29 P 93 * P 487 Chap. 23 V. 36 p
85. read there for v. 2. v. 36 * V. 38, 39 99 * Chap. 24. V. 3 102 * V. 11 484
* V. 13, 14. Book 3. Chap. 4. Sect: 4. * V. 30 82, 83, etc. V 31, 32, 33, 85 V.
34. 83, 84, 85 V. 46, 47 85 * Chap. 26. V. 29 91
Mark.
Chap: 1. v. 14, and 15: B. 3. C. 2. S. 51. 5 5 * 4. Chap. 13.32 * P 486, 1
Ture.
Chap. 1. v. 31, 32, 33. p. 183 l 10 etc. throughout the whole 5. and 7 and 8*
Book 3. Chap. 4. Sect 2 383 And * p 481 3.42 Chap. 13. v. 26 92, 44 Chap. 18.
v. 8. * p 484, 4 Chap, 19. v. 11.15 p. 107, 2 * V. 19.11. to 28 p 104, and p 95
* Chap. 21. v. 24, Book 3. Cha. 4. Sect. 3 * Chap. 22. v. 28, 29, 30. B. 3. C.
4. S. 4 Chap. 24. v. 42, 43 91
Gospel of John.
Chap. 1. v. 11 7 V. 16 p 88. l. 4 Chap. 6. v. 39, 40, 44, * p 477, 2 Chap. 10.
v. 34. p 160. 3 Chap. 14. v. 2, and 3 * p 475 Chap. 19. v. 37 78
Acts.
Chap. 1. v. 6 p 33, p 80. B. 3. C. 4. S. 5 V. 9, 11 p 80 p 83, p 112 7 Chap.
2. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. B. 3. C. 2 S. 47, 2. * V. 16 etc. 298, 299, etc.
Chap. 3. v. 19, 20, 21 p 96, p 165 3 And * p. 473, 2 V. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 p
165, 5 Cha. 10. v. 41 92 Chap. 13. v. 22. etc. to v. 43. p 188 1 * Chap. 15.13,
14, etc. to v. 18.314 3. And 315, 316, 318 Chap. 19.37 78
Romans.
* Chap. 4. v. 3, 4, etc. to v. 25. paralleld with Genesis chap. 12. v, 1. etc.
chapter 15. 4. etc. chapter 17.1. etc. chapter 18. v. 18.22, 18 chapter 26.4. chapter 48. v. 19.
and v. 26 137 Chap. 8. v. 18. * largely p 517, etc. Chap. 9. v. 25, 26. p 291,
12 Chap. 11. v. 15.60, 63 V. 25. p 145, 7, p 291, l 19 V. 26. p 41, p 219,
Sect. 22 * B. 3. c. 4. Sect. 6 V. 30 p 198, 1 Chap. 14. v. 8, 9, 10, 11 p 216 1
Chap. 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12 188 2, and p 192 l 2
1 To Corinthians.
Chap. 15. V. 24 p 11, p 81 V. 25, 26, 27, 28, p 166 6. etc. And * B. 3. Chapter 4.
Sect. 7. and * p 481 3 * V. 29 416
2 To Corinthians.
* Chap. 3. V. 15, 16, 17, 18. Book 3. C. 4. S. 8. Chap. 6. v. 17, 18, B. 3. C.
2: S. 45. 3 4.
Galatians.
* Cha. 3. v. 6, 7, etc. to 17. paralleld with Genesis 12. v. 1. etc. Genesis 15. v.
4. etc. Genesis 17. v. 1. etc. Genesis 18. v 18 Gen 22. v. 18. Genesis 26. v. 4. Genesis
48. v. 19. v. 26 137
Ephesians.
Chap. 1. v. 13.14 p 144 4 etc. Chap. 2. v. 5. 60 Chap. 5. v. 5. 94
Philippians.
Chap. 2. v. 8, 9, 10, 11 p 215 2 And B. 3 Chapter 4. Sect. 9.
Colos.
Chap. 3. v. 1. 60
1 Ep. to These.
Chap. 4. v. 16, 17, * a large discourse, Page 492 Chapter 5. 1 etc:
2 Ep. to These.
Cha. 1. v. 1. etc. to v. 9. p 86, 88, etc. * p 487. v. 8. p 49 Cha. 2. v. 8 p
45, * p 491, Sect. 9
1 To Timothy.
Chap. 6. v. 14 89
2 To Timothy.
* Chap. 4, v. 1 95, 89 V. 6 * p 487
Hebrews.
Chap. 1. v. 5. p * 160 2 V. 6. p 9 * p. 133, 134. See also in the margin
largely, and p * 160, 3 Chap. 2. v. 5 paralleld with Genesis 1.26. and Ps. 8.131
V. 5. etc. 9, 73, 94 V. 8, 9 165 4 Chap. 3. v. 7. etc. to the end of the
Chapter p 171 1 etc. V. 17. p 173, br. 2 Chapter 4. v. 1, 2. etc. to v. 12 p 171 1
etc. p 176 l 1 etc. Chap. 10. v, 11, 12, 13 p 168, 7 etc. * Chap. 11. v. 8 etc.
to 17 paralleld with Genesis Chapter 12, v. 1. etc. chapter 15. v. 4. chapter 17.1, 2, etc.
ch, 18, v. 18. chapter 22: 18.26.4. chapter 48. v. 19, 26 137 Cha. 12. v. 26 p 124, 2
James.
Chap. 1. v. 1 43
1 Ep. of Peter.
Chap. 1. v. 8 81
2 Ep. of Peter.
Chap. 1. v. 17 etc. and from thence to the end of 3 chap. in general, B. 3. c.
2 S. 51. 5. 2. V. 19 97 Chap. 3.10 49 V. 13.14 V. 17, and 19. B. 3. c. 2. S.
51, 5, 2
Jude.
V. 14 125, 126
Revelation:
Chap. 1. V. 1.4. p 61 * p 486 2 V. 6.81 * V. 7. Ps. 80.81 etc. 90 * Chap. 2.
v. 25, 26, 27, 28 B. 3. C. 4. Sect. 10. * Chap. 3, 21. B. 3. C 4. Sect. 11
Chap. 5. v. 10 p 67, 73 74, 76 Cha. 7.1, 2, 3, etc. to the end, p 204, br. 6.
etc. Chap. 9. v. 1, 2, etc. 49 V. 11 87 Chap. 10, 6, 7 p 96 * p 530. Sect. 7
Chap. 11. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, p 3, 49, 58, 72, 91 V. 19 * p 536 Chap. 12, 9, 10
94 Chap. 13, v. 18 87 Chap. 14. v. 1, 2 3, 4, etc. p 3, 67, 73, 74 V. 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, p 307, 5 1 * Chapter 16. v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, p 309 l 22 Chapter 17, 16 p
88, 90 Chap. 18. in general, p 88 in particular v. 2, 3.4. B. 3. c. 2. S. 45. 3
4. * This Chapter throughout, B. 3. c. 4. Sect. 12, 1 etc. Chap. 19, v. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, p 62, 74 And this Chapter throughout, B. 3. c. 4. S. 12. 2 V. 15 p
74, 89 V. 19, 20, 21, p 56, 58, 90 * Cha. 20. throughout, 116 etc. * Chap. 20,
v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.8, 9 etc., p 2, 55, 56, etc. 66, etc. 61, 65, 68, 76,
226, etc. * Chap. 21. throughout, p 116, viz. lib. 3 Chapter 3. Sect. 1. 4. viz.
partic. p 118 * V. 3. p. 144 3, 145 4 Chap. 21. v. 1 p 14 and v. 1, 2, 3, 4, p
106, br. 1. etc. V. 24 49 Chap. 22.11, 15.94
A Table of the things contained in the TREATISE.
A
Authors Alleged for our Thesis, to take off the supposed singularity, and
novelty of the opinion Page 4 Authors Alsted Page 36 Authors Alapide Page 41
Authors Mr. Archer Page 46 Authors Rabbi Arisba in Agadot Page 421 Authors
Aben-Ezra Page 425 Authors Austin Page 435, 436 Authors The Turkish Alcoran
Page 418 Authors Alphonsus Conradus Page 439 Authors Benz^ma in Beracoth Page 9
Authors M. W. Burton Page 36 Authors R. Abrah. Bibag. in his Derech Page 422
Authors Cyprian Page 436 Authors T. Crispoldus Page 35 Authors Mat. Cotterius
Page 440 Authors Carolus Gallus Page 40 Authors Chemnitius Page 416 Authors The
Cabalists Page 423 Authors The Cabalists alleged by Lactantius for us Page
426 Authors Alphonsus Conradus Page 439 Authors Great Councils and ancient
forms of Catechism for our Tenet Page 431 Authors Johannes de Combis Page 439
Authors John Dobricius Page 441 Authors Eliezer the Great a J.R. Page 6 Authors
Epiphanius Page 15 Authors R. Moses Egyptius Page 421 Authors Epiphanius, in
that Section beginning at p 372 and 435 Authors Rab. Eliezer Page 429 Authors
Rab. Elhazar ibid. Authors Ra. Elhazar Ben Hazaria ib. Authors Funccius Page
439 Authors Glimpse of Sions glory Page 53 Authors Rab. Moses Gerundensis Page
421, 424 Authors R. Jos. Galilean Page 426 Authors The Hebrew Antiquities Page
4 Authors E. Huet Page 54 Authors Dr. Hakewel Page 40 Authors Rabbi Huna Page
426 Authors Homer the Poet considerably alleged Page 414 Authors Irenaeus Page
13, 434, 436 Authors Justin Martyr Page 11 Authors Jonathan Chald. Paraph. on
Hos. Page 6 Authors R. Isaac Abravanel Page 421 Authors R. Ketina Page 7
Authors The Jerusalmy de Kilaym Page 43 Authors King Edw. 6. Catechism for our
Tenet Page 438 Authors Lactantius Page 16 Authors Lorinus Page 33 Authors
Luther Page 53 Authors Rab. Levi Page 429 Authors R. Menasse Ben Israel Page
410 Authors R. Midrasch Tehillim Page 9 Authors The Maccabees alleged by
Cyril Page 436 Authors Mr. J. Mede Page 40 and 46 Authors D. Mayer Page 43 and
Authors M. Maton Page 45 Authors R. Meyer in Tract Sanhedrim Page 420 Authors
L. Napier Page 54 Authors R. Natan in Talmud Page 420 Authors Nidras a Nehelem
Page 430 Authors Council of Nice for our Tenet Page 430 Authors L. Osiander
Page 434 Authors Ovid the Poet, and that considerably Page 415 Authors
Stephanus Panonimus Page 440 Authors Peter Martyr Page 30 Authors D. Pareus
Page 32 Authors Piscator Page 440 Authors Theophrastus ^aracelsus Page 440
Authors Plato Page 414, 416 Authors Rivet Page 42, 439 Authors Of the Rabbis,
See in their several names, and see a multitude of them alleged p 419 c. 4.
throughout. Authors Ruffinus Page 452 Authors R. Saadias Page 10 Authors Jewish
Tract Semot Page 428 Authors The J. Treatise Siphra Page 428 Authors Sozomen.
Page 451 Authors Michael Sendivogius Page 440 Authors The great Synagogue Page
442 Authors P. Simsons History of the Arian persecution Page 449, etc. Authors
Targum Babylonian on Genesis Page 5 Authors Targum Hierosolimitanum on Genesis
Page 5 Authors Targum Manuscrip of Ester, Page 4 Authors Talmuds, the Jewish
and Babylonian Page 7, 425 Authors Theodorit. Page 451 Authors Tertullian Page
16, 437 Authors Dr. Twisse Page 40 and 46 Authors The Prophecy of Tobit
alleged by Mr. Mede Page 431 Authors Paras. Voyera Elar: Page 423 Authors
Wendelinus Page 439 Authors H. Zanchy Page 40. and 439 Authors The Rabbinical
Zoar Page 423, 426 Authors Antichrist includes Turk and Pope, as the body does
all the limbs Page 86 Authors Alexandrinus confuted, see Dionysius. Five
Arguments to prove that there is yet to come a most glorious state on earth
Page 406 Authors The Arguments of the Adversaries answered Page 443
B
Authors Mr. Baylies arguments against the general Position, fully discussed,
and answered Page 472
C
Gaius, Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Eusebius most falsely to have fathered the
opinion of the thousand years, with a mixture of abhorred impieties and
absurdities upon Cerinthus, is proved fully out of the best Antiquity Page 372
The qualities of men, in the future glorious state on earth shall be Coordinate
Page 523 Chiliasme vindicated from voluptuousness Page 372 The Chaos preceding
the glorious state Page 497 The new Creation of the glorious state Page 499 No
Church Censures in the glorious state, held forth in this Treatise Page 523 No
procreation of Children in the glorious state treated of in this Book Page 523
In that state shall be a restoration of all the Creatures Page 526 Item a
confluence of all comforts Page 533 How the six days work of the first
Creation typifie the state of the New Creation according to the opinion of the
Rabbis Page 428 How according to the opinion of the Author Page 502
D
Dionysius Alexandrinus (in Eusebius) confuted in his standering the opinion of
the thousand years Page 372 The Dimensions of the glorious state held forth in
their Treatise Page 505 That state also shall be Death-lesse Page 515 No
desertions in that state Page 523 No Decay in that state ibid.
E
Eusebius Pamphylus justly reproved and confuted for his facile, and simple
credulity to Gaius and Alexandrinus, falsely calumniating the Doctrine of the
thousand years Page 372
F
No Fears in the glorious state, intended in this Treatise Page 523
G
Gaius (mentioned in Eusebius) reproaching the opinion touching the thousand
years confuted Page 372 Diverse opinions about Gog and Magog Page 427 Jews
confess they shall have a strivng with Gog and Magog after their return into
their own Country, with their Scripture proofs thereof Page 426
H
Hieronymus, alias Jeroms jeers and jirkings at the proofs of the glorious
state to come, discussed and confuted 369 The confession of beathens touching
the glorious state on earth yet to come 414
I
Jerome opposing the 1000 years confuted. See Hieronimus. Jerome reproved for it
by Mr. Mede 435 How Christ's intercession does, and does not remain in the
future glorious state on earth 485
K
King Edwards Catechism (set forth by his authority, and brought by the Bishops
to M. Philpots trial) expounds the Petition in the Lords Prayer, Thy KINGDOM
come, of this GLORIOUS KINGDOM ON EARTH YET TO COME, of which this Book does
treat 438
L
Of the Saints living a 1000 y. on earth 53 Of the clearing of Lactantius
touching voluptuous Chiliasme 435
M
The confession of the Mahumetans acknowledging in substance, the sum of the
general position of this Treatise 418 No humane ruling Majesty in the glorious
state on earth yet to come 523
N
The voice of Nature for this restoration, or Nature in all things groans by
Natural instinct, for this restoration of all things on earth yet to come,
which must be fulfilled, God never impressing any kind of Natural instinct on
the species of things in vain. See largely 526
O
Objections against our arguments for the general Thesis, refelled 495
P
The general Position propounded 1 The general Position expounded 2 The
Position divided into two parts, viz. I That Christ shall visibly appear in
person. 2 That under him the Saints shall sensibly and properly reign 77 Dr.
Prideaux his arguments answered 443 Dr. Pareus answered 471 No procreation of
children in the glorious state, intended in this Treatise 523 The privileges
in that glorious state 536 All Prophesies shall then be fulfilled 536
Q
Ten Qualifications, or Qualities of the glorious state yet to come upon earth,
with several other consequences from those ten 507 At that time shall be a
perfection of all Qualities 532
R
Of the Jewish Rabbis confession of the main of this Treatise 410 In the
glorious state we speak of shall be a Restoration of all the creatures 526
S
Ten Scriptures out of the N. Testament to prove the visible appearance of
Christ to the Church on earth, at the great Restoration 78 Five places out of
the old Testament to prove the same 170 666 is fitted to be the Antichristian
numeral name of Turk and Pope 87 One and fifty Scriptures out of the O.
Testament, collated with those allegation of them in the New, to prove that
there shall be yet on earth a glorious state of al things 115 etc. The glorious
state intended in this Treatise shall be sin-lesse 507 It shall also be
sorrowlesse 511 An abundant pouring out of the Spirit shall then be 538 12
Scriptures in the N. Testament to prove that there shall be yet on earth a most
glorious state of all things 377 and to 406
T
Of the Saints living gloriously a THOUSAND YEARS on earth 55 Of their Reigning
there so LONG 66 Of their Reigning with Christ THERE that while 68 More of the
space of time of 1000 Y. of the Saints reigning with Christ on earth 74 The
doctrine of the 1000 years vindicated from voluptuous Chiliasme 372 The state
in that time shall be Temptation-lesse 525 The glorious state shall be a
Time-lesse condition, viz. more like eternity 530, 536
V
The voice or vote of al Nations confesses in substance the Tenet of a
glorious etc. 413 Our Tenet little less then the voice of the law of nature
434 A full answer to an universal objection 492 The state of the thousand years
vindicated from voluptuousness 369 etc. 479 etc.
W
What in particular the glorious state held forth in this Treatise shall be 464
No wants in that State 523 The six days Works of the Creation applied by the
R. to typifie the new Creation 428
FINIS.

