A SERMON Preached before THOMAS ANDREWS LORD MAYOR, And the Aldermen, Sheriffs,
etc. of the honorable Corporation of the City of LONDON, At PAVLS; on the
Lords day, Feb. 2. 1650.

By Doctor NATHANAEL HOMES, Teacher to the Church at Mary Staynings, LONDON.

In which Discourse is held forth, 1 The Order, Method, and Succession of Times
and Things, both good and evil, that are to come to pass before the next
appearance of Christ; as an explanation of his former Sermon before the said
honorable Assembly, upon October. 8. 1650. 2 A touch upon the Two Witnesses. 3 An
Iconism or Picture of the present Apostacy in England. 4 A Systeme of
Symptoms of them that will have the spiritual Falling Sickness to depart from
the Faith.


Left as a Testimony and Protest of the Author, against the Evils of this
present Age.

London, Printed by I. R. and J. C. 1650.

To the Right Worshipful Jasper Draper, John Blackwel, Samuel Harsenet, and
William Hulme, Wardens of the Right Worshipful Company of GROCERS of London;
And to the rest of that worthy Company.
Honored Sirs,
IN answer to Desires, I have printed this Sermon, and bequeathed it to you
also; who (that I might acknowledge your great respect to me, and your favor
to the present Government therein) were the Primum mobile, the First movers of
printing my former Sermon, (to you also bequeathed) which so far taking your
spirits (as you then much expressed) I thought it necessary to catch hold of
this happy opportunity, to explain That by This, in showing you as well the
black side, as the bright side of the cloud of future times; and so your
judgments might be set upright in the apprehension and expectation of those
things; to rejoice in Christ, but with a holy filial trembling: Do as
Chrysostom sent word to the threatening Empress; Ego nil nisi peccatum timeo:
Fear sin, and then fear nothing. Your reverence of Christ shall be then filled
with rejoicing that his day is coming, to beat down all his enemies, and
advance his Saints upon earth before the ultimate glorifying of you, and him,
who subscribes himself

Your humble servant in Christ Jesus, NATHANAEL HOMES.
From my Study at Mary Staynings, London. Feb. 12. 1650.
2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Let no man deceive you, by any means. For, that day shall not
come, except there come a falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed,
the Son of Perdition.


THis chapter is happily divided from the rest; it distinctly containing the
second part of thi^ Epistle, viz. (...) Prophesying of the Prognostic
Antecedents, fore-running near before the next Appearance of Christ, with their
appendices and Appurtenances.

An Error of some of the Thessalonians, that the Day of Christ, (...), was then
even as present, Verse. 2. was the occasion of this Discourse of the Apostle.
Which he begins with beseeching and obtesting them, ( Verse. 1.) by the future
coming of Christ, that they would not be shaken in mind, as if he were then
presently coming, though (as in all Ages down to us) some would assert it, (
Verse. 2.) as pretending their own spirit of Prophecy, or some word, viz.
Tradition; or suppositious Epistles of the Apostles. But, says the Apostle,
them that persuade that, decline ye; for they go about to deceive you. Because
that Day cannot come, unless such and such things first come to pass; and so he
smoothly slides into our Text, and the Prophecy of the falling away of the
seeming Christian, and the revealing of the Antichristian, before the next
Appearance of Christ. Let no man deceive you (says the Apostle) by any means,
for that Day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed.

You see by the change of the Letter in your Bibles, how much is supplied by
our Translators, viz. Day shall not come is not in the Greek: but are the true
sense and intent of the Text, and therefore supplied by other Translators, both
of the best Latins and others. And they do it, because, say some, here is an
Aposiopesis, an Ellipsis, say others. The Commentator on this Epistle in
Zanchies works says, that some Syriack Copy so supplies words, viz. Syrus
(inquit) Ne quis vos decipiat ullo modo, nam nisi venerit prius defectio, and
reveletur silius hominis peccati, silius perditionis, scilicet non instabit
Dies ille Domini. Howbeit I find them not any how so supplied in either of my
two Syriack Cosies.
But what need of all this? To me the Greek it self duly pointed, and rendered,
is able sufficiently to express it self. (...), etc. Correct the pointing (for
we had need sometimes, as John 15.2. etc.) and put the first Coma at (...), and
then the sense runs smoothly and fully thus; Let no man deceive you by any
means, that so it is, ( viz. as Verse. 2. that the Day of Christ is at hand)
except there come a falling away first, etc.

There are some singular Elegancies and Emphases in the words, 1. (...). Two
Negatives are put in the Dehortation, whose properties are more vehemently to
deny, and forbid; as that we may truly render the Apostle, according to the
Idiome of our English thus; Let no man by no means deceive you. Intimating
vehemently, that thence to succeeding Ages there would be much danger of many
deceiving and being deceived, that Christ's second Coming was fulfilled before it
was. And this Deceit would peep up under many shapes, as the word (...)
(rendered here means) may also signify. We shall view this thousand-shap'd
Proteus better afterward. 2. The falling away in our English, is in the Greek
expressed by a word which signifies an odious falling away, and our English of
it (if rendered word for word) exactly takes after the Greek for casting an
odium upon it; For it is (...), Apostasy. The Arabic keeps the same. The
Syriack (...) signifies Rebellion. For Apostates usually do not only fall away
from the Truth, but also against the Truth Heb. 6.6. (...), Fall against. As
the Greeks say, (...), Contrary to reason, (...). A transgressor against the
Law. And the Apostle adds in that Heb. 6.6. (...) which is falling against the
Truth with a witness.
3. Revealed, and the Greek of it (...), are near kin to (...), the Book of the
Revelation, both name and thing, viz. This man of sin, and of perdition must be
revealed as ripe in sin for perdition, according to the Revelation, Chap. 16.
and Chap. 17. before Christ's next coming. Which Man of sin is expressed with
the greatest Emphasis, of Emphasis upon Emphasis, (...), i. e. That same man of
the sin, that same son of the perdition. And the Greek of perdition is of the
kindred of that Greek name of Antichrist ( Rev. 9.11.) Apollyon. (...), the
Hebrew name there answers exactly.
This Feast (as the Revelation often calls him) is both actively and passively,
The Man of sin, and Son of perdition, Illud scelus, and Homo perditus; as the
purer Latins name, one desperately wicked for ruin.
He causes, and is sin and perdition. The cause in others; the object in
himself. Son in Hebrew applied to things as in the Text, signifies inherence
and propriety of the thing to that man.

I think it long this while I am in the Bark and Shell of the Text. Let us show
you briefly the pith and kernel. I am not willing, though it would be easy to
show you the variety of Glosses of the Greek ancient and pious Fathers, but
rather (to my light) strike point blank upon the verity of the native sense.

Before the next Appearance of Christ, two Signs shall precede as
forerunners, Apostasy, and Antichristian Impiety, both transcending, and
surpassing. For it is as well emphatically said (...), The or that Apostasy; as
(...), The or that Man of sin. And both inferring one another, like Scales. If
profession of Christianity go down, Anti-christianisme rises up. If
Anti-christianisme stands up, ascends; visible Christianity falls down, and
deelines. The Apostle speaks both in a breath, not putting so much as a period,
or half period point between And after in this Chapter prosecutes them, as
reciprocally, by turns, inferring one another. So in Ver. 10 after the Text.
Men hear the Truth, but not receive the love of the Truth; they are out of
love with it; Therefore the Man of sin is let to appear: He openly acts his
power, signs, etc. and deceives such with his unrighteousness and lies. This
the order of nature of these, in the Apostles following prosecution.

This Apostasy, and this Discovery revealine Antichrist are both twofold
(here hinted, and elsewhere more explained) twilled together, like the Legs of
two Wrestlers, clasping for a Combat. The first Apostasy is not only from the
outward serious practice of Religion, but also from the Doctrine of Faith, and
the historical, or temporary Faith of Doctrine, (as elsewhere we have more
enlarged Doemonologie or Character of the crying Evils of the present Times.
) yea, and by that means gradually to apostatise from a fundamental Faith, that
there is one true God, JEHOVAH, that has his throne in Heaven, and the Farth
for his footstool; and yet (many) have a diabolical Faith, implicitly, at
least to go to the Devil in unlawful, Astrology, ^ele^mes, Stoicheioseis,
Schemes, Cir^es, and Infernal ceremonies, to know, and do, things not revealed
by God. This Apostasy the Apostle here hints, ^ers. 10, 11, 12. after our
Text, as a Commentary upon it, touching the word Apostasy, says he, They
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved. For this came God
sent them strong Delusions, that they should believe a ^e^; that they all might
be damned, who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

But this, this same Apostle, in 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. lays wide open, and strikes
home thus: Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later ^imes some shall
depart from the ^ITH, giving heed to seducing spirits, and DOCITRINES of
DEVILS, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their CONSCIFNCES SEARED WITH AN
HOT IRON. This added, fully reaches this latitude of the first Apostasy;
which though it seems to wrestle against Anti-christianisme, yet does but list
it up. For by the opportunity of this Apostasy, Anti-christianisme takes its
turn to be advanced, and therein is the first Revelation of Antichrist (as the
Text speaks) that is, Antichrist shall be revealed in his power and glory So
the Greek Fathers generally, though I list not to name them.
(as the blind Worlds power and glory Rev. 13.3. All the world wondered after
the Beast.
) as our Apostle sufficiently hints in the (...) (...) and ^erses after the
Text, as a Commentary upon it, touching that revealing; that same man of sin
(s^ith the Apostle, according to the Creek) and (...) of perdition be revealed,
that same opposer and exalter of himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped; even to hi^ sitting over the Temple of God as God, showing himself
that he is God; and now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in
his time. That is, the being and power of the Roman Emperor hindered
Antichrist then, from appearing in that dominion, power, and glory, as to be
above all that is called God, etc. that is, above all Magistracy. To which as
he attains, there is added a second Apostasi^, he draws after him the Nations
of the Earth, from their due Subjection to their own chief Magistracy, to adore
and worship him, Rev. 13.8. And this our Apostle sufficiently hinteth Though we
n^me not the whole stream of the Latin (...) the generally running this way:
unto us in Verse. 9. and 10. After in that he says, This same Opposer of all
other powers shall come after the working of Satan, with all power, and
deceivableness. Should seem he shall deceive many with all his false
Principles, and draw them after him, to submit to his power; till at last
follows a second Revelation of that Man of sin Antichrist; revealing him in
his intolerable impiety, tyranny, and enmity, not only against the
Christianity of Beleivers, but against the natural liberty of mankind. So that
this second Revelation of him, Legs down, and overthrows the first Revelation
of him. And repays his causing the former Apostasies from Conscience toward
God, and due subjection to Magistrates, with an Apostasy (if I may so call it,
it being a godly Apostasy) of the enlightened World from him and his pretended
power, both ecclesiastical and cevil. This second Revealing of him (not to lean
upon modern learned, which might numerously be quoted) we clearly collect out
of the Apostles words in the 8. Verse. after our Text, as further commenting
upon the extent of the word revealing. And then (says he) shall that wicked
one be revealed. How revealed? As stubble in a slame; and nearer to the words;
as riches and pomp in the riotous wasting and spending. And as a person in
great honor, divested and degraded from that honor. For (says the Apostle) him
shall the Lord consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of (to keep to the Greek) his Appearance. The Spirit or Breath of
Christ's mouth is his Word; See Isay 11.4 The Chalde on that Chapter expounds
the Spirit or Breath of his mouth, to be his Word.
and his Spirit accompanying it (as 2 Cor. 3.) And his appearance is as well
spiritual in the effect of his Word and Spirit upon the hearts of men drawing
them from Antichrist, and providential in ordering things to that end, as
personal in his visible coming; next before which personal, his spiritual and
providential shall be most eminently conspicuous, to a glorious brightness in
the eyes of the generality of all men. So that before them, in their esteem,
the pomp, glory, riches, power, authority, dominion, majesty, etc. of
Antichrist shall be blotted out as a fair writing, or melt away as a great
estate rioted to nothing, and made void, as non ens; as the Greek (...)
expendere, delere, etc. (...), antiquare, irritum facere, abro^are.
well imports. The Gospel shall manifest such freedom, comfort, etc. in
opposition to Antichrist, and providence shall so serve that end, that men
shall infinitely vilify him; until at last that be fulfilled, Rev. 17.16. The
ten horns hate the Whore, make her desolate, and naked, eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire. That is, the Nations that were formerly subject to him, that
were formerly his horns of power to arm him with might, now shall turn their
power against him to his ruin. For though they be called Kings, Verse. 11. yet
the meaning cannot be Kings properly, for that the holy Ghost tells us there in
the 10. Verse, those Nations should change their Government often; as from
Kings to Consuls, Dictator, Triumvirs, etc. And experience suggests that
several Nations that have departed from Antichrist, have no King. Switzers,
Helvetians, Low Countries.
And therefore the ten ho^ must signify so many Nations, by those chief Powers
the People shall set up, in whom under God, all civil power is radicated; and
is planted (for use and shelter to a State) in him or them to whom the people
by an orderly general consent shall delegate it. There is no Rule in Scripture
to constitute any Form of civil Government to be jure divino, and unchangeable.
The Apostle uses first the word Apostasy, because its native signification
denoting the shrinking and slinking of Soldiers from their. General unto the
Enemy, the translating and transferring thereof to the Apostasy meant (as we
have heard) in this Text, is very apt, elegant, and emphatical. And secondly,
he uses the word revealing, because the beginning of Antichrist was in a
Mystery, Verse. 7. after the Text, that is hiddenly. But Christ by his Word and
providence should reveal him. John in the Revelation (as one says) writ the
Mystery of Antichrist, Paul in his Epistles the Commentary. And both (our
experience can tell us) are daily more and more expounded, by the divine
providence wheeling Kingdoms and States to that effect. And thirdly, the
Apostle calls the Race and Succession of Antichrist, the man of sin, the son of
perdition, as if but one man. First, because still (as their main prinpal) one
man is the absolute Head, and chief of all that Monster and monstrous Body,
whether Turk or Pope. Though both one They are one in desent both of Nature and
Religion. Mahomet by one of his Parents being a Gentile, by the other a jew:
and Mahomet and a Popish Monk invented his Alcoran or Religion. And from the
Pope he took his Dominion, breaking off three horns from the ten, Dan. 7.
Antichrist; In descent, in dominion, in the Iconisme or description in the
next Verse after the Text, viz. Sitting over the Temple of God, etc. The Turk
sitting over the material Temple at Jerusalem; as the Pope of Rome over
Christians, the spiritual Temple.
Though they pretend, the Turk something, the ^ope more, to honor Christ, and
to be (...), for Christ, (as (...) sometimes signifies, ^o. 1.16.) yet they are
(...), against Christ, (as the word is intended and explained, 1 ^o. 2.22.) And
secondly, the Apostle speaks of Antichrist, as if but one, because originally,
collectively, and representatively in the esteem of God, there are but two men
from the beginning of the World to the end there of. Adam is called the first
man, 1 Cor. 15.45, 47. Christ in the same place is called not only the second
man, but also the last man. And so all the sons of men in all Generations are
to be reserred to, and considered in one of these two. Sinners to and in Adam
(fallen) the first man; and Beleivers to and in Christ, the second and last
man; as it is the whole Discourse, and the main intended Design in that
Discourse of the Apostle, Romans 5. v. 12. to the end of the Chapter: and
punctually and home the Apostle tells us, Romans 6.11. that all Beleivers are to
be RECKONED in Christ. Yea, in 1 Cor. 12.12. he boldly eals the Church by the
name of Christ, as of old did the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 33. verse. 16. And this
is the name wherewith SHE shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. Which is
the Name, the same Prophet in Chapter 23. Verse 6. gives to Christ. But sinners
have a twosold consideration, as under a double notion; one general, in their
corrupt natural condition, as dis-obedient to God, contrary to the Law, and so
they are Adam, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48. The first man is of the earth, as is the
earthy such are they that are earthy. The other notion is more special, as
sinners are under, and considered in a moral state and acting of nubeleif,
refusing Christ, contraay to the Gospel; and so they are all Antichrist, limbs
and members of the Antichristian Head, though some parts are more remote and
less quickened by that Head. Thus Saint John in his Epistles does much
inculcate; as in the place but now mentioned, 1 John 2.22, 23. He is Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has
not the Father: therefore there are many Antichrists now of those called
Christians. For they slight Christ at the least: and Verse. 18. of the same
Chapter, Antichrist shall come; now are there many Antichrists. They went out
from us, because they were not of us. Observe, the Departers from religious
persons and practices, from the holy Church, and the holy Rule, are called
Antichrists. So chap. 4.3. Every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is that spirit of Antichrist; and
is even now already in the World. The same in 2 Ephesians. v. 7. Now we know by 2 Timothy 3.5. Men may deny Godliness, though they keep the form: by Romans 2.20, A
man may have a form of knowledge, yet be, and act as a great Transgressour: by
It Is. 1.16, Men may profess they know God, but in Works deny him. And it is
granted by all (generally) that are not Papists, or Heathens, the Papacy and
all its Members holding Justification by Works, to be Antichristian, though
they do in words acknowledge Christ for a Savior. So that (to our point in
hand) all that refuse Christ, believe not in him, are more or less Antichrist.
For in substance of Religion he that is not for Christ is against him; though
in natural or civil circumstances (as to serve Christ, though we be not in his
personal presence) Not to be against Christ is to be with him. It has been
something irksom to me (for your sakes) that I have been so long in the
Explanation of the Text, absent from the doctrine which is my Errand, and your
charge to be carried with you. But you see, it was a Cabinet locked; till opened
you could not have the Jewel. That, I shall now give you in the main, though I
(that am here less then the Poets (...) A man of a day; couched to an hour)
cannot stand to gather up all the small Bracelets that might go along with it.
I must omit Observations upon several words, and tell you my Design from the
heart of the Text, The observation.
this doctrinal point: What ever many deem and dream, yet before the next
Appearance of Christ there will be a falling away of Hypocrites, obscuring
Christianity, and a revealing of Antichrist: There will be an Apostasy from
Piety, and a revelation of the man of iniquity. Profession of Religion will
have the falling sickness; and Antichristianisme a recovery; the rise of
Heresy and Impiety, and the ruin of Godliness will eminently appear, asore
Christ the second time appears; and this defection shall be attended with
perdition. Take it in which form of words you please, so as you carry with you
the thing. It Is not a Point selected, whereon to show learning or eloquence (if
I had them worthy the naming) or to vent my self (too common a sin with us) but
(God is witness) laid upon my spirit, with deep impressions, by the hand of
God, out of love to my Nation, to warn them, that as the Jews after Conquest of
Kings and Nations, they do not perish by their own sins. Here is (though
self-flatterers will dote of strange things) Perdition in the Text as well as
sin: and for the Apostasy in the Text, perishing and damnation after the Text,
ver. 10, 11, 12. Men that are short sighted (as purblinde eyes) will see no
Apostasy, answering to the Text, but that which was nearest at hand after the
Text had spoken, many hundreds of years since. But men dream what they desire,
and love such Interpretations as put away fear. I do not forget what I have
preached, and printed, and still do hope, that a glorious time is coming, and
do expect that it is not very far off: but I cannot change the Scriptures, nor
invert Christ's method. It will be dark before the Cloud shine as a pillar of
fire. Some storms and streights will be, before Israel get clear of Egypt, and
come to Canaan. So our condition all along the Revelations. The case stands
thus; as the Promises and their Privileges of good things have their
successive and gradual fulfilling, (as we have in another place demonstrated
Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Day of Thanksgiving for our Victory
against the Scots, October. 8. 1150.
) so the divine Premonitions and Prognostics of future evils (that shall in
succession of Ages conflict against the welfare of true Saints) have also, in a
kind of equipage, or lackeying, of a Geometrical Proportion, if not
Arithmetical their successive Increments, at least by-turns, and proportionable
Perdition or judgment at the heels of that, till the Promises swallow up the
Prognostics, as Aarons Serpent did that of the Inchanters. Enoch (should seem
by Saint Jude Jude v. 14, 12.
) in the seventh Generation from Adam prophesied, That the Lord would come with
ten thousands of his Saints, What to do? To execute judgment. What is the
matter? Men should be found to be ungodly, ungodlily committing ungodly dieds;
and ungodly sinners, speaking hard speeches against God. Which Prophecy of
Enoch, though it were many years after, at the time of Noah's Flood, Enoch
prophesied about An. Mundi 937. The Flood was An. Mundi 1657. Buchole.
* ere it was fulfilled, was not then total; fulfilled, but more after the
time that God confirming Israel in the knowledge of himself by a stery Law at
Mount Sinai, carrying them thence, along by Seir, and Paran, etc. to the
overthrow of more wicked Kings and Kingdoms, of Og the King of Bashan, and
Sihon King of the Amorites. For so Moses repeats Enoch his words, Deul. 32.2.
and makes it the groundwork of Prophecy, that as God had so done against the
wickednesses that did arise against Israel till then; so the most impious Kings
and Nations in Canaan should be dealt withal. Compare v. 2. with v. 7. v. 11.
etc. in that Chapter: and yet in this, that Prophesse of Enoch had not powered
out all its Vial; there was yet more Apostasy, and sin, and Antichristianisme,
to be revealed in the World, and therefore there is behind more wrath in that
Vial, to be powered out in the last times to succeed in and after the Apostle
Judes time, to which S. Jude applied it. Thus also is the race of that
denunciatory Prophecy of Isai. 11.4. The Rod of the stemm of Jesse (Christ
Jesus) should with righteousness judge the porr, etc. but smite the earth with
the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his nostrils slay the wicked:
which though mightily fulfilled in his personal preaching, and confounding the
Errors of Life and Doctrine of the Pharisees, and making them to fall back ward
with his words, I am He; and giving power to the Apostles to do Miracles, to
the terror of the Enemies, and death upon Ananias and Saphyra; yet more
wickednesses Apostasies, and Antichristianisme succeeding the time of Christ
and the Apostles, must have of the Vial of this prophetical threat powered out
upon them, as our Apostle in the 8. Verse after our Text does punctually apply
this place of Isaiah to the Apostasies and Antichristianisme to follow his
Times, and down ward. First, he puts Apostasy, and next Antichristianisme:
Apostasy leads the Dance, from an Almain to a Coranto, I mean from bad to
worse, and Antichrist follows, revealing himself in the fame of rise, till he
be revealed in the flame of his ruin.

Without furher preamble, the System and frame of this Mystery of iniquity (as
the Context calls it) is thus; the foundation and root of Apostasy is
personal, in the graceless, sinful hearts of Hypocrites: the superstructure
and limbs are the concurrence of the generality of a Nation to speak that
Language, and act that conversation as suits to apostatizing, or falling away,
more or less; till at last it benear oeconomical and universal; that
Christendom (as they call it) be for the most quite cold in their affections,
and corrupt in their very Principles as well as in their Practices. And though
at a time, like an house on fire, some pieces falling, or a few Buckets powered
on, do damp, and obscure the flame for present, yet anon it breaks out worse,
till the whole be pulled down: and thus it gets head again, by rising in
several shapes, and when it has gone over all sorts; then an old one rises
up, as a new Fashion: all which process and recory of Apostasy and
Antichristianisme, notwithstanding some impedings, or discountenance, is
sensibly perceived by them that are spiritual, Living Creatures ( Revel. 4.)
that have eyes as well within as without. These can see, that though all Roots
of goodness be not killed, yet the Blossoms and young fruit of of the Trees
are generally blasted. Though Autumn Plants and Herbs be not as in Winter,
altogether leaf-less, without all appearance, yet lifeless, without spirit and
vigor.

You will say, How shall these things be, now forward, The Demonstration.
which have not been so, palpably, these two or three hundred years backward or
more? If this be true, thank Persecutions, Oppressions, Afflictions for it. But
besides the common Cause of Apostates and Antichrists; it is the nature of the
Beast, and property of the Disease, viz. Wicked men and Seducers grow worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived, till their folly and madness be made
manifest to all men, (2 Timothy 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.) I say, besides this common
Cause, that such, in longer time, grow riper in their sins, there are special
Reasons now nearer the end, before Christ's Appearance, to wit, now God changes
his hand, ever and anon, to trust Nations that have pofessed the Gospel, with
Liberty (Civil and Spiritual) a thing which for many Ages they have not known,
and therefore are utterly unskilled to rightly use it. And from hence as men
half-famished coming to full Diet, they surfeit and break out into spiritual
Scabs, and Botches. Their Liberty to the generality of them proves but as a
Lightening before Death; their glorying but as the bright Glance and Glare of a
Spark or Snuff before it goes out. The Liberty they triumphed in, as if they
would improve it to great advantages in matters of Religion, proves but an
opportunity (none then controlling their Opinions and way of Profession) for
them to become any thing, till at last they become nothing.

And further, the rotten-hearted (the most of men) bad enough of themselves,
infecting (as I may say) the common air where they professed, and now putrify,
causing some Saints (none being yet perfect) to be touched with a tincture of
the common Contagion, some specks of Itch, and petty spots appearing, as
Symptoms of their stain also (so far) with the general Infection, those
rotten-hearted men take encouragement thence to loath all the sincere, and
their ways; but pronounce to themselves their own licentious Liberty, and base
backsliding, a pious privilege, a spirituality, a perfection. Thus as Luthers
Sw^ne (of which he speaks to this our purpose) These impious Revolters joyfully
grunt, gladly to nuzzle in Excrements, but contemptibly trample Gold and
Jewels, and pleasingly wallow in the Mire, because some godly men by force of
temptation a little trod in the dirt, but got out again. These Comparers of
themselves with the worser things of the best men to be worst themselves, never
take notice of the common hour of temptation, brought on by themselves; nor
take any true account of the just circumstances of beleivers failings, that if
Solomon be carried forth to make experiment of the vanity of wine, yet still he
acquainted his heart with wisdom. Nor do they look after the Saints, many, yea,
thousands of repentings for one sin. David for his, pens many penitential
Psalms: how often by him recited who can tell? We are not destitute of
Precedents to confirm this, even down to these times; wherein the common crowd
of Professors of Religion fall away to be detestors of Religion. And because
they see some weaknesses in some single Saints that adhere to Ordinances; and
that no way either of Baptisers, Presbyters, or Congregations, is perfect,
therefore they adore their own New-nothing, or their worse then nothing in
Religion, to be a great religious something. For to a many, a freedom of their
spirits to sin, is by them cried up for a sanctity. So long since as
Constantine the great we have a draught, and platform of the manner, means,
and measure of Apostasy and Antichristianisme, before asserted. He putting a
period to the ten Persecutions, about the year after Christ, 313. thence
forward for his time, giving liberty, peace, promotions, and donations to the
Churches, how odiously anon after, brake out and sprang up Papal pride, Arrian
Antichristianisme, and the thousand headed Hydra of Heresy; too much to be
counted, name and thing, in one hour, as pious and learned Epiphanius about 50
years after, and S. Austin about 30 years after him have declared. When a dark
cloud of War began again to overshadow the Earth; fullness of troubles in many
places; God raising Carolus Magnus (accounted to have been a wonderful
religions Prince Carolus Magnus fuit admodum religiosus princeps. Epit. Hist.
Fccles. Magdeburg. Ad annum 383. c^. 3.
) about the year 760 after Christ, as a mighty Warrier, and succesfull
Destroyer of the open Enemies of Religion, and withal exceeding indulgent and
beneficial to the Churches (which then were many in many Countries Ibid. page
1. Epit. Histor. Hist. Eccl. Magd. ad ann. 788, 789, 791, etc.
) how abominably after a while did thousands apostatise, Pontifical pride
begins more to swell, and Heresy, and Superstation more to fret and spread
like a Gangrene and Leprosy. Multi jam errorres, etc. many Errors had now
crept into the Church of Christ. The Hunnes revolted from Christian Religion to
Ethnicisme. Tum religio christiana, etc. Christian Religion then was much
contaminated with many Superstitions; with infinite more in the next Century,
and downwards. These doubtless might be part of the Apostles meaning in our
Text, and in his Explanation, 1 Timothy 4.1. etc. numbering the kinds of
Apostasies, etc. to be in the later Times, (mark the Phrase according to the
Greek (...).
. But these are not all our Apostles sense and intent. These before named in the
said Times are but beginnings, and Landskips, and petty Maps to that Ocean, and
world of wickedness that was to follow in future. For surely, when our Apostle,
and the Apostle Peter do afterward, by the same Spirit, speak in a higher Key,
2 Timothy 3.1. etc. saying, In the last Days. (...).
And in 2 Pet. 3.3. in a yet higher Key, saying, In the last of Days: (...)
and do immediately subjoyn these Prophesies of worser Impieties near to the
Appearance of Christ, (2 2 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Pet. 2.1. compared with 2 Pet.
3.10.) they must needs intend to signify to us a further Apostasy of
Professors, and Revelation of Antichrist; viz. An ((...), as it is in the Text)
eminent, a the or that same Apostasy, and Revelation of Antichrist, of the sin
of the perdition, some general and grand defection. And so does S. John in the
Revelation carry on the succession and succretion, the length and latitude of
that defection: for in the 13. Chapter. The Beast has power to act two and
forty months, i.e. 12. hundred and 60. Days, i. e. Years, blaspheming God,
and adored of men, more or less. This John prophesied about an hundred years
after Christ: so that this (if we could say no more) carries the Pedigrecc to
1360. years after Christ. But we can out of Scripture say more to this.
Antichristianisme in Paul's time was but in a Mystery. The Hinderer (...): alii,
(...).
(the Roman Emperor sitting in the Throne) lying in the way, and keeping under
the Revelation of Antichist (as it is in the Context); Antichrist had not yet
his (...), etc.
power given to him to make war those 42. months (mentioned Rev. 13.5.) You
heard before, that till 313, after Christ, the Church was under a sore
Persecution by the Heathen Roman Emperors. But after that time Antichrist
began to appear in Arrianisme, and Persecution of them that were contrary
minded. Then began his power, about 390. years after Christ. And in 410. the
Hinderer, the Roman Emperor was taken away, Rome being taken and spoiled by
the Goths, etc. All which accounts (putting 410. to 1260.) are not yet run
out. So that Apostasy and Revelation of Antichrist to all effects, fruit and
branches are yet in the increment and increase, as our woeful experience at
this day can fully attest. And this Saint John does further mainifest unto us,
Rev. 16. v. 10. etc. In the time of the fifth Vial (which is the utmost to
which we are come, if we be come) Antichrist has his Throne So the Greak.
(though then to be darkened) and men are very blasphemous and impenitent,
notwithstanding the pouring forth of that Vial (O that our Ears could not
witness such Blasphemies). And beyond this under the sixth Vial are three
unclean spirits like Frogs, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast,
and the false Prophet which are spirits of Devils working of Miracles, and
drawing the Kings of the Earth to Battle against the Saints. And lastly, Satan
still reigns, and the great City is undivided, and the Cities of the Nations
stand, ana Babylon comes not into rememberance before the Lord, to give her the
cup of the wine of the fierce wrath of God, till the seventh Vial be powered
out, Revel. 16.17. When this is powered out, then those things are done,
(ibidem) and Satan is bound, Rev. 20. Be sure Amorite-Apostates and Antichrists
sins must be first ripe and full, before they receive for their sins their total
fall and ruin, which being not yet executed, no doubt but the truth of our
Text by costs and turns shall have its progress and augmentation, of further
Apostasy and Antichristianity; though here and there, now and then, by parcel
they receive shrewd blows before the fatal one comes. For if ye mark the Mystery
of Gods dispensations, and his Method between his promises of good, and
Prognostications of evil; the prognostic is progressive to such a period; the
promise likewise being successive, overtakes it, and knocks it down; it rises
up again, and gets more head; the promise again makes after it, reaches it,
and gives it another blow and wound. And thus they keep turns, till Good has
the full Victory of Evil unto its full perdition at Christ's appearance, as you
have heard and seen all along this Discourse.

So here is our fear and our care now brought home and laid before us; The
Application.
namely, to inquire how forward we are gone in Apostasy and Antichristianity;
and how far behind Perdition is; for according to the stature of the
defection, there attends proportionable perdition, you see perdition is written
upon sin (in the Text). Cains mark. And to Apostasy is added after the Text,
Seduction and Damnation. And so as God said to Cain, Evil lies at the door, the
Apostle cries in my Text, Let no man deceive you. Should seem men are apt to be
deceived about these things which we now discourse. Heb. 3.12, 13. Rev. 3.24. 2
Cor. 11.15.
Apt to be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, their deceitful hearts, the
depths of Satan, and the transformation of men the instruments of Satan (the
Prince of Darkness) into Angels of light. To be sinfully miserable, and not to
know it, is double misery. Darkness and Chains. The Apostasy of England. In
opinions and Principles.
It Is not out of our sight and hearing in part, that the common Crowd of
Professors in this present Age count their Apostasy (kicking behind them
Ordinances with the scorn of forms; holy conversation with the brand of Bonds
and privation of their native liberty; and Christ with the reproach of a
fleshly thing) to be their sublimity, and high perfection.

And for Antichristianism, many they are on the other side who deny Christ to
have come, been born, and suffered in the flesh; (which S. John defines to be
Antichristianism:) Familistically making him a Non-ens. And as S. John (you
heard before) tells us, In denying the Son, they deny the Father also. And
truly for Atheism, store of them are professed ones; and make the Creatures
that should convince them, to be God; and the Scriptures that should be their
cure, to be their scorn. I will not name all that I know of these men's nefanda,
words and things, lest I should transgress against the Word, that forbids
Baalim, and Fornication, Covetousness, and other sins, so much as to be named
Hos. 2. v. 17. and Ephesians. 5.3.
. These roots (it seems by Books) came out of Germany; which planted here, do
like their soil, and grow mightily. And beside, the devil is as well here, as
any where else; and can as easily make Judasses among us, as in other Nations;
how much more Ananiasses, Magusses, Hymeneusses, Ephesians, Sardisians?
Multitudes among us heretofore seemingly sound and hot in Religion, have lied
to their profession, made Gain their godliness, embraced Religion out of
design, made shipwreck of the Faith, forsaken their first love, entertained
unsound Teachers, have only a name of Christians; and are as dead and cold in
Religion, as a stone. Thus they are, and refuse (a many of them) to read, or
hear, or converse with sound professors, that they may be sure never to be
better.

Is this all? No. In Practice.
These are but the foundation and root; the superstructure and fruit is evils
of Practice; as, Drinking, Riotousness, Whoredoms, Wantonnesses, Against Self.
Cursings, Blasphemies (even in Pulpit, and elsewhere) with such words of
allusion to the sacred things of Christ, as a pious heart hates to think. With
some of these sins they please the flesh; with others they sear their
consciences, that they may never repent. And they do profess an insensibleness
of any sin, and to act those things by principle.

Are these all? Against God.
No. There is another predicament or Table of high transgressions against God.
I will name but two. 1. Unlawful, superstitious, and diabolical Astrology. Of
which because I have spoken in Print, I say no more here. 2. Profanation of
the Lords day.
Of which sin, the Edict or Book of Sports was I am persuaded a main
meritorious cause to bring our two last Kings to untimely ends; and the
practice of it brought Gods judgments upon hundreds: as the Book of Gods
judgments on sinners, and that other of Gods judgments on Sabbath Breakers,
do declare. And we are extremely guilty still; Thousands choosing to walk in
fields on the Lords day, rather then to hear the Preaching of the Word. For now
they are free from enforcement to hear the Service Book, they return this for
their thanks, They will hear nothing at all. And thus they daily do about
London, though the worthy Lord Mayor present, and others formerly, have much
endeavored to prevent it. But let me say to those Profaners, Toll Diem, and
toll Deum cultus. Take away the Day, and you take away the Deity of Worship.

Are these all? Against our Neighbor.
No. There is another Predicament or Table of sins against our Neighbor; Viz.
False accusations, Injustice, Bribery, Oppression, Circumvention.

Have we yet All? Against the Church of Christ.
No. There is another of sins against the Universal Church of Christ.
Reproaching of Ordinances: Disgracing all ways of Worship: Questioning all
Ministeries, reproaching their Persons and Offices, pining them from
maintenance, and professing their hope (as some have expressed) that within few
years the name of Minister shall be odious. For testimony, we have their Books,
common expressions, and deeds. Would God all the Lords people were Prophets; or
that you need not to be taught by men, but were fully taught of God. But mean
while, Lord turn those men's hearts; or else dispose of us, that we may not see
your ruin.

Have we yet all? Sins against the State.
No. There is one Predicament more of sins against the State. 1. Self-power;
every man would rule, or bring the Majesty of Magistracy as low as
themselves; (a dangerous preface to cutting of throats:) an Adamitish
diabolical Levellism. 2. Selfends. Most men care for their Cabins, whiles the
Ship, the Common welfare, is in danger. They are like the Roman Consul, that
was deaf with delight in his Garden, whiles the Drums of the enemy beat at the
walls of the City. 3. Sycophancie, with pretense of the Common weal, to fill
ones own pockets. O this State-eating, this Commonwealth-devouring!
I wish I might see men go quite beyond Iehu, and, like Nehemiah, do that which
all may have a share in. O England, I am afraid concerning thee; and London,
concerning thee. The Swedes, and that party, are fallen from their first zeal,
and have unworthily made agreement with Antichristian Amalek, with whom, in
such a Case and Cause, no Peace was to be made. The Netherlands unhappie in
their League with one limb of Antichrist, and in their assistance of another
limb of him to be their near ill neighbor. The Scots have fallen from their
own Articles, profession of Reformation, and their quondam Principles, to bring
Malignants to condign punishment. But England and London are mightily fallen
from Religion. Not long since you were near the highest in profession of
Religion above all the Nations of the earth. England was the Paradise, and
London the midst, where were the choice trees of knowledge and of life. But now
in many main things of Religion, ye are fallen lower then Lutherans, Papists,
Jews, Turks, and Heathens; in despising Christ, denying the Scriptures, and
professed Atheism. England is a waste wilderness of decayed Religion, and
London the nest of all unclean birds. Therefore am I afraid of the City of my
habitation, and of the Land of my nativity. I fear not the French, Danes,
Scots, etc. I fear the sins of England and London. For when Balak could not
beat us, nor Balaam enchant and curse us; we received and acted the Doctrine
and Counsel of Balaam; the Nation is full of Adulteries, Corporal and
Spiritual, beside those clouds of sins before appearing. Can God in justice put
up these things at our hands, and not do by us as by Israel for that
Balaamitish defection, till Zimri and Cozbi, Number. 24.
and thousands more, were destroyed unto death; some killed with a javelin,
others hanged, and Four and twenty thousand destroyed by the Pestilence? What
though glorious times for the Universal Church are not far off? England is but
a small spot of ground, and may have an hour fo temptation, and yet that
design little or nothing interrupted. A storm of Lightning, Thunder, and Hail,
may fall in the dawning of a most glorious fair Summers day, as it proves
afterward. Israel was got quite out of Egypt; yet often sinning in the way
toward Canaan, were often sorely punished, 1 Cor. 10. And if any Believers
among them concurred in the sin, they escaped not the punishment. The Lord
forgave their iniquities, Psalm. 99.8.
but took vengeance of their inventions. Yea, when Israel had begun to enter
Canaan, and had conquered Jericho, Of the Two Witnesses, and their time and
place of lying dead and rising.
yet, for a great sin, before Ai they fall. Though the Two Witnesses have been
long time slaying, the Question still is, Whether they have layn their three
days and an half dead. Which being not yet fulfilled, it will be a Common
calamity when and where it falls. And not altogether unsuitable, it is the
judgment of some piously learned, That the time of all the great troubles to
be on the Christian Gentiles is not yet over: but that there is a time yet to
come, in which the Popal power shall dowineer over all Europe, before its full
ruin. Their Arguments are two. The one from Revel. 17. 1 Argum.
in which (say they) is intimated a twofold subjection of the ten Horns, that
is, of the ten Kingdoms of Europe, to the Beast. The first in verse. 12, 13.
where it is said emphatically, They, all ten of them, had one mind, sentence,
judgment, or resolution to give their power to the beast. They then being all
of one Religion, under the same gross Ignorance and Superstition, they were by
that means all of one mind. Secondly, in verse. 17, God put (Greek, gave) into
their hearts to make (so again in the Greek) one mind, sentence, judgment, or
resolution, to give their kingdom to the Beast. (For I am bold to observe this
for them, That though in both places it is (...), one mind, sentence,
judgment, or resolution; yet there is this singular difference, that in verse.
13. it is (...), that is, They have one mind, sentence, judgment, or
resolution; in verse. 17. it is (...), To make one mind, sentence, judgment, or
resolution. Before, from innate Principles of the same superstitious Religion,
they were of one mind: But now, upon debate, policy, confederacy, and
design, they make one mind, sentence, judgment, or resolution.) How? Why,
say they, the Text tells us, God gave it into their hearts to make that one
mind: That is, (as it is said in a like phrase, Romans 1. God gave them up; and
Romans 9. God hardens some men's hearts) God gave them up in just judgment, that
as many of the ten Horns as should after destroy the Whore (ver. 16.) should
notwithstanding before that, having been enlightened, and in good measure
delivered from Popery, revolt from that illumination and deliverance, and
close, confederate, and covenant into one determination with the other of the
ten Horns or Kingdoms of Europe, that continually abode in Popery. For, say
they, Now, in verse. 17. all the ten Horns were not of one mind, till by
consultation and agreement they made themselves of one mind. Some of them (as
we said but now) had been enlightened, and escaped from Popery; but now revolt
into one mind with Popish Kingdoms and Nations, and their powers. And this
must be, say they; else how shall the Witnesses of all Gods people lie dead
three days and an half? For these Witnesses of all Believers, are not found in
Kingdoms that still contined in Popery: Therefore they must be in Nations that
once, being enlightened, departed from Rome; but (as 'twas said before) revolt
again unto subjection to Rome. And this last subjection to Rome, is that which
precedes next before the ruin of Rome, by the resurrection of the Witnesses;
who must rise up, out of those Nations before enlightened, though since
revolted; but now again returning to the Truth; God stirring up his people to
that animosity. For not all the ten Horns or Kingdoms shall hate and destroy
the Whore; because it is express, Rev. 18. that some of them shall lament her
ruin, But, the meaning is, that some of the ten Horns shall destroy her,
(Synechdoche generis pro specie, totius pro part.) As it is said with the same
figurative speech, The Thieves (that is, de specie latronum, some of the kind
of Thieves, as well as of Soldiers, etc.) reviled Christ, though but one of
them did it. 2 Argum.
Their other Argument is from Revel. 18.7. That before the total fall of
Babylon, even a little before that ruin, she shall glorify her self, saying in
her heart, I SIT A QUEEN, AM NO WIDOW, AND SHALL SEE NO SORROW. But, say our
Authors, it is not yet so with the Popedom. For my part, I had not time (in my
sudden warning to this work) to debate these things to my full satisfaction;
nor have I time in this hour to determine how far I close with these things in
all particulars, further then to tell you, that so far I conceive them to be
right, as in the main they make out my Text and Doctrine, That an eminent
falling down of Religion, and arising up of Antichristianism, will be before
the next appearance of Christ; and suitable perdition successively will attend
upon it. And both will be the more general, and high, where they are not
timously prevented. You will ask, How should there be any prevention in any
degree? We answer out of the Text, three things. 1. Three Preventions.
To beware aforehand; take warning: Fear and repent. Blessed is the man that
fears always, (as is the general scope of the Text.) And our Savior to the
lapsed Churches in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, gives this
antidote in the word Repent: threatens to remove the Candlestick: or to do so
and so unto them, unless they did repent: and aggravates their sin, that he
gave them time to repent, and they did not: and commands them to repent, and do
their first works. It should seem Christ distinctly requires affectionate and
effectual Repentance, to prevent those judgments. Affectionate, in deep
workings of the affections (as the word intimates;) and effectual, in doing our
former works, as it is there express: Repentance, it should seem, will avert such
threats. Non-repentance lets in ruin as a deluge. In Revel. 16. at pouring out
of one Vial, it is added before the next be poured our, that they repented not at
the pouring out of the former. Repentance is fully described, A Motlon for days
of Humiliation.
2 Cor. 7.11. And to help on this, I would Parliament, and City, and Kingdom
would not lose their acquaintance with days of public Humiliation. (Now for
Sins, as formerly for Judgments. The former is a weightier cause, and includes
the business of the later:) And to go to the work before we are whipped to it.
Forcement to that duty, will neither speak for our sincerity, nor for our
hopes, in the day of solemn cries. Poor Nineve of Heathens escaped by this
course of Repentance. Think of it, you English Professors, and promote it. Mean
while, let us be marked with the letter (...), The first letter of (...), the
Law, Doctrine, Instruction, and Word, of God. Thereby signifying men whose
hearts are deeply affected with the Word of God, to judge and do according to
it.
, T (as it is in the Hebrew) noting us for them that mourn, and sigh, and cry
for the abominations of the land, Ezekiel. 9.4.

And you Senators and Judges of Sessions and Judicatures, Let justice be done
according to the Law (as the Persian Emperor said of judging a mighty Queen,
in Esth. 1.15.) chiefly on Blasphemers and Atheists; who are worse then many
Thieves you hang. And let all of us call upon our apostatized friends, and
reclaim, or constrain, or restrain them.

2. 2 Prevention.
The Text does intimate, that all shall not be deceived, to fall totally away;
else the Apostles admonition to the Thessalonians had been totally vain.
Therefore let us search into our hearts and try our ways by the candle of the
Lord, (as Solomon speaks, meaning Divine light) whether we be of them that are
like to have this Falling Sickness of Apostacy from Religion, Symptoms of the
spiritual Falling Sickness, or Apostacy from Religion.
like to fall away from our Profession. I shall here for brevity sake give you
but Five Symptoms.

1 Symptom Not to receive the LOVE of the Truth. So verse. 10. after my Text:
where it is not said only, receive THE TRUTH; but the LOVE of the Truth. Truth,
and love of Truth, and to love it as Truth. And that, not merely to be prudent,
wise, understanding men; but (as it is there also) to be saved. And salvation
(as S. Austin well, upon Mat. 1.21.) is to be saved from our sins. Truth must
be a Science closed with the Stock of the heart by Love: It must be a Plant set
in a moist heart, Jam. 1.21. An implanted or engrafied Word. (...).
Thy heart and the Word must live, and grow up together, as a Stock and a
Science or Scion: And (which is wonderful) the Science must change the nature
of the Stock.

2. He whose heart is willing to sin, 2 Sympto(...)
but only it is restrained by something without the heart; as in Laban, Balaam,
and at a time in Saul and Pilate; he, that very man, is like to fall away;
whiles his forbearance of sin is not from inward divine principles, and
disputed in Prayer, and backed by Faith in the death and resurrection of
Christ: which was the Art of Paul, Romans 7. and Phil. 3. If men do not mainly by
such inward principles, so manned and managed, depart from sin; but do it, so
far as they do it, by policy, looking at outward respects, they have the
tokens of this Faling-sickness.

3. When a man acts good with self ends, 3 Symptom
and beyond that he does not act, as Jehn, Judas, and Magus; he has the signs
he will fall away as the did. Jehn only acted to remove that which stood in
his way, viz. That which did impede his access to the Crown, and his peaceable
enjoyment of it; but not the Idol and evils of his predecessor. Magus professed
his belief, and was baptized, that he might obtain the admired gifts. Indas the
longest lasting false ground, lasted as long as his gain lasted, no longer.
Hos. 7.14, When ye howled (as alluding to dogs crying for love of their meat,
not of their master) for corn and wine, and oil, did ye fast unto me, even to
me? And Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty vine, bringing forth fruit unto himself.
He only clothed himself gay with green leaves, unless he brought a few berries
to seminate its kind: not to serve the end of the Husbandman, that planted it.

4. (...)ymptom.
Be the fruit never so fair, or full, if it be not from a right cause, root and
stock, he will fall off as a dead branch. Ioh. 15.2. Point it right, thus:
Every branch, (put the comma there) in me that bears not fruit, he takes
away; and (as it is in verse. 6.) is cast forth AS A BRANCH. That is, a man will
fall off, and become a tarquam-Branch, a thing that is but an AS IT WERE in
Religion unless he be fruitful, and brings forth that fruit from a Physical
union (as 2 Pet. 1.4, intimates) from a partaking of the divine nature, from a
communication (as Gal. 2.20.) of the life of Christ; from a serious frequent
application of Christ to that very end.

5. (...)ymptom.
The last Symptom of the spiritual falling sickness is, the want of that
Antidote of Antidotes; oil in the vessel, (as Christ calls it) Mat. 25.4. For
as it is there in the parable, the foolish virgins went very far; were in the
Heaven of ordinances, companiors to the wise, had lamps of much brain knowledge
of divine things, with a fair moral conversation; had an expectation of Christ
coming, (therefore took lamps and waited) had some awakenings of conscience at
the noise of Christ's coming; yet for all this because they had no oil in the
vessel, that is, no infused habit of divine grace in the heart; no inward
change, no complexion of holiness; they fail and fall at last.

Therefore (Christians) if these five tokens of the spiritual falling sickness
be upon us, our work of salvation lies yet undone; (...) matter and (...)ner of
Rege(...)tion and Sal(...)on.
it is yet to be done. A new foundation is to be laid, in floods of godly sorrow
for sin, and in particular, for past hypocrisy. New applications of Christ by
faith in Gospel promises offering him, are to be made; with strong cries of
prayer that God would give our hearts and souls to Christ, that we may be
joined to the Lord (1 Cor. 7) as one spirit; and so really close with him, with
mutual taking him to us and we giving up our selves to him, Cant. 2.16. My
beloved is mine, and I am his; adding to all an earnest begging of God (as was
the manner of sincere ones, Job, David, and Paul's advice to the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 13.) to search and try us that we be not deceived. And still to stick to
this work in attendance on ordinances and duties, with Meditations,
ejaculations, and spiritual contestations between God and us, and us and our
own souls (as Psalm. 42. Ps. 43.) till the soul come to an experimental
knowledge of the inward mystery and power of godliness in the heart, having all
the spiritual senses touched, affected, and exercised with the delightful
presentation of their commensurated objects, thus: The inwa(...) mystery and
power of G(...)ness in the (...) described.


1. The heart hears the voice of Christ, in the language of a spiritual lover,
as in Cant. 2.8. The voice of my Beloved, The ellipsis and imperfect expression
intimates a sudden spiritual passion of the heart, leaping with joy at the
found thereof. Of this inward voice the Prophet speaks, Thou shall hear a voice
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it. And Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my
soul, Thou art my salvation. And Psalm. 27. Thou said, Seek my face: thy face,
Lord, will I seek. (That Text intimates a voice making an Echo in the heart.)
Should seem by this last place, and the rest, that this voice is not a
Scriptureless dreamed Revelation or Enthusiasm; but the voice of God's written
Word carried from the ear to the heart, by applications and impressions of the
Spirit. 2. The heart sees the glory of the exellency of Christ; Visions of
faith, and raptures of admiration and adoration of him, Cant. often. And 1 Cor.
2. Eye has not seen, etc. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. And
Phil. 3. I count all dung to the excellency of the knowledge of Christ. 3. The
heart feels the operations of the Spirit of Christ, as mortifying sin, so
quickening, raising, and enlivening the soul in spiritual actings, Romans 8.
much. And Cant. 5.6. While he spoke, my soul failed, (Heb. my soul went forth)
through wonderful affectionate apprehensions. 4. The heart tastes the sweetness
of Christ's love shed or poured upon the spiritual palate, Romans 5.5. 2 Cor.
5.14. 5. And lastly, the heart smells the fragrant, pleasant, acceptable
communications of Christ to the soul, Cant. 1.12. While the King sits at the
table, my spikenard, viz. by communication from him, sends forth the smell
thereof: for so it follows in the next verse, A bundle of myrrh is my Beloved
unto me. And v. 14. My Beloved is to me a cluster of camphire. So the soul
speaks of Christ, Psalm. 45.8. All thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and
cassia. Jacob is sweet, but not of himself, but in the garments of his elder
brother; by that means, he smells as a field of flowers whom the Lord has
blessed, Genesis 27. And thus (Christians) we be, or must be, if right.

The third thing to be done in relation to the Minatory Prognostics of evil to
come, (...)nvention.
is to raise our Faith to believe in God through Christ, that (as the Prophet
says, Say to the righteous, It shall be well with them) it shall be well with
us that believe. This our Apostle hints in the Context, when he exhorts the
Thessalonians not to be shaken in mind. As we flee to Prayer for succor
against such storms, so Faith is the hand of Prayer to lay hold and climb up
into God's lap. And to cherish our Faith, and comfort thereby, the Apostle
tells us in the Text and Context, that if, do the good party what they can,
Apostacy and Antichristian impletie rise yet higher and higher, come the worst
that can come, it shall not be long after ere Christ come. Acerbissima pati
possumus, modo brevissima. We may endure sharp things, if short. If nothing
else can take down the high appearance of Apostates and Antichrists, Christ's
appearance shall. Then is their total ruin, and our perpetual restoration;
and to triumph on earth (for a time) before the Ultimate Glory; as we have it
elsewhere. That as when nothing would restrain several rebellions of the
Israelites about to stone Moses, Aaron, and other good men among them, The
glory of the Lord appeared upon the Tabernacle, and awed and hushed all: so
shall it be in this. Therefore with Faith, and Hope, and personal purity, wait.
Cannot we watch with Christ one hour? Blessed are all they that stand ready
waiting for him with their loins girt. Amen.

FINIS.

