A NEW PROPHECY: OR, A Prophetical Discourse OF THE BLAZING-STAR, That
Appeared, April the 23d. 1677. Being a Full ACCOUNT, OF THE Events, and Sad
Effects thereof, Which Threaten these NATIONS of England, Scotland, etc. As
likewise, to FRANCE, HOLLAND, etc.

The Reader is desired to take notice, That this Prophecy was writ Two Years
ago, as will be Attested by several Persons upon Oath, and by me the Author and
Observer, (Living in Spittle-Fields, London)

John Holwell, Philomath.

LONDON, Printed at the Request of the AUTHOR. 1679.

A New Prophecy: OR, A Prophetical Discourse OF THE BLAZING STAR, That Appeared
April the 23d. 1677, etc.
SIR,
MAny are the opinions of the Ancients; but among the rest, the Opinion of
Aristotle is the most followed: Concerning the matter and generation of a Comet
or new Stars, viz. That it is composed of matter that is exhaled from the
Earth, and that it is set on Fire by the excessive heat of the place where it
rests; and that makes it that it, does continue longer sometimes than other,
according to plenty of the matter whereof it consists: but by those Men, I do
desire to be satisfied of these Four things.

First, How and by what means exhaled vapors can put themselves into such forms
or figures as they usually appear in. Secondly, How their motion can be
sometimes regular, and sometimes irregular; sometimes direct, and sometimes
retrograde; and sometimes fixed, as that Comet was, that was seen 1572.
Thirdly, How and by what means they do appear, sometimes with long Tails, and
sharp, very bushy; and others appear with no Tails, or if any, that very small.
Fourthly, Whether it is possible for the matter which is exhaled from the
Earth, to form a body that is bigger than the Earth it self, at that Star was,
that was seen 1572. whom Tycho observed; or that which was seen 146. Years
before the coming of Christ, whereof that famous Seneca speaks of, to be bigger
than the Sun it self, which is 333 times bigger than the Earth it self; it may
be required from whence all this Matter was exhaled, to make such a vast body
as the Sun is.
Paracelsus, that famous Philosopher, is of another Opinion; and indeed more
rational; that is this, that Comets or new Stars are composed by the Spirits of
the Air, by the Commandment of the Eternal God, to forewarn this Evil World,
that they might amend their Lives; other ways, they may be sure to have the
Judgment by them signified. For the Spirits or Angels (says he) well knowing,
that such things shall most certainly come to pass; and they does attract the
Comet a long through the Air, either higher or lower; and in such Parts of the
Heaven, that we Mortals may the more Zealously behold it, and be the more
remarkably possessed with its Significations, and so to give Thanks unto God,
for not sending of a Judgment before he has given them warning.

These, or to this effect, are the Words of Paracelsus, which unto me does seem
to be most rational.

These may serve to satisfy all those, that does think, that Comets are
natural; and that they came for no other end, than for Men only to look at.

Now, I shall give you a description of the Comet lately seen; It was an
Oriental Comet. It had its Head depressed; his Tail did point unto the Zinoth;
but did a little incline to the North-Star: His Tail was somewhat large; but at
the end, it was contracted to a point, and the very end of the Tail, did seem
to be hooked like unto a Sickle.

As to his place, it was near the upper- Star of the Triangle; and the left
Foot of Andromada; which falls in Taurus, about the 17th. or 18th. degrees;
having near Twenty Degrees of North Latitude, from the Ecliptic: They write,
that it had its Motion direct near two degrees in a day; but I could not see it
above one; And therefore, could not observe its motion my self. When it first
rose, it was of a martial-Colour; but as it did rise higher, it did seem to be
of a more Lunar-Colour; but I conceive, that was by reason that day came on a
pace, and took the Color away.

It had its first Appearance in or about the middle of Aries, and had its
motion out of Aries into Taurus. And I do believe, that it ended in Gemini. It
was as big as a Star of the first Magnitude. The particular relation, this
Comet has to diverse Kingdoms and Countries, Emperors or Kings, is as follows:

Under Aries the first Sign that this Comet did appear in, are England, France,
Germany, Burgundy, and Denmark, with a many more places: but these being most
concerned, and the head Cities thereof, I only mention them.

Under Taurus (the place of this Comet, when I saw it) are Russia, Swedeland,
Lorraigne, Campania, Holvetia, Franconia, Ireland, with a many Cities.

Under Gemini, (the place of the Comet, where I do believe it did end) are
Sardinia, Lombardy, part of England, Flanders, Brabant, the Dukedom of
Wertenburgh, Armenia, with a many Cities in those Countries: all these places
shall find great Changes.

Authors say, if a Comet, of a Martial Color, appear in the East, or
North-East part of Heaven with his Head depressed (as this was in all respects)
is the Forerunner of Wars, House-burnings, Fire and Sword, Plague and Famine
Caused by Wars.

A Comet in Aries, is the Forerunner of great Warlike preparations, the
shedding of much Blood, the death or destruction of some great Prince or
Princes; and must be those Princes whose death does cause a Change in the
Government wherein they does live; it does show the Vulgar men to be Male
contented, and inclinable to rebellion, exalting themselves: it also does
signine Invasion, little mercy shown by the Conqueror.

If a Comet appear in Taurus, it is the Forerunner of much evil for to befall
Mankind, and a lessening of their Estates; they will rebel one against the
other; it shows the death of a Great King or Prince, with an Alteration of Laws
and Customs: It denotes the destruction of great Cattle, as Horses, or Cows
and Oxen.

A Comet appearing in Gemini, is the Forerunner of men, being given to all
manner of bad Courses, given to strife and contention, taking great delight
therein; it denotes that abundance of young Men and Children to dye by sickness.

Sir, From what has been said, I do believe, that this Comet is the
Forerunner of many evils, to befall this poor place of England, and that in a
short time. I pray God bless England, from being once more invaded by the
Scots; for if they do, they will find such willingness in the English to help
them, that it may produce a most bloody War; but they shall not establish their
Government here. The first show of this Change, or first appearance in a
Warlike manner, will be about the latter end of Fifty Six or Fifty Seven
degrees; I pray God bless this City of London, from being destroyed once more
by Fire by the hands of an Enemy. In short, There has not been greater Changes
in no Nation nor City, than we fear, will be in this Island of Britain, and
City of London, ere Seven years pass over our heads.

France, great are the Changes that shall befall thee, a mercyless Enemy shall
destroy great part of thy fruitful Country, and thy Kingdom must be given to a
Prince bordering upon thy Territories.

Holland, prepare thy self for a Change, for thy States are not to be much
longer States.

The Ancients Write, that, that place is most Concerned, where the Tail of the
Comet does point: the Tail of this Comet pointed to the Zinoth; therefore it
must signify those places where this Comet was seen, for it cannot be said for
to point to any place but their own: Farewell.

FINIS.

