THE HOLY GHOST ON THE BENCH, OTHER SPIRITS AT THE BAR: Or the Judgment of the
Holy Spirit of God upon the Spirits of the Times.

Recorded in Holy Writ.

And Reported by Richard Hollinworth, Mancuniens:

London, Printed by J. M. for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the Parrot in Pauls-Churchyard, 1656.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
IF thou be Pious and Prudent, and love Gods truth, and the Churches
Purity and Peace. This plain Piece will not be unacceptable to thee; The
Subject is seasonable, and suitable enough; and I have endeavored to handle it
(so far as I meddle with it) solidly, satisfactorily, and also succictly,
omitting Illustrations Illations; yea and Applications also, that thou might
have much fruit in a few small Leaves, and not read long for a little; If the
Doctrine be sound, I shall leave thee to make the use. My desire and design is
the suppression of sin and wickedness and whereas wickedness (according as one
or other of the three enemies of our salvation is predominant) is either
fleshly, as Adultery, Fornication, Gluttony, Drunkenness. Or wordly, as
Covetousness, injustice, oppression, extortion. Or Divelish, as Schism,
Heresy, Blasphemy, Contempt of Magistracy, Ministry and other Ordinances of
God; The first of which was too much indulged in former times; and the third
(to say nothing of the second) is as much indulged in these times; I am not now
to fight against flesh and blood, but against the spiritual evils of the times,
which are both sins and judgments, and show both man's wickedness and Gods
wrath, and are (to say no more) as leavening, Matt. 16.6.11, 12. Gal. 5.9.
Antichristian, 1 Ioh. 2.22. and 4.3. and 2 Ep. Ioh. v. 7. Sathanical, Ioh.
8.44. 1 King. 22.22. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Act. 13.10. 2 Timothy 3.8. as profaneness is,
though now more practiced, Preached and pleaded for then formerly: I am not
able to encounter with them my self alone, when these enemies come in like a
flood the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against them; I desire
not to speak any thing my self, but to hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; and to report what judgment he gives as he has left it on Record in
holy Scripture, in which are written the great things of the Law, and the
gracious, glorious things of the Gospel: O let them not be accounted a small
thing: The ensuing Tract does represent that the holy Ghost does (as it were)
cite or summon and cause several spirits to be apprehended and brought to
Trial; and that he sets down certain distinctive Signs and Symptoms of the
Spirit of God, and other Spirits. And Lastly, That he does examine and
determine some particular cases brought before him concerning the Spirit of
Prayer, the Spirit of Prophecy, the witnesing Spirit the Ministerial and
Anti-ministerial Spirit: And when this Treatise has made this representation,
it gives up the Ghost.

It has been my hearts desire and Prayer, that I might represent these
judicial proceedings aright; It is my hearts desire and prayer, that thou
may receive them aright, And that the high and holy Spirit of God may be
with thy Spirit, and with the Spirits of all Saints; and particularly with the
spirit of him who is the least of all Saints,

Manchester, March, 1. 1655/6 R. H.

An Epistle.
Good Reader,
I Cannot conceal the contentment that I took in this little, but judicious
Treatise, when it was brought to me for perusal; The communications of Gods
Spirit are made matter of scorn by some, and by others a mere pretense; what
more usual now, then for fanaticall persons to pretend to a peculiarity of the
Spirit; as the filthy Gnostics, in the primitive times, gave out that all
others were carnal, they only were (...), spiritual men, as having a special
presence of the Spirit in them: Vide Iraeneum, Lib. 5. to adversus heresis,
cap. 11. and passim alibi; and therefore their pride is supposed to be taxed by
the Apostle Jude, verse. 19. (...), sensual, not having the Spirit; that is, by
their brutish practices they plainly showed, they had least of that Spirit to
which they did pretend: Tertullian when he turned Montanist, wrote a Book
Adversus Psychicos, against the carnal or animal men, intending thereby the
Orthodox: But this is not all, how often do such kind of persons father the
Brats of their own carnal hearts, upon the Holy Ghost? and entitle the
suggestions of the Devil that evil spirit, to the impulsions of that holy
Spirit of promise, by whom we are sealed to the day of Redemption: Therefore it
much concerns the Ministers of the Gospel, to vindicate the honor of God,
and to put people upon trying the Spirits, and in a matter of such concernment
to give them the best light they can: You will bear with me a little in my
folly (for uch I account it to be, to acquaint the world with the course of my
private Ministry) and indeed bear with me, 2 Cor. 11.1. whilst I tell you
that considering the necessity of the present times, wherein some deny the
Personality and Godhead of the Spirit; others counterfeit his Presence and
Operations; and many misshapen and monstrous conceits, are obtruded upon the
world concerning both: I thought I could not better serve the present truth,
and accomplish the ends of my Ministry, than by clearing up the whole Doctrine
of the Spirit, as touching his Godhead and Personality; His Effusion first,
upon Christ as the Head, sensibly at his Baptism, Mat. 3. On the Apostles as
the chief Agents and Factors for his Kingdom on the day of Penticost, Act. 2.
Then upon all Beleivers, till his second coming, especially on the Ministers
of the Gospel, who are ordinarily presumed to have a more plentiful measure of
the Spirit, according to that place which they sustain in the body: Next, my
work was to state the manner of his Presence, the quality of his Operations, in
Inlightning, Sanctifying, Witnessing, Comforting, Strengthening, Quickening,
awakening, thoughts of, and desires after, our blessedness in Heaven; more
especially the influence of the Spirit upon the duties of Prayer and Preaching:
And after all this, I took occasion to speak of resisting, grieving and
quenching the Spirit on the one side, and of gratifying and glorifying the
Spirit on the other, in all which discourses I mainly intended a Direction to
Christians to guide them in the trial of Spirits: and whilst I was considering
of making this work more publicly useful, how happily am I prevented by the
pains of this Godly, Learned and judicious Author, who has treated of the
same things, almost in the same Method; and that in such a succinct and
strengthy way, that if thou complain of any thing, it will be of want of Words
not of Matter, so Much being spoken in so Little a compass; for my part I
cannot but profess my joy, That the Lord has inclined the heart of such an
able person to such an Argument. Now this good Lord bless his Labors to thine
Use, I am

Thine in all Christian Service Tho. Manton.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. OF Trial of Spirits in general. Folio. 1 CHAP. II. Of the Properties
of the Spirit of God, with the vindication of them from common mistakes. Folio.
13 CHAP. III. Of four other Qualifications of the Spirit of God, and the
vindication of them. Folio. 23 CHAP. IIII. Containing two other Properties of
the Spirit of God. Folio. 31 CHAP. V. Of the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication:
Showing how he does assist in Prayer. Folio. 40 CHAP. VI. Of the difference
between the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and the common gift of Prayer.
Folio. 50 CHAP. VII. Of the Spirit of Prophecy, mentioned, Act. 2.17, 18.
Folio. 57 CHAP. VIII. Of the witnessing Spirit, mentioned, Romans 8.16. Folio. 73
CHAP. IX. Of the continuance of the Ministerial Spirit and Office in all ages,
on Isa. 66.21. Folio. 86 CHAP. X. Of the Spirit of Corah, and his gainsaying on
Jude, verse. 11. Folio. 106
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 8. for permission read commission, l. 10. for commission r.
permission, p. 3. l. 2. for shows r. would show, l. 16. for spirit of r.
spirits of p. 5. l. 3. for into r. unto p. 9. l. 1. for Templers r. Temples p.
12. l. 15. for thy r. the p. 13. l. 9. for (...). (...) p. 15. l. 6. for
unsuitable to good r. unsuitably, to do good p. 16. l. 12. for Uzzah's r.
Uzziah's P. 17. l. 1. for the Apostles pray r. the Apostle prays l. 6. for
there are r. there are p. 19. l. 3. for inconstancy r. incontinency p. 26. l.
12. for fleight r. slight p. 22. l. ult for first r. fifth p. 29. l. 16. for
bot r. not for ^n r. an p. 49. l. 8. for (...) read (...), p. 62. l. 17. for
certain (...) certainly l. ult. for gelist, came r. gelist come p. 64. l. 1.
for bouted r. (...).

CHAP. I. Of Trial of Spirits in the general.
THere are evil Spirits as well as good; reprobate Angels which did not abide
in the truth, as well as Elect Angels, which were confirmed in grace and truth;
The Scripture mentions a Spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2.12. a man's own spirit,
Ezekiel. 13.3. a perverse spirit, Isa. 19.2. a spirit of Divination, a spirit of
Antichrist, a spirit of error and giddiness, as well as a spirit of truth, of
Faith, of Love, of Meekness: as Satan sets up false gods, in opposition to the
true and living God, and false Christ's, in opposition to the true Christ; so he
also sets up lying spirits, in opposition of the true Spirit; false Apostles,
false Prophets, false Ministers, in opposition of the true and faithful
Ministers of Christ. And the worser sort of Spirits are abroad, Satan walks up
and down, too and fro in the earth. Many false Prophets are gone out into the
world; they have from God a kind of permission, though no approbation, 1 King.
22.22. and from men, too much commission and connivence: and this comes to pass
by the wise and gracious ordering of God: Partly for the punishment, both of
Ministers, which have too much complied with the Sins, Errors, and Schisms of
the times; and of Professors, which have loathed Manna, grown wanton and weary
of the most holy and wholesome truths, and desirous of Novelties: And partly
for the probation and trial of the truly, sincere and sound Pastors and People,
Deuteronomy. 13.1.2. 1 Cor. 11.19. As Joseph's chastity was tried by his strong
temptations to uncleanness, Genesis 39. or possibly God shows us the misery and
mischief of toleration, under which (as we plainly see) whatsoever is dear and
precious in the eyes of God and his People, is basely profaned and abused: It
is therefore necessary, that we should try the Spirit, Indeed it is not easy
to discern the difference of Spirits; a bodily blemish, as defect of an eye, an
arm, or hand, is discernable by every child, or fool; but a defect in the
Intellectuals, is less discernable; and spiritual deceits are spun with the
finest thread, and least of all discoverable or confutable; yet it is dangerous
not to discern them: The spirit of some Herbs are as hurtful, as others are
healthful: The House and Home of good Spirits, is Heaven, of bad ones Hell;
each of them labor to conduct men to the respective places from whence
themselves do come. Adam and Eve not discerning Satan in the Serpent, plunged
both their persons and posterity, into a world of woe and misery, and many of
their posterity are in like manner cheated into Hell, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.

The Persons that are to try, are the Church of God; the Catholic and
particular Churches, Pastors, Governors, and every Christian; Those that are
truly Regenerate, have in measure the Spirit of God, and them God will keep
that either they shall not err foully, or not finally; And those that have
only the common gift of the Spirit, may thereby be enabled soundly, (though
not sanctifyingly, or savingly) to discern and discover errors. Trial is in
order to passing judgment; and though private Christians have not the judgment
of decision; yet they have, and are to use the judgment of private practical
discretion, that their faith may not be implicit and blind, resting only upon
men, But alas, what ever right or liberty all Christians have, sundry of them
have no ability of trying spirits, at least not in all cases; as Infants in
age, Ideot's, and those that are weak in the faith, which are indeed to be
cherished and received, but not into doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. Castles
cannot be built in the Air; Foundations must be laid, and Walls built, before
the Roof can be laid, or Pinnacle set up: Some have need of milk, and not of
strong meat, being unskilful in the word of righteousness, Heb. 5.12, 13. Oh
that they would learn the first principles of the Oracles of God, and build
themselves in their holy faith upon firm Foundations, which through Gods
wisdom and goodness, are more plain and easy, before they exercise themselves
in matters too hard and high for them, Psalm. 131.1.

The Spirits that are to be tried, are those Spirits that we have need and
occasion, as well as ability, to try: All Spirits need not trying, either
because their folly and falsehood is manifest to all men at the first sight:
Those that Preach other Gospels are to be accursed, Gal. 1.7.8. They are
neither to be entertained in our house, nor saluted by the way, 2 Ioh. 10. When
Cerinthus was in the Bath, John disputed not with him, but leaped out from him:
Get thee behind me Satan, is good in this case. Or because they have been duly
tried already; there is a time of trying, and but a time; and then there is a
time of holding fast that which upon trial we find good, and abstaining from
all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.21. The Beraeans having by scarching the
Scriptures, found that Paul's Doctrine was sound: And the Church of Ephesus
having tried the false Apostles and found them liars, need not try the same
Persons and Doctrines over again, Acts 17. Rev. 2. Also some Spirits lie not in
our way, and we are not to go out of Gods way, to find out matters of trial;
for then we should needlessly rush into many temptations, and spend all the
days of our short life, in enquierie and examination of the several dreams and
dotages of Pagans, Turks, Jews, Papists, Heretics and Schsmaticks of several
sorts, instead of growing in grace and the knowledge of Christ Crucified, and
abounding in the fruits of righteousness.

Trial necessarily supposes some Rule by which the Trial must be made, and no
righter or surer Rule imaginable then the Word of God; and if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isai. 8.20.
whatsoever they boast of light in them, their light is darkness: this is the
Rule and Square of our walking, Gal. 6.16. and must judge us at the last day,
Ioh. 12.48. Rev. 20, 12. God the Author of the holy Scripture, is the Supreme
Lawgiver and Judge, the Maker and Expounder of the Law, Isai. 33.22. Jam.
4.12. This holy men writ, being inspired by the Holy, Eternal, Infallible
Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. ult. and and none knows the mind of God, better then the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. To the Spirit speaking in Scripture, all created
spirits are to be subject: Paul's Doctrine (though an Apostle) was tried by this
Rule, Act. 17.11. Though the Scripture cannot do all the parts of a Judge,
because it neither speaks with the voice of a man, nor does it, or can it,
examine or determine matters of fact; as whether Arius denied the Godhead of
Christ, or no? yet it is said to speak, Ioh. 7.42. and does judge
controversies, as a Writing, Hos. 8.12. a man's Will and Testament, Heb. 9.15. a
Chartey, a Letter, a Law does speak, and we may understand a man's mind by his
writing, as well as if we heard him speak, and may better preserve, yea more
and longer ponder upon a writing, then upon words only.

I shall add this hereunto, by way of Caution, That when I speak of the
Spirits being, or dwelling in a Saint: I mean not an essential or personal
in-being or in-dwelling of the Spirit, as he is God, or the third Person of the
Holy Trinity: God is said to dwell in us, 2 Cor. 6.16. and we are the Templers
and Habitations of God 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and Christ is not only given for us,
but to us, Isa. 9 6. comes in to us, Rev. 3.20. is in us, Ioh. 17.23. lives in
us, Gal. 2.20. dwells in our hearts, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. as well as the holy
Spirit of God: Yet me thinks it is strange, to say that the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, do dwell personally in the Saints; for whereas each Person is both
indivisible and omnipresent; this seems both to divide and limit them, to say,
that any of them is personally here, or there, in Peter, Paul, or other Saints,
and not in intermediate places; and there is a generation of men, now a days,
that upon this account, would confound and and equalize the Creator and
creature; the Eternal God, Father, Son and Spirit, with mortal (yea miserable)
men. If the evil Spirit, though finite and limited, may act and rule in the
children of disobedience, 1 Ioh. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. and may be said to keep the
house, Luke 11.21. though he do not inhabit personally in them; much more may
the Infinite and Eternal Spirit, without such personal inhabitation, act and
rule in Believers. Besides this Scripture phrase of in-being and in-dwelling,
does import only inwardness, mere relation and close union, Ioh. 17.22, 23.
Hence God is said to be in Christ, as well as Christ in God, Ioh. 17.21. and
Saints are as well said to be in, and to dwell in Christ, Romans 8.1. Ioh. 6.56.
and to be in the Spirit, Romans 8.9. As Christ or the holy Spirit are said to be,
or dwell in them; and therefore this phrase does no more evince personal
inhabitation, on the one side then one the other. It may be granted, that the
Spirit of God being the last of all the three Persons, in order both of
subsisting and working, does come lower and nearer to us, and more immediately
close with our spirits, then the Father or the Son; for what the Father or the
Son do act andinfluence upon the soul, is mediately by the holy Ghost; and God
by the Spirit on his part, does take hold on us, Ezekiel. 11.19. and we are the
Habitations of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. as we by faith on our
part lay hold on Christ, Ioh. 1.12. And he dwells in our hearts by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. and it must of necessity be granted, that the Spirit by a Metonymy,
may be said to dwell in us, when we dwell in love, 1 Ioh. 4.16. and the truth
dwells in us, 2 Ep. Ioh. v. 2. When we partake of his Gifts and Graces,
though these be not the Spirit it self; for the Scripture does manifestly
distinguish them from it, saying there are diversities of Gifts, and but one
spirit; and that these are but the Gifts, Fruits, and operations of that one
spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4. to 14. Gal. 5.22. as when we say the Sun comes into an
house, we mean not the body of the Sun (for that abides in its own Orb) but the
Beams of it; so the Apostle makes the Word of Christ dwelling in us, richly in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, etc. to be the same
with being filled with the spirit, Col. 3.16. with Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Yea even
Bezaleel, because God had made him a good workman in blue Purple, etc. is said
to be filled with the Spirit of God, Ex. 31.2, 3, 4, 5. And there is a stronger
and higher reason why a good Christian, because of such gracious impressions of
Gods Spirit on his soul, should be said to be filled with the Spirit. Lastly,
it is not to be denied, but there are several actings of the Spirit, in, on,
and with thy soul, distinct from, yea and subsequent to his working of grace in
it, viz. those Acts whereby he does support, assist, cooperate and comfort,
bear witness with our spirits, and seal to the day of Redemption, Romans 8.16.
Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30. which notwithstanding, come short of proving the Spirits
personal In-being, or In-dwelling in us, as has been showed.

CHAP. II. Of the Properties of the Spirit of God, with the vindication of them
from common mistakes.
THe First unquestionable Property of the Spirit of God is, that it is good,
Psalm. 143.10. not only Metaphysically, (so the Devils are good, because they
are beings) but morally: He is the Holy Ghost, or Spirit; the Spirit of
holiness, Romans 1.4. and his Motions are good and holy and never evil; but Satan
is (...)the wicked one, wickedness, spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6.12. the evil
spirit; his temptations are evil, and to evil, being a spirit of whoredoms, an
unclean spirit, Hos. 4.12. he tempts to murder, and lying, John. 8.44. to
Sacrilege, Act. 5.2. Covetousness and Treason, Ioh. 13.2.

Object. But this or that spirit moves to good Duties, to abhor pride in
Apparel, to renounce the world, etc.

Answ. Though the good Spirit of God does never tempt to evil; yet the evil
spirit sometimes persuades to that which is good, and so he transforms himself
into an Angel of light, and his Ministers, as the Ministers of righteousness;
appearing and pleading for righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.14. but Satan does never
move to good, as it is good (though by accident it may be materially good) but
as some sin or evil cleaves to it; his main design is to promote evil, and he
moves to good duties, but obiter, that he might more easily deceive, and be
less suspected; the bait is good for the fish; but the Fisher aims at the
catching and killing of the fish, not at the feeding of them; and therefore
there is an hook in it; so does Satan in this case, James 1.14.

Quest. How may I know when it is the evil spirit that moves me to that which
is good?

Answ. 1. When we are moved to do holy Duties unsuitable to good things, in a
bad manner, without care or conscience, viz. in pride, as David numbered the
people (a thing in some cases lawful and necessary) 1 Chronicles. 21.1. or in
hypocrisy, so the Pharasees fasted, prayed, and gave Alms, Matthew. 6. with
oppinion of merit, Gal. 5.2.4.5.8. or for a pretense for the covering of our
wicked intentions, Matthew. 23.14.23. so Herod, Matthew. 2.7.8. So to Pray, or
Preach carelessly, to come to the Lords Supper unpreparedly, and unworthily, 1
Cor. 11.27. for Satan knows that not only the plowing of the wicked is sin,
Prove. 21.4. But also their Praying, Prophesying, and their Service of God,
their Sacrifice to God, is abominable, Prove. 28.9. and that a curse belongs to
them that do the works of God negligently, Jerem. 48.10. much more if they do
it profanely; And Satan would have us by this means, to go away with a curse
instead of a blessing.

Secondly, when we are moved to do good Extravagantly, without call or
commission: so Corah and Dathan offered incense, Numb. 16. Such was Saul's
sacrisicing; Uzzah's staying the Ark, (though his intention was very good)
Uzzah's offering incense: God is the God of order; the evil Spirit causes
tumult, disorder, distraction, confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33. God has appointed
Orders in his Church, first Apostles, etc. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. His Canon
is, Let all things be done in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. For the Church is an Army
with Banners, in Military Rank and File; women are appointed to keep silence in
the Churches; and the Spirits of the Prophets are to be subject to the
Prophets; and every one ought to abide in his own Place and Calling, 1 Cor.
7.20.24. And the Apostles pray (a very needful and useful prayer) that they may
be delivered from absurd men; or men out of their places, 2 These. 3.1, 2.

Thirdly, When we are moved to do good unseasonably, viz. when there are other
Duties, either in themselves greater, or more incumbent on us at that time,
then that which we are moved to; such isour considering our worldly occasions
(at other times lawful and fit) upon the Lords Day, Amos. 8.5. Isa. 58.13. So
private Duties and Exercises, in time of Public Ordinances; for God loves the
Gates of Sion; the more Solemn and Public Assemblies of his People more then
all the private dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. So impertinent thoughts (though
otherwise holy and good) which do hinder our praying, hearing, serving of God;
that we cannot pray or hear, etc. as we ought, with all our might, Eccles.
9.10. so that expression of Peter's love and affection to Jesus Christ, was
unseasonable, and savoured more of man then of God, of Satan then of a Saint,
Matthew. 16.21, 22, 23. There is a time for all things; mis-timing of our Duties,
does turn them to sin: Satan would make Gods ways to interfer, and would have
one duty to shoulder out another; if he cannot hinder every duty, he will
hinder opus Diei, the present duty: but the good man brings forth fruit in due
season, Psalm. 1.3. and every thing is beautiful in its season, Eccles. 3.11.

Fourthly, When we are moved to do good things unmeasureably, when a Christian,
especially a young Convert, will be doing, Satan will have him over do: It was
the duty of the incestuous person, to be sorrowful, 1 Cor. 5.2. but there was
danger, least Satan should swallow him up with over much sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.10.
It was a duty to keep the Sabbath, but the Pharasees over-kept it, Mat. 12.1,
2. the Eutichae were to pray, but they would be always praying; It is a duty for
married persons to forbear the use of the marriage Bed, for a time, but not too
long, least Satan should tempt them for their inconstancy, 1 Cor. 7.5. Then
also are duties unmeasurable, or at least unseasonable, when they are
prejudicial to our healths, Hos. 6.6. God will have mercy, not sacrifice; or do
occasion us to neglect the duties of our particular callings or relations, 2
These. 3.11. We cannot indeed exceed in our love to God, modus diligendi Deum
est sine modo; but we may exceed in external expressions of love or service,
and this excess is Satan's policy, that he might weary out the spirits of men,
ride them off their legs, and beget both in them and others, hard thoughts of
Religion, and draw them from this excess in holy performances, to an utter
neglect of them.

The second unquestionable Property of the Spirit of God, is Truth, 1 Ioh. 5.6.
It is the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 16.13. as Christ is Truth, Ioh. 14.6. as
goodness is a conformity to Gods Will, so Truth is a conformity to his
Understanding; all truths below, are but Copies of that Original and Eternal
Truth that is above; God always speaks truth, and neverlies, he cannot lie, nor
deceive, or be deceived, It is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6. This Spirit
leads not only to the truth; but into it, into all truth: But the evil spirit
is a liar, Ioh. 8.44. a lying spirit, 1 King. 22.22. A seducing spirit,
speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. As truth is the Son of God, so
lying is the Daughter of the Devil; Satan lied to the first Adam, Genesis 3.5. and
to the second Adam, Luke 4.6. and still he raises open, outward, scandalous,
lying reports of holy Ministers, and other men, or else inward false surmises
and suspicions.

Object. But this or that spirit does speak truth, viz. that we should repent,
fear the living God, and that there are false. Teachers and Seducers abroad, of
whom we must beware, or the like; therefore this is the good Spirit of God.

Answ. Though it be true, that what soever Spirit does lie, is not the Spirit
of God, yet it is not true that every spirit which speaks any truth is
therefore the Spirit of God: Satan does sometimes attest the highest and
holiest truths, viz. That Fesus is the Son of God, that the Apostles are the
Servants of God, which show the way of Salvation, Act. 16.17. but our Savior
silenceth them, and would not suffer them to speak, though they spoke truths,
Mark 1.34. Act. 16.18. The difference therefore between Satan's speaking truth,
and Gods Spirit speaking truth, is this.

1. If Satan speaks truth, he speaks not of his own; a lie only is his own,
Ioh. 8.44. he does but borrow truths, or rather steal them from from the
Scriptures, the Ministers or people of God, Fer. 23.30. 2. When Satan speaks
truth, he usually misapplies it, as Jobs Friends did many precious truths. 3.
He never speaks truth in the love, or for the advantage of it; but to be a
pretense, shadow and introduction to a lie: If Error should appear in her own
shape, she would be very horrid and deformed, therefore she puts on her, the
Mantle of Truth, or gets some truth usually to bear her company.
CHAP. III. Of four other Qualifications of the Spirit of God, and the
vindication of them.
A Third Property of the Spirit of God, is Light, he is the Spirit of Light, of
Wisdom and Knowledge, Isa. 11.2. of Revelation in the knowledge of Christ, Ephesians.
1.17. As God is light, and Christ is light, a Sun, a bright Morning Star; the
Spirit is compared to fire, Act. 2. 1 These. 5. Heavenly fire which gives light
as well as heat; but Hellfire is hot and dark: Satan is that Prince of
darkness, the Ruler of the darkness of this world; which darkens and blinds the
minds of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4.

Object. But does not the evil Spirit bring also a light with it?

Answ Satan does indeed transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
especially in times, and amongst persons pretending to much light, and
abounding in all utterance and knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.5. And therefore we are to
understand that the Light of the Spirit of God, is to argue or convince the
world of sin, of righteousness, of judgment. Ioh. 16.8. Ephesians. 5.12, 13. to show
us (as the Angel did, Dan. 10.21.) that which is noted in the Scripture of
truth, to explain the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel, and Godliness, that we
may discern them in a spiritual manner, which a natural man cannot do, 1 Cor.
2.10, 11. to show us that by Sun-light, which reason can either not see at all,
or but as it were by Moonlight.

The Gospel is an everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. and the Spirit bids us contend
for the faith once delivered to the Saints, not always in delivering: This Light
is a Light of the same nature with the light held forth in the Word, Psalm.
119.105. the Word is a Lantorn, a dark Lantorn (say some) without the Spirit;
but I am sure that Spirit is a going fire, a deluding spirit that carries not,
but contemns and confounds this Lanthorn, and there is no light in them, Isa.
8.20. The light that is in them is darkness, and how great is that darkness,
Mat. 6.23. Gods people are led by the Spirit, when they are led by the word
inspired by the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. ult. and they are taught by God, when taught
by his Book: No Spirit of Christ does abstract any man's faith from the Word of
God, which is indeed the word of faith, Romans 10.8. Spiritual knowledge does not
exclude, but contain in it the litteral knowledge, though the litteral
knowledge may be without the spiritual; yet the spiritual knowledge of Gods
Word is not without the litteral: We are not warranted to expect, or trust to
Enthusiasm's, or praeter-scriptural, much less contra-scriptural Revelations;
as they which had Moses and the Prophets, the Books of Moses and the Prophets,
and those that sat in Moses Chair, were not to expect guidance from revived
returning Ghosts, but to hear Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29. Mat. 23.2, 3.
so we, which besides Moses and the Prophets have also Christ and his Apostles,
and have the Canon of the holy Scriptures perfected, have much less reason to
expect Revelations, and to slight the holy Scriptures; but may, and ought to
build on the foundations of the Prophets of the old Testament, and the Apostles
of the new, Ephesians. 2.21. That light which contradicts old Articles of faith, and
coyns new ones; that Canonizeth new Scriptures, or preaches new Gospels, yea
the very questioning of, Carping, or Cavilling against known, received Truths,
is of Satan, Genesis 3.1.5. And he that preaches another Gospel, though he seem
wise as an Angel, and have the Tongue of an Angel, and seem as holy and zealous
as the Angels, is to be accursed, Gal. 1.7, 8, 9.

The fourth Property of the true Spirit of God is Lowliness, and indeed, the
more light, the more lowliness; The more loathing of our selves, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
with 31. for the Spirit convinces us of sin, Ioh. 16.8. makes Paul to judge
himself the chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. and to be carnal, Romans 7.14. but the
evil Spirit is proud, and puffs up, 1 Timothy 3.6. 1 Cor. 8.1. is supercilious
and censorious of other men; speaking evil of persons, and things which they
know not, and saying stand by thy self, I am more holy then thou, Isa. 65.5.
calling others carnal, sensual, divelish, while they pretend themselves to be
free from sin: But the Apostle, who had the true Spirit of God, says, if we
(that is) If I John that writ this Epistle, or other Apostles, or Believers,
say that we have no sin, we are liars, 1 Ioh. 1.

The first Property of the true Spirit of God is Liberty, where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. He is a free Spirit, Psalm. 51.12.
Satan is a slave, and of a servile Spirit, and so all his Agents and Servants
are; yea (say some) that is it which we plead for, viz. Liberty; but you must
therefore take notice of the marks of this Liberty. First, That Liberty which
is from the Spirit of God, is not a Liberty to sin, but from sin, John 8.34. 2
Peter 2.19. Secondly, This Liberty overthrows not either Ecclesiastical or
Civil Government, 1 Pet. 2.13.16. for this were to make it a Cloak of
maliciousness. Thirdly, This Liberty is to and in the service of God, and not
from it; men now talk much against Forms, but there are some Forms of Gods
Institution, and others of men's inventions; though we be free from all sinful
superstitious forms of men's inventing; yet we are not therefore free from the
lawful and needful Forms that are of Gods appointing, His service is perfect
freedom.

The sixth Property of the Spirit of God, is Unity: Unity, Love and Peace is the
fruit and effect of the good Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3. Gal. 5.22. we are all made to
drink into one Spirit, as we all Jews and Gentiles, are by one Spirit baptized
into one body, or universal Church, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. the most plentiful
effusion of the Spirit, made believers of one heart and soul, Act. 4.31, 32.
but the evil spirit is a dividing spirit, Jude 9.23. The Apostle intimates that
scandals and devissons are from Satan, Romans 16.17, with 20. He is a separating
Spirit, as the Spirit of God is not, Jude v. 19.

Quest. But is dot Satan also on uniting spirit?

Answ. Yes he is, but that is in his own Kingdom, and amongst his own people;
For he is not divided against himself, nor is his Kingdom divided against it
self, Mat. 12.25, 26, 27. While the strong man armed keeps the house, all
things are in peace, Luk, 11.21. He would not have Idolatrous, Heretical false
Churches to be disturbed, divided, or separated from, much less destroyed; but
in true Churches (which are the Kingdom of his enemy the Lord Jesus) Satan
labors to breed and feed jealousies, suspicions, divisions, scandals,
heresies, separations; As it is the Policy of all States to maintain Unity
amongst their own Subjects and servants, and to foment contention and divisions
amongst their enemies.

CHAP. IV. Containing two other Properties of the Spirit of God.
THe seventh Property of the Spirit of God is, That he is a friend and Favorite
of all Graces, or holy habits and dispositions in the soul; he is the Spirit of
grace, Zach. 12.10. of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2.
of meekness, descending in the shape of a Dove, Mat. 3. Gal. 6.1. and the
effects and fruits of it are love, joy, etc. Gal. 5.22. obedience, Ezekiel. 36.27,
31: But the evil spirit is an adversary to these graces; they are the Armor of
the soul against him, Ephesians. 6.12, 13, etc. and a man would not have his enemy
armed but naked, that he may more easily wound him; He is an adversary to
faith, Luke 22.31, 32. to integrity and uprightness, Job chapter 1, 2. to
obedience, Genesis 3.1. etc. He rules in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.
Indeed he is a friend to false and feigned graces, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15. a friend
of false faith, or of presumption, of hypocritical repentance, as in Ahab and
Judas; of voluntary humility, while men are vainly puffed up, Col. 2.18. of a
pretended purity, Isaiah 65.5. that a sinner is not to be touched, Luke 7, 39.
of a seeming self-denial, such as was in the false Apostles, which inveighed
against the true Apostles, that they walked after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. that
they were Hirelings, and Preached for money; but (say they) we will not exact,
nor expect any thing, we will Preach the Gospel freely, 2 Cor. 11.12, 13, 14.
And this occasioned the Apostles to plead, that it was as lawful for Ministers
to receive; yea in its place to expect Maintenance for himself and Family, as
it is for a Soldier to expect his pay, an Husbandman, a Planter of a Vineyard,
a Shepherd to expect the fruit of his Grounds, Vineyard or Flock: Though Satan
had got such strong Holds in the carnal, covetous hearts of the Corinthians,
that Paul was glad to Preach the Gospel freely to them, while he received
maintenance from other Churches.

The eight Property of the Spirit of God is, that he also is a friend and
favourer of holy Duties and Ordinances: of Supplication as well as of Grace,
Zach. 12.10. the breath of the Spirit is sweet, it breaths in grace, and
breaths out prayers, and other duties: For First, It is gotten and increased by
Ordinances, by Preaching, Gal. 3.2.5. Prayer, Luke 11.13. Sacraments, Luke 4.1.
This golden Oil comes from the two Olive Trees, through the golden Pipes of
Ordinances, Zach. 4.12. Secondly, It does assist and help in holy Duties and
Ordinances, as in Preaching, Isa. 61.1. in praying, Romans 8.26, 27. in
Sacraments, Mat. 3.11. Baptizing us inwardly, and making us Christians within,
Romans 2.29. and the word which Christ speaks concerning eating his flesh and
drinking his blood, are Spirit and life, Joh. 6.63. And by one spirit we are
all, whether Jews or Gentiles, baptized into one body, and are made to drink
into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. So we sing with the Spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 14.
Thirdly, When the gifts of the Spirit were undeniably poured out plenteously;
and that Prophecy of Joel was unquestionably fulfilled, Act. 2.16, 17. those
upon whom those gifts were poured out, and in whom that Prophecy was fulfilled,
did highly prize holy Ordinances; they were baptized and continued daily with
one accord in the Temple, and in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and
breaking of Bread and Prayers, Act. 2.41, 42, 46, And the gifts then poured
our, were principally to fit and furnish men for the work of the Ministry and
other Ordinances, Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12. particularly they were taught to prize the
Ministry: Cornelius was not of a Captain made a Preacher, nor did the Angels
preach to him, or send a gifted Brother to him, though he had a devout
Soldier, and Servant that waited on him; yet he was to send, and Peter must
come from Joppa to Cesarea straight, which was about thirty six miles, Act.
10.4. In Acts 8. the Spirit finding the Eunuch reading, does not himself
interpret, but bids Philip go join himself to the Chariot, and Philip Preached
Jesus Christ to the Eunuch: Indeed the Spirit of God has sometimes wrought
without, or above the Word and Ordinances; yet it never wrought against them,
it has sometimes strengthened their Authority and Use, but never weakened
them: But the evil spirit is an enemy to holy Ordinances, to Prayer, resisting
the Priest, as he was standing to Sacrifice and Pray, Zach. 3.1. To Preaching,
1 These. 2.18. and thereupon Elimas withstanding Paul, is called a child of the
Devil, Act. 13.10. he endeavors to draw Ministers into sins and snares, Luke
22.32. He is an enemy to Baptism, he moved some to despise the Counsel of God,
and not to be Baptized of John, Luke 7.30. He persuades Witches, Wizzards, and
open Apostates, to renounce their Baptism, received in their Infancy, that they
may be more devoted to his Service: As soon as Jesus was Baptized, Satan
fiercely tempted him, Luke 4.1. and entered into Judas, as soon as he had
received the Sop, Ioh. 13.

Object. Is Satan in no case, a friend to holy Ordinances?

Answ. Satan is never a friend to Ordinances in themselves, or to Ordinances as
holy; though he do not always appear plainly against all Ordinances; he may
seem to be zealous for them, in these Cases. First in case there be some
usurpation, either on the part of the person sadministring them, or on part of
the persons which partake of them: Though Satan be an enemy to the right
offering of incense, sacrificing, preaching of the Word; yet he liked Corahs
offering Incense, Saul's Sacrificing, giving of holy things unto Dogs, casting
Pearls before Swine, coming to the Marriage Feast without a wedding Garment;
unworthy communicating, whereby men are guilty of the Body and Blood of the
Lord; so though he be an enemy to Timothy, and other Ministers, and their sound
Doctrine and Teaching; yet he is not an enemy to all Teaching; he will admit
that men shall get themselves an heap of corrupt and flattering Teachers, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. and that Jeroboam should set up Idolatrous Priests of the lowest
of the people, and consecrate whosoever will (which yet indeed were good enough
for their Gods, for they were but Calves) so he sets up false Apostles, false
Ministers; and As Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, so do these men resist the
truth, being men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. Secondly, In
case there be some notorious pollution, profanation, or corruption of that
Ordinance, which Elies Sons were in their Sacrificing guilty of, 1 Samuel 2.12,
13. whereby not only themselves were made vile, but the Lords people (possibly
the better part of them) were made to transgress, because they abhorred not
only that corruption, but also the offering of the Lord, because: of it.
Thirdly, In case that Ordinances be set up against Ordinances, Church against
Church, and Altar against Altar: Some (says Paul) Preached Christ of envy and
strife and contention, Phil. 1.16. those which say, they are of Christ in
opposition to Peter and Paul, are reproved, 1 Cor. 1.12. so far as the holiest
Minister that lives, does never so rightly and skilfully Preach the Word, or
administer other Ordinances, in contention and opposition to any faithful
(though possibly not so well gifted) Minister or people; he therein does the
work of Satan and not of God.

CHAP. V. Of the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication: Showing how he does assist
in Prayer.
THat the Spirit does help us to Pray, I need not to prove, only I shall
endeavuor to search out the manner how he helps: And that First, Negatively.
Secondly Affirmatively.

First, The Holy Ghost does not immediately inspire the Method, Matter, words
of Prayer; as he inspired the holy men of God in their Prophesying and Penning
of holy Scriptures, for if he did, then as those Prophesies were purely divine,
infallible, free from any fault or failing, corruption, yea and indiscretion in
the form, phrase, method or manner of them; so also should the words of our
Prayers be also perfect, purely divine, infallible, etc. but by sad experience
we find the contrary.

2ly. It had been a sin (I conceive) for the Prophets or men of God not to have
delivered the very same Message they received of the Lord, both for matter,
manner and method; but it cannot be conceived to have been a sin in any Saint
of God, against the guidance and governance of Gods Spirit; if he had used
another Method or Phrase of words in his morning Devotions, then then he did.

Secondly, The Spirit is not in our prayers properly, the person praying or
petitioning; that is below the High and Holy Spirit of God: Arrius, Macedonius,
and others more lately, do abuse, Romans 8.26, 27. and finding him (as they
fancy) upon his knees, they degrade him from his Deity; but Augustine Answers,
the Spirit is said to Pray; as we say Solomon builded the House, yet he was a
Magistrate, a King, not a Mason or Carpenter; he directed how to build, found
out Workmen, furnished them with Materials and Money, for the work: Indeed all
the Persons in the Trinity are Authors of our Supplications, as well as of our
Sanctification: Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa; but every one in his
order; the Father and Son do Sanctify, and also help us to pray, by the Holy
Ghost.

Thirdly, The Spirit does not make Intercession for us after the same manner
that Christ does, Romans 8.34. Christ makes Intercession in Heaven, presenting
himself to God for us, as the high Priest did bear the names of the children of
Israel upon his Shoulders, and upon his Brest-Place, noting to us that he would
bear them up, and bear them out, that he loves them, and they lie near to his
heart, Exodus 28.12.28, 29. but the Spirit of God does make Intercession in us
upon Earth; there is a vast difference (which somewhat does resemble this)
between directing or drawing up a Petition to a Prince or State, and the
preferring, presenting it, speaking to it, and pleading for it; the one may be
done in the Country, the other must be done at the Court.

Fourthly, The help of the Spirit of God in Prayer, is not to be understood
exclusively, with relation to other Ordinances, as though he did not help Godly
Ministers to Preach, and Godly men to hear, remember and practice, as well as
to pray; for the Sons of God are led by the Spirit in the one as well as the
other, Romans 8.14. and he (as has been before showed) is the Spirit of wisdom,
of the fear of the Lord, and of grace as well as of Supplication: Now these
have a general influence upon the whole conversation and not only upon Prayer:
We are to walk in the Spirit, to sing with the Spirit, to serve God in the
Spirit, Romans 1.9. Ioh. 4.24.

Fifthly, The help of the Spirit of God does not prohibit, evacuate or
invalidate other helps; John did not sin in teaching his Disciples to Pray,
Luke 11.1. nor did the Disciples of Christ sin in desiring Christ to teach them
to pray; and yet they did not consider Christ as God, as Head of the Church, or
Savior of the world, but as their Master, pressing him with the example of
John the Baptist; and persuading him to imitate it: they (it seems) did not
understand, or not remember the mind and meaning of Christ, in his Sermon, Mat.
6.6, 7. (brief notes whereof are in Luke 6.) Therefore they here desire that he
would teach them to pray; and our Savior says not, ye have the Spirit,
therefore you need not to be taught, nor says he, John was to blame to teach
them to pray, nor. I will teach you as being the Head of the Church, but I
oughe not to teach you as your Master, no, I will send my Spirit to teach you,
and in the mean time I will not help you; but he teaches them again, giving
them hence, a special rule of direction; to whom, for what, and in what manner
and order they ought to pray; as also we have a short directory, 1 Timothy 2.1.
And the Israelites were appointed to take unto them words, Hosea 14.2. though
the Spirit of God does put us in remembrance, Ioh. 14.26. yet Ministers also
may; yea must put people in remembrance of what is necessary, 2 Pet. 1.12.15.
the same may be said of Prayer.

Thus much for the Negative, how the Spirit of God does not help in Prayer.

Now I shall endeavor, by the help of his Spirit and your Prayers, to show
Affirmatively how the Spirit of God does help in prayer; and that help is of
two sorts, Habituating, or Actuating; the one is more remote, and the other
more nearer: The one qualifies the person praying, the other the Prayer it self.

The Spirit of God as to the person, is First, an Enlightening Spirit.
Secondly, an Enlivening Spirit. Thirdly, an Enlarging Spirit.

First, He is a Spirit of Light, enlightening the person, discovering our
needs, necessities, our dangers and duties, our cases and cures, he shows us
our sins, our selves, and the means of our Salvation, Ioh. 16.9. and
consequently what we should pray for.

Secondly, He is the Spirit of Life, enlivening a man, Romans 8.2. When God made
man, he breathed into his Body the Breath of Life, and when a man is converted,
the Spirit of Life is breathed into the soul; as the body without the soul is
dead, so the soul without this Spirit of Life is dead also: A man that marries
an Inheretrix, is Tenant by the Courtesy of England, if he beget a Son, which
is born and cries, it is much presumed, that if there be life there will be
crying; The Spirit of grace, is the Spirit of Supplication, Zach. 12.10. Paul a
new born Babe, falls a crying, Act. 9.11. without life there can be no crying.

Thirdly, He is the Spirit of Liberty, and not of Liberty only, but of Adoption
also, enlarging the soul with faith and love to God, Romans 8.15. only Sons can
call God father: Christ in his Prayer called God Father, six or seven times,
Ioh. 17. This Fatherhood is a good foundation of Faith and Prayer; Christ
taught us to call God our Father; children cry Dad and Mam.

I shall now come to those Acts of the Spirit, that are nearer to, and have
more influence upon the Prayer: Which are these,

First, The Spirit of God does invite, excite us to pray, as Satan suggests
evil motions to hinder it, so the Spirit of God suggests good motions, Rev.
22.19. The Spirit says, venite oremus, come let us pray.

Secondly, The Spirit of God does discover to us our present wants and needs;
that we, which of our selves know not what to pray for, may know what to pray
for, Romans 8.26.

Thirdly, The Spirit brings to our remembrance the savory and suitable phrases
and passages of holy Writ, especially the precious Promises which are most
pertinent, are brought to our minds and memories by this Spirit of Promise,
Ioh. 14.26. Ephesians. 1.13. Promises and Prayers are like figure, 6. and of 9. the
very same figure, only the Promises like the figure of 9. do bend downward, and
Prayers like the figure of 6. do point upward.

Fourthly, He excites, corroborates and strengthens the graces of prayer,
faith, hope and love, etc. That they lie not as sparks under the ashes, he
fills the Sails of the soul with a fair wind, and carries it with a full sail,
Heb. 10.12. as Satan filled the heart of Ananias and Saphira to lie; so he
fills the hearts of the Saints to cry: Our hearts (says one) are dead and
dull, and lie like a Log in a Ditch, and though we toil and tug with them, we
cannot lift them up, but (...)he enlivens our graces and raises up our souls,
Romans 8.26.

Fifthly, He enlarges our affections in prayer, with sighs and groans that
cannot be uttered in words or phrases, as one who is so sore burdened,
oppressed and grieved, that he cannot express it, Romans 8 26.

Sixthly, It teaches us to take care and make conscience, that now, especially
in Prayer, we offend not in our tongue, Psalm. 39.1. It restrains that petulancy
and extravagancy of words and wit, great swelling words of vanity, vain
bablings, idle repetitions, etc. and so far as the Spirit does assist us in our
words, he teaches us to pray in the words of truth and soberness.

CHAP. VI. Showing the difference between the Spirit of Grace and Supplication,
and the common gift of Prayer.
THe help of the Spirit of God is not in all alike, some have only a common
gift of Prayer; such are as canting Beggars, which by use and custom have got
an artificial trade of begging; such were the cunning women in Iewry, and the
like in Ireland, that have Lachrimas venales, Tears to sell: and others have a
special gift or grace of Prayer; and though even the common gift be from the
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. Yet I shall crave leave thus to distinguish these
works, by calling the first of them, the gift of Prayer: and the second I shall
call (as Zachary calls it, Zach. 12.10.) The Spirit of Prayer, And thus they
differ.

First, Hypocrites may have the gift of Prayer as well as the gift of
Prophesying, Mat. 7.22. so had Judas; but only the Saints have the Spirit of
Prayer, Romans 8.26, 27.

Secondly, Possibly all Saints have not the gift of Prayer, or skill to
conceive and compose a Prayer suitable to their several occasions, as Children,
or Babes in Christ; but all Saints have the Spirit of Prayer, Romans 8.15.

Thirdly, The gift of Prayer is only exercised in vocal Prayer, and that in
conceived Prayer too; but the Spirit of Prayer may be found in silent
Ejaculations, as in Nehemiah, Chapter 2.4. and Hannah, whose words were not heard,
and Eli supposed she had been drunk, but she was full of the Spirit of God, as
they were, Act. 2. Yea, though a word be not uttered, Ex. 14. 15. the heart
has a tongue that God can hear; Jesus Christ prayed the same words thrice,
though he had not the Spirit by measure; and he exercised the Spirit of Prayer
as much, or more, the last time, then the first: So we may sing David's Psalms
in the spirit, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Hence it also follows, that Tyrants may rob us
of the exercise of the gift of Prayer, but not of the Spirit of Prayer,; the
tongue of the Spirit cannot be cut out; when a man cannot speak, the Spirit may
pray.

Fourthly, They that have the gift of Prayer, they have apt expressions,
outward enlargements; they court God, and complement with him, profess more
then is true, and promise more then they mind to perform, they draw nigh to God
with their mouth, Matthew. 15.8. But they that have the Spirit of Prayer, have
sometimes (yea at all times when their Spirit is lively) deep impressions upon
their heart, devout affections, soul inlargements; sighs and groans of the
soul, are the life and soul of Prayer, sighs and sobs, grieving and groaning
are good Rhetoric in the Closet, between God and us; their affections are too
big for their expressions, Romans 8.26, 27. words are but the outside of Prayer.

Fifthly, The gift of Prayer is only or chiefly of use, when we join with
others; the Spirit of Prayer is of as much use when we are alone.

Sixthly, The gift of Prayer is apt to puff men up with pride, because he can
pray better then others, it makes men censorious and contemptuous of others
saying, or thinking at least, I am not as this Publican, Luke 18.11. or stand
by thy self, I am more holy then thou, Isa. 65.5. But the Spirit of Prayer does
show men so much of their own wants and weaknesses, that they are ashamed of
themselves, that they are humble, mean in their own eyes, and prefer others
before themselves; the one is easily taken notice of by men, and has the
praise of men; but the Spirit of Prayer is only known to him that searches the
hearts, Romans 8. 26, 27. Could we discern who has the Spirit of Prayer, we
might discern who is the Child of God; the Father has compassion on his sick
Child, though it cannot speak articulately, nor speak at all, but only sighs,
groans; looks upon his Father, and then his Bowels yearn.

Seventhly, Our living in known sins, and loving them, may possibly not hinder
the gift of Prayer, but it cannot but damp the Spirit of Prayer: true, our sins
may meritoriously deprive us of all gifts, yea common gifts, but sin is not so
diametrically opposite to gifts, as it is to grace, and the Spirit of Prayer;
for the Spirit of Supplication is also the Spirit of Sanctification, Romans 1.4.
the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12.10. A little Box with Civet in it, will smell
long of it afterward; Prayer is a conference with God, a company keeping with
him, and every man is better by that company and conference: He that refrains
not sin, may be said to restrain Prayer from God, Job 15.4. Supplication will
either subdue sin, or sin will cause Prayer to cease, either Prayer it self, or
at least, the spiritual performance of it.

Eighthly, He that has only the gift of Prayer, may make frequent mention, and
have some general minding of Jesus Christ: But he that has the grace of
Prayer, lays all his weight, and leans only upon the Lord Jesus, in whose Name
only he hopes to be heard.

Ninthly, The one is satisfied with the performance of the duty, and rests in
the work done, especially if he have the praise of men; the other is not
satisfied with any thing on this side Grace, and the Love and Favor of God.

Lastly, To omit more particulars, every certain sign of Faith, Hope, Love, or
other the sanctifying or saving Graces of Gods Spirit, is a sufficient
Character of the Spirit of Prayer, as it is distinguished from the common gift
of Prayer.

I have been the more careful to show this difference, because some men's gifts
in Prayer have been such a snare to some well minded weak souls, that they
presently thereupon deemed them to be Saints; yea and greedily embraced their
errors, and wicked practices.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spirit of Prophecy, mentioned, Act. 2.17, 18.
THE Lord here promises a plentiful, powerful, and withal, a prudent effusion
of his Spirit (for he says he will not only drop, but pour, and yet not all my
Spirit, but of my Spirit) on all flesh, men of all Nations, Gentiles as well as
Jews; men of all conditions, sons or servants; men of all ages, old or young;
persons of both Sexes, sons or daughters; and that they shall Prophecy: Now
Prophesying frequently in holy Scripture, and probably in this place, is a
speaking to men to edification, and exbortation and comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. The
Sum and Substance of their Speech, for the matter thereof, was (...), the great
things of God, verse. 11. Probably such great things as the blessed Virgin did
praise God for, viz. the Incarnation, Conception, Nativity of the Lord Jesus,
Luke 1.49. and also the Innocence, Miracles, Death, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension of the Lord Jesus, who is called wonderful, Isa. 9.6.

As for this Sermon of Peter, it is not recorded for an Epitomie of what they
spoke, but an Apology and Justification of their persons from that base
imputation of drunkenness, and also of their Doctrine, from Falsehood and
Novelty, by proving it by the old Testament.

Visions and Dreams, being both of them divine representations of things to
men, do thus differ: Dreams are to a man when asleep: Visions are
representations of things to the eye, either of the mind or body when awake.
Dreams and Visions are but dimmer and darker representations of Gods mind; God
did speak more freely, clearly, friendly, familiarly to Moses, Numb. 12.6, 7,
8. And now in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1. they
both of them differ from Prophesying (though such were called Seers and
Dreamers, 1 Samuel 9 9. Deuteronomy. 13.1. Prove. 29.18. Isa. 1.1. for man is merely
Passive in the one, and Active in the other; by Dreams and Visions God speaks
to men, Psalm. 89. 19. Numb. 12.6. by Prophesying one man speaks to another, 1
Cor. 14.3. In the one they receive Instruction, and by the other they vent it;
their Dreams and Visions did furnish them for Prophesying. The great Question
is, When, and in Whom this Prophecy was fulfilled: which I shall endeavor to
answer in certain Propositions.

The First is, It is most plain and certain, that the Prophecy was fulfilled
at that time; so Peter does assert, verse. 16. and the Spirit did then descend
upon them, and they began to speak with other Tongues, Act. 2.2, 3, 4. and they
that (probably) in the morning could understand none but their Mother Tongue,
Act. 10.44, 45. nor could read one letter of the Book, were by the Spirit
enabled not only to read, but to understand and translate the Hebrew, Greek,
Syriack, Arabic, into their own Mother Tongue; yea to speak and Preach in
several Tongues, the wonderful things of God, verse. 11. as able, yea more ably
then if they had been Masters of Arts, Doctors of Divinity, Professors of the
Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, and the other Languages; yea they were able to
deliver sound Doctrine, and to dispute for it, Act. 6.9. This was a wonderful
and miraculous pouring out of the Spirit, shortly after Christ's Ascension into
Heaven, and for the honor of it, Ephesians. 4.8. and in performance of his promise
to his Apostles, Act. 1.4.5. and immediately preceding in order of time, as
well as of the Text; those strange prodigies that threatened the ruin of
Jerusalem, Verse. 19, 20. That God might have a Church amongst the Gentiles,
before the fall of the Jewish Church: And as the miraculous confusion of
Tongues was the casting off of the Heathen, Genesis 11.7. so the gift of Tongues
in this variety, was a means of their conversion. And if the Prophecy was
fulfilled at this time (as doubtless it was) it is enough. Sundry Prophesies
neither have been, nor shall be any more fulfilled then once, it is too much
when a Prophecy is fulfilled once, to expect it should be fulfilled again; or
because it was fulfilled in one Age, therefore to expect it shall be fulfilled
in every Age.

If this Text was fulfilled after this time, it must be understood principally
of the Apostles, for they that spoke in this place were Peter and the Eleven,
Acts 2.14. called Galileans, verse. 7. and therefore their Preachings and
Prophecyings were the principal accomplishments of this Prophecy: And then
Secondarily, of Prophets and Prophetesses, 1 Cor. 12.28. Such as Agabus was,
and the Daughters of Philip the Evangelist, Act. 11. and Act. 21.10. Indeed it
were to be wished that all the Lords people were Prophets, but not that they
may Prophecy till they be Prophets, and may lawfully do it: Now the word
Prophet always imports a distinct Order, Office and Calling from others; The
Apostle forbids women to Preach, though the Corinthian women might be as well
or better gifted then any woman or man now adays is; yet certain the Apostles
did not forbid those women whom my Text does allow to Prophecy, and whose
Prophesying is here mentioned as a blessing, as well as the Prophesying of men:
had such Prophetesses as Deborah and Huldah, and the Daughters of Philip the
Evangelist, came to Corinth, or if they were now alive, they might Prophecy by
virtue of a special Calling and Office, and none should either forbid them to
Prophecy, or being uncalled (what ever gifts he may seem to have) imitate them
in Prophesying. And Thirdly, Of the ordinary and perpetual Officers of the
Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. for some of the gifts which Christ gave to men at his
Ascension, did fall upon them also, Ephesians. 4.11.

The third Proposition, This Prophecy is not rightly and regularly fulfilled,
in the Preaching of uncalled and ungifted men: For First, As they have no
lawful ordinary Call (as might easily be proved; yea, is already by those which
professedly undertake that work) nor have either Dreams or Visions, or any
other extraordinary ways of receiving the materials of their Preaching. so they
have not any extraordinary Call, above what many others have, which are gifted
as well as they (save that possibly these are less bouted and adventurous then
then they (to give it no worser name) which yet do not, dare not Preach, nor
can it be charged on these as a sin, that they do not Preach, as it would be a
sin, and a great one too, if they did not Preach which are called to it.
Secondly, They seem to be highly conceited of their Parts and Gifts; they judge
any one sufficient for these things, being swift to speak, slow to hear, like
humor, hardly kept within its own bounds; no Text too hard for them to expound;
no difficulties which they cannot unty: once themselves said, that the work of
the Ministry, was enough to take up the whole man; and that it was not fit
that the gravest, godliest, ablest Minister should be a Justice of Peace, or in
any civil Authority; but not only Military men, but even Handicrafts-men, can
all the week day entangle themselves in the affairs of this life, and on the
Lords day discharge the highest and hardest work of the Ministry, whereas it
is more scriptural and rational, that Ministers should execute civil Offices,
then that Soldiers or Handicrafts-men, should execute Ministerial Offices, and
there are more presidents of the one, then of the other. Thirdly, They very
frequently despise the Ministry (which is an Office, and a worthy work, 1 Timothy
3.1.) and Ordination by the hands of the Presbitery, which is an unquestionable
Ordinance of God, used and approved by the Apostles and Apostolic men, upon
whom God poured out more of his Spirit, then these can pretend unto; and also
prescribed and commanded by them, in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.
Fourthly, All the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Rantings, Quakings, of these
times, have been bred and fed by the Preaching of uncalled persons in New-
England; the Doctrine of the Familists, Anabaptists, Antinomians and
Libertines, was bred and brought up in those Nurseries, says Mr Weld: All the
Ministers of England, since the Reformation, have not broached so many Heresies
and Blasphemies, nor perverted a fourth part of the number that these pretended
Prophesiers have done in a few years; hence it is that the Arminians in the
Netherlands, and Heritical and Schismatical persons elsewhere, are usually for
this liberty of Prophesying; now the abounding and tollerating of errors (not
to speak how distructive it has been by consequence to the lives of men) is
far worse the most cruel persecution; for the one is but destructive to the
body and outward welfare of Christians; but this is destructive to the souls of
men, divides and subdivides the Church, subverts the faith and graces of the
Spirit: In the one true Religion was crowned with Martyrdom, whereby the
Gospel was much honored, and sanguis Mariyrum, was semen Ecclesiae; but in the
other true Religion is extremely dishonored; yea lost in a crowd of false
opinions, and patience and perfeverance also; the one did but occidere
Presbiteros, the other Presbiterium. Fifthly, These gifted men's preachings are
either rude, rambling, loose discourses, having no method nor matter of weight
in them; whereas the Spirit of God gave the Apostles (...) to speak apothegms,
Act. 2.4. wise and weighty sentences, not many words to little purpose, as
phrantick, fantastic men do, Act. 26.25. or if their Preaching be sound and
solid, they either steal their matter from others (as (possibly) some idle
ignorant Ministers also do) to pretend that they are Prophets too, but the Lord
is against them, Ier. 23.30. or they have little variety thereof, if our gifted
men should be so much and often for many years together in one place employed,
as some Ministers of the Gospel are, their shallowness and emptiness would
easily appear. Sixthly, Satan I fear has an hand in this business, for how
easily can he transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. and
counterfeit the Spirit of God upon the soul, as amongst the Jews he made use of
false dreams, and lying visions, Ier. 23.25.27.32. Deuteronomy. 13.1. Isai. 28.7. and
14.14. Ier. 23.16. so also amongst Christians I read, that septemes pueri
concionantur, in the order of St. Francis, and Cornelius, Mus. was an eloquent
Preacher at twelve years of age, and an assertor of Popery in the Council of
Trent, and many amongst us were much taken with the child-Preacher, and though
some gifted men (as in charity I am bound to judge till the contrary appear)
have sincere aims and ends, and do intend to glorify God, and edify the
Church; yet finis operis, the end of the work (though not finis operantis, the
end of the Worker, and yet the end of the Worker also, so far as Satan has any
hand in it) is to cause the Ministry to be dishonored and despised, as the
most eminent Ministers, the Apostles were amongst them that did abound in all
utterance and all knowledge, and came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.5. and Chap.
4. yea to destroy the Ministry; to make every one a Minister and a Magistrate,
is to destroy the Ministry and Magistracy, to cause the Seals of the Covenant
of Grace, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, to be slighted and set at naught, to
cause sundry to turn aside unto vain jangling, desiring to be teachers of the
Law, under standing neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7.
being not able to clear up any one truth, or solidly state, or determine any
controversy, or interpret any obscure part of Scripture, or vindicate the
truth of God from Popish, Socinian, Arrian, Arminian Errors: To open a door to
the Popish Priests and Jesuits that are come from beyond Sea to Preach to our
Assemblies, to revile and rail against Protestant Ministers; to vent Errors
and Heresies, to the reproach and dishonor of the Protestant Religion, To
furnish all sort of men, and scratch their itching ears with an heap of
teachers, for they will not abide called officers or sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.
as the adulteress too often pleases the unchaste Husband more then the
beautiful yokefellow, as Witches and Wizzards are merry at their diabolical
fancied Feast, as though they did eat and drink the most pleasant and wholesome
meats and drinks: How strangely did Satan fill the heart of Hacket Copinger and
Arthington, whose story you may read in Camdens Elizabetha, as well as see the
like in very many now adays: To promote those sins that (in opposition to the
sins of the world, and the sins of the flesh) are properly and purely
Sathanical, viz. Errors, Heresies, Seduction; for Satan is not a drunkard,
adulterer, a swearer or a covetous person; but a liar, seducer, that abode not
in the truth: to disturb the unity and peace of our Congregations, whilst
almost every man is (...), an absurd man out of his place, 2 These. 3.2.
multitudes of souls perverted, very few, saved; a good Protestant of the old
stamp, whether conformable or non-conformable, is worth a thousand of these new
Saints: Finally, I have heard an ignorant, one distempered in brain and
overcome with melancholy, speak excellently of the most divine and deep
Mysteries of Religion; and Doctor Merick Causabone, endeavors to show how this
may be done by natural causes, and we read that the Anabaptists in Munster,
having made a Law that all the Citizens should bring their goods into a common
stock, there were Maids amongst them, could tell how much every man had left at
home, like as Paul did discern Ananias and Saphirah: It is easy to guess who
taught them: Little did Peter, (a pious and eminent Apostle) think that he
acted Satan's part, till Christ discerned and discovered Satan, Mat. 16.

CHAP. VIII. Of the witnessing Spirit, mentioned Romans 8.16.
EVery matter of worth and weight, is to be transacted before, and proved by
two sufficient witnesses; unus testis, nullus testis; In the mouth of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established; the Apostle produces here two
witnesses of our Adoption and Sonship, which is a thing of very great
consequence and concernment; our Spirit, and Gods Spirit, and these witnesses
depose point blank, we cry Abba Father, verse. 15. and this is not a false cry,
but a true cry, and the Spirit it self bears witness together with our
Spirit, that it is so; the Spirit (as we use to say by way of excellency) the
Bible, the Scripture, the eminent, excellent, Spirit, Infinite Eternal Spirit,
a wit-witness of greater authority, evidence and credit. After the reading of
these and other words of Scripture, it is unnecessary (as well as it is beyond
my purpose) to prove that the Spirit does witness that we are all the children
of God: I shall only enquire into the manner how the Spirit of God witnesses.
And first it must be granted that the witness-bearing of the Spirit here
mentioned, is spoken of, not as a peculiar privilege of two or three or a few
eminent Saints, but as the general or usual privilege of all the Saints of
God, which are led by the Spirit, are the children, Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ; and how this witness is born, I shall endeavor to show. 1.
Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.

Negatively, First not by outward voice, as of Christ, Mat. 3. ult. Mat. 17.5.
which voice (says the Apostle Peter) was heard of many 2. Pet. 1.18.19. this
witness is inward and secret, it is hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. which no man knows
but he that receives it: As Satan can suggest thoughts into the soul which no
by-stander can see: So can the Spirit of God set his privy seal upon the soul,
and none discern, but the spirit of a man in him. 2ly. The Spirit of God does
not use the Ministry of Angels, though Christ's his Sonship was proclaimed by
such Heavenly Heralds, Luke 1.30, 31, 32. Luke 2.9.13. 3ly. The Spirit of God
does not witness our Adoption, by immediate Revelation and Inspiration: Jesus
Christ indeed received not the Spirit by measure, Ioh. 3.34. The fullness of the
Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. 2.9. and the Prophets and Apostles were in
their measure so inspired, 2 Pet. 1. ult. by virtue of which Inspiration, that
which was not Canonical before, was so after, and new Truths and Tenets were to
be received and believed; But now we may say, are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? Yea, are there now any Apostles, any Prophets so inspired. 4ly. The
Spirit of God does not witness our Sonship, in such dark and dubious phrases,
as Apollos Oracles used to be delivered in; but there is such certainty and
clearness in this Testimony, that it does either altogether, or in a great
measure, suspend and silence doubts and distrusts; he that sees the Sun, knows
it is bright and light; he that tastes honey, knows it is sweet; and he that
tastes the hidden Manna, and hears this Testimony, is fully persuaded and
satisfied by it, Romans 8.38. 5ly. The Spirit of God does not witness to all men
that they are the children of God; there are multitudes, myriads of men, that
never heard it; when we speak of it to them, we are as it were Barbarians to
them; this high Language of Canaan is an unknown Tongue to them; for they must
be the children of God by Adoption indeed, before they be witnessed to be so:
prius est predicare de esse quam de cognosci; Yea the Elect of God have it not
before conversion, nor usually in the first act of conversion, then they lie
under the spirit of bondage, v. 15. and are in the pangs of the new Birth, nor
always afterward; for the Testimony is not de esse, but de been esse, of a
Christian; not their Diet, but their Banquet, not common food, but a Cordial; a
witness, the most punctual faithful witness, does but speak when there is need
and occasion; he witnesses not always, but for always.

Secondly Affirmatively, The Spirit of God (I conceive) does witness all, or at
least, some of these ways. First, He does attest Scripture truths unto the
soul, saying the same in the breast of the believer, that it says in the
Bible, by irradiating those truths he making the the light of Gods word
brighter, and illuminating the eyes of the soul, he makes the sight better; so
that the divine Authority, Infallibility and Majesty of the Word of God does
appear. I shall instance in two sweet and comfortable Scripture truths: Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, Mat. 5.6. (which seems to
be the minimum quod sic, the lowest, least degree of saving faith) and Come to
me, I will give rest to them that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. which
seems to be the lowest degree of true repentance; The Spirit of God says to
the soul these are true words; I writ them, do own them, and will maintain
them, and so he sets his Seal to these truths, as the soul by receiving and
beleiving Gods Testimony, sets to her Seal also, Ioh. 3.33. 2ly. He owns the
graces that are in beleivers, to be his work, as he does own the Scripture to
be his word, as he does attest fidem quae creditur, the Doctrine, the Object of
faith, so he does attest fidem quae creditur, the infused habit or grace of
faith; some Officers in Corporations and other Towns, do seal Cloth, Lether,
etc. to witness thereby, that what they seal is truly made, rightly dressed, or
of due length, etc. So the Spirit of God when we believe does seal us, Ephesians.
1.13. saying (as it were) this is true faith, a lively faith, firmly fastened
on the word of God; so I might say of Hope, Love, Repentance, etc. for the
Spirit of God does not only freely give us the things of God, but also gives
us to know them, 1 Cor. 2.10.12. he tells which graces are genuine and which
are spurious, which are real and which are counterfeit, he that teaches us to
know what we do believe, and that we do believe, love, hope, repent, etc. 3ly.
He makes application of the promises to the soul; thy name and mine are not in
the Scripture; What an huge Volumne would the Bible be, if every Saints name
that have been, are, or shall be, were written in it? God has wise and good
ends, why this is not done; it is enough that particulars must needs be
included in the general, but Gods people (especially at some times) are unapt
and unable to make particular application of the promises; therefore God by his
Spirit, which is also called his finger, Mat. 12.28. with Luke 11.20. points at
thee or me; when he is a Spirit of conviction or of bondage (as sometimes he
is, Ioh. 16.9. Romans 8.15.) or witnesses against us, then he puts our name into
the threatenings, which in the word indefinitely or generally spoken, as cursed
is every one that continues not in all things written in the Law to do them,
Gal. 3.10. if you live after the flesh you shall dye, Romans 8. and says, as
Nathan to David, thou art the man, that the soul cannot shift or shuffle off
conviction or terror, but when it will witness for a man, then it puts its name
in the promises, as thus; thou Peter, Andrew, Thomas, Bartholomew, confessing
and forsaking thy sin, shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. 1 Ioh. 1.9. When God by
his Spirit, as by his hand, takes hold on us, and says, Thou art mine, and I
am thine; and the soul by the hand of faith, takes hold on God, and says
likewise, Cant. 6.3. then there is a comfortable marriage made by joining of
hands.

4. He does from these raise up much consolation in the soul, and therefore is
fitly called the comforter, Ioh. 16.7. And the Kingdom of God is in
righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.

The certainty and assurance of our salvation does arise from this, or such a
like Syllogism.

He that believes shall be saved;
But thou believe,
Therefore thou shall be saved.
The first Act of the Holy Ghost does seal the major or first proposition; The
second Act does seal the minor or second proposition; The their adds further
assurance and evidence, then that which is inferred from the premises; The
fourth does raise us up to the joy of this salvation, Psalm. 51.12.

But because there are many pretenders to the witness of the Spirit that have
neither part nor lot in this business, for their heart is not right in the
sight of God; and as many said, here is Christ, and there is Christ, when he
was neither here nor there; so many profess they have the Spirit, which have
it not: These are they that separate themselves sensual, having not the Spirit,
Jude v. 19. Schismatical persons which say, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of
Cephas, etc. may think themselves spiritual, but they are therein Carnal, and
walk as men, I Cor. 3.1, 2. whether there be an immediate witness of the Spirit
given by God in some cases, I need not, nor will I now dispute, for these words
speak only of such a witness of the Spirit, as together with the leading of the
Spirit, is common to all the Sons of God: and this (I believe) I may truly say,
1. The Holy Spirit does ordinarily, if not always, witness with our spirits
mediately, by the fruits, effects, and gracious operations thereof, or else to
what end are marks and signs set down in Scripture, and we commanded to try our
selves by them, 1 Ioh. 3.14. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.2, 3.

2. The Spirit of God in the breast of the believer, and the Spirit of God in
the Bible, are the same Spirit of truth: and therefore the Spirit of God will
not speak peace to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. or witness them to be the Sons of
God, which by their pride, lying, cruelty, treachery, or allowing themselves in
sin, declare themselves to be of their father the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. 1 Ioh.
3.8. So it does not condemn the generation of the just, which are weary and
heavy laden, do hunger and thirst after righteousness.

3. The Spirit of God witnesses in ordinances, or at least, not without them,
not in the neglect and contempt of them: God indeed does not tie his own hand,
but ours: God can feed with Manna, but will not, when men may plough and sow.
How the Spirit of God does make use of holy Ordinances, we have heard before;
those that think themselves above ordinances, are indeed much below them.

4. There is ordinarily a spirit of bondage, antecedent to the spirit of
adoption, v. 15, 16. it first convinces of sin, then of righteousness, Ioh.
16.9.

5. The witnessing Spirit is a working spirit, a spirit of sanctification, Romans
1.4, 5. can thou find the work of the spirit, or at least some prints and
parcels of that work? A few grapes (says Dr. Sibbs) discover a tree to be a
Vine, not a Thorn; and truth of one grace, does evidence truth of all graces:
it is a golden chain God has linked them together, let none put them asunder.

6. They only have the witness of the spirit that are led by, and walk after
the spirit, verse. 1.14. Now these words do import both their having and acting
of spiritual life: Dead things may be drawn, but cannot in propriety of speech
be said to be led, or to walk.

2. They import motion, a continued motion after some thing that goes before.

3. A willing motion, when the soul is not haled, hurried, or violently forced,
but they are led. I cannot enlarge.

CHAP. IX. Of the continuance of the Ministerial Spirit and Office in all ages,
on Isa. 66.21.
THese words are a gracious Gospel promise, in which the Lord of the Harvest
promises, it shall be his care and work to send forth laborers into his
harvest: he says not, You or they shall take, but I will take, viz. from
amongst men, Heb. 5.1. lift them up to be over and above the people, call them
to be near to me, accept them, assist them in a peculiar manner, them (I say)
not all the faithful of the nations, or most of them, but sundry of them, at
least some of them. To be Priests, he says not Priest, for then it might have
seemed he had spoken but of one, viz. Christ; nor does he say Prophets, which
might seem to be temporary and extraordinary, or Preachers, which some will
needs distinguish from officers: but Priests and Levites, which being the names
by which the Jewish ordinary constant ministry were expressed, he does thereby
also express the ministry of the Gospel.

Priests.] the Hebrew world (...)has no necessary relation to an Altar or
sacrifice, if signifies not Sacrifices, but a Servitor, a Minister. Now public
Ministers were of two sorts, first Political. So David's Sons which were of
Judah (of which tribe the Scripture says nothing concerning the Priesthood)
were chief Officers, Princes or Priests, 2 Samuel 8.18. cum 1 Chronicles. 18.17. The
second sort of public Ministers was Ecclesiastical, and this ministry has
these two offices perpetually annexed, to it preaching and prayer; so Samuel
when deposed from his Civil power, would be a Priest still, and would not
cease to pray for them, and by preaching show them the right way, 1 Samuel 12.23.
the Priest was to be a kind of mediator, a middle person between God and the
people, and so was ministerially to make reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. In linea
ascendente, as he looked upward he is but Minister Dei, in linea descendente,
as he looked downward, he is the Master of the Assembly, Eccl. 12. God looks
upon him as standing for the people, and in their stead. Heb. 5.1. and people
look upon him as standing for God, and in his stead as an Ambassador of God, 2
Cor. 5.20. and therefore sometimes he is to be Gods mouth to the people by
preaching; and the peoples mouth to God by prayer. Now preaching and prayer was
either ceremonial or moral. Sacrificing was ceremonial praying; faith and
prayer were the soul, the substance of those sacrifices, without which the
sacrifices and sacrificers, were but dead carcasses and carrions, and did stink
in Gods nostrils: Expiatorie sacrifices were prayers, especially for pardon of
sin through the Sacrifice of Christ; gratulatory sacrifices were praises and
thanksgivings for the mercies of God in Christ: Sacraments, and other
ceremonial observances, were their preaching, they were their Gospel. The Old
Testament was but Evangelium velatum, Christ's face with a mask on it, the New
Testament is, Evangelium revelatum, Christ unvailed, revealed, that now we see
him with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18. and the office of Priesthood, which was in the
time of the Old Testament, was not by Christ utterly extinguished, but changed;
Heb. 7.12. The English word Priest, is an Honorable name of it self, though
now partly, because of the Idolatry, Ignorance, Iniquity, both of the Popish
Priests, and of too many Ministers, and principally because of the impiety and
profaneness of the times it be degenerated and become, a reproach; it is
derived of the Latin Presbyter, or rather from the Greek(...), a name very
frequent both in the Septuagint of the Old, and Original of the New Testament.

The word [Also] signifies that this is an additional promise to the former,
that the Gentiles should not only be Proselyted, as v. 20. but also Priested;
Several of them were proselyted before, but the Priests and Levites were not of
any but the Jewish Nation, nor of any Tribe but the Tribe of Levi; and
therefore this Text is certainly fulfilled amongst the Gentiles.

All that I purpose to do, is to show the continuance of public Ecclesiastical
Officers, or Ministers from the creation to the consummation of the world.

Adam the first man, was the first Priest, a Priest at first without a people:
as a man may have Commission to be a Colonel which yet has no regiment; a
Priest for himself, then for himself and wife, then for his children also,
which did multiply and replenish the earth: Cain and Abel did not offer up
their own sacrifice, but brought them to Adam to be offered by him, Genesis 4.3,
4. doubtless Adam offered sacrifice before, but there is no direct mention made
of it, because (possibly) no such notable accident fell out therein, as in the
sacrificing of his Sons: but doubtless they learned of Adam to sacrifice; and
those beasts are supposed to be offered up in sacrifice, of whose skins God
made Adam and Eve their Coats, Genesis 3.

Under Adam whilst he lived, and after him when he was dead, the firstborn
were Priests, the heads of the houses, Fathers of Families, did feed their
Families; the Church being then Domestical, the Government was Patriarchal,
such were Seth, Enos, Cainan, and Enoch the Prophet, Jude v. 14, 15. and others
until the stood, and then Noah was a Priest and offered Sacrifice, Genesis 8.20.
and preached righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. and had a natural Sacrament, the
Rainbow. A remainder of this is still in Families, every man being a King to
rule, a Prophet to instruct them, a Priest to pray for them, as Ioh did, Ioh
1.5. and to bless them in the Name of the Lord: and hence it is that under the
name of Father and Mother in the fifth commandment, are included both Civil and
Ecclesiastical Parents, as well as Domestical, because at the time of the
promulgation of the Law, Parents were Princes, Priests and Prophets of his
Church. So Abraham was a Priest, offered sacrifice; received the promise, and
circumcision the seal of it, and did instruct his children and servants, Genesis
18.19. (Hence Isaac knew what he went about, and asked for a Kid or Lamb for a
burnt-offering, Genesis 22.) After him Isaac and Jacob were the Priests; yea in
Egypt God made his mercy visible, in sparing the firstborn which were
dedicated to God, Exodus the 11.4, 5, 6. and of this sort were those Priests,
we read of Exodus 19.22. Indeed God did not tie his own hands in this, Cain
being excommunicated and put out of Gods presence for his bloody act; Seth his
younger brother was put in, Genesis 4.14.16. So Sem was not Noah's eldest Son
(though named first for dignities sake) for Iaphet was his elder brother, Genesis
10.21. Sem was the Father of Heber, and of the Hebrews, the Church of God: and
Japhet, of the Gentiles, which then were not (though afterward they, or some of
them did become) members of Gods Church; and I believe that Sem was he which
was called Melchizedek, for he lived sundry years in the time of Abraham; and
who else could be a King and Priest in Gods house, and greater then Abraham but
only Sem: So God rejected Esau, and Jacob, the blessing and the Principality
and Priesthood, which was annexed to the primogeniture, though Esau profanely
sold it, and Rebecca dealt indirectly about it, yet the Lord confirmed it, Genesis
25.31, 32. Then the Tribe of Levi was separate to be Priests and Ministers to
the Lord, instead of all the firstborn, Numb. 3.40. and Aaron was consecrated
an High Priest, and after him Eleazar, though the Highpriests office did not
long continue in his family, possibly the Highpriests in that troublesome and
changeable time had sinfully complied with toleration, that every man might do
what is right in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6. and 21.25. and with the wandering of
Priests and Levites for want of settled maintenance, Iud. 17.6. and 19.1. and
therefore Eli of the Family of Ithamar was made Priest, who also again being
indulgent to his Sons, that were horribly profane, the Priesthood returned to
the family of Eleazar in Zadok (and there God remembered Phinehas, Number 25.13)
whom others succeeded even in the time of the captivity, for though they did
eat the bread of affliction, and drink the water of affliction, yet their eyes
did see their teachers, according to Gods promise, Isa. 30.20. Ier. 33.18.21.
and sundry of their Priests did return with them from captivity, Ezra 2. Yea
the Priests and Levites were continued till Christ's time. Zachariah of the
course of Abiah, and his Wife of the Daughters of Aaron is mentioned, Luc. 1.
and Christ bade them show themselves unto the Priests, Matthew. 8.4. bade them
hear the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair, Matthew. 23.1. and he
appeared before the High Priest, and answered for himself. Act. 23. To tell of
the manifold corruptions and depravations of the Priesthood, mentioned in
Canonical and Jewish Church-story, what Idolaters, Apostates, Traitors some of
them were, what traditions and humane inventions they observed, what sects,
schisms, seditions, wars, tumults, murders they were guilty of: what buying
and selling, what placing and displacing, chopping and changing there was of
the High Priests Office, the Highpriests executing the Office sometimes by
turns, and sometimes yearly, (as is conceived in Christ's time, Ioh. 11.49.)
and sometimes the High Priests Office was conferred on those that were not of
Aarons Line, nor of any of the other Levitical Families, and one Ananelus one
of the Priests of Babylon, was thrust into that office: I say to express these
things largely, would fill a volume; and yet the Lord (you see) preserved the
essence of the Priesthood in the midst of all these confusions and corruptions,
Jesus Christ had all the Priesthood of the Old Testament concentred in him,
therefore he is called our High Priest, Heb. 3.1. or the chief Officer of the
Old Testament, a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, the greatness of whose
Priesthood the Apostle proves by his blessing Abraham and tything him, Heb.
7.2.4, 5, 6. and consequently of the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, who receives
Tithes, of whom it witnessed that he lives, v. 8. has an unchangeable
Priesthood, and is able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him,
v. 22.24, 25. So was he also the Father and Fountain of the ministry of the New
Testament, which at first was in Christ alone, hence he is called also our
Apostle, Heb. 3.1. Prophet, Act. 3.22. Evangelist, Isa. 41.27. Chief Bishop or
Pastor, 1 Pet. 2.25. Doctor, Matthew. 23.10. Diaconus or Minister, Romans 15.8. As
Adam the first Minister of the Old Testament, was a King, a Priest and Prophet,
so also was Christ.

The increase and growth of the Church, was the occasion of the several
Ministers, Officers and offices of the Church; this appears by express
Scripture in the Apostle, Matthew. 9.36. etc. Matthew. 10.1. in the 70. Disciples,
Luc. 10.1.2. in the seven mentioned, Act. 6.1, 2, 3. etc.

Jesus Christ when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelist, some Pastors and teachers for the
work of the ministry, Ephesians. 4.11.12. Christ was the chief Pastor, 1 Pet. 25.
then the Apostles, Ioh. 21.15. (which was a three fold renewing of the
Apostolic commission, because his threefold denial of Christ, seemed to
degrade him) then the Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.2. Acts. 20, 28. Christ was the
Archbishop, 1 Pet. 2, 25. Apostles, Bishops, Act. 1.20. then the Presbytors,
Act. 20.28. Tit. 1.7. God sent Christ; he sent the Apostles, John 20.21. Christ
ordained twelve, Mark 3.14. Ioh. 15.14. And the Apostles did not only
themselves ordain Church Officers, Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. but also directed,
yea, and charged others also to ordain that there might be a succession of the
Ministry after their departure, 1 Timothy 3.1. etc. and 5.21.22. 2 Timothy 2.2. And
doubtless Timothy, Titus, and others concerned, were careful to observe and
keep their directions and charge; and Jesus Christ himself promised he would be
with the Apostles, not only all their days, but (...), all days and successions
of times, (...), which is frequently taken for the end of the world, by the
same Evangelist, Mat. 13.39, 40.49. and 24.3. and therefore includes a promise
of being not only with the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, extraordi^ary and
temporary Officers; but also with Pastors and Teachers, their ordinary
successors to the end of the world; and in performance of the said promise, we
do not only read of Bishops, Elders, Pastors, and Rulers, Ministers, in the
Epistles of Paul, but also Angels, Elders, Prophets, Stars, which Christ
holds in his own Right Hand, who walks also in the midst of the seven
golden Candlesticks, in the Book of the Revelation, which is a Prophetical
History, or Historical Prophecy of the Principal Passages of the Church of
God, unto the end of the world, that the holy Bible might one way or other,
relate the Principal concernments of the Church, from the Creation of the
world, to the consummation thereof. In Revel. 4.4.6, 7. There was a Throne, a
place of Gods sitting amongst his people as in the Tabernacle or Temple, and
four and twenty Elders, by which we must understand the Presbiters, or Bishops
of the Church, not the Saints or private members: For first, Never are private
members called Presbiters, Priests, in contradiction to their Officers.
Secondly, They are said to sit upon Thrones, and have Crowns on their Heads.
Thirdly, This seems to allude to the twenty four courses of Priests that waited
on God in the Temple. Fourthly, One of those Elders, Rev. 7.14. speaking of the
144000d. (of every Tribe 12000d.) says, these are they, not we are they, as
making a difference between the Elders and other Saints; and by the four
Beasts, are meant, the Christian Churches, through the four Quarters of the
world, alluding to the encamping of the Israelites, which did bear in their
four Standards, the same beasts, that are here mentioned, they that expound
this Prophecy clean contrary ways, yet they grant that the Ministers are
signified, if not by the Elders, yet by the four Beasts. In Rev. 7. the Tribe
of Levi is not omitted (as sometimes it is in the old Testament, where also we
read of 12. Tribes besides) if it had then the Anti-ministerial Spirits of
these days, would have seemed to have somewhat to glory of, but it is said,
that of that Tribe as well as of the other Tribes, though it was a small Tribe,
were sealed twelve thousand, which being spoken of the Church of the Gentiles,
by allusion to the Jewish Church, may well show to us a number of the Ministers
lawfully called, and approved by God, proportionable to the rest of the people,
or that God would also out of the believing Gentiles, choose some to be Priests
and Levites to him. Also when Antichrist most raged and reigned: and the
outward Court was given to the Gentiles, Rev. 11.2. Yet the Temple (though
Antichrist did sit in it, 2 These. 2.4.) and Alter, and they that worship
therein (now amongst the Jews (to whose custom he alludeth) the Priests did
worship the Lord in the inner Court) were to be measured, as being Gods
Building, to be repaired and kept up by him; and God did all along preserve not
only precious truths; the Positive and Affirmative truths of Christian Religion
(Popery consisting mostly in Additions, as elsewhere I have showed) which were
preached by the very Priests themselves, especially those main Doctrines of the
Trinity, the Nativity, Death, and Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus
Christ, of his sending the holy Ghost, etc. upon the yearly days, set apart for
the memorial of them: But also he did preserve an holy people, that instead of
having the mark, name, or number of the Beasts name, had their Fathers name
written in their foreheads, Rev. 14.1. and a faithful Ministry, proportionable
thereunto: two witnesses, a sufficient number to hold up his truth; for in the
mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established; and it was
Prophesied that they should feed the Church during the time of her lowest
exiled condition, Rev. 12.6. It is not said I will feed her, which might seem
to be extraordinary; or she shall feed her self, for then it might be imagined
that private brethren did feed one another; but They, the Prophesiers, should
feed her, and these were slain, and who were they? not only Saints, but
Prophets, which are distinguished from other Saints, and Righteous men, not
only in other Scriptures, Ephesians. 4.11.12. Mat. 10.41, 42. but also in this very
Book, which does not only mention the slaying of the Witnesses, but also for
the same, draws up an Indictment against Babylon, that in her was found the
blood, as well of Prophets, as of private Saints, Rev. 18.24. for they as well
as others, were witnesses by the word of the Testimony, and not loving their
lives unto the death: Many godly Ministers in several Ages, have born Testimony
to the truth of Christ, and appoted Antichrist; so that God, notwithstanding
the Idolatries, Sorceries, Whoredoms, Heresies, Persecutions of the Whore of
Rome, did always preserve the Essence of the Ministry, even where Satan's Seat
is, Rev. 2.13.

CHAP. X. Of the Spirit of Corah, and his gainsaying on Jude verse. 11.
Corah was a Levite, though he seems to disclaim the privilege thereof, and
made himself as one of the people; for he says not all the Tribe of Levi are
holy, but all the people which were of other Tribes also, and the two hundred
and fifty Princes did offer incense as well as he, Dathan and Abiram were Sons
of Reuben, the first born of all the Patriarchs; these Reubenites, camped next
to the Kohathites, on the Southside of the Tabernacle; as is showed, Number. 2.
and joined with them, and two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assemblies,
Senators, Statesmen, Governors, Reputed, Religious and Righteous men, were
famous in the Church, men of name and renown, Numb. 16.1, 2. they were not any
of them (that we read of) vile or vicious in their conversation, nor is it
likely, if they had been so, that the Congregation should so much respect them,
and though they be called wicked men, v. 26. or (as some others read it)
sinners, perverse, hard men, yet that was by reason of their division, which is
a work of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. showing them to be carnal, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. not
by reason of any gross miscarriage in their conversation that we know of; the
occasion of it (says Solomon Jarchi) and indeed it might well be one occasion,
was, Corah being a Levite, of the Koathites, which was the chief family of the
Levites took offense, and envied at the preferment of Elizaphan the son of
Uzziel, whom Moses had made Prince over the sons of Koath, Numb. 3.20. when he
was of the youngest brother, and Corah himself was of Izhar, elder then he; and
probably Dathan, Abiram, and On, being the sons of the eldest son of Jacob did
grudge that the privilege of primogeniture, was taken from their Father, and
his house; See Ainsworth in Numb. 16.

The nature and manner of their offense was this; Corah took men, he departed,
says the Syriach Verbion; was divided, says Fargum Onkelos; withdrew himself,
separated himself, took himself to be a part from the Congregation, says
Solomon Jarchi. And Datha^, Abiram and On also, ^ook men, and separated
themselves, or rather, Corah took them all into a distinct Congregation or
Church, from the Congregation of the Lord, and from being under the power and
oversight of the Rulers thereof, Numb. 16.5, 6.17, 40. Psalm. 106.17. They
rose up against Moses and Aaron, though I conceive them guilty rather of
Ecclesiastical then of Civil division, rather of Schism then Sedition or
Treason, and their opposition was rather against Moses as a Minister, then as a
Magistrate, for they said not all the people are wise, valiant, true hearted,
which are the qualifications of the Magistrate, they did not claim to rule the
state, but to offer Incense, v. 3.5, 10. hence Aarons Rod budded, not Moses his
Rod, Numb. 17. though in their zeal for their Schism, they did undutifully
reflect also upon the civil Magistrate, v. 13.14. nor did they plead only for
the equality of the Priests, with the high Priests, or of the Levites with the
Priests, as some learned men do conceive they did; though this then had been a
very great error, and more express against plain Texts, then it is now to hold
the equality of Church Officers under the New Testament; but though Corah was a
Levite, they pleaded for the equality of all the people with the Priests and
Levites the words which Jude calls the gainsaying of Corah were these; All the
Church is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them; wherefore lift
ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord, v. 3. whereas in deed and
truth it was they that took too much upon them, v. 7.8, 9. they preached much
for Liberty, yea, spiritual, ministerial power in the body of the people, in
opposition to their guides and leaders, they affected, challenged and usurped
the Priesthood, v. 10. in that they did seek (...), (as the Septuagint reads
it) to do the work of the Priests, to offer Incense, which though they might
easily be gifted for, yet were not called to it, and questionless, the people
intended their own profit too; for if the Priests work might be taken from
them, and done as lawfully by others, why might not also their Tithes and
Wages? This Schism pretending the purity, power, privilege and indirectly the
profit too of the body of the Congregation, and complaining of the usurpation
of the Priests, though resisted by Moses, and Aaron (who having been highly and
visibly honored by God, deserved to have been very venerable amongst the
people) so far prevailed that Corah gathered all the Congregation against Moses
and Aaron, v. 19. and though God by Moses (the Elders of the Congregation
following him) charged them to forsake Corah and his company; yea, though God
himself according as Moses had foretold, appeared against them in an
extraordinary miraculous way, v. 28. to 34. So that the people saw it and fled,
v. 34. Yet on the morrow all the Congregation (so fond they were of that
pleasing Doctrine, after they had slept on it) murmered against Moses and
Aaron, saying, ye have slain the people of the Lord, v. 41, 42. as though
Moses, Aaron and the Elders were not the Lords people, but enemies, yea
murderers of them, they meant of Corah and his company, which were taken away
by Gods immediate hand, but afterward God for this their murmuring sent a
plague, v. 45. etc. This Spirit that was in Corah, was indeed an evil,
seditious, schismatical Spirit, and their opinion and practice, how pleasant
and plausible soever; and what ever the 250. Princes of the Assembly, and all
the Congregation voted for it, was a dangerous, deadly, damning sin, God did
strike them dead, not by the common death of all men; some the earth swallowed
up, v. 33. some the fire consumed, v. 35, some the plague, v. 47. and Jude
says, men perish in the gainsaying of Corah.

This gainsaying of Corah is a sin of the new Testament as well of the old,
Jude v. 11. Let it be seriously and sadly considered of whom that Text is
spoken, and whether there be not many now adays some perhaps of honest
intentions and affections) guilty of it.

FINIS.

