The Doctrine of LIFE, OR OF MAN'S REDEMTION, BY The Seed of Eve, the Seed of
Abraham; the Seed of David, etc. as it was taught in several Periods of Time,
from Genesis 3.15. till Christ came in the Flesh, to fulfill all Typical
Prefigurations of him by his Death.

WHEREIN ALSO Sundry other Fundamental Points are discussed and cleared from
some common mistakes. As Daniels Chronology of SEVENTY SEVENS, which is
cleared from the uncertainty which too many Expositors have unadvisedly cast
upon it.

And about the Jews calling; that it must not be understood of any Return to
Canaan, or of their Restoration to a perspicuous Common wealth any more, but
of the calling of a Remnant of them to the Faith, in the Countries where they
live dispersed.

And with the true nature of our LORDS SUFFERINGS: with sundry other such like
Points, as may be seen in the TABLE.

Propounded by way of Question and Answer, with Annotations thereunto annexed;
Divided into three Parts.

By Edward Holyoke of New England.

Come and see,

John 1.46. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Nath. Ekins, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To his Beloved, and much Honored Brother John Bridges of Hackney Esquire, and
to his dearly Beloved Sister his wife, and to their Religious and well
deserving Sons Colonel John Bridges, Captain Robert Bridges, Major William
Bridges, Matthew Bridges, Brook Bridges, and Francis Bridges Esquires, peace be
multipli^^^
BEloved and much honored Brother, though the Lord Jesus to whom all things
are made subject, has separated us by the great Deep, yet I have you often in
remembrance, and cannot forget our alliance, and indeered love and acquaintance
that has been between us from our childhood, both in the Country, and in the
City of London.

You have a great Family, and like to have, through the Lords blessing, a
numerous posterity, and my desire is to show that I have some interest in them,
being also my bone and my flesh, as Laban said to Jacob: and I suppose you will
be well pleased, if I endeavor in any thing to further them in the knowledge
of the Son of God. This I now present unto you and them, was done many years
ago for the most part, as I think, you may remember, and then I made some
marginal notes to attend upon the several answers to the several questions that
are propounded in the two first parts: some things I have since added
concerning the Covenant of God in Christ, made with our Fathers in Gen 3.15 and
Genesis 9. and Gen 12.1, 2, 3. and in Genesis 17. This I did because of the errors
that get quickening in these times, and for the same cause I have affixed diverse
other weighty and profitable points in the third part of this Treatise.

I hope the whole will be a means to show, that the Covenant of God in Christ,
is one and the same in all ages, though the outward administration differ, and
that the Covenant to Israel of old was not only in the carnal, and fleshly
promise and covenant, but also in the spiritual promise and Covenant, even the
same that is now made with us in the new Testament of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God. Dear Brother, and Nephews, you have known my manner of life,
studies, and endeavors, and I bless the Lord, I have had comfortable
experience of that course of study which I have followed: I mean chiefly of the
book called the Consent of Scripture. And let me speak as I think, If men would
use that course of study, together with the blessed Scriptures, it would settle
in us and in our posterity, the true knowledge of religion, and the certainty
of everlasting salvation.

The whole Scripture and all learning should be contrived unto Christ, as Gods
servant did in the Consent of Scripture, and so Stephen did; he drew all the
holy story to Christ in Acts 7. and so the Apostle Paul, he drew all the Law to
Christ, as Romans 10 does make it evident, being conferred with Deuteronomy. 30.

Some in New England have seen this frame of mine, and have desired that it
might be made more common by printing, and indeed I cannot write so many
Copies, as to communicate it to you and to that generation, except it be by
Printing. It may be you will marvel I dare be so bold as to Print it in this
evil time, but indeed I dare not but do it, and I believe this labor of mine
will talk with many sorts of spirits, and I hope that Gods people will judge
the best of this my undertaking: other things I have, if the Lords providence
please so to order it, that must be made more public, because I have a great
desire thereby to provoke others to the diligent study of the blessed
Scriptures.

Dear Brother, and much honored Nephews, as Salus populi is the care of
Magistracy; so the edification of the Churches ought to be the painful care of
godly Teachers: and we ought to know that Families are little Churches and
Common-weals, and the Seminaries of greater Corporations; and that Parents are
entrusted with children and servants: it is not a small honor that Christ has
conferred this trust on them: and verily, if Families be neglected, the
Churches will fail. Let us with all godly industry make this promise good to
our selves and posterity, in Isa 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with
them, says Jehovah, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put
in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says Jehovah, from henceforth,
and for ever: and that this promise and covenant may be conferred on you, and
on your posterities for ever, is the affectionate prayer of.

Your assured and ever loving brother In the surest bonds, Ed. Holyoke.

Some DIRECTIONS TO THE GODLY READER. For the Reading of the Holy SCRIPTURES.
LEt me be bold, as having obtained mercy of the Lord, to give some advice to
godly Families.

1. Let children be brought up constantly to read all the five books of Moses
knowing it was the Son of God, the Angel of his presence, the Angel of the
covenant that gave Moses the lively Oracles for his Israel. Omit not one
chapter, and that which some think not so useful, read somewhat the more
carefully, believing the Apostles Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.

2. Read the 12. first Chapters of Genesis often, and after every book of Moses,
read the Epistles to the Romans, and to the Hebrews, or one of them, sometimes
the one, sometimes the other, because it is said, the Scriptures of the
Prophets is the faith of the Nations, Romans 1, 2, 3. and 16.25, 26. etc. etc.

3. Know that Moses is the Text, and that the holy history of the Prophets is
an Exposition of Moses, and when children, or any young man, though a Scholar,
is well versed in Moses, and the Prophets, they will more clearly understand
the New Testament, that it has no new Principles, but then they will see that
the Son of God came to be a Second Adam, and an holy Witness and Teacher of
the Truth, sent down from the Father to be confirmed in his Office of
Mediation, and that as Eternal God he taught Moses and the Prophets, and in
this Seat they shall behold the face of Christ to shine like the Sun, through
all the Bible.

4. Observe, that the Apostles do prove their Doctrine from the Old Testament,
as in the Epistle to the Romans, chap. 1. and 2. and 3, 4. in all the chapters
he handles the corruption of our nature, and that great point of the
Justification of a sinner, from Genesis 15. by the evidence of Abraham's faith,
and from Psalm 32. from David's Testimony, and in Romans 10.5^6. etc. from
Deuteronomie 30.11, 12, 13, 14. where he opens to us all Moses, as I have
showed in the Dialogue. And he handles the Doctrine of Election, and
rejection, from Genesis, Exodus, Deuteronomie, and Job^ etc.

5. Observe, that the Epistle to the Gal^thians does largely: expound Genesis
12, 1, 2, 3. and know, that Abraham could Teach, and gather Observations, and
Deductions out of the Promise in Genesis 12. as well as the Apostle, and it is
evident also, that he did so, for the instruction and comfort of all his
Household and posterity, as the book of Job with Genesis does witness.

6. Observe, that the Epistle to the Hebrews does lead us through all the old
Testament from the first of Genesis to Malachy, yea further even to the stories
of the faithful Martyrs, in the Macchabees, and from Dan. 7.8, 10, 11, and 12
chapters: the events of which chapters for a great part are after the Prophecy
of Malachy, in the story of the Macchabees. etc.

7. Observe, that the Apostle Peter, being an Apostle of the Circumcision, does
in his Epistles allude much to the phrases of the old Testament, and so does
Judas Thaddaeus in his Epistle, and both Peter and Thaddeus do show, that as
there were false Prophets of old, that spoke from the old Serpent, so there
should be such under the New Testament, that would resist Christ and his
Mediatorian Kingdom, as Cain, Balaam and Kore did.

8. Observe, that the Apocalypse does exceed in this way of expressing things,
by selected words and sentences, from the old Testament, and from old events,
and from the low Jerusalem, to open new matters, concerning the Church of the
new Jerusalem from heaven, and of the destruction of the enemies thereof, and
thus all the Revelation must be expounded, and whosoever does not so will miss.

9. I would yet give further direction to young men, yea to young Scholars.
First reading of the blessed Book of God, as it lies in order, by 14 chapters a
day, by which means the Bible is read over in three months. In the second
reading, confer the Genealogy, and the Chronology, as in the Table prefixed,
which will show you what principal men lived in such a state of time, and most
of the men are Fathers to our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom he took humanity, and
it should delight us to know his Genealogy: and all the other names of persons
are considerable as attendants on his stories. And I wish that young men would
transcribe the Table of our Lords Genealogy, twice or thrice over, it would
teach them more than they are aware of, and imprint things in their mind. It is
but one page, no great matter to do.

10. Then to make use of the Genealogy of Noah's sons, and Nephews for
Geography, which will much help the understanding, so that one months
Meditation at times upon these two Tables, will furnish you with plentiful
n^^ions, and with such a ground work, that you cannot but make use of them all
the days of your life* and in this manner read it the third time, and the
fourth, and by thus doing you will come to a sweet taste and relish of the
phrase of the holy Scriptures, which will be of more use to your mind and
heart, than you can at first conceive, I know this counsel and exhortation is
of God, and to help your proceeding, you have the holy Chronology set down in
many varieties of expressions, to stir delight in the study of the Scriptures.

11. in the Table of Genealogy, you have the times (though briefly) set down,
in which are showed, what Prophets lived in the times of the Kings of Judah: in
your second, and third, and fourth reading the Bible, endeavor to bring the
Prophets to their proper times with the Psalms, it will be much to edification.
And remember that, because men mind not Genealogy, Chronology, and the
Geographie of the Scriptures, they fail commonly in their Narrations.

12. The Dialogue Will show you what was the Doctrine of Chrift touching man's
Redemption in every age, to the vessels of mercy, his severity to the seed of
the serpent, for despising and persecuting the Professors of this blessed
Doctrine.

13. Consider, that the Kingdom of God in Christ, the seed of the woman, and
the second Adam is the matter of all the Bible: Adam had that theme to preach
on for 930 years, and Sem, the sacrificer to Jehovah, God most high, taught
this Doctrine 500 years after the Flood, and confirmed Abraham in that Doctrine
75 years, and consider that all the larger writings that were breathed by the
holy spirit teach no other matter but this, and gives promises of grace for
accepting this, and punishments for contempt of this all Cains posterity
perished in the Flood, then the Babel-builders, then Jeroboam, and the ten
Tribes, and the people of Judah were afterward burned by the wrath of Christ
for despising this Doctrine of life: and after this great salvation was
preached by the Lord himself, and confirmed by his hearers with all gift^, of
the spirit: the Jews for contempt thereof were cast off, and the world was
given over to Arrius, Turk and Pope.

Objection, If a man read so much at a time, as you have now prescribed, he
will not remember, and so not pref^^, and a man had better read a chapter in a
day, and meditate on it.

Answer, I know it is a most sweet and heavenly mercy to understand what we
read, but if a godly heart endued with courage will take this course for one
year, in his youth, the phrase and course of the holy Scriptures will be the
more familiar to him, and his knowledge, understanding, and affections will far
more increase (through mercy) then in reading a chapter or two in a day, and at
last he will remember ten times more, than reading a little.

2, And let none say, that fourteen chapters a day will hinder time in our
callings, for an hour and a quarter in a day will read fourteen chapters and
Psalms one with another, and what is that? we may purchase wisdom with the
loss of a little sleep, especially in a morning, it is said, Buy the truth,
bu^ sell it not, etc. and redeem the time, for the days are evil. I doubt not
he that will be constant, will say, it is as profitable an hour, as ever he
spent.

3 I take it for granted, that he that will hearken to this counsel must be
godly disposed and full of courage, for Christ our Lord does give to his
servants, not the spirit of fear and slothfullnesse, but of courage, of love,
and of a sound judgment: I confess that Gods people had need be backed with
heavenly strength in this degenerating time to meditate in the Law of God day
and night: But a good heart must mind what Christ said to Joshua, chap. 1. (and
he had as much business in his hand as any man that now lives) Oh that I
could persuade young men to trace me in all these directions, I know the Lord
would then bless them.

4 I have heard of a godly man in London, that did read over the ^ib^e twelve
times in one year, and that made him so prompt as he was in the holy
Scriptures, and yet he was diligent in his calling, and died wealthy: he
pleased not himself in much steep, and shunned unnecessary prattling discourses,
and vain, frothy company: he was of a sober, and stayed conversation, his name
was Mr. Roger Cotton, a Woollen Draper in Canning street.

But alas, there are but few at this day, that do search into Gods word, the
wealthy, and principal of state, remit that work over unto others, as a base
work for themselves to regard, but God does greatly chastise the world for this
neglect, and Hosea from God, does thus complain of the people of Israel. I have
written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange
thing, Hosea 8. read chap. 4.

5. I pray the beloved Reader to consider, that these days, are days of
trial, of shaking and winnowing, both of the outward and inner man, and that
Satan, is a great Malignant, both of godly parents, and their children, and
that he labors to plunder them of an able, godly, and learned Ministry, and
of the Sabbath, and of the seals of the Covenant, yea, of the Covenant it self
(as touching their infants) and Satan would not have children catechized by
forms (which was yet the prctise of the Apostles times, Heb. 6.1, 2, 3.) that
so they might be a prey to every foul spirit, but the Lord our God will rebuke
Satan and all his instruments.

6. Consider there has been ever, and in these days is an aptness to depart
from the Gospel of Christ, but that neither we, nor our posterity should
apostate public and private ordinances must with all godly care be attended.
All cannot be Angels of Churches, and the Angels of Churches receive gifts and
graces from Christ for the good of the Church. It was an holy wish in Moses, to
say, I would all the Lords people were Prophets, and that he would put his
spirit upon them, and who is but would so wish? but yet ever since the world
began, Christ in his administrations never did it, nor ever will, therefore
they that despise ordinances, it is of Satan, and also for men to think they
are above the holy Scriptures, and need them not, and that therefore they look
for new Apostles, this is also most certainly of Satan the old liar and
deceiver.

7. Let all such at neglect the Ordinances of Christ and the blessed
Scriptures, pretend never so much illuminations, and Revelations of the Spirit,
and new light, etc. all such vanity, is but Ignis fa^^^s, thus, even thus did
the old Serpent deal with our first Parents, but Christ, that restores all
things, says to his disciples and children, To the Law, Isa. 8.28, 19.20.
and to the testimony, and if men speak not according to it, there is no
morning light in them, it is also said. Psalm. 138.^.
The Lord has magnified his word above all his name, and also has said in his
new Testament, Search the Scriptures John 5. etc. etc. They are not worthy the
new name, by which God has called his chosen, I mean the Christian name, that
set light by the word of Christ, and a godly, learned, teaching Ministry.

8. They that look for new Apostles, and are not content with the Scriptures of
the Prophets and Apostles, Christ never prayed for such, he prayed for them
that believe in him, through their word and preaching, John 17. that makes the
Spirit of Christ, (he foresaw this evil) to admonish us to be mindful of the
words and commandments of the Apostles, and he that knows God, hears the
Apostles, and they know not God that do not hear their doctrine, and the
apostle Paul says, That he with the other were the last Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.2.1
John 4.6. 1 Cor. 4.9. Judas Thaddeus 17.

9. Their faith is not worth a rush that neglect or reject the Scriptures of
the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
the holy doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ with which he inspired, and sent
his apostles to preach to all nations, is most pure, glorious, and full of all
consolation, and they filled the world with the fruit of their doctrine, which
has remained to this day, and shall to the end by a faithful succession of an
holy ministry, 1 Cor: 11: 26.

Brethren, beloved, you know who says, What singular thing do ye? An
unbeliever; and a misbeliever will provide meat, drink and clothing, and lay
u^ what they can for their children, and will give wages to their ^^^^^^ts, and
it is well so to do, but what singular thing do ye^ do that which none of the^
will do, let your children which Christ has trusted you with, and which you
have born to him (let Satanical spirits blaterate what they will) be precious
to you, 2 John 4. Ezekiel. 23.37. Deur. 6.6, 7.
train them up in the blessed Scriptures, that you and they may be blessed, as
those two blessed and godly Matrons, the mother and grandmother of Timothy, and
also be careful of your servants, that they may bless God for you, when God
shall visit their hearts: and know this ye godly Parents and Masters, An acute
aphorism of that R^man of God Mr. John Trap
Ye are really, what ye are relatively.

10. You see what leaven is laid by the marked of the Beast, the Papist, and by
the Anabaptist, and the wretched Gorton, etc. etc. If the honor of the word of
God, the blessed Scriptures be glorious with you, if the glory of the Churches
of Christ be of any value with you, if the glory and comfort of the Covenant of
God in Christ, be of account with you, teach your children unweariedly the
sweet Scriptures, that they may be delivered from the vanities and idols of
these inchanters.

11. But above all, Popery is to be taken heed of, and indeed the Dialogue was
and is chiefly intended against it, It is the greatest mystery of iniquity in
the world, and the most bewitching; for there is nothing in it, but will please
an unregenerate and carnal heart.

The Papist will have people to believe the Church of Rome is the mother of all
Churches, and all must be subject to her, and they have great shows, and
outward glory to persuade, and false authority to compel men so to esteem her.

It is true, at the first the Church in Rome was a famous Church and a worthy
daughter of the heavenly Jerusalem (which is the mother of all true Churches)
and she was a noble off spring of the most high Sacrificer, Romans 16.17.
but when she would not keep her place, but caused scandala from the Apostles
and Prophets doctrine and would be above her Father, and her mother, and all
her sisters, by playing the imperious whore in her Fathers house, Lev. 21.9.
then she lost her true glory, and burning shall be her end.

But yet Papists will plead for their mother, but we must not yield them
motherhood in that sense as they would have it, we may yield them by the
authority of the Scriptures, that Rome is called a Woman, a Mother, and set
forth by outward ornanaments most glorious and dazelling to the carnal eye:
but yet further, (and that marres all) she is called a Whore, and mother of
fornications. I will transcribe the Scripture, Apoc, 17: 4. And the Woman-Whore
(verse 1.) was arrayed in purple and scarlet-colour, and decked with gold and
precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of
abominations and fil^hinesse of her fornication, and upon her forehead a name
written, Mystery: Babylon the great, the mother of fornications, and
abominations of the earth. That chapter is against the seven-Mountain city,
which city, when Saint John wrote, reigned over the Kings of the earth, Revel-
^ation 17. ult.

Thus the Spirit spoke to the seven Churches of Asia, of Romes motherhood, and
it is best, that all people take motherhood in that sense, as the spirit taught
the churches: so it is charged upon us, Apoc. 2. and 3. for if we do not,
better we had never been born.

The true mother of all the faithful is not so manifest to be known, but the
mother of fornications and abominations is as apertly described by the Spirit,
that it is a wonder, (but that Gods counsel must stand, Ap c. 13 8.) how men
should miss to know the one or the other? But why do I say a wonder, whereas
the truth of the Gospel of Christ is called a Mystery: and so the falsehood of
the Kingdom of Satan in the Beast like a Lamb, is called a Mystery, and so
much the more it is a mystery, because in the false Church, there is a
deepnesse of Satan, in mannaging his Kingdom, that he does in many things
assimulate the true Church, there is a notable instance of this in Prove: 8. and
9.

Prove. 8. Wisdom (in the true Church) stands in the top of the high places,
by the way, in the Places of the paths, Jer. 7.2 and 17.19.
she cries at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the
doors, O ye simple, understand wisdom, chap. 9. Who so is simple, let him turn
in hither, as for him that wants understanding, she says to him, Come eat of
my bread and drink of the wine which I have mingled; forsake the foolish and
live, and go in the way of understanding, etc. etc.

Prove. 9.13. A foolish woman is clamourous she is simple, and knows nothing,
notwithstanding, she sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high
places of the city, to call Passengers, who go right on their way. Who so is
simple, let him turn in hither; and as for him that wants understanding, she
says to him, Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant:
but he knows not, that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the
depths of Hell.

Wisdom stands in the high places of the city, in the places of the paths.

So does the foolish woman sit at the door of her house, on a Seat in the high
places of the city (the more is the pity that she has such toleration) the
false Church will advance her self to be more eminent, and too often she is so
esteemed of all those that follow the Lusts of the flesh, the Lusts of the eye,
and Pride of life.

Wisdom sweetly inviteth, and cries to the sons of Men, to hearken to sound
wisdom and understanding.

The foolish woman will exceed, for she will be clamorous, consider the ten
Tribes, 1 Kings 15.
they all protested, they worshipped God that brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, when they worshipped the Devils of Dan and Bethel. Will you behold
another clamorous company of the foolish Woman, Achabs, and Jezabels Prophets.
And yet lift up your eyes, that you may behold another company, but they were
learned Reconcilers, and Moderatours of Baals and the Temples Religion:
therefore I may not call them fools, for they were Priests Prophets, Dreamers,
Diviners, Inchanters, Sorcerers, Jeremiah 26. Jer. 7. They could bu^n incense
to Baal, and yet come to worship in the Temple.
8, 9, 10, 11, and 27.9 And I should do them wrong, if I should not remember
another multitude of clamorous fools, the worshippers of Diana, Acts 19. read
Apocalypse 13.12.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Wisdom says, she will teach the simple understanding: And so the foolish
woman of the ten Tribes pretends to teach the simple understanding (babbling
against Judah) that they had the truth.

Wisdom, says she has bread and wine for those that do attend her.

The false company says, they want not pleasant bread and sweet waters for
their guests.

The ten Tribes thought the Religion of Jeroboams Calves better, sweeter, and
pleasanter, than the Eternal wisdoms Religion of the Temple, unto which they
were so earnestly and Pathetically, and comfortably invited, in the nine former
chapters of the Proverbs, and by all the Prophets, and were Proud, Scornful,
and stubborn Despisers of all the Prophets Admonitions. But what came of all
the guests that followed this clamorous foolish woman? What became of Jerobams
house, of Baasaes of Omries, of Jehues, etc.

Thus, as the Apostle speaks in his days, so it has been ever, and will be
still, That Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of light: So it is not a
strange thing, that his Ministers can transform themselves, as if they were the
Ministers of Righteousness. Thus we have a brief Compendium of the mystery of
godliness, and of the mystery of iniquity, and nothing in the world can
describe these two unto us, but the Holy and Blessed Scriptures, and to this
day this has been the Controversy between Christ's two faithful Witnesses in
the Reformed Churches, in their Teaching, Writing, Profession, and Sufferings
against the false Lamb, and his worshippers.

Now in this case, what should we do, say unstable and carnal hearts; we know
not what course to take, we are in a staggering condition: truly unstable
Souls, are ever ready for the wolfs mouth, a fit prey for the smooth, subtle
Serpent, and his seed. People must be constantly admonished: weaken Popery,
weaken all: this the Layalans know well enough. Turcisme is no mystery, and
all the unclean spirits of error, is no mystery.

Therefore in few words, O ye godly Families, study the holy Scriptures, they
are the Inheritance of all the Israel of God. And verily, the most faithful
Witness has said, (and then he spoke of the old Testament) Ye err not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Misbelievers know not God:
Wherefore, if ye cry after knowledge, and lift up your voice for understanding,
Prove. ^.
if ye seek wisdom as Silver, and search for understanding as for hid
Treasures, then certainly you shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God; for the Lord gives wisdom, and out of his Mouth in his
holy Scriptures comes knowledge and understanding. And this also will follow,
That no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper, and every tongue that
rises in Judgment against you, you shall condemn: this is the This is a rich
and great heritage.
Heritage of the servants of Jehovah, and their Rghteousnesse is of me says
JEHOVAH, Isaiah 54.17.

To conclude, it is said, he that asks receives, he that seeks finds,
Mat. 7.
and to him that knocks it shall be opened. The secret of Jehovah (that is,
the Mystery of Christ) is with them that sear him, and his Covenant to make
them know it. He will cause the meek to go according to right, and teach the
humble his way, Psalm 25.

Two or three Directions concerning the reading of the following Dialogue.
First read the Text of it often, to see how things in the course of the Bible
follow one another; then the margins at your leisure for explication.

2. Let none be discouraged at the largeness of this Dialogue, for it is not
intended, that children or any should learn it without book, but the substance
of it they will have in their minds before they be aware. For,

1. Hereby a faithful mind, that has his wits exercised in the word of
righteousness, will often in a day run over all the Bible in sundry
varieties, if he mark the Chronology, and the chief persons in the Genealogy:
for by marking the times, and the persons that lived in those times, he will
remember their stories, as it is common to do in worldly affairs.

2. I have not cited every verse to the chapter I mention, because I would have
the Reader to mark the coherence of things the better, and though the verse be
not named, yet some part of the chapter is expressed: and you are to remember,
that the holy Apostles, when they cite a Text, they name only the Prophet, or
more generally the Scripture, not naming the Prophet, Romans 9.13.15, 17.25. 1
Pet. 2.6 etc.etc.

And observe that Speech, John 15.25. The Psalms are called their Law: that
term has deep Meditation; for the term Law comprehends all the Scriptures, and
the Doctrine of salvation by Christ, and that saying of James 4.5. Do ye think,
that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that dwells in us, lusts to
envy, but there is no one particular Text in all the Bible, that has those
words, and yet the whole Book of God (and I think every particular Prophet)
does show this corruption of our nature, that the Spirit, that dwells in us
lusts to envy. And where the verse is cited, you may miss of that
edification which you may attain, unless you mark the scope, for the holy
Spirit does in diverse verses drive to one chief Conclusion, therefore you must
consider many verses, and it may be the whole chapter, before you find the true
sense of a verse.

I will not excuse my want herein, in not citing every verse, But beloved, all
my labor is to gain this of you, to delight in all the Blessed Book of God.
And if this effect be attained, I shall think my labor well bestowed: and out
of this desire, I hope, it may come to pass, I may be encouraged to do you
further service.

E.H.

CHAP. I.
OF the UNITY of the GODHEAD, AND TRINITY of PERSONS.

Also of their Properties and Works.
QVestion, I. What Scriptures do show the Unity of the Godhead, and the
Trinity of Persons, with their properties and works?

Answ. very many, of which I will propound only some to consideration.

Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Eternal our God, the Eternal is One. Genesis
1.1.2.


In the beginning If the knowledge of God in Trinity had not been the ground of
life, God would never have declared himself to us in the plural number, for
his eternal wisdom foresaw what wars would come for that, betwixt Jews,
Turks, and Arrians, and his true faithful ones, and God the God of peace would
never have placed a name plu^all in his first Scripture, but for peace to life,
to the fallen Sons of Adam.
Elohim [Gods] he created the Heavens and the Earth; And the Earth was without
form, and void, and darkness was upon the face of the The Spirit of Elohim is
sometimes called the Spirit of God, the Father, 1. Joh. 4.13. Apoc. 11.11. and
sometimes the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.9.1. Pet. 1.11. because it
proceeds as well from the Son as from the Father, Joh 14.16.26. compared with
Joh. 16.26.
deep, and the Spirit of Elohim, [Gods] moved upon the face of the waters.

In the beginning was the WORD, and the WORD was with God, and the WORD was
God, the same was in the beginning with God. All things were made A^^ things
were created by him, and for him, Col. 1.16. consider that Gen 1. and 2. shows
that, and all the rest of the Bible shows this.
by him, and without him was made nothing that was made: In him was life, and
the life was the light of men, Joh. 1.1.2.

And Elohim said, Let US make man according to OUR Image, Genesis 1.26.

And Jehovah said, The man is become as one of US, Genesis 3.22.

And Jehovah came down to see the City and Tower, and Jehovah said, let US go
down, Genesis 11.7.

And it came to pass, when they, Gods [Elohim] caused me to wander, Genesis 20.13.

He built an Altar there, and called the place El-Bethel, because there they,
Gods, appeared unto him, Genesis 35. 7.

But none say, where is the Puissant my Makers, Job. 35. see Braughton on Job.

Let Israel rejoice in his Makers, Psalm. 149.2

Thy Maker is thy Husbands, Esa. 54.5.

Remember thy Creatours, Eccl. 12.1.

By the WORD of Jehovah were the Heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the
SPIRIT of his mouth, Psalm. 33.6.

I am with you says Jehovah of Hosts, with the WORD by whom I made a covenant
with you, when ye departed out of Egypt, and my SPIRIT remaining among you,
that ye should not fear, Hag. 2.5.

Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Fether, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19.

For there are Three which bear record in Heaven the Father, the WORD, and the
holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1. Joh. ^.7.

Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, for salvation is of
the Jews, but the hour comes, and now is when the true Worshippers, shall
worship the Father, in Spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to worship
him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him, in spirit
and truth, Joh. 4.22.23.24.

Jer. 10.1. Hear ye the word which Jehovah speaks unto you, O house of
Israel.

2. Thus says Jehovah, learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed
at the signs of the Heavens, for the Heathens are dismayed at them.

3. For the customs of the people are vain, for one cutteth a Tree out of the
Forest: the work of the hands of the workman with the ax.

4. They deck it with Silver and Gold, they fasten it with Nails and with
Hammers; that it move not,

5. They are upright as the Palm Tree, but speak not, they must needs be borne
because they cannot go, be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil,
neither is it in them to do good.

6. For as much as there is none like unto thee O Jehovah, thou art great, and
thy name is great in power.

7. Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? for to thee does it
appertain, for as much as among all the wise men of the Nations, and in all
their Kingdoms there is none like unto thee..

8. But they are altogether brutish and foolish; the stock is a Doctrine of
vanities, 9. Silver spread into Plates is brought from Tharshish, and Gold from
Vphaz; the work of the Workman, and the hands of the Founder, blew and purple
is their clothing, they are all the works of cunning men.

10. But Jehovah is the true God, he is the the living God, and an everlasting
King, at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able
to abide his indignation.

11. Thus shall ye say unto them, the Gods that have not made the Heavens and
the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens.
God gives rain, and he witholds rain, Deuteronomy. 11.14. Amos. 4.7. Psalm. 147. Sing
unto Jehovah who covers the Heavens with clouds, read Job. 36. and 37.


12. HE has made the Earth by his power, he has established the world by his
wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his discretion,

13. When he utters his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the Heavens,
and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes
lightnings with rain, and brings the wind out of his Treasures.

14. Every man is brutish in his own Vain man would be wise, though man be
borne a wild ass colt, Job. 11.12.
knowledge, every founder is confounded by the graven Image, for his molten
Image is but false-hood, and there is no breath in them.

15. They are Unity, and the work of errors, in the time of their visitation,
they shall perish.

16. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance,
Deuteronomy. 32. how gracious is this reciprocation. See the uses that the Saints
should and have made of it, Psalm. 73.16. and 119.57 Lam. 3. Christ is the
portion of the faithful, and they are his portion.
The portion of Jacob is not like them, he is the former of all things, and
Israel is the tribe of his inheritance, Jehovah of Hosts is his name.

Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand says Jehovah, and not a God afarr off? can any
hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says Jehovah? do not
I fill Heaven and Earth, says Jehovah?

Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever pleases Jehovah he does in the Heavens and in the
Earth, in the Seas and in all deep places, vid Dan. 4.34.35 and Ephe. 1 11.

QVestion, 2. What may be learned from these Texts.

Answ. These Scriptures teach us to know the most glorious God in his nature
and properties, in his works of Creation and providence: Also the Unity of his
essence; and that there is a distinction in the unity of essence, by which
description wemay plainly see that he cannot be likened to any thing, nor any
thing made like to him; Therefore all Idols and Images of him are vanity and
wicked, and are to be abhorred, and that he only is to be feared, believed in,
worshipped. etc. And all this will more clearly appear by certain positions
which may be gathered out of these Texts. QVest. 3. Which be they?

Answ. 1. These Scriptures teach us that God is a Spirit most perfect and
infinite, and therefore impossible to be conceived of us as he is in himself;
and therefore we must content our selves with such a knowledge as he has, in
his word, revealed to us, according to our capacity, in his names and
properties.

1. His names are, It is good to observe how the attributes and titles are
taken one for the other, as Deuteronomy. 18.13. Mat. 5 48. So that Elohim, Jehovah,
and Father are all one, and so we shall find in other Scriptures. These names,
titles, and properties, do expound the proeme of the decalogue, and the first
commandment, and the Proeme of the Lords prayer, and the first petition.


Elohim. Jehovah, Adonaj, Shaddaj, Jah, Tzur, etc. which signify the Mighties;
the eternal being of himself; and the giver of being to all things else; the
Stay of the World; the All-sufficient the giver of life and breath; the Rock,
etc. these and others are abridgments of the Bible, and the Bible a commentary
on them,

2. His properties, some of them are incommunicable, and some communicable; the
incommunicable are simpleness (or unmixednesse) infiniteness, eternity,
omnipotency, unchangeablenesse, immeasurablenesse, etc. no creature has these.

3. The properties communicable, are, being, life, goodness, power, wisdom,
justice, holiness, truth, mercy, etc. These he communicates to his creatures,
yet they are but in a measure in them as qualities, but in God essential, in
the creatures weak and imperfect, but in him each of them is infinite in all
perfection, and by these things in the creatures which we see and perceive, the
invisible things of God are understood; Some call these, names and properties,
titles and attributes.

4. These Scriptures affirm that there is one God, and but one, for there can
be but one infinite and eternal being, Creator and Governor.

5. The distinct persons in the Godhead, are from these Scriptures to be
learned, the Father, the WORD, and the holy Spirit. Other Scriptures do further
direct us how they are distinguished by their order, properties, an works.

1. By their order, the Father is the first person of himself, the Son is the
second person, only of the Father, he holy Ghost is the third person from them
both. 2. By their properties, Joh 1.14. Joh. 15.26.
the Father from all eternity begets the Person of the Son, the Son from all
eternity is begotten of the Father, the holy Spirit from all eternity
proceeds from them both; These are incommunicable properties in the Persons,
the Fathers relative property is to beget, and not to be begotten, and
therefore he is the first person in order; so, for our better conceiving, we
may say, a Person in the Godhead is a subsistence or a being, considered in
his relative property. (A) 3. By their works, to the Father is ascribed
creation, election, predestination, and adoption; to the Son redemption, to the
holy Ghost sanctification. Again, the beginning of every action is given to the
Father, the dispensation to the Son, the perfection and consummation to the
holy Ghost, these in some respects may be said to be communicable properties in
the persons.
The reverend Mr. Richardson, Mr. Yates, and Mr. Antony Wotton, etc.
Also it must be considered that every title, attribute, or property, that in
general is spoken of the Deity, is spoken of, and attributed to each person;
as the Father is Jehovah, so is the Son, so is the holy Ghost, Joh. 12.41. Act.
28.25. conferred with Esai. 6.3. to 10.

The Father, the Son, the holy Spirit be one, co-essentiall and co-eternall,
infinite and unchangable, etc. And so in the attributes, just, holy, good,
merciful, etc. each person is so infinitely and unchangably, etc.

Also in respect of the Creatures, the attributes are communicable to each
Person, as the Son is called Father, Esai. 9. So it may be said of the holy
Spirit who begets and renews us by the word of truth, the Father is our
teacher, and so the Son, and so the holy Spirit, the Father sanctifies, the
son sanctifies, the holy spirit sanctifies.

Therefore it is very useful to observe two things in the persons, their
cooperation, and distinct manner of working, the one is necessary in regard of
this, that they have the same essence, and therefore cannot but co-worke in
every thing; the other is, likewise, as necessary, because each person has his
distinct manner of subsisting. All operation flows from their essence,
cooperation from their unity in it, and distinct manner, from the distinct
manner of their subsisting. One essence, one operation: and Three being One,
must needs work inseparably, and one being Three must needs work in a
distinct manner.

6 Through faith we understand that the worlds were builded by the word of God,
that the things which are seen, are not made of things which had appearance,
Ebr. 11.
6 It is the thrice holy Jehovah, the Father, the Son, and their spirit, all
Three one infinite nature, that has created the heavens, and the Earth and
Seas, and all things in them, whether visible or invisible, in a sweet
dependency of order. And He the Eternal Being, gave them all their being with
perfection of qualities that (B) was fit for each creature in its order and
kind

7 It is the same everlasting God, that in his providence from the beginning to
the ending, does in a most holy, just, wise, and merciful order, preserve and
govern all things with all their circumstances in the heavens, earth, seas. (C)
Therefore called an everlasting King. But this King and (D) Kingdom is more
specially to be understood of the son of God, as Mediator, to whom the Father
has committed all authority and power. Vt infra,

8. The true God being thus glorious, and a spirit infinite, is therefore
impossible to be perceived by our senses, or comprehended in the short span of
our understanding; for he is like to nothing in heaven earth or seas, neither
can all the wisest men of the world, make any thing like to him: but if any
think so to do, they dote, and are follish, and vain, (as Isui 40. and many
more Chapters do speak) and their images are no Gods (E) nor resemblances of
him, but works of errors and lies. They can do neither good nor evil, those
that make them are like unto them, and so are all that put their trust in them.
And all that worship God by them are (F) haters of the eternal God, and are
hated and accursed of him.

9 Here it is showed that Gods worship is chiefly spiritual, (G) and all
outward worship, otherwise then he has appointed, is hateful and abominable
and uncomfortable; as here and in other scriptures, ceremonious, and
superstitious, vanities and makers of images, are reproved as brutish
senseless and hopeless.

10 God being One, and none other beside him the supreme Governor, whose is
the Kingdom and power over all things, he is only to be feared, loved, trusted
in, prayed unto and obeyed; therefore he has given us ten commandments, with
this entrance, That he is Jehovah our (H) Elohim, the Eternal, the Mighty God,
our creator and Redeemer, and he has taught us to pray to him, who is the
everlasting father, from whom all help comfort and defense comes, and is to
be praised and glorified in all his works of goodness, mercy, wisdom,
justice etc.

11 God being a most simple, spiritual, eternal, and infinite Nature: It
follows that he sees at one instant, and togegether, past, present, and to
come, all things in heaven, earth and seas. There is nothing so invisible to
our eyes in any place, or so spiritual to our understanding, but he sees
every particular. Nothing is so secret as the imaginations of our thoughts, yet
God sees them. Many uses hence, an understanding and believing heart will make
for spiritual obedience, and careful watchfullnesse over his whole man. Psalm.
139. all of it, and 119 168. Job 31.4. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Men not understanding or
not believing, say in heart, there is no God, or like the wicked in Job, chap.
22, and Psalm. 94. Who say, Jehovah shall not see, the God of Jacob will not
regard. But God does both, as the Psalm is notable. Secondly, Hence a world of
outward Christians, do show themselves but Atheists. Yea thirdly, The godly,
not seriously and constantly considering this, fail much in their sincerity for
holy and just obedience.

12. Another singular use is for afflictions, When we have any cause of fear,
we may be preserved, that this passion do not too much assail us; by
meditating often, we may be thoroughly acquainted with (I) our God, his titles,
properties, and attributes, both incommunicable and communicable: Also of his
works of creation, redemption, and Government; in any evil felt or feared, we
may quickly turn and seek to god, and so may not fear above measure, as David
says, (K) They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. Again, When
I was afraid, I trusted in thee, Psalm. 56.3. Remarkable also is this in
Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Also transcendent in those three noble confessors,
and Martyrs, Dan 3.16.17.18. So in all temptations, yea in death it self.
These things when they are well graffed, and as nails fastened in our souls,
will prepare us to contentedness in all adverse things. But let a man be
careful allwaies to keep a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward
man, then he shall not need to fear for any sudden fear; for the Eternal
Being will be for his assurance: But an unfaithful heart of unbeleif cannot
tell whither to turn him in affliction and distress, this is manifest in Kain,
Saul, Ishcariot and Achitophel.

13. The mighty Elohim, the eternal Being has created and disposed all things
in Christ for the good of his Elect. Therefore the Prophets show that Gods
Jesurun, portion and inheritance should not be as the Idolatrous heathens and
such like blind ignorant sots, (L) They must not learn their Abominations, nor
to be afraid of any of the signs of the heavens, the constellations, eclipses,
or strangeness of any of the fiery, ayery, watery, or earthly Meteors: God has
ever used them (as all are his servants) for the good of his church and the
world, and for the destruction of the wicked, as in the Flood, Sodom, Egypt,
etc. so it is said, the Heavens fought, and the Stars in their course fought
against (M) Sisera, Jud. 5. The stars by their influence in their
Constellations raised storms, wind, rain, hail, inundations, etc. Compare
with this Job 38.22.23. and Jos. 10.11. also Exodus 5. and the troubles of
Pharaohs pursuit, of Israel in the Red sea, Exodus 14.24.25. Psalm.
77.16.17.18.19. meditate on Psalm. 18. and 28.3. etc. and Psalm. 104. and 148.
and 1 Samuel 7.10. and 12.17. and 14.15. and much of Jobs book.

ANNOTATIONS upon Chapter 1.


As for the other, the Love of the Father, draws on the sons redemption, and
their spirit works it up by sanctification, etc. This is an irrefragable bond
of working, which the creature cannot frustrate; and Jehovah changes not, Ephesians.
1.2. to 16. 1 Cor. 8.6. 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 13.13. Joh. 5.19. and 14.26. and
15.26. and 16.7.



Lam. 3, 27.38. Broughton reads it, Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing,
and one of them shall not fall on the Ground without the Father? Matthew. 10. Is
there evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it, Amos? 3.6. Let us be
humbled for our Atheism, that look so much to second causes, (God alters
times and seasons, and overrules his means, as in the plague in 1636. it being
most in winterly season.)

And as for fretting and tormenting our selves about events, every event is an
Oracle of God, then no disputing: Yea, be the instruments what can be, it is
just, wise, or a merciful event, and all to his glory. Why does living man
murmur? a man for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3. Therefore David was in a
sweet temper when he said, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it, Psalm.
39. 2 Samuel 16.10. So then what ever be the second causes, yet the most high God
rules all in all things in Heaven, earth, sea, and in all deep places, Psalm.
135. His providence reaches as far as his creation. We say it raines, it
snowes, it freezeth; ir misteth, it thundereth, it blows, and that the stormy
winds do raise the waves etc. We may so speak impersonally, for the holy
scripture allows the Phrase: But yet we must look, and our children must be
taught to look to Jehovah the Eternal Being. He says to the snow be thou
upon the Earth, and likewise to the small rain and the great rain of his
strength; he thundereth, he raises the stormy wind etc. Job 17.38. and Psalm.
104. and 107. These things should be in us from our infancy, that our Faith,
Fear, Love, Joy, Hope, Patience, should abound toward him, who does all things
by his wise Counsels, and for the good of his chosen.

In N 7. [Kingdome] Although the Kingdom of God be much spoken Matthew. 28.18.
For God has governed the world by his son ever since Adam lost the government
by his fall, Genesis 3.15. And therefore it is said, Jehovah from Jehovah rained
fire and brimstone up- Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24.

In N. 8. [Nor resemblances] We ought to be very careful in prayer, etc. That
we fashion not God in our conceptions to any shape. We ought Acts 17. Esa. 40,
Romans 1. Therefore let us help our children from the breasts with true
knowledge.

In N. 8. [Haters] For God says, I will visit the iniquity of Fathers upon the
third and fourth Generation of them that Hate me, as in Exodus

In N. 9. [And all outward worship] Self-will worshippers are brutish wights,
they worship they know not what, for all their babbling and Act. 17. Joh. 4.22.
Jeroboam and his Priests thought and taught that they worshipped the true God in
his calves, but God has told us that he worshipped Devils. A Papist thinks he
worships Christ, when he kneeles before a golden, silvery, wooden, stony, or
painted Crucifix. But the spirit says, It is the worship of Devils, 2 Chronicles.
11.25. Apoc. 9 20.

In N. 10. [Our Elohim] Meditare ever more of Gods Attributes and Israel, that
he sees us, knows us, that he is just, if he judge and condemn us, that he is
holy and cannot abide iniquity, that he is mighty, and able to plague, save,
and deliver. And this is a gracious way to make entrance to the Attributes of
Mercy, Grace, Patience, loving kindness, Consolation, etc. etc. When men will
conceal and hide their sins, they labor to make themselves no better then
Atheists, Ezeck 9.10 Psalm. 86.14. and 94 7.

First, The Apostle says thus of Gods Attributes of strength: Do we provoke
the Lord to anger, are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10. Jeremiah exhorts not
to glory in the wisdom, strength and riches of this world which come to
naught, but in the wisdom, strength and riches that may be found in the true
knowledge of God, Je^. 9.23.24. Job. 22.25. Apot. 3.18. and make the
comfortable expression of an incommunicable Attribute, in Mal. 3.16. There is
both terror and comfort in this Attribute, the living God, it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, then it is a living wrath unto
hypocrites, that shall last to all eternity, and observe how this is pressed by
the Aopstle to the revolting Hebrews despising the blood of the covenant, and
cleaving to the false Doctrine of the traditions of their Fathers, Ebr. 10.1.
Pet. 1.18. Moses pressed this upon the deceitefull hearts that were in Israel
in his days: But to the godly this title of living God is as comfortable, for
he is their living joy, living consolation, living peace, living glory with God
after this life: and therefore while we live here let us meditate as. David
did, Jehovah lives, and blessed be my Rock, Psalm. 18.46. This was his comfort
in all the storms, floods and winds, that assaulted him in diverse trials,
as this Psalm and others show, he built on the Rock. This Psalm is expounded
of the Son of God, who rules all, Romans 15.9. And he says to his Disciples,
Joh. 14. Because I live, ye shall live also, lively stones built on him the
living Rock, this he said to them and to us, because of the trials he foresaw
would affront them. It is well for us that Jehovah lives; Also observe how
Moses deals in pressing his exhortations, Deuteronomy. 7.9. Again, he is wise in
heart, and mighty in strength, who ever hardened himself against him and
prospered? Job, 9.4.3. When a man addresseth himself to prayer, it is a ground
of faith, to begin with some Attribute, and with all to remember some promise
as is suitable to our petition, this is an high point of Christian wisdom and
piety, the Saints have used so to do, Dan. 9.2.3.4. Romans 15.5. Neh. 1.8. A man
that has not some knowledge of God in his attributes, and faith concerning
them cannot pray with that profit to his inner man, as else he might do. What
man can pray as he ought to do, if he believe not Gods emnipotency,
omnipresence, and omnisciency, and so of the other attributes, above noted. Oh
what shall we say, we are not able to order our speech concerning the
attributes and works of God, by reason of our darkness, Job. 37.19.

Dod on Exo. and 34. D. Preston and others; oh we of little faith; God will set
al his attributes on work for us, his attributes are of unspeakable consolation
to an holy soul; so on the contrary they are of thundering terror to the
Vessels of wrath and dishonor, Psalm. 147.5.6. That worthy man, (though a
private man) Mr. Henry Church is worthy of joyful memorial for his Miscellanea
philo theologica speaking of the Attributes of God.

abundantly above all that we can ask or think. Gods name is as his nature
is, secret, and not to be sought: this may wonderfully strengthen faith, for if
God were not above, and greater then our apprehensions, he could not help us
infinitely Ephesians. 3.29. and faith makes a man to set too his seal, that God is
true; faith gives God the honor of all his properties and attributes. Assure
shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to
the works of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the fatherless find
mercy, Hos. 14. Again it is said, My defense is in God who saves the upright
in heart, Ps. 7. and 112.6, 7.8. Prove. 3.26.

In N. 13. [They must not] The mystical Babylonians called the England and the
State there, which before they could not do. The Angel of the pit, the false
Prophet, and all his deceived worshipers, laid up all their hopes upon this
years destiny. But for Isreal's and Jesu^uns sake, (as against old Babylon) God
frustrated the tokens of the liars, and made the Diviners mad, and turned the
wise men backward, and made their knowledge foolish: For they, as Balaam and
Ha^man could not prevail with their enchantments and sorceries, and counsels,
neither could their Astrologers, the star gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators,
stand up and save them from the miseries that came on themselves. Foolish
Idolaters mistake their Calculations, and do not consider, that the Eternal
our holy one, the creator of Israel, our King, has made the Earth, and created
man upon it, and that his hand has stretched out the Heavens, and that he
commands all their Hoasts for the service of his Redeemed. It is he that
commands deliverances for Jacob Isa. 44 45 47 Psalm. 44. Vi. The thankful
remembrances of Gods mercies by the R.D. Carlton. page 130.

In N. 13. [Sisera] So again consider for the year 88. for by allusion, Sisera
is Cited in Apoc. 16. to show like events against Abaddons kingdom. And while
we make Christ our Judge, our Statute maker, and our King, He will be Lord
Admiral of our Seas, that the Enemy shall not come with their ships against
us, they shall not strengthen their Mast, nor spread their sails, etc. He will
save us, Esa. 33. Deuteronomy. 33.29. And see how he will make the creatures bustle
for us in our distress, Psalm. 18.6.7. etc. Psalm. 77.14, 1 15.16. and 114.1
Sam. 2.10. God has no portion in the world or any inheritance but his Church,
to which he will be a sun and shield, every man will plead for and defend his
inheritance, much more will our Redeemer do it for his inheritance his Church
and people.

Beloved Reader it is said, This is life eternal that they know thee to be the
only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Joh. 17.3. This first
Chapter, in some measure, has spoken concerning the knowledge of God: Now all
the rest of his book does endeavor to declare the knowledge of the sending of
Jesus Christ, and this knowledge should not be a thing indifferent with us,
because the excellency of this knowledge tends to the enjoyment of life
everlasting, 2 Timothy 3.15 16.

CHAP. II.
Has diverse Questions and Answers, with Annotations from Genesis 3.15. to the
Flood of Noah. In which space of time, the Doctrine of Redemption by the
promised seed of the woman is Explained.

QVest. 1. What is the first promise concerning the sending of JESUS CHRIST for
our Redemption?

Answ. Gen, 3.15. I will put Enmity between [AA] thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed. HE shall break thy head, and thou shall break
his heel.

QVest. 2. What do you observe out of this Text?

Ans. That the Son of God who was before the beginning, and with the Father in
the beginning, is here first promised to be manifested a second Adam, to
dissolve the works of the Devil for man's Redemption.

QVest. 3. Open the Text more largely.

Ans. In this Text the Person and office of Christ is taught, his person, that
he is as all other men (sin only excepted) the seed of the (a) woman That is
the Son of God is made man, and as it is here prophesied, so it is also
historyed, from what persons concerning the Flesh he came, and how the Son of
God took man's nature, in Luke 3.23. he was (as men supposed the son of Joseph,
but properly) the son of the blessed and beloved Mary the blessed Virgin, the
Mother of our Lord, is in namelest out of Luc. 3. but in matter certained, for
the term son, through all these has relation to our Lord Jesus. The spirits
intent is to show, not Joseph's, but Christ's natural line.
Virgin Mary, of Eli is not Joseph's Father,! for Matthew says, Jacob begat
Joseph, but thus it is, a married man has two Fathers, his own proper Father,
and the Father of his wife, as David had Jesse and Saul.
Eli, of Matthae, of Levi, of Melchi, of Janna, of Joseph of Mattathas, of
Amos, of Naum, of Esli of Nagge, of Maath, of Mattathias, of Simei, of Joseph
of Judah, of Joanna, of Rhesa, of Zorobabel.

Of Salathiel, of Neri, of Melchi, of Addi, of Cosom, of Elmodam, of Er, of
Jose, of Eliezer, of Jorim, of Matthat of Levi, of Symeon, of Judah, of Joseph,
of Jonan, of Eliakim, of Melea, of Mainan of Mattatha, of Nathan, of DAVID.

Of Jessai, of Obed, of Boaz, of Solomon, of Naasson, of Amminadab, of Aram, of
Esr^m, of Pharez, of Judah, of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham.

Of Thara, of Nahor, of Saruch, of Regu, of Phaleg, of Eber, of Salah, of
Cainan, of Arphaxad, of SHEM.

Of Noah, of Lamech, of Methuselah, of Enoch; of Jared, of Malaleel, of Cainan,
of Enos, of Seth, of Adam, (d) of GOD.

QVest. What understand you by his Office?

Ans. The first Adam not keeping for one day the government committed to him,
the Son eternal would take man's nature that he might (e) govern, he was made
(f) Heir of all, far above all principality and power, might, and Dominion, and
every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that to come. And
all things in Heaven and Earth and Seas were subjected to him the second Adam,
as indeed all things were created by HIM and FOR HIM. And he is before all
things, and by him all things consist. And in him all the elect, both them
which are in Heaven, and them which are in Earth, are reconciled, and gathered
as under one head. He was consecrated by God the Father from the day of (g)
man's fall to be Mediator, and head over all things to the Church, which office
he did execute, as he is a Prophet, Priest, and King, in the time of the Old
Testament in his Types both Kings, Priests, Prophets, first borne, etc.
persons and things. And when the fulness of time was come for the making of
the New Testament, be himself took unto him our Nature to do the Will of the
Father.

Quest 5. What are the benefits that come to us from the person and ^ffie of
Christ?

Answ. They are unsearchable, but I will name some principal.

1. Satan (h) brought man to offense, and so out of the favor of God, and to
shame of face, and to the fear of Bondage; (i) Christ the second Adam procured
Reconciliation, Justification, and (k) Adoption. 2. Satan brought man's soul to
darkness, sinfullnesse, or to death in sin; (l) Christ the second Adam gives
it knowledge, righteousness, and (m) the life of holiness. 3. Satan brought
man's body to miseries, death and corruption; (n) Christ the second Adam
sustaineth it in this its pilgrimage, and perfectly restores it to life and
incorruption in the Resurrection. 4. Satan caused the first Adam to be expelled
from the Tree of life, and the Paradise terrestiall, and brought all this world
(o) under curse, and so subject to vanity, and (p) corruption: Christ the
second Adam restores to the faithful a comfortable, and sanctified use and
service of the (r) creatures, and will make a new world for his and their glory
to dwell still with God, and to feed upon the Tree of life in the Paradise
celestial, and command Satan with his seed into eternal flames.
Add also unto this, that Christ the second Adam, the head of all principality
and power, restores to them that are in him adopted, the attendance of the
Read Psalm. 34. and 91, Ebr 1. Col. 1.16.2. Romans 6.17. Esa. 37.36. Abrams, Lots,
and Jacobs stories, and Daniells book Ebr. 13.2.
holy Angels.

Quest. What other observations out of this Text^

Answ. 1. God has decreed what shall be the estate of the corrupted mass Has
not the Potter power over the clay to make of the same lump, one V^ssell to
honor, and another to dishonor, who art thou, O man that disputest, Romans 9. For
the manifsstation of Justice and mercy, there are elect and reject in all ages.
of mankind; that some shall be the seed of Satan, (t) and the children of
perdition, and that some shall be elected, predestined, and adopted Sons of
God, by Faith in Christ, (u) and heirs of salvation.

II. God out of his free love and mercy made this promise to our first Parents,
of giving his only begotten Son, when they neither desired it, much less
deserved it; nay this mystery of his will, and this way of salvation could not
(y) enter into their heart, till God in whole eternal council and decree it
was hid, did reveal it. And this is the State of all mankind, from the first
Adam till the Spirit of Christ, by cherishing the waters of the LAW, beget in
us, to a new light and life, even a new creation, 2 Cor. 4.6.

III. The Son of God being promised, that he should destroy in man's nature as a
second Adam, the (a) works of the Divill, the holy Spirit taught the Saints in
all ages, that they should not allow or practice the dead works of darkness,
or of the corrupt (b) nature of the old Adam, but labor for a new life by
faith and regeneration in the second Adam, in whom we are (c) complete. And
hitherto pertain many of the Lords Read Ezekiel 16. and 36 Jer. 31. and 32. and
33. Esai. 42.1. to 17. etc.
gracious promises, and all the commandments, exhortations, motives, examples,
prayers, vows, covenant: to be heavenly, Read Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 32.38.39.
to love the Lord and the word of his truth, to walk before him in godly fear
in all well pleasing, and so all the Saints ever did: as Adam, Habel, Henoch,
Noe, etc. also hitherto pertain the Reduce al dehortations, as love not the
World, nor the things of the world, 1. Joh. 2. set not your affections on the
Earth, Col. 3. and on the contrary, ^educe the exhortations: as seek the things
above, Eccl. 11. and 12.
dehortations, threatenings, curses, and examples of sin, and punishment in
walking contrary.

IV. From this first preaching of the Gospel, we must attentively mind this,
that Jehovah who was, who is, who will be still the same, (d) does rule all
ages to one sum of salvation in Christ. And to this faith he ever calls his
elect (e) by his word and Spirit, from the communion of Devils and the wicked
world, to have communion with him and his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord by way of
Ordinances. The reason that God hates the wicked, is, God teaching this
continually from the beginning, yet the wicked rebel and join with Sa^an, 2
Cor. 4.4.

V. * In all ages for teaching, ^ead Psalm 44. and 79.1. These. 3.2. Col. 1.24.
etc. for his S. observation.
beleiving, and professing this glorious Doctrine of Christ (f) great
disputations, contentions, sorrows, tentations, persecutions, in body, goods,
name, and life, come unto Michael, Christ Jesus and his (g) Angels, by Satan
and his Angels: yet Christ went through all conquering: and so faith in him
and in his word does make us conquerors. Many sweet promises belong to this
head.

VI. The duty of all Christian beleivers, is to be unfeigned in brotherly love,
(h) holding one another with a dear pure heart fervently, and to resist the
Divill and his members, (i) and to have no fellowship with the workers, nor
with the works of wickedness. Behold severity through all generations; when
the Church walked contrary.

VII. Because this Text of Genesis 3.15. is a promise of Christ, that he should
take humanity, and destroy Satan's works, therefore in it, implicitly are the
petitions of the Saints for all good concerning soul and body; Intercessions
as respecting the communion of Saints, deprecations to be delivered and
protected from all evil, and holy imprecations against the seed of the
Serpent. Also hence issue, the (k) praises and thanksgivings, for receiving
good for our selves, or others, both in respect of spiritual blessings, and in
that all (l) creatures of each days creation (whether visible or invisible) in
Christ, are servants and friends to the elect. Hence also proceed praises and
thanksgivings for (m) deliverance and protection from Satan, his seed and works.

QUest. 7. Did God ordain any public worship to his name, presently after the
fall of our first Parents, and after the promise?

Answ. As God (n) taught our first Parents the Doctrine of faith, so he taught
them prayer and sacrificing, and blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, for
a day of rest, for study how God rested from Creation in the Redemption by
Christ, he being promised to be Heir of all. (o) Sacrifice was used from the
day of Adams Apostasy, teaching of life coming by death. Adam taught his Sons,
and his Sons Sons, to the eighth successive Child, and those that offered in
faith discerning the blood of the covenant did please God, had peace, and
reconciliation with God, and were made heirs of the righteousness that is by
faith, the Church in Adams family with Gods The Ordinances were the preaching
of the word of faith. 2, Prayer. 3. the Seal of the promise.
Ordinances is called (p) the presence of God. The Mr. Ainsworth on Genesis
4.14.16.
Presence of God in holy Ordinances is most glorious and comfortable, to which
the faithful in all ages of the Church resorted with holy fear, exceeding
joy, praise, and thanksgiving, Psalm. 42. and 43. and 84. and 100. etc.

QUest. 8. Who believed this report concerning the second Adam, and to whom was
the arm of the Lord revealed? Answ. Adam and his Sons * Habel, Seth, Enos, and
the rest of the godly Fathers, and their godly posterity to the Flood.

QUest. 9. Who hated this Doctrine, and persecuted this way of life in Christ.

Answ, Kain was the first that began the War of the Serpent against the (q)
holy seed. And this persecution by men that followed Kains ways, goes on to
the end of the World.

QUest. 10. Was there any apostasy from this faith and way of salvation before
the Flood?

Answ. Christ the Light and Life shined in darkness, but he was not
comprehended of the Sons of darkness: for beside the Doctrine and practice of
bodily exercise in Kain, there was (r) a great apostasy, and that quickly of
the Sons of the open Church, who having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, despised the Doctrine of regeneration, greived the holy Spirit,
and corrupted the calling on the name of the Eternal: And the chief occasion
of all this was by (s) ungodly marriages, with Kains (t) worldly glorious
house: from all which issued (u) a confluence of all iniquity, setting Light by
Gods long suffering while the Ark was making, committing all ungodly deeds, and
uttering hard and bitter speeches against the Heavens. And so it is in all
apostasies. Remember still, that in all apostasies of the Church, the faithful
cannot be visibly glorious.

QUest. 11. What came to the faithful that did first cleave to the faith, (
which was once delivered to the Saints) and that walked with God?

Answ. Through (x) faith, they obtained good report with God, God was not
ashamed to be called their God, and their Father, and they his Sons, and he
accounted that the world was not worthy of them, and therefore he prepared for
them an Heavenly (y) City and Country, for they had gracious promises of Gods
favor, through his covenant in Christ, the true Noah, who does comfort us
concerning our works, and concerning the sorrows of our hands, and concerning
the earth which God has cursed. wherefore they had preservation and
deliverance from the severe destruction of the World by Waters. Thus God was a
rewarder of them, that by faith did diligently seek him. This does teach us how
precious faith is in the Son of God, that should come into the World.

QUest. 12. What came on the (z) co:^upters of the Faith, the despisers and
wantons, and feasters, and mockers, and murderers, the seed of the serpent,
that walked after their own lusts?

Answ. Kaine was cursed (a) and excommunicate, and Christ did execute
Judgment, and bruised his posterity, and the Apostates in his fearful
severity in the Flood, washing their bodies away, and cast their spirits into
eternal prison, for their unbeleeving, disobedient striving against the (b)
Spirit of Christ in his Prophets, preaching the Gospel: So dangerous it is,
when people will not be wise Consider Psalm. 2. through the whole volume, how
Christ breaks the plots, counsels etc. of the serpents seed.
and kiss the Son. The next general judgment of the world, and of wicked
and ungodly men shall be by fire. God hates (c) the wicked, unbeleevers and
hyppocrites in all ages, like Devils, according to that most constant
doctrinall position, 2 John 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God; he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he
has both the Father and the Son.

QUest. 13. How long was it from the first pronouncing of the curse upon the
Earth, to the open manifection of it by the Flood of waters?

Answ. It was sixteen hundred fifty and six years.

Some Annotations upon this second Chapter, with References to the number of
the Questions, and Letters of A, B, C, etc.
Genesis 3.15. This scripture is the Basis of all the Doctrine of Gods Counsel
concerning Redemption by Christ; this scripture declares the decree of Gods
eternal counsel and covenant, as it was concluded and agreed on by the holy
Trinity for man's Redemption from Satan's head-plot. Satan's plot and purpose was
to spoil man, and so consequently to have spoiled and undone the whole work of
God in the Creation: But this that sets forth an heavy threatening against
Satan, and the serpent his instrument, that one from the seed of the woman
should break his headplot, and heal that misery which he brought on man, and
because that should be done, a new heaven and a new earth should be made to the
praise of Gods counsels, which over raught the plot and project of Satan. So
this scripture contains in it, a threatening to the serpent and his seed, and a
promise to Eve and to all her believing seed of Christ. Beloved Reader,
concerning this Text and the threatening in it to the terror of the serpent and
his seed, be pleased to read Mr. Pynchons book of the meritorious price of
man's redemption, printed 1655. there you will have plentiful satisfaction; but
for this little work I purpose chiefly to enlarge my self, not as it is a
threatening, but as it is a promise concerning Christ.

The refore I will further observe from Genesis 3.15.

I. That in this Text, The eternal Gospel hid in God, before the foundation
of the world, was now in Paradise manifested, even the hid wisdom.

II. To this first and precious promise, the Apostle has respect, when he
says, He was made an Apostle of the faith and truth, that is for the hope of
eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the times of the
world, but made his word of promise manifest in due time by the sending of
Jesus Christ, Tit. 1.1, 2, 3.2 Tim. 1.9.2. Pet. 1.4.

The times of the world are counted by the birth of the first ten Fathers to
the flood, Thence by ten holy Fathers to the promise to Abraham. Thence to the
coming from Egypt. Thence to the building of the Temple. Thence to the burning
of it by Babels King. Thence to the end of the captivity in Babel. Thence by
seventy sevens of years to the death of Christ, or to the glorious redemption
of man, by the death of our Lord Jesus Christ.

III. This comprehends the Faith of Gods elect, which was once delivered,
that is, first and once for all, delivered to the Saints, and never after to be
changed. All other promises of Christ, are but commorations and expositions of
this. The Doctrine of Faith can be but one, because there is but one God, and
one Mediator, Ephesians. 4. Note this phrase again once delivered but still
expounded. This is Genus generalissimum. And for this faith, the Saints of all
ages have contended to keep and uphold it against the serpent and his seed, as
all the Epistle of Judas Thaddaeus is upon this argument. All sins and
punishments come on the world for despising this faith, and comforts for
embracing, 2 These. 1.8.

IV. From this first preaching of Christ till the mystery of God, which he has
spoken by his holy Prophets and Apostles be finished, we must mind this
constantly, that Gods purpose was not to bring man fallen, to life by the
remains of any natural abilities; there was a Bar that we should not think of
any hope in that, Genesis 3. ult. But by a new and living way in the second Adam.
This is a Covenant of Grace, not to him that works, but to him that believes
and receives the Son of God as Mediator, him has God exalted (in holy
doctrine from the beginning) with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior,
for to give change of mind and forgiveness of sins to all the Israel of God,
Acts 3.21. and 5. 31. Now this new way is very foolishness to us naturally,
therefore we dream of great excellencies in our corrupt, dead, stinking
graves: But we must hear the voice of the Son of God in his own ordinances,
John 5. and he must say to us, live, before we can have the first Resurrection,
as we cannot have the second without his powerful voice, Ioh. 5. Isa. 2.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.

V. If the first Adam or any of him could help themselves, what need the Son
of God to be promised from the beginning, to be a second Adam, and to appear to
destroy the works of the Devil? 1 John 1. and 3. he only knew how, and was
only able to manage the whole offic^ of mediation, and to perform all
righteousness, according to covenant in his own person, without pressing, and
by his glorious Ordinances effectually to call, and unquestionably to justify,
and to prepare for glory all them of his mystical body which the Father gave
him. Neither Adam nor any of his posterity had such abilities, and for any
thing they could do, they should have born their own iniquities, which was such
a yoke, that neither Patriarch nor Apostle were able to bear; change of mind
and forgiveness of sins was ever preached to be by the second Adam, Luke
24.47. Be it known therefore to all men (says this first promise) that
through this blessed seed, the son of God made man is preached to us the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified (that is, made
free) from the guilt of sin and punishment, from which we could not be
justified or made free by the Law of Moses, Acts 13. The world was 3960 years
from the Apostasy of the first Adam, to the Redemption by the second Adam, and
who in all that time saved himself from death, Death reigned over all, old and
young; it is the second Adam that conquered death, the reward of original sin,
and he rose again for the justification or freedom of all. Gods Children
from sin and fear of death. Oh that self conceited and proud iniquity would
once stop its mouth; for every mouth shall be stopped, and all the world shall
be subject to the judgment of God, Acts 13. and 15. Romans 4 ult. What the Law
of works could not do, the election has obtained, Romans 11.

VI. Mark that from this first and maine free promise, God has conveyed all
comforts, of wisdom, justification, (or Freedom) Sanctification and
Redemption, on fallen man, and no way else can or ought to be sought after: It
could never have entered into the heart of man to think of this way, if God of
his rich Grace had not first declared this rich mystery of his will in a free
promise; how could our first fallen Parents have thought of a Redeemer, much
less of the means of obtaining such a Redeemer at the hands of God. This
mystery was ordained in Gods eternal Council and providence, before the
foundation of the world was laid, to be revealed upon Adams fall, his ways are
unsearchable, his wisdom, mercy, power, and love is past finding out, and
doubtless our first parents and all their faithful posterity, could but with
admiration, say the Epitaph not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into
the heart of man the things that God ^ath prepared for them that love him 1
Co^. 2. Of him and through him, and to him are all things. To him be glory for
ever Amen, Esa. 43.25. Esa. 48.9, 10, 11. Romans 11. Jer. 31.33. Jer. 32.39.
Ezekiel. 36.25.26.

VII. Christ was promised a Redeemer, not only from the guilt and punishment of
sin, but to make us in himself Sons of God; even new creatures.

VIII. All outward comforts come by promise in Christ; several godly persons
of late years have done well in composing Treatises of the promises.

IX. It is to admiration, That Jehovah the eternal God, should seek to enter
into a covenant of Grace with fallen man, with the slaves of the Devil, with
enemies, and with children of wrath, that he should enter into a free promise
and Covenant with us to be our God, and to make us to be his people. See his
kindness to the polluted infant in Ezekiel. 16.

X. All things are made subject to Christ, as the heir of all from the first
day of Adams fail, but Satan does labor with all sedulity to withdraw man's
Blind heart from the understanding of this doctrine, and does labor to suggest
fond imaginations of idolatry, superstition, bodily exercises and Fables etc.
to corrupt it, and by persecution to hinder it; yea to abolish it: This is a
Doctrine of Faith which no natural man can attain until his mind and divine
illumination be regenerate and made capable to comprehnd this hid mystery of
God in Christ.

All precepts, promises and threatenings, are ordained to bring fallen man to
obey the Son of God as mediator. All the victory, administrations of Christ's
Kingdom by the word, seals, censures, etc. are for this purpose till the
mediatorian Kingdom be redelivered, 1 Cor. 15. But all things are chiefly
intended for the Elect, 1 Cor. 14.32.

11. The second not on Genesis 12.13. may be of use here.

12. Thus from the first preaching of the Gospel, we must observe why Christ
is called Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, not only in causes and
effects, but also of all divine Revelation in the blessed scriptures, all runs
on him. All the Promises, Threatenings, Commandments, Examples, Chastisements,
etc. all drive us to Christ, he also is Alpha and Omega in all the praises of
the Church, he is also the maine matter and mark of the holy Bible, All things
were created by him and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all
things consist, and he is the head of the body, the Church, Col 1.18.

In 3. Q. [The seed of the woman] Hence Children should be first Gen 3. with
Luke 3. and Luke 4 together for two principal ends, first, To know, how Jesus
our Lord is of the blessed Virgin Mary of Eli, and of Adam and Eve naturally,
and in this respect the Genealogy of men in Luke 3. are the glory of mankind,
being all Fathers to the Son of God after the flesh.

2. The better to compare the sorrowful combat of Adam, being killed on his
first day, from the life of the soul to death in sin, with the glorious
combat and victory of our Lord the second Adam, driving Satan to flight, and
the reason why the Son of God should take hold of man's nature, is purposely
handled by the Apostle, in Ebr. 2. Ebr. 3. Ebr. 4. Ebr. 5. Great is the mystery
of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, It is most glorious to consider it,
and how it has been diligently taught in every age from Genesis 3.15. and for the
better knowing of this mystery, the Law of Moses was made, the Tabernacle, and
the frame of the world, and well might David and Solomon say with admiration,
That God would dwell with man on earth, also in his apparitions to the Saints
before the Flood, and to the Patriarchs and Prophets,, he spoke with us, (mark
this corporation speech in Hos. 12.4.) At Bethel, and dwelt among us, in his
Tabernacle and Ordinances, then in the Temple till the captivity, then in the
second Temple, and then at last he became very man, making our flesh his
Tabernacle, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. Cor. 6. but his special residence
in us is in our hearts by Faith, These things made singing affections in the
Saints of old, Ps. 40. Ps 100. Ps: 135. Ps. 147. Ps. 149. Ps. 149.1 Chr. 16.1
King. 8.2 Sam. 7. Joh. 17. Ex. 15. and any that duly consider this, cannot but
sing praises to the God of our Salvation.

Q. 3. [Of Adam in the Genealogie] When the holy spirit brings Genealogies
from the first man unto Jesus our Lord, it may teach all men that the world was
made and had a beginning, so Moses Law taught Misgraim, that is the Egyptians
and others in his time, and Ezra the Persians too, before Aristotle and such
Athean praters, 1 Chronicles. 1.1. see Bro. in Manuscript.

Q 4. and Answ. [He might govern] Genesis shows how that by the word of
Jehovah the Heavens were made, all the settled Army of them by the spirit of his
mouth, and when man fell, the word tells, That for the destroying of the
works of the Serpent, he would be made flesh, and have a Tabernacle in our
nature, and so to be a second Adam to govern all things. In which point the
Patriarks faith is evidenced by the charge of Joseph to carry his bones with
theirs unto the Land of Canaan, where our Lords Resurrection should be a
testimony of a new world, see Bro. in Appo. 1.108. The government of the world
to come (for so the Jewish Doctors did style the days of Messiah) is that
meditorean Kingdom which the holy Prophet so magnifieth to endure through all
ages and generations, Ps. 8. Ps. 45. Ps. 93. Ps. 145. etc. And this Kingdom of
Christ the second Adam is handled in 1 Cor. 15. Ebr. 2. Ephesians. 1.22. from Ps. 8.
Namely, That the Son eternal should rule as the mediator of his Church, till
all things be restored, but then his Kingdom shall be delivered up when the
last enemies death and Satan are perfectly subdued and destroyed, Then all the
elect which have been called, justified and adopted in Christ by the word of
his kingdom and by the work of his spirit, shall be presented unto the father,
and all prophesying, and Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.

In Q 4. [Heire of all] David with great admiration does handle this in Ps. 8.
He the second Adam upholds all by the word of his power and this he showed in
Noah, when all beasts and Elements obeyed him at the flood, and so at the
destruction of Sodom, Jehovah from Jehovah Genesis 16. and so in the days of
Joshuah, 10.11

In like sort, those noble and excellent descriptions of Christ his person and
Office (in the three fold Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King) are wonderful
for all sorts of heavenly and terrible Doctrine, in Psalm. 2. Psalm. 45. Psalm.
110. Esa 9. Dan. 7. Dan 9. Dan. 10. Daq. 12. and that in Apot. 1. may well
comprehend the sum of them all, but all of them should first be minded as
expounding, Genesis 3.15. Ephesians. 1.22.23. Col. 1.14.15. and the Epistle to the Ebr.
all of it, He is the blessed and only potentate to the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. Apoc 19. Joh 3.35. The Father loves the Son and has given
all things into his hands, we must reverence the Heir, and beleevingly obey
him, for Christ is appointed a Prince and a Savior, to give change of mind
and forgiveness of sins. This was taught from the beginning, that he should
be this horn of Salvation, and of this Doctrine, there have been prophets to
declare it ever since the world began, Luke 1.70. Act. 3.21.

In Q. 4. [From the day of man's fall] All the time from the time of man's fall
to the restoring of all things by the Messiah, is called, The World to come,
and it is subjected to the Messiah, Ebr. 2.5. but the restitution of all things
is first prophesied in Act. 3.21.

In Q. and Answ. 5. [Satan brought man, n. 1.] Man was ever the Col 2.15. and
this comfort also belongs to all the persecuted Saints, that this great Red
Dragon is chained, Apoc. 20. and shall shortly be utterly trodden under our
feet, Romans 16.

In Q. 5. [Christ the second Adam] Christ destroys Satan's works, Joh. 13.1.
Christ is the restorer of all things, in him we have all things that
appertain to life and godliness; he is the Corner stone that couples all the
building, and there is no other name under Heaven whereby we can be saved, Act.
4 None but Christ, as blessed Lambard said, Him has God the Father sealed,
Joh. 6.27. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior to give repentance to all the Israel of God, and forgiveness of sins,
And this is a sure rule from the beginning, He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life, and he that believes not the son shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3^36. so then cursed was he that said, Si and
illa, and illa colantur; neque esse noxium, si inter Gentilium aras and Dei
Ecclesiam quis transiens, utraque v^nerc^ur; and little better are the
Atheistical moderators of our days, 1631.1632.1633. 1634.1635.1636.1637.

In Q. 5. [And Adoption] And now little Children abide in him (the Adam) that
when he shall appear, we may have boldness, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming, 1 John 2. By him we have adoption, Joh. 1.12. and his spirit does
enable us to cry Abba Father, mark these scriptures, Ebr. 4.14.15, 16. Romans
8.15. Ephesians. 2.18. Romans 5.1, 2.

In Q 5. N. 11. [Christ the second Adam] Now Satan the old Serpent, Adam, and
by the word of his Grace, we are set free, and such as are blind do receive
their sight, and by his grace we are made able to stand, resist, and overcome:
his Grace is in us and over us, and the Apostle of the Gentiles salutes them
all thus, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. Esa.
42.6.7. Esa. 49.9. Ephesians. 6.1. Ioh. 2, Rom 7. Esa. 45. 24.

Q. 5. [The life of holinesse] In him was life, and the life was the light of
men, Ioh 1. Ioh 8.12 The second Adam says, I am the light of the world, he
that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, his Law restores the soul, Psalm. 19 Ps. 23. Ephesians. 2.1. Ephesians. 4.24. Col.
3.10.1. Co^. 15.49. Esa. 11 9.1 Ioh. 1. Ioh. 2 4. He is the true Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls.

Q 5. N. 3. [Christ the second Adam] The appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ,
as it was promised, has brought life and immortality through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. Marthas and our Lords conference was heavenly, the shows; that she
expected life and immortality through him, Ioh. 11.21. and 1 Cor. 15.1 These.
4. And Iohs faith for this point is worthy of all consideration Ioh 19. Ps.
46.15. Ps. 17.15. Sin reigns to death through the first Adam, but grace reigns
through Righteousness (or freedom) to eternal life through Christ the second
Adam, R^m. 5. The comparisons of the first and second Adam, are most sweet, in
Romans 5. and 1 Cor. 15.

Secondly, Consider further, how our Lord does sustain us in this our
pilgrimage, he is said to hold our souls in life, in him we live, he is our
life and the lenghth of our days he provides and gives means of life, meat to
eat, and clothes to put on, he is our preserver in all places, and at all
times, he speaks to diseases to come and to go, and when he pleases to
withold his preservation we languish and dye, the Godly have the feeling and
knowledge of all this, they find they have their life from Jesus as from a
common stock, even for the body, he is a second Adam to us, that his life might
be made manifest in our mortal flesh, Ioh 7.20. Ps. 30.2. Cor. 4.8. Jehovah
i.e. Christ is thy life through Israel, Deuteronomy. 30.20. not Moah, nor Ammon, nor
Edom.

Q 5. N. 4 [under curse] All afflictions are comprehended in this and the like
sayings, First, cursed is the earth for thy sake, for in sorrow thou shall eat
of it, Genesis 3 17. Secondly, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, Genesis 3.16.
Thirdly, I will put enmity between the Serpent and the woman, and thou, Satan,
sh^lt bruise his footstool, Genesis 3.15.

For the two former, see how Christ does for his chosens sake destroy Satan's
works in Ps. 8. Ps. 107. Ps. 128. Ioh 5.23. Hos. 2.18. 1 Timothy 4. Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 2.14.15 The creatures are joyful to be employed for the churches uses, Ps.
65. Ps. 67. Es. 44.23. Hos. 2.21.22. They are purified from the usurpation of
the curse, made useful, serviceable, and sanctified by the Covenant, and by
the word of promise, and by holy and humble prayer, Ez^k. 36.37 But many cases
of conscience do often arise for these things in our hearts, If Christ destroy
Satan's works, how is it that there be so many afflictions, restraints,
crosses, etc. in our persons labors and estates, whereas in the mean time the
wicked do commonly prosper? All is answered in Iohs book and in Ps. 73. Ps. 30
Ps. 37. All the affliction of the godly is either for the trial of Graces, or
for the purging of vices; by Christ the curse is removed and afflictions are
sanctified, and by his discipline made wholesome medicines, the counsels of
God are unsearchable, but what he does is in wisdom, love, and righteousness,
and in that respect he makes all to work together for good to them that love
God, why then should we dispute, murmur, distrust, or judge hardly of our
selves or of others that fear God, or have an ill opinion of the Lord God;
every event is an Oracle, Be dumb therefore before the shearer, the more we
strugle the less we prevail, no wise Father does greive his child willingly,
so God does not afflict willingly, Lam 3.31. but when need is, 1 Pet. 1. Lay
therefore thy face to the ground in a holy submission, that so there may be
hope, Lam. 3.27. Esa. 28 23.

And as for that third saying, That Satan shall be at enmity with the woman,
and shall bruise, consider Psalm. 129. Romans 8.28.2 These. 1. etc. all these sums
of afflictions must call to remembrance the sin of our first Parents, in whom
all have sinned, Rom 5.12.

In Q. 5. N. 4 [Vanity and corruption] All Ecclesiasts must here be considered,
which shows from a plentiful induction, the variety of Ps. 73. and to this
not to love the world, nor the things that are in the world. 1 Ioh. 2.15. 1
Cor. 7. 31.

In Q. 5. N. 4 [Service of the creatures] The very creatures do joy both in the
temporal and spiritual good of the Church, (as has been Luke 15.10. Ps. 65.
Ps. 67. Es. 43.23. Apoc. 5.11.12.13. Ps. 24 Ps, 91. The Angels, the Stars, the
Heavens, the Rivers, the Seas, the Earth with winds, storms, tempests, hail,
etc. Ps. 18. Iud. 5. Ps. 11 All these are ordered for the good of Christ and
his Church. Ps. 96. Psalm 98. And Christ's intercession does mitigate the curse
Genesis 8.21. Psalm. 128.

I will once more briefly sum up these four heads.

The first old Adam was a figure, (but in a contrary way) of the second Adam
that was to come, The first Adam by his sin was the corrupter of all things,
the second Adam the restorer of all things, by his obedience procuring our
Regeneration and Justification; the godly are a new creation, old things are
passed away, all things through Christ are become new to them, and hence that
speech is glorious, All things are yours, whether the world, life, or death;
whether things present or things to come, all condi^^ons, all events are yours,
all the Ordinances, all the Officers both of Church and Commonweal are yours,
all the Angels are yours, all the promises and precepts are yours, Christ is
yours, God is yours, ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.

In Q. 6. N: 1 [The seed of Sathan] This is the malignant Church, But observe
through all the holy story, how the Son of God the second Adam has whet his
sword, bent his bow, and prepared his arrows against them, he has both
promised and sworn to the Church, that he will have war with him from
generation to generation, even until Satan's head-plot is wholly broken, Ps. 7.
both by giving them over to spiritual judgments, and to outward plagues, Thou
have trodden all them that err from thy statutes, for their deceit is falsehood,
thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, Therefore I love thy
testimonies, Ps. 119.116. Jer. 6.30. And in the promise to Abraham, God does
curse them Genesis 12. and Lev. 26. The holy spirit does also in detestation
describe them by many infamous titles and comparisons, Seed of the Serpent,
Genesis 3.15. Mal. 3. Angels of the Devil, Sons of Belial, etc. these are the
multitude that go the broad way to destruction; as may be seen in the Apostasy
of the old world, and in the Apostasy of Nimrod, and in the Apostasy of the ten
Tribes, by the persuasion of Jeroboam, and of the two Tribes not long after: so
liwkeise it fell out in the Kingdom of the King of Locusts.

Q. 6. [Adopted Sons of God] These are the Church militant, yet great is their
glory in the Covenant and in the promises that are made to them in Christ; they
have glorious Titles, They are called the Sons of God, the Angels of Christ,
the truest of the living God, his spouse, his portion which God has created
for his promise, Es. 43. This is that Kingdom of Christ that endures to the
end, and that consumes all other kingdoms that oppose the little flock that go
the narrow way that leads unto life.

Q. 6. N. 11. [God made this promise] God was the first teacher of the glad
tidings of the Doctrine of faith, to open the blind eyes, and to turn men from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God: When Adam was become
poor, blind, miserable and naked, God was pleased to give his collyrion eye
salve from the promise of Christ, for that declaration of Redemption by the
seed of the woman was denounced as a threatening to the Serpent, but as it was
spoken in the hearing of Adam and Eve, it employed a promise of Redemption to
them from Satan's head-plot, so the promise was also made to once ungodly
Abraham before his calling, where now was free will, merits, works foreseen,
etc. Read Esa. 42.7.16. Esa. 43 25. Psalm. 103. All is of free Grace.

Q. 6 N 11. [Nay it could not enter] This made the Apostle to break forth into
joy and praise, because God does to us (not to the Angels that fell) above all
that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20.21. Christ says, I was sound of them
that sought me not, Es. 65.1. and of this wonderful mercy did David and Aethan
sing; Psalm 40. Psalm. 89. Psalm. 103. This is the great and wonderful thing of
Christ's Law that David prayed that he might see with opened eyes, Psalm. 119.18.
and Paul for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.18. Great and glorious is the mystery of
Godliness, that the Son of God should be manifested in the flesh for the
effecting of all this, to the elect, Genesis 3-15. and Esa. 57.15. is very
pertinent, yea all the blessed Scriptures are the Revelation of these glad
tidings of the Gospel from Genesis 3.15.

In Q. 6. N. 11. [Till the Spirit of Christ] The word is of no effect Ephesians.
4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The Law of Christ the true shepherd is a Doctrine of
restoring and converting the soul, Ps. 19. Ps. 23. of his own good will, begat
he us with the word of truth, so sweet and precious is the Law of Christ.

In Q. 6. N. 3. [The works of the Devill] from the First Adam we Adam, that so
from his infinite fulness we might have grace for grace; being made Sons in
him by faith, that speech is heavenly. As we have the image of the earthly
Adam, so we shall bear the image of the heavenly Adam, not only in the second
but also in the first Resurrection. The second Adam in both is a quickening
spirit, the begotten is like unto him that begets; else no communion with
God and Christ, and God is only the God of such, 1 Cor. 1.30.1 Cor 15.49.1 John
1.1. Ioh. 5.4. Parents are means to beget, and (with travail) to bring forth
children after the image of the first sinful Adam, like the foale of a wild
Ass,, so they should with all holy care and diligence travel in birth again
till the second Adam be formed in them; if any man be in Christ the second
Adam, he is a new creature, and partaker of the divine nature, 2 Cor 5.17.1
Ioh. 4. 17.1 Pet. 1.22. Col. 3.10. and see how the old and new Adam are
compared, in Ephesians. 4.17. etc. The scripture says, that the second Adam had not
the spirit by measure, but that all fulness pleased to dwell in him, and that
he was filled with the spirit of the Lord; with the spirit of wisdom,
counsel, strength, understanding, knowledge, and of the fear of Jehovah, and
that of his fulness we all have, in some measure, answerable grace, Es. 11
2. Es 42.6, 7. Christ is the head of the body, Regegeneration by the matter of
holy doctrine, and by the spirit was taught to Nicodemus to be from Christ the
second Adam, Ioh. 3. Hence many cases of conscience may arise in the mind: If
Christ have destroyed Satan's works in us, how is it that sin is of such force
in us, All this is answered in Romans 7. and Romans 8. and Romans 12.3. Gal. 5.16,
17, 18. Es. 42.3. Es. 57.15,

splendida peccata, their hearing of the word, and shows of profession comes
to no fruit; as in the three former sorts of ground, Mat. ^3. As in Kain a
great heir, Achitophel a private counselor, Herod a King, Iscariot an Apostle,
Simon Magus a great Scholar, etc. etc. Their execution of Laws for civil
policy, through Christ's overruling is turned to good for society of humane
life, and sometime a wall of defense for the Church, as the Apostle Paul found
Neroes authority long a defense against the Masters of traditions. Our Natures
are so corrupt, that our spirits are most vile for hatred, enmity and fretting
against God and Christ's Kingdom, evermore in war as enemies; bea^ing weapons
against him, Romans 6 Bent to anger God, for Satan the Prince of darkness rules
in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. Col. 1. Romans 1.1 Cor. 1. Jam. 4. Romans
8 7.

Q 6. N. 3. [In whom we are compleat] If a man wade into the depth of all that
is in the first old Adam, he cannot be complete, whether Philosophy, humane
Traditions, commandments and Doctrines; but in Christ the second Adam, are all
measures of height, depth, length, breadth yea and all treasures of Wisdom,
Knowledge. Fortitude, Justice, Temperance, Freindship, Love, Patience, earning
of Bowels, etc. And this we shall find if we measure it with a golden reed,
Job 28.1 Cor. 2. and 3.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. Esa. 11. to 9. Ephesians. 4.21.22. etc. 1
Job. 3. 8, 9, 10. He enlightneth, changes and guardeth both heart and mind,
enlivens the conscience, makes the memory retentive of good things, sweetly
turns and draws the will, mortifies the inordinacy of the passions, and rules
the min all holy majesty, neither to be dull in want, nor wanton in fruition,
casts down vain imaginations, brings into captivity every thought, commands
the senses, clears and settles the fantasy, teaches to order speech and
silence, subdueth the members of the body, to be weapons and servants unto
righteousness and holiness. Briefly he lives, he thinks, he speaks, he
works all in us, Of him, and through him, and for him are all things, that
God in him may be glorified. This is the influence that comes from the second
Adam, in his Ordinances public and private, to all the building of his
mystical body, until we all reach unto the unity of faith, and the Knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, without whom we are void and without form, darkness, dead,
dry stakes, (2 Cor. 4.) and out of whom we neither have nor can do nothing.
But following the truth in Love (as the truth of this healing Doctrine, is to
be sought and found only in JESUS) we grow up in all points into him which is
the head, even Christ himself, by whom all the body conveniently joined and
fastened together by every point of the furuit^re according to the operation of
the spirit, which is in measure of every several part, renews increase of
the body unto the edifying of it self in Love.

A proud Laodicean Arminian, thinks and speaks contrary, which shows he is
not only ignorant of Christ and his learning, but of his own natural
Philosophy, Nosce teipsum, What natural abilities did and would work, we see
Jer, 4.22. Job 28. Romans 1.1 Cor. 1. But no change of heart to fear God in
Christ; here heathens who could say, Video meliora, deteriora sequor, might see
further with the Apostle, Romans 7.23. etc. But man sold unto sin, can neither
hear nor see where God opens not the eyes, and here the spirit teaches the
godly to groan, with sighings unspeakable, (See Mr. Bro. upon Lam. 1.11.) When
we read in the holy scriptures, or elsewhere, of errors in judgment, and sins
in practice in heathens and others, then refer all hither, to think upon the
poison of the serpent, breathed into the natures of our first Parents, which
could never by all humane learning be healed. The truth is, man is most adverse
to be cured till Christ by his word and spirit illuminate and quicken, The
Pharisees were the most excellent of all naturalists, yet they could not attain
to the Law of Righteousness, (or freedom from sin and guilt) Romans 7.8, 9,
10.11. chapters, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5. etc. The plain reason is, they despised to
know this glorious hidden mystery of Christ the second Adam, and missed the
meaning of the Law.

In the 6. Quest. N. 3. [Doth rule all ages] The second Adam and Salvation is
of our God, and of the Lamb Apoc 5 9. and Chap. 7.10, 11, 12. This is the true
Catholic faith, faith in Christ ever one and the same, although the outward
Administration did differ, Psalm. 100.5. and 119.89. and 135.13.1 Pet. 1. JESUS
CHRIST yesterday and to day is the same, also for ever. Christ the Rock of all
ages Esa. 26 4. Ebr. 13.2 John 1.2. He that comes to God must believe that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently (by faith in Christ
Jesus) seek him. This is a ruled case from the beginning, No man comes to the
Father but by the Son, The cloud of witnesses from Habell to our Lords days
confirms this. Ebr. 11. all of it: And the clouds shall not catch up any to
glory, but those of the same holy faith. This faith is the charge and
commandment of the Lord, which the Saints are to keep inviolable from age to
age, without spot of heresy, or vanity of man's traditions.

In Q. 6. N. 4. [To this faith he calls his elect] The faith of Gods show the
same from the first to the last, Prove. 8.31.2 John. 9.

Ibid. N. 5. [Great disputations, contentions, etc.] Here is the faith and
patience of the saints, here are they that keep the commandments of God and
the faith of JESUS, Apoc. 13. and 12. and 14. When the Lord God spoke that of
Gen 3.15. fire was cast into the Earth, and a sword was sent, ever since there
has been divisions, factions, and contentions, Three against two, and two
against three. Hitherto pertain all the wars, plottings, devises; deceits,
slanderings, cavillations, mockings, ^sco^nes, scoffings geerings, thrasonicall
boastings, murders, massacres, treasons, etc. of them, of that wicked one. It
is not liberties and states that the Seed of he Serpent so much shoots at, but
blood, All that will live goldly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, and
yet in all trials whatsoever, faith is victorious. Christ sometimes builds his
Jerusalem, Temple, street, and wall in troublous times; Note, whereas
sufferings might be just punishments for sin, the Lord God in his unspeakable
goodness, and in honor to the Saints, makes them to be for testimony to his
truth.

Psalm. 73.1.1 Sam. 27.1. All is answered, Romans 8.17, 18. Dan. 11.35. Mat. 10.1
Pet. 1.1 John 15. and 16. and God over-ruleth all for the good of his children,
Apoc. 1.18. Psalm. 33.10. and 76.10. and 94.19. and 119.75.2 Cor, 1. Phil. 4
5.6.7. Heb. 12. Be humble, and live the life of faith with temperate
affections, and in the sober use of all good means, and all will be well. 1 Cor.
7.29, 30, 31, 32. The spiritual armor belongs hither, Ephesians. 6 Afflictions are
compared to darkness, to waves of the sea, etc. God can still them, Psalm. 89.
and 93. we look not to the decree of God concerning sufferings, Genesis 3.15.
that it must be so, we propound self ends in profession of the Gospel.
Verily we do not consider why we were borne, and for what cause we came into
the world, if we did, all reasonings of our hearts would be silenced, then let
us meditate that good confession that the Lord Jesus witnessed before Pilate,
John 18.37.

John 3.11. Kains and Habells story is there remembered. This 6 point is the
sum of. the second Table, and handled by exposition and example continually,
See the later part of the Epistles to the Churches, to Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesians, Colessians, Heb 10.24.25. Act. 4.32. Psalm. 133. Ioh 15. compare 1
John 3.23. and 4. ult. 2 John. 5.6.2 Tim. 1.13.

Michael and his Angels against the Dragon and his Angels, cannot, and
therefore must not be reconciled, it is a cursed work to endeavor it, And
indeed either side holds one another Anathema. God has put the enmity between
the seeds, and who shall join that, which God, by principles of unreconcilable
distance, has perpetually divorced and separated, it was never yet reconciled,
though Satan and his prophets and the false brethren in their own ungracious
projects have labored, Genesis 6.2.3.4. etc. Numb. 31.16. Apoc. 2. Iud 2. and 3.1
King 11.1. and in Nehemiahs and Ezras days, God has forbidden it, and plagued
the transgression in the old and new Testament, 2 Cor. 6, and 7.1. Apoc 3.14.
See Ezraes sadness, chap. 9.14. the affinity of Loegria with Gallia has
brought heavy wrath.

In Q 6. N. 7. [Praises and thanksgivings] He is thy Praise, and he Deuteronomy. 10,

For the duty of praise, Psalm. 95. and 96. and 100. and 103 and 108, and for
all kinds of blessings, spiritual and corporeal, and the assured hope of
eternal, let us delight in this duty of praise and thanksgiving.

In Q. 6. N. 7. [Of each days creation] All the Hosts of the Heavens and Ps.
136. and 91. etc see this in all the stories of the word and especially when
the saints offer up strong cries to Jehovah of Hosts. a terror to the seed of
the serpent who engage all the armies of Heaven and Earth and seas against
them, 1 Samuel 7. See much of Ps. 18.6, 7, 8, etc.

In Q. 6. N. 7. [For deliverance] Psalm. 136.23.24. Apoc. 15. and 19. All the
plagues of Pharaoh show this, His plagues were from Jehovah E^^him from each
days creation in Ge^. 1. The thankful remembrance of Gods mercy to our
blessed England, is worthy of happy memory, Ephesians. 3.20.21.

In 7. Quest. and Answ. [Christ who is Alpha and Omega, the first and

In Q 7. [I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Genesis 12.8 1 Samuel 7.9, Yea Habel Genesis 4. Eb 11. consider Ps. 20. all of it. and Genesis 15. God
promised, Abraham believed, and to strenghen his faith, sacrifice was added,
and it is say, God made a covenant with Abraham the same day. From the time of
man's fall, beasts were killed for sacrifice, and it kindled first with fire
from Heaven. The tame, quiet, and mild kind as Ox, Sheep, and Goat, and birds
not devouring, as Turtle and Pigeon and other little birds, no beasts of prey
nor birds of prey, but such as feed upon seed are fit for sacrifice. These
showed that the second Adam by his combating with Satan through his constant
patience and holy obedience unto death, should procure our justification or
freedom from Satan's power. Also such manner of sacrifices taught us
mortification following Christ, and profession of a quiet and harmless life.
For no Tyrants can sacrifice to God, but just quiet and patient folk, 1 Timothy
2.8. And the keeping of the fire once kindled, taught them not to quench the
spirit. That speech of Apoc. 13. must here be minded, Christ was the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world: slain in the decree of the blessed
Trinity, and in the Church by types of the Lords own appointment.

Q 7. [The presence of God] Holy convocations, together with Gods Ordinances,
was so called in after times, called also the Courts of God, there is Gods
residence, there he keeps Court, and glorious is it to consider, Exodus 20 24.
and chap. 29.43.44.2 Cor. 6. For it is said, There will I meet with thee. There
we sit at his f^et, as his disciples, to hear his words; at the posts of
wisdom we must attend Prove. 9. There is the beauty of holiness, his own
commanded worships: There is the provision of the heavenly householder, there
the blessed shepherd feeds the flock of his fold. Oh see the comforts that an
holy soul does there find, Psalm. 23. and 36. and 40. and 42. and 65. and 84.
and 95. and 100. and 132. etc. The Saints as Habell have blessed communion with
God their exceeding joy, there the Saints, the Israel of God rejoice in his
Makers, the children of Sion rejoice in their King, Jehovah their God is with
them, the joyful shout of a King is among them, There the holy voluntaries, the
army of Heaven, assemble and compass their commander, and blessed and holy is
the communion that the Saints have there one with another, and especially it
shines when there is none unclean and profane of their company. Infinite are
the uses of application, how that we in all things must remember, That
holiness becomes his house, and presence for ever, What preparations,
longings, and attention to meet such a King, such a Father, such a Bridegroom,
etc. insuch holy Ordinances, and before men to show forth the virtues of him
that has called them, that as their King is holy so they to be holy in all
manner of conversation. Solemn assemblies without mixture of men's in ventions
is a dear blessing, it is an Eden, the very Garden of God, Ezekiel. 28. Cant. 4 3.

In 8. Quest and Answ. [Habel] Now faith is the expectation of that which is
hoped, and the tryer our of things which are not seen, for by it the Elders
were well reported of. By faith Habel offered unto God, a more excellent
sacrifice then Kaine, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous ( i.
e. j^stified, that is freed from sins, guilt and desert) God testifying of his
offerings; and by it he being dead yet speaks, Eb^. 11.4. So Habels faith did
speak to the revolting Hebrews, how and from whom they must expect
justification and salvation.

Quest. and Answ. [Began the war] Where, as it is said, the seed of the serpent
shall bruise, it shows they should be of great power, outward glory and
temporal felicity, as from Kaine through all the holy stories, Psalm. 44. and
73. and 79. Job 12 and 22. Apoc. 13. etc. etc.

In Q 9. [The holy seed] Habel for love to Christ, was the first that was The
just is an abomination to the wicked, Observe hence that the wicked are one
corporation from Kain to the end of the world, and all the godly from Habel to
the end of the of the world are another corporation in Christ. And therefore
what persecution Kain did to Habel, wicked men are now guilty of, Psalm. 66.6.
Hos 12.4. Mat. 23.35. for they would have done the same to our Lord, to the
Prophets, as Kain did to Habel, if they had then lived. And ungodly men have,
do, and will fulfill the measures of their forefathers impieties, in
persecutions, massacres, treacheries, gunpowder-plot, cruel mockings, etc.
ungodly men cannot trample on God; but they reach as high as they can against
his image, both in his Ordinances, and his saints, and his graces in them, this
is the highest step they can go; as Achab, Jerome, Joash, and Jehoiakim, fretted
against God, and they would be revenged by imprisoning and killing his
Prophets. Christ and his Doctrine have been called and esteemed, ^nathema, even
from the beginning of all that will not receive his Doctrine in the love of it:
so it was accounted of Kain, when Christ would not accept his bodily exercise,
so he says, Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, Ex^d. chapt. 20. So they
despised his Statutes, and did abhor his judgments, Levit. 26 15.

In 10. Quest. and Answ. [A great Apostasie] All flesh had corrupted his way
both in religion and conversation, Genesis 6. Job 21. and 22. Mat. 24. Judas Thad
14.15. So Judah were corrupters, Esai. 1. Ier. 6. They were but flesh, they
cared not for regeneration (nor the Doctrine of it) to serve the Law of God in
their minds, for the imagination of their heart was only evil continually,
They mocked the religion of the Second Adam, Ion 21. and 22. they desired not
to know the ways of Christ.

In Q. 10. [Ungodly marriages] The Sons of God the visible Church

In Q. 10. [Glorious house] Glorious for Cities, Wealth, Music,

In Q. 10. [A confluence] When people have not a sincere care to retain not,
or cast off the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, no religion teaches nor
works in the heart and carriage such strictness of a peaceable and holy life,
as the pattern of wholesome words, faith and love which is in Christ Jesus,
Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7, 8. And verily there can be neither holiness nor
righteousness in truth, but in them that are renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him that created them, that is of the man Christ Jesus, the second
Adam, the Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.47. Esa. 11.1. to 9.

Quest. 10. [Remember] After our first Parents were turned to dust, the rest of
the holy Fathers dyed not long one after the other (except Henoch) yet they had
three witnesses of Christ to the flood, that contested against their apostasy,
Methuselah, Lam^ch, and Noah; But Henoch had before spoken of, terror to the
wicked, and godly Lamech of comfort to the faithful.

Quest and Answ. [Through faith] Now faith is the expectation of that which is
hoped, and a tryer out of things which are not seen, for by it the Elders are
well reported of, by Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen, as yet
moved with fear, prepared the Arc to the saving of his house, by which he
condemned the world, and was made heir of the justification that is by faith,
Eb^. 11. A believer will be careful of the salvation of his household.

In Q. 11. [Good report] Faith in the Son of God is most glorious, faith
evidencing things not seen, made all the Elders honorable in a good report, in
life and death, and after death, whose faith we are exhorted to follow; a godly
man should so walk, as all he does should evidence to the soul things not
seen, All Ecclesiastes tends to confirm this in us, as godly Lamech testified.

Q 11. [Sons] The flood in the faithful does show the benefit of adoption and
covenant, the faith of God is not without its effect, though many did ^all
away, and the Ordinances were unsavory to them, 2 Cor. 2.16. Our Natures so
universally depraved, that whilst we are in the flesh unconverted we cannot
please God, without says it is impossible we should please God, or that God
should please us, Jus divinum 31.

Q 11. [City and country] They believing on the Son of God had everlasting
life, and came not into condemnation, but passed from death to life: Mind it,
a present possession, and immediate passage, no judgment intervenning, nor
torment, All the faithful till the fullness of time had perfect joy in an
immortal state of life and glory with God in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt.
8.11. and therefore are termed, Them in Heaven, Ephesians. 1.10. and the family of
Heaven, Chap. 3.15. Away then with the dotages of Lymbo and purgatory, and all
other cursed opinions of the heathens, and heathnish Kingdom, Abyssigena,
Apoc. 9. Psalm. 17. and 22. 4, 5. Psalm. 36.8.9. Dan. 7.18. Psalm. 49.15. and
73.24. Esa. 3.10. Pro. 14.32. Job. 5.24.

In Q. 11. [Wherefore they had preservation] The fleed was a sacrament Pet. 3.
Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deliver
but their own souls, by their righteousness faith the Lord God, Ezekiel. 14.14.
confer this to Genesis 6. many observations may be collected see the effectual
says of Noah, which he showed by his works, believing he seared, made the
Arc, and was careful to save his household, he prayed for the wicked mocking
world, he stood in the gap to turn away wrath, so J^b prayed for his friends,
and God heard him, so Daniel Chap. 2.18.23. and was heard, so Christ had heard
Noah, but would no more after the decree came forth for one hundred and twenty
years, so Jeremiah prayed, but at last would not be heard; he was forbidden
to pray. Things come to an extremity, when Gods forbids his remembrancers, if
the whole state will not humble themselves, yet let Noah Daniel, and Job do it,
they shall have comfort, they shall be sealed to be kept safe, When
Unbeleevers, despisers, mockers, feasters, drinkers, and all abominable shall
be shut out of the Arc, and the heavenly Jerusalem to be in the flood and lake
of fire. Ezekiel and our Lord citing Noah's story, gives to consider of the like
general Apostasy of the Jews. And that the Apostasy of the old world was as
general as the Jews both in Ezekiels days and our Lords.

In 12. Quest. and Answ. [Corrupters of the faith] This phrase is Apoc. 11.8.
The Papacy was an apostate policy, and did depart from and corrupt the says,
and so the whole earth was corrupt. Therefore God has and will corrupt that
policy, as God did corrupt the corrupters. G^^. 6. The former be stamps of the
later. Hench prophesied of the destruction of the Apostates of the old world,
saying, Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his holy ones to give
Judgment upon all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their
wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed; and of all their cruel
speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against him, Judas Thaddaeus v.
14.15. St. Peter shows they were mockers, 2 Pet. 3. and Job 21. and 22.
shows, how they despised the Gospel. Thaddaeus and Peter, by allusion, show
the end of all false Teachers, and their deceived, that follow their pernicious
ways: So when the state of Judah became mockers, judgment was at hand, 2 Chronicles. 36. read Matthew. 24. Luke 17. for the sins of the old world, the fools
make a mock of sin, Prove. 14.9. Be not mockers least your bonds increase.
Scoffers shall eat the fruit of their own ways, Esa. 3. Prove. 3. Scoffers
made a wonder of the Prophets, and perished, 2 Pet. 3.4. and so in after times.
Habbak. 1.5. Act. 13.41. 1 Pet 4.4.4. Esa. 8.18.

In Q. 11. [Excommunicate] He that has the Censures of the church, Anathema
maranatha that was given Kain and his posterity, as Henoch told them, He
comes, Kain did not love the Lord Jesus Christ and his holy doctrine, Kain
hated Habel, because his own works were evil and his brothers good. Such Kains
were in aftertimes, Es. 38.20. and the Pharisees were such, and so now all
those are such that follow their doctrines of men's traditions and bodily
exerecise, etc. Woe be to them that follow the ways of Kain, Thad. 11. Woe be
to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, etc. Esa 3.11. Job. 11.20. Pro. 14.32.

In Q. 12. [The Spirit of Christ] Whereas Moses says, The spirit of Jehovah,
Genesis 6. Peter citing that story, says, The spirit of Christ, Gen 6. 1 Pet.
3.18.19. so for Jehovah in Exodus Levit. Numb. Deuteronomy. Saint Paul says, Christ, 1
Cor. 10. We must mark diligently such expositions of the scripture, even from
Christ himself, Luke 24.45 This made the Apostle to say, The holy scriptures
will make us wise to salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3.

CHAP. III.
Has diverse Questions and Answers with Annotations, How Redemption was taught
from the Flood, till the Promise to ABRAHAM: And the Seed of SHEM is explained.

QUest. 1. How and to whom was the Council of God in Christ revealed after the
Flood?

Answ. The old Testament writes Shem, the new Testament writes Sem, Luke 3.36.
To Shem the Son of Noah.

QUest. 2 What is the Scripture?

Answ. Genesis 9.26. Blessed be Jehovah the God was not ashamed to be called the
God of Shem for he had prepared him a Son after the flesh, who after the spirit
of holiness is the son of God, and God blessed for ever, Romans 1. and 9.
God of Sem, and Chanaan, shall be his Servant.

God persuade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem, and Chanaan shall be his
servant.

QUest. 3 What observe you out of this Text?

Answ. I. He that was called the seed of the woman, is now called the God of
Sem. Christ Jesus our Lord came of Sem according to the flesh, Luc. 3.

II. That Jehovah Sems God was the only blessed and true God, none like him,
nor any beside him. Therefore the Religion of the God of Sem was [A] the true
religion, and for this cause in Israel, ( Sems faithful posterity) it was
graciously exclaimed, that blessed are the people whose God is Jehovah, Psalm.
33. and Psalm. 144.

III. That unto this blessing in Sems tents, Sems own families, Japhets and
Chams were to have regard.

IV. It is prophesied, that when the Prerogative of Sems tents was out, the
other families of the sons of Noah should be persuaded to embrace the faith,
and so be brought into equal covenant as it is said, [B] That the Gentiles
should be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and joint partakers of his
promise in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6.

V It is the mighty work of the spirit to make a man know and [c] to persuade
the heart by believing to obey the mystery of Christ. All the wisdom of the
wise and prudent of this world is not sufficient, till God draw, teach, and
persuade us to the Kingdom of his son.

VI. Parents should in all fervency, pray unto God for their posterity, that
they may be wrought upon and persuaded to obey the gospel, and such faithful
prayers shall not be lost.

VII. In Noah's story we may see the example of godly children that honor their
Parents though they are old, Prove. 10.12.23. and 14.9. and 11.12, 13. and
12.16. and 17.6. and 18.3. and 22.10. and 23.22.
with all tenderness caring for, covering and pitying their infirmities and
weaknesses. Love covers a multitude of sins, therefore Sem and Japheth had a
most joyful blessing pronounced on them, the fruit of which, themselves and
their posterity did find.

VIII. That scorners of Gods truth and his servants (though they have
infirmities) are cursed, being the seed of the Serpent, and hence also note,
wicked men procure much evil to their posterity, both in their example and for
Gods judgments.

IX. As long as Sems godly house Consider what God did for Salem and Sion,
while they knew him, and advanced his name and religion in his Tabernacle,
Psalm. 76.1, 2, 3, 4.
held the faith of Christ sincere, then Chams and Chanaans posterities were
servants, but when they walked contrary to Christ, he in fury walked contrary
to them. So if we hold Sems God to be our God and be constant in the faith of
Sems Tents, to which we were allured and persuaded by the Apostles and
disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God and Son of Sem; God will assuredly
make that servant of servants, and all that cursed policy of that mystical
Nimrod, to be a This is a point as evident as the clearest sun at noone, that
the subduing of ours and gods enemies, is a benefit tied to our constancy in
true religion. see the thankful remembrance of D. Carlton. p. 236.
servant of servants.

* Mark this question, the corruption of man's nature was so great after the
apostasy of our first parents that they were under the power of satan's
darkness, unrecoverable in respect of man: But presently the Lord God taught
them the way of life to bring them back again to him their sovereign good.
Genesis 3.15 and by holy prophets, continued the same doctrine both before and
after the Flood, Genesis 26.5. and 18.19. the revelation of the second Adam is
man's only comfort, and all that receive him, and believe in his name shall
live, John. 1.12. Act. 26.18.
QUest 4. "Who kept the way and charge of Christ-Jehovah in his Commandments,
Statutes and Laws, the religion of Sems Tents after the Flood, Genesis 26.5.

Answ. Sem; Arphaxad, Selah, Heber, Peleg, and the rest of the godly Fathers,
and their faithful posterity to the days of Terah and Abraham.

QUest. 5. Was there any that contemned and apostated from the God of Shem, and
his true religion?

Answ. Yea, Cham and Chanaan, and Nimrod the grandchild of Cham, drew away many
of the sons of the open or visible Church to despise Christ in Shem, surnamed
Melchisedeck, who was ordained over them King and Priest, who governed in
Justice and peace, so that there was a great apostacy of Sems own families,
Japheths and Chams.

QUest. 6. Show further how this apostasy went on?

Answ. The outward glory of the false church was so great, that some of the
Fathers of the holy line, as Terah and Abraham, fell to the idolatry of Nimrods
Kingdom Jos. 24. But they being called, repented, Genesis 11.

QUest. 7. How did Christ break and bruise the seed of the serpent for their
enmity and wickedness that would not bave him to reign over them?

Answ. I. With his unspeakable severe judgments, for even those families for
despising the faith, were excommunicated and cut off both Father and child,
from being of the household of God by the confusion So Judah for despising the
faith, were plagued by a Nation of a strange tongue, Deuteronomy. 28 49. so the world
by the man of sin, 1 Cor. 14. mind seriously Jer 44 26.
of tongues, and so were No-people, and foolish Nations, by being estranged
from the life, justice, and peace of God in Christ, that they did not hear nor
see the light of his truth for two thousand years, but followed Devils, the
Prince of the darkness of this world in endless and lawless Idolatries; and
of all the miseries that befell them, they in special lost the Sabbath, which
would have kept them in the faith of the creation and redemption. And let this
sink into the hearts of all men, that all men ever were and will be Atheists,
or Idolaters that Christ speaks not to in their own language by his holy law,
and to this answer ever seriously mind, 2 John v, 9.

II. From these days, the wrath of God was revealed from Heaven against them
for their ungodliness and unrighteousness by wars and commotions, and
suffered them to walk in their own ways, by giving them up to a regardlesse
mind, and to the power of gross darkness and wilful ignorance, and to their
hearts lusts and vile affections, etc. etc.

QUest. 8. What benefit had the godly in Sems Tents and house, by cleaving to
the faith of Gods Elect?

Answ. Through faith they obtained good report with God, and confessed that
they were pilgrims and strangers in this cursed world, wherefore God was not
ashamed of them to be called their God, and accounted that the world was not
worthy of them: And as he promised, builded and prepared, so they hoped for an
heavenly City and Country. And Sems Tents had this glory, that all the while
that those families were cut off, the hidden mystery of godliness was
carefully kept in his Tents and house, and the Hebrew Tongue also, as all the
old Testament does witness.

QUest. 9. Then the Prerogative of Sems Tents did not always continue?

Answ. No; When the God of Shem took man's nature of the seed of the woman, and
gave his life a Ransom, not for the Hebrews or Jews only, but for the
Heathens also: Then that he might reign and judge the world in righteousness,
he turned the curse of tongues to preach to, and persuade all those families to
obey the same faith, from which their forefathers had apostated, even to the
Religion of Shems Tents.

QUest. 10. How and to whom was the Revelation of the mystery of Christ
continued to be revealed after the blessing to Sem?

Answ. In the promise to Abraham, that Christ should come of him according to
the flesh.

QUest. 11. How many years are from the flood to the promise made to Abraham?

Answ. Four hundred twenty seven years, and so from the promise to our first
Parents whom the Serpent murdered, unto the promise to Abram given presently
upon the death of Terah, whose faith the Serpent corrupted to flames of
Idolatry, are years two thousand eighty three.

QUest. 12. How many Chapters of Genesis are contained in those 2083. years.

Answ. The eleven first chapters, and also part of the first chapter of 1
Chronicles, and also Luke part of chap. 3. Note that all the rest of the holy
scriptures does not contain so many years for the writing of them.

A breife sum of the former Questions and Answers.

JEhovah our God, Jehovah is one, the Father, the Son, and the holy spirit be
one, coeternall, and co-essentiall. The Son is called the word, by the word the
Father made the world, and by the spirit beautified the heavens. And because
the word would become flesh the world was made to serve once Adam the first.
The Angels that grudged at that fell for ever, and deceived Adam, and made him
dead in sin, and brought him to be daily turning to dust until he dyed. And
for him the whole frame of the creation was pronounced corrupt; but after
divine Revelation, he believed that Christ made of a woman, made under the Law,
God being in him, to reconcile the world unto himself, should give him free
forgiveness for justification by faith, and renew the inner man in knowledge,
holiness and righteousness, and raise up his body, and make a new world by
his power, Whereby he can subdue all things to himself.

All faithful travailed in soul to have Christ brought forth to the knowledge
of their posterity that all might know that all this world was made obedient to
a man at the first; which man fell from God his first day, and then God opened
his counsel, that the Son eternal would be made man of a woman, to destroy
the works of the Angels that fell, who all are collectively Satan.

Satan brought Adam to loose the life of his soul, and his body to death and
dust, and all this world to corruption: Christ kindled light in Adams soul,
and after 930 years heaviness for sin took it to his joy, and will raise up
his body, and make a new world, that all men who will receive the abundance of
Grace of free forgiveness for justification, may reign by Christ, and all who
will not regard this mercy so clear as the sun, they all, by Adams fall dead in
sin, shall be damned for ever with the Devils.

This is the travel of the christian mind, speech of this, full of joy, is in
all the books of the old and new Testament.

Or thus.

The sum of the Bible is short, how of Gods eternal counsel the world was
made for man, because the son of God by whom he made the world would be a man
to give life to them that rested in this wisdom.

All this dialogue will evidence this, or does desire so to do.
* The faith of Gods elect in the incarnation and resurrection, how it has
been followed or contemned from the beginning, with plain and civil carriage
in Gods ways, and satanean in the contrary, and how * the goodness and
severity of God has been answerable, This contains * the sum.

And the story of four thousand years to Jerusalems fall by Rome, has no more.
And all should gladly hear of this all their life, and see Christ's bright face
still to this sum.

The book of God is open and easy to be understood, Prove. 8.9.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of CHAPTER 3.
Quest. 3. N. 2. [The true Religion] If any should question what Religion Sem
was of, the Answer may be, that he was Priest to Jehovah Japhet were persuaded
by the blessing of tongues, and by the ministry of the Sons of Sem, Genesis 14.
Act. 2. Apoc. 14.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10. And so Sems blessing did contain the
same faith that the blessing did which God gave to Abraham, Genesis 12. Mark well
the Doctrine to the seven Churches of Japhets house in all the Apocalypse, and
so in all the Epistles of the Apostle of the Gentiles, and in the Epistles of
the Apostles of the circumcision. Again, he was of the same Religion and holy
faith of his Father Noah, who inherited the righteousness that is by faith,
and who pronounced this ^lessing on Sem. Heb. 11.

Quest 3. N. 4. [That the Gentiles] The greatest favor that God bestows on
men in this world, is to make them of his family true members Ezekiel
remembers this to the Apostate Prince of Ty^us, chap. 28.13, 14. The godly
Jews foreseeing the calling of the Gentiles, (by the promises and prophesies
of Genesis 9. and 12.) rejoiced in spirit, that Christ should reign over them,
Psalm 67. and 97. 1 Romans 15.12. Zach. 8. and 14.9. And the Gentiles seeing the
performance were glad, Act. 13.46. But for two thousand years, Satan the strong
man kept a large and great possession by metamorphosed Fables and Idolatries.

In Quest. 3. N. 5. [And to perswade] Universal and free will to good (in the
state of unregeneracy) is vain and vain glorious Doctrine. Noah Act. 26.18. not
only illumination, but a turning from the power of Satan in the will and
affections, is all done by the mighty work of Christ in his own Ordinances.
The fashioning of the spirit is his prerogative, Esa. 11. Ephesians 1.19 20, 21, and
2.1 2*3. etc. and by his strengthening and preventing, we stand to our dying
day, 1 Pet. 1.5. The spirit convinces false opinions, and teaches the true
doctrine, Ephesians. 6.10.11, Romans 7.8 Ezekiel, 11.19 and 36.26. Phil. ^.13. That all
iniquity may stop her mouth Thus it is said of all that have the Prerogative of
Sons, which are born not of bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. The house of Japheth needed much
persuasion and beseeching to embrace the word of reconciliation. They had
excellent natural parts, as their writings show which made them despise the
gospel, The Grecians sought after wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. Therefore God gave them a
son of Sem, an Apostle of exquisite parts and learning, that he demonstrated
all their wisdom to be foolishness, and cast down their high imaginations by
the invincible weapons of the spiritual warfare.

N. 8. Q. 3. [That scorners] Let inferiors beware of Satan's deceits in causing
them to slight, yea in heart, their superiors, though for their sins and
infirmities. And let Superiors give no occasion, but be sober, grave,
temperate, sound in the faith, in charity, in patience, etc. Tit. 2. But it is
not for infirmities that the children of the wicked one hate the godly, but for
the image of Christ that shines in them, for they can bear with the same sins
in their own, yet the wicked are glad, and insult to see the holy image of
Christ stained by any blot of the Saints, and this by Gods just judgment is a
stumbling block to the wicked, to harden them in their sinful courses.

N. 8. [Procure much evill] Cham is cursed to his youngest Son Chanaan, Genesis 9.
Exodus 20 5. Also it is observable, how the wrath of Christ has followed Chams
posterity, that the Negroes are slaves in diverse countries to this day, even
servants of servants.

Quest. 5. [And Nimrod] King Abaddon may fi^ly be compared to Nimrod, both
infamous cutthroat hunters, both intruders into other men's possessions, both
abhorred Christ's Kingdom of Justice and Peace, Genesis 10.9, 11, 12. 2 These. 2.
My Son fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change, for their destruction shall rise suddenly Prove. 24. This is also
notable, as in Nimrod, so in Korah, in Absalom, in Sheba, Ben-Bichrio in the
unlawful Kingdom of Ephraim, and in the whole policy of the man of Sin: See
in all the transgression and the punishment and beware what, did it prove
madness of counsel in them to change Melchisedecks Kingdom for Nimrods
Kingdom? so it is to change the true Melchisedeck for King Abaddon, so they
abhorred Christ the Lord of glory for the unclean infidells the Caesar's, John
19.15.

N. 8 [Over them King] One ornament of Kings may here be remembered which Sems
story does show, which is the antiquity of a kingdom, and the fatherly
government thereof, that before Tyranny sprang in was, Mr. Bro, Treatise of
Melchiz.

N. 8. [Justice and Peace] A worthy example for Princes so to rule by just
Laws uncontrolable, then they shall rule men willingly subject, for they have
from Christ honor and authority above their Brethren so to govern, But none
can well rule, that cannot well obey the sceptor of Christ's Kingdom Psalm 45. It
is hard when he that cannot order his own life, shall be made the Judge of
another, for the Kingdom of Christ is in righteousness and peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost. The apostate families felt none of this, Princes and subjects
that seek not so to order and to be ordered in their policies, shall find the
power of Christ crossing their purposes, and plaguing their dominions.

N 8. [Of Sems owne] The Church is not visibly glorious at all times, of sixty
seven families there was but one family that held the faith and the Hebrew
tongue, and that was the line of Christ of Sems house, so Israel in Egypt
revolted, often in the book of Judges, and under Jeroboams kingdom, after in
Judah and after the return from captivity, and under the Papacy, and now after
reformation will not Apostasy be again, when that the Son of man shall scant
find faith on the earth at his second coming? For as it was in the days of
Noah, so shall it be at the day of the coming of the Son of man, Mat. 24. etc.

Quest. 6. [And Abraham] Abraham once ungodly (yea after his calling, he much
failed) rejoiced in him that justifies the ungodly, Jos. 24.2 Romans 4. so after
mystical Nimrod how many good men have been overtaken with their outward
glory, yea many strong men of great parts have been wounded by that whorish
Church, Prove. 7. Apoc. 17.

Quest. 7. N 1. [Those familes] The families of Noah's sons despising Sem, a
King of Justice and Peace, were cut off ^or two thousand years, so the Jews
for despising Sem the great and reverend, the true King of Justice and peace,
were cut off to this day, Romans 11. from Noah's days, all heathens were Lo-ammi,
and Loruchamah, no people and unpitied, a foolish nation, barren and a desolate
widow to our Lords days, Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 113. Esa 54.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3. Psalm 119.118.

Q. 7. [From the life, Justice] But when light was revealed to the Gentiles,
and the glory of Jehovah was risen upon us, It is said, I will make thy
government peace, and thine exactions righteousness. Mark the allusion, This
was under the King of Salem, and Tzedek, Justice and Peace kiss each other, as
it did of old in Sems Tents, Psalm. 85. Then peace on earth, and good will
toward men.

Q. 7. [Nor see the light] Now darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness
the Nations. Esa, 60. So Pope Nimrod by his mystical Babylon, caused such
darkness by confusion of Language, and all holy speech. All languages of
Europe, and much of Asia, if not all Asia, have been confounded by the means of
mystical Nimrod, and his rebellion, Apor. 9.

Q. 7. [For two thousand years] All the time of this ignorance, God hated them
like devils, till the time he would judge the world in righteousness, that
is, favor the world in mercy, Act. 17. Psalm. 97. from this time to the
Apostles, the whole world did lie in wickedness, 1 Job. 5.19.

Q 7. N. 11. [In their own wayes] God left them to walk in their own ways of
endless and lawless idolatries, and superstitions, and ill manners,
judgment, and practice wholly corrupted, as the holy scriptures and humane
stories show. The Philosophers of the heathens spoke much of the earth, etc.
and to the height of heaven, but unto Paradise above the Heavens, no thought of
theirs could ever come. They had no Lamp of Grace, not the best learned of
them, their sage, as Pythagoras, in tongue, confessed God to be one, but they
knew not the holy Trinity, and that the eternal son would be manifested in the
flesh, to come a man looking through our walls, and to come a Judge of all, nor
that he framed the world for man, because he would dwell in our Tabernacle,
(Mr. Bro. Apoc. page 20.) That regeneration is by faith from him the second
Adam, by hearing the doctrine of divine revelation, that he should destroy
death, and him that had the power of death, by his own death and resurrection,
and give us a Resurrection, and that be should be a mediator between God and
man, as Prophet, Priest, and King, Lord of Angels, the head of all
principality and power, that a company of people were in him elected, and
should be called out of this present world, to whom he should be wisdom,
justification, sanctification and redemption, etc. in these things the outward
Jew was dull of hearing, Romans 2. and 3. Phil. 2. Heb. 5.11. much less could
the wisdom and Philosophy of the heathens once think of these things, Col.
1.26. yea alas for pity, how weakly and poorly are these things either taught
or known, and experimentally in mind and conscience felt, and answerably in
life practiced in most of our congregations, of our blessed England. This must
be proper to true christians; no marvel the holy spirit does taunt the wisdom
of the worlds wise Masters, and charge the saints to take heed of their
Philosophy and vain deceit, verily it is not fit for Christians to be trained
up in their pedagogie, 1 Cor. 1. they were haters of God, Romans 1. Col. 1.21.
and haters of his people, Psalm. 83. Hest 9.1. Then all that time they were not
in the state of universal grace, but in very deed of universal wrath, such a
woeful famine of hearing the word of the Lord, holy justice gave them over
unto. So when the would did depart from the faith of the true Melchisedeck, it
was given over to Turk and Pope, and all force of error, and were far from
Justice, Peace, and Truth, the Reverend Doctor Ames in his Med^lla, page 244
editio quarta, cites a fit testimony for this.

Non pium igitur minus quam prudens suit illud maximi artium magistri P.R.
judicium and votum: Hujus Philosophiae doctrinam, si mihi fuerit optandum quod
assequi velim, malim ^ue^as ex Evangelio per cruditum aliquem probatisque
moribus, Theologum, quam ex Aristotele per Philosophum tradi. Puer impietates
mullas ex Aristotele discet, quas verendum ne nimis sero dediscat. Beatitudinis
finem in homine terminari, virtutes om^cs hominis facultate penitus contineri:
Eas ex hominis and natura, and arie, and industria comparari. Deum, ad haec
opera quamvis magna and divina, tamen vel adjutorem, vel artificem nusquam
adhiberi: divinam providentiam ex hoc numanae vitae theatro removeri, de
justitia divina verbum nullum fieri, Beatitudinem huminis in hac caduca vita
constitui, etc.

Quest 8. [To be called their God] This is a word of Covenant as God spoke to
Abraham, Genesis 17. and as it was noted above, God is called the God of Shem.
Andoh! most glorious privilege of the Saints (through the mediator) in all
ages. Mark these Texts from the first to the last, Gen 6.18. and 17.7.8. Exodus,
19.5. and 20.2. and 29.45.46. Jer. 31.33. 2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 3.29. Tit. 2.14. 2.
Pet. 2.9. Apoc. 21.3. Hence it is that the Saints say, from Gods interest in
them, and theirs in him, Our God, my God, my portion, my Rock, my Shepherd,
etc. and Jesurun is Gods portion, Jer. 10. In this they boast, praise, and
sing, My welbeloved is mine; and I am his, Cant. 2.16. Psalm. 44. and 48.2
Coron. 25 6.7. Psalm. 42. and 43. Deuteronomy. 10.21. The observations of the
properties, and works of God should here be minded, which are in chapter first
spoken of.

Q. 8 [Heavenly City] The Saints of old knew as well as them of the New
Testament, That if the earthly house of our Tabernacle were dissolved, they
should have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. They had all the same spirit of faith, compare the ^ Cor. 4. with
chap. 5.1. to 12. and Eccles. 12.14. etc. upon the dissolution of the one, the
holy soul possesses the other; here is no interposition of time, nor of any
tormented estate.

Q. 8. [The mystery of godlinesse] The mystery of Godliness was hidden in
types and figures from the ages and generations of the Apostate families, Ephesians.
3. Col. 1.26. But in Judah was God known, his name was great in Israel, in
Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion, Psalm. 76.1.2. He
showed his word unto Jacob, and his statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he
dealt not so with any nation, and as for his judgments they had not known
them, therefore they said, Praise ye J A H. Psalm. 147 So that Israel did enjoy
the true knowledge of God in Christ, and were the household of God, having the
covenants of promise, and the seals of the fame, and lived and dyed in the
constant hope of immortality in glory; read diligently Ephesians. 2.11, 12, Act.
26.6.7. And this we must understand concerning the true hidden mystery, hid in
types and figures among godly families, until Moses and then to the Nations
while Isreal's fleece only was moystened by the dewes that fell on mount Sion,
but after the ending of the seventy sevens, Dan. 9. then the Gospel was openly
revealed and made known to all Nations of Noah's families, and yet in those
days, yea now in these days, it is an hid mystery, too too manifest
experience does witness in kingdoms, towns, and families, 1 Cor. 2.

Q 9. [The heathens also] All those noble prophesies in Moses Prophets, and
Psalms of the calling of the Gentiles, do comment on the blessing to Sem, and
the Promise to Abraham. The holy Prophets rejoiced in spirit, foreseeing the
glorious calling of the families to the Faith, we should have the like
affection to the calling of the Jews, Romans 11.

Q. 9. [By sending his disciples] The Apostles were sent unto them to open
their eyes to turn them from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to
God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among all
them (of the old Testament) which are sanctified by faith in Christ, Act. 26.
Ephesians. 1.11, 12, 13, 14.

Annotations, How Redemption was taught from the Promise to ABRAHAM, till the
Law of the Passover, or the coming forth of EGYPT.
QUest. 1. What is the scripture in which the Revelation of the mystery of
Christ was made known to Abraham?

Answ. Genesis 12, 2. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless
thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing.

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee. And
in thee shall all the families of the Earth be blessed.

QUest. In what does this scripture teach, instruct, convince, correct, and
comfort.

Answ. I Of the cursed and most wretched estate of the apostate families; and
unrecoverable in respect of any ability in themselves, God hiding from them by
Babells Languages, for many generations, the glorious mystery of the Gospel of
his Son, that they became Loammi and Lo-ruchamah, that is, not Gods people, nor
pitied: and ever enemies to God and his people, walking in all courses of
unperswadeable disobedience.

II. It is prophesied by this great and precious promise, that the families
shall be delivered from the misery of that apostasy, by the Son of God, who
was sent of the Father into the world in fullness of time to be a blessing, to
make known the riches of the glorious mystery of his will, to reconcile them
to be Gods people, and to be under mercy through his gracious Redemption, and
by the same to reconcile the enmity of Jew and Gentile.

III. Here it is taught who Christ is, touching his person, that he being God,
is also man of the Seed of Abraham, Gal. 4.4. Eb. 2.16.
Saint Matthew chap. 1. does show the history, and the promise fullfilled. As
also how Christ Immanuel does bless us, saving his people from the guilt,
punishment, and dominion of their sins, by his precious death and sacrisice. By
which he brake the Serpents head-Plot, Genesis 3.15. in his constant patience and
obedience, at the very same time when the Serpent and his seed put him to an
accursed death on the tree, as a notorious sinner. By this performance, Gal. 4
5. Romans 3 25.
this manner of the blessing of Abraham came on the Gentiles, Gal. 3.13.14.

IV. By faith in the promise we are reconciled, justified; and adopted, and so
are no more servants in bondage, but heirs in Christ.

V. Whereas it is said, in thy seed, all families of the Earth are blessed, it
shows there is the same and no other way or means of eternal life and
salvation to Jew and Gentile, but only and alone the Lord Jesus Christ, nor any
comfort in this world, but as given us by promise and covenant through faith in
Christ in the use of the means lawfully used, Wherefore all other Religions,
Additaments and inventious of men are abominable, and all communion with such
is no better then the communion with devils.

VI. We have not forgiveness of sins, life, and the inheritance of heaven, Act.
3.26. Tit. 3.5 6. Gal. 3.16.17, Abraham had not-wherein to rejoice as of
himself, he did not prevent God, but God prevented him.
by works of our doing, or will in our choosing, but all is of free grace and
free promise.

VII. The Lord God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, does give, "The Lords
Prayer, and all the prayers of the Saints belong hither, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15.
so note here, that Gods promises are the foundation of prayer, David, 2 Samuel
7.27. and Dan. 9.2. etc.
as the effects of his promise, his spirit to cry " Abba Father, and to seal
assurance of reconciliation, justification and adoption, and to be an earnest
of that inheritance of the Saints in light, and to work mortification, and to
begin the life of glory in sanctification. This the Lord God does work in
those only that look for salvation in Christ as sons by the promise, not as
servants for works or images.

VIII. In that the eternal God, the Gentiles shall be blessed in Christ, it is
a speech manifesting Of eternity all Gods works were known to him, as the
Apostle James says, Act 15. This is handled, Rom 8.9, 10, 11. chapters
the purpose of Gods election and predestination in Christ, as the spiritual
blessings are handled by the Apostle to proceed out of those eternal
fountains, Ephesians. 1. under the word blessed, are comprehended the unsearcheable
riches of Christ the second Adam, who of God is made unto us the efficient
cause of wisdom, Or freedom, or forgiveness.
justification, sanctification, and redemption.

IX. The precious promises in Christ understood and believed, transform or
metamorphose a man, and make him partake of the divine nature, so that they
which believe in God, must, as from a new principle, in uprightness of heart
walk in the spirit, be always zealous to show forth good works, and with all
due care flee the corruptions that are in the world through lusts. This is, to
keep the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, and this we are to do by
restipulation of Covenant.

X. As Abraham was blessed, that is justified, in believing the Gospel preached
unto him, so shall those that walk in the steps of the faith of our father
Abraham, who is the Father of us all, that is, of all such that so believe as
he did.

XI. The Doctrine of justification by faith in Christ is very ancient, being
taught Abraham before Romes foundation was laid, or Rhomulus or Rhemus, or a
Pharisee or Papist were borne.

XII. God will bless them that bless this Doctrine of Christ to Abraham, And
he will curse them that curse and persecute this Let the Anabaptist consider
whether all godly parents ought not to curse their tenets, in denying infants
to be in the covenant, and in denying the seal to them.
doctrine of Christ, and his people, for it shall be said to all such, Cast out
the Servant and her Son, etc. Gal. 4.

XIII. This also may be observed, as the families of the sons of Noah, were
cursed and out off from the Gospel and peace of God by the confusion of
tongues at Babylon; Christ would turn this to a blessing in tongues understood
at Salem, creating the fruit of the lips to be peace, to the far off and to the
the near, Jew and Gentile, so the Gospel the word of faith in our own
Languages is a most dear blessing. Accursed be the contrary endeavors of the
mystical Babylon, against the Kingdom of Justice and Peace in the Jerusalem,
that is from heaven.

XIV. Us Gentiles of the posterity of Japheth, Zacharias and the blessed Virgin
remember the promise with thanksgiving, Luc. 1.
have great cause to praise and bless God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has performed this promise, and has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Moses and the Prophets call upon us for
this duty, and so our godly predecessors did, Psalm. 18.67. Romans 15. Act. 13.
AApoc. 7

XV. As God does curse him that obeys not this doctrine of Faith, so they
that teach a diverse or contrary way of justification, then by faith in Christ,
are to be abhorred and accursed of all the Saints.

Moses, the Psalms, Esayas and all the Prophets open this scripture of the
Gospel of Christ to Abraham, in many particulars, (this is a gemm to them all)
not only of the special blessings in us and for us, but of the particular The
te^mes, families, nations, Gemiles, Heathens, and in the New Testament,
Grecians and tribes are very often to be taken in one sense.
nations that revolted from Sems blessed God, how they should be called again
to Sems God: All Nations shall bless him, and be blessed in him, Psalm. 73.
Esa. 11. and 66. Act. 2.

QUest. 3. Did God add any Sacraments or Seals to the word of his Covenant and
promise?

Answ. Besides the sacrifices the eternal God ordained Circumsion.

QUest. 4 What did circumsion teach them?

Answ. I. Jehovah made it a seal of his promise, and covenant of blessedness
in Christ, to be a God to Abraham and to his seed. Therefore it was a seal of
Gods Reconciliation, Justification, and adoption, and God did thus keep his
covenant with them.

Of Gods reconciliation, because God all sufficient does condescend to enter
into covenant with sinful man.

Of Justification or remission of sins because it is a seal of the
justification that is by faith, God did justify the circumcision by faith, and
all the policy of Israel did, or should have professed the same; God gave it
for that same end, Romans 4.

Of Adoption, because God selected Abraham and his seed, and preferred them
above all Nations to be a chosen generation, a royal Preist-hood, an holy
nation, a purchased and peculiar people. And therefore also God had said to
Pharaoh, Israel is my first borne, Exodus 4. and 19.

II. It is signified and sealed to them, to fathers and their infant children,
their reconciliation with God by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, in
which they were conceived; and by consequent the putting on the new man: So
mortification and sanctification, or regeneration is taught. Moses and the
Prophets ever drew them to the spiritual meaning, and to rest in the outward
work. and the faithful did thus keep their covenant with God. The Saints made
excellent uses of this seal of faith for instruction and consolation of their
own souls, as of their posterity, as Moses, Manoah, Jonathan, David, Esaias,
etc. Exodus 6.12. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Judge. 14.3. 1 Samuel 14.6. and 17.36. Esa. 6. And
observe the Apostle Paul what he says in Romans 2.29. Col 2.12.

III. It sealed to them both to Fathers and their infant children, the blessed
Estate of the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection.

IV. It was a seal of entrance into the Church and policy of Israel, which is
called the kingdom of God, to distinguish from the Apostate families. For all
Israel, they and their children, were by special privilege federally holy,
Exodus 19.5.6. Deuteronomy. 7.8. 1 Cor. 7.13, 14 Matthew 21.

V. It was a seal to the deed of gift of the Land of Chanaan, (the Land of Rest
or promise) to Abraham and his natural seed and proselytes: And of all outward
necessary comforts for this life, both of provision and protection.

VI. It sealed to Abraham, that he should be a Father, not of the Jews only,
but of many nations, that when that deed of gift, the Prerogative of it was
out, the Gentiles should be called to the faith, fathers and children to be
made disciples, and so become Abraham's see, and the kingdom of God. This is so
expounded in the Epistle to the Galatians, and in Matthew. 21.43. and 28.19. Acts
2. and 3. and 11.17. and 15.

VII. Thus we may see what a Catechism out of the promise, and out of the seal
of Circumcision the holy Prophet Abraham might teach his household, as he did,
and as God testifies he would. Now out of all this, let this be noted, that the
promise concerning Christ to Abraham, was not only of temporal blessings to
him and his posterity, but also of spiritual: and that chiefly. And
Circumcision sealed the same, and no other doctrine but what the promise
taught. Let Romans 15.8. be thoroughly studied of us.
They are vain talkers and deceivers of minds that teach otherwise.

QUest. 5. Furthermore, To Whom did God instruct his Church in expectation of
Christ?

Answ. To Judah the fourth son of Jacob in these words. Genesis 49.10. A Tribe
shall not Or, fail to Judah. Shebet a tribe is in Moses, 32 times, as the
learned observe; and never a Scepter in him but a Tribe: and so Tremellius.
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till his Son shall
come: and to Jehovah the hope of their Fathers: that is, Christ the hope of
Israel, Jer. 50 7. Acts 28.20. observe how Jacob left the faith to his
posterity, on his death bed. Let it be for example.
him shall the gathering of the peoples be.

QUest. 6. What do ye observe out of this text?

Answ. 1. This prophecy and promise does look back to the promise to Abraham
concerning the great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, for it
is foretold that Christ should also come of Judah.

II. When other tribes should despise for the faith of Christ and be scattered,
but Judah should hold the faith throw a succession of holy Scribes and Teachers
of the Law (and them chiefly of the holy line of Christ) and his Tribe endure
till Christ his Son came.

III. Whereas it is said, the peoples shall be gathered to Christ, the meaning
is, they shall be called to the faith, and in his Name and Law shall the
Nations trust. This prophecy is expounded by Esaias Chap 11 10 and 66 19 20
John 11 51 53 etc.

QUest. 7. Who had the knowledge of the Son of God in this state of time,
revealed and testified by the spirit, in these exceeding great and precious
promises, and the seal of Circumcision?

Answ. Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarks and many of their Godly
posterity in Egypt: also Lot, Job, and others in diverse places.

QUest. 8. Who were they that disregarded Heb. 11.26.
reproached, and despised the doctrine of life in Christ exhibited in these
promises (and the seal of Circumcision) to Abraham and Judah?

Answ. Nachor the brother of Abraham, and many of his posterity: many of the
posterity of Abraham by Keturah: the posterity of Lot, Ismael, As Esau was
profane and despised the covenant so his posterity: they profanely left the
seal of circumcision, which was conferred on their Father, Zerem. 9.26.
Esau, and their posterities: the Canaanites, the Egyptians, yea all the
families that fell away in the revolt of Nimrod.

QUest. 9. Was there not an Apostasy in the Church from the faith of Christ
taught to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Judah?

Answ. A great apostasy: for Israel in Egypt forsook the faith of their Godly
ancestors, and followed the idols, and religion of Egypt. Read Ezekiel 20. and
23.

QUest. 10. What was the hope and comfort of the faithful, for these times, in
cleaving to the faith?

Answ. Through faith they obtained good report with God: and confessed that
they were pilgrims and strangers on the earth, Heb. 11.13. Genesis 27. all of it.
and strove for the blessing of the heavenly inheritance. Wherefore God was not
ashamed of them to be called their God, and filled their hearts with joy, that
by faith saw the days of Christ, and provided for them the eternal recompense
of reward in the heavenly City, Luke 20.35, 36, 37.
and Country and Kingdom: for he accounted them his children, and worthy to
enjoy that world and the better resurrection.

QUest. 11. How was the wrath of God revealed from heaven against those that
did mock, curse and despise the faith of Christ and his people?

Answ. Wars and broyls among Genesis 14. four Kings against five.
Kings of diverse countries: Ismael the son of the bondwomen cast out, Esau
given up to hardness of heart. Sodom and Gomorrha burned with fire and brimston.

II. All apostate families were further separated from Christ and the Church of
God from the days of Abraham by uncircumcision, Genesis 34 14. Ephesians. 2.11.
and in great reproach called uncircumcision of them which are called
Circumcision.

QUest 12. How did Christ pour out his fury, and his anger for the apostasy of
Israel in Egypt?

Answ. God gave up Isreal's babes to the sword of Pharaoh and to be drowned in
the river Nilus, Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. Exodus 1.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the fourth CHAPTER.
IN the first Quest and Answ, note, The Promise of Christ to Abraham, is often
renewed to him, also it was given to Isaac and Jacob This is the foundation of
that speech, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, this is my memorial to all generations, that is, to all of their faith
whether Jew or Gentile, Exodus 3.15. Gal. 3.6.

2. Also observe on Genesis 12.3. it is said And in thee shall all, But in Genesis 22.
18, it is said, And in thy seed shall all, so the new Testament uses the same
variety of Phrases, for in Act. 3.25. it is said, In thy seed shall al^. but in
Gal. 3.8. In thee shall all, yet Saint Paul in chapter 16. expounds it at
large, and says, To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. This is
noted, that we might confer scriptures, that neither Jew nor Gentile, might
trust in Abraham or any of the saints, but in that holy seed, the Son of God
that took humanity of Abraham.

3. In Genesis 1 2.3. [And I will blesse] The Promises of God in Christ are the
foundation of all comfort to the Church, whether in his goodness to it, or
severity to the malignant company, that curse and do all ill offices to the
church. Why did God do all that is spoken of in Psalm. 105. in every verse both
to his church, and to the children of the wicked one? The reason is rendered in
verse 42 He remembered his holy promise to Abraham his servant, and the effects
of that promise did not stand in force for Moses time alone, but for one
thousand generations, as verse 8. and that is the intent of penning this
Psalm, Mich. chap. 7: remembers his promise, and expounds it with terror to
the seed of the Serpent, but with joy to the Saints, for the pardon of sin,
withholding of anger, showing mercy and compassion, and burying of sins as in
the sea, and all this accompanied with another grace of subduing our
iniquities, (all these expound the promise) a godly soul does as much desire to
have sin subdued as pardoned, so justif^cation, mortification, and
sanctification are taught in the promise. The blessed and beloved Virgin and Z
charins do both comment on Micah, Luke 1. and the Psalm 106. must be
considered as Psalm. 105.

4. Mind further, how this promise is pursued in Levit. 26. and Dan. 9.24. and
Act 3. Gal 3 and 4. for the faith of this promise, was taught both to the
Jews; Acts 3. and to the Gentiles, Gal. 3. and indeed all the Bible dilateth
on that of Genesis 3.15 and Genesis 12.3, and this of Genesis 12.3 is but an exposition
of Genesis 3.15

5. yet further observe, that as Jehovah the eternal Lord, does remember the
promise to a thousand generations, Ps. 105.8. so likewise all the Israel of God
that are of Abraham's faith, are reciprocally to remember it, as 1 Chronicles.
16.15.16. mark it well, As God says, The promise is his memorial, so it
should be our memorial, and especially we should remember it in the days of
affliction, for then we most need so to do, consider Exodus 3.15. for then
Israel was in great affliction, and Moses was sent to tell them that God was
mindful of his memorial. Consider Nehemiah 9.

6. And lastly, note the promise is called a Covenant, Act 3. and Gal. 3. and
so the promise, Genesis 3.15. must be considered as a covenant that God made with
our first parents; as Christ is the hope of the promise made unto our Fathers,
Acts 26.6, 2^2, 3. Jer. 50.7. so he is the hope of the covenant, Esa. 42.6.

Quest. 2. N. 1. This first point is handled by a Son of Abraham, Rem. 1. and
2. and 3. The book of Job teaches of the corruption of nature, (taken from
Parents) and of redemption, so it shows how Abraham taught his posterity, and
how all the faithful of old, taught their children by tradition, and all true
and sound tradition before the scriptures agrees with the scriptures, and so
must all tradition since the scriptures, Ps. 78.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Jobs book was
before the Law of faith was written by Moses.

Ibid. N. 11. This second is handled, Romans 3. and 4. and 5. To these two points
confer the notes of N. 4. and N. 5. in page 21. All of the first Adam
miserable, and no blessduesse but in Christ the second Adam, all the Acts and
the Epistles etc. abundantly open this.

Ibid. N. 5. [In thy seed all families] In Christ all are gathered, Ephesians. 1.10.
The glory of this blessedness (to procure the salvation of the elect) God will
not give to any other mediator, Esaias. 42.1. etc. This blessing came on Abraham
in his uncircumcision, Romans 4. and so observe these blessings are handled to
the uncircumcised, the familes of Japheth, the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians
etc. Therefore Turks, Jews and all misbeleevers are excluded from all hope of
comfort.

Ibid of Question 2. N. 5. [Only and alone the Lord Jesus Christ] all scripture
speaks exclusively concerning any other, 1 John, 5.11.12, 13. so the Apostle
Peter is plain, This is the stone cast aside of you builders, which is become
the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for among men
there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.
God would in due time show this his justification of a sinner, and that he
might be just in all his promises, and a justifier of him who is of the faith
of JESUS. Romans 3.

Ibid. of N. V. [Given us by promise] We cannot, we may not pray or expect any
blessing temporal, spiritual, or eternal, but by covenant and promise in
Christ, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy 28.7, 12, still look to the promise. The promise is
sure by faith to all the seed, it can be sure no way else; faith does realize
and evidence things promised to our hearts, God is keeper of covenant, and in
that faith rests. In God things promised have their consistency, and
therefore they shall have a being on us in due time, Deuteronomy. 8.18. And we must
take blessings as blessings of the covenant, and redemption in Christ (all
mercies to the Saints are the price of blood) not as common favors with the
world, that have the sun and rain, etc. else we shall not be of those
generations that praise God through Christ, Ephesians. 3.21. Hos. 2.19, 20, etc.
else our mouths will not be filled with laugher, and our tongue with singing
praises to our God, Psalm 96.98. and 136. and 137. Lev. 26.

Ibid. of 2 Quest. N. VII. seal assurance] As the spirit seals to the heart
of the believer the doctrine of the Covenant and promise, so the seals of the
Covenant are made effectual by the spirit, for the further confirmation of the
justification that is by faith, to none other persons but to the children of
the promise and covenant made with Abraham, Acts 3. Romans 4. And none other
persons can understand what this saying of covenant and seal means, but those
that are redeemed from the earth, Apoc. 14.3. Ephesians 1.13, 14. and 2.18. Romans
8.15, 16.

N. 9. which believe in God must] Faith is a wise and an obedient grace, says
works by love, Romans 6.7, and 8. chapters, handle this; Gal 5.6. the Apostle
opens this as a part of the blessing in the promise, Acts 3.25, 26. Christ
destroys sin in his and sanctifies. If any be in Christ he is a new
creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. old things in the old Adam are passed away, and all
things become new in us, from the second Adam. The ten Commandments belong to
this point, and handled as an use from Gods mercy and covenant in Christ, Exodus
20.1, etc. Romans 6. chapter and 12. chapter, and the later parts of the Epistles
to the Galatians, Ephesians, colossians, and by holy Zacharias, Luke 1.74. and
ubique. See the practice of this in holy Job, his effectual faith, and diligent
love, and patience of hope from the godly instruction of Abraham in the
promise. The covenant of grace is reciprocal, the seals also teach the same. It
is glorious to keep the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. And this is an
easy yoke to an holy and humble soul: his commandments are not burdensome.
Mat. 28.20. 1 John 5.3. And after the Lord has spoken peace by justification
we must not turn again to folly that grace may abound Psalm. 85. Ro^. 5 and 6.
And they that put away a good conscience will make shipwreck of faith and
blaspheme. Briefly, this is a sure character of the Saints of God, that all
that call on the name of the Lord with a pure heart do follow righteousness,
faith, charity, peace, etc. and such only are vessels of honor for our
heavenly masters use.

Observe yet further, the Popish Company, and many others that are ignorant,
when they speak of good works, their thought darteth chiefly on almsdeeds,
prayer, fasting, etc. But withal teaching and believing the doctrine of opere
operato, at the Pharisees: Whereas by good works is meant not only those, but
all the duties of charity of the first and second Table, both toward God and
toward man: yea all to be done in faith as regenerate in the Second Adam, that
God the Father in him may be glorified: And where the true faith of our
glorious Lord Jesus Christ is planted it will so show it self: And this is the
true sense of James 2. of showing our faith by our works, and our Father
Abraham, and Rachabs story are conferred to this exposition. Again, observe
that commonly those that so call for those good works care not for sound
teaching of the word of God, but rather carry a grudge against it, and holy
assemblies, and the sincere professors and preachers. And alas, what are
their prayers, almsdeeds, fasting, etc. for matter, manner, or end It may be
questioned, if they be materially good. And let such take heed that for manner,
or end, they are no better than Kains, Genesis chap. 4. then theirs in Psalm 50
and Esaias 1. and 58. and the Scribes and Pharisees, who did all those things and
more too, and yet crucified the Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, who would
have had them come to a more exact and joyful righteousness. But they could not
call JESUS, the Lord, but held him, his Kingdom, his doctrine, and his
disciples anathema, as of old they did Esaias 8.18. and chap. 65.5. and 66.5. all
John 9.

N. 10. In the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham] There are many that do
not walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, as the Anabaptist that says,
infants of believing parents are not in the covenant of God in Christ, and so
ought not to have the seal conferred on them; therefore they do not administer
the seal, but scoff at it, as Patience did in New England. Now see Abraham's
faith, He did not only believe that the children that came of Israel were in
the covenant of God in Christ, but he believed the same touching the infants of
the Gentiles: therefore in testimony of his faith he circumcised his house, the
same day the covenant and promise was renewed to him, Gen 17. And all the
tribes to our Lords days did observe circumcision. And the promise is sure to
all the seed of whom Abraham is a Father, not only to that seed that is
circumcised, but also to them of the Gentiles that are uncircumcised; for he is
said to be the Father of us all, according to that which was spoken to him.
That he should be the father of many nations. Therefore the Anabaptist is far
from walking in the steps of the faith of Abraham: and they run into sad
uncomfortable errors: First, They deny God to be the God of infants, having no
right nor portion in the covenant. Secondly, If infants be not in the covenant
of God in Christ, they shall not be partakers of the better resurrection: O ye
parents consider it. Thirdly, They will not present them to Christ in his
ordinances, that he should teach them: what is this? but a dedication of their
infants to Moloch, to the devil to be devoured. Whereas the godly parent has
great comfort that if the children of Idolatrous parents were born to God, (God
so accounts in respect of his covenant) Ezekiel. 16.20. how much more have godly
parents comfort that their children are born to God. Let the Apostles reasoning
Romans 4.16, 17. to the end of the chapter be thoroughly minded, and let Gods
people observe providence, whether many of the Anabaptists do not turn to
Sadducism, denying the resurrection, or as vile opinions: for it has been
observed, not without cause, that Anabaptistry is a cloak of all filthiness,
and our times have found it to be so. Surely they that are of the faith of
Abraham, shall be blessed with faithful Abraham: For so it is said, Many shall
come from the East, and from the West: from the North, and from the South, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven, Mar 8.
Luke 13. Romans 4 13. and so they became the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. The
promise of blessedness in Christ is in extent as large to all converted
Gentiles, and to their seed, as to Abraham and his seed.

N. 11. The doctrine of Justification by faith] Abraham believes in him that
justifies the ungodly: who counted his believing for his justification before
he received circumcision that he might be the Father of the believing
uncircumcised Gentiles: so it is not heresy, as the circumcised Pharisee then,
and the baptized Papist now would bear the world in hand. What, the Gospel not
before Popery? mark here two sayings, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that
God would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before the Gospel to
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed. And from this
promise he had the justification that it by faith, and before circumcision,
Romans 4. The other text is Heb. 4. For unto us the Gospel has been preached as
also unto them: that is to the people of Israel that came out of Egypt, Exodus
12. Mind the sayings of the new Testament illustrating for us the old
covenant, that we may see Antiquity gloriously triumphing over Popish cursed
Noveltie. Holy Luther, and multitudes before him, and others after him, by
preaching this everlasting Gospel have routed the armies of King Abaddon that
he shall never make up his troops again.

N. 12. God will bless them that bless this doctrine] Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, Psalm 122. they shall be as the
bright Sun that love Christ, Jude 5. Bless Christ and Abraham, that is, all of
his faith, and thou shall be blessed, thou and thy posterity, as Lot found that
blessed Abraham: and so the very Amorites, Aner, Escol, and Mamre, Genesis 14. and
it is probable the Gibeonites might be of their posterity, being a remnant of
the Amorites: Under the term Amorite all the Chanaanites sometimes are
understood. How did Christ pity them in suffering Israel to make a league with
them, and for Saul's cruelty. And they were the Nethinim that returned with
Judah from captivity, Jos. 9 22. Ezra 8.20.

Ibid. N. 12. Cu^se and persecute this doctrine] Do thou curse? Wilt not
bless the holy seed, and the holy doctrine? Read thy doom; as he loved cursing,
so shall it come unto him, as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far
from him, Psalm 109. Wilt not exercise bowels to the body of Christ? the curse
shall enter in thy bowels. Do not hear? Let them be confounded and turned
back that hate Sion, let them be as the grass upon the house tops, which
withers before it grows up, wherewith the reaper fills not his hand, nor he
that binds sheaves his bosom. Neither do they which go by, say, the blessing
of Jehovah be you, we bless you in the Name of Jehovah, Psalm 129. Thou that
have spittle in thy mouth, and an aching tooth against Christ, and the sincerity
of the faith, hear what one of thine own prophets have said. Number. 24.9. He
couched, he lay down as a Lion, as a great Lion, who shall stir him up? blessed
is he that blesses thee, and cursed is he that curses thee. Mark how the
promise to Abraham, and Jacobs blessing was carried by tradition among the
children of the East, and how Balaam durst not but remember it to terrify
Balak in his Enterprise. What says Christ to Pharaoh, Kill my child, and I
will kill thy child; Israel is my firstborn (the heir of the world) it thou
afflict him, I will slay thy son, thy first born. And consider Psalm 105. how
it pursues the promise and covenant to Abraham for Israel, and against the
seed of the Serpent. And thus it must be considered for Israel all the time of
the old Testament, and for the Israel of God till the end of the world. He that
meddles against Israel, meddles with a burdensome stone, and puts fire into
a sheat to burn his house, Psalm 2 10, 11, 12. Zach. 12.3.6. What gat Balak and
the Princes of Midian, and Balaam, that sought to curse? God cursed them, and
the false Prophet felt it. So though the Balaks and Balaams of mystical Egypt,
and mystical Babylon have cursed, and do seek still the destruction of our
nation, especially of the Gospel: yet while we keep our covenant they shall
never prevail. Balaams counsel was more dangerous than his curse; for his
counsel being followed brought a plague. O ye Princes, O ye people do ye not
know that the sincere Word, and the holy seed is the subsistence of your
Kingdoms and common-weals, towns, and families? Esaias 6.13. Every child of God
is a public good.

Mind one thing more how those thor did seem to be of the truth and were
brethren touching the outward circumcision, yet cursed the servants of Christ,
that would not walk in their ways, traditions, devises and abominations, Esaias
66.5. and in after times they so used the poor blind man, John 9. So have the
cruel Prelates used the dear servants of the Lord: they did curse, yet Christ
did bless, and has and will pay his enemies home that abuse his ordinances:
for if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, anathema maranatha is his heavy
Censure, 1 Cor. 16.22.

Ibidem N. 12. Cast out the servant and her son] Without shall be liars. Liars
in judgment as all Papatines be. Whosoever transgresses and abides nor in
the doctrine of Christ has nor God: he that continues in the doctrine of
Christ, he has both the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.24. 2 John 2.9. Be it
that they sometimes confess the doctrine of Christ's person, yet both in their
doctrine and practice they deny it, because they deny him in his offices and
administrations for which he became such a person and such a Mediator And oh
what lying blasphemies do they utter against the holy records that testify of
the eternal Son the Mediator. Popery is a mystery of iniquity.

N. 13. The word of faith in our own languages] In the Law it is written, with
men of other tongues, and other lips will I speak unto this people, and yet for
all that they will not hear me, says the Lord; Wherefore tongues are for a
sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not, but prophesying
serves not for them that believe not, but for them which believe, Esaias 28.11,
1 Cor. 14.21. This looks back to Nimrods rebellion, they despised the faith
taught by Noah, Sem, and the rest of the godly fathers (before Abraham) in
their known language; therefore Christ cut them off from the faith by strange
languages. When Israel despised the things of the Law of Christ written for
their comfort; see how he, in this, would avenge the quarrel of his covenant,
Deuteronomy. 28.49. and fulfilled it, Ier. 5.15. 2 Chronicles. 36. If it be then such a
deer blessing to have Moses and the Prophets, our Lord and his Apostles speak
to us in our own language, let the saints worship God with hearty praise and
thanksgiving, so did David Psalm 103.7. and 147. 19. All are abominable,
idolatrous and false worshippers and unclean infidels that Christ speaks not to
in their own language by his blessed Gospel: as all the Babylonian builders,
and their seed to this day, and the mystical Babylonian builders: It is much to
be considered, that when the churches departed from the Apostles doctrine,
Christ confounded the Europian and Asian languages. When it was prophesied of
the calling of the Gentiles to the faith of the Gospel, it is said, I will turn
to the people a pure language, which was fulfilled when Christ sanctified all
tongues as it is said, We do here them speak in our own languages the
wonderful works of God, Acts 2.11. Zeph. 3.9. Whereas, for two thousand
years, the Gentiles, Noah's families, called on idols names. We little consider
the severity of the wrath of Christ in the confusion of tongues, what a plague
it is, and will be to the end of the world; most sad is that scripture, Jer.
44.26.

3 Quest. of his covenant and promise] God did not first give a seal and then
made a Covenant, but first made a Covenant and a promise, as to our first
parents, Genesis 3.15. and then taught them of the seal, the Sacrifices: so to
Noah God made a Covenant, and then gave him the seal of the Flood, and of the
Ark: so in Genesis 9. first the Covenant, and then the Rainbow: so to Abraham: so
each godly parent must seek to know God in Christ in the Covenant, and to be in
covenant for them and their children. And it is to be marked, Cham had an
outward blessing in the covenant with his father, for he was of Noah's household,
Heb. 11: 7. and he and his children had continued in the same, if he had not
and his son mocked and scorned his father; for which both of them were
excommunicated: and Chams house feared not, but waxed worse and worse against
Christ and his Kingdom, and set up a tyranny in Nimrod, to give the affront to
Sems blessing. Again note, when the merciful God made a covenant with all
flesh, man and beast; were not young, as old comprised in the covenant? a
sucking chile and a lamb as the parent, Genesis 9.9, 10, 11.

Quest. 4. Of justification or remission of sins] The apostate and adulterous
generation in our Lords days (that did adulterate the faith) missed, stating
Circumcision as a part of the Law or Covenant of Works, (a school distinction
of their own, neither of Moses, nor of the Prophets) whereas it was rightly
understood, a law and seal of faith in Christ, and the seal of justification
that is by faith. Their fac hoc, is, credere, in our Lords interpretation of
the Law; to believe in him whom the Father had sealed and sent to be the true
manna and sacrifice, and their perfect justification and freedom, as was told
them, Acts 13.38, 39. And as they missed in stating circumcision a Law of works
ex opere operato, to justification: so they did of all the politic of Moses,
that it did initiate them unto, which yet they could not do, being too heavy a
yoke, Acts 15. Now they despising Christ the end and scope of the law of Moses,
they made their own justification, their idol and vanity, and so provoked
Christ to their rejection: confer Deuteronomy. 32.21. with Romans 10.19. That speech is
very strong that the Lord Jesus spoke, John 7. that circumcision was not so
much of Moses, but observed of the Fathers before Moses was born. They should
have considered in what sense Abraham received it, and used it, Romans 4.

Ibidem, God did justify the circumcision] so this is clear, God did justify
the infants of Israel, for else he would not have commanded circumcision to
infants: this was to comfort all godly parents, that although they knew their
children were conceived in sin and born in iniquity, yet God knew how for his
covenant sake, (not for our sakes) to justify, that is, to free infants from
sins guiltiness, filthiness, and desert; and to comfort godly parents of the
Gentiles touching their infants: the Apostle says, God is not the god of the
Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, for he that justifies the circumcision
will justify the uncircumcision. And God is a husband to the once barren and
desolate woman, but fruitful in children as the former married wife, Israel.
Does not the promise save infants as well as grown men? and does not our
heavenly father declare his counsels that his will is to save infants as well
as grown men? that he enjoins the seal to infants: and says, that he will be
their God: and the Lord says not, he will be the Father of grown men rather
than of infants. And a godly parent has as great hope of his dying infants, as
any Anabaptist can have of their grown men.

Ibid. of Quest. 4. Of adoption.] This adoption of Israel has a double
consideration: general and special, visible and invisible: visible, in
covenant, in respect of the Apostate families that were cut off Genesis 10. and
11. invisible, the faithful in Israel. All did profess the faith (except in
their apostasies to the false faiths and religions of Earl-Peor, and Moloch,
and Chemosh, etc) So they were not all faithful, no not in outward profession.
They were Christ's own, before he came to his own (all Exodus etc.) his own by
visible privileges, yet many a time they grieved him and his holy Spirit,
Psalm 78 and 106. so many of them slighted this adoption by joining themselves
to Peor, as the sons of the open Church followed Kains ways Genesis 6. even so it
is now; some in the Church born after the flesh, and some born after the
Spirit, yet both make a visible Church of Christ it cannot be, it must not be
denied. It is not sound reasoning from a visible Church estate, to the doctrine
of election. If any be further contentious, beware of them, Romans 16.17, 18.

Quest. 4. N. 11. Putting of the sinful body] It showed how distastefull man is
to God in his sinful estate of the first Adam, and no communion with God but by
regeneration in the second Adam, 1 John 1. Therefore observe what Esaias,
Ezekiel, John Baptist, and our Lord, and Stephen said to carnal Israel,
boasting to be Abraham's seed. Esaias 57.3. Ezekiel. 16.3. Ioh. 8.44. Acts 7, 51.
Matthew. 3.9. That they were neither Gods children, nor Abraham's seed, not
treading in the steps of the faith and works of Abraham.

ibid. N. II. The putting on the new man] An Israelite being circumcised yet
the old Adam was not so put off, nor the new Adam so put on, but that birth sin
did remain: yea so remained, that through the Bias of lusts and sinful
appetites, and by temptation, and not taking heed to themselves, and keeping
their souls diligently, omissions of duty, and many actual sins did bud forth.
For although by faith in Christ the saints were justified, or freed from the
guilt and punishment of sin, inheriting the justification that is by faith, yet
there was corruption in them issuing from that original or birth-sin, that we
still are yoked with all: we are in Christ Jesus justified from the reign of
this sin, but not from the being of it in us. Gods counsel is such to make us
humble. This the saints of old felt and acknowledged, and bewailed, and prayer
for further mortification, Psalm 51. And those Scriptures from two Apostles
that were both circumcised and baptized show the truth of this, Romans 7.1 John
1.8. Phil. 3.12, 13. Therefore every godly soul must observe three things; 1.
That we slight not any sin in thought, word, or deed, Romans 6. and 7. And 2. to
be careful that we content not our selves with bodily exerccise, Phil. 3.1, 2,
3, etc. And 3. not to be discontent that Gods counsel is such that perfection
is not attaineable in this life; that was the sin of our first parents, they
were Seekers to be in a better estate then they were stated in: they were
discontent and hearkened to Satan. While we are in this vale of tears, this must
ever be in our hearts, 1 Ioh. 1. If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and truth is not in us, but if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our
unrighteousness, and mind that of the Apostle. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
etc. Satan and his instruments will by all means corrupt our hearts in these
three things.

Ibidem N. II. Drew them to the spiritual meaning] The faithful worshipped Gop
in Spirit, and rejoiced in Christ Jesus, Ier. 4.4. Phil. 3.3. but a circumcised
carnal Israelite thought opus operatum enough, as a Law of works, and so in all
their ceremonies. And note this, as the doctrine of the covenant is reciprocal,
so of the Seal, as they did teach and seal all comforts from God, so they did
bind them closer to God in Christ by faith and filial obedience.

N. III. of the 4 Quest. their infant-children, and] Let us consider two or
three words more of that which is said touching the infants of Israel, that
departed this life. It is Gods promise and covenant that are workfull, and his
Spirit did bless circumcision for the joy and comfort of parents for their
infants reconciliation, justification, sanctification, and adoption and hope of
immortal glory. The same covenant and promise does belong to the Parents of the
Churches of the Gentiles for their infants in the seal of Baptism. Is the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the holy Trinity the God of the Jews only; and
not of the Gentiles also? yea of the Gentiles also. Thy Makers are thy
Husbands, Esaias 54. faithful is he that has promised, and he will do it.
Therefore he is reconciled to our infants, and will justify, and sanctify,
and adopt them and bring them to immortal glory. They by circumcision were
circumcised into one body, as is evident in all the Church politic of Moses.
And so by baptism we are all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks.
The promise and covenant is ours as well as theirs, (as the Epistle to the
Galatians upon Genesis 12.2, 3. shows) and baptism seals the same: and the
Covenant and seal is in extent (excepting the obligation of Ceremonies, and
some judicials) as large for application to all converted Gentiles to them and
to their seed, as of old to Israel, and their seed. The false teachers of these
days say the Covenant with the people of Israel was carnal and fleshly, etc.
but this is not so: not so in Gods intent when he gave those promises, and made
that covenant, and ordained that seal of his covenant: not so, in the judgment
of the faithful, and in their whole conversation which was heavenly, as all
Heb. 11. Luke 1.55, 72, 73, 74. Again not so, for after they came to Canaan,
they did not reject Canaan, nor city, nor Temple (but in apostasy) nor
sacrifices, nor washings, etc. as Psalm 50. Esaias 1. Ier. 7. yet God plagued
them, which was for despising Christ in those ordinances: so their table was
made a snare to them: and Christ was a stumbling Stone to them, as he was to
Kain. That which was ordained for their welfare, they made their ruin. And so
if we do no more but outward exercises in a show of godliness, and deny the
power thereof, and live wickedly as they did Psalm 50. Esaias 1. Jeremy 7. The
Angel of Gods presence, our glorious Lord Jesus Christ will not spare our
misdeeds, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 6. etc. These false teachers abuse the holy Scriptures,
as in that of Heb. 8. It is said, better promises, etc. but they must be asked
what better promises than Genesis 3, 15. and Genesis 12.3? Let such know there
are not better promis^s in old or new Testament: and indeed those two promises
contain all the doctrine of the Gospel, as in part before is showed. They must
excogitate the true interpretation, by seeking how our Lord, and his Apostles
convinced the false glosses the Conc^sion made of Moses Polity: for we all
must know theirs and ours is the same Covenant (as often said) only new for
Administration in fulfilling all promises and prophecies. Let us confer, Exodus
19. and 29.45. Lev. 26.15. with Apoc. 21.3.2 Cor. 6.16. Genesis 3.15. with 1 John
1.2, 3. and chap. 3. Jos. 1. with Heb. 13.5. Romans 4. with Genesis 15. and 17, etc.
This must be often spoken and meditated, for we are dull of hearing. Again,
better promises, has respect to Deuteronomy. 30. Psalm 40 and 95. in Deuteronomy. 30. Christ
promises that he will circumcise their heart, and the heart of their seed, to
love him, Jehovah their God, and to keep his commandments, etc. This Christ
spoke to them, that they might not be deceived to think that their salvation
stood in outward observances; as in circumcision, etc. but in serving God in
their spirits in the Gospel of his Son. And so this to be understood in all
Moses ceremonies. The blood of Oxen and Goats and Rams did not, could not purge
their conscience from dead works, but their conscience would still be to them,
for all their bodily exercise, an ill, accusing and condemning conscience.
Their salvation was established upon better promises, and a better hope, That
Christ by his own most perfect sacrifice, and bloud-shedding should be a sweet
smelling savor to God for us, and procure eternal redemption. And while we, as
strangers, converse in this world, he would be mortification, and
sanctification, by his word and spirit, Mic. 7. John 3. Yet let the godly take
heed they neglect not ordinances, and outward observances of Christ's
institution, though they be as the bark and shell, yet they are such a bark and
shell, that a Christian cannot have life kept within him without them: as a
tree will not live without his bark, nor the kernel prosper without his shell.
Public administrations and family ordinances, and secret duties, are of that
consequence, that he that carelessly neglects them is in danger of
gangrenating errors both in doctrine and manners.

N. VI. Not of the Jews only, but of many Nations] Genesis 17.5. It is promised by
the Lord Jehovah the performer of his promises. For a Father of many nations
have I made thee: This speech was spoken at that time when God renewed his
promise and covenant in Christ with Abraham, and added the seal to that
covenant teaching thereby that he would not be, the God of Israel only, but in
due time the God of the Gentiles also; therefore the Covenant is to the infants
of the Gentiles, as of the Jews: and all faithful are Abraham's seed, and the
Israel of God, Gal. 3 and 6.16. and if the covenant be to the infants, then the
seal: none dare deny it, but those that care not for the education of their
children in godliness and honesty, for the hope of the resurrection unto
eternal life. Abraham durst not deny the seal, but with all joy went about it.
Again, consider Mat. 19.13. and Mark 10.13. little children are comprehended in
the Covenant, For of such is the Kingdom of heaven. Yea, observe further, Of
such is the Kingdom of God, that is, of the Church of God, as Matthew. 21.43.
The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation that shall
bring forth the fruits thereof. So then Isreal's infants were of the kingdom of
God, and so are the Gentiles infants. Did the Kingdom of God consist of the
parents and infants of Israel in the old Testament? surely then godly parents
and their infants of the Gentiles are in equal honor. He that shall hill an
infant shall be put to death as justly as if he had killed a parent. So the
murderous, accursed, doctrine of Anabaptists that would murder children is as
wicked as to kill a godly parent. For the Lord God does justify and wash
infants from their sins in his Covenant, and bring them to glory, as well as
their godly parents. And again, seriously mind, The covenant of God in Christ
by circumcision was in full force to the death of our Lord and Savior, Luke
1.59. and Circumcision was a seal of the covenant of grace to the infants of
the faithful, and infants were in covenant as is evident: and now after our
Lords death were they not in covenant? Did our Lords death disannul the
Covenant of his grace in respect of them? absit, absit. It was about six or
seven weeks from our Lords death to Peter's sermon, Acts 2. And the holy Apostle
in the conclusion of his Sermon does exhort his auditors to receive the
ordinance of Baptism in the name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins: and
to show he spoke by the same Spirit of God that gave the promises, does affirm
that the promise and covenant is as firm to infants as ever it was, and
therefore says, The promise is made unto you and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2.39. In
chap. 3.25, 2^. It is said, the Jews were the children of the Prophets, and of
the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying to Abraham, Even in thy
seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. First unto you has God
raised up his son Jesus, etc. so the Jews had the first prerogative of the
blessing in their kinreds, and of the resurrection of Christ; and then secondly
the Gentiles have the like portion in the blessing, and in our Lords
resurrection, Romans 2.10. consider for these things, Romans 4.16, 17, 18, etc. to
the end of the chapter.

Quest. 5. and Answ. on Genesis 49.10. And to Him shall the gathering of the
people be] O give thanks unto Jehovah, for he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever. And say ye, Save us O God of our salvation, and gather us together,
and deliv^r us from the heathen that we may give thanks to thy holy Name, and
glory in thy praise. Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel for ever and ever,
and all the people said, Amen. 1 Chronicles. 16. Psalm. 147.2. The Apostle says the
same, Grace be to you and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ; who gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the Will of God which is our father: to whom
be glory for ever, Amen, Gal. 1.3, 4.5. Ephesians. 1. 10. Abraham was gathered from
the world, and Christ has and does still gather and deliver us out of the
world to be of his Israel, John 11.52. so observe John 17.

Quest. 7. and Answ. Abraham, Isaac, Iacob] they to testify their faith in the
Promises of Christ built Altars in diverse places, and called on the name of the
everlasing God. And therefore observe, the Apostle says he served God with
pure conscience from his forefathers in the promise of life, which is in Christ
Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.1, 2, 3. and therefore the promises to the Fathers with the
seal of circumcision were not carnal and fleshly, as Mateologists wickedly
prattle: if they were carnal to them, so they are to us, for the promises and
covenant belong to us, as has been laid from Acts 2.39. and chap. 3, 25.26.
Surely the faith of a good Christian is builded on Christ the Comer stone, and
on his religion practiced of the godly Patriarks, and on the bless, holy
scriptures, and hope in the resurrection: all which by the work of the spirit
does make a man watchful to keep a good conscience in Church, in Commonweal,
by Land or Sea, at home, abroad, in s^ops, in labors, etc. see how all is
taught in promise and seal. He that is such an one shall look death in the
face, and needs not to be afraid before whom he comes, nor needs be ashamed of
the groundless criminations of schism, heresy, and blasphemy, etc. diligently
ponder Acts 24, 14, 15, 16.

Quest. 9. and Ans. A great apostasy, for Israel in Egypt] Read Ezekiel. 23.8.
Israel with his family came as a pure virgin into Egypt: and so continued all
the days of Jacob: and Joseph while he lived held the whole house in life and
faith: but the Egyptians afterward infected their poweritie with idolatry:
even in her youth lay they with this virgin Israel, and bruised the breasts of
her virginity, and powered their whoredoms upon her. False worship being a work
of the flesh pleases and quickly insinuates into our corrupt nature,
especially being conversant with idolaters. Let all people beware of mystical
Egyptians: And let Commonweals, Churches, and families note, that false
worship, and heresy increases and somenteth all projects of ungodlynesse and
unrighteousness. Ezekiel. 16.6. and 20. must also here be considered to the
captivity, both of Israel and Judah: They were by apostasy rather of the
Amo^ite and He^hite then of Abraham and Sarah. They were in the blood of their
false religion, being foully corrupted with the idols of Egypt: and so they
were dead till Christ by his own law said unto them live: So were we, being
under the bondage of Rome-Egypt, until Christ, by his everlasting Gospel, made
us to live, Apoc. 14.6. and 20.4, 5. And note as Terah his corrupt worship
continued long in Israel: so did that of Muzrajim (i. e.) Egypt, Jos. 24.14.
Ezekiel. 23 8.

Quest. 10. and Ans. God was not ashamed] But God will be ashamed of adulterers
and adulteresses, that follow superstitions, lusts of the flesh, lusts of the
eyes, and pride of life; for such do and will deny Christ, and be ashamed of
him and his word, and such cannot be pilgrims and strangers, and seek things
celestial, James 4. 1 Ichn 2. Mark 8. Col. 3.1.

Ibid. To be called their God] Christ says, I am the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, this is my memorial to all generations,
that is, to all of their faith and heavenly conversation, whether Jew or
Gentile, Exedus 3.6, 15, 16. Hebrews 11.

Ibid. Heavenly City and Countrey] The faithful to the fullness of time were in
heaven, and part of the blessed family of the heavenly Father, Ephe. 1.10. and
3.15. All the faithful in Israel were the adopted sons of the Eternal, their
God, (and if sons, then heirs, Romans 8.) so they were, living, and so they were,
dead. Therefore the living might not sorrow as the heathens that had not
certain knowledge of the joyful and glorious state of the immortal souls of the
faithful, nor any hope of the resurrection, Luke 13.28, 29. They might not cut
themselves for the dead, nor make any print or mark in the flesh, Levit. 19.28.
Dent. 14. 1, 2, 1 Thessalonians. 4 The loving kindeness of Jehovah, is better than
life, because though life departs, yet we be, and live for ever in him.
Therefore it is said, God is the God, as of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and so
of every true believer, even when his body is dead and turned to dust, and
therefore Abraham must be held in spirit to be and live with God, and shall
have the resurrection of the body, Luke 20.37.38. Matt. 22.24. Mark 12. The
faithful enjoy the same inheritance and happiness with Abraham, and this is one
part of the blessedness in Christ promised to Abraham. And Christ says of
Moses being dead, Moses my servant is dead: he was still the Servant of Christ
though he went up to Mount Nebo, and dyed: and we know he does live, for he
appeared when Christ was transfigure, and death is one of the works of the
devil which Christ was to dissolve. Christ was promised from the beginning to
destroy the works of Satan now called the old Serpent, Acts 26. 6. Josh. 1.2. 1
John 3.8. Heb. 2.14, 15. 2 Timothy 1.10.

CHAP. V.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations on them, How Redemption was taught
From the Law of the Passover to the building of the Temple.

QUest. 1. Proceed to declare what Noble Pillar did Wisdom hew out to which
the holy and golden Chain of times is fastened, by which life and salvation was
taught to the Saints?

Answ. This is the Although they apostated to the idols of Egypt: yet by the
blood of the Passover God chose them again, but again rejected them for their
idols and vanity when Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.
Passover, Exodus 12.

QUest. 2. How many years were from the Promise to Abraham, to the Passover,
or to the coming from Egypt, or to the giving of the Law?

Answ. Four hundred and thirty years.

QUest. 3. How much of the Scripture is contained in those 430. years?

Answ. From the beginning of the 12. of Genesis to the 12. of Exodus, the book
of Job, and also part of the 1. and 2. chapter of 1 Chronicles.

QUest. 4. How does the Passover, etc. teach of Christ?

Answ. Christ is called the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World:
also our Passover. Mark what the Holy Ghost says, Heb. 11.28. The Levites in
Hezekiahs days taught the good knowledge of Jehovah, that is Christ. The
Levites taught the meaning of the Passover as Moses by faith instituted it. 2
Chr. 30 22. mark and consider the Psalm 22. and 40. and 110. what was taught in
those three great congregations, the assemblies of holy beauty.
Through faith he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that
destroyed the first born should touch them. The 12. of Exodus will afford many
meditations. And although three months after the Passover they had the Law in
two Tables given, full of terror to humble man, yet by a still and soft voice,
a pattern of heavenly things were enjoined, as a Tabernacle made with hands,
the Priesthood of Levi: the Breast Plate with VRIM and THVMMIM. The Ark of the
Covenant, the blood of peace offerings, sin offerings, whole burnt-offerings,
holy incense, washings, cleansings, redemptions, attonements, remissions, the
Manna, the brazen Serpent, and holy garments of ministration, and other holy
feasts beside the Passover, distinction of times, in new Moons, years of
Rest, Jubilees, etc. enjoined. All which do teach of Christ, the truth, Who is
Jehovah our righteousness: Christ is all, and in all.

QUest. 5. But were not the moral and ceremonial Laws given to disannul the
promises, that we should seek righteousness or justication, by doing of outward
works through our own will and power?

Answ. In no wise: For although the Law of the passover came 430. years after
the promise, yet it cannot disannul the faith in Christ taught in the promises.
The same must be said of all the Ceremonies.

QUest. 6. Wherefore then did God give the Law?

Answ. I. Because in those days both among the apostate families, and in
Israel when they lived in Egypt all ungodliness and unrighteousness did
exceedingly abound. Therefore the Law was added because of transgressions, that
the offense of sin might abound to our feeling, and that we might be loathsome
to our selves. And it must be noted that the Law was not declared to Israel
only, though chiefly to them, but to the mixed multitude that came with Israel
from Egypt.

II. That it might be a Schoolmaster to lead unto Christ, to seek the
justification that is by the faith of Him. For Christ was the end, drift, and
scope of the Law for justification to every one that believes. Moses polity
ever aimed at him, for Moses wrote of Christ. And the Prophets, and History
still expound Moses, Psalm 40. Esaias 53. Daniel 9.24. And our Lord, and his
Apostles, expound Moses, and the Prophets.

III. Although our Lord Jesus Christ abrogated the Ceremonial Law, in respect
of the actual performance, and took away the (a) curse of the Law to all that
believe: They were cursed and plagued if they did not observe the ceremonial as
well as the moral: for both were contained in the book of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.
ult. Mal. 1.14.
yet the moral Law was and is still in force to be the rule of a sober,
righteous, and godly life, and so taught in all the New Testament. And with all
we are to note that the Ceremonial is inscructive and the moral is to humble,
as well as to direct in the ways of peace and holiness.

Quest. 7. Produce one text more out of Moses which may further open the
mystery of Gods will in Christ.

Answ. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14.

This commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden from thee:
neither is it far off.

It is not in heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up for us to
heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it, and do it.

Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the
Sea for us, and bring it to us, that we may hear it, and do it.

But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou
may do it.

Quest. 8. What hence, in brief, do you observe?

Answ. 1. The holy Apostle called this text the word of faith, and does expound
it of Christ concerning his incarnation and resurrection, Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11.

2. Moses brings his whole Law to this sum, and so the prophets, that
Christ the son of God was to come down from heaven, and to be man, and to
suffer many and great afflictions from the Serpent and his seed, and being the
first from the dead, is to give life and light unto the world. The wicked ever
despised this life and light in Christ, accounting this wisdom foolishness, 1
Cor. 1.23. and 2.8.

3. This Scripture, with some verses preceding, and subsequent, sets forth to
the spiritual man, the excellency, the glory, the brightness, the facility, the
preciousness, the stedfastness, and the efficacy of the Law of God, being a
revelation from heaven, and a most blessed instrument of God, to preserve his
people if they cleave unto it, to live in his covenant, to comfort in
affliction, to restore the Church decayed, cumbred, and overwhelmed with
errors, and for conservation of outward and inward consolation, etc. But
apostasy from it, brings all Curses and utter ruin. And therefore it is a
most rich favor to Jesurun; to all the Israel of God, that they are glorified
with such an inheritance of lively oracles?

4. When Moses had wrote of the Creation, of the apostasy of our first
parents, of the curse of all things visible, of the incarnation and redemption
in the Promises. Tabernacles, and Sacrifices; Of Melchizedeks and Levies
Priesthood, etc. Then says he, this doctrine is not an hid doctrine. Moses
face did not so shine with brightness, as the Law did shine in the hearts of
the faithful, that looked to Christ, (the holy seed of the woman) the end and
scope of the Law. It was hid to none, but the blinded by Satan. We should
labor to reduce history and prophecy with the New Testament to Moses.

QUest. 9. Who were followers of the doctrine of Justificacation by faith,
taught by tradition in the doctrine of the seal of circumcision was believed of
the faithful 406, years, to Isreal's coming from Egypt.
the Promises for two thousand five hundred and thirteen years, and now written
by Moses.

Answ. All the Patriarks, as is said, the people of Israel that came out of
Egypt, and that were in the wilderness, and the faithful, both Rulers and
people, in the Books of Josuah, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, etc. and especially our
Lords Fathers from Abraham to David (the first fourteen) are to be remembered,
Mat. 1.17.

QUest. 10. Who were the seed of the Serpent; hating, bruising, cursing, and
persecuting the Religion and People of Christ, his Israel?

Answ. The Egyptians, Amalek, Moab, Ammon, Midian and the Canaanites, etc.

QUest. 11. Did the Church constantly reverence the religion of the Tabernacle?

Answ. The eternal WORD came unto his own in providence and ordinances, but
his own received him not; for six hundred thousand in the Wilderness at once,
through an evil heart of unbelief, murmured, tempted, and denied Christ, and
despised the Land of Promise, and would have gone into Egypt again: and many
followed the religion of Peor. And after in Canaan, many (...) time they
revolted and rebelled against Him, called also the Angel of Gods presence,
despising his statutes, abhorring his judgments, and so brake his covenant,
and vexed his holy Spirit. Jesurun chose new gods, were defiled with their own
works, following diverse Religions, Idolatrous and foolish opinons, both of
their forefathers, as of the Canaanites, and of the peoples about Canaan.

QUest. 12. How did Christ manifest his goodness while his people obeyed him
according to his Written word, as now and after, he ever called them to it?

Answ. Through the obedience of faith, they obtained good report with God: and
God was not ashamed of them to be called their God and vouched them before all
to be his peculiar people. This he showed by his joyful presence dwelling
among them in his Tabernacle, whence joy, peace, victory, plenty, and all
outward comforts attended them in the promised earthly Rest, and to all that,
by faith in the promises, saw the days of Christ, joy and hope of entrance
into the eternal Rest, Tabernacle, and inheritance.

QUest. 13. How did Christ, in this age, bruise the head, power, and dominion,
and enmity of the Seed of the Serpent?

Answ. 1. He cast upon It is through all the old Testament, Mitzrajim where it
is translated Egypt, Esaias 43.3.
Mitzrajim, that is the Egyptians the fierceness But if thou shall indeed obey
his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies,
and an adversary to thine Adversaries, Exodus 23.
of his anger. Amalek discomfited, and utter ruin denounced: Midian plagued,
the Canaanites destroyed, and other enemies subdued.

II. Now a The first separation and rejection of the families was by the
confusion of tongues, 2. by Circumcision. 3. By the Laws given by Moses.
third time Christ showed his anger and enmity against the families by a
partition wall of ceremonies, and an handwriting of ordinances that they were
further separated, and made aliens from the Commonweal of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and were without God
in the world. Thus in every age observe how Christ called and kept his elect
from the communion of Devils, and the wicked world: yet God showed much mercy
to the heathens through the limitation of Circumcision, Exodus 12.

QUest. 14. What severity was on the Church for their revoltings from the fiery
Law, and lively oracles which Moses received from the Angel, Jehovah, the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

Answ. Him the Angel of Gods presence, who had the name of God in him, was
turned to be their enemy, and would not pardon their transgressions, but swear
they should not enter into his earthly Rest: so that heavy chastisements befell
Israel in the wilderness, and in the Land of Canaan, plagued by enemies on
every side, until the Transmigration (a) of the Land, (that is, the removing
of the Ark (b) from Syloh) yea until the days of David. Bear diligently still
in mind, with all fear and trembling, how Christ afflicted the Church for
their communion with devils, and idolators, Psalm. 78. all of it.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the fifth CHAPTER.
QUest. 2. Forth of Egypt] The deliverance of Israel from Egypt is much
celebrated in the old Testament. And amongst other things of that bondage, this
is twice noted, from a people of a strange Language, Psalm 81 and 114 Israel
could not be ignorant of the language of Egypt, but I think their idolatrous
Priests, had a mumming language in their devotions; like Rome-Egypt that taught
our forefathers in their devotions in a language they understood not: for which
we have as great cause to sing praise to God, as well as Israel of old, that we
are saved from that cruel bondage.

Quest. 4. and Answ. The breast plate with V^im and Thummim] Consider from this
time, that as the twelve Tribes followed the faith in the promises to their
godly ancestors, so the V^im and Thummim that was placed among the twelve
precious Jewels upon the Breast Plate of the High Sacrificer, never uttered any
other faith. And the same Jewels are the foundation of the Christians Jerusalem
from heaven, So our high Sacrificer more excellent then Aaron, who is Vrim and
Thummim, light, life and all perfections, all in all: all fullness dwelt in him:
and he came from the bosom of the Father, and walks in the midst of the VII.
Golden Candlesticks, and never uttered any other faith but what he taught in
Moses. The Apostle alludeth unto this when he exhorts to put on the
breast plate of Faith and Love, Faith in Christ is our light and life, and love
is the perfecting and fulsilling of the Law: and all our thoughts, speech and
action should ever intend these two. In Christ we are made sacrifices, and
therefore with a constant spirit carry this Breast plate before God and man.

Ibid. The Ark of the covenant, the blood of peace offerings, etc.] All these
things were shadows of good things to come, and enjoined till the time of
reformation, when the new and living way was manifested. The land of Canaan was
also a shadow of the true rest in the Kingdom of heaven: so David taught
carnal Israel, Psalm 95. which the Apostle handles to the revolting Hebrews,
And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a Testimony of
those things which were to be done and spoken after, Heb. 3. God did draw them
by these ordinances, to give them to understand who should be their
justification, cleansing, sin-offe^ing, etc. by many outward things and
promise, to the spiritual: but when they made their belly their God, and minded
earthly things, and thought to be justified by the outward action: Then God
showed them to be poor elements, as at Syloh and Salomons Temple burnt by
Babel, etc. yea, once more it is said, God would shake them, and Dan. 9.24, 25,
26, 27. shows by whom and how. Solomon told them of this also. The labor of
the foolish does weary him, for he knows not how to to go into the City,
Eccles. 10.15. They knew not Christ the way, the truth, and the life for the
heavenly City and Country: not like children of faith of their faithful father
Abraham.

The holy Prophets and Priests taught the meaning of the sacrifices in the
great congregation, Psalm 40.6, 7. They preached Gods justification of a
sinner, and kindeness in Christ that would come to do Gods will, They declared
Gods faithfulness and truth that he would perform his promise concerning the
sending of Jesus Christ, his death, resurrection, and ascension, Psalm 22 and
16. and 68.18. conferred with Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11. And the holy Tribes
instantly serving God day and night in this hope went thrice a year to the
Tabernacle and Temple (which were the great Congregations) to hear these things
taught, and to profess the same in their holy con^ocations. Besides the Levites
in their forty eight Towns every Sabbath, and all other Prophets and Teachers
in all their Synagogues (which were very many) had Sabbatical convocations, and
they preached upon Moses. And there were diverse Universities, or Schools of
Prophets at Ki^jabje^arim, at Bethel, at Jericho, etc. to educate young men for
knowledge to teach this most noble and glorious doctrine of faith in the Son of
God that should come into the world to make our flesh his Tabernacle.

Ibid All which do teach of Christ] The holy Prophets Psalm. 50. Esaias 53. and 55
1, 2. etc. giving the people true Expositions of the Law, show that Christ is
the end of all: all privileges of the Jews, and Gods own ordinances they not
discerning or seeking Christ by faith in them were nothing: nothing bread but
Christ: and in outward performances, and bodily exercise to be most bountiful,
most exact, accurate and unrebukable is a bestowing cost and pains, and not for
bread, for all is but dung and dogs meat without Christ. See how the Apostle
urged this to the Jews from Esaias 55.1, 2, 3. Acts 1^.38, 39. read Mich 6.6.
The Law of Mo^es polity was not given that we should be justified ex opere
operato, by bodily exercise, it was given for signification, humiliation and
direction, that Christ might be our life, without him it is a killing letter:
for so it is weak, and ^e are weak But carnal Israel mistook the Law, and so
believed, John 6. Their bodily exercise in eating Manna, did not bring them
into Canaan; for they dyed in the desert. And our Lord most heavenly draws all
Moses to himself, that he was the true Manna, and was sent of the Father to be
the true bread. And there opens all the sacrifices, that his flesh and blood
was the true sacrifice of which (though now ascended) by faith we must feed or
die, and never come to the happy resurrection of the heavenly R^st. And this
was, and is the heavenly Fathers will in the old and new Testament. The
spirituality of ordinances was cumbersome to them as to Kain, Genesis 4. wherefore
Christ in his wrath made them a snare to them, and a stumbling block: And this
was the reason they hated Christ and his Apostles to the death, Because Christ,
doctrine drove man out of himself, and so all their labor to be lost for
salvation, seeking to enter in at the strait Gate, and yet were not able
Eccles. 10.15. yea it is natural (alas) to us all to rest in outward
performances (as Kain) and not to care for Christ, the second Adam, and the
justification, that is by the faith of Him. The Ceremonial Law was weak to
justify Romans 8.3. for it was impossible that the blood of Oxen, Goats,
washings, etc. could cleanse the conscience from the guilt and filth. The moral
could not justify because we were weak, nothing in us was able to do any thing
to satisfy the justice of God; and because the carnal heart of many, being
covered with a veil could not discern Christ (the end and intent of the Law)
yet they knew that they must labor one way or other to have peace with God,
and their own conscience, they would thousands of Rams; and thousands of Rivers
of oil, and would be exact in outward doings for justification. And they durst
not touch about the spiritualness of the Law, for it is the very pangs of death
to understand the Law rightly, R^m. 7. Though sometime it could not be but the
conscience was affrighted, then they did busy themselves in outward acts of
fasting, praying, almsdeeds, washings, etc. to quier their heart. And this was
their Divinity, and they were cursed by their censors that taught the Law
otherwise. The Pharisees are the true Fathers of the Popish company: and we may
very well yield the Papist antiquity (because they talk much of antiquity) even
Esaias 1. and 58. yea higher Psalm 50. yea Genesis 4. in Kain, who was the first
that practiced this doctrine.

The Ph^risees thought Christ came to destroy the Law, when he taught his holy
doctrine; he answered he came not to destroy, but to fulfill it by orthodox
expos^^ions. But they saw how it will go with them if Christ's doctrine were
received, and they would rather kill him, so it is now: where the word of
Christ is truly taught, it makes the carnal heart mad, and to persecute. I did
desire to remember these things often, because of the cursed corruption of our
nature, who are so ready (yea every mothers child of us) to contend our selves
without Christ, and to rest in bodily exercise. The Churche^ were warned of
this evil springing in the Apostles times, 1 Timothy 4^8. And we have cause to
fear that not only Papists, but thousands of Protestants are leavened with this
leaven of the Pharisees which is but hypocri^ie.

Quest. 5. ^u^ mine not the Moral] I use the term Moral as godly Divines do
because it is the holy Law of Christ that shall last for ever, when the
ceremonial was abolished. And people must be taught, that it is that which is
called the form of sound doctrine, of faith and love which is in Christ Jesus:
and we are to understand, that the Son of God, the Angel of Gods presence, who
has the name of God in him, who is very often called Ienovah: he gave the Law
as Mediator, between God and man to train up his people in faith and love. And
all the Law, and the Prophets, are but expositions of the ten words, therefore
faith in Christ is taught in the Law: as 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment,
that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another as he gave commandment: Again it is said, when we carry our selves
proudly, and do not walk charitably one toward another we sin against Christ,
Romans 14.1 Cor. 8. All relations in their obedience serve Christ, Ephesians. 5.14,
15. and 6.5, 6. Col. 3.24. 1 Timothy 6 3.

Ibid. seek justification by doing] This was the false doctrine of the
concision, and has cast them off to this day: see how sweetly the Lord Jesus
calls them from this error, John 6.27, 28. etc. This is an idolatrous error of
all our hearts: to be spiritual, to come to God by faith in Christ, and in our
whole conversation so to be spiritual: to come to God by faith in Christ, and
in our whole conversation so to walk as seeing him that is invisible, as H^bel,
as M^ses and all faithful: Oh how hard! how impossible! such a power of
darkness and weakness is upon us. O Lord God, the way of man is not in himself,
till thou turn us from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to thy self.
The glorious wisdom of Moses Law, which stands for the Marr^w still but not
for the outward Sabbath, circumcision, Tabernacle, and other rites of Levi.
That Christ from the Law plagued the concision, and made the Law held as their
Table for the in ^ood (...) succor them, to be their snare unto death. They
would not enter into the rest of Christ; where Baptism and the Lords Supper are
no burden, (Mr. Bro. on Lam. 1.14.) where Christ is not sought and found in his
own ordinances, all (not the moral, but also the ceremonial) savours death, 2
Cor. 3.7. to 16. what are we then to think of men's precepts, voluntary
religion, and self-willed humbleness. Take notice what our Lord taught, Mat.
15.3. John 6.27, etc. and his Apostle, Romans 10.3. Phil. 3.3. etc. Colos. 2.23.

Quest. 6. Number. II. Moses polity ever aimed at Him] The Law Moral and
Ceremonial was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: grace
is two fold, the one of Justification from the guilt and curse of the Law, the
other of sanctification, the righteousness of the Law being fulfilled in them
that are in Christ Jesus. who inables them by his spirit most willingly to walk
therein: delighting in the Law of God concerning the inner man. And Christ was
the truth and substance of the Ceremonial Law, as all the Epistle to the
Hebrews shows: all was sponsorious of a better hope in him, Heb. 7.22. and
8.6. And this was that the saints so fervently prayed for teaching and
understanding the wondrous things of the Law, how all was sponsorious of
comfort in Christ, Psalm 119. And so of this did Ethan sing, Psalm 89.1, 2, etc.

Ibid. Quest. 6. N. III. The Ceremonial Law] That is, Gods ceremonial Law: no
man has power to institute or sanctify as of himself any teaching sign or
ceremony of person or thing, time or place to worship God thereby, or to take
away that which the: Lord has ordained, Moses durst not add or diminish any
thing: no not any other color as green, which is as pleasant as blew, purple
and scarlet, all colors of blood and sus^^ing. The pattern was his Direction*
And therefore was Moses called faithful in Gods house, the Church of God, the
Pillar and ground of truth. Will worship is a corruption of all our hearts, it
likes us better then Gods commandments, Amos 4. Mat. 15. Luke 16.15. And we
have great confidence in it that it pleases God. But it brings shame at last
to any State: and all the Priests of Bethel cannot quench the fire that it will
kindle, Amos 5. Hos. 10.14, 15. And let all will-worshippers mind that however
they have a show of wisdom in their will worship, yet it makes the people
forget their Maker, Hos. 8.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Kin. 12.33. Amos 5.21. and 8.10.
And this too evident of later years in the ungodly dealing of the Prelates in
their hinderance of sound teaching of the word in most paroches of England.

Ibid, N. III. and the moral is still to humble] Doubtless the Moral Law must
be taught; it is a part of Christ's mediatorian kingdom, God the Father made Him
Lord and Christ to all the Israel of God, and obedience is better than
sacrifice, It is a point of faith to believe that Christ gave the Law, Exodus
23.20, 21, 22. They of old were commanded to hear him, and so we under the New
Testament, must hear the Beloved Son, and reverance the Heir, Mat. 17.5. Matthew.
21.98. It is said, Felix called forth Paul to hear him of the faith in Christ;
and as he was teaching of righteousness, temperance, and of the judgment to
come, Felix trembled, Acts 24.25. Therefore the Law ought to be taught, it
belongs to the faith of Christ. And godly teachers are to lift up their voice
like a Trumpet to make men's hearts shake and tremble for rebellion against the
Mediator: and therefore the godly teachers 40.50. and 60. years ago taught the
way of the Lord more perfectly then many now do. vid. infra. the note on Levit.
26.17. chap. 8.

Quest. 7. and Answ. Upon the text of Deuteronomy. 30.] Moses speaks this of the Law,
the Apostle of Christ taught in the Law, Romans 10. So Esaias faith, In his Law
shall the nations hope, Esaias 42.4. Matthew says, In his Name, Mat. 12.21. The
Apostle calls this text, the word of faith, and the just do live by faith:
Moses shows the Law of Jehovab, that is Christ is a law of Love, and the
Apostle calls it, A law of Faith: So then it is a form of Wholesome words of
Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. And how precious, sweet, dear, rich,
pure, is the Law of Christ, being a Law of Life in him, Deuteronomy. 32.47. Therefore
Stephen says, that Moses received from the Angel of the Covenant, lively
Oracles, Acts 7.38. And so the Apostles received from him words purer than
snow, whitter than milk, sweeter than honey, or the honey comb, words of spirit
and life to preach unto the dead apostate families, John 6.63. So the
Sacrifices, washings, tabernacle, the land of promise, etc. profited nothing,
were a killing letter, having the veil on the heart. The words and doctrine
that Christ spoke to Moses, they were spirit, and they were life. And so David
knew, (and all of faith) when he cried to Christ to be his sprinkling, and his
hyssop, Psalm 51. And so Esaias and Stephen taught them: and the Apostle, Romans
10.6. Exodus 20.2. And all expositions of the ten words were a killing letter
not looking to that which is within the Veil, even the grace and truth of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 15.11. The Prophets and Apostles unveil Moses face most
brightly, they have made it as open, even as Moses made it when he took off the
veil when he went to speak with Christ, Read.

Quest. 8. and Ans. N. II. To be man and to suffer] Mark the cause of the
Apostle, I am accused for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers,
Psalm 16.10. and 22.29. and 40.6, 7, 8. Acts 26. this was a constant doctrine
from the beginning, and to be declared from age to age to the end of the world,
that the Son of God should come down from heaven to be a second Adam, and to
give himself a sin-offering to death and be raised from the dead, 2 Timothy 2.8.
and so in this doctrine Christ is our bread and drink, Joh. 6.27, 28, 29, etc.
The pattern was not yet to come down from heaven to take our nature to be his
Tabernacle, and his flesh and blood by sacrifice to be our bread and drink,
John 1.14. and 6.54. And till the Son of God came to be and do thus, All that
Christ revealed to Moses was sponsorius, and an introduction of a better hope,
that is, Christ hoped for, by all faithful of the old Testament, by whom they
and we come unto God, Hebr. 11.1, 2, 3, 4. John 14.6. Heb. 8 Ephesians. 1.10, 11,
Esaias 15 1, 2, 3. Acts 13.

Ibid. N. II. Accounting this wisdom foolishness.] And the light shines in
the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not, Joh. 1. (...). It was ever
a stumbling block and foolishness to the wise and prudent of this world, to the
natural man: John 6.52.60.1.1 Cor. 1. and 2. And so is was to many while Moses
was yet alive, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 27, 28, 29. such waited but for an opporeunity of
Moses death, and Ioshuahs, and the godly Elders, then they did show themselves:
so blessed Paul spoke of Wolves and apostasy, Acts 20. It is hard for us to
deny all of the first Adam, and wholly submit to be taught and guided in the
doctrine of the second Adam, the Lord from heaven.

Quest. 8. and Answ. N. IV. Of Melebisedecks and Levies sacrifice hood] See the
Apostles disputation concerning Melchesedeck ( Heb. 5. and 6 and 7.) who was
still alive, after a sort, in description. As the holy Prophet David taught the
people of his days, and what use they should make of the Land of Promise,
Psalm 95. and of the use and end of the sacrifices and washings, etc. Psalm 40.
and 51. So he taught them that Levies Priesthood should have an end; for that
our glorious Lord Jesus Christ is made a sacrificer for ever ofter the order of
Malchesedek, and not after Aarons order of the Levitical Priesthood; where
neither the persons or things that Levi did, could justify the doers, or
comers thereunto. Now the Lord Jesus Christ he was promised and prophesied of
in all the old holy volume of the book of God, that he was made a Mediator, and
a Surety (a Sponsor) of such an Administration that should perfectly save and
justify them that came unto God by him. He was of God the Father (none else
could) made a Sponsor, a surety. All the sacrifices that he commanded our
Fathers they did them, till the fullness of times did come, and then he did
send his beloved Son and Servant in whom his soul delights, he took unto him
true humanity and was a Sponsor, a Surety of a better Testament, (i.e.) The
Mediator of the New Testament, for their full con^olation: to comfort them
concerning their works, and concerning the sorrows of their hands, and
concerning the earth which God has cursed. He shall do that which all Levites
tribe could not ex opere operato. Levies Priesthood could not cleanse the
conscience from the guilt of our sinful works, not procure a blessing on our
Labors, nor make a new world: his Priesthood could not cleanse the conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God, etc. And for this cause Christ was a
Sponsor of a better covenant. And Christ himself faith, he will become this
Sponsor and Mediator to answer the will of the Father. Lo, I come to do thy
will, O God, thy Law and appointment (for the redemption of thy people that
thou have given me) is in my heart to give my self a Sacrifice of a sweet
smelling favor of rest God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not counting their trespasses unto them. For be made him to be a Sin-offering
for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
2 Cor. 5. Much more might be said, but let the people of God study the
Scriptures their inheritance. God has a time and a day wherein he will burn up
the hay, stubble, and rotten wood of impertinent applications and
interpretations.

Ibid. N. I V. Is not an bidd doctrine.] It is not an hidden thing nor a wonder
for thee O Israel: for this doctrine that the Son of God should come down from
heaven to be man has been taught to thy Fathers from the beginning, and that
he should be the great High Priest and Sacrifice, and that he should raise
himself from death to give hope to all faithful of their resurrection. Israel
should not make doubt of this doctrine. Yet it is a Wonder as Ethan sings of
it, Psalm 89. great is the mystery of Godliness. But this has been ever taught
in the Church, this doctrine is the faith of Gods elect, and the Churches
possession, Ioh. 1. Levi the Tribe appointed to reach divinity should never
have been graven in the bright and pleasant Smaragd, if the stories of this Art
had been dark. ^et had been a fitter stone for darkness. The mind of man may
have abundant satisfaction, and strong confidence concerning the doctrine of
the way of life, by holy and humble diligent study of the Scriptures: And they
that will not believe Moses and the Prophets will not believe though one should
rise from the dead.

Quest. 9. and Answ. Taught by tradition] Note, the doctrine of faith one, and
the same whether by Tradition or Writing. For those 2513. years, the faith of
the Gospel was propagated by tradition by great prophets of long life, and
great authority and sacrifices as seals of the Covenant added for confirmation
of doctrine.

Quest. 10 and Answ. Midian] Although Abraham taught his household the faith of
Christ, as is seen in the book of Ioh, yet many of his posterity apostated to
that idolatry, religion and opinion, with which he was corrupted, at YR, others
fell to the false faith, religion and opinion of Peor, Jos. 23. and 24. and did
seek to curse the true faith of Gods elect, and the holy people of that
profession, Number 23. and 24. Midian was of Abraham by Ket^rah. The world was
then full of false opinions and heretical Doctrines as now: they could plead
for Nachors Teraphim, for Peor, for Chemosh and Mil^ham, etc. but Israel must
hearken to the Law and Testimony that Christ gave them: so Moses and Iosuah
most pathetically, a little before their deaths, exhorted them, to regard the
holy Law, and not to follow the traditions of their fathers, or of the Nations,
Ios. 24. Deuteronomy.

Quest. 11. and Answ. And would have gone into Egypt again] Like them are our
Popish fools, that would go into Rome Egypt again, for their Fish, Flesh pots,
Leeks, Garlic, Onions, Cucumbers, Melons, their doctrines of bodily exercise,
of Images, Pilgrimages, the dotage of Purgatory etc. goodly Cates sure, to be
compared to the heavenly Manna of Gods word, and Gods dwelling in his
tabernacle among us. We do not consider the glorious presence in Christ in his
Ordinances and protection, etc since he brought us from among them. By the
Gospel, the way of Christ, the face of God shines upon us. The Gospel is the
object of promise, joy and gladness to every honest hearted Christian. Let our
apostate hearts remember Lots wife in looking back to Rome-Sodome. Christ
complained Israel would none of me: Oh that we could think of these things:
What one nation on the earth has been like us for mercies, and how ill have we
requited the Lord? as Israel did so do we, Psalm. 81. Deuteronomy. 32.

Ibid. Of their forefathers.] The idolatry of Terah and Abraham continued above
500 years, to the death of Iosuah, yea long after, Iosuah 24. 2.14. Observe how
fast idolatry and superstition, and will worship sticks in the heart of
posterity. Although they had the fiery Law expounded by Moses, and miracles to
confirm them of the truth of that Religion, that holy faith of the Son of God
Moses, taught, and possessed Canaan, in the obedience of that holy faith, and
many chastisements for Apostasy to Baal Peor, etc yet many of their hearts
were false, So it is with us at this day in our nation; although God has
spoken to us by his Son, and have the blessed Scriptures, which have in them a
blessed comforting, flaming light, and brightness, and 70. years and more under
Gods gracious husbandry, yet how rebellious! Oh mourn for the Corruption of our
natures, and see how the tradition of a false religion from forefathers
prevailed and prevails with many before the written word. Our Teachers must
earnestly press the reading of all the holy Scriptures: but surely they do but
coldly and seldom do it. The Serpent and his seed are great enemies to the
holy Scriptures, and a surer note of a wicked man need not be sought after,
then the slighting and the scorning of the Scriptures.

Ibid As of the Canaanites] And an Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to
Bochim, and said, I have made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you
unto the Land which I swear unto your fathers, and I said, I will never break
my covenant with you: And you shall make no league with the inhabitants of the
Land: you shall throw down their altars, but you have not obeyed my voice. Why
have you done thus? Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from
before you, but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their Gods, (their
religion) shall be a snare unto you. And it came to pass when the Angel of the
Lord spoke all these words unto the Children of Israel, that the people lift up
their voice and wept. And they called the name of that place Bochim, and they
sacrificed there unto Jehovah, Judges 2. observe all that chapter.

Quest. 12. and Answ. Joyful presence dwelling among them] It is a joyful thing
indeed, and a glorious privilege to have the Tabernacle reared, that Christ
may dwell among us, and for us to tread in his Courts. Look what any Father,
Husband, or King is to a Kingdom and family, such is Christ to his. After
Christ had promised many blessings Levit. 26. as the basis of all he says, And
I will set my Tabernacle among you and my soul shall not abhor you, and I
will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. And look
these texts for meditation to see the glory of Christ in his Tabernacle as our
Prophet, Priest, and King, Exodus 20.24. and 25.22. and 29.42, 43 and 30.6.36.
Psalm 2. 1 Samuel 12.12. Psalm 45. and 47. and 48. and 84. and 95. and 100. and
145. and 146, etc. So when they were to come from Babel this is mentioned as
the foundation of all comfort, Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. also we must mind what is to be
done of us: ye shall reverence my sanctuary, and keep my sabbaths, and never
appear before Christ empty, Exodus 23.15. Levit. 26.2. Now observe the same
glorious mercies are related and applied to us under the New Testament, 2 Cor.
6.16. Apoc. 21.3. and their holy practice in their worships, 2 Cor. 7.1.1 Cor.
11. and 14. And their Alms-deeds every Lords day in their holy meetings, 1 Cor.
16.1, 2. as Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17. Now of the uses of application, how many? how
great? how full of comfort and terror?

First, to instruct, God would not have a Church or family in the world, but
because he would have holy worship: Religion is the essence of a Church,
family, or person. 2. The world is not continued but for this. 3. Great are the
privileges of the Church that Christ is among us by his ministry and
ordinances, for our Prophet, Priest, and King. 4. What an heinous wickedness it
is to interrupt or pull down holy things 5. They are cursed of God that do so.

Secondly to exhort, 1. to study, 2. to procure, 3. to maintain, 4. to be
zealous for, 5. to esteem above all, and to be thankful for: 6. to take up with
content, 7. to relish, this glory, Psalm 42. and 63. and 122. and 132.8. To lay
to heart to mourn for the absence and desolation of holy things, Dan. 9. and
10.2, 3 Lament 1. and 2. and 3.

Thirdly, To reprove the wretchedness and deadness concerning these things,
Acts 18.17. etc. Also we must ever observe, that Moses Tabernacle was according
to the Pattern of that which was in heaven. They that enjoyed the peace of God
in the earthy tabernacle, had the same still in the heavenly, as Psalm 15.1, 2.
And it is said our Lord, with his own blood went through the veil of his flesh,
into the most holy place, the very heavens, as the high Sacrificer went with
blood into the holy place made with hands. This touched often, and needful to
be observed in all the Ceremonies of Moses, else we shall have a veil over our
hearts, as Jews and Papists, who see not Christ the end of all these things
that were to be abolished.

Ibid. 12. Quest. and Answ. -- Victories] By faith they waxed valiant in
Battle, and turned to flight the Armies of the Alians. Their faith saw the
d^ies of Christ, that he would overcome him that had the power of death, the
Devil. the Prince of darkness, the old Serpent. Therefore by faith they
overcame the Serpents seed. All true soldiers should be doctors in divinity,
such will conquer with small loss, as Israel under Josuah, and the Elders
surviving Josuah, who delighted in the study of Moses, Jos. 1. and 23.6. And
David's Captains by knowledge of Moses were mighty in Battle, Heb. 11.34.

Quest. 13. and Answ. N. I. Analek discomfited] Amalek of Esau despised the
faith as Esau his Father, and became a fierce persecutor of the faith of
Christ, and his people, which was the break-neek of that State. Gods curse, and
the Churches War were never reversed nor appeased to the days of Haman. A
warning to persecuting States, especially to mystical Edom. The form of the
pattent and promise that God gave to Abraham. is for comfort to all the Israel
of God for ever; I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee, as see in Numb. 24. and Balaam foretells the like destruction to Kittim as
to Amalek: The same enmity, the same war, and the same curse shall follow the
Serpents seed in perdition to the end.

N. II. a partition wall] This was the vail and covering on all nations which
Christ would abolish, Esaias 25. Dan. 9.24. etc. Ephesians. 2.15. God hated the
apostate families like Devils, that he gave by Moses an hedge of Laws to keep
Israel from amity and communion with them And this was one special Law, that
certain Beasts, fowls and fish prohibited (to distinguish them in diet from
heathen) are called unclean. So be all without the Gospel in their high
learning, To. 1.21, 22. as Socrates, Plato, Tully, Varro, Plutarch, and the
civilest. These things were continual occasions of enmity between an Israelite
and an Heathen, Ephesians. 2.15. Hest. 3.8.

Ibid. N. II. Separated and made Aliens] But being blessed in Christ, (when the
vessel was let down from heaven, Acts 10.) they and their children were equally
stated in all those glorious privileges of Israel, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Let
Anti-poedobaptists consider it: and hence forward call not your children common
or unclean: and do not reason against the comforts of your selves and children,
where the merciful Lord God gives you no warrant so to do; nay, is it not a
daring speech against God and his covenant, to say the infants of believing
Gentiles are common and unclean, whereas Christ says they are clean and holy,
1 Cor. 7.

Ibid. N. II. without God in the world] Compare just divine severity. When the
X. tribes had revolted from David's house, and the religion of the Temple. They
were almost in as bad a case for salvation as the heathens. Observe Ephesians. 2.12
etc. It shall be further noted hereafter, that it may be deligently marked.

Quest. 14. and Answ. From the Angel Jehovah] Be careful to observe how Christ
is called Angel, and Jehovah, Exodus 3. and in many other places. Also in Exodus
23. mark this speech; Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the
way, and to bring th^e into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and
obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions,
for my Name is in him. He is the express Image of the fathers person, Hebrews
1.2, 3. confer Matthew 17. 5. John 12.47, 48, 49, 50. All the Churches of the
New Testament should hear him what he by his Spirit says to the Churches. And
the seven golden Candlesticks felt his hand as heavy, as the Golden Candlestick
of Israel: both provoked him, and both felt: he was a consuming fire.

Ibid. Plagued by enemies on every side] Among many particular evils that
Israel was plagued with, note this, that false religion brought penury, and was
the decay of liberty of trades and commutation of civil commerce, etc. Jud.
5.6, 7, 8.1 Sam. 13.19. corruption in religion and trouble of State ever go
together: Then was War in the Gate, Jud. 5. The State of the Common weal,
commonly follows the State of the Church. Princes in all their Governments
should so manage their affairs in righteousness, temperance and godliness to
be a Commentary on Psalm 2.10, 11, 12. and let them remember David's last words,
2 Samuel 23.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Mr. Fox in Acts and Monuments toward the later end of
Henry the seventh has a worthy speech concerning this.

CHAP. VI.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations on them, How Redemption was taught
unto David, and others.

QVest. 1. Declare further how God opened the mystery of his will for man's
Redemption in after times.

Answ. Christ was promised to David the sweet Psalmist of Israel, who in holy
Psalms taught his people the histories past, and the prophecies to come, which
draw unto Christ and his Rest for man's Redemption, as if the matters were
present. And in those days and after: the brightness of Christ in holy
prophesies does so plentifully shine, that they cannot here be conveniently
abridged.

QUest. 2. and Answ. The Psalms and Prophets are indeed a most sure word of
prophecy, and a glorious light enlightening the eyes to see the Person and
Office of Christ the Morning Star, according to the promises to Hevah and
Abraham: Therefore now only express a few texts how the Saints of the old
Testament, professed experimentally the doctrine of the apostasy of our first
parents, and of the promises?

Answ. Psalm 51. ver. 5. Behold, Joh. 15.14. and 2.5.4, 5, 6.
I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me.

Ver. 7. Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be
whiter than snow.

Ver. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Ver. 11. Confer this verse concerning David with Cains murder and
excommunieation from Gods presence and terror of conscience, Genesis 4.
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

Ver. 12. restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free
Spirit, etc.

Psalm 130.3. If thou, O Jah, should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand,

Ver. 4. But forgiveness is with thee, that thou may be feared.

Psalm. 143.1. Hear my prayer, O Eternal, give ear to my supplication: in thy
faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

V. 2. And enter not into judgment with thy servant for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified.

Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered.

V. 2. Blessed is the man unto whom Jehovah counts not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

V. 3. When I kept silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day
long.

V. 4. For day and night thy hand is heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into
the drought of summer*

V. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I
said I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
punishment of my sin.

Genesis 15.16. And he believed in Jehovah, and he counted it to him for
righteousness.

Hab. 2.4. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him* But the
just shall live by his faith.

Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver
them.

V. 5. They cried unto thee, and were delivered, they trusted in thee, and were
not confounded.

Esaias 26.3. Thou will keep him in continual peace, whose mind is staid on
thee: because he trusts in thee.

V. 4. Trust ye in Jehovah for ever; for in Iah Jehovah is the Rock of all ages.

Jerem. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in Jehovah, and whose hope
Jehovah is.

V. 8. For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out
her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall
be green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yielding fruit.

Hab. 3.17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom neither fruit be in the
vine, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat,
the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and no herds in the stalls.

V. 18. Yet will I rejoice in Jehovah, I will joy in the God of my ^alvation.

V. 19. The Lord Jehovah is my strength, and he will make my feet like hindes
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places.

Psalm 66.18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Eternal will not hear my
prayer.

Psalm 103.1. Bless the Eternal O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his
holy name,

V. 2. Bless the Eternal, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.

V. 3. Who forgive^h all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.

V. 4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving
kindeness, and tender mercies, etc.

QUest. 3. What do you, in general, observe out of these portions of Scripture?

Answ. These Scriptures are a confession of faith, proceeding from the holy
Spirits illumination, and experience in the inner man, agreeing with the
doctrine of the promises, wherein the faithful soul applies the doctrine of
the corruption of nature, and of justification, and the fruits thereof unto
special uses of information, confession, prayer, and praise, containing two
parts what we are without Christ, and what we are by Christ, for he is the
Mercy-seat.

Quest. 4. What more specially may, and is to be minded?

Answ. I. It is necessary that each one, Job 11.12. and 14.4 and 15.14.16. Genesis
6.5. and 8.21. Genesis 1.27. compared with 5.3. Psalm. 51.5. and 58.3. Esa. 48.8.
and circumcision enjoined in infancy shows the corruption of nature.
though in a visible Church Estate, know and be persuaded of the truth of the
doctrine of the uncleanness and filthiness of the corruption of nature, taken
from parents derived from the first Adam, and that all actual sin proceeds
from this birth-sin as from a fountain.

2. That the Son of God became a Second Adam to be to all that receive him, and
believe in him, a fountain for sin and for uncleanness, and to renew and create
in us his glorious Image, and to repair the lapses and decays of the same. The
graces of which are from his fullness, as a well of water springing up unto
eternal life.

3. The regenerate upon conscience of guiltiness can never be in quiet till
with godly sorrow he do freely and ingenuously confess his sin, which being
done by the convincing power of the Spirit of Christ, the soul which groans and
sighs from the same Spirit earnestly longs and prays for reconciliation,
and restoring to former favor, peace, and joy with God, which is more sweet
and satisfactory then all contentments in this World, and on the contrary the
withdrawing or withholding from the conscience his gracious Divine aspect
nothing more dejecteth.

4. No man can stand before God to be justified, if God should judge him
according to the Law.

5. Here is showed the blessedness of the saints touching justification, and
how them of the old Testament understood the doctrine, that it consisted in
transgression forgiven, in sin covered, iniquity not imputed (speeches
importing one, and the same thing) which grace is only procured by Christ's
redemption and satisfaction figured in the Gospel-Law. And when the Lord God
preaching his free promise of grace and peace in Christ Jesus by the words of
reconciliation, does by his spirit unite a man to Christ, then at that instant
he receives and believes in Christ as Mediator of his atonement,
justification, and salvation, and by this faith in Christ the saints in all
ages had good report, Heb. 11.

6. No man can fear God, that is to say, serve God as his Child, unless he be
set free, that is, justified from sin by faith and forgiveness. Faith resting
upon Christ, and apprehending (at least a possibility of) forgiveness, works
love, obedience, reverence and godly fear, Luke 7.47. To. 5.1. Esa. 26.3, 4.
Heb. 4.5-56. and 1.0.16. to 23. Psa. 130. and 62. S. Romans 10.14.
Also hope, joy, patience, perfect or continual peace, quiet waiting upon God,
and stirs up to prayer with boldness and confidence.

7. In coming unto God we must do it with an humble heart from an inner feeling
of our sins and corruptions, and a true desire to be eased or justified from
thern; not only for remission of guilt and punishment, but mortification and
sanctification. For no man that stands upon his own righteousness, or allows,
or is indulgent to himself in any sin, secret or open, of omi^sion or
commission, can be an humble and upright supplicant, and petitioner to God, nor
can look for audience.

8. The saints go only to Jehovah in prayer, and only to him for forgiveness,
and all kinds of mercies, who has set up his throne of grace only in Christ.
Our Lord in his doctrine of prayer, teaching us to pray, confirms this,
Matthew chap. 6.

Here is to be noted the glorious use of faith, not only for justification,
but how necessary it is for us in this our pilgrimage, in all estates,
conditions, and varieties of life, that it settleth the heart, and banisheth
from the inner man heartrending thoughtfulness, that the mind, will, and
affections, are conserved from heaven in a flourishing green temperature: the
word of promise, and the blessed Spirit that seals the promises do so water,
nourish and restore the soul, that it is carried above all wants and
difficulties, etc.

10. Before we can have any comfort to be delivered from any danger by the seed
of the Serpent, or from any other affliction, or for assistance, consolation,
or direction in any thing for our selves or for the Church, we must go to God
by faith in Christ for forgiveness of sin.

11. The inner feeling and apprehension of Justification, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.
and Psalm 32.1, 2, 3, etc.
Mortification, and Sanctification, does greatly affect an holy soul with
thankfulnesle and praise, and denial of self-sufficiency, etc. deeply admiring
the blessed Jehovah in those, and in all other fruits, comforts, and effects of
his favor, etc. etc.

Quest. Go on to show to what other famous Pillar the Spirit of endless wisdom
has fastened the holy and pleasant Chain of times which direct and draw unto
Christ?

Answ. To the building of Salomons Temple, a figure of Christ the true Temple.

Quest. How many years are from the Lamb of the Passover, or since the coming
from Egypt, to the Temples foundation?

Answ. Four hundred and fourscore years.

Quest. What Scriptures are contained in those four hundred and eighty years.

Answ. Exodus 12. to the end of that book, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuterenomy,
Josua, Judges, Ruth, two Books of Samuel, the first of Kings to the 6. chap.
and most of the first of Chronicles: and the two first chapters of the second
of Chronicles, and very much of the book of Psalms.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the sixth CHAPTER.
Qvest. and Answ. David the sweet Psalmist] David sung most sweetly of Christ,
and his Kingdom: of his Person (both of his divine and humane nature) and
offices, and the benefits thereby. He spoke of Christ's humiliation and
exaltation. This Patriark and prophet in holy Psalms speaking by the Spirit of
God; 2 Samuel 23. Mat. 18. calls Christ his Lord, Psalm 110. the Son in whom
they that trust are happy Psalm 2. Also after God had promised him Christ, he
called him David beloved, Psalm 130.10. Mat. 3.17. etc.

Quest. 2. and Answ. Psalm 51 7. Purgeme with hyssop] The High Sacrificer
purged the unclean with hyssop: he was to do the outward action, and could do
no more: David did not believe the doctrine of bodily exercise. So John Baptist
says, I baptiz^lyou with water, but the Messiah with the Holy Ghost, So Daniel
goes to God in Christ, who is the true hyssop, and he that sprinkleth the
conscience for justification and sanctification, as St. Peter taught the
circumeision, 1 Pet. 1.3. and St. Paul in the Epistle to them, Heb. 9. and 10.
So David confessed he was a Leper, and unclean spiritually, crying to God to be
purg^d, and cleansed as Lepers, and other unclean were purified, Levit. 14.6.
Number. 19.18. By this we see they had knowledge what the Ceremonies meant, and
the Law was written in their hearts, and so their minds, and on the Table of
their heart, Prove. 3.3. and 7.3. and none but God could so write it, and this
was from his covenant in Christ, he being their God; also this shows they had
expounded of the Law.

The Modern Jews could say (and they had it from their ancient Elders) and an
excellent saying it is, What Aaron did on earth, Michael (that is Christ) did
in heaven: But yet they should go one point of faith further, That every
Sacrificer must be taken from among men, to teach us to believe that the Son of
God should take man's nature to end Moses, and to be a sacrificer for ever, Heb.
5.1, 2. etc. But they doubted and said, Who can go up to heaven to bring Christ
down to dwell in our Tabernacle and who can go to the deep of the earth to
bring Christ from the dead. They believed not JESUS to be Jehovah, and by the
Godhead to raise the manhood, and that God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto Himself: not counting their trespasses to them, and that he made him to be
a sin-offering for us, who knew no sin that we might be made God the Fathers
righteousness or justification, pardon, forgiveness, freedom, and atonement in
Him.

Upon Psalm 143.1. Hear my prayer, O Eternall] As it was observed at the
beginning that each comfort comes to us by way of free promise and covenant,
(unthought of, and undesired on our part) so it is in this duty of prayer,
helped us in the duty, and promised in the Mediator to hear us, Psalm 50.15,
Genesis 46.1. Ephesians. 2.18. we could neither know what to pray, nor had the face to
look up to God. But this through the work of the Spirit makes the saints (them
of the old Testament, as well as we of the New, as Ephesians. 2.18, 19. weeboth) to
utter their Groans, and sighs to the God of Covenant: Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John 16. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy ways, Prove. 3. By faith in Christ
Habel drew near, or came to God, in assurance of acceptance, Heb. 10, 22. and
11.4. A promise believed most lively stirs up to prayer, 2 Samuel 7.27. Dan.
9.1, 2, 3, etc. Ezekiel. 36.37. Genesis 32.9. The unchangeableness of Gods counsels,
and the stability of the promises, yea, and the fruits of our Lord Christ's
death, do not dispense from the duty of prayer, yea they are wrought for our
good by his ordinance, Number. 16.46, 47.

Quest. 3. and Answ. The Spirits illumination] The Spirit enlightneth the eyes
of the understanding experimentally to know the mystery of God, who is the
Father, and of Christ. It convinces of sin and uncleanness, abaseth all our
righteousness, shows the fountain for washing of guilt and filth: seals
reconciliation in the assurance of justification and adoption: frames the foul
a new Creature, to humble filial and sincere obedience and invocation: it
recovereth from-salls, and comforts in affliction, and carries the heart aloft
in praises and thanksgivings, etc.

Quest. 4. and Answ. N. 1. From the first Adam] By one man sin entered into the
world in whom all men have sinned, Romans 5. Mark there the sweet comparisons of
the first and second Adam: Again, that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, John 3. Every man is born an
ignorant Ass-colt, born an Atheist and Idolatour: born of a false worship, an
hypocrite, a blasphemer, and a profaner of Gods Name and Worship, forgetful
and unmindeful, and slighting Gods sanctified time of Worship: born with a
stubborn spirit against the duties of all religions, born a murderer, an
adulterer, a thief, a false accuser, and slanderer, a covetous uncontonted
person. In all things the thoughts of man's heart is evil from his youth.
Therefore the Spirit testifies that wear all born dead in sin and children of
Wrath by nature. But alas! How dully do we think of these things?

Ibid. N. 1. Became a second Adam] David looked to the Tabernacle God would
rear, not such a one as was made with hands, but from the similitude of that
which was on earth, he looked to the heavenly thing themselves: Faith did
evidence to him things not seen. David says to God in Christ, reconciling the
world to himself, wash me. So the Apostles show this washing and cleansing, as
from him, that is, from the beginning, but manifested to be a second Adam to be
seen, selt, and handled, even for this great mercy, 1 John 1.7. Apoc. 1.5. Tit.
3.5. 1 Pet. 1.2.

Ibid. N. 2. repair the lapses and decayes] The just man falls scaven times a
day, but he rises again, God will uphold that he shall not fall finally: and
David prayed for upholding, Psalm 37.24. and 51.12, Pro. 24 16 and God does
uphold us in all our temptations, that there will be an issue out of them,
Psalm 73.23. 1 Cor. 10.13.

N. 3. w^harawing or with hold^,] How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb 9 14 and 10.22. 1 John
(...). 20, 21.

N. 4 According to the Law] We most hence learn to undervalue our best
abilities, and to be humbled for our exactest performances. Therefore Christ
ordained sacrifice for the sins of their holy offerings, Deuteronomy. 16. And that the
High Priest should bear the iniquity of their holy things, which the children
of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts, Exodus 28.38. And the Saints
were sensible of this; confessing we are all unclean, and that all our
righteousness is as filthy rags, Esaias 64.6. if the best man dare not justify
his actions, his actions cannot justify him: the most regenerate does not what
he would and should, Romans 7. a godly man sees cause to hate somewhat he does in
his best actions. The Law of Christ, Exodus 20. is more spiritual than the best
man. If we condemn our selves, we justify the Law, that it is holy, just, and
good.

N. 5. That it consisted in transgression, forgiveness] By the grace of
forgiveness, we stand justified from sin, or we stand, being made free from
sin: the Law maker may forgive sin, and so does, but yet in the Mediator, and
so we may stand. Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5 1. This verse, yea all the chapter is but
an inference from the former doctrine in chap 3. of justification, and from the
Testimony that Abraham and David felt in themselves, Romans 4. Again, Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, it is God that justifies, that
sets free, that forgiveth Romans 8.1. all our comfort depends on
forgiveness of sin. When an Israelite offered sacrifice, it is said, his sin
shall be forgiven him, so he stood just by the grace of forgiveness, by faith
in Christ's sacrifice. So the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ has
witness of the Law, and the Prophets. No new doctrine, Levit. 4. and 5. and 6.
Romans 3.21, 21, etc. Habel offering in faith inherited the righteousness or
justification, that is by faith, Heb. 11. so in the Seal of the Lords Supper,
Matthew. 26.26. forgiveness of sins is only spoken of as the foundation of all
blessings, the most admired privilege of the Saints, drawing all other after
it, as adoption, peace, joy, etc. as non-forgiveness draws wrath, and all
other miseries after it. If sin be such an evil how unvaluable is the sacrifice
of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.

N. 7. From an inward feeling] every one should be affected with grief and
godly sorrow for his birth sin, as David Psalm 51. This saying should always
sound in our ears, that the Eternal God said, It repents me that I have made
man: also this, the frame of man's heart is only wicked all the day, Gen 6.
which is handled, Romans 7. I do not that which I would, but that which I would
not, that do I: O spoiled man that I ant, who shall redeem me from this aye
sinning body. The wicked heart sells himself to do all iniquity as A chab, 1
King. 21.20. But the godly heart is sold against his will, as holy Paul, Romans
7.14 we cry out and so we ought, upon particular sins, but are no^ humbled as
we ought for the corruption of nature. The cause is greater than the effect, as
in good, so in ill: The word of exhortion belongs only to the weary and laden.
Matthew. 11. The whole will not seek the Physician. To this man will I look, to
him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words, Esaias 66
He heals the broken in heart and binds up their wounds, Psalm 14^.1 Chr^n.
34.27. Esaias 61.1. Mat. 5 3, 4, etc. From all that has been written hitherto in
this book, and shall be written, let men consider, whether the People of Israel
of the old Testament were not under a covenant of Grace, and whether they had
not the law of God written in their hearts, as well as the Israel of God under
the new Testament.

Ibid N. 7. Or allows, or is indulgem] A man whose sin is forgiven, covered,
not imputed, his spirit will be without guile: so the 1 Pet. 2.1. is urged upon
the doctrine of the former chapter, Psalm 26. etc 32. and 66. 18, and 51. Prove.
28.13.14. The holy soul prays as sincerely and affectionately for upholding,
in the path that is called holy, as for pardon.

N. 10. Before we can have any comfort] Observe the coherence of matter in these
Psalms, so Jacob Genesis 46 1, 2, etc. Ezra 3.3. and 8.21, 22, 23, 31. Excellent
in Samuel, who by faith and prayer in the blood of the Covenant put to flight
the Armies of the alians, 1 Samuel 7.9, 10. Heb. 11.32. There must be a daily use
and improvement of faith and pray^r, in all occasions and conditions,
especially as touching sin, and day^y transgressions against holiness and
righteousness in matter, manner, or end, in omission, or commission. We need to
cry for cleansing of our secret faults to be pardoned and justified by him that
justifyeth the ungodly. As Abraham that was a believer, and a worshipper of God
in Genesis 12. and 13. and 14. yet needed daily the use of his faith to be
comforted in him that justifyeth the ungodly, Genesis 15. Romans 4. do show, and
therefore he builded Altars in every place he came unto.

CHAP. VII.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations on them, How Redemption was taught
from the foundation of the Temple, to the burning of it.

QUest. 1. How does the Temple teach concerning Christ?

Answ. 1. That in due time the Son of God would make our flesh his Tabernacle
or Temple, and dwell among us, John 1.1.4. This was it that Solomon admired,
saying, Is it true indeed, that God will dwell with man on earth? 2 Chr. 6.18.
So did Agur Ben Jakeh, Prove. 30.19.

2. All that looked toward the Temple in faithful prayer should be heard.
Christ is the true Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem, to whom they that look in
prayer shall be heard.

QUest. 2. Now after the Temple was built, who were obedient to the faith
looking after the portion and inheritance in Christ the off spring and sen of
David, and Root of J^ssai^

Answ. Solomon, Asa, Jehosophat, all the godly Kings of the house of Judah,
with many of the Sacrificers, Prophets and people, very many were of the faith
of Abraham before the Temple and after, as many as the siars of heaven in
multitude, and as the sand of the seashore which is innumerable. All these
through faith obtained good report, and all these dyed in the faith that was
first taught in Paradise, etc. embraced by Abel. Henoch, Noab, and all the
faithful to the end of Daniels Seventy Sevens, which faith we are exhorted to
follow. Our Lords fathers from David, Nathan, etc. to Zorobabel, must here
specially be remembered: this line from Nathan is in Luke 3.

QUest. 3. Was there any apostasy from the faith of the kingdom of David in
Christ, and the worship of Jehovah in his holy Footstool upon the then holy
mountain?

Answ. Yea, and that lamentable: after Salomons death Jeroboam the man of sin
that made Israel to sin, of the Tribe of Ephraim drew away (as Nimrod) ten
Tribes to rebellion, and to worship his Devils at Dan and Bethel. And besides
the Worship of his Calves they were defiled with diverse kinds of idolatry of
the heathens: they filthily corrupted themselves, and dealt like a foolish
people, and unwise, as a nation void of counsel, forsaking Christ, the God of
their Fathers, and followed the blindness of the God of this world, Jesurun
kicked with the heel, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.

QUest. 4. Did all the Kings of Israel follow the Abomination of Ieroboams
Calves?

Answ. All but Shallum, and Hosea; Jeroboams house did, and so Baasaes, and
Omries, and Jehues, and the rest?

QUest. 5. Did the house of Judah wholly cleave to God?

Answ. No, they also moved him to jealousy with their vanities, and Stephen
charge them with this, Acts 7.42, 43 They mocked the messengers of God and
despised his words and misused his Prophets, etc. 2 Chronicles. 36. Acts 7.52.
detestable things: many of their Kings and Princes, the great high counsel,
the Sacrificers, Prophets, and people, most grievously revolted, and followed
the precepts of men, and the statutes, ordinances, Solomon foretold them of
their evils, Eccles. 10, 15, 16, 17. Rchoboam that foolish child, that would
not be admonished (Eccles. 2.) paid the price of that: so King Joram, and King
Joash, etc. but look into David's court and Hezekiahs, Psalm 101. Pro. 25.1.
way and manners of Aholah apostate Israel, and the heathens their lovers: und
even as Israel forsook Jehovah their Father, the God of their Fathers, and so
became the Harlot Ahliobah. And in their apostasy advanced the wicked and
unworchy, but scorned and oppressed the Gospel, and the godly continually.

QUest. 6. Did not God send to his people Israel holy prophets ^o call them to
repentance toward God, and faith in the Messiah?

Answ. From the days of Mos^s, the Eternal God being full of compassion still
raised up holy Prophets, who testified to them by his good spirit, and called
them from the backslidings of their forefathers to the faith of the Law and
Testimony. And in all ages it is seen, that prophesying is the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel, So the Apostles by the word of Christ's mouth made a new
heaven, and a new earth, Esaias 66. Apoc 21. and 22.
and a recreation of the World. Samuels and Elias times had proof hereof.

QUest. 7. How was the goodness of God exercised toward Judah, keeping the
truth of the Gospel?

Answ. The gracious Lord God ever showed his blessed protection over them, and
always things went well in that State. A most evident testimony, that the
maintenance of the plainness and sincerity of the Gospel, according to the
Written Word, is the most renowned, and perfect beauty, and greatest glory of a
Kingdom, Dent. 4.8. Ezekiel. 20. all of it, Psalm 147.19.20.

QUest. 8. How was Christ's severitie exercised toward Israel, the ten Tribes,
the Harlot Aholab for their apostasy?

Answ. 1. They dis-esteeming the glorious Law of Jehovah their God; and
despising the holy Prophets, God deprived them of true Prophets, and gave them
over to the lying spirits of false Prophets, and foolish and idol-shepheards;
by whom they were merchandized, blinded, deluded and seduced, to walk in their
own counsels, in statutes that were not good, and in judgments by which they
could not live, the life of a State or Church.

2. He did pour out his fury, and accomplish his anger, by bringing upon them
famine, pestilence, and other heavy miserics, by Intestine garboyls, and by
secret corroding mischiefs within their State, and by foreign enemies, chiefly
by the Kings of the house of Aram, and by the Kings of the house of Ashur, who
at last carried them away captive out of their own land, so that they became
jezreel, Lo-ruchamah, and Lo ammi till our Lords days, then they were
gathered, pitied, and made Gods people by the preaching of the Apostles of the
circumcision, Hosea 1. and 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10.

QUest. 9. What came to Judah, the Harlot Aholibah for her revoltings?

Answ. The same spiritual plagues (Esa. 6.9, 10. and 29.9.) that came to her
elder sister Aholah, and also open manifestation of anger and For jealousy
read Deuteronomy. 29.20. Ezekiel. 16.38. and 9.5, 6. Solomon told them what would come to
their whorish state, Prove. 6.34.35. jealousy is the rago of a man, be will not
spare in the day of vengeance.
furious jealousy, Esaias 30.3.5. Jer. 26 27, 36. Hosea 10.6. 2 Chrow. 24.24.
and 28.19.
that shame of State, sie read Deuteronomy. Esaias 1.6. and 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Mic. 6.3. 2 Chronicles. 28. The colloguing and complying with Israel, and the nations, never did
them good, but hurt, as their Forefathers with the Canaanites, Jud. 2. and 3.
sickness of State 2 Chronicles. 28 20. 1 King. 22. 2 Chronicles. 22.3, 4, 5. Mich. 6.16.
intanglements of State Mich. 1.9 Hos. 5.13. and the Earthquake in Judah had
its events in their State, Esaias 6.4. Zach. 14.5.
and incurable wounds of State (through counsels, treaties, and affinity with
the harlot Aholah, and the Nations) befell them: yea, astonishing sorrows by
cruel enemies, and by being captivated to Babel, which tyrannized over them
seventy years. Then Solomon's race was ended, his Kingdom overthrown, the City
and Temple burnt.

QUest. 10. How many years had passed from the foundation of the Temple to the
burning of it, and the third captivity upon that?

Answ. Four hundred twenty seven years.

QUest. 11. What Sciptures are contained in those four hundred twenty seven
years?

Answ. The first Kings, chap. 6. to the end of that Book, the second of Kings,
the second of Chronicles, from the second chap. many of the Psalms, the
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. Esaias, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Jonah, Micah,
Nahum, Habbakuk Zephaniah, the three former chapters of Daniel, much of
Jeremiah, and much of Ezekiel, o much as touches the nineteenth of
Nebuchaduezzar, or the eleventh of Zedekiah, or the third Captivity.

The Annotations upon the Questions, and answers of the seventh chapter.
THe first Quest. and Answ. Is it true indeed] so Solomon had also said of
Christ, that his delight was to be with the sons of Adam, Pro. 8. Therefore by
faith Solomon built the Temple looking to things not seen, 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Great
is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. ult. Cant.
2.9-17. Mark Stephens Oration, Acts 7. The lamb is in the Temple in the
heavenly Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. He is the Holy of Holies, Dan. 9.24. And
Christians are the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 1 Pet. 2. Apoc. 15. God plagued
old Babylon with horrible vengeance for the burning of the material Temple,
Jeremiah 51.11. So he has and will destroy mystical Babylon for crucifying
Christ and Christians.

Ibid. Agur B^n Iakeh] He believed the great mystery of Godliness, when he
spoke these words. There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea
four which I know not. The way of an Eagle in the air, the way of a serpent up
a rock: the way of a ship in the midst of the Sea, and the way of a Manchilde
in a virgin, Prove. 30.18, 19. Esaias 7.14. The same word for manchild is in Job
3.3.

2. Quest. and Ans. And all these dyed in the faith] All these with the
faithful for the times of the old Testament were reconciled by the blood of
the Mediator, and gathered into one head, even Christ the Head. And therefore
when it is said they were gathered to theirfathers or people, they departed
from that part of Gods family on earth to the other part of the family that is
in heaven. Note also these Scriptures. That in the dispensation of the fullness
of the times ( Dan. 9 24.) he mightbring to one Head, by Christ himself, all,
both them which are in heaven, and them which are on the earth, Ephesians. 1.10. Of
whom has name the whole family in heaven, and in earth, Ephesians 3.15. And by
himself to reconcile all unto himself (making peace by the blood of his Cross)
both them which are in the earth, and them which are in the heavens, Col. 1.20.
confer to this 1 Some. 7.9, 10. Heb^. 11.32, 33, 34. Psalm 22. 4, 5. Psalm 49 It
is said the godly shall enter into peace, Esaias 57.2. Then none of Gods family
were in any Popish purgatory, or in any popish Lymbecks, the cursed heathenish
dotages of Virgil and Ovid. The Pit-bread Locusts had Sun and air much
darkened, when they knew not whether man's soul ascended or descended, and
whether the soul goes to heaven, or Gehenna, to joy or torment, mark
diligently, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. for these words, that we -- in whom ye, etc.

Quest. 3. and Answ. The Kingdom of David] The revolting from the house of
David, and the Religion of the Temple: these two transgressions were the
foundation of all other sins in the Church and State of the ten Tribes, Hosea
10.10 They forsook the Tent, Tabernacle, or Temple of Jehovah, and went to
their own Tents and Gods: and then followed murders, slaughters, oppressions,
etc. etc.

Ibid. Jaroboam the man of sin] Ephraim broken in judgment willingly walked
after the commandment of Jeroboam. Because Ephraim made and instituted many
Altars to sin. Altars shall be to him sin, They had enough of their own
counsels, Psalm 81. Ezekiel. 20.25. Christ will not be found, neither do spiritual
blessings come to us, but in the spirits way, the conduits of Christ's own
Ordinances, they only work a transformation, Romans 12.1, 2. Ephraim provoked
Christ to anger most bitterly, 1 Kings 12.28. and chap. 15. Hosea 8.11. 2 Cor.
3 3. Gal. 3.5. Hosea 12. Mich. 6. uls.

Israel, the harlot Aholah by breaking Wedlock, moved Christ to jealousy, and
in time corrupted Judah by their counsels, and made her Aholibah. So Rome is
called the great Harlot, and the mother of Harlots that corrupted, and seduced
the Churches by her sorceries, and made them harlots, Ezekiel. 16.38. Apo. 17.

As Jeroboam, so the Pontificalitie is called the man of Sin, that made all the
world to sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apo. 17.

Now the harlot and foolish woman, the ten Tribes, babbles loud, and disputes
smoothly and subtly against Judah, as if Wisdom and Truth were with them,
Prove. 9.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. so does the woman-Whore of the seven Mountain City,
plead and write against all reformed Churches that have come out of Babel; as
the godly in the ten tribes forsook the Communion of the Calves of Dan and
Bethel, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, etc.

Ibid. and to worship his Devils] They sacrificed to Devils, not to God, Deuteronomy.
32.17. Christ by Moses prevented the pretensed counsels of idolaters, Jeroboam
he pleaded he had not forsaken God, but that he worshipped God that brought
Israel from Egypt. But the same spirit that spoke by Moses, calls his Calves,
Devils, 1 Kings 22.28, 2 Chronicles. 11.15.

Quest. 4. and answ. Jeroboams house did, and so Baasaes] All that go to her
return not again, neither take they hold of the ways of life, Pro. 2.19. For
great toil they took, family after family, to maintain the faction of Jeroboams
iniquity. But God swept them all away as dung, till all was gone, Prove. 5.9,
10. 1 Kings 14.10. They perished in their ways and courses, against the
Kingdom of Christ, as David foretold, Psalm 2.12.

Quest. 5. and Answ. Moved him to jealousie] They fretted Christ their husband
(humanitus dictum) and brake his heart with their whorish hearts and eyes,
Ezekiel. 6.9. and 16. all of it; and so the twentieth, and three and twentieth
chapters. Judah the harlot Aholibah, she followed idols, horses, money, wealth,
pride, and their lovers; she wearied her self with these lies and vanities,
Ezekiel. 23. and 24, Jer. 2.18, 19, 20. false religion and earthly confidence must
go together. But see, sincerity needs none of those poor refuges, Psalm 20.
read Esaias 2.6, 7, 8, 9. and 29.13. with chap. 30.1, 2, 3. and good Kings must
not greatly multiply horses, nor money; nor bring their people back into Egypt,
Deuteronomy. 17. Princes are not wise, nor learned, that either lead not their people
out of Rome-Egypt, or that would reduce them thither, Rome is called Sodom and
Egypt, for filthiness and cruelty, Apo. 11.

Ibid. With their vanities] Dreams and Precepts of men, a policy of Satan, and
the lying spirits his Angels, to make men forget the Law of Jehovah, and his
sincere worship: when the precepts of men were urged in, or, for Gods worship,
the Patrons of these things caused the holy Teachers to be prisoned in secret
corners, or they were forced to hide themselves in secret corners from the
tyranny of such wise, understanding prudent prophets, and Seers: such deep
heads that were able to add to Gods word; yea, that would hide their counsels
from Jehovah, their breath and being. They turned things up and down, if one
project took not, they tried another, if not that, then a third. So Haman cast
Pur, not considering Jehovah saw them, and that he would dash all in pieces
like a potters vessel: see the other pranks of these sleepers, giddy, blind,
staggering, and wonderful ignorant in the things of Christ's Kingdom: but
expert in cogging and craft to polish and maintain men's precepts. These evils
came from the apostasy of Israel, and from the plots and projects of Omri: (of
him more anon) Who would think such men to have been in the state of Judah.

Ibid. 5. Quest. and answ. The great High counsel, etc.] Esa. 5.19.23. and
8.18. and 28.14. and 29.19, 20, 21, and 30.8, 9, 10, 11. and 57.3, 4. Psalm. 82.
Amos 2.6, 12. and 5.10, 11. Mich. 3.1, 2. and 7, 5. Ezekiel. 8.11. and 11.2. Then
said he unto me Son of man, these are the men that devise wicked Counsel in
this City, etc. So Christ, and his Apostles, and disciples were signs and
wonders to the State of Israel: so it was in after times, Acts 13.40, 41. and
to this day: The State of Judah shed much innocent blood in the days of
Manasleh, which Christ would not pardon.

Quest. 6. and Answ. Testified to them] They called for fruits from the
husbandmen of the vineyard to the end of the Seavensy Seavens, but when they
had killed the heir, the vineyard was let out to the Gentiles, Esaias 5. Neh
9.26. Jer. 7.25. Mat. 2^.33.34, 35, etc.

Ibid. Chariots and Horsemen of Israel] The Ordinances of Christ are drawn
along by holy prophets. He tideth on prosperously with truth, meekness, and
righteousness; and terror, Psalm 45 3, 4, 5. And Christ's Chariots, and his
horsemen, were the strength of their State, Psalm 20. yet David and the Godly
Kings, neglected not outward means, 2 Samuel 8.4. They that endeavor for to
deprive our Land of Godly and able Teachers; are as treacherous to our Land, as
they that would endeavor to set on fire the Navy Royal. They that would not
have a godly able teaching Ministry would have our Land to be as the State of
the ten tribes, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.

Ibid. Samuels and Elias.] Samuels memory shall be blessed in the Church for
ever for advancing holy learning by erecting schools of Prophets: a worthy
president for all godly Commonwealths. They are possessed with satanical and
Julian fancies that would not have Schools of Prophets: Christ will curse such,
and their posterities.

Quest. 7 and Answ. blessed protection] Upon their glorious faith was a
defense: and the last speech of Moses was made good through all their State,
while they hold their glory, Deuteronomy. 33, 26, etc. That Scripture is full of
heavenly joy to all Christian States, that hold the faith of Christ sincere,
Esaias 4. Where this glory is seated, there shall be a defense Blessed have thou
been, O England, who is like unto thee? O people, saved by Jehovah from the
^eed of the Serpent sundry times, but especially in eighty eight, and in the
Gan-powder plot, and in 164^, etc.

Ibid. Written word,] The sweet blessed Scriptures are to make Kings and Common
Weals wise and learned, that the wrath of Christ burn not up their States, and
in special the books of Kings, and Chronicles with the prophets of their times,
are for instruction to Christian Kings, and polities in many things of State,
but chiefly to take heed how the true Church does tamper with the false and
apostate in treaties and affinity, Psalm 2. 2 King, 22. 2 Chronicles. 34. and 35.
etc. The holy Scriptures will yield more fundamental conclusions, and sure
rules for government, then all the Machiavels in the world.

Quest. 8. and Answ. Aholah for their apostasie] Our blessed, gracious and
merciful Lord God does never cast off his people till they have first cast off
and contemned his word, for then idolatry will begin, and all ungodliness and
unrighteousness like a torrent will follow. Then will God hiss for a fly, and
a Be. What Prince is able to keep a fly, or a Be from coming near his
Court, yea, or into his Chambers and Excheq^ers, God is as able to bring an
enemy, even of their lovers to enjoy and possess them: See the stories of
R^choboam, Ioram, Ioash, Amaziah, etc. 2 Chr. 12. and 21. and 24. and 25 And
Pharaoh with all his wisdom, and multitude, Ezekiel. 29. and 30. and 31, etc 32
could not prevent, Nebuchadnezzar from his spreading his royal Pavilion near
his Court Gate, Jer. 43.9, 10. and who caused that the Babylonian Princes sat
in the Gate of Jerusalem, but the Lord Jehovah the God of recompenses, Jer. 39.
Esai. 42.24. Esaias 5.26. and 7.18 Pro. 13.13. Jer. 6. and 7. 2 Kings 22.13.

Ibid. N. 1. and gave them over to the lying Spirits] Woe to them says God when
I depart from them: then followed a secret dedication of them to devils,
transferring his right of them to idols, Ephraim is joined to idols, Let him
alone Hos. 4.17 Acts 7.47. 1 King 22.23. Psalm. 81. Ezekiel 14.9. and so 2 Thessalonians.
2. Apoc. 16.13. 1 Timothy 4.

Ibid. N. 1. To walk in their own Counsels] Ezekiel. 20.25. Psalm. 81. 2 Kings
17.8. Hos. 10.6. and 13.1. Observe Mich. 6. ult. Solomon fitted many Proverbs,
and told them, the words of the wise, do bear grace, and that the words of the
fools of the ten tribes, and of Judah also would be foolishness, and wicked
madness to swallow them up, Eccles. 10. Behold still how Christ the Corners
stone was rejected, and became a stone of offense, to both the houses of
Israel, as Esaias and David had told them Psalm 69.22 Esaias 8.14. and 28.16 and
so is ever to all that will not receive him in the way of his own ordinances,
and mark how these texts are pressed by our Lord and his Apostles in the Acts,
Evangelists, and in the Epistle to Rome, and 1 Pet. 2. and this is written for
us, Romans 15. confer Esai. 6.9, 10. with John 12.40. and Acts 28.26.27, etc etc.

Ibid. N. 1. Could not live the life of a State, etc.] Observe how the Holy
Spirit compares the dead State of the ten tribes being in Apostasy, with the
apostasy of the families, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. with Ephesians. 2.1. to 12. Dead from a
Church life, Hos. 13.1. false worship breeds atheism and corruption in manners:
heresy frets like a gangreane, and such Authors and fautours wax worse and
worse. The ten tribes were without the true God by their apostasy, and so the
heathens were atheoi, atheists without God in the world, and note, that speech
of Asa, King of Judah, was spoken of Israel, before the idol Ba^l was brought
into Israel 2 Chronicles. 15.3.

Ibid. 8. Quest. and Answ. N. 2. He did pour out his fury] God was angry for
the provocation of his sons, and of his Daughters, Deuteronomy. 32. Gods four sore
judgments followed Aholah and Aholibah, for their backslidings, Ezekiel. 14. and
the Earthquake in Amos 1. had in Israel its events; Jeroboam the second, his
son, was two and twenty years in getting his Fathers Throne: such trouble in
State, all plagues, and curses; Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. came on them not for
breaking a Covenant of Works, but for accounting Christ and his Kingdom,
Anathema. They did (as all apostates do) loath his word, they abhorred his
Statutes, they obeyed not the Son of God, the Angel of Gods presence, as
Mediator, and so had not life, John 3.35, 36. they served not God in their
spirits, in the Gospel of his Son. He that has not the Son of God, has not
the Father, 1 John 5.12. 2 John 9. and so come all plagues and curses on men.
Let the wild Olive branches fear.

Ibid. Upon them famine, pestilence] Famine and Pestilence are chiefly the
Plagues of the meaner sort, and the sword is the plague of the rich, Ezekiel.
21.14. when the heavens dealt with the subjects, Levit. 26. the Governors felt
the other The spirit of Christ has long and wonderful patience before the sword
comes, Lev. 16 23, 24, 25. and then the sword does avenge the quarrel of Gods
covenant (not a covenant of works but for despising the covenant in his Son)
against the godliness of high place, who were, and are the hinderers of all
good, and the promoters of all evil, as it is said, A great man grieveth all,
and he hireth the fool, he hireth also the transgressors, Prove. 26.10.

Ibid. By secret corroding mischiefs] Christ was as a Lion to tear in pieces by
their domestic dissentions, as in the overthrow of the houses of Jeroboam,
Baasa, Omri, Iehu, etc. and by foreign enemies; and also he was as a Moth
insensibly eating and consuming their riches, honor and people by one ill
project or other. And for this read Hosea 5.12.

Ibid. House of Assure) They made Israel, Iez^eel, Loruchamah, and Loammi, till
the latter days, as Hebr. 1.1. But then they were gathered in Christ, and
pitied, and again made Gods people. The Apostles of the circumcision preached
to them that were dispersed in Asia, Galatia, Pontus, Bythinia, Cappadocia, and
Chaldea, etc. 1 Per. 1.1. and chap. 2. all tribes then are called Jews. Ephraim
mixed himself with the heathens Religion, therefore God mixed them among the
heathen.

Ibid. Out of their own Land] There nettles and thorns grew in their pleasant
palaces: then the thorn and thistle grew on their Altars (weeds of the curse,
Genesis 3.) And then they cried to the mountains to fall on them, and to the hills
to conver them. Let England look to their backsliding to Altars, Hosea 10. To
thrust away the Gospel by man's inventions is to make our houses, as well as
Gods house desolate, and so our Lord tells the Jews, Mat. 23.38. Judah and
Israel dashed themselves against the Corner stone, and were broken.

9. Quest. and Answ. For her revoltings] Idolatry is a State-ruining sin, Psalm
106.36. the prayers of the Saints could not prevail for their reigning
idolatry, and false worship, Jer. 15. and 16. Ezekiel. 14. King Moses by his most
fervent intercession, and abolishing idolatry procured pardon: but note in that
false worship, there was no innocent bloodshed. Idolatry divides the heart from
Christ, and subjects it willingly to follow the commandments of men, and of
the man of sin: Je^oboam should see such events of apostasy that they should
fret and and curse their King, and their Gods, that is the false religion they
so pressed, and see neither help from heaven, nor earth, but all full of
anguish and darkness, Esa. 8.21, 22. Hos. 9.6. and 10.8. Deuteronomy. 28.34, 65, 66,
67. Their State-politicians could not prevent, nor their State Surgeons, heal
the wounds that God made in their State. The wisdom and turning of devices of
the wise, and prudent Counselors of State was booteless, all was but the
weaving of the Spiders Webb. Esaias 29.15. and 59, 5. Jer. 30.12. Hoses 5. all of
it. They sinned against Jehovah the hope of their Fathers, Ier. 50.7. Job
12.17, 18, 19, 20. To backsliding and adulterous Israel, Christ her Lord gave a
Bill of divorce, and put her away; yet Judah her sister, being also
treacherous, feared not, but went and played the harlot also, Ier. 3.7, 8. The
minds of these two sisters were alienated from Christ, and so his mind at
last was alienated from them, read Ezekiel. 23.

Ibid. And affinity with the Harlot Aholah] Mark State affairs in Judah. They
saw Om^i was a mighty Prince, overcoming Zimri and Tibni who stood in
competition with him for the Kingdom of Israel, and that Achab possessed all
in peace, that his Father Omri had settled. Iehosophat thought it good
state-policie to make affinity with him, although he followed Ieroboam-man of
sin his Religion, but it was the ruin and almost the rooting out of his house,
etc. for mark, first Iehosaphat, being in his visits with Achab was solicited
for association in a league for War, to which with reluctation he yielded. For
he might not in Court courtesy show himself so weak and discrepant to think
that four hundred prophets were so to be slighted, as to follow the humor of
one singular self-willed, refractorious fellow, Michaiah. So he went with his
Brothet Achab to battle to Ramoth Gilead; but there he was in danger of his
life. Jehosophat although a goodman, yet in that no good Statesman to weaken
Judah to help these with men, and all ammunition (although circumcised
Israelites) that hated the Gospel: He was reproved, and wrath was upon him, a
Chron. 19

2. He joined with Achaziah of Achab in a Navy to go to sea for gold, but
Christ was displeased with it, and plagued Jehoshaphat, in that the ships were
broken, so that project took not, 2 Chronicles. 20. Psalm. 8. ult.

3. Joram, Jehosaphats son, (who married Achabs daughter) after his fathers
death, forsook the Gospel, and followed Jeroboams Religion, the two Devils of
Dan and Beth^l, and caused Jerusalem, and compelled Judah to commit
fornication, to worship Devils, 2 Chronicles. 21. 2 Kings 8.18. All worship what
Christ has not commanded is the worship of Devils Levit. 10. and 17.7. Psalm.
106.39. 1 Cor. 10. All their projects of State must justify that affinity, else
all the provisions in Law against Ieroboams revolt, had been a reprof to Achabs
daughter, and so her faction prevailed for the corrupting the calling on the
name of Jehovah, as, of old, Satan's project was Gen 4.26. conferred with chap.
6. and this seed of false worship sowed in Judah did g^ow to an evil harvest,
Hos. 6.11. And did stick so fast, that it could not be weeded out for 180
years, till the days of Hezekiah King of Judah; for the businesses of their
State were agitated according to the modells and plots of Omri, that maintained
the faction of Jeroboam, man of sin, his Religion: as Micah challenged the
State in Achaz his days, that the Statutes of Omri were kept, and their way and
their counsels. Behold the working of that affinity. But Hezekiah that good
King made reformation according to the primitive institution, 2 Chronicles. 28.2 2
Kin. 16.3. and 17.19. yet Manasse fell again to Achabs idolatry; so fast false
worship cleaves to our nature.

4. This Joram, after his fathers death (as Turks now do) killed his six
brethren, and many Princes: very like, his brethren and the Princes did dislike
and protest against his courses, about idolatry and tyranny and had no heart to
the faction of Jeroboam, man of sin, his Religion, therefore the Queen and her
Counselors might say to the King, An't like your Majesty you can never be in
safety, and rule as King, while your brethren have fenced Cities, and while the
Princes do not approve your proceedings: frame mischief by a Law, and off with
their heads, 2 Chronicles. 21. Psalm. 94.20. Now David's house are Belial and thorns,
2 Samuel, 23. Mark, here false worship inttroduced, then the liberties and
privileges of the subjects are invaded. That Subjects might not so much mind:
Apostasy in their Princes, means were excogitated to busy them by rumors of
this and that project, and also for their particular estates, till false
Religion had gotten footing, this is the very heart and counsel of apostate
and idolatrous Princes.

5. Ioram lost the regency and principality of Edom 2 Chronicles. 21.

6. Libnah one of the prime Cities of Judah rebelled, because he forsook the
Religion of Jehovah, that is; in very deed, the Gospel of the Son of God, the
God of his fathers, 2 Chronicles. 21. when the Magistrate thrusts out the Gospel,
then Christ divides the hearts of the people; Apostacy in the Prince, breeds
Apostacy in the subjects. Christ pours contempt upon Princes, Ps. 107.40.

7. The Lord Jehovah stirred up the spirit of the Philistims, Arabians, and
Cu^him, who invaded Judah, and took much spoil even out of the Kings house, and
captived his wives and all his sons, save one, 2 Chr. 21. Deuteronomy. 28.30, 31, 41.
oppressions filled their Exchequers, but the enemies emptied them, he pours
contempt upon Princes, Job 12 21.

8. He died of a rotting disease in his bowels, that they fell out, because he
slew his own bowels, worse befell not that persecutor Antiochus, 2 Mic. 9.
Riches avail not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death,
the like plague came on that bloody tyrant Herod, Acts 12.23.

9. He was not esteemed worthy of honorable burial, as his noble
predecessors: the land being glad it was rid of such a Tyrant and Apostate; He
pours contempt upon Princes

10. His son Achaziah knew all this, yet he feared not God, but walked in the
way; that is, the Religion and manne^s of apostate Israel, 2 Kin. 8.27.

11. His idolatrous mother was his Counselor, and because there were not
Statesmen wise enough in Judah, the couns^llours of Jeroboam, man of sin, his
Religion must be sent for, and so the secrets and mysteries of State in Judah,
must be discovered Ah poor Judah, how sick and entangled was thy State? ^
Ch^on 22 3 4. can such with well to, and procure the weal of Mount Sion? Psalm
122. Apo^ 14.1.

12. As the two fathers, so the two brethren joined in league; for Achaziah
joined with Iehoram King of Israel in battle against H^zael of Aram, who held
still Ramoth-Gilead: so Achaziah being not only a very wicked man, but as bad
a Statesman, wasted also the strength of Judah.

13. Achaziah going to visit Joram, being sick, was slain by Jehu; as he was of
the house of Achab by the mother, so he perished with it, 2 Chr. 22.6, 7.
Accomplices in tyranny and idolatry, accomplices in punishment, Hosh. 5 5.

14. Many idolatrous Princes, and 40 young Gentlemen and Courtiers of the
kindred of Achaziah, going down from Judah to comple-mentit, with the children
of the King and Queen of Israel, there Iehu found them and slew them. These
apostate Princes of the faction of Ierob^am, man of sin, his Religion, (and it
may be pensioners too) that put their hands to kill the good Princes, God met
with them by Iebu, 2 Chronicles. 22. Let this teach Courtiers, the eye of Christ is
in Kings Courts.

15. Athaliah the wife of Iehoram (daughter of Achab, and it may be of Iezabel)
being Queen Regent six years in Judah, seeing her son Achaziah was slain by
Iebu, she seiseth like a cruel tyrant on the children of her son Achaziah, and
slew all but a young infant of a year old. O sick Judah, sick, sick, sick, 2 Chronicles. 22 Isa. 1.5, 6, 7.

16. She being Regent, governed in an idolatrous and turbulent manner, to the
hearts grief of the honest Subjects: for, she being King cut off idolatry was
banished, the Gospel was restored, and the Land was quiet, 2 Ch^on. 23.21.
Christ pours contempt upon Princes.

17. The sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, for the time of those six years
had broken up the house of the Lord, and had committed abominable and
idolatrous sacrilege. It should seem she had sons whom she tendered by some
other man, 2 Chronicles. 24.7. These evils and others, yea and others which are not
written ( Deuteronomy. 28 61) followed good Jehosaphats bad affinity, with Achabs
wicked house.

18. Mark through all the holy story, what pollution of blood from that
Ammonean, and Achabean breed, ran in all the Royal descents to the Captivity.

That you be not mistaken, you must observe, that there were two Kings of
Judah, and Israel, reigning at one time, of the same name, Iehoram. Also two
Kings, both called Achaziah, and near of the same time, Ioram, and Iehoram are
all one name: and so in King Iehoash of Judah, and King Iehoash of Israel. The
Table of genealogy prefixed will help your observation.

Other State Affairs in the stories of other Kings reigns, beginning with King
Azariah (alias Vzziah) and so forwards, compared with the prophets, will afford
many meditations.

I think it not amiss to touch a little from the story of Solomon for this
matter of affinity. In policy he might make affinity with Pharaoh, a great
Potentate, to strengthen himself being a King of peace, by this course he
thought to maintain it for him and his successors, but it proved otherwise.
Although Pharaohs daughter might prove a proselite, and forget the Religion of
her own people, and her fathers house, and cleave to the truth of Christ, as it
is thought she did, to be a figure of the Gentiles calling to the true Solomon.
It might be a great mercy to her to be of the true Church, and of the household
of God. But very like it it was done of Pharaoh, but as a snare to work their
own interests against Israel. No trust to be had in idolatrous people, for so
of this affinity came no good to the Church of God. 1. There was no succession
of this proselyte-daughter. 2. The State of Egypt maintained a Faction, and
fostered Traitors, and enemies to Solomon, and the State of all Israel, as
Ie^oboam that lifted up his hand against the King, and Hadad the Edomite, 1
Kin. 11. So Egypt nourished two factions in Salomons lifetime against him. 3.
And Shishak King of Egypt (might well be the brother of that daughter) who five
years after Salomons death invaded Judah, and warred against Rehoboam, that
apostate fool, Eccl. 2.19. 2 Chronicles. 12.13. and 13.17. Marriages do not always
unite houses and kingdoms, as in the Seleuco-Pagidae, Dan. 2 43. and 11. So
France and Spain knock one against the other: (16 36) Rome is called Egypt, and
it has nourished traditours and proditours against Christian Princes of the
Reformation. This should make all Christian Reformed States to be very
watchful and diligent concerning any treaty with Abaddons Kingdom, for he in
allusion is compared with Jeroboam, called the Man of sin, 2 These. 2. and
Romes polity, is called Egypt in a mystery.

Quest. 9. and Ans. and the nations] sometimes they gadded, and treated with
Assure, but that framed not; sometime with Egypt, that also failed, Ier. 2.16,
17, 18. False worship takes heart from a State. This folly, madness, and
silliness, other Prophets reprove in Ephraim, Esaias 29. Hos. 5. and 7. The
whorish State, her feet cannot abide in her house, therefore she did wander,
P^ov. 7.11.12. Hos. 9 2 Ezekiel. 16.33. etc. and chap. 23.14.15 etc. God plagued
them by their lovers. They pleased themselves in the children, and manners of
strangers, Isa. 2.6. wise Statesmen of old were careful of this, Job 15 19.
and the godly returned from Babel, Ezra 4. Hezekiah was to blame, Isa. 39. Our
nation changed their glory, and loved K^ttims Religion, therefore God plagued
and did trouble them with Italian Monsters, Ier. 2.25. Deuteronomy. 28.43.44. Hos.
7.9. It is to admonish, 1 Cor. 10.11. and to make States wise, and learned,
Psalm. 2. read Ezekiel. 16. and 23. for their Babylonian lovers, and compare
things: for Rome is called Egypt and Babylon in a mystery. Vide Mr. Cade
Instit. Lib* 1 page 128. and the Appendix. Also insinuations for corruption of
manners will make the sweet yoke of Christ burdensome, and will work further
change of our way, as things go on uncomfortably at this time, anno 1636.

Ibid. -- Yea, astonishing sorrows.] The Lamentations of Jeremiah, and Psa. 80,
and 89, etc. etc. compared with the history, show astonishing sorrows with the
causes, and this was one chief cause: for the sins of her Prophets, and the
iniquity of her Priests, that shed the blood of the just, They, they the chief
cause of all evil, and Jerusalem admonish^^^ all States to be warned by her
example, Lam. chap. 1. and 2.14. and chap. 4.

Ibid. Then Solomon's house ended.] David showed, his house would not be upright
with God, but would be Belial and thorns, and should be burnt; A terror to
Princes that will not rule justly, and in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23. Observe,
Lam. 2.5, 6. The Lord is become a very enemy, he has swallowed up Israel, he
has swallowed up her palaces, he has destroyed his strong holds, and he has
increased in the daughter of Judah mourning, and lamentation. And he has
violently taken away his Tabernacle, as it were of a garden, he has destroyed
the places of the Assembly. Jehovah has caused the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths
to be forgotten in Sion, and he has despised in the indignation of his anger,
King and Sacrificer. Let not the wild olive branches be high-minded, Romans 11.

CHAP. VII.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations; Showing how the Covenant of grace
was taught and opposed in this space of time; from the burning of the Temple,
to the end of the Captivity of Babel.

QUest. 1. Show some Scriptures concerning the Captivity of Judah under the
Babylonian Kingdom, with other things thereupon depending.

Answ. Levit. 26.14. observe how the holy history, and the prophets comment
upon this Scripture of Moses: very useful to confer history to prophecy.
to the end of the chapter.

14. But if ye will not hearken to me, and will not do all these commandments.

15. And if ye shall consider here how the holy Gospel Law of Christ delivered
to Moses, was unsavory to the outward Israelite: it was a savor of life to
some and to others a savor of death to death, so it ever was, and ever shall
be: as it was to Kain and Habel, and Esaias 6.9, 10. and 11. chapters, 2 Chronicles.
2.16.
despise my Statutes, or if your soul abhor (c) my judgments, so that ye will
not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant.

16. I also will do this unto you, I will appoint even over you terror,
consumption, and the burning ague, and that shall consume the eyes, and cause
sorrow of heart, and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat
it.

17. And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your
enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none
pursues you:

18. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you
seven times more for your sins.

19. And (...) will break the pride of your power, and I will make your heaven
as iron, and your earth as brass;

20. And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your Land shall not yield
her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.

21. And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I will
bring seven times more plagues upon you, according to your sins.

22. I will also send wild beasts which shall rob you of your children, and
destroy your cattle, and make you few in number, and your high ways shall be
desolate.

23. And if ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary
unto me:

24. Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven
times for your sins.

25. And I will bring a sword upon you that shall avenge the quarrel of my
covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your Cities, I will send the
Pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hands of the enemy.

26. And when I have broken the staff of your bread, Ten Women shall bake your
bread in one Oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by weight, and
ye shall eat and not be satisffed.

27. And if for all this, ye will not hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto
me;

28. Then I will walk contrary unto you, also in fury and I, even I will
chastise you seven times for your sins:

29. Moses foresaw captivity and Dan 9. does comment on all this chapter.
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall
ye eat.

30. And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your Sun-Images, and
cast your carcases upon the carcases of your filthy idols, and my soul shall
abhor you.

31. And I will make your Cities wast, and bring your sanctuaries unto
desolation, and I will not smell the savor of your seed odours.

32. And I will bring the Land unto desolation, and your enemies which shall
dwell therein, shall be astonished at it:

33. And I will scatter you among the heathen, and I will draw out a sword
after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your Cities wast.

34. Then shall your land enjoy her Mark how the holy Story commenteth on all
Moses.
Sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate, and ye be in your enemies land, even
then shall the Land rest, and enjoy her Sabbaths.

35. As long as it lies desolate it shall rest, because it did not rest in
your Sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

36. And upon them that are left of you I will send a faintness into their
hearts, in the Land of their enemies, and the sound of a leaf driven shall
chase them, and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall
when none pursues.

37. And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none
pursues, and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.

38. And ye shall perish among the heathens, and the land of your enemies shall
eat you up.

39: And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your
enemies lands, and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away.

40. If they shall So Daniel did, and God rememb^ed his Covenant in Christ,
Dan. 9.24, 25* 26, 27. read Ezekiel 36.
confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass
which they have trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary
unto me;

41. And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into
their enemies lands, if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then A justified person will justify God in all his providence, so Neh. 9.
all of it: Dan. 9.5. If we judge our selves, God will not judge us,? but
remember his covenant 1 Cor. 11.1 Ioh. 1. The better a manis, the more unworthy
he thinks himself to be, Job 42.6.
accept of the punishment of their iniquity.

42. Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with
Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham, will I remember, and I will remember
the Land.

43. The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her Obse^ve 2 ch^on.
36.21. though the prophets departed this life, yet the ward of Christ dyed not,
Zach. 1.5, 6.
Sabbaths, while she lies desolate without them, and they shall accept of the
punishment of their iniquity, because, even for because they despised my
judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

Though we be unfaithful in many acts of unbelief, and break our covenant, yet
the Lord is faithful he cannot deny himself, Tim. 2.13. though he cause grief
yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.
N="44" 44 And yet for all that, when they be in their enemies land I will not
cast them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to break
my Covenant with them, for I am Jehovah their God.

45. But I will for their sakes remember the Covenant This covenant as the same
with Jacob, Isaas, and Abraham, ver. 42.
of their Ancestors whom I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt in the sight
of the Heathen, that I might be their God, I am Jehovah.

Jer. 27. 1. In the beginning of the reign of Jehojakim the son of Josiah King
of Judah, came the word unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,

2. Thus says Jehovah to me, make the bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy
neck.

3. And send them to the King of Edom, and to the King of Moab, and to the King
of the Ammonites, and to the King of Tyrus, and to the King of Zidon, by the
hand of the Messengers, that come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah, King of Judah.

4. And command them to say unto their Masters, thus says Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel: thus shall you say unto your Masters.

5. I have made the earth, the man and the beast, that are upon the ground, by
my great power, and by my stretched out arm, and have given it unto Whom it
seemed good unto me.

6. And now have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the K.
of Babylon, my servant, and the beasts of the field, have I given him also to
serve him.

7. And all Nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons son, until the
time of his land come, and then many Nations, and great Kings shall serve
themselves of him.

8. And it shall come to pass that the nation or Kingdom which will not serve
the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon: and that will not put their neck
under the yoke of the King of Babylon, that nation will I punish, says the
Lord, with the sword and with the famine, and with the pestilence until I have
consumed them by his hand.

9. Therefore bearken not to your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your
dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you,
saying, ye shall not serve the King of Babel.

10. For they prophecy a ly unto you, to remove you far from your land: and
that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.

11. But the nations that bring their necks under the yoke of the King of
Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, says
Jehovah, and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

Jer. 25.9. Behold I will send and take all the families of the North, says
Jehovah. and Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babel my servant, and will bring them
against this land, and the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations
round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and
an hissing, and a perpetual desolation.

10. Moreover, I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of
the milstones, and the light of the candle.

11. And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment, and these
nations shall serve the King of Babylon, seaventy years.

12. And it shall come to pass when Seavensy years are accomplished that I will
punish the King of Babel, and that nation says Jehovah for their iniquity,
and the land of the Chaldeans and I will make it a perpetual desolations.

13. And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced
against it, even all that is written in this book which Jeremiah has
prophesied against all nations.

14. For many nations and great Kings shall serve themselves of them also: and I
will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the work of
their hands.

2 Chronicles. 36.14. Moreover all the chief of the Priests, and the People
transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathens, and polluted
the house of Jehovah, which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.

15. And Jehovah the God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers,
rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion on his people,
and on his dwelling place.

16. But they mocked the Messengers of God and despi^ed his Word, and misused
his Prophets until the wrath of Jehovah arose against his people, till there
was no remedy.

17. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their
young men Now the sword does avenge the quarrel of the Covenant Levit. 26. What
covenant? of works? no such matter, but the Covenant of grace in Christ, They
would not have Christ, the Heir as King to reign over them by his word, and
holy, ordinances: therefore they were slain before his face, by the chaldean,
Luc. 19.12. to 27. Grace despised, brings the heaviest Plagues, yea all plagues
here and hereafter.
with the sword, in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon
young men, or maiden, old men, or him that stooped for age, he gave them all
into his hand.

18. And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small and the treasures
of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the King, and of his Princes, all
these he brought to Babylon.

19. And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem and
burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels
thereof.

20. And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babel, where
they were servants to him and his Sons, until the reign of the Kingdom of
Persia.

21. To fulfill the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah until the land had
enjoyed her Sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept Sabbath to
fulfill Seavensy years.

Jer. 29.10. Thus says Jehovah that after the seaventy years be accomplished
at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing
you to return to this place.

11. For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says Jehovah, thoughts
of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

12. See, how this is a commentary on Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. Also how Daniels
prayer looks to Moses and Jeremiah: and that God remembers his Covenant as is
seen, Dan. 9.24, etc. Observe how promises quicken to prayer. We should be more
studious and conversant in them than we are Our slightness will hinder much our
consolation in sad hours, read Ezekiel. 36 31, etc. They must pray and did pray:
but the blood of the covenant brought them from Babel, Zach. 9.11.
Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you.

13. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all
your heart.

14. And I will be found of you, says Jehovah, and I will turn away your
captivity, I will gather you from all Nations, and from all places whither I
havedriven you, says Jehovah, and I will bring you again unto the place whence
I caused you to be carried away captive.

Pertinently it may be here remembered, that the Son of God by his Spirit in the
Prophet Esaias, foretold above two hundred years, how Cyrus King of Persia
should conquer Babel, send Judah home from captivity, and give letters patents
for re-edifying Jerusalem, and the Temple.

Esaias 44.24. Thus says Jehovah thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from, the
womb, I am Jehovah that makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens
alone, that spreads abroad the earth by my self.

25. That frustrated the tokens of the liars and makes diviners madd: that
turns wisemen backward, and makes their knowledge foolish.

26. That confirms the word of his servant and performs the counsel of his
Messengers, that says to Jerusalem. Thou shall be inhabited, and to the Cities
of Judah, ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof.

27. That says to the deep be dry, and I will dry up thy Rivers.

28. That says of Cyrus, Read more of Cyrus in Esaias 45.1, 2, 3, 4 13. whom God
raised up by a strong hand to conguer Babel, to return Israel home, and to
build the City Jerusalem.
He is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid.

This is the prophecy, now follows the History.

2 Chronicles 36.22. Now in the year of Cyrus We must consider here that Cyrus and
Darius Dan 9.1. were fellows in government, who joined their Forces against
Babel, as it is prophesied, Esaias 21. Go up against Babel, O Elam, besiege Babel
O Media. And mark here by conferring, Dan. 9.25. Cyrus his proclamation, is
that going forth of the word of commandment of returning the people, of
building the Temple, and city: as when Daniel was in humble prayer, then Cyrus
was drawing his Letters Patents, even at the same instant of time: and the
Angel Gab^iel is disparched from heaven with a joyful message to tell Daniel
so. Let us think of it, upon humbling our selves surely some message is coming
from heaven.
King of Persia, that the word of Jehovah, spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah
might be accompli^^ed, Jehovah stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia,
that he made a proclamation throughout all his Kingdom, and put it also in
writing, saying.

23. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the kingdoms of the earth, has
Jehovah the God of Heaven given me, and he has charged me to build him an
house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah, Who is there among you of all his
people? Jehovah his God be with him and let him go up.

QUest. 2. What Collections do you take notice of in these Scriptures of Moses,
and the Prophets?

Answ. For brevities sake, I will name but few, and those main principles out
of the doctrine of Christ that Moses spoke in Leviticus.

1. Let this be observed of all that have their senses exercised in the word of
righteousness, to confer History with prophecy, whether in promises and
threatenings: We shall see God to be Jehovah in all: to be Being, and to give
being, as to all his works, so to his words, whether they concern persons,
families, Cities, Churches or Kingdoms.

2. Whereas it is said, that Jehovah spoke to the Patriarks, and to Mo^es (in
all his five Books) in most places we must conceive it spoken of the second
person, of the holy Trinity the Redeemer, the Angel of the covenant, to whom
the heavenly Father has committed all authority and power as Mediator: yea
also this attribute of Jehovah throughout all the old Testament, must be so
understood, some few places excepted, wherein the first person, or the third,
is also to be considered. Examine this by Psalm 18.49. and 117. with Romans
15.9, 10, 11, Psalm 68.18. with Ephesians. 4.8. Psalm 97.7. with Heb. 1.6.1 Cor.
10, 4.9. with Number. 21.6. Esa. 6.9, 10. with John 12.41. Our Lords most heavenly
speeches in the Apostle John's Gospel will show us the reason of all, cha. 5.17.
and so forwards.

3. Among all the corruptions (from the first Adam) that is in us, note this,
that we hold Christ his Kingdom and Ordinances anathema, this is expressed by
Moses, there is in us a contrariness to God, confer Lev. 26.15. with Zac. 11.8.
These terms, abhorring, loathing, etc. of the old Testament is in effect the
same of the new: the preaching of the Gospel to them savoured death, unto
death, and so it does in the days of the New Testament, Gods people must be
diligent to mark phrases, though different in words, yet the same in force and
value.
a despising his judgments, abhorring, loathing and hating him, his word,
statutes and commandments mandements. The New Testament speaks the same as the
old, when it says, the wisdom of the flesh causes enmity against the Law of
God, by nature enemies in our mind by evil workers, also haters of God,
fighters against God, and such a stubborness is annexed, that we are
unreconcileable. Much may be said of this in the sad effects thereof, that men
meeting with cross providence, when his folly perverts his way, his heart
frets against Jehovah, that is, his breath and being, and saying he is a hard
master, and that his ways are not equal: yea alas, what do the regenerate
find in themselves of murmuring, fretting, impatience, distrust, etc. But the
second Adam dissolves the works of the devil, by his spirit in the
administration of the Gospel of his Kingdom, heals all in the elect, Ezekiel.
36.25, 26, 27-37. Mich. 7.19. 2 Cor. 5 11-15 and chap. 10 4, 5, 6 etc.

4. Whereas in Levit. 26. Moses says from Christ, sicknesses, diseases,
sorrows on the labors of our hands, the teeth of wild beasts, pestilence,
famine, sword, captivity, etc. avenge the quarrel of his Covenant: we must
advisedly understand, This is not meant of a covenant of works, but the
covenant of his Grace, the laws of which they have despised and abhorred: and
so in Deuteronomy. 5. and 29 Jer. 34. all of it, and many other places there is
mention made of the covenant, and it is but the renewing or dilating on that,
as is noted Exodus 24. which they violated. For the whole covenant is, Jehovah
is our God in Christ, and that we vouch him so to be in love unto him, and in
love to our neighbor, as it is said, to love the Lord our God with all our
heart, mind, soul and strength etc. and our neighbor as our self: and this is
ratified by the blood of the covenant, Exodus 24. And they not obeying his
Gospel-Law, is as much as to say, we will not have this man to reign over us;
therefore it is said, those mine enemies (and Israel were Christ's own citizens,
Luke 19.27.) that would not have me the Heir to reign over them, bring them
hither and slay them before me, Luke 19 27. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. and 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Christ Jesus our Lord as eternal God to Moses, and the Prophets, and Christ
Jesus our Lord as God-man in his New Testament in his own speeches, and in his
Apostles doctrine does not differ: and when our great Rabboni had reduced the
ten commandments into two, then he says on these two commandments hang all
the Law and the Prophets; and so where it is often said, Obey my voice, Jer.
7.23. it must be understood of the obedience of faith, (receiving Christ, and
believing in him, and obeying him, John 3.36.) which despised, The wrath o the
Lamb is great wrath, Apoc. 1.16.
brings the heaviest plagues, as those eight and twentieth fold punishments,
Lev. 26. and thoses curses, Deuteronomy. 28. Luke 23.28, 29, 30. and so Exodus 23.20,
21. and Matthew. 17.5. do explicate on the other in sense and meaning: and John
6.27. must be brought to this undurstanding.

5. The Law of the Lord is a converting Law, it restores the soul, that is, it
is the word of Christ, by which, and by which only he does by his Spirit work
in the hearts of men to turn them from darkness to light from the power of
Satan to God, for it is the power of God to salvation, restoring, converting,
regenerating the soul to know, believe, fear, and love Jehovah their God, and
to love their neighbor. And the New Testaments doctrine and commandment is the
same, 1 John 3.24. and 4.21. Faith and Love is the Pattern of wholesome words,
(or healing doctrine) ever taught from the beginning. This is the Vrim and
Thummim which Christ puts in the heart of all them that the Father draws unto
him: the Apostle (alluding to the High Priests Garments) phraseth the Breast
plate of Faith and Love. They that despise Christ's Gospel, that is, his Law,
Esaias 2.3. and 11.9. and 42.4. despise the doctrine of regeneration, and such
cannot mortify their passions, but will bite and devour one another ( Esaias 11.
much of it, Gal. 5.15.) as Cain did Abel. See how and why their Story is cited,
1 John 3. And by that we may see, how easily reducible all that Epistle is to
Genesis, yea to all Moses, and if this Epistle, then all the New Testament.

QUest. 3. What other Collections?

Answ. The Scriptures of the Prophets show.

1. That Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel had made Nebucharetzar Monarch of
all nations, and that the Kingdom of Babel should keep, them the State of
Judah in subjection, Seavensy years. And that Nebuchadnezzar was great by
conquest and not by inheritance.

2. That the Kings of the Kingdom of Babel for those seventy years should be in
number three, which are these, the first is said to be Nebuchadnezzar, the
second is his son, the third is his sons son. Other Scriptures show their
names, that Evil-Merodach was the Son, and his Sons son was Bel-shazzar.

3. We are to note, that part of the third year of Jehojakim King of Judah, and
more of the fourth is the first year of Nebuchadrezar, as Dan. 1.1. and Jer.
25. compared do show And in this first year of Nebuchadrezar, King Jehojakim,
Daniel, Hanariah, Azariah, Mishael and other Nobles were captived. This is the
first captivity. But the King was sent home again.

4 Here it may be convenient to remember that the heathen annalls and
chronicles in many things are no true relations, because they confound the
Stories of Elams, Arams, Ashurs, and Babels Monarchies: For now Ashur was no
Monarch, but was under Babel. Ashur had been a great Tree, Ezekiah 31. But now
Babel was the Tree, Daniel 4. And Aram had been a Monarchy before Ashur, and
Elam had been a Monarchy before them all, Genesis 14. But it may be Nimrod or Belus
was the first hunter after tyrannical Monarchy.

QUest. 4. Did all submit themselves to this Conqueror, Nebuchadnezar, that God
had established and advanced over them?

Answ. Jechonias King of Judah, by the advice and counsel of Jeremiah,
submitted; who though captived, and many of the people, yet they had many
comforts following them to Babel.

1. They were the basket of good figs, whom God would greatly respect: Ezekiel,
Mordecai, and many godly went in this captivity.

2. Although they were captived, and wanted the glorious sanctuary, and its
public ordinances, yet The ble^sed glory of Jehovah from his place in diverse
removings came to them. Read Ezekiel. 9 and 10. and 11. This might put them in
mind of the utter removing of his vineyard from them to the Gentiles, as the
Lord told them near the ending of the seventy seavens.
Christ who is the truth of all the shadows was to them a Sanctuary, whom in
spirit they worshipped, In the captivity Christ recompensed the loss of
public ordinances with most gracious providence, Ezekiel. 11.16. and much of
Dan^el, who was then a great favorite: and would be as Joseph, and so his
three cousins Dan. 3 Hanamah, Misacl, and Az^iab, they would be great comforts
to the brethren captived.
Many precious promises are to this company, both of protection, and return
from captivity.

3. They and their children should be chief in restoring religion at the return
from captivity. This company are the second captivity.

QUest 6. Who resisted?

Answ. The Kings of E^ypt. Tyrus and others, which brought upon them ruin and
desolation. Jehojakim returning home, purposed rebellion, which was to his
destruction. Zedekiah and his people would not hearken to the word of the Lord,
and to the persuasions of Jeremiah, but believed false prophets, and Zedekiah
brake his Oath of subjection to the King of Babel, and rebelled, whom with his
subjects God severely plagued, by famine, pestilence, sword, and captivity.
This company are the basket of vile and bad figs, and the third captivity.

QUest. 7. What more may be observed?

Answ. Here we are diligently to mind, What God did with those staves Mark
also the metaphor of cruel plough men Psalm. 129.
rods, axes, sawes with which he did beat, saw, and hew his Church withal. Each
enemy did rage and smite a little while, till God who is wounderful in counsel
and excellent in working Esaias 10.7. etc. Deuteronomy. 30. 2, 3, 4. etc. Levit. 26.41.
Mic 7.9 Psalm. 119.67.71. Esaias 27.9. Hebr. 12.10
performed his (not their) intent, work and purpose. Then upon the This duty in
sincerity performd ever sped well, God speaking peace to his people, 2 Chr. 20.
Dan 7.1 Sam. 7. Psalm 84. Hest 4.16.
humiliation of his people he always heard their cry, He had ever respect to his
glorious and great Name, Exodus 34. Number. 14. Deuteronomy. 32. Ezekiel. 20. and this the
Saints perpetually remember to God, Psalm 74. and 79 149. his promise and
covenant is ever working.
and remembered his covenant in Christ, breaking the head and head-plot of the
seed of the Serpent, in his unsearchable judgments Consider Psalm 2. and 110.
through all stories at the word, from Kain to all that follow his ways.
putting away all the wicked of the earth like dross treading and trampling
them in the Let this text of Esaias 63. be cited no more impertinently, not
erronionsly, Apoc. 19. teaches to expound it.
Wine Press of his anger and fury, and overthrowing Kingdom after Kingdom
with great desolation, as it is said, Lo I begin to bring evil on the City
whereupon my name is called, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Read Jer. 23.
and Esaias 30.

Very many more are the observations which these Scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets will afford to the wild Olive branches: but to the godly and deligent
student they will be familiar.

QUest. 8. Was not the Kingdom of Solomon restored after the captivity?

Answ. 1. No, They were told that they should never have an earthly Kingdom
any more, for God had sworn that Jechonias of Salomons posterity (and of the
direct line of the Royal descent) should die childless, and that none of his
seed nor of Jehojakim his father should bear rule any more in Judah, Jer. 22.
and 36.30.

2. Also God had told them in Babel, that the 4 Kingdoms signified by the four
metals of the Image, and by the four beasts Dan. 2. and 7. should overruled
their outward estate, and that the Crown and Kingdom should be overturned,
overturned, overturned, and cast to the ground, till he came to whom it
belonged, that is Christ the King.

QUest. 9. If Salomons race was ended in Jechonias, how was Gods promise
fulfilled that Christ should come of David, according to the flesh?

Ans. David (besides Solomon) had a son of Bathsheba called Nathan, and of him
our Lord Jesus Christ linealy descended.

QUest. 10. If Jechonias dyed childeless, how is it said that he begat
Salathiel, 1 Chronicles. 3.17. and Mat. 1.12.

Answ. Salathiel was the Son of Jechonias by legal right of succession to the
kingdom, not son by nature: and so Ezra teaches 1 Chronicles. 3. That Jechonias
being in See how Tremelius translates 1 Chronicles 3.17. the term Assi^ is not a
proper name.
strait prison adopted Salathiel his heir. And in the same manner the
Evangelist Matthew handles our Lords case, declaring that he was right heir to
the kingdom of Israel.

QUest. 11. Which are the Kingdoms signified by the four metals, and by the
four Beasts, Dan. 2. and 7.

Answ. By the Head of Gold, and the Lion is signified Babel, the Breast and
arms of silver, and the Bear, signify the Medes and Persians: the Belly and
sides of Brass, and the spotted Leopard, the kingdom of Graecia: the thighs and
legs of iron and feet of iron and clay, and the Beast with ten horns the kings
of Gog in the north, and the kings of the South.

QUest. 12. What was the end of those wicked kingdoms that oppressed the
Saints the holy Hebrews?

Answ. The whole Image was beaten to dust and made as chaff before the wind:
the four Beasts were cast into the fire unquenchable before the Son of man came
in the clouds.

QUest. 13. What reasons may be rendered, why God did abolish some of Moses
Ceremonies, and Salomons race, and everthrew Temple, City, and kingdom?

Answ. Israel which is after the flesh looked not to the sure mercies of David
in the eternal throne and kingdom promised to them in Christ. But that which
was for their welfare became to them, through misbelief, an occasion of
falling: they stumbled at the Stumbling Stone, and seeking by the outward work
to be justified (as Esaias 1. and 58.59 and Psa. 50. complains) and made their
Belly their God, and minded outward and earthly things: therefore God did shake
all those poor rudiments by Babel, (read Jer. 3.16. and 52.13.17. etc.) and
once more finally said he would^ that they might be better persuaded to embrace
the New Covenant, that God had promised to make with them: to look to Christ
the end of the Law, and to entertain his easy yoke, and to enter into his
rest, to be more spiritually minded, to look to him the true Solomon, and to
his Priesthood and kingdom.

QUest. 14. How many years was it since the 19. of Nebuchadnezar, or the third
captivity, to the end of the Captivity.

Answ. Full 50 years: then the golden head was made dust, the Lion thrown in
the fire. Then Cyrus K. of Persia overthrew Babel, The eighth Chapter of Dan.
for the fufilling of it belongs to the time of the Seventy Sevens, and likewise
much of chap 2. and 7.
and made a decree for the return of the people and building of the City and
Temple in the first year of his Reign.

QUest. 15. What Scriptures are contained in those 50. years. Ans. Part of the
last chap of 2 Kings, and part of the last chap. of 2 Chr. much of Jeremiah,
and much of Ezekiel, so much as is noted to be after the 11. of Zedekiah, or
the burning of the Temple: the 4, 5, 7, and 8. (a) chapters of Daniel, the
prophecy of Obadiah.

The Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the eighth CHAPTER.
QUest. N. 4. Moses says from Christ] People should be taught this constantly
that the Son of God, to whom the Father has committed all authority and power,
so as Mediator, he gave the Law. And when we are careless or wilful and break
the law, and do not obey it, then we dishonor the Son: for this is the holy
revealed will of the Lord that all men should honor the Son, as they honor
the father, Exoa. 23. Mat. 17.5. So it is said of Servants, they serve and obey
Christ when they perform their duties in conscience to their masters: the same
is said of wives and children. And so we must say of all relations divine and
humane in all the Ten Words, Mark Jeremy chap. 34. all of it. That is a great
Word which is spoken. Obdience is better than Sacrifice. This well understood
will make to vani^h the term Legalists, and the vain doctrines, that have been
about keeping and walking in the Law of the Lord: as though it were not made
for the righteous to be a rule of life; but we may not once to think to be
justified by the doing of it, for the Law is more spiritual, then the best
Christian in the world. But we ought to be very careful that we walk in his
holy covenant that our hearts by his spirit may comfort us, that we are honest
subjects of the Kingdom of so good and gracious a King: And let such take heed
that will not thus be Legalists that the Lord Jesus Christ the King, do not
send forth writs against them as outlaws, that will not obey his
commandments, but be as untamed Heifers: for he has (as we see) many Marshals
(such as is sicknesses, diseases, etc.) to attend him to serve his processes,
from which there can be no escaping, if once the decree come forth. But do I
say, no escaping? yea it may be upon godly humiliation not only escaping; if
not that, yet abatem^nt of the chastisement, or else all will be sanctified to
us, that all shall be for our good: for he that is our King and Law giver is
also our sacrifice of propiti^ation and reconciliation to all that judge
themselves, and confess their sins, and forsake their iniquities, for he is
merciful and just in his promises to pardon them that by the assistance of his
Spirit walk in his righteous Law. All his providence are to humble, and to
bring us to the obedience of faith in him our holy Mediator, and blessed are
they that do his commandments, Apoc 22.14.

Ibid. N. 5. The Law of the Lord is a cnoverting Law] The Law Ceremonial and
Moral was a regenerating and converting Law by the spirit of Christ to them of
the old Testament. Although the Lord Jesus ending all the Ceremonial Law in his
offering up of himself as a most perfect sin-offering, and his blood a perfect
sprinkling, is our complete cleansing and justification, yet still teaches us
the Moral law, as his New Testament shows to obey God in him, whom all the
Israel of God must know, that God the Father has made him Lord and Christ; as
to be our Priest and Teacher, so to be our King and Commander: yea as to be any
one of them, so to be all of them to us. And all this is to present us to God
an holy people, 1 Corinthians. 15. ult. Colloss. 1.28. John 17.

The Law was not given by Christ with that terror to be to us only a Law of
works (as many understand works) but it was a Gospel Law, teaching of Faith and
Love which is in Christ Jesus: and it was given in terror to make men fear to
despise the Son of God as Mediator. All the preaching of God to the Patriarks,
and by Moses, and the Prophets, was to bring man back again to God by preaching
Jesus Christ the Mediator from God, and his mediation was ever manifested
since the fall of our first parents. And our Lords Apostles taught the same
holy doctrine among all nations for the obedience of faith, read Romans 1.5. and
16.25.26. Nicodemus a Teacher in Israel should have known all these things.
John 3.

Quest. 7. and Answ. And should ye be utterly unpunished] When the Church is
afflicted then let the world look for a scourge: for in the prosperity of the
Church the world fares the better: let the world bless the Church, it shall
then have many outward comforts. The world should now be wise to consider, that
to vex the Church of God, to curse Abraham is the ready way to bring plagues on
it self. But it is said the whole world lies in wickedness, and so it will
still be, and we must expect it.

Quest. 8. and Answ. N. II. Overturned, etc.] That speech of Ier. 22.29. O
earth, earth, earth, write Iechonias childeless: and that speech of Ezekiel.
21.27. Overturned, overturned, overturned, must be diligently observed
together, the one for the ending of Salomons house, the other for the Kingdom.
Although God overturned Salomons Kingdom, and ended his progeny, yet he
failed not David of his truth, and mercy promised, but he raised up One, even
Christ, our of his loins, after he was dead, and set him upon his throne, and
his throne shall stand for ever, Luke 1.32.33. which opens Psalm 89. And Gods
promise to David, 2 Samuel 7. And concerning the refusal of Salomons house in
Iechonias, and the choosing of the house of Nathan, mark the words of the
blessed and beloved virgin, Luke 1.51. He has showed strength with his arm,
and he has scattered the proud in the imaginations of their heart; he has put
down the mighty from their seats and exalted them of low degree.

Quest. 10. and answ. in a threefold Charge] The mighty and great God says
Jer. 22. Words by his servant the prophet ending the succession of Solomon with
greater proclamation to all the world than David's oath at the first had brought
it into honor. The ending of Salomons house was one of the weightest matters
in all the government of the world, to show that Christ his Kingdom is not of
this world, Mr. Bro. in Manus.

Quest. 11. and answ. and the Lion] When the State of Judah, by being
conversant with Lions, became a Lioness, and brought forth Lions that roared on
the subjects, then God brought upon them the Lion-Babel, and other hunters who
spread their nets from them, Ezekiel 19.

Ibid Kings of Gog in the North] By Gog and Magog is meant the kings of the
North the fourth Beast, or the iron leg, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. Dan. 2. and 7.
skilful ought we to be to discern the proper Gog and Magog from that spoken
mystically, Apoc. 20.

Quest. 12. and answ. The four Beasts] To the carnal and worldly minded the
wicked Kingdoms of this world seem glorions powers, as in the image to
Nebuchadnezzar: but to the spiritual minded they are as salvage Beasts that go
to a fire unquenchable. So the state of mystical Babylon is glorious in the
world. Apoc. 17.4. but their end shall be as Sodoms, Apoc. 14.10. and 19.20.

Quest. 31. and answ. The sure mercies of David] That glorious Temple of Stone,
and all Moses Ceremonies, and that golden Throne of Solomon, and that store of
gold, and plenty of silver as stones, strong Cities, and Chariot Cities,
stately buildings, forty thousand stalls for Horses, plenty of all provision,
royal furniture, and all princely accommodations, curious delights of eyes and
ears, etc. were not the sure mercies, and holy things of David, For all was
vanishing into vanity, when Rehoboam showed himself a fool, both in matter of
State and corrupting the Gospel, 1 Kings 10. Eccles. 2.19. The sure me cies are
showed to the circumcision, and to the uncircumcision, Esaias 55.1, 2, etc. 1
Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 4.18. Acts 13.34, 35. etc. And all the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Esaias 57.15. and 66.1, 2 Mat. 5. and 6. and 7. Hosea 1.7. Z^ch. 4.6.
And the true gold and clothing is from the true Solomon, and the firm building
is on Christ the Rock, Apoc. 3.18. Mat. 7. That these things might be graffed,
and as nails fastened in our hearts, look further within the veil of these
matters. Salomons wives over-wrought him to suffer, and by his charges to build
idol places, whereupon he saw he had occasioned Gods threatening for the renting
and overthrow of his Kingdom, and foreseeing the destruction of the Temple,
City, and Kingdom, he writes his Gospel, That all under the Sun is vain, and
the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but the promise of the eternal
Throne to David was spiritually to be taken, and to his Scepter all must yield
subjection, that hope to stand in judgment, when he calls all to account for
their works, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. And Salomons
case alone, (noble in the vanity of this world, and the first, and the last
that had all this world at will) might have taught Herod, Pilate, Caesar's and
Concision, that the pomp of this world is not fit to breed poverty of spirit,
to breed mourning, to breed meekness, to breed hunger and thirst after
righteousness, to find the Kingdom of heaven. And that the King eternal,
invisible, blesses men only to his invisible Kingdom.

Ibid. Seeking by the outward work to be justified.] Opus operatum, bodily
exercise, even this, now at this day is the foolish conceit and practice of all
the carnal Christians in the world, Eccles. 5.1. The coming unto God by faith
in Christ, as Habel, they care not for, as Kain. In the story of Kain and Abel,
the carriage of all deceitful hypocrites, and true Worshippers is contained.
Outward religion may be the vessel of an incarnate Devil, as well as of a
sanctified soul: it is as capable of hypocrisy, of murder and uncleanness, and
all iniquity, as of sincerity etc. as in Kain, Iscariot, and the Whore in the
proverbs ( Prove. 7.14.) whom the ten Tribes followed as an Ox to the slaughter,
and the whore (in Apoc. 17.) whom ten Kingdoms followed drunken with the wine
of her Fornication The opinion of self-sufficiency, and resting in outward
performances brought many plagues to the whole house of Israel, and to
captivity, as Psalm. 50 etc. etc. And at last scattered them (as Kain) into the
four winds of the heaven, and made their habitation desolate to this day. And
this doctrine of bodily exercise, and men's ^^aditions brought apostasy as a
plague, to the Christian Churches, 1 Timothy 4.1. to 8. The warming our hearts
with such sparks will make us ly down with cold comfort in darkness and sorrow:
For it is a forgetting of God, and they have base, barren, and unworthy
conceits of the Holy One of Israel, that think he will comply with such
idolatrous, and easy devotions, for they could not do less to an idol. Pelagian
heresies, and bodily exercise will ear out all power of godliness: the one is
the doctrine of popery, and the other is the religion of popery: compare Col. 2
23. with c^ap. 3.1, 2, 3. and mind Esaias 1. Psalm 50. Jer. 7.

Ibid. and once more finally] Dan. 9.27. shows by whom. And this speech yet
once more, signifies the removing of things shaking as made with hands, that
the things which shake not way remain. Wherefore seeing we receive a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken, let us hold Grace by which we may serve God aright with
reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming sire, Heb. 12. Hag. 2.
Mark how this speech opens, Dan 2.44 and chap. 7. Therefore Abaddons Kingdom
is to be held anath^ma, of all true Christians, for building of there which
Christ has shaken, and adnulled. But what care Princes for these things, they
will rather embrace the enchanting whore, Apoc 17. than make the word of God
their delight, but Christ has and will burn and shake their Kingdoms and
Common Weals.

Ibid. David foretold them this.] David showed his house could not be upright
with God, but would be thorns, and must be burnt: and that therefore they
should expect a better King and Kingdom. So the revolting and wavering Hebrews
through misbelief concerning Christ's Kingdom and Priesthood would prove to be
but thorns and briars whose end was burning, Psalm 22 and 40. and 95. 2 Samuel
23. Observe Ethan, all Psalm. 89. Heb. 6.8. and 10 29, 30, 31.

Quest. 14. and answ. and made a decree for return] as Jehov^h promised that a
remnant should return, so he performed. For Israel has not been forsaken, nor
Judah of his God, of Jehovah of hosts, though their land was filled with fin
against the Holy One of Israel, Ier. 51.5.

CHAP. IX.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations, for the time of the seventy Sevens,
in Dan. 9. Showing how Redemption and the Covenant of grace was taught and
opposed in this Space of time.

QUest. What remaining Text does yet continue the golden chain of times, with
which Gods eternal Counsel, and riches of his glorious mystery in Christ, was
further revealed to the Elect?

Answer. Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. This Scripture is a Text full of shining glory,
overshining all the Doctrine of the old Testament, and an Abridgement of the
new.

QUest. 2. Repeat the Scripture, with some more of that Chapter, as a
preparation to observe the Angels heavenly message the better?

Answer, verse 1. In the first year of Darius, the son of Achasuerosh, of the
seed of Madai, in which he was made King over the Realm of the Chaldeans.

2. In the first year of his Reign, ^ Daniel marked by books the number of the
years, whereof the word of Jehovah, had been unto Jeremiah the Prophet, for the
accomplishing in the ruins of Jerusalem seventy years.

3. And I turned my face to the Lord God, and sought by Prayer and
Supplication, with Fasting, with sackcloth and ashes.

3. And I prayed unto the eternal my God, and made my confession and said, O
Lord, the great and dreadful God keeping the Covenant and mercy to them that
love him, and to them that keep his commandments.

5. We have sinned, and we have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and
have rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts, and from thy judgments.

6 Neither have we hearkened unto thy Servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy
name to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our fathers, and to all the people of
the Land, etc etc.

20. And as I was yet speaking, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people
Israel, and presenting my supplications before the eternal my God, for the
holy Mountain of my God.

21. Even as I was yet speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen
before in a vision came unto me, flying with vehemence until he touched me at
the time of the Evening oblation.

22. And he gave understanding, and talked with me, and said, Daniel, I am now
come forth to give thee skill of understanding.

23. At the beginninng of thy prayers came forth the word which I am come to
tell thee, because thou art greatly beloved; Therefore conceive the word, and
perceive the clear vision.

24. Seventy sevens of years are exactly accounted for thy people, and for thy
holy City, to finish Trespasse-offerings, and to end sin offerings, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring righteousness everlasting, and to
seal vision and Prophet, and to show Vi. M. Bro. translation of Daniel in
English, printed at Hanaw. Ebr. Messiah.
CHRIST, the Holy of Holiest.

25. Know then, and understand from the outgoing of the word to restore and
build Jerusalem unto Ebr. Messiah, so v. 26.
CHRIST the King, shall be seven sevens, and sixty and two sevens. In the other
it shall be restored and builded, Street and wall, and troublous shall these
times be.

26. In that after the Sixty and two Sevens CHRIST shall The sufferings of the
Messiah, allusion often touched in the new Testament, Acts 26.23. The angel
seals Balaams Prophesic concerning Kittim, Italy, to be the crucifier of
Christ Number. 24.24. hereby.
suffer, but not for himself. Thereupon the City, and Holy Place shall he
destroy, and the Kings own people in the next generation, and their end shall
be with a Flood, and at the end of the war shall be a final judgment of utter
desolations.

27. But he shall confirm the covenant for the Not for the Jews only, as Luc.
22.20. but for the many, as Mat. 26 28. Romans 5.15.1 John 2, 2.
many, the last Seven and half that seven shall bring to an end Sacrifice and
Offering. Afterward by an Army of unclean, loathsome infidels he shall make a
desolation, even until utter destruction, and final judgment come flowing on
the desolate.

QUest. 3. What special Observations are in this Scripture? Ans. As the
motions of the heavens declare the glory of God: so the army like ordered times
in Gods word, is worthy of all admiration, all serving Christ. This Scripture
does show the finishing of the golden chain of times, of the old Testament, in
a pleasant Sabbaticall account, The Seventy Sevens are from Daniels prayer for
freedom from Babel, until the Son eternal, the King of glory does purchase
an eternal freedom for all that believe the glorious Gospel.

2. This Prophecy was given in the first year of Cyrus and Darius, who
overthrew Babels Kingdom, and sent the Jews home that year with a most
comfortable Proclamation of Subsidy over CXX. Provinces, and with commandment
(...) building Jerusalem and the Temple, which with the wall, and the Streets
of the City, were reedified within the Seven Sevens.

3. This Scripture is a glorious revelation from heaven, concerning Christ the
King, the Holy of Holy: who by his just, peaceable, and spiritual government,
uncontrollable teaching, and never ending Priesthood, should finish trespass
offering, and end sin offering, and make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring
righteousness everlasting: and seal, that is, confirm all the visions and
Prophesies, that he was the end that all aimed at: himself being the true
Prophet, Sacrificer and King, altar and Sacrifice, so in himself ending all
Abraham's, Moses, and the Temples Ceremonies, both persons and things.

4. Here is declared whither the benefit of all Christ's sufferings tend, that
he suffered not for himself, but for us, the just for the unjust, he was
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, he gave himself
for us, an offering, and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God.

5. Gods people for endeavoring to perform any worthy work for the advancement
of the Gospel, and the common weal, must expect troubles and all oposition of
slanders, reproaches, false accusations, and whatsoever else, the seed of the
Serpent can possibly do, the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, show this in
re-edifying Jerusalem, the wall and the Temple.

6. Whereas the Angel told Daniel, that he was sent to make him skillful of
understanding, we must know, that Daniel knew all but the time which brings a
greater clearness to all: therefore the appointed time, the very year, day and
hour of fulfilling this prophecy is not a trivial, or an uncertain thing, but
is that which the Angel calls skill of understanding: and therefore he
doubleth a charge to the Prophet to understand and consider.

7. This is remarkable as by the coming from Egypt, recorded for the very day,
the day of the promise to Abraham may be certainly known which was the self
same day, 430 before. so the day of our Lord, death being known, which was
answerable to the promise and Passover, this Prophecy also of the Seventy
Sevens, being exactly 490 years before it, may be known to agree in time with
it. Glorious is the wisdom of God, herein to honor his feasts with most
heavenly stories, that promise and seal, truth and figure might meet together.

8. This Oration of the Angel shows how long Sems Tents should hold their
glory, and be accounted holy, and that at the end of the Seventy Sevens, or 490
years, The ending of the Seventy Sevens, the time of reformation.
the heathen should have the Partition wall of ceremonies broken down, and the
hand writing of Ordinances Epi^es. 2.14, 15.16. Col. 2.14.
blotted out, and the old enmity between Jew and Gentile Isa. 11. and 60.17,
18. Ep^^^s. 2.15.
abolished, and be brought into equal covenant, and that Christ the King would
destroy his own Nation, and demolish City and Temple with perpetual devastions
as with the Flood of Noah, and make a new Jerusalem from heaven, because all
Nations could not depend on the City in Canaan, read Isa. 63 23.

9. Observe that the Romans for killing of Christ, are called like the unclean
beasts in Leviticus, unclean loathsome Infidels, and Rome it self, of all Cities
in the world, for that, is specially cursed, the Apocalips is a full
declaration of this.

10. Whereas the Angel says, Christ shall confirm the Covenant, for the many,
and shall end Moses ceremonies, and by his only Sacrifice once offered bring
in everlasting justification or freedom from sins, guiltiness, and desert,
Popery is to be abhorred and accursed, that does revive Moses ceremonies, the
handwriting of Ordinances, with repetition of Priest, Altar and Sacrifice
propitiatory. And we in the Lords Supper do protest against Jews and Popery,
that CHRIST ended all by his death once performed, through which he is to all
the faithful a most complete and perfect reconciliation for all iniquity.

QUest. 4. Who gave heed to this word of Prophecy spoken by the holy Angel
from heaven?

Answ. The Forty nine thousand, Ezra? that left. Babel for Jerusalem, with the
holy Prophets and Governors, Zorobabel, Nehemiah, Haggai Z^h^ri^h, ^^^alachi,
and our Lords, fathers and kindred from Z^^b^^le^, Mat 1. Luk^ 3. and the
Ma^^habean martyrs, and so many of Israel, as had hope of salvation thought of
Je^^^^^^m in all places (...) they were scattered, read Jeremiah Chap 51.50.

QUest. 5. Who also in the new Testament?

Answ. Zacharias, and his wife Elizabeth, John the Baptist, old Simeon, and
Anna the daughter of Phanuel, and many in Israel and Jerusalem, that waited for
Christ, the hope and consolation of Israel, and Jews before the full ending of
the Seventy Sevens came from all countries to Jerusalem, looking for the
Kingdom of heaven, then to appear, as Daniel foretold, chap 2. and 7. and 9.
And John Elias cried, and our Lord, and his disciples preached, that, The
Kingdom of heaven was come, Mat. 3.2. and 10.7. Luke 19.11.

QUest. 6. Who were enemies that did hate and cruelly mock and persecute the
doctrine of God and his people?

Answ. The wicked Kingdom signfied by the Bear, Leopard and beast with ten
horns, Hamans wickedness, and Sanballats and others under the Government of
the Breast and Arms of silver must be remembered.

QUest. 7. Who did neglect and apostate from this prophecy of so great
salvation?

Answ: Many in Israel that associated with Sanballat, and Malachi shows that
some began to be Atheists, and to speak stout and wearisome words against God
and his doctrine. The Angel foretold of Antiochus caused stars to fall. D^n. 8.
and 11. so did the tail of the Dragon, the new Anti^chus, Ap^c. 12.2. These 2.
The fourth beast cast down truth to the ground, Dan ^.
forsakers, and wicked dealears against the holy Covenant (of Daniels own
people) under the iron legs and fourth Beast. Also Zacharias spoke of wicked
Shepherds that loathed Christ and his Kingdom. And that came to pass in those
Heretics and false Teachers, the Sadduces, Scribes and Pharisees. They were
great oppugners of all Gabriels heavenly message, as in all the Evangelists the
Acts, and in the Epistles to Rome, and to Galatia, to the Hebrews is seen.

QUest. 8. How did Daniels holy people find Gods goodness in cleaving to this
Doctrine?

Answer. By faith they obtained good report with God: and God was not ashamed
of them to be called their God. By faith the Jews in Esther escaped the edge of
the sword. Also we are to consider, that Zachariah, Haggai, and Malachi enlarge
Gabriels Oration for many things, that a fountain for sin and for uncleanness
should be opened by the King and Sacrificer, even Jehovah of hosts, that should
glorify the second Temple with his presence. And that although the low
Jerusalem and Temple should be destroyed, a larger should be builded, and a
better raised up, And the Covenant shall be confirmed, with the many Gentiles
from East to West, among whom in every place, incense of prayer, and pure
offering of lips, praising of God shall be offered unto his holy name; That
Him, the Angel of the Covenant, the Sun of righteousness shall arise with
healing in his beams, and that God enrolls in the book of life all that fear
him, and thought upon his name, to glorify them in that day of the better
resurrection, to shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars
for ever and ever.

Quest. 9. How was Gods service executed on the Seed of the Serpent, the open
enemies of his name and people?

Answ. Streams of fire came from the fiery Throne, through the Mediation of
the high Sacrificer in the heavens, which overthrew the thrones of Kingdoms,
Dan. 7.9, 10. Zac. 1.12, 13.
and destroyed the strength of the Kingdoms of the heathens, contained in the
image and Beasts, Dan. 2. and 7. That same vengeance hanged that Courtier and
favorite Haman, and his sons, and brought to confusion their assassines, and
others were told that they had no right, nor portion, nor memorial in
Jerusalem, Nehem. 2.10.

QU. 10. With what reward did Christ recompense the disobedience of scandalized
revolters from the Doctrine of salvation? Heb. 2.1.

An. 1. Malachi denounced, that Gods wrath should burn them up as an oven: and
tormenting sorrows befell them before and after the bright morning Star of Jacob
appeared, as Zachariah also had foretold them; for as they abhorred and loathed
Christ and his Doctrine, so Christ abhorred and loathed them, leaving the lost
sheep to perish, that would needs be perishing, whom yet he pitied before that
wrath came on them to the utmost.

2. And Christ the Rock of Israel, having confirmed the covenant for the Jews,
and the many of all Nations, the last year of the last Seven, did forty years
after grind to powder the Jews his own people, by the Roman infidels, and
destroyed City and holy Place with utter and small Then the corner stone fell
on the Jews, and the vineyard was let out to other husbandmen. Mat. 21.41. etc.
desolations, and such miseries and sorrows Read Heb. 25.31. and Josephus on
the wars of the Jews.
befell the N^tion, that they could rather have wished the mountains to fall
upon them, and the hills to cover them, read Luke 23, 39, 30.

QUest. 11. But shall not the Land of Canaan, City, and Temple, and Kingdom be
restored to the Jews?

Answer. They shall never be restored, yet the Jews shall have a general
glorious calling in all places where they are scattered, when the fulness of
the Gentiles is come in, and when they are called, and the veil Then they shall
see the 12 Tribes over our gates, and the apostles doctrine to be fastened in
Aharons jewels, Apo. 21
taken off their heart, and know Christ and his spiritual government, they
will esteem Canaan and Jerusalem, no more than any City or country in the
world; they will then look to the heavenly Rest, (yet here begun) and to the
holy City from heaven, in which the Lord God of hosts, even the Lamb is the
Temple, Apocal. 21.22.

QUest. 12. What Scriptures are contained in those Seventy Sevens?

Answ. The two last verses of the last of Chronicles, Daniel the 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12. chapters, Ezra, Nehemiah, Hester, Haggai, Zachariah, Malachy, and
the 4 Evangelists, which finish their story with the death, resurrection and
ascension of Jesus Christ our Lord, whose death was the very last day of the
Seventy Sevens, or 490 years, at the time of the Evening Sacrifice.

Note all the rest of this New Testament was written within 70 years after our
blessed Saviors ascension.

QUest. 13. What do you observe in the Scriptures of the old Testament, as
special occasions of the Churches apostacies and revoltings?

Answ 1. Wicked marriages, as is manifest from the times of the old world to
Malachies days.

2. The open or visible Church never cares for, nor cleaves to the written
word, unless there be faithful Governors, but ever men are declining to their
own vain inventions.

3. Wicked sacrificers, and false Prophets, who came without Gods sending, both
came with outward shows of truth, but were base sycophants and parasites,
always falsely accusing and persecuting the godly, and flattering Princes and
people in their exorbitant courses.

4. The abuse of sweet peace, health, and plenty, turning these blessings of
the Gospel, to pride, wantonness, idleness, gluttony, drunknnesse, oppression,
worldly confidence, and carnal, and careless security, for Church and
Commonweal, etc.etc.

QUest. 14. How many years has Palmoni the wonderful Numberer, numbered from
the Creation to the Redemption?

Answer. The Sun in his Tabernacle of the heavens had joyfully run his race, as
a servant to the SON of righteousness, Three thousand nine hundred and sixty
years, from the first promise of Christ to Evah, till the SUN lost his light,
the SON brake the Serpents head dying, rising, and ascending.

QUest. 15. How many Jubilees were there?

Answ. From the Conquest and partition of the Land of Canaan, by Jesus the son
of Nun, unto the conquest of JESUS, the son of God over Sin, death, and Satan,
and all our enemies, are twenty eight Jubilees: our Lord and Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the second Adam, and Sem the Great and Reverend, The
Jubilee year a wonderful^ (...), the joyful sound of the Trumpet, in the
acceptable year of the Lord sounded all these things. The victorious combat,
with the Serpent and his seed, and his triumph over them, the fulness of
times, the Sacrifice of eternal Redemption, the just for the unjust, the open
recovery of Paradise, the resurrection of the most holy, the true Temple
destroyed and raised, the day of salvation, the Jews Prerogative ended, the
Gentiles called, the enmity of Jew and Gentile abolished, the shadows flee
away. Christ shook and ended the things made with hands, the Sun is darkened,
the Vail of the Temple rent, because the way into the holy heavens was opend by
a better Priest and Sacrifice, etc. etc. etc.
died in a * Iubilee year. The ancient, holy Hebrews had an excellent and
wonderful saying among them, that, The Divine Majesty, dwelling in our
Tabernacle, will be to Israel in a Iubilee, remission, redemption, and finisher
of Sabbaths.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the ninth Chapter.
QVest. 2. and Ans. upon the 2. verse of Dan. 9.] The reading, study, and
meditation of the holy Scriptures, a great furtherance to prayer. A man cannot
pray with sound spiritual comfort, that is ignorant in them, as is manifest in
this verse and the rest of the Chapter. Blessed is the man that delights in
them, and in them does meditate day and night, Psalm. 1. And anathema maranatha
be that man of sin, and his locusts and Kingdom, that withholds and
forbids the reading and study of the holy Scriptures to the people. Observe
well, 2 Samuel 7.27. Gods revelation, the ground of prayer: yea boldness in it.

Upon Daniel 9 23. Conceive the word and perceive it, etc.] By this
commandment doubled for vehementer charge he condemns the world that
regards not to be instructed in this doctrine, sent from heaven by an Angel
unto Daniel, and penned for all Nations use. Wherefore we must give better heed
unto the speech, lest we perversely swarve: for if the word spoken by angels
fall out sure, and every trespass received just recompense of reward, how
shall we ever escape neglecting so great a charge of our King, to our own
salvation, where the vision is so clear, that no doubt can be moved by any
plain heart, that will rest in the clearness of the most bright message by an
angel of glory, who coming to teach all the world, was to shine in words, as
Steph^n by him did in the face, Acts 6 when he spoke the angel Gabriels words,
that Jesus of Nazareth would destroy the place, City, and Temple, and change
the Laws which Moses gave. To this day the blind Jews stand in this, that the
Laws of Moses shall stand for ever, Maymon Tom. 1. delege perek 9. Therefore
God foreseeing their dullness of hearing, would have an angel of light to
teach them by this Prophecy 490 years, when from the year of that message unto
Daniel, the Laws of Moses should have their end, and none of the Scribes when
Herod was affrighted, nor any of the Jews, as is seen by their answers in all
the Gospel, objected disagreement for the time, which thing had been done, if
there had been any color of disagreement in time, but they could not conceive
of Christ's person and office, how that he should be the most holy, and King,
and yet die for our redemption: how he should be David's Lord, and yet his son;
of these things the main objections arose. Now let us look unto the Text, s^il.
Mr. Bro. on the text on both his english Daniels.

Upon Dan. 9.24. etc.] In this Scripture we come to behold in its flaming
brightness of the King that is Sacrificer also, by whom and for whom death is
vanquished, sun is cleansed, Justice is brought, redemption is wrought, a
vision is sealed, our soul is healed, sacrifice abolished, and the Temple
destroyed for defacing of this doctrine, the Jews be rejected for embracing
this doctrine, the Gentiles be elected to open calling, Mr. Bro. in S. sight,
surely the angel his message concerns, the sum of all the Bible. The Jews
went weeping to Babel, seeing Salomons house and Kingdom ended, and the Temple
burnt, and all Moses ceremonies shaken, but they returned rejoicing, bringing
sheaves of all comfort, by Gabriels heavenly message of the seventy sevens
concerning MESSIAH the King, the Holy of Holy.

Upon Dan. 9.25, Out going of the word to restore etc.] mark the word of
Proclamation of Cyrus, Ezra 1. how it answers this Prophecy. Meditate also
how pleasing it is to our God to have a tender affection to his cause. Daniel
mourned and prayed for the holy City, and the holy Mountain, and had a gracious
answer by the holy angel, compare Dan. 9 21.22. Also observe a speech in
Zephaniah, I will gather them, that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly, who
are of thee, (such are the children of Sion, the genuine members of Christ's
mystical body) to whom the reproach of it was a burden, Zeph. 3.18 Psalm.
137.5, 6. So Daniel again was affected when he mourned so bitterly when the
building of the temple was hindered by Cambyses, in Cyrus his absence, Ezra 4
Dan. 10.2, 3, 4. No loss to the loss of holy things, when they are gone God
is gone, and the enjoying of them, no gain so great, and no time so acceptable,
Lam. 2.6, 7. H^s 9 12. Ezekiel. 9, 3. and 10 4.18, 19. and 11.22.23. Mic^hs
idolatrous contestation in a contrary must be the thought of every Holy soul,
for the esteeming, procuring, and upholding of Holy Assemblies, Jud 18 24.

Upon Dan. 9.26. The City and holy place shall be distroy] The holy Martyr
Stephen was called into question, and lost his life for this glorious Doctrine
of the holy Angel, and yet his countenance before the Council was like the
Angels that brought the message, Act 6.13, 14, 15. and all Chap. 7. How did
Despisers wonder and perish, when Stephen and Paul taught this, Act. 6 and 7
Act. 13.41, 45. and 21.28. they wondered, and in the end perished: As of old
they wondered at the Prophets, Esai. 8 18. Jer. 26 6, 7, 8. Hab. 1.5. so they
did at our Lord and his Apostles Doctrine. And verily so it is at this day
where ever the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus is truly and
zealously taught.

Upon the same verse, and verse twenty five, about the attribute Messiah, which
in this message of the Angel is twice expressed as a proper name of the Son of
God, who became a Son of man (the Son of Adam) Dan. 7.13 to fulfill all the
Angels message. And from this time of Dan 9. this attribute Messiah was very
usual among the faithful and profane, Joh. 1.41. and 4.23. And the Jews at
that time commonly speaking Syriack, spoke the term Messiah, and speaking
Greek, they uttered the Greek term, Christ: so that as often as we read the
Greek term, we must remember the other Term of the Hebrew or Syriack: And all
the Orthodox Churches in Christendom hold Messiah here to be the Son of God,
our Redeemer, vi. Mr. Bro. on Daniell, and in Advertisment, page 33.

Upon the verse 27. and half that seaven] of this last seven, the first part
is passed over in silence, for a preparation, the latter half does Christ
bestow in confirming the covenant for the Many, beginning at his Baptism,
ending at his death.

3. Quest. and Answ. N. 1. As the motions of the Heavens] The creation was made
to serve the Son of Enosh, Psalm. 8. so the revolution of the year, all are his
Servants, Psalm. 119. (lamed-part) No Army is ordered more comely then the times
in Gods word, Dan. 10.1. And Gods people must learn to know that the times as
well as the ceremonies and tipes teach of, so they lead unto Christ, for the
Golden Chain of times are fastened to famous Pillars, as is prefixed to this
Book.

N. 11. This prophecy was given] Read Esai. 44. and 45. with Ezr. 1.1, 2.
concerning Cyrus, his Letters Patents of building the Temple and City, and
returning the people. But Cy^us (going to war in Scythia) was plagued for not
leaving better order at home, that his Letters Patents were not thoroughly
executed, for the good of Gods people, and Cambyses, Da^ius, Hystaspis and
Xerxes, for questioning and damning the Patent, felt Gods wrath and their
Kingdoms, Ezra 4. and 6.11, 12 Est 1. trouble in Dan. Hyst court.

Ibid Sent the Jews home] The blood of Gods Covenant in Christ sent them home,
as from Egypt, so from Babel, Zach. 9.11. Col. 1, 20. the blood of the Covenant
is our comfort in any disconsolate condition.

Ibid. That year with a most remarkable Proclamation over an hundred and twenty
Provinces] Then the Nations did hear of their demanding and enquiring of the
way to Sion, upon the hope of the Son of man, his coming to show the Kingdom
of heaven to all Nations, and to shake even the heaven of Moses policy, Jer.
10.4, 5. they presented Sion in the dust before glorious Babel, (and they then
ought so to do, but not now) Psalm. 102.13, 14. So Moses, and all the Nobles of
all ages, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26 ye that have escaped the sword, go away stand not
still, remember Jehovah a far off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind, Jer.
51.50, Psl 137.5, 6. So all ye that have escaped mystical Babylon, go away
stand not still, remember Jehovah, and let the glory of the heavenly Jerusalem,
come into your mind, be ye separate be at a distance in all holy zeal, still
come out from among them, touch nothing of theirs, neither Laws, nor their
phrase, nor apparel, make a covenant, as Neh. 10. 2 Cor. 6.18. what if your
name be put out as evil, remember Isa. 66.^. John 9.34. and 16.2. 2 Cor. 6.17.

No. 3. And seal, that is, confirm all the vi^ons and Prophesies that he was
the end all aimed at] Among many Prophesies that might be related, I will name
now that of Jer. 31.22. The Lord has created a new thing in the earth, A woman
shall compass a man; that is, a woman Virgin. The holy Spirit of Christ
prosecuteth the foundation of Doctrine, which he laid down in Moses, of the
blessed seed of the woman, Genesis 3.15. and of Shiloh Genesis 49. that a tribe
should not fail to Judah till Shiloh came. Now Judah being in Babel, and held
captive, the Prophet does from the Lord comfort them, that although they were
in heavy calamities, and much disconsolate, Jer. 30, 31.32, 33. chapters) yet
Judah should return, and have a policy to buy and sell, and that Jerusalem and
Temple should be built, and the Cities of Judah inhabited, and that that New
thing should be accomplished, a woman Virgin shall compass a man. All promises
were made in Christ, and should be yea and amen in him to the glory of God. And
this is promised to be as sure as the heavens order, that God would not fail of
his promise he made to David and Israel (although Salomons house and Kingdom
were ended) yea to all the elect from the beginning, in sending Christ Jesus to
be born of a Virgin, and that in him the Church should have unspeakable
consolation. This made the people of God to be so refreshed, as a man is by
sweet sleep, Ier. 31 26

But Jeremiah told them not, nor any Prophet as yet, How long, (Psalm. 64.9.)
that should be for the performance, that was reserved for a more fit season,
when they were to come from Babel, then they had the time told them by an angel
from heaven, which did much heighten their consolation, wherein all comfort was
promised by that glorious message of the angel concerning the Messiah
(compassed by the woman-Virgin) to perform all the promises, visions, and
Prophesies, by finishing and ending all sin offerings, and trespass offerings,
and make by himself a reconciliation for iniquity, and bring in everlasting
righteousness by his perfect sacrifice once performed: so by this Doctrine the
godly were preserved and strengthened greatly in their faith and hope of
Christ's coming in this determined time.

And seeing it is said, Christ shall seal Vision and Prophet, is taught that he
shall restrain apostasy through preaching his glorious Gospel, that they fall
not away as the Jews did, in that most grievous and almost universal revolt,
in and from the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan 8 13. and 11 30, 31, 32. Our
Lord Jesus Christ in his coming was the morning star, and the SUN of
Righteousness, and his brightness did visit us as holy Z^chariah says, Luc.
1 7.8. For those times were most deplorable in corrupting all holy Doctrine, as
it was greatly darkened by these three Shepherds, Zac. 11. concerning the holy
Trinity, the sons inco^nation, his death and resurrection, and concerning
justification, and all Moses polity, as all the Epistle to the Hebrews shows.
But the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles from him, made all clear again.

Also this Prophecy of the angel from heaven, was wonderful to the comfort of
the people of God under their pressures by Persia, Javan whole, and Javan
parted. This Prophecy is mavelous, if we consider the times. Oh who is
sufficient to express the things of Gods blessed word.

Ibid. N. 3. Everlasting righteousness.] The mentioning of everlasting
righteousness, justification, redemption does show the Law made nothing
perfect, but was sponsorious, and an introduction to a better hope in Christ,
for Christ by his own blood entered once through the vail, that is, his flesh,
into the holy place, into the very heavens, to appear now in the fight of God
for us, and obtained eternal Redemption, Heb. 9. For it is not possible that
the blood of Bulls or Goats should take away sin ( Heb. 9. and 10) or give
entrance into the heavens, but the blood of Christ did Col. 1.20. and in this
faith all the faithful from the beginning of the world died, and went to the
heavenly City, and country and inheritance, Heb. 11. and Col. 11.12. And all
the faithful evermore knew this our blessed Mediator, to be Jehovah our
justifications, Jer. 23.6.

No. 4. Suffered not for himself, but for us.] Zachariah says, they shall
mourn, and be in bitterness when they consider this, as they did in Mark
16.10. Acts 14. and 2.37. which is an history to the Prophecy of Zac. 12. And
so should we consider and do. This Text of Daniel is a fit Meditation for
preparation when we come to the Supper of the Lord.

N. 6. Therefore the appointed time] As in Moses, the Law had an express day
and hour for their sacrifices, even from the beginning: so it was no less
needful to have from God an express warrant, when sacrifice should be ended:
specially seeing all the world was bound to regard sacrificing at Jerusalem, so
long as it was to continue if they hoped for Gods favor. And also to know most
exactly when the Jews Prerogative did end, and the partition wall should be
broken down!

Ibid. Is not a trivial, or an uncertain thing] Talk no more so exceeding
proudly, let not arrogance come out of your mouth, for Jehovah is a God of
knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, and times pre-ordained and
determined, 1 Samuel 2.3. Acts 17.26.

N. 8. Ceremonies broken down] Christ shook the things made with hands, and
settled the polity of his Kingdom in the heavenly Jerusalem, Dan. 2. and 7.
Hag. 2. Apoc. 21. Heb. 12.27. There is the Throne of the Son of David, Apoc. 4.
and 5. and 22. 1. Luke 1.31.32, 33.

Ibid. Perpetual devastations] In the Vision of Ezekiel. 1. although terror of
fiery desolations, and captivity for seventy years, yet there was a Rainbow in
the vision, to show that God in wrath remembers mercy; for there was a return,
but for the desolations by the Roman Infidels in Daniels and Zachariahs
Prophesies, and our Lords. speaks, Mat. 24. no Rainbow mentioned; and
consider the phrase of sp^ing, out Levit. 18. 28. Number. 31. ult. after the chana
anites were spued out, the ^ever returned: so it has the Jews who shall never
return and to be in such a condition, as we are taught now adays. Hear O ye
people, O all ye.

Ibid. As with the Flood of Noah] The men of the old world, resisted the holy
Ghost, the Flood destroyed them, and so the Jews resisted, and a flood of
miseries has ever followed upon them to this day. Acts 7.51. The Apostle
remembers Noah's and Sodoms story to the Circumcision, and so does Judas
Thaddeus, v. 14, 15. of the judgment of the old world, when the Lord came with
thousands of his holy ones to plague the old world, faith was scant found on
the earth; so in the overturuning of the Kingdom of Judah: and so at our Lords
first coming, the Church was in a sad condition of ignorance and heresies, by
the means of the wicked Shepherds, Zac. 11. And before our Lords second coming,
there will be another apostasy after a Reformation, when faith will be scant
found on the earth, Luke 18. for it is said, the ending of the world shall be
like the ending of the old world Mat. 24. The times shall exceedingly
degenerate into outward shows of bodily exercise, and into atheistical
scoffing and security, Mat. 25.3. 1 These 5.1.2, 3. 2 Pet. 3. and so it was
before the desolation of Jerusalem, by Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chronicles. 36. And upon
that general defection the Lord Jesus will appear in the clouds with his
mighty angels. Christ will not come in a glorious time of Reformation, but in a
time of general defection.

No. 10 And we in the Lords Supper do protest, etc.] The Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper, is a Seal of ending Moses polity, given by the Creatours wisdom
and authority. The end of Moses Ceremonies could hardly be taught the Jews. So
God by an angel of light and glory gave them words for that to reckon ever
since they came from Babel, how for they were year by year to the Redemption by
our Lord, and to the end of the shadows, that must flee away, and be cancelled,
Cant. 2. Col. 2.14. And therefore let all Gods people mark diligently, that the
ending of Moses Ceremonies required as certain a warrant, as their beginning
had, even for the very last day. And so stand the angels words clear in their
own simplicity for ending of them. And the Authority of the Lords Supper
stands upon that, when Bread is given for the bodies of Sacrifices, and Wine
for their blood. All soundly learned, and of stayed judgment, will refuse all
color of learning that contradicts. In the words of an honest man spoken in
like sort, (as the angel spoke to Daniel) none would doubt what should be the
true meaning. The more to blame are we, who pervert the words of the living
God, to make Questions thereupon, to set light by the Rock of our salvation, as
though one thing might be spoken, and another thing meant. Mr. Broughton, Sede^
Olam. 18. assert. 2. upon Dan. 9.

Ibid. No. 10. Death once performed] the Epistle to the Hebrews by Christ's
foresight, was written of purpose, to teach this, and convince the contrary.
As Popery is full of Paganism, So it is of Judaisme.

Quest. 4. and Answer. The forty nine Thousand.] Who are thus described in
Daniel.

Michaels people. The Saints of them, The high Trinity. The stars of heaven,
Dan. 8. The holy people. Daniels holy people. The Army of heaven. Their
Religion, the truth and the holy Covenant. The Temple called the Sanctuary and
the holy. And chap. 7.25. mark that verse. Glorious holy mountain.
These terms cannot belong to the State of the Jews of these last days, Heb.
1.1. for these 1580 years, for these are proper and peculiar phrases to them of
the old Testament, when as yet the partition Wall was not broken down, and the
Gentiles were not as yet brought within the Covenant, when not as yet the
vessel was let down from heaven, Acts 10. therefore only the Jews State for
the time of the Seventy Sevens is the afflicted in Daniel, chap. 2 and 7.8. and
10, and 11 and 12. by the image and four beasts. All these terms are in the
Prophecy of Daniel.

Ibid. Left Babel for Jerusalem] the hope of the SON OF MAN, who should come
with the clouds of heaven, and have Kingdom, power and glory over all Nations,
and for ever persuaded them to leave Babel, Dan. 7. Ezra 1. Jerusalem the
beauty of holiness ever loved and longed for, and labored for by the Saints.

Quest. 5. and Answ. And Jews before the ending of the Seventy Sevens] the
glorious Prophesies of Isaiah, of Amos, of Dan. 2 and 7, and 9. etc. etc. of
the Kingdom of Christ made all the Nation of the Jews to expect it, as Luke
17.20. and 19.11. and 23.51. Acts 2. John 1. they by Daniel looked the Kingdom
of heaven should appear, though most of them knew not in what manner, through
misunderstanding of the Scriptures, Acts 13.27. Luke 24.21. Their false
Teachers had greatly clouded all holy Doctrine.

Quest. 6. and Answer. That did hate and cruelly mock.] Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth, (since their peregrination In Egypt, Ier, 2 1.3.
Ezekiel. 23.3.) may Israel now say, Ps. 129 yea the Church may say this from the
first to the last. It began in blood, and has grown up by blood, and shall end
in blood, as it was redeemed by blood. Let the godly when they come to the
Lords Supper think on this, and ever prepare for trialls, and take up the
cross.

Qu. 7. and Ans. And to speak stout and wearisome words.] Apostasy from
Gabriels holy Doctrine, Dan. 8. and 9. and 11.12 chapters, consider. Judahs
manners, in profaness, adultery, perjury, violence, etc. In brief for not
remembering the Gospel-Law, that Christ gave in Horeh for all Israel, Mal. 4.
These things show, that they shall cease to be of the holy City for this,
diligently read Haggai, Zachariah and Malachi.

Ibid. Great oppugners of all Gabriels heavenly Message.] They were zealous
Ministers of traditions, men's precepts and bodily exercise: they were serious
in trifles, and trifled in serious things. (The frame of spirit of all
superstitious hypocrites, Col. 2.) They made false glosses on the holy Text,
and great enemies to the Gospel, etc. They are followed step by step of the
Popish faction and their friends. But those that love. the shining glorious
appearing of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ will abhor to be like such
hypocrites, that do all to be seen of men, that care for nothing but pompous
outsides, and bodily exercise, (opus ex ernum operatum) yet managed with
great shows of humility, with great show of wisdom, and great shows of zeal,
and neglecting the body, and defended by Pharisaicall, and Locust-Scorpion
cruelty, and by cogging, and dice-play Doctrine in all craftiness, Ephesians. 4.
Such did, and do hold Christ and his Doctrine Anathema: It was ever so with the
seed of the serpent, ever since God spoke, Genesis 13.15. and so it will be to the
end. Mark what the Christ the angel of Gods presence said of old, And if ye
shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will
not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant, Levit. 26.15. Deuteronomy.
7.10. -- and repayeth them that hate him. Observe what Malachi says, that
Christ will be refiners fire, and Fullers soap, to the three Shepherds, (whose
soul abhorred Christ) and their Doctrine, which he was in Mat 5, 6, and 7.
chapters, and chap. 23. and so he was to the Churches of Asia, Apoc. 2, and 3.
and in all other, by his apostles, and so to this day he is to all
traditionists, etc.

Quest. 8. and Answer. And thought upon his name to glorify them.] The four
beasts successively afflicted the people of God; yet observe what is said for
their consolation, Dan 7.18. That although the beasts shall take away the
earthly Kingdom of the Saints, of the most high Ones, (the holy Trinity) yet
they shall possess the Kingdom for ever, yea for ever and ever: The loss of
the one is the enjoyment of the other. So all that follow their faith are said
to be partakers of their inheritance in light, Col 1.12. Psalm. 36.5. with this
note, consider the former notes of the immortal State of the faithful, them
in heaven, and the family of heaven, Ephesians. 1.10. and 3.15.

Quest. 9. and Answer. -- hanged that Courtier and Favorite Haman.] Let
fawning and flattering Courtiers, that have a secret sting against the godly,
and ways of holiness, remember this man their predecessor, and likewise
Doeg, that mischievous and deceitful tongue. Achitophel, that acute oracle of
counsel, Shebna the Treasurer, a fautor of atheism, and all debauched
courses, Isa. 22. and those Princes and Presidents that could find no quarrel
against gracious Daniel, but for the Law of his God. And those Deputies, that
by plausible pretenses, lies and slanders, did insinuate into the hearts of the
Kings of Persia, to damn the glorious Letters Patents of Cyrus King of Persia,
and those counselors, that were pensioners to hinder the Gospel, Ezra 4. And
those Courtiers, that would have the King to put Jeremiah to death for
preaching the word truly, and at last put him into a^miry dungeon, etc. Now
that you may see Christ rules in Princes Courts, in the midst of his enemies:
he rooted out Doeg, Psalm. 52. Achitophel, seeing his projects took not, hanged
himself. Shebna was banished, and a godly officer substituted in his place. And
for those Princes and Presidents, we see their sudden destruction, Dan. 6.
consider Ps. 9, 10. The sword, famine, and pestilence met with Jeremiahs
accusers. And as wrath came from the fiery Throne upon the Kings of Persia; so
it fell, we may be sure, on their creatures, Dan. 7.

Ibid. Had no right nor portion, etc.] That speech of the truly Noble Nehemiah,
that famous, godly, and honorable Courtier, is full of piercing terror, and a
brave contestation to affront the stoutest stomachs, that hinder the welfare of
Sion. And these Texts will further explain it, Phil. 3.2.3, 4 Ephesians. 2.10, 11,
12. Jer. 10.16. Apo. 12.14, 15, 19. if no porttion among that part of Gods
family on earth, then no portion with the other part of the family in the
heavens.

Ibid. Ierusalems polity.] Nehemiah genealogized the people, that none, but of
the true faith, and posterity of Abraham might dwell in the holy City, or have
communion with them in holy things, Neb. 9.2. so they were genealogized in the
Lambs book of Life, that are Citizens with the Saints in the Jerusalem, that is
above, Apoc. 3.12. and chap. 7. and 21. Heb. 12.23. Psalm. 87. But the unclean
in faith or life, are shut out, Neh. 6.63, 64, 65. Ezekiel. 13.9, Apoc. 20. and
12. Isa. 4 3, Let every man know if he will enter into life, he must show his
genealogic, John 3. 1. etc. 1 John 3. Ti^. 3. Many Gentlemen glory much if they
can derive their genealogy from Ancestors, from or beyond the conquest of
England, by King William; which it may be they and their Ancestors had little
in them worthy of commendation. But never think of any of these things in Gods
Book, especially of the Genealogle of our Lord Jesus Christ, who became man to
adopt us the sons of God. If Nobility and Gentry could show that they follow in
regeneration the steps of faith and holiness of the ancient Patriarks,
Prophets and Apostles, then it were glorious, whereas all their lineall
succession is but vanity, being inflamed with idolatrous, and superstitious
lasciviousness and following Cains ways. What eared Isaiah, Ezekiel, John
Baptist? Our Lord when the Jews boasted of Abraham, that they came of him, Isa.
57.3. Ezekiel. 16.3. John 8.44. Mat. 3. Christ says to the unbelievers and
hypocrites, Ye are of your father the devil. Men that hate Christ, and his
word, and his servants, their genealogy is from Satan and Cain, 1 John 3.12.
and the faithful, theirs is from Abraham, yea from God and Christ, Gal. 3.
7.29. and chapter 4.31. John 1.13. Let all Phil: 3. be considered with this
note.

Quest. 10. and Answ. N. 1. And tormenting sorrows.] Note some special God gave
over into the hands of one another, and into the hands of: their Kings, the
Herod's, and the Cesa^s, Joseph Liber 13. chap. 19. etc. Then Christ brake both
his staves, by which they were strengthened, he brake the staff of beauty,
bereaving them of the duty of his Ordinances, and brake also the brotherhood
of Judah and Ephraim. And much of this came to pass when the tribe of Levi
cared not for the sacrifice-hood, and would be Kings contrary to Jacobs, and
Moses will, Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 33. Then they and others became Sadduces, and killed
50000 Pharisees. This is the fruit of heretical Doctrine and men's Traditions.
The poor of the flock that waited on Christ, and valued him above all,
observed these things, Zac. 11.

Ibid. For as they abhorred Christ.] As their forefathers moved Christ to
jealousy by revolting to idols, so they did by men's traditions, and false
Doctrine, which is as bad as idolatry: yea it is idolatry and vanity, Deuteronomy.
32.21. compare with Romans 10.19.1 John 5.21. Observe how the Apostle Paul cites
that Text of Moses. They despised the eternal Son, and his righteousness, the
new and living way: Bodily exercise was not the living way, and so they
despised God the Father, 2 John 9 but that brought upon them the day of violent
fire and wrath to the utmost, as it is said, despisers wonder and perish, Acts
31.41, Heb. 10.27. 1 These. 2.19. False Teachers, and their deceived never
prized nor admired Christ and his word, read Phil. 3.

Quest. ibid. N. 2. with utter and final desolations] Your house, that is, the
Temple shall be dosolate while the world stands, Mat. 23. Luc 13. And this
came to pass about 40 years after our Lords ascension. Not such a desolation
and trans^^gration, as was at Shiloh, or at Jerusalem by Babel, or as that
three years, and half by Antiochus with restoration, but utter desolations: as
experience for 1500 years. The affliction from Egypt had a foretold
limitation, so had Babels, so that of Antiochus, and Isreal's proper glory was
limited, Dan. 9.24. But how carnal Isreal's affliction is not limited, and
earthly Canaan, and Jerusalem, shall never have proper and peculiar glory.

Quest. 11. and Answer. They shall never be restored.] Let Ezk. 16.43. to the
end of the chapter, be well considered, both for the captivity to Babel, and
the utter desolations by Rome, as Ezekiel compares Iudahs state with Sodoms
unrecoverable, so our Lord, both to Sodom, and to Noah's flood, Mat. 24. mark
well, Number. 33. ult. Again note, where the Apostle says, Sacrifice and offering
thou would not have, etc. by a cosequent he meant, Neither would he Temple,
City, and Kingdom, which were all figures till the time of settling. Christ
should be and was the building in which God would delight, and therefore these
shadows shall never be restored, unless we say Sacrifice and offering shall.
Why, do we not, as Mr. Finch and Mr. Brightman, etc. make the Jews expect
things seen and temporal? No no, they will rejoice to be of the holy City from
heaevn, and will never care to make a corporation. in the Low^ Jerusalem.

Ibid. Then any country or City in the World] Then they will believe the
doctrine of their apostle Peter (the Apostle of the circumcision) as their
Godly forefathers dispersed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinis, and
Chaldea; and mind the heavenly inheritance, that is uncorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not, and the spiritual Temple, 1 Peter 1. and 2. and
2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. How sweetly does the Apostle draw them from their carnal
sense of Ezekiels prophecy, under the terms of Canaan, City and Temple. So
the apostle to the Hebrews draws them to the heavenly Government of Christ in
the Jerusalem Celestial. And that the Low- Jerusalem, and all that hold of the
policy of it, now ended by the Son eternal, were briars and thorns, and near
rejection, cursing, and the destruction of violent fire, and wrath to the
utmost; compare 2 Samuel 23.1. to 7. with Hebrews chapter 6. and 10. As their
forefathers did, so the children: as Stephen lays that heavy crimination on
them.

Ibid. The Lamb is the Temple] Seeing the Lamb is the Temple, and that he
destroyed the material Temple, and all the polity of it: for if the
Priesthood be changed there must be of necessity a change of the Law: old
things are all passed, Then surely it is abominable to have Priests, Altars,
Sacrifices, Candles, Incense, Copes, Linen Ephods, Music, Distinction as of
Mosaical days and times; as Rests, Jubilees, new Moons, distinction of meats,
annointings, etc. in our Ecclesiastical administrations: yea, or an
Ecclesiastical polity answerable to Levi of a subservient Clergy, under one
universal high Priest on earth. Christ our Statute-Maker has forbidden all
Levitical ceremonial worship, John 4. There is no Typical ceremony left unto
us in his New Testament but the two Seals of the covenant of the New Testament,
and Gods Worshipe^s must worship him in Spirit and truth; Spirit is opposed to
bodily exercise of our carnal hearts; Truth, is opposed to the shadows, rites,
types and ceremonies by which Christ says, The hour was coming that the Father
would refuse to be worshipped. And the Son, by whom the Father spoke taught
none such to be repeated; much less others by man to be invenced They are
tyrannical ecclesiastics that force ceremonies Col. 2.

Before Christ's coming, the Wisdom of God, as the old covenant needed,
instituted many types and ceremonies, but the fullness of time being come, two
signs, seals and memorials, Baptism and the Lords Supper were ordained. Seeing
the Lord God of hosts even the Lamb is the Temple, and we all with open face,
see the shining of the Sun of righteousness; all Moses Ceremonies, and others
of man's invention should be left: It is else as if we were still under
pupillage, and now it is bondage from which Christ has justified us, that is,
made us free. The servants of Christ in these things must not be the servants
of men, but still contend and fight the good fight, for the utter abolishing
what he has abolished, and what in his last Will and Testament he never
bequeathed nor commanded, Gal. 4. Greek Fathers began the Name Priest and high
Priest, to be fitted to their doctors. But in the end the gangrene crept to
ha^m unspeakable, that Satan by Turk and Pope ruled the world. For the
god-Pope, the high Priest of the Papacy he made a Mosaical subservient Clergy,
He made another peculiar holy Citie^: He made Priests and anointed them, and
Priests must serve at an altar, and an altar must have a sacrifice, then his
Priests must have holy garments of ministration, and so copes came in, and holy
Temples, etc. many as well as Papists ignorant of the Scriptures think it not
amiss to retain many ceremonies of Moses, (which the Son of God commanded for a
time) not knowing he came in the flesh to do Gods will and to abolish those his
own ordinances: Innocent the third maintained that the Ceremonies of the Law
were not abolished. And all popery is exceedingly leavened with this heresy.
Due Plessis in his Treatise of four Books of institution, pa. ^1. Lib. 1. chap.
7. It is a denying of Christ in part to use any of Moses ceremonies: must it
then be religion to use any humane significant ceremonies in Gods worship?

Quest 13. and Answ. N. 1. wicked marriages.] Judah has dealt treacherously
and an abominotion is committed in Israel and Jerusalem: For Judah has
profaned the Holiness of Jehovah, which he loved, and has married the daughter
of a strange God: Jehovah will cut off the the Master, and the Scholar out of
the Tabernacle of Jacob, although he offers an offering to lebovah of Hosts.
Treachery, abomination, and profaneness, Mal. 2.11, 12. Ezra 9. and 10. N^h.
13. consider Iosuah chap. 23.6, 7, to 12. For the word of God and Marriages:
wicked women of high place; and wealthy, a grievous evil to the Church of God.

N. 2. The open or visible Church.] Most men care not for Gods holy and plain
religion, 2 Kings 17. Ezekiel. 20. The greater part in open policy cares but for
his life. As in Salomons time, all were of great show, but soon after his death
Ephraim turned all, but Judah, to Worship calves, not God: So great Constantine
helped the Christians, but few of his men cared for God. Our own age and
Country shows the same. All our nation generally had a liking of the Gospel
both the Magistrates, and the Ministry, all the days of Queen Elizabeth, and
the beginning of King James his Reign, England remembered the flames in
Smithfield, etc and 88. and 1605. But toward the later end of K. James, and in
K. Charles his reign how degenerare?

N. 3. Wicked sacrifices and false Prophets] All apostasic commonly began at
the Sanctuary: the greater part of the Prophets and Priests did most wickedly,
and were become hypocrites. From them wickedness went into all the land. They
were blind Leaders, sleeping Dogs, dumb dogs, pressing their own dreams. The
preaching of the true Prophets was in horrible contempt, with them: Such were
Hananiah, that taught revolt, and Shemajah the Neclemite, the Dreamer, that
reputed Jeremiah for a mad man, and would have had him tortured. Achah and
Zedekiah, those two lecherous villains that prophesyed lies: that man pleaser
Vrijah, 2 Kings 16. Amaziah that would not have the tell-troths, the true
Prophets, to come to the Kings Court, nor to preach in the Kings Chapel, Amos
7. Pahshur, that put Jeremiah in the Gate House, and in the stocks. Eliashib
that profance and treacherous Prelate, Neh. 13. compared with Mal. ^.11, 12.
and those Priests that nothing but the blood of the Prophets would quench their
thirst. And those Prelates that convented the Son of God, and his Apostles
before them, imprisoning, whipping and murdering them; etc. etc. But as the eye
of Christ is in Princes Courts; so it is, be they assured, in the Courts of his
sanctuary; although such think Christ has forsaken the earth. And when his
jealousy began to be poured out, it began at the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. Read
Ier. 28.29. what came to Shemajah, Hananiah: Achah and Zedekiah were roasted in
the fire, fellows full of burning Lusts, burning was their end, as Sodomites.
Amaziahs wife played the whore (and in Gods holy severity of judgment given
over to filthiness) which made him to have many an heavy sigh, when he went up
to his Altar at Bethel, to officiate, a plague of all terror when God
punishes sin with sin: as Hose^ 4.14. Amaziah his sons, and his daughters
should be slain, and himself must go into captivity. Pahshur was made
Magormissa^ib, and the blood of Christ, and his Servants was heavy upon those
Kains, etc.

Ibid. N. 3. Always falsely accusing and persecuting the Godly] Elias,
Jeremiah, and Amos were accused as troublers of the Church and enemies of the
State: and the cause of famine, etc. whereas those, and such were the props of
the State, and mourned and prayed for the people, Jeremy 7 and 18. And note it
again, who did accuse but the R R F F and the apostate Nobility of their times,
Jeremy 26. and 38. 1 Kin. 17.1. and 18 17, 18. Amos 7.10. Ier. 29.26. and so it
was in our Lord and his Apostles, and so it was and has been in our times. The
wicked Priests and Prophets were ever the cruellest enemies of the Saints: they
made many Widows, imprisoning and killing their godly husbands for not
harkening to their dreams, and lies, and men's precepts, and for not putting
into their mouths, Ezekiel. 21. Mich. 5. Hosea 9. Lament. 4.13.

Ibid. N. 3. flattering Princes and People.] They made their Kings glad with
their wickedness, and Princes with their lies: for they were so deluded, that
although the Prophets and Priests made merchandise against the Land, they would
never acknowledge nor mark it, Jeremy 14.18. Hosea 7. Jeremy 6.14. Lament.
2.14. They healed the hurt of the daughter of my people, says Christ,
slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there was no peace. They walked in lies,
and strengthened also the hands of the wicked, that none returned from his
wickedness. They smooth their tongues, and cause my people to err by their
lies and lightness They were the occasion of all profaneness, cruelty, and
hypocrisy in Princes and People. And at last all might see, that those
dirt-daubers of their untempered mortar, they were they, that brought misery
and shame to the State, Ezekiel. 22.

N. 4. The abuse of sweet peace, and health, etc.] These are promised as
blessings of Obedience to the faith of the Son of God: blessings of the
covenant of grace in him; as godliness has the promise of the things of this
life, and of that which is to come, Levit. 26 Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm 81. Esaias 1. Those
were not blessings and curses, to the Church, for doing, or not doing a
covenant of works, but for believing, or despising the Son of God, as
Mediator, Exodus 23. and would not have him to reign over them.

N. 4. Pride, idleness, wantonness, etc.] Esaias 2. and 3. and 5. and 2 S.
Eccless. 10.16, 17, 18, 19. Amos 6.1. men in times of peace and plenty quickly
fall away. Think of Salomons and Constantines times, so it is said, Jesurun
waxed fat and kicked; Thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art
covered with fatness, then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock of his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32. Ease slaies the foolish, and the
prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1.

Quest. 14 and answ. How many years has Palmoni] Palmoni an attribute of
Christ, Dan. 8.31. much to be meditated. He numbreth our tears, and wanderings:
He numbreth the hairs of our head: He numbreth the Stars: He numbreth the times
in the holy Scriptures in a most pleasant frame, by the ages of holy Fathers,
by promises and types, by Sabbaths and Seavens: and he will teach us so to
number our days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

Ibid The Sun in his Tabernacle] The Suns chronicle draws all along to the
Sons righteousness. It is not a small matter in consideration, that the whole
frame of the Celestial Orbs should be so wheeled by him that made day and
night, Summer and Winter that the Suns journeys should be so guided that all
Isreal's stories do fall out in time according to their ceremonies, to be the
harmony of all the Bible, and the joy of Christianity; of this very thing David
the sweet singer of Israel, and the other Prophets did joyfully sing and speak,
and made many heavenly ditties and comparisons, Psalm 8. and 19. and 103 21,
22. and 119 89, 90. Psalm 136. 7, 8, 9. and 148.3. Jeremy 31.35 36. and 33 20.
etc. A godly Mathematician should consider this. Profance, abominable has
been, and is the endeavor of some men to teach us of Christ's coming, by the
building of Rome, by the Archontes or Mayors of Athens, by the foot-races, and
horse-races, etc. of the Satanical games of the Olympiads of the Heathens: as
gamestry is much prejudicial to godliness, so this heathenish gamestry-doctrine
to the holy Chronology of the blessed book of God.

Ibid. Quest. and answ. 14, Ru^ his race as a servant] The Suns name in Hebrew
is Shemesh, a servant, to perform service. 1. Especially to the second Adam, as
all are his Servants, Psalm 8. and 119.91. And 2. in him to the Church holding
sincerity, Jos. 10. And it shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night,
Psalm 121 And 3. to all the world through his general good providence. Deuteronomy. 4
Mat. 5. And 4. that mankind should not worship that which the creator has
made their daily servant.

Quest. 15. and answ. Dyed in a Jubilee year] The Jews never kept in their own
land any more a Iubilee, for 40 years after our Lords death, Titus Vespasian
raced to the ground, City and Temple, and sold the Jews as flaves. This came
to pass as our Lord foretold, Deuteronomy. 28.68. Zac. 14.1, 2, 3. Matthew. ^4. Luke 21.
and 23.28, 29, 30. Read Josephus on the wars of the Jews.

Ibid. will be to Israel in a jubilee] They might well cast this to be so: by
the Seavensy Seavens, which did 490. years foretell the death of the Lord of
Glory.

Ibid. Remission.] Or freedom, or Justification: our holy Apostle (seeing the
fullness of time) more fully and gloriously, adds, Wisdom and Sonctification,
1 Cor. 1.30. if the Son shall make you free, then are ye free indeed, John 8.
He that was before the beginning, and promised from the beginning did appear to
destroy, unloose, dissove the works of the Devil, 1 John 1. and 3. This
expounds Genesis 3.15. He gives liberty to the Captives, Esaias 61. Romans 7. then
was the just captivity delivered to go to his heavenly possession, and to the
heavenly family of our Father which is in heaven, Lev. 25.23.

Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb,
for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments, Mal. 4.

Observe well this conclussion of the old Testament: the Written Word, the
glory and inheritance of the Saints, and let them most highly account thereof:
The spirit of Christ foreseeing the false doctrine of those three Shepherds,
Zachary 11. and the afflictions of the Army of heaven in the days of the
fourth Beast, and the iron Legs thus forewarned the Elect Daniel 7. and 8. and
11.28. to 33 and 12.3, 4.10. This text of Malachi well minded, would stop the
prattle now a days, that Moses Polity was a covenant of works, and not a
covenant of Grace in Christ.

CHAP. X.
Showing how God ordered the Several Captivities of his people for the planting
of Religion among the Heathens as a preparation to the Covenant of Grace under
the Gospel.

QUest. 1. How was Gods providence seen {in bringing about famous matters)
concerning the People of Israel, and that the Heathens of Noes families might
have a general preparation for the days of Christ?

Answ. 1. The Jews being carried to Babel, the Land of Nimrod, of the house of
Cham, were a great means of good to those heathens, for the knowledge of the
true God, and of the faith of the Messiah; for they were bidden to say when
they came to Babel.

Thus shall you say unto them, the Gods that have not made the heavens and the
earth; The learned say this verse of. Jer. 10. is in the Chaldean Language.
they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens, Jer. 10.

We are also to consider that many Jews believing the prophets, that their
country should become under Babel, fled into other Countries, where they would
have Synagogues.

2. Daniel being advanced and famous in Nebuchadnezzars Court, did inform the
King very much of the true God, in his opening of the dream of the image of
four metals, upon which the King acknowledged the God of Israel, and preferred
Daniel over the province of Babel, and above the wisemen of Babel, Dan. 2.

3. Daniels three noble cousins, Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael, denying
worship of Babels gods in the presence of King Nebuchadrezar, that mighty
Monarch, and at the Assembly of such an huge concourse of peoples, nations and
languages, at the dedication of the golden Image, and upon their denial to be
cast into the burning furnace, Who by faith escaped the violence of fire, Heb.
11.34. And the Kings proclamation, over every nation and language, setting
forth the praise of the God of Israel: and that none should speak amiss of the
God of Shadrach* Meshac, and Abednego. These things must of necessity cause
great consideration among the heathens, seeing also the King made their cause
more famous by their advancement.

4. Daniels opening the dream of the Tree: The Kings proclamation over the
world, unto all Nations, Peoples, and Languages, that dwell in all the earth,
in which telling of his own abasement for seven years, and of Daniels opening
of the dream, would cause the nations to think better of the Jews although
captives. And Daniel being at the opening of the dream, a famous Courtier of
thirty five or thirty six years standing, and a great favorite, had and would
still tender the cause of his own nation.

5. Another proclamation concerning Daniel chap. 5. (being now an old Courtier,
and an attendant on three Kings) upon the reading and expounding the
handwriting on the Wall, and upon that, investing him again with great
authority.

6. The glorious prophecy of the Seavensy Seavens of the precise year and day,
and hour of the death of Messiah to end all Moseh's polity, was a light to all
the East, as those Noble Sages who came from Persia, as we may guess, knew by
the prophecy of Daniel that the Son of man, Matthew. 2.
the king of the Jews should come in the clouds, and in humiliation for our
Redemption: the image of four metals, and the four beasts being beaten to
dust, and cast into the fire, Dan. 2. and 7. That then a glorious heavenly
kingdom should be erected over the world. And we must advert the confluence of
the Jews from every nation under heaven to Jerusalem, Luke 19.11.
upon the ending of the Seavensy Seavens looking for the kingdom of heaven then
to appear. Daniels prophecies of the Seventy Sevens and the utter abolishing of
those four kingdoms by the birth of our Lord, gave them that knowledge.

7. The prophecies of Cyrus to be a Conqueror of Babel, and a restorer of the
Church, Esaias 44. and 45. and 46.11. and 48.15. naming him long before he was
born for the convincing, instruction, and comfort of Cyrus himself, of Israel,
and of the Nations, Noes families, that Jehovah the God of Israel, was the true
God. The Jews having Synagogues among the heathens, could tell of these things
of Cyrus to them, and by this means, many might be won to the faith, as it is
said Esaias 45.6.14. They should come to the East and West to the Polity of
Israel, and leave their idols. The godly Jews reading and believing their own
Prophets, might be as Prophets to the heathens: and histories do show that the
Jews were skilful in prophecy.

8. The overthrow of Babel by Cyrus and Darius, and upon that, the first year
of Cyrus a Proclamation over one hundred and twenty Provinces, where Jews were
scattered, of a general subsidy to send them home with Riches and Honor, Ezra
1. The godly Jews being among the heathen, by these matters, and others, could
and might well speak of comfort to many of them for salvation, that they might
still listen for the ending of the Seavensy Seavens, when God would piti^ them
in Christ, for that liberality toward his people for their Brass, God gave
them Gold: for Iron, Silver: for Wood, Brass: for Stones, Iron: and made their
Officers, Shalom, Peace: and their Exactors, Tzedek, Righteousness, Esaias 60.
For their carnal, Christ gave them spiritual things. Observe whence is the
Gold: and best clothing, Apocal. 3.18. one hundred and twenty Provinces paid a
Subsidy for the relief of the people of God, one hundred and twenty Jews
converted them to the faith, Acts chap. 1.8.15. and 2.1, 2, etc.

9. Daniels continued advancement under Cyrus and Darius, and by faith stopping
the mouths of Lions, Hebrews chap. 11.33. And Darius, his proclamation unto all
people, Nations, and Languages of the true God, and of his everlasting Kingdom,
and gracious administration, which proclamation was occasioned by Gods
miraculous saving his servant from the Lions: this would give them to consider
of such a glorious martyrdom.

10. The conspiracy of Haman, From Esthe^s days all tribes are called Jews,
and it may be before. Ier. 44.
and his Sons (the last known off spring of Amalek) against Gods (a) people
dwelling in one hundred and twenty seven Provinces, who by faith escaped the
edge of the Sword, Hebrews chap. 11.34. Letters of Commission going into all
those Provinces to destroy them? and again Letters of Commission sent by Post
to contradict the former, that the People of God should be delivered, and to
stand for their lives. These things made the Nations and Languages better
bethink themselves, and to consider more of Israel, so that many became
Proselytes. In those one hundred and twenty seven Provinces we are to think,
the Jews had Synagogues in diverse places, in which they performed holy
exercises of Religion, and so also might make many Proselytes, which gave
further occasion to that I know the proper Machiavil, was but of late years:
but Satan their Master and such have been from the beginning.
Machiavilian Statist, and Atheist Haman to plot against them, and to accuse
them to Ahasuerosh, that is, Darius Hystaspis, Esth, 4.

There is a certain people scattered abread among the people, in all the
Provinces of thy Kingdom: and their Laws are diverse from all people, neither
keep they the Kings Laws. Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer
them. If it please the King, let it be written, that they may be destroyed: and
I will pay ten thousand Talents of Silver into the Kings treasuries, etc.

All these things are remarkable that the Heathens might more willingly hearken
to the Jews, and might very well say to them, as Zachariah says, That ten men
shall take hold out of all languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of
the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard,
that God is with you. Observe, Zachariah chap. 8.20, 21, 22, 23. But that was
chiefly fulfilled in the Apostles. How many did hang upon the skirt of one
Apostle Saint Paul? Not Ten, but many a ten thousand in Asia, and Arabia,
Achaia, Macedon, and Thessaly, etc. When he caused the Gospel of Christ to
abound from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum, and also to Rome, etc. Read
(...) Corinth. 11.28. Romans 15.19. Collos. 1.6.

11. The interchangeable Wars of the Kings of the North and South, of the house
of Japheth, Dan. 11. caused the Jews to be more scattered into all quarters,
and where they came they had Synagogues in diverse Cities, as the new Testament
shows: and by the occasion of those Wars, the Greek tongue began to be almost
universal and familiar, that the Apostles might more conveniently publish the
Gospel, and write the new Testament in Greek.

12. Gods providence overruling Kingdoms, and State-policie: This 12.
Observation is often noted by Mr. Bro.
one of the Kings of the South, Ptolomy Philadelphus, commanded seventy two
Interpeters, learned men among the Jews, to translate the Old Testament into
Greek. This was a special Preparation and means of good to the apostate
families of the Sons of Noah, that they might be persuaded to embrace again
the faith of Sems Tents, Zachary 8. ut supra. These things show that Christ was
great over Gog, Ezekiel. 38.23. and 39.21.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the tenth Chapter.
N. 3. Hananiah, Azariah and Misael.] These noble Worthies that hated Babylons
idolatry, with burning zeal does teach our Nobles to hate mystical Babylons
idolatry, and superstitions, that crucified Christ, that pierced his hands and
feet, and would nail all feet and hands from walking in Gods ways, and working
in his truth.

Ibid. who by faith escaped.] That glorious sentence for salvation, The just
shall live by faith, which Habbakuk spoke to comfort the Saints in the
captivity of Babel, and in all after times, yea it was the stay of their heart
ever since it was said, Cursed is the earth for thy sake etc. And the seed of
the Serpent shall bruise the heel of the holy seed, Ge. 3.15. Faith stays on
the rock of Israel, God in Christ was the rock of their heart and portion for
ever, Psalm. 73. another Scripture faith, Trust ye in Jehovah, for in Jah
Jehovah is the rock of all ages, Isa. 26. And again, My God is the Rock, in
whom I will trust, 2 Samuel 22.3, 32, 33, 47. And the terms of the New Testament
are agreeable; it is said, Ye believe in God, believe also in me; for he is the
Rock. Mat. 16.1 Cor. 10. And they are pronounced happy that trust in the Son,
Psalm. 2. and curled that make flesh their arm, Jer. 17. And gracious Hannah
says, there is no Rock but our God, 1 Samuel 2.

Ibid. The violence of fire.] By faith they looked to things not seen, they by
faith knew, that JESUS the Son of God by the blood of the Covenant would save
them from the wrath to come, the vengeance of eternal fire, the second death, 1
These. 1.10.

N. 4. Would still tender the cause of his own Nation.] Daniel a Subject makes
a golden state for the Church under tyranny: so did honored Mordecai Hest. 10
Good Statesmen seck the wealth of the Saints: so did Eliakim, when he was
substituted in Sh^baaes place, Isa. 22. Obadiah was of great and good use in
Achabs Court, 1 Kings 18.13. Nebemiah a noble pattern of courage, fidelity, and
zeal to God and the King: forget not holy Joseph, none of these were
temporizers, Psalm 122 and 132.1, 2, 3, etc. Remember Ahikam, and those Princes,
that had somelise of Religion left in them, that saved the holy Prophet from
the blood thirsty Priests, and false Prophets, Jer. ^6.

N 6. As those noble Sages, who came from Persia.] Daniel so tendered of
Princes, and so Religious would cause the mystery of Christ to be known in the
Court and Palace at Susan, as Saint Paul in C^sars Court, Phil. 1. Daniel, a
pattern for young and old Courtiers: and such shall find more favor at last,
both of God and their Prince, then they that flatter with their lips, Dan. 8.2.
Susan was in the Province of Persia or Elam.

N. 8. Of a general Subsidy.] Daniel, a wealthy subject, doubtless, would
further help in this matter, his care for the returned would answer the effects
of his prayer, Dan. 9. as Mordecai did afterward further the cause of Christ,
as Esther 10.

N. 9. And by faith stopping the mouths of lions.] Daniel knew by faith, that
the Son of man would stop and deliver us from the mouth of Satan, that roaring
lion, the accuser of the brethren, who goes about seeking whom he may devour,
whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren which are in the world, 1 Pet 5.9.

N. 10. Offspring of Amalek] Amalek was of Esau, who with his posterity
despised the blessing of the Gospel, and hated the Israel of God, even to
Herod, To this story of Haman the Agagite, of Amalek, we must remember, Exodus
17.15, 16. and Number. 24.20. of terror to all apostaticall fierce persecutors of
the holy seed.

Ibid. -- They escaped the edge of the Sword.] They knew by faith, that the
MESSIAH, the King would by his death frustrate the counsel of Satan, and all
the power of darkness, and deliver all the children of God from the bondage
and fear of death, and spoil and triumph over the principalities and powers of
darkness, the spiritual wickednesses, even all the Legions of Devils that war
against us concerning super-celestiall things, Ephesians 6.

Ibid. Letters of commission.] this story fell out about seventeen years before
Zachariah prophesied, that he might well say from God, He that touches you,
touches the apple of his eye, Zac. 2.

Ibid. -- Atheist Haman, to plot against them, and to accuse.] See how Satan's
seed fol^owed Hamans project, Acts 16.20, 21, 22. and 17.5, 6, 7. And all times
have not neither will want such shameless liars, and cursed dogs, that accuse
the Saints to Princes, Hos. 7.3. The Locusts and their King, and their friends
were ever most vigilant and sedulous in this thing; and no marvel, for Satan
the accuser of the brethren dealt so against the holy One of Israel, Luc. 23.2.
Their throats are open sepulchers, the poison of asps is under their lips* But
our Lord and his apostles, though few and mean were better subjects to Caesar,
than their lying, numerous malicious adversaries. Acts 17.7. and 24.5, 6, 7.
etc. Oh that Princes and Nobles would search into matters, that they would read
Gods Chronicles with diligent study, as it is their duty, Deuteronomy. 17. They would
find all to be false, that Haman speaks against Mordecai and the Jews, mind a
story, 2 Samuel 16. flattering Ziba tells a most shameful lie: too many such
about Princes, that accuse honest subjects, and make Princes trespass against
their Subjects, as good David did, that gave Mephibosheths lands away upon a
false accusation. But David said he would do otherwise, in ruling the
Commonweal: He said, he would sing of mercy and judgment, and that a
slanderer and a liar should not be in his Court, or royal City, Psalm. 101. But
alas, alas, what with sycophants, and backbiters, and gifts, as lying Ziba
presented to David, 2 Samuel 19. Kings and Nobles trespass against the faithful
of the Land, and remove Landmarks. It is pertinent to confer Dan. 6. that
wicked men can find nothing for the most part against the Saints, but
concerning the Law of their God: as it was then, so it is now, Acts 16.20.21. 1
Pet 4. Let none of you suffer for evil-doing, but as a Christian, etc.

Ibid. And their Laws are diverse from all people.] What Laws? none but the holy
Scriptures of the blessed God: thou adversary and enemy, thou wicked Haman. See
the contrary in good Princes and Nobles, that good and truly noble and Royal
Darius, Artaxe^xes, and his privy counselors, who honored the Laws of the
God of heaven, he knew that Gods Laws were not hurtful, but profitable to him
and his Government and that his subjects ought to walk in them. View his
letters patents well, which he never questioned nor revoked, that King and his
counselors, let them be patterns to their Peers, Ezra 7

Ibid. Neither keep they the Kings Laws.] There your Lorship hit 'em: they will
not obey the Kings Laws. The idiome now of profane and superstitious hyocrites
self-willed in humility. Help O eternal, they have said with our tongue we
will prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us, Psalm. 12. and 120. Isa
57. Psalm. 131.18. Let the lying lips be put to silence, which speak grievous
things proudly, and contemptuously against the righteous, and make their own
tongue to fall on them, Psalm. 64. Acts 17.6, 7.

Ibid. And I will pay ten thousand.] But Lord Haman, this sum of money would
not have recompensed that great damage, that the King would have sustained, no
not in the bondage, much less in the destruction of so many honest, and
^^l^thfull subjects, and so it was told you to your face, you know when, Hest.
7 shall voluntary gi^ts and contributions of such dross Statists corrupt the
breasts of Princes, to make and confirm the Decrees and Canons, etc. to undo
their b^st subjects, absit, absit, Es. 10.1. Psalm. 94.20. Prove. 25.4.5.
wherefore hear thou men's words, saying, David seeks thy hurt? Now
therefore, I pray thee, Let my Lord the King hear the words of his servant --
If Jehovah have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an off^^ing but if
they be the children of men, cu^sed be they before Jehovah, for they have
driven me out this day, from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying go
serve other gods, 1 Samuel 7.4 and 26.

CHAP. XI.
Showing why there were no more Prophets after Malachy to our Lords incarnation.

FOr the better understanding of the reason, three things must be well observed.

1. The times of Daniel concerning Christ and his Church, and the exact time of
our Lords death.

2. Concerning the church of the Jews standing or falling in these times.

3. Concerning concerning the enemies of the church, in these three things the
times will be coincident, which must be diligently observed.

First, touching Christ, and the exact time of his death, it must be remembered,
The Seventy years of Babels captivity ending, Daniel h^d this message from
heaven.
that the Lord God had sent an holy angel from heaven to Daniel with that
heavenly Message of the Seventy Sevens of years, wherein MESSIAH the King
should finish trespasse-offerings, and end sin offerings, and make
reconciliation for iniquity, and bring in everlasting righteousness, and seal
Vision and Prophecy, and that MESSIAH the holy of holy should confirm the
Testament for Jews and the Many, and should end Sacrifice and offering by his
most obedient sufferings and death, giving himself a sweet smelling sacrifice
of savor to God for our Redemption, Dan. 9.24. etc.

This Prophecy foretold the year, month, day and hour of Messiah his death,
the angel Gabriel at the time of the eenng sacrifice or ninth hour came then to
Daniel, to tell him that at the Seventy Sevens the Messiah should suffer, and
his Prophecy was performed and fulfilled at the ninth hour of the day, for
then our Lord gave himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the Jews and the Many of
all Nations, and said all was finished, when he yielded his holy soul into the
hands of the heavenly Father.

2. We must know that Daniel knew all the holy Doctrine of the angels Message,
but the time of fulfilling all visions and Prophesies, for the exact time of
Christ's death. No Prophet ever told that time but Daniel: this must be
advisedly condered. Now when the Church of God had the time of Christ's death
exaxctly foretold, which Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and all godly did desire
to see and hear This gave the faithful abundant satisfaction.

3. When Daniel had such glrious Prophesies of chapter 2. and 7. and 8. and this
blessed Revelation from heaven, in chap. 9. for the rejoicing of the hearts of
the people of God, They forsook Bahel to go to Jerusalem, though in the dust.
Psalm. ^02.14. This company that returned were precious feed for after times.
Psalm 126. Haggai end Malachy show, that the messiah shall s^ddenly come to the
second Temple, before it be destoyed, so they open Dan. 9.24 etc.
then 49000 with Zorobabel were persuaded to forsake Babel in hope of the
coming of the Son of Man, in the clouds of heaven, and to have Kingdom, power
and glory over all Nations, Jeremiah shows that the deliverance from Babel,
should be more glosious than that from Egypt, Jer 30. and 31. and 32. and 33.
excellent things are spoken for the returned from Babel, but Daniel only tells
the time of the death of Christ.

4. When David had thus declared the exact time, then Haggai further
con^ecrated the returned against their discouragements, that the Temple
Zorobabel built, should be of greater glory than Salomons, because the MESSIAH,
the desire of all Nations should come and fill it with his glorious presence,
by teaching in it, doing miracles in it, and in it, give peace to all the
Israel of God.

Likewise Zachariah, commenteth much on Daniel, that Zion and Jerusalem should
rejoice because the King of Israel was coming, but in a lowly manner, as our
Lord tol them, the Kingdom of heaven did not come in him, with great shows of
outward observation, and he told them of the undervaluing King MESSIAH, how he
was bought and sold, as for a slave, for thirty pieces of silver: this expounds
Daniel, for the sufferings of Messiah, yet at that day he would be a fountain
for sin, and all uncleanness unto all the godly families of Judah, and Levi,
for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and all faithful, as Daniel shows, Christ
shall suffer, so Zachariah shows, the blessed shepherd shall be smitten, and
the flock shall be scattered; these things show the sufferings of Messiah, not
for himself being just, but for us.

6. Daniel having showed of Messiahs confirming the Covenant for Jews and the
many of all Nations, Malachy expounds this, saying from the rising of the SUN
unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord should be great among the
Gentiles. Also he shows of Messiah the mesenger, of the covenant in whom they
delighted and expected. Also he shows of him the SUN righteousness shall
appear with healing in his beams, and prophesies of John Elias the Baptist; to
be Christ's Messenger, to prepare the way for his coming: and the Nation of the
Jews were so taken with John Baptist; that they thought he was the MESSIAH; for
that time had many thoughts and questions.

7. Daniel foretold the destruction of the low Jerusalem, as with the Flood of
Noah, in the next generation after the Seventy Sevens were ended at our Lords
death, Zachariah says the same, Zac. 14.12.
that it should be very terrible: Also he shows of the heavenly Jerusalem,
the new Jerusalem, so Esai 2, 1, 2, 3. Micah 4^1.2. Esai 54. speaks of his
glory. Titus Vespasian destroyed the low Jerusalem forty years after our Lords
ascension, and the Lord Jesus gave them an assured token of the same, Luke
21.20.

The Church standing.
Secondly, touching the Church of God, especially the faithful rejoiced to
think of the determined time of the Seventy Sevens, and did calculate the years
since their return from Babel, so that they could not miss to know the time of
MESSIAH his coming. And nothing was ever objected against our Lord or his
apostles about the time. Zac. 11.11.
The poor of the flock still waited for the accomplishment of all things,
especially the godly families of the house of Nathan ( Salomons brother by
Bat^shebah) that came of Zorababel, All the god evermore waited for Christ
their blessed hope, Isa. 25.9. now much more. And as they did thus for his
first coming, so should we for his second coming, and with more joy, but alas;
and the godly families of the house of Levi, chiefly them of Shimei: and old
father Rabbi Simeon greatly waited for the Messiah, the consolation of Israel,
and so did that old Matron the Prophetess Anna, of the Tribe of Aser, who
spoke of MESSIAH in that Synod, to all that looked for Redemption in Israel and
Jerusalem: So she and Simeon, Zacharias, and his wife Elisabeth, and the
blessed Virgin, with many others, blessed and praised God for the performance
of his promises: all the godly now know that the Kingdom of heaven was come,
and that was John Baptists theme, Mat. 3.

2. As Anna was godly, so her father Phanuel, and it seems his father was
godly, tnd believed the Doctrine of the Seventy-Sevens, for he spoke to his
children of seeing God in the flesh, Phanuel imports seeing of God, or we
shall see God. Jacobs story has Peniel, and Panuel, Zac. 4^ Luke 2.
Genesis 32. And gracious Anna cried, grace, grace, to the righteous branch, and
to the Lamb, the true Temple. The birth of Anna was about the 54th Seven; her
fathers might be in the 47th seven, and his fathers might be in Antiochus
Epiphanes time, about the 40th seven. To these we must consider of the house of
Zarobabel, he had two son, Abihud, and Rhesa, Mat. 1. Luke 3. of Abihud these,
Sadoc, These lived in the time of Ianan whole and Ianan parted.
Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan, Jacob, Joseph, the husband of Mary. Of Rhesa
these, Mattathias, Maath, Nagge, Esli, Naum, Amos, Mattathias, Joseph, Janna,
Melchi, Levi, Matthat, Ely Mary. These might be contemporary in sucession with
the former godly, under the Kings of the North and South.

3. I do desire somewhat to enlarge. The godly returned from Babel, were a
foundation of glorious mercies to the Church, they were a godly seed, and left
a godly seed, which held on successively, how godly were they in Ezra,
Nehemiah, Esther, Haggai, Zachariah and Malachi. It were too long to gather all
that might be said.

First, by the gracious Proclamation of Cyrus, the returned, as they had
Jerusalem ever in their mind, so now their faces looked thitherward, Jer.
51.50. Psalm. 102.
though it was desolated in the dust, yet they preferred it before glorious
Babel, and other stately Cities and Palaces in Chaldea, or Persia, 2. Being
come the incumbent neighbors of Samaria, etc. did envy them, therefore they
builded the altar, and offered sacrifice, calling on the name of Jehovah, the
everlasting God, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their godly forefathers had
done. 3. Set on Temple work, and being hindered, upon better opportunities set
on the work again with great courage, as Ezra 4. and 5.

4. In the second return by Ezra chapter 7. and 8. what a godly company came with
him? Many mo returned afterward. Zac. 8,
what fasting, prayer, and thanksgiving used they. 5. When Ezra, being come,
saw their unequal yoking in marriages with infidels, how did they repent of it
with godly humilation, and amend it by putting away their strange wives, and
the children by them? Doubtless, a sharp corasive to flesh and blood. An holy
seed in the Church of God is most precious, that is, Gods end, and should be
our intendment.

6. In Nehemiah, is seen how full of courage, labor, and diligence they were
in building the wall of Jerusalem, and how God did comfort them in reproaches
of the enemies. 7. Upon the complaint of the oppression of one another, these
evils were repented of and amended. 8. Their reverent demeanor in the
exercises of public Ordinances, in teaching, prayer, hearing of the word, all
done with much love, rejoicing and thanksgiving, very imitable. 9. Kept solemn
fasts. 10. Made solemn renewings of their Covenant, and for the maintenance of
the worship of God 11. Cons^der their loving association to come out of the
Cities of Judah, one of ten to dwell in J^rusalem. 12. Holy care taken for the
Sabbath.

13. In the book of Esther, how many godly were in 127 Provinces? What fasting,
prayer and thanksgiving was among the Jews, who by faith Escaped the Edge of
the sword, Hebr. 11, 34. of that cruel bloody massacre intended by wicked Haman.

14. It is showed in the Prophet Haggai, they obeyed in teaching of the Lords
message, and were careful to promote the building of the Temple.

15. Zachary declares they humbled themselves in hearing of the word, and
turned from their sinful courses against Gods holy Worship, and love to one
another, and did love peace and truth.

16. The inhabitants of one City did exhort the inhabitants of another City to
the Worship of God.

17. Yea, the Jews having Synagogues in all Countries should make many
Proselytes, and take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and be of Isreal's
Common weal, to learn the faith of Sems Tents.

18. They had great zeal against false Prophets, Zachary 13.

19. Malachi shows what an holy seed the returned were that although there
were many Hypocrites, and Atheists, Wantons, Sacrilegious, among them, yet
there were many godly that feared the Lord, and spoke often one to another to
encourage in godly ways: Mal. 4.1.
and the Lord God took notice of their Godly communion, and they were a
blessing to themselves, and the State of Israel: and the Lord God promised many
comforts to them: but a day of wrath was coming which should burn the wicked
up as an Oven.

Iosuah was (...) a self Seeke^ to grappl^ what he lis^ for his great service,
by the Elders granted (...) he request Iosuah 19.50.
of their godliness, meekness, courage zeal, wisdom, etc. Looking into the
manners of the people to amend what was amiss: they were not self-lovers, nor
self-seekers, and would not suffer their servants and attendants, to oppress
or grind the people (not like them in Amos 4.1.) that is a great matter to be
observed in a Commonweal.

20. Zorobabel lived long, but Nehemiah longer, near to the end of the
Persians, to be a Noble Corrival against Sanballat, who also lived long, to see
Alexander the Great. These things I write to show what a godly seed, the
returned were, and so continued to the end of the Persian Monarchy.

21. And the fruit of these comforts went on the days of Antiochus Epiphanes
in many godly called, Dan. 7.18.
Saints of the most High. Antiochus times reach to about two hundred and eighty
years of the Seventy Sevens. Dan. 12.3.
Daniel prophesied that in the days of Antiochus there should be wise and
faithful Teachers that did instruct many, and turn many to righteousness.

22. That although those days of Antiochus were the saddest times that ever
Israel before had, yet Christ had noble Worthies that stood to the Truth, and
did not shrink for Sword, Dan. 11.33. Heb 11.35.
Flame and Captivity, that they might enjoy the better resurrection, to shine
like the Stars, for ever and ever. And this godly seed still successively
sprang up to our Lords days in the godly Families, as has been noted: For
Daniel 12.4. shows that those times would cause much action among the godly:
Daniels book a treasury of Wisdom for the time of the 77. and ever, Dan 12.4.
and Daniels book for the time of the Seaventy Seavens, was a wonderful
treasure of wisdom to teach them knowledge for many occurrents: many did search
thoroughly, and knowledge did much increase. These times of Javan in the Kings
of the North and South, were times of much agitation on all sides and
occasions. Thus far of the holy Seed for these times, which were ^he substance,
and stay of the State, as others formerly for their times, Esaias chap. 6.13.

of the falling away from the faith of many in Israel.
II. Daniel spoke, as of many particular events touching the Kings of the North
and South, so of the Apostasy of the visible Suns of the Church, of many in
Israel which came to pass in those sad calamitous times of Ptolomy Philopater,
K. of Egypt, and in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes King of the North. Daniel
shows how many were drawn away by Philopaters allurements, and became
lawless. Whereas other of their Brethren being constant in the faith had great
deliverance, Dan. 11.14.3. Macca.
and the apostates shame and disgrace.

Of Antiochus it is recorded, Thus by oraf^ and deceit, he did prevail against
many of the Jews, and made them forsake the holy Covenant, and with these he
had intelligence, how to do mischief against the faithful, and the Temple, and
Jerusalem. Daniel shows the vilonesse of his wicked King, chap. 8.24, 25, and
chap. 11.28, 30, 31, 32, 33. Let the godly Reader see the Commentaries of Mr.
Broughton on Daniel.

Zachariah foretold of the Civil Dissentions among the Jews, and how they
would oppress one another, Those three wicked Shepherds, with the former false
Prophets, were thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them, Joh. 10.
Dan. 12.
and forsake the Law of faith given by Christ to Moses, and follow heresies.
There were three wicked Shepherds that hated sound doctrine, and made false
expositions on the holy Text, and many fables, and many traditions, and did not
cleave to the Law that Christ, the Angel of Gods presence, gave to Moses at
Horeb, with the Statutes and Judgments; Malachy 4. This fulfils ch^^ which
Daniel foretold, That although Godly Teachers did turn many to righteousness,
yet the wicked would do wickedly, and none of the wicked would understand.

Wherefore God gave them into the hands of one another and into the hands of
their Kings, the Levitical Kings, Vid. Tremel. on Zach. 11.
and the Herod's, and the Caesar's. Malachi shows that Saddwois^^^ was
beginning in his days, c. 3.14.15 which greatly increased.

This was a strong faction and prevailed much against the Pharisees, that they
made sad and woeful Tragical slaughters, of one another: Genesis 49. Deuter. 33.
and many of their High Priests were of this faction. The Priests would be
Kings, not remembering Jacobs and Moses Testaments. Jacob showed that of right,
Judah should have the Government of the State: Moses showed how the Tribe of
Levi should be exercised; but they neglected the Prieshood, and the covenant of
the Priesthood, therefore the imprecation of Moses fell on them.

Then Christ's brake both his Staves: Beauty and Binders: The Beauty of his
Ordinances, they had till about these times, Zach. 11.10. Dan. 11.35. and 12.10.
which now were grieveusly corrupted, therefore God deprived them greatly of
that Glorious Mercy, and in his anger brake the staff of strength. They
despised the godly Teachers that had suffered sore afflictions many ways for
the faith of the truth: Therefore God gave them over into the hands of wicked
Shepherds, that never sought their Good, Zachary 11.15, 16, 17. So Achab for
despising Michaiah, was given over to believe four hundred liars to his
destruction: So under the new Testament, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

As for Christ's other Staff, Binders, We must remember that Ezekiel had
prophesied that when they returned from Babel, Judah and Ephraim should be as
one Stick in his hand and so they were after the return: But we must know many
of Judah and Israel continually returned. as Zac. 8. and 9. and 10.
For of the forty nine thousand that returned Ezra 2. Ten or twelve thousand
were of the ten Tribes, and this unity continued all the time of the Persians,
and to about one hundred and fifty of Javan, consider, Zachary 9.13. how they
conjoined: But for their apostasy, Christ brake this Staff also, that the
Brotherhood of Ephraim and Judah, was almost utterly dissolved. The event of
which was borrible distractions, emulations and contentions very sad and
grievous. The poor of the Flock, as is noted, observed all these things,
Zachary 11.11.

Miserable and deplorable was the State of these times, and which continued
until our Lords days. And when He came he sealed Vision and Prophecy by
teaching, and sound expositions of the Law, and so much restrained this
apostasy, by himself, and his Apostles by him; and cleared all holy Doctrine,
and opened the truth of the Scriptures how, and of whom the Prophets, Luke 24.2
These. 2.1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3 2 Timothy 3.1, 2,
the Psalms and Moses spoke, and the faithful believed. This apostasy was as
dreadful, and in many things like the apostasy of the Lawless man of sin, for
the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth Centuries, then the fourteenth Century the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ began to consume with the breath of his mouth that Wicked Romilus; and
the glory of Christ continued more and more to this day; blessed be his holy
name of all the Saints for ever.

Thirdly, Of the enemies, of the Saints the Jews.
Concerning the Enemies of the people of God in the times of the Seavensy
Seavens.

1. Daniel foretold what troublesome times should befall the returned from
Captivity, under the Persians, for Seven Seavens, that is forty nine years,
both to them that returned, and to them which were not yet returned. In those
Seaventy Seavens, by the returned the Temple was builded, and the City
Jerusalem re-edifyed, with the wall and distinction of Streets.

Ezra and Nehemiah show what troubles they had by the Seed of the Serpent in
performing those Noble Enterprises. And for them not returned, the book of
Esther shows the cruel and malicious intendment of that wicked Haman the
Agagite, of the posterity of Amalek. The Persians reigned eighty years, after
the Seven Seavens, they reigned in all one hundred and thirty years.

Also Daniel foretells how Javan in Alexander should afflict. The King of the
North was that Gog and Magog Ezekiel. 38. and 39
Also how the Kings of the North and South. The Ten horns collaterally should
long afflict. This Daniel shows by an Historical Prophecy in many particular
events to the days of Ptolomy Philopater, and Antiochus Epiphanes, The 8.10,
11. and 12. chap. of Daniel are all in the time of the seventy seavens.
and Ptolomy Epiphanes: all that time of Javan in those Kings of North and
South, they were a Beast horned to gore the people of God, and had Iron legs to
trample under foot the pleasant Land, that is the Land of Israel, Immanuels
Land.

But after Antiochus Epiphanes, the Fourth Beast, Daniel 7. failed much of the
strength of his horns, Before and after Antiochus Epiphanes death, Christ
strengthened, Judah and Ephraim against Iavan, Zac. 9.13.
and the legs of the image, Dan. 2. were day now, as Iron; partly strong and
partly brittle, and so continued, till at last Kittim the Romans possessed all,
as has been noted.

The Kings of the North the Seleucidae reigned two hundred seventy years, the
Kings of the South, i. e. Egypt, reigned two hundred ninety four years: But we
must understand the years of these Kings of North and South were contemporary.
So these stories of the Medes and Persians, Javan whole, and Javan parted, will
reach 430 of the Seventy Sevens, and the other 60 years to our Lords death, for
the most part the Romans ruled. If the godly Reader will make use of Mr. Bro.
Commentaries on Daniel, the preface thereof will show him the Kings of Persia,
and the Kings of Javan, their number and succession, and the number of their
years, and all these Kings are to be confined within the compass of the
Seventy Sevens, all the stories, both of the four beasts, Dan. 7. and of the
four mettalls, of the image, Dan. 2. Mr. Bro. is so large in his Expositions of
Daniel, that there is not need of enlargement at this time. Also let the Reader
mark his Consent of Scripture, for the orderly disposing of the times.

Furthermore, they should not have nor needed any more Prophets, for that they
should be greatly scattered shortly after Malachies days, and their State
continuallly shaken for hundreds of years (before the holy incarnation) by the
interchangeable wars and victories of the Kings of the North and South: Mal.
4.
therefore the Law of Moses was so strictly enjoined to them to remember it,
which would have preserved them from all those errors and apostasy they fell
into.

Again the Hebrew tongue after the return from Babel, ceased from common use:
even the returned spoke a mixed language, as Nehemiah shows: so they should
have no more Prophets for the Hebrew tongue. And we are to mark the lively
Providence, touching the families of Scripture, Babel, the eldest wicked
monument, Mr. Bro. in his notes on Dan. 5.
which was built to the great ruin of all the godly families, by Nymrod the
Nephew of oursed Cham, to the great grief of SEM and Japheth, whereupon Adams
tongue was made 70. of one. Which Babel ended the Jews language, the first
tongue, that it was common in no Kingdom after that. And the greek tongue
shortly after Malachies days, became to be the most common tongue in the
world, that the the apostles did use it, and write the New Testament in it.

Furthermore, for Jews, that look for such Prophets, they should consider, that
Jerusalem and the Temple should have utter, The Rulers and people of the Jews
did not know the meaning of their own Prophets, Act. 13.27. All the Prophets,
and the Law propheprophesied until John, Mat. 11.13. so our Lord and his
apostles shall prophecy in his speeches, and their writings, until our Lords
second coming.
and final desolations in the nea^ generation after the Seventy Sevens, and
such Prophets were to be no longer than Isreal's Prerogative lasted, which was
at the ending of the Seventy Seven^: for it is said, God has in these last
days spoken to us by his Son, who has told us all thing, and sealed vision
and Prophet for the old Testament, and has given by himself, and by his
apostles, visions and prophesies, for the new Jerusalem to the end of the world
in his new Testament. Therefore those that now look for new apostles, Prophets
and miracles, do and will run into all vanity and error, as the Jews did, that
regarded not the clo^ing up of the Prophecy of Malachy, and for us of Japhets
families of the new Testament, we are charged to remember the commandments,
and words of the holy apostles our Lord Jesus Christ, which charge not being
observed, the Church fell into errors, fables, and Doctrines of Devils.

Thus, I suppose we, may see they needed no more Prophets to foretell the exact
time of Christ's death, John Baptist was a great Prophet, but he pointed with
the finger, that Christ was come, and the chief point of his Ministry, was to
prepare the peoples heart for Christ, that in him they might be blessed, and
saved from the curse that was coming on the disobedient: so old Simeon, with
Zachurias and Anna a Prophetess did declare Christ was come, of whom Daniel
and all the Prophets spoke, and John-Elias, the Baptist, preached to all
Israel, saying, the Kingdom of heaven is come, as Daniel had foretold, chap.
2. and 7, and 9.

Briefly sum up the premises, seeing the holy angel from heaven had told Daniel
in the Seventy Sevens of the exact time of the death of the MESSIAH, to end
Sacrifices and offerings, and of the four metals in the image, and of the four
beasts, and of the wicked Kingdoms that were taught by them, and of all them
to be destroyed by the birth of the Son of Man the MESSIAH, that is, Babel,
Medes and Persians, Javan Whole, and Javan parted, and the afflictions by them
on the stars of heaven, the Jews, and of the full date of Isreal's peculiar
glory, by the utter desolation of the City Jerusalem, and the Temple, and that
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther did comment on Daniel, and that Haggai, Zachariah and
Malachy, had reproved the sins of their present age, and also had much
enlarged and opened Daniel in many things to the days of the coming of the Son
of Man. Now no more Prophets needed, Mal. 4.
but only to remember the Law of Moses, the servant of the Lord, which he
commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the Statutes, and judgments.
They should study it till the coming of CHRIST, and the coming of his
forerunner, Mat. 11.13, 14. for it should be to them a most sure word,
Therefore they needed not the URIM and THUMMIM.
and Schoolmaster This conclusion of Malachy, with his Speech of John-Elias,
does intimate a cessation of such holy prophets, for all was spoken, that need
to be spoken.

People should diligently be exhorted privately and publicly by them, whose
place it is in chief so to do, to read the holy and blessed Scriptures
diligently, and for this above handled, to read together These 6 books were in
the time of the Seventy Sevens.
Ezra, * Nehemiah, * Esther, Haggai, Zachary, * and Malachy, with Daniel, these
six last books do much comment on Daniel. And the godly Reader would be
exhorted to mark the chronology of the holy Scriptures, and the chief persons
in the times.

Thus I have endeavored to relieve the studious and godly about that doubt and
question, concerning, why no more Prophets after Malachy, to the days of
MESSIAH, the King, the holy of holies.

CHAP. XII.
Being an Answer to the five things lost in the Second Temple.

They might have named more then five as you will perceive.
BEloved Reader, It may be worthy of good consideration to say somewhat of
those five things, that Solomon's Temple had, which some Modern Rabbis of the
Jews complain they wanted in the Temple built by Zorobabel, and thus they
number them.

1. The fire from heaven to consume the Sacrifices on the Altar. 2. The sacred
Monuments of the Vrim and Thummim that were put into the Breast Plate of the
High Priest. 3. The Ark of the Covenant, wherein were put the two Tables of
stone written with the finger of God. 4. The Mercy-seat and Cherubim from
between which the holy Oracles were given. 5. The manifest breathing of the
holy Ghost upon the Prophets.
These were great outward glories of the first Temple. But let us consider of
them.

1. For the fire from Heaven to burn upon the altar: It should seem to be so,
for it is said, God testified of his gifts, Heb. 11.4.
I will transcribe what Mr. Broughton says of it. When Adam first sacrificed,
fire from heaven kindled it: and Habels Sacrifice, respected of God ( is in
Octaplo) was fired by God: that fire was kept until the Flood. Then again Noah's
sacrifice was kindled from heaven, and that fire was kept by Great Sem or
Melchizedeck. Abraham sacrificing had fire (first in record) from Heaven. And
in Moses and Solomon, that is expressly told, and thence gathered to the former:
so when the Jews came from Babylon, If they had had fire, Antiochus would have
put it our again, taking away the daily sacrifice for 3. year and a half, Dan.
8.11.
they sacrificed, but no direct mention is made of fire, yet their private
story Salseleth Hakabalah says they had fire from heaven. See Mr. Bro. in
Apoc. 190 Now one would think this to be true, because so many promises of
comfort by Jeremiah and such a godly company returned, they might have that
glory, although there is no mention of it. Gods counsels are unsearchable: But
the Angels, message from heaven of the Messiah was a great satisfaction to
them. Malachi says the second Temple should have this honor that Christ in his
doctrine should be refiners fire no purge the corruptions of their Rabbis
touching all sacrificing.

2. For the Vrim and the Thummin, Daniels Prophecy of the Seavensy Seavens has
as glorious Light and Perfection of Doctrine, as ever the Vrim showed, which
also was brought by an angel of light and glory. This prophecy shows when
Messiah that had all light and perfection in him should come, and would bring
light to us all: The Messiah when he comes will tell us all things, Job. 4.
Heb. 1.1
so the Saints of the Most High were exceedingly comforted in him, that would
reveal and tell us all things, better than the oracle of Vrim, for he came from
the Bosom of the Father to reveal the whole mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven:
For He should seal vision and Prophecy. And so Christ was Vrim and ^hummim in
the hearts of the faithful, and has made us Kings and Priests to carry on our
Breasts and Hearts, 1 These. 5.8.
the Breast Plate of Faith and Love.

3. The Ark of the covenant: Jer. 3.15, 16. mark that text of Jeremiah, they
should want it, yet Christ says they shall have godly Teachers.
the Prophet Jeremiah foretold, the Ark should be no more, they shall say no
more, the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come to mind,
neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it, neither shall that
be done any more.

Babel shook these patterns of heavenly things in part, and Rome should end
all. The Seavensy Seavens was a relief to the Saints, concerning this Once
shaking by Babel, it showed of Messiah the King, the Most Holy, who had the Law
of God in him most perfectly that from his fullness we all should receive and
grace for grace: The Ark was golden within and golden without, it was plated
with gold upon Sittim Wood, so our Lord, although he took flesh, was golden
within and golden without: perfect in his inner man without sin, and perfect in
his conversation, the Messiah, the Holy of Holy. And although they had not the
golden Pot of Manna, yet all faithful of the Jews did feed upon it for the
time of the Seaventy Seavens, as all Christians do now feed upon it. Apoca.
2.17. Christ took away such things that they might look to him the true Manna,
as he showed them most heavenly, John 6.

4. For the Mercy-Seat, and Cherubim: the Holy Angel Gabriel from Heaven
foretold, Daniel 9. in the Seavensy Seavens, (though they lost that outward
glory) who should be our Mercy-Seat of Reconciliation for all iniquity, the
Hilasterion of all comfort, bringing in everlasting righteousness, or freedom
or justification. So the faithful in the Seavensy Seavens did meditate, and did
hope still in the full accomplishment of it, at the end of the Seavensy
Seavens. So they needed not these outward things. And to all the faithful the
Lord God sent holy Angels to be Cherubim, visibly to the returned from
captivity, and to all faithful after, invisibly. And although they lost Moses
and Salomons Candlesticks, yet the returned were a golden Candlestick, and two
Olive branches of Golden oil, which signified a replenishing of the Church with
all graces of the Spirit: so the Lord God taught them, to meditate things
spiritual rather than to glory in outward things. The holy faith and doctrine
of the Seavensy Seavens, and walking in the light of it in peace and truth,
made them a glorious golden Canalestick.

5. For the manifest breathing of the Holy Ghost upon the Prophets; they wanted
not this for one hundred and thirty years after the Return from Babel, all the
time of the Persian Government. The Jews say Ezra was Malachi, and he lived
long, the Holy Ghost breathed in him: and likewise in Haggai and Zachariah.
Daniels Prophecies with Haggaies, Zacharies, and Malachies, and the study of
Moses, and the Prophets breathed the holy Ghost in the Saints of the Most High,
in the aftertimes, who were men of Wisdom, and did instruct many, and, as it
said, did turn many to righteousness all the time of the Seavensy Seavens,
confer diligently, Dan. 8.9, 10, 11-24. and 11.28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. and
12.1.4.10. Zacharias, John Baptists Father, Simeon, to whom the Holy Ghost
revealed himself, and likewise to Anna a Prophetess; these were under the
second Temple: and so in the beginning and ending of the Seavensy years, the
holy Ghost breathed in some special persons.

So that they did not so much want these outward things, because the spiritual
were conferred more abundantly: the outward Jew looked carnally, but surely the
Second Temple had more glory then the first; Hag. 2.9.
None of all the Prophets told the definitive time of fulfilling the promises,
to perfect the event of the Predictions of the Prophets, and the joyful singing
Hosanna to the King of Israel, who made the day to break and the shadows to
flee away, etc. etc. The Second Temple had this glory, and the performance of
that which Moses Tabernacle, and Salomons Temple, with all their appendancies
figured.

Therefore these things being well considered, we may well give Sentence that
the prophecies of Daniel, cha. 2.7, 8, and 9, 10, 11, 12. chapters, with the
Prophecies of Haggai, Zachariah, and Malachi were a thousand fold more comfort
to the Faithful then the loss of those exteriours could be sorrow.

That worthy noble man, Lord Plessi. Trueness of Christian Religion has
written somewhat of these five things, chap. 29. page 455.

Thus Christ was taught yesterday. Heb. 13.

The SECOND PART OF THE DIALOGUE: Drawn from the NEW TESTAMENT.
CHAP. XIII.
How the New Covenant, or the way of Redemption: was taught or opposed under
the first preaching of the New Testament.

QUest. 1. Hitherto we have in part seen how God, at sundry times, and in
diverse manner, spoke of Redemption to the Fathers and faithful of the times of
the old Testament. Now give me some text in the New Testament which may call to
mind the Prophecies of the old Testament, that our hearts may be comforted
being enriched in the full assurance of understand-standing to know the mystery
of God, even the Father, and of Christ?

Answ. Matthew 17.5. This Scripture is very pertinent. This is my Beloved Son
Psalm. 2. Es. 9.6. Prove. 30.4. 2 Samuel 7.14.
in whom I am well Esa. 42.1. Psalm. 132.10.
pleased, Exodus 23.20, 21, 22, as Moses received the lively oracles from the
Angel of the covenant to teach Israel: so the Apostles received from him words
that have spirit and life to teach the Israel of God, John 6.
Hear Him.

This text does graciously look back to all the Prophesies that have been
spoken of: that now he was come: this is He He that was promised in Paradise to
Eva, and afterward to Sem, to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, David, etc. and
figured by the Passover, Tabernacle, and Temple, Cloudy-fiery-pillar, Manna,
Rock, Brazen Serpent, The Sacrifices, etc. By Melchizedecks, and Aarons office,
and promised in Daniel to be the complement of all. All the New Testament
commenteth on this Oracle that came from the excellent glory.

QUest. 2. and Answ. What are the points that you observe out of this Scripture
of Mat. 17.5?

Answ. 1. The Gospel consists in the true knowledge and belief of the person
and office of Christ. John 17.3. 1 Cor. 2.2. Col. 2.3, 4, 5.


2. The doctrine of his person is clear, in that the Father calls this man
Christ his son, so that he is the son of God and man: where this word Son is
not to be understood in regard of Creation as were the Angels, or of adoption,
as are the elect, but by nature and generation eternal and in-effable. John
1.18. Col. 1.15.


3. Observe, the distinct person of the Father acknowledges the distinct
person of the Son, to which add out of Matthew 3.17. the distinct Person of the
Holy Ghost.

4. This Son is called Beloved, to show that in that love the Father has to
the Son, Pro. 8.31. Ephestans 1.6. John 1.14, 15, 16.
there flow the joyful streams of love to his Elect, so that he is the fountain
of grace unto us.

5. Unto those two points of his Person are joined two of his office, answering
unto them. first, In the beloved he is well pleased. This shows the Mediation
of his sacrifice-hood to God for us, Secondly, Him being Son, he would have
heard, this shows the Mediation of his Sovereign Kingdom from the Father
over us.

6. This Mediation of his Sacrificehood is to be understood in two parts.

First, John 17.
What he did for us on earth.

And secondly, What he did and does for us in heaven.

On earth, he made intercession for us, and was delivered to death a sacrifice
for our sins, and was raised again for our justification from sin and death
to a resurrection. Romans 4.25. 1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 5.1.
By his death and Sacrifice he purchased reconciliation, justification, and
adoption, also the word of reconciliation, and the ministry thereof. In
heaven, he entered with his own blood into the holy Heavens, and purchased
eternal Redemption, and the possession of the heavenly Mansions, John 14.2. and
17.
and in his ascension is our Forerunner thither, to prepare them: he sits
at the right hand of the Father, making request for us: he presents all our
supplications, 1 John 2.1. There is one God and one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. Ayoc.
8.3. Ephesians. 3.12. and 2.18.
intercessions and giving of thanks for our selves and others. The effect of
these things are joy, peace, hope of glory, the giving and the in dwelling of
the holy Spirit, who mortifieth sin, sanctifyeth our natures, blesses all holy
means, quickneth in duties, persuades and assures of free access to the
throne of grace, etc. more then we can ask or think.

7. These words In whom, 1 Cor. 3.11.
do exclude from this mediation all other Saviors, and Mediators whatsoever,
and condemns such doctrine as stubble for the fire.

8. In that he decreed to please himself with Christ: it shows our free
election, justification, adoption and salvation, Galat. 1.4 Mat 11.28. James
1.18.
to exclude all man's merits, free will, and works fore seen, and to establish
an unspeakable comfort to the man that finds in himself that God has given
him faith, that he may know God has predestined him unto Salvation in his
Beloved Son.

9. The second part of his office is his Sovereignty in this, Hear Him, which
shows his Sovereign authority over all Nations, which stands in this, that
He is the chief Prophet over all Kings, Powers, and Principalities, and in all
things Head to his Church.

10. Under the word, Hear, is commanded our obedience, that we should hear Him
with our ears, hearts, and deeds, that is, by learning his word, by believing
it, and practicing it by works.

11. This word Him, is spoken exclusively, there is no other Head of the Church
but Christ: none other to rule and make Laws and Offices, and Officers, for
the well ordering thereof but Christ: none other Priest or Sacrificer to offer
sacrifice for reconciliation of iniquity: and lastly none other in That
doctrine of the Papalines, that Christ is not in heaven sole mediator of
intercession, anathema sit, Rome. 8.34. Heb. 1. and 8. Acts 2.36. and 5.31.
heaven to offer with his own odours the prayers of the Church militant.

QUest. 3. and answ. What Seals has Jehovah our King, Judge and Statute-maker,
the Lord of the House, hung and fastened to the writings of his new Covenant?

Answ. Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

QUest. 4. Show first what is considered jointly in these two?

Answ. Both these are memorials, signs and seals, (as strong as the worlds
frame) to repenting and believing Receivers of whatsoever Gods word has
revealed for their hope and comfort of life temporal, spiritual, and eternal.
They, by the work of the Spirit represent and seal the whole doctrine of the
covenant and promises made to our Fathers; and also it must ever be remembered,
they are reciprocal, and for restipulation, as the covenant; and being added to
the covenant more firmly binding, strenthning, and comforting to faith,
obedience, and thankfulness.

QUest. 5. What do you conceive to be taught us in Baptism? Answ. Baptism is to
teach and seal unto us.

1. 1 Mat. 3. Acts 2.38, 39, 40, 41, 42.2. Acts 2.38. and 22.16.3. Gal. 3.26,
27.4. Rom 6.5. Tit. 53.6. 1 Cor. 15.29. Rom 6. Col. 2.12. and 3.3. To all which
we must join the calling on the name of the Lord with good understanding, Acts
22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Concrning our entrance into the Church, and polity of Christ's Kingdom, and
the privileges of the same to distinguish us from other polities.

2. Concerning our justifiation.

3. Our adoption.

4. New birth or sanctification.

5. Mortification.

6. The resurrection.

QUest. 6. What do you consider in the Supper of the Lord.?

Ans. This should be written in all hearts, that they only be happy, which in
the Lords Supper protest the abundance of grace, of free forgiveness for
justification, to reign by Christ the second Adam.

2. The Bread broken and without mixture, the wine poured out and without
mixture administered in the Primitive sincerity and plainness, dispensed by a
lawful Pastor, and taken with holy judgment and faith, our souls feeding
upon the eternal Son, his inca^nation and Redemption, is a Seal of mercy, of
faithfulness, builded and established in the very heavens, to stay us in
Christ, and in his holy Doctrine. The authority of the Speaker, promising,
covenanting, and now sealing, who made the world by his word, must be looked
unto.

3. As our eyes judge of the frame of the world, and our minds to what
invisible use all was made subject to the second Adam: So our eyes must judge
of Bread and Wine, and our minds, that Christ our only, and most holy, and
perfect high Sacrificer, offered himself a Sacrifice for us.

4. When Sacrifice was to end at the Supper of the Lamb Christ Jesus our Lord,
the Son eternal, whom we must hear, to seal the end of Sacrificing, gave for
beasts flesh and blood, (which figured his Body and Blood) Bread and Wine, to
be in Covenant-speech, his body and Blood.

5. As all faithful of the old. Testament, kept with all Religious observance,
the Gospel Statutes and testimonies of circumcision, the passover and Jubilee,
etc. to the death of our Lord Jesus Christ at his first coming: so shall this
precious ordinance, yea, and all the ordinances that it seals to, continne to
the judgment of the great day. And the Saints must evermore celebrate and
observe it with an eye to his second coming. This should be a constant
Meditation with the people of God.

Read a little treatise entitled a fruitful Sermon on Romans 12. but man by
nature of a stubborn disposition to divine revelation, will not be charmed,
though the charmer charm never so wifely.
Here should be inserted concerning the offices and officers of Christ for the
government of his churches, and the ministration of the holy things thereof.
Much has been written Pro and Con. but questionless, that church polity,
that is according to the words and commandments of the apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ is best, and will agree and stand with the polities of Christians,
yea of heathen common weals. And nothing but Popish ambition, tyranny,
coveteousnesse, idleness, does resist Christ's government, of which if the
territories of Princes were rightly possessed, they would glory in it, * both
for safety of person and State; Kings being just, Kings that set light by gody
and just government shall find Christ's providence to be iron and fire to their
common-weals. 2 Samuel, 23.7.
and ruling in the fear of God, need not fear loss by Christ, for that his
Kingdom is not of this world. What his Kingdom is, and who his Subjects are
he shows, Mat. 5. John 18.37.

QUest. 7. Who believed the most sure word of Prophecy and the Record that God
the Father witnessed of the Son?

Answer. The apostles and disciples, and many others, before our Lords death,
the 3000 converted at one Sermon, and 2000 and many more added presently after,
and in succeeding times 144000 Jews, and innumerable martyrs and confessors,
of all Nations and languages, as the Acts, the Epistles to the Churches, and
the Apocalips do show.

() Now the Kingdom of Christ spokeng of in Daniel, c. 2 and 7 is fully
manifested, when the image of four metals, and the four beasts, became as
chafe before the wind, and were consumed by rivers of fire, and that the Son
of Man was come, and had ascended to the Ancient of d^^es, then to him was
given Kingdom, power and glory, that all people, Nations and tongues should
serve him. Thus Prophecy and history do sweetly agree.

QVest. 8. Then by this that you have said, it does manifestly appear, that all
Nations, which were of the families of the Sons of Noah, had no other faith for
salvation taught them, but what was taught in S^ms Tents. and by the Sons of
SEM?

Answ. Most true it is, for all that was taught to Eva, to Sem, to Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Judah, Moses, David, Solomon, Daniel, and all the Prophets in the
old Testament, the same faith and none other, (as the new Testament shows)
Christ taught his Apostles and disciples, who went from Jerusalem, Sems tents,
to the uttermost parts of the earth by our Lords commandment with the gift of
tongues to disciple all nations by preaching the word of truth, the Gospel,
concerning the incarnation of the Son of God, his sufferings, death,
resurrection from death, his ascension, and shining, glorious appearing at his
second coming to judge the world. That work they performed by the strength of
God, who confirmed their Doctrine with signs, wonders, and diverse miracles,
and gifts of the holy Ghost. Then tongues, nations, and people of all Kingdoms
departed from the power of darkness by faith and obedience to the Kingdom of
Christ, giving honor and glory for ever, to the king eternal, holy,
invisible, God only wise.

2. As Christ our salvation came of the Jews, so the scriptures of the old and
new T^stament, which reach the salvation came from them, and because the saints
from the days of the apostles have obtained the same like precious faith, as
Salem, Sems tents had of old, the state of the Church is terme^ a J^rusalem
from Heaven: and the names of the twelve Tribes upon the twelve Gates of this
^i^^e, do show, that all must be of their faith that enter therein, And the
names of the Lambs twelve Aposties, upon the twelve precious Jewels, (the same
as the High sacrificer ware on his Breast) the twelve foundations of the Wall,
teaches and convinces that all must be builded on their most holy doctrine,
that will be within the corporation of the Holy City.

The Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the thirteenth CHAPTER.
THe first Quest, and Answ. This is he that was promised] Christ the hope of
the promise made unto the Fathers, Acts 26.6. Heb. 11. all: Christ the hope of
all the Israel of God, Acts 28.20.1 Tim. 1.1. Observe the gloriousness of
Christ in all the old revelation of him, yet in manner of doctrine they had not
perfection to see and feel the word of life, 1 John 1. But we know that the Son
of God is come, and has given us a mind to know him, which is true, and we
are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This same is very God and
eternal life. Babes keep your selves from Idols, that is, from all false
doctrine, 1 John 5.20, 21.

Quest. 2. N. 9. The Father does love and honor the Son, (and has committed
all power into his hand, as Genesis 3.15.) for humbling himself, and laying down
his life for his sheep: so do the Angels: so do all the Saints, John 10. Phil.
2. Apoc. 5. Christ is a great King, and witnessed concerning it, a good
confession before Pontius Pilate, John. 18.37. He is Fore-leader and Commander
over the House of Jacob, even over all the Israel of God, Jew and Gentile. Luke
1.32, 3^. Gal. 3.7. and 6.16. Esaias 55, Christ will be received as King,
Prophet, and Sacrificer in Sion the heavenly, or he will fill all places with
dead bodies, Psa. 2.8.9. and 110. Deu^. 18.18. Heb. 3.1. Ephesians. 1.21, 23. Mat.
28. Hebr. (...). 1. If Angels and Moses must be heard, and disobedience was
justly recompensed, much more the Son eternal must be heard, to whom Mase^ was
but a servant, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.

N. 11. This word Him is spoken exclusively] ^y divine dispensation he alone
passes all acts from God to man, and from man to God, 1 (...) 3.23. and 5.11,
12, 13, he is the One Mediator between God and man Hebr. 2.17, 18. 1 Timothy 2.5.
Observe ev^lusive speeches, although the terms only and alone, be not always
expressed; for in divine revelation there is not from Genesis 3.15. to the end of
the Apocalips, the least hint of any other Name under heaven: he is the Alpha
and the Omega of all the holy and blessed Scriptures: so the promise to Abraham
is exclusive: no blessedness but in Christ the holy seed of all holiness: and
so expounded by two Apostles, Paul and Peter, to the Jews and Galatians, Acts
3. 25. Gal. 3.

Ibid. Is no other Head of the Church] Christ's Supremacy: he is Lord of our
faith, and binder of conscience by his Laws. To the Church he is Prophet,
Sacrificer and King: and the same to every particular person, for his
particular comfort and calling: as his person is not divided, so neither his
offices: he is not a sacrificer for any, but also he is a prophet to teach, and
a King to govern: he is a Prince, and a Savior to all the Israel of God. If
Christ is not thus received, his Father is not honored in Kingdoms, families
and persons. For this eleventh observation ponder these Scriptures, Ephesians.
1.22. Jam. (...). 1^. Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13. Mat. 23.8. Acts 2.36. and 5.31.

Quest. 3. What Seals has Iehovah] commonly to call them Seals, is the best
and aptest term and suiteth even to the capacity of the meanest, to be soonest
conceived. Because in this (as the Jews proverbially say well of the holy
Spirits familiarizing with us) God speaks according to the language and
dealings of the Sons of Adams: it is used Romans 4. as also the true sign or
token, Genesis 17.

Ibid. the Lord of the house] None may ordain a Seal, but he that has ordained
the writings of the Covenant. God only inspired the holy writings, and he only
can add seals to his covenant, in them. As none can make a true deed or lease
and seal it, but the true Landlord in whom the Propriety is. Therefore all
Popery is to be a^^ursed, that adds writings and Seals. The Apostle glories
only in this, What I received of the Lord that have I delivered unto you, 1
Cor. 11. Thus, he as Moses, faithful in the house of God, Heb. 3.

Quest. 4. and Answ. They are reciprocal] Ever since the Gospel was taught Genesis
3.15. God made a covenant with the faithful and their seed, as with Adam and
Habel understood it thus: he walked in good works, 1 John 3.12. God renewed the
covenant to Noah before and after the Flood, and he was godly. But the Terms of
the covenant in open record is more fully declared in after ages, Genesis 17.
and there it is showed there is a restipulation on our part concerning Gods
promises, commandments, threatenings, curses, admonitions, counsels, good
examples, etc. we engage our selves in all, when we apply the Seals. Our Lord
says, Go teach and baptiz^, and teach them to observe all things, Mat. 28. So
the Tenant binds himself when he subscribes or puts to his seal.

Quest. 5. and answ. Baptismis for to teach and seal] Baptism is a Seal of
ending circumcision, and all Abra^ams and Moses ceremonies (the same may be
said of the Lords Supper, (...) supra) much more it binds to abhor humane
religious traditions and precepts. And we should not care to be judged as
culpable for the not observing of them, Col. 2. A circumcised Israelite was
bound to keep the whole Law^ and our baptism binds us to look only to Gods
commandments what he has commanded us, Mat. 28.20.

Quest. 6. and Answ. N. 2. without mixture] The Wine not to be mixed with
Drakes, blood nor water: nor Bread or Wine to be mixed with poison, as the
Papal Hostia was, when they gave it to the Emperor Henry the seventh next
Albertus. A fine device of the seed of the Serpent, to kill Princes and Nobles
that stand in their way. Any action feazible and consequent for the Throne of
King Abaddon, is and must be a Declamation on that Theme of theirs, sides non
observanda cum ^aereticis. O ye Princes and Nobles beware of such Scorpions:
trust none of them that hate the sincerity of the Gospel, lest you find their
doctrine of Transubstantiation too true, when they are such cursed Sorcerers,
that can turn bread into poison: pretending to give Christ our life, they give
death, and sacrifice your precious lives upon their Altars. They can and will
give you a secret sting, for they are Scorpions and Sorcerers.

Also the Bread and Wine neither to be adored nor conjured with crossings, or
any other fantastical, Popish, Devilish, humane device^, but in all plainess
the holy seal of the Covenant to be administered in both kinds, according to
the primitive institution. As King Josias said, Keep the passover of the Lord
your God, according to all that is in the book of the Covenant, 2 Kings. 23.
Kings should so speak to their subjects, if they have any portion in the
Covenant.

Ibid. With holy judgment and faith] We must discern by faith as Habel, Heb.
11.4. The Lords body crucified, and the blood of the covenant shed: opus
operatum is not enough. It is the Lords seal of the forgiveness of sins.
Ala^le, alas! for want of sound reaching in the most of our assemblies.

Ibid. To stay us in Christ, etc.] Not only for increase of faith concerning
our effectual calling, justification, adoption and redemption, and for
nourishment and strength to walk in the ways of holiness and righteousness,
being made comformable to his image renewed in us, etc. but for supporting us
in the days of trial and affliction, which in this seal is represented by the
sufferings of our Lord, to whom we also must be conformable in sufferings to
take up our cross daily. As it is the cup of gladness of salvation, so it is
the cup, yea of bloody sufferings, if our heavenly Father will put it into our
hands.

N. 4. which figured his body and bloud] The Pope, and his corporation
corrupted from the plainness that is in Christ, making an Altar, Priest, and
Sacrifice have missed wholly of the truth in Christ. By that blasphemous idol
of his mass, and other inventions they have abolished the remembrance of the
death and sacrifice of Christ Jesus our Lord in the holy seal of the covenant.

Ibid. Bread and wine) by Seal of things without life, by Bread broken, and
blood of the grape, by the term Supper, the whole tenor of Christianity is
meant, Apocal. 19.9. But the acceptance of the Seal is an open action to
distinguish us (more then baptism does) from others. The King of Locusts, and
his Locusts are fatal enemies to this seal of the Covenant in their idolatrous
Nothing of their Sacrament of the Altar, setting forth Christ both unbroken and
unbloudy, which cannot represent nor seal Christ for reconciliation, remission
of sins, or nourishment.

As the Ordinance of Christ is blessed, and shall be ^^lessed to the day of his
coming, so this abominable corruption is cursed and shall be accursed of all
that love our Lord Jesus Christ, to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.
As in the Ordinance of the Passover, the Angel of the Covenant did execute
judgments on the Gods of old Egypt, so where this Ordinance of the Lords
Supper is truly administered, the idolatry of the breaden gods of Rome-Egypt are
demolished.

Ibid. To be in Covenant speech, his body and bloud] a seal of most high
matters is most highly to be esteemed: But none without Athean madness will
say, The Seal is the King: the Kings authority it should have, to be as
himself: but none of wit orgrace, would make it the King himself. All wise know
proper speech and civil. The Gospel thrice and St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. tell that
Jesus gave bread and wine, and that the disciples are and drank what he gave,
that no miracle was here, but the native manner of a Covenant. Eyesight is
Gods testimony by creation, Law, and allowed ever even in the seal of the
Covenant, which may contain no matter litigious. And if the Apostles or Greck
Fathers had said, the bread and wine were altered from their taste and nature,
for so much, the heathen would have sworn; the world never bare wickeder
Magicians, nor worthier of death by Mases Law, which Christ gave as eternal
God, and came as man, to be judged of man how he did perform all; so that the
native power of reason which he planted in all souls for sense of eye sight,
taste, feeling, smelling, and hearing of words should judge of him, that he
performed all justice to plain capacity of all nations, and required none to
believe further then Logic common to every man, would require assent, or tell
of open Rebellion against the truth. Transubstantiation, a monstrous term for a
monstrous matter, Mr. Brou. in Apocal.

At the figure of the Star (*) according to the words and commandments] Though
it be but a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or
adds thereto, Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.15, 16, 17. neither alters the Legacies,
nor adds others, nor takes away, nor makes other Executors or Overseers,
etc. Men must not be Rectifters of Christ's Testament, which is confirmed by the
death and blood, (as in his type, Exodus 24) Of him the Testatour. And the seals
bind us all to look to the holy evidences. Men may as well pull away the seals,
as falsify the plain truth in the writings: They bind us to observe whatsoever
Christ has commanded, as circumcision did Israel, Exodus: 12. Gal: 3: 5, the
angel of the pit, and his pit-bred creatures corrupt the evidences, and utterly
pull off one of the seals, they are great impostors:

Quest. 7. and Answ: Martyrs and confessors of all Nations:] Us heathens were
from Noah's days, Loruchamab, and Loammi^ Deuteronomy: 32.21: and so the ten Tribes,
Hos. 1 but both in Christ Ruchamah and Ammi: so that now many come from the
East and West, Isa. 49. to be blessed with faithful Abraham, and to sit down
with him, and Isaac, and Jacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of heaven:
no sitting there, unless of Abraham's faith, without shall be liars, mark the
terms of the Covenant: I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob. This is my memorial to all generations, that is, to all of their
faith, whether Jew or Gentile, else they are protested against, not to be of
Abraham's, Gal. 3.7, 8. John 8.39.40, 41. etc. and have been, and shall be
broken off, Romans 11.17. and cast out Gal. 4.30.

At the mark of the. Then to him was given Kingdom, power, and glory.] See how
our Lord commenteth on Daniel, chap. 2. and 7. All power says he is given to
me in heaven, and in earth, therefore go and disciple all Nations, etc Mat. 28.

Quest. 8. and Answ. 1. But what was taught in Sems Tents.] The Scriptures of
the Prophets, the faith of the Nations, Romans 1.2. and 16.26. The same faith and
Covenant, although the outward administration did differ. How glorious is the
Scriptures consent. The Saints from the beginning to the ending have one and
the same God and Savior, one and the same faith, the same hope, the same
Covenant, the same premises. Behold how all is administered by one Mediator,
from one eternal being, who is A. and. confer Genesis 3.15. and 6.18. 1 John 1.1,
2. etc. Exodus 19.5, 6. Apoc. 21.3. 2 Cor. 6.16. Exodus 29.45. Ios. 1.3. Heb.
13.5.

Ibid. Who went from, Jerusalem Sems tents.] The faith of Gods elect came to us
from Jerusalem, Sems tents, not from Rome Babylon, with babbling language, as
the Locusts prate, see Isa. 2 1, 2, 3, 4. Micah 4. Luke 24.47. The heavenly
Jerusalem began to be built in the earthly, Acts 1.2. And there were the
Master Builders, and others with them that made up 120. then they converted
5000. and many more at several times, these with many others, with the Apostles
by persecution, were scattered, East, West, North and South, to build the
heavenly Jerusalem. Now the lively waters in this City, and from Christ the
true temple, issue and run into all the world, and then multitudes of Jews and
Gentiles came to keep the feast of tabernacles, crying H^sanna, salvation to
God and the Lamb, with palms in their hands, Zac. 14. Ezekiel. 47.1, 2. Apoc. 7.9,
10. Col 1.8. 2 These. 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.1.2, 3. etc. etc. etc. Christ expounds
Ezekiel, that he was the Temple from whom the quickening waters flow, John 4.
and 5, 8, 9, and 7. and the Council Acts 15. expounding Am^i 9. expounds
Ezekiels last chapters, and the other Prophets, and the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and the first of Peter does the same, and we must note, when the word was made
fruitful over the world, then, and not before, Titus Vesp. destroyed the low
Jerusalem.

Ibid. with the gift of tongues.] By the blessing of tongues, they that were
once darkness are made light in the Lord, Ehp. 5. the confusion of tongues
brought darkness, and from that time to this, the glorious mystery of Christ
was hid in types and figures among the godly of Sems house, from the ages and
generations of apostate families.

Ibid. Resurrection from death.] From death, Acts 2.27. -- ex (...), phrases
gracae de hominis morte perturbant inassuet^s, (...), contra epituros, dum
spiravit Graetia, personuit, idque ubt de justis sermo eraet, hebehatur
felicissimum, Christianis satis erat, (...),. Apud Patres, (...), haec duo,
idem Hebraeis erat, ire in paradisum, and (...),. Dolendum, Gehennum, and
gehenaeos dolores ex ignoration^ vocum consuetudinum, circa salutiferum D N.
mortem tam mortiferos errores peperisse. Mr. Bro. in his second Edition of his
Latin concent p. 151.

Ibid. Then tongues, Nations, and people of all Kingdoms.] A Jerusalem
Catholic, Then the Kings of Tharshish and of the Isles brought presents, the
Kings of Sheba, and Seba brought gifts, doing homage to the eternal King; then
the root of Jessai stood up for a sign of healing, (he heals our natures,
Isa. 11.) and rest to the Nations, the families of the sons of Noah, of Assure,
of Mitzraim, of Pathros, of Chush, of Elam, of Shinar, Hamath, Pull, Lud, Tubal,
etc. Now Japheth is persuaded, and all families of the earth did bless the
true Solomon, and were blessed in him, Psalm. 72. Isa. 11. and 66. Acts 2. 1
Pet. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. That speech of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. and cited Romans 10. must here
be minded, They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God. and they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I will move them to
jealousy with those that are Lo-ammi, no people, I will provoke them to anger
with a foolish Nation. A Metaphorical speech of divorcing terror to the Jew,
and of Matrimonial loving kindness to the Gentile, see the jealous envy of
the Jews, Acts 13. and 14. and 17. 1 These. 2.15, 16. Ephesians. 2, 7. Luke 20.16 Mat.
2 1.43.

Ibid. N. 1. By faith and obedience.] Until Christ did shine unto us heathens,
and turn us from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, we
should never have once thought upon, much less have walked in the way of life,
universal grace and free will to walk in holiness and righteousness, from
natural abilities, are foolish, proud, fantastical, erroneous conceits. The
Ephesians and Golossians, etc. were dead in trespasses and sins, till Christ
the second Adam by his Gospel did shine in their minds: yea and after
conversion wrought in them, both to will and to do of his own good will, Ephesians.
2. Phil. 2.13.

Ibid. N. 1. Giving honor and glory.] O let the Nations be glad and sing for
joy, for thou shall judge the people righteously, and govern the Nations upon
earth, Psalm. 67. and 96.10.11, 12, 13. Acts 17.31. Jehovah reigns, let the
earth rejoice, let the multitudes of the Isles be glad, Psalm. 97. Let the
Gentiles praise God for mercy, Psalm. 18. Rom: 15. Rejoice ye Gentiles with his
people, Deuteronomy. 32. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified
the word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed,
Acts 13. Isa. 54.1, 2.

N. 1. Obtained the same like precious faith.] This faith is it that makes us
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and of the commonweal of
Israel, and to have interest in the covenants of promise, and hope of immortal
glory, and they shall not be citizens with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
heavenly city and country, that are not of their faith, they have no right nor
portion, nor memorial in Jerusalem Mat. chapter 8, Luke 13. The faithful being
cityzens, then they have, they and their children, the privileges of the City
in Ezekiel, and Apocalips, they being of the household of God, they and their
children have chambers in the City, they being made inheritours, they and their
children have a portion in the Land Ezekiel speaks of, Ephesians. 2.19. and 3.5. But
these words, they are spirit, and they are life. A glorious inheritance, Ephesians.
1.18. and the measures of the Temple, who is Christ, the height, depth,
length, breadth, of whose love, mercy, kindness, and compassion, etc. is
immensurable, passes knowledge, and in whom we are an holy Temple, to be the
habitation of God. Jehovah Shammah, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. Who fills all his with the
fullness of his goodness, and favor, as the cloud of his presence filled the
Temple. Oh mercy to be admired, but what a small portion do we understand.

Ibid. N. 2. And the names of the Lambs twelve apostles, upon the twelve
precious jewels.] This shows, they taught no new Doctrine, but the same which
the Tribes had of old, Exodus 28. Apoc. 21. URIM and THUMMIM in the breast plate
of Faith and Love, stood among the twelve Tribes, as all rules of faith, and
carriage of life is in the twelve Parriacks stories, and the New Testament has
no more, nor other foundation, surely the true story of the twelve Tribes
taught Apoc. 21. by their names teach others a passage into the City. As the
Urim and Thummim was placed among the twelve stones: so where Christ breaths in
his Ordinances, we are taught of God, whereby the faithful are precious
jewels, and such are glorious in Eden, the Garden of God, Isa. 54. Ezekiel. 28.
These Meditations will make to vanish those conceits, that Moses polity given
by Christ, was not a Covenant of grace. And these things well considered will
stablish us against the prattle of the Anabaptists, and Antinomians. We are
debtours to the Jews to this day, Romans 15.17. All heavenly and spiritual
Doctrine came to us from Sems Tents, and by the Doctrine of Sems sons, the
Prophets and apostles, all Doctrine is to be tried, and not by the best
Orthodox Churches.

Ibid. N. 2. --. The twelve foundations of the Wall.] The apostle Paul was
graven on the Jasper, first foundation, so he should be the head of the Church,
not Peter. The twelve Jewels had the names of the twelve apostles, then where
is Peter above the rest? his Epistles are pearls and so are Paul's and the other
apostles, the Spirit of God spoke in them, and no one could be above another,
but each stood a foundation on the Rock Christ, the eternal Son of God, Ephesians.
2.20. There are stronger proofs, or more arguments to make St. Paul or Saint
John head of the Church, than any Papalyn can bring for Saint Peter, vide Mr.
Henry Ainsworth, and Mr. Bernard, Mr. Ainsworth against Locust Ainsworth, Mr.
Bernard Khemos against Rome, page 130.

CHAP. XIV.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations; showing who have the Spiritual
blessings of the Covenant, and who the Curses.

QVest. 1. and Answ. Who were enemies that did rage and imagine vain things
against the Christ of God, the Rock, upon whom the Church is builded, despising
the Counsel of God against themselves?

Answ. The high Sacrificers, the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Scribes, Herod,
Pontius Pilate, and the loathsome Roman infidels, the Caesar's and their
people, persecuting this faith: first in crucifying the Lord of glory, and
after persecuting the Church for 300 years, and it is remarkable as it is said,
in the Alpha of the word, that the seed of the Serpent should persecute the
seed of the woman, so it is said, in the Omega of the same, that the Dragon,
the old Serpent, the Devil and Satan does persecute the seed of the woman, that
is, Them that keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ.

QUest. 2. How does the goodness of God reward the faith of the Saints in the
holy and constant profession, of his name?

Ans. By faith they obtained good report with God and, God is not ashamed of
them to be called their God, whence proceeds sweet peace of conscience, and
joy in the Holy Ghost, who stirs them to, and helps them in that most heavenly
exercise of prayer, whereby they have unspeakable consolation in all their
tribulatin, for that the Spirit of Christ does enable them by patience to
possess their souls, and work in them, and seal unto their hearts an assured
and lively hope of things not seen, of eternal rest, and a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord will give unto them at that day, and to all
those that love his bright appearing.

QUest. 3. What severity was executed on those that set themselves, and took
counsel together against the Lord his anointed, the King of Mount Sion?

Answ. The thrice holy, the Lord God omnipotent, which was, which is, and which
will be, sitting as a King on a Throne, in the heaven of the Church, and
administering the government thereof to the end of the world, by the Mediation
of the Son eternal, who being the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, The Jews, and
Romans despising Christ's Kingdom, and sacrifice-hood were plagued greatly, as
Psalm. 2. and 1 10. The seven Seals, and four horses did plague the Empire.
did tear in pieces the Jews his own people (spoken of before) and the Roman
Empire, for he riding as on a white horse of Justice and Power, plagued the
world by the horses and Arrows of his vengeance, Red horse.
bloody War, Black horse.
Famine, Pale horse.
Pestilence, and through the cry of the innocent blood of Martyrs, a grave of
destruction, following the unclean infidels, the Emperors and their people, to
the ruin of the Empire; that all men cried to the mountains to fall upon them
and the hills to cover them, and in the world to come endless misery, and
vengeance in the Lake of flaming fire.

QUest. 4. Had the Church rest after 300 years?

Answ. Yea, for God raised up Constantinus, a good Christian Emperor, so that
the Church had rest, and did wonderfully increase, but this peace was quickly
interrupted by the tares of ambition, schism and heresies of Ecclesiastical,
Teachers.

QUest. 5. Did Constantinus continue the Roman Empire?

Answ. No, he removed the Seat of his Empire to Constantinople, so that Rome in
Italy was little set by for many years, and often burned by the Goths and
Vandals, and at last by them brought to an extreme ruin. Then the sixth head
or polity of Rome was made dead.

QUest. 6. Was there not an Apostasy from the faith of the Prophets and
Apostles Doctrine, after the Empire of Rome was made dead.

Answer 1. Yea, for the Spirit spoke evidently, that there would be an
apostasy or falling away: The mystery of iniquity was working in the apostles
days, and quickened secretly still by diverse means, Doctrines of Devils, and
worship of Devils, with sundry corruptions, superstitions, and heretical
Doctrines were continually springing. The Churches left their first love, zeal,
watchfullnesse and diligence. and when the Empire, the with-holder was dead,
presently after, multitudes of heretics arose, 2 These. 2.6.
which with covetousness and ambition of Bishops exceedingy furthered the
appearance of King Abaddon, and his Locusts out of their bottomless Pit.

2. For the first, second, and third Centuries, this was generally received of
the faithful Jew and Gentile, that God was One in holy Trinity, Apot. 7.9, 10.
and Unity, and salvation was ascribed to God, and the Lamb Christ's sole
mediation. And in the Confession of this faith, all the Saints, the Elders and
people cast down their Crowns before Gods Throne, and fell down before God and
the Lamb with all joyful acclamations of praise, blessing, honor, glory and
power, for the mighty Creation and gracious Redemption.

3. But after those three Centuries, heretics and false Teachers, more
corrupted the Doctrine of God and Christ, and Saints, and angels, were
glorified as Mediators, and prayed unto, etc. But the Lord God takes care, (as
Apoc. 7.) for his elect both of Jews and Gentiles, that they might be kept
safe: the foundation of God remains sure, and has this Seal: the Lord
knows who are his. Therefore he takes order for their sealing to be kept from
the deceit of the perilous times that hastened, and those that are sealed make
a most holy, solemn, and glorious confession of the faith, according to the
Prophets and apostles Doctrine, and by this Confession, the sealed servants of
God are known in all ages: The rest of the seventh Chapter shows the gracious
privileges of the Saints.

4. And Christ forewarned the backsliding of the Churches by the seven
Trumpets, and showed much mercy for the fourth fifth, and sixth Centuries, by
stirring up the Spirit of some Christian Emperors for summoning Bishops to
Councels to repress their ambition, contention, schism and heresies, of the
which, the first four general Councels were the most orthodox.

5. Also in those Centuries were many worthy fathers, who by teaching and
writing with great constancy resisted Satan in his undermining of the faith.
Only one thing they did not so discern, Satan's project and enterprise, the
mystery of iniquity, the spiritual Supremacy, one of the greatest heresies,
most of them being so corrupted with desire of priority and superiority.

QVest. 7. What other things might be a means of the furtherance of the
mystery of iniquity?

Answ. The open or visible Church by certain steps insensibly, not all at once
corrupted, and schismed from the syncerity and plainness of Doctrine of the
written word, and the gifts of the offices of Christ's ministry, and the
ministration of the Seals of the new Testament, and censures, and followed and
managed their own decrees, orders, additions, inventions, and heathenish
superstitious, ceremonies and traditions, with wordly wisdom, pomp, ambition,
hypocrisy, self-willed humility, faction, covetousness, envy and cruelty:
extreme corruption in manners, 2 Timothy 3, 1. etc. And even thus it was in all
apostasies of the Church since Moses wrote. Add also to these, that the
Teachers and Pastors rejected the fountains of Hebrew and Greek, from which
all things proceeded, a great decay of all right proficiency in all Divine and
humane studies. Read and consider these things as sin, and the punishment of
sin: the desolation of holy things never come, but as effects of great sins,
and a forerunner of mighty plagues. Esa. 5. So Mat. 21.


QUest. 8. How was Christ's severity manifested on the Churches for their
idolatry and apostasy from the Commandments and words of the apostles
Doctrine, not hearing what the Spirit spoke to the Churches?

Ans. 1. Christ the Lamb slain cast fire on the earthly apostate world,
despising his Person and Mediation; plaguing (. it by) the ambition, heresy,
spiritual whoredom, etc. of the falling and wandering stars, and the
badnesse and negligence of Emperors (but especially of Apolluon, King of the
Pit, that did exalt himself, and his Catholic Locusts against them all to be
Pests and Tempests of hail, Vid. Mr. Cade Lib. 2.73, 74.
fire and blood, a Mountain full of fiery, bloody, bitter, poisoning, and
unutterable miseries! to all States and Churches. These things were in the four
Trumpets, yet as Preparations to the fifth Trumpet and first woe, in which all
these evils were coincident and complete. Of the which fifth Trumpet and first
woe, the Pontificality, and its Corporation is an explication.

2. Idolatry and other sins increasing in all hardened impenitency, the King
of Mount Sion plagued the Christian world by four messengers of his wrath let
loose from Euphrates, that is, the people of the Eastern Countries, which
troubled lesser Asia, and also much of Europe, with horrible vastations, and at
last possessed great part. But least that the Popish, and Turkish Factions,
should wholly drown the world with raging and impetuous innundations of outward
and Spiritual calamities, the angel of the Covenant descended, clothed with a
cloud, and a Rainbow about his head, his face as the Sun, his feet as pillars
of fire, and in his hand the little Book of Scripture opened; and standing on
the earth and sea, roareth like a lion, thundereth, and swears secret,
bitter, and inevitable destructions to the Enemies.

Also God tormented the King of Locusts Sodomitical-Egyptian Corporation, by
the two Prophets, in their teaching, praying, and martyrdom, and by their
resurrection; which caused a great Earth quake in the Papacy, that a tenth part
of the King of Locusts polity fell. This is under the sixth Trumpet and second
Woe.

3. Christ, the Rock, and Lion of the Tribe of Judah does grind to powder, and
also tear in pieces mystical Babylons polity, by Kings and Princes, that in
the later times should fall from the Papacy, and they and their People
following the Lamb. And also makes a further earthquake in Star-Wormwoods
Kingdom by greater voices of godly Teachers and Witnesses that with the
eternal Gospel fly through the heaven of the Church, preaching terror to the
Corrupters of the faith, and the eternal blessed reward to the Saints. This is
under the seventh Trumpet, and third Woe.

4. Thus God has once revealed all unto the end in Seals, and Trumpets by
sevens, to teach the profane world of the resurrection. The rest of the
Apocalypse repeateth again and again in sundry varieties, as briefly is touched,
these matters of Empire and Papacy, and affliction of the Church by them, and
the overthrow of the King of Locusts, and all his corporation of mystical
Babylon. Deprivation of all their spiritual and corporal merchandise, and
temporal destruction with all shame, horror and lamentation, and their
eternal sorrow in the world to come: and lastly the glorious joy and comfort
of the saints being revived from their dead State under mystical Sodoms polity,
to be of the corporation of the Holy and Beloved City. Each blessing is here
begun, and shall be perfected when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven in that day of his bright appearing.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the fourteenth Chapter.
QUest. 1. and Answ. The High Sacrificers, the Pharisees] Is^ael which is after
the flesh despised Christ, and his Rest, and fell after the same example of
disobedience and unbelief (or misbelieving disobedience) as their Fathers both
in the Wilderness, and in the revolt of the ten Tribes, and of Judah also, and
would not receive the word of exhortation, Heb. 3. and 4.10, 12 and 13.
chapters.

Ibid. That the Seed of the Serpent] All that persecute the faith are the seed
of the Serpent from Kain to Caesar's and Popes. But the gates of Hades could not
prevail, because Christ had the keys of death and H^des. Here observe, that the
Apocalypse in two sorts draws all the Law unto it. It shows Christ from all
the Law and Prophets, and the curse of mystical Babylon from all the old cursed
since the Serpent deceived Eva. Jehovah from Genesis 2. and 3. and Exodus 3. and 6.
is expound^d in Apocalypse, i. e. Who was, Who is, Who Will be: and this draws
to the last acts looking to the first Counsels, that all may be seen to depend
upon One God. The Apocalypse sets forth the last acts. Therefore they that
expect new Revelations besides that which was le^t us by the Lord Jesus the Son
of God in the writings of his Prophets and Apostles, shall never be settled in
a sound judgment in the Gospel: and those that pretend they have new
Revelations, in such thoughts, they are of them that add to the word of God:
but let such t^emble at the curse, Apoc 2^.18, 19. Such shall bear this blame,
that they are an adulterous generation they would adulterate the faith, Mat.
12.39.

Quest. 2. and Answ. by sait^^ they ebtained good report with God] Heb. 11.1,
2. conferred with chap. 12.1, 2. and Romans 1.5. and 16.26. Gal. 3.8, 9. Apoc.
14.12. and 21.3. and 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. As many as received him to them he
gave prerogative to be the Sons of God, to them that believe in his name, John
1.12. and chap. 5.24. is fit for this answer both of the commendation of faith,
and the blessed fruit of believing, eternal life and rest.

Ibid. heavenly exercise of prayer] Who shall stand before the son of man at
that day of his bright appearing: even such that watch their hearts, and that
pray much: watch therefore and pray continually that you may he counted worthy
to escape all these things that shall come to pass, Luke 21.36.

Ibid. Of eternal Rest, etc.] As all the faithful of the old Testament in their
blessed spirits had an immortal life, with God in the heavenly Tabernacle, in
the bo^om^ of Abraham (the happy part of Hades) in Paradise, and were the
heavenly family, so all since that have died in the faith are In heaven, and
also of that blessed family. We are taught to pray Our father which a^t in
heaven, therefore as our affections should ^e heavenly, so heaven is our
Country. And therefore a^ they of old were not to mourn immoderately, being
the sons of Jehovah their God, Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. neither are we to sorrow as men
without hope of the better resurrection, 1 Thessalonians. 4 Behold what love the Father
has given us that we should be called the Sons of God. 1 John 3.1. This
adoption is from the Son of God who died and rose again, to give us hope who is
Lord of quick and dead, Romans 14, 9.

Quest. 3 and answ. Sitting as King on a Throne] Observe the fourth and fifth
chapter of the Apocalypse is to be considered as a Platform of the divine
Majesty's administration through the stories of the Church, and the enemies
thereof: we shall find mention made of the Throne of God, and the twenty four
Elders, and the four lively wights, under the Dracon Caesar's, and Dracon
Papacy, and after that, the King of Mount Sion begins to consume the
Kingdom of Abaddon, with the breath of his lips, and to shine in glory to the
comfort of his people, Apoc. 11.16. and 14.3. and 19.4. The Rainbow about the
throne Apoc. 4. is an ^^lusion to Genesis 9. and Ezekiel. 1. and is to be remembered
through all the stories of the troubles of the Church; also mind that in all
the Apocalypse the Church is termed commonly heaven, to show that its
Polytenm^, conversation, trading, dealing, should be heavenly; and also that
the State of Abaddous Kingdom is called the earth, and the bottomlesspit, as
indeed it tends to these two.

Quest. 4. and answ. The cares of ambition Schisms and Heresies of
Ecclesiastical Teachers] Note that Churchmen, and for the most part Bishops
were the beginners of Schisms, and founders of heresies, and then with open and
full mouth like dogs ( Enemies of the heavenly Icrusalems peace and glory,
Apoc. 21.) they cried, heresy, heresy, schism, schism, faction, faction,
sedition, sedition, anarchy, anarchy, of all that would not obey their
constitutions, etc. so of old it was, The Leaders of my people have caused them
to err, who destroy the way of their paths, Esaias 3. So the Scribes and
Pharisees made constitutions and canons, etc. and then all were questioned and
heretics that questioned their traditions, John 9. Acts 24.14. and 28.22. Man.
15. They cannot be truly called Schisma^icks and Here^icks that cleave to the
Words and commandments of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior, but they that
do depart from the purity and sincerity of the Apostles doctrine, Romans 16.17
Mark what is said, of your own selves (and St. Paul spoke to Bishops) shall men
arise speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them Acts (...) so such,
although Bishops, were Schismatics, factious, sed^ious and heretical persons;
and it was they that brought all to anarchy, and Princes became subject to King
Abaddon, that lawless man of sin. And let Princes take heed of such Spirits
that still speak lies through hypocrisy. The Prelates of our native Country
for most part, have been exceeding culpable in urging their Canons and
inventions, and for setting the hearts of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Char^s
against faithful Teachers.

Quest. 6. and answ. Yea, for the Spirit spoke evidently] 1 Timothy 4. Now the
Spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies
through hypocrisy having their consciences seated as with an hot iron.
Teaching not to marry, and to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. It has
been observed before for the old Testament, and so it must be for the New, that
the Government of Christ (for essentials) is the same. The plot of his
counsels, expressing it self in an uniform manner. Men of old time apostating
and pleading against the Gospel were given over to Devils and false Prophets.
So, men despising the healing doctrine in the Words and commandments of the
Apostles were given over to lying Spirits and strong delusions of ^lse
Teachers. Mr White, Way of the true Church page 385. has this speech cited out
of Egesippus. That the Church continued a Virgin undefiled, as long as the
Apostles lived, but when that generation was passed, the conspiracy of wicked
heresy, through the seducement of those which taught other doctrine, took
beginning: Consider the like speech, Iud. 2 6, 7. and so long as the flames in
Smithfield, and other cruelties of King Abaddon, and his Locusts were fresh in
memory, so long Orthodox Bishops and zealous Protestants, and no peace with
Rome and our good Laws were executed against the Locusts, and other Babylonish
traiterous sectaries, of the man of sin: but now against Christ and his
ambassadors and servants: how were the godly of late disgraced at the assizes,
etc. and now the Catholic Roman church, is a true church of Christ, etc etc.
The first love and works are best, Apoc. 2. and we hope and pray Christ will
make his Scriptures good upon us; which are written, Hosea 2.6.7. and Ez^k.
20.32, 33. etc. etc.

Ibid. N. 11. For the mighty Creation] A^oc. 4. Sets forth Gods glory in the
Creation: and affords meditation against Heathen^ Romes Gods. They worshipped
Stars, and Juno in the air, Aeolus in the wind, Neptune in the Sea, Pan in
their sheep, etc. etc. These were their Div^s and Divas, He gods, and She
gods. etc. And this was the the cause of the wars against the heaven of the
Church, Apoc 12. whether Jupiter, Apollo, etc. and the heathens oracles, or the
eternal Son and his Gospel were to be followed: and the same war was with the
tail of the Dragon, for their refined idolatry.

Ibid. and gracious redemption] Apoc. 5. Gives Meditation for Christ's
Mediation, by whom all is restored, who is the Head of all Principality and
Power, as all Creatures acknowledge, joying that they shall be for the service
of Christ, for being turned to service of idols they groan in Gods esteem as
corrupted. This is against the Divos and Divas of the New Empire of Holiness
in title. They had and have Patrons, and Pat^onesses of Countries, Cities,
Houses, Cattels, Trades, etc. as the old heathen. As the covenant of God in
Christ was the same in the old and New Testament, only the outward
administration changed: so the idolatry is the same, only the names and
administration changed, putting a new face on things. But the Lord Jesus Christ
is the head, and all things are put under his feet, Psalm. 8. and he rules all
for the comfort of his redeemed: All things were created by Him, and for Him.
See for one trade or handicraft, of great use in the world what is said, Esa.
54.16, 17. and as the Smith may be an enemy, yet he is further encouraged by
Counselors, and men of State, who sit and conspire against the Lord and his
People, the Saints, by slanders and lies, and false suggestions, etc. But
Christ over rules the trade and Counsel of the Smith, Vul-kain was the God of
Smiths to the Heathens: a Clement a titulary Saint to the Papists. The Jews
from heathens had Citic-gods, Ier. 2. so Vigilins was the tutelary Saint of the
valley of Trent, Hist. Council Trent. lib. 2. But when the Saints held the
faith sincere, see their holy protestation, Psalm. 46. and 48. and 127. and well
they might so protest upon the promise, Exo. 34.23, 24. And who has been the
Redeemer and Protector of England (not tabulous St. George) from the people of
that cursed Kingdom of the Beast in all those treasons and invasions of theirs,
specially in eighty eight, and one thousand six hundred and five. The eternal
God has been our refuge, his everlasting arms have been under us, he has been
the Shield of our help, and the Sword of our glory But we may now sear the
Scripture of Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. etc. will be fulfilled in our nation, and
that we nor our children shall see such seventy six years of the Gospel with
such protection, peace, plenty, riches, honor, victory, and all prosperity, as
le^emy 13.11. ah! our glory is departing.

N. 4. The Spirit of some Christian Emperours] but in after times Princes had
not that love to the truth: for Empero^rs strife was with the Popes for
authority, little or nothing for Divinity. And so alas to this day men would
never search Gods word, the wealthy and Principal of State, but remit that over
unto others, as a base work for themselves to regard, whereby God then and now
does cast of the world: and hence it was that subjects in Parliament, ever
stood greatly for their own liberties: but for the sincerity, liberty, and
power of Christ's ordinances they never so contended: wherefore he chastised
them, and will still in causing their Liberties to be infringed, and their
Land-markes to be removed.

N. 5. The spiritual supremacy] Heresin pestile^issimam, vid. Mr. Cade,
justif. lib. 1.53. The mystery of iniquity did not simply consist in
Superiority. But the B. B. and D. D. not holding sincerity to the Head and
Foundation, Christ Jesus, inventing each his opinions, and superstitions
drawing disciples after them. And they would be angry, etc. if they were not
believed and obeyed, because that they did was not without a show of wisdom
and Holiness, Col. 2.16, 18 23, and this went on by degrees from age to age,
till all iniquiti^ was perfected in the Pontificalitie, Cade Iustif. lib. 2.57.
lib. 1.31. Corruptions began even from the Apostles times. But the Papal
autho^ity chiefly corrupted and darkened the glory and honor of Christ's
kingnome in all things. It corrupts the written word, the Seals of the
covenant, the Ministry of Christ's ordination, and the Censures, etc. Therefore
the warning of the Spirit must prevail with Gods people to remember the
commandments and words of the Apostles, that is their doctrine, the Pattern of
wholesome words. All learned in things controverted concerning the Worship of
God, or any doctrine should have recourse to the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, for definitive sentence, not to Fathers and Councils, nay not to the
best reformed churches. Therefore of old it was said, To the-Law and to the
Yeslimony, Esaias 8. and also it is said, He that kn^w^th God hears us, 1 John
4. But man born a wild asse-colt would be selfwise. And we naturally bear in us
an onimious mind to Gods revelation, ever since our first parents hearkened to
Satan, Genesis 3. Oh cursed corrupted nature, that is now more ready to follow man
or devil, then the Son of God, Christ Jesus, the second Adam. Christ is
wonderful tender of his own ordinances, he is nice, touchy, and jealous: this
makes our corruption fret, vex, and fling, and to hate Christ, Exodus 20.
thinking him to be too curious, as Kain, Genesis 4. because his own commanded or
dinances is our rule, and him to be worshipped in them, with-all the mind, all
the soul, all the strength, all the understanding, even all our alls. And an
honest heart will say as the Saints have said, Thy (...) dis very pure,
therefore thy Servant l^veth it: a gain, I hate vain inventions but thy law do
I love, Psalm 119. An holy soul is as scrupulous, as jealous, as nice, as Gods
is. It is impossible but he should be so in the regenerate part: and he will
not speak in thought, that Gods commandments are burdensome: but unbelievers
and superstitious hypocrites and masters of traditions in a raging and fretting
mood (they are so always) called Christ's ordinances, bands and cords, Psalm 2.

Quest. 7. and Answ. With worldly wisdom, pomp, ambition, etc.] Mr. White, way
to the true Church, pa. 140. Mr. Cade justif. lib. 2.256, 257, etc. Wretched
and unlearned Scholars turned all the doctrine of God, to ambition and tyranny;
superstition and heresy: Politicians to profaneness. In those days and after
the sweet influences of comforting aires and winds of wholesome doctrine was
with held, and did weakly breath in the church, and shortly turned to hellish
smoke out of the pit, Apoc. 9. But the sealed of God in all ages Christ took
care of. Then was fulfilled, that which was prophesied, The time will come when
they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, or healing doctrine: but having sore
ears after their own lusts shall beap to themselves teachers. and shall turn
their cars from the truth, and shall be given unto sables, 2 Timothy 4. Acts 20.30.
Then they became naked of holy truths, Apoc. 16.15. The second Adam and his
doctrine is the garment with which our inner man is bravely clothed, Romans
13.14. Ephestans 4.20, 21. Apocalypse 3.18. Ezekiel 16.

Quest. 8 and answ. Not. Christ the Lamb slain cast fire on the earth] the
seven Trumpers sound the mischiefs that wicked apostate Rome should cause,
consider Psalm 110 for their robellion against the true M^lch^zedecks kingdom
and sacrifice-hood, Jude 11.

Ibid. as preparations to the first Trumpet] The mystery of iniquity was
working from the Apostles times, and men successively arose that spoke and
wrote perverse things: wherefore the reformed are too blame in two respects.

1. In yielding too much to the Papalines to prove points from the Ancients,
for that does not sa^iss^^ them, and there is no end with them.

2. To urge against their Brethren, that desire sincerity, the opinions and
practice of the Fathers in doctrine, church-politie, or ceremony. The Apostles
being Prophets, and foreseeing evils, gave this precept, To remember their
words, 2 Pet. 3.2. And it is safest so to do. This must be often pressed and
thought upon by all that love our Lord Jesus Christ, with incorruption of
spirit It was said plainly, Beware lest any man carry you for a spoil, through
the traditions of men according to the rudiments of the world. Augustine was of
mind that Councils and Bishops ought not to be objected for trial of
controversies, but the holy Scriptures, August. Cont. Max. Wherefore give the
controversy about altars no quiet, no not for an hour, for the truth of the
Gospel else will not continne with crifice to officiate upon his altar.
Mordecai was sure to overthrow Haman. God had sworn and said, that be would
have war with Amalek til he was rooted out. O ye servants of the Lord contend
by meek writings, by fervent prayer, and bold confession, for the maintenance
of the faith once given to the saints, for Christ has sworn and said, Romes
apostate politic should be perishing to the end, Exodus 17. Number. 24.2 These. 2.
Apoc. 10. and 17. ^l^ars are a main prop for Abaddons Kingdom, and it is a
complying with it, and therefore some learned men have done amiss in pleading
for that innovation.

Ibid. and first wo] Whereas Christ pronounces Woe, Woe, Woe, to the apostate
churches, it shows the ignorance and vanity of a childish, belly-god spirit
of many that say it was a good world in the days of Popery, of such good
neighborhood, plenty, and prosperity, and cheapnesse of things. Thus of old
apostates pleaded against Christ and his Prophet Jeremiah chapter 44. But his
answer will stop all mouths, but the obstinate in superstition, profanesse and
man's inventions: lyea such are ignorant of our own chronicles that so speak.

Quest. 8. and answ. N. 2. which troubled lesser Asia] The seven churches of
Asia, and others falling from the faith, Christ removed their Candlesticks by
the Turk, which shall be further touched in the comparison of the seven
Trumpets and seven Vials

Ibid. and by their resurrection] The two Prophets that were killed by the
beast stand upon their feet: that is, other godly of their spirit Christ raised
for the good of the Church: as the Spirit of Alias rested on Elisha.

N 4. Thus God has once revealed] The eleven former chapters of the Apocalypse
reveals the State of the church to the end of the world: and the rest of the
Apocalypse goes over the same things with sweet variety.

Ibid. Eath blessing is here beg^n, and shall be perfected] all the saints that
are in this vale of tears do sit in the heavenly places, and have chambers in
the Jerusalem that is from heaven. And here God wipeth all tears from our eyes.
And when they change this life they fully possess that of which they had an
earnest, as the godly of gold were in the heavenly Tabernacle, Psalm 15.1. The
heavenly Father has but one family, yet two Tabernacles, or two dwelling
places, the one in heaven, the other on the earth: When any of his Servants
has done so much service or factorage ( Polyt^uman, Phil. 3.20.) as he thinks
fit, then he calls for him home, from that part of the family on earth, to the
other in the heavens to possess the joy of his Lord. Here an entrance is given
us into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
1. here we pass from death to life, John 5. It is said we are in the second
Adam renewed after the image of God that created us, and as here we bear his
image, so shall we bear it in the heavens, and there be fully satisfied with
it, Psalm 17.1 Cor. 15.49. and further the Scripture says, he that has
prepared us for immortal glory after our earthly house of tabernacle is taken
down, is God, who has also given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. Another
Scripture says, He has made us meet to be partakers of the inhertiance of the
Saints in light, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. Col. 1. We are made meet in this life for that
blessed possession. Christians trained up in the word of Christ, must hold
anathema the Ovidian and V^rgilian doctrine of the Popish purgatory, etc.
Beware left there be any man catry you for a spoil through Philosophy and vain
deceit, Col. 2.

CHAP. XV.
Questions, Answers, and Annotations, Proving that Rome in Gods just Judgment,
is the place that he has given unto the power of Satan for the setting up the
mystery of iniquity.

QUest. 1. and Answ. What place by Gods unsearchable judgment was permitted to
Satan for the setting up of the Mystery of Iniquity?

Answ. Rome in Italy, for after those ruins it was brought unto, it began in
process of time to be in credit again. Then Satan used all signs, and lying
wonders to advance there the Throne of the Beast, the man of sin, or the
Pontificalitie: As most churches so Rome in special was broken off by mis
belief: and for not continuing in Gods goodness, as they were forewarned, Romans
11.
And when the Pontificalitie was set up by the decree of God, then nations from
East to West; obeyed and Worship the Pope, and the image of the Imperial State
as of old time they did the profane Emperors, Whereas if it had not been for
the Pontificality, Rome and its Empire should never have been revived, but left
a most filthy lodging of Oxen and Hogs St^uchus against, Vallo, Lib. 1. in the
beginning.
Even this do the Roman Catholics themselves confess. And so there the
wounded Head was revived by the Pontificality.

QUest. 2. But Rome (totidem literis) is not named in the holy Scriptures to be
the Mother of Whoredoms and abominations. How do you know that all these evils
were thence to arise?

Answ. By diverse notes and marks.

1. It is evident that the fixed Head of the Roman State and Power, the Polity
of Roman Caesar's, crucified our Lord.

2. By the Locusts and their King, the Angel of the bottomless-pit, which can
agree to no politic corporation in the world but to the Pope, and his
spiritualty.

QUest. 3. and Answ. How is the King of Locusts described?

Answ. 1. It is showed that the King of Locusts was a star in the heaven of the
Church, but did opostate, and became not a Messenger of the Church of Christ,
but the Angel of the Pit.

2. The keys which formerly he had being an Angel, and a Star, were for the
honor of CHRIST'S Kingdom, but apostating his keys, are the keys of the
bottomless pit.

3. When he used the keys of Christ's authority well, then light of truth he
taught, to the opening of the kingdom of heaven, and to glorify Christ; but
apostating with the keys of the Dragon, and his own authority, he let out of
the pit a smoke of heresies to corrupt the earth, and to darken Sun and air,
Christ the Sun of Justice, and his Mediation, and the Scriptures by which light
comes to our eyes. So in all this he is not a Star of Heaven, nor a Messenger
of the Congregation of God, but Apolluon, a King of Pit-darknesse.

4. In that the Holy Spirit gives the King of Locusts the appellation of
Apolluon, it was to teach the sealed of God, that all his Polity, his Laws,
(crossing common reason) his mass, his idolitry; his Especially on Genesis 3.15.
translating she for he.
false translating of Scripture, his false litigious rules of faith, his false
miracles, lying signs, and wonders, Mr. Calvin and others write of their
Relics.
forged relics, his reviving of Aarons office and ceremonies, As eloquent and
learned Viretus in his Christian disputations has showed so also a book of the
three conformities.
and heathenish customs, and fables, etc. etc. that all tends to eternal
destruction: so he is another Apollo, a Devil of Delphos, destroying all such
as spoke at his mouth.

QUest. 4. How are his Locusts described?

Answ. 1. Out of the smoke of the Pit, the Popes Clergy arises, They be
Locusts for their Great swarms, and idle bellies, bred from the pit (fruges
consumere nati) to consume the fruits of other men's labors: Millions of Monks
and Friars, etc. void of all actions for Political use, are fitly compared to
Locusts.

2. They be as Scorpions having stings in their Tayls, showing they be false
Prophets by close-poisoning and terrifying doctrine, to sting and vex, inthral
and torment the hearts and minds of men.

3. They are for the Wars which they are their king cause and make, and for
strengthening and defending their own authority and doctrine, as horses This is
too manifest ever since the Bishop of Rome got the Supremacy by the Murderer
Phocas.
ready for battle, with wings of Chariots, with Breast-plates of iron. Also
they have teeth of Lions to devour all, and to hold fast that, which by fraud
our violence they have once gotten.

4. They would seem to have no secular power, yet their dealings show they wear
Crowns like Gold: as hating Gods ordinance of Magistracy. How have they and
Abaddon their king contested against Princes, how have they given the affront
to the greatest Potentates, etc. etc.

5. For private State in pretense they are said to have faces of men: for
cloister keeping, and womanly-life, and for many of women-sex in their orders,
they are said to have hair like women. This denotes also their counterfeit
modesty and simplicity, and alluring inticements by good words and fair
speeches, deceiving as Balaamites the hearts of the simple to spiritual
fornication.

6. They are three unclean spirits like frogs, spirits of Devils, that come out
of the mouth of the Dracon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the
mouth of the false Prophet, from whom they have commission to creep into kings
Courts, to teach and pers^ade by false miracles, and froggy slimy, unclean
doctrines of devils, to ignoble and dangerous attempts, cruel and tyranical
projects, etc. But their croaking has not that event for their purpose, under
the Phials, as under the Trumpets. These notes all agree most fitly to the
Roman Catholics.

QUest. 5. How furthermore has the holy Spirit described Rome in its
abominations?

Answ. By the arms, that God has set out the Empire and Pontificality: first
by the great red Dracon and his tail: by the body of the Dracon, is meant the
Empire under the Caesar's: by the tail is meant the false Prophet, that deceived
the world with false doctrine.

QUest. 6. How secondly?

Answ. The Empire is described by one Beast coming out of the Sea, who has
seven heads and ten horns: yea also in this Beast is comprised the
Pontificality, being the Reviver of the wounded Head. This beast has his arms,
from che four Beasts in Daniel chap. 7. For Rome having subdued all those
Countries that those Beasts ruled, and being like them for idolatry and cruelty
in afflicting the holy City descending from heaven, is a monster compounded of
all four: Being a Beast of seven heads and ten horns, mouthed like a Lion,
footed like a Bear, and spotted like a Leopard.

QUest. 7. How thirdly?

Answ. By the Beast that arose out of the Earth, having two horns like a Lamb,
which means the false Prophet, the Angel of the Pit, the usurping Vicar of
Christ, which is the Pontificality, or the Corporation of Popes.

QUest. 8. What is meant by the seven Heads of the spotted Beast?

Answ. Two things: First the seven Hills on which the City of Rome was builded.
Secondly, the seven Kings or Polities, or kinds of government, that were and
should be of that City.

QUest. 9. How many governments had been when the Apostle wrote?

Answ. Five had been, one then was, and another should come after.

QUest. 10. What Head was it that then was?

Answ. The Caesar's ruling the Empire. This description of a City that then
reigned (when the Apostle wrote) over the Kings of the Earth, by seven Hills,
and seven changes of Government agrees with no City in the World, but Rome.

QUest. 11. How long did that Head live, which was alive, when the Apostle
wrote?

Answ. About three hundred years, and then godly Constantinus made it dead, as
is said, removing the Constantinople.

QUest. 12. What Government did come after the Caesar's, the fixed Head was
wounded to death?

Answ. The Pontificality, that is, the Government of the Roman State by Popes;
This is meant by the Beast with two Horns like a Lamb, who revived the wounded
Head, of the Empire, and made it to live. So the double power of the
Pontificalitie is a Seavensh, and after a sort an eighth Head or Polity.

QUest. 13. What is meant by the ten horns of the Spotted Beast?

Answ. The Kingdoms that committed fornication with the great Whore, and that
gave their power to uphold the kingdom of the Beast, that revived the Empire.

QUest. 14. How further is Romes Policy under the Empire, and the Corporation
of the Papacy, described?

Answ. By mystical allusions to Countries and Cities: to Sodom for filthiness
of life, pride, excess, idleness and oppression: to Babylon and Egypt for
false Religion, bondage, and cruelty. And observe, it is said plainly, That our
Lord was crucified in the great City, or large Commonweal, which Spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt. And Apolluon the King of the Pit, the King of
Locusts, and his Locusts did cruelly murder the faithful Witnesses of Christ;
that they found in that their policy.

QUest. 15. How does the Apostle to the Thessalonians, set forth unto us the
Beast with two Horns, like a Lamb? Answ. By what he is, and by what he does.

1. He is called like Jeroboam As God taught Adam to give names to express
natures, Genesis 2. so God in these names teaches Princes and People what they
shall find, in the Beast, that was, and is not, and yet is.
A man of sin: called the Son of Perdition, like Ishcariot, a new Antiochus, an
adversary, and in the estimation of his corporation, a God: called also the
Wicked and Lawless: add hitherto the other names, and titles of the Father of
the Papacy: an apostate Star, Wormwood, Angel of the Pit, King of Locusts,
Abaddon, Apolluon, i. e. destroyer, false Prophet, Beast of the Pit, Beast like
a Lamb, Healer of the wounded Head, Tail of the Dragon, Antichrist, Pope The
common name which we and Papists give the Pope unawares, is to be marked, how
Christ over-ruleth our tongues, for Pope and Demon are all one, as learned
have observed.
or Demon.

2. His actions are, he causes an Apostasy or Rebellion from the faith, and
when that apostasy came to the height, he set him and his corporation above all
authority of the Magistrate. And in the Church or Temple of God would do those
things, which are proper unto God: forgiveth sins, makes new articles of
faith, Vid. Mr. White, way to the true Church Epistle to the Reader, and Mr.
Junius on the Apoc. 13.12, 13, etc.
makes his Decrees to be obeyed and followed, as, yea before, and above the
very Scriptures He dispenses with Gods Law.
of God, and Lord of faith and conscience, etc. and says of himself; I am a
God on Earth, and that all the Kingdoms of the World are his, and gives them
to whom he will. Now all this iniquity is administered in a mystery by the
effectual working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying wonders in all
force of deceit and violence.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the fifteenth Chapter.
QUest. 1. The man of sin or the Pontificality] The Corporation of Popes is
termed as one man. Mark such Corporation speeches: Moses speaks to all Israel
as to one man: so all the wicked from Kain to the wicked Jews are but one
corporation: yea to the end of the World, Mat. 23.35. So the four Beasts are
termed four Kings, that is four Kingdoms, Daniel chap. 7. So the ten horns of
the Roman Beast are ten Kings that is Kingdoms that gave their power to the
Beast. And all the godly from the beginning of the world to the ending are one
corporation in Christ, Ephesians 1.10.

Quest. 3. N. 3. with the keys of the Dragon, and his own authority] Keys argue
deputation of office, as Esaias 22. Matthew. 16. Apoc. 1. And we may see what
deputation to office Satan gave the Beast like a Lamb, Apoc. 13.11, 12, 13,
etc. So here note King Abaddon is Satan's Lieutenant to destroy Hebrews and
Greeks, Jews and Gentiles, by advancing and urging his Keys, to the rejecting
not only the holy doctrine of Christ in the old and new Testament, but those
two languages of Hebrew and Greek, and making a Scripture of his base Latin,
and urging it upon the Church. Therefore he ought to be esteemed, of Jew and
Gentile, not only Abaddon but Apolluon.

Ibid. Smoke of herestes to corrupt the earth.] Apolluons apostatical kingdom
did corrupt the earth: and the seven thunders of Gods judgments of the Lord God
omnipotent attend to corrupt it, as in the seven Vials: as God did corrupt the
corrupters, Genesis 6.

Ibid. and the Scriptures by which light, etc.] the lawless man of sin, and his
Locusts by their strong violent, and usurped authority, and false doctrines
set up a Religron more after Homer, Ovid, Virgi^, and Plutarch then after the
Prophets and Apostles: such a fearful darkness they brought upon all the
doctrine of Christ: that to this day our nation in many places is full of
heathenish customs and traditions.

N. 4. His false litigious rules of faith] even their own learned men that were
at ^rent could not understand the meaning of some points, and wrote one against
another, like the old Babylonian builders. Things were so crastily set down of
purpose, like the oracles of Apollo. vid. the Hist. Coun. Trent. page 229.
edition 1620. read Mr. Cade Justif. page 281. and 282.

Quest. 4. N. 1. Out of the smoke of the pitthe Popes Clergy arises.] Thus
view them.

Devouring Locusts, Sti^ging Se^rpions, Ar^^^ horses. R^n^^ng Li ns. Crowned
usu^pers, Croaking frogs, Spirits of Devils.
All noisome creatures, vermin not to be suffered in any wise or godly polity:
they are the creatures of a Destroyer: These attributes show their conditions.
Warm weather of policy puts quickening in the Locusts, and then they will
devour, and if you look not to them betime, they will prove stinging Scorpions,
then barded horses, then rending lions, then crowned usurpers; if they find not
their party strong enough, then they creep like frogs into other Kings Courts,
to excite to war; and then Spirits of Devils to walk over Land and Sea to
destroy all them that oppose them: they are the stigmaticall sworn slaves of
Satan, and Abaddoon:

O ye Princes and Nobles, and Gentry, and Commonalty, our fathers found them
so, vid. the reigns of King John, Henry 2. and Henry 3. etc.

N. 2. Poisoning and terrifying Doctrine.] Singultu cruentato: the Scorpions
sting men's hearts, that death was desired rather than life, Apoc. 9. 6. Vid.
Mr. Cad^, his worthy labors, Iustif. lib 1.128. and lib. 2.88 and 89. and the
Appendix, li. 1 and 3. So we may observe how the Histories of our forefathers
do comment on the A^ocalips. Also observe these stinging Scorpions in their
Doctrine: of Purgatory (especially on men's death beds) pilgrimage, and
anathemaes, and treasons, etc. And how no man must dare to question any thing,
vid. the book of the Spanish Inquisition.

N 4. They wear Crowns like gold] Note, not only King Abaddon wears a Crown,
but it is said his Locusts have Crowns like Gold, each Locust dethronizeth, and
uncrowneth godly Princes in his heart. A sharp Winter of policy will and must
make the Scorpion-Locusts flee to the hedges to hide themselves, or else we
shall all grieve it is good to remember the two noble Henry's of France. Let
our Nobles, Gentry, and Commons, all our blessed Nation, advisedly think of
businesses fort posterity. The Spirits of Devils are traversing the earth and
Seas, as much as Becket, Petrus de ^u^ibus, and the Archpriest under Hen^y the
fourth, Gardener, Bonner, Raviliac, etc. etc.

Ibid. N 4. Hating Gods O^dinance of Magistracy.] Obedience to Princes, the
Doctrine of Sems Tents, and the sons of S m, Romans 13.1 Pet. The contrary is the
Doctrine of Apolluons Tents, and his Locusts, and their deceived, who make but
a mock of Princes and Governors, as it was foretold of such, Likewise these
silt by dreamers defile the sl^sh, despise dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities, Jude 8.

N. 5. By good words and fair speeches.] Like the old schismatic Romanists,
that by such means made Divisions and offenses against the Doctrine of Christ,
See how the mystery of iniquity began to work even in Rome in the apostles
days, Romans 10.17.2 These. 2. In Rome they not only schismed from the holy
Doctrine, but from the righteous Doctrine of lawful powers ordained of God.
Romans 13.

N. 6. To creep into Kings Courts.] Such are fittest for Achabean Kings Courts,
which hate the true Michaiahs. Let Jehosaphats Court look to it. They can never
make an holy Court, if there were 400 of them, and 450. If Jehosaphat
notwithstanding what Michaiah said, will yet go to Ramoth G^lead, with Achab,
Jeroboam-man of sin, his Religion -- Let the Princes of the Papacy wrangle
together: Let the Reformed maintain the glorious Gospel, and keep at home, and
stand upon their defense, and not weaken themselves in men and money, and
ammunition: yet to do as Simeon and Judah did, and to help the Lord against the
mighty, Jud. 1. and 5. Note also, as it was a plague to Pharaoh, and old Egypt,
that God brought frogs into his Land, into his bedchamber, and upon his bed,
and into the Egyptian houses, so it is a plague that the frogs of Rome-Egypt
come into the Territories of Princes, to have entertainment either into their
Courts, or their subjects houses, chambers and beds. The same must be noted for
the other plagues of blood, darkness, blains, boils, and sores that were on
old Egypt, are and shall be on old Rome-Egypt. Apoc. 16.

Ibid N. 6. Cruel and tyrannical projects.] They said, as their Predecessors,
we have a Law, and by our Law they ought to die, and that it was not lawful for
them to put any man to death, and so craved aid of the secular power, which men
durst not refuse. The Popish company and their friends make Decrees and
Cannons, and Princes must be their men to punish the transgressors. Thus they
make Princes executioners of their best subjects. Vide Mr. Cade Justis. p, 166,
167. etc. and who were worst enemies to the Prophets, our Lord, and his
Apostles, but the Ecclesiastics of their days, whose eyes ran a whoring after
their fathers idols and vanities, Icremiah durst not humor, but reprove the
wicked apostate Prelates, therefore forsooth the King and Princes must put him
to death, Ier. 26. So because our Lord from Galilee to Jerusalem taught against
the traditions of the Elders, and reproved their errors of bodily exercise,
their superstitions, their ignorance, blindness, hypocrisy, and false glosses
on the Law, therefore he was a perverter of the Nation, and a mover of
sedition, and so it was in the case of the apostle Paul, and therefore our Lord
and his apostles must be put to death. Trouble wicked and apostate Prelates,
you are ipso facto, a seditious person, and a troubler of the State. O ye
Magistrates take heed how you give c edit to the flatteries and Diabolical
slanders of such creatures, that you stain not your hands with innocent blood,
Luc. 3.5 Acts 24.5, 6. R. B. Latimer in a Letter to King Henry 8. shows how
it was the practice of the Scorpion locusts, to conveigh their own inventions,
and Proclamations under the Kings name and authority.

Princes that have cast off mystical Nimrod, and have made their Common-weals
our Lords and his Christ's, will not rule subjects as the Princes of mystical
Egypt and Sodom, to conquer honest Subjects, as such apostate Shepherds did of
old, which were rebels and robbers, Ezekiel. 1. Ezekiel. 33. such know not the ways
of peace, which is the fruit of holy and just government; but godly Princes in
the policy of the heavenly Jerusalem, will be as it is wtitten, I will make thy
government peace, and thine exactors righteousness, Isa. 60. as Ezekiel further
says, chap 45.9. and 46.18. Sad events have been when Princes have removed the
Landmarks. The Covenant with the Gibeonites was a Land. mark, which was broken
and severely plagued, Achabs and Naboths story confer, see the plottings, and
projects. Princes that will have their wills and lusts satisfied, mind nor him
that rules in the heavens. See a Landmark concerning the liberty of the
Subject. Christ ordained, how transgressed, how plagued, Jer. 34. Again,
I^hriak^m thought his Kingly Prerogative would bear him our in covetousness,
oppression, innocent blood, and in usiug the labors of his Carpenters and
masons, without pay, Ier. 22. what came to this son of Belial. So here were
Landmarks of an ancient sanction, of men's possessions, of I^berties, and of
goods transgressed, and mightily plagued. God is Jehovah, his Judgments are
for ever unchangeable, he is neither wearied by long process of time, nor won
to give his blessing in one^age, to that which he has carsed in another. There
are Landmarks of Christ's own making in those ten words, Exodus 20. (and in
other places expounded) between all relations divine and humane, which none may
will ully violate, but will fall on the point of his own sword, Hos 5 Deuteronomy. 27
Job 24 Prove 28.16.

Quest. 6. and Ans. This beast bath his arms from the four be ^sts in Danie The
Apocalips, and some other places and parcells of the new Testament is a new
Prophecy of Christ, of new States, and governments, both of the Church, the
new Jerusalem, and its enemies, but expressed in old terms. This we must well
observe how the Spirit of endless wisdom and foresight, contriveth like
revolutions, and the former to be the stamps of the latter. If we mind not
this, we shall run (as we do) into great confusion of story: so he that is A.
and. from the beginning to the end, rules the world in a most wise course to
show his judgment and mercy: where in this last book of the Apocalips, calling
old speeches to new matters, goes through the Alphabet of old ages, that he
may be seen to join the first and last stories in wise order, Mr. Bro. in Apoc
304. and upon Daniel page 3. chap. 13.9, 10.

Quest. 9 and Ans. Five had been] The seven heads of the Roman Beast
afflicting the Church, Apoc. 13.

1. Pompey, 2. Crassus, 3. Julius Caesar, 4. Brurus w. Cassius. 5. Antonius, 6.
Caesar's, 7. Popes,
The Popes their double power is a seventh, and after a sort an eighth head:
these are the seven States over the faithful, as John and all the Jews knew
the story ofe six of these heads.
their story full well.

The Church has great comfort, that the Pontificality is the last head of the
Beast.

Heathen stories may sit those other States of Rome, of 1 Kings, 2. Consulls.
3. Decemviri. 4. Dictators. 5. Tr^umviri. 6. Caesar's. 7. Popes. The more fall
out fit, as often many do to one speech, the more Rome that crucified Christ is
condemned, when God turns continual revolutions to have Rome called into
mind.

Quest. 12. and Ans. So the double power of the Pontificality] Caesar and
Ponisix. It is worth the noting, that the Caesar's titled themselves Pontisex,
that shows the Pontificality revived the wounded head of the Caesarian
Pontifex.

Quest. 13, and Answer, what is meant by the ten horns of the spotted beast?]

Ten Tribes followed Jeroboam, the Man of Sin, Ten Kingdoms followed King
Abaddon the Man of Sin, Ten Tribes rebelled against the Kingdom of David,
and the Religion of the Temple. Ten Kingdoms under the Papacy despised, the
Kingdom of the Son of David, and the holy Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem.
Steuchus a mystical Babylonian records the Kingdoms of Europe, that gave
their power to the Beast, 1. Spain, and Portugal, 2. Hungaria, 3. Great
Brittany, 4. Denmark, 5. R^ssia, 6. Croatia, and Dalmatia, 7. Arragon, 8
^ohenna, 9. Suevia, and Nornegia, 10. Dacia. These paid Tribute to the Pope.

Quest. 14. and answ. By mystiall allusions to Countries, and Cities, to
Sodom, for filthinesse] no sin so vile, but it reigns in an Apostate Church,
so it reigns in Abolah, and Aholibab, Ezekiel. 23. are said to do worse than the
heathens before them, to transcend in excess of impieties, Sodom and Gomorrba.
The apostate State of King Abaddon became the mother of Harlots, and all
abominations of the earth, Christ, his holy Gospel is cords and bands, post and
rail to man's corrupt nature, but that taken away, men do degenerate into all
profanesse.

Ibid. That our Lord was crucified] As long as we protest in the Symbolon of
our faith, that the eternal Son, the Lord of glory was crucified by Pontius
Pilate, Rome must be held accursed^ The Pontificality does not take away the
curse, but continues it, because it revived the wounded head, and does as it
did, persecuring Christ in his witnesses, Them that keep the Commandments of
God, and the faith of JESUS CHRIST.

Ibid. called Sodom and Egypt.] The former be stamps of the latter, it is
said, I am Jehovah thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage This is a Preface to all the Commandments: so the same
must be a reason to all the Israel of God, to walk with God, for bringing us
out of Rome-Egypt, out of that house of cruel bondage. Look what cause Lot had
to be thankful, for saving him from Sodoms destruction, such cause have we for
being delivered from Rome-Sodome, and what cause of thankfulinesse and praise
Israel had for deliverance from Egypt and Babylon, such have we for that great
and mavelous deliverance from Rome-Egypt, and Rome Babylon. All those Psalms
of praise, wherein deliverance from Egypt is mentioned must be sang of us for
Rome-Egypt, and the holy Spirit teaches us so to do, Apoc 15.3. and 19.1. All
the faithful under the new Testament are the Israel of God, Gal. 6 Note this
by the way, if we under the new Testament are under a Covenant of grace, then
was Israel of old under a Covenant of grace, for we fing their songs. Observe
the note in chap. and page infra Again consider, is Rome called Egypt; What
shame should cover those apostate mouths and faces, that say, there is little
or no difference, and an easy reconciliation may be made between the faith of
the Church of England, and the Roman? What an apostaticall slander is that to
our Vine and vine-dressers, that our God brought forth of mystical Egypt, yea
to our Princes and Parliament, in all their Statutes that they made against the
people of that cursed religion: when as manifest a difference God has made, as
of old he did between old Egypt and Israel, Exodus 8.22, 23. and 10 23. etc. as
the RR FF. D.D. D. Jewel. D. Abbot. D. Fulk, D. Carlton, D. Reynolds, D.
^^hitakers, Mr. Perkins, and all our worthies have demonstrated. See also Mr.
white way to the true Church, who wrote most whitely, the Epistle dedicatory,
and the Epistle to the Render But very like none of all these, neither Princes,
nor Parliaments, Books of Controversies, Teachers, and Laws understood, what is
Popery, properly so called, as Bishop Lawa says in a book of his. But for all
their plotting, the old enmity shall never be reconciled, while light and
darkness continue, God has put the enmity, Genesis 3.15. What, will ye reconcile
the Kingdom of Christ, and the Kingdom of Abaddon, of Satan's darkness:
goodly days men, thou think says God, that I am like to thee, Psalm. 50.
These umpires, forsooth, will make Christ yield something, yea any thing on his
part, and the false Lamb must yield something on his part, and so our
Atheistical hearts think a good end is made. There was a time when our Laud
said, No peace with Rome, What a spirit of slumber and giddiness has covered
our Seers? Christ was angry of old for these sins of his sons, and of his
daughters, halting between two opinions. And thirdly, is Rome called Egypt,
then the Magistrate must not bring the people of Israel back to Egypt, nor go
to Egypt for horses, or any help, Deuteronomy. 17. Accursed be their project, that by
fair speeches, and plausible pretenses, but indeed speaking lies through
hypocrisy, do insinuare to corrupt the breasts of Princes, to reduce their
people into Rome-Egypts bondage: Judah is blamed for these projects, Isa. 30.
and 31. Most of the stories of old Egypt and Babylon must mind us of their
allusions. Note two things, 1. Israel doted on the Egyptians, and Babylonians
their lovers, traversing projects with them, Jer. 2. Ezeck. 16. But Christ
befooled their doings, that these nations were their plague, and ruin. 2. A
deal of profaneness, oppression, and much wickedness they brought from Babel,
as Ezra, Nehemiah, and Zachary do show. Let all true English hearts, that love
Christ and his Gospel, and their native Country, greatly humble their souls,
and pray that the Ephah of wickedness ( Zac. 5.6.) may be carried unto its own
place, into the Land of mystical Babylon. O heavens be astonished at our 2
evils. Ah Lord God, what iniquity do we find in thee, what iniquity is in thy
ordinances, thy commandments, thy Gospel, thy true Christian servants, all
which now are reputed vile, mean, and as anathema, but thou have not been to us
in these a wilderness, or a Land of darkness, but a God of glory, riches,
honor, plenty, victory and protection from those accursed of that cursed
Religion of the breaden God. O unthankful Nation. Let our souls weep in secret.

Quest. 15. N. 1. Antichrist.] And what if the title Antichrist ^e not totidem
literis attributed to the Pontificality, yet if the other titles are to be
applied to it, then this is truly predicated of that Corporation; must not he
be the Antichrist (can we think a worse to come) for persecuting them that held
the testimony of JESUS, and for cleaving to the word of God, Apocalips, chap.
13.12.

Ibid. N. 2. I am a God on earth.] Like the proud Prince of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 28 2.
But that Tyrian God was not a God, but a man in the hand of him that killed
him. The holy Spirit has phrases from Tyrus its destruction, to show how the
Lord God will render the mystical Tyrian god, his strength, his glory, and his
Gammadims, and all that love his merchandise, a thrice execrable terror, and
make them die the death of the unbaptised, and settle glory in the true Church,
the Land of the living Jehovah of hosts has purposed, (and let us believe it)
to stain the pride of all glory, read Ez^k. 26. and 27. and 28. and Isa. 23.9.
Apoc: 18. Consider like revolutions, and how the former be stamps of the
latter. Ungodly Princes and men of place have proud thoughts, and think
themselves some Deity: This comes from the old Adam, to whom Satan said, Ye
shall be as gods, Genesis 3.

CHAP. XVI.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations; Proving that the mystery of iniquity
begun to get head from Constantines time.

QUest. 1. and Answ. How long was it before the mystery of iniquity came to
the full?

Answer, 1. From Constantines time, Ecclesiastical Teachers were never quiet,
but still aspired after Supremacy, and drew Princes to their factions till 600
years after Christ, then about that time, Boniface the third Pope of Rome,
obtained by the help of the murderer Phocas, to be called universal Bishop.
And this universal Supremacy did so increase until the tenth Century, that
then Satan was let loose every where, and few Martyrs and Confessors were
found to hold the Testimony of Christ sincerely and constantly. The Locusts
and their King Abaddon had so obscured Sun and air, the office of Christ The
holy Bible tho air to see Christ.
and Law, by which we see him, and prevailed in the world by all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth in the holy and blessed Scriptures.

2. Note, that the Pontificiality continued in that height of Supremacy to
about the 13th and 14th and 15th Century. All which time it was and is still
upheld by Rebellion, treasonable and cruel practices, unsatiable Covetousness,
and ambition, and by speaking lies through hypocrisy, and by strong delusions
in false Doctrine, concerning the holy Scriptures, Latine-service, the attained
Supremacy, images, perjury, covenant breaking, urging unlawful oaths, and
killing of Kings, giving Dispenlations for incestuous marriages, dissolving one
to contract another, and all for Popish interests, to shore up their tottering
Babylon, etc. And also their Index Expurgatorius, corrupting all good ancient
authors, and their own Modern, yea sleighting with great contempt, the worthy
M. cade Justi^. ^ib. 1 p, 48. Mr. White way, etc. 323. all that 47. digression.
ancient fathers, calling them Heretics, liars, orroneous, instead of the
great things of Gods Law, they obtruded their lying Legends, etc. Mind also
their detestation of the thoughts of any Reformation, either of Doctrine and
manners, etc. etc. etc.

3. Oh the abominations of that apostate Church: Oh the intricate and
investigable paths, the flatteries, But her steps are not as her lips, Prove.
5.3, 4, 5. Romans 16.18.
smoothness and fairness of speech, pleasurable delights of eyes and ears,
etc. clamourous and impudent subtilties, lies, and slanders, formal pretenses
of palliated holiness, and outward strength and glory of that great whore,
enchanting, and merchandising the Kings of the earth, and the Nations, all
which that Church yet managed with a secret Scorpion-like stinging terror in
their Legates and Emissaries, Bulls, and Breves, etc.

4. What pen can delineate the miseries of the Christian-world, when and after
the polity of Apolluon became a perfect mountain of fire, and that specially
appeared in the deepnesse of Satan, when he drew all the West for 200 years,
into those calamitous and superstitious Wars, the 11. and 12. Centuries, for
the Low Jerusalem, that all the force of the Kings and Princes of the West was
weakened to be under the Pontificality. In those days was the Jerusalem from
heaven, the holy and beloved City of Christians besieged, as if old Gog and
Magog were alive, and still the Papacy will fight against it, till Michael, the
mighty angel of the Covenant, our Lord JESUS CHRIST, utter the seven Thunders
of his power under the They shall feel unawares the power of Christ, the
seventh Trumpet, as Jericho felt the seventh day the seven Trumpets.
seventh Trumpet, and the seventh Phiall against Abaddons Kingdom, to give the
enemy a final destruction.

QUest. 2. What is that you call the mystery of iniquity?

Answer, It is the spiritual Supremacy of the Pontificalitie, that the Sea and
Church of Rome only, with the Head thereof, is the oracle of the world, and of
infallible judgment and cannot err, and that therefore all States and
Churches, as children must be subject to him the Head, and to her as Mother, As
old Babylon said, I shall be a Lady for ever, so mystical Babylon says, she
sits as Queen. Their wisdom and their knowledge perverted them, Isa. 47. Apoc.
13.
Queen and Mistress. And this is the faith of its Corporation, which also has
through the transformation of Satan into an angel of light, some points of
truth conjoined, but exceedingly defiled and over clouded with worldly decrees
and humane devices, heresies, and blasphemies, which in conclusion contradict
and overthrow the truths they hold, and renders their polity execrable to the
Saints and their King, the holy one of Israel.

QUest. 3. Who were followers of the King of the Pit-darknesse, and Pit-bred
Locusts, that revived the Empire.

Answer, Kings, and peoples, and multitudes and Nations, and kindreds and
tongues, small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, who wondered at the
glorious rising and standing of this new kind of Govenour and government. This
Corporation of the Papacy, the Locusts, and other mystical Babylonians, fitly
enough call, the Roman Catholic Church. But the First and the Last, the
faithful and true Witness, teaches to call it the Kingdom of the Beast.

The annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the sixteenth Chapter.
QVest. 1. and Answer, N. 1. Until the tenth Century.] 1000 years there were
Churches, and many godly that did reign with, and live the life of Christ.
Apoc. 10.6.
But the tenth Centurie, reckoning from the Apostle John's death) Rome the cause
of fall to all, and then the State of the Church or a great part was a dead
State, being wonderfully estranged from the testimony of JESUS, and the word of
God, the only mean of the first Resurrection.

Ibid. N. 1. Among them that perish.] Those in the Book of life, and the sealed
of God, the Locusts did not hurt; but others turning their ears from the truth
were given unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4. This Spiritual judgment was on Israel, Isa.
29 9. A gainsaying people shall be hardened, and given up to their own hearts
lusts, Romans 10.11. Psalm. 81.

N. 2. Insatiable Coveteousnesse.] Unsatiable covetousness and ambition
introduced many corruptions in Doctrine, as it was foretold, the love of money
the root of all evil, and makes men err from the faith and a godly life, 1 Timothy 6. another Scripture says, and through covetousness shall false Teachers
with feigned words make merchandise of you, 2 Pet. 2. And the souls of men was
one kind of the vendible things in Rome-Babylons politic, Apoc. 18.13. and here
must be remembered their Pharisaicall Co^ban ^obbing all Churches.

N. 11. -- Images.] Old Babylon was a Land of graven Images, and were mad upon
their idols, Jer. 50.33. Dan. 3. so mystical Babylon; Papists although plogued
by the Turks wars would not repent of their idolatry, Apoc. 9.20. as Israel
Ezekiel. 16.26.

Ibid. And killing of Kings.] For ^illing of Kings (of whom they are jealous)
see a book of the State mysteries of the Jesuits, that is translated out of
French, and dedicated to Sr. Tho. Penistone Knight and Baronet by Peter
Gosselyn, printed by G. E. for Nicholas Bourn. Qui cum Jesus itis, non itis cum
Iesuitis, the indoctrinated Iscariots of the world.

Ibid. Any Reformation.] See the history of Council of Trent, page 553. and
all our godly men's labors, by teaching and writing, that all the reformed
Churches may truly say of mystical Babylon, as the Saints said of old Babylon.
We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed, forsake her, and let us
every one go into his own Country, for her judgment reaches unto heaven,
Jer. 51.9. All the godly writings and endeavors of the Reformed Churches,
shall rise up in judgment against them.

N. 3. Sub^llties and lies] See Sir Edwin Sands relations of his travels, he
shows their sleights in reports, etc. all histories and experience of Reformed
Churches show their plots and devises. But Jethroes Speech does comfort the
Church, Exodus 18.11. Subtle Hypocrites, and Inventers of false Religion, Christ
will defeat all their counsels. Job 5.12, 13. read Mr. Cade of Popish policies,
lib. 1. p. 6. lib. 2. page 159.

Ibid. N. 3. Great Whore] Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the
well-favoured Harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that sells the Nations
through her whoredoms, and the familles through her witchcrafts, The two
Sisters followed the idolatryes of Ninive, Neh. 3, 4. 2 Kings 16. Ezekiel. 23.5.
so did the Nations the glorious well-favoured Whore, through her enchantments,
Apoc. 17.1, 2, 3 4, 5. etc. And the same plagues that came on the former shall
come on this latter 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.

N. 4. a perfect Mountain of fire] Where King Abaddons Locust^ and subjects be
maintained, it will make that Kingdom a burning Ae^na. The King of Locusts,
and his Locusts, the great incendiaries of the World, and all is to minister
advancement to Popish interests. They excite Princes against Princes, yea Turks
against Princes of Christendom and Princes against subjects, etc.

Ibid. N. 4. Drew all the West for two hundred years] Woe and alas, it is to
think of those miseries when presently after, Apoc. 20.7. the tenth Century,
Satan was let loose. That age was an unhappy age: even as the Locust Genthrard
spoke, and the Locust Bellarmine says, Never age more unlearned or unhappy.
Cited by Dr. Usher, in answer to a Jesuit, pa. 7 Mr. Cade, lib. 1. pa. 40.

Ibid. 4. For the Low Jerusalem] Christ had told that Jerusalem should be
desolate so long as the Gentiles calling continues, even to the worlds end,
Marth. 24 Luke 21. as he caused Moses to foretell Deuteronomy. 28.63. Number. 33.56. But
the Pontificality the false Prophet to weaken Princes who would be deceived,
and not excel in Gods word, as they most of all might do: He caused them to go
from England, France, etc. men women, and children to recover the cursed Land.
Compare the apostasy of Nimrod, and the man of Sin in Israel, with the
apostasy of mystical Nimrod, the man of sin in the Christian Church; and the
miseries thereupon depending. Far from Justice and Peace, 2 Chronicles 15.3, 4, 5,
6. How do men of power that are crafty and plausible draw men away from the
Gospel of Christ?

Ibid. As of old, God and Magog.] By God and Magog, Apoc. 20. is meant all
oppressors of the faithful Christians, whether Turk or Pope, ^s Michael our
Prince, captain of the Lords host, calmed old G^gs waves, Daniel 12. So he will
mystical God and Magog, Apocalypse chap. 10. and 20.

Quest. 2 and answ. It is the spiritual Supremacy] The Locusts say such as
submit not to the Popes supremacy do renounce Christianity Mr. Cade Justif.
lib. 1. page 98, If Satan had not mightily possessed men's hearts, Rome the only
place plainly cursed, should not rule Religion. But the rejected of God must
strive, where God warns to do otherwise, Mr. Bro. in Sinai Sight. The Romists
seeking to have Rome a peculiar Citie^, do revive the shadow of the old
Covenant: for now we are not tied to no one Mountain, much less to Ahaddons
City of seven Mountains, John 4.21. And the name Catholic, used of old in the
Church destroys that opinion. Catholica qu^esse potest quae Romana dici^u?
And seeing the partition Wall is broken down between Jews and us, why make they
another partition between us and them Rome for this and all of that Synagogue,
are to be h^ld accursed till our Lord comes, for it is accursed. And some of
our Divines do little better than Judaize about the Jews possessing Canaan and
Jerusalem.

Ibid. Some points of truth conjoined] The Whores cup of Fornications was
gui'ded with some truths, but filled with the waters and wine of Sodom, and
doctrines of Devils, A Mystery. By thy Witchcrafts were deceived all nations;
cauterized consciences speak lies through hypocrisy, Apoc 18.23.1 Tim. 4.

Ibid. Heresies and blasphemies] And I saw a Woman sit upon a scarlet col^ur^d
Beast, full of Names of blasphemy. Their translations, Psalters, Rosaries, etc.
show this. The Lord has rebuked such Satan's, and still will.

Quest 3. and Answ. Kings and Peoples, and Multitudes, etc.] Here you may
behold a Roman Catholic: here is their universality, multitude unity, outward
glory, etc. let them boast: but rather let them tremble, and consider Apoc.
13.8. and 17.8. They whose Names are not written in the Lambs book of life from
the foundation of the world followed the beast. Their Diets, Councels,
Parliaments, Synods, etc. were to inslave themselves to serve a Beast, and
blasphemous Whore, a Witch, etc. God shall send them strong delusions to
believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth. Serve Jehovah, kiss the Son, the Heir of heaven, Psalm 2.
Mat. 21.38. Hebr. 1.2. O ye Princes study your Kingdoms, Principalities, and
your common-Weals. O ye Nobles and Judges study to advance the Gospel, the
glory of any Nation, that embraces it, and that walks after it. Oh be
persuaded it is a good, light, and easy yoke, 2 Chronicles. 12.8. ye are the chief
Bishops from God and Pastors: oh do not ye by negligence or transaction of your
power to the unworthy, cause the Lords flock to be scattered.

CHAP. XVII.
With Questions, Answers, and Annotations, Concerning the two Witnesses, and
the mark of the Beast: And the decay of the mystery of iniquity.

QUest. 1. Who kept the Testimony of Jesus, and the word of God that came from
Sems Tents in the times of the rising and height of the Pontificality?

Answ. Many in the times of the rising of it, and there were here and there two
Witnesses, some that followed the true Lamb, and that in the height of it,
prophesied, misliked, and cried out against the proceedings of the mystery of
iniquity. But this company were not so conspicuous and visibly glorious, being
for diverse Hundreds of years driven as into a Wilderness through a red sea of
fire and faggot by the Beast of the Bottomless pit, the counterfeit Lamb, and
the prevailing faction of his six hundred sixty six apostatical number, yet at
the last, the Brethren overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death.

QUest. 2. Then the papacy would not bear with such as contested against it?

Answ. Christ's faithful witnesses were caused to mourn in Sackcloath: No man
might buy or sell that would not Worship the Image of the Beasts imperial State
re-erected in the Pontificality, Like their forefathers, the servants of
servants, the cursed Canaanice. Deuteronomy. 2.28, 29.
and receive the Mark of the Beast, in his hand or forehead, or the name of the
Beast, or at least be of the number of his name: yea, else were most cruelly
used (as is said) throughout their large Commonweal. That Whorish Church, was
and is drunk with the blood, and martyrs, of Jesus.

QUest. 3. What do you understand to be the mark of the Beast?

Answ. The Popes Canon Law tells that none may live under the Empire, but by
yielding to the Popes Laws, in his subscribing to his Imperial and
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and oath of fidelity as a mark on the hand, and some
open token of communion with him, and profession of his decrees as a mark in
the forehead: The saying of the Ave Maria, went over all to the poor beggars,
and reverence to the cross, and coming to their most wicked Mass. Forbidding
and refraining from reading and teaching the holy Scriptures, but for licensed
and auricular Confession. Briefly all differing from their Dracons Laws were
heretics, and mightnot use policy having not the marks of his Polity.

QUest. 4. Did then the Pontificalitie and Papacy (as the old Empire) porsecute
the faith of the Prophets and Apostles doctrine.

Answ. Yea, for it is said that the latter Beast like a Lamb with two horns,
did all that the former Beast did. He had the voice and speech of the Dracon-
Caesar's: and did maintain the same War against the For the wars of the dragon-
Caesar's, and dragon-Pope^, see former notes.
Saints, and for the same cause, and that was, the keeping of the commandments
of God, and the faith of Jesus. And this is the very mark of those that have
Gods Name in their Foreheads.

Note as the old Beast-like enemies fought against the faith of Jerusalem Sems
Tents, and the People of God: so Rome-Egypt, Rome-Babylon, with like cruelty
and intestine hatred both in the Caesar's, and Popes against the same glorious
faith of Jerusalem the holy. City that came down from heaven. Kain began the
War, the Pontificality and Papacy follow Kains ways. The former be stamps of
the latter. As there is a like revolution of time, so there is of other matters
of Christ's administration.

QUest. 5. But the mystery of Iniquity the spiritual Supremacy did not still
continue in that strength and repute in the Christian world, as it had in
former times?

Answ. The Apostle foretold that the Lord Jesus would consume that wicked, that
man of sin, and his corporation with the Spirit of his mouth, and abolish it
with the brightness of his coming; so the fifteenth century, the Lamb, the
King of mount Sion appeared with one hundred and forty four thousand, attending
on him who caused the Gospel to break out again, and the light of it in the
holy city increased to our days that Christ the Sun of Justice shines and
reigns in England, Scotland, France, Germany, etc. Blessed be his glorious
name. And let the four and twenty Elders, and the sour lively Wights, and all
that fear God both small and great, give thanks and sing Hallelujahs with all
hearty courage, as Apocal. 15. and 19.

QUest. and Ans. 6. Shall the Papacy be still decreasing?

Ans. Yea, for the preaching of the eternal Gospel falls Rome-babylon, and
builds Jerusalem. This the Sword of Christ's mouth, has consumed the Kingdom
of the Beast: and chiefly through this, Abaddon the son of perdition, the angel
of the bottomless pit, and his cursed earthly polity and corporation shall be
perishing to the end, and is every day going to utter perdition.

QVest, 7. But the Polity of Rome. Egypt is strong by power and subtle
counsels, through the Kings and Princes that give their power to the Beast,
and through the swarms of innumerable Locusts, and all his Worshippers: all
which are confederate with him, and say, So said the Atheists of old Egypt, and
old Babylon, Dan. 3.15. Exodus 5.2. Jer. 50.34.
who can war with the Beast as Apocal. 13.4.

Answ. Strong is Lord God of Hosts, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that
will judge the great Whore, and overthrow that habitation of Devils, that hold
of every foul Spirit, that Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. For he
fitteth as on a White Cloud with a sicle in his hand, and as on a White Horse
of truth and might, and in righteousness does judge and make War. And the
godly The called, the chosen, the faithful, are on the Lambs part, Apoc. 17 14.
Warriors All those cry mightily to him that sits on the Cloud, to thrust in
his sicle, and their prayers are heard, Apoc. 14.15.
Princes, Teachers and people, as on White Horses in his truth and might will
follow him.

And that we might be assured of Mystical Babylons destruction, Gen 6.11, 12,
13. and 11.8. Jos. 10.11. Jud. 4. and 5.19. Jer. 25.10. Nah. 3.4.17. Ezekiel. 17.
and 28. Deuteronomy. 2.27, 28. with Apoc. 13.17. Esai. 63.3.
the holy Spirit alludeth to the stories of the old enemies, the old world,
Sodom, Egypt, Chanaan, Edom, Tyrus, Niniveh, Babel, and apostate Jerusalem,
and to the four cursed Kingdoms in Daniel chap. 7. and to Gog and Magog, Ezekiel.
38, and 39. As Gods wrath and vengeance came on them, so most surely shall the
cursed, bloody, heathenish, apostaticall polity of King Abaddon be trodden in
the wine press of the wrath of the Lord God omnipotent, and perish. The seven
The seven Phialls show how Rome shall as it dealt in the Trumpets, as shall be
more largely showed hereafter.
Phials set forth this, how the just God does pour out plagues on the Throne
and Kingdom of the Beast.

QUest. 8. Shall the Gospel of Christ increase in glory?

Answer, It shall: Christ will raise up holy Teachers, who shall by his great
power cause the earth to be lightened with glory. And the Temple and Testimony
which the Beast of the Pit had shut up, shall be further opened, and the Lord
the Almighty One shall reign. The same Kingdoms that gave their power to the
Beast, shall regain, and shall revive from their dead apostaticall condition,
and hate the Whore, that loathsome Corporation of the King of Locusts, make
their Kingdoms our Lords and his Christ's, for they shall embrace the Gospel
which shall shine among them. This is called the marriage of the Lamb, Apoc.
19. And verily, as that whorish Polity has been desolate and naked, in respect
of England, Scotland, and much of Germany, etc. so shall it be of France, and
Spain, and others, when Gods purposes are fulfilled.

QUest. 9. What is the final judgment given on the second beast with two
horns like a Lamb, who is the Beast of Empire revived, and also with his
Locusts is the false Prophet?

Answer, It is said the Beast was caught, and with him the false Prophet which
works miracles before him, by which he deceives them that receive the mark
of the Beast, and worship his image, both were cast alive as Sodomites into the
Lake burning with fire and Brimstone, and shall be tormented with the Devils
day and night, for ever and ever.

Even so, Amen, Lord God omnipotent, holy, just and true are thy ways, and
judgments, O King of Saints,

QUest. 10. What is the judgment on them that are seduced by the great,
glorious, and Catholic Whore, and were drunken with the cup of the Wine of her
fornications, that had the Mark of the Beast, and did worship his image?

Answ. They shall drink of the Cup of the wrath of God, the wine mixed in the
cup of his anger, Psalm. 11.6. and 75.8.
and shall be tormented for ever and ever, without rest day or night in fire
and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb, Apoc. 14. This should be a most serious admonition, for men to come out
of mystical Babylon, mystical Egypt, to use no garments, no prayers, no laws
of the Popes making.

QUe. 11. What are we to think of all that go under the name of Papists, that
are under the Papacy?

Answ. Fearful judgment is pronounced on all those that worship the image of
the Beast, or have his Mark or print of his name in hand or forehead, but
sentence is not so passed on all that are of the Number of his name, yet they
are in great danger, unless they obey the voice from heaven, Come out of her
my people. O thrice blessed is that Kingdom,
O thrice blessed is that family,
O thrice blessed is that person,
that not only has gotten victory over the Beast, and over his image, and
over his Mark, but also and over the number of his name.

QUest. 12. What is the end of all that know not God, and which obey not to the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will not be of the Corporation of the
holy City?

Answ. Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power: for so it is said, without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and
fornicators, and murderers, and idolaters, and the fearful and unbelievers,
and the abominable, and whosoever loves, and makes a he, Apoc. 21. and 22.

QUest. 13. What is the end of the godly that would not obey the Papacy, and of
all that sincerely walk with God?

Answ. The Apostle John heard a voice from heaven, saying, Write, blessed are
they that die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow with them. Phil. 3.12. They shall not be
unclothed, but clothed upon: in them mortality be swallowed up of life. 2 Cor.
5.4. Luke 20.35.36.
And in the day of the all-joyfull resurrection, our weak, vile, and corrupt
bodies, shall be raised up incorruptible, and be fashioned and made like our
Lords glorious body. And the Saints that are alive, and remain unto the coming
of the Lord, shall have instead of death a sudden and unspeakable * changing in
their bodies, and shall together with them of the Resurrection, be caught up in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and to be ever with the Lord, not to
die any more, but are equal unto the angels, and shall shine like the Sun in
the Kingdom of their Father, Amen, Even so come LORD JESUS.

Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the seventeenth Chapter.
QVest. 1. and Ans Here and there two witnesses.] See Mr. White, Way, etc. page
384. etc. and Mr. Cade, Justif. l. chap. 4 and lib. 2. chap. 1. and many
others, Christ still raising up his witnesses, was an argument that his cause
should live till better times. All the power of the Western world, that Pope,
and Emperor, and other horns of the Beast could make, could not root out the
Church, nor the faith of the Primitive purity. It did and shall increase in
spite of fire, and faggot, prisons, Massacres, Index Expurgatorius, etc. the
King of Locusts, and his Locusts prevailed against the bodies of the Saints,
but not against their Testimony to the true faith of Christ.

Ibid. -- Prophesied, misliked, and cried out.] Here is a sore combat of
Michaels servants, called the patience of the Saints, as with the Casars, so
now with the Tail of the Dragon, the King of Locusts. All the fight was for the
salvation and power, and Kingdom of God and his word, and the authority of of
Christ and his Testimony, Apoc. 12.10. and this still is, and must be intended
for unto banishment, spoiling of goods, bonds, and death: Yea it shall be
contended for till the seventh Trumpets sounding shows Christ's reigning over
the Kingdoms of the world in the glorious manifestation of his Ordinances,
Apoc. 11.15.19.

Ibid. For diverse hundreds of years] In those days the Temple was shut, and
Christ's Ordinances abandoned by the authority of the Beast with two horns, like
a Lamb, so there is two kinds of authority, and for this was the great strife,
Jehosaphat much reformed the State, and took away the high places, that had
Groves, but the other high places stood still, for the peoples heart was not
able to comply with purer worship, 2 Chronicles. 20.33 So in our days our people
are full of superstitions, and hate faithful teaching, therefore pure
Reformation shall not be yet, nay now the the things not reformed by Queen
Elizabeth and King James, are a means of introducing more things of Popish
abominations.

Ibid. Of his 666. Apostaticall number.] Observe the Roman Catholic Church of
Kings, multitudes, peoples, Nations and kindreds, and tongues rejoiced, when
the Beast of the Pit had killed the two witnesses, and Martyrs of Jesus, so
they are the many that go the broad way, and Christ's witnesses sew that go the
narrow way. Papists ask where was your company before Luther, the answer is
easy, where was it not? and they themselves knew and saw where it was well
enough. They did not murder men that were invisible. And it does not alter the
Cas^ in respect of truth, that Christ's witnesses were mean, weak, and few,
Christ was among them, 1 Cor. 14.11, 12, 13.2 Cor. 4.8. 9, 10, 11. and 13.4
vid. Mr. Cade, lib. 2. page 181. etc. What unreasonable prating do the Locusts
use, (the foolish woman is clamorous Prove. 9.) that we must show a visible
glorious company, prosessing the Gospel in all ages, when the Spirit forewarned
of perilous times, and of apostasy from the faith:and evermore they that
spoke or did any thing to question Popish Doctrines, or their usurped power
were killed, etc.

Question 2. and Answer, No man might buy or sell.] Apoclyps 11. and 12. and
13. and 14. chapters, set forth their cruelties, the just is an abomination to
the wicked, and contra, a Proverbof experience from the first and last
Counsels. It is more dangerous to speak against, and withstand their decrees
and decretalls, than the commandments of God, a speech of the good and noble
Lord Cobbam, is worthy of place, lo good people lo, for the breaking of Gods
Law, and his great commandments, they never yet cursed me, but for their ^^wn
Laws and traditions, most cruelly do they handle me and other, men. Thus that
good Noble man spoke to the people with a loud voice of those bloody stinging
Scorpions, the Bishop of Canterbury and other Locusts. Babylonian Lucifers that
exalted themselves against the Kingdom of Christ, and the Laws of the Land,
Acts and Monuments 731. of the last Edition. Whores that break wedlock are
cruel, Ezekiel. 16. and 23. Sicut Patres vestrietiam v^s, Acts 7.51. How are men's
inventions yet pressed in these days of the Gospel (1636.) But for Gods
Commandments how slighted. Experience, the Saints of God, both godly
ministers, and people have of this continually.

Ibid. worship the image of the beasts imperial State.] The imperial State of
the Pontificality was a glorious image, that all the world wondered and
worshipped, but John and all gracious know that that State is a Beast, and is
going into the lake of fire.

Quest 3. and Answ. In subscribing, etc.] All had, must have communion with the
Beast in one manner or other. Gods marked hated the Beasts mark, and the Beasts
marked hated Gods mark.

Ibid. Revec^^nce to the Cross.] So do the Bishops in their Canons, that in
the sign of the Cross in Baptism, the child is dedicated thereby to him that
died on the Gross, Can. 30. And many of our people, that will not be Papists,
yet are very superstitious, and defend themselves by the Cross in Baptism,
Mat. 18.7. Luc. 17.1. That is a sad speech which Christ says, Cursed is he
that makes the blind to go out of their way, and let all the people say, Amen,
Deuteronomy. 27.

Ibid. Of the 3. Quest. and Answ. Forbidding and refraining from reading and
teaching the holy Scriptures.] It is great wickedness, that any should forbid
any of the simplest to read the holy Bible, or any godly learned, requested by
a company not to expound it, as in the Primitive Churches, this order for every
man able and faithful to utter his gift continued to the time of Theodoret,
yea long after, Theod. upon 1 Cor. 14. See what the Spirit faith by the Apostle
Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10.2 Tim. 2.2. But Gregory the ninth, a Pope of Rome
prohibited, that no Layman should preach, of whatsoever degree he was.

Quest. 4. and Answ. He had the voice and speech.] Laws be the Speech of a
polity, so that many have fitly compared the new Religion, of the Pontificality
with old Romes, because it is so stuffed with old heathenish Customs, after
the Theology (rather the Popologie) of Virgil and Ovid, etc. Add hereunto the
Popes decretalls overruling States, are wicked commonly, and the more they be,
being urged by men unlawful.

Ibid. Keeping of the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus] Blessed is
he that watches against cunning craftiness and deceit, that he may keep his
garment close to him. Apoc. 16.15. Christ has made us Kings and Priests, and
then we must bear holiness in cur hearts and forcheads. And let the just hold
on his way, and let the clean in hands increase in courage, Job 17.9. Apoc.
21.11. Truth is better than our lives or States: be independent, and God will
be with the good; for whosoever says the Lord shall be ashamed of me and of my
words among this adulterous and sinful generation, [that is, that does
adulterate the faith by heretical Doctrines and men's Precepts and traditions]
of him shall the Son of man be ashamed also, when he shall come in his own
glory, and the Fathers, and the holy angels, Make 8. Luc. 9. Here note, how the
Corporation of the seed of the Serpent, esteems Christ and his servants, and
the holy Doctrine, anathema. And contrarily the Corporation of the holy seed,
esteem the Serpent and his seed, and their commadements and inventions,
anathema, maranatha. This has been the deadly feud and enmity and war from the
beginning, ever since Kain flew Habel. This is the fire, sword, and division
that Christ has sent on the earth, Genesis 3.15 Mat. 10. Luc. 12. This must be
constantly observed for Kingdoms, towns, and families, and persons.

Qu. 5. and Answ. The King of mount Sion appeared with 144000.] Observe the
allusion in the term Mount Sion, which shows, all that follow the Lamb under
the new Testament, harp the same song of holy faith, as the faithful of Mount
Sion of old, Apoc. 14. answerable to this the Apostle sweetly protests, Acts
26.6, 7. and all the Epistle to the Hebrews shows this most evidently.
Likewise any part of the old Testament, cited or paraphrased, or any way
expressed by our Lord and his apostles, proves that cursed Popery should be
accursed, that objecteth. novelty to our most holy faith, and this well
considered will strengthen the godly Student, against the Anabaptist and
Antinomian, etc.

In Apocal. chap. 7. there were 144000. that the first Beast warred against:
and in chap. 14. the same number (that held the faith of the Patriarchs and
Apostles) The second Beast wars against them. The tenth Century Satan was let
loose to deceive, and then the Churches were in a dead State from a
Church-life, but now the Churches begin to recover life, to live again is, as
it were, a Resurrection, as the Jews in the return from Babel, Ezekiel. 37. Apoc.
20.

Ibid. And all that fear God, both small and great gave thinks.] None but one
made gracious, as John can see the holy Jerusalem, and sing praise, Ezekiel.
43.11. Worldly look to worldly pomp, and every man as he bears a person
Christian, will praise the Lord God for his salvations from the idolatry,
heresy, strange language, and tyranny of the man of sin, of Rome-Egypt,
Psalm. 98.1, 2, 3. Psalm 114. Oh the searfull judgment of Christ giving the
world over to slavery and befottednesse in former times: Rejoice over her thou
heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and Prophets, for God has avenged ye on her,
read attentively, Psalm. 81. and in all this book of the Apocalips compare old
things with new.

Quest. 6. And chiefty through this Abaddon.] States miss much the mark that
think to overthrow the Kingdom of Abaddon, if liberties, and not the quarrel
of the Gospel be not syncerely intended. Let the King of Swedens doings advise
them; And consider Zac. 4.6. chiefly so must the Temple be built, and Fathers
and Councels, Doctors, and School men, are not the sword of Christ's mouth, much
less a dumb, base, idle, and proud ministry: those and these humane helps we
have used long enough.

Ibid. Shall be perishing to the end.] As those four beasts Da^^y perished by
the time of our Lords first coming, so the Roman Beast made of those four
shall by his second. A greater curse cannot be to terrisie us in partaking with
them. For what State will seek to uphold the Kingdom of the Beast, King
Abaddon must sink with it, as a great millstone that Christ casts into the
sea, and let each State whose Kingdom is the Lords, and his Christ's, take heed
how they tamper in leagues and Treaties with any of the horns, that yet uphold
and give their power to the Beast, and mark events. Christ has and will
preserve his Common-Weals that rule for him, that in truth defend his faith, as
D. Cariton in his thankful remembrance has evidenced to our ungrateful and
forgetful Nation. Will we not yet mind that theme of theirs, nulla fides
observanda baereticis: yea it is more than a theme; it is one of their Papal
Laws, a Canon in the Couneel of Constance, Sess. 19. Will not we believe a man
to be bald till we see his brains, vide Cade Justif. lib. 2. 80, 81. etc. and
the apdendix: Ques salvos suscita^, ques destruit dementet. Just with God that
they that will not know his holy faith, should not know reason. The children of
Noph, and Tahpanbes have broken thine head (contrary to Genesis 3.15.) Jer. 2.
Isa. 9.13. and 30.4. The harlot Aholibah doted on the Egyptian and Babylonian
worships, which were her ruin: they sent for the brave Gallants of Babel
clothed inred attire, a type of Scarlet Cardinals of mystical Babylon, Ezekiel.
23, 14, 15. Hos. 9.2. and 10.6. etc. etc. Dear Queen Elizabeth would not suffer
Jerolamus Martinengo to come over into England for any Treaty, Hist Council of
Trent 440. but now Treaties, and Locusts are either sent for or suffered to
swarm. Alas what means it? that an ambas^adour should be sent to the seven
Mountain, City, of mystical Babylon. What have we to do to drink the waters of
Tyber, Jer. 2.18. (1636) Ezekiel. 23.16. in King Edwards days the State sent for
P. Martyr, and Martin Bu^er, and for many years countenanced men of their
Spirit, but now etc. The syncerity of the Gospel is the sure Basis of all
prosperity to a State: and notwithstanding all this, Elias, and Elisha, and
Sam^el, etc. will be the Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof. False
Religion and oppression is the earthquake of a State, as Mr. Cade most
affectionately shows in the Appendix.

Quest. 7. and Answ. That gave their power to the beast.] The Kings that did
traffic with the Pope continually for his confirmation, they felt Christ's
anger for it, for he would have them know, that by him Kings reign, that all
power in heaven and earth is his, that the most high rules over the Kingdoms
of men; as the proud King of old Babel, who was made a beast, did confess to
warn the Beast of mystical Babylon, of his blasphemous arrogance, Prev. 8.
Mat, 28.18. Dan. 4. Romans 1^.1. i.e. Kingdoms that will not stick to Gods
covenant shall find this Scripture made good on them, 2 Chronicles. 12.8.

Ibid. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.] The Lamb shall overcome and
revenge the blood of his servants, Apoc. 19. Five beads were fallen for Gods
peoples sake, when John wrote, and the sixth head was wounded to death for
persecuting the faith, so shall the seventh Head feel the curse of the living
God

Ibid. That will judge the great Whore.] God shall judge them and his Prophets,
and their enemies shall judge them, and the righteous men shall judge them
after the manner of adulteresses, and blood is in their hands, Ezekiel. 16.38. and
23.45.

Ibid. That hold of every foul spirit.] Whom do these foul spirits,
conscience-cauterised hypocrites seduce? on whom do these Vultures, kites, and
ravens seize on? surely on none but those men and women, that have sore and
itching ears, and cannot abide sound Teaching, and have no love to the truth,
and laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts, lusts of the eyes, of
flesh, and pride of life, 1 Timothy, 6.10 2 Timothy 3, 6, 7. and 4. and 3, 4.1 John
2.16. Apoc. 18.2 This verse of Apoc. 18.2. may be an allusion to Isa. 13.21.22.
as old Babylon was troubled, Zim, Jim, and Ohim, so mystical Babylonians in
our Land, in these days of darkness have been troubled with spirits, and
hobgoblins, and night-terrours, etc. But blessed be the father of mercies, the
God of all consolation for the Gospel of his Son, which has scattered these
evils from us.

Ibid. For he sits as on a white cloud, with a sicle in his hand, and on a
white horse.] Let the Saints remember with joy how Christ the King rode on a
cloud, in bringing Israel out of old Egypt, so now in bringing us his Isael out
of Rome Egy^t, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, Psalm. 45. in Apoc.
6.2. Christ rode as on a white horse in his instruments the angels invisibly,
men visibly against the Casars, till he had wounded to death that head of the
Roman State: so now against the reviver of the wounded head, he rode on a
white horse, Apocal. 19.11. as against old Egypt. Hab 3.8. Jehovah shall reign
for ever, and ever. Moses and all faithful so sing, Exodus 15. Apoc. 15.

At the figure of the The holy spirit alludeth to the stories of the old
enemies.] Apocalypse 18. etc. shows the great fall of mystical Babylon from
old stories (Oh that our brethren would be conversant in the holy Scriptures)
the Roman polity killing men for the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine, is as
guilty as if it had killed them and all holy in the same faith. All the
righteous blood shed from Habel the righteous to this day shall be required of
them, and it should admonish our Nobles, Gentry, ministry and Commonalty, to
take heed how they comply with that bloody, whorish Church, lest they acquire
the guiltiness of its massacres, treasons, Gunpowder plot, etc. consider Job
9.4. to help the Reader to compare the Ap^calyps with old stories, somewhat I
will mention for these present expressions.

The old world, Genesis 6.11, 12, 13. corrupted the earth by apostasy, and God
would corrupt, that is destroy it, so the Lord will corrupt the policy of the
man of Sin, Apoc. 11.18. God plagued Sodom. Genesis 19. Rome is called Sodom, and
God will destroy it, Apoc. 11.8. We know how God plagued Egypt. Rome is called
Egypt, Apoc. 11.8. and many of the plagues of Egypt are and shall be on
Rome-Egypt, Apoc. 16. Sicho^ the King of the Amorites would not suffer Israel
to buy and sell bread nor drink: so the Popish policy. Apoc. 13.16. but God
destroyed the one, and will the other, Edom Isa. 63. with Apocal. 19.15. Tyrus,
Ezekiel. 27. 30, 31, 32. with Apoc. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Niniveb, 3, 4, 17.
Apoc. 17.4. and for Ninivebs Locusts, Apoc. 9. Apostate Jerusalem, Jeremiah
25.10. Apoc. 18; 22; 23. Of the four beasts in Dan. 7. spoken of before, in
applying them to the Roman beast. All the Apocalypse, almost every Sentence is
taken from the Prophets, expressing old rerms for new States, and places, and
times, but that would be too long a work here to describe, it is done other
where.

Quest. 8. and Answ. The same Kingdoms that gave their power.] A man even
bymans wit, might marvel why Princes would suffer such a deceiver, as Apolluon
to stand one year, his Doctrine being against all light of the blessed
Scriptures, and each Prince being able to cast him from his Territories. Gods
ways are unsearchable. God has chosen a few only, and none can come to
Christ, unless the heavenly Father draw him, but the things revealed belong to
us and our children.

Ibid. They shall embrace the Gospel.] The holy City shall be yet more
glorious. The streets of the City are pure gold, as clear as glass, then shall
the Saints walk cheerfully, when Gods commandments and the faith of Christ are
purged from the filthy scum of man's inventions. Our Lord Christ, the Teacher
appointed of the Father, and his apostles in their Doctrine were like Refiners
fire and fullers soap to the Rabbis of traditlons and bodily exercise, Mat. 5.
and 6. and 7. and 156 and 23. but they were not able to abide it, but as Cain,
persecuted with intestine hatred: so Christ in his martyrs, and his angels in
the Reformed Churches, has been and will be as refiners fire and fullers soap
to the King of Locusts, and his Locusts Doctrine, he will purge his floor of
the fulsome stuff, and the chafe of the decitfull hypocrites.

Ibid. And verily, as that whorish polity has been.] As Israel in Egypt under
Pharaoh, so the cause of the Gospel seemed unrecoverable under the Egyptiacall
Kingdom of the Man of Sin, but the sayings of God are true; he is Jehovah,
performer of promise, as Israel felt for old Egypt, Exodus 6.3. so we have felt
for Rome-Egypt, and as we have seen the loving kindness of God, so shall
others, Rome-Egypt, shall be more and more desolate.

Que^^. 9. and answ. With his Locusts, is the faise Pro phet.] The
Pontificality is a Beast of Empire in its power, and it with its Clergy is the
false Prophet, a Corporoation speech, false Prophet; that is the body of false
Prophets.

Ibid. Cast alive as sodomites.] The commonweal of King Abaddon is called
Sodom, and his Catholic company and Church faith of her self, she is a Queen,
Apoc. 18. yet she is but the Queen of Sodom and Babylon: all the Kings and
Princes that are of that polity, let them fear the punishment of Sodom,
unless they repent, and make their common-weals our Lords and his Christ's.

Quest. 10. and answ. Without rest day and night.] God gave men over, that
loved not the truth, to believe lies, that they might be damned. Terror, it is
said without Rest, and then what lies and witcherafts do they teach and
believe, of Masses, Trentalls, Requiems, Dirges, Libera me's, etc. No rest to
them that follow the Beast.

Ibid. To use no garments] Their Cannons and prayers, and apparel, are all
bent to a blind drift, and not fittest to have been used in our tongue, the
whole frame is out of order, Mr. Bro. in Apoc. 94. and 156.

Quest. 11. and answ. But sentence is not so passed, etc.] We judge well of
many of our forefathers, that they are Saints in heaven, for they made diverse
good Laws against Devilish Popery, and were still complaining of Popish
enormities, and many in their last Wills, would not bequeath any thing to
maintain Popish Masses, etc. etc. and in their judgment and affection were
much against Popery, and did come very far out of that polity, yet through fear
went under the name of Papists, and the number of his name, and durst not,
through the diligent tyranny of the Scorpion-Locusts, openly confess the
truth, as there are now such in Spain and Italy etc. that hate Popery, yet go
under the name of the Beast, and the God that multiplieth to pardon, the God of
all mercies, no doubt did, and does pass by the weakness of his servants in
those days and places of darkness, but that is no comfort to Papists that are
in Reformed Churches, for they in obstinacy still worship the Image of the
Beast, and have his mark, both in hand and forehead

Ibid. Come out of her my people.] They must not be of worldly glorious,
mystical Babylons part that will condemn her, but absolute free from her. We
must be as in a wilderness, as Israel from Egypt, and as on an high mountain
in the Spirit, as John and Ezekiel before Christ will show us the glory of his
own ordinances, and the great Whore, and her abominations, and till we be
ashamed of all the wickedness that we have received from the man of sin, we
cannot so clearly see the form and fashion of heavenly things, Ezekiel 43.10, 11.
Forty nine thousand were persuaded to leave old Babylon, in hope of Christ his
first coming, so they that hope of comfort at Christ his second coming, must
come out of all mystical Babylons polity, R. R. B. Jewel and other Worthies
of Christ in our State, Def. Apol. chap. 22. Divis. 1. But in departing from
the Papacy. Godly Teachers must not think of a new Constitution of Churches,
but of Reformation, part off all additions from the holy Scriptures, from
offices in the Church, and officers, seals and censures, and the open profane
from seals, and the Primitiye apostolic purity will appear, if we otherwise
do, we shall not avoid the ungodliness of Anabaptistrie, and other pratlers
that do dischurch Churches and Members.

Ibid. O thrice blessed.] The Lord JESUS faith, Blessed is he that reads, and
they that hear the words of this Proph^cie (of the Apocalypse) and keep those
things which are written therein, Apoc. 1. and 22.7. Again, Blessed are they
that do his commandments, that they may have ^ight to the tree of life, and
may enter in through the gates into the City, Apoc. 22. 14 Mark the phrase,
Blessed are they that do his commandments, what is this? a covenant of works,
is not this the same language of Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28 and 30 vain talkers
must vent their Mateologisme?

Quest. 12. and answer, That know not God, etc.] Many will not be Papists, and
yet are ignorant (and love to be so) superstitious, ungodly, and unrighteous in
all their life, they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord,
and such shall eat the smit of their own ways, Prove. 1. and 5.12

Answer, without shall be dogs.] Without, the Lord Jesus Christ in his holy
ordinances coth make a mavelous separation of the precious from the vile, but
at that day shall be the perfection, Psam 1. Mat. 25. Also note all these sorts
of sinners are not to be understood as commonly men apprehend them, but they
stand in opposition to the peace, quietness, holiness, zeal, purity of
worships, truth, grace, and glory of the heavenly Jerusalem. -- Shall be dogs.]
The Concision were dogs and murderers, Psalm 22 Phil. 3. and cast our, Gal 4.
they resisted the building of new Jerusalem, maintaining bodily exercise (opus
operatum) their idol and vanity: this made their house and habitation desolate
to this day. And is not this written for our admonition. Those mine enemies
which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them
before me. Luc 19. 2 Those. 1.9. as it was observed at the beginning that CHRIST
his Doctrine, and servants were held anathema of the godless, so it will ever
be.

Ibid. And sorcerers.] Or poisening Sorcerers, read Thankful Remembrance, page
193. A^ias translates venefiei, Apoc. 22.15. It is thought the Jesuits are
such creatures, the book of their State mysteries mentioned does imply such
things, it must be taken also spiritually, bewitching people by feined words,
etc. to make them believe false Doctrine, G^l. 3.1. All this the Locusts must
do, for we are sure that the holy Lord God does not answer them by dreams, nor
by Vrim, nor by Prophets: so that the next course is to go to Eudor, they know
who will there readily attend them, 1 Samuel 28.6.

Ibid. -- And the fearful.] And I say unto you my friends, Be not asraid, of
them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do, Luke 12.
I, I, a^ he that comfort you. Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of
a man that shall die, and the Son of man who shall be made as grass, and
forgettest I^bovah, the eternal being, thy maker, that has stretched out the
heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth in the waters, Isa. 51. If Gods
word bear Supremacy in our hearts, and faith evidence to us things not seen, we
shall as men of another spirit and independent as those three noble martyrs and
Confessors, Dan. 3. and as Daniel himself, chap. 6. as Moses Heb. 11. as Calch
and Joshua, etc. etc.

Quest. 13. and Answ. -- Saying, Write.] Observe still the bless^ comforts of
the written word, and mark the command Write, Apoc. 14.13. Psalm. 103.18.

Ibid. -- For they rest from their labors.] Let him that has an ear to hear,
let him hear what the spirit says to the Churches. Those that keep the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus, Write it, they shall have rest.
They shall have Rest that follow the true Lambs Religion, let liars and cursed
dogs bark never so much to the contrary. let all that bear the name of
Christian, hate and accurse the fables of the heathenish Papacy of Purgatoty,
that men walk when they are dead, and their vain Doctrine of prayer for the
dead, and their anniversaries, and other ceremonies and superstitions
numberl^sse, as the Christian Disputations of Mr. Viret show. O ye all that are
Gods Iesurum, the Israel of God, study the blessed Scriptures, your
inheritance, cursed, smokie Popery, and all deceitful vain Doctrines will
flee before the glorious light of the word, Amen, Amen.

A Postsrcipt
BVl ye Beloved, Remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 2 Pet. 3.2. and Judas Thaddaeus verse 17.1 John 4.6.
etc. etc.

The holy spirit seeing and foreseeing that false Teachers were and continually
would arise after the apostles times with fair speeches, flattering and feigned
words, philosophy, a show of wisdom, cogging and vain deceir, spurious
Epistles, feigned revelations of the spiri, and h^ocriticall lies and slanders,
and by bringing in fables, superstitious, voluntary humility, will worship,
men's Precepts, Decrees, Doctrines of Devils, perverse things, damnable
heresies, and rejection of Magistracy, to cause divisions and offenses to
beguile men, and to carry them for a spoil from the plainness and simplicity
of the Apostles Doctrine, and these evils were pursued by all deceit and
violene of flesh and blood, being driven on by the fury of spirtuall
wickednesses, principalities and powers, the rulers of the darkness of this
world, that did war against the Church about super-celestiall things: therefore
this warning and many others were given to regard the Prophets and Apostles
Doctrine. Thus the Holy Ghost did as is noted in the conclusion of the old
Testament, refer them that feared God to the Law of lively oracles, given by
the inspiration of the SON OF GOD, the angel of the Covenant, and by the
ministry of Moses at Horeb, Mal 4.

Thus Christ was taught to day, and so shall till the time of his coming, 2
Cor. 11.26. Heb. 13.8.

The Caesar's persecuted the faithful for The word of God and the Testimony of
JESUS. Apoc. 6.9. chapter 1.9. Keeping of the commandments of God, and holding the
testimony of JESUS. Christ, Apoc. 12.17.


The Popes persecured the faithful for Keeping of the Commandments of God and
the faith of Jesus, Apoc. 14.12. The Testimony of JESUS, and for the word ^of
God, Apoc. chap. 20.4.


THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. XVIII.
Of the seven Trumpets in Apocalypse 8, 9, 10, and 11. chapters: In which the
Popes Rising to his Antichristian Hierarchy is first described, compared with
the seven Phials in chap. 16. under which the Antichristian Hierarchy does
fall, and is consumed by degrees.

THE Seven seals destroyed the Roman Empire, and the seven Trumpets do forbid
that Rome being overthrown (as Jericho) should be built again, and as Hiel
endeavored to re-edify Jericho, contrary to Gods will, for which act God in
Justice took away his eldest and youngest son. So Princes that joined with the
Pope to hate the Greek Empire, that they might se^ up Rome, for which act the
Lord in justice made it the means of their woe and great misery.

The comparison of the Phrases for the Trumpets in Ap^. 89, 10, and 11.
chapters, with chap. 16. for the Phials is diligently to be marked for the
understanding of the true scope of the Apocalypse. The Phases concerning the
Plagues; for the ruin of the Papacy in the Phialls are wonderfully fitted to
the former Phrases in the Trumpets, by which the Popes rising was first
described.

SECT. 1. The first Trumpet, and first Phiall..
UNder the first Trumpet, Satan endeavoring to advance his project, The
Mystery of Iniquity, then the Earth had hail and fire mixed with blood cast
into it: which metaphoricaly imports stormy, fiery, and bloody contentions,
which Churchmen were full of, from Constantines times, about P^^ority and
JESUS Christ his alone mediation wa^ neglected, this made the profession of
christianity to be full of Hypocrisy, and full of coldness in the pure
worships among people, and thereby love to the truth waxing cold, the people
began to be given over unto fables, etc. for when B.B. Unlearned Scholars
turned all to ambition and heresy to politicians to propsenenesse.
strove for superiority, then Monachi fell to idleness, and to extol Saints and
Angels, etc, and to hate painful and orthodox Scholars, as Athanasius,
Chrisoslome, Basil, etc.

In like sort from the first Phiall) most grievous Ulcers and Boyles of State
are powered upon the Popish Earth: The plague of old Egypt is upon the minds of
Papists, his Jannes'es and his Jambres'es, namely on their seduced ones that
resists the truth, after the LAMBS appearing on Mount Sion, with his 144000
attending on him, in the fourteenth Century, but more in the fifteenth.

SECT. 2. The second Trumpet and second Phiall.
UNder the second Trumpet, the Mystery of Iniquity still increasing toward the
sixth Centry, Ecclesiastics never ceased affecting superiority, and the
spiritual supremacy (one of the greatest Heresies) that they became a
Mountain (but not as yet come to his full growth) of fire cast into the Sea of
Nations: burning and throwing out sulphurious and bloody matter of contention,
by heresies, errors, Ceremonies, etc. every where, so that true Religion was
burned up greatly, both in Magistrates and men of place, and in ordinary
Christians, and in Teachers compared to ships. This was a further degree of
misery to the Church, (more then the first Trumpet warned) to the quickening of
the Beast.

In like sort, under the scond Phiall, the Sea of Nations, namely the most
potent Kingdom of King Abaddon has been and is within it self, full of bloody
commotions, through diverse factions, and sharp contentions, which came out of
the Phiall of Gods anger, to consume the bowels of that viperous Hierarchy: and
holy Martyrs discovered that the whole Sea of Ordinances of their Religion, was
of no more soul nourishment, then the putrified blood of the dead, so that all
became his marked, were like the dead Sea Asphaltes, being full of hypocrisy,
trusting in bodily exercise, idolatry, sorceries, idleness, murders, pride,
covetousness, filthy lusts, etc. This also was a great plague to the King of
Locusts, and to his Locusts. The conscionable study of the holy Text, from the
Hebrew and Greek Testaments was much neglected by flothfull contempt, and only
translations from translations were used with us, bred uncertainty, and it bred
disdain, and it bred blindness, and it bred contempt of Christ, and at last it
bred rejection to Machomed, and to the man of sin. Locusts went from all
professions, as Franciscans, Dominicans, Carmelities, Priests, Levites, etc.


SECT. 3. The third Trumpet and third Phial.
3. UNder the third Trumpet, a great star fell from the heaven of the Church,
which denotes an apostasy of many learned men, and they became wormwood, and
each one to strengthen his Faction, made bitter by false and bad expositions,
the sweet fountains and waters of holy Scripture, so that a third part of their
Church became dead in all abominations, and through much addition of heathenish
Customs. They instead of being comfortable and clear lights, were but stinking
torch lights, and full of contentions, which caused much innocent blood to be
shed. This did further help on to the three Woes of great misery, that were yet
to come on the world.

So in like sort, the third Phial pours out wrath upon the Papal fountains and
and Rivers, their canons, decretalls, cathedral Expositions, Monastic
studies, all their divine Services, as they called them, etc. Also their
feigned relics, Papal dispensations, Papal indulgences, hallowed amulets,
holy Shrines, etc. etc. all which were rivers from their Sea, to conveigh and
transport maintenance and glory to their glorious Monarchy of the King of
Locusts, King Abaddon. All these things by this Phial were made known to be but
rotten dotages, lying sables, This bred effusion of much blood in all countries
from their Princes, Shipmen, and their people; which also in all occasions, as
rivers and fountains did show their Subsidious relation to the great
Pontifician Sea, by all endeavors, but especially, in that their Princes were
then Carnifices, the executioners of the Papal Breves and determinations, and
c. against the Saints, and Prophets. Now these from the just judgment of God
do drink blood, measure for measure, by the Princes Teachers, and people that
fall from the Papacy, God is unchangeable in his justice on the Cains of the
earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous to this day, as he was, so he is,
and will be still the same.

Our native country chiefly did pour out this phiall in wickliffes days, bur
more in K. H 8. and K. E. 6. and Q.E. and K.J. And Luther and others did it in
Germany.

SECT. 4. The fourth Trumpet, and fourth Phial.
4. UNder the fourth Trumpet, the apostate churches not being warned by the
three former Trumpets, the fourth sounded a further degree of apostasy, that
sad and dark evils of most grievous blindness and ignorance should be in the
Church (yet in these times, Christ that restrains apostasy, had his two
Witnesses) that a third part of Sun, Moon, and Stars, were smitten with the day
and the night.

Jacob expounds Sun, Moon, and Stars to be his Church: Learned men and
Scholars greatly fell away, that the Mountain of fire came to a further
greatness, and more burned in the world.

In like sort (under the fourth Phial) a great part of Apolluons Sunglorious
universality (and by Synechdoche, all his inferior glories) is smitten by the
godly Witnesses: as Elias smote Achab^ Kingdom, that brought it into a
desperate burning fever: and as men so affected speak strange things; so the
Pseudo-Catholicks be in a great boiling heat, torment and vexation, because as
it is seen in all Countries, more or less cast off Popery. So that whereas they
should have repented and glorified God for his inestimable mercy of the
everlasting Gospel, they fret as Moab and Balaam, and utter great blasphemies.

SECT. 5. Of the fifth Trumpet, and si^st Woe, and fifth Phial.
5. IN the fifth Trumpet is showed that the Beast Abyssige^a, when he with his
Locusts crept out of the Pit of deep darkness, they conjured up with them a
smoke of all former errors and heresies and heathenish customs that Christ
the Son of Justice, his Throne and Kingdom, and his blessed Law (the air by
which we see him) were darkened. And also he with his Locusts set up a pompous
throne exercising universal Supremacy in temporal and spiritual things like old
Babel.

And so as old Babel is called a destroying Mountain: so now Abaddon of
mystical Babylon became a Mountain of fire of most grievous calamities to all
Christendom: What an incendiary was he.

1. Against Constantines Kingdom in exciting the Turk to invade it.

2. In the Wars for the Low Jerusalem after the Tenth Century.

3. By intestine Garboyls among themselves still to uphold Popish interests.

4. By cruel dealing against any that contested their enormities: as will be
said more in the sixth Trumpet.

The name of the King and Beast of the Pit is Abaddon and Apolluon a destroying
and beast-like Prince. As his Name is, so is he. And his Locusts are filled
with his spirit of all deceit, hypocrisy, and cruelty. See more of this in
them, and their King in their Dialogue.

The Pontificality or Corporation of Popes whose Kingdom was so glorious, and
whose Throne so radiant that all the world wondered ( Apoc. 13.3, 4.) at the
beams thereof; and thence he like the Sun did rule the day of that State, (so
that his Creatures and Parasites say, he is as the Sun) And from this throne he
sent his Decretals, and the power of his counsels, and the fulminations of his
excommunications etc. into all his Kingdom to the terror and amazement of all
opposers (our native Country is a sufficient commentary of this) A very
Leviathan, Job 41. A Dragon as Pharaoh of old in his Waters, Ezekiel. 29. and
acted by the old Red Dracon. This is the first Woe.

In like sort in the Phials that glorious earthly Throne, Kingdom and
Supremacy is made vile and much darkened, for more godly Teachers in pouring out
the fifth Phial, have polluted the Pride of all the glory of that mystical
Tyrian god, and brought into Contempt, in some places, all the honorable of
that earthly State. Ezekiel. 28.2 6, 7, 8, 9. Christ the mighty Angel roared like
a Lion in his faithful witnesses. Apoc. 10.3. and 19.14.
They discovered Abaddons and his Locusts hidden abominations and blasphemous
impieties that some well-minded and courageous Princes have taken from him his
usu^ped authority: and yet in spirituals they have, and do still tamper with
him in temporals, as Venice and others, and now his Throne is much ecclypsed,
that it shines not in many places, his mandates are slighted, his
excommunications are of no terror, etc. And now the King of Locusts in some
kingdoms is experimentally known to be Apolluon, an apostate Star, the grand
impostor of Christendom: the man of sin that made all the World to sin.

He and his Locusts got land by begging for monasteries and got other unclean
cages, for unclean birds of every wing: Locusts of all professions, by these he
had a great Kingdom, and his Throne of Government was set up in every nation:
all which together made his great Polis, or large Commonweal.

So that now under the fifth Phial, the Throne and kingdom of the Beast is
darkened by contempt and pillane of land in some of the kingdoms that had given
their power to the Beast: and all the other kingdoms will do the same; as
England has done of late in the extirpation of the Tail of that episcopal
Hierarchy.

But yet in all this mercy of glorious light and reformation, the Beasts
marked, are transported with implacable ^ury and envy: for so it is said They
gnawed their tongues for sorrow and blasphemed the God of heaven, for their
pains and sores (of State) and repented not of their works of their idolatry,
murders, sorceries, fornications, and thefts, etc. deifying the Pontificality
and teaching his Decrees to be infallible.

This is often laid to the charge of the Papalines, they repented not: like old
Babel of whom it is said, We would have cured Babel, but she is not cured, Jer.
51. This argues great obduration of heart, like Pharaoh like Jericho, like the
Chantanites, etc. their state is compared with and alluded to these old Enemies
of the Gospel: Therefore they shall not repent till they be all destroyed, as
the other were. It is hard, yea impossible for men to repent which will not
learn from the word of God how their case stands; and they have so blasphemed
the holy and blessed Scriptures, and corrupted them as far as in them lies
putting she for he to bring the virgin Mary into Christ his honor to destroy
the Bible, and the world, G^^. 3.15. making Peter the Rock of the Church, etc.
thus they have most reproachfully corrupted the blessed Seriptures, and cannot
mind them in sincerity, because the Lord Jesus has in his just judgment
blinded their eyes, stopped their ears, hardened their heart for their utter
confusion.

SECT. VI
1. I think it will be pertinent to touch a little the tenth chapter of the
Apocalypse (before I go to the sixth and seventh Trumpet) for it is most
comfortable for the Church to observe it against the evils that came, and are
yet upon the Church by the Beast of the Pit, and by the Turkish desolating
forces under the fi^th, and sixth and seventh Trumpet, and under the first
second, and third Woe, and under the fifth and sixth, and seventh Phials: yea
all the Phials do expound this tenth chapter.

2. This chapter sets forth a glorious description of the mighty Angel of the
Covenant, the Lamb, the King of Mount Sion, that although king Ab^ddon came out
of Pit-darknesse with his Locusts to darken all knowledge of Christ, and his
Word, yet here it is for the joy and comfort of all the godly that our mighty
Redeemer is come from heaven, and is described full of glory. And this
description of Christ is from Moses, Esaias, Daniel, Ezekiel, Mat ^7. and Apoc.
1.

1. He is clothed with a cloud, and his feet as Pillars of fire: this remembers
the conduct of Israel from Egypt, to assure us of the same mercy of Redemption
from Rome Egypt, what old Egypt found and felt Rome Eggpt shall feel the like.

2. The Rain bow remem^reth Genesis 9. and Esaias 54. Ezekiel. 1 that in all storms,
floods and inundations of Pope Dracons Tyranny (Apoc. 12. and 13.) the Rainbow
does assure us that God will remember his covenant for his church: and that the
Waters of trouble, the rod of the wicked shall not ever be upon the Lot of the
righteous, Psalm 124. and 125.

3. His face is as the sun-shining in his strength, Dan 10. Mat. 17. Apoc. 1.
his eyes in every place behold the evil and the good. Christ is greater than
Moses, Moses face did shine, but not as the sun: For Christ's glory darkened his
(yet not his but Christ which he put on him) for when he came to Christ, he put
off his vail. If we pursue the tenor of the Law that Christ gave to Moses, our
faces shall^ shine as M^ses, through Christ's brightness upon us, if we delight
to study the holy Bible. And his face so shining, does assure us that he will
utterly dispell the Popish frogs, and that in the Lords due season the whole
earth shall be filled with his glory, Apoc. 18.

4. One foor on the Sea, and another on the land, does show from Da^^ 12. and
Psalm 8. that the Lamb slain, though he once were the afflicted Son of
sorrowful Enosh, yet that now he is ^^^lred above everyname, and that to him
all power in heaven and in earth, was and is committed, and that he rules all
by Sea and Land: and therefore little children and faithful evermore did, Apoc.
6. and 7. and 12. and 13 and 14. chap.
and evermore shall say Hosanna to him that now is in the highest heavens. The
great Cry of Hosanna destroyed the Caesar's Empire, so it shall the Reviver of
the Empire, King Abaddon.

5. His voice is as the voice of a Lion when he roareth: he being the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah: has made all the Beasts of the Pit to tremble: and this
teaches what the Pope and Turk shall find: Christ with his called, chosen and
faithful, full of courage in teaching the Gospel, shall take the prey and
recover the spoil, and the King of the Pit, his Locusts and all his marked
shall not be able to help themselves from his just judgments.

6. The seven thunders from him uttered their voices of secret ununspeakable
wrath to the Enemies of the Church: which the Phials in chap. 16. declare
abundantly: and the enemies shall not perceive it, but go on in hardness
impenitency as Pharaoh did, to their utter destruction.

7. Christ has in his hand the little book of the Holy Scriptures always open
for great consolation to the Church, from which the Holy Angels of the
Churches, and other Witnesses do still prophesy to nations and Kings of their
great Trespass in advancing the seven Mountain City. All Abaddons power and his
Locusts could never shut this book, nor hinder prophesying. This our native
Country showed in the days of King Henry the eight and Queen Mary. and in
times before See the story of the Saints Marbeck and Tindal, etc. etc.

8. All this is managed with an oath to comfort and stablish the hoirs of
promise that the Lord Christ the only Potentate (1 Timothy 6.) will put an end to
all the troubles of the Church under the voice of the seventh Trumpet: and last
Woe, and seventh Phial:

9. It is of necessary consequence to observe some circumstances about the sad
times of the fifth and sixth Trumpets, because some say the Beast of the Pit,
King Abaddon did utterly root out the church of Christ, and that no visible
true church did appear when Antichrist possessed all in outward show.

10. But this is impossible: for the promise is that the gates of (Hades) death
and destruction, should not so prevail, Matthew. 16.8. and that promise also is
firm as a Rock, which says, that Christ must reign till he make his enemies
his footstool, 1 Cor. 15.25. Abaddon could not put ^he Son of God, the Rock and
his cause so under his feet; for as i^ said, Christ the great angel of the
Covenant did ever show that he ^uled as King in his Kingdom of mount Sion
(Apoc. 14.) and had ever one foot on the Sea, and the other on the Land, and
the fifth had sixth Trumpet, to rule all things both by Land and Sea, and that
he had the little book of the holy Bible ever open in his hand, which he still
put into the hearts of his witnesses to prophecy, though in sackeloth, and
full of troubles, Apoc. 11. this book Christ still kept open in spite of all
the new Antiochus devises.

11. Therefore let this teach us with strong assurance, that though the Papacy
did so overspread, yet that Christ had here and there two witnesses, some godly
ones that held the fundamental truths, when the Beast of the Pit had most
darkened the surface of Christendom, and they are also called the two Olive
branches, and the two Candle-sticks, which Christ made still to abide before
him, that in every age his Saints might see the light of holy Doctrine. 2. This
likewise is for great consolation to the Saints, that the Gospel of the
Kingdom, as it has, so it shall continue, notwithstanding all the opposition
that has been and shall be in the world against it,

3. Hence many are sharply to be reproved and rebuked, that think and utter
blasphemies, that Christ did not reign, and that he had no witnesses under the
Papacy, and that the Beast of the Pit had annihilated the Church of God. And
hence new upstarts, vain men that wait for new apostles, and new R^velations,
would dischurch the Reformed Churches, and dischurch members thereof, that have
come (according to the commandment) out of mystical Babylon. And in great
wickdednesse they cast off Magistracy, and the ordinances of the public
ministry, and the care of Religion in family, etc. and so themselves become
very antichrists, yea, some in new England, 1. Do abhor the baptising of the
infants of godly parents. 2. Account our Congregations antichristian. 3. Make
no regard ^o sanctify the Lords day. 4. Despise Magist^acy. 5. Scorn our godly
Teachers: the Lord grant that such as do openly profess this abomination, may
never have a toleration among us, but if the Lord please to be gracious to them
to enlighten their minds by the word of truth, then they will soon see how they
are given to Satan, and lying spirits, 12. Remember that apostasy from the
faith was foretold, and that the brethren must be put in it, that they might be
careful to be nourished up in the words of faith, and in good Doctrine, such
holy brethren ever were, and ever shall be, because God from the beginning has
elected such to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and the belief
of the truth. 13. Can such a thought enter into our hearts, that the Man of
sin has destroyed Christ's kingdom utterly, that it should not have a being
ever since the apostles days. Let us mark what our Lord Jesus Christ has said
to his apostles, I have chosen you, and ordained you, John 15.16.
that ye should go forth among the Nation^, and bring forth fruit, and that
your fruit should remain. Let us not therefore be deceived, that Antichrist
has ever been able to root out the Kingdom of Christ, although they killed
some witnesses, yet still Christ raised others to prophecy, and the most holy
faith is builded on Christ the rock, the polity of the heavenly Je^usalem is
builded more sure, then that the seed of the Serpent should ever be able to
prevail so far, as to destroy it utterly: It is builded on the twelve found
ations of the faith of the holy Patriarks and apostles Doctrine, and this city
is compassed with a wall of holy truth unvin^ible. And what has shaken
Abaddons Kingdom, but the prohesying of the two witnesses, from the opened
book, that is in Christ his hand.

Thus much by way of Parenthesis to Apoc. 10.

Now I will go on with the Trumpets and Phials.

SECT. 7. The sixth Trumpet, and second woe, and sixth Pbia^.
1. THe sixth Trumpet shows how Christ raised up the Turk from Euphrates:
they were four evil Angels or messengers of Christ's wrath, before whom Christ
roared as a Lion, so that nothing could hinder them: they are described in
terrible manner to plague the idolatries of the apostate Churches, whom Christ
sent to destroy the third part of men, who came westward, and wasted the Asia^
Churches, those wars were most fearful and bitter, and because the seven
Churches of Asia, and others fell from the faith, Christ therefore in his just
judgment removed their candle-stick by the Turk, who brought lamentable
crrours and profaneness into Asia, and at last into Europe. But Rome was the
cause of the fall and of weakening to all; for the Pontificality seeking to
advance its Supremacy, did by all means weaken Constantines Empire, and the
Popish Princes did assist the Papacy therein, for the Pontificality, and its
frog locusts excited the Turk to war against the Greek Empire, and to overthrow
new- Rome, or Constantina, but Princes to their sorrow and detriment, saw that
it was unrecoverable to this day, and so will be till Princes cast off the Man
of sin (that made them to sin) and receive Christ as their King and Lawgiver.
Here was great woe the churches of the East, and then it came to the West.

2. So in like sort, under the sixth Phial, the Turk getting the Greek Empire,
Christ makes him to plague the Papacy (The kings of the East from Euphrates in
the sixth Phial are the same people, and scourge of Christ, in the sixth
Trumpet that are mentioned in the sixth Trumpet, Apocal. (...).) And we may
well say, that the Lord Jesus Christ the only potentate made the Turk in some
sense to be an Armageddon in part to the Pap^^y, When the Turks plague the
Papacy, then the frogs croak up and down in Kings Courts, and so when the re
formed Churches departed from the man of sin (as the godly from Ie^oboam, 2.
Chron. 11.13 16.) and his policy, then frogs bestirred themselves in Kings
courts, mark now in Apoc, 16. and the 13. verse is immediately inferred from
the 12. verse.
and to some Papal Princes that were excited to those wars by the frogs, as
histories show. But it must chi^fly be understood that when the Reformed
Churches one after another departed from the Papacy, then the frogs that came
out of the mouths of the Boast, and false Prophet, and the Dragon, did creep
into Kings Courts, and stirred them to war against the two witnesses, the two
Candle-sticks, and two O. live-trees. But Christ made all the enemies projects
and endeavors to be an Armageddon to themselves, as among the Waldenses and the
Albigenses, etc. and in Bohemia, etc.

The Beast has and still rages and warreth with the Saints in many places, as
he can muster his forces.

3. But under the Phials Satan and the double power of Rome, although they stir
up all their forces against the Reformed churches by their three froggy
spirits, Devilish Emissaries, yet they do not fight more prosperously than
Jabin King of Canaan at Mageddon, to be cut in pieces. Then the great and only
Potentate, Christ Jesus the great angel, Apo^. 10. showed how he had one foot
on the sea, and the other on the Land, and overruled war, and guile, deceit
and violence, nor to pass bounds. Then the Rainbow in the cloud, and the feet
as Pillars of fire were remembered and manifested. Then the Saints did sing the
song of Moses and Deborah, to the praise of the angel of the covenant, Jehovah
of hosts mighty in battle, and still we have cause to sing Hallelu-Jab for
those and our deliverances, and other countries shall have such mercies, and
sing such praises.

But the people of God must be careful to watch and keep their garments, that
when those frogs have croaked up any expedition against us, the Lord Christ may
not behold the nakedness of our unworthy walking ecclesiastically or civilly,
lest he depart from us, when he sees any filthiness in our camps.

4. Also under the sixth trumpet we must be careful to observe that although
the power of the Beast of the Pit has been great and spread far and near (and
it is yet great) yet there was the society of holy people two witnesses, that
did worship God as in his Temple, and still he has looked to them, as to
Israel of old from the Temple, ever measu^ing them, and caring for them, but
yet the King of Locusts and his Locusts, the seed of the Serpent shall do a
deal of mischief, trampling the holy city, in all their large Polis, where ever
they shall find such as are holy wor^ ippers, how then can the prattling Locusts
say, where was your Church before Luther.

5. Though the Beast and his marked are strong in worldly power, yes the two
Witnesses by their praying, prophesying, and martyrdom, were as great a
vexation, and a torment of woe to the Papacy, as ever Elias and other Prophets,
were to Achabs and Jezabels Kingdom by their prophesying, praying, and
sufferings, yea martyrdom in the full intent and endeavor of Achab and
Jezabel,

And the Martyrs are as Moses plaguing mystical Egypt with spiritual plagues,
as with spiritual darkness, etc.

And the two Witnesses by praying, prophesying, and sufferings brought great
troubles to the Popish kingdom, not only by peoples falling from them many
seeing the Pontificality an incendiary of all their troubles depart from it,
and not only that, but in taking up arms in their defense as in Bohemia and
others to this day: yea, not only that, but by intestine troubles in the Papacy
it self, the Princes thereof full of tumults among themselves as was in Achabs
kingdom, this wrought much good to the reformed in two things.

1. The enemies were so busied about their own interests that they could not so
well mind how the reformed got strength. 2. When the Papal Princes were thus
weakened, then the Protestants could stand upon their defense.
And this also was a great torment to the Beasts Kingdom, that the two
Prophets that were slain did stand upon their feet again (that is Christ raised
up others of their spirit, as Elisha was raised up with the spirit of Elia.
(that is gifts of Elias) rooted out of Achabs kingdom So the martyrs caused a
great Earthquake of State in Star-Wormwoods kingdom to its fearful terror
amazement and overthrow in many places, that a tenth part of that large Polis,
or Commonweal fell since the preaching of the everlasting Gospel.

SECT. VIII. The seventh Trumpet, and third woe, and seventh Phial.
UNder the seventh Trumpet, and third Woe is showed the further Torment and Woe
of the ungodly and profane kingdom of the Beast of the Pit after that the
Martyrs had by prayer, prophesying and martyrdom called for fire to burn it.
And under this seventh Trumpet it will in further events of things be more
fully manifested to the great rage and anger of the King of Locusts, and to his
Locusts, and to all his marked, when in Christ's appointed season every nation,
kindred, tongue, and people of the Papacy shall submit to the Everlasting
Gospel, to fear God, and to give him glory, and to worship him that made the
heaven and the earth, and the fountains of water: and upon this mystical
Babylon shall fall more and more by faithful Angels, one after another ( Apoc.
14.) But this will not be of Kingdoms together all at once, casting off
^baddons Kingdom, but it will be successive, one Country and Kingdom after
another.

2. Now the seventh Phiall is much like the seventh Trumpet: one will explain
the other; But this we are diligently to observe, that in the fifth Trumpet, it
is mentioned that the Air is darkened, as well as the Sun, the Air is such a
medium, that by it we see the light of the Sun, the blessed and holy Law of
Christ, his lively Oracles, is the Air by which as the only Instrument we see
the Son of God. This Air was darkened by the cursed smoke of Heresies, from the
pit of darkness, blaspheming the purity of the Hebrew and Greek Testaments,
hindering by all possible means, Translations into our own Languages, and
forbidding the Study of the Scriptures, urging their unsound Translations, as
authentic, Especial. Genesis 3.15.
corrupting most Satanically, the holy Rolls not fearing an eternal Pillory:
obtruding also idle and erroneous, and heretical expositions, wicked
Decretalls, golden Legens, Apocrypha Books, their Rosaries, Missals, Ladies
Psalter, transcendently blasphemous, Heathenish customs, etc. etc.

By all which the Beasts marked knew, What and Who King Abaddon was: these
declared him to them. By these they saw and believed him to be their God, their
most holy Father, that he had power to forgive sin, and had power to send them
into Purgatory, and to recall them, etc. etc. There was a kind of invisible
spiritual power, that w^nt from him to all his marked. How did they reverence
him, and submit themselves to him in his Cardinals, Nuncioes, Priests,
Jesuits, even all his Seminaries and Locusts of every kind.

3. Now the wrath of Christ in the seventh Phial, is powered on all this smoke,
this pontifician Air, all these were dispelled by the light from Christ's
Throne set up in the reformed Churches; by the Angels that he sent, holy
spirits invisibly his Christan servants visibly. They by learning Hebrew and
Greek, and teaching in the Schools of the Prophets: And by the help of the
blessed Spirit of Christ, the great Rabboni, and Doctor of his Church, did by
sound and learned Translations and Orthodox expositions, and by many excellent
and worthy endeavors, both by teaching and writing (the Enemy being Judges)
and by the practice of noble Arts and Sciences, especially Printing, and by
courageous Parliaments in the days of King Hen. the eighth, and King Ed. the
sixth, and Queen El. and King James, and King Charles, and by Diets in Germany,
etc. make such Voices, Thundrings, and Lightnings in the Popish Air, Yea the
Lord Jesus has so ordered in his providence that some learned in the Popish
Kingdom have been a means to overthrow i^ as A^ias Mont.
that it did dispell the foggs and smoke that Apolluou and his Locusts had
formerly raised: and as the Angel- Jehovah, at the giving of the Law of his
Gospel, did by his voice with Thunder and Earth quake dispell the Idolatry of
old Egypt from his Israel, so now against Rome-Egypt, he did thunder and send
forth lightning by zealous Luther, Tuelancton, and diverse Martyrs in Germany,
etc. and by painful Tindall, etc. and by Martyrs in England, Germaney, France,
Scotland, etc. And after this by faithful prophesying, and Orthodox writings
of many worthies of the Lord in England, Scotland, Geneva, etc. but yet
something is still to be reformed for the be-smoked Air is not fully cleared
amongst the best reformed in some points.

4. In Abaddons Kingdom, that shall yet be by the just providence, of Christ a
further terrible Earthquake of his Government, that it shall be greatly
divided, the Cities of the Nations shall more and more fall from it, which will
also be a cause of more wars and commotions, and such fierceness of wrath
shall come on the Papacy, as there did on the Chanaanites, by hail, Jos. 10.
and such alteration of policy shall be in the King of Locusts Kingdom, as if
Islands and Mountains were not found, and such alteration and breaking, as of
the Genesis 6. the Earth is corrupted, and I will corrupt them, says Christ
Jehovah.
old world corrupted, and Chanaanites destroyed, that the Isralites might dwell
in their sted; and the Kingdoms of the world shall become our Lords and his
Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

5 Then the twenty four Elders which sat before God on their-seats shall fall
on their faces, and worship God saying, We give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty
which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great
power, and have reigned, and the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and
the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give
reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear
thy name both small and great, and should corrupt them that corrupt the
Earth. And the Temple of God was The apostate and wicked Kings of Judah shut
the Temple, so did both godly 2. Cor. 6.16.
opened in Heaven, and there were seen in his Temple, the Arc of his
Testament, and there were Lightnings, and Voices, and Thundrings, and an
Earthquake, and great hail, Apoc. 11. the Man of sin, by burning and
distroying the holy Temples of Christ, Teachers, and godly Congregations, 1.
Cor. 6.15 19. Chapter 3.16.17

6. Thus great Babylon shall hear the voice of the seventh Trumpet as Jerico
did, and feel the seventh Phial of Gods wrath in the Lords due season, when
Nations oppressed by them shall learn skilfully to sing Halleluj^th, and with
understanding shall praise the Lord: the Lord must, for vain is the help of
man, consume that bad King Abaddon of Kittim Italy, in the end at his glorious
appearing as those Beasts in Daniel, by the first coming of Christ into the
World were wholly consumed, for whom God sat on a fiery Throne, so the Beast
compounded of those four shall not wholly perish until the second coming of
Christ, for whom a white Throne of Justice is openly revailed, by sentence
thence the false Prophet Pope, and the Beast of his Authority, shall ay feel
Gods wrath until they be both ^ast with the Dragon into eternal fire. Amen.

SECT. IX. Consider these things advisedly about the Phials.
1. THe seven Phials do distinguish the manner of Christ's dispensation, not
the time, as it is apparent.

1. Because these Phials are not yet powered out in all the Kingdoms that gave
their power to the Beast, as not on Spain, etc.

2. All these Phialls have been, and are now in further execution in our Native
Country.

3. The holy Spirit, as is noted, transfers the plague of the Papacy in
dispelling its Air to the seventh Phial; under it, it shall be utterly
dispersed (though as yet it is still much in some places) from all the
Countries where the Beasts Kingdom has been and yet is.

4. As the fiery Mountain of Abaddons Kingdom, increased by degrees, and in
some Countries Great Brittany was the last that fully yielded to Romes polity,
and the first that cast it off. Jer. 28.
more and sooner then in others, so it decreaseth in the same manner. If this
had been seriously marked, some would not have not been (may I say) so
peremptory, and definitive for the Popes utter destruction in 1650. or 1655. we
are not to talk what the Lord Christ can do, but rather to observe the course
of his providence, as it has been exercised since Wickliffs days, both
concerning the enmity and wars of the holy seed, and the seed of the Serpent, I
wish, as Jeremiah said to Hananiah, that the Lord would perform your words
which you have propheseyed. But it shall not be so.

5. Rome, Kittim, Italy, shall be a mark for Gods Judgments to the end, it
shall hold some strength in their iniquity to the end. For the Church shall be
troubled in one place or other with Dogs, Murderers, Fornicators, There shall
be persecution and vexation from the seed of the Serpent in one place or other,
more or less, secret or open, while the Church remains in this World:
notwithwanding all that is alleged for the glorious personal reign of Christ
here on Earth, they mistake the Tropes used in the Prophets, from the visible
to he invisible Church here on Earth.
Sorcerers, Liars, and other abominable. Let us not flatter our selves, the
seed of the Serpent shall be to the end; and all outward Enemies shall not be
put (though more and more weakened) under the feet of Christ till the end. The
Heavenly Jerusalem has been from the Apostles days, and shall be to the end,
and the seed of the Serpent shall bruise to the end. The holy Spirit does show
us the Counsel of Christ, that there is no age in which the vanity of this
cursed World shall not be manifested, Genesis 3. Eccl. 1. Such peace as many talk
of under Christ's personal reign is not for this World, but for the World to
come. etc.

6. There is no Phiall powered on the Turks tyranicall Kingdom, for he was
raised up, only to be a scourge to the Apostasy of the Greek Churches, in the
Trumpets, and of later years of the Papacy in the Phials. But when the
Kingdoms that gave their power to the Beast of the Pit, and his Kingdom of
Kittim, do revolt from him, and embrace the Gospel in sincerity and purity,
then God will throw that Rod of the Turk into the fire.

Chap. XIX.
The dead Bones, Ezekiel, 37.11, 12. etc. must not be understood of the Jews
calling after our times, but only of their return from Babel.

THen said he unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole House of Israel,
behold they say our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for
our parts.

Therefore Prophecy, and say unto them, thus says the Lord God; Behold O my
people, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come out of your Graves, and
bring you into the Land of Israel -- and I will place you in your own Land.

1. The coherence of this Scripture, about the dead bones, with the former
Chapter is not to be understood of the Jews, calling at all after our times,
but must properly and only to be understood of their return from Babel, the
Land of the North, and other Countries where they had been scattred by the
Kings of Ashur and Babel.

2. But before I go on, I will premise some principal overruling providence
of Christ, which the holy story does declare unto us; 1 Concerning the progeny
of Solomon being extinct, 2. Concerning his Kingdom being overthrown, 3.
Concerning the Temple and City burnt, and laid in an heap of dust, and thus
Christ in the indignation of his wr^th did loath both King and Priest, 4.
Concerning themselves in sad captivity, 5. Concerning the Temples holy Vessels
carried captive, 6. Concerning other grivous evils of scorn and derision, and
of other daily dangers, both corporal and spiritual, Dan. 1. and 3.
Who is able to recount their sorrows and calamities: Now being thus
disconsolate: It is no marvel it caused them to say, our bones are dried up,
So the Apostle uses this same argument, 2. Cor. 1.9. to his comfort, so Esai.
26.19. and Hos. 13.14.
and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts.

But now at last is pleased the Lord God to comfort them by an allusion to the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, that as surely as they believed the Doctrine of
the Resurrection, so surely God could and would revive their dead State. Now we
are not to think that the Prophet does comfort any but the present age then in
Bondage and captivity, and therefore he does not proph^sie of the Jews calling
to inhabit Chanaan again, and build Jerusal^m again, now after our times, as
too many doc mis-interpret the Prophets meaning.

3. They were so disconsolate under Babels Yoke, that when Cyrus made that
Proclamation, of their return, Ezra. 1. they thought they rather dreamed, then
that it was a truth of their deliverance granted, Psalm. 126. Many acts of
un-beleif were in their hearts, and in their speeches, and so it is with us in
afflictions: Yet Christ was faithful in his promises, he cannot deny himself.

Some object, that the Apostle then in Romans 11. might well then have spared the
Jews in so deep a question as touching their calling.

Answ. I dare not say so, for the Apostle being a Prophet, it was as authentike
as if Esatas or Ezekiel had foretold it. And by the same answer it may be
questioned (notwithstanding all the plausible speeches of some) whether any
Prophet of the old Testament did prophecy of the Jews calling yet to come,
for the Apostle does only by allusion, cite Esaias and Ezekiel to show that as
the Lord God did formerly show his power and mercy in their restoration from
Babel, so he would once again call them to the faith, after so long a time. To
the same effect the Apostle dealt in Act. 13.40, 41. in citing Abakuks
prophecy. Abakuk propheseyed of the Chaldeans to arise; But the Jews then
would no more believe that Babel should overcome them, then they believed the
Apostle Paul, citing Abakuks words of Gods wrath, by the Romans, to make an end
of them. And so Saint Paul does, in like manner, cite Dan. 11. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
concerning the man of sin, the new Antiochus of Rome by allusion only.

4. Whereas the present age of Ezekiels days was so disconsolate, and lamented,
one would think the Prophet comforts them, and does not (...) of men that
should live two thousand years after, it is not ration^^ (...) to think (most
impertinent assertions) As if a godly soul, or a (...) under grievous pressures
and afflictions at present, should (...) for consolation, must the Teacher then
tell stories to (...) that neither they nor theirs for many genera.

5. Again these in captivity were godly and faithful, and knew they were
chastised for not regarding Gods The Jews now are persuaded of no such thing,
although forewarned, Heb. 10.25, 26, 27.
covenant in Christ, and therefore they did humble themselves and confess
their sins, as Levit. 26. foretold and had gracious promises of return to
Canaan, and of building city and Temple, and that the City should be builded on
its own heap, and that they should have a policy to buy and sell, Ier. 32. and
the Prophet Ieremi^h knew well enough that the godly in the state of Judah were
or would be much cast down in their spirits, even as Jeremy himself was
concerning their most grievous calamities, as Ier. 32. It was ^n that age of
God people, that needed this satisfaction.
and thereupon the Lord God did comfort him and all the godly of those days,
and did revive their hearts in diverse passages (even as he did by Ezekiel) see
Jer. 29.30 31 32, 33. chapters.

6. But the Jews now are not godly, but grievous apostates, for they hold
Christ, and his Gospel, Kingdom and people anathema, they are exceeding hard
of heart, and blaspheme our Christ, and look for Christ yet to come, not one of
1^00 is godly of them, nor have been for many hundred years.

7. A glorious calling of the Jews from Romans 11. is not denied in all places
where they are scattered, and will not this be a wonderful glory to them and
us, that they in all places where they are shall yield obedience to the Gospel.
This should suffice, for more cannot be proved, and when Christ came we
Gentiles were received into their sheepfold, John 10, Other sheep I have, etc.
but hereafter the contrary, Romans 11.11. To provoke them to follow them, that,
was their glory, this ours.

8. So certainly, this speech of Ezekiel. 37. was spoken for the present
disconsolate age, These were not yet cast off, All Zac. z. was consolatory to
the returned who were vexed by the Samaritans, and others, Jerusalem, being as
yet unwalled, although the providence of Christ was as a wail of fire for them,
till it was walled.
nor cut off from their own people, but they only were as yet Gods people, and
that made Zachariah say * that the Lord will yet choose Sion and Jerusalem, and
that yet he would be jealous for Jerusalem, and Sion. This was to comfort them
under many pressures, being under the government of the Persians, and under
such like pressures, they should be under Iavan whole, and Iavan parted, namely
in much affliction, therefore it was fit and convenient, so to comfort them,
for the Lord does always speak sitly to his olive, and so the Lord did yet
choose them, even after this, for the time of the Seventy Sevens of years, in
which space of time they should be the peculiar holy people, and Jerusalem
should continue to be the holy City, but after the Seventy Sevens of years were
accomplished, according to Dan. 9 they had not any peculiar privilege, nor
ever shall. We m^s^ not regard that strange Doctrine, that teaches otherwise,
but what tends to that Sion in Hebrews 12. and in Apocalypse 14.1. and to that
Jerusalem Hebrews 12. Gal. 4. Apoc. 3 and 21. in too many things we do hinder
the conversion of the Jews in Judaizing with them: They hope for the building
of Jerusalem, and daily pray for their return to Canaan, and many of us thus
Judaize with them, in teaching their return thither to b^ a glorious Church
again.

9. And whereas the people of God in Jeremiahs and Ezekiels days were much
dejected in spirit, for the sorrows which they felt by Babel the golden head
(as they had cause) and went weeping to Babel, not clearly discerning Gods
counsel, yet at the end of the captivity, the holy counsels of God were fully
opened by Gabriel the holy angels glorious message from heaven to Daniel, This
Text of Dan. 9.24. did comfort them for the loss of the Ark, Jer. 3. and the
shaking of the rest of the Ceremonies, and because the Lord foresaw what he
would once more do by the Roman polity, therefore he gave to Daniel that
glorious revelation, that they should expect the MESSIAH, the holy of holy, to
confirm the Covenant for the many by his death.
Dan. 9.24. That they need not mourn nor lament for destroying Salomons Progeny
and Kingdom, because the holy angel had told them of the MESSIAH their King
greater than Solomon, who was also of the house of David, for it is said, he
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the most high, and the Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob, for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luc. 1.32,
33. and hence we learn that Christ's spiritual kingdom shall never be ended,
nor overthrown, nor his heavenly progeny extinct, who are Princes and Priests
in all the earth, Psalm. 145.16 and the Metropolis of his kingdom, is the
heavenly Sion and Jerusalem, builded by the Gospel, over all the four quarters
of the world and this city 1500 mile square, compassed about with a wall of
precious truth, invincible, that no power of the enemy can scale it, or make
any breach in it, and the foundations of the wall are twelve, compounded of
twelve precious Jewels, (The holy Doctrine of the Lambs twelve apostles) that
there can be no Satanicall pioneers to make any mines to blow it up (no, if
they be as deep in their counsels as Garnet and Faux, of that hellish crew) and
the Temple within this holy city, is so glorious, that it secretly affrights
all opposers, more than that in the times of Psalm. 48. For the Lord God of
hosts, even the LAMB is the Temple, who is also the Rock of defense of his
Church.

10. Now though all this be our glory under the new Testament, yet the Doctrine
of many is contrary, for in effect they teach the Jews to lament and mourn for
earthly Canaan, and for the low Jerusalem and Temple. Teachers may as well
follow their Thalmudicall fables, as this doctrine, and so they do in part, for
they look for a pompous Kingdom in Canaan, and continue against Gods oath, the
line of Solomon, Ier. 22. These things will be touched again, as the argument
calls for it.

11. The Prophecy of Amos chap. 9. is expounded in Acts 15. by the holy
Council, and it will confine all our expositions that we make upon Esaias,
Ezekiel and Zacharias, for such a calling of the Jews, as I have showed. The
last of Amos expounded by the Apostles themselves, I take it is a key to open
all these matters: to this agree the words of the Prophets, Acts 15. he speaks
plurally, Prophets, yet cites but Amos, and let us mark how the apostles
interpret, and because almost all the Prophets shut up their Prophesies like
Amos, therefore I suppose Amos and that Council do expound them all, and so
Amos will expound, Jer. 30. 31, 32, and 32. and 33. chapters, some part of
them, as also Ezekiel. 37. the latter part of it, as it shall be touched about the
two sticks, which come next to be considered.

CHAP. XX.
Of the two Sticks, Ezekiel. 37. in confutation of them that say, it is not yet
fulfilled that Ephraim was joined to Judah, also some observations are annexed
from Zach. 2. Zach. 8. Zach. 9. Zach. 10. and chap. 11.

SECT. 1.
ANswer. 1. It is evident by an express promise, that the other Tribes, as
well as Judah should return from captivity out of the Land of the North and
from other countries where they were scattered, Consider these Scriptures.

Jer. 3. In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel,
and they shall come together out of the Land of the North, to the Land that I
have given for an inheritance to your fathers, with this verse, the 16, and the
17th verse should be minded.

Jer, 50. In those days, and in that time, says Jehovah, the children of
Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping,
they shall go and seek Jehovah their God, and many such expressions the
Prophets have.

2. The 49000 that did return with Zorobabel, Ezra 2. many of them might be of
the ten Tribes, for at this time all the Tribes were called Jews, but before I
go further I would note two things. 1. The angel Gabriels glorious message from
heaven of the Seventy sevens, and the holy Doctrine therein contained. 2. The
mild government although the Medes and Persians were likened to a savage Bear
to Babel, Dan. 7 yet they are likened to a tame Ram for the comfort of Israel,
Dan. 8.
of the Kings of Persia, under Da^ius Artaxast 41 year, that so favored Ezra
and Nehemiah, and eight years under his successor Da^ius, and 42 years under
Artaxtrxes his successor, almost 100 years, this long space was of much rest to
Israel. These two things doubltesse would cause many to remember Sion and
Jerusalem, and to return and flock to Canaan. And in the time of that
comfortable quietness they might get Cattle, Silver^ and gold, apparel, etc.
as in these 80. years of David and Solomon, Ez. 38. how did they increase in
riches, and honor, in multitudes? and so in our native Country, in the days
of Q.E. and K.I. How did England increase in people, honor and wealth by our
blessed peace, which the Lord in great mercy gave us for 66 years?

3. Again, it is said plainly, 1 Chronicles. 9. that some of Ephraim and Manasseh
were of them that returned, and some of Bethel that idolatrous City of the ten
Tribes returned, V. Tremel. in 1 Ch^. 9 and Neh. 11.12, 3 these of Ephraim, and
Manasseh were an earnest that more should return, and Mr. Pemble, Zach. on 13.
shows that of the 49000 that returned, 12000 of them were of the ten Tribes.
and it is showed that they dwelled with Ivdah in Jerusalem, and many more in
the other Cities of Judah, this is an history to the prophecy of the two
sticks to be as one.

SECT. 2.
SOme object that those of the other Tribes besides Judah, were but a
sprinkling and not worthy of consideration in respect of the Prophecy. Answ.
1. I think we may be much to blame to say so, (...). what is 38000, 38000
besides the Levites, and Nethinims and their servants and hand maids, in all
49000.
that returned (suppose they were all of Judah) to the infinite numbers of
Judah that were carried captive, and that still remained in the nations abroad?
that number would be but a thin replenishing of the land of Judea, and
Jerusalem, and Benjamin, and we are not otherwise to think, but that many more
of Ju^^ah returned afterward.

2. I suppose I may take up the argument of the Apostle, that the promises of
God were not without effect, though so many of the ten Tribes did not return,
as did of Judah, some did return, though not to the State of a Kingdom by it
self, yet we are not to make question, but that multitudes did return after
ward according to the Prophecy, The term Nations, Ier. 3.17. may intimate
Iiphraims nations, as Genesis 48.19.
many myriads of them, as is evident by the wars under Javan, as Dan. 11 and
Ezekiel. 38, and 39. shows that very many of the whole house of Israel, did
replenish the land of Judah and Benjamin, Josephus and the Maechabees show it
was so, and it is said, there were besides them that had returned, and that did
separate themselves from the filthiness of the heathens, Ezra 6.21. and Darius
Artaxast gave great encouragement, Ezra 7 13.

3. Iudahs Tribe was principally to be nominated in the returned, because of
the Prophecy to Judah, the fourth son of Jacob, who should have his Tribe
chiefly to exist, because of his Shitob, according to Jacobs Prophecy. So
Tremellius, Genesis 49.
A Tribe shall not sail to Judah till his Son shall come.

4. This is considerable that all the time of the Seventy Sevens, the Tribes
were kept in some distinction, yea, until the destruction of Jerusalem by
Titus, but not so afterward, The Jews write that none knew their own Tribes.
Dr. Lightfoot, and others show the vanity of their modern genealogies.
for they could not, being so scattred. The deceitful unbelieving Jews did
trouble the believing Gentiles, by darkning the holy Genealogies of the
Scriptures by their endless genealogies; for after the Evangelists, Matthew
and Luke had cleared the case of our Lord, by uncontrollable private Records,
which the Jews could not deny, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, then the
apostle charged the Churches to take heed of (not only that, but to avoid)
Jews fables, and their endless genealogies. And now let us consider the 21.
verse of Ezekiel. 37. I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen
whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into
their own Land. Can we think, but that this was spoken of to the present age,
and therefore in that respect it cannot be understood of the Jews calling yet
to come; for we all know, they shall not be called till the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in, and when is that? I will gather them from among the
heathen, when is that? mark it, for the Lord speaks reproachfully [the
heathen] but now many of the Jews are among Reformed Churches, which cannot be
called heathen. The Apostle said long since, whether we be Jews, Scythians,
bond or free, all are one in Christ Jesus, shall we then be accounted dogs,
unclean. Certainly, Ezekiel so speaks of Israel, that the heathen should have
nothing to do in their policy, as long as their Prerogative did continue: and
whereas Ezekiel says [wither they be gone] he calls to mind all their
oppressors, as well ashur, as Babel, and from [these heathen] they shall be
brought into their own Land, but when the Jews are called to the faith, they
will est em of Canaan no better than any other country; as indeed they ought
not.

5. Now we will touch a little of Zachariah, who utters many consolatory
promises, and prophesies to the present age of his time (and for the times of
the Seventy Sevens) because they were slack in returning to their It is a
singular observation (I think of B^roaldus) that Hamans Plot against the Jews
in 127 Provinces was a chastisement to them for their slacknesse in returning,
they loved their outward comforts, and settled habitation too much, they should
have done, as 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 16. I hope the Lord will remember poor new
England, and our posterity, as Ier. 2.2, 3.
brethren that had already returned, and had ^elt some hardship by some of the
former Kings of Persia, and were put into many fears by Sanballat and his
associates of the Samaritans, yet the Lord God promises that he would put into
their hearts to return, to be as one with Judah.

6. I will express some Scriptures of Zac. 26, 7 Ho, ho, come so^th, and flee
from the Land of the North, says the Lo^d, for I have s^^ed you abroad as the
four winds of the beaven says the Lord. Deliver thy self O Zion, that dwell
with the daughter of Babylon. This earnest call of the Lord might well cause
Ezra and his company to return, and of them many might be of the ten Tribes, as
well as of Judah; his return was four or five years after, for this Prophecy
was uttered in the second of Darius Artaxast, and Ezra returned in the seventh

7 Zachary 8. shows that the returned were somewhat disconsolate, because
Jerusalem was so scant of inhabitants, as ( Nehemiah 11.) read Zac. 8.
Therefore God promises, I will save my people from the East country,, and from
the West country, and I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, etc. in verse 13. it is said, And it shall come to pass, that as ye
were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so will I
save you, and you shall be a blessing, fear not, we are not to doubt, but the
Lord brought them of the ten Tribes, as well as of Judah, read verses 20.21.

8. Zac. 9.13. When I have bent Judah for me, and filled the bow with Epraim,
and raised up thysons O Zion against thy sons O Javan, and made thee as a sword
of a mighty man. The Lord made Iuhah and Ephraim a bew and arrows against the
enemies, in the days of the Seleuco-Logidae, as the Macchabees show, and this
shows that many of the ten Tribes had returned, as well as Judah. See
Tremellius on Zac. 9.

Zach. 10.6. I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of
Joseph, and will bring them again to place them, etc. and they of Ephraim shall
be as a mighty man -- I will hiss for them, and gather them v. 10 -- I will
bring them again also out of Egypt, and Ashur into Gilead, and Lebanon, etc.
These speeches and others do show, that Ephraim had returned as well as Judah,
and were as one stick

10. And the new Testament shows, that Israel in the Tribes were multiplied,
great multitudes fol'owed the Lord Jesus where ever he came, and he dwelt and
taught much in those places where captivity began by the Kings of Ashur, there
the light of the Gospel first began, in the Land of Zabulon and Naphtali,
Esaias had prophesied it should be so Esai. 9, And there are histories and
writers, that show how at the holy feasts of the Jews, there were hundreds of
thousands that assombled, which shows, that many of the ten Tribes had
returned, and were as one stick joined together in holy worship.

11. And this will further be evidence by Zac 11. that they had returned, both
Judah and Israel, and were as one, because the Lord threatened them, that he
would break the brotherhood of Ephraim and Judah, for their departing from the
faith, and did not regard the Law of the Angel of the Covenant, which he by
Mases gave at Horeb; for he had charged them by the Ministry of Ma^achi, to
remember the lively oracles, Mal. 4 4.
with the Statutes and judgments, that were commanded for all Israel, for they
should have no more Prophets ^ill John-Elias.

12. But they followed the wicked doctrine of the three shepherds, Sadducisme,
Pharisailme, etc. and many Jews that despised the holy Covenan^, became
treacherous; therefore God brought upon Jerusalem etc all Jullea, heavy
miseries that they destroyed one another before our Lords incarnation and
after: very many sorrows by civil dissentions, and schisms, so that then was
broken the brotherhood of Judah and Ephraim, and thus, Zac 11. must be
understood of these times, and to this effect.

13. And further to dilate on the Text. They took Jerusalem from one another by
domestical seditions, and they cut down the Cedar-great men, spoiling and
destroying the great ones among themselves, and the great ones did roar like
Lions on the meaner sort, as they had gotten power over them, so their vintage
of consblations was taken away, not so much literally to be understood, but the
Temples holy worships, were heathenishly, and otherwise corrupted, and their
exercises in their Synagogues were greatly suspended; for as either of their
factions prevailed, they blessed themselves, as though the Lord God favored
them! But the Lord took his pity from them, and did deliver them every one into
the hand of his neighbor, and into the hands of their Kings, the Seleucidae,
the Herod's and the Romans, whom they also called to their quarrels, and yet
for all this, Canaan was yet the holy Land, and Jerusalem was yet the holy
city, and Sion the holy mountain, for in all these troubles the Lord had a care
of the poor of the flock that waited on him.

14. the stories of these things are manifest, and that Zach. 11. must not be
understood of the times, after [now our dayes] many passages will tedder and
confine the times of some men's apprchensions, as that Scripture of their
under-valuing MESSIAH their King, the Lord of glory, at the price of a slave,
and so applied by the Evangelists, upon which followed a further breach of
brotherhood, and civil dissentions, Zac. 11.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
horrible distress and wrath, vid. Tremellius and Zach. and Josephus on the
wars of the Jews.

15. Zach. 11. may well and must be accommodated to the times somewhat
preceding our Lords days, and some what after, but there is not the least show
of intimation, of applying the Prophet to the Jews calling now after our times.
Let the godly Christian Student, diligently read the Scriptures (We err not
knowing the Scriptures) and then Josephus and Macchabees and other authors: and
with all observe the times, the families or Nations, and the places of their
habitations, and for the times of the new Testament, mark allusions, as has
and will be touched, but so far as Propriety will reach for times and persons
that must be still adhered unto.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Jews calling, the 12, 13, and 14. Chapters of Zachary, that it cannot
be applied to the Jews calling yet to come, as many Ministers do too
unadvisedly teach.

WE are to consider many passages in Dan. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Chapters,
1. That all the time of the Holy Angel, Gabriels message of the Seventy Sevens,
the Jews were called the holy people, Michaels people, Daniels people, their
Religion is called the truth, Sion and the Temple is called the holy Mountain,
Jerusalem the holy City, and the only place of holy worship in the World, Joh.
4. And the Son of God is called MICHAEL, the great Prince before his blessed
Incarnation, and that he had over them a special regard during the date and
lease of their prerogative of the Seventy Sevens.

2. Therefore we are diligently to observe, Zach. 12. that although those
troubles were among them, yet still Jerusalem was the holy City, and that God
had respect to them, because the holy faith of the Gospel was among them, and
also among the Godly dispersed Jews, and the same holy faith was maintained by
the many godly that exhorted one another, but the most of them were of the
meaner sort, called the poor of the flock, and for their sakes, Jerusalem was a
burdensome Stone to all the ungodly, whither the Heathens, or the lawless
Apostates of Daniels people ( Dan. 11.) And sometimes the better part that had
some life of Religion were their Leaders, and did govern them, and they were
as a Torch of fire in a sheafe to burn and devour the Enemies, and Jerusalem
was defended, and as yet, adhuc permaneat, did abide in her own place, and so
it was to abide until the ending of the S^venty Sevens, Zach. 12.6.

3. And whereas Zachariah says in Chap. 12.6. Jerusalaima adhuc permaneant,
Jerusalem is there, and I think in all other places in the old Testament, in
the plural teaching them celestial meditations (as Psalm. 15.1.) And that
although the Saints of them the high Trinity, should yet inhabit the
Low-Jerusalem, in much affliction, they should notwithstanding account
themselves but strangers ( Levit, 25.23.) and should rather look to the
Jerusalem that is above, the sight of true peace, the Heavenly City, as
Abraham, Jsaac, and Jacob did to the Heavenly Country, Eby. 11.

4. This speech that Jerusalem should yet abide, and be inhabited, is
consolatory, both for the present State of the Church against the plottings of
Sanballat, etc. and for that Daniel had showed that Iavan in the fourth Beast,
should bring great affliction of trampling Daniels holy people, and taking away
the daily sacrifice, and altering the times. (of the the holy Feasts) and the
Law. And that Antiochus should distress the holy Mountain, Jerusalem, and the
Temple, etc. notwithstanding all these troubles Jerusalem should yet abide an
holy City (They were not yet to be cut off from their Olive Tree) And Gods
dealing for his people was a burdensome Stone, and a Torch of fire to all the
Horns of the fourth Beast, and all the Enemies to the ending of the Seventy
Sevens.

5 And Zach. 12. says God, would raise up noble worthies for them, so God gave
them sometimes valiant men to be for their comfort, as the worthies of old in
the reign of David. Valiant in acting and suffering for the truths sake that
was only among them. The Jews were then the holy people, and Ie^usalem the
holy City, and Sion the holy Mountain, though So Babel going about to dash
Ierusalems hope, is bent to set his Throne above the highest, in destroying his
Temple, but Gods vengeance was a burden some stone to make the golden Head,
dust, Esai. 14. Jer. 50. Dan. 2.
Anti^chus had greatly polluted the Temple. And the godly the poor of the flock
did observe these things, and still did inhabit Jerusalem (or still did so
desire, though driven into Mountains and Dens, and Caves of the Earth) looking
for the Kingdom of Heaven to appear, now drawing on toward the ending of the
Seventy Sevens. And for their sakes, as is said, God destroyed all Enemies that
came against the holy City Jerusalem, whither the Heathens, or the Law-lesse
Jews that profaned the holy covenant, Dan. 11.

6. And we must not slightly pass over this Epithet, Jerusalem the Holy City.
It is so called at the beginning and ending of the Seventy Sevens, and likewise
so called at the beginning of our Lords Preaching, and at his Resurrection, Mat
4 and 27 mark, it was so, at that very time they had crucified MESSIAH their
King, the Lord of glory, but after our Savidurs a^eension, that title was never
bestowed upon it. For then the date of their prerogative was out, and the
Gentiles brought into equal Covenant. But for the whole time of the Seventy
Sevens, as the Angel from Heaven had declared, while the preferment of the
circumcised Jew was in honor, Christ had a special eye to them and the Low-
Jerusalem. As when it was destroyed by the Chaldean, the Lord bade his
dispersed people to remember it in all Countries. Ier. 51.50. and so Daniel did
and 49000. though in the dust, Psalm. 102. But after our Saviors ascension, and
sending the Spirit, furnishing his holy Disciples with gifts to be
Master Builders for the erecting the New Jerusalem, there is not any word of
intimation in all the Evanglists, Acts, Epistles, or Apocalypse (nay, nor in any
Prophet of the old Testament) that they should remember the Low- Jerusalem,
etc. But more of this hereafter.

7. Jerusalem, the sight of peace, the faithful held and looked to hold in
possession till our Lords days, Esai. 66. Psalm. 110. and 95. would instruct
them so to believe, as they did. Observe well, 1. King. 11.13.32.36. and 2.
King. 21.4. Ier. 51.50. Dan. 9. Psalm. 102. And we must consider that although
the Kings of North and South afflicted Israel and Jerusalem, Dan. 11. and had a
great hand in bruising the holy people, yet Christ plagued those Kings and
Kingdoms. And although the Jews in the times of the Macchabees were mutinous
and became wicked and Law-lesse, and brought much trouble to their own
Brethren, as also did the Remainders of the Sel^ucidae, the Herod's, and the
Romans, yet among all these Enemies of the faith, Christ caused from his fiery
Throne ( Dan. 7.) that Rivers of fire ran among them; God had ever a special
eye of regard to them for his promise sake, Zach. 2.8. 1. King. 11.32. He shall
have one Tribe for my Servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem the City which I
have chosen, out of all the Tribes of Israel. The Providence of Christ in a
constant progress, of the holy story, made this promise good to the ending of
the Seventy Sevens. Then was the Period of Isreal's peculiar glory.

CHAP. XXII.
Expounding Zac. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Verses.

1. ZAch^riah shows how the faithful should mourn for the sins of the
times, every godly Family, chiefly them of David's progeny, of the Family of
Nathan ( Solomon's Brother by Bath^hebah) of whom our Lord lineally ascended. As
also of the godly of the Tribe of Levi, and all the godly Families that did
remain, for then to them was the blessed Fountain for sin and uncleanesse
opened. And our godly translators do confer, Act. 2. in the 3000. converted by
Peter's Sermon to be an History to this Prophecy. And Act. 1.14. is fitly to be
conferred for their godly private exercises.

2. Also we must diligently observe how John Elias, the forerunner to Christ,
by his powerful Ministry did turn the heart of the Fathers to the children,
and the children to hearken to the wisdom of their godly Teachers, that the
evil Spirits of the three Shepherds, and their Doctrine was much quailed, and
were made ashamed of their evil ways. And our Lord Jesus Christ the great
Apostle, from Heaven coming after John Baptist, he brought his Fan of holy
Doctrine in his hand, and by his holy Spirit separating the chafe of persons
and Doctrine in wonderful manner, as in Mat. 5, 6, and 7. chapters, and at
other times, which Sermons of Christ made them rage against him, and were never
quiet, laying snares still for him, till they had his life. And when they had
smitten this blessed Shepherd, and destroyed the Temple of his precious
Manhood, he raised it again and gloriously ascended. Then afterward the Lord
Christ gave a mouth and wisdom to his holy Disciples and Apostles, that all
false Doctrine, and all Worldly wisdom of Satan's Kingdom, fell (like Dagon)
before them. All their idols of the Doctrines of justification (ex opere
operato) bodily exercise, and their Traditions of their Abotheru, and the
Sadducisme of the Sadducies, and other errors among them. All these idols of
theirs, and the Heathens were famished and so perished, Zeph. 2.11.

3. That Doctrine of Justification of bodily exercise was the great
controversy of those days, and it was their idol and vanity, as Deuteronomy. 32.
compared with Romans 10. that idol cleaving to the letter, made them despise
MESSIAH their King, whose most precious obedience, through his manifold
sufferings made his death a most acceptable Sacrifice, and so it was the end of
the Law, for justification to every one that beleiveth, and by him all that
believe are justified from their sins guilt and punishment, Moses Doctrine
given by Christ taught the sure mercies, Act. 13. Deuteronomy. 30. Such an idol it
was, and is, that it has cast off the Jews to this day; For by it they
despised the Son of God and his justification.
which the bodily exercise of all the Law of Moses could not do. And that they
might not think of justification by bodily exercise from the Temples worships,
Christ destroyed City and holy Place to this day, who brought to us by his once
offering up of himself to an everlasting Righteousness or Justification.

4. After the Jews had rejected the Cornerstone, their King for Caesar, many
heavy and unexpressable sorrows came upon the Jews and Jerusalem continually,
until by the Roman power, Titus Vespasian, who came against Jerusalem, took
the City, rifled the Houses, and the unclean infidel Soldiers ravished the
women, slaughtered multitudes, and carried may thousands of Jews Captives, and
sold many numbers of them for Slaves. All this came to pass about forty years
after our Lords ascension. Our Lord sitting on Mount Olivet, and beholding the
City told these things of Zachariah (Chapter 14.1, 3, 4) to his Disciples, Mat. 14.
Luc. 19. and 21.

5. And the Apostle as a Prophet, Act. 13.40, 41, 1. These. 2.16. Ebr 6 8. and
10.26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Act. 13. threatened by allusion, H^bb thicks prophesy against them (noted
before) that as the Chaldean had done, the Romans should execute further and
greater wrath upon them, even wrath to the utmost. And so the Apostle had told
the revolting Hebrews, that they and their Nation would be Briars and Thorns,
and must look for violent fire to consume them. Moses and David foresaw all
these evils; Deuteronomy. 32.22. 2 Samuel 23. Then the corner Stone which the Builders
refused, fell on them and bruised them to powder.

6. The Prophet Zachariah having spoken of the d^struction of the Low-
Jerusalem, makes this transition to speak by way of Jer. 31.38, 39. Is
literally prophetical, and performed in Nehem 3. but this of Zac. 14.6. is
allegorical, see Tremel. on Zach. 14.10. etc.
allegory of the building and setting up of the High Jerusalem: As by the
returned from Babel, Jerusalem was builded from Benjamins Gate, etc. so sure
shall the Heavenly Jerusalem be builded, notwithstanding all oppositions of
Enemies. And whereas it is said. Zac. 14. Jerusalem shall be inhabited in her
own place: it is to be understood that the Heavenly Jerusalem should begin to
be builded in the Earthly, as it was fittest. Thence the Law went forth of
Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, then the Mountain of the Lords
House was lifted above all Mountains, and all Nations ftowed unto it, to build
on that Mountain, and this promised blessing was performed before Salem was
abolished. and the word of the Lord did not fail, that Iapheth must have
religion from Some Tents.

7. There were skillful Master Builders at Salem, the Fishers of Galilet, and
the other Apostles with others to the number of six score, and five thousand
after, which, with the Physician of Anti^ch, and the Tent-Maker of T^rsus that
might carry the healing and wholesome Our Lord in his Apoc. 21. expounds, Zach.
14. and Ezekiel. 47. For these waters that run thorough the streets of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and no better waters shall ^ver come among us then what the
holy Prophets and Apostles have let us in their most sweet, and blessed
writings. Let us beware of deceitful opinions of new Apostles, and new
Revelations.
waters of holy Doctrine to the uttermost parts of the Earth. Oh how wonderful
and un-utterable was the glory of Christ in and by them, that he was King over
all the Earth, that, as the Apostle says, God was not the God of the Jews,
only, but of the Gentiles also, Romans 3.

8. Zac. 14.12. shows that all montanous opposions could not hinder the
building of this Heavenly Jerusalem, this City was lifted in glory and did and
does abide notwitstanding all the wrestlings of the misbeleiving and
unbeleiving Jews, and the Roman Empire against it. And all that fought against
his Holy City, both the Caesar's, the old Pontificality (the sixth head of the
Roman Beast afflicting the Church) and the new Pontificality, the Papacy, the
seventh Head (and Turk afterward) found great severity of thundering wrath and
terror of most bitter plagues: as if their filthy flesh rotted from their
bones, and their idolatrous and adulterous eyes did consume in their holes, and
their blasphemous tongues in their mouths.

9. And the Lord MESSIAH to whom the Father of Heaven had committed all
authority and power, raised tumults among them, first on the Jews, then on the
Caesar's Augusti, and their people in most fearful manner. That the Caesar's and
their Assassines had death, and a gulf and grave of destruction by intestine
garboiles in their Armies, destroying one another for three hundred years, the
six seals do also show this in Ap. 90 Ap. 6.

10. Zach. 14.16. When the Heavenly Jerusalem was builded on twelve precious
Foundations, all of precious Jewels, the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine, These
are the same waters Ezekiel speaks of, that came from the Temple, Ezekiel. 47. and
Christ JeAsue, expounds, Zac. and Ezekiel. in Apoc. 21. and 22.
then those holy waters (as is noted) of healing Doctrine issued, and had free
course into all quarters under Heaven, East, West, North, and South, and every
quarter had three Gates into the City. And the godly in all times of the New
Testament, did flee like Doves to nestle in this City, they came to it
Constantly, continually, from mouth, to mouth, etc. Esai. 66.23. these are
allegorical expressions.
anniversarily to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. And the Apoc. 7. is an
Historical prophecy, that 144000. of Israel, the twelve Tribes that held the
faith, and an innumerable company of all Nations come to this City to bless
and praise All Nations did bless him, as they were in him, Psalm. 72.17 Genesis
12.1, 2, 3.
the Eternal Son of God, who did Tabernacle or Temple in our nature for (...)
^edemption: and when they came, they brought Palme-Branches in their hands,
crying Hosanna, Salvation to our God that s^^teth on the Thorn, and to the
LAMB for evermore.

11. And they that will not come to the Feast of Tabernacles, to serve Christ
Jesus (the true Tabernacle or Temple) in his holy Assemblies in this his
Jerusalem they shall have no Rain to moisten their dry and barren hearts. They
shall not know what means the Dewes that fall on Mount Hermon, and the sweet
small Rain that distilleth on the Holy Mount aine of Sion ( Apoc. 14.1.) All
the Gentiles that will not yield obedience to the faith of the Gospel, Christ
will bring upon them positive and privative plagues, as the stories of the
Church show this in all the Centuries, in all Countries.

12. And because Christ Jesus our Lord has made us Kings and Sacrificers to
God, his Father, Holiness to Jehovah, which was graven on the front place of
the high Sacrificer, shall be written on the Horse Bridles, and on every Pot in
the Heavenly Jerusalem, thus Zachariah, as Dan. 9. and Esai. 66. shows an
utter abrogation of the Ceremonies of Moses, Chanaan, City, Temple, and
worships.

13. And let this be noted that the holy Apostles expounding the Prophets,
never taught the Saints that ever they should expect any outward glory to
return to Chanaan, City, Temple, or Kingdom, but taught them of the Heavenly
I^^usalem, and therein the Lord God of Hosts, the Lamb to be the Temple, and
the holy worship to be che^fly spiritual, prayer to be every where in lifting
up pure hands and hearts in all godly qualifications, as our Lord Messia^ told
the woman of Sama^ia, Ioh. 4.

14. And therefore the Apostle Peter, the Apostle of the circumcision, taught
the scattered Tribes of Israel, in Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Bithinia, Capadocia,
and Chaldea, of the Heavenly inheritance that fades not (as Canaan) and that
themselves were lively Stones in the spiritual building, to be an holy
Preist-hood to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ
the true Temple. And that they that were and had been for many days Lo-ammi,
and Lo ^uchamah, Hos. 1. and 3. were now by the glorious Gospel made Gods
people, and had obtained mercy and pity, and warnes them that they be not as
their Fathers, to stumble at Christ, and his Doctrine. And further instructs
them that the Prophesi^s which they so looked, to be fulfilled in an outward
manner, were not to be taken properly and literally, as Ezikiels Land, City,
and Temple, is taken to this day of the Jews in propriety of sp^ach, that
Peter blames: And the teaching otherwise was damnable heresy, and a denying
of Christ Jesus (as the Apostle said of Circumcision, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4) as
experience also tells us these fifteen hundred years. And therefore let Teachers
beware how they harden Jews in their idol^ and vanity. Solomon's Kingdom was
shaken, but we receive a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, the Low- Jerusalem was
destroyed, but the Heavenly City cannot; The Priest hood of Levi is passed
away, but Christ's Preist-hood abides for ever, etc. and we cross all the
Doctrine of Christ's new Testament to plead any more for Terrestials.

Chap. XXIII.
Expounding, Zach. 12, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and Zach. 14.10, 11, etc.

SECT. I. It is obj^cted that Zac. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. is not fulfilled.
AND; I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplications, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pe^rced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his
only Son, etc. and the Family of the House of David and Nathan shall mourn,
and the House of Levi, and the Family of Sbimei shall mourn.

1. I think, Act. 1.14 is an History to the prophecy for David's House The
Apostles argument is strong, that although must did not mourn yet the says
^ulnesse of God is not without effect, and God had not cast off all, the
Apostle reasons from himself, as if there should not have been no more then
himself, Romans 3. and 11.1, 2, 3. but in the Acts there were five thousand and
more, and in ^erusalem, su^^ly the faithful are but a little stock.
these all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
women, and Mary the Mother of JESUS. and with his Brethren. In this company was
some of the House of David, and some of the Family of Nathan, and some of the
House of Levi, for it is said, a great company of the Priests were subject to
the faith, Act. 6. and Ba^nabas a Levite became a gracious Son of consolation
to the Church: And that the Lord powered on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of his grace and supplications is historied in Acts, chapter 2.37 and many
more afterward, chapter 4. and in after times of every Tribe twelve thousand,
Apoc. 7.

2. I doubt not but when the Jews be hereafter called according to Romans 11.
they will mourn for their own sins; and for the sins of their fore Fathers, but
we must stick to propriety, unless it opposes the analogic of faith in other
Scriptures, that so we may confer History to prophecy, and that is one of the
surest ways of understanding the Holy Scriptures, if we ^^n rightly attain
unto it.

3. For now we are not to expect new Revelations to tell the Church which man
is of the House of David, and what of the Family of Nathan, or which man is of
the House of Levi, and of the Family of Shimei. But if we will understand,
Zach. 1^. of the Jews calling yet to come, we must expect new Revelations, and
some that have a prophetical Spirit to tell the Church which man is of which
Family and Tribe: But the truth is, this distinction of Families must be as
evidently manifested by their geneologies at the time of the Jews calling, by
the preaching of the Gospel, as it was to Zachariah, when he prophesyed that
the House of David, and Family of Nathan, and the House of Levi, and the Family
of Shimei should mourn, that so the Saints then may be comforted in that
prophes^y, that it was fulfilled by themand to them.

4. For unless they be genealogized, how shall, they know that the Prophet
spoke true for the consolation of their named particular Families. And there
will be further reason of this distinction, they of Judah and L^vi being the
noblest Familes, and so should be perspicuous, and exemplary to all the Jews,
for they are so spoken of that they should go before the rest in holy Worships.
Either the Jews have now evident demonstration in their genealogies for these
Families, or else a Prophet must arise to show them these Families, but the
former they deny, they say that none knows his Tribe, much less of which
chief Family: Then a Prophet must arise to show them, which is of David, and
which is of Levi, that the particular promise to those Families may be applied
to them, and then they in special only are to regard it.

5. Again, it may be the Families of Nathan and Shimei, may be ignorant or
careless to perform that worship, but if a Prophet declare to them which is
of which Family, and call upon them, it might be a comfortable invitation to
perform the worship fore told, that the blessing promised might be made good
to them, Zac. 13.1. And as I conceive this distinction of Families, must be as
evident for the performance as it was in the days of the prophecy.

6. Distinction was kept carefully in some Families, all the time of the
Seventy Sevens. P^ Chr. 24.
And the wisdom of God saw it was very needful it should be so, our Lords
genealogy was undoubtedly known, though much in private records, and so
Zacarias, Iuc. 1. of the course of Abia, Levi, the eighth course, and Paul of
Benjamin by Father and Mother, and Barnabas a L^vite. But these distinctions of
Families (...). Tribes could not be so kept after the desolation of Jerusalem
by the Romans, who lcat^ed them into the sour winds of the Heaven for 1600.
years together, the wisdom of God therefore saw it was most needful to
confound all their Tribe genealogies; and themselves now say, that none knows
certainly of which Family, and of which Tribe any of them be, and if any of
them shall affirm otherwise, yet by Apostolical canons we must not believe
them.

7. And some modern Doctors of theirs that follow their Forefathers steps in
denying the Lord Jesus Christ, write thus, Mr. Broi ^col. 37.
in the days of Messiah the King, when his Kingdom shall be settled, and all
Israel gathered unto him, all they shall be genealogiced according to their
Families. Thus if we will not stick to propriety, we must run to Jewish Fables
and endless genealogies, and look with them for new Revelations, and so not
cleave fully to the words and commandments of the Apostles of our Lord and
Savior.

8. There is also a like necessity of genealogies, if we refer Eze^. 37. to the
Jews calling yet to come, that they might know which is of Judah, and which is
of Ephraim. But what has been above written must serve for this also.

SECT. II. Also it is objected and much pleaded for, from Zac. 14.10.11. etc.
that Jerusalem in Chanaan shall he restored, that the Jews shall have a
Kingdom there, and all Nations must flock to them, etc.
1. ANsw. We dare not understand, Zac. 14.10. etc. literally, for if an Angel
from Heaven should preach that our posterity must keep a worship anniversary at
Jerusalem, namely there to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, he must be held
anathema, for it is plain ludaisme and not a genuine interpretation of the
Prophets meaning, and contradicts the most sure word that bath been given by
any holy Angel to Daniel, Chap. 9. That Seventy Sevens are exactly accounted
for, Jerusalem to be an holy City, and that in the next generation following
the ending of them, the City and holy Place should have final and utter
desolations, which has been verified for these fifteen hundred years, and
more.

2. This of Zac. 14. has the same analogy of faith, with Esai. 6^. from month
to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall all flesh come to worship before
Jehovah at a Jerusalem, and Mal. 1. expounds, Da^. 9. and Esai. 66. and Zach.
14. From the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my name shall be
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be great among the Heathen says
Jeh^wah of Hosts. And the Lords conference with the woman of Samaria is
pertinent: Job. 4.
And the Apostle Paul shows that after our Lord and blessed Media^our had
given himself a Ransom for all, and that Testimony in due time, as Dan. 9.
had foretold, then says the Apostle, it is the will of the Lord, that men
pray every where lifting up pure hands, 1. Tim. 2.

3. Must the Teachers of England teach their Auditors, that they must keep an
anniversary worship, namely the Feast of Tabernacles in Low-Iorusalem in
Chanaan, or else that such grievous judgments both privative and positive, as
are there threatened will come upon the Nation, Zac. 14.17.18. Or must I teach
these things to my Children, and must my Children teach their Children so, and
theirs the after Generation, as all are bound to do, if it be understood in a
literal sense, Ps. 48. (as some have intimated for Jerusalem in Chanaan) but I
dare not receive this Doctrine, and therefore I say to mine, take heed what you
hear, and I am assured that time will show that such as expound otherwise
about the Jews calling have run into many absurdities.

CHAP. XXIV.
Gog and Magog in Ezekiel. 38. and 39. must be taken properly, but Gog and Magog
in Apoc. 20. must be taken in a mystical sense.

SECT. I.
1. THE consent of Moses, and the Prophets, and of the New Testament, is
wonderful in places, times, and Families, but few mind such studies, and that
makes many write and speak at random, drawing prophesies and stories to the
times after the great mystery of godliness was manifested (the holy
Incarnation of God manifested in the flesh) when their events are before it.

2. The Apocalypse all of it is by allusion to the old enemies of the Low-
Jerusalem, as the stories of Egypt, Babel, Tyrus, etc. are alluded unto, that
the heavenly Jerusalem should have many enemies in all quarters. The Apocalypse
expresses new times, states, and governments in old terms, so it opens all
the old Testament for us, that all the old enemies fought against Christ and
his Kingdom then, as now Rome and Turk do against Christ and his holy City
from heaven.

3. Magog, Meshech, Tubal, etc. were Nations known in Ezekiels days, and
without mixture, and their dwelling undoubted. But now the Lord God has made
great confusion and scattering of all Nations by the wars and commotions that
have been in the world, that those places are not known by such Princes and
Nations.

4. The very phrase of the holy Prophet, concerning the Nations he describes,
Magog, Meshech, Tubal, Gomer, Togarmah, and the North-quarters, that is, the
North quarters from Israel, with the times, do argue, that it was of Israel
that returned from Captivity, from all the Countries of Ashurs and Babels
dispersion (not of the Roman) And it cannot be said, that the Jews now are in
such a captivity as formerly, unless it be the spiritual captivity to Sin,
Satan, and Unbelief: at all Nations are, without the Gospel. These
Considerations would make one conceive that the Prophecy of Ezekiel, chap. 38.
and 39. must be before the ending of Gabriels Seventy Sevens. People must be
taught to distinguish between Gog and Magog spoken in propriety, and of Gog and
Magog taken mystically.

5. If we regard the holy story well, we shall find that most Prophesies of
these things reach not much further than the first coming of Christ, Balaam
goes as far (if not further) as any Prophecy of the old Testament concerning
Kingdoms, and Countries, and their affairs: He prophefied of Kittim afflicting
Heber (the Jews or Hebrews) and especially of Christ Jesus, the chiefest of all
Hebers sons, and so all Christians, as in the Caesors and Popes.

6. Tremellius, Mr. Forbes, and many others expound, Ezekiel. 38.39. to be of the
Nations that were under the Kingdom of Seleucidae, called the Kings of the
North in Dan. 11.

SECT. 2.
I Think it is to good purpose, to examine some verses in Ezekiel 38. and 39.
concerning Gog. Thus it is said, chap. 38.16.

1: And I will bring thee against my Land, that the heathen may know me when I
shall be sanctified in thee O Gog before their eyes.

The Lord God of Israel did not bring Gog and his armies unto the mountains of
Israel to war only, but that the knowledge of God might be dispersed among the
heathen, by the dispersion and affliction of his people, doubtless those wars
had that effect, doubtless it caused after a while much dispute in many points
about Religion, and the calling of the Gentiles now drawing on, and for these
days of affliction, it is said, many shall greatly search, and knowledge shall
increase, Dan. 12. So then the persecution of the two witnesses by the Beast of
the Pit, caused much study in Christendom, as it did warring with mystical
Gog.

The wars among the Seleu^^-lagida were many and great, and many fearful
slaughters among them, the which the Jews could foretell to the heathen by the
Prophefles of Ezekiel, Daniel, and Zachariah, Dan. 11. and 12. as by an
historical Prophecy, and it is reported by diverse writers, that the Jews were
skillful in Prophecies, and By Daniel they might have understanding to foretell
many events about the Kings of the North and South, yea, and of many other
great matters about the coming of Messiah, Mr. Bro. has this in the Consent of
Scripture, Anno mundi 3910, that Sybil writ that which Virgil is thought to
follow, and Lactantius cites, may well be made by some witty men, taught of a
Jew, or the spirits otherwise might well speak of those times what Daniel
taught plainly.

These things of Gog would cause much knowledge of Jehovah, the God of Israel,
for it is said, the Heathen shall know the Lord God of Israel when these things
should have their events above Gog and Magog, Thubal, Meshech and Togarmah,
etc. There were great expectations in the world, but especially of Israel by
Daniels Prophecies, which would cause great rumors among all sorts: so we may
well think that Jehovah the God of Israel brought those wars of Javan, in the
Land of Gog, for this purpose, that the heathen may know me, says Jehovah, the
ever-living God.

By these wars there was spread a report among the heathens what Laws Israel
had, better and more ancient than all the heathens: and although the heathens
captived the Jews, A wonderful providence of Chist.
yet their Law captived the heathens. This rumor of the holy Scriptures
stirred up Ptolomie Philadelphus King of Egypt, to endeavor to have the old
Testament translated for his Library, which was done for him by seventy two
learned Interpreters of the Jews. And this their work to this day, is called
the Septuagint.

1. Ezekiel. 38. ult. Thus will I magnify my self, and sanctify my self, and I
will be known among the Nations, and they shall know that I am Jehovah. Christ
did make himself great over Gog, by the bloody slaughters, that he sent among
his Camps, but all these troubles of Gog among the people Israel, were so
ordered as is noted, that the heathen might know Jehovah the Lord God of
Israel, therefore there was a further Providence of Christ, to show his power
to be great over Gogs Kingdom in the les^er, Asia, when in Antiochia, the
chief City of the Kingdom of the Seleucidae, (Kings of the North) the says of
the Gospel of the Son of God, so prevailed, that the disciples of Christ were
there first called Christians. So the seven Churches of old Gogs kingdom, does
further look to Ezekiel, That these events may plainly show they are an history
to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, and Christ in their own language does conquer them
to his Kingdom and faith of the Gospel.

3. Ezekiel. 39.23. And the heathen shall know, 'that the house of Israel went
into captivity for th^^r iniquity, because they trespassed against me, etc.
This Text will afford these meditations, 1. It must be well observed, that the
knowledge of all the providence of Christ that befell Israel by Assu^, and
Babel came not to Israel, as the heathens had foolish conceits of the people of
God, which made them have these Proverbs in scorn of Israel, yea in scorn and
de^sion of Jehovah the God of Israel, that they were a Nation born to bondage,
and their holy Religion was a barbarous su^erstition, etc.

2. But now the heathens by the Septuagint, and the Jews being so dispersed
among them of Iavan in Gogs country, and in Egypt, The heathens by these
providence of Christ and by his word that they began to have among them, know
what iniquity was, and for what principal iniquity Israel was dispersed by
Assure, and Babel.
did know that all these captivities came on Israel for their iniquities and
apostasies from the faith of the Gospel of the Son of God.

3 These things might be a means to procure much knowledge of the Lord God of
Israel among the heathens, and it did so, for Zac. 8. shows that the heathens
should take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and so consort much with
the people of God, and this reason should the heathens themselves give, we have
heard that God is with you: yea, further they should say, Surely our fathers
have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profi^, Ier. 16.

4. The ways of Christ are unsearchable; for this knowledge might well come
among the heathens, by the Jews daily conference, and by preaching the word
among them, in their Synagogues, and by the Septuagints translation. The
Septuagints translation was much used among them. Saint Luke and the Apostles
chiefly used that translation, and cite many times the Text of their
translation (as learned men observe) and the godly Proselites did much read it
doubtless, and the profane heathen might also read it, because Horace and
Ovid mock at their Sabbatismes, as the Chaldeans had done.

It is also as true, they might have knowledge by the Jews being so dispersed,
and having Synagogues in all great Cities, by which means Jews matters would ^e
much celebrated.

Beloved Reader, if we were better versed in the holy Scriptures of the Son of
God, we should know more of him, and the mannaging of his Mediatorian Kingdom
in mercy, and severity from Gen 3 15. cocerning the holy Seed, and the Seed of
the Se^pent.

SECT. 3.
OBject. Some say, there shall be a great Battle, which has never as yet come
to pass, as Ezekiel. 39. and Apoc. 20.

1. But for answer we ought to understand the warriour^ there and here are of
diverse times, and peoples and places (as is above noted) That of Exckiel is of
Israel and the low Jerusalem, this of Gog and Magog in the Apocalypse, is meant
of the troublers of the Church (the holy City from heaven) wheresoever, and
that at diverse times.

2. Neither place, either of Ezekiel, or of Apocalypse most be understood of any
one Battle, there never was, nor ever shall be any such one Battle, as some
would understand in Ezekiel. 39, although it be said that all the arms and weapons
of war, of bows, and arrows, bucklers, shields, etc. should serve the Cities of
Israel to burn seven years, and they shall not need to go to the woods and
forests, to fetch home fuel to their fires What, shall not the Cities of
Israel fetch home fuel for their necessary uses, for their families to burn
for seven years? We must labor to understand better, when the literal sense
must admit of allegories, Tremellius understands seven years to be very long,
and very often, nume^u fin^tus pro infinito.

3. Gog and Magog, and all the North quarters mentioned, are the Kingdom of
the Seleucidae, one of the iron legs, Dan. 2. and explained chap. 11. and their
war with the other leg, the Lagidae of Egypt, and their camping in Israel
brought great troubles to them for 250 years, and more, so that all their arms,
utensils, and weapons of war should last seven year for firewood: and because
they were a continual vexation to Israel for above 250 years, it is spoken as
one battle: such are Corporation-speeches, and so the Apocalypse must be
understood, not of one battle, but after the tenth Century, then the holy City
of Christians was besieged in all quarters, and is still even to this day, and
yet still it shall be vexed by the Beast and false Prophet (that also is a
Corporation speech) for the Beast-like Empire of the Papacy, and the false
Prophet-Pope, and all his Clergy have been in being these 600 years and more,
and is still as yet in being, and so for a while shall be, till they be with
Satan cast into the Lake of fire and Brimstone.

4. Corporation Speeches must be observed diligently, as, Man of sin, not to be
attributed to one man, 2 These. 2.
but it is the Pontificality, the whole Corporation of Popes, they are that Man
of sin, that Adversary that exalts himself, etc. and so the two Witnesses, are
not properly two, but they are all the godly, that have, do, and shall witness
against the Beast, and false Prophet, the holy Scripture is full of of such
manner of speaking. Moses often speaks to all Israel as to one man, so it is
said, the Prince of Tyrus was in Eden the garden of God, Ezekiel. 28.
but it is not meant of that Prince of Tyrus in Ezekiels days, but of him in
David's and Salomons days: lie in Ezekiels days was an apostate and an enemy to
Israel and, did not care for that honor, as to be of the household of God, and
common weal of Israel, in which Hyram Prince of Tyrus rejoiced, 1 Kings 5.

5. It is not said, Israel shall have such a battle against Gog, but that Gog
and his companies shall fall on the mountains of Israel, and this came to pass
by the Ptolomies of Egypt, overcoming Gog the King of the North in diverse
battles. The Sell uco-lagidae made marriages to strengthen one another, but it
did not take that effect, for they dealt deceitfully one with another;
therefore it is said, they shall be destroyed one of another, Ezekiel 38.21. But
all this came (...) them for afflicting the Saints of them, the holy Trinity,
and Christ was a burdensome Stone to them for their oppressing Jerusalem, the
holy City.

6. It is true also the Jews had (as in the Macchabees and Josephus) a great
hand diverse times against Gog, as against Antiochus the vile, and afterward
also.

CHAP. XXV.
Some Observations on Jeremiah 30, 31, 32, 33 Chapters.

IT is evident; that the Prophet must in these Chapters be taken in proprier
for the return from Babels captivity, and from all other Lands of the North.
where they were chiefly scattered

For Jer. 30.18. Ezra and Nehemiah do show the fulsilling of that 18. verse.
Also chap. 31.23. these words, a^yet, they have been often touched, and for
chap 31.38, 39 Nehemiah in chap. 3. is an express history; for chap. 32. the
godly being much disconsolate, yea Jeremiah himself for that incurabl: breach
(in man's apprehension) and grievous wound in the Common weal of Israel, yet
Jehovah the performer of promises does assure them they shall return from
Babel, and have a policy to buy and sell, to set and let, etc. and this promise
was as sure as the order of the heavens, and chap. 33. has speeches of like
comfort.

The godly it may be were troubled, Heb. 6.8. and 10.27, 28, 29.
as the Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.1.2. For when the Jews saw that Babel had so
ruinated them, they could not choose but have many sad thoughts of discomfort,
that they should never return: So when the Churches saw wrath so full of fiery
indignation on the Jews, they thought the day of Christ was at hand. The
Apostle satisfied them, and the Prophet Jeremiah comforts them with this speech
[as yet] and the Prophets often reiterate these words, which must be marked.

And in all those prophesies of their return, there are many promises of Christ
mixed, for he is the radix of all comforts to the Church, because God will send
Christ to destroy Satan's work and his seed, and to bless us, All promises are
made in him to be yea and Amen, as that promise to Achaz, although he despised
it, Esai 7. and would not put the safety of his Kingdom on such promises, but
would seek as his stubborn and unbelieving heart taught him, help from Assure,
but because God had made promise [yet] to protect Jerusalem, the City he had
chosen to put his name there, therefore he would protect it, and because our
heavenly Father would send his Son to be immanuel, God with us: therefore he
would yet save Judah, Sion and Jerusalem. Ieremiahs Prophecies are of this
nature to be understood.

Esaias before Jeremiah, had said by prophecy, that although Babel had sorely
afflicted the Church, Isa. 14, 1.2, 3.
notwithstanding the Lord would have mercy on Jacob, and would yet choose
Israel, and set them in their own Land, the Land of Jehovah, called elsewhere
the Holy Land, and pleasant Land, and so it was to the ending of the Seventy
Sevens, but then any Land, City and Assembly, where the Gospel of Christ was
and is taught, believed, and professed, was and is as holy as that Land.

CHAP. XXVI.
That the Covenant of God in Christ made with Israel in Deuteronom. is the very
same, that God made with Israel in Exodus and Leviticus, and so to the end of
the 19. chap. of Numbers, in answer to them that hold the former to be only a
covenant of works, and the latter in Deuteronomy. to a covenant of grace, because it
is said in Deuteronomy. 21.9. beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

Mr. Ainsworth says, it is the same Covenant, but only renewed to the
children. And Tremellius speaks to the same effect, we must remember, that
Malachi in shutting up the old Testament charge Israel from Christ to cleave
to the Law, given by Moses at Horeb, Mal 4. as the only good means to secute
them from the Apostasy that would come upon them in the days of Antiochus
Epiphanes, yea it began even in the days of Malachi, then stout words were
spoken, that it was in vain to serve God, etc. Like the apostasy of the old
world, Dan. 11.14.30 31, 32.
Job 21. 14, 15. and 22.17. Mal. 3.13, 14. And the angel foretold of the
lawless crew of Daniels people, that would deal corruptly concerning the holy
covenant.

2. It was greatly consequent to renew the covenant to the children, for now
all their fathers were dead of the first numbering: and so it was very fit that
the children should be taught the fathers holy Religion, by way of covenant,
the better to watch over their hearts, before they went over Jordan, to
possess Canaan.

3. Moses repeats diverse passages of Christ in three former chapters of
Deuteronomie as a preparation, and then most pathetically exhorts to the
obedience of Christ, Deuteronomy. 4. and prosecutoth the same exhortation in chap. 5.
where he repeat. Exodus 20. and mark the second and third verse of chap. 5. in
these words, The word only must be understood, as in Cor. 1.17. Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and 10 20. and so the Rabbis of the Jews understood it, vid. Mr. Ainsworth
Not with our fathers [onely] made Jehevah this Covenant, but with us. This
does not only look to them of the first numbering, that died in the
wilderness, but to Jacob, Isaac and Abraham, and so Tremellius, it was verily
the same covenant for substance, that was made with Abraham, renewed in the
wilderness, and exhibited fully and plainly in Christ, but in respect of times
and persons, it is called a diverse form of covenant, vid. Heb. 8. So he, yea, I
doubt not but we may go higher, even to that promise of God to our first
Parents, Genesis 3.15. and to Noah Genesis 6. Promise and covenant are often taken
promiscuously, and it is for our comfort so to understand.

It is much for our edification and comfort in the holy faith, so rounderstand
the same promise made to our first Parents concerning Christ (for they had
sacrifices to seal the covenant of their salvation to him, the same was made
with Noah Gen 6. and the same with S^m (whose God was God, blessed for ever)
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and in that covenant all the visible Church were
engaged, before Moses to observe it, and it is called the way of Christ and his
charge in his commandments, statutes, and Laws, Gen 26.5. These were enjoined
by Christ, and by most godly tradition propagated in godly families from father
to child, until Christ commanded Moses to put all these Laws and histories of
Genesis into writing, with sundry other Laws, because the Church was now grown
into a large commonweal, and were to dwell in a Land by themselves, as Christ's
peculiar people.

I will add one Text in Leviticus to stablish our hearts in sound Doctrine,
chap. 25.23. The Land shall not be sold for ever; for the Land is mine, for ye
are strangers and sojournens with me. This text shows what all the Polity of
Christ by Moses aimed at, even faith and love in the Son of God Christ Jesus:
this text has irradiant beams over all the holy Doctrine. What a worthy
exercise might a godly Orator of a congregation, a Scribe taught unto the
Kingdom of heaven, that has his wits exercised in the word of righteousness
make hence to an Auditory?

1. You are strangers and sojourners with me. How might he amplisie this from
other Scriptures? 1 Chronicles. 29. Psalm. 39. and 119. Heb. 11. by the godly example
of the Nobles of all ages, 1 Pet. 1. and 2.11.

2. From the coherence of matter in the verses preceding, and following, that
those that confess in heart this Doctrine of Christ, that they are but
strangers and sojourners in this cursed world, they must not oppress and vex
one another, in setting and leting, in buying and selling, but deal justy and
mercifully one with another.

3. It will afford an heavenly meditation to consider, how and why the Lord
should say he is a stranger, and sojourner in this world, surely this Text
shows how Light, Life, and immortality was brought to light by the Gospel in
Moses, and in Leviticus.

4, All Deuteronomie is the abridgement of Moses Sermons for one month. The
Apostle, Heb. 9. does dilate much on Exodus, and shows it was a Covenant of
grace in Christ.
Deuteronomie must be understood to be the same covenant with Exodus and
Leviticus, for we must observe that the Son of God, the holy Angle of Gods
presonce repeateth diverse Laws that were formerly commanded in Exodus and
Leviticus, the holy Law with the exposition was first delivered in Exodus and
Levitecus, See Exodus, 10 21, 22, 23. and 24. chapters, and that holy covenant
was made in the b^ood of the covenant, Exodus 24. as it is said, Assemble my
Saints together, that have made a covanant with me by Sacrifice, to walk in his
holy Law, and as the breach of it is charged on them, Ps. 50. So it is the same
covenant that is made with the children in Deuteronomy. for (as it is said) Moses
repeats the Law to them, Deuteronomy 5 and makes large Expositions upon it, and then
renews the covenant, even the same Covenant in Deuteronomy. 29. Note also that the
same promises for obedience to the law of the Gospel, and the same curses are
spoken to the fathers, as are repeated to the children, Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.

Yea, which must be well observed, Numbers 20. Numb. 20. to the end of that
book, and all Deuteronomy. is but the history of one year, and Aharon died the
fortieth year, in in the fifth month, Number. 33.
and forwards may and must be called Deutera-nomie, a second Law, for all is
spoken to the people of the second numbering, all the Fathers being dead.
Consider Number. 28.2. also confer Exodus 19. with Deuteronomy. 76. and 14.1. and 26. And
the covenant that Joshua made with Israel a little before his death, is but the
renewing of the former, and says Mr. Ainsworth in Deuteronomy. 29.1. Here the
covenant is renewed between God and the people, and it is the same in effect
with the covenant made at Horeb, Exodus 19. and 24. save that Christ who is the
end of the legal covenant is here more clearly recalled, and says he on Exodus
20.2. here he especially intends the covenant of grace made with his people,
whereby they are blessed that have Jehovah for their God, Psalm. 3^.12. and
Tremellius speaks to the same effect, and diverse others might be cited to
their sense.

Men man and will speak their pleasures, but let us take heed, we do not darken
Gods counsels by our own words, or by his words mis-interpreted.

CHAP. XXVII.
Short Collections out of Genesis, Job, and some part of Exodus; showing that
the Gospel of the Son of God (Mark. 1.1, 2) was manifested and taught among
the faithful before Moses wrote the same.

SECT. 1.
CHRIST the eternal word, the light and life of men, inspired holy Prophets in
all ages to teach men his way and charge, which consisted in Commandments,
Statutes and Laws, from the apostasy of our first Parents to Isreal's coming
from Egypt, that is two thousand five hundred and thirteen years, all which
Laws were to bring men to fear and love Jehovah, and to love the holy Seed,
their Brethren, and to give no just occasion of offense to any, no not to the
seed of the Serpent, Genesis 18.25. and 26.5. And that this holy faith and
religion might abide, and the fruit of it remain, Christ gave holy Prophets,
who were of long life, and of great authority, which were a great help to
preserve the faith for those years, and propagate the same by tradition to
posterity, till those commandments, statutes, and laws were written.

And because many things before the Flood and after the Flood do set forth the
Law of faith rather by way of narration then by manifest precept (though
doubtless they were commanded even from the beginning I will briefly set down
some particulars, in which the Son of God reveiled himself even before Moses.

1. The Holy faith for Doctrine was taught in that great and precious
fundamental promise coucerni^g the Son of God, his person and office, I will
^u^ enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her s^^d: He
shall break by head, and thou shall break his heal, Genesis 3.15.2. We are to
consider that this holy promise or covenant was opened by diverse providence
and ordinances, which the Saints most religiously observed, that so they and
their posterity might abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and not transgre^se from
it. For they knew, they that did not so, had no communion with the holy
Trinity, but they that did abide in it, had communion both with the Father and
the Son.

SECT. II.
1. TThey had Sacrifices to make profession of this holy faith of the son of
God taking humanity of the Seed of the Woman to be the Mediator and
Procuratour of justification, sanctification, wisdom and redemption, by his
death, and sacrifice, and thus sacrifices ever taught of life coming by death

Now we are to consider how this way and charge of Christ was made known to
Moses in commandments, statutes, and laws, he wrote the very some that was
formerly practiced by the Saints, Christ indeed commanded more laws to Moses,
because the church of God became into a great commonweal and kingdom; Therefore
hence observe that all ancient godly tradition is according to the written word.

2. Moses is frequent in this.
They had Altars, on which they sacrificed their offerings, which made the
sacrifices acceptable, because it sanctified the offering, signifying the in
effable Divinity of the Son of God made man to uphold the humanity in that
great work of our Redemption.

3. So in Moses most sericusly the Sabbath is enjoined, likewise in the
Prophets.
The holy Trinity; Father, Son, and holy Spirit, Jebovah, Eloim appointed the
Sabbath, to be a sign between him and his people, that in it they might
meditate on the mighty Creation and gracious Redemption. And it was to sanctify
them unto himself, and to s^perate them from all the profane, and so to be a
means of holiness in their persons, soul, body, and spirit. The Sabbath was
made for man to meditate how the holy Trinity rested in Christ's Redemption. And
the Subbath was kept before it was commanded in Exo. 20. for Moses speaks of it
in Ex. 16. as being observed before, and teaches them there further the holy
use of it, as it was at the first enjoined, Ex^d. 16 23. but Israel in Egypt
apostating from the faith, and following the Idols of Egypt, neglected the
Sabbath very great ly, as the word Remember, in Exo. 20.8, does argue, and we
see that where men care not for, or do corrupt the holy Doctrine of faith, that
they either neglect the Christian Sabbath, the Lords day; or utterly cast it
off Eze. 20. And 100 manifest miserable experience in our days, of rejecting
the fourth Commandment and its Doctrine, as Papi^ts do the second Commandment,
do witness.

Again, further note, all the Patrarchs entered into the Sabbaticall Rest, from
Genesis 1. to Moses times: God did not rest but in Christ, and the Sabbath taught
that, and the faithful kept it, but the Families most wickedly followd Nimrod,
Genesis 26.5.
and would not be persuaded to embrace the faith of Se^^s Tents, which was the
charge of Christ contained; in Commandments, Statutes, and Laws, which Abraham
observed, therefore the Families were cut off from the Sabbath, and all the
Ordinances of it, and then followed abominable and law-lesse idolatries. The
observation of the Sabbath would have kept them in the faith of the Creation of
the World, and the faith of Redemption.

Object. But it is not said, they kept the Sabbath.

Answ. It is comprehended most certainly in the charge of Christ, which was
contained in Commandments, Genesis 26.5.
Statutes, and Laws, which were extant in Sems and Abraham's days. We may
object as well, they kept not Sabbaths for the times of three hundred and fifty
years, all the time of the Judges, and but little mention of it for many years
together. And it is not recorded that they kept the Sabbatical year of Rest,
butonly once in Zedekians reign, and he a wicked King, and it is not recorded,
they kept any Iubilee year. But we ought not to doubt but they did keep
Sabbaths, and the years of Rest, and the Jubilees.

4. In all their Sacrifices they invocated the holy name of Jehovah, the
everlasting God, Psalm. 116.17. Psalm. 20.1.2, 3, 4. yea all of it.
Genesis 21.23. This is in commendation of Abraham's faith, and in opposition of
all the idolatries of the Families.

Here I think it is meet to observe, sometimes offerings are mentioned and no
Altar and sometime Altars and no Offering, and sometime both are mentioned, but
not calling on the name of Jehovah, and sometime an altar was builded, and
invoca^^n was performed, and no sacrifice is mentioned, So in Moses and the
Prophets, holy convocations are called the presence of God. False ^eatheys do
as their first evil master did, Satan promised our first Parents w^e^y, when
himself was a Servant of cor^untion, Satan used flattring speeches and fair
words, and great swelling words of vanity, Ye shall be as Gods, etc. Genesis 3.5.
, semetime calling on the name of Jehovah is mentioned, but no Altarnor
Offering But we may be assured that all the faithful did all three; built
Altars, brought Ostrings, and made invocation, all this before Moses.

5. The place of worship where the Saints assembled is called the presence of
God, Genesis 4. there he did put the remembrance of his name. The Lord God thus
showed great merey to enjoin such assemblies for our good, we should else ay
forget our MAKER and Redeemer, and by this nercy of Sabbaths and alsemblies
enjoined, we have communion with God, our exceeding joy in the redemption by
Christ, Observe diligently. Although our first Parents were shut out of Eden
Garden or Paradise, and from that Tree of life, yet the Lord God would have an
Eden in another way for the comfort of his chosen ones. For where He puts the
remembrance of His Name, that is an Eden, a Garden of God, as Israel having
G^ds Ordinances among them. The Ensign of his presence was there set up for
fourteen hundred years. And it is called Eden, the Garden of God, Ezekiel. 28.13.
And there Christ the Tree of life was fed upon by holy O. dinances. No marvel
that Solomon did sing so much of this Garden, out of which he had almost
excluded himself from the Tree of life, but the Icdidia was helped to overcome
himself, and all Satan's Instruments. We should much think on this, what a
blessing it is beyond comparison, that God should make us his Garden, and set
up his Tabernacle among us, the Church is called the Garden of Eden, from the
first we are excluded by Adams sin, but in this we are Inhabitants by faith in
Christ, and there Christ does meet with us to bless us, Exo. 20, 21. Exo.
29.43. And so Israel was Gods Garden, Cant. 4. and so is the Church gathered
from the Gentiles, Apoc. 2.7.2. Cor. 6 16.17. And mark how Ezekiel. 28. and Cant.
4. and Apoc. 2. do allude to the first stories. It is said to us, to him that
overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of life, which is in the midst' of
the Paradise of God, this looks to the first stories.

Ever since Adams fall man's corrupted nature is exceeding apt to forsake the
faith, and to cleave to the false Doctrine of Devils. Our first Parents were
pild by Satan of Gods Image, and of created comforts, and shut out of Paradise,
etc. to be sojourners here, they and their children as pilgrooms, in hope of a
better Country by Christ, 1. Pet. 1.3, 4. We are poor grooms, pild and pold
by Satan and his Seed, and so shall be till we come to our Father which is in
Heaven, 2. Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Here we are pild-grooms and
sojourners in this cursed World, but live in hope of the Heavenly Paradise
through the blessed tidings of the Gospel of Christ, who has brought life and
immortality to light, by that promise of Genesis 3.15.

Israel being made Gods Eden and Garden, they had the Tree of life among them,
so the Church of the Gentiles, while they abide golden Gandlesticks, and
overcome false Doctrines and worldly lusts, they do and shall cate of the Tree
of life, and shall be nourished by it continually, Apoc. 2 and 21. and 22. The
meditation of these things are a refreshing, but my intent is not now for
manifold explications. The godly soul by holy study will help to enlarge an
hundred fold.

6. They had the Law of distinction of Beasts and Fowls, of clean and un
clean, and might offer in Sacrifice only of the clean, Genesis 7. the like Law of
distinction is Moses.

7. They must not eat blood, that they might have a reverend apprehension of
the blood of Redemption by Christ, Genesis 9. the like is in Moses.

8. They had diverse kinds of Sacrifices, the Meat Offering of Kain, but the
offering of Habell was of Beasts, also they had Burnt-Offerings, as in Noah
(the effect of Noah's sacrifice is termed as our Lord his passion) and Drink
Offerings, Ephesians. 5.
and Oil Offerings, Genesis 35.

9. They had Sacrifices often, Job 1. they knew as they asked for daily Bread,
so they needed daily forgiveness of sins, so in Moses they had a daily
Sacrifice; this Antiochus put down for a while, Dan. 12.

10. The chief Father was Priest, and Jacob wrestled for that honor of the
birthright.
most commonly the eldest, as in Exo. 24, son was trained up to that function,
yet for many hundreds of years they had a peculiar Priest, Sem the Son of
Noah, sir-named Mechizedek (a figure of the Son of God, Sem the great and
reverend ( Deuteronomy. 28.) the great High Pfeist of our profession) who was
Sacrificer to Jehovah; God most high, Possessour of Heaven and Earth. And he
was a directour and strengthner of the godly in holy ways for five hundred
years after the Flood (to the fiftieth of Isaac) Sem was a great stay to the
Church of God, to uphold the faith so shaken, against the revelt of Nimred and
the apostate Families, Genesis 11.

11. They paid Tithes to maintain holy worships, and other charitable uses;
And so it was in Moses.

12. They had Teachers which were Preachers of righteousness (of the
justification that is by faith) which of old was called propheseying, Noah was
a Preacher of this righteousness, and the godly Peophets did teach others the
ways of Christ, as it is said, Abraham would, and so did Jacob, etc. and so it
was under the polity of Moses.

13. The Spirit of Christ in the Prophets did strive with the people of their
days, to turn them from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God,
Genesis 6. Neh 9.

14. Although the Prophets were godly, yet what ever profection or any earthly
or spiritual comfort they had from the Lord, all was of grace, as it is said,
Noah sound grace in the eyes of the Lord ( Gen 6) to be saved by waters, and if
of grace, it is no more of works. So Moses says, understand this day, it is
not for thy righteousness that God brought you from Epypt, and placed his
Tabernacle among you, and gave you Chanaan, but Gods love and mercy, Deuteronomy. 9.

15. The corruption of nature taken from Parents is told, Genesis 5. that they
were but flesh, that the thoughts of man's heart were evil from his youth, Genesis
6. and 8. and so all the apostate Families were un-regenerate; Job is
plentiful on this subject: Col. 3.5. Romans 12, 1.
This shows how Abraham taught his House hold, and Circumcision taught the
same, and the offering and burning of the rump, kidneys, and far, taught them
Mortification.

16. In matters of doubt that concerned their particulars, they went to holy
Prophets to e^quire of God, as Rebecca did to Eber, or her Fatherinlaw Abraham.
Gen 20. and so it was in Moses, if any doubt did arise they asked Moses, and he
inquired of God for them.

17. We are constantly to observe, that the same holy Covenant made to our
first Parents, was continued to some special persons for the comfort of the
present age, and posterity, as to Noah, Sem, Abraham, etc.

18. As occasion was offered, they made vows to God, to bind themselves to a
watchful care, and to cheerful thankfulness, and willing obedience, and so
it was under Moses.

19 In all which holy Doctrine, and holy profession of it, they knew that
without faith in the Son of God, it was impossible to please God: therefore in
all their worships they came in faith, receiving and resting on Christ in the
holy promise and Covenant, Genesis 4. Heb. 11. and so Moses taught them in Exed.
12. and in Dent. 30.

20. And by this holy faith receiving the Son of God (as Mediator from the
Father; for their Prophet, Sacrificer and King, Receiving and accepting the Son
of God in all his Offices, trusting in him for doctrine, government, and
ex^iation. That speech of John chapter 1.12. As many as received him, is expounded
of them that believe in his name. Remember it still for a more clear definition
of faith is not revealed.
and resting on him for Doctrine, expiation and government, were adopted the
sons of God, ( Gen 6.) and were made heirs of the Julification that is by
faith, Heb. 117. and this receiving and believing on the Son of God, was
accounted of God above any righteousness they could do, and this is the same
holy faith, that the Son of God imbreathed in the Prophets and Apostles, to
teach and write, and all Moses taught the same Doctrine, Deuteronomy. 30. Romans 10.

21. Want of love to the brethen, hypocrisy, envy, ill Gestures, and hanging
down conntenance, bodily exercise, murderous thoughts, etc. in the woship of
God, is reproved, as in Cain, and Christ in all, Moses called them to
holiness, truth, and love, etc. See hers how the Prophets expound Moses and
teach the people of their generations.
and the Prophets do so expound him, Psalm 50. Esai 1. God sees not as man
sees, the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the
prayer of the righteous is his delight, again the Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, how much more when he brings it with an evil mind
Proverbs of experience from the first and last counsels, Prove. 15. and 21.
David says. I will wash mine binds in innocence, and so compass thine a ta^,
Psalm 26. So Christ faith to us, Let men pray every where, ^^fung up pu^e hands,
without wrath and doubting, 1 Timothy 2.

22. That the holy faith of the holy Son of God might not be violated or
adulterated, they were to take heed of unequal yoking, by ungodly morriages,
Genesis 6 1, 2, 3, Christ in Moses speaks much to this purpose.

23. Upon any great design they sought God by the intercession of Christ's
Sacrifice, as Jacob Genesis 46.1 2, 3. And Abraham still showed the same in
building altars, so did the faithful in after times, as Psalm 20.3.

24. To all the holy Doctrine revealed, they had Seals of the Covenant. The
Sacrifices were Seals of the justification that is by faith, and the flood was
a Sacrament of saving by waters, as Baptism^ is to us, 1 Pet. 3 21. Christ
renewing his Covenant to Abraham instituted Circumcision, a seal of faith, Romans
4. and so in Moses was the Passover, and the other Sacrifices.

25. It was required of all that did call on the name of the Lord to be upright
in heart, and to walk as before him, and to testify their faith by good works
of obedience, as Habel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job, etc. the same is taught us,
2 Timothy 3 Tit. 3 and Christ in Moses taught all this.

26. They had washing or persons and garments, that they should hate the
garment sported by the flesh, or for any defilement of worship, etc.etc.

Thus for many things we may see, The Modern Doctors af the Jews say, that all
was Tohu, till Abraham, that in him their glory might begin, Mr, Br. 1 in Mele.
p. 75, 76;
all was not a Tohu, an emptiness from the apostasy of our first Parents, to
the death of Terah, that apostated to idols, but that the Gospel of Christ was
revealed to out first Parents, and by them taught, as is evident to the
Fathers, and great severity came on despisers, neglecting the word of faith,
both in the flood, and in the confusion of tongues.

And we may well perceive what was their conversation, Jesus Christ, yesterday,
and to day, and the same holy Doctrine in him shall be for ever. Their
conversation was acccording to Christ's way and charge, in his commandments,
statutes and laws, as in all Genesis, and Job: it is said, they walked with
God, and before God.

Hence we may see and discern the close life that is scattered in the short
sayings of Moses, (especially) for 2083 years, to the death of Terah, in Genesis
11. and in all Genesis, and to the twentieth of Eaodus.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Divine Tradition.

I Think it is to some purpose to write a little about Tradition, in reference
to the last mentioned short O^se^vations.

1. Although the Church was taught by Tradition for 2513 years, From the
creation to Isreal's coming from Egypt, is 2513 years.
yet the written word, was no other Doctrine, th^n was formerly taught, by
Tradition for all Genesis and much of Exodus was first delivered by Tradition
till Moses wrote Genesis.

2. The Eplstles to the Romans and Galatians. open, Genesis 12. and 15. So John 1.
and 1 John 3.8. open. Genesis 3.15. So the Apostles Doctrine and writings are
answerable to Gods Doctrine by Tradition for those 2513 years. Ezekiel. 28.


3. That which Moses received by Tradition since Adam, or by inspiration, or
both, till he was 80 years old, was no other than Christ gave him on Mount
Sin^i (which he wrote when he was shepherd to Israel 40 years) So it is said by
faith Abel offered, by faith, Araham when he was tried offered Isaac, and by
faith Moses kept the Pa^leover, and this holy faith has commendation, for all
the godly of the old Testament, Heb. 11. And the same faith we of Japhets house
are exhorted to follow, that Christ may be to our consolation to day, as he was
to them yesterday.

4. And for that 2513 years, wherein Religion was taught by Tradition, Gods
providence so ordered the affairs of his Church, that while the families that
hoped in Christ were few, there were (as is noted) rate prophets, long-lived,
and of great authority, who although the Gospel was not written (for ought we
know) till Moses times, were most able to strengthen the faithful of their
times.

5. The men that continued the Gospel by infallible Tradition, from the
creation to the giving of the Law, are the first ten Fathers before the flood.
Nine of them living together, were a noble consistory to uphold the faith, so
shaken by the Apostasy of their own children, and the wicked families of Cain

6. Then after the flood there were nine Fathers also of the holy line that
lived together, worthy Pillars against Ni^rods revo^t: these nine were Noah,
Sem, Arphaxad, Selah, Eber, Peleg, Regu, Serug, Naho, and so Sem, Arphaxad,
Sela^, Eber, might and did instruct Abraham, Sem, Selah, Eber, and Abraham
might and did teach Isaac, Abraham, Isaac and Eber taught Jacob, Isaac and
Jacob the twelve Patriarchs, who left many godly that lived to Moses. Moses
Parents were godly, Heb. 11. There was but 64 years between Joseph's death, and
Moses birth.

7. More briefly thus, Adam taught the Gospel to Mathuselah and godly Lamech,
they two to Noah and Sem, Sem taught Isaac, Abraham and Isaac taught Jacob and
Isaac and Jacob the twelve Patriarchs, and they in Egypt held Religion sound
while they lived, and Joseph lived after Jacobs death 50 years, and Levi 70
years after, and there was 42 years between Levies death, and Moses birth.

8. The wisdom of God is admirable in the long life of the few families of the
old holy men, to preserve the faith by Tradition, that Sem, who lived with
godly Lamech, and Machuselah, who saw Adam, taught the Gospel to Isaac. These
four men, Adam, Lamech, Sem, Isaac, could reckon years above 2000, but when
men's ages were diverse times shortened, and at l^st brought to 70 years, Psalm.
90. and when the Church of God consisted of many families, and that the purity
of Religion was forgotten and neglected (after the death of the said
Patriarchs) of the most in Egypt (for Israel in Egypt fell to the idols and
Religion of Egypt) then God commanded Moses in the wilderness to write the
word of faith, and ever after it was the Standard and Cannon of faith and
manners, as all the Prophets after, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Apostles
kept themselves to the written word, and to this all the Israel of God is
enjoined. To the Law and to the Testimony says Esaias, Starch the S^^iptu^es,
says the Lord Jesus. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you in all
wisdom, says the Apostle of the Gentiles, etc.etc. This word of Christ, is
the holy Scripture, and it teaches us wisdom to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. we are
exhorted to give heed to the old Prophecy, 2. Pet. 1. and thrice blessed are
they, that with an honest and good heart so do

9. All the Patriarchs were Bishops for their families, (...), using all care
to teach theirs from their Fathers speech, what Sem, i. e. Melchizedeck learned
of Mathuselah, taught of Adam, of the holy Trinity, and how our Lord should
come of Judah, the King of glory, the eternal, the framer of the world, of
that poor shepherd, to be man, to have his Tabernacle in us, to look through
the windows within our wall, and also how Christ by death should vanquish him
that had the power of death, they did know that he should come down from
heaven, and did feed upon his flesh and blood, comforted in sorrow by this
hope: they would not miss to catechize their sons in this point, as Joseph
gave (...), to feed his brethren, Genesis 47 12. so all godly gave (...), to feed
their families souls. In one word, (...), never used before, but in Joseph's
story, with the Septuagint. Our Lord his gracious tongue calls us to the
Patriarchs story, Luke 12.42. compared with Genesis 47.12.
to look to the Kingdom of heaven, not to the earth, which God has cursed, so
Mr. Br. in Lords Fam. Luke 12 42.

10. Observe a little more concerning Tradition in those 26. Collections above,
that we should consider that the Spirit of Christ in the holy, Prophets by
Tradition, and in the Law written by Moses is like it self, one and the same
Doctrine, and all for the glorifying of Christ, as it is said, The spirit of
Prophecy is the Testimony of Jesus: He is the mark of all, Apoc. 19.

Let us consider briefly for the new Testament: therein also God took the same
course, though not for so long a time by Tradition, I conceive it is a good
instruction for us, to strengthen us against the false Positions of Roman
Catholics, concerning their unwritten verities, for we shall easily perceive
God to be without shadow of change, whether by Tradition or writing.

1. The Birth Life and Death, the Doctrine and Miracles of our Lord Jesus
Christ were by Tradition, till the four Evangelists had written them, but when
written, then it was the rule of our faith, John 20.30, 31.

2. The teaching of the Corin^hians, the Institution of the Supper of the Lord
was a Tradition, 1 Cor. 11. (...),.

3. The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead to them was by Tradition; 1
Cor. 15. (...), the 1 Cor. 15. was the same Doctrine, he taught them.

4. The Apostles teaching of the Man of sin, that Son of Perdition, was a
Tradition to the Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.5, 15.

5. Painfullnesse and diligence in a man's calling, was a Tradition, 2 These. 3.

6. The Doctrine of Devils should ever be remembered, or tradited to Posterity,
to be warned, and taken heed of; all the Doctrine of the Gospel should be
tradited or delivered by the faithful to others, that there might be a godly
feed in the Church, 1 Timothy 4 6. 2 Timothy 2.2. But all these Traditions are now
written by the Apostles, yea what they taught was according to the Scriptures
of the old and new Testament, as ever they proved their Doctrine b^ the old
Testament.

7. The Doctrine to the Galathians was by Tradition at the first, but we see
what the Doctrine was by the Epistle unto them, it could not be but by word of
mouth at the first, and they were accursed that taught other Doctrine than the
Apostle taught by preaching and Tradition, and the same was as is written; else
the Apostle had incurred the anothema pronounced by himself. Again, consider
the Doctrine to the Galath^an, was no other, but what was taught to Abraham,
Moses, and the Prophets.

8. Observe again, 2 These. 2.15. and 3, 6. These two places show what
Traditions he gave them when he was present, none other than those he wrote
unto them, as confer chap. 2.5. and chap. 3, 10. So we may be sure by such
conference of Scripture, that none of the Apostles gave any Tradition by mouth
contrary to their writings, and contra.

9. Now then, Traditions are of two sorts, some agreeable to the Scriptures,
some disagreeable, that make the word of God of no authority. The Pharisees are
the true fathers of the Pontificality and Papacy for these latter, but for the
former, all that fear God, and love the Gospel, and love their posterity, will
follow the example of the old faithful, Psalm. 78 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and obey
the commandment of the Spirit of Christ, of holding fast, and standing fast in
the now-written word, and the comandments of the Apostles; of our Lord and
Savior, 2 Pet. 3: So this Apostle exhorted the Saints of his Bishopric, to
regard the Prophets, and reproved them for follwing ^yain Traditions of their
fathers, 1 Pet. 18. and 2 Pet. 1.20.21.

And therefore to conclude with the Text of Romans, The same holy Lord God as
Abraham worshipped, Genesis 21.33.
in chapter 16.26. When the Apostles and Disciples were enabled with the gift
of tongues, they were sent, by the commandment of the everlasting God, among
all Nations to preach the Gospel and mystery of Christ, by the Scriptures of
the Prophets, for the obedience of faith.

Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name.
Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and forget not all his Benefits -- who m^de his
ways known to Moses the Prophets, and his holy Apostles, Psalm 103.7.

CHAP. XXIX
Being an answer to them that say, that the Polity of CHRIST, given to Moses,
was not a Covenant of grace.

SECT. 1.
TO answer this sorry assertion, we are to consider, that Moses on Mount ^ivai
talking with the Angel of the Covenant, saw the whole Doctrine of our
salvation, in what sort all ages had and should have it among men, what Moses
saw his Law offers to our fight. The Prophets and Apostles saw the very same,
and happy are they only, which study to see these things.

The Dialogue with its annotations, and chapter 14. does endeavor to show this, and
therefore I shall not now be large: I will touch a little of Circumcision, and
of the Passover, and of the place of holy worship, with the practice of the
Saints, I will speak somewhat promiscuously upon all, in which the errors of
the Concision will be occasionally spoken of.

1. Crn cerning the Seal of Circumcision, we must mark diligently the Doctrine
of it by the Lord himself, Genesis 17. and of his Apostle, Romans 4. and of the
practice of faith in the S^i^ts, how they understood it, and made use of it,
the Dialogue shows these things.

2. Of the Passover, it was a Doctrine of faith in Christ, as it is most
evident by Exodus 12. Heb. 11. John 29.1. C^^. 5. etc. and the practice of the
Saints is much to be observed, 2 Chronicles. 30.22. -- The Levites taught the good
knowledge of the Lord concerning the Passover, and they did eat throughout the
feast seven days, offering Peace Offerings, and making concession to the Lord
God of their fathers. Thus the Levites taught the good knowledge of
Christ-Jehovah in the Passover, as well as the Apostle, to us, 2 Cor. 11. They
made confession of their sins, and of their faith in the Son of God, thus the
godly and faithful did, and did not doubt and say, Who can go up to heaven to
bring Christ down to dwell in our Tabernacle? or who can go to the deep of the
grave to bring Christ from the dead? but they confessed the Son of God should
come to be a second Adam, and give himself our Passover to be sacrificed for
our atonement, and that the Godhead would raise the manhood to ascend the
heavens to find eternal redemption, and heavenly mansion for us. And the
Apostle does show us how and what they understood of the Passover, and the
feast of unleavened bread, 1 Co^. 5. So it is said of Josias, that he commanded
the people to kee^ the Passover unto Jehovah their God, 2 Chronicles 35.
as it is written in the Book of the Covenant. What is that, a Covenant of
works? No such matter, but a Covenant of grace in Christ. Thus in brief of the
Seals of Circumcision and the Passover, which were seals of the justification
which is by faith, and all parts of worship that Circumcision initiated them
unto, must be understood of the Doctrine of a Covenant of grace, Covenant and
Seal must not differ, neither do they in Gods ordination, Psalm 119.04.128.

3. Of the places of worship, these are to be understood generally, and
specially: the place of their general worship was of all the Tribes together,
the more special and particular places were their Synagogues. O^ both which we
must observe what Gracious Promises of the presence of CHRIST is spoken Exodus
20. In every place where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and bless
thee, Exodus 29. Where I will meet with you to speak with thee, and there I w^l^
meet with the children of Israel, and Israel shall be sanctified by my glory,
and I will sanctify the Table of the congregation and the Altar: I will also
sanctify both Aaron and his sons to minister unto me in the Priests office,
The same ^is said to us for all the faithful christians are the Israel of God,
1 Cor. 6. Gal 6. Apoc. 21
and I will dwell amongst the children of Israel, and will be their God, etc.
etc. Unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes
to put his name there, unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou
shall come, Deuteronomy. 1^ 5. and seek his presence evermore, Psalm 105.4. 1 Chronicles.
16.11. Who is able to utter the comfort of these Scriptures.

4. God in Christ was the Shepherd of Israel, and they are called the sheep of
his pasture, and in all places where he put his name, there he fed his flock
first at Shiloh, 350 years, seven Jubilees, and after, in (...), to the end of
the Seventy Sevens, in both places three times a year, most solemnly they did
enter the Courts of Jehovah, there they ascended his presence with great joy,
praise, and thanksgiving, etc. The godly did so 2 Chr. 29. and 30 and 35. and
when they did not serve the Lord with gladness of heart, see what was
threatened and performed, Deuteronomy. 28 47. etc.
, and all were exhorted so to do, also they had other smaller Sabbatical
Convocations in their Synagogues, the Tents of the Shepherds, where also Christ
fed them, and where God manifested himself, it was called the presence of God,
and the gate of heaven, where always the ladder stood, as the godly Shunamite
found, and many thousand even among the ten Tribes, 2 Kings 4. Thus the
Commonweal of Israel was the Kingdom of God, above 1400 years.

5. I will show some Scriptures, where the Saints felt the comfort of the
promises, when they did meet with Christ in the greater and lesser Assemblies,
Psalm 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to come to thee,
that he may dwell in thy Courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of
thy house, of thy holy Temple: So Psalm. 36. Let the godly heart meditate on
Psalm 42 an 63. and 81. and 84. and 100, etc. and in Psalm. 122. In all their
holy assemblies they testified their faith in he incarnation and redemption by
the Son of God
The twelve Tribes came to bear witness by their faith, to that holy Testimony
of the Son of God, in expectation of him the Testimony, to be manifested in due
time, 1 Timothy 2.6. and the twelve Tribes, instantly serving God, day and night,
did hope of immortality in the Resurrection of the Son of God, the second Adam,
the Lord from heaven, Acts 26.6, 7. 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.

6. A little more for the smaller Sabbaticall Assemblies, Psalm 111. It is is
said, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the Assembly of the
upright, and in the congregation. The Hebrew word, as the learned say,
signifies lesser Assembles, and in Psalm 74. it is spoken in a mournful
manner, that heathens making inrodes into the Land of Israel, burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land, which shows the great benefit Gods people
found in the exercises there performed. Now the new Testament is plentiful for
these Sabbaticall Convocations, how the dispersed of Israel practiced in all
nations. This has been plentifully showed of late, in a book entitled, A
Discourse, touching the Jews Synagogues, that there is no necessity to insist
more upon this Argument.

SECT. II. Now I will speak promiscuously upon what has been observed, with
reference to the errors of the concision.
1. ALthough the Law of the pass over came four hundred and thirty years
after the Promise, yet that was not another Covenant, but a further exposition
and confirmation of the former promises. The Concision mistook the meaning of
the Law, and regarded not the promises teaching of Christ, but thought after
the Law was given by Moses, to be saved by bodily exercise, whereas the Law,
truly understood, was but an expansion or dilatation of the promises.

2. And they might have learned the same from their Forefathers, even the
pattern of the holy faith and love that is in Christ Jesus. For Abraham, when
he called upon God, he called upon him by an Altar and Sacrifice, as it is
said, Abraham built an Altar, and called, on the name of Jehovah, the The same
holy says was taught to the Gentiles at the commandment of the everlasting
God, and not Gentiles worship the same everlasting God as Abraham did, Romans 1.
and 16.20.
everlasting God, so Jacob, although Joseph had sent for him with all necessary
accommidations for the journey to Egypt, yet he durst not, or rather would not
proceed till he had sought God by the intercession of Christ, Genesis 46.1, 2, 3.
To teach us what we should do in all our journies and undertakings, so it is
said when they sacrificed, call upon me, in the time of trouble, and I will
hear thee and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50 See Psalm. 20.3. And so Samuel by
faith in Christ's sacrifice, had good report, and put to flight the armies of
the Aliens. And thus also did David and Solomon, and all the Prophets, and all
the faithful.

3. And Malachi by Christ's command, concludes all the old Testament to Israel,
to regard the holy Law that he gave in Horeb, and to look for no more Prophets
till John Elias the Baptist, but study the statutes and judgments of the Law
and cleave to it, that Fathers and Children might be blessed, Mal. 4.

4. And thus the Concision should have understood all, for Moses wrote not a
new Covenant, for Abraham received circumcision as a seal of the justification
that is by faith, and so all Israel should have professed the same in faith, as
our Lord tells them, that circumcision was of the Fathers, not so much of
Moses, Joh. 7.22.

5. It is true, circumcision did further oblige Abraham to keep the way of the
Lord and his charge which was comprehended in commandments, statutes, and laws,
and those Laws, etc. with many others that Christ ordained, Moses wrote, as
has been at large before noted.

6. And what did this way and charge of the Lord tend unto, even surely this,
repentance toward God and faith in the Son of God, our Mediator, and love to
the holy Seed. Which way and charge was taught ever since the promise, Genesis
3.15. even the Breast Plate of wholesome words, Faith and Love. And all Moses
and the Prophets and Apostles do still bring their Doctrine to these two
heads, Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus.

7. This is in Habell, how he made the like holy uses of the Sacrifices, as 1.
Pet. 4.1, 2. Tit. 2.14. he did bear on his Breast, Faith and Love, as he was a
beleiver, so he ceased from sin, being purified to be of Christ's peculiar
people, and was zealous of good works, as it is said, his works were good,
Habel by all this we see, was gathered into Christ the Head, Ephesians 1.10.

8. The promise says to Abraham that in the holy Seed, Christ we are blessed,
what is this blessing, but chiefly in spiriturall things in Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
1. Him to be our Peace Offering, Sin-Offering, Trespasse-Offering, Whole
burnt-Offering, to be our Washing, cleansing hissop, etc. And in the years of
R^st and Jubilee, to be our freedom (or justification) from the bondage and
servitude of sin (as deaths) death and Satan, and to be our fore-goer into the
mansions of the Heavenly Paradise. Luke 23 etc. etc. Now the concision mistook
all, and turned all to be their own idol and vanity in their bodily exercise
to be so justified from sins, guildnesse, and filthiness.

9 Questionless Moses polity was a Covenant of grace in Christ and not a bare
covenant of works. For all the ceremonies were implicit promises, all
sponsorious of a better hope in Christ, and because they despised to believe
this, God was a consuming fire to them, though they were never so exact in
bodily exercise, Ebr. 12. examine well, how the Apostle speaks the same speech
to the Hebrews, as Moses did to them of his time, Deuteronomy. 4.24.

10. And whereas Saint Paul says, that the Law of the Passover came four
hundred thirty years after the promise, Gen, 12.2, 3. He does not speak it as
his judgment that it was a new covenant, or all the Laws following it, to be a
covenant of works; but reasons against the false Apostles, taking up their
phrase, a Law of Works, for he knew and has witnessed that Christ delivered to
Moses the Law of faith, Romans 10. conferred with Deus. 30.

11. And whereas the Apostle says, Romans 10.5. For Moses describes the
justification that is by the Law that the man that does these things shall live
by them. This speech he cites as it may be supposed from the allegations of
false teachers There is a Law for the ransom of the Soul by half a Shekel of
Silver, and so this was a tradition even in the Apostles days. The Jews
dispersed sent Silver to the Temple for their Redemption, but the Apostle calls
it a vain tradition of their Abothenu, not looking to Christ the end of all,
read Exodus 30. 12, 13.1 Pet. 1. so did Papists in carrying the H^st to sick
men's houses, etc.
that so interpreted all Moses to be of the outward letter to build their
comfort on themselves by bodily exercise. And in this doing, they must not
misle in any eternal point, no, or in ceremonials commanded, because of the
course, Deuteronomy. 27.26. And suppose they could have fulfilled all externals, yet
they could not have eternal life, as the reward thereof: it is not any
exteriors only that procures life eternal. And in deed to all externalls, was
too heavy an Yoke, as the council shows, Act. 15.

12 It is true, the holy Apostle uses tho phrase (as abovesaid) Law of Works,
in diverse places. I have often thought, that the Apostle, in reasoning and
disputing with false Teachers, uses their phrase, not that Christ in Moses
commanded a Law of works to attain eternal life, ex opere ope^ato, the In
those days, Apostasy from the says was great, and Christ ^ame to revaine this
de^ection, Dan. 9.
Teachers before our Lords incarnation invented this phrase (to rupting all
holy Doctrine) a Law of w^rks, as a Schooleterme of their own against the true
intent of the Spirit of Christ: They by their false interpretations and
expositions made all Moses a Law of works, to themselves; Christ in Moses did
not make it so, for they are reproved for stumbling at Christ, the drift, aim
and scope of the Law, though they might be unrebukeable in exteriours.

13. But one would think that speech in Leviticus 18.5. truly understood
according to Christ's intent, was part of the Law of faith, for that Text is
p^osecuted in N^h. 9 29. but not as a Law of works, for we may suppose that the
godly did not in the day of their humiliation confess their sins, and the sins
of their fathers, for not doing the Law of works but for the disobedience
According to Exodus 23.20.21, 22. and it is true also they despised Christ in
not doing, but casting off all the exteriors Christ commanded, and when they
did so, they much less cared for internals. Exodus 30.12, 13.
of faith to the Son of God, our Mediator that gave to Moses the lively
Oracles of faith, and Ezekiel chapter 20.11 handles this Text of Leviticus to the
like effect, and that speech of Levit. 18. is among the Gospel Statutes and
judgments.

14. In one sense it might be truly called a Law of works, as thus, if an
Israelite had touched any unclean thing, he might not come to the Tabernacle in
his legal uncleanness, that he died not by some sudden stroke, as Nadab and
Ab^hu, and so the Priests mast wash also, that they died not, etc. etc. These
externals they might do (though they cared not for heart-worship in the faith
and Love which is in Christ Jesus) and so have their bodily life continued, but
life eternal is only promised to them that look to Christ by faith, as he was
typified by Moses rites, and so bodily exercise by doing the outward works of
the Law did profit a little for a bodily life, and for an outward justification
in their persons in respect of liberty to come into the Sanctuary, but not for
eternal justification in Gods fight.

15. And in such exteriors, the Apostle was exact, but all his Justification by
bodily exercise of the Law which he was mistaken in, were most vile to him,
when he knew Christ, as he says, Phil. 3 7, 8, 9. But the things which were
vantage unto me, the same I counted loss for Christ's sake, yea doubtless, I
think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my
Lord: for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judg^ al^ things to be
vile, that I may win Christ, and might be found in him, not having mine own
justification, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the justification which is of God (the Father) through says ( in
Christ) So 2 Cor. 5.19.2.

16. And therefore if Levi. 18. be understood as some would, yet then God was a
consuming fire to all (though exact in externalls) that despised Christ,
resting in the most exact bodily exercise: then what life was that in Levit. 18^

17. Whereas it is said, Heb. 12. Ye are not come to the fi^rie mountain, but
are come to Mount-Sion, etc. If they of the Concision had seen the Son of God
(according to the Prophets, Mark 1.1. (as Mediator) it had been no fi^rie
mountain to them to destroy them, but if they saw him not in his Law he would
be a consuming fire, and persecuting Saul, would have found him to be so, for
all his Law justifications, but he was received to mercy being in his unbelief
of the Son of God.

18. Mount Sion and Jerusalem in Canaan, was a city of bondage, an Hagar, and a
fiery mountain, after the ending of the Seventy Sevens ( Dan. 9.) they not
giving diligent heed to the holy Angel Gab^iels message, but perversely swerved
from it. But Jerusalem was not a city of bondage in David's and in Salomons
times, but it was an holy City, and a faithful Town, yea, it was so for the
most part to be accounted, till the ending of the Seventy Sevens, but not any
longer, they doing, cleaving to, and resting in Salems ceremonies, which could
not procure justification, Acts 13.38, 39 and, 2 Cor. 3.3 must be understood to
this effect. The Letter kills, but the spiritual discerning Christ gave
life, the Letter only was the ministration of death, all were lively oracles
in Christ, as ^^^ephen witnessed, and lost his life in that cause, and that was
the great controversy, after the ending of the Seventy Sevens.

19. Israel after the flesh, and proselited Jews boasted in and trusted to
exterior glories, (and so do at this day) as Gods writing in the two Tables,
the Tabernacl^ and Temple furnished with all dignity of matter and form, and
all their append^nces, doubtless the outward glory was great in these things
of the Priesthood of Levi, but when outward things were only See Exodus 30. 12.1
Pet. 1.18 noted above.
prized, esteemed, and trusted in, and that their hearts were so veiled, that
their worships terminated in the outward action: then God left all in small
regard, and shook them all by Babel, and abolished them by Rome, and so all
that outward glory was done away, that Christ might be known to be the building
in which God delighted to dwell, and to take up his rest for ever, Psalm 132.
Christ was the sacrifice in which God was well pleased. Christ was far more
glorious than all by Moses, yea he was all in all, and the glory of all.

But we must not think that the ministration, that Christ ordained by Moses was
simply the ministration of death and condemnation. Is not the ministration of
the Gospel under the new Testament, the ministration of death and condemnation?
Does it not savor death unto death, to some, as it savours life unto life to
others? So surely the Doctrine of life in Christ by Moses is the same after
Moses had set down the sum of all the holy Doctrine of his Gospel Law, Deuteronomy.
13.11.12, 13, 14.
then says he from Christ, See I have set before thee this day life and good,
death and evil: in that I command thee this day to love I^^^v^h thy God, to
walk in his ways, etc Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16 etc and in vers^ 19. it is said, I call
heaven and ^arth to record this day against you, that I have set before you
life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, that both thou and
thy seed may live, that thou may love Jehovah thy God, that thou may ober
his voice, and that thou may cleave unto him, so he is thy life etc. What is
said more in the New Testament, if any man love not Jehovah, the Lord Jesus
CHRIST, let him be anathema, 1 Co 16.22.
etc. and consider these Scriptures as relative to Moses, John 3.35, 36. and
the speech of the son of consolation, Acts 11. 23. Acts 28. with Isa. 6. etc.
etc. etc.

Therefore that speech, 2 Cor. 3 is to batter down the error of the concision,
who mis-understood, mis-interpreted, and so mis-believed the whole tenor of
the Doctrine of Christ by Moses, turning all his Doctrine of faith to be
terminated in bodily exercise. Our brethren would be exhorted to study the holy
Scripture, the errors of these times are impetuous, but they shall not prevail
long, although they be driven on by the principalities and spiritual
wickednesses of the powers of darkness in all hellish fury.

And therefore again, let us know the ministration of Christ by Moses, was the
Ministration of Justification to the Faithful of the old Testament, and the
Gospel is not the Ministration of Justification, to unbelievers and hypocrites
in the new Testament, but we are to consider the controversies of those days
were mavelous, that the Polity Christ gave by Moses should be abulished, and
the Apostles teaching of this was the chief cause of all their troubles and
sufferings, Gal. 6. Stephen so found.

CHAP. XXX.
Showing further, that Israel under Moses law, was under a Covenant of grace.

1. IN general it is said You have I chosen above all people, though all the
earth be mine. Take this speech how you will, and still it was Grace.

2 They were all redeemed or bought from Egypt by the blood of the Passover.
Take this how we will, it was grace, in respect of the Apostate families, so us
redeemed from Satan, and Satan dragon Caesar's, and from Satan-Dragon Popes. It
is true, many despised the Lord that redeemed or bought them, and so did we
under the new Testament, and still do, wretches that we are, 2 Pet. 2 1. Heb.
10.29. how ready for Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4. etc. But yet this Covenant of grace
was not without effect to eternal life to many, and the argument of the
Apostle holds good in all generations, Romans 9 10, 11. As Christ promised, I am
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and it is his
memorial to all generations, to all of their faith, whether Jew or Gentile.

3. So by this, if we mark well the process of the holy story, we may
understand, that the sons of Adam never were, nor are plagued for not doing a
Covenant of works, but for despising Christ, his Gospel and Kingdom. That
unexpressible plague of the confusion of tongues, 2000 years, came not but for
despising Christ, and his Kingdom, and the Jews are cast off for this, and to
this day Turks and Papists are destroyed for the same, and the ungodly, and
unrighteous in the Reformed Churches.

4. They were under a Covenant of grace, as much as any Reformed Church under
the new Testament: for all (we may fear) are not elect among the Churches,
finis operis did intend them all, it did not exclude any from being under the
covenant of grace to outward apprehension, though finis operantis was for the
elect, as Moses speech, D^ut. 29. ult, would argue, and so it is in all
Reformed Churches. No Nation but Israel were the household of faith, and had the
covenant of promise, and enjoyed God and Christ, Romans 3 and 9. Ephesians 2. and 3.
therefore they were under a covenant of grace, if they had not been in that
state, not one of them should have been saved, and if they had been under a
covenant of works for salvation, they needed not to have been a Kingdom of
Priests, mark that speech in Epb. 1. We which first trusted in Christ, that is,
we of Israel under the old Testament, this is a most evident proof, that they
were under a covenant of grace.

5. Examine well Exodus 19.4 Christ says to Israel, I have brought you to my
self, as the fathers had appointed him, as Exodus 23 21.22. He says the same
Doctrine to us in the new Testament. All things are delivered to me of my
Father, Mat. 11. and so it is showed, Christ made a covenant with them to be
their God, and to bring them to the Father to reveal the Father to them; The
Apostle prays, that we may attain to comprehend the height depth, length and
breadth of the love of Christ, and of his calling, etc. Ephesians. 1. and 3.
this is a mercy past evpression, that God should make a covenant with such as
we are, this is the radix of all, and therefore it is said, 1. That they were
his peculiar treasure. 2. A Kingdom of Priests. 3. And holy Nation. 4. God
placed his Tabernacle among them, and 5. called them the Kingdom of God, and
the joyful shout of so just, good, and merciful a King was among them. Who
can but shout with all exultation, if we did but understand our own comfort.
These things, and other Scriptures show, they were under a covenant of grace,
if we be, they were, for their spiritual privileges and promises are now
conferred on us, 2 Cor. 6.16. Apot. 21.3. Ephesians. 2. and 3.1 Pet. 2. conferred
with Exodus 29.45. Levi^. 25, 23. and 26.12. D^ut. 7.6, 7, 8. now as Israel was
Gods peculiar treasure, so the Gentiles called to the faith are, Tit 2.14. this
well considered will make the Doctrine of Anabaptistrie to be abhorred of us,
touching our infants.

6. If reformed churches can make it good that they are under a corenant of
grace (and we may truly say it, blessed be the name of the Lord) then they
were, and we could not be so, but because their privileges are transacted to
the wild olives, and we are graffed into their olive tree, we received from
them all our glory, all our spiritual things for Christ our salvation, and all
his holy Doctrine is of and from them. I will collect some brief heads of
Doctrine, which were taught, believed, and professed in the common Weal of
Israel.

1. They had the Doctrine of the Trinity and Unity, Deuteronomy. 6.4. 2. They had the
Doctrine of election and rejection, Psalm 65. Exodus 9.16. and 33.19. 3. They
had the Doctrine of the great mystery of godliness. God manifested in the
flesh, to be a second Adam, and to be a sin-offering, and to rise from death
the third day, Genesis 3.15, and 12 3. Genesis 49. and they went three times a year,
according to the Testimony, to Israel, to testify their faith in this, this
was the main. 4. They were taught, that the Father, the Word, and the Spirit,
one infinite nature created the world, Psalm 33.6 Prov^^. 5. They were taught
that the Father had committed all power to the Son for governing the church and
the world, Psalm. 2. and 8. and 110. Genesis 19.24. Exodus, 23.20, 21, 22. all
expound Gen 3.15. 6. They were taught justification by faith in Christ, Gen 4
and 15 Heb. 11. 7. They were taught Sanctification, Be ye holy, for I am holy,
Levit. 19 2. 8. Under Moses Polity they had hope and rest in Christ, Psalm. 130.
Ephesians. 2. Jer. 6.16. and 50.7. Mat. 11.29. Christ complained they had forgotten
him their resting place, he was the rest of the Saints evermore, Jer. 50 6, 7.
the Apostle says, the Gentiles were without hope, but Israel had hope in
Christ, both for remission of sins, and eternal glory, Ephesians. 2.12. Ezra 10.2.
9. The spiritual graces of Circumcision and the Passover were required, and
so practiced, Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6. Exodus 12. Heb. 11.28. 1 Samuel 1.7.36. 10.
The heavenly inheritance was taught them, Levit, 25.23. 11. They were taught to
account themselves strangers and sojourners in this cursed world, Levit. 25 23.
and so David taught his generation, 1 Chronicles. 29 and so believed himself Psalm.
39. 12. They had hope in the Resurrection, Job 19. Psalm. 49. Exodus 3.6 Mat. 22
32. 13. They had the holy Spirit to lead them in all holy ways, 2 Cor 4.
to write the Law in their hearts, to seal to them all holy Doctrine of the
word, whether promises, threatenings, commandments, all good examples, etc. One
may make a large volume of this Subject. I think this question may be asked,
what one new doctrine is taught in the new Testament, that the Saints of the
old Testament knew not, when grievous crimination of heresy by the Council,
were laid to the Apostles charge, he protests he taught no new principles,
Acts 14.15, 16, 17. and 26.7. now if the Commonwealth of Israel had all this
holy doctrine, they must needs be under a covenant of grace.
CHAP. XXXI.
A Prosopopeia on Solomomons fall, by the Temptations of his idolatrous wives
to the ruin of his Kingdom and posterity, in granting them the liberty of
conscience for the practice of their idolatrous Rites, framed by way of
Dialogue between King Solomon, and Tirzana the Queen.

TI^zana being a Princess of the house of Moab, and being called for did enter
into the presence of King Solomon, and after some dalliance with her, and after
she had fitted his humor, by giving him all the best content she could, she
took the opportunity, and said, my Lord King Solomon, I have an humble Request
to make unto your gracious Majesty, I pray you, say me not nay.

K. What is that my sweet Ti^zana?

Q. My most gracious Lord and Sovereign, I have been some years with you, and
though you have often spoken to me to be a Proselite to the Religion of Isreal's
commonweal, yet I cannot bring my heart unto it, you well know that my
education was not in the way and manner of Israel, and my affection is not
toward it, it is not so pleasing to me, for I cannot forget my fathers house,
nor forsake his Religion: In this case I shall blemish my father, and my
mother, brethren, and sisters, and people, in case I should apostatise from our
ancient Religion, and in my opinion far the better, we have more zeal in ours,
and many more pleasures to give man and woman content, than is in your
profession: your Religion is very cross to man's nature, and is urged with
great terror and strictness, your Religion reproves thoughts, words, and most
men's actions: no Religion under heaven does so as yours, and that makes so few
to embrace it. Yea many of Israel have formerly been more addicted, unto ours,
and the worships of neighbors Nations than to this of Israel, and they will
not follow it but by compulsion of Governors, whereas religious worships should
be freely exercised according to every man's conscience; when if your subjects
should be left unto, you well know which way the ride will run, it is a
pitiful thing that man of a noble and free spirit should be so tired with hard
injunctions, and heavy burdens, as with bands, cords, and fetters, and it may
be, that reformation that your noble Father endeavored, and your self have
prosecuted, would not and will not be so convenient, as due liberty, which
would be a more noble design than rigid reformation. And if Antiquity make
things reverend, then our Religion is more ancient, or if not more, yet as
equal for Antiquity, for ought I can learn (I am but a poor Historian being a
woman) but I am able to prove the Religion of our God Chemosh, to be above four
hundred and fifty years old. This I can attest and prove by your own Records,
and you had yours but in the wilderness when ye came out of Egypt.

King. Then said King Solomon, what my Tirzana, does all your speech tend unto?

Queen. I humbly crave your Graces favor to finish my speech, I remember I
have heard my Father and Grandfather speak what plenty of peace, and
prosperity our God Chemosh has given us, nay what victories we have had
against our mighty enemies, the Giants called Emims, and as it was your God
that conquered the Chanaanites for you, so it was our God Chemosh that
conquered the tall, great and terrible Giants, the Emims for us. Yea, which I
am loath to utter, our God Chemosh has given our Fathers power over Israel for
twenty years together: Oh, should not we then have a most devout opinion of our
Religion. But why should I your handmaid thus be bold to speak to your royal
and sacred Majesty, your great favor and respect unto me has quickened my
spirit, and then with an humble deportment of body with her face to the ground,
she said, the intent of all my speech is, that it would please my Sovereign
Lord the King, to grant my small request, I humbly beseech that I may have
leave to build a Chapel on Mount Oliver to worship our famous and reverend
Numen, Chemosh the God of my Fathers.

King. What is this I hear from you my Dear? Did your speech drive at this? Oh
I may not do this; Jehovah our most holy Lord God whom we worship in his holy
Temple is the true everlasting God, and he can command nothing but what is good
and perfectly good, so that we need not add any thing, and he forbids nothing
but what is evil, which we must not dis-annull; and he is the Sovereign Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and it is most requisite that man should subject himself to
the most high, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and God above all Gods:
and therefore all the Children of men must be subject to his Laws, and
whosoever harden himself against him by disobedience shall never prosper, and
whereas you talk of strictness, etc. you are to know, man by nature is borne a
wild ass colt, and there is no c^ming of corrupt nature but by a strict course
of holy Laws, which to a regenerate and godly soul is an easy Yoke, and to
which he is willingly subject: yea, man by nature is sometime so refractory
that he will not be brought unto God but by affliction, yea, neither Law nor
affliction profits till the Lord himself deal with the heart, such
perverseness is in man: It is most true, that man is addicted to his own vain
heart, Pro. 4. vid. the Margin.
and accounts the Law of our God most vile, and is altogether contrary to God,
and would run to all licentiousness, if there were not holy and just Laws, and
good government (Gods ordinance) to keep men within bounds.

2. And whereas you talk that man is of a noble and free Spirit, you are
deceived in your apprehensions, he is of a most ignoble Spirit, ready to fall
into all vile opinions, and to all sin and wickedness, and to follow all
tentations to evil, as for his freedom of spirit, he is free indeed to all
evil as an horse rushing into the battle, and not one spark of that celestial
fire is in him to any good till God put it in him, and maintain it when he has
so infused it. Man's mind, will, and affections, are all corrupt, and in
himself no healing can be found: How merciful then was our God, that he from
whom we fell would give us a holy Law to be a medicine and healing. Doctrine to
restore the soul, as his mercy and goodness is unspeakable in giving us his
word, for our need (which is better known to God then our selves) called for
such blessed Heavenly Revelation as is declared in our most holy and most
righteous Law which Moses received of God for us. And we and all men must obey
this Law, and be reformed by it if we will have any comfort or protection in
this world or hope in another.

3. Whereas you talk of due liberty, my beloved, Tirzena I would have thee to
consider all the reformation we can possibly attain unto by the careful
industry of my royal authority, and of our Priests and Prophets, and Schools
will not come to that purity and exactness, that the Lord our God requires.
Many imperfections in omissions, and commissions will appear continually
through the lusts of corrupted nature that war in our souls, by reason of the
darkness of the understanding, and the untractablenesse of the will and the
affections. And none that have a feeling of the most holy Lord God, and of his
truth in the heart, but find this thus. And therefore to give the least liberty
to thy opinion is such a design that will provoke to anger our gracious and
mighty Lord God, and if I give liberty to thy opinion, why not to the
abomination of Moloch of the Children of Ammon, and to the opinion of
Ashtaroth, the abomination of the Zidonians. And so in the end to root out the
holy faith of the Son of God, our great high Priest Melchizedek, and then that
you desire will prove an evil impetuos, to the down fall of truth and
godliness, and hardly ever be reclaimable, yea, let me enforce this further,
that there cannot be any liberty granted in any respect to false worships, and
ungodly opinions, such liberty will bring us and our posterity to miserable
bondage, as our Fathers felt in the Wilderness, and in the times of the
Judges: And if we that now live, and our posterity do not keep close to that
reformation which is now settled in Isreal's Commonweal, Jehovah our God who is
a jealous God, will destroy this glorious Temple that we have built to his
name, and shake this Kingdom by many grievous calamities: and at last weed us
out of this good Land that he has given to us and to our Fathers, therefore
you speak most unworthily, to call our Reformation rigid. And whereas you talk
of pleasures, etc. you must know the pleasures of sin are but for a time, which
wast before we can enjoy them: And all such lusts and pleasures do but war
against our souls, as for the fewness of them that follow our God the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, it should put you to a stand whether the most do not go the
broad way to destruction.

4. I will inform you a little more, because you boast of Antiquity in your
Opinion and Religion, you are deceived: for our holy faith is as old as the
first man and woman that was created, yours is but of late, from a God newly
come up, and indeed no true God: Our God created the Heaven and the Earth, and
from him is our Religion, and He destroyed the World by waters for profaning
the name of the Lord by false worship^, and it was our God that cursed the
Nations with strange Languages, for despising this our holy faith, by which
most heavy plague, all the Families of the earth are in the bondage of Devils,
following athe^sme and abominable and lawless idolatries: and it was this our
God that brought up Israel out of the Land of Egypt, and destroyed Pharaoh and
his people with great plagues for despising this our holy Lord God and his
people. And your fore. Fathers knew this, and sent for Balaam the Inchanter to
curse us in the Wilderness, and it was our God that saved our Fathers from
Balaam and the King of Moab, and as for the other King of Moah by whom our
Nation was afflicted, it was for falling to the idols of the Nations, 5. I must
warn you of a great error: whereas you say your Chemosh conquered the Emims
for your Ancestors, no such matter, it was our merciful God that destroyed
those Giants and gave you their Land, this our mighty Lord God did, because
your Father Lot loved our Father Abraham, and did follow his faith and holy
Religion, and he did bless our Father Abraham, and God blessed him, and for
this cause our God gave AR unto the Children of Lot for a possession. And this
you may read in our holy stories, Deuteronomy. 2.9. And your God is a false God; an
idol, but our Jehovah is the Eternal Lord God who made the Heavens and the
Earth, and a jealous God, and will be very angry with us if I should grant in
his Land any more Temples to be builded then his own, And you cannot be
ignorant of this, nor your own kindred, that our Eternal God is not such as
your false Gods, even all our Enemies being Judges, and you have heard of these
things by our Priests, and Prophets, and all my Court still have told you these
things. Therefore, my Dear, thou art much mistaken in all thy speeches, and
thou have been instructed in an evil manner, I have, as you have heard, spoken
to you in an easy and mild frame of Language to persade thee, therefore be
advised by me if ever thou hope of comfort in the World to come: Do as your
Father Lot did, and do as Ruth your faithful and godly Countrey-woman did,
forget thy kindred and thy Fathers House, and serve the Lord our God with a
good heart.

Queen, Although the King had thus brayed her as wheat with a pestill in a
Mortar, yet her folly departed not from her. But having this denial, tears
fell from her eyes which bedewed her cheeks, having her Handkercher in her
hand, with snubs of umphs and imphs, fell at the Kings feet, and further said;
Oh, and it please my gracious Lord the King, it is but to build a Chapel for
me and my maids, and some of my retainers, which cannot fancy this worship of
Israel. I will promise your Majesty that not one of Israel shall come into our
holy places.

King, This may not be done, it will be a snare unto my subjects to set up the
abomination of Chemosh in Jehovahs Land. I may not do it.

Queen, Oh why does my gracious Lord call our Religion, the abomination of
Chemosh, I assure your Majesty by the faith of a woman that there shall be
dore-keepers, that none of Israel shall come to have communion with us in our
worships. It is for my self and retinue, and some of mine own Nation as they
have occasion to come and see me in their visits.

King, I may not, I may not do it. I pray thee talk no more of this matter.

Queen, Ymph, umph, tears: And thus she is dismissed and departs the presence
of the King: But yet another time assaults the King, and sends an honorable
personage, her Brother before hand, a notable insinuating crafty instrument,
who on a time came to Salomons Court, and having seen and heard an excellent
consort of music, of Instruments of all sorts, as also the voices of singing
men and singing women, which he admired and praised, and extolled the King, as
if all had been of his invention, Kings and Princes when they came to Solomon,
would bring their Physicians and their learned men with them, and they would
gather into writing much of Salomons speech of natural philosophy, etc.
also he magnified the King for his excellent endowments in contriving his
plots for buildings, and his wisdom in natural philosophy, and his rare gift
in song, and his wonderful instinct to speak of the natures, vi^tures, and
effects of Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs, of fowls, beasts, fishes, and creeping
things, etc. And that all Princes of the Earth that come to visit your Majesty,
and bring their Physicians with them, will carry notes and writings home with
them that shall stand all ages and people in great stead for ever. And as for
your Religion in worshipping Jehovah in his holy Temple, he is the great God,
and above all Gods, and all your performances are glorious. But yet other
Nations have much joy, content and comfort, every Nation in serving their own
Gods. For they cannot be persuaded to embrace your devotions, as too strickt
and rigid: you may not add any thing to what your God commands, nor take away
any thing he forbids: But we may add any thing as just occasion calls for, and
sometimes take away what was not so fitting, which things are rational to all
Nations, for what is it, but may be amended? Yea, I have heard of your Priests,
Prophets, and learned men that there will be a great alteration in your
Religion after some certain time, that all this service that you do shall be
ended as if it had never been, for they do say there shall be another manner
of Kingdom, Priests and Temple, and Sacrifices, and Worships. These things
considered, is it not an hard thing to pe^swade your bordering Princes to
embrace your Religion which shall have such a great change among your selves,
and therefore they may well think it is more rational to hold their own then to
be of yours, seeing your own selves say it shall be chang^d, and therefore they
suppose their worships shall continne as long as yours, for if we go to Kittim,
Kedar, Chaldea, Ashur, Ammon, Egypt, etc. what Gods they have, they ever had,
they change not; and they think greater glory, honor, wealth, prosperity, and
victories should not befall them if they should embrace your God, for they all
know that Israel has had heavy pressures of famine, wars, and pestilence under
your God, yea, of late years in the reign of the noble and royal King David
your Father, and it is not likely that such mighty Nations wise and politic,
should be all deceived in their worships and yours only good and perfect.

And so these causes it is that those honorable women, that your royal
Majesty has taken into so near society to your self, and into your most
honorable Court, cannot be drawn to your Religion, and among the rest my most
honored and noble Sister, your sacred Majesty's consort, to whom you have
manifested much love and respect in an high degree, for which all the Family
of my Father and Mother do much rejoice. And although your most excellent
Majesty have given her (out of her gracious respect to her) good counsel, and
she is much greived that she cannot give content to her most Sovereign Lord
in changing her judgment in Religion from that she was educated in: Wherefore
if I may be so bold to im^lore your graces favor on her bohalfe in granting
her small request to build her a Chapel on Mount Olivet to satisfy her mind,
it is but her fancy: I am sorry, for my part, she cannot comply with your
devotions, she is but a woeman, and I hope no hurt will accrue to your self
or Kingdom, and if I may have leave of your sacred Majesty to say it is but
too much stricknesse, for I am well persuaded of your Religion, that you may be
saved with your profession, and so I hope we shall as soon also come to the
Elisian Feilds of all happiness as well as you. At this speech of the Queens
Brother the King was somewhat moved, and began to be angry, but he fell at the
Kings feet and besought him that he might speak two or three words more in my
Sisters behalf, and I hope I may speak freely, that you did covenant with my
Sister that she should use her conscience, and that she and her attendants of
our Nation should have free exercise of their devotions, and therefore let it
please your Majesty, give us leave to put you in mind of your promise, and how
can they perform their devotions unless they have a place of assembly, else it
had been better for her never to have come to the Land of Israel: But as you
have given us cause to admire your special love to my Sister: So we humbly
pray, let us have no occasion to distrust it: And let me say one thing more, it
will marvellously affect our Nation, and it will persuade them that you love
us, if you please to grant this request to the noble Daughter of our Liege
Sovereign Lord the King of Moab my Father, and yet one thought more comes into
mind which I suppose will be pleasing to your sacred Majesty, that if you
perceive any damage or danger is like to issue upon it, you may pull down
every stone of the building and level it with the ground.

King, The King said, trouble me no more with these matters; I will g^ant no
such thing, your speeches are unsavory and full of ignorance: I could answer
all your fond allegations, but it is not for Kings to dispute with them, that
have nothing to do with us in such cases. Where the word of a King is, there
power is, and let that suffice you.

This Brother went and told his Sister of all the discourse with the King, and
of his denial, at which report she fell sick and was very sad, upon which the
King gave her a visit and she wept abundantly, now the King had some relenting
in his heart, for the King perceived it was grief and trouble of heart, he
spoke very kindly and tenderly to her. A man of ingenuity cannot endure,
unless a Nabal, a Fool, a Churl, to see his near and dear consort to weep, a
woman endowed with excellent parts of wit, understanding, grace of speech
courteous, loyal, comely, sweet and beautiful, and what may give a man
content (I speak simply of man and woman) The King after he had in a most
pleasant manner saluted her, departs, and then her spirit was revived. color
began to be in her cheeks, and lightsomnesse in her countenance, Although a
woman be as a man's self very desirable, yet in case of Religion, and the
worship of the most High, who is a jealous God, and his worship is pure and
holy, and will not abide our Tresholds to be set by his Thresholds. In this
case we must deny our selves (as not to be servants of men, much less of
women) and her that is most dear, of earthly comforts, that lies in the
Bosom, and dearer then all other relations what ever, rather then to be a
means that the name of Jehovah be profaned by false worships, he that does not
so, the Son of God says, is not worthy of him. The story of our first Parents
must be conferred, when our first Father was persuaded by his Wife with her
self to break the commandment, it should seem she persuaded him, for it is
said; Because thou hearknest to the voice of thy wife, G^en. 3.17. and ever
since women are weak to be seduced, but strong, even Satan's engine, to seduce
the man with her Enchantments (for so they may be very well called) of her
eyelids, lips, tears, etc. The Son of God laid this danger before his people,
Exodus 34. And Satan put this in practice by his wicked Prophet, Numb. 24. and
25.1, 2. And Satan thus dealt by the Jannes's and Jambres'es under the New
Testament times, who did and do creep as Serrpents into Houses, to lead
captive silly women laden with sins and led away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 3.
The wife she is still at home with her children and servants, and how
insensibly does she corrupt them: And if a Woeman be active, she will corrupt
other women, and after a little while, men follow their wives, and so
corruptions gangrenate quickly, and spread far: This the Apostl^ foretold,
which came to pass afterward, but especially concerning Mahomet and in the
Papacy. Pardon this digression.

Queen. About certain months after that the King had called for this
honorable and royal Lady, she prepares her self in all costly raiment,
cloth of Gold and Silver of curious needle work, with chains of inestimable
Jewels about her neck, that the beams of her spankled raiment with the
precious gems made radiant beams (the Sun shining thorough the Windows) upon
the walls of the Kings palaces as she passed, and at last enters the chamber of
presence, honored Virgins attending her, and presents her self before the
King, with her ^orient eyes, damask rosy cheeks, twinkling eyelids, cherry
lips, and all festivity and grace of speech, with comely and pleasant
deportment, fell at the Kings feer, the King took her up by the hand, and falls
a kissing her, with all loving embracements, and after many pleasant passages,
the night drawing on, the King and she had sweet complacency in the bed of
love, the next morning she retired her self to a close secret Chamber by, and
after she had washed and perfumed her self, and had put on other change of
raiment very costly, craves leave to do her humble duty, and take her leave of
the King, whom when the King saw, he was taken again with her eyelids, and
closes her fast in his arms. Then she ponders how she may enforce her old
arrand, and after much and pleasant complement with the King, as soon as she
had perceived she had entangled him, then she utters the oracles of the old
Serpent, and says to the King; How do I admire and wonder at the great
respect and love that my Sovereign Lord does manifest to me hi handmaid, that
he should afford such his amiable society; I do perceiv your most ardent and
indeared love to me above any of your honorable weomen, your kind and fervent
desire toward me though most unworthy, has fired my heart toward your sacred
Majesty: I am your Servant and at your Graces command, and so ever will be to
perform all loyal and dutiful observance: I would I were able to express the
fervency of my heart unto my Sovereign Lord, and seeing it has pleased the
King so royally to manifest himself, I hope I may present and importune my
fo^mer humble request unto my Lord my gracious Sovereign, for the building of a
Chapel for my maids, and my Household Servants and Attendants, it shall not be
so much for my self as for them, whom I humbly confess are not worthy to come
into the confines of Jerusalem your holy City, 1 Chr. 8.11.
much less into the Palaces of Zion, the City of David your Father, your love
is so great unto me, which if I should distrust I should most highly offend:
For I know you hate Atheism, and as it is an, abomination unto you it greives
my heart that I have no place of devotion to resort unto, when all the Ladies
of Israel may resort unto your Temple and I and my maids sit moping at home all
amort, as they worship their God so would I serve my God, the God of my Father.
And she gave the King a gentle stroke on the breast, and said, my noble
consort, my Sovereign, my ^oyall Lord, I know I have your heart, I know you
love me, and what shall or can be wanting from a loving heart, etc. etc. And
the King being ravished with her love, and with such words sweeter then honey,
softer then oil, and all subtle flatteries, and after some discourse the King
was captivated with her dalliance and snared with her devilish devices, and her
hands were as bands, she persuaded him, she enticed him, and forced him to
yield, that she had his license to build a Temple on Mount Olivet to Chemosh,
the Devil, the idol, the abomination of Moab.

Now the Queen and her Attendants followed their businesses with diligence,
they slacked no time. Masons and Carpenters are sent for to hew Stone, and to
square and saw Timber, and so an high place was builded on the Mount of
co^ruption, which did give a most vile affront to CHRIST'S holy Templ^, for they
could overlook all Jerusalem from Mount Olivet.

When King Solomon was thus caught by this Lady of Moab, then all the other
strange wives might thus prattle, and they plied their businesses diligently,
and used all their agents, men and women, as there ever are in Kings Courts
too many time servers and hypocrites for such projects and negotiations. And
things went so ill in the State, that not one of his thousand Wives and
Concubines would dissuade the King, if half the World were a Church, a Troop
or squadron of a thousand of such creatures (if suffered) would overturn all,
these were so pampered with pride, ease, wantonness, and fullness of bread,
that no holy Doctrine could take with them, but rather the Jedidiah the
precious servant of the Lord was taken and snared, and corrupted by their
pleasing and insinuating incantations.

Those thousand wretches could not spend so little, each of them with their
Maids and Attendants, as seven hundred or eight hundred pounds per annum, and
some of them would consume more (like the Locusts, Apoc. 9. fruges consumere
nati) And the charges in Building their Temples was great. All these expenses
might amount unto eight hundred thousand pounds per annum, if not to a million,
an excessive charge, which very likely the subjects stumbled at, and after
Salomons death craved ease of taxations of Rechoboam. They would not take it
ill, to build strong Cities, and Chariot-Cities, and Store-Cities, etc. that
charge was for the profit of the Commonweal. But to be at such rates, excises,
and taxations for the maintenance of such a number of base creatures, the
subject was not able to bear, and craved release of such oppressions.

Common-Weals should have a diligent inspection that rates and taxations
collected for the common profit, be not employed by men to private interests to
make great purchases, to maintain themselves, wives, and children, and
flattring Attendants in pride, idleness, and luxury. Such coveteousnesse,
self-love, and loving of pleasures more then lov^rs of God, will breed
perilous times and undo all. The Son of God to whom the Father has committed
all authority and power, who is King in Sion and the only Potentate, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, he knows how, as we have seen, to put fire into
Subjects hearts to destroy oppressors. An^ let Rulers and Governors consider,
all the Chariot-cities, ^enced Cities, and Store cities which Solomon had
repaired, fortified, and furnished with all provisions and ammunitions in the
ten Tribes, and in part of Benjamin, all this fell to Jeroboom in one day. 1
King 9.
Thi^ was a punishment to the Kingdom for Salomons transgression in toleration
of false Religions and bad opinions. And observe also the story of Gideon; He
was a man of no great estimation and authority in the Tribe of Manasseh, or
among the thousands of Israel, his was the meanest, yet when the Son of God
would advance him to do his work, he made him General of Isreal's Common Weal,
and he by the Sword of Christ and his own Sword avenged the quarrel of Gods
Covenant against the seed of the Serpent in many exploits, upon which the
people were so affected that they would have conferred on him and his
posterity, the Government of the State, which he modestly and religiously
denied, but his wicked opinion of will worship in making an Ephod to worship
God by, was the ruin of his house and the cause of much trouble to the whole
Commonweal, Jud. 6.15. and 8.27. and chapter 9.

Wherefore let all States be admonished concerning toleration of wicked
opinions in pretense of conscience, especially of the papisticall opinions,
which draws to the second death, we must remember the whoredoms of the
seven-Mountain City, is a mystery, and Christ has said, Mystical Babylon
shall fall and be cast as a mil-stone into the Sea, and what State soever seeks
by toleration to uphold it, must sink with it, undoubredly. We have the
providence of Christ fresh before our eyes, how he has resisted all cunning
plots and wit of man to bring in Popery, the toleration of Popery is a
countermanding of Christ's project, for it is said, the Kingdoms of the world
shall be our Lord Gods, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever.
Toleration of Popery does uphold the King of Locusts Kingdom, and the Lord
JESUS says, he that gathers not with me, scatters. CHRIST says, come out
of her my people, and toleration hinders their coming. The reverend Master
Perkins, in his reformed Catholic, declares the impossibility of
reconciliation, and which was written of purpose against such intendments, and
many others have testified against such State-abominations.

Yea, Christian reformed States and Common-Weals, that have departed from
Abaddons Kingdom, should be well advised what treaties they make with the King
of Locusts Subjects. But by no means to yield them, while such aid of men or
ammunition, not to receive from them any help,: It is best, that the reformed
look to their own Common-Weals, States and polities. Let the holy stories of
Asa and Jebosaphats Kingdom with Achabs House be our instruction, as also the
holy Scriptures that show us the mis-carriage of a maziah King of Judoh, 2
Ch^on. 25. and 18. and 19. and 1 King. 22. confer also Esai. 30. etc. etc.

Let all Princes and Common Weals take heed of idolatrous and wicked weomen,
there are wealthy, politic, and of high countenance: Such have caused much
grief and trouble to the Church of God and the Republic, a common mische if in
most places, from Genesis 6. even to this day.

But godly gracious women that have in them the power of godliness, to love
the word of God in the holy Scriptures of the Prophers and Apostles, and to
love the holy public assemblies of Christ Jesus, and be sober, discreet,
temperate, merciful, meek, humble, chaste, and be keepers at home, to train up
their dear children in godly ways, and to have a special care that servants
do not corrupt their children (they have been an occasion of much evil in
children) also to be careful in overseeing and guiding the affairs of the
house, especially in the husbands absence, etc. Such are a Crown of glory to
their husbands, the Commonweal, Town, and Family.

I will transcribe a speech out of Josephus, pertinent to this conference of
Tirzana the Lady of Moab, which will also manifest the wickedness of these
apostating and perilous times, Josephus Lib. 4. chap. 6.

When Moses, the faithful servant of the Angel of the Covenant, the Son of
God, was zealous against the Apostasy of Israel especially of the Tribe of
Simeon for joining themselves to Baal-Pebor and seperating themselves to that
Shame, then Zimri to make a mutiny most audaciously uttered this speech to
Moses.

Moses, says Zimri, use thine own Laws, whereunto by long use thou have added
strength and confirmation, which had not thou done, often times ere this had
thou suffered punishment, and learnt to thine own misery, that the Hebrews were
not to be deluded; for my self, thou shall never tie me to thy tyrannical
decrees, for hitherto have thou endeavored naught else but under pretext of
Law and Religion, to bring us into servitude and subjection, and thy self by
thy subtle and sinister means to honor and sovereignty, taking from us the
pleasures and liberties of our lives (things that belong to free men, and such
as appertain or live not under any man's government.) For this should be worse
then an Egyptian thraldom, to punish every man by thy Laws,, according to
thine own pleasure, whereas thou thy self art more worthy to be punished, in
that thou disannullest that thing that is approved by all men's consent, and
desire that thy decrees should be of more force then all the resolutions of
all other mortal men whatsoever. But I (as touching that which I do) in that I
suppose it to be well done, am not afraid to confess in this Assembly; namely,
That I have taken a stranger to wife, thou hear mine actions, from mine own
mouth, as from a free and resolute man, neither do I desire that they should
be hidden, I likewise sacrifice to the Gods contrary to our custom, because I
suppose it to be both just and necessary, that from many I seek the truth, and
not (depending as it were upon a tyrany, or living there under) to build my
faith upon one only, for no man shall please me that will have more interest
in my actions then my self. Dear and beloved Reader this expresses the
unclean and vile spirit of Satan in these evil days.

CHAP. XXXII.
Brief considerations about Sheol, Gehenna, and especially about Hades, as it
relates to the Article of the Creed he descended into Hell.

BEloved Reader, there has been in some places, not a little stir about the
sufferings of our Lord, which doubtless were mavelous great, even greater
then can well be expressed: But yet unless a man will say as some say, that he
suffered the very Essential Torments of Hell, they will account such little
better then Heretics.

The very first occasion of his assertion, was as I conceive from the
misunderstanding of the holy Article of the Creed, commonly called the
Apostles Creed, which speaks thus in the original Greek, K (...), in Latin,
descendi ad infe^os, in English he descend^d into Hell: But this Latin and
English Translation do come much short of the large sense and meaning o^ the
original Greek, I mean the said Translations do not fully express the large
elegant meaning of the Greek word Hades, as it ought to be understood, and
therefore from this barren and bad Translation, sundry erroneous Expositions
have been broached by sundry Authors which has filled most Churches with much
trouble.

1. The controversy between Doctor Bilson and Master Broughton was this,
Whither the holy soul of our Lord Christ went at his death, hence to Hell or
hence to Heaven, Doctor Bilson after much sweat, and labor for his journey to
Hell, at last concludes thus in his Sermons, p. 219. we have no warrant in the
word of God so to fasten Christ's soul unto Hell for the time of his death, but
that it might be in paradise before it descended to Hell.

2. On the other hand there are some learned men (not all) and some Churches
(not all) that expound this Article of Christ's suffering the essential
Torments of Hell in his soul in the Garden, and on the Cross.

Now that we may attain to a true understanding of the Article, we may do well
to consider the Terms Sheol, Gehenna, and Hades.

1. The word Sheol is only Hebrew, and it has several exceptions, of which
see Ains. in Genesis 37.35. and in Ps. 16.10. and in sundry other Authors also. 2.
As for the term Gehenna it is a dialect from the Hebrew, and (...) signifies
properly and only the place of Torment, for in all the New Testament it is ever
taken in that sense, in Mat. 5. Man. 9. Luke 12.5. etc. 3. As for Hades: It is
very needful that light may shine in our paths to consider well in what sense
it is used in the New Testament, and in what sense it must be taken in the
Creed.
It is noted by Mr. Bro and Mr. Robert Wilmos, and by some others also that
Hades has these three principal significations.

1. It signifies death to the person, or destruction to things. 2. It signifies
the grave to the dead body. 3. It signifies the world un-seen, namely the world
of souls to the souls that are separated fron. he body, without distinction of
joy or sorrow, that must be gathered from the person and his cause, whether it
be good or bad, and therefore Hades is not always used properly, and only for
the place of Torment to all departed souls, but it has two parts, the one is a
happy part for all the godly, and the other is a most miserable part for all
the wicked that dye in their sins.
1. Hades does signify death to the person, or destruction to things, as in
Mat. 11.23. Thou Capernaum which art exalted to Heaven shall be brought down
to Hades, that is to the lowest Earth, this City was destroyed by the Justice
of God, because they despised the days of the Son of man, and did not regard
his blessed visitation, although he was much conversant both in preaching and
working miracles among them, so that now there is but a little remainder of it
left, as Sir Walter Raleigh excellently shows in P. 347. The words of Christ
do show the once greatness of that City both in temporal and spiritual
respects: It was one of the principal Cities of Decapolis, and the metropolis
of Galilee, and though some marks of this Cities magnificence were seen in
Saint Jeroms time, it being then a reasonable Burge or Town, yet those that
have seen it since (as Brochard, Bradeinbech, and Saliniac) affirm that it
consisted but of six poor Fishermens Houses, and thus it has pleased God by
his providence to direct that Histories should show the sad event of Christ's
prophetical threatening, and in this sense Sheol is also used in Number. 16.33.
for the death and destruction of persons and things.

2. Hades in Mat. 16.18. does mean 'eath to the person as the scope of the
place does best bear it, and by the Gates of Hades is meant a cruel and
violent death which should be inflicted by the Roman persecuting Emperors, and
after them by the Popes and by the Substitutes of each, that should have power
to fit in the Gates of Judgment, to condemn to death by grievous tortures,
all those that did build their faith on the Rock, Christ, as Peter did, and for
saying as he did, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, on this Rock
Christ (faith Christ) I will build my Church, so that the Gates of Hades shall
not by any sentence or torture of death prevail against them to extinguish
them.

1. Hades is used to signify the grave to the dead bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 55. O
death where is thy sting, O Hades where is thy victory, Hades in this place,
faith Master Bro. in Exp. Anti. P. 15. Is the holy bodies lodging.

2. In Act. 2.27. Thou will not Jeave me or my vital soul in (Hades) the Grave
that it should corrupt (as other men's bodies do in that space of time) before
it was raised.

3. In Apoc. 6 8. death sat on a pale Horse, and Hades followed him, now that
which follows death must needs be the grave to the body called Hades, and in
that respect Master Bro. in Apoc. 56. calls Hades the gulf of the grave, and
says he in P. 165. A gulf of a grave was opened, to show how the Casa^s
warred and perished miserably three hundred years with their great Armies, and
such a Sheol, Grave, or great Burial is spoke of in Eze. 39.11. and in Es. 14.
which places the Seventy translate Sheol by Hades, and so Hades has as wide a
mouth as, Sheol, and therefore in Apoc. 6.8. death rides on a pale Horse to
hasten the death of persecutors in abundance, and that Hades the grave follows
death, and therefore the Seventy translate Sheol in Pro. 30, 15. by Hades the
grave as being one of the three things that says It is not enough, and in Pro.
27.20 Sheol and destruction are never full, in which place the Seventy have
Hades.

3. Hades signifies the world un-seen, or the world of souls to the souls that
are separated from the body, without distinction of joy or sorrow, but as it
may be gathered from the qualification of the person and his cause.

The Apostle Peter in Act. 2. was to prove the Resurrection of Christ from
death to life against the Saduces, he did not dispute of the second death, nor
of a journey to Hell (as many understand Hell) nor of suffering Hell Torments
in his soul, as some do also understand Hell in Act. 2. for if he had so
disputed with the Saduces. (which were many in those days) he had disputed
besides the question, which was about the Resurrection of his dead body, and it
may also be a grei^e unto us that such an Heavenly Article of our Christan
faith, as is the immortality of the souls: passing from the dead body to the
joys of God, should be so much mis-interpreted as has been and yet is in some
Churches in the aforesaid un-sound senses.

The holy rational soul of the Lord Jesus Christ at his death went to the happy
part of Hades, namely to that part of it, that is called Paradise. The rich
man's soul at his death went likewise to Hades, but yet it was to that part of
it that is called Gehenna, to torments in the lake of fire. 'Abrahams Bosom
was in Hades, and the rich man was also in Hades, and there Abraham, and the
rich man spoke to each other, which shows that they were in the same world of
souls, though in several distinct lots, and it is evident by Es. 66. that the
godly and the wicked kn^w one the others case, therefore we are not to think,
that Hades is low in the earth. It would be ridiculous, that in a Dialogue one
should talk with another above his head millions of miles, see Bro. in Rep. 11,
12, 13.

All souls ascend to Gods Throne, Eccl 3. and 12 yea even the wicked ascend to
Gods Throne, in the proper term of ascending, and have their lot there before
the Throne of God, and in the presence of the just, and are tormented in the
presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Apoc. 14. these
places show that the place of joy and the place of torment are in sight and
some near distance to each other, and that Hades is the general term of them
both. Hence therefore I conclude, that it is the person, and his cause, that
must interpret the word Hades, as it respects the departed soul, either for j^y
or sorrow, either for heaven or hell. I may exemplify my meaning by this
similitude: Traitors go from Westminster to the Tower of London, and so do
faithful State. (...) men also, but traitors and proditors go to prisons and
torments in the Tower: and so also faithful States men go to the Tower, but
they go to the pleasant chambers, and gardens in the Tower: so in like sort all
godly souls go to Hades, but they go to the pleasant places of Paradise in
Hades, in the unseen world of souls, but the wicked when they die, their souls
go to the dark places of torment in Hades, in the unseen world of souls, and in
this sense also Hades is also used in heathen authors, and in some Greek
Fathers, being rightly alleged as it has been well observed by Dr. Ligh^foot
in Acts 2. and by M. Bro who has also observed, that in no Greek author, nor
in a^l the new Testament, Hades does only and properly signify the place of
torment, So in Philemons Jamb^i^ks, two paths are in Hades, one of the
righteous, the other of the wicked.

4. The Reader may please to take notice, that in these interpritations. and
explications, I have not run without good company, but learned men and Churches
that have suffered much for the truth of the Gospel, have thus thought, taught,
and written: P. Martin, and M. Buce^, that held the stern of Religion in the
days of King E. ward the sixth; The first at Oxford, and the other at
Cambridge. These two godly men, were as good Divines as the world saw for a
1000 years (as it is testified by Mr. Bro in a Treatise of the Article printed
1599) they brought into our native Country the Zurick Confession, which was
allowed by King Edward the sixth, and by Queen Elizabeth.

The Confession is in these words.

Per inferos intelligimu^, non locum supplicis designatum impiis, sed,
defunct^s sideles, quemadmodum per superas ^dbuc sup^r st^es in vita; proi^de
anima Christi descondi^ ad inferos, id est delat^ est in sinum Abrak^, in qua
collects fu^runt omnes d functi fideles: ergo cum lat^oni secum crucifixo
dixit, Hodie er^s mecum in Paradiso, promisit ei consortium vita, and beatorum
spiritum, Licet enim Dominus descend^s^e dic^tur, fit tamen, ex more ^^quendi.
Confitemur in hus articul^ animas esse immortales, ^asque p^otinus a morte
^o^porealy ansi^e ad vitam.

And the right Reverend Mr. Hen. Bullenger, the godly Tigu^ine Professor does
record this very Confession on the Article of Christ's descent, as it is to be
seen in his seventh Sermon, in his first Decade toward the latter end of that
Sermon. I acknowledge that I never saw the Zurick Confession, but as I find it
recorded in other men's writings, but that of Reverend Bullenge^ is translated
into English, and printed many years ago.

His words translated run thus.

By (Hades) Hell, we understand not the place of punishment appointted for the
wicked, but (the place) of the faithful that are departed, even as also by the
higher parts, we understand them that are yet remaining alive: wherefore the
soul of Christ descended inro hell, that is to say, it was carried into
Abraham's bosom, wherein all the faithful already departed were gathered
together; therefore when he said to the thief that was crucified with him, this
day shall thou be with me in Paradise, he promised him the fellowship of life,
and of the blessed souls, etc.

And prefently after Bullenger calls this article, The article of the souls
immortality, in this article (says he) we confess that the souls are
immortal, and that immediately after death they do pass to life, and this he
speaks of all the Saints that have died in the faith of Christ from the
beginning of the world.

5. I find that many learned men of our native Country have and do wave (as
evil) the translation, He descended into hell, and do hold the two former
interpretations to be impertinent to the true scope of it, and I believe that
more and more will do so daily, unless such as be too careless in taking the
pains of the mind to search into the true knowledge of the things of God, for
indeed many Students care for no more, but what they have received by Tradition.

6. There is a Dictionary, that is called Portus Dictionary, and another little
book a kind of Dictionary, called ^lementa Graeca, which show that Hades (among
other acceptations) does signify heaven as well as hell, and some learned do
record, that in the Macedonian Greek dialect, children are taught to pray, Our
Father which art in Hades. Also there is another little book of 22 pages, put
forth lately in English by a godly learned man, e^tituled, Of the Article of
our Creed. Christ descended to Hades, or ad inferos. This little Treatise will
much help to guide common Readers on this Subject.

7. It is very useful for the godly Reader, to be well acquainted with the
several phrases of the holy Scripture, and in special of the term soul the
Reader may see the various acceptations of it, in Ainsworths Tables, after his
translation of the five books of M^ses.

He shows that the term soul is taken.

1. For our natural estate, Genesis 2.7. 2. For person, Genesis 12 5. 3. For life,
Genesis 19.17. 4. For mind of will, Oen. 23.8. 5. For Ege, it is, ille, I, thou, he
Genesis 17.4 6. For ones self, Deuteronomy. 4.9. 7. For a dead body, Levit. 19.28.
8. The word translated descended in the Creed, is of great use to be rightly
understood, for in that place it does not mean a going down, but it means only
a passage from one place to another, as they may easily observe that have but a
little skill in the Greek Concordance to the new Testament,

Also it is to be noted that the Pronoun ille, he, spoken of the person, must
yet be understood of the Soul in this Article. He, i. e. his soul passed from
his body to Hades, to Paradise, to heaven, to God. Again, it is spoken of the
person, he rose from the dead the third day, this must be understood of the
body.

Some Objections answered.

Objection 1. He was crucified, dead, and buried, and went to Hades, (to the
unseen world) The third day he arose from the dead, and he ascended into heaven.

Whence some object, that then Christ ascended twice, which is not likely, say
they, that there should be such a Taut^l^gie in so short an Abridgement of the
faith.

Answer, Is it not great pity that we should be educated in the Articles of our
faith, as to make such an ignorant Objection, as this? I grant, that Christ
ascended twice, but yet it was in two differing sorts, as it is expressed in
two several Articles of our faith.

1. In his holy rational soul, only when he died on the Cross, and that
passed from his body immediately to Hades, or to the unseen world of souls, and
in those days it was heedfull to profess this Article of the souls
immortality, as an Article of the faith, because of the Sadducean Tenent.

2. Forty days after his Resurrection, he ascended into heaven, both in soul
and body together, as the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 30. And
thus you see a necessity, that the Articles of our faith, should profess his
ascending twice in these two differing sorts.

Objection 2.

Some do scoffingly object, because we make Christ to bless God in Psalm.
16.10. and in Acts 2.27, because he would not leave his soul in Sheol, or in
Hades.

Answer, 1. I have fo^merly, showed, that Nephesh, which we translate soul in
Psalm. 16. must be understood of his vital soul, and not of his rational soul.

But suppose it were meant of his rational soul, yet it is not to be scoffed
at, that he should bless God for not leaving his soul in Hades heaven, till
his body saw corruption, C^ristopher Carlisle in his Descent, shows in page 47
48. That souls in joy have an earnest affection to be united to their dead
bodies, that so they may both together partake of the same glory, and Weams in
his Portraiture, Page 33.34. speaks just to the same effect.

Objection 3.

Some object, that many Creeds have left out this Article, and thence they
conclude that it is but a suppositious Article.

Answ. 1. * Is it not strange, that any should be so far blinded as to think
that the pen man of the Creed should speak of the crucifying death and burial
of the Lords body, and yet should omit to record the immortal state of his
holy and precious soul? when he sent out his Spirit into the hands of his
heavenly Father, s^eing there were so many Sadduces living in those ancient
days, that denied the immortality of the rational sou?

2. Some reasons may also be rendered why some Creeds might after a while leave
it our.

1. when the immortal state of the soul was generally believed and not doubted
of it might be left out. 2. When other tongues could not find a fit word that
could attain to the large sense and elegancy of the Greek word Hades, then the
learned, seeing it might be mis understood, might in wisdom rather choose to
leave it out. 3. When the mystery of iniquity did so increase, that
Christendom was darkened by the smoke of the Pit, as has been touched from
Apoc. 9. and that learning was grown so weak, that most did not know whether
the soul of man did ascend, or descend, or whither the godly soul went after
death, I say when the holy doctrine was so exceedingly darkened a^ it was in the
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 Centuries, and that the Article of descending to
hell was so corruptly expounded then also, some learned of latter times might
leave it our, as they did in former times, for the former Reason.
These things I thought necessary to advise the Reader of, because not many,
though some have written of this Subject, I thought it my duty therefore to
add these Considerations for the benefit of the godly and studious Reader, and
I hope that my endeavor will not be in vain in the Lord.

CHAP. XXXIII
Of the Phrase of Abraham's Bosom.

THis Phrase, The Bosom of Abraham, did arise, and was made familiar (as I
suppose) by the faithful Hebrew Rabbis before our Lords days, upon this
Consideration.

1. The Covenant of God in Christ was made with Abraham, and his Seed, that in
his Seed all nations should be blessed, and thereupon such as desired to be
partakers of that blessedness, must be of Abraham's faith, and must testify
their desire by receiving Circumcision, the Seal of that Covenant, and then
they were also received into his house, or into his Church, and so they were as
it were nourished in Abraham's Bosom, where they were nourished by Gods
Ordinances, and so Abraham was very hospital to all, but especially to them
that were of the household of his faith; he received and nourished such, not
only with temporal, but with spiritual food, he taught them the way of God in
Christ, and instructed them in the true meaning of his Commandments, Statutes
and Laws, all which Abraham observed and kept, and he is commended of God
therefore in Genesis 26.5. and long before this, God said of Abraham, I know him,
that he will command his sons and his house after him, that they shall keep the
way of the Lord, that is, the true Religion, faith and obedience, prescribed
for men to walk in, as in Genesis 18, 19. compared with Acts 18.25, 26. Deuteronomy. 8.6.
and 10, 12. and therefore all the faithful of his house might at their death
expect to be made partakers with him of the heavenly City, which God had
prepared for them, and therefore when they died, they might still be said to be
in Abraham's Bosom; for all the faithful, whether they continue alive in this
world, or depart this life in the faith of Abraham, are called Abraham's
children, and therefore when they die their spirits go to Paradise, to Abraham's
Bosom. In like sort, the faithful being yet abiding here in this valley of
tears, are said to sit in heavenly places, and to eat and drink with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 8. and in this respect all the
godly, whether living or dying are called Abraham's children, cherished as it
were in his Bosom, family, and Church, both militant and triumphant.

2. The holy Patriarch Abraham was so highly honored of God, that he is called
the father of the faithful, and the heir of the world, Romans 4 12.13, 16. so
then his house was the Bosom of the Church, into which he received all that
professed the true faith for almost 2000 years, and in this respect, the
eternal and blessed estate of the faithful, might well be called the Bosom
of Abraham.

3. That Parable of the rich man in Hades in torments, and of Lazarus Soul that
was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, in Luke 16.19, etc. Was spoken
to the unbelieving Jews and Pharisees and Sa^duces, especially to such as were
contemners of Abraham's faith, and cared not for the days of the Son of Man,
and therefore they were not glad to see his day, as their Father Abraham did
and was glad, but instead thereof they despised and disdained such as were
godly Eleazars whose hope and help Christ is, and that he will send his Angels
at their death to carry their souls into the happy part of Hades, to Abraham's
Bosom, where note that Lazarus and Eleazar, Faithful factors in far
countries, for their Masters need not fear to be called home: so the great Lord
and householder, when the servonts are called to give account of their trading
by the Talents they received, we know what the Lrd will say to them that can
give a good account, Man. 25.
are but one name, though differing in Dialect.

3. That Parable of the rich man in Hades in torments, and of Lazarus Soul that
was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, in Luke 16.19, etc. Was spoken
to the unbelieving Jews and Pharisees and Sa^duces, especially to such as were
contemners of Abraham's faith, and cared not for the days of the Son of Man,
and therefore they were not glad to see his day, as their Father Abraham did
and was glad, but instead thereof they despised and disdained such as were
godly Eleazars whose hope and help Christ is, and that he will send his Angels
at their death to carry their souls into the happy part of Hades, to Abraham's
Bosom, where note that Lazarus and Eleazar, Faithful factors in far
countries, for their Masters need not fear to be called home: so the great Lord
and householder, when the servonts are called to give account of their trading
by the Talents they received, we know what the Lrd will say to them that can
give a good account, Man. 25.
are but one name, though differing in Dialect.

3. That Parable of the rich man in Hades in torments, and of Lazarus Soul that
was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, in Luke 16.19, etc. Was spoken
to the unbelieving Jews and Pharisees and Sa^duces, especially to such as were
contemners of Abraham's faith, and cared not for the days of the Son of Man,
and therefore they were not glad to see his day, as their Father Abraham did
and was glad, but instead thereof they despised and disdained such as were
godly Eleazars whose hope and help Christ is, and that he will send his Angels
at their death to carry their souls into the happy part of Hades, to Abraham's
Bosom, where note that Lazarus and Eleazar, Faithful factors in far
countries, for their Masters need not fear to be called home: so the great Lord
and householder, when the servonts are called to give account of their trading
by the Talents they received, we know what the Lrd will say to them that can
give a good account, Man. 25.
are but one name, though differing in Dialect.

4. Let me yet give the godly Reader, one lift more to the placing of their
souls in Abraham's Bosom when they come to die: Remember that the Lord God our
heavenly Father. The Lord God our heavenly Father has but one Family, part of
it is in the heavens, and part of it in the earth, and when any one of his
servants have finished their factorage, Phil. 3.20. (their Politeuma) among
that part of the Family on earth, then he sends for them home to the other
part of the Family that is in heaven (all the faithful for the days of the
old Testament are so called) And so the Apostle, Paul finishing his course, he
went to receive his Crown in the Kingdom of the Father. So Peter the Apostle,
1 Pet. 1, 2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 1. therefore let us strive for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, that when we think or speak of death, or are
near to the approaching to it, we may be without much disturbance in mind or
heart, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, etc. Delight in the stories of the
faithful, that ye may be more transformed. This made the Saints to say, Why
should I fear in the evil day, when our iniquities shall compass us about, and
trip up our heels unto death; for God will redeem us from the power of the
grave, for he shall receive us to himself, to Abraham's Bosom, Psalm. 49.
Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from heaven, has destroyed death, and him
that had the power of death, he has opened the gates of death, and himself
has passed through them, to deliver the children of God from the guilt and
bondage of sin, and from the fear of death, unto which we are subject. Christ
our life is our justification, for he has freed us from the sting of sin by
his precious death and Sacrifice, The Law the strength of sin, Genesis 2.17. and
3.19.
and although the curse of the Law is the strength of sin, yet he has
fulfilled the Law for us, and so became a most perfect Mediator for us; For
such an high Sacrificer and Mediator it became us to have, who was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens.
Again, death is but an harbenger to bring us to Christ, it is said, that death
is ours, its our servant for our good. Again it is said, that Christ is our
life, and therefore death must needs be our advantage, 2 Cor. 3.12. Phil. 1.21.
and therefore we should not be troubled at that which is so advantageous to
us, we cannot live holily, righteously, and comfortably, unless we live above
the fear of death, 1 Cor. 15 34.58. 2 Cor. 5 15. to be well instructed in this
point, is a point of great wisdom, Moses prized it at a high rate, when he
prayed, Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom,
namely to be prepared for death, and Solomon does exhort us saying, Remember
thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come upon thee,
Ezech. 12. This wisdom is to be valued above gold and silver, and the most
precious Jewels of the earth, but it is wonderful how averse our hearts are by
nature from the practice of this heavenly wisdom, we commonly put off the
thought of our death, until the Lord bring upon us bruising miseries, and then
we begin to think of God and Christ, and of death, as it is said, Destruction
and Death say we have heard of the fame of this wisdom with our ears, and when
men come to the doors of death, then is this wisdom of some fame with men,
then they send for a godly Minister, or for a godly neighbor, whose person it
may be they hated in the time of their health, and abhorred his teaching with
their godly counsels.

Death was a terror indeed to Aristot^e, though a wise and great Philosopher,
and to all such Job does call it the King of terrors, that speech of Bildad in
Job 18. does import, that God is a just God, to whom all souls must ascend to
have their judgment, and so in 2 Cor. 5. knowing the terror of the Lord, etc
This made that most miserable Cardinal to say, that he had rather lose his part
in Paradise, then his part in Paris.

But let all the godly be still mindful, that though they depart from their
Families hereon earth, yet they shall still continue to be of Gods family, they
go from brethren and sisters here, to brethren and sisters there, and above all
remember the dying, or rather the living words of the Lord Jesus the night
before his death, Job. 13.14, 15, 16, and 17, chapters, Oh the ineffable love
and care of our blessed Mediator for his apostles, and for all his faithful
servants to the end of the world.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Some Propositions and Expostulations concerning the true nature of Christ's
Sufferings.

1. BEloved Reader, we are yet further pressed, and orthodox Churches are
called up as Troopers against us (about the true nature of Christ's sufferings)
we acknowledge that the very remembrance of them is reverend, and does joy us,
not annoy us. I know we shall not fight but treat: for they may perceive that
we have otthodox Churches with us, and as learned Leaders though perhaps not so
many: That is not much material, for the book of God must lie between them and
us, and they and we must search the holy pages, that so by them we both may be
composed.

2. It is to be lamented, that the Article of our Lords going to the joys of
God taught in (...), should be taught people of suffering hell torments, that
when we should be taught to understand Hades of heaven, we have been instructed
to understand it of hell, but we hope it will be so no more, to put darkness
for light, and evil for good.

3. But now of latter times some learned seeing the native meaning of the greek
in the Article, will neither justify the translation, nor the exposition that
is made upon it, and yet still they do labor to make the matter good about
hell torments, and therefore they have endeavored by the Scriptures to fortify
that opinion, which how orthodoxly they have done, it is hoped men may have
leave to examine, which if it be denied, then we shall transfer the
infallibility of the Pontifician chair (justly decried) to them whom we know
will not arrogate any such thing.

4. Are Orthodox Churches so infallible in all things, may not godly learned
men utter unsound Doctrines, and much miscarry in matters of sound judgment
and application? It is possible they may. There were in times past three godly
Divines, none like them now on the earth, yet they did not speak of God right
things, although they thought they spoke in the behalf of God. I will
transcribe what is spoken of them.

5. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleading of my lips; will you
speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? will ye accept his
person? will ye contend for God? Is it good he should search you out? Job will
tell us that it is not good to defend Gods cause with an error, pretending
Religion.
or as one mocketh another, do you so mock with him? He will surely reprove
you, if you do secretly respect persons. Shall not his excellency make you
afraid, and his d^ead fall upon you? Your remembrances are like to ashes, and
your bodies to bodies of clay. Hold your peace, etc. Job 1^.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. They were holy men, and spoke most excellently, and we see by this,
that though they exalted Gods holy justice in their applications, yet they
spoke not righteously, as Christ testifies for the comfort of his servants,
Job in chap. 42. Thus Job spoke to his three friends, and we hope we speak to
friends, and we doubt not but they will remember that we ought not to have the
faith our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons.

6. And we hope our learned will say, as Elihu, What shall we say to him, for
we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness, Job 37. and they will
acknowledge they know in part, and prophecy in part, and we hope they will not
be angry, if we judge of what they say, the Apostle would not be angry, but
said, Judge ye what I say? 1 Cor. 10. and we hope they will not deny, but that
they may know (we will not say, be instructed in) the way of Christ more
perfectly.

7. May not godly Ministers now speak things not fitting about the sufferings
of our Lord and Savior, as if any shall say, that he sufferred the second
death, else we should have suffered it: if any shall say, he suffered Hell
torments for the same reason. If any shall say, that the Son of God was not
Christ for a time, when he underwent the wrath of God. Also if any shall say,
that in his agony in the garden, or upon the Cross, he did enter the lists to
fight the great combat hand to hand with his angry Father, etc.etc. Are these
speeches, if any shall so say, the Dialect of the holy Spirit in his holy
Scriptures which he has conveyed unto us, by his infinite, good, and gracious
providence?

Again, if some good men shall have these passages, that it was not the
violence of his crucifying, that cut off his life, but the wrath and curse of
God swallowed up his spirit, and made his heart fail him, and that his soul
left the body in that agony. Thus, if any shall say, then one may inter, that
he felt not the love of God his Father, before, he yielded the Spirit, but died
in a cloud, but we are taught of God, Genesis 3.15. Psalm. 22 the cicle of ii.
that when the Seed of the Serpent was so busy in breaking the foot soal,
piercing the hands and feet of the * morning Star, that he with an holy
peaceable, and quiet spirit, as a sheep dumb before the shearer committed the
cause to him that judges righteously, and prayed, Father forgive them, for thy
know not what they do. And it is said in Psalm. 16. that he did always behold
the Lord his heavenly Father before him, and that he was still at his right
hand, that he could not be so moved, or disturbed in soul as some talk. The
world was made to show principalities and powers, and thrones, and dominions,
the contrary that he would rule all his souls affections, in an holy and
glorious manner, and by that Justice make a new world, and that he the second
Adam had power over his affections more than ever the first Adam, he had power
to trouble himself with grief and sorrow, and to be affected with grief and
sufferings from others, and to rejoice as he saw occasion: he could rule his
affections as he did the waves of the sea, so far to go, and no further, such
an holy Majesty appeared in all his Sufferings at all times, but especially in
his agony in the garden, and sufferings on the Cross. In all which he carried
himself beyond the comprehension of men and angels. And this does more appear,
if we consider the sweet, heavenly and calm conference he had with the
repenting thief on the Cross.

He that bade us possess our souls in patience, that so in all afflictions we
might enjoy our selves, he much more did enjoy himself by his patience and
obedience, and as David in type says, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he
inclined his ear unto me, and saved him from the pit of tumultuous as
flictions. So the Lord Jesus was from the fear of death, Heb. 6* 5.7. Again he
loved his enemies, and did good to them that hated him, and prayed for them,
and bade us so to do, and to overcome evil with goodness, thus the LORD ruled
his affections, and gives us grace for grace so to do, as Stephen, etc.

And in that agony in the garden there was an angel from heaven, strengthening
and comforting the humanity, so that he was neither forsaken (as some
understand forsaken) of the Father, nor of the holy Angels, and if God had
forsaken him, what Angel durst come to comfort him? That we may better
understand the term forsaken. The rich man (we know) was forsaken of God, for
he was in torments under the second death, and therefore he might not have so
much as a drop of water to cool his luxurious palate, much less might he have
an holy Angel from heaven to comfort him: and it is most evident that Christ
was not forsaken, for the holy Angel did not come from heaven to the Lord Jesus
without a commission from the heavenly Father, to whom the humanity prayed, and
therefore in the closure of his meritorious sufferings, his heart rejoiced, and
his tongue was glad, and being full of faith and comfort he said, Father into
thy hands I commend my spirit, and then he sent out his Spirit from his Body.

10. Again, if some shall say, the wrath of God (as some understand wrath)
killed Christ. We should be well advised what passes the door of our lips;
for Christ our holy Mediator said, I have power to lay down my life, J^^.
10.17.18.
and have power to take it again This commission or commandment, have I
received from my Father, also he said, As the Father knows me, so know I the
Father, and lay down my life for the sheep -- therefore does my Father love me,
because I lay down my life, that I may take it again, Joh 15. As the Father
has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love If ye keep my
commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers
commandments, and abide in his love, John 16. Ye shall be scattered every man
to his own, and shall leave me alone, and yet I am not alone, because the
Father is with me. These Scriptures and others are prevalent to make one think
and believe that he was not under, the wrath and curse of God in any respect or
consideration (as some understand wrath) not for one minute of an hour, for
surely the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ was a most willing Mediator and
Redeemer, for us to God our Father, he gave himself a voluntary and free will
offering to our heavenly Father for us, and therefore no force did separate his
soul from his body, but he did that act by his own power, as the formality of
his Sacrifice.

11. Many Ministers have some expressions about our Lords Sufferings, which
many godly, and learned Divines have testified are not warrantable, for what
are we dust and ashes to speak of God and our Redeemer, and Mediator, words
not comely, but we all should consider, that a^ Moses spoke nothing of his own
mind, nor Christ in the flesh, nor his Apostles from him, but what he taught to
Moses and the Prophets. So we should all speak from his holy Scriptures, sound
Doctrines, wholesome Doctrines, plain and pregnant speech, sound and
uncondemnable.

12. The assertion, that our Lord suffered hell torments in this life, in his
soul (or body) appears not true by any Scripture. True modesty would look to
Scripture phrases in handling our Redemption. The ill translation of the
Article, and the bad interpretation of it, but especially the mistaking of the
Greek (...), has filled the Church of Christ with much trouble, and the smoke
of the Pit, which has troubled many men's eyes, has also been a great occasion
thereof, but now the smoke is much vanished, blessed be God.

13. Beloved Reader, we desire to reverence his word by whom the world was
made, his word is of sufficient authority with us, and to that we through the
strength of Christ will cleave as to our life, and therein is these words, And
the Bread that I will give is my flesh, namely, that I will give (in sacrifice)
for the life of the world, Joh 6. And this is at large expounded, Heb. 9 But
Christ being come, an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more
perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, I mean not of this building, neither
by the blood of goats nor calves; but by his own blood he entered once into the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. And it is also sald,
that without shedding blood is no remission, and this is further amplified: How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament,
that by the means of death (this is not the second death) for the Redemption of
the transgressions that were under the first Testament they which were called
might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. Chap. 10.
By the which will we are sanctified through the offering the body of JESUS
Christ once for all, He. 10. And so he does most sweetly and confortably speak
in verse. 19. 20, 21. and in deed all that Epistle does open. Ioh. 6. most
heavenly.

14 Again, if Orthodox Churches (yea, the most Orthodox) are so infallible
that our faith must be resolved in part into their commentaries, expositions,
etc. how comes it to pass that some do differ in Church discipline from so
many reformed Churches, both from Geneva, Zurick, Scotland, Low Countries, etc.
that they neither scotize it with the Scot, nor Genevate it with the zealous
Town of Geneva, they fall, it may be, under reproof, in not agreeing with, but
discording the judgment and practice of the best and reformed and Othodox
Churches in discipline. And they had need to show very good reasons of their so
dissenting, or they are to blame, or else some may say, came the word of God
out from them, or came it unto them only? yea, and may not others say so too of
the best Orthodox Churches, came the word of God out from, or came it unto them
only? that men must be judged by them. But the Holy Ghost has charged us, in
his cause, be not the Servants of men, 1. Cor. 7.

15. The Pontificians said, that our fore. Fathers had the word of God from
them, and therefore they did by Egyptian Bondage tie our Ancestors to their
Doctrines and Councils, and at last to the Pontifician chair, and caused all
Christ's Witnesses to mourn in Sack-cloah that would not obey their
constitutions. But the Lord our God has delivered us from that house of cruel
bondage of mystical Egypt. And Christ says his Magistrates must not bring his
people back again to Egypt, Deuteronomy. 17.

16. We are of Japhets posterity: And it is said, God persuade Japheth to dwell
in the Tents of Sem. So that we must know Japheth our Father and his faithful
posterity had their faith from Sems Tents, and not from the Tent, of the seven
Mountain City of King Abaddons Kingdom. And this holy faith was taught to
Japheths posterity, by the Sons of Sem, the Prophets and Apostles. The Apostles
and Disciples taught this faith from the Scriptures of the Prophets, at the
commandment of the everlasting God, to the Romans, Corinthians, and Galatheans,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, and the other Churches of
Asia round about from Jerusalem to Illiricum, and also to Dalmatia, Croatia,
and doubtless to Spain, Romans 15. And also to great Brittany, as ancient
Histories, and as Master Speeds chronicle declares.

Therefore it is good for us to hearken to the counsels of the Scriptures of
God, the surest way is to consult with them. It says, ask for the old way,
Ie^. 6. Again it says, he that knows God hears the Apostles, 1 Ioh. 4.
Again we are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, Ephesians. 2. And again for perfect
resolution, we are referred to the words of the holy Prophets, and commandments
of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. And Judas
Thaddaus speaks the same. And they all were the Sons of Sem. The Scriptures of
the Prophets is the faith of the Nations, and it is said often in the Apocalips
that Christ's Witnesses suffered for the word of God, and the Testimony of
Jesus, with which orthodox Churches must have no vote granted to them to stand
in competition for authority.

17. The Pontificians so dealt and deal that they will in show at last yield
honor to the Scriptures, so that we rest in their Churches exposition and
determination, we suppose godly Christians should not be like them in such
tergiversations.

Beloved Reader do not conceive that we dis-esteem and reject Orthodox
Churches, or the writings of their godly Divines, no such matter: But we highly
prize them as most gracious mercies of Christ Jesus our Lord, and as they by
whom the Temple of God in the Heaven of the Church has been opened, and the,
Ark of his Testimony manifested. And as such by whose voices, teaching and,
praying, writings, and martyrdom, they have made such a thunder in the
Pontifician Air, that the smoke of the Pit is much vanished, and a tenth part
of Abaddons polity is fallen. And the great Angel of the Covenant, the Lord
Jesus Christ will still send forth godly Teachers, that the whole Barth shall
be lightened with his glory, Apot. 18. We may and ought to have them in godly
and respectfull remembrance for their works sake, both of them that are
departed, and of those that are yet living, though we make them not Lords of
our faith.

18. I will yet-speake a little more of that speech which some affirm of
Christ that he did combat with his Angry Father, shall the Son of God, faith
that treatise, suffer the second death for you? Shall he unchrist himself, for
a time for you? Shall he suffer Hell Torments for you? Treatise of sac^ed
divinity published by Mr. John Downame, in the year 1619. p. 1. 317.
Shall the Son of God enter the lists to fight the great combat hand to hand
with his angry Father for you? God the Father to fight with God the Son: Is
this good Orthodox Theoligie to be sold or taught in Pulpits, or in Books to
the people of God, doubtless there is a deep silence of such expressions in
the Book of God. And from this time forwards, I hope our godly Teachers, will
have the same deep silence, and make no stir, and utter plain Doctrines and
then our inventions will vanish.

1. I pray consider it well, did the humanity of our blessed Savior and
Mediator, cope or combat with the Divine nature of the God the Father? Alas!
the humanity, though holy, yet it was but a finite creature created in time,
and what is a finite creature to the infinite creator? The humane nature in a
such a case could not abide the least touch of contradiction: But I suppose we
must seriously consider that the humanity did evermore from its conception
subsist in the Divine nature of the second person (by way of support) else it
could not have borne such sufferings as the holy Scriptures declare from the
power of Satan, death, the grave and wicked men, ye^, else his oblation of
himself had not been meritoriously satisfactory, and therefore it is a strange
saying that the second person did combat with the first, for then the whole
person of the Mediator must combat if any combating, my heart, yea, whose
heart would not tremble at such speeches as this?

2. Genesis 3.25. does hold forth a declaration of a combat of enmity between the
seed of the woeman (namely her special seed Christ) and the seed of the
Serpent, but no mention is made of any such combat with God the Father, nor
that the second person should combat with himself; the humane with the divine
nature: These Tenentes do jar much from the Divinity that was taught to our
first Parents in Gen 3.15.

3 Is it not strange Doctrine to affirm that the Lord Jesus with the help of
a holy Angel did combat with God, for in his Agony in Luke 22.43. there was
an Angel sent from Heaven to strengthen him.

4 Was it ever heard that a Mediator between two at variance, should fight with
the stronger opposite to bring him to agreement? some Teachers in teaching such
Doctrines must use some such like strange language.

5. The Lord Jesus did commit his cause to him that judges righteously, 1.
Pet. 2.23. This argues (although the Divils instruments did in wrath and rage
condemn him for a sinful malefactor, as all presecutors did the Martyrs yet)
that God the Father did not judge him for a sinner, but justify him as one that
was every way Innocent, therefore the Heavenly Father did not combat with his
Son, for he committed himself and his case to him as to a righteous judge.

6. The Martyrs in like sort being Baptized with the Baptism of Christ in
sufferings, committed their case to their Heavenly Father, in Apoc. 6.10. And
therefore as Gods essential curse, Hell Torments, and the second death, was
not on the Martyrs in their sufferings, so neither was it on the true and
faithful. Martyr the Lord Jesus in his sufferings.

CHAP. XXXV.
Observations upon that distinction which some make between the local and
penal Hell: which penal Hell some say Christ suffered.

1. SOme say that God can make a man's Hell here in this world, by which speech
they must mean (if they mean any thing to he point in dispute) that God can
so plague a man in this world that the will not bring him to eternal
destruction in Gehenna in the world to come: I grant that the eternal Lord can
do what he pleases both in Heaven, Earth, Sea, and in all deep places, Ps.
135.6.

2. The same eternal Lord can also make a Heaven for his children here in this
world, and never bring them to everlasting glory in Heaven, in the World to
come: But Teachers, must not bring their own speculations, let them be true
seers to show us the visions of God from his word rightly expounded, even his
Revelled will, for nothing else belongs to us and to our children.

3. The holy Scriptures tells us that there is an everlawing blessed estate for
all Gods chosen not hear but in the Heavenly paradise, though each blessing is
here begun by justification, is freedom from sin, death, Satan; whence arises
peace and joy in the holy Ghost, the first fruits of the spirit: In like sort
there is a place appointed for the Reprobates, for their everlasting torment
not hear, but in Hell, in the world to come, hut yet man) times some of these
Reprobates have, as it were the first fruits of Hell torments here, in this
world, by an accusing and tormenting conscience, as Kain, Caligula, etc. but
not the essential Torments of Hell till they come into the very place of Hell
it self.

4. And yet some have said that local Hell is but a circumstance, and that our
Lord suffered penal Hell, though not in local Hell: In like sort they may as
well affirm that the glorious place of Heaven in the world to come is but a
circumstance, and so in this sense all created things in respect of God are but
circumstances.

5. Is it well done to make this distinction and division of a penal Hell from
a local Hell, our old English Saxon word. Hell, will not manage this cause,
neither for Plaintiff nor Defendant.

It is not Hades unto which our English Saxon word does not answer but Gehenna,
that Ecclesiastics must clear about our Lords sufferings for all the Saints
do in one kind or other undergo Hades in this world, and so our Lord did
undergo Hades in two of its significations, namely first in the death of his
humanity, and then after that death he was put in Hades the grave, and thirdly
the wicked Ecclesia of he Council was a Gate of Hades to him, and so in like
sort all wicked Courts are Gates of Hades: to the Godly Martyrs, and therefore
such Courts are in Mat. 16. called the Gates of Hades, godly Martyrs must
remember when they are going to such Courts that they are going to the Gates of
Hades, and yet they must encourage themselves, and one another, with that
speech which Christ spoke by his Spirit to the Churches in Apoc. 1. Fear not I
have the Keys of Hades and death, and that he showed in his own Resurrection,
and will one day in ours, so then persecuting Tyrants, have not power simply
over the bodies of the godly, they could not retain Peter's body in Prison, Act.
12. nor the bodies of Paul and Sylas, Act. 16, Christ did not as yet grant
leave to their persecutors to turn the Keye to let them into Hades, though
afterward he did, Steven and James were the first Martyrs of the New Testament
that were sent to Hades, and Christ Jesus was the last great Martyr of the Old
Testament whom they sent to Hades, for the old Testament was not disannulled,
but by his death.

6. It is a great comfort that persecuting Tyrants can send the godly no
further but to Hades, they cannot send them to Gehenna, and if our
Ecclesiastics will Rest hear, we will, with good will, join with them both
our hands and heart, that Christ Jesus under-went a penal Hades in this world:
But I suppose they mean further matter, or else they mean nothing, as indeed
their meaning in this distinction will come to nothing.

7. This then I conceive is the state of the question, Whether there is a
penal Gehenna in this world out of local Gehenna in the world to come: I say
that Gods blessed Book does not show this, and if any shall yet affirm it, we
must be bold to say it is but a dream, not the Revelation of God, which
evidently shows that penal Gehenna is in local Gehenna.

8. Let these Scriptures be dilligently marked for the place and punishment of
Gehenna, Mat 5.22.29.30. Mat. 23. Mar. 9.43.45.47. Luke 12.5. And now compare
these Scriptures with the case of our Lords sufferings, whether any spark of
the penal fire of Gehenna fell upon his soul or body? or whether that cursed
worm did ever gnaw one minute of an hour on his spotless soul, as some dread
not to affirm.

9. Hence the Reader may see the necessity of a right translation and
exposition of the words Hades, Gehenna, etc. the learned keep the term Amen in
all Translations, and many Greek words are commonly understood, and how full is
the English of Latin words, see H. Bro. in L. Fam. 60.

10. Observe that in all the Evangelists, the holy Spirit does not change
phrases (as in other passages he does) to put Hades for Gehenna, or Gehenna for
Hades, neither is Hades taken properly and only in all the New Testament, for
the cale of Reprobates: But still the person and his cause must judge of the
matter where Paradise in Hades is the lot of the godly and Gehenna in Hades is
the lot of the wicked.

11. Shall we say we deal worse then Papists about the holy Article of the
Creed, they say the Lord went to H^ll to Triumph over the Devils and not to
suffer: Let all the godly put away this mis-interpretation of that holy
Article, first, that Christ went to Hell only to Triumph over the Devils, and
secondly, that pore jejune distinction (which does not honor but dishonor the
pen of a godly Scholar) of our Lords suffering Hell Torments in a penal Hell
out of the local Hell.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Observations on the second Death which some say Christ suffered.

1. THE Lord Jesus did not undergo wrath as some understand it, of the
Essential wrath of God, which also they term the second death, must not we
understand that whatsoever is in God is God touching the holy deity; and
therefore as God is love, that is essential love, so his wrath is essential
wrath, and can we say that Gods essential love was ever on Christ, and
therefore he is called his beloved Son or the Son of his love, Joh. 15.10. Act
2 25. yea, and that God loved him to the end as he loved the Breathren, Joh. 4.

2. When he was in that most lad agony, in the Garden, there was an Angel sent
from Heaven to strengthen him, which does evidence that he was not then under
the second death, nor under essential wrath, for then it had been impossible
for any Angel, or for all the Angels in Heaven to strengthen him or support
him.

3. If he had suffered the second death which is indeed the effect of the
essential wrath of God, he could not have said My God my God, why do thou
leave me, and, O my Father if it be possible let this cup pass, and Father
forgive them, and Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, neither could it
be said that he did always behold the Lord at his right hand (as a loving
Father) Act. 2. and that he did abide in the love of his Father, Joh. 10.

4. When did the Lord Jesus suffer the second death? was it before he dyed the
first death, or after, or did he suffer both deaths together? if you say yea,
then give me leave to ask who told you so, did the Apostles at the commandment
of the everlasting God? Preach that Doctrine out of the Scriptures of the
Prophets for the obedience of faith? show that Scripture evidence by Scripture
rightly expounded, or did he suff^^ the second death after the first?

5. When and where did the Lord of glory suffer the second death? if you
prophesy to the going down of the Sun there will be no answer, many Ministers
will have the Lord to suffer the second death before the first, or in, and with
the first: They must exercise their wit (but there is no Divine Revelation)
what to affirm, least their imaginary Doctrine be lost.

6. We must know and that by Divine Revelation, that as there is a first death,
so there is a second death, and that the second death must be after the first,
or else if we by our wit and learning will affirm the contrary, we shall
destroy Gods order, but no accutenesse of wit or learning shall ever be able to
do that; what! shall man's subtle wit nullify the order of nature, of first
and second, and the order of Divine Revelation which shows that the first
death is in this world, and the second death in the world to come. The Spirit
of Christ said by John, He that overcomes (namely that overcomes the will of
Tyrants by suffering the first death for the truth) shall nor be hurt of the
second death. Apoc. 2.11. Lo, the second death is after the first, and in
another world, and this does more fully appear by Apoc. 20.14 and by Apoc.
6.7.8. which placles do show, first the place of punishment, secondly the
punishment it fe^se, thirdly, the time when, fourthly, the company that shall
he there heaped together, first, the place expressed is the lake, secondly, the
punishment everlasting pain in fire and brimstone, thirdly, the time is at the
last and great day of account when the Books shall be opened, fourthly, the
company is the Devil, the Beast, the false Prophet, the fearful, the
un-beleiving, the abominable, and murderers, and whore-mungers, and sorcerers,
and idolaters, and all liars, etc. of which second death the Lord Jesus the
holy one of God under-went to part. Therefore that Doctrine that says so must
be reprobated with the Reprobates.

7. The primitive Churches were admonished to take heed of running after
Fables, and reformed Churches have as much need to look about them^men, yea,
Scholars, yea, Ecclesiastics are as subject now to fables and heresies as
ever; it has been observed that Ecclesiastics have ever been the Founders of
fables, errors, and heresies: The Apostle gave warning of this to the Bishops
of the Churches, and tells them that of themselves men should arise speaking
perverse things to draw Disciples after them, Act. 20.

8. Some have not traversed these paths as they should, because they have been
so long instituted and catechized in the Doctrine of Hell Torments, and that
Christ the holy one of God was a sinner, yea, the vilest of sinners, and when
they are by modest arguing put out of their beaten track, they run wild and
utter sesquipedalia verba, on their breathren, that have and do desire that
they and their Children should walk with God in soundness of judgment, and
in a godly and sober conversation.

9. Let it be further considered that the first death has four parts, first,
the death of the soul in sin, secondly the death of the body by sickness,
thirdly, the separation of the soul from the body, fourthly, the putrefaction
of the body: First the death of the soul is thus expressed, dead in Trespasses
and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1.5. and so the Gospel is said to be preached to the dead in
Sin, 1. Pet. 4.6. Secondly, the death of the body is effected by fire, water,
sickness, etc. Thirdly, the body being dead, then the soul departs to the
world of souls until the day of the Resurrection: Fourthly, the putrification
of the body is evident by constant experience: The first part of this death,
namely the death of the soul in Sin could not betide the Lord Jesus because of
his ineffable conception in the sanctified womb: The second part the Lord Jesus
under-went when he gave himself a Ransom for the many, when he was put to
death as a Malefactor on the Tree; Thirdly his separated soul went from his
dead body to the world of souls to the happy part of Hades, to Paradise, to
Heaven.

The fourth part of this first death the Lord did not undergo, his body saw no
corruption, Act 2.

10. Now as no man may say that Christ was spiritually dead in Trespasses and
Sins, so neither must they say that he under went the second death, none ever
under-went the latter that had not first undergone the former.

11. I will cite two or three godly Authors that expound the second death.

First, Mr. Ainsworth speaks thus on the signification of the word death, in
Genesis ^.17. Finally death is the everlasting perdition of soul and body in
Gehenna, from the presence of the Lord, and called the second death in Apoc. 2.
and 20. and 21. Mat. 10.28. Mat. 9. he, says Hell, but Gehenna is in the Text
he cites, therefore I dare be bold to put Gehenna for it, see his Notes on Ps.
16. and see his communion of Saints, last page.

Secondly, Trelcatius says, that by second death is meant Eternal death.

Thirdly, Master Perkins in Gal. 3. speaking of the parts of the second death,
says, the second degree is an absolute separation from God, but says he into
this second degree of this death Christ entered not, because the Lord says in
the midst of his passion, my God my God, and says he this absolute separation
could not be without the dissolution of his personal union, Master Perkins was
cautelous of going too far in the point of Carists sufferings, and yet it seems
he would have the Lord to suffer a part of the second death, and he makes that
part to be in this World, and the other part in the World to come (and that he
suffered the first and second death together, or rather some part of the second
death be fore the first) is this good Divinity, is this Doctrine Orthodox.

12. Master Perkins also says in Gal. 3. That whole Christ Man-God, God-man
was accursed, is not this another fearful speech, though with limitation, and
some retractation as it were in the same breath, and yet all that he says,
does not, nor cannot expiate the horror of the position.

13. Master Perkins also says further on Gal. 3. The second death is a
separation from Gods favor and special love, whereby God cease to be their
God: This is the second death indeed: But now let any godly man, whether
learned or un-learned, bethink himself, whether ever this did befall the
humanity of the holy one of God. This speech conferred with some other men's,
does infer that Christ was not Christ for a time.

14. It is affirmed by some that Christ bore our deserved curse for our
Redemption: But bring this general position to particulars, and then they make
a stand, as first of the spiritual death in sin, secondly, touching the
corruption of the body after death, and some are afraid to say that he
suffered any part of the second death.

15. It is not man's inventions of Tantundem and Equivalency (as it is urged by
some) touching the sufferings of Jesus Christ that will reach and fathom these
things: The holy Scriptures are plain for our instruction and consolation,
there we may see who has Redeemed us, and how, and for what, and from what,
and unto what: A godly man and diligent searcher into the Scriptures, affirms
that he has written thus, or to this sense, to a Reverend Divine, though I
have formerly (says he) used their expressions that oppose the idem, and
affirm that Christ only suffered the Tantidem, because I clearly saw that
their way of arguing was sufficient to confute them that affirm that Christ
for our Redemption did suffer the essential Torments of Hell, yet
notwithstanding (says he) I do not fully approve of their way of arguing from
the Tantundem (as if it were the right way of opening Christ's satisfaction,
because they also run in the vindictive Court way of Justice (which is not the
Scripture way) for most of them that are for the Tantundem (not all) do affirm
that Christ suffered the vindictive wrath of God in some degree, according to
the Court way of vindicative Justice, though yet they do also deny that Christ
suffered Hell Torments.

But the way of Christ's sufferings for our Redemption that I approve and
follow, is this, namely that he suffered as a combater, from his malignant
combater Satan, according to Gods declaration of the combat of enmity, between
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, for God proclaimed a
liberty to the Serpents seed to pierce him in the foot-stooles as a sinful
Malefactor on the Cross: And therefore hence it follows, that all Christ's
outward sufferings must be inflicted on him, from the enmity of his proclaimed
enemy Satan. And secondly, hence it follows that his internal sufferings were
from the sense of his outward, or Christ as he was true man, must be tenderly
touched, and deeply affected with his evil usage, and therefore it was Gods
will and Christ's own covenant, that all h^^ internal humane passions of
Fear, Sorrow, and sadness in his vital and animal soul, should arise from
the evil usage of his malignant combater Satan (namely from the evil usage of
Satan's malicious and envious instruments) And thirdly, this way of Christ's
sufferings was in Gods wisdom ordained to be for his preistly perfection, or
for his consecration, before he could make his death to be a most perfect
Sacrifice, and this way I believe has more sound footing from Gods
declaration, in Genesis 3.15. then the contrary Court way of vindictive Justice,
and I believe that all other after Scriptures that speak of Christ's sufferings
are but a commentary on Gods declaration, in Genesis 3.25. And therefore Genesis
3.15. must be the Standard that must rule and order all our interpretations.
Thus he.

16. Let men therefore take heed how they force belief, they know not what,
about Hell Torments, and let them not think that what they write and speak, Ex
Cathedra, must be believed of Hearers without double control or examination,
truly it is natural to Ecclesiastics to affect supremacy, it is as proper a
sin to them by nature, as Tyrany is to magistracy.

17. But the Lord Jesus is come down to see the buildings of our instructors,
and in some things he does confound their Language, but I hope and pray that he
will also be pleased to send fiery cloven tongues to sit on them, and to touch
their lips with a live coal from the Alter to take away all iniquity, that we
in our own Language may hear them speak the wonderful works of God.

And I doubt not but in due time, our only Doctor Christ will so inform them
that they will say with holy Job, once have I spoken but I will not answer, yea
twice, but I will proceed no further, I have uttered that which I understood
not, things too wonderful for me which I knew not.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Some Observation on 2. Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. with Gal. 3.13.

SECT. 1. He made him to be sin for us which knew no sin, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him.
1. THe Translation must be considered: It had been well if our godly and
learned Translators had rend^ed it, he made him to be a Sin-offering for us,
for so the Geneva I suppose two millions of Geneva Bihles ^ave been Printed,
that have conferred 2. Cor. 5.21. to Exodus 29.14.
Translation teaches to render it, and understand it: I think near a year a
go, citing 2. Cor. 5.21. to Exodus 29.14. That phrase, He made him to be sin
for us is an Ebraisme; for in the old Testament, the Sin-offering is ordinarily
called sin (and no more) but the word Offering is added by our Translators, and
by the like Reason it should have been a^ded in 2. Cor. 5.21. and Master
Ainsworth in Ps. 40. shows that it is so to be understood where the same
Hebraisme is used, but fully expressed in Heb. 10 Sacrifices for sin, so we
have the Translation of the holy Ghost. And if our godly Translators had so
Translated, 2. Cor. 5. 21. they had not done amiss, seeing we have such
warrant, yea, themselves so translate it in Exodus 29.14 etc. The like Ebraisme
in Esai. 53.10. when thou shall make his soul a Trespass, namely a
Trespasse-offering, but the Seventy translate it sin, and then the words must
run thus, When thou shall make his soul sin, that is to say, a Sin-offering,
just as it should be in 2. Cor. 5.21. The like Ebraisme is in Dan. 9.24. there
the Messiah is said by his death to finish Trespass, and to end sin, that is
to say, to finish Trespasse-offering, and to end Sin-offering, these things
considered, our Translators had done worthily if they had rendered 2. Cor. 5.21.
He made him to be a Sin-offering for us.

2. So Romans 8.3. Should have been rendered, and by a sacrifie for sin
condemned in the flesh. It is well it is in the margin, for what sense
(according to our language) is it to say -- by sin condemned sin. All
tongues have their proper idiomes, and we have been taught in our youths in the
Grammar Schools diligently to make it, and so it must be in translation of the
more learned tongues. This had been plain for us common readers, and so it
might have been read of us and our children from their infancy. If this had
been so translated, and had been famillar to all our Ministers in their tender
years, there would not have been such collections as this. That God made him
sin, that is, (say many) God made him a sinner, yea a most vile sinner by
imputation in Gods account, and many such orthodox expressions are used.

3. The common tenet, which many Divines (not all) from this Text of 2 Cor.
5.21. is, that as our sins are imputed to Christ, so his righteousness,
(meaning his obedience to the Moral Law) as most say, is imputed to us. But it
is very questionable whether we ought so to teach or believe, for then he is as
really a sinner, as we are righteous by him, the reciprocation calls for that
sense, but we may not so say, for his righteousness makes a change in our
state and condition, but the reciprocation calls for thoughts of derestation,
the ear cannot endure it.

4. Hence it is, that some Ministers in their Rhetorical amplifications
speaking of our sins imputed to Christ, say that Christ was the vilest sinner
that ever was; that the essential curse and plague of God pursued Christ with
Huy and Cry as a sinner, and therefore they may say, (and it may be some have
said) go Huy and Cry, as to attach Ch^istum illum Atheon, Christum illum Dei
cultus corruptorem, illum hominem blasphemum, illum Sabbati vinato^em, illum
bominem parentibus ^jus non obs^quentem: pursue with Huy and Cry Christum illum
homicidum, illum mo^chum soedum and ^o^nicatorem so^d^dum mollem, concabitantem
masculinis, illum surem, raptorem, and latronem, illum soenoratorem,
conterentem, and pervell^ntem, illum convi^iatorem, detract^rem, and misere
perjucatum, illum hominem temper aliorum proprietatum ^varum and ^upientem.
Whose ear does not tingle? Thus some may please themselves to roll in
blasphemous Rhetoric. And it should be most abominable to have such words as
some have in book and Pulpit.

5. To such Doctrine men have brought themselves about imputations, so to
impute (as some teach) our sins to, Christ, is to impart, Mr. Anthony worton
(de reconcil) shows such Doctrine is not orthodox.
communicate or make common to him, with us our unconformity to God and his
Law: so that he thereby shall be unholy and unj^st, both in habit and quality,
inwardly and ourwardly in action, and thus it comes to pass, that we making
him a sinner, as them of the Priesthood of L^vi who offered for their own
sins as for the peoples, but the Holy of Holies, Christ Jesus our high
Priest, at that time of offering up himself, was holy, harmless, und^fi^ed,
separate s^om sinners, and made higher than the heavens. So his holy Priesthood
was infinitely transcende it above the persons and Priesthood of Levi, but some
men's Doctrines would make him like them.

6. This Doctrine of Huy and Cry, for ought we ever yet did see, must be
pursued with Huy and Cry out of Schools, studies, books, and Pulpits, But let
us a little further examine what this Huy and Cry tends to, with its great
noise.

When the hour of our blessed Redeemer was near at hand, no Huy and Cry needed,
for he set his face to go to Jerusalem, and said to his Disciples, that he went
to be delivered to the sons of men, wicked sinners, and that they would
crucify him, Mat. 20. Luke 18. He was sent of the Father, and came of purpose
to give his life for his sheep: and when they came to apprehend him, he did not
shift nor deny his name, as malefactors do, that are pursued with Huy and Cry,
but he asked with a constant mind, whom seek ye? They said, Jesus of Nazareth,
then he said, I am he, with which speech there went such an energie, that they
fell in a swound to the ground, and there might have lain, unless he had given
them leave to rise out of their swound: Then again he asked them, whom seek ye?
and offered himself willingly. Pilate with his Romans and Jews could not have
had power over him, but by dispensation from above, that is, of Christ himself,
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, for the Lord Jesus had said to Peter,
Think thou, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give
me more than twelve legions of Angels, Mat. 26. Thus far of the idle expression
of Huy and Cry, of which there can be no defense.

The Phrases, illustrations, and expressions of the holy Scriptures are most
seriously transcendent, and so full that that we need not be so enamoured with
our black pin feathered young birds.

SECT. 2. Of the several Curses spoken of in Deuteronomy. 21.23. and in Deuteronomy. 27.26.
and in Gal. 3.13.
1. THE Apostle in Gal. 3.13. does not prosecute the eternal curse cited in
verse 10. from Deuteronomy. 27.26. But he goes to another Text for another curse,
namely to Deuteronomy. 21.23. which is not the eternal curse. For who is able to say,
the seven sons and Nephews of Saul died out of the Covenant of God in Christ,
therefore none can say, they had the essential and eternal Curse: yet they
underwent the Curse of the Law, in Deuteronomy. 21.23. for the evil deeds that Saul's
house had done to the Gibeonites, which brought the Curse of famine on the
whole Nation. And so the repenting thief had the curse of God inflicted on him
by the gods, the Judges of the Nation, according to Deuteronomy 21.23.

2. If the Apostle had not expressed himself further for any other curse, than
Deuteronomy. 27. there had not been so much doubt, but seeing he ^lledgeth Deuteronomy.
21.23. and does not dilate on Deuteronomy. 27. As Gods essence is love, so Gods
essence is hatred and curse.
doubtless he would not have us to think, that the Son of God our holy
Mediator underwent that eternal curse that he spoke of in verse 10. He knew
it was impossible the most Holy One could suffer the eternal and essential
Curse: for he was not the Holy One of God, as touthing humanity only, but in
respect of the personal Union of the Divine and humand nature, therefore that
speech of Mr. Perkins upon Gal. 3.13. must slot be entertained of the people of
God. Whole Christ, Man God, God-Man was cursed, this is an evil saying,
although we speak it with retractation, as he does presently, but his
retractation and limitation will not expiate the sin of his former Doctrine.

3. Was it nothing, that the Son of God, the Lord of glory, should so humble
himself, as to suffer such shame from the Seed of the Serpent before the Angels
of heaven, and men on earth, as Psalm. 69. speaks, Thou have known my
reproach, my shame and my dishonor, mine adversaries are all before thee.
Reproach has broken mine heart, and I am full of heaviness, and I looked for
some to take pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but I sound none. Is
this nothing, when the Holy of all holiness gave his body and blood a
Sacrifice for sin, through such great shame and Sufferings.

4. What would you have us to say? That our blessed Mediator underwent the
second death, we dare not say so, absit, absit; it is to be detested. Will you
have us to say, that we may say, that the Son of God was not Christ for a time,
when he suffered such sorrows as you intimate? This also has no analogy of
faith with Divine revelation, but contradicts, for it is most blasphemous.
Belike our Teachers have this theology from the Philosophers. Due Pless.
Trueness of Christian Religion, page 82. Will you have us to say, that the
Godhead of the person of Christ hated and cursed his humanity, as you
understand curse, this is as full of trembling to be spoken, as the vilest
speech that ever was spoken.

5. What shall we say? Tell us from sound Judgment, in few words, from Divine
revelation. These Tenets and others, though from some godly Ministers must not
be received but contradicted, and contended against, as not of the faith once
given to the Saints, but indeed we may as well span the heavens, and dig the
Tehom of the first days Creation, and gather the wind into a sack, and measure
the earth with inch^s, yards, and perches, as to search into these things, and
yet we dare affirm the imaginations, and declare the wadings of our own
never-seen visions.

6. The doctrine of imputation (as some teach it) to make the Holy and Just
One, a sinner, has bred all this stir and trouble.

7. Reverend Teachers of salvation, do not think we beseech you, that out of
any sinister end and purpose we thus write, but out of conscience. We know we
ought not to maintain error, much less foul here sie, neither ought we to be
silent at other men's errors, but to contest for the truth. The Lord Jesus will
witness for his poor servants, that we have not written of perverse pravity.
As for 2 Cor. 5.21. time I know will wear out some men's interpretations, and
sound disquisition will qualify men's minds for the other: and if this fort of
mis-interpetation of 2 Cor. 5. be demolished, other things will more easily
yield upon quiet parlie.

8. In does not relish well to make Christ a sinner by Gods imputation; for
the holy Scriptures snew, that at the instant time of his sufferings, he was
not in Gods account a sinner, nor in the Apostles account (though in wicked
men's account he was) and therefore Peter charge them with a just and heavy
crimination, Ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and again he says. 1 Pet. 3.
He suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. He
could not have given us manuduction to God the Father, unless he himself had
been just. And again at the very time when he offered a propitiatory Sacrifice
for sin, he was JESUS CHRIST, the righteous; therefore it cannot be thought he
was accounted of God a sinner.

Christ Jesus our Lord, the holy of holy, stood not in the state and place of a
sinner (as some understand sinner) but as of a Mediator of atonement between
God and man for sia. Christ Jesus the Holy One must not be stated of us a
sinner, but a Mediateur according to that Law of M^diation, transacted between
the Father and him, Heb. 10.7, 8, 9.
Psalm. 40. and 110. Heb. 7.8. and 9. and this Text of 2 Cor. 5.21. does evince
the same, as is most evident.

SECT. 3.
THerefore to go on with this most blessed Scripture. He was made a a sin
offering for us who knew no sin, that we may be made the righteousness or
freedom of God in him.

1. Q. How are we made the righteousness or freedom of God?

Answ. God the Father does justify, does set free, does forgive, does pardon
the guilt and punishment of our sins, for his dear sons sake, the sins of all
that by faith receive Christ Jesus, and rest on him as the Mediator of our
Redemption. This is God the Fathers justification, and plentiful Scriptures
are answerable, Christ his perfect sin-offering has procured this
justification, righteousness or freedom, mercy, forgiveness^ and atonement
from God the Father; therefore it is said, the righteousness or freedom of
God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe,
and this righteousness or freedom, is freely bestowed by God the Father,
through Christs-Redemption, and through faith in his blood.

2. This is. (as is said) to declare God the Fathers Righteousness, or
freedom through the Remission of sins, Romans 3.25, 26. and David and Abraham
are brought in for this justification, righteousness, or freedom in Romans 4.
and all Romans 5. duth not add any new matter to make our justification more
complete, but only makes most heavenly deductions from the Doctrine of
justification completely laid down in chap. 3.21. to the end of that chapter.

3. The Apostle to the Philippians utters this point most heavenly, and might
be found in him, not having mine own righteousness or freedom, dicaiosune,
which is of the Law (ex opere operato) but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the freedom, (or righteousness, dicaiosune) of God [the Father]
through faith, Phil. 3.

4. Beloved Reader, the unbelieving Rabbis of the Jews did think to justify
or free themselves from sins, Observe the Pharasaicall righteousness Luke
18. (...) Mark 7.
guilt and everlasting purishment, by their (ex opere operato) bodily exercises
of Sacrifices and washings, and contribution Exodus 30.12. etc. compare with
Pet. 18. John 6.
of silver, etc. in these exteriours they would be exact and unrebukeable, and
they thought and taught the worship of God was so terminated. But our Apostle
Paul after that Christ had revealed himself unto him, and had revealed the idol
and vanity of his Pharasaisme, he would have no other freedom or
righteousness, but that wrought by Christ, when he sacrificed himself, and
gave his flesh and blood to be our bread and drink, life, atonement, washing
and redemption: For the Apostle had before this written to the Hebrews that it
was impossible the blood of bulls and goats, or any Mosaicall sprincklings
could cleanse the conscience from the guilt of sin, and this he had testified
long before this to the Jews in their Synagogues, as we may see, Acts 13.38,
39. They did wonder and stumble and perish, when the Apostle taught this
Doctrine, showing all their bodily exercise was lost labou^: therefore this
Doctrine they thought ought ought to be persecuted to the death: as destroying
and making void the Law, Mat. 5.17. and Romans 3.31. Acts 22.4. and 26.9.
be it known to you therefore men and Brethren, that through this Man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are
justified (freed, or set free) from all things from which ye could not be set
free (or freed) by the Law of Moses. This Text does show what is our
justification, or freedom, even forgiveness of sins. Reader, study the
Scriptures, and be acquainted with the term justfi^ed, that is freed. And so it
is translated in Romans 6 7. Again Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. must be well considered,
the false Teachers did persuade the Galathians to be circumcised, not knowing
their deceit; for if they thought circumcision was of absolute necessity, they
were to sacrifice and do all the rites of Moses, that circumcision did initiate
them unto, and so they must deny Christ and his Priesthood for ending all
Moses, and so christ could profit nothing, for they were bound to observe the
whole Law, that is all that the Priesthood of Levi taught them, and so Christ
is of no effect, for if they thought by the Law ceremonial or moral, ex opere
operato, to be justified, Christ would be of no comfort to them; by this Tenent
they denied the grace of free justification by Christ, mind also, Gal. 4 9, 10.

5. Let it be considered from this time forward concerning this point of
justification, whether it be not better to use the terms and phrases, sets
free, freeth and freedom; for, seeing our godly, learned, do so translate in
some places, we may have Christian liberty so to render and interpret the Noun
and the Verb of the Greek in other places, if it may be done with rational
understanding according to the analogy of faith.

6. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. The Apostle says to Philemon, If Onesimus owes thee
ought, compute, count or reckon it to mine account. The word I suppose is the
same, a meraphor from debts in books, therefore may it not better be said for
clearing doctrine, not counting, not computing, not reckoning their trespasses
unto them, in the words, impute, compute, count, or reckon, is not much
difference, so the point be cleared to our understanding.

7. Our sins are called debts, which we cannot justify or free our selves
from, nor pay or satisfy for, by all the means that we can use, as from our
selves, and we are naturally so vile, that we care not to be reconciled, and
therefore naturally we care not for the word of reconciliation, but are enemies
to God, and have a very ill opinion of God, because of love to our sinful
appetites, and because of the soulnesse of offenses, which the conscience does
accuse us of.

8. But our merciful God, heavenly Father, determined a way from all eternity
to reconcile us to himself, by sending his dear son, a second Adam, to take
humanity and in humanity to give himself to death for us, a sacrifice offering
of a sweet smelling savor, and for this sacrifice of his beloved son, he does
not count, he does not reckon our debts and trespasses to us, but does pardon
them, does forgive them, does justify us, that is, does free us from the guilt
and In all these speeches, it is not to be understood temporally, although by
the blood of the Covenant, we are comforted in all conditions Zach 9.11 but
chiefly still to be under stood of eternal freedom, redemption, and salvation,
Dan. 9.24. Adoption is the fruit of redemption, Gal. 4.
punishment of them, and this he does to all that by the word of
reconciliation, are by the mighty work of the Spirit perlwaded to embrace by
faith Christ Jesus, the Mediator sent down from heaven from the Father, to be
our Prophet, Priest and King, and they that so receive Christ, and believe in
him shall have this dignity, to be called Gods adopted children in Christ, and
by this most glorious Grace of adoption in the Son of God, believers are
stated into a most joyful capacity of being heirs to the inheritance of the
Saints in light, for that the spirit of God does by the same word of
reconciliation regenerate them or cause them to be borne again, not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, to serve God
in their spirits in the Gospel of his Son, and so to be meet persons for that
inheritance. This was the sum of the Apostles message in his embassage to the
Gentiles.

9. God the Father does justify for Christ's sake as the first person, for he
is the first cause in order of the persons, the father is the first efficient.
2. The Lord Jesus Christ does justify us as the meritorious cause, and so he
is the second efficient, this makes the Apostle often to say, Grace be with
you, and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, ( the son
of the Father, 2 John 3.) and the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the
son, does regenerate us, and qualify us with the grace of faith, as the
condition of applying the said justification, and does seal to our hearts God
the Fathers justification from the sons redemption.

10. Dicaiosune is the effect of dicaiontai, Acts 13.39.
justification (or sets free) and freedom, differ as the form and applying
of the form to the subject. Dicaioumenoi, etc. is the act of God the Father,
upon, or to a believing soul, freeing him from the guilt and punishment of sin
for the merit of Christ's sacrifice; also dicaiosune, is that freedom, that God
the Father bestowed upon the repenting and believing Apostle Paul, Phil. 3. So
dicaiosune is the effect of dicaioumenoi and diacontai, the freedom that a
godly soul finds in himself, from God that justifies or sets free, and the
holy Ghost by the word of The holy spirit dothregenerate by the word John 3.
Ephesians. 5. Tit. 3. and by this new birth, says and all other graces are
manifested.
reconciliation does work faith, which does ovidence that soul to be the
subject of that freedom, as Gal. 2. and although every godly man has not (as
himself apprehends) that Plerosoria, yet he knows his heart is reconciled to
God, to love the Lord and his ways, and does rest on the Promises of God in
Christ for salvation, and only by him.

11. This I suppose, may be thus illustrated, a Kings son, that is obedient to
all his fathers commands, has a promise, that for such and such performances
he shall obtain his favor for any Traitor that he shall please to intercede
for, thereupon he does by the virtue of his Fathers promise and his performance
intercede the Kings dicaiosis, justification of the said Traitor, and the King
does justify, that is, does pardon, sets him free from the guilt of his sin
and punishment, provided he will repent and accept the said pardon, and
therefore that he may be the subject of the said pardon, he does repent,
believe it, and accept it, and so comes out of prison, and when he has this
pardon and freedom under seal granted him, he may truly say, here is my
dicaiosune. Justification, freedom and pardon from my guiltinesses and
punishment due for them, he will not say, nor cannot say, the personal
righteousness, honesty and obedience of the Kings son is reckoned to him
(for his righteousness) but this is all his righteousness, (and it is enough)
even pardon and freedom from his offense and the desert of it, and received
into favor, this it a complete atonement and reconciliation, through the
Kings sons intercession, the offender is not only pardoned, but also is
restored to his former, yea to a greater honor and favor with the King, and
what can he desire more for the comfort of a subject. From all which, the
Delinquent, if he have any ingenuity, will show much love both to the King and
his son, and will ever render himself a faithful and trusty servitour.

12. So then Gods reconciliation has these two parts, justification, Acts
26.18. Romans 8.7. Col 1.
that is, the freedom from the guilt and punishment of sin, and receiving into
favor or adoption to the heavenly inheritance.

13. And thus I think I have made it evident from 2 Cor. 5. that the not
counting our sins to us, but freeing us from them, and pardoning them is the
justification or freedom of God the Father, that he freely vouchsafes to poor
sinners, so verese 19. conferred with v. 21. do open one the other plain and
easy for Gods people to understand. Surely, the holy, sweet, blessed
Scriptures rightly conferred are like a benevolent constellation.

14. Let Gods people consider what in this translation and explication of 2
Cor. 5. is derogatory to the mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or
derogatory to the comfort of the Saints all their life, or on their death beds
for the hope of immortal glory. Much more might be said, but often we darken
Gods counsel by our words. When things are plain, some Ministers make them
harder, and far more knotty than the Text.

15. We may suppose, if from this time forwards Gods people be exercised to
read the Text of 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. it will not be amiss thus to read it, God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not counting their trespasses
to them; for he made him to be a sinne-offering for us who knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness (or freedom) of God in him.

16. By that time godly, Christians have been accustomed to read 2 Cor. 5.21. a
sinne-offering, and rightly understand the terms, justification righteousness,
sets free, vnd freedom. And not counting or not reckoning, or not imputing
our trespasses to us, I say by the time of 80 years more, the people of God will
come to a more clear and perfect judgment in the wonderful mysterious
Doctrine of a sinners justification.

17. The terms and Phrases of Justice, righteousness, and justification, are
exceeding variously understood, and have been largely handled by diverse
learned Authors, to whom I refer the Reader, I will instance one Text, wherein
the word Righteousness, or Justification, is different from the justification
of vindicative Courts, and more like to the justification of voluntary Courts,
sometimes are ordained for the trials of combaters, in Apoc. 19.8. To her was
granted that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white, for the
fine Linen is the Righteousness of the Saints, this Text is often alleged
for the imputation of Christ's legal Righteousness to sinners, acording to
vindictive Courts of Justice, but if the coherence be well looked into, it will
appear to have another sense, which is this: The Beast and his marked made the
Church mourn in Sack cloth, Apoc. 11. But when the Beasts polity shall be
conquered by the constancy of godly Martyrs and Professors, then the Church
shall rejoice, and white Garments are here given as a sign of that, so then the
Garments of fine Linen, and white was given to signify the Churches joy
because of her freedom from the power of those dark and black afflictions
that were under the Beasts polity, and for the better understanding of this,
read Hest. 4 3. and 8.15, 16.

2. In this sense also must Apoc. 7.9.13, 14. be expounded, for there the
Church had been in great afflictions by the Casars for 300 years, but by
Constantines special grace and favor, and by the victorious constancy of the
godly, the Church had deliverance, and therefore white robes are given to show
their great joy for that deliverance and victory.

3. The Robe of (Tz^dek) Righteousness in Isa. 61.10. is translated by the 70.
the robe of joyfulnesse, according to the true sense and meaning of the
context, for in v. 1. Christ is anointed with the spirit of the Lord, for this
end, namely to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken hearted,
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, and in v. 2. to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and to
comfort all that mourn, and in v. 3. to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and in
verse 7. he does promise that everlast^ng joy shall be upon them, and then in
v. 10. the said poor broken hearted Converts do with exultation say thus, I
will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he
has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the
robe of righteousness, but the 70 (according to the context both before and
after, translate it, he has covered me with the robe of joyfulnesse, it is
called a robe of righteousness in respect of the perrformance of the promise,
which was to give the sweet comforts of God. spirit to poor and humbled souls
by the preaching of the gospel, and in respect of the sense the said comforts
to the converted soul, it may be called the robe of joyfullnesse, as the
Seventy render it, and we may see an example of this robe of righteousness,
how it was also a robe of gladness and joyfulnesse at the conversion of the
prodigal son, in Luke 15.22, 23, 24, 32.

18. This Translation and explication of 2 Cor. 5.21. and of the other
Scriptures cited, will rid us of no small trouble, and I hope it will rid
others also of doubtings of the truth of the Doctrine of justificatiif they will
but with patient study, mind and mark the true scope and meaning of the
Scriptures.

I do freely acknowledge, that several Institutions, Common places
Catechismes, etc. have been, is, and are a great mercy to the Church of God and
shall be while the world stands: But yet the Lord would have us to try all
things, and wisely to hold that which is good.

I say also that there are many godly and learned men, some that are departed
this life, and some that are yet living that have expounded 2 Cor 5.21. to the
same effect as I have done, and I make no question but the generality of our
godly Ministers, will in due time be so proselited also, for there is no
standing out long against divine reason, where true godliness and true
learning does bare sway: I mean such as will take the pains of the mind to
dive into the true sense and scope of the text, and will see it with their own
and not with other men's eyes.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Our Lords genealogic conferred with the times of the Judges and with the King.

The first, Adam Seth Enosh Kenan Mahalaleel Jared Henoch Methuselah Lamech.
Genesis 8. chapters

Noah in his 600 years was the flood and the world 1656 years old.

Whose are the Fathers, etc of whom concerning the Flesh Christ came who is God
over all, blessed for ever Romans 9.

Sem. Arphaxad. S^lah Heber Pel^g Regu Serug Nahor
Genesis 9.10, and 11 chapters.

Terah he died 427 years after the flood the world then 2083 years old,

For he in no sort took on him the angels nature, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham, Heb. 7.

Abraham Isaac Jacob Judah Phares Hezron Aram Amminadab
The rest of Genesis and Exodus to the 12 chapter of Job

Naasson a Prince of Judah in the wilderness 430 years from the promise, Genesis
12.2, 3. to the coming from Egypt, the world then 2513 years old.

It is evident our Lord sprang out of Judak, Heb. 7.14.

Naasson begat Salmon Boaz Obeb Jessai David Solomon
Exodus Levit Numbers Deuteronomy. Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1. and 2 Samel, and Psalms,
and 1 Kings to the (...). chap and 1 Chronicles.

Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David was raised from the dead,
according to my Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.

The incarnation and the Resurrection are the Basis of all, and should be
better remembered, and more taught.

The Cronology of the Judges and their oppressors
The Judges and oppressors mentioned in the book of Judges, all which were
contemporary with Solomon, Boaz, Obed; I^ss^i.
Judges. Othoniel 40. Ehud 80. Shamgar 40. Deborah 40. Barak 40. Jael 40.
Gideon 40. Abimelech 3. Tholah 23. Ia^r 22. Iephth^h 6. Ibsan 7. Elon 10. Abdon
8. Sampson 20. Eli 40 399 Oppressors. Chusan 8. Eglon 18. Iabin 20. Midian 7.
Ammon 18. Phil^st. 40. 111. 339 450

And after that he ga^^^ unto them ^udges after a sort 450 years, u^til Samuel
the Prophet, Act 13.20.

Kings of Israel, King, of Judah

Jeroboam Nadab Baasa Elab Z^m^i, Tibni Om^i Achab Achaziah brethren Ioram
brethren I^hu Io^ch^z loash Ie^ob^am Zacha^iah Shal^um Menachem P^chaiah Pe^ab
Hosea
David Solomon R^bo^m Abiam Asa Iosaphat Ioram A^haziah Athal^ah loash Amaziah
Vzziah Jo^ham A^h^z Hezekiah Manasses Amon J^s^^s J^h^jakim Iech^nias Zedekiah
in his 11 yea the city Jerusalem was taken by N^buchadnezzar, and it and the
Temple burnt, and that was 427 years from the foundation of it, Bab^l
tyrannized full 50 years more, then the world as 3470 years old.

Saint Matthew follows Sal^mons line, to show Christ's Right to the Kingdom of
Israel, for Sal^mons line failing in J^chonias, who made S^lathiel his ^^ir, as
next of ri^h^.

1 Kings And some of 2 Chr. 'ro. Ec^l. Canticles.

Kin. and the rest of Chr and for the kings 'Judah and Israel.

Jonah Hosea Joel ^m^s Esaias Micah Nahum Habbakuk ^z^phan^ah Jerem. Lam.
Daniel Ezekiel Ohadiah
Nathan Mattatha Mainan M^lea Elia^im Ionan Ioieph Judah Symeon Levi Matthat
I^rim Eliezer Iose E^ Elmodam Cosam Ad^i Melchi Ne^i Salathiel Ped^jah
Of these Fathers concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over all
blessed for ever, Amen.

Z^robabel, he was made Prince of I^dah by Cy^u^. Cy^us in the first year of
his Reign over Judah, made a Proclamation for the Jews return from Captivity
with Zorobabel: from which Proclamation to the doath of our Lord and blessed
Savior Jesus Christ, are 70 Sevens, or 409 years, then the world was 3960.
years old.

The Kingdom of Israel continued 327 years under 19. or 20 Kings, most of them
were stained with the sin of Jeroboam that caused Israel to sin, their Royal
descen^^ changed nine times. The Kingdom of Ashur ended their apost^ticall
Kingdom, and carried the ten Tribes beyond Babel, and so made them Lo-ammi,
no^ people, that is, not Gods people but they were made Gods people by the
preaching of the apostles, of the Circumcision, Romans 9.1 Pet. 2.10. Then they
looked on him whom they pi^rced, the last King of Israel was in the days of
Hezekiah, King of Judah, Pro. 28.2. Tibni stood in competition with Omri for
the Kingdom of Israel, but he was not sole King, so he is not reckoned, but if
he be, then there is 20. Kings.

ZOROBABEL. Abihud Eliak^m Azor Sadoc Acbim Eliud Eleaza^ Matthan Jacob Joseph
the husband of the blessed Virgin Mary.


St. Matthew follows these of Zorobabel to show Christ's right to the Kingdom
of Israel.

Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Haggai, Zachar. Malachi, Daniels Prophesies, and the
stories of the Bear, Leopard, and the fourth Beast, their rising, fall, and
afflictions of the Saints of them, the high Trinity, etc. all are in the time
of the Seventy-sevens; at the ending of which, the World was three thousand
nine hundred and sixty years old,

Rhesa. Joanna Ju^ah Joseph Sem^i Mattathias Maach Nagge Esly Nahum Amos
Mattathias Joseph Janna Melchi Levi Matthat Eli Mary Jesus Christ the second
Adam.
O^ these from Z^r^ba^el did the Lord Jesus Christ take humanity, Luke 3.

A little pains in observing the Geneology of Genesis, and this of our Lord
will be of great use: you shall find them the Pillars of story both to
Geography, Chronology, and to all Narrations through the whole Bible. Labor to
wade into the depth of our Lords Geneology: there is not more use of the Stars
of Heaven, then there is of our Lords Ancestors, who all shine like Stars in
the holy Story. Let no man think that his Geneology is condemned as Endless,
which the Spirit of endless Wisdom has indicted in his holy Volume. But let
all that hope for life know the Family of whom the Lord of life descended, No
Family in the World, nor altogether match it; therefore give glory to it.

The first fourteen Fathers of our Lord in Mat. 1. do abridge all the holy
History from Gin: 1^. to 1 King. 1.

The next fourteen do abridge all the Kings and Chronicles, and all the
Prophets, except Aggi, Z^chary, Malachi, Ezra, Nehemah, Esther, and most of
Daniel: whose Chronology does stop the mouth of the lying Heathen Chronology.

The third fourteen does abridge the last named Prophets with much of Daniel,
and they make a Commentary for the honor of Zorobabels house, for whom our
Lord face on a fiery Throne to cast the Chaldeans, Medo persians, Macedonians,
and S^le^co Lagid^ into eternal flames; that so Matthews last fourteen might
have an heavenly glory to begin the new Testament, for though their persons
were base in the fight of the base World, yet in the holy Angels account, they
were Kings of Heaven, Dan: 7.18.

Japhets seven Sons and seven Nephews. Gomer Magog Madai Javan Tubal Mesec
Thiras
Ashcanaz Riphath Togarmah Elishah Tha^shish Kittim Dodanim


Chams Sons and Nephews. Chush Sheba Havilah Sabbatha Regma Sabtecha Sheba Dedan
Nimrod
Milzraivn still translated Egypt. Ludim Anamim Lehabiim Naphtuchim Pathrusim
Castuchim Captorim Philistin
Put. Chanaan. Sidon Heth Iebusi Aemori Gargasi Hivi Arki Sini A vadi Zemari
Hamatbi



Sems Sons and Nephews. Elam Ashur Arphaxad, Sela, Heber Lud Vz, Gether Aram
Chul, Mash


Heber Peleg, Regu, Serug, Nahor, Terah Ioktan thirteen Sons.


Ioktans thirteen Sons. Elmodad Shalaph Hazahmaneth Ierah Hadoram Vzal Diklah
Obal Ahimael Sheba Ophir Hanilah Iohab


It is thought the East and West Indians come of these of Ioktan, because both
of them (as Learned say) speak some Hebrew. And the high God is doubtless
laying a foundation of comfort for them for their calling to the Gospel.

All the Hebrew stories of the old Testament, go upon the Families of Noah's
Sons and Nephews, and on the latter offsprings of Terah.

It is very necessary for us to mark how the Prophets express these families
by their wars, or by their merchandise, or by their calling to the Gospel, Esa:
11. and 66. Ez^k: 27. and 38. etc. All these wicked families despising the
Tents of Sem, a King of Justice and Peace, were cast off by the confusion of
Tongues 2000. yea. and were Lo-ruchama and Lo ammi, not pitied, and no people;
that is, nor Gods Church, nor people: and did no more hear the Gospel, till the
true King of Justice and Peace turned that curse of Tongues to a blessing, and
to gather his Elect from among them, Acts 2. Then all those families were
blessed in Christ, as it was foretold to Abraham, Genesis 12.3.

Ter^^, Genesis 11.26, 27. Haren. Lot Moab-Ruth Of him all the Kings of Judah from
Rehoboham. Ammon -- Of him all the Kings of Judah from Rehoboham.
Milcha Sarai
Nah^r, of Milcha and Reumah. Uz Kemuel Hazo Iidlaph Tebah Tahash Buz (of him
Elibu.) Chesed Pildath Bethuel Laban Sons, Lea Rachal Rebecca Sons, Lea Rachal
Gaham Maachah
Abraham Of Sarah, Isaac Esau, vide his Geneologie, Genesis 36. Jacob, of him the
twelve Patriarks. Of Hagar, Ishmael, of him twelve Dukedomes in the Land of
Chush. They drove Chush further into the South. Of Keturah Zimran Sheba Dedan
Ashurim Letushim Leummim

Iokshan Medan Midian Epha Epher, Abidah Henoch, Eldaah
Ishbak Shuach (of him Baldad.)




Genesis 12.3. The Apostle opens the blessings in the Epistles to Rome, Corinth,
Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, etc. then us Gentiles were Ruchamah,
pitied, and a people, Ammi.

All these Families were scattered East, West, North, and South, by the
confusion of Tongues, for many Generations, and followed Devils, the Prince of
the darkness of this world, but being blessed in Christ, by the blessing of
Tongues, to be of Abraham's faith, they came from East, West, North, and South,
to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew.
8.11. Luke 14.29

The Posterities of these families showed the corruption of nature received
from parents, manifesting it by their Idolatries and hatred against Israel, one
after another: first by Chams house, then Sems, then Iaphets. And unless the
Lord Jesus Christ had sent to seek them, they would never have enquired after
him, Acts 26.18. Jeremiah and David prayed against these families, Psalm. 79.
Ier. 10.

Ioktans posterity dwelt in places further remote from Chanaan: for seeing they
had so many godly Ancestors, whom they despised and cared not for the blessing
to Sem, but followed apostate Nimrod, who built Babel, which brought a
Babylonian confusion over all the world, even a scattering from Sems Tents: and
in this unexpressable Judgment (but godly meditated) Ioktans Sons were cast
furthest off from the means of salvation. This should make us have no society
in Religion for phrase, nor Apparel, nor Court, with mystical Babylon: the
Issue will be scattering.

The Kings of the Images and Beassts in Dam 2 and 7 and see Mr. Bro. Preface.

I. Babel Nebuchadnezar Evil-Mor^dach Belshazzar
When the Golden Head, Babel, was made dust, then the glorious prophecy of the
70 Seavens was brought from Heaven by an Angel, Dan: 9.24. etc.

II. Mada^ and Pa^as, that is, the M^des and Persians.

Darius and Cyrus that sent the Jews from Captivity. Artaaxe^xes he hindered
the Temple, Ezra 4.23. Assuerus (Heathen call him Darius Hy^taspis) the Husband
of Esther, He hindered the Temple, and sought to have slain the Jews. Xerxes
the Son of Darius Hystaspis, spoken of only in Dan: 11. Darius-Artaxerxes, a
good King, he built the Temple; he as the Jews think was the Son of ^^ther by
Darius Hystaspis, he had two names, Ezr. 6.14. it should be translated Darius,
which is, artaxerxes: so Mr. Bulling. in an Epistle to one of his Decads,
Beroaldus, and many good Authors. Darius N^thu: These three are passed over in
Nehemiah. Artaxerxes These three are passed over in Nehemiah. Ochus These three
are passed over in Nehemiah. Darius the Pe^^an, Neb: 12. whom Alexander
over-came.

III. The Grecians whole Alexander and his posterity, and the whole power of
Gre^ia.

IV. The Grecians parted the Kings of the North and South

South. North. Ptol. Lagides, Dan: 11.5. Seleucus Nicator. Amiochus Soter, Dan:
11.5. Ptol. Philadelphus, Dan 11.6. Antiochus Thens. Seleuchus Callinicus, Dan:
11.6. Ptol. Eucrgetes, Da^: 11.7. Antiochus the Great, Dan: 11.10. Ptol.
Philapator, Da^: 11.11. Selencus Philopator, Dan: 11.20. Ptol. Epiphanes, Dan:
11.18. Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan: 11.21.

All these Kings were hard iron Legs against the Saints; the other Kings after
partly Iron, and partly Clay: the Jews now had some strength to resist, as
Zach: 9.13, 14, 15. and 10.6, 7. Ptol. Philometor Ptol. Lu^hurus Ptol. Anlaetes
Cle^patra
Antiochus Eupator Demetrius Soter, son to Philip. Deme^^ius Nicator his son
Antiochus, brother to Nicator Antiochus Gryphus Selencus his son. Antiochus
Cyzizenus Antiochus his son. Antiochus Asiaticus.


I have not written Antio. Sater, and Selen. Callinicus, of the Posterity of
them of the North: they were not Horns of trouble to the Jews. After all these
the Romans ruled

CHAP. XXXIX.
The holy Chronicle sundry ways expressed, and every way agreeing to the same
number of years, being from the first promise in Genesis 3.15. till our Lords
death, 3960 years.

SEe Bro. in Texts of Scripture, From the first promise of Christ to restore
life upon death, brought in by the Serpent to the promise of Christ made to
Abraham up on the death of Terah, who was the first of our Lords Fathers, that
the Serpent drew to idolatry, are years 2083. The said time of 2083 years is
secorded by the particular years of the Fathers in Genesis 5. and Genesis 11. From
the second promise made to Abraham at the death of Terah, Genesis 12. to the Lamb
or to the Law of the Passcover, Ex. 12 which typifyed Christ the Lamb of God
are years 430. From the Lamb to the Temples Foundation, 1 Kings 6. A type of
the true Temple, are years 480. From the foundation of the Temple to the
burning of it. Ez. 4. or rather to the captivity upon that, are years 427.
Thence to the end of the Captivity in Babel when Cyru^ made a Decree of
re-edifying the City and Temple, 2 Chronicles. 36. are years full 50. Thence until
the Temple of our Lords body arose the third day, are years, 490. The whole
Sum is 3960.

Observe that in this page it is said, from the foundation of the Temple to the
burning of it, is 4227 years, but in chap. 44, it is said, from the sin of
Israel to the burning of the Temple is 390 years, which is reckoned from
Ezekiel 4. now to this 390. add the 37 of Salomons Reign, and then it is 427.
for the foundation of the Temple was laid in the fourth year of Solomon.

2. In the said 44. chapter you will find the number of 518. which is thus
cleared.

It was from the coming out of Egypt, to the foundation of the Temple 48^
years, which was laid in the fourth year of Solomon, to which add 37 years for
the rest of Salomons Reign, and the year wherein the Ten Tribes made their
Division from Judah, and so you have 518, years: and this way does also still
maintain the general sum of -- 3960 years.

CHAP. XL.
Another expression of the holy Chronicle, which the former Dialogue has
followed.

FRom the first Promise of Christ (to destroy Satan's works) unto the Flood (the
first general manifestation of wrath and judgment upon the seed of the
Serpent for despising the Promise) are years 1656. From the Plood to the
promise made to Abraham of restoring blessedness in Christ to the Apostate
families, in Genesis 10.11. are years 427. From the Promise to Abraham, to the
glorious and mighty Redemption of Israel from Egypt, and the giving of the Law,
of the Passover, Gal. 3, are yeas 430. From the coming from Egypt, to the
Foundation of the Temple (a figure that the Son of God would make [not the
nature of angels, but] the Seed of Abraham his Temple) are years 480. Thence to
the burning of the Temple, That Israel should not glory too much in outward
Ceremonies, and therefore God did shake them by Babel, are year 427 Thence to
the overthrow of Babels Monarcy by Cyrus, and Darius and sending the Jews home
from Captivity are years full 50. Thence to he death of the MASSIAS, and ending
of all Moses ceremonies, which is that once more, that Christ said he would
shake them, to settle that which should remain until his second most glorious
appearance, is 490. The whole sum is 3960.

These seven Pillars may well be resembled to those seven that wisdom hewed
out, Prove. 9.1. which has the golden chain of times fastened to them upon
which hang the glorious Curtains of needle work, the embroidered prophesies and
stories of the eternal wisdom. In which there is a Table spread and furnished
with all varieties of grace to feed the soul in Christ, who is the cluster of
Redemption, and ought to find a lodging betwixt all faithful breasts.

CHAP. XLI.
A third expression of the holy Chronicle.

IT is glorious to meditate, how the Sun in all his journies did constant
service to the SON Eternal, in a mavelous distinction of times, and most
harmonious manner, in which is seen how his Mediatorian Kingdom was exercised
mall ages in mercy to the godly, and in severity to the wicked opposers.

From the miraculous creation, to the miraculous over flowing the world by
waters, are years 1656. From that inundation, to the death of Terah, who was
first of the Fathers of the holy Line, that corrupted the true sacrifice to
flames of idolatry, are years 427. From the death of Terah, and the promise to
Abraham made presently upon his death, to the ending of Isreal's peregrination
in the Land of ^am 430. Thence MOSES was to Israel a Shepherd in the
wilderness, years 40. From M^^es death, to the conquest, and Partittion of the
Land of ^anaan by Jesus, a type of JESUS Christ, the Son of God, that has
procured for the people of God, the true Rest, Jos. 14.20. are years 7. Thence
by seven Jubilees, the time of the Arks abode in the Tribe of Ephraim, at
Shi^oh, at the ending of which Jubilees, the Ark was captived, but Christ gave
them it again: then was the Transmigratirn of the Ark to the Tribe of Judah;
those seven Jubilees are years 350 Thence by Seventy Sevens, to the first
captivity by Babel Then Christ did to Jerusalem in part, as he did to Shi Ioh,
Jer. 2. 490, By Iudahs captivity, and subjection to Babel: then the Land of
Israel kept Sabbath seventy years, as Moses foretold, Levit. 26. 70. Lastly by
the most comfortable Prophecy and Promise of Reconciliation by the death of
CHRIST, at the end of Seventy Sevens of years, Dan. 9 24. 490. The whole Sum
3960.

7 Jubilees are, 350. 70 Sevens are, 490. 10 Sevens are 70. 70 Sevens are, 490
1400. 28 Jubilees, or 1400 years from the conquest of the Seed of the Serpent
by Joshua to the victory of our Lord Jesus CHRIST over sin, death, and the
grave, and over him that had the power of death, the Devil.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the Geometrical Frame of the process of Times.

THE Stones in Salomons Temple were not more curiously fitted for the building
then the times of the holy Scriptures are from Moses death; neither is any army
more orderly composed then the times revolution by the infinite providence of
CHIST.

Seven years of conquest and partition of Chanaan.

Seven Jubilees, the Tabernacle of Moses and the Ark of the Covevenant, at
Shile for Ephraim glory.

Seven Seavensies began with the Transmigration of the Arc of the Covenant,
for Judahs glory, Psalm 78.

Seven Tenns for Captivity to feel Ieremies Lamentations. And then again the
former measure of Seven Seavensies to find comfort in servitude, which none
but the poor in spirit and mourning will ever find. Vid Mr. Br. in Advert. 72.

CHAP. XLIII.
Further Considerations of these 28 Jubilees, that the godly student may
delight in the holy Book of God.

THE plainness of Gods dealing still calls us to mind of a first Sabbath, by
a like account of Sevens, which also is usual through the Scriptures, and
especially from Moses times. And that cannot be denied: Now that the whole
record of the Suns service for twenty eight Jubilees, unto the Suns service
prophesied Dan. 9.24. etc. which was spoken by an Angel, to make us shine in
Justice, and that it may shine in plainness, diligently ponder, and observe.

1. Moses in Levitions chap. 25. tells that the Jubilee shall be an holy
year, and the old Hebrew Doctors thereupon in the Zoha^, (as learned say) write
thus, In the Iubile year, Shecinetha, that is, the Majesty of God having his
Tabernacle with us, will be Freedom, Redemption, and Sabbatisme to Israel, by
the Angel Gabriels years, the last Iubilee that ever the Jews had in their
Land, shall fall out at our Lords death, in which year the Majesty showed it
self upon the Mountain to Peter, James and John, with Moses and Elias, and
became to us freedom ( i. e. justification) and redemption, and finisher of
Mosaicall Sebbaths, consider the proceeding of times herein.

2. Seven years were spent before Israel had conquered and parted the Land.
Before the Partition, the Jubilees could not begin, and by Moses words the next
year after was to be the first of fifty for the Iubilee. Thence unto our Lords
death are 28. Jubilees, exactly year, 1400.

3. In that we have a long time broken the whole frame of both Testaments, by
suffering heathen Olympic toys to call us from the wisdom which Gabriels
healthy and heavenly message had, and offers to us, we must confess that God
has been angry with us justly, in giving over the world unto blindness,
whereas that Prophecy would have lightened all the Scripture. (Of Olympic
vanity more below)

The 26. Levit. running still in Phrase upon Sevens, in the punishments, comes
at last to the captivity for ten Sevens of years, and foretells such a
confession of sins, as Daniel makes, and how God will remember his Covenant,
which Gabriel there mentions, Moses and the Prophets shall be vilely
disjointed through quite; if here we hold not the plain propriety of time.

5. These former parts of time, be no less clear in Scripture, than the stars
in the Sky, that in the Seventh year the Land was parted that That is 42 years.
six sevens Israel held it in quietness: that Chusan held it the whole Seventh
Seven. That in the Iubilee Othoniel turns them into their possession. The
golden Candlesticks with seven branches, bowls 22. (as the Hebrew letters)
knops half so many, flowers thrice three, all 42, commended not Bezaleets
wisdom more, and obedience to the prescript, then we are bound to mark how the
holy volumes record, the Hebrew stories, to fall out in times according to
their ceremonies Thence the seventh Iubilee reaches to A kindler (...) the
golden candle-sticks, land an erector, and Rector of the Schools of the
Prophets.
Samuels happy times. Thence. to the captivity of Babels seventy Sevens. Moses
did closely allude unto that space. Now the Seventy years of captivity Moses
and Ezra compares with the Sabbath, Levit. 26. 2 Chronicles. 36.

6. The Prophecy of Dan. 9.24. surmounteth all, easy for memory and
celestial for Meditation. It had not been so harmonious to have chains of the
time hitherto most certainly fixed, if hence we should un clasp the links of
it: But we have the chains of times fastening hitherto-more closely than the
Finnes of the Leviathan stick one to another, Job 41. All the works of God have
perfection, and so is the time from the Creation to the Redemption, Mr. Bro. ex
manus.

CHAP. XLIV.
A fourth expression of the holy Chronology from the Creation to the
Redemption.

THE golden chain of times are evident, which draw from the apostasy of our
first Parents unto our Lords Resurrection which when they are all known do
bring unto Christ, and we shall find much comfort and edification, if we often
think upon them for they are a greater ornament to the Scriptures, than any
chains of the finest gold or of the most rare or polished Jewels to the neck.

The first is from the beginning of time, since Satan's fiery tongue did set
the wheel of the whole Creation on flame, that nothing but the flood of waters
(nor that) could quench it.

The second is from the Flood to the death of Terah, Arahams father, the
author of idolatry in Christ his Line, and thereby causing to cease the royal
accompting of the Churches annals, by the ages of the Fathers, Genesis 11. Jos. 23.

The next begins upon his death, with a new promise of CHRIST making Abraham
heir of the world, not through the Justification of the Law of Circumcision,
but through the justification of faith in the promise of blessedness in Christ
to the Families Genesis 12. This Chain draws along to the Lamb, that is the Law
of the Passover, Exodus 12.

The fourth chain is from the Lamb to the Temple, the allurement of the Nations
unto the worship of him that made the Temples of the heavens, From the lamb to
the Temple, 480. Salomons 37. and year of division, all 518.
who in fulness of time would come to make humane nature his Temple to dwell
with the children of men. And further this chain teaches to Salomons death:
his idolatry (as Terah) was worthy to have this chain ended, for which his
Kingdom was parted, and Jeroboam did set up calves for God, which doing, is
called the sin of Israel. These sums with the year of the Division of the
ten Tribes from Judah are years 518.

The fifth chain is from that apostasy of Israel to the burning of the Temple,
that space is 390 years. Judah now is only Gods Kingdom. In that time is
contained the books of the Kings, Ezekiel. 4.
and 2 Chronicles, and most of the Prophets, as the table before will show. Here
must be considered Ierusalems ruin by Babel, the flames of the Temple, and the
ending of Salomons race and Kingdom, the breaking of the golden candlestick,
yea the Ark, the special sign of Christ's presence (which had the two Tables
of the Covenant) was no more, as Ierem. 3. They lost it at Shiloh, but found it
again in the woody field of Ki^iath Iaharim, Psalm. 132. All Moses, curtains
Babel carried away for a spoil, and all that Hyram the King and Proselyte
procured, and Hyram the artificer made, etc. all these goodly things, left the
Temple and showed Christ his severity. Christ by Babel shook his own ceremonies
by Moses, and ended them by Rome, that is, the meaning of that speech in Aggei,
Yet once more I will shake, never to have any setting: yet some in their
writings will re-edifie the low Jerusalem, etc. But as Israel had a first and
second Temple: so Jerusalem was twice builded by David, Solomon and Nehemiah,
and twice razed: now no other Jerusalem, ever shall be, but that which is from
heaven, and no material Temple ever shall be, for the Lord God of Hosts, even
the Lamb, is the Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem.
Thus in part he did shake these similitudes of heavenly things: that they
might look to the sure mercies and holy things promised in CHRIST unto David,
Acts 13.34.

The sixth shows the earthly glory of this worlds Monarks, with their
abasement and sudden destruction: all this is seen in the golden head, Babels
Kingdom, which Christ made as chafe before the wind. Now the Jews had seen
the end of Salomons progeny, the fall of his Kingdom, their hope, the burning
of the Temple their glory, and the fall of Babel, the glory of Nations, by
Cyrus and Darius, Solomon foresaw all this, and said, all is vanity, Eccl. 1

The seventh is from Cyrus Proclamation of bringing back the people of God from
Babels yoke to the eternal freedom the Lord Jesus Christ purchased. This time
is the glorious and shining Prophecy of the Seventy Sevens, Dan 9. This chain
began with Cyrus, of Sem, and Darius, of Japhet, both which Princes proclaimed
the God of heaven, the God of Israel over an hundred and twenty Nations, who
gave Israel a liberal subsidy to comfort them in returning to Sion, who by
that faith in that joyful Prophecy left great Babel for Jerusalem yet in her
dust, Psalm. 102. And this year the faith of Gods elect, stopped the mouth of
Lions, etc. And this chain ends most comfortably by the death of Messiah, the
Holy of Holy: which ends all Sacrrifice and offering in the low Jerusalem,
and it ends the peculiar. Prerogative of Israel, and it brings the Gentiles
into equal covenant, and breaks down the Partition wall, and blotteth out
the hand writing of Ordinances, and makes the shadows flee away, and with
commandment of showing the Kingdom of heaven to all Nations, etc. etc.

Thus the SUNS labors have glorious stories through all ages, till Christ
showed a new world, and a new Jerusalem from heaven by the preaching of the
holy disciples, who went forth by the Lords Commandment, and turned the familes
of Noe from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God, that they might
receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are
sanctified by the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

From these various expressions of the holy Chronologic, we may see the marks
which the holy Spirit aims at in the ages and generations of the Bible. These
are the joints to which the holy Chronicle is fastened, fit for Christians to
know concerning the Son of God, that was to come into the world, to be a Second
Adam, That by these, as a part of the holy revelation of the Spirit of God, we
might be made wise unto salvation, through the faith which in is Christ Jesus;
For the Testimony of JESUS is the Spirit of Prophecy.

It would be wished, that people were somewhat educated in that course of
study, of a book called the Consent of Scripture: That study I suppose would
more stablish us in sound principles of Christian Doctrine, against light and
vain errors, and bad opinions, then many books of sa^ greater volumes: much
more might be said, the Lord bless endeavors, and make our hearts upright
with him.

THE books of Chronicles reach from Adams to Babels captivity, and to Cyrus
first, thence Daniel reaches to our Lords death, and the fall of Jerusalem,
thence the Apocalypse holds on to the fall of the world: the confusion of this
narration is a cursed piece of work.

Seven times Daniel speaks of the Chaldeans, seven times of the
Medo-Persians, seven times of Javan whole, seven times of Iavan parted.

Daniel comfort the holy Jews, and no other Nation afflicted for Religion by
the Kings of the East, and before the incarnation, showing, that as every one
of his predictions shall fall out in their times, and they of Antiochus, in
exact foretold number of days, so the exact number of days should be most
surely kept for our Redemption, and the three years and half for our Lords
preaching, when he must begin, even when he began to be thirty, and at the
first of those 30. open records of Kittim Italies power, Numb. 24. should show
that the image Dan. 2. was broken in pieces.

Now the Holy Ghost in the New Testament keeps Daniel clear, that the
captivity to Babel began with his captivity, that Saint Matthew shows that
Iechonias was begotten a little before the captivity to Babel, at the second
captivity he was 18. years old.

So where the image is made chafe, and the tree cut, but not at the root, and
the Beasts cast into the fire, John Baptist from matters past does teach the
Jews how they rejecting MESSIAH. Christ shall be used, the ax shall be put to
the root of the tree, and the chafe shall be burnt in fire unquenched. Upon
stories past this stands plain, if Daniels stories had been yet to come, the
grace of the speech had been lost, but John speaking of punishments foretold
and felt, pierces more the wise hearer, that the Jews shall feel what he
foretold.

So where after the four Beasts are consumed, One like unto the SON of Man,
comes into the world, and again ascends our great God and Savior, naming
himself the SON of Man and Rock, Deuteronomy. 32. upon which the Jews stood in the
boisterous sea, whence the four beasts came forth, teaches us, that those four
Beasts were consumed, speaking to the whole consent of the Jews.

So Saint Stephens pleading upon the Angel Gabriels words, and having the
Angels face, shows, that the whole Nation agreed in time, from the return
from captivity, or beginning of the Seventy Sevens, as they could not choose.

And whereas the acts of Antiochus the vile, are much in Daniel chap. 7. and 8.
and 12. and concluded in chap. 11. with mention of resurrection to glory for
his afflicted, the Macchabees company, and of resurrection to shame for Gods
enemies, as the Jews in the third of Macchabees, and in Josephus, note well,
and as Chrysostom noted from them, so Saint Paul before all noted the same,
speaking of tormented in Antiochus manner, that they would not be delivered,
because they looked for the better resurrection, Heb. 11. Moreover while the
affliction of the Jews, were in visions that described not their Nation
plainly, that they were the tendered of God, and so they were without danger,
they were penned in Chaldee, spread over the East, out when the speeches
plainly name the afflicters, and the Jews the afflicted, then they are written
in Adams tongue, lost, but in Schools, and not spoken in the world. And this
shows, that the Jews are the only afflicted in Daniel, and that he has not
one syllable of the Romans afflicting the Jews before the Birth of our Lord,
nor one word to bring them within his pictures.

But the Apocalypse plainly distinguishes them from Daniels Kingdoms, a Woman,
that is a State settled, and a Beast coming out of the Sea, made of all the
four, that are in Daniel.

Thus Daniel is a Bridge from the Chronicles to the Apocalypse, and the breaker
of this bridge cuteth off all passage from the old Testament to the new, and
works a Babylonian confusion, missing in the Nations, Countries, or Times.

Daniel pictureth East Kingdoms only, he makes stories agree to the
proportion of a man's image, head, arms and breast, belly and sides, and two
legs, our notes would make but one leg, and six times longer than the
proportion of a man's body would suffer. Daniel brings an Angel to comment
upon his Visions, applying them to stories which Greeks explain. But none can
apply our notes to fit stories.

CHAP. XLV.
An Advertisement to the Reader, to take heed of embracing the evil tenants of
two men especially, that have lately put forth irreligious opinions about the
Chronology of the Book of God, namely Mr. Sarson, and Mr. Parker, they deny the
certainty of Chronology from the first promise, to the death of Christ.

1. AS for Mr. Sarson, let him take heed he be not degenerated into a Sarrason,
by bringing upon the holy Bible a Leprosy of Chronologic, that it should be of
no greater authority, than Machomer's Alcoran.

2. Mr. Parker says, there is not truth nor certainty in the holy Angel
Gabriels Seventy Sevens, when they should begin or end, his words in his book
of the Visions, and Prophesies of Daniel page 51 are these.

Mr. Broughton and his followers, denying the truth of heathen Chronology,
constitute the years without ground, D.R. on the other side, (and that
worthily), allowing and maintaing the heathen Chronology, and finding no way
how to accommodate those years untoi^, affirms that no certain time is meant,
but an uncertain, and undetermined duration in allusion to the seventy years of
the Babylonian captivity, etc.

To say, there is not truth nor certainty in the holy Chronology of the
Scriptures.

1. Let us take such heed that they deny not the truth and certainty of other
doctrines of faith.

2. It may be truly said, because men have not loved the truth by a diligent
search of the holy Bibles Chronology, they have been given up to believe the
lies of heathen Chronologies, 2 These. 2.11.

3. The holy Chronology of the Book of God is a doctrine of faith, as clear
and certain as any other doctrine of faith, and therefore that speech of the
holy Apostle bears supremacy in our hearts: That the holy Book of God does
not only teach and instruct us of the truth of its Chronology, but it does
also correct and convince the heathens Chronology to be most false and
abominable doctrines, as some produce them, 2 Timothy 3.

4. It is said, that the holy Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and
is able to make (children yea) the man of God wise to salvation through the
faith which is in Christ Jesus, and this must be understood of, Scripture
Chronology, as well as of any other doctrine of the holy Bible, and he that
will rightly consider the holy Chronology, as it is above expressed by sundry
calculations, will say, that the holy Scripture Chronology teaches doctrine
of faith, which is in Christ JESUS, and (in him) by it wisdom to salvation.

5. It is said, we have a more sure word, (2 Pet. 1. and that was the old
Testament) but now heathen Chronology of the devilish worships of Apollo, the
heathens Olympiads are by some made more sure and certain criptures, than the
oracles from heaven. We have more cause to yield to the Locusts that defend
their Apolluon, that allege Fathers and Councils, than to yield to men that
authorize the vain Olympiads of Apollo of Delphos. Therefore let us that are
Christians hearken to the words and commandments of the Apostle of our Lord
and savior. Beware lest any man carry you for a spoil through Phlosophy and
vain deceit after the rudiments of the world, and not after CHRIST, Col. 2.
it is the holy scriptures that have ditted up the mouths of Apolluon and his
Locusts, by the RR. Jewel, Fulk, Cartwright, Perkins, Calvin, Beza, etc, etc.
we doubt not but the holy scripture shall do the same to them that plead for
the gamestry of Stanicall, Olympian reckonings.

Verily all the scriptures should as well take a check, as the wisdom touching
the time of the seventy sevens, be controlled by heathen. We may as well
believe the heathen spoke true (when the Sun went back) that for Hercules birth
the Sun made a longer night, but the word of Christ shows, that he that rules
the heavens made it, and did show to all the world, but specially to Israel,
that the heavens order was not so stable as Gods covenant in Christ: for then
that miracle was to confirm the faith of the church in Christ promised, so the
sun performed service to the SON of righteousness: surely the motions of the
heavens declare the works of God in the harmonious measure of times. Although
many men be great Scholars and godly, yet some of them do not consider that the
sun did run his race for the glory of Christ and his word. For it is said,
All things were created by him, and for him the second Adam. For Him, for his
honor and glory, not for Satan's sports and pastimes of the Olympiads.

6. What a grossness and cross is this? because we cannot make the heathens
accounts to agree with the holy Scripture-Chronologie, therefore we fly upon
the word of the living GOD, the Lord of hosts our God, reproaching it, and
exclaiming against it, that there is not truth nor certainty in many parts of
it, but we should say and do the contrary: and should say, let God and his word
be true, and the heathens and their Chronicles, lies, and liars. For there is
more to be said.

If that the Angel taught not Daniel certainty of knowledge and understanding
for the Chronology, he taught him nothing that he knew not. Daniel knew all
the rest of the Message, but the time of performance. And so we make the holy
Angel a deceiver, an evil spirit, a Satan. And therefore D.R. and Mr. P. and
all that follow their course, have sorrily dealt with the Church of Christ
Jesus our Lord.

7. Mr. P. says, that Mr. Bro. and his followers, etc. Let Mr. P. know, that
Mr. Bro. and those that use his godly and learned labors do adhere to, and
follow the lively oracles of the living God, sent from him by an Angel from
heaven, to teach Daniel knowledge and understanding, and to teach all faithful
Christians by him. And therefore we are confident in the Lord, and dare not
otherwise say, but that the holy Angel from God stake a true plain, and proper
speech, and a most certain chronology for the beginning and ending of the
seventy sevens, and that their beginning was from Daniels prayer, and their
ending at the abolishing of sacrifice and offering, and confirmation of the
Testament for the Many, by the blood and death of the MESSIAH.

It is true, many have objected against the holy Scriptures Chronology before
Mr. P. and Mr. Sarson (which is to be lamented) but we know there are many
graceless speeches and objections against the very fundamental truths of
Christian Religion.

But this I think, 1. That it is good that the Scriptures chronology should be
clear and certain, Isa. 5.
and can we think that God has omitted this good for his church?

2. Men should deem, or ought so to do, that the Scripture has truth and
certainty for chronology, though they see it not, and they that oppose it
should think and say, they err not knowing the Scriptures, and they should
think that the works of God, the rock are perfect, and that he that began the
chronology for the glory of Christ by the genealogy of his holy ancestors,
Genesis 5. and 11. would perfect it.

3. To affirm truth and certainty in Heathen chronology, and to deny it in the
holy Scriptures, is an opinion scelerate and flagitious: we cannot think how
great the evil is: and therefore Mr. P. has done ill in justifying D.R. saying
the holy Angel in his heavenly Oration to Daniel meant no certain time, whereas
the Angel taught him perfect wisdom for the chronology of it, and so
professes that he came to give skill of understanding that very thing.

4. Whereas Mr. P. says, that Mr. Bro. denying the truth of heathen
chronology, constituted the year of the seventy Sevens, without grounds Mr. P.
in this saying, puts a stumbling block before the blind, and causes him to go
out of the way, and falls into a great offense of untruth, not only against
Mr. Bro. (for that's little) but against the Angel from heaven, who said to
Daniel, at the beginning of thy prayer came forth the word, which I am come to
tell thee, because thou art greatly beloved, therefore conceive the word, and
perceive the clear vision. Which is, seventy Sevens of years are accounted for
thy people, and for thy holy City, to finish trespass (offerings) and to end
sin (ofierings) and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring
righteousness everlasting, and to seal vision and Prophet, and to show Christ
the holy of holy, etc. Thus we see the groundwork of Mr. Bro. is a Rock as firm
and stable as Mount- Sion, (that we might build on Christ the Rock) spoken by
an Angel. So the Angel speaking from heaven, makes the begininng of the seventy
Sevens to be from Daniels prayer, and their ending to be at the glorious
manifestation of MESIAS, i.e. Christ, to be the Holy of Holy, which was seen in
his healthy passion, and glorious Resurrection

5. Let us further consider the speech of the Angel, which I noted before, and
think it worth the noting again, who says to Dantel, Conceive the word, and
pe^ceive the clear vision. By this commandment doubled for more vehement
charge, he condemns the world, that regard not to be instructed in this
Doctrine sent from heaven by an Augel unto Daniel, and penned for all Nations
use. Wherefore We must give better heed unto that speech, lest we
wilfulyswerve, for if the word spoken by Angels fall our sure, and every
trespass received just recompense, How shall we escape neglecting so great a
charge of our King unto out own salvation? where the vision is so clear, that
no doubt can be moved by any plain heart, that will rest in the clearness of
the most bright message by the Angel of glory, who coming to teach all the
world, was to shine in words, as Stephen by him did in the face, when he spoke
the Angels words, Acts 6. That Jesus of Nazaret would deftrroy the place, city
and Temple, and change the Laws which Moses gave. To this day the blind Jews
stand in this, that the Laws of Moses shall continue for ever. Maymon. Tom. 1.
de lege, Perek. 9. Therefore God seeing their dullness would have an Angel of
light to teach them by this Prophecy 490 years, when from the year of that
Message unto Daniel, the Laws of Moses should have their end. And none of the
Scribes, when Herod was affrighted, objected disagreement for the time, which
thing had been done, if any color of disagreement could be brought, so none in
all the new Testament touched disagreement in the time, Mr. Bro. upon Daniel.

6. Who would think to say the sveenty Sevens are a time not certain, when as
the holy Angel divides them into three parts, seven sevens, and sixty two
sevens, and one seven, for the seven sevens he shows the troubles, the ^^^dly
returned from captivity should undergo, before the Temple should be built, and
City walled, and Christ's should be born toward the latter part of the 62
Sevens, and the last seven, the last half of it our Lord would by his preaching
and teaching three years and an half, and by his death, confirm the Covenant.

7. Another weighty reason, though noted other where, That there was great
need, that Gods Israel, and all the world should have and know a definitive
sentence from God how long Canaan and Jerusalem and Temple should have their
Prerogative, and how long sacrificing should be there lawful and acceptable,
and when the partition wall should be broken down, and when the Gentiles should
be brought into equal Covenant, and this definitive and determinate time is
most graciously demonstrated to us in the seventy Sevens.

It is not man's V^. Mr. P. his Epistle prefixed
Eulogia, nor his Chrestologia (nay rather) nor his Mateologia, that shall
dis-anull the holy Chronologia of the holy Bible.

And therefore most cordially we do protest against the unworthy dealing of Mr.
Sarson and Mr. P. in the premises, not doubting, but one of them will seriously
think of his doings and be humbled (though he says he is unmovable, pa. 65)
and that hence forward he will adhere and subscribe to the propriety of the
word (for tropes may not be sought where propriety stands well enough) and
cleave to the lively. Oracles of Jehovah the God of Israel. And what
Chronology can be plainer then those of the holy Scriptures on which we rest
and rely? First, on the accounts of the Fathers to the Flood: Secondly, the
Fathers ages to the death of Terab, upon whose death the promise to Abrabam was
given: Thirdly, From that promise to the Law of the Passover, Exodus 12.
Fourthly, Thence to the building of the Temple, 1 King. 6. Fis^hly, Thence to
the burning of it which was in the nineteenth of Nebuchad^ezay: Sixthly, Thence
to the ending of the Captivity in Babel: Seavenshly Thence that sweet Heavenly
scripture (the I amp of all the Old Testament, and the Abridgment of the New)
the Seavensy Seaveus which began from Dani^lls prayer, and ended at the death
of Christ. All these Journeys of the Sun (before largely showed, now briefly
expressed) were created to serve the Son of righteousness, and are sure,
clear, and certain, and in their holy use have the power and strength of the
Almighty.

But as for the Olimpiad accounts in this respect, D.R. and Mr. P. etc. would
have us fall into the plame of 2 Timothy 4.4.
we do not reston them but detest to take up their names into our lips, it was
the offering to a strange God, to Devils, to new Gods which came newly up,
which the holy Patria^ks and Prophets, and Saints of old feared not, nor
served. What is this? must we and our children regard the * fabulous toys,
stories and accounts from this man that wan the Stadion this Olympiad, or from
that man that wan it in another, or from that man that acted his part bravely
as a gladiator this Olympiad, or from him that acted the next Olimpiad, or from
this foot race, and this horcerace, that this man atcheived at this Olympiad,
or the foot race and horse-race, that another man archieved at another: or from
the accounts of the Archontes, of Athens, or from the accounts of the building
of Rome, or from the accounts of the lying Caldeans (as Daniel ever found them
so to be) Must I and our children hearken to these abominations and neglect the
word spoken by an Angel from Heaven, no, surely, but let all this cobweb-stuff
of Doctrines of Devils, be left to them, to whom it belongs (we are sure not to
Christians) this further warning I give to the people of God our Brethren. For
it is a shame that our godly learned, Mr. Bro. in Advertis. pa. 25.
or any should contend to teach or to be taught by these Olym piads how to
understand an * Angel of light sent by the grace of God to teach all the simple
world, into whose lips if grace were not poured to be unnerstood as soon as he
spoke, Heaven would say Daniel saw no Angel.

CHAP. XLVI.
That the point of Chronology was a chief part of the Angels Message to
Daniell, for Daniell knew all before the Chronology.

1. HE knbw that Salem, Daniel says, Seavens; Seavens ore exactly ^^^^u^ted
for thy people, and for thy holy City.
Sems Tents and people should not always have peculiar glory, and that one
day, the postericy of Japheth should be persuaded to embrace the faith of Sems
Tents, he knew that all Families that apostated, Genesis 11. should be blessed in
CHRIST, Genesis 12 and that he would also confirm firm the Covenant of his grace
for them: The blessedness promised and the confirming the Covenant are all one.

2. He knew as well as Esaias that the Temple and holy place should not always
be regarded, as Stephea cites Esaias and Daniet, Act. 6. and 7. Esai. ^6 1.
Dan. 9 26.27.
that the holy place, Christ would destroy.

3. He knew that Esaias had said, from Month to Month, and from Sabbathto
Sabbath, all flesh shall come to worship before me, says the Eternal, Esai,
66.23. This shows an utter abrogation of Moses, seeing all Nations cannot
come every week to Jerusal^m, Mr. Br. in the latter end of Ecclesiastes.

4. He knew the Priest hood of Levi, should be changed, from Psalm. 110. And he
knew, if the Priest hood be changed, of necessity, there must be a change of
the Law, and therefore the Law of all manner of Sacrifices of Beasts and Birds,
etc. should be abolished, this he knew from Psalm. 40. And all faithful, as
Habel thus expected and believed, and by that their faith they were made heirs
of the justification that is by faith. And Daniel shows the same, that
Messiah should by his once offering of himself make reconciliation for
iniquity, and bring an everlasting justification, and so seal and confirm all
the visions and premises and prophesres, that himself was the end an scope
that all aimed at.

5. He knew from Esaias, that Cyrus should send the Jews home from Captivity,
and build City and Temple, read Esai 44, and 45, and 46. and Jer. 30.18. But in
what time after the return from Captivity, Esaias told not. But the holy Angel
did show the time, that within the Seven Seavens from Daniels prayers, and the
return of the forty nine thousand, Jerusalem should be builded Street and Wall.

6. He knew that HE, the holy seed of the Woman, of Abraham, of David, etc.
should destroy Satan's works, that by the Seed of the Serpent his foot sole
should be bruised, that he should be slain not for himself but for us.

7. He knew that Esaias had prophesied of the acceptable year^ of the Lord (in
the Jubilee) in which should be preached good tidings unto the meek, to bind up
the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of
the prison to them that are bound, etc. Now Daniel told of the last Jubilee,
when all should be performed, Levit. 25. seeing all the promises of God in
Christ are yea, and amen, we are bound to mark the Jubilees beginning and
ending, and to join the last to our LORDS death, for indeed they do so most
exactly fall out.

When the Angel had told the Prophet Daniel of the Seavensy Seavens; Then the
godly Teachers before the holy Incarnation could say, the Majesty of God
dwelling in our Tabernacle will be Redemption, freedom (i. e. justification)
and Finisher of Sabbaths to Israel in a Iubilee (this speech is worthy of
golden Letters) This they might easily account. For they knew how many Jubilees
had been past, and how many would be the last year of the Seavensy Seavens.
The last Jubilee falls out with the last year of the Seavensy Seavens. Simeon
the just knew this, and he wa^ted for the M^ss^as, the consolation of Israel,
and it was reveiled unto him that he should not see death, till he had seen the
MESSIAH of the Lord. Luke 2. All this glorious meditation of the Jubilees, and
this last Jubilee Master P. defaceth, utinam bec illi ne imputetur. Number. 33 56.
Deuteronomy. 28.66. Esai. 66. P^^l. 95. Ez^k. 16.


8. He knew from Moses and the Prophets that Christ the King would destroy his
own people as with a Flood of Noe, that they should be shaken out of their own
Land, and that that Land should not be their Rest, nor an holy Land, nor holy
Mountain, no more then any place under heaven, after the ending of the
Seavensy Seavens, the Jews shall be converted, they will believe that City and
Temple shall never be restored, and then they will not much regard the Land.

Now the holy Lord God sent his Angel from heaven to tell the time of the
accomplishment of all these (they are un-utterable) wonderful things and
glorious mercies, that from the beginning of Daniels prayer, this exactly
accounted time should begin, Mr. Bro^ (...) Daniel,
and end at the showing of CHRIST to be the most holy Redeemer, in declaring
the power of God in his passion and resurrection, as is foretold in Dan. 9.
Because the passion marveilously showed Christ to be the most Holy when he
sanctified himself, Ioh. 17.17. and the Centurion said doubtless he was the
Son of God: and his resurrection showed that he was indeed the Son of Gone.

I will add a little to the eighth Section above.

If the Jews had known the words of the Prophets, they would not have stoned
Stephen, for saying Jesus of Nazaret should destroy the City and the holy
Place. Great error has herein been committed by not marking the force of Noes
words pursued by Moses, by Gabriell, by the Lord, and by their full Event, and
by the glorious erecting of the Church, termed the Jerusalem from Heaven,
insted of it. Julian the Apostate to satisfy our Lords words endeavored to
repair Jerusalem, but he felt the wrath of Christ for it. So in after ages,
Anno 1100. and 1200.
the Pontificality stirred the Princes of the West to war for Low. Jerusalem,
but Christ plagued Christendom to this day, for that vanity.

Yea, at this day, people study not, nor believe the words of the Prophets, but
as the Jews are susperstitious, so are many, the superstition of the Jews is
in part expressed by a godly Teacher: And it seems their vanity pleases us to
write so of them as we do: Christians now a-dayes are so foolish and erroneous
as thinking of going to Jerusalem. (I could name some) But it is better for
them to alter their opinions, and if I might give them counsel (to do as it
is reported Jews do about their dead bones) let them give order to some
Feoffee to have care of their dead bones, and when they have a sufficient
Cargosie to freight some Vessel to Joppa, and to consigne them to some
Reverend Mussel-man, that he by Wagons may transport them to Jerusalem to be
interred.

Ah, let Teachers consider whether they have not been an occasion to people to
stumble at the Law, in teaching and writing about the Jews repairing of
Jerusalem in Chanaan, and of the great businesses that will follow thereupon.
Some Teachers have silled the Churches full of mateologie, and fond
expectations.

CHAP. XLVII.
That Daniell is alleged in the New Testament to prove the Messiah to be
already come.

MR. P. says in pa. 52. That in no place in the New Testament, this prophecy [
of Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.] is used against the Jews to prove the Messiah
already come.

Of this assertion, I suppose I may and ought to say (if I say no more) that it
is un beseening a man of God, and a Minister of Messiahs Gospel, so to say,
For,

1. Stephens speeches to those that disputed with him, and to the Counc^ll,
shows that he spoke the words and Doctrine of the holy Angel, Act. 6. and 7.
and as he had the Angels words, so he had his countenance. This I have noted,
and it seems there is necessity to note it often, and to say as the thing is,
Stephens contestation is the sum of the Angels message, if M^ssias shall
destroy the holy Place, and change the Mosaicall customs, then no longer an
holy Mountain, then no holy City, then no peculiar people, then no holy Land,
all these depend each upon other, but the Lord God does give us further
illustration, For

2. Where ^ver we read the attribute Christ in the new Testament, we must
remember it to be the attribute of Messiah from Dan. 9. there given as a proper
name of the Son of God, and so used of his Nation in expectation of him, and no
place in the old Testament, but Daniel, uses it as a proper name, the Hebrew
word is in Greek letters, and that in the mouth of the simplest, as Andrew the
fisher man, and the Samaritan woman's showing, that the Sama^it^ns, as well as
Jews, knew when Christ should come into the world. Job 1.4,

3. Our Lord teaching to forgive, as God in Christ forgave us, alludeth to this
Oration of the holy angel, teaching Peter to forgive seventy times sev^n times,
Mat. 18.

4. The Angel Gabriel says, that Christ shall make reconciliation for
un-righteousnesse. The Epistle to the Hebrews goes upon this point, that the
Son of God the M^ssia^, the holy of holy by himself, should purge our sin^,
should procure remission of sins, and should be the reconciliation for our
sins, Romans 3.1 John 1. and 2.

5. The angel says, Christ shall bring everlasting justification, the Apostle
says to the Hebrews, Christ by his own blood, entered once into the holy
place, the very heavens, and found eternal redemption for us.

6. The angel says, Messiah shall seal vision and prophecy. The visions and
propheciess and ceremonies all tended to our redemption by the Son of God. When
that was manifested, young men and maids might be said to see the visions and
dreams, because they saw the performance of the best part of them. They saw
Acts 2 what the first Adam looked for, Genesis 3.15. How Christ the second Adam by
death overcame him that had the power of death, to work freedom for them which
all their life time with fear were guilty of, or subject to bondage, Heb. 2.^5.

They saw how the great God of Sem after the flesh persuaded the sons of
Iapheth in their own language, as Noes allusion, Iaph and Iapheth told, they
saw in whom from Abraham all the families apostared, Genesis 10. and 11. were to
look for the blessing, Genesis 12. They saw the last Iubilee gave us an open
recovery of our possession of the heavenly Paradise. Luke 23.43. Romans 15 8.
They saw how the Lamb of God had taken away the sins of the world, having a
better Tabernacle than Moses made, a sacrifice-hood better than Aharons, a
sacrifice better than oxen, goats, and sheep, and birds, and a covenant of
greaterforce, larger extent, not only to the Jew, but also to the Gentile.
They knew what Nathan told David of the eternal Throne, and what Daniel
dreamed of it, chap. 7. and what Gabriel told Mary, Luke 1.32. This they knew
clearly, how all the promises of God in Christ were sealed with yea and Amen.
Yea the Lord Jesus Christ has sealed and confirmed the holy doctrine of the
old Testament in the holy Evangelists, and his holy Apostles in their Epistles,
and in a wonderful manner in his Apocalypse, showing how new enemies under old
terms did strive against the doctrine of his heavenly Jerusalem, and the
phrases of holy speech are so couched in the Apocalypse from Moses and the
prophets that no one article of new doctrine of faith is taught to the churches.

7. The angel says, Messiah shall suffer, but not for himself, so it is said,
he once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3^18.

8. The angel foretold that Messiah should confirm the Testament, for many, the
latter half of the last seven, and the Lord Christ bears witness to his
message by the angel, that he was now ready to do that which was foretold and
he took the cup, and gave thanks^ and gave it to them, saying Drink ye all of
it, for this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins, Mat. 26.28.

9. When Christ the King had suffered and confirmed the covenant, the angel
foretells, that afterward in the next generation (so Mat. 24, 34.) by
loth-some Infidels he would destroy the city and holy place, and his own
people, with most bitter wars to a final judgment of utter desolations, and
Messiah foretelling the same again, as he had done by his angel, that when they
see Jerusalem besieged by an host, and the abominable infidels standing in the
holy place, Let him that reads Daniel consider [the whole doctrine of the
seventy Sevens] Mat. 24 Mark 13. Luke 19. and 21.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Showing how the holy Evangelists, express the Attributes, MESSIAH, or CHRIST.

1. JAcob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born JESUS, which is
called CHRIST, Mat. 1.^6.

Chap. 2. When JESUS was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the
King, Behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying,

2. Where is HE, that is born King of the Jews, for we have seen His Star in
the East, and are come to worship him.

3. When Herod the [usurping] King had heard these things, he was troubled, and
all Jerusalem with him.

4. And when he had gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where [Messias] Christ should he born.

The Magi (from Persi^, we may suppose) They asked, Where is the King of the
Jews? But Herod the usurper, he demanded of the learned of the Nation, where
Messiah, i.e. Christ should be born, so this plainly looks to Dan. 9. where
the Lord Jesus is called Nagid, Bas^^^us, Messiah the King, Mat. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

3. In the godly, and ravishing society of Messiah, Andrew, Simon, Philip, and
Nathanael, What joyful heavenly conference have they about Dan 7. and 9. and
Genesis 28, says Andrew to his brother Simon, We have found that Messiah, which
is by intepretation the Christ, and Phili^i finds Nathanael, and said unto him,
we have found him of whom Moses, in the Law and the Prophets did write. All the
Prophets did write of Christ, but none named him Messiah, the attribute of a
proper name, but Daniel from the Angels message, and the same Angel was sent to
Mary, to name him Jesus, so both those names were given to the SON of GOD, not
by man, but from heaven: so in their blessed and heavenly society these
speeches were uttered, and confessed Christ to be the Son of God, to be the Son
of man, to be the King of Israel, and the Messiah the Holy of Holiness, and
the Ladder of all comfort.

4. And Martha's conference with our Lord is most comfortable and full of
faith, showing what they all expected and believed, I believe thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, that should come into the world, to be our life and
Resurrection -- John 5.

5. Pilates speech to the Jews is of great force. What shall I do then with
JESUS which is called MESSIAH Christ? They all said, Let him be c^ucified. This
looks to Dan. 9. Psalm. 22. where it is said, Messiah shall suffer, Mat. 27.

6. The questions that were in agitation among the Jews at this time, will
brighten this matter; the signs of the times, as our Lord speaks, gave them
occasion of moving many questions, when John Elies came teaching and baptizing,
the Jews sent Priests and Levites to ask him, Who art thou? and he conf^ssed,
and denied not, and plainly confessed, I am not the Messiah the Christ. Yea the
Jews did so expect the Messiah, that all men mused that John was the Messiah,
and they were hardly driven off from the conceit, they were to taken with him,
Luke 3.15. John 1. Therefore this is a strong argument, that Dan. 9.24. etc.
must of absolute necessity be believed to be a proper speech and definitive for
the time, MESSIAH coming to satisfy the consciences of the faithful. And for
that also our Lord foretold of false Christ's that would arise, as immediately
they did, and deceived many, as our Lord said unto them, I am come in my
Fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his own name him
ye will receive, John 5. Therefore he said, Search the Scriptures, etc. and
very likely Mr. P. if he had then lived, would have been a deceiver, and
deceived, and a false Prophet or a false Christ, if he had not believed Daniels
Prophecy to be a most clear, exact, and definitive time from Daniels prayer to
the death of MESSIAH.

So Iohn-Elias sent his disciples to Christ to stablish them in that which he
their Master had acknowledged. When John being in prison heard of the works of
Messiah, i. e. Christ, he sent two of his disciples, and said unto him, Art
thou he that should come, or shall we look for another? The times did call for
all these questions, being but a little before the ending of the seventy sevens.

7. The adjuration of the Priest to the Lord, is very considerable. Mr. P. If
he had been of the Council, he xitld have objected to him, that the seventy
sevens were ended long before he was b^^n,
The high Priest, and the whole Synedrion could not, nor did challenge the Lord
for the time of 70. sevens: so where no doubt or question was, ^^va answer
needed, but the high Priest and most of the Jews thought him too base for such
a Messiah as they expected, and so adjured him to answer to this: I adjure thee
by the living God, to tell us, if thou be the Messiah the son of the blessed
God, and Christ answered affirmatively.

8. Many weighty arguments depend on these things of Dan. 9.24. as 1 John 4.
Every spirit which confesses Jesus to be the Messiah [the Holy of Holy] is
come in the flesh [ to be a son of man, Dan. 7.] is of God, and every spirit
that confesses not Jesus to be the Messiah, the Christ is come in the flesh,
[to be a son of man] is not of God, 1 John 5.1. whosoever believes, that Jesus
is the Messiah, is born of God, not simply, or barely, a confession of the
attribute Messiah, i. e. Christ, but a right apprehension of his person and
offices, Rom, 10. his person, that he is the son of man Dan. 7. and the holy of
holy, as touching the spirit of holiness that raised him from the dead. God
dwelt in the Messiah, who is God blessed for ever: nor only to confess this
of his person, a Locust from the bottomless pit (as Satan) will chirp out
this, but to confess Jesus to be Messiah experimentally in our minds and
hearts, in his offices as he is Prophet Priest and King, All the three Offices
of Christ as he is Prophet, Priest, and King, are in Dan. 9.24 etc.
to be Messiah, Nagid, Christ the King, that all power is his by donation from
the Father to command and rule the Church, to restrain apostasy, and all
adverse power, and that he suffered not for himself but for us, who by his
precious death has abolished our sins, and wrought reconciliation for
iniquity, and has brought everlasting justification, by his once offering up
of himself, and that he has sealed vision and Prophecy, that we need not
expect new revelations: that he made himself manifest to be the holy One of
God, by his Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the
Power, in the higstest heavens, and from thence sent gifts to furnish his
Church with Offices and officers to teach, and gather the elect out of the
world, to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, from the power
of Satan to God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritancce among them which are sanctified by the faith which is in him.
Christ has confirmed in his Testament all this holy doctrine for the many, Jew
and Gentile, and the Jews for despising the blood of the Covenant have felt to
this day the heavy burden of their own imprecation, Matthew. 27 25. as their
Fathers, Number. 14.2. etc. All this the holy Apostle John meant, (and much more
unutterable) that the Lord Jesus Messiah became such a person to be such a
mediator, and that testimony in due time, according to the prophecy, 1 Timothy
2.6. And the spirit is peremptory, and says, whosoever transgresses, and
abides not in this doctrine of [ Messiah, which is called] Christ, has not
God: he that continues in this doctrine of Christ, he has the Father and the
Son, 2 John 9.

9 It will not be useless altogether to observe what Taci^us Suctonius, and
Josephus speak, that in all the Roman Empire it was divulged in Augustus
caesar's days, that a King should arise in Judea, that should rule all the
world. This is evident by the Persique Magi. They having discerned an unusall
Comet in the air, which did argue to them the birth of some noble and famous
light, even that Star of Jacob, that should Number. 24, ^id wonderfully expounded
in 2 Cor. 10 4.5.
unwall all the sons of Seth) that was now come into the world) and whither
shotld they direct their journey, and steer their course, but thither the star
guided them, and that was to Judea. It should seem by the good hand of God,
that Daniel As the Apost^e Paul did in Caesar's Court, Phil. 1.13. and 4.22.
celebrating the cause of Christ by the angels seventy sevens; at the City
Susan, where was the Royal Palace of the Kings of Persia, Let these godl
Authors be consulted with about those things. Mr. Rollock. Du Plessis. Beroald.
Mr. Bro. Mr. wolphius, and many others.
there were some that did expect continually the completing of the seventy
Sevens, of which this celebrious Comet appearing, gave them an undoubted hint.
For we are not to doubt, but the seventy Sevens was a glorious Prophecy to
lighten all the East. And the Evangelist Luke chapter 3.1, 2, 3. does show, that he
bringing in the Emperors annals into the Churches stories, and John, Elias
Ministry to settle the stories of the times, do make a sweet concent of all
these things.

But to make things yet more plain, it is said, Luke 19. That the Nation of the
Jews did expect This scripture was spoken but few days before our Lords death
and resurrection.
the Kingdom of heaven should immediately appear, according to the Prophesies
of Dan. 2. and 7. and 9. no Prophesy showed the time as Daniel, and all falls
our fit'ly, according to the worlds expectation, especially the Church of God.

1. Mr. P. objecteth, in page 52.

If the restoration of the city, Dan. 9.25 is of the material Jerusalem after
Nebuchadnezzars captivity, it must begin the first of Cyrus from which time
seventy weeks of years will fully expire long before the birth of Christ.

Answ. It is most true, the seventy Sevens do begin at Cyrus first year of the
reign of his monarchy. In this Mr. P. says true, but to say, they end long
before the birth of Christ, is a most manifest untruth, for it is said they end
at his confirmation of the Testament for the Many, by his sufferings and death
in the last Seven. He must be born the Son of man, before he could suffer death
to redeem the sons of men. I will stir no more in this, for it is too too bad,
and that which has been said, will I hope, make this assertion to vanish.

I am persuaded all the godly Churches in christendom hold MES-SIAS, Yea
Papists, vide Cornelius a Lapide; he has many excellent passages on Dan. 9.
but yet none but what the learned and godly reformed have and had (yea more
completely) before him.
in Gabriels message, to be the Son of God our Redeemer. Scotland, Heydelberg,
Geneva so does, and our dear native country, by diverse learned Expositers, and
in our Bible notes (I think above eighty years since) it is said, In this last
week of the seventy shall Christ come, and preach and suffer death. And a
little after, speaking of Christ confirming the covenant, the note says, by
preaching of the Gospel, he confirmed his promise, first to the Jews, and after
to the Gentiles. And that Christ by his death and resurrection, caused
sacrifice and oblation to cease. Are not we to mourn and lament, that our
ministers should thus deal to take us off from holding to the Messiah, the Rock
of salvation, as it was taught to Daniel by the holy Angel from heaven.

The Angel spoke matter of salvation plain, and fortified by Scripture, and it
is fortified also by learned Expositions recoived in all Orthodox churches, but
by Mr. P. is added much impertinent and false matter. I will briefly
recapitulate some things, and let the people of God study the holy Scriptures,
and judge.

1. The angel continues the holy chronicle to the death of Christ, Vide Mr.
Bro. Advertis. page
Mr. P. breaks it off altogether concerning that.

2. The Angel names the Redeemer of the world, Messiah; Mr. P. does utterly
deny that, and will have Zisca the Bohemian to be his Messiah.

3. The Angel says, Messiah shall confirm the convenant for many, that is,
for the elect of all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, Mr. P. tells us of a
covenant that Antichrist shall make with his antichristians and their
favorites, page 62. and 63.

4. The Angel prescribed for our Lord his preaching three years, and an half,
and that is the compass of the Evangelist Marks Gospel, and of the Evangelist
John, as it has been noted by old and later writers, by four Paschata's, that
is, by four Passeovers, which he kept after his Baptism to his last Supper,
which proves that public administration of his office to be three years and
an half, or the half seven. See Dr. Lightfoots harmony. All this Mr. P.
disgraceth.

5. The Angel taught how long Jerusalem should be an holy City for use of
sacrifice, and how long Israel only should be Cods holy people, and peculiar
treasure, namely from the time of Daniels prayer, seventy Sevens were exactly
accounted for his people, and the holy City. But Mr. P. takes from the Church
(which God has gathered from the Gentiles) these meditations etc.etc.

6. Some ancient principal Rabbines confess, that by Messiah Christ the
Redemer is meant. Mr. Bro. on Dani.
Christians that dare put forth books to deny this against the honor of
Christian name, should think that here they do not well, and Christians should
loath such Treatises, even as the godly converted did their books at Ephesus,
and account them, and make them anathema, as the Prophesies of Achab and
Zedekias.

Much more might be said, of Mr. P. Expositions of Dan 9. (and of all his book)
It is said, by the great Rab^oni, the Lord Christ. We be to the world because
of offenses, and Mr. P. must, yea he will lay it to heart, yea it is marvel,
that the godly Teachers of new England did not question him for it in some of
their Synods: they have not convented a Synod for a greater matter than the
agitation which that Book called for, and I hope some godly and more learned
men will consider of that book especially about Dan. 9. and by the fire of
sound judgment consume it, as hay, stubble, and rotten wood, and Gods day
shall declare it, that that work is worthy of no better an end, 1 Col. 3.

CHAP. XLIX.
A Conclusion of the point of Chronology.

1. IT has been observed, that the holy Spirit of endless wisdom, and
foresight has perfectly made up the holy Chronology of the old Testament, and
that the seventy Sevens does that, by ending the Chain of Jubilees, and all the
ceremonies in the death of Messiah.

2. The first coming of Christ was most needful to be known for the assured
comfort of Jew and Gentile, Little did Mr. P. consider the state of time that
the holy spirit did testify in the Prophets for the coming of Mesas, and his
sufferings and glory that should follow in his Resurrection, ascension and
sending gifts to convert the Nations, 1 Pet. 1.11.
by his death to confirm the promises made to the faithful, and to be the
truth of all the types, which were all sponsorious of a better hope, but of the
time of his second coming, there was not that need to know; For it is said, But
of the times and seasons brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you: for
your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in
the night, 1 These. 5.

3. Of the Chronology of the New Testament, the spirit of Christ has not
disposed an orderly process of times, neither historically nor prophetically
from his death. There is no time cast in the Apocalypse; For God would not begin
to account the times after the death of Christ, but he must have gone through
with it: else it had been a fault in art but that he would not, because of the
end of the world, he would conceal, that no man nor angel knows it: the Son
(in respect of his humanity) is said not to know the time, who yet gives the
Apocalypse to John, but nothing is unknown to his Godhead who is the first and
the last. The thousand years are spoken of for the loosing of Satan, Apoc. 20.
but the history is not cast by course of time, the thousand years begin (we
may best suppose) from the writing of the Apocalypse.

4. But behold the wisdom of God, To teach us in whom we have rest.
that most graciously ordered times most exactly, till the death of Christ, in
a most pleasant Sabbatick * account, tres-remarkable from JESUS the son of Nun,
to our JESUS, that saves us from our sins. Thus he did, that the whole Nation
of the Jews should not miss (but by wilful and despitefull swarving) to
receive him the true Messiah, Heb. 2. and 1. and 6. and 10.
to leave all the ceremonies, and to look to him the end and scope of all, and
this time was it (often noted, and needful often to be noted) wherein the
Gentiles should begin to be brought to S^ms Tents, and thence to learn
salvation.

5. When all this was done, there needed no times to teach us ceremonially of
Christ to come, for his government and offices are perpetual, and shall never
be abolished, as Levies Priesthood, till he re deliver up the Mediatorian
Kingdom to the Father, and till that time we all should joyfully look in
watching when the Bridecrome will come.

6. The Gencalogie and Chronology served to the promised Lands glory, The
non-continuance of genealogies after the apostles times shall be to-ched else.
to the people of Isreal's glory, to the Tabernacles glory, to Ierusalems glory,
to the Temples glory, and to Salomons Kingdoms glory, for the glory of all
these ended when the Chronology and Genealogy ended, for all the time of the
old Testament, they had that heavenly and glorious use.

2. Blessed be the name of the Lord God for ever and ever, for wisdom and
strength are his, and he it is that has altered times, places, and persons, to
the glory of the unchangeable Priesthood, and never ending Kingdom of his dear
Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and praise everlasting, Amen.

CHAP. L.
Being a Caveat to beware of such Satanicall spirits that prattle about the
expectation of new Apostles and new Revelations.

1. AS is said, for the Chronology and Genealogy of the the old Testament,
that the infallible use of them did cease after the new Testament was written,
so we may say, for the other holy Doctrine of Christ, that we need not to
regard, the vanity of wretched men, in expectation of new Apostles, and new
Revelations, but studiously to cleave to what is left and ordained, to us in
the holy writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles.

2. As our Lord and Savior said, He that will not hear and believe Moses and
the Prophets, will neither hear nor believe, if one should rise from the dead:
so truly we may say, he that will not hear and believe the holy Evangelists,
and the holy Apostles writings, who wrote of the doctrine, life, death and
resurrection of Christ, is as far from holy faith as ever any Sadducie was; for
Christ is risen from the dead, and after his Resurrection gave commandment
what his Apostles should preach unto the Nations, and we see what it was they
taught by the four Evangelists, by the book of the Acts, by their Epistles, and
by the Son of God in his Apocalypse.

3. And that we might not be deceived by the ungodly, 1 Cor. 4s
to look for new Apostles, mark what the apostle Paul says plainly, that
himself and Earnabas, and other Apostles then living, were the last apostles.

4. Wherefore the apostles, seeing the Churches began to be troubled with false
apostles, and with grievous and gangrenating errors and herefies, and foretold
of worse and more perilous times, that men would not endure sound, and
wholesome doctrine, but having sore ears, should after their own lusts get them
an heap of Teachers, and should turn their ears from the truth, and should be
given unto fables, therefore they gave warning, as is seen in all their
writings, and have thus charged us from Christ. That we be mindful of the
words, which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the commandment
of us the apostles of the Lord and Savior, 2 Pet. 3.2: and Judas Thaddeus
says thus in his Epistle. But beloved, remember the words which were spoken
before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Apostle John says, He
that knows God hears us, he that is not of God bears nos us, hereby know
we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error, 1 John 4.

5. The faithful obeyed this charge and commandment for many years after the
apostles, for the apostles had said, what they had taught to the faithful then
living, should be communicated to other faithful for the instruction of
others, for above an 100 years after their days, we have not writings of the
Ancients, they kept themselves to the holy Scriptures of the Prophets and
apostles.

6. And when the Ancients of the Primitive Churches began to write, much about
the second Century, and after, it is manifest they adhered to the holy
Scriptures, and commended them much to the people, and some of the Ancients did
so admire and advance the holy Scriptures, that they adored the sufficiency of
them for Doctrine of faith and manners.

7. This is most clear, for it is said, the faithful martyrs for 300 years
suffered for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, Apoc. 6.9. and so the
two witnesses suffered under the Beast of the Pit, King Abaddon, For the
keeping of the commandem^nts of God; and the says of JESUS, Apoc. 14.12. sofar
off they were from expecting new apostles, and new revelations, but hearkened
to the apostles directions, Col. 2.18, 19, etc.

8. Doubtless, divine revelation in the Prophets and Apostles writings is a
mercy beyond comparison, no tongue is able to express the goodness of God in
this his grace to the Church, so the Saints ever have thought. Psalm. 103.7. and
147.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.

9. And let us beware of Satanicall spirits that prattle about the expectation
of new apostles: Apoc. 22.18, 19.
and new revelations, for else we shall fall into the curse of the Lord Jesus,
who wrote his Apocalypse to the Churches, where his appostles had laid the
foundation of the holy faith, and all Churches then, and now we are admonished
to hearken to that which: Christ the Lord spoke to the Churches. All the
apostles, as it is thought, but John, were departed this life when the
Apocalypse was written.

10. And let such take heed of illuminations and new light (as they speak) yea
to take heed of lying wonders, of visible lights, and sights, and strange
audible voices, Iannes and Iambres heardened Pharaohs heart by such. Satanical
delusions. And under the new Testament Satan and his instruments, do, and will
do so to deceive. Men and women so bewitched are hardened in pride,
stubbornness, and curiosity, etc. that the holy Scriptures are but of mean
estimation with such, and prayer and praising of God, and the seals of the
covenant, and an able and faithful ministry, yea godly magistracy: these
inestimable mercies are of no repute with them; and Family exercises are
deserted of them as things of bondage, but the godly soul ever has, and shall
find that the cleaving to the Prophets and apostles writings will be a most
sure foundation for truth of Doctrine, and for a godly, righteous and temperate
life, and of joyful hope when our eyes are closed in the dust.

11. Without question those that expect new apostles and new revelations. Satan
has new Revelations; for even our first Parents, because they stuck not fast
to the revelation of Gods will, but hearkened to new revelations, from that
counterfeit angel of light Satan, they were deceived, and still Satan does
labor to bewitch men's minds with corrupt and bad opinions, and with vile
courses of life. 2 Timothy 3. I. 109. being not content with the Scriptures of the
Prophets and apostles, which are not scaled, but made known to us by Messiah
coming who has in them told us all things needful to be known: Therefore it
is said, concerning this very thing, He that is unjust, let him he unjust
still, and be that is filthy, let him be filthy still, and he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy let him be holy
still,

12. I will conclude this to the godly Reader, with that of the apostle Peter.
Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness:
but grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to
him be glory both now and ever Amen.

CHAP. LI.
The Exposition of the times mentioned in in the Apocalypse.

1. THere is mention made in chap. 11. of 42. months, and 1260. days, those
show the rage and cruel persecution of the Beast of the Pit against the two
witnesses.

2. In chap. 12. There it is told 1260 days, and of a time, times and half a
time: which are spoken of the Dragons cruelty in the Caesar's.

3. In chap. 13. There is also mention made of 41 months, which is to be
understood, both of the Tyranny of the Caesar's, the sixth head that was wounded
to death; and of the Tyranny of the Beast, like a Lamb that healed the wounded
head of the Government of the Empire.

4. By these times so variously expressed in diverse chapters, Beroald and M.
Broughton
ancient and later Expositours show that by them is meant the quality of State,
not length of years (namely) that the Church should be afflicted with the
afflictions of Christ, who was persecuted three years and half by the seed of
the old Serpent.

5. The like analogy is from Isa. 49. and 61. Luke 4. and 2 Cor. 6. As by the
acceptable year of the Lord is meant the Iubilee year, in which Messiah Christ
our Lord was given for a covenant, and laid down his life for our
justification, redemption and ending all Moses ceremonies: But now all time of
the Gospel to the end of the world is the accepted time, and the day of
salvation, and the acceptable year of the Lord. The like force is in 1 Cor. 5.
That all in the Church must keep the feast of Christ our Passover, who was
sacrificed for us with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, to the end
of all Ordinances, that is till the Son of man come to deliver up the
Mediatorian Kingdom; 1 Cor. 11.26.

The time of Tyranny under the Caesar's, was three hundred years, yet by
Metonomia, meaning the argument of persecution from our Lords time, it is
called three years and half: the matter shows twice in chap. 11. and twice in
chap. 12. and once in chap. 13. that proper time cannot be meant: and the same
is to be understood of the persecution of the Beast of the Pit. They who think
to get any certainty from these numbers, deceive themselves and their Readers.
The allusion is most heavenly, calling Christ still unto mind. Our Lord
preached 42 months or 3 years and an half, or days 1260, or a time, two
times, and an half: so that these numbers in the Apocalypse mean no certain
time, but the manners from a like time is meant. The persecuting Pharisees and
Sadduces, were revived and continued by the Caesar's and Popes. The Caesar's
Persecution, as is noted, lasted 300 years, and the persecution of the false
Lamb lasts yet, and will, till the Lord cast him and his deceived into the
Lake of fire and brimstone.

7. The seven Seals, the seven Trumpets, and the seven phials, are not
distinguished in time in the Apocalypse, none of these are, or properly can be
referred to any exact time.

8. I will add a little more in brief, of the times of the New Testament,
which will give some light to all that may read the Histories of the Church:
Mr. Patrick Symson, of the History of the Church, will much help the Reader.

The ten Persecutions lasted three hundred years by the Infidel Roman
Emperors; the sixth head of the Roman Beast: from Nero to Constantine, that
time was an age of violence.

Thence to Phocas (who murdered his Master the Emperor Manritius) who
confirmed the Papacy to Boniface the Third, about the year six hundred and six;
and then Mahomet rose about that time, or somewhat after. This time of three
hundred years was an age of fraudulence by Heretics: Arius, Pelagius,
Donatus, Marcion, Nestorius, etc. they were confronted by Fathers, Athanasius,
Hillary, Basil, Nazianzen, Cl^ysostome, Augustine, etc.

The times following were also times of violence and fraud in Pope and Turk;
Popish superstition still increasing exceedingly. till by the two Witnesses it
was resisted, by Waldenses, Wickliff, Hus, Jerome of Prague, and Luther, etc.
and Mahometisme greatly prevailed, to the removing of the Candlesticks of the
Churches of Asia, as it was threatened against them, Apoc. 2. and 3. and evils
in the Churches of the East prevailed by the strength, deceit, and falschood of
the Papacy, till that the Turk possessed Constantines Empire and City.

The Kingdom of Christ our Lord and Savior under the new Testament, was first
impugned in the time of the Caesar's, and in the growing on of the mystery of
iniquity. Then this Prophetical Office: and at last his Priestly Office was
striven against, which was almost desperately corrupted in the height of the
mystery of iniquity in the tenth Century. This last was first contested against
by Waldenses, Wickliffe and Luther, etc. Then his Prophetical Office was
upheld by the faithful in cleaving to the Divine Oracles of the holy
Scriptures: and at this day this is the greatest contestation. And his Kingly
Office has been but in few places executed; for Christian States do not
consider as they should, the benefits thereof that will redound unto them by
true Ecclesiastical Discipline: and much opposition there has been and is
about it. But as Christian Governors and Teachers have embraced the two
former, they will also the other, rejoicing to defend only Christ's Ordinances,
and hate to maintain any thing of the Beasts marks, that they may make good
that Scripture of the Apostle of us Gentiles: 1 Timothy: 6.13. I give thee charge
in the sight of God who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus; who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good profession. 14. That thou keep this
Commandment without spot. unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 15. which in his times he shall show who is the blessed and only
POTENTATE, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 16. Who only has
immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom no man
has seen, nor can see, to whom be honor and power everlasting, Amen.

CHAP. LII.
Of the Attributes or Titles of God Essentially considered.

AELohim. Almighties; or Almighty Powers: but in Greek the Apostles do always
render it singularly, Theos, God. Aelohah. Omnipotent, or Almighty, Job 12.4.
Ael. Puissant, or mighty, Genesis 14 18. Jehovah. Being of himself, and giving
being to all things. Elion The most High. Elionin A Plural. Shaddai. Almighty,
or All-sufficient. Genesis 17.1. Adonai. My Stays, my Pillars. Genesis 15.2. Job
28.28. Ehieth. I am, or I will be: Ex. 3.14. Jah. In notation much like
Jehovah. Yzur. The Rock; the seventy translate it Theos, and sometimes Ctistes.
Goel. Redeemer. Ghosai Plural, sig. my Makers. Job 35.10. Abba Father The
Power. Matthew. 26.64. The Fear. Genesis 31.57. Psalm. 76.12. Name. Theos. God.
Curios. Lord. Creator. Master. Mal. 1.6. Ephesians. 6. Eternal God. Genesis 21.33.
Sabbath. When he warreth against the wicked he is called Jehovah Sabbath. the
Lord of Hosts: or when he performs great intendments for his Church.
From these Attributes sundry Uses may be gathered. 1. From the Attribute or
Title Aeloim.

1. Aelohim is a form plural, to teach the mystery of the Trinity which is
most necessary to be well marked; or else that form were dangerous. I say it
were dangerous, if necessity did not require us to be thereby taught the
knowledge of the Divine persons.

2. But sometimes it is joined with a word singular: as in Genesis 1.1. Aelohim He
created, because there is but one Godhead; but the plural form of speaking
when it is joined with a word singular, does necessarily call upon us to know
the mystery of the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead.

3. This plural Attribute Aelohim, though it be commonly joined with a word
singular (for the reason aforesaid) yet it is sometimes also joined with a word
plural; as Aelohim, He went: 1 Chronicles. 17.21. and so Aelohim, They went, 2 Samuel
7.23. and so in Jos. 24.23. He is holy Gods: and in Jer. 10 10. He is living
Gods; but in Genesis 20.13. it is also joined with a word plural, They Gods
caused me to wonder: and in Genesis 35.7. They Gods were revealed to him.

The Wisdom of God thought these Expressions to be necessary for our
instruction in the mystery of the Trinity, and in the Unity of the Godhead, or
else it had been dangerous, for Idolatry, so to declare himself to us.

2. Hence we may learn, that though sometimes words of the plural Number be
joined with the plural Attribute Aelohim, yet God did no way intend thereby to
teach to worship a plurality of Gods, as the ignorant and negligent in the
Scriptures are ready to understand it, because he has taken good order to
clear it from that errtour by other Scriptures, especially to such as are
diligent in the study of the blessed Scriptures: he has cleared his Attribute
Aelohim, from being taken for many Gods; because he has often put this
Attribute into the form singular: as by Eloah in Job 12.4. and sometimes by a
shorter form El, The Mighty, in Genesis 14.18. And secondly by joining it often to
a word singular; and thirdly by limiting this plural Attribute Aelohim only
to three persons, or Existences in the unity of the Godhead: as in Psalm. 33. 6.
By the word of Jehovah the Heavens were made, and all the Hosts of them by the
spirit of his mouth.

And says Ains. in Genesis 1.1, The ancient Hebrew Doctors have left Records of
this mystery; Though at this day that Nation does not understand it. Come and
see (says Rab. Ben Iochai) The mystery of the word Aelohim: There are three
degrees, and every degree by it self alone (that is, distinct) And yet
notwithstanding (says he) They are all One, and are not divided one from
another: And says Ains in Numb, 15.25. Rabbi Men^^hem on these two Phrases
[Vnto the Lord] and [Before the Lord] says, from their former ancient Rabbis:
This it meant of him and his Judgment Hale, and no Judgment Hale had less then
three: by which it appears, that the mystery of the Trinity in the Godhead
was formerly believed by the Jews, though now they do oppose the same: And the
Lord Duplessie in his Trueness of Religion, page 74.75.76.78. does prove, that
the ancient Hebrew Doctors held the Trinity. But (blessed be God) our New
Testament does tell us most clearly.

1. That the Father is the Creator. Ephesians. 3.9. 2. That the Son is the Creator.
Ephesians. 1.8.10. Col. 1 16. 3. That the holy Spirit is the Creator. Genesis 1.2. Psalm.
33.6. Psalm. 104. 30. And hence it is that Solomon would have young men to make
it their care to Remember their Creator in the days of their health. Eccles.
12.1.
4. Hence we may learn, that God is Almighty for the protection of those that
fear him, and that trust in his gracious promises; and he is Almighty to
ruinate his Churches Adversaries: Surely there is an Aelohim that judges in
the Earth. Psalm. 58.13.

2. From the Attribute, or Title, Jehovah, we may learn,

1. That Jehovah is the only true God; for this Attribute signifies one that
has Being of himself, and that gives Being to every Creature, and that can
take away their being at his pleasure; and therefore it is an incommunicable
Attribute, for none has being of himself but he alone. 2. There is none that
can give being to all other things but he alone. 3. None can take away the
Being of all other things, but he alone. But for the better understanding of
the large signification of this Attribute, see Ains. in Psalm. 83.19. and in
Gen, 2.4. and in Gen 6.3. and in Genesis 15.2. and in Numb. 6.24. and in Levit.
24.16.

2. This Attribute may be a sufficient ground of encouragement to such as the
Lord is pleased to call forth to do any difficult service: as for example; when
it pleased God to call Moses to go on his Embassage to persecuting Pharaoh, he
was of himself unwilling because of his inability of speech: But Christ Jesus
said unto him in Exodus 4.11. Who has made the mouth of man? or who makes the
dumb, or the deaf, or the open eyed, or the blind? have not I Jehovah;
therefore go now and I will be with thy mouth, etc. And in like sort Christ
showed himself to be Jehovah, when he said unto his Disciples in Luke 21.15. I
will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries shall not be able
to gain say or resist: and hence we may also gather, that that Jehovah which
spoke unto Moses, was the Son of God, the Angel of Gods presence: and so
Christ must be still understood to be called Jehovah from Exodus 3. to the end
of Deuteronomy.

3. After that Moses had been discharged, and by Pharaohs threatening both
against him and against Aaron in Exodus 5. then the Lord did still encourage
Moses by this Attribute in Exodus 6.2. saying unto Moses, I am Jehovah: as if he
had said in more words, be not discouraged, but go, for I will now in verse. 8
give a being of performance to that promise which I formerly made to Abraham,
that I would give unto him the land of Canaan.

4. This Artribute is for terror to all persecutors of Gods people; for Christ
is Jehovah that gives a being to the performance of all his promises, and of
all his threatenings he told Moses in Ex^d. 6.6. I am Jehovah, I will bring you
out from under the burden of the Egyptians, and I will redeem you with a
stretched out arm, and with great judgments: And thereupon he bad Moses say to
Pharaoh in Exodus 7.17. Thus says Jehovah. In this thou shall know that I am
Jehovah: Behold I smite with the Rod that is in my ba^d upon the waters which
are in the River, and they shall be curned into blood. And in Exodus 8.1. Thus
says Jehovah, Send a^ay my people, if thou refuse to send them away; behold I
will smite thy borders with Frogs, that thou may know (as verse 10.) that
there is none like Jehovah our God: And in verse 20. Say to Pharaoh, thus says
Jehov^h, send away my people, or else I will send conjoined swa^mes upon thee,
and upon thy servants, and upon thy people. And in verse 22. There shall be no
(such) conjoined swarms in Gashen, that thou may know that I am Jehovah.
And thus after this sort did Jehovah Christ give a being to his threatenings;
and though Jesus Christ did suffer Iannes and Iambres to resist Moses in the
execution of his miracles with their counterfeit miracles for a time; yet at
last Christ Jesus did not suffer them to courterfeit all the miracles of Moses,
and thereby he made their madness, namely, their mad zeal evident: 2 Timothy 3 8.

5. This Attribute is for instruction to all Gods people to take special
notice of the powerful actings of this Jehovah for his people, and against
their adversaries: for as it is in Exodus 10.1. lehovah said unto Moses, Go in
unto Pharaoh, for I have made his heart heavy, and the heart of his servants,
that I may set these my signs in the midst of them; and that thou may tell
it in the ears of thy son, and of thy sons son, etc, that ye may know that I
am Jehovah. The like arguing is in Psalm. 78.5.6. etc. and the like is in Exodus
6.6. Say unto the sons of Israel, I am Jehovah: I will bring you out from under
the burdens of the Egyptians. And in verse 7. I will take you unto me for a
people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am Jehovah your
God.

6. This Attribute is prefixed and affixed to the ten Commandments, in Exodus
20.2. for the comfort of them that are in Covenant with God, and that keep his
Commandments by faith in Christ; and for the terror of such as transgress his
Commandemants through the want of faith in Christ, for no other obedience is
acceptable, but that which is mixed with faith.

7. This Attribute Jehovah is often pressed upon the people of Israel that were
in Covenant with God, that they may walk in holiness as a people in Covenant
ought to do: as in Levit, 18. and in Levit, 19. and often elsewhere, as a band
to tie them to yield all holy obedince to all Gods Laws, both to his
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, as well as to the Decalogue; and therefore
obedience to all the Ceremonial Laws is enforced on this ground: Because I am
Iebovah your God: and in Levit. 11.44.45. You shall not make your selves
unclean by any c^eeping thing that moves upon the earth; for I am Jehovah that
brings you up out of the Land of Egypt to be a God unto you, and ye shall be
ho^y at I am holy: And this duty is also urged on the faithful dispersed Jews
in the new Testament: 1 Pet. 1.15.16.

3. From the Attribute Elion the most High.

1. We may learn not to be daunted with the big looks of such as do oppose us
in a good Cause: and therefore Melchisedek did most pertinently use this Title
of God in his blessing to Abraham; He called him the most High: namely, over
his Enemies the four Kings, when he returned with Victory over them, Genesis
14.18. And then also Abraham told the King of Sodom in verse 22. That he had
lift up his hand unto [Iehovah, Ael, Elion] The Lord God most High, the
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, that he would not take any thing that was his.

2. The like instruction we may learn from this Attribute in the form plural,
Elionin, Eccles. 5.7. Mr. Bro. reads it thus: If the oppression of the poor,
and robery of Judgment and Justice, thou do behold in a Country, marvel not at
the matter, for an higher then the high one does mark; and there be high above
them, namely, Elionin, the high Trinity: as his Marginall Note is.

3. Jeremy in Lam. 3.35.38 does twice over complain to Elionin against the
wicked high States of Judah, whom they felt and should feel in his judgments,
to be higher and mightier than they.

4. The Saints of Zorobabels house are called the Saints of the most High, in
Dan. 7.18. and they are comforted with this Attribute in Chaldy, against the
four persecuting Empires there expressed, which ended with the parted Greek
monarchy: namely, that though they should by their tyraany be deprived of the
possession of an Earthly Kingdom, yet they should still be the Saints of
(Elionin) the most High, and shall hold a Kingdom for ever, yea for ever and
ever.

This Chaldy term in the plural is put for the singular; as Aben Ezra notes;
and we may be sure that it was so spoken to note out of the Trinity of persons
in the unity of the Godhead: and in this place it was fit to be plural,
because it has relation to the distinct vision of the Son and of the Father;
and upon the same account Thrones are also plural, in verse 9.

5. Therefore such as are Saints must pay their Vows to God most, high, Psalm.
50, 14. as Abraham did in Genesis 14.22. and the most High, in Luke 6.35. is
called Our Father which is in Heaven, in Matthew 5.45.

4. From the Attribute Shaddai, the Almighty or the All-sufficient.

1. Hence we may learn, that it is good for us in all our temptations to rest
or stay our Souls upon his promises; for if we be qualified with faith and
grace according to his Covenant, as Abraham was, in Genesis 17. 1. we may be sure
he will be Ael Shaddai, the Almighty, or All-sufficient to perform his
promises, and threatenings, though they seem never so unlikely to natural
reason, as in performing his promise to Abraham, by making Sarahs dead Womb to
conceive and bring forth: and in performing his threatenings on the wicked,
though in their reason they do often thing themselves compassed about with
Rocks of security: yet God says, that Shod [destruction] shall come from
Shaddai [the Almighty] Isa. 13.6.

5. From the Attribute Adonai, which is plural, and imports, my Pillars, or
stays.

1. Hence we may learn to rest and depend upon him for the certain fulfilling
of his promises, if we be but rightly qualified according to the conditions
required of us in his Covenant of Grace, Abraham said in Genesis 15.2. Adoni
Jehonith, what will thou give me seeing I go childless; or seeing I am going
out of the world childless, for I have no hope in nature of a child: but yet
notwithstanding I do call thee Adonai, the Pillar and stay of my weak says, in
that gracious promise now propounded, in verse 6: Fear not Abraham, I am thy
shield, and thy reward shall be exceeding great: namely, The Messiah shall be
born from thy loins; Abraham replyeth in verse 2. Adonai, Jehonith, what will
thou give me, seeing I go childless? And so those sweet promises before given
in Genesis 12.3. and Genesis 15.15 of the Messiah, shall be frustrate: but yet I call
thee Adonai, Jehonith, as still making thee my pillars and stays, and the
giver of being to thy promises, and therefore I do by my interrogation expect a
further answer to stay my faith upon.

2. Job, in chap. 28.28. is thus translated by Bro. Mark. The Fear of Adanai
is wisdom, and to eschew evil is understanding. His Marginall Note is this;
Adonai is used first in Genesis 15.2. of Abraham: and is plural for note of
Trinity, and signifies, My stays.

6. From the Attribute Ehieth, I am, or I will be.

1. Hence we may learn to establish our faith in Gods unchangeable promises for
the good of his Church, and of his threatenings for the destruction of their
Enemies.

2. This is also observable, that when his promises are confirmed with his
oath, or confirmed by signs, as his promise of Canaan was to Abrah. posterity,
then God applies his name Ehieth to it, as in Ex. 3.14. I am that I am, or I
will be that I will be: and so in Rev. 1.4. God is called, he that is, and that
was, and that will be; in which word the name Ehieth is opened, and also the
name Jehovah: and it is applicable to the certainty both of his promises of
support to his faithful ones under their persecutors; and also to his
threatenings of their enemies destruction: and the same Title is given to God in
Rev. 16.5. chiefly to assure the godly of those times, of the certain
destruction of their antichristian adversaries. This Title is also given to
Jesus Christ, in Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever: because of the certain effects of his Mediators Office.

7. From the Attribute Jah, Breathing, in Exodus 15.2.

1. Hence we may learn, that in Jah we live and move and have our breath and
being.

2. Hence we may learn, that Jah does take away the breath and being of his
Churches enemies when it pleases him, and therefore in Exodus 15.2. Israel in
their Song of triumph did praise God that had given breath and being to them in
the midst of the Red Sea, and that had taken away the breath and being of
Pharaoh and all his Host in the Redsea.

2. This Attribue do the Saints give, in Revel 19.1.3.46, to Christ their
being, for their deliverance or preservation from the prevailing power of
Antichrist, saying Halalu-jah.

3. Isa. in chap. 16.4. does exhort to faith and confidence in this Iah;
saying, Trust in the Lord for ever, for in Jah, Jehovah is the Rock of Ages

4. His Title Iah, in Psalm 68.4. is there used in that exhortation to praise
God for his mercies by his name Iah.

5. This Title Halalu jah is in Psalm. 104.35. where the consuming of sinners is
mentioned, alluding therein to the destruction of the Sodomites, and of Pharaoh
and his Host in the Red Sea, as in Psalm, 105.44.45.

6. This title Halalu-jab is also used in Revel. 19. where the destruction of
Antechrist is foretold.

8. From the Attribute Tzur the Rock, it is first used in Deuteronomy. 32.4.18.30.37.
and in 2 Samuel 22. and in 2 Samuel 22.2.32.

1. Hence we may learn, that no Rock is like this Rock; and therefore if we
have right unto him by the Covenant of grace, we may depend upon him in all
straits and temptations for protection and preservation: for this Rock is
Christ, as it is expounded in 1 Cor. 10.4. and and so the Rock in Matthew. 16.18.
is not Peter but Christ; for Peter said in verse 10. Thou art Christ: Christ's
answer is, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, land the gates of Hades shall
not overcome it. Mr. Bro. says, that the term Rock in commendations of a
person, must ever be taken for God; and therefore (says he) He that takes it
for Peter, does make him a God: and says he, it is used for Christ only in
the usual name of God.

2. The term Rock in Psalm. 31.5 is by the seventy translated Ctistes, which is
translated the (faithful, or sure) Creator, in 1 Pet. 4.19.

9. Ghosai, a plural signifying My Makers.

1 Hence we may learn, that there is a Trinity of persons in the Unity of the
Godhead: it is used in lob 35.10. and Psalm. 149.1.

2. Hence we may learn, that God has not only made us to have a being in his
visible Creation, but also that he does make his Elect to have a being in his
invisible Creation, namely to be his people by a spiritual Creation; as the
double reading in Psalm. 100.3. does well expound the sonse.

10. Goel, Redeemer.

This is most usually applied to the second person, because he paid the price
of our redemption: But yet redemption is also often attributed to the first
person in trinity, as in Isa. 63. because all our actual liberation is from
him. The second person paid the price; But the actual Attonemont by which
redemption is complete, is the act of the first person: and the qualification
that belongs to the persons that are to be redeemed, is the act of the third
person: and in this sense all the three persons may be called Redeemers.

11. The other Attributes, the Power, the Fear, etc. are coincident with the
former Titles, and with their Expositions and uses.

Conclusion.

Seeing Elohim is the mighty Creators, and Jehovah is Being of himself, and
giving being to all other things, and the most High and only Potentate to
maintain and defend his Saints that are in Covenant with him, and seeing he is
our All sufficient, four Pillars and stay, always unchangable, and ever the
same, our breath, in whom we live and move and have our being, in whose hand is
our breath and all our ways; and seeing he says, that he is our Father and
Redeemer through the everlasting Covenant confirmed in the blood of his dear
Son, we may well make all the Trinity in that eternal Covenant, to be our Rock
and Refuge for our Redemption, Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, and
Eternal Salvation, Amen.

CHAP. LIII.
Of the Attributes of the Divine Nature of the second Person in Trinity.

JEhovah, in Genesis 6.3. Rock. Son. The Word. Wisdom. Immanuel. Lord. God Angel
Michael. Puissant. Name, Act. 3.14. Alpha and Omega, Beginning and Ending,
First and Last.
1. Jehovah is the Attribute of the second person, as in Genesis 6.3. there the
Spirit of Jehovah, is in 1 Pet. 3.19. called the Spirit of Christ. 2. Jehovah,
in Isa. 6.8.9. is expounded of Christ, in John 12 37.38. 3. In Icr. 23.6. that
Christ is called Jehovah our Righteousness, because he is by God made unto us
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and 31. And says Bro. in Ecclesi^stes, the Hebrew
Doctors do commonly say from Jer 23. as in Bathra, Sect 1. fol. 75. B. that the
Messiah is Jehovah our Righteousness. 4. In Genesis 19.24. Jehovah, from Jehovah
rained fire and brimstome, etc. hence we may learn, that the second person as
Mediator does speak and work from the Father, as John 5.17 to verse 30. The
Father must evermore be considered as the first in the order of working in the
Trinity.

5. From John 5.17 etc. we may see the reason why the Title Jehovah is so
usually to be understood of Christ, except in those places where the Father is
distinguished, as in Genesis 19 24. Psalm. 110.1. and some few other places, as in
Isa. 26.4. there Jehovah is said to be in Iah [the Father] and our Lord does
thus insinuate the sense of that and such like places, to Philip, in John
14.10, 11. Believe than not that I am the Father, and the Father in me: so in
Exodus 23.21. My name is in him, is thus opened in 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ.

2. Hence we may learn that all the attributes that are given unto God
essentially, are likewise given to the second and third persons, as well as to
the first.

6. Christ is called the Angel that Jacob invocated: The Angel that appeared
unto Moses in the Bush, Exodus 3. The Angel of Gods presence Esa. 63. And the
Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3 1. Likewise the Titles Jehovah, Aelohim, etc.
used by Moses, in Geneses, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deutrenomy, and used by
David and all the Prophets: These Titles are applied by the Apostles to Christ,
in 1 Cor. 10 and Stephen, called Christ the Angel, in Act. 7.38.

7. The title God is applied to Christ, as in Psalm 78.1. Let Aelohim [God]
arise, and in v. 19. Thou art ascended on high, is expounded of Christ, in Ephesians
4 8.9. and the former sentence, Let God arise, is taken from Numb. 10.35. and
there it is, Rise up Jehovah: and in these words Moses also has respect unto
the promise, in Exodus 23.20, 21. Behold I send and Angel before thee, etc.
Beware of him and hear his voice, etc. for my name is in him: and in Genesis
31.13. he is called the God of Beith^l.

8. The title Son is applied to Christ, in Psalm. 2 12 Kiss the Son least he be
angry; likewise in Prove. 30.4. What is his name, and the name of his Son, if
thou can tell. Likewise God the Father does call him Son: This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him, Matthew. 3.17. Matthew. 17.5.

9. Word, as in 2 Samuel 7.21. For thy words sake; but in 1 Chronicles. 17.19.
repeating the same thing, it is for thy servants sake: So in the new Testament,
the second person is called the Word, John 1.1. he as Mediator is also so
called in relation to the eternal Covenant, which he in his Godhead made with
his Father for man's redemption; and that he is called the servant of God,
because he assumed our nature in relation to do the Office of a Mediator,
Matthew. 12.18. compared with Esa. 42.1.

10 Christ is called the Wisdom of God, first in Pro. 8.1. and secondly, he is
so called in the new Testament, Luke 11.49. 1 Cor. 1.24.

11. He is called the Father of Eternity, in Esa. 9.6. because he did in his
Godhead from Eternity covenant to undertake the Office of a Mediator, by which
means he procured the spirit for our Redemption, and so consequently for our
Adoption, and thus Christ is called the Father of Eternity: and in this respect
he has taught us to pray unto all the Trinity by this title Our Father, Matthew.
6.9.

12. He is called Michael the Archangel, by Judas Thaddae is, v 9. but this
very person is called Jehovah, in Zach. 3.2. being cited thence.

13. He is called Gods Fellow, in Zach. 13.7. with Mat^h. 26.31. for he thought
it no robery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.

14. He is called God over all blessed for ever, Romans 9. and the God of
Beithell, Genesis 31.13. and the mighty God, Tit. 2.13.

15. He is also called the Lord, in Romans 10.9. But that place is taken from
Deuteronomy. 30 10. etc. and there he is called Jehovah; and in 1 Cor. 2 8. he is
called the Lord of Glory, and in Jam. 2.1. our glorious Lord Jesus Christ.

16. He is called Name, in Exodus 23.21. My Name is in him, and in Heb. 1.3. he
is said to be the express Image of Gods person; and in 2 Cor. 4.4. he is
called the Image of God, and in Col. 1.15. he is said to be the Image of the
invisi^le God, begotten before all the Creation, for by him were all things
created, which are in Heaven and which are in Earth, the visible and the
invisible, whether Thrones, or Dominions, or principalities, or powers, all
things were created by him and for him, and he is before all things, and by him
all things consist: yea, he is called the beginning of the Creation of God,
Rev. 3.14. and hence it follows by necessary consequence, that seeing all
things were created in the first six days, both the visible and the invisible
Creation, both the earthly and the spiritual Creation, namely, because some of
all these kinds were then created, it must needs be, that Adam and Eve were
then created (not only for an earthly Paradise) but for a spiritual and for
an heavenly Paradise, for he presently lost the possession of the earthly
Paradise; and therefore seeing some were elected to an heavenly Paradise, Adam
and Eve must be belonging to that kind of Creatures that were elected to that
place, for there were no other that should be created for that Paradise in the
first six days but Adam and Eve, or else if they were not then created a new
for that place in the first six days, then it will also follow, that God did
not finish all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth in the first six days. But it is
affirmed that he did finish all the said Hosts, namely, some of every Host in
the first six days, and therefore it does necessarily follow, that Adam and
Eve were then created as a part of the Host of the spiritual Paradise here,
and as a part of the Host of the heavenly Paradise hereafter, by a re^creation
on the same sixth day in which they were created, and fell.

17. He is called the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, who only has immortality, and dwells in light that none can
approach unto, whom no man has ever seen, nor can see: To whom be honor and
power everlasting, Amen. 1 Timothy 2.15.

These, and many other Texts which are cited in the new Testament from the old,
do prove the Godhead of Christ by an undeniable consequence, against Turks,
Jews, and Arrians.

CHAP. LIVE.
Of the Attributes of the humane nature of the second Person.

THe Seed of the woman. The seed of Abraham. The seed of David. The root of
Jesse. The offspring of David. The Son of God, the Son of Man. Shiloh.
Immanuel.
1. Christ in his humane nature is called the seed of the woman, in Genesis 3.15.
Then God said thus to Satan, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed, he shall break thy head plot, and thou shall
pierce him in the foot soal. This seed of the woman must not be expounded in a
not collective sense for Christ and his members, but of Christ only, because
he only could break the Devils head-plot.

2. God said to Abraham, in Genesis 18. In thy seed Shall all the Nations of the
earth be blessed. This word seed is expounded in a collective sense but of the
individual person of the Mediator, and of his humane nature only, as it is
expounded in Gal. 3.16.

3. It is said in Romans 1.3. That he was made of the seed of David according to
the flesh, though it was also united personally to his divine nature: as, in
Mat. 9.27 O thou Son of David have mercy on u^: let the beams of thy divine
nature show forth its power in thy humane nature, taken from the loins of
David,.

4. Christ is called the Root, and the Offspring of David. in Rev. 22.16. as it
was prophesied in Isa. 11.10. In that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which
shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the heathen seek, and his
rest shall be glorious.

5. He is called Shiloh, in Gen 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come, and unto him shall
the gathering of the people be.

6. The titles Son, Son of God, and Son of man, are often applied to the humane
nature of Christ: as for example, 2 Samuel 7.14. I will be to him a Father, and he
shall be unto me a Son: this word Son is applied to his humane nature in
personal union with his Divine, in Heb. 1.5. because he does there make him
above the angels.

7. God called him Son, in Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my son, I this day begat thee.
Now Christ is called Gods son, in sundry respects.

1. He is Gods son from Eternity by divine generation.

2. At his incarnation, when his humane nature was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
in the Virgins womb, and therefore that holy thing was called the Son of God,
Luke 1.35.

3. He was called Gods Son in Psalm. 2.7. by being begotten into the Mediators
office, when he was extrinsecally installed by the visible anointing of the
Holy Ghost, when we was baptized of John at Jordan, Mat. 17. and of this
begetting of Christ the Apostle speaks in Acts 13.23. 32, 33. Of this man's
seed, (namely of David's seed, as verse 22.) has God according to his promise
(in Es. 11.1, 2.) raised or begotten, as it is after expounded, unto Israel a
Savior Jesus: and this raising he takes up again in verse 32, 33. We declare
unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the Fathers,
God has fulfilled unto us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus
(again) as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee (The word again is not in the Geneva, nor in Ains. who
translates the verse in Psalm. 2.7. and being added, it carries the sense to the
Resurrection of Christ, which is not intended in this verse, though it be
intended in the next verse) but that which is intended in this verse, in the
beginning of the raising up of Christ on the spiritual throne of David, to be
a King, Priest, and prophet, by his extrinsecall anointing into the Mediators
office, which was not done till he went to Jordan to be baptized, then the Holy
Ghost did anoint him visibly before Johus Auditory, by sitting like the dove
upon him, and Christ's extrinsecall installment into the Mediators office is
also proved by Heb. 5.5. from the second Psalm, Christ glorified not himself to
be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have
I begotten thee: hence it is evident, that he called him his son, glorified him
with the visible anointing of the holy Ghost at his Baptism before all John's
auditory: and in this respect he is said to be his son by being begotten
extrinsecally into the Mediators office.

4. He was also begotten from the dead, by the power of God in his
Resurrection, and of this begetting or raising up his son, the apostle also
speaks in Acts 13.30.31, 34. This twofold raising of Christ, spoken of in Acts
13. ought to be well marked, because it will then clear the citation of Psalm
2.7. to be alleged only for the proof of Gods begetting his son by his
extrinsecall installment into the Mediators office when he began to be 30
years of age, even as Daniel was not united to the extrinsecall execution of
his Kingly office, until he was extrinsecally anointed, and so Christ his
raising or begetting into the extrinsecall execution of his Mediators office,
is also spoken of in Deuteronomy. 18.15.18. Luke 1.6, 9. Ier. 23.5. Acts 2.30 Acts
22.26.

Hence then it follows, that the humane nature, as it was taken into personal
union with the divine, is called Gods son, Luke 1.35. and 22. as it was
glorified by his extrinsecall anointing to the public execution of the
Mediators office, he is also called Gods son: this day have I begotten thee,
Psalm 2.7. and in this sense must Paul be understood in Heh. 1.5. Unto which of
the angels did he ever say, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, by
my visible anointing thee into the Mediaatours office: and then God also gave
this public testimony of him. This is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased, Mat. 3.17. and this day have I glorified thee, or begotten thee, to be
a High Priest, Heb. 5.5. and the reason why all is made subject to man, in Ps.
8. is because God would Tabernacle in our nature, as it is well observed by Mr.
Bro. in Melchizedech.

8. The Genealogy of Christ's humane nature in Luke 3.23. is first drawn up to
Adam, and then in v. 38. He in his humane nature, and not Adam (as many
mistake) is called the Son of God according Luke 1.35.

10. Christ's humane nature, namely as it is considered in personal Union, with
his Divine nature is called a child borne, and a Son given to the Church of
Beleivers, in Es. 9.6, 7. unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, the
Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called
wonderful, councellor, the mighty God, the Father of Eternity, the Prince of
peace, and of the increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end
upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it and establish it
with judgment and Justice, from henceforth even for ever: The zeal of Jehovah
of Hosts will perform this.

11. Christ is called the Son of man, in Dan. 7.13. Lo, in the clouds of
Heaven, came one like a Son of Man: Afterward he went to the ancient of Days:
When our Lord continually terms himself the Son of man in the four
Evangelists he does (says Bro, on this verse) most graciously call us to weigh
this Text.

12. He is called the word that was made flesh, and dwelt among us or that did
tabernacle in our nature, Joh. 1.14.

13. He is called a man in a Virgin, for thus says Agu^ in Prove. 30.19. Three
things are too wonderful for me, yea four that I know not, the way of an eagle
in the air, the way of a serpent on a rock, the way of a ship in the midst of
the sea, and the way of [Geber] a man in a virgin; for the Hebrew word for
virgin, does always signify a virgin that never knew man.

14. Christ in his humane nature personally united to his divine, is called
Immanuel, in Es. 7.14. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and
shall call his name Immanuel, this does Matthew show to be fulfilled by the
birth of Christ, Mat. 1.23. and the Angel said unto Mary, That holy thing that
shall be born of thee shall be called the son of God, Luke 1.35. and hence it
is said, that in the fulness of time, God sent forth his son made of a woman,
Gal. 4.

15. The holy Law in the old Testament does often give terms to God from man's
body and afflictions: This (says Bro.) was so done to prepare the faithful of
those times, to believe the sons incarnation.

So in Genesis 18.1, etc. he that appeared unto Abraham (with two angels) is
called both a man, verse 2.22. and Jehovah, and Abraham took him for both,
(says Estwick contra Biddle, page 4, 24.) he is called Jehovah, verse 1.13,
14, 17, 20, 26, 32. and in verse 33. Jehovah went his way when he left
communing with Abraham, but he appeared to Abraham in the figure of a man, he
walked and talked, and did eat, etc. this was a praesudium to his future
incarnation, and for this and the like apparitions, our Savior says, Abraham
saw my day (my coming in the flesh) and rejoiced, John 8.56.

CHAP. LV.
Of the Attributes of the Mediators Office.

ANgel. Servant. Messiah, in Greek Christ, or the anointed. Jesus. A Savior, a
Redeemer, a Captain, a King, Priest, and Prophet, Palmoni. Archangel. David.
Solomon. Bishop. Apostle. High Priest. Advocate. Shepherd.
1. Christ is called an Angel, in relation to his Office of Mediatourship.

1. The Title angel does signify one sent on a message: and so God sent forth
his son to be made (man) of a woman, Gal 4 4. but God could not as his supreme
send him forth, because the second Person thought it no robbery to be equal
with God: therefore, in that he was sent forth, it argues that it was done by
his voluntary condescension, according to the articles of a mutual Covenant.

2. Christ is called the angel, or messenger of the covenant which God made
with fallen man, long before he came in the flesh, Mal. 3.1.

3. He did often appear to our Fathers in a most excellent shape, even as an
angel for their direction in matters of faith, and for their protection from
evil, if they did obey his voice, Exodus 23.20, 21.

4. Hence it is, that Jacob said, the angel which redeemed me out of all
adversity bless the lads, Gen 48.16.

5. Christ is called the angel of Jehovah in Exodus 3.2. The angel of Jehovah
appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bramble bush,
and this angel in verse 6. calls himself the God of Abraham, and by this it
is evident, that the God which did so often appear unto Abraham was Christ.

6. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence
saved them, Es. 63.9.

It is said in Hos. 12.3, 4. that Jacob had power with God, and had power over
the angel, and prevailed, he wept and prayed unto him, he found him in Bethel,
and there he spoke with us: but in Genesis 32.34. (from whence this of Hosea is
taken) he is called a man; for men that are excellent in form and in qualities,
are often called angels, hence it is evident, that it was Christ, that did
appear both to Abraham and to Jacob in a most excellent humane shape, fairer
than the sons of men, as he is styled in Psalm, 45.2.2. It was Christ wrestled
or combated with Jacob, and that suffered himself to be overcome with Jacob for
the sake of his gracious promise with Jacob, laid hold on by faith, and because
that Jacob did importunately urge that promise in verse 9. for the blessing in
this angel of Gods presence was revealed to Jacobs posterity for their
protection, in case they did obey his voice, Exodus 23.20, 21.

2. Christ is called a servant in relation to his office of Mediatourship.

1. David does style him Gods servant, in 1 Chronicles. 17.19. O Jehovah for thy
servants sake, but his prayer was first expressed thus, in 2 Samuel 7.21. for thy
words sake, and so John does style him John 1.1.

2. After that Christ was pormised to come out of David's loins, then David
proyed unto God in the name of his servant David, sometimes he said, O Jehovah,
for thy servants sake (as above) and sometimes for thy Servant David's sake, in
Psalm. 1.32.10. and God does call his son Christ his servant David in Ezekiel.
34.23. Ezekiel. 37.24. likewise he does call his servant Israel, Isa. 49 3. and
his sevant Zorobabel, Hag. 2.24. and all this must be understood in relation to
his office of Mediatourship, and God calls him his servant by the name of the
aforesaid persons, because he was promised to come out of their loins, and so
in Zach. 3.8 he is called the branch, my servant.

Peter speaks thus to the Jews in Acts 3.26. First unto you has God raised up
his servant Jesus: and in verse 13. the God of our Fathers has glorified his
servant Jesus: so Bro. does render it in these two verses.

4. God said thus, in Isa. 42 1. Behold my servant, whom I uphold, namely by
the unction of my spirit, in the execution of his Mediators office.

5. God calls him his righteous servant in Isa 53.11. because he did exactly
keep himself to the laws of the combat with his malignant combater Satan, as
it was first declared in Gen 3.15. and then as soon as he had in perfection of
obedience finished that combat, he did then make his death to be a most
perfect, and a most acceptable sacrifice for the procuring of Gods
reconciliation to all believing sinners, and in this respect he is styled Gods
righteous servant, and in the former part of the verse it is said thus, by the
knowledge of him, that is to say by faith in him (so Peter Murtyr does
translate and expound this text in Romans page 392.) Shall my righteous servant
justify many; and so Bullenger expounds it in his D^cads page 48 and our
larger annotations and others.

6. Christ as Mediator says thus, in Psalm 40.6. mine ear have thou boared,
according to the badge of most willing and perpetual Servants, in Exodus 21 6.
and Deuteronomy. 15.17 but the Seventy put body for ear, and their Translation does
Paul follow, in Hebrews 10.5.10. and thence it follows, that Moses names the
ear for the whole body by the figure Synechdoche, because that member does
hearken and attend to the Masters command, as faithful servants ought to do.

7. Christ is said in Phil. 2.7. to take on him the form of a Servant. But
first he is said to make himself of no reputation; namely, he that was in the
form of God, verse 6. emptied himself, or made himself of no reputation,
namely, i^ condescending by his mutual Covenant to take our humane nature into
the unity of his divine person. And then secondly, he is said to take upon him
the form of a Servant; not a humane nature only, as most do expound the word
Servant, but to do the office of a Servant in combating his envious Combater
Satan, according to Gods declaration in Genesis 3.15. or as it is expounded in
verse 8. being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself as a Servant, or
Combator, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross;
though his Combator Satan has liberty to try his patience and obedience, by
his ignominious and painful suffering as a Malefactor on the Cross; yet he
could not disturb his patience, and therefore he could not pervert him in his
obedience, and therefore consequently he could not hinder his death from being
made a most perfect and acceptable Sacrifice for the purchasing of Gods
reconciliation to all his believing Children: wherefore it follows in verse 9.
that God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above
every name, etc. and to this sense must that prophecy be understood, in Esa.
52.13. etc. Behold my Servant shall deal prudenty (in the execution of his
Office of Mediatorship, and especially in his office of combating with his
proclaimed malignant Combator Satan, and then it follows as it does in the
said place to the Philippians, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very
high.

3. Christ is called a Prince, or Captain, in relation to his Office of
Mediatorship.

1. In Josh. 5.14, 15. He is called the Prince or Captain; for he appeared to
Joshua in the form of a man, and said unto him as a Captain of the Lords Hosts,
Am I now come to destroy the Cananites, according to Gods promise, in Exodus 23
20.22, 23. In like sort he is called the Prince or Captain of our salvation, in
Heb. 2.10. because of his undertaking of the office of a Combator, with his
proclaimed malignant Combator Satan, for man's redemption from Satan's head plot,
according to Gods Declaration of the combat, in Genesis 3.15.

2. He is called the Prince of the Army, in Dan. 8.11. Broughton does render
the Text thus: And it (namely the little Horn) became great against the Prince
of the Army: and in verse 25. he is called the prince of princes; and in Dan.
10.13. he is called Michael the first of the chief princes, and in verse 21.
there is none (says the Angel G^driel) that strengthens himself with me in
this thing but Michael the prince: And in Dan 12.1. At that time shall stand up
Michael the great prince. And why else is he called the great prince, but
because he is the prince of princes, and King of Kings, Rev. 1.5. yea the
prince of Angels, and therefore he is called the Archangel, in Jude verse 9.
from this place of Daniel, and from Exodus 23.20.22. compared together.

This Attribute your prince, and Michael, shows, that the term Angel here
must not be understood of a created Angel, but of the Archangel, the Captain of
the Lords Host, according to the promise in Exodus 23.20. and he is also called
Michael, which signifies one that thought it not ^obery to be equal with God.

These titles of prince and Captain are here applied to Christ, as he is the
King of his Chruch and people: but the like title is given him as he is our
high priest and the captain of our salvation in his combat of suffering from
Satan, until he conquered him by his obedience, and in that obedience did make
his death a most acceptable Sacrifice of Reconciliation.

4. Christ is called the Prince of life, in relation to his Office of
Mediatorship.

1. Peter tells the multitude of the Jews, in Act. 3.14, 15. Ye killed the
Prince of life; why else is he called the Prince of life? but because he brake
Satan's head-plot by his combat of suffering, and by his sacrifice of
obedience, even through all the said sufferings, and by that means he redeemed
the Elect from the death of sin, which Satan by his cunning head-plot had
brought upon them all, and so in this respect he is called the Prince of life,
alluding to that Combat and Victory over Satan, in Genesis 3.15. and to that in
Psalm. 2.2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Princes do plot
together against Jehovah and against his Christ: and the fulfilling of this
combat is thus expressed, in Act. 4.27, 28. Of a truth Lord against thy holy
child Jesus whom thou annointedst, gathered were both Herod and Pontius Pilate,
to do whatsoever thy hand and thy Council had determined before to be done;
according as he had declared, it in Genesis 3.15. namely, That the seed of the
Woman should combat with his proclaimed Enemy Satan and his seed, and that by
his obedience to the Laws of the combat, he should break the Devils head plot
for the redemption of the Elect, from the death of sin to the life of grace,
and so at last to the life of glory: and in this respect lie has merited the
Title, Prince of life; and to this effect did Peter speak to the Council of the
high San^d^im, in Act: 5.31. Him God made high with his right hand, a Prince
and a Savior to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins: and in
this respect Christ is also styled the King of Justice and the King of Peace,
Esaias 7, 2. And the Prince of Peace, in Esaias 9.6 and in Ezekiel 34 23 24. God calls
him One Shepherd, And his Servant David, And a Prince among them; and so in
Ezekiel. 37.25.

5. Christ is called the King of Israel.

1. Nathaniel makes this confession of his Faith to Christ, in John 1. 49.
Rabbi thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel: In this speech
Nathaniel had respect to Dan. 9.25. where he is called Messiah, the Prince, or
King, as Broughton in his last Edition reads it.

6. He is called the Messiah.

In Dan. 9.25, 26. He is twice called the Messiah which in Greek is Christ,
that is Anointed; and so in John 1.41. Andrew found his Brother Simon and said
unto him, We have sound the Messiah, and in verse 45. Philip found Nathaniel,
and said unto him, We have sound him of whom Moses did write in the Law (Deuteronomy.
18.18) and in the Prophets, Esa. 4.2. and in John 4.25. The woman of Samaria
said unto him, I know that Messiah comes which is called christ, or the
Anointed: and this Title was given him in relation to his Victory, in breaking
Satan's head-plot for our redemption, as it was first implied in Gods
Declaration of the Combat and Victory, in Genes. 3.15.

7. He is also called the Apostle and high Sacrasicer of our profession, in
Heb. 31. And the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls in 1 Pet. 2.25. and our
Advocate, in 1 John 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the just, who is the reconciliation for our sins.

8. Christ has many Titles given him in relation to his Office of
Mediatorship, from Metaphors and Similitudes:

1. My Husband, Hos. 2.7. 2. The morning Star, in the Title of Psalm. 22. and in
Rev. 2.28. and Rev. 22.16. 3. A Nazaren, Math. 2 23. He was not a Nazarite
according to Number. 6. (as some through heedlesnesse do take it) for he both
drank Wine and was polluted by the dead, Luke 7.33.34. Luke 8.49.54. Mat 9.25.
Luke 7.14. which a Nazarite might not be; but he was a Nazaren, of the Town of
Nazareth, which Towns name is derived from Nazar the Branch out of the root of
Jesse, in Esa. 11.1. And says Bro. Nazar in the Thalmud, is the Messiah, from
Esa. 11.1. and says he in his Consent 2830. Nazar is a Spring, or Branch, Esa.
11.1. and says he, the Town Nazareth alludeth unto that in Mat. 2.23. 4. He is
called the brightness from on high: has visited us, Luke 1.78. 5. He is
called the Bud of the Lord, in Esa. 4.2. Zach. 3.8. Zach. 6.12. 6. The Son of
Righteousness, Mat. 4.2. 7. A Son and Shield, Psalm. ^4 12. 8. The way, the
truth, and the life, John 14.6. 9. The Door, Job. 10.7. 10. The bread of life
that came down from Heaven, John 6.35.48.51. 11. The true Vine, John 15.1.5.
12. The Lamb of God, John. 1.29. 13. The chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Pet.
2.6. 14. The head of the body of the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. 15. The head
of all principality and power, Col. 2.10. 16. The first fruits of them that
sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20.23. 17. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. 18. The
horn of salvation. Luke 1.69.
These and such like Attributes do show the effects and the operations of
Christ's Mediatorship sundry ways, both for the comfort of the godly, and also
for the terror of the wicked enemies of his Church and people.

CHAP. LVI.
Of the Attributes of the holy Spirit.

HE is called the Holy Ghost, Act. 28.25. Paul said to his offended Hearers at
their departure: Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias as the Prophet unto our
Fathers, etc. But in Esaias he is called Jehovah, Esaias 6.8, 9, 10. so also the
Title holy Ghost, in Heb. 10.15. is taken from Ier: 31.33 and there he is
called Jehovah, which is an incommunicable Attribute to any Creature; and hence
it is evident, that Jehovah the Father, Jehovah the Son, and Jehovah the holy
Ghost, in the unity of the Godhead and in the Trinity of persons, did make the
new Covenant for all the Elect: and therefore they will certainly give the gift
of faith to all the Elect, that so they may be partakers of all the blessings
that are therein contained.

2. The said Holy Ghost is called the Spirit, John 1.32, 33. Mar. 1.10.

3. The Spirit of Aelohim, Gen: 1.1, 2.

4. The spirit of God, Mat: 3.16. Act- 5.3, 4.

5. The holy Spirit, Psalm: 51.11. Esa. 63.10. Luke 11.13.

6. The holy Spirit of God, Ephesians: 4.30.

7. The holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians: 1.13.

8. The Spirit of the Father, in John 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father (says
Christ) and he will give you another Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my name, and so consequently, the Spirit proceeds from
the Father, as in John 15.25.

9. The Spirit of the Son, Gal: 4.6. and therefore he proceeds from the Son as
well as from the Father: If I depart (said Christ to his Disciples that were so
full of sorrow for his departure) I will send the Comforter to you, John 16.7.
and in John 15.26. I will send the Comforter to you from the Father, for our
Covenant and Contract was so from eternity, that in case I did perform the
conditions of the Mediators Office, I should have a joint hand with my Father
in the sending of the holy Spirit.

10. He is called the Spirit of his mouth, namely, the Spirit of Jehovah,
Father and Son, Psa^: 33 6.

11. He is called the Finger of God, in Luke 11.20. by which the humane nature
of Christ did his Miracles.

12. He is called the power of God, Luke 1.35. The Angel said unto Mary, The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
over-shadow thee, namely, as it did over-shadow the confused Chaos in the
Creation, as Mr. ^rap speaks.

13. Peter calls the Holy Ghost God, in Act. 53, 4.

These and such like blessed Attributes of the third person in Trinity, are
sufficient to convince any Jew, Turk, or Arrian, that the holy Spirit is true
God: except such as God has given up to the Spirit of slumber, and to the
hardness of their own hearts, to perish in their own impenitency.

CHAP. LVII.
Of the Attributes of the Holy Ghost, in relation to its opperations and
effects in the various manner of his working.

1. AS the Spirit of Aelohim in the beginning, did move upon the face of the
waters, to the producing of the visible Creation, Gen: 1.1. so it moved also
upon the water of Gods word to Adam, and so to all the elect for the producing
of the spiritual Creation, For except a man be born of Water and the Spirit he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5. And there are three that bear
witness in the earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these
three agree in one, 1 John 5.8. And so Moses Doctrine is compared to rain, in
Deuteronomy. 32.1. and so Tit. 3 5.

2. Says God in Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he is but flesh: Hence take notice of the Spirits working or striving with
men that are given to the flesh; it does often strive along time with such, but
if after some time they will not hearken, then God says, it shall not always
strive, but it shall at last give them up to their own hearts lusts to perish
in their sins: Noah ^a a preacher of righteousness to the old world for a
hundred and twenty years, and this long time the Apostle calls the long
suffering of God, 1 Pet. 3.19.20. 2 Pet. 2.5.

3. It is said in 1 Pet. 3.18. That Christ was quickened by the Spirit, by which
he went and preached to the Spirits that now are in prison, that were
disobedient in the days of Noe: hence two things are observable.

1. That Christ was called Jehovah, in Gen: 6, 3.

2. That the Spirit by which Naah preached to the disobedient world is here
called by Peter, The Spirit of Christ.

4. In Esa. 6.10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit (which did strive
with them for their conversion by the preaching of his Prophets). Therefore was
he turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them, as he threatened to do
if they did not obey his voice, Exodus 23.21. and he did also fulfill it in
Psalm. 78.40. etc. and 1 These: 5.19.

5. God says thus to his Elect, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them, Ezekiel.
36.27. This is the operation of Gods Spirit in the Elect at one time or other
while they attend upon him in his Ordinances, for the walking in his Statutes,
and the keeping (or doing) of his Judgments; does imply the obedience of faith
to all his statutes in their spiritual sense and meaning, as in Ezekiel. 11.19,
20. and Ezekiel. 36.27. and in Rom: 2.26. Yea the Spirit does by its operations
work upon baptized Infants that belong to Gods Election, by virtue of the
Covenant, which is the word of promise for their Regeneration and knitting to
Christ, if they dye before they come to knowledge by the outward hearing of the
word, as Esa. 59 21.

6. It is said in Esa: 11.2. That the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon the
root that shall proceed out of the stem of Jesse: and the Prophet does repeat
some heads of those endowments of the Spirit, whereby the humane nature of the
Messiah should be furnished: But the said heads are expressed in such large and
copious words, that it implies he should be furnished with the whole Spirit,
and with all the gifts and graces of that Spirit, and from thence it is said in
Reve: 1.4. that he has the seven Spirits of God; that is to say, the whole
Spirit, and all the graces of the Spirit, and this Endowment of his is often
repeated, as in Revel: 3 1. Revel: 4.5. and Revel: 5 6.

7. It is said in 1 Cor. 1^.4. That there are diversities of gifts, but the
same Spirit. And in verse 8. to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom,
and to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, and. And in verse 13.
by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body.

8. It is said, because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
son into your hearts, which has this operation, it inables you to cry Abba,
father, Gal. 4.6. and in this Text the holy Trinity is also expressed.

9. Sundry operations are ascribed to the Spirit in Romans 8.

1. in verse 5. They that are after the spirit, do mind the things of the
spirit. 2. In verse 6. The wisdom of the spirit is life and peace. 3. In verse
11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, etc.
he shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit. 4. In verse 13. If ye
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live. 5. In verse 14.
As many as are led by the spirit are the s^ns of God. 6. In verse 15. Ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry Abba Father. 7. In verse 16.
The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. 8. In verse 26. The spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what
to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request for us with fight
and groans that cannot be expressed. 9. In verse 27. The spirit makes request
for the Saints according to the will of God, These sundry operations of the
Spirit are expressed in this eigth chapter. 10. Sundry operations of the spirit
are in Gal. 5. 1. In verse 16. Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. 2. In verse 17. For the Spirit lusts against the flesh.
3. In verse 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the law. 4. In
verse 12. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, says, meekness, temperance, against such there is no
law. 5. In verse 25. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.
11. It is said in Ephesians. 6.17. The sword of the spirit is the word of God, and
in verse 18. Pray in the spirit. 12. Quench not the spirit, 1 These. 5.19. 13.
The holy Ghost does renovate our corrupt natures, as in Tit. 3.5. Of his mercy
he saved us, and by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. 14. The spirit and the Bride say come, Rev. 22.17. 15. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, he
with you all Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14.
Sundry other Attributes are ascribed to the holy Ghost, in relation to its
operations and effects, from metaphors and similitudes, as by fire, water,
seed, an earnest, and to the oil of gladness, etc.

All which, with many more, will be of heavenly use to every godly Christian,
that will take delight to meditate in Gods book, as David did both night and
day, Psalm I therefore say, as David said, O how love I thy law, it is my
meditation all the day, Psalm. 119.97.

FINIS.
A Table of Chief Heads.
Chap. 1. OF the Unity of the Godhead, and Trinity of Persons, also of their
properties and works page 1. If the knowledge of God in Trinity had not been
the ground of life, God would never have given himself names in the Plural
number p. 1. The Spirit of Elohim is sometimes called the Spirit of the Father,
and sometimes the Spirit of the Son p. 2 It is good to mark how the Attributes
and Titles of God are often interchangeably used the one for the other p. 5
Chap. 2. How Redemption was taught from Genesis 3.15. to the Flood of Noah p. 14
Gods purpose was not declared to bring fallen man for life, by theremains of
any natural abilities p 23 The place of holy Convocations was wont to be
called the presence of God p 36. 298.
Chap. 3. How Redemption was taught from the Flood, till the promises to
Abraham, also the seed of Sem is explained p 40 The subduing of ours and of
Gods enemies, is a benefit that God has tied to our constancy in Religion p 42
Chapter 4. How Redemption was taught from the Promise made to Abraham till the
Law of the Passover, and the coming of Israel out of Egypt p 52 We may not
pray for, nor expect any blessing, either temporal, spiritual, or eternal,
but according to the promise and Covenant of grace in Christ p 61 Covenants go
before Seals p 66 The Covenant of grace was not made only to believing
Parents, but also their Infant children p 70
Chap. 5. and Chap 6. How Redemption was taught from the time of the Passover,
till the building of the Temple p 74 How Christ was the end of all Moses Law p
75 76 77 82 83 85 86 It is a point of rare faith to believe that Christ gave
the Law p. 84 n. 3
Chap. 6. How Redemption was taught unto David and others p 92 How they of the
old Testament understood the Doctrine of Justification p 95 n. 5 and p 100 n. 5
p 356
Chap. 7. How Redemption was taught from the foundation of the Temple to the
burning of it p 102
Chap. 8. But it is misprintd How the Covenant of grace was taught and opposed
in this time, namely from the burning of the Temple, to the end of the
Babylonian captivity p 117
Chap. 9: How Redemption and the Covenant of grace was taught and opposed in
the time of the Seventy Sevens, as it is expressed in Dan 9.24 p 137 The
endeavor of some Scholars is by necessary consequence very profane, by
teaching us to confute Daniels propriety of the seventy sevens, by the building
of Rome, and by the Mayors of Athens, and by the Satanicall chronicles of the
Olympic games p 160 and see more toward the end of the book.
Chap. 10. How God by his wise providence did order the several captivities of
his people to build Synagogues for the planting of Religion among the heathen
nations, as a preparation to the speedy preaching of the Gospel, by the
Apostles and Disciples that were dispersed into those Countries at the death of
Stephen p 162
Chap. 11. Giving diverse reasons, why there were no more Prophets after Malachi
(or after Ezra, for he is holden to be Malachi) to our Lords Incarnation. p 170
The 49000 that returned from Babel were godly, and l^ft a godly seed after them
p 173 174 175 Many of Judah and Israel did continually return after the 49000
were returned p 178 271 Daniel foretold of the falling away of many of the Jews
from the faith p 176 The Saints the Jews in the time of the 70 sevens had
sundry enemies, before and after the death of Antiochus Epiphanes p 179 but
Christ did strengthen the godly Jews against the tyranny of Javan p 179 The
Kings of the North were Gog and Magog in Ezekiel. 38. and Ezekiel. 39. p 179 129 The
Hebrew tongue after the return from Babel, ceased from common use p 180 The
Rulers and people of the Jews did not know the meaning of their own Prophets,
after that the Prophets, and Vrim and Thummim did cease, Acts 13.27. p 181
Chap. 12. Being an answer to the complaint of the Jews for the loss of five
things under the second Temple, which they enjoyed under Solomon's Temple p 183
Fire from heaven to burn their sacrifices, was a testimony of Gods gracious
acceptance, of the types of Christ's death p 183 If they had had the fire from
heaven after the captivity, they should after some time have been deprived of
it by Antiochus Epiphanes, when he took away the daily sacrifice for three
years and a half p 184 Vrim and Thummim they needed not when John Elias came p
182 184 Though after the captivity they wanted the Ark of the Covenant, yet
Christ told them they should have godly Teachers in the place of it, Jer. 3.15,
16. p 184
Chap. 13. How the new Covenant and the way of Redemption was taughe and
opposed under the first preaching of the Gospel p 187 How the heavenly
Jerusalem began first to be builded in the earthly Jerusalem p 198
Chap. 14. Showing who they are that have the spiritual blessings of the
Covenant of grace; and who the curses 201 The Jews and Romames for their
despising of the Kingdom and sacrifio^hood of Christ were greatly plagued p 202
Chap. 15. Proving that Rome in Gods just judgment is the place that Christ
has given to the power of Satan for the setting up of the mystery of iniquity
p 215
Chap. 16. Proving that the mystery of iniquity began to get head from
Constantines time p 229
Chap. 17. Of the two Witnesses, and of the mark of the Beast, and of the decay
of the mystery of iniquity p 235
Chap. 18. Of the seven Trumpets in Apoc. 8, 9.10, and 11 chapters, in which
the Popes rising to his Antichristian Hierarchy is first described, compare
with the seven Phials, in chapter 16. under which the Antichristian Hierarchy
does fall and is consumed by degrees p 261 Unlearned Scholars that affected
Superiority in the several Centuries after Constantines time, turned all to
ambition and heresy, and politicians to profaneness. p 262 There shall be
persecution from the seed of the Serpent in one place or other, as long as the
Church remains in this world, notwithstanding, all that is alleged for
Christ's glorious personal reign here on earth p 266 None of the Phials is
poured on the Turks Tyranicall Kingdom, p 267
Chap. 19. The dead bones in Ezekiel 47. must not be understood of the Jews
c^ling after our Times: But only of their return from Babel, p 2^7 The calling
of the Jews yet to come shall be in all places of their dispersion, ^269 The
Jews do hope for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and do pray daily for their
return to Canaan, and many Christians do Judaize with them in teaching their
return thither, and to be a glorious Church there again, p 269
Chap. 20. Of the two sticks in Ezekiel. 37. in confutation of them that say, It
is not yet fulfilled, that Ephraim was joy^ed to Judah in the return, from
Babylon, p 271 178 Also some observations on Zach. 2. Zach: 8. Zach: 9, 10, 11.
chapters p 271
Chap: 21. Of the Jews calling: that Zach: 12, 13, and 14. chapters, cannot be
applied to the Jews calling yet to come, as many Ministers d^ too unadvisedly
teach, p 284
Chap: 22. Expounding Zach: 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. verses. The subservient
Typical Covenants of works after some time was made such an Idol of
Justification by the Jews, that it made them despise Messiah the King, and his
justification, p 288
Chap: 23. Expounding Zach: 12.19, 11, 12, 13, 14. with Zach: 14.10.11, etc. p
291
Chap: 24. Gog and Magog, in Ezekiel: 38. and Ezekiel: 29. must be taken properly:
but God and Magog in Apoc. 20. must be taken in a mystical sense, p 294 179
Corporation-speeches must be marked for the right accommodation of the true
sense of the blessed Scriptures, p 298
Chap. 25. Some Observations on Jeremi^h 30, 31, 32, 33: chapters, p 299
Chap. 26. That the Covenant of grace made with Israel in Dan. 29. is the same
that God made with Israel in Exodus, 20, and the one is no more a Covenant of
works than the other p 301
Chap. 27. Short Collections out of Genesis, Job, and some part of Exodus,
showing, that the Gospel was taught among the faithful before Moses wrote the
same 304 alias misprinted 296 The Sabbath was a sign of Sanctification to them
by the death of Christ p 304 alias 297 296 In Moses and the Prophets holy
Convocations are called the presence of God p 298 alias 305 p 36
Chap. 28. Of Divine Tradition p 302 From the Creation till Isreal's coming from
Egypt (or from the promise of Christ in Genesis 3.15. till the Passover in Egypt)
is 2513 years in which space of time the Church had not the written word, but
was taught by Tradition.
Chap. 29. Being an answer to them that say, that the polity of Christ given to
Moses was not a Covenant of grace p 306
Chap. 30. Showing that Israel (under Moses Law) were under a covenant of grace
p 313 Finis operis intends all that live under the visible Church (as once all
the world had a being under the Church in Adams days, and under Sem) none are
excluded from being under the Covenant of grace to outward apprehension, though
finis operantis is for the elect as Moses speech shows in Deuth 29.29. p. 314
Diverse brief Arguments to prove the Jews under Moses Law were under a covenant
of grace p. 315
Chap. 31. A Prosopopeia of Solomon's fall, by granting liberty of conscience to
his idolatrous Wives p. 316
Chap. 32. Brief Considerations about Sheol, Gehenna and especially about
Hades, as it relates to the Article of the Creed, he descended into hell p 328
Chap. 33. Of the phrase of Abraham's Bosom p 335 Faithful Factors need not
fear to be called home from foreign parts, so when the good servants were
called to give an account for their trading by the Talents, they feared not p
336 Comforts to the godly against the fear of death, p 336, 337
Chap. 34. Some propositions and expostulations concerning the true nature of
Christ's sufferings, p 338 Job does tell us, that it is not good to defend Gods
cause with an Error, pretending Religion, p 339 The second Adam had power over
his affections more then ever the first Adam had in his Innocence, for he had
power to trouble himself with grief and sorrow, which Adam in innocence had
not, p 340 Christ in his sufferings was not under Gods vindicative wrath for
one minute of an hour, p 840, 341 The assertion, That our Lord suffered Hell
torments in this life in his soul or in his body, appears not true by any
Scripture, p 341 In Heb: 9: 14, 15. Christ offered himself by his eternal
Spirit, etc. That by means of death for Redemption, etc. This death cannot be
expounded of the second death, because it is compared with the bodily death of
such as do thereby confirm their Testaments, p 341 A just reproof of them that
affirm, That Christ in his sufferings did combat hand to hand with his angry
Father, p 343
Chap: 35. Observations upon that distinction which some make between a local
and a poenall Hell, which Poenall Hell some say Christ suffered, p. 345 Some
say Christ suffered a poenall Hell out of a local Hell; they say, Local Hell
is but a circumstance: they may as well say, That the glorious place of heaven
is but a circumstance, and so in this sense all created things in respect of
God are but circumstances, p 345 Our old English Saxon word Hell does not
answer to Hades, but to Gehenna Hell, which our Ecclesiastics must clear, p
346 Christ underwent a poenall Hades in this world, but not a poenall Gehenna,
p 346
Chap: 36. Observations on the second death which some say Christ suffered, p
347 When Christ was in his sad Agony in the Garden, there was an Angel from
heaven to strengthen him, which does evidence, that he was not then under the
second death, for if he had, then it had been impossible for an Angel, or for
all the Angels in heaven to strengthen him, p 348 If Christ had suffered the
second death which is indeed the Effect of the Essential wrath of God, he
could not have said, My God my my God why do thou leave me: And, Father into
thy hands I commend my Spirit, etc. p 348 When did our Lord suffer the second
death? was it before his bodily death? We know by divine Revelation, that the
second death is after the first: or else if we by our wit and learning will
affirm the contrary, we shall destroy Gods order, p 348 The Doctrine of making
Christ a sinner by Gods Imputation, numb: 8. is dangerous, p 349 It is not man's
inventions of Tantundem, and Equinalency touching the sufferings of Christ,
that will reach and fathom these things, p 350
Chap: 37. Some observations on 2 Cor: 5.19, 20, 21. with Gal: 3.13. p 350 I
suppose two millions of Geneva Bibles have been printed that have rightly
conferred, 2 Cor: 5.31. to Exodus: 29 14. p 350 This assertion, That as our sins
are imputed to Christ, so his righteousness of the moral Law is imputed to us:
Calls for thoughts of detestation; the care cannot endure it, p 353 So to
impute (as some teach our sins to Christ, is to impart, communicate, or make
common to him with us our unconformity to God and his Law, p 353 355 Of the
several distinct courses spoken of in Deuteronomy: 21.23. and Deuteronomy: 27. 26. with Gal:
3.13. p 354 How the righteousness of God the Father does justify sinners, p
356, p 357
Chap: 38. Our Lords Genealogy conferred with the times of the Judges, and
with the Kings, p 363
Chap: 39. The holy Chronology sundry ways expressed, and every way agreeing
to the same number of years, Beginning from the first promise, in Gen 3.15.
till our Lords death, 3960. years. p 369
Chap: 40. Another way of casting up of the holy Chronicle to the said number
of years which the former Dialogue has followed, 370
Chap: 41. A third expression of the holy Chronicle to the said number of
years, p 371
Chap: 42. Of the Genealogy frame of the process of Times, p 373
Chap: 43. A further consideration of the said twenty eight Jubilees, that the
godly student may delight in the holy book of God, p 374
Chap: 44. A fourth expression of the holy Chronology from the Creation to the
Redemption, p 375
Chap 45. An Advertisement to the Reader, to take head of embracing the evil
Tenets of two men that have lately put forth irreligious opinions about the
Chronology of the Book of God. p 380 The holy Chronology of the Book of God
is a Doctrine of Faith clear and certain as any other Doctrine of faith, p 381
The Heathen Chronology by Olympiades, is by some regarded as more certain than
the Scriptures Chronology, p 381 If the Angel taught not Daniel to understand
the certainty of Chronology, he taught him nothing, p 382. 385 Who would think
to say the seventy Sevens are a time not certain: whereas the holy Angel
divides them into three parts, 1. Into seven Sevens. 2. Into sixty two Sevens.
3. Into one Seven, p 383
Chap: 46. That the certainty of Chronology was a chief part of the Angels
Message to Daniel, for Daniel knew all things else before the Angel came to
him, p 385 Some Teachers, in teaching and writing about the Jews repairing of
Jerusalem: and many great businesses that will follow thereon, have filled
Churches full of Matrologie and fond expectations, p 387.
Chap: 47. That Daniel is alleged in the New Testament to prove the Messiah to
be already come, p 388
Chap: 48. Showing how the holy Evangelists express the Attributes, Messiah,
or Christ. p 390 All the three Offices of Christ, as he is Prophet, Priest, and
King, are in Dan: 9.24. p 392 Mr. P. his false and impertinent assertions, on
Dan: 9.24. p 393
Chap. 49. A conclusion of the Point of Chronology, p 395 The New Testament
does not keep the Chronology of the times to the end of the world, as many
labor in vain to prove out of the Apocalypse: Though the Old Testament did
exactly keep the Chronology of the times, from the first promise to the death
of Chris, p 395. 399 Neither is the Geneologie of the Tribes kept after the
death of Christ p 396
Chap. 50. Being a Caveat to beware of such satanicall spirits, that prattle
about the expectation of new Apostles, and new Revelations, p 396
Chap: 51. An Exposition of the times mentioned in the Apocalypse, p 399
Chap: 52. 1. Of the Attributes, or Titles of God, essentially considered, p
401 2. What is to be learned from the Title Jehovah, p 403 3 What is to be
learned from the attribute Elion the most High, p 405 4. What is to be learned
from Shaddai the Almighty, p 406 5. What from Adonai, ibid. 6. What from the
attribute Ehieth, I am, or I will be, p 407 7. What from the attribute Jah,
Breathing, ibid. 8. What from the attribute Tzur, The Rock, p 408 9. What from
Goshai, My Makers, p 408 10. What from Goel, The Redeemer, p 409
Chap: 53. Of the Attributes of the Divine Nature of the second Person in
Trinity. How his is said to be begotten before all the Creation, Col: 1.15. p
412
Chap: 54. Of the Attributes of the humane Nature of the second Person, p 413
Chap: 55. Of the Attributes of the Mediators Office, p 416 Crist is called a
Servant in relation to his Office of Mediatorship, p 418 Christ is called a
Prince, or Captain in relation to his Office of Mediatorship, p 419 Christ is
called the Prince of Life in relation to his Office of Mediatorship, p 420
Christ is called the King of Israel, and the Messiah in relation to his Office
of Mediatorship, p 421
Chap. 56. Of the Attributes of the holy Spirit p 422
Chap 57. Of the Attributes of the holy Ghost in relation to its operations and
effects in the various manner of his working, p 424

A TABLE of some few Scriptures (among many others) that are Expounded, or
Illustrated.
GEn: 1.1, 2. page 1 3. 15. p 11 14 22 26 34 42 53 60 61 66 194 302 344 413 418
419 420. 3.22.24. p 23 9.26. p 41 11.2, 3. p 52 60 290 567 17.5. p 70 18, 19. p
335 19.24. p 11 20, 21. p 299 21, 22, 23. p 298 alias 205 305 309 22.18. p 60
26.5. p 302 304, alias 296 298 335 34.14. p 59 47.12. p 304 bis 49.10. p 57
Exodus: 3.15. p 60 61 198 19.2.^1 p 407 17.15, 16. p 168 19.4. p 314 19.5. p 56
20.24. p 36 23.15. p 89 23.20, 21, 22.23. p 188 311 412 417 419 28.38. p 100
30.12. p 311 Levit: 14 6. p 98 18.5. p 311 Lev: 25.23. p 203 315 26.2. p 89
26.15. p 154 26.23, 24, 25. p 111 Numb: 19.18. p 98 14.2. p 392 24.20. p 168
Deuteronomy. 5.2.3. p 302 Deuteronomy: 6.4. p 1 28 49. p 66 28.68. p 161 30.6. p 17 32.4.18.
p 408 32.21. p 156 61 32.47. p 85 33.26. p 109 Jos: 19.50. p 175 1 Samuel 7.9,
10. p 107 2 Samuel: 7.14. p 188 2 Samuel: 7.2^. p 147 1 King: 11.32. p 286 1 King:
17.1. p 159 2 Chronicles: 3.17. p 131 2 Chronicles: 6.18. p 102 106 2 Chronicles: 11.15. p 108
Neh: 2.10. p 143 Neh: 6.63, 64, 65. p 155 Neh: 9.2. p 155 Job 21.14, 15. p 301
Job 22.17. ib. Psalm: 2.2. p 420 Psalm: 2.7. p 414 Psalm: 2.8, 9. p 194 9, 10. p
155 16.10. p 334 20.1, 2. p 305, alias 298 22.1. p 339 348 40.6, 7. p 81 418
45.3, 4, 5. p 109 51.7. p 98 51.12. p 100 68.18. p 81 69.19, 20. p 355 69.22. p
110 78.1, 2, 3. p 61 102.13, 14. p 149 171 105.8. p 60 105.42. p 60 126.6. p
171 132.10. p 188 137.5, 6. p 149 Prove. 3.3. p 98 9.13. p 108 10.12.23. p 42
30.4. p 188 30.18.19. p 107 102 415 Esaias, 2.1, 2, 3.4. p 23 127 2.6, 7, 8. p
108 4 5. p 109 5.19.23 ib. 6.9 10. p 105 6.17. p 164 7.9.14. p 299 300 8.14. p
110 9.2. p 282 9.6. p 188 411 415 26.4, p 410 42.1. p 61 188 418 42.4. p 85
42.6, 7. p 27 45.6.14. p 164 46.11. p 164 48.15. p 164 53.11. p 418 55.1, 2. p
135 61.10. p 361 66.23. p 141 293 Jer: 3.15, 16.18. p 184 271 3.16. p 132 9.26.
p 58 22.29. p 134 28, 29. p 159 30.18. p 299 31.23. p 299 31.38.39. p 17 299
36.30. p 130 44.26. p 66 51.50. p 149 174 286 Lam: 1.14. p 159 4.13. p 159
Ezekiel. 6.9. p 108 9.6. p 159 11.2. p 109 14.14. p 39 16.38. p 108 21.27. p 134
23.8. p 72 28.13. p 299 36.37. p 99 37.11, 12. p 267 37.26.27. p 89 271 37.21.
p 281 38.16.21. p 295 299 39.23. p 297 Dan: 7.9, 10. p 143 7.18. p 154 176
7.17. p 222 8.11. p 184 419 8.24, 25. p 177 8.31. p 160 9.23. p 383 9.24. p 90
170 270 383 388 390 391 9.24, 25, 26, 27. p 137 9.26. p 385 9.27. p 136 385 389
10.2, 3, 4. p 148 11.14. p 176 301 11.30, 31, 32. p 301 11.33. p 176 11.35. p
177 12.3. p 176 12.4. p 176 12.10. p 177 Hos: 2.3. p 105 4.14. p 159 4.17. p
110 10.10. p 107 12.3, 4. p 25 417 13.1. p 111 Amos 6.1. p 160 7.10. p 159 9.1.
etc. p 270 Zeph. 319. p 66 Hag. 219. p 186 Hag. 2.6 p 376 Zach. 1.12, 13. p 143
21. etc. p 269 26, 7.4 p 281, 286 4.2.11. p 185 8.12, 13. p 224, 282 8.23. p
175, 297 9, 11. p 149 9.13. p 178, 179, 282, 368 10.6, 7. p 368 11.6.10. p 177,
282 11.7.11. p 184 11.10.11. p 173. 178. 283 11.12. p 171 11.15, 16, 17. p 178
12.6. 198. 284, 285 12, 10. p 151, 287, 291 13.7. p 411 13.7, p 411 14, 1, 2,
3, 4. p 161, 288 14.10.11. p 293 14: 12. p 172, 289 14.16: p 289 14: 17, 18. p
294 Mal. 1.11. p 293 211.12. p 159 3, 14, 15, p 177 3.16. p 12 175 4.1^ p 175
4*4^ p 180, 182, 282. 301, 309 Mat: 1: 12: p 131 1.23 p 416 2: 1. p 163, 390
3.2. p 142 3, 2 p 98 415 6.9. p 311 5.3, 4, 5. p 101 8.11, p 367 10.34. p 253
11.13, 14 p 181.182 11.23. p 225 12.21. p 85 16.18. p 325 408 16 19. p 222
17.5. p 188 19.13. p 70 21.43. p 57 23.35. p 222 24, 34. p 389 26.26. p 100
26.28, 389 27.25. p 392 28.18. p 11. 28.20. p 196 Mark 8.38 p 252 16.10. p 151
Luke 1.32, 33. p 134. 270. 389 1.35. p 415 1, 51. p 134 1.70. p 26 3.27. p 14
3.28. p 415 9.26. p 252 12.4^. p 304 bis 15, 22, 23. p 361 16, 15. p 84 16.19 p
336 17.20. p 153 19.11. p 164, 153. 393 19.27. p 126 19.57. p. 252 20.35, 36,
37. p 59 21.24, p 233 21.36. p 208 22.43. p 344. 347. 23.28, 29, 30. p 161
24.45. p 40 John 1.1, 2. p 2 418 1 12. p 42 1.14. p 6 25 102 1.41. p 338 3 1. p
155 3.36 p 127 4.23, 24. p 157 5.17, p 125 6, 27 p 83 6.63. p 85 8 44. p 68,
155 9.34. p 149 15.26. p 6 18 37 p 194 19.15. p 48 Acts 1.2. p 198 1.14. p 291
1.8 15, p 165 2.1, 2. ib. 2 27. p 334 2.37 p 151 291 2.39. p 71 3.14, 15. p 420
3.21. p 23. 26 3.25. p 60 3.^6. p 53 71 4.27, 28. p 420. 5.31. p 23 6.13, 14,
15 p 148. 388 7.38. p 85 7.47. p 110 12.23. p 114. 413 13.27. p 181 13.30.31. p
413 13, 41. p 39 138 ^68 13.38, 39. p. 67. 357, 359 13.40, 41. p 288 13.48. p
200 15.11. p 85 26.67. p 308 28 20 p 57 28.25. p 422 31.41. p 156 Romans 3 21. p
27 Romans 3.25 26. p 61, 357 51. p. 100. 6.7. p 357 7.4. p 101 8.3. p 82 103. p
84 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, p 77, 85 10.19. p 156 11, 1, 2, 3. p 291 12.12. p 107
16.17. p 209 16.26. p 305 1 Cor. 1.30. p 410 1 Cor 7.13.14, p 56 4.9. p ^97
104. p 400 11.26. p 399 14.11, 12. p 242 15.30. p 333 15 51. p 249 15.34.58. p
337 2 Cor. 1.9. p 268 2 Cor. 5.4. p 249 5.19. p 411 5.21. p 98 ult. 350, 356
6.16. p 89 6.18. p 149 71. p 89 10.45. p 392. Gal. 3.6. p 60 3.7. p 29 155 3.8,
p 60, 64, 198 3 13, 14. p 53.354 3.16. p 60, 41^ Gal. 44. p 53, 417 4.6. p 423
5.1.2.3. p 357 6.16. p 70 Ephesians. 1.10. p 38, 107, 222 2.10, 11, 12. p 155, 59, 61
2.12. p 79 2.15. p 90, 141 2.18. p 99 ^.19.21, 22, p 200 3.6. p 41 3.15. p 38,
107 3.21. p 62 Phil. 1.13. p 392 Phil, 1.21. p 337 Phil. 2.6, 7. p 418 3.2, 3.
p 155 3.10. p 214 3.20. p 336 Col. 1.11. p 154 1.15. p 412 1.20. p 107, 149
1.26. p 51 2.14. p 141 2.15. p 27 2.18, 19. p 398 1 These. 2.15, 16. p 199 2 19.
p 156 5.1, 2, 3 p 152 5.8. p 184 2 These. 1.8. p 23 2.6. p 204 2.15. p 305 bis 1 Timothy 2.6. p 308 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. p 178 2 Timothy 2.8. p 85 3.1, 2, 3. p 178, 205,
398 4.4 p Tit. 1.1.2.3. p 22 2.14. p 309 Heb. 1.1. p 153 1.3. p 90 412 1.5. p
415 2.5. p 27 2.15. p 389 2.16. p 53 5.1, 2. p 98 5.6, 7. p 340 6.8. p 288
7.22. p 84 8.6. p 84 9.14, 15. p 341 10.5. p 418 10.15. p 422 10.27. p 156.288
11.1.2. p 208 11.4. p 36, 183 11.9. p 285 11.13. p 59 11.24, 25, 26. p 149
11.26. p 58 11.28. p 75 11.32. p 101, 107 11.33. p 165, 176 11.34. p 163, 165,
176 12.23. p 155 12, 26, 27. p 81, 132, 136, 151 14.6.10. p 288 1 Pet. 1.2, 3,
4, 5. p 308 1 Pet. 1.11.^ p 395 1.19, 20, 21. p 157 2.9, 10. p 105 2.23. p 344
3.18, 19. p 40, 389 4.4. p 39 2 Pet. 1.4. p 22 3.2. p 397 1 John 3.12. p 155
3.23. p 83 5.11, 12, 13. p 61 5.20, 21. p 156, 194 2 John v. 9. p 43 Apoc. 1.5.
p 419 Apoc. 1.9. p 259 2.17. p 185 3.18. p 12 6.9. p 259, 397 6.10. p 344 7, 9,
13, 14. p 361 9.20. p 232 10. Expounded, p 258 10.3. p 257 11. p 399 11.8. p 39
247 11.11. p 20 11.15, 19. p 242, 247 12. p 399 12.10. p 242 12.17. p 259 13. p
399 13.11, 12. p 222 13.16. p 247 14.1. p 290 14.12. p 259 16.13. p 110 18.13.
p 232 18.23. p 234, 247 19.8. p 360 19.10. p 304 bis 19.11. p 246 19, 14, 15. p
247, 257 20.2. p 395 20.4, 5. p 252, 259, 299, 395 20.6, 7, 8. p 232, 233, 299
21.1, etc. p 289 21.22. p 376
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 12, line 4. read mark. p 24 l 21. r could not but with admiration say,
the eye has not seen, p 25. l 4. r. viatory, p. 26. l 26. r. viatory, p 26. l
32 r. Genesis 19. p 27. l 36. r wickednesses, p 30. l 20. r. Temple, p 30. l 21. r
praise, p 35. l 41. r. were kindled, p 37 l 9. deli (of the) p 52. l 2. dele
Annor and add chap. 4. p 53 l. 9. r. in this manner the p 56 l 16. r. and not
to rest, p 60. l 11. r. in verse 16. p 82 l 37. add, give, p 98. l 24. r. how
they expound, p 107. l 36. add not, p 111, l 30. r. godless, p. 115. l 41. r.
Lagida, p 139 margin r. is by, p 149. l 33 r. preferred p. 171. l 10. r.
considered p 171. l 25. r. Daniel p 179. l 28. and p 209 l 17 r for p 234 l 34.
add, to advance p 310. l 26. r. external. p 345. l 7. r. the l 8. r. he, p
351, l 15. r. for p 370. l. 2. r. 427 years, p 387. l 21. r. falsify.


