

HOMER HIS ODYSSES TRANSLATED, ADORNED WITH SCULPTURE, AND ILLUSTRATED WITH
ANNOTATIONS,

BY JOHN OGILBY, Esquire Master of His MAJESTY'S Revells in the Kingdom of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS ROYCROFT, for the Author, MDCLXV.

Collegium S.S. et Individuoe Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi.



TO THE MOST NOBLE PRINCE JAMES, DUKE, MARQUIS AND EARL OF ORMOND, EARL OF
OSSORY AND BRECKNOCK, VISCOUNT THURLES, LORD BARON OF ARCLO AND LANTHONY, LORD
OF THE REGALITIES AND LIBERTIES OF THE COUNTY OF TIPERARY, CHANCELLOR OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN, LORD LIEUTENANT GENERAL AND GENERAL GOVERNOR OF HIS
MAJESTY'S KINGDOM OF IRELAND, ONE OF THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE
PRIVY COUNCIL, OF HIS MAJESTY'S KINGDOMS OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND,
GENTLEMAN OF HIS MAJESTY'S BEDCHAMBER, LORD STEWARD OF HIS MAJESTY'S HOUSEHOLD,
LORD LIEUTENANT OF THE COUNTY OF SOMERSET, LORD LIEUTENANT AND LORD HIGH
STEWARD OF THE CITY OF BRISTOL, AND KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE
GARTER:

THIS The most Ancient and Best Piece of Moral and Political Learning, is
humbly Presented and Dedicated,

By the most Obliged, And most Obedient Of His Servants, JOHN OGILBY.

scene from book 1 Ilustrissimo et Potentiss: March: et Com de Genli: Hiberce.
Palatii periscelidis Equiti:'f. Principi. Jacobo, Duci Ormond L. Gubernatori
Regii Senescallo Aurece Tabulam han^ LMDDDIO Lib. j.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE FIRST BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Court of Gods: Telemachus complains
To Pallas. Suitors riot: Phemius strains.
Penelope disgust; Pallas inspires
The Prince with Strength and Prudence, then retires.
Antinous girds, Telemachus retorts,
Eurymachus sides: Night closes strife and Sports.
THAT prudent Heroes wandering, Muse rehearse,
Who ( Troy being sacked) coasting the Universe,
Saw many Cities, and their various Modes;
Much suffering, tossed by Storms on raging Floods,
His Friends conducting to their native coast;
But all in vain, for he his Navy lost,
And they their lives profanely feasting on
Herds consecrated to the glorious Sun;
Who much incensed obstructed so their way
They nere returned: Joves Daughter this display.
All now by Wars and Billows undestroy'd
Were safe at home, He only not enjoyed
His dearest Spouse, nor wished for Passage gained,
Whilst in her Cave Calypso him detained,
And hoped to Wed. But when the Circling Spears
Completed had the Fate-appointed years
That he his home and Native soil should see
(Not from intestine broils and trouble free)
The Gods all pitied him; but Neptunes rage,
Until he landed, Vows could nere assuage:
Who now to It is observed by Herodotus, That Neptune was a God brought out of
Lybia into Greece, and therefore properly feigned by Homer to delight in the
Countries thereabout.
Aethiops distant Regions gone
(That verge the There is great variety of Exposition upon this place amongst
the ancientest of the Greek Grammarians, Aristarchus, Crates, etc. all whose
conjectures are produced and refuted by Strabo in the first book of his
Geography. After which, he thus delivers his own opinion; That as the ancient
Grecians called all the more Northern people Scythians, or Nomades; and the
Western Celtae, Iberes, or Celt-Iberes, etc. so they called all that lived upon
the Southern Ocean from East to West, Aethiopians, not those only which lie
South of Egypt. This he confirms with auctorimes out of Aeschylus and
Euritides, which are something obscure by reason those Tragedies from whence he
borrowed them, are now lost: We shall therefore supply their room with those
which are more clear and evident. Aeschylus in his Prometheus, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
You shall black people find, where rising Suns
First guild the Earth, and swelling Aethiops runs.
Ptolomy in his Geography, (...). There live under the Zodiac from East to
West men black of color, Aethiopians. And in another place he divides
Aethiopia into Eastern and Western These Aethiopians then according to Homer
(...) were divided into Eastern and Western by the Arabian or Egyptian Gulf:
which though Homer never makes mention of, as Aristarchus observed, yet it is
not probable, says Strabo, that he should be ignorant of that Gulf which is
but 1000 Stades distant from the Mediterranean, and be so well acquainted with
Thebes of Egypt 4000. Stades farther off.
rising and descending Sun)
At plenteous Tables highly entertained,
Sat, where his Altars Hecarombs distained,
Whilst the other Gods in Heavens high Palace met,
There Jove reminding with no small regret,
Aegisthus story, whom Atrides Son
Orestes slew, thus in full Court begun;
How fondly Mortals us accuse, that we
Both of their crimes and sufferings Authors be,
When by their folly they themselves destroy;
So Agamemnon new returned from Troy
Aegisthus murdered, then Espoused his Wife,
Though Hermes him on forfeit of his Life
From us forbad; Kill not the King he said,
Nor Clytemnestra that Adultress Wed,
Lest young Orestes his Revenger come,
And these usurped Kingdoms reassume:
Yet obstinate he would not us regard,
So his foul crime has met a due reward.
Then Pallas; Thou who rul'st these bles'd abodes,
Great King of Kings, and father of the Gods,
Deservedly he fell, and may they all
Who murder Princes in like manner fall.
But much my bowels for Ulysses yern,
Who pined with grief, remote from his concern,
A Sea-guirt Isle, the Navel of the Main,
And fair A Nymph the Daughter of Atlas according to Homer, whom others make
the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis. She being in love with Ulysses detained him
seven years in the Island Ogygia: though Ovid mentions but six An grave sex
annis pulchram fovisse Calypso?
Aequoreaeque fuit concubuisse Deae?
Suffered Ulysses much six years to enjoy Calypso? with a Nymph to sport and toy?
Calypsos blandishments detain.
Him Atlas Daughter, who Heavens starry rounds
Supports, and the Oceans deepest channels sounds,
With charming Beauty, Flattery and Wit,
Labors that he his Country might forget;
Who rather would, though there he then should dye,
Behold his native Smoke ascend the Sky.
Have thou for him, O Jove, no more regret,
Who never thy Altars slighted at the (...)
(...)
(...), etc.

Fleet,
That thou offended laist him thus aside?
Why me thus taxest thou Heavens King replied?
How should I him forget who so excells
Mortals in Prudence and all Virtues else; Their Vessels at great distance from
the fight,
Did on the briny Oceans Margents lie,
The foremost bedded in the sand sat dry.
Walls ranging with their Sterns, their streitned Prores,
Lay pinched up upon the narrow shores;
Like Ladders steps in ranks the Vessels lay,
The large-Jawes fringing of the trending bay.
Iliads 14. The word Walls makes it appear evidently that the Fleet was their
Camp out of this, Iliad 7.

Then Towers and Walls strong Bullwarks they erect,
Which might their Navy and themselves protect:
Next hung on Gates with Bars well fortified,
Through which the Princes might in Chariots ride,
Which they enclosed with Trenches steep and large,
And Pallisadoes to break off the Charge.


Who often this Court with Hecatombs engaged?
But Neptune still for Whose eye Ulysses put out with a Firebrand. Which story
is related at large, Odys. 9.
Polypheme enraged,
The Cyclops Prince, whom he on Thosa got,
The Nymph compressing in a shady Grot.
Though he not killed him, yet midst swallowing deeps,
Coupt in an Isle, far from his Country keeps.
Well; let us now consult how best we may
Work his return, and Neptunes wrath allay:
Who never sure a War dares undertake
Single against us all. Then Pallas spoke;
O thou great King, and Father of the Gods,
If that Ulysses shall his own abodes
Again behold, let Hermes straight repair
To bright Calypso, and your will declare:
That she must him discharge without delay,
Whilst I with speed descend to Ithaca.
There I, his Son, better to act his part,
Shall prudence give and a courageous Heart;
So he his House shall of those Suitors rid,
And their disorders in full Court forbid;
Whose ryots make such havoc there and spoil.
Next, him I Will send to Sparta, then to Pyle,
To seek his Sire: So he in foraign parts
Shall purchase Honor by acquired deserts.
This said, she fits her golden Talaries,
Which her ore Hills and Dales and swelling Seas
With fanning Winds through aerie Regions bear;
Then up she takes her strong and ponderous Spear,
With which, descended from so great a Sire,
Often Regiments of Heroes feel her ire.
Next stooping from Olympus spiry heights,
Transformid to Mentes Taphos was a City on the Island Cephallenia near
adjoining to Ithaca, the Country of Ulysses: so called from Taphus the Son of
Pierelas. --
Taphians Prince alights
Before Ulysses Gate, then makes a stand,
A Brazen-pointed Javelin in her hand;
Where the proud Suitors It is not agreed on by the ancient Grammarians what
this Game was which Penelopes Suitors are seign'd by Homer to recreate
themselves with. Some expound the (...) here by (...) Dice: but Herodotus does
clearly distinguish between these two, where he says that the Lydians were the
inventors of Dice, and the rest of the Sports except the (...). Appion, an
eminent Grammarian in his time, called by Tiberius the Emperor Cymbalum mundi,
says that, according as he received it from Cneso a native of Ithaca, where
it is probable the Sport might remain in use, 'twas this, The number of the
Suitors being 108. they equally divided their Balls, that is 54. on each side,
directly opposite to each other. Betwixt the two ranks remained a vacant place
in the middle of which they placed a mark which they called Penelope, the scope
which they all were to aim at. They took their turns by lot, and he that hit
the Penelope and removing that farther lay in its place, and afterward should
with another hit the Penelope again without touching any of the other Gamesters
men, was acknowledged Victor, and took it as a good Omen of obtaining his
Mistress.
gaming she beheld,
Seated on Hides of Bullocks they had killed.
Heralds with meaner Officers attend,
Some in large Vessels Wine and Water blend,
Others the boards with pory Sponges dried
And Tables covered, serv'd-up Cates divide.
Her first Telemachus, amongst the debosh'd
Corrivals sitting, saw as she approch'd,
Then sadly fancying to himself: Should there
His valiant Father suddenly appear
Routing them all, how he would spoil their sport,
And soon regain his Honor Wealth and Court:
Troubled a Stranger there so long should stand,
He rose, and gently took her by the hand,
And it disburthening of her Javelin spoke;
Since you are freely Welcome, please to take
With us, of what supplies our Boards, a share,
And when your Spirits, Sir, recruited are,
How I may serve you intimate: This said,
Up to the Hall the Goddess he conveyed:
There against a Column sets her Lance, where stood
Ulysses Javelins planted like a wood:
Then in a Chair, with a rich Cushion graced
And a carved Footstool, he Minerva placed;
Then sets himself against her, from the rest,
That, nor their rude deportments should his Guest
Disturb, nor their impertinencies tire,
And better so of's Father to inquire:
Water to wash their hands a Damsel-sewer
Poures forth in Silver from a Golden Ewre,
Then spreads the Board, and on pure Manchet sets;
The Cook the Table loads with various Cates,
With richest Wines Attendants crown the Feast,
When to their places the proud Suitors pressed.
'Soon as they washed, and Bread up Virgins served,
All charged at once and cut, and each where carved;
Bowls filled and emptied wander here and there:
When thirst and hunger satisfied were,
Of Songs and Dances they begin to think,
Sports highten Banquets more than Meat and Drink.
The Herald, Phemius, brings a Harp well strung,
Who, though unwilling, played and sweetly Sung:
When thus Telemachus in Pallas ear;
With this our rudeness, Sir, be pleased to bear,
Songs are their business with a well set Air,
And thus to feast without a Bill of fare;
Whilst on some Shore his Bones lie bleach'd with Rain,
Or tumbled are with Billows through the Main,
Whom should they see, rather they would Wings desire
Than large Possessions, Gold, or rich Attire;
But of my Father now remains no hope:
If any born under Heaven's glorious cope
Should me inform that here he would arrive,
Since the time's past, I should not him believe.
But tell me, Sir, your Country, stock and name,
And how, and why into these parts you came:
Whether a stranger, or were heretofore
Known to my Sire, since many on that score
Visit our Court: He correspondents had
Through all these Isles. Then thus Minerva said,
I Mentes am Anchialus Son, and reign
Over Taphians, Traders through the boisterous Main:
Hither I came to Anchor, as we pass
At Temesa was a City of the Brutii in the foot of Italy, now called, as
Pontanus conjectures in his History of Naples, Longobuco. That this is the City
meant by Homer, not that of Cyprus of the same name, appears, because the
Neapolitan Temesa was famous for its veins of Brass, for which Mentes says he
traded thither, at appears by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, l. 15. Hippotadaeque
domos Regis, Temesesque metallae.
Hippotades Palace, and Temesian Steel.
And Statius in his Sylvae,

-- se totis Temese dedit hausta metaellis,
Temese whose Iron mines are drained.
And Strabo witnesses that the rooms for preparing of Brass remained there in
his time, though empty. To which may be added the vicinity of this place to
Cephallenia, and the great distance of the other.


Temese to barter Iron for Brass.
Our Vessel in the Rheithran Harbor rides
Safe under Neiums Grove from Wind and Tides.
I often and thy hospitable Sire
Treated each other, this thou may enquire
Of old Laertes; who, as they report,
Absents both from the City and the Court:
Where his old Maid, when faint with Toil and Sweat
Pruning his spreading Vines, provides him Meat.
I hear the Gods thy wandering Sire impead
In his return: For sure he is not dead.
Him fierce Men in the navel of the Main,
A Sea-guirt Isle, against his will detain.
Though I no Prophet am, nor Augurie boast,
Know he ere long shall reach his native Coast:
Not him from home shall Brazen Fetters keep,
Nor raging Billows of the boisterous Deep.
Are you his Son? Him you resemble much,
Such were his Eyes, his manly Visage such.
Me for his Friend Ulysses pleased to own,
Before the Trojan expedition:
But since the Grecian Princes lanch'd their Fleet,
We nere enjoyed the happiness to meet.
Then he replied; my Mother tells me so,
Nor Children more of their own Parents know.
Would I the Son were of a happy Sire,
Who aged might in his own Court expire:
But mine the unfortunat'st ere trod the Earth.
Then Pallas; Such a Mother brought thee forth,
At such a time, that no unworthy Fate
Shall thee attend: Sir, please to intimate
What means this concourse, why such store of Guests?
Is this some treatment, or else Nuptial Feasts?
This seems no Club, where each one paies his share,
And yet extremely insolent they are:
A sober person ill would brook to view
The ruffian pranks of this disordered Crew.
Then thus the Prince; Whilst here my Father reigned,
Good orders he and plenteous Boards maintained,
Whom now cross powers, who always mischief plot,
Of mortals make the most unfortunate.
Nor for his Death should I so much complain,
Had at the Trojan Leaguer he been slain,
Or scaping Wars and Billows died at home:
Our Princes then erected had his Tomb,
Investing me with his Estate and Power;
But greedy The Harpyes were the Daughters of Pontus and Terra, from whence
they were feigned to have their dominion partly on the Seas, partly on Land.
They were Fouls with the faces of Women. Their form is to be seen in Sculpture,
in the Church of St. Martin at Venice, frequented as a Masterpiece to draw
these Monsters by, both by Carvers and Painters. That they had Wings, we learn
from Aeschylus, who mentioning the Furies asleep by Orestes, concludes they
were not Harpyes, because they were (...), without Wings. There is a Coin yet
extant of L Valerius, where there is a Harpye represented.
Harpyes now his Corpse devour,
Leaving to me, his most unhappy Heir,
In stead of Riches, sorrow and despair.
Nor wail I his disasters thus alone,
The Gods have given me sufferings of my own:
Those Princes who these scattered Isles command,
Hellanicus one of the ancientest of the Greek Historians took Dulichium here
mentioned to have been Cephallenia. But Strabo has manifested that to be a
groundless error: first, because Dulichium was under the command of Meges, the
Cephallenians under the command of Ulysses. Secondly, because if Dulichium had
been the same with Cephallenia, Homer would not have said that there went fifty
Suitors from Dulichium, and four and twenty from Same, which was a City of
Cephallenia. Strabo reckons Dulichium, and that rightly, one of the Echinades,
near the mouth of the river Achelous, in his time called Dolicha.
Dulichium, Samos, and Zacynthus Strand,
And Ithaca, my Mother to espouse,
Daily addressing, thus molest my House:
Whose suit she not rejects nor grants, and now
Would gladly shake them off, but knows not how.
Whose ryots wast my Stock; on this pretext,
Me they perhaps will tear in pieces next.
Much pitying him, then thus Minerva said;
Thou want alas thy valiant Father's aid,
He soon their ranting humors would abate:
Could I but see him standing at the Gate
As in our Court when first I him beheld,
Armed with two Spears, a Cask and glittering Shield,
New come from Ilus was great Grandchild to Medea, a Lady, famous for her
exquisite skill in all manner of Poisons.
Ilus (for the boisterous Main
He plowed to There are four Cities of this name. Some of the Ancients conceive
Homer to mean that of the Thesprotians, others that of the Corinthians, Strabo
rather enclines to Ephyra of Elea, because Homer makes Agamede the Daughter of
Augias King of the Epeans to have the knowledge of all sorts of Poisons.
Ephyre) Poison to obtain
To 'noynt his Barbs, which wary he denied,
Yet then my loving Father thine supplied.
Should he now enter in that posture here,
Bitter would prove their Nuptials, sad their Cheer.
But it is at the appointment of the Gods,
If ever he review his own aboads,
Or be revenged; yet now consider well
How best thou may this haughty Crew expel:
A Court to morrow early summon, there
Require them all thy Palace to forbear,
And if thy mother one must needs Espouse,
Let her return to her rich Father's house,
There let them Wed, there let her wary Sire
After her Dowre, or what ere else, inquire.
Next, if I may advise, make ready straight
A nimble Vessel of the second Rate;
Then sail in quest of thy long absent Sire
To Sandy Pyle, of Nestor there inquire:
From thence to Spartan Menelaus have,
Who of the scattered Fleet arrived last;
Of him perhaps some tidings thou mai'st hear,
Make this thy business of the following year:
But hear'st thou of his death, return straight home,
Perform his Obits, and erect his Tomb.
Then let thy Mother Wed, and last employ,
Thy wits how thou these Suitors mai'st destroy,
By force or fraud: And since of age thou art,
Leave childish sports, and bravely act thy part.
Have thou not of Orestes heard, whose name
His gallant acts through all the World proclaim?
He in Aegystus breast, that Regicide
Who Agamemnon slew, his Weapon died;
Thou art as likely so to purchase Fame:
But I expected at my Vessel am,
And must aboard with speed: What I advise
Be sure to do; when thus, the Prince replies;
You counsel like a friend, a Father such
Would give a Son, which me concerns so much,
That I shall it pursue: Here only stay,
Though posting time and business call away;
Bathe and repose, till I a Gift prepare,
Which thou with joy may to thy Vessel bear,
And keep as precious Treasure for my sake,
Such as loved Guests from those that treat them take.
Then Pallas; Sir, I should be loath to offend;
What favor you soere for me intend,
Reserve till my return, that then I may,
Accept your Present, and the like repay.
This said, she vanished like a Bird, from thence,
Giving him courage and a tender sense
Of his dear Sire. A while he wondering stood,
But when resolved this Stranger was some God,
He to the Suitors went, who silent at
Old Phemius Music, and attentive sat;
He sung the Greeks hard pass, from Ilium hurled,
By Pallas heavy wrath about the World.
Penelope hears him from Her upper Rooms,
And down Stairs with two Maids, attending, comes,
Entering the Hall a Veil her Beauty hides,
And weeping, thus the sweet Musician chides;
Have thou no other Lays which deeds relate,
Of men and Gods which Poets celebrate,
Such choose whilst they Carowse, these but foment
Old grief, and work afresh on discontent;
Forbear this woeful Theme, since I not yet,
Can one so honored through all Greece forget.
Then spoke the Prince; Why Mother him do you blame
Pleasing himself, or tax the Poets Theme?
When greatest Jove inspires their sacred Verse,
Well he the Greeks misfortunes may rehearse.
What most concerns us, most our ears invite;
What Is new and rare still heighten our delight.
My Father not alone his Voyage lost,
But many more nere reached their native Coast.
Look to your house, and your affairs at home,
See that your Maids Spin, Card, and ply their Loom:
Leave such Disputs to men who understand,
And me to Umpire who should here command.
This said, astonished at her prudent Son,
She thence returns by two attended on;
And in her Chamber for her Lord did weep,
Till Pallas closed her Eyes with gentle sleep.
When from the Board the proud Corrivals rose,
And drowsy hasten to desired repose.
Then spoke the Prince; You that so haunt my house,
And vex my Mother, hoping to Espouse,
Cease your rude clamor, this disorder curb,
Nor this high pleasure with such noise disturb:
But hearken to his heavenly Voice and Lyre.
Next I to morrow early you require,
To meet in Counsel, where I shall such Guests
Forbid my Court, elsewhere to make their Feasts:
Which if thus warned you slight, and not forbear,
To ruin me, by all the Gods I swear,
If Jove so please, you unlamented shall,
Just Vengeance feeling, perish in this Hall.
This said, all bit their Lips, his Speech admired,
That he redress so boldly had required.
Antinous then; What God, my little Prince,
Inspired thee with such pretty Eloquence?
Jove not decreed, that thou should rule this Land
Because thy Father once did us command.
Then thus the Prince; I should thy wrath contemn
Would Jove confer on me the Diadem:
To reign is good, Courts are with plenty stored,
Princes are served, are honored, and adored:
But there be many great ones here who may,
Since that my Father's dead, this Kingdom sway,
Yet I a King, shall in this Palace reign,
And, with Paternal wealth, due State maintain.
Then spoke Eurymachus, Polybius Son,
Heaven's pleasure must, Telemachus, be done.
But who soere shall fill our empty Throne,
Rule thou thy Mansions and enjoy thy own:
None who this I sle inhabits thee shall wrong;
But say, what Stranger talked with thee so long?
Ought know's he of your Sire, or hither comes
To pay old Debts, and clear contracted Sums?
He staid no time, did company decline;
He has a noble look, and princely Mien.
Then thus the Prince: No news of him I hear,
I to no Wisard now will give an ear,
For whom my Mother to this Country sends:
This Stranger's one of my Sires ancient Friends,
Mentes, Anchialus Son, who now commands
The Taphians, Traders into Foreign Lands.
Thus said the Prince, though he the Goddess knew:
Then they to Dancing and their songs withdrew;
When routed day sought refuge in the West,
They to their several seats repaired to rest.
When to his Lodgings built with wondrous art,
Which midst Ulysses Palace stood apart,
Thought-full Telemacus to rest ascends,
Whom Euryclea with a Light attends:
( Laertes her had purchased of old,
At no small rate, for twenty Bullocks sold,
Her loved he as his Spouse, but nere enjoyed,
His jealous Wives displeasure to avoid.
She up the Prince with much affection bred)
Opening the door, down sits he on his Bed,
And off with speed his plyant Garments gets,
Which up she hanging puts in comely pleats
Close by his Bed: Her business thus dispatched,
The door, plucked by a Silver Ring, she latch'd;
Whilst plyant Blankets over himself he laid,
Minding his Voyage, and what Pallas said.
scene from book 2 Hustrissimae Domince Do: Elizabethae Ducide Ormond Tabulam
hand LMDDDIO Lib: 2.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Telemachus a Counsel summons; all
The Island Princes meet: a frequent Hall:
Corrivals charge: sharp Answers and Replies.
Eagles disturb the Court: the concourse rise.
The Prince (a Vessel with Provision stored)
And Pallas, like old Mentor, go aboard.
NO sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers days Portcullice drawn,
But from his Bed Laertes Grandchild springs,
Puts on his Vest, and 'thwart his Shoulders flings
His well hatched Falchion, on his Sandals ties,
And forth with a majestic presence hyes.
His Heralds then commanding straight to call,
The Island Princes to the Counsel-Hall.
Soon as in Court convened the Heroes were,
In comes the Prince, armed with a glittering Spear,
It is observable that Telemachus, Prince of Ithaca, has no Guard or attendance
to accompany him to the Council: neither do I find in the Poems of Homer, that
ever Prince used any but in time of War: though Eustathius thinks, his
attendants had forsaken him, for fear of the Suitors.
Two Dogs attend, whose face Minerva decked
With Heavenly rays, and a Divine aspect:
All who beheld, admire his winning grace,
And, whilst he mounts his Father's Throne, give place.
Then first arose It is not altogether unusual with Homer, to make the
appellative name of a Country, the proper name of a Man: as he does here
Aegyptius, which signifies a Native of Egypt, to be the proper name of a
Prince of Ithaca: for so, in his Iliads, he feigns several proper names, as
Meon, Dardanus, Imbrius, Epens, and the like; all which are properly relative
to the native Country of any persons so called; which in succeeding ages, grew
more common: Achaeus the name of a famous Poet, Scytha of a Philosopher, and
Carystius an Historian.
Aegyptius, a grave Sage,
Bowed with the burden of unweildy Age:
Four Sons he had; one, to the Ilian Plain,
Followed Ulysses fortune, through the Main:
Him Polyphemus in his Dungeon killed
The last, whose Flesh his ravenous Stomach filled.
Three more survived; one to the Queen made love,
The other did their Father's ground improve.
But he, as if he had no other Son,
Still mourns his loss, and weeping, thus begun;
Me first to hear, you Princes condescend;
We never here in Counsel thus convened,
Since good Ulysses sailed for Ilium.
For what then are we summoned, or by whom?
Can any us newly arrived inform
Of some approaching Foes, impending storm,
Or ought else that concerns the public good?
His presence speaks him one of Noble Blood,
May Jove succeed his fair Designs. This said,
No longer sits the Prince; but highly glad
At what he heard, amidst This is spoken, according to the custom of those
ancient times. And therefore Agamemnon made an Apology for himself, when he
went not into the middle of the assembly, but spoke to them from his own feat.
the Concourse stands;
And when Pisenor had into his hands
A Scepter put, to Aegyptius, the Prince
Himself addressing, thus declares his sense;
The Man's not far, and you shall quickly see,
Who called this Court, forced by hard Destiny:
Not lately he arrived, nor can inform
Of any Foes approach, or gathering Storm,
Nor ought concerns the public good relate,
My business all my own, my torn estate
By two sad chances: First my Sire I lost,
Who like a loving Father ruled this Coast;
Then what is worse, the House that He enjoyed,
Is topsie-turvy turned, his stock destroyed:
Our Grandees Sons do daily there resort,
And against her will my dearest Mother court;
Waving to visit her rich Father's House,
Who might the Contract draw, and her Espouse
To one he likes, with a sufficient Dowre;
Daily repairing thither, they devour
Fat Beevs, Sheep, Goats, and highly Sup and Dine,
Gratis Carrowsing deep on richest Wine.
Havoc they make, whilst I a Champion want,
Such as my Sire, these Ranters to supplant:
Since I Am too weak to charge such wasting swarms,
Nurtured in Peace, unseen in feats of Arms;
But were my strength proportioned to my mind,
Who act such prancks should soon my vengeance find;
I Would prop my sinking House. You Patriots, fear
Your Neighbors ill reports, the Gods revere,
Lest they should punish you, for your neglect,
My case condole, and my Estate protect;
But I by Jove implore and Themis, who
All Counsels Eustathius on this place notes that the Statue of Themis,
according to some Grammarians, was brought into all public assemblies, at
their beginning, and carried forth at their dissolution, to which they will
have Homer here to allude.
summons, and dissolves, that You
Refrain my House, suffer me there alone,
My self and my misfortunes to bemoan.
If ere my Father by Hostility,
Wronged any here, retaliate that on me:
Better it were that you such havoc made,
Devoured my 'state, then might I be repaid:
For in the City I Would upon you call,
Until you cleared accounts, and gave me all:
But now my sorrows are on sorrows heaped:
This said, his Scepter down he threw, and wept.
All pitying silent sat, nor Answer made,
Till thus Antinous rising boldly said;
You have not well, young Prince, your business scanned
Thus to asperse us, and our Honor brand:
Thy Mother rather blame, we faultless are;
Three years she fed our hopes and held us fair,
Promised her self to all; her Women sent,
Us to assure of what she never meant:
When her inventions were at lowest Ebb,
Then she, forsooth, pretends a curious Web,
And thus to all said; Though my Lord be dead,
Suspend your suit, and urge me not to Wed,
Till this be wrought, which when his sad Fates call
Must serve Laertes for his It was the custom of the ancients, to have their
Funeral garments made while they were yet alive; if either Nature, or any
eminent danger, put them in mind of their death. The Mother of Euryalus,
lamenting her Son, lost in the War, mentions the Funeral Robe she was before
providing for him. -- pressive oculos, aut vulnera lavi,
Vest tegens, tibi quam noctes festina diesque
Vrgebam, and tela curas solabar aniles.
Virgil l. 9. -- nor close thy eyes at rest,
Or bathe thy Wounds, and cover with the Vest
Which night and day I did for thee prepare,
At my Web, curing an old Woman's care.

Funeral Pall;
So shall no Grecian Lady me asperse,
That I with naught adorned his Funeral Hearse.
Thus did the Queen our easy minds persuade,
By night unraveling, what by day she made,
And held three Summers thus, and Winters on;
But when the fourth years gliding spears begun,
One of her Women her design revealed,
And busy, her unweaving we beheld.
Discovered thus, her work she finished straight;
So we reply, and the whole truth relate;
Advise thy Mother at her Fathers House
With his consent to choose a noble Spouse,
For if this tedious game she longer plays,
Hopes height'ning now, now starving with delays;
And thus insists, whom Pallas gave such parts
Making a Mistress, in her own great Arts,
That Tyro was the Daughter of Salmoneus King of Elis, a beautiful Lady,
impregnated by Neptune, in the form of Enipeus. Of whom Ovid, in the Epistle of
Hero to Leander, Si neque Amymone, neque laudatissima forma
Criminis est Tyro fabula vana tui.
Nor fair Amymone nor Tyro prove,
Vain fables of thy vicious love.

Tyro Mycene the Daughter of I nachus and Melia.
Micen, nor The Mother of Hercules, whom she had by Jupiter, in the absence of
her Husband.
Alcmena ere
Could boast like skill, though they so famous were.
Her ill-lay'd Project shall no better take,
But that so long of thine we will havoc make,
Till Heaven shall change her mind: True! she may be
Renowned for this, whilst here we ruin thee,
Feasting on thine, and off all business leave,
Till one of us she as her Spouse receive.
When thus Telemachus; I were accursed
Should I expel, who me both bore and nursed,
My Father too may live, nor can I send
Her home with all she It was an ancient law among the Grecians, that the Wife,
upon the Death of her Husband, or Divorce, should receive the Portion she
brought with her: for which there was security given to her friends, upon her
Marriage. Demosthenes in his Oration against Baeotus, (...), (...), (...),
Afterward her Husband being dead, leaving his family, and receiving back her
Portion, etc. Wherefore Telemachus makes this his Apology, why he sent not away
his Mother to her Fathers house, because the Suitors had not left him
wherewithal to return her Portion.
brought, nor ought pretend
In my excuse to my offended Sire,
Nor to the Gods, when imprecations dire,
My Mother raging, to sad Furies makes,
Cursing her Son, as she his House forsakes;
I Will nere propose that motion to her, shall
Gain me her hatred, and dislike from all:
This if you relish not, my House refrain,
Feast elsewhere, or each other entertain;
Yet if it better with your humor square,
To ruin me and mine, my Board not spare.
But I Will implore the immortal Gods, if ere
Great Jove retaliate, unrevenged that there
You all may perish. Thus he said, when Jove,
Humane affairs observing from above,
Sent from a Hill two Eagles, swift they fly,
And cut, with Wings expanded, the easy Sky;
But when they came into the Counsel Hall,
They shake their fluttering Pinions, viewing all,
And sad, from their own necks and bosoms drew
Blood, with their Talons, then to the right hand flew,
And to the Houses and the City bend.
All saw, admiring what this might portend:
When Alitherses, expert grown by Age,
Who well could speak, and best by Birds presage,
Most sober in advice, in Counsel grave,
Thus on the Prodigy his judgment gave;
You Princes, this concerns the Suitors most,
Whom sudden Danger threats; his Native Coast,
And friends ere long, Ulysses shall enjoy:
He comes, will them, and many more destroy.
You Princes, who this famous Isle possess,
Consult before how we may acquiesce;
Advise them straight, all Courtship to forbear,
His House refrain, that he their lives may spare.
I am no idle Prophet, wanting skill,
What ere I have foretold, has happened still:
When first to Troy, the Grecians steered their Fleet.
And Sails with them Renowned Ulysses set,
I said, That suffering much, his Friends all lost,
He in the twentieth year his native Coast
Unknown should reach; which will prove true. Then said
Eurymachus; Thy Children so persuade,
Though prediction by Augury was religiously maintained, by both Greek and
Roman States, yet the more discreet of them seldom took further notice of it,
then stood with their own advantage: of which Homer himself has given ample
testimony in an elegant Speech of Hector's, Iliad 12. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Must I mark Birds when they their wings expand,
Leave sure designs upon the Countermand?
Let them, for me, to right or left hand fly.
Where the Sun rises, or forsakes the Sky;
Joves pleasure we should do without delay,
Whom mortals, and immortal Gods, obey:
It Is a good sign, We for our Country fight.
From which last Verse, Q. Fabius Maximus, a Roman Augur, took that Saying of
his; whatsoever, is done to the benefit of the Commonwealth, is done optimis
auspiciis: whatsoever is acted to its rain, fit contra auspicia.


Dotard, at home, lest they should suffer, I
On this account can better prophecy:
Many Birds fly beneath the glorious Sun,
But all not fit to make a Judgment on.
Far off Ulysses died, would thou had there
Perished with him, and never talked so here,
And with vain Prophesies his youth incense,
Expecting at thy House a recompense:
But truth I Will thee foretell, if thou engage
The Prince with poys'ning words, provoking rage,
It shall prove bad for him, and worse for thee,
And thy design shall vain and fruitless be.
Dotard, on thee we will punishment inflict,
Nor can we in our Vengeance be too strict;
But this advice I to the Prince commend,
Let him his Mother to Icarius send;
There let them wed, there let her wary Sire,
After her Dowre, or what ere else, inquire:
But we, till then, shall to his House repair,
And court the Queen, since none alive we fear;
No not Telemachus, although so high
He rants, nor yet thy fustian Prophecy,
Which thou, fond buzzard, scandalizing Fate,
Pratlest to purchase our united Hate:
Still we shall haunt his House, there Sup and Dine,
Till she with one of us in Wedlock join.
Her Beauty takes us so, and curious Arts,
None else but she can captivate our Hearts.
Then said the Prince; Eurymachus I crave,
That you, and this Assembly, now would wave
Former dispute, and I the like shall do,
Since all the Gods, and Greece, our difference know:
And me a Vessel of the second Rate,
Well manned, provide, that I imbarking strait,
May Sail for Pyle, the seat of old Nester, as appears by the following Verses.
But there were three Cities of that name in Peloponnesus, each of them, in
after ages, challenging to themselves the honor of having been the seat of
Nestors Empire: The one in Arcadia, the other in Messene, and the last in
Triphylia. Strabo attributes it to the last, and proves it at large, out of
Homer himself, in the eighth Book of his Geography.
Pyle, and Sparta, to inquire,
As duty bids, of my long absent Sire:
If any there can tell, or Fame, that Post,
Who brings Intelligence from Coast to Coast;
Yet if I nothing hear of his return,
A year his absence patiently I Will mourn.
But of his Death informed, and that no more
He shall alive behold his native Shore,
Due Rites performed, I Will rear his Monument,
Then match my Mother with her own consent.
This said he sat, and up old Mentor rose,
Whom amongst his trustiest Friends Ulysses chose
His Steward, when for Troy he Anchors weighed,
And Supervisor of his Household made.
And thus began; You who our Princes are,
Hear with attention what I shall declare:
No more let Kings be pious, mild, nor just;
Nor act by Law, nor Reason, but their Lust,
Since none Ulysses minds, who ruled this Land,
Ruled, like a Father, with a gentle hand:
I these proud Suitors not at all envy,
Who, by depraved Counsels, act so high,
Vent'ring their Lives his Riches to consume,
And thus, as never he would return, presume:
But I Am concerned, that all sit silent here,
And none rebuke, nor force them to forbear,
Since they a few, and we so many are.
Then spoke Leocritus, Euenor's Heir,
Well such advice might be, old Mentor, spared,
To force us to forbear, that task were hard;
When we with Wine are heightened at a Feast,
Should then Ulysses, an unwelcome guest,
Arrive, and think to drive us from his House,
Small joy would find his long-expecting Spouse,
Ore-match'd, to see him slain at his return,
You counsel ill: Let straight this Court adjourn,
Then thou and Halitherses, if you list,
Who were his Father's friends, may him assist:
But here he long may sit, ere news arrive
Of his return, or that he is alive.
This said, the concourse rose, and each repairs
To his relations, and their own affairs,
The Suitors to the Court. The Prince mean while,
Down to the Sea-wash'd Margents of the Isle
Withdraws alone, soon as his hands he had
With salt Waves It was the constant practice of the Grecians, to purify and
cleanse themselves, by washing, before prayer, and Sacrifice. So Chryses in the
first of the Iliads. (...)
(...)
Up with washed hands they unbruis'd Barley take,
When Chryses thus his earnest prayer did make.
Which is not confirmed only by example of particular persons, but by a general
precept, recorded by Hesiod.

(...)
(...)
To Jove nor any who in heaven commands
Early libate before thou wash thy hands.

cleans'd, he thus to Pallas prayed;
Hear me, who honour'dst yesterday my roofs,
And with thy presence gav'st such ample proofs,
Virgin, of thy affection, with commands,
That I should seek my Sire in foreign Lands,
The Court, me in my expectations, fails,
And the proud Suitors interest prevails.
Straight Pallas, like old Mentor, as he prayed,
To him appeared, and comforting, thus said;
Thy Father's Principles I shall instill
(Thou shall not coldly act thy part, nor ill)
Into thy bosom, and his courage too;
Nor shall thou only speak like him, but do:
Thou in thy intended Voyage shall go on;
But if the art not Icarius Daughter's Son,
Of what thou undertak'st thou may despair;
Although few Children like their Fathers are,
Some better be, but many worse by far.
Thou not degenerat'st, but may compare
With thy great Father: So thou need'st not doubt,
Thy enterprise, what ere, to bring about.
Let the fond Suitors to Vain projects trust,
Since they are neither Politic nor Just,
Who little know, their Fate approaching, they
Are destined all to perish in one day;
But I will, as a Father and a Friend,
Provide a Vessel, and on thee attend.
Now first go home, the Suitors kindly treat,
Pure Flower, rich Wine, such good provision get,
Put in Borachios up, and Sacks well sowed,
Whilst I shall raise thee Volantiers abroad;
Amongst many Ships I Will choose one tight and stanch,
And all our Goods aboard to the Offine Launch.
Thus Pallas; Straight Telemachus obeyed,
And, with a heavy Heart, have homeward made;
Where stripping Goats, the Princes he beheld,
And Porckers dressing in the Portal killed,
Antinous, smiling, met him in the Hall,
And his Hand grasping, thus began to Droll;
My pretty Speaker, rangle now no more,
But merry Eat and Drink, as heretofore:
Because the Greeks will Rigg thy Ship mean while,
That thou may seek thy valiant Sire at Pyle.
Who thus replied; Should I with Ranters Feast
Against my will, who privacy love best?
Is It not enough, you my Estate destroy,
My Stock consume, as still I were a Boy,
But now of Age I Will take advice, and learn
With Courage how to manage my concern.
I shall attempt, either at Pyle or here,
To make you pay large Recknings for your Cheer:
Nor shall I loose my Voyage, though I want
A Ship, which you were pleased they would not grant,
Since as a Passenger, I Will leave this Land.
Thus said, he from Antinous plucks his Hand;
They went to Feasts prepared, and merry make,
Cavil and prate; when thus a proud Youth spoke;
This Boy will kill us all: Bravoes he will hire
At Pyle, or Sparta, or from Ephyre, dire
Poison Transport; and when we take our rowse,
Wine mixed with deadly Bane shall clear his House.
Another said; He may a Voyage make,
Bad as his Father erst did undertake,
And perish far off, on a Foreign Shore,
Which rather will incumber us the more,
How we his Goods shall share; but we this House,
Shall give his Mother, or whom she will espouse.
Thus drolling they their pride and folly vent,
Whilst he up to his Fathers Chamber went;
Where Gold and Brass congested stood in piles,
Along the wall, and Jarrs of several Oils,
And Vests laid up; a Pipe of richest Wine
Lay farther in, whose liquor was Divine,
Kept for Vlysse's glad Return from Sea,
By Euryclea under Lock and Key.
To whom the Prince; Draw next that richer piece,
Which for my hapless Sire provided is,
Twelve Runlets, Nurse, let them be staunch and sweet,
And twenty measures sack of purest Wheat.
Do this alone; which, when my Mother goes
At night up to her Chamber, I Will dispose;
I must to Pyle and Sparta, to inquire,
And listen after my long absent Sire.
Aloud, this said, she bitterly complained:
Why will thou venture to a Foreign Land,
Who art Ulysses dear and only Son?
So perished he, far off in Realms unknown,
And now for thee some mischief they will prepare,
Thou once destroyed, thy Fortunes they will share.
Ah! stay thou here, thy Enterprise decline,
Nor furrow Billows through the rageing Brine.
Then he replied; No danger Nurse suspect,
That power who me advised, will me protect.
But Swear, you my departure keep unknown
To my dear Mother, till twelve days are gone,
Unless that she of this my absence hears,
And so her Beauty wrong, with briny Tears.
Then swearing Secrecy to his design,
Pure Wheat she sacks, and runlets up rich Wine;
But down the Prince, amongst the Suitors went:
Whilst Pallas did another Plot invent,
And him resembling, gives about the word,
That at Sunsetting all should come aboard,
Desiring Noemon to lend his Bark,
He kindly grants, and when the Streets grew dark,
His Vessel launched, where she might ly afloat,
And Oars aboard, Yards, Sails, and Tackle brought,
With speed: thus prompted by the Goddess, they
Attended at the bottom of the Bay;
Then thought she of another quaint device,
Herself to Court conveying in a trice,
With gentle Sleep, the Suitors there trapanns,
And shakes their tottering Goblets from their Hands:
With drowsiness surpised, straight all arose,
And to the City went, to their repose;
Next, like Old Mentor, from Ulysses Hall,
Thus gives she Prince Telemachus a call;
All ready are to go, hoyse Sail and weigh,
Have, lest we lose our Voyage by delay.
This said, Minerva from the Threshold leaps,
He, following close, reprints the Goddess steps;
Soon as he came, where lay their Vessel moored,
And found them all prepared to go aboard;
Sirs, our Provision wants your helping hands
He said, which ready in the portal stands,
Neither my Mother nor her Damsels know
Of this, but only one: This said, all go
As he commanded, nor their business slipped,
Till they full Sacks and swollen Borachios Shipped.
Before the Prince, aboard Minerva goes,
And placed together on the Stern, unlose
Their Cables, straight all mount, their Bancks assigned,
And Pallas calls a fair and whispering Wind;
They raise their Masts, and hoyse their Sails a-trip,
Soft Gales give speedy passage to their Ship;
Bruised Billows thunder, as her course she stood,
Cutting rough Furrows through the boyst'rous Flood,
Whilst they loose Cordage fasten to her side,
And a Libation for the Gods provide,
Hon'ring Jove's Daughter most; then on they Steered
All Night, until the blushing Dawn appeared.
scene from book 3 Illustrissimo Domino: Do Thome Com: de Ossory Subpraefecto
Gen: Totius Regni Hibernice Tamuam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 3.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE THIRD BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Telemachus Lands, Pisistratus invites
Him, and Minerva, unto Neptunes rites.
Of lost Ulysses, Nestor nothing knows;
Day and the Feast concluding, all repose.
Nestor, Telemachus his Chariot lends,
And, with the Prince, his Son to Sparta sends.
WHEN the Sun rose, leaving the ample Floods,
To light both Mortals, and Immortal Gods,
Guilding the Opacous Earth, and Heaven's bright Sphere,
To Pyle they ( Neleus strong built Walls) drew near:
Whose people on the Ocean's Although it might seem probable, that the Temple
and Altar of Neptune, here mentioned, were but the fiction of the Poet, as well
as the Sacrifice, and the Attendants on it, yet Strabo assures us that there
remained in his time, the Temple of Neptune, in the district of old Nestor, by
the Seaside, between the Cities of Lepreus and Samicum, about an hundred Stades
distant from each, intended here by Homer. He makes Bulls a Sacrifice peculiar
to Neptune, as in the eleventh of his Iliads, (...),
(...).
(...)
Joves Altars there with sacred rights we filled,
Two Bulls for Neptune and Alpheus killed,
A Heifer next Minerva we present.
Signifying by their fury and lowing, the rage and noise of the Sea.


Margent had That they were black, which were here sacrificed, relates to the
color of the Sea, by him frequently called (...), etc. which Homer himself
intimates in this place, by the Epithete of Neptune (...) black hair'd. The
nine Bulls relate to the nine Cities, under the command of Nestor, mentioned by
Homer in the Boeotia, Who dwelt in Pyle, and those Arene stored,
And Thryos, where Alpheus you may ford;
Who did in Aepy's lofty Walls reside
In Cypariss and Amphygen abide;
Who Helos, Pteleos, Dorion, where the throng
Of Muses silenced Thracian Thamyris tongue.
And the number of the Attendants on the Sacrifice, to those that waited on
Nestor in the Trojan expedition, 500. to each feat here, as 500. to each Ship
there.


Black Beeves, a Hecatomb, to Neptune paid;
Up to nine Boards, fivehundred Guests at each
Were served nine Steers, all slaughtered at the Beach,
Whilst they with furl'd-up Sails for Harbor bore,
Then mooring fast their Vessel, leaped ashore;
But Pallas forth Telemachus conducts,
And on the Peer safe mounted, thus instructs;
Now simpring Modesty and Blushes spare,
Since thou have sailed to make inquiry, where
Thy Father lies, and how he died; let us go
And see, if ought of him old Nestor know;
Request the prudent King, to tell the truth,
Nor ought extenuate, to sooth thy Youth.
Then he replied; How shall I make address?
How him salute? That Language want to express
My self in, at the Accost, who bashful am,
And he a Prince, as great in Age as Fame.
Telemachus, the Goddess then replies,
Be confident, nor thy own parts despise,
Some God shall thee inspire, for I suppose,
Thou have in Jove's Celestial Court no Foes.
This said, off from the Beach Minerva leaps,
He, following close, reprints the Goddess steps,
And up they came, where all the Pylean State,
Old Nestor, and his valiant Offspring sat,
Whilst others dressed their Cates: straight Old and Young
About such Guests, so unexpected, throng,
Desiring with glad welcomes to sit down;
But first Pisistratus, old Nestor's Son,
Them to the Board lead up, in either hand,
Placing on Skins, upon a bed of Sand
Next Nestor and his Brother: Part then brought
Of Sacred inwards, and with rich Wine fraught
A Golden Bowl, which he to Pallas bore,
And thus presents; Sir, Neptune now implore,
Since thou have fortuned here, a welcome Guest,
To celebrate the World-Embracer's Feast;
And when with Prayer the have paid Libations due,
Give him the Cup that he may offer too:
Whom I suppose thou need'st not much persuade,
TO implore the Gods, all Mortals want their aid.
But he is thy junior much, resembling me
In Age, therefore I bring this first to thee:
Giving the Bowl Minerva as he spoke,
With his discretion, extremely took,
Rejoiced that his respects to her he paid
Before the Prince, and thus to Neptune Prayed;
Oh thou! great King, whose circling arms are hurled
Round the vast body of the mighty World,
Honor on Nestor, and his Sons bestow,
And next, these civil People favor show,
Whose Offerings on thy sacred Altars burn:
Last grant this Prince and me a safe return,
His business well effected, for whose sake
We hither furrowed up the briny Lake,
Thus Prayed she, and all Ceremonies done,
The Golden Bowl presents Ulysses Son:
Who in like manner paid Libations due,
Then Cates well roasted, off with speed they drew,
And Messing up, all plentifully fare.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
To raise Discouse, thus ancient Nestor said.
Our Stomachs, worthy Guest's, now well alay'd,
Let us with Table talk, the time awhile,
And customary Questions, beguile;
Who are you, Sirs, and from what Country come?
Trade you abroad, or else as It may seem strange, that Nestor should entertain
his strange Guests with that ignominious, as it is now esteemed, title of
Pirates. But it does appear by the ancient Historians, that both the Islanders,
and those of the Continent who bordered upon the Sea, chiefly maintained
themselves by the Inrodes, they made into strange Countries and Towns
unfortified, esteeming it the part of base and inferior Spirits to live upon
their own labor; and on the other side a token of Valor, and Eminency to live
upon Rapine and the spoils of others. This Thucydides delivers in the Preface
to his History, and confirm^ with this very place of Homer, though but
obscurely intimated, where he says, In the ancient Poets when Mariners were
interrogated, whether they were Pirates or no, they counted it no dishonor to
confess it, nor did they think they had upbraided them, who asked them the
question.
Pirates Rome,
Your Lives extending, through the boisterous Floods,
To seize as lawful Prize, all Foreign Goods?
When thus the Prince, emboldened by the Maid,
To ask about his long lost Father, said;
Oh thou! to whom all Greece prime honor pay,
Hither we come, from Neian Ithaca,
On private, not a public score; t'inquire,
If dead or living be my absent Sire,
Ulysses, who, with thy especial ay'd,
As Fame reports, proud Troy in Ashes laid.
Who ere there perished, by the insulting Foe,
The place, and manner, of their Death we know;
But Jove his Pate absconding none can tell,
Nor certainly inform us, where he fell.
If slaughtered by the Trojans, in Champaign,
Or lost'mongst Billows in the boyst'rous Main;
On this account I now, thy Supplyant am,
If thou did see, or since, by flying Fame,
Heard'st his sad Fate, that thou would tell the truth,
And naught extenuate, pitying my Youth;
But sure a hapless Son his Mother bore:
I by my valiant Father thee implore,
If ere his word he good by action made,
Against the Foe in field, or Ambuscade,
When worsted Greeks were in their greatest straight
That to remind, and all the truth relate.
Then Nestor sai'd; Thou make my heart to melt,
Recalling all those miseries we felt
Under Achilles, Plundring Towns by Sea,
Or that sad Leagure, where so long we lay;
Where our prime Chiefs we lost: There Ajax lies,
Patroclus and renowned Aeacides,
Where toils and sorrows fell on us so thick,
To cast them up would pose Arithmetic;
There fell Antilochus, my offspring, who
Well kept his ground, and could as well pursue.
Five years should thou inquiring, here remain,
What hardship there, we suffered in Champaign,
Thou might the sixth return unsatisfi'd,
Nine years all Plots and Stratagems we tried,
Which Jove scarce ended then: In that sad War,
None with thy prudent Father could compare,
On all occasions acting best his part
At close designing; if his Son thou art.
And now I view thee better, I admire,
Thou look so like, and speak so like, thy Sire.
Nor need thy blushes thee excuse as young,
Who have his Eloquence and silver Tongue;
We never in public, handling points of State,
Thwarted each other, nor in close debate;
But of one Judgment jumped still on the same,
Playing the best of a hard Grecian Game.
Ilium once sacked, our Navy Anchors weighed,
But Jove offended, long our Voyage made.
We were not Pyous all, Prudent, nor Just,
Hence some for Riot suffered, some for Lust:
And Pallas favored the Grecians during the whole Trojan War, nor does Homer
give any account whence she was so incensed against them. The later Poets say
that Ajax deflowered her Priestess Cassandra, a Virgin and Prophetess. Which
dishonor she revenged not only on Ajax himself, but the whole nation: and
these Virgil follows, Aen. 1. -- Pallasne exurere classem
Argivam, atque ipsos potuit submergere ponto
Vnius ab noxam and farias Ajacis Oilei?
Illa Jovis rapidum jaculata e nubibus ignem
Disjecitque rates, evertitque aequorae ventis:
Illum expirantem transfixo pectore flammas
Turbine corripuit, scopuloque infixit acuto.
-- could Pallas burn
And sink the Grecian Navy in the Sea
For one man's lust, Ajax impiety?
She cast Jove's winged lightning from a cloud,
Dispersed their Fleet, with wind the Ocean plowed.
Him breathing flames, which through his bosom broak,
Staked with a Whirlwind on a pointed Rock.



Pallas'twixt the Atrides strife begun,
Who called a Counsel late, at setting-Sun.
Heated with Wine, the Greeks divided straight,
And, from harsh Language, fell to high debate;
Then Menelaus orders all to weigh,
And minding home to Plow the Broad-back'd Sea.
But Agamemnon, not so pleased, denies,
Not one must stir before they Sacrifice,
That so Minerva's wrath might be appeased;
Gods once Incensed are not so easily pleased.
Thus they contesting made a bitter close,
And in divided Factions clamouring rose.
That Night our Sleep but little us revived,
Whilst greater sorrows Jove for us contrived.
Next morn weLaunch, our Goods and Treasure stowed
And with our long-Veil'd Captives leave the road,
The other half with Agamemnon stay,
And as their King and General obey;
Tenedos, plowing Billows, soon we made,
And on the Beach our Offerings duly paid
For a safe Passage, but this Jove denied,
And did our Fleet a second time divide.
Ulysses Squadron on our General's score
Sailed back, and Anchored where they rode before:
But I, perceiving Jove offended, fled
With my whole Fleet, and honored Diomed.
Us Menelaus found at An Island in the Aegaean Sea, not far distant from Troy.
Lesbos, there
Consulting if we should 'bove Another Island in the Aegaean Sea four hundred
Stades distant from Lesbos.
Chios Steer
To An Island distant 60. Stades from Chios.
Psyria, or on our Larboard hand,
For Stormy A Mountain in Ionia, abounding with Trees and wild Beasts, directly
over against Chios; so called from Mimas a Giant there buried.
Mimas, under Chios stand:
Then we great Jove besought, who gave a The Poet mentions not what sign it
was, which has given liberty to the conjectures of the Commentators. But I
conceive he meant no more then a favorable gale for their passage to Enboea.
sign,
Would we be safe, to plow A large Island near unto Greece now called Negropont.
Euboean Brine;
Thence through swollen Billows, with a favoring Gale,
In one short night we to A Port-town in Enboea, but not mentioned by Homer in
his Boeotia.
Geraestus sail;
Where we with Thighs of fatted Bullocks stained
Strabo mentions the Temple of Neptune at Geraestus, standing in his time.
Neptunian Altars, then forsake the Land;
The fourth day Diomed at Argos lands,
Thence turning straight for Pyle my Navy stands,
Nor the same Wind that Jove first sent us failed,
So I, dear Son, in safety hither sailed,
Nor know who escaped, or were of life deprived;
But what I learned since I at home arrived
I shall to thee relate: Pyrrhus, they say,
His Navy safe to Phthya did convey.
Safe Philoctetes harbored his tall Fleet,
None lost Idomineus, but to Creet
His flying Squadron he in safety Steered.
How Agamemnon Landed you have heard,
And how Aegysthus him supplanting slew,
Where he received Retalliation due,
Slain by Orestes; who his Faulchion died
In Blood of that accursed Regicide.
Be Valiant thou too, Son, thy Face has lines,
Which speak thee Famed to be for bold Designs.
Then thus the Prince; Thou who the Glory art
Of all the Greeks, he met his just desert,
And through the World, Greece shall his Fame divulge;
Ah! that the Gods would me so much indulge,
That I might take the like revenge on them
Who plot my ruin, and my Youth contemn.
But the unkind Powers allow my Sire nor me
No happiness, we still must sufferers be.
Then Nestor; Truth thou say, so all report,
That several Princes to thy House resort,
Courting thy Mother, melting thy Estate.
Is it thy will, or is it thy Peoples hate,
Stirred up by Eustathius on this place observes, that Princes have often been
deposed by their Subjects, incited thereto by some Oracle.
Oracles? who knows but he
Returning, may on them revenged be
Alone, or else for him a Party made?
Should Pallas thee, as erst thy Father, aid
Against the Trojans, when we suffered so.
I never saw any God such favor show
To Mortal in distress, as she to him;
Had thou from her like favor and esteem,
Soon Nuptial fancies they should lay aside.
When thus the prudent Youth to him replied;
Nestor, What thou have said will never be,
For I despair that happy day to fee,
Although revenging Gods with us should side.
Telemachus, Minerva then replied,
How escaped such words thy Teeth, their Jvory guard,
Not Jove from Heaven's high Turrets finds it hard,
In exegencies Mortals to relieve,
I rather, suffering many woes, would live,
And home returning my Estate enjoy,
Then that some Stranger there should me destroy;
So hapless Agamemnon lost his life,
By sly Aegysthus, and his cursed Wife.
Nor can the Gods those whom they most esteem,
Rescue from Death, nor from the Grave redeem,
Who once Arrested, to the Infernal shade
Are hurried hence. Telemachus then said;
Mentor, of this sad Argument no more:
I fear he nere shall see his Native Shore,
Since he is dead. Of Nestor now I Will learn
Some other News, waving my own Concern,
Who by his years has much experience gained,
And, like a God, has now three Ages reigned:
Great Prince, thou Glory of thy Nation, tell
How that Renowned Agamemnon fell,
Where then was Menelaus, by what Plot,
One in his power, subtle Aegysthus got,
So much the better Prince, whether he were
At Argos, or in foreign Lands elsewhere.
Then Nestor thus; I shall, most noble Youth,
Resolve thee straight, thou hint'st upon the truth;
Had Menelaus there arriving found
Aegysthus living, he not under ground
Had laid his Body, but upon the shore,
Exposed for Dogs, and Vultures to devour
Far from the City, nor fond Grecian Dames
Had pitying Tears shed at his Funeral flames;
At Argos he, whilst we beleagur'd Troy,
Indulged his pleasure, Courting to enjoy
His Spouse, fair Clytemnestra: the chaste Queen
Long time stood out, loathing so fowl a sin:
Besides, the King departing, left in trust
Her to a learned The name of this Bard, or Musician, the Poet no where
delivers. Some Writers call him Chariades, others Demodocus, or Glaucus.
Demetrius Phalereus; relates the Story thus; Menelaus and Ulysses were sent to
consult the Oracle at Delphos. about the Trojan Expedition, at what time were
celebrated the Pythian Games, where Demodocus, one of the Scholars of
Automedes, was Victor; whom they persuaded to return with them, and whom
Agamemnon left overseer of his Queen.
Bard, discreet and just,
Whose Fate him to his ruin did beguile:
Subtle Egysthus on a desert Isle,
Leaves him to Vultures, and wild Beasts a prey:
Then she consenting, keeps their Wedding day
In her own Court, and the Altars of the Gods
With Hecatombs of fatted Bullocks loads,
Their Fanes with Arras graced, their Priests with Copes,
Proud of a Prize so much beyond his hopes.
Whilst we our constant course from Ilium bend,
And with me Menelaus, my dear friend,
Until we near Athenian A Promontory belonging to the City of Athens, where
was the Temple of Jupiter Suniensis.
Sunium drew,
Where All sudden deaths of Men, the Poet ascribes to Apollo, as of Women to
Diana.
Phoebus, Menelaus Pylate slew,
As at the Helm he stood, Phrontis, who best
Of Mortals, steered a Ship with weather strest.
Here, though in have, his Voyage he deferred,
Till he his friend with Funeral rites Interred;
This done, their Squadron through the Ocean glides,
Until they reach steep A Promontory belonging to the Lacedaemonians, where
Navigation was counted so dangerous, by reason of the contrariety of winds,
that the Asian and Italian Merchants, chose rather to transmit their Goods over
Land, at the Corinthian Isthmus, then trust them to that Channel.
Malias Rockie sides;
There Jove a dangerous Passage them designed,
And Waves like Mountains, raised with blustering wind,
Which them dispersed; a part for Creta stood,
Where the A People on the Island Crete, over against Laconia.
Cydonians plant, near Jardan's Flood:
On Cretan Coasts, a Rock with Sea-worn Clifts,
His towry scalp above swollen billows lifts,
Where Southern gusts roll on rough A City of Crete, where Epimenides was born.
Phaestus tides
On the left hand, which a small rock divides.
Hither they steer, and hardly death escape,
Whilst all their Fleet, but five, bulg'd on the Cape;
Which sailed for Aegypt's fertile Margents straight,
Where with rich Goods their crazy Ships they freight.
Mean while Aegystus his dire Plot pursues,
Murders the King, the Queen corrupts, subdues
His Realms, and seven years them in slavery held,
The eighth Orestes the Usurper killed;
Whose Obits, and his Mother's Funeral rites,
Performed, the Greeks he to a Feast invites:
And Menelaus landing the same day,
A world of Riches brought into the Bay.
Then stay not long, nor travel far, lest those
Thou left'st behind, thy Goods, to spoil expose,
And for this fruitless Voyage thee despise.
But go to Menelaus I advise,
For he came lately home; whence he again
Never hoped return, driven by a Hurricane,
Into a Sea so broad, that Birds might ask,
A year to cross over, and no easy task.
But Sail thou hence, or if thou go by Land,
My Steeds and Chariot are at thy command,
And thee my Sons to Sparta shall conduct,
Atrides there thee farther may instruct.
This said, Sunsetting Night her Flagg unfurled,
Spreading black Ensigns over the waterie World.
Then Pallas; Thou speak, Nestor, like a Friend,
Now part the It was an usual Rite among the Gracians, to Consecrate the
Tongues of their Sacrifice at the end of their entertainment, mentioned by
Athenaeus, and Didymus, by Homer meant only as a Symbol of Silence.
Tongues, and Wine with Water blend,
To offer Neptune and the Immortal Gods,
That all may then repose in their abodes,
Since late it grows and dark; nor is it fit,
That long we should at Feasts Celestial sit.
This said, the Concourse follow her commands.
Water the Heralds pour upon their hands;
Young men with sparkling wine their Goblets crowned,
They drink about, and still the Bowl goes round.
Tongues broiled on Sacred Flames, all rising up
Libations pay, and take their parting Cup:
Then Pallas and Telemachus desire
They might depart, and to their Ship retire,
But Nestor staying them, thus gently chid;
Jove and the Immortal Deities forbid,
That you my House should baulk, and ly aboard,
As if our Court no Lodging could afford,
Nor ought that Strangers might accommodate;
I furnished Chambers have, and Rooms for State,
Adorned with Arras, and rich Tapestry,
Ulysses Son shall never a Shipboard ly,
Whilst I, or mine survive; who ever resort,
Shall civilly be Treated in our Court.
Then Pallas; Nestor thou have nobly said,
And may Telemachus to stay persuade:
But I must down, our Company to cheer,
With my wished presence, who am Oldest, there:
Young men they are, much of the Prince's Age,
Who on his friendship's score with him engage.
But early I to Strabo, in the eighth Book of his Geography, proves that the
Caucones here mentioned, were a People that lived near Dyme in Elea, not those
of Triphylia. She makes this excuse, that she may not accompany Telemachus to
Lacedaemon, where the Marriage of Menelaus Daughter was celebrated, she being a
Virgin Goddess.
Caucones must repair,
To state accounts, which of concernment are:
And when thou kindly him have entertained,
Lend him your Steeds and Chariot, then command
Thy Son to guide the Prince; let him, I crave,
Since it is your Grant, your fleetest Horses have.
Pallas, this said, thence like an Eagle flew,
Which all the Concourse, struck with terror, view;
Then by the Hand the Prince Old Nestor took,
And thus to him, admiring, kindly spoke:
There Is hope of thee, brave Youth, whom Gods instruct,
And thus in thy Minority conduct;
This of all Powers, who plant the Starrie Sky,
Is Pallas, for no other Deity
Thy Father so befriended; Virgin! be
Propitious to my family and me,
And a broad Fronted Heifer, one year old,
I Will offer thee, and tip his It was one of the Rites among the Grecians, to
adorn the Horns of their larger Sacrifices with Gold: which from them descended
to the Romans; for the Senate of Rome decreed that the Decemviri should
Sacrifice to Apollo, Graeco ritu, after the manner of the Graecians, an Ox and
two Goats with their Horns gilded. Ovid, -- blandis indutae cornibus aurum
Conciderant istae nivea cervice juvencae.
Virgil Aen. 10. Et statuam ante aras aurata front juvencam
Candentem, pariterque caput cum matre ferentem.

Horns with Gold.
Thus Nestor Prayed, and Pallas heard his Prayer,
Then home with his Relations did repair.
There in his Palace seated, he in Gold
Presents them Wine new pierced, eleven years old:
Pallas Libating, each one chears his Heart
With a full Bowl, and thence to rest depart.
Under the high Arched Portals, Nestor lead
Telemachus, unto a curious Bed,
Near him Pisistratus, his Valiant Son,
Who yet unmarried, Lodgings had alone.
Then he retires to Chambers further in,
And a soft Couch prepared by his Queen.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers, Days Port-cullice drawn,
But Nestor rose, and down before his Gate,
On Nelius Throne of Pollish'd Marble sat,
Whose prudence living, matched the Immortal Gods,
Now dead descended to the Infernal Floods.
There Sceptered Nestor with his Sons about
Him, places took, Thrasymedes first, and stout
Perseus, Aretus, Stratius, Echepron,
And last Pisistratus his youngest Son;
These to a Seat Telemachus conveyed,
Next to old Nestor: who thus rising said;
Pallas let us now Atone, since she our Feast
In public graced, as an invited Guest.
Let one of you command our Heards-man straight,
A Heifer bring to offer at the Gate:
And let a second to the Vessel go,
And summon all their Company, but two:
Larceus a third; our Goldsmiths, who adorns
Our Gifts, to guild the sacred Victims Horns,
Let all the rest here in their Seats abide,
But bid the Damsells all things fit provide,
Seats, Wood, and Water: Their old Father, They,
As soon as said, him Filial duty pay,
From field the Heifer comes, those from the Ship;
Ready the Goldsmiths stands the Horns to tip,
With Anvil, Tongs, and Hammer; Pallas would
Not absent be, For in those times Gold was a rarity for a Princes Closet, not
a Subjects Purse. Athenaeus says, That when Hero King of Syracuse had resolved
to consecrate a Golden Victory and Tripos to Apollo at Delphos, Greece and
Sicily could not afford him matter sufficient, till after long search, he met
with some at a Merchant's house in Corinth. Nor does it appear that there was
any plenty of Gold in Greece, till the Phocians had Sacrilegiously robbed the
Temple of Apollo, enriched with several Monuments of Gold, by the Princes of
Lydia, Gyges and Croesus.
Nestor gives out the Gold,
That such their cost might more the Goddess glad:
Stratius the Beast and Echepolus led
Out by the Horns, Aretus Water brought,
And in 's left Hand with Cakes a Charger fraught:
Ready stood Thrasymedes with an Ax,
Perseus the Basin holds, Nestor the Cakes,
And Pallas supplicating, plucks the Hair
Betwixt her Brows, and burns, closing their Prayer:
Straight Nestor's Offspring thence the Barley took,
His Ax exalting Thrasymedes struck:
The Victim straight, her Nerves dissected fell,
The Women shreek, raising a hideous yell.
Pisistratus soon cuts the Heifers Throat,
Forth, with the Blood, her vital Spirits, float:
Which flead, they to the Thighs lop'd off affix
A double Cawle, and Lean with Fat commix;
Next thinner Steaks, from parts extremer cut,
And round the Thighs, about the Altar put,
Which Nestor burns with Wood, then powrs on Wine,
His Sons brought Spitts, which five in one conjoyn,
The Thighs consumed, they on the inwards feast,
And what remained, in pieces cut and dressed.
Polycaste, Nestor's youngest Daughter, 'noynts
And Bathes the Prince, and Vestments him appoints;
Which when put on, he with a Godlike grace,
By Ancient Nestor, reassumes his place.
Soon as the Joints well roasted were, they drew,
And dish'd them up, the Princes straight fall too:
Then some arising, power in Golden Bowls
The richer Wine, that cures despairing Souls.
When thirst and hunger satisfied were,
Said Nestor; Sons my Chariot straight prepare;
Put in my Steeds that he may go: This said,
The ready Princes their old Sire obeyed,
And to the Teem-Poll his swift Horses join:
Forth brings a Damsel Viands, Bread and Wine.
Up to his place Ulysses Offspring gets,
And next Pisistratus, who by him sits.
Taking the Whip and Rein, they Pyle forsake,
Plying the Lash, their Steeds free metal shake
The jolting Teem, which rattles all the way,
Till night's black Regiments secluded day.
To A City of La^^nia, betwixt Pyle and Lacedamon.
Pheras, Diocles Palace drove they on,
His Sire Orchilocus, Alpheus Son;
There they all night well treated took repose:
But when the rosie-finger'd Morn arose,
They join their Steeds, and mounted ply the Whip,
Over smooth Champain their Horses nimbly trip,
Till, the Sunsetting, night her Flag unfurled,
Hanging her sable Ensign ore the World.
scene from book 4 Illustrissimoe Dominae Do Emi^ae Comitissae de Ossory
Ta^ulam ^hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 4



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Menelaus Nuptials keeps; unlook'd-for Guests,
Telemachus and Nestor's Offspring, feasts.
His long and dangerous Voyages relates.
Proteus, his Brother's, and Ulysses Fates,
Then Ajax tells. A Plot the Suitors lay
To intercept Telemachus at Sea.
STraight on they drive to Menelaus Court,
Who now sat Feasting with a great resort
Of Friends and Neighbors all invited, where
Together with great State solemnized were,
His Sons and Daughters Nuptials: Her he sent,
(At Troy Contracted first by his consent)
With Horse, with Chariots, and a stately Train
To Pyrrhus, where in Phthya he did reign.
Him, he Alector's beauteous Daughter gave,
Bold Megapenthes, gotten on his Slave
When Aged grown, for Heaven so pleased that he
Only, by Helen, had Homer mentions only the Contract made between Pyrrhus and
Hermione, by the consent and order of Menelaus; but Sophocles and other Greek
Poets speak of a former Contract between her and Orestes, made by their
Grandfather Tyndareus, who in revenge of his lost Mistress, slew Pyrrhus at
his return. These later Poets, both Virgil and Ovid follow; the first, in his
Aeneids, l. 3. Nos patriaincensa diversa per aequora ve^tae
Stirpis Achilleae fastus, juvenemque superbum
Servitio enixae tulimus: qui deinde, secutus
Ledaeam Hermionem, Lacedaemoniosque hymenaeos,
Me famalam famuloque Heleno transmisit habendam.
Ast illum ereptae magno inflammatus amore
Conjugis and scelerum furiis agitatus Orestes,
Excipit incantum, patriasque obtruncat ad aras.
We from our Countries flames through all Seas born,
Felt the proud Youths, Achilles Of-springs, scorn;
Who after, fair Hermione did Wed,
And, Fatal still, enjoyed a Spartan Bed,
And me to Helenus his Servant gave.
But him Orestes, who did strangely rave
For his lost Spouse, impatient did pursue,
Surpised, and at his Father Altars slew.
The other, in his Epistles.
Hermione,
Fair like bright Venus. Atheneus observes that Aristarchus took these five
Verses, wherewith the Feast, with its appendages, is described, out of the 15.
Book of the Iliads, and placed them here, least the Poet should seem too
slightly to pass over so solemn an entertainment: but with what bad success, he
proves afterward at length. First, because the Nuptial feast was now over, and
Menelaus his Daughter sent away unto Phthia, and himself left alone with
Helena: Secondly, because it is a Cre^an dance which is here described, not
used at Lacedaemon. Thirdly, because the Language is incongruous, the word
(...) being proper to the Harp, or Voice, not to those that dance after it: so
Hesiod uses it -- -- (...)
(...)
And Archil^chus (...)
Whilst they treated were
In his high Palace, thus with sumptuous Fare,
Two Dancers moving 'mid'st the admiring throng,
To a learned Bard, who Played and sweetly Sung:
Telemachus and Nestor's Son drive up,
And in the echoing Porch their Chariot stop:
Them Eteon, Menelaus Steward, spies,
Who with his Royal Master to advise,
Hasting to 's presence said; Sir, at your Gate
Two Princes, like Jove's Heavenly Issue, wait.
Shall we take out their Steeds, and treat them fair,
Or let them entertainment seek else where?
Who thus incensed, replies; Art thou a Fool,
Or shallow Novice, lately come from School?
To raise such doubts; We had not lived to see
Jove grant a period to our misery,
If we abroad had missed like kindness; Go
Take out their Steeds, and in the Strangers show.
Back with like speed, thus ordered, Eteon comes,
Calling to his assistance ready Grooms,
Who straight unloose their Steeds, to Mangers tie,
Which they with Oats and Barley mixed supply,
Their well hung Chariots place against the Wall,
The Strangers then conducting to the Hall;
Who wondering view his stately Court, which shon
Like Titan's beams, and quite eclipsed the Moon;
With so much Cost and Art his House he built,
His Columns, Walls, and lofty Ceilings gilt:
Their Eyes with Objects feasted, they descend
To a warm Bath, fair Virgins them attend:
Whom when they had Anointed, Bathed, and Dreast
In costly Weeds, they Ushered to the Feast,
Placing them nigh the King, a Damsel Sewer
To wash their Hands, fills from a Golden Ewer,
A Silver Basin, near a Table brought,
And straight with many sav'ry Dishes fraught,
And Golden Bowls: Then thus Atrides spoke,
Giving them kindly his right Hand; Partake
Of what you see; and when sufficed you are,
Your Country and your Parentage declare.
You seem to be of high extraction, sure
From no mean stock you spring, nor yet obscure;
Princes you are by your majestic Mein;
And his own Dish, this said, a roasted Chine,
Before them placed, on which they highly fare.
When thirst and hunger satisfied were,
Telemachus in Nestor's Offsprings ear
Thus softly whispered; What a House is here?
The splendour of this stately Hall behold,
How daubed with Silver, Ivory, Brass, and Gold,
Like Joves own Court that crowns the Olympic spire,
The more I look, the more I still admire.
The King orehearing said; None must compare
Mansions with Jove, his seats immortal are,
But with me any may, who eight years tossed
Through worlds of miseries from coast to coast,
Amongst unknown Seas, of my return small hope,
An Island in the Mediterranean, whither it seems he was driven from Creet.
Cyprus, Phenicia, Egypt, The Commentatours on Homer have been very
inquisitive to find out Menelaus's Voyage into Aethiopiae. Crates supposed that
he passed out at the Streights, doubled the Southern Cape, and so arrived
thither. Eratosthenes conjectures that in the time of Homer the Streights mouth
was an Isthmus, and the Egyptian Isthmus overflowed by the Sea, which afforded
him a shorter passage. But that is most probable which Strabo delivers, That he
then went to the borders of Aethiopiae when he passed up Egypt to the City of
Thebes: the borders of Aathiopiae being not far distant from thence in Strabo's
time, probably very near it in Homer's.
Aethiop,
Sidon, It is most probable that they were the Arabians, lying on the other
side of the Gulf, directly over against Egypt and Aethiopiae.
Erembos found, and Libya, where
Their Lambs are horned, their Ews teem thrice a year:
Whose Lords and Peasants flesh and cheese have store,
And all the year the milking Paile runs o'r.
Whilst I thus Coasting store of Riches got,
One, with his Queen conspiring, by a Plot
My Brother slew; so that small comfort I
Of this my Palace, Wealth, and Realms enjoy.
And you perhaps may from your Parents hear
What my great Losses, what my Sufferings were.
My ransact Court of Jewels, massy Plate,
Of Vests, of what or served for use or State,
A third of which I rather would enjoy
So those were living yet, who died at Troy:
For whom so often disconsolate alone
Here sit I sighing, and their Fates bemoan.
Now sorrow pleases, now sad thoughts I wave;
Quickly of griping Woes our fill we have.
But more for one, then for them all, I Weep,
Whom minding, I neglect repose and Sleep;
Ulysses, none of all the Grecian Host
Could parts like him, Prudence, or Valor boast;
None like thy Sire against Troy maintained our cause,
Nor purchased equal Fame, nor like Applause:
Yet all his Toils turned to no more account,
But that his future should past woes surmount;
And I am sceast of Tears a constant rate,
Since none knows how or where he met his Fate.
His Father, his dear Wife, and only Heir,
Whom he an Infant left, like me despair.
This said, the Prince a briney Deluge sheds,
And o'r his Face his Purple Vestment spreads.
Him Menelaus knew, and pond'ring sat
If he should suffer him to intimate
His business, or his Father mention first:
Whilst thus Atrides to himself discoursed;
Forth from her persum'd Chamber Helen came,
Like Quiver'd Cynthia, the Forests Dame.
Aerasta placed her Chair, Tap'stry well wrought
Alcippe, her rich Cabinet Eustathius observes, that Helenae has not the same
Attendants here which she had in the Iliads: it being not consentaneous to
honesty, that those should now remain of her Retinue who were conscious of the
foul fact of her Adultery.
Phylo brought,
Alcandra's costly Gift, Polybus Spouse,
Who in Egyptian Thebes a stately House
Well furnished kept; Cups of a curious mould
Two, and two Tripods, Talents ten of Gold,
He gave the King; to Helen then addressed
A Golden Distaff, and a Silver Chest,
The edges Gilt, which pleased she did accept,
And in it her Work, and curious Worsted kept.
This modest Phylo bare the Distaff full
With segregated streaks of Purple Wool;
Well settled on a Footstool in her Throne,
The Queen to Menelaus thus begun;
Know thou not who these are, nor from what coast
These Strangers come, nor Parentage they boast?
I would ghess right, speak truth, and be no Liar,
For still the more I look, I more admire:
Since I never any yet beheld, not one,
More like, then this, to be Ulysses Son
Telemachus, whom he then left at home
An Infant, when you launched for Ilium;
And on my sad account a numerous Host,
Brought with destruction to the Phrygian Coast.
Then he; It Is true, him he resembles much,
His Hands and Feet, his Face, Hair, Eyes were such.
Now I recall, when of Sire I spoke,
And sorrows he had suffered for my sake,
Tears down his Cheeks in riv'lets dew'd his Breast,
And over his Face he threw his Purple Vest.
When to the King Pisistratus begun;
Y' are not mistaken, This, Sir, is his Son,
Who modest thought not fit that he before
Him, whom like Jove we honor and adore,
A Speech should make: Nestor commanded me
Him to attend, who longed to gain from thee
Some grave advice: Many and high affronts
At home he suffers, whilst his Sire he wants;
Few are his Friends, desperate his case and sad,
And none amongst the people him will aid.
Then spoke the King; See I Ulysses Son,
Who for my sake so much has undergon?
With him I thought, had he who rules the Sky
Brought us in safety home, to live and dye,
And we in Argos had together dwelt:
His Son and Wealth Transported, I had built
For him a Court, and fetled in a Town
His people, though belonging to our Crown:
There He and I would meeting often discourse,
And nothing should us two but Death divorce;
But Jove us so much happiness envied,
Who him, alas! a safe return denied.
These words awaked old griefs which long had slept,
Helen, Telemachus, Atrides, wept;
Nor could Pisistratus from tears refrain,
Minding Antilochus by The Son of Tithonus, Brother of King Priam, and Aurorae;
who came out of the East, to the assistance of the Trojans, and was Slain by
Ulysses.
Memnon slain.
Who thus; Nestor, renowned Atrides said,
When we, of thee discoursing, mention made,
That thou of Mortals most accomplished art;
Therefore spare me, I would no heavy part
At Supper act; but when the Sun's approach
Gilds Eastern Portals with his bright Carroch,
Then I, my Friends and dear Relations dead
Reminding, shall a briny deluge shed.
To them, descended to the silent World,
Tears we as duties pay, and It was the custom of the Grecians to cut off a
lock of their hair, and lay it upon the Coarse of their deceased friends;
recorded by Homer in his Iliads, describing the Tuneral of Patroclus, -- (...),
(...).
'Twixt these his Intimates Patroclus bare,
Covering his Body with their cut off hair.
And by So^hocles, in the person of Teucer speaking to Eurysaces,

(...), (...),
(...), (...).
(...), (...)
(...), (...), (...),
(...).
Draw near my Son, and by thy Father stand,
And, as a Suppliant, hold thou in thy hand
My Tress, this Woman's, and thy own bright Hair,
So pay rich Offerings with an humble prayer.
So does Orestes at the Tomb of Agamemnon, in Euripedes's Electra.

-- (...)
(...), (...).
I at my Father's Tomb tears shedding stayed,
And him the first fruits of my Tresses paid.

Tresses curled.
My Brother there Antilochus I lost,
Not least significant of all that Host.
You knew him, Sir, whom never I beheld,
Whom few for speed and Martial feats excelled.
Then said the King; More like some reverend Sage
Thou speak, then one of unexperienced Age:
Like thy accomplished Sire the art eloquent,
We soon find persons out of high Descent,
On whom great Jove, Wealth in abundance powrs,
And sends his Birth and Nuptials happy hours.
All which he Nestor gave, and that he should
Have Sons renowned, and in his Court grow Old.
But let us dry our Tears, and Sorrow wave,
Water and fresh supplies of Dishes have;
I and Telemachus to morrow shall
Early, more private on his Business fall.
This said, with speed obeying his commands,
Asphalio Water powrs upon their Hands,
They Viands taste, which warm, the Table fraught.
Joves Daughter Helen, then her self bethought,
Straight sending for a Cordial to compound,
Would Rage and Grief both in Oblivion dround;
Whoere drinks this commix'd with Wine, though dead
He saw his Parents, not one Tear would shed
In a whole day, nor him, his Brother more,
Or Son would trouble, weltring in their Gore.
On her this Medicine, to appease all woe,
Did Polydamna, From this King received its name the ancient City Thonis, not
far distant from Canobus, as Strabo relates. Aelian says, that Menelaus
traveling into the Southern parts of Egypt, left Helena with King Thon, while
Queen Polydamna, jealous lest she should be preferred before her, caused her to
be sent into the Island Pharos, abounding with Serpents and Venomous Beasts;
but withal, pitying her condition, instructed her in all sorts of Medicines,
which might serve for her defense.
Thonus Wife, bestow,
Rich Aegypts product: many Simples there
Make wondrous Compounds, some that deadly are;
The Natives great Physicians prove, and all
From Peon boast their high Original.
Infusing this, she said; My dearest Lord,
And these young Princes, feasting at our Board,
Since Jove dispenceth, who best may and can,
What ere makes happy or unhappy Man:
Therefore let us here Feasting take delight
In pleasant talk; and somewhat I Will recite,
(To reckon all, Arithmetic would pose)
Ulysses acted, when by pressing Foes
You streighten'd were: He like a On what design he thus entered Troy, Homer
delivers not: whether to observe the height of the Walls, and the largeness of
the Gate; for the better proportioning the Horse, immediately here mentioned:
or to steal the Palladeum, as Lycophron writes in his Cassandra: but in which
action Virgil allows him Diomedes a companion, here he is alone. -- impius ex
quo
Tydides, sed enim scelerumque inventor Ulysses,
Fatale aggressi sacrato avellere templo
Palladium, caesis summae custodibus arcis
Corripuere sacram effigiem.
Till impious Diomed with Ulysses went
(The best that ever mischief did invent)
And boldly from her sacred Fane conveyed
Fatal Palladium, and dire slaughter made.

Beggar went,
Through hostile Troy, his Garments patched and rent.
Who had no equal at the Grecian Fleet,
Alms of the Trojans craved, from Street to Street.
I found the King, though thus disguised, who often
Disarmed my Questions, meeting Craft with Craft:
'Till him I Bathed, Anointed, and did Cloth,
And to conceal him, took the solemn Oath;
Then he to me discovered all his Plot,
And Slaught'ring many, off in safety got,
Slighting the Trojans and their Guards debauched,
Loud Trojan Ladies mourned, whilst I rejoiced
Hopeing to see my native Soil, I wept,
That Venus, who Transported me, had kept
From my dear Daughter, and my Lord so long,
And thee a Prince so worthy I should wrong.
Then said the King; Thy Character is true;
I far have traveled, many Heroes knew:
But yet amongst them all, I nere beheld,
One with Ulysses to be Paralleled:
Who such things acted, and so well could Plot,
When all our prime Commanders close were shut
In that stupendeous The History of the Trojan Horse is most incomparably
delivered by Virgil in the 2. Book of his Aeneids.
Steed, pregnant with fate,
Big with destruction of the Trojan State.
Thither some God did thee, my Dearest, send,
Her Husband, after the death of Paris, according to some writers.
Deiphobus enforcing to attend,
TO obstruct the Trojan fame: thrice did thou walk,
About the Steed, and like This fiction of Homer's is received by none of the
succeeding Po^ts: nor can it, for several reasons, be allowed of.
their Wives did talk;
Their voices faining, our prime Leaders did
Call by their names; I sitting in the midst:
Tydides and Ulysses heard thee speak,
We two would answer straight, or forth would break;
But Ithacus, though we so earnest were,
Dissuaded us and others to forbear;
Only Anticlus opens, straight his Chops
Ithacus starting up with both Hands stops:
So by his strength and prudence saves us all,
Till thee from thence Minerva pleased to call.
Then to the King Telemachus thus said;
O thou who art most honored and obeyed;
Yet cruel Death, his courage, strength, nor skill,
Could keep off, nor his Breast, though solid Steel.
Now, Sir, be pleased to grant me my repose,
That gentle sleep, grown late, our Eyes may close.
Helen, this said, straight bids them make a Bed,
And Purple over, and Royal Tap'stry spread;
Forth went her Damsels with a lighted Torch,
The Guests a Herald ushers to the Porch:
Over the resounding Gates the Princes lay,
Whom Morpheus Golden Fetters bound till day.
Atrides thence to Chambers further in
Went, where fair Helen lay, her sexes Queen.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers days Portcullice drawn,
But from his Bed up Menelaus springs,
Puts on his Vest, athwart his Shoulders flings
His well hatched Faulchion, on his Sandals ties,
And forth, with a majestic presence, hies:
Then sitting by Telemachus thus says;
On what concern have thou plowed swelling Seas,
To Sparta, public is it, or private score?
The Prince replies; I from my native Shore,
Set sail, of thee, Atrides, to inquire,
If ought thou know of my long absent Sire.
My House stands thwack'd with Foes who me o'rpow'r,
And my fair Flocks and stall-fed Beeves devour;
Love their pretense, Penelope they woo,
But their design us fairly to undo.
On this account here I thy Supplyant am,
If thou have seen or heard by flying Fame,
Ought of his Death, in pity of my Youth,
Extenuate not, nor yet conceal, the truth.
If ever he by Prowess or by Plot,
Upon the Trojans Reputation got,
When you at Troy were in your greatest straight,
Remember that, and truly tell his Fate.
Base wretches then, Atrides sighing said,
May tumble on an absent Heroes Bed:
As in a Lions Den: a Hind her Fauns
Securing, straies ore Hills and fertile Lawns;
Whilst he returning finds unbidden Guests,
And their Blood gusling, on their Entrails feasts:
So they, when strong Ulysses comes, shall fare,
Would Pallas, Jove, and Phoebus, as they were,
Then be to him propitious and assist,
As when at Lesbos entering the List,
He threw King of the Island Lesbos, who, according to his custom, challenged
the chief of the Grecians to wrestle with him.
Philomelides on his Back,
Loud Shouts resounding like a Thunder crack.
To these Corrivals he would prove so kind,
They soon should sad and bitter Nuptials find.
But I Will to answer your desires be plain,
Nor shall I heighten ought, decline, or feign,
What I from Proteus, the Sea-Prophet had,
I shall recount indifferent, good or bad.
Long angry Gods in Egypt me detained,
Because with slighter Victims I profaned
Their Altars often; we their commands should keep.
It is now part of the Continent of Egypt, which in Homer's time was an Isle:
the reason whereof is, because the River Nile, by its continual evomition of
dirt has constantly gained upon the Sea. Of the same nature is the River
Pyramus, which swept along with it so much dirt and sand out of Cataonia, and
the fields of Cilicia, that an Oracle declared, that in future Ages it should
run into the Island of Cyprus. (...)
(...).
Swift Pyramus the circulating Sun
Shall, carrying Sand, see into Cyprus run.
To this place of Homer, Lucan alludes in his tenth Book, thus, Tunc clanstrum
pelagi cepit Pharon, insula quondam
In medio stetit illa Mari, sub tempore vatis
Proteos, at nunc est Pellaeis proxima muris.
Then he took Pharos, circl'd with the Main,
When Prophet Proteus of old did Reign,
But now to Alexandria conjoined.

Pharus an Isle amid'st the swelling Deep,
Against Egypt lies, from whence a nimble Ship
May Sail, 'twixt Sun and Sun, with Sails a-trip.
There twenty Days the Gods my Navy It is a strange mistake of the latter
Commentators, who say, The Ships stayed in the Port, till the water they had
received were pumped out. We have followed the Ancients, amongst those Strabo,
in our Translation.
kept,
Nor the least Breese up silver Billows swept,
That might conduct us thence, with Sails unfurled,
O'r moving Mountains, through the watery World;
Our Victuals spent, us, in a heavy case,
The Nymph Idothea pitty'd, Proteus race;
Her I implored, she finding me alone,
My famished people all a Fishing gone,
Thus drawing near me, said; Art thou a Fool,
Or to bear Sorrows make this place thy School,
And tarriest here, no nearer thy design,
Whilst all thy Friends with want and Famine pine?
Who ever thou art, blessed Goddess, I replied,
That in this Sea-wall'd Prison, I abide
A against my will: But I some God perhaps,
Who dwells on steep Olympus Spiry tops,
Offended have: Say, since thou all things know,
What Power thus keepsme from my native Coast,
And here so long impedes? She thus replies;
The best I may, Stranger, I Will thee advise.
Here He was the Son of Oceanus and Tethys, who is therefore feigned to be
Pastor of Sea-Calves or Horses, because his Dominions were upon the Maritim
Coasts.
Proteus, Neptune's Minister of State,
The sounder of the Ocean, keeps his seat,
The Egyptian Bard, who me they say begot;
Him could thou seize by some ingenious Plot,
He would discover, how with Sails unfurled,
Thou shoul'dstreturn, plowing the watery World;
And, if the art curious, show thee by his skill,
What chance to thy Domestics, good or ill,
Has in thy absence happened. Then said I,
But how shall we secure a Deity,
Who will foresee what ever we shall contrive?
Hard it is for Mortals, with a God to strive.
I Will show thee, said she, by what means thou shall.
When Titan bends from arched Heavens highest Vault,
Then the old Prophet rises from the Floods,
Clothed with gross Vapors and a Cloak of Clouds,
And his Cave entering sleeps, Virgil feigns him carried in his Chariot by
these Sea-Horses, Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite rates
Caeruleus Proteus magnum qui piscibus aequor
Et juncto bipedum curru metitur equorum
Green Proteus there in the Carpathian Main,
The Egyptian Prophet, through broad Seas he glides;
And in his Chariot with Sea-Horses rides.
Where observe Virgil calls them bipedes, Homer (...).
Sea Monsters snore
Round him, supinely slumbring on the Shore,
Breathing foul Scents, derived from briney Seas;
Early I Will place thee in his dark recesse,
But choose to help thee three prime Persons more,
And I Will acquaint thee with his flights before;
First he will counting, view his Scaly fry,
Then down amid'st his quartered Life-guardly,
As Shepherds use amid'st their Fleecy Sheep;
As soon as thou shall spy the God a-sleep,
Then seize on him, besure he not escapes:
Nothing is more familiar among the entient Poets, then his Transformation of
Preteus. Virgil, from this place of Homer, thus describes it in his Georgick^,
Fi^t enim subito Sus herridus, atraque Tigris,
Squamosusque draco, and fulva cervice Leaena,
Aut acrem flammae s^nitum dabit, atque ita vinel^s
Excid^t, ant in aquas tennes d^lapsus abibit.
A salvage Boar he will be, a Tigre, Snake,
And a huge Lion with a shaggy neck;
Or to escape, shall thunder like a flame,
Or glide from thee in aswift Crystal stream.
The Moral of which fiction, some refer to the Diadems of the Aegy^tian Kings,
which according to their fashion were various, and bore sometimes a Bull, a
Lion, a Flame, and the like. See Diodorus Siculus lib. 2. Many other
Mythologies are reckoned up by Natalis Comes.
He Will straight Transform himself in several shapes,
To creeping Monsters, Beasts or wild or tame,
A swelling River, or devouring Flame:
Then graple harder, and him faster keep.
But when he questions, as when fallen a-sleep,
His former Shape resuming, then desist,
Free the old Hero, and ask what you list.
What angry God thee from thy home detains,
Permitting not to plow the Azure Plains.
This said, she dives amongst soamy Waves, and I
Went museing where my Ships lay on the dry;
Where taking some repast, when Night arose,
On the Oceans sandy Margents we repose:
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers Days Port-cullice drawn,
But I, the Gods imploring, chose out three,
Valiant and Strong, whilst four Sea-Calves Skins she
Brought newly stripped, her Father so to catch,
And us expecting bedded on the Beach.
Soon as we came, she placing us within,
Threw over each of us a Fishes Skin;
But much offensive proved our Ambuscade,
The slimy Husks a smell so loathsome made:
TO embrace a rank Sea Monster who will endure?
But she straight thought upon a present cure;
Ambrosia she, which Aromatic shuts
Foul odours forth, into our Nostrils puts:
Till Noon we patient there expecting lay,
When shoals of Water-monsters leave the Sea
To That Sea-Calves are sleepy Animals, is observed by the Authors of Natural
History. Martial in his Epigrams, Dormitis nimium glires, Vitulique marini.
Whence among the Egyptians they were the Hieroglyphics of drowsy persons,
says Pierius. Elian also notes that they take the Noonday for their time of
rest on the Shore.
sleep ashore; old Proteus last comes up,
And us Four reckons amongst his scaly Troop:
Then down he lies suspecting no deceit,
We clamouring charge and seize upon him straight;
He skillful such Conspirators to evade,
Himself at first a shaggy Lion made,
A Serpents form, a Pard's, a Sow's receives,
A crystal Stream a Tree with shady leaves;
Yet we with patience armed, him faster grasp;
But when with struggling he begun to gasp,
Thus me he questioned; Atreus Son declare
What God thee thus advised me to ensnare,
Your business speak: Then I replied; Thou know,
Then why thus ask'st, thou? on this fatal coast
Long I Am detained, no hope of favoring Gales
To bear me off, my strength and courage fails:
Say, since thou all things know, what angry God
Obstructs my passage through the briny Flood.
Thou must, said he, before thou art dismissed,
Great Jove implore, and the supernall List;
Nor shall thou see thy Friends and native Soil,
Until thou offer'st on the Banks of It is observable that Homer never calls
the famous River of Egypt by the name of Nile, but Egypt: as (...) And (...)
From whence its conjectured, not improbably, that the Country received its name.
Nile,
To them a Hecatombe; with Sails unfurld,
Then homewards may thou plow the watery World.
This wracked my Soul to think that I must back,
And such a long and dangerous Voyage take.
Then I replied; We shall perform the task:
But I must yet another Question ask;
Are all our Friends arrived in safety Home,
Which I and Nestor left at Ilium?
By Sea who perished? who escaped raging Waves,
At home by Friends attended to their Graves?
Then he; No farther ask, I Will not reveal
Things not for thee to know, or me to tell:
Should I, thou would not long from tears refrain:
Many are dead, many alive remain:
Two Princes only of that numerous Host,
Who sailed from Troy, in their return were lost:
One in a Sea-girt Isle his Fates detain,
But Ajax the son of Oileus, for there was another Grecian Prince of that name,
the Son of Telamon.
Ajax he was swallowed in Ajax's Shipwreck Silins Italicus thus describes,
Qualis Oilides, fulmen jaculante Minerva,
Surgentes domuit fluctus ardentibus ulnis.
As Ajax, struck with Pallas thunder, storms
The rising Billows with his flaming Arms.
Pliny in his Natural History relates, that the Story of Ajax struck with a
Thunderbolt, was most exquisitely Painted by Apollodorus the Athenian; and in
his time shown at Pergamus for a Masterpiece of that Art.
the Main,
Whom Neptune drove on Rocks near unto Myconus, one of the Cyclades, so called
from the roundness of them.
Gyra, and had saved
On jutting Rocks, although Minerva raved;
But that the Impious said, those raging Floods
He would escape, in spite of all the Gods.
Neptune, straight hearing the blasphemous Wretch,
With his huge Hand did up his Trident snatch,
And the Gyrean Rock he cleft in twain,
Half stood, the other half dropped in the Main,
On which he sitting, under Billows sunk,
And perished, after he Salt Water drunk.
Thy Brother then escaped by Juno's aid;
But when the Malean Mountain he had made,
Him much lamenting, a rough Tempest tossed
To the utmost confines of the Agrian Coast,
Where once Father of Aegisthus.
Thyestes, then Aegisthus dwelt:
But then the Gods with him more kindly dealt,
Changing the Wind, straight home his course he stands,
His Native Soil then kissing as he Lands,
With a full Flood of joyful Tears bedews:
When him a Spy, hired by Egysthus, views
From a high Towr, for Talents two of Gold,
There a whole Year he suffered Heat and Cold,
With speed the news he carries to the Court;
Egysthus twenty of the baser sort
Hides in his House, provides a Feast, and bids
The King, his Chariot sending and his Steeds;
Then at the treatment, kills him in his Hall,
A Butcher so the Ox slaughters in the Stall.
This sad News pierced my heart; down on the Shore
Weeping I sat, and wished, that I no more
Might see the glorious Sun, but there expire.
When I with vying Tears began to tire,
Said Proteus; Sigh no longer, Atreus Son,
Nor dew thy Cheeks, since remedy there is none:
But when thy Native Soil thou shall obtain,
Egysthus thou shall find alive, or slain
Else by Orestes, then erect his Tomb.
This said, my sorrow gave fresh comfort room,
And thus I said; I know the fates of two,
But thou a third to me did mention, who
Pent in an Isle, remains alive or dead;
Of him I fain would hear. Then Proteus said;
Ulysses I, the King of Ithaca,
Extremely weeping in an Island saw,
By fair Calypso in her Cave detained,
Not knowing how to reach his Native Land,
Since he has neither Men, Sails, Oars, nor Ship,
That may Transport him through the raging Deep.
And Menelaus, know, it is not thy Fate
To dye at home, the Gods will thee Translate
To seats of Bliss, the blessed Elyzian Plains,
At the Worlds end, where Rhadamanthus reigns;
Where comes no Winter, Snow, nor Winds, nor Rain,
But constant Breezes, rising from the Main,
With cooling breath still fainting spirits revive,
Thou Helen have, and do from For Helena was Daughter of Jupiter, and Leda,
whom he begot in the form of a Swan.
Jove derive.
This said, the God beneath the Waves descends,
I to our Fleet went musing with my Friends,
There taking some repast, when Night arose,
On the Ocians flowery margents we repose.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn
With rosy Fingers days Portcullis drawn,
But up our Masts we rear, our Sails unfurled,
And launch our Vessel to the watery World.
The Sailors fettle on acquainted Banks,
And sweep the briny Foam in triple ranks:
Thence plowing Waves unto the Banks of Nile,
There Hecatombs on blazing Altars pile.
The Gods appeased, next reared my Brothers It was customary among the ancient,
both Greeks and Romans, to erect honorarie Tombs to their deceased friends,
when they were absent: where were exhibited the same Solemnities that were
usual at the real Funerals. Andromache, lead Captive into Epirus, in Virgil,
Selennes tum forte dapes and tristia dona
Ante urbem in luco, falsi Simotutis ad undam,
Libabat cineri Andromache, manesque vecabat
Hectoreum ad tumulum, viridi quem cespite inanem,
Et geminas, causam lacrimis, sacraverat aras.
By chance sad gifts and annual Rites that day
Andromache paid his ashes, and implores
At Hector's Tomb near feigned Simois Shores,
Before the Town in Consecrated Woods.
She raised his empty Monument of Sods.
When Drusus died in Italy, in his return to the Forces he led against the
Germans, and his body was sent back to Rome, exercitus honorarium ci tumulum
excitavit, circa quem deinceps stato die quotannis miles decurreret,
Galliarumque civitates public supplicarent: Sueton, in the life of Claudius
Caesar. The like mentions Lampridius in the life of Alexander Severus,
Cenotaphium in Gallia, Romae amplissimum Sepul^rum meruit, He obtained a large
Sepulcher at Rome, and an Honorary in France.
Tomb
To keep his Fame, my course thence steering Home;
Celestials sent fair Winds which never faild
To court our Canvas, till we Sparta saild.
But stay with me till twice six days are spent,
Then thee a Chariot I Will, and Steeds present,
A Golden Cup, that thou may mindful be,
(If thou surviv'st great Sir) of mine and me.
Then said the Prince; Great Sir, it much may wrong
Me and my business here to stay so long;
I could a year your sweet discourse admire,
My House forgetting, and my absent Sire;
But if thou stayst me longer, 'twill afflict
My Friends in Pyle, who me ere this expect:
Your Presents, Sir, I thankfully accept,
But Steeds for This place Horace relates to in his Epistles, l. 1. Ep. 6. Haud
male Telemachus proles patientis Ulyssis,
Non est aptus equis Ithacae locus; ut neque planus
Porrectus spatiis, neque multae prodigus herbae.
Atride magis apta tibi tua dona relinquam.
Telemachus well replied, that no fit place
Was Ithaca for Horses, wanting grass:
Therefore your Presents spare, for me unfit.

Ithaca none ever shipped;
Let in this large Campaign thy generous breed,
Wantoning on, on delicacies feed,
Where Lotus springs and Cyperon unset,
Store of white Barley, Spelt, and purest Wheat.
We have no Chariot-course, our Meadow feeds
Scarce shaggy Goats, not rank enough for Steeds.
Our Sea-guirt Isles, with barrenness accursed,
Are bad for Horse, and Ithaca the worst.
Then smiling, by the hand the Prince he takes,
And said; These words noble thy extract speaks,
Thou shall some other have, I well am stored,
What ere my House or Treasuries afford,
What Is fairest, richest, or of most esteem:
A Silver Goblet with a Golden brim
I Will thee present, by Vulcan rarely wrought,
Which the Sidon was a City in Phoenicia, famous for curiosity in all sorts of
workmanship. The name of the Prince, which the Poet mentions not, some
Historians deliver to be Sobalus, others Sethlo.
Sidonian King, that Hero, brought
Me, when he feasted in his Royal Court.
Whilst thus they held discourse, a great resort
Came to the Palace, Sheep and Wine they brought,
And their fair The Servants of Penelope, whom they familiarly used as their
Wives.
Wives the Boards with Manchet fraught,
And they provided high and plenteous Fare.
But at Ulysses Gates, the Suitors were
At Coyts delighted, or else casting Darts,
Acting with no mean insolence their parts;
Antinous, and Eurymachus, the best
Of all the Suitors, sat there among the rest,
To whom came Noeman, Old Phronius Son,
And questioning Antinous, thus begun;
When, Sirs, Telemachus at home will be,
Knows any here? A Ship he had from me,
To Sail for Pyle, the Vessel now I need,
That I at Elis, where I have a breed
Of Mares and Mules, may break one for the Plow.
All were amazed, they never heard till now
He launched to Sea, but him supposed withdrawn,
To see his Flocks, or to Sabalius gone.
Be pleased, Antinous said, to tell me true,
When went the Prince, and to attend him who.
Were they choice Young men, of their own accord,
Or Mercenaries, whom he took aboard?
That he should venture from his native Shore:
And not to trouble you one question more;
Has he your Ship against your will impressed,
Or else consigned him on his own request?
I parted freely with her, he replies;
Me how would you or any else advise?
When such a person has an earnest Suit,
A shrugg's uncivil, or the least dispute.
His company, are Youths of great esteem,
Mentor their Chief, or else some God like him!
But I admire, their Captain yester-day
Early I saw, who long since launched to Sea.
This said he left them. At the strange report
The Suitors gather, and forsake their Sport,
Whilst Grief and Anger swells Antinous Breast,
His Eyes like fire, thus he his mind expressed;
This may prove dangerous, no idle toy;
Could we believe a Child, a saucy Boy,
Would hence without our joint commission slip,
And Youths of better rank to man his Ship?
Let him plot mischief, and let Jove destroy
His machinations, ere they us annoy.
Straight Rigg me forth, with twenty Men, a Bark,
And I Will his motion in returning mark;
Him in our Bay concealed, amongst Samos was the name of the Island, afterward
called Cephallenia, and also the name of a City in the same Island: near
adjoining to Ithaca.
Samian Creeks
We'll intercept, whilst he his Father seeks.
This said, the Plot approving, all consent,
And rising, straight into the Palace went.
This Medon to Penelope conveyed,
Who overheard, when their Design they laid.
Have to the Queen her careful Herald makes,
To whom as soon as entered, thus she speaks;
Why have they sent thee? must our Maids, aside
All business lay, and Supper straight provide?
Ah! would they quit my House, and that this might,
Their farewell Banquet be, and last goodnight:
Who thus at meetings wast my Sons Estate;
Did nere to you your Sires renumerate
Ulysses parts? Mildly with all he dealt,
Nor any ere his ponderous Scepter felt:
In public none he praised, nor loud would rate,
Like Kings accustomed, this to love, that hate;
But your demeanor cleers your Character,
Who for his kinder use so thankless are.
Then Medon thus replied; Ah would, best Queen,
Ingratitude their greatest Crime had been!
They to the height of Villainy proceed,
Your Son to murder (which great Jove forbid!)
Returning home, who went to Pyle t'inquire,
And Sparta, after his long absent Sire.
Trembling, this said, and silent long she stood,
Her bright Eyes clouded with a briny Flood;
At last she said; Why from us did he slip,
What forced my Son t'ascend a nimble Ship,
That Horse that scowrs through waves from Coast to Coast?
Would he his Name should be for ever lost?
Then Medon said; I know not if some God,
Or his own Genius through the swelling Flood,
Forced him to Pyle, expecting there to hear,
If Dead or Living his dear Father were.
This said he Spondan^s supposes that he left Penelope and went to the Palace
of Ulysses, and therefore makes two distinct Palaces. But that conjecture is
refuted by the Verses immediately following, where Iphthime is sent to Penelope
to comfort her (...),
(...)
(...).
The phrase in this place, which he mistook, (...), is not to go to, but to
descend down the house.
left her; but the afflicted Queen,
As if with Grief she had distracted been,
No longer in her Chair her self contains,
But on the Threshold sitting, loud complains:
Her Women young and old about her ran
With dismal shreeks: thus weeping she began;
The Gods on me no common Griefs impose,
Besides our Birthright born to suffer woes:
First I a Wise and Valiant Husband lost,
His Fame divulged through all the Grecian Coast:
Now they will kill my Son, and wretches you
Nere called me, though you his departure knew,
But had I known when he his Anchor weighed,
For all his haste, he should a while have staid,
Or dead he should have left me in the Hall:
But one of you should straight Old Dolius call,
Whom me my Sire when I came hither gave,
Who keeps my Orchard, now no more my Slave,
That he might straight to Old Laertes go,
And this their dire designment let him know;
He would the People with their project fill,
How they conspire, Ulysses Son to kill.
Then Euryclea; Cast me off, or kill,
All this, I dearest Madam, knew, and will
No longer hide: I Wine and Manchet both
Supplied him with, and took a solemn Oath,
Not in twelve days to make his absence known,
Unless you asked, or heard the Prince was-gon;
Least you with weeping, should your Beauty wrong;
But Bathe and dress your self, then take along
With you your Maids, and when you are withdrawn,
Implore Minerva to preserve your Son,
Nor Old Laertes with this news afflict,
The Gods his Progeny not disrespect,
But one shall still survive his Realm to bless,
Who shall this Court and fertile Fields possess;
These words her grief asswag'd, her Tears suppressed,
And Bathing straight, her self she neatly dressed.
Then with her Train, have to her Chamber made,
And thus to Pallas, Sacrificing, Prayed;
Jove's Daughter hear, if ere my Lord, the Thighs
Of Beevs and Sheep to thee did sacrifice,
Remember him; ah! save his Son and mine,
Turning on these conspirers their Design.
Thus begs she weeping, and the Goddess grants.
Mean while the Suitors deaf the Walls with rants:
When one thus said; The Queen will now elect
Amongst us her Spouse, yet not our Plot detect
Upon her Son. The said Antinous; Fie,
Make no such idle brags, lest any nigh
Ore-hear and tell within; no time protract,
But rising let us what we agreed on act.
This said, He twenty men selects, and strait
Looks out a Vessel of the second Rate,
And hires one in the Harbor, yare and stanch,
Her Masts and Sails brought up, from shore they lanch,
Then fit their plyant Oars, their Sails unfurld,
In readiness to plow the watery World;
And last the Comp'ny went aboard, where they
Refresh themselves, and for the Evening stay.
Mean while Penelope her Chamber keeps,
And musing takes no sustenance, nor sleeps,
'Twixt hopes and sears, how that her guiltless Son,
The impious may kill, or he the danger shun:
A Lion so suspects the Hunters guile,
Whom hedging in they drive upon the Toil.
Such wandering Fancies her from slumber kept,
At last, wearied with burthening cares, she slept.
The thoughtfull Queen then gentle Morpheus bound,
And fretting cares in mild Oblivion drowned;
Whilst Pallas fashioned out an empty shade,
And like her Sister fair Iphthima made:
At Phere her King of Phera a City in Thessaly; the Son of Admetus and Alcestis.
Eumelus did Espouse.
This straight she sent into Ulysses House,
Charging to free the Queen from torturing fears,
From eating grief, and inundating Tears;
Entering her Chamber, through the narrow Lock,
Drawn near her Bed, these words of Comfort spoke;
Do thou Penelope afflicted sleep?
Thou must no longer pensive be, nor weep.
Thy Son, who little has displeased the Gods,
From Foes shall safe return, and swallowing Floods:
Then sweetly slumbering in sleeps pleasant Port,
Thus spoke the Queen; Dear Sister, to our Court
Why come thou, who before were never here,
Dwelling remote? would thou that I should fear
And grief shake off, which me so much molest,
Mustring fresh parties in my troubled Breast,
Who such a Lord and so accomplished lost,
Through ample Greece admired and honored most?
And now my Son adventured to the Seas,
Not used to Traffic nor hard Voyages,
For whom far greater cares my Breast invade,
Then for his Father, lest he be betrayed
By Land or Sea, of life him to deprive
Many conspire ere he at home arrive.
When thus the Shadow said; In me confide,
Laying all fears and jealousies aside;
So great a Goddess looks upon thy Son,
Pallas, who pitying thee sent me alone,
This to acquaint thee with, and to persuade
From fruitless Tears. To whom the Queen thus said;
If thou a Goddess have a Goddess heard;
Say if Ulysses live or be interred,
His Soul descended to the Infernal shade?
Then to the Queen the Airie Fantom said;
Be he alive or dead, I must not yet
Declare, nor answer questions now unfit.
This said, it vanished, stealing through the Lock,
She shakes off drowsy sleep, and comfort took:
And whilst the Vision fled; with Sails unfurled,
The plotting Suitors plow the waterie World,
To kill Telemachus. A Rockie Isle,
'Twixt Ithaca and Samus, which they style
Small A small Island betwixt C^^^ ^^lenia and Ithaca, it retains no na^^^ the
Italian Charts, though Apolloa (...) says, that in his time there was a P^^^
there, and a small City called Alal^^menae.
Aster, lies, for Ambush fitting, they
Enter this Port, and him expecting lay.
scene from book 5 Domino Do: Rich Dice Comiti Tussogh Tabulam hanc. Comiti de
Arran Baroni de Cloghgreman LMDDDIO Lib: ^



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Hermes, Calypso bids Ulysses free:
Who makes himself a Bark, then puts to Sea.
A Storm by Neptune raised his Vessel splits:
To Land he by a Sea Nymph's favor gets:
Naked and tired he to a Covert creeps,
And hid in Leaves all Night securely sleeps.
AVrora leaving The Fable of Tithonus, Brother to Prians, being Married to
Aurora, according to the Mythologists, signifies no more then that he took a
Wise out of the East: to which that History agrees, which delivers him Founder
of the City Susa, not far from the river Choaspes, the Seat afterward of the
Persian Emperor. There is no Fable more familiar among the Poets then this.
Virgil, in the 4. of his AEneids, Et jam prima novo spargebat lumine terram,
Tithoni croceum linquens Aurora cibile
Aurera now had early Dawning spread,
And weary left Old Tithen's golden Bed.

Tithon's golden Bed,
Ore Heaven and Earth Days glorious luster spread,
When Jove and all the Gods assembled sat
In Consultation; when much troubled at
Ulysses danger in the Nymphs aboads,
The Court thus Pallas moved; Jove, and you Gods,
No more let Kings be pious, mild, or just,
But let their Will be Law, their Rage and Lust,
Since his own People not Ulysses mind,
Who Parent-like was to his Subjects kind:
He suffering in a Sea-guirt Isleremains,
Whom fair Calypso in her Cave detains,
Despairing to review his Native Coast,
That neither can of Friends, nor Vessel, boast
Home to Transport him through the foamie Brine;
And now his Son to murder they design
In his return, who sailed to Pylet' inquire,
And Sparta, after his long absent Sire.
How escaped these words thy Teeth, their Ivory guard,
Said Jove? Who here thy business would detard?
Have not thou laid the Plot, Ulysses shall
Returning be revenged upon them all?
Fetch back his Son with speed (for well you may)
And him in safety to his home convey;
So, frivolous the Suitors Voyage make.
This said, thus Jove to his Son Hermes spoke;
Go thou that art the Gods Ambassador,
And this our order to Calypso bear.
Ulysses, say, must reach his own aboads
'Thout man's assistance, or immortal Gods,
Him a new Vessel must, the twentieth day,
To It is agreed on by most of the Ancients, that the Island Scheria is that
which was after called Corcyra, from Cercyra the daughter of Asopus: which lies
in the Venetian Gulf, not far distant from Ithaca, now named Corfu. But
Apollodorus takes the name of the Isle, as well as the rest of the story, to be
a mere figment of the Poets.
Scheria and Pheacian Towers convey:
Where Silver, Brass, and Vests, they will him present,
More worth then all his Trojan Divident.
He must his Wife, and Friends, (thus Fates decree)
His Palace, and his Native Country, see.
His Father straight obeying, Hermes goes,
And buckles on with speed his golden Shoes,
With which the Air he cuts ore Sea and Land,
As born This whole relation of Mercuries passage, is Translated by Virgil in
the fourth Book of his: AEneids, which we have here transcribed to the end we
may observe his translation of one phrase in Homer. -- Ille patris magni parere
parabat Imperio, and primum pedibus talaria nectit
Aurea, quae sublimem alis, sive aequora suprae,
Sou terram, rapido pariter cum flamine portant.
-- hinc toto praceps se corpore ad undas
Misit: avi similis quae circum littora, circum
Piscosos scopulos humilis volat aequorae juxta.
Here (...), he translates rapido parister cum flamine, as if it had been
(...), in which sense the word (...) is usualy taken in Homer, as, (...) una
cum aurora apparente. But in this place I take it in a different sense and
meaning: (...), for (...), perinde ac si ventis veheretur, that is, his winged
Shoes carried him as swift as the wind. This interpretation of ours is
confirmed not only by the sense of the place, but by the authority too of
Eustathius, who expounds it (...).
on the Winds; then takes his Charming Wand
That Mortals lulls asleep, and sleeping wakes.
A high Mountain in Macedonia, the feat of the Muses, so called from a certain
Hero of that name.
Pieria reached, a stoop from Heaven he makes,
Like a Sea Foul, whose fanning Pinions sweep
The furrowed Visage of the frowning Deep.
The God there lighting, leaves the purple Floods,
Thence walking, finds her in her own Aboads,
Burning sweet Incense in a heap'd-up pile,
Which spread a sweet perfume through all the Isle:
Whilst she sung rarely, through her curious frame
Her Golden shuttle nimbly went and came.
A pleasant Grove her shady Mansion round,
With Poplar, Alder, and tall Cypress crowned,
Upon whose Boughs, Birds various built and bred,
Hawks, Owls, and Choughs, who on Sea margents fed;
A circling Vine which purpling clusters lade,
Whose verdant Branches her low Palace shade:
Four stately Founts in comely order placed,
With disembogueing Spouts each other faced,
Environed with delightful Meads, which round
Soft Violets, and pleasant Smallage crowned:
Which if a God, wandering by chance, had seen,
He had admired and much delighted been.
There Hermes wondering stops: when he his eye
Had surfeited with strange variety,
Straight to her cool Apartment Hermes goes,
Calypso him sooner then entered knows:
Immortal Powers who nere converse, although
They far from either dwell, each other know:
But not the Nymph he with Ulysses found,
He sitting on the shore deep sighing, drowned
His Cheeks with Tears, his Breast with sorrow swelled,
And restless Seas as restless there beheld.
But when Calypso in her Golden Throne
Had Hermes placed, the Goddess thus begun;
Why, my dear Hermes, make thou this address
To me, that nere did visit my recess?
Lay your commands, your pleasure I Will obey
If in my power, if possible I may;
But first take some repast. This said, the Board
She with brisk Nectar and Ambrosia stored.
When he had tasted her Celestial fare;
Ask you, he said, why hither I repair?
Know beauteous Nymph, Joves pleasure I fulfill,
He sent me hither much against my will;
Who one such vast and swelling Floods would fly?
No City near, nor sacred Temple nigh,
Where pious Mortals on our Altars lay
Whole Hecatombs: but Jove we must obey.
One of those hapless Chiefs, Nine years employed
Beleag'ring Troy, which they the Tenth destroyed,
Whom in return offended Palla's hurld
With raging Tempests through the watery World
His Friends destroyed; him with rough Billows drove
Upon your Coasts, you must dismiss, says Jove:
It Is not his Fate to perish in Exile,
He must his Court review, and Native Soil.
She troubled said; You envious Gods delight,
In nothing more, then thus to wreak your spite:
Who not allow a Goddess in her house,
To treat a Mortal, though she him Espouse.
So when Aurora with The Moral of this Fable of Orion being taken away by
Aurora, is only this, That he dying an immature death, before he came to
ripeness of age, was buried presently upon break of day, they not thinking it
fit that the Sun should behold so grievous an evil. Eustath.
Orion mach'd,
Their private meetings you still prying watched;
Until her golden Bow Homer delivers not the reason why Orion was slain by
Diana; but the latter Poets say that he attempted her Chastity, Horace, -- et
integrae
Tentator Orion Dianae,
Virginea domitus sagitta.
Orion chaste Diana strove to obtain,
When by the Virgins Arrow he was slain.
Enphorion gives the same reason of his being slain, but different means; for
he says that he was stung on the Ankle by a Scorpion, produced to that purpose
by Diana, of which he dyed.


Diana drew,
And with her Shafts him in this Island slew:
And so when Ceres did to passion yield,
Enjoying Jasion was the Son of Jupiter and Electra: he was a Husbandman, and
therefore feigned to be beloved of Ceres: of whom he begat Plutus. Hesiod in
his Generation of the Gods, (...),
(...).
Ceres the Goddess with the golden hair,
Impregnated by Jasion, Plutus bare.
The Thunderbolt with which he is slain, signifies, according to Eustathius,
the extremity of heat and drought in the Summer, by which the hopes of Husband
men are frustrated. Ovid in his Metamorphosis acknowledges not his death, but
makes Ceres complain of his old Age; -- queritur veteres Pallanias annos
Conjugis esse sui, queritur canescere mitem
Jasiona Ceres.
Aurora moans her Husbands age, and fair
Ceres her Iasions silver hair.

Fasion in a thrice Plowed Field,
Jove, soon informed, adjudg'd the fact a fault,
And slew him with a blazing Thunderbolt.
So I a Mortal Spousing shall be served.
On's turnd-up Keel him riding I preserved,
When Jove with Lightning, 'midst the raging Sound,
His Vessel sunk, and his Associates, dround;
Drove on this Coast, by Wind and Billows rage,
I loved and cherished; promised him from Age
And Death to free. In vain ourselves w' afflict,
Great Jove, or any God, to contradict.
To quit this Isle, the Ruler of the Sky
May him command, but I shall nere, not I,
Since we a well-man'd Vessel want, which may
Him safe, through the Oceans broad-back'd Waves, convey;
But I Will advise, and best to his avail,
How he to's Country may in safety Sail.
Hermes replied; Keep touch, Jove's anger shun,
Nor farther into his displeasure run.
This said, the God departs: she not delays,
But straight Ulysses seeking, Jove obeys;
Whom finding on the Beech disconsolate,
With Floods of Tears lamenting his sad Fate,
No hope of getting thence, seven years expired,
Now with a Goddesses embraces tired,
Enforced each night within her shady Grot,
To warm her Side, will he, or will he not;
Yet all the day placed on the Rocky Shores,
Viewing the restless Billows, he deplores
Himself with Sighs, would rend a Heart in twain:
The Nymph thus said; Fie, Sir, no more complain,
Save precious time, my interest I Will resign,
And set thee free; Go, fell some lofty Pine,
And make thy self a Vessel, tight and staunch,
In which thou may to Sea in safety launch:
I Bread, Wine, Water will, and Garments find,
Thee to supply, and send a prosperous Wind.
That, if the Gods so please, thou in short time
Shall steer in safety to thy Native Clime.
Some new and quaint device, then he replied,
Not my dismiss, or would I should confide
In a small Bark, where Vessels ablest built,
Knock at Hell gates, and at Heavens arches tilt,
When Tempests rage: against thy will I loath
Should be to Sail, unless thou take an Oath
Thou have no Plot. Then said she, with a Smile;
For me, thou art too crafty to beguile;
I Swear by Heaven and Earth, and Swearing by Styx, an infernal ^ake, was
accounted the most solemn and most revered Oath: as Homer in his I^ads declares
Il. 14. (...).
(...),
(...) --
Swear by the inviolable Stygian Lake,
Taking in one band Earth, in the other Seas,
And the fixed Land with floating Water poise.
Which whosoever of the Celestial Gods violated, was interdicted not only the
Table but all society and company of the rest, for the space of ten years.
Hesiod in his Theogenia, (...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...), etc.
What God so ere swears by the Stygian Lakes,
That dwells on sleep Olympus crown, and breaks
His sacred vow, lies breathless one whole year,
Nor comes to Nectar and Ambrosia near.
Silent he lies upon an ill-made bed,
A dozing Lethargy all ore him spread.
After twelve months he this has undergon,
Follows the heavier affliction:
In nine years more the Gods not him admit
With them in Counsel, nor at Feasts, to sit.

Stygian Floods,
An Oath nere violated by the Gods;
I have no Plot against thee, no design,
But am as Cordial as thy cause were mine:
My Heart is soft, not Adamant, nor Steel,
So I on thy concern compassion feel.
The Nymph, this said, before him lightly trips,
He, following close, reprints Calipso's steps,
Into the Cave a Prince and Goddess goes,
Who seats him straight whence Hermes lately rose,
Filling his Board with various Humane fare,
Then ore against him fills her golden Chair:
Renowned Ulysses, Thou, with no small care,
Do for thy home and Native Soil prepare;
But thou would not rejoice, if thou did know
What sufferings wait on thee, what woe on woe,
Ere thou at home arriv'st: Come! dwell with me,
Rule this my Palace, and immortal be.
Although thou hanker'st still after thy Wife,
And rather would enjoy her than thy life;
Her Beauty, Feature, nor her comely Mein,
Not ours eclipse, and if they did outshine,
Not with Immortals Mortals must compare.
Then thus Ulysses did himself declare.
Ah my dear Goddess! Tax, Ah tax not me!
My Wife that day must not be named with thee,
So far beneath in Beauty and desert:
She is but Mortal, thou Immortal art.
And if some angry God should rage at Sea,
I must with patience bear it as I may.
I much have suffered, much have undergon
In Camps and Seas, and this too may be done.
This said, the Sun descending, Darkness hurled
His Sable mantle over all the World:
They to her Caves recess together went,
And tedious night in sweet embraces spent.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers Days Port-cullice drawn,
But up he starting puts his Garments on;
She her bright Stole, her Veil and golden Zone,
Then forth the Nymph thus dressed in royal Weeds,
To hasten her Ulysses bus'nes speeds:
First in his Hand a Steel edged Axe she put,
The Pollish'd Heft from smooth-rin'd Olive cut,
A sharp Wedg next to him she down conveyed,
Where a tall Forest cast a spreading shade,
Whose Poplar, Firr, and Alder, scale the Sky,
Which plow Waves lightly, seasoned well and dry;
When she had showed him where the largest grew,
The Goddess to her mansion thence withdrew:
Whilst he fells Poplar, Fir, and lofty Pine,
Twenty fair Trees, then squares by Plumb and Line,
When fair Calypso him a Wimble brought,
On which he hard to join the But-ends wrought,
And starting Planchers peggd; a Rudder last,
The Helm to answer makes with joyntings fast;
What ere materials would a Ship-Write ask,
To build a Ship, and well perform his task;
Of such and such a Mold his Catch he made;
And close his Decks and well clinch'd Planchers laid;
Close lay the jutting Ribbs, the Plancks at length:
Next shapes a Mast with Yards of fitting strength
A Helm next smooths, for steerage, which he round
With Sallow Twiggs against angry Billows bound;
Canvas for spreading Sails Calypso brought,
With great and smaller Cordage strongly wrought.
So the fourth day his Vessel tight and staunch,
He from the Stocks by Rowlers freed did Launch;
The fifth, the Nymph him from the Isle dismissed,
And Bathing kindly, in sweet Garments dressed,
Next purest Wine, and Water puts aboard,
And him with Cates and good provision stored,
And sends to wait on him a gentle Gale:
Joyful Ulysses straight unfurls his Sail,
And sitting at the Helm, through swelling Deeps
A steady course Steers on, and never sleeps,
But gazing, contemplates Heavens ample Sphere,
The Pleiades, Orion, and the Bear,
And watching still Orion, Charles his Wain,
Whose Wheels nere dip beneath the swelling Main.
Calypso strictly him advised to stand,
Through briny Billows to the Lar-board hand.
Thus seventeen days and nights he onward steered,
The eighteenth morn Pheacian Hills appeared,
Whose haizy crown not far off he beheld,
From the dark Ocean rising like a Shield:
When Neptune, him from The Geographers finding no such Mountains in Aethiopia,
or the Southern parts of the World, suppose them feigned by Homer in similitude
and correspondence to the Mountains so called in Pisidia, which were the most
conspicuous and eminent Southerly to those that sailed in the Euxine Sea; as
these must be supposed to be, in respect of Ulysses now sailing in the Ocean.
Strabo in the first Book of his Geography.
Solym's lofty side,
Returned from Aethiop plowing Waves espied,
Shaking his Tresses, thus the enraged said;
The Court of Gods have other Orders made,
I absent, yonder Sails Ulysses free,
And soon will reach that Land, where Fates decree
His Woes must end, which straight I Will contradict,
And him before much more then ere afflict.
This said, his Trident taking, he alarms,
And from all quarters musters new raised storms,
Listing swollen Billows, Seas, high Heaven, and Earth,
Muffles in Clouds, at once all Winds burst forth;
Eurus and Notus, Zephyre, Boreas raves,
Tumbling in thwart-plow'd Furrows hide ous Waves.
Trembling and pale, Ulysses then complains;
What miseries for hapless me remains!
The Nymph, I fear, spoke true, who said, before
I should in safety touch my Native Shore,
I much should suffer; Ah! what Winds inrage
These swelling Waves, and my sad Death presage!
Plutarch tells a story of Memmius, the Roman General, that after he had sacked
the City of Corinth, and had made Slaves of all that survived the ruin of their
Country, he commanded one of the Youth to write a Verse, who presently writ
this Verse of Homer, with which the General was so surprised, that he fell a
weeping, and set at liberty the Child with all that had any relation to him.
Thrice happy you, who on the Trojan Plain
Died bravely, in Atrides quarrel slain:
Would I had perished there, and breathed my last,
When showrs of Spears at me the Trojans cast,
As off Homer no where relates the Story of Achilles's death, only hints at it
here: but Dares Phrygius delilivers it at large thus, Hu^ Hecuba in facinus
andax invitat Achillem,
Conjugii factura fidem: venitille, sed arma,
Sed comites nulli, solum sibi Nestore natum
Jungit, vix gladio cingi memor; omni^ linquit,
Dum miser optatos properat visurus amores.
Hecuba's fraud Achilles hither led,
Him promising he should her Daughter wed.
He came unarmed, scarce takes his Sword, by none
Accompanied but old Nestors Son;
Leaves all behind, no danger fears, nor Life,
Hasting to see his so desired Wise.
Where before the Altar of Apollo, he was slain by Paris, and an Ambuscade of
armed Trojans.
Achilles Corpse I guarding came;
Then they had kept my Obits, and my Fame
Divulged through all the World: But ah, now I
Must here obscure, and unlamented die!
Against his Boat, this said, a Billow dashed,
And him ore-board from Helm and Steerage washed:
Which seconded with a resounding blast,
The Yard flies from the Sail, and spends his Mast:
Nor he his Head could 'bove the Water get,
Pressed down with surging Waves, and Garments wet.
Long struggled he, but up he boy'd at last,
And Briny draughts his Stomach easing cast:
Yet he his Boat reminds, though out of breath,
And in he gets, avoiding sudden Death;
Him in the middle placed, vast Billows bear,
Raised by uncertain Gusts, now here, now there;
As when the Autumnal storm through Champaign sweeps
Light Thistle-down, which yet in clusters keeps,
So went she tossed about among billows rough,
Now Boreas her, now Eurus, Zephyre cuff,
Bandying his crazy Boat from side to side:
She was the Wife of Athamas King of Thebes, who in his madness slew Learchus,
the Son which he had by her. Whereupon she, out of impatience, taking her other
Child in her Arms, cast her self into the Sea. But upon the entreaty of Venus
was made a Goddess of the Sea by Neptune, as Ovid writes in the 4. of his
Metamorphosis, At Venus immeritae neptis miserata labores,
Sic patruo blandita sno est; O numen aquarum,
Proxima cui coelo cessit, Neptune, potestas.
Magna quidem posco, sed tu miserere meorum
Jactari quos cernis in Ionio immenso,
Et Diis add tuis --
Then Venus, grieving at her Neece's Fate,
Her Uncle thus entreats: O thou, whose State
Is next to Joves; great Ruler of the Flood;
My suit is bold, yet pity thou my Blood,
Now tossed in the deep Ionian Seas:
And join them to thy watery Deities.
Whence all that were saved from Shipwreck paid their Vows to her with the
rest of the Guardians of the Sea, as Lucian in one of his Epigrams testifies,
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
To Glaucus, Nereus, Ino and Melicertes,
Neptune and Samothracian Deities,
Lucillius I, escaped Shipwreck, consecrate
My hair, all that is left of my estate.

Leucothoe, Cadmus Daughter, him espide,
Who had a Mortal been, but now the Gods
Allotted her the honor of the Floods;
Pitying Ulysses in so sad a plight,
She, rising like a Sea-fowl, straight did light
Upon his Boat, and said; Unhappy Prince,
Why Neptune did thou so, so much incense,
That thus he prosecutes thee, yet he shall
Not be thy ruin, should he burst his Gall:
Take my advice, thou seem discreet, thy Coat
Put off, and to the Winds bequeath thy Boat,
And thy course, swimming, to Pheacia shape,
Those Confines Fate decrees for thy escape;
This Ribband tied about thy Bosom bear,
Then Death it self, nor any danger fear;
But soon as thou shall longd-for Land obtain,
Unloose the Charm, and throw into the Main.
The Goddess him, this said, her Fillet gave,
Then diving hides beneath a foamy Wave.
At this Ulysses troubled and dismayed,
A deep sigh fetching, to himself thus said;
Alas! what God contrives this subtle Plot
Against me, persuading to desert my Boat,
I Will not obey, since Land I yonder see,
Where the Nymph told me should my refuge be,
Whilst she together holds, here I Will remain,
And all the brunt of Winds and Waves sustain;
But when she splits I Will swim, and Death evade.
Whilst thus consulting to himself he said,
From deep Seas Neptune a huge Billow drew,
And charged his Vessel, which in splinters flew:
As Chaff dispersed by blustering Tempests born,
So his ripped Pinck divides, in pieces torn:
When on a Plancher getting up he strides;
Himself then stripping (as on Horseback) rides,
Then wound about him, ties the Ribband fast,
And in himself, his hands extended, cast:
When Neptune, in this Posture him surveyed,
His curled Tresses shaking, thus he said;
So swim for life, by ore-grown Billows drove,
Till thou arriv'st among People dear to Jove:
Yet all thou have not escaped. This said, the God
Drove on to A City in Eubaea, not that (...) Achaia, as Strabo observes
(Whe^^^ notwithstanding there was a Te^^^^ of Neptunes) which gave the name the
Aegean Sea.
Aegae, where his Palace stood;
But here her Favorite Minerva minds,
Stopping the passages of Thundering Winds,
Commanding, in their Caverns, all to sleep,
Boreas must only smooth the furrowed deep,
Till to Pheacian Shores Ulysses came.
Two Days and Nights on bounding Waves he swam,
Expecting Death: when the third Morn appeared,
The Winds all hushed, the Sky from Vapors cleared,
Mounted upon a swelling Billow, he
The trending Shore, not distant far could see:
So to kind Children their Sires health appears,
Who Bedridden lay, Consumptive many years,
By sad Diseases, and their Demon charged,
At last from all by milder Gods enlarged.
So to Ulysses showed the Grove and Land,
But Swimming, that he might the Shore ascend
Upon his Feet, he heard loud Billows roar
Amongst the Rocks, and thunder against the Shore,
A great Surf rising with a briny Spry
From broken Clifts, retorted, brushed the Sky.
For there no Harbor was, no Port, nor Bay,
But Rocks and Stones, guarding the Confines, lay.
Much troubled then he sighing, thus complained;
By Jove's assistance Land I have obtained,
Through boyst'rous Waves, yet now no Harbor see shocks,
Where I may escape from farther danger free.
Each where Waves storm the Coasts with thundering
Which hanging Clifts surround, and slippery Rocks,
And the deep Ocean near, not any gap
Where I may footing find, and so escape:
Me the swollen Surge, Land striving to obtain,
Will bruise against Stones, and I shall strive in vain:
But I will farther Swim, perhaps I may
Find smoother Shores, and some protecting Bay:
Mean while I fear a sudden gust again,
May drive me sighing back into the Main:
Or Neptune, whom I have offended much,
May send a huge Sea Monster; many such
The Ocean breeds. Whilst thus the Prince discoursed,
Him on rough Shores a swelling Billow forced,
There had his Flesh been rent, fractur'd his Bones,
Amongst rolling Pebbles and sharp pointed Stones;
Had Pallas this not put into his mind:
Fast a firm Rock with both Hands he intwin'd,
And sighing stuck about her Marble wast,
Till over him the swelling Billow past;
Which re-advancing charged once again,
And swept him sinking back into the Main.
Upon the rough-skin'd Polypus so thick,
Drawn from his Lodging, brittle Pebbles stick,
As in his Palms, when the retiring shock
Of a huge Wave divorced him from the Rock.
There had, despite of Fate, Ulysses died,
Had not Minerva from the orewhelming tide,
Her Favorite raised, and on a Billow bore,
Where he could see a Beech, and smoother shore.
At last a pleasant Rivers mouth he finds,
Free from rough Clifts, safe from disturbing Winds,
Then swimming in, thus to the Rivers were counted Sacred among the Ancients,
under the protection of some peculiar God: so was Eridanus the God of a River
so named, described thus by Claudian, -- ille caput placidis sublime fluentis
Extulit and totis lacem spargentia ripis,
Aurea roranti micuerunt cornua vultu, etc.
Raising his head above his watery banks
His golden Horns, reflecting, tip'd the banks
With sprinkled light; drops trickling from his Face,
He his moist Hair veiled not with Oziers base,
And vulgar Reeds: fresh Poplars shade his Brows,
And Amber from his curled Tresses flows:
A Robe his Shoulder hides; Phaethon's wrought there,
His blew vest burning in his Fathers Chair.
And Tyberis acknowledged for a God by Virgil, Aeneid. 8. Huic Dens ipse loci
fluvio Tyberinus amoeno,
Populeos inter senior se attollere frondes,
Visus, etc.
The Genius of the place old Tyber here,
Amongst the Poplar Branches did appear.

Stream he Prayed;
Who ere thou art great King, thy suppliant aid,
And me escaped, from Neptunes rage defend:
The Gods do still poor Wanderers defend.
Ah, to thy Votaries petition list!
And him who much has suffered now assist.
This said, the River levells all his Waves,
And in his quiet Bosom him receives;
Who scrambling up, on feeble Knees and Hands,
At last much swollen with soaking Billow, lands,
Drawing short Breath, much Water from his Nose
And Mouth distilling down, himself he throws;
But when his Soul dislodged was repossest,
And he recovered with a little rest,
From's Bosom he the Goddess Riband took,
And threw into the Sea-descending Brook,
Which a swollen Billow carrying to the Main,
Straight to the Nymphs fair Hands conveyed again.
Leaving the Stream, shelter'mongst Reeds he took,
And kissing the Earth with a deep sigh thus spoke;
Ah me what shall I do! what next remains,
If I ly here till day, night's cold serenes,
Or from the Stream the chiller morning Dew,
My weary Body will pinch through and through,
If up to yonder shady Grove I creep,
I warm at ease'mongst leavy-shrubs might sleep,
But if surpised by gentle Somnus may
Some Serpents be, or Salvage Monsters prey;
On this he pitched. The Grove then enters straight,
And found a place fitted for his receipt,
Two twin-born Olives near the River stood,
In prospect skirting the adjacent Wood;
Not into this, Sun, Rain, nor piercing Wind,
The Twigs so closely Wove could passage find;
Here straight Ulysses entering makes his Bed,
And store of leaves above and under spread;
There two or three might warm in Winterly,
Safe from fowl weather and a raging Sky:
This Receptacle, the glad Prince receives,
Who lying down himself heaps ore with Leaves,
As under Ashes One a Brand conceals,
Who, far from Neighbors, in the Country dwells,
That Fire on all occasions he may keep;
So covered lay Ulysses, whom asleep
Minerva casts, closeing his weary eyes,
Freeing at once from toil and miseries.
scene from book 6 Illustrissimae Dominae de Arran Tabulam Dae Marice
Comitissae hanc LMDDDIO Lib 6



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Nausicaa's Dream; she to the Fountain speeds,
They wash, and spread on drying Plots their Weeds.
Loosing their Ball at Play they raise a cry,
Which wakes Ulysses; he appears, they fly:
Only the Princess stays, his suit receives,
And him supplied with Food, and Raiment leaves.
SO slept Ulysses free from Toil and Cares,
Whilst Pallas to Pheacian Towers repairs,
Who near the Cyclops in Some Grammarians take it to be an Island near unto the
Country of the Cyclops: but that agrees not with the mind of the Poet: for how
could Islanders be endamaged by the Cyclops's, who, according to Homer, used no
Shipping Others conjecture it to be a City of Sicily, afterward called
Camerina, which is more probable.
Hyperia dwelt,
And often their rage by Plund'ring In-roads felt,
Which Colonie Nausithous commands,
In Scheria, planted far from Peopled-Lands,
Their The Poet has briefly here in two Verses comprehended the whole affair
of settling a Colony. The first part, that is, the fortifying the City, and
building Houses for the inhabitants, contains their security and commodity, the
other speaks their Religion and Justice.
City Fortifies with Bulwarks round,
Builds Houses, Temples, and divides the ground.
But he descending to the Stygian shade,
Renowned Alcinous the Scepter swai'd:
Her steps Minerva to his Court directs,
Nor ought to haste Ulysses home neglects:
And straight a stately Chamber enters, where
A Virgin slept, as the Immortals, fair,
Alcinous Daughter, bright Nausicaa;
Two Damsels, like the Graces, near her lay;
The twy-leav'd Doors on Jaums opposing shined,
Through which the Goddess, lighter then the Wind,
Silently stole up to the Princess Couch,
Resembling Dymas Daughter, whom she much
Accompanying, in estimation had,
Her tardyness thus seeming to upbraid;
Why bore thy Mother such a sluggard? why
Thy richest Garments foul neglected ly?
Thy Nuptials near, when thou should all transcend
In gorgeous dress, and those who thee attend,
For femal arts thy fame spread, far and near,
Which thy Indulgent Parents joy to hear.
Let Us to the Fountain with the rising Sun,
I Will help, that we the sooner may have done:
You Will be no Virgin long, a great resort
Of Prime Pheacians thee prepare to court.
Thy Fathers Chariot ask, in which we may
Your Stoles, and Veils, and richest Garments lay:
Nor stands it with your Dignity nor Port
To walk on Foot, so far off from the Court.
This said, Minerva seals Olympus is a high Mountain in the borders of
Thessaly whose top was anciently believed to be above the Region of the Clouds,
and therefore feigned to be the seat of the Gods: which Lucretius thus
describes out of this place of Homer, Apparet Divum numen, sedesque quietae
Quas neque concutiunt venti, nec unbla nimbis
Adspergunt, neque nix acri concreta pruina
Cana cadens violat, semperque innubilus ether
Integit, and large diffuso lumine redit.

Olympic Towers,
The blessed seat of Gods, with bitter Showers
Never infested, where no Tempests blow,
Nere clothed with crusted Frosts nor fleecy Snow;
A cloudless Sky still crowns those blessed Aboads,
Of ever young and never Dying Gods:
The Dawn now blooming with a tender beam,
The Princess wakes, much wondering at her Dream;
And thence straight goes t'acquaint the King and Queen
With her intents, and finds them both within;
Her with her Maids spinning rich Wool about
A stately Fire, her Father going out
To a great Council, where the Princes met,
When thus she on her Royal Parent set;
Your Chariot order Sir, that straight I may
Your Royal Vests down to the stream convay,
That there they may be washed, it is much unfit,
You in soyl'd Robes should'mongst our Princes sit.
Five Sons dwell in your Court; for two your care
Provided has, three yet unmarried are;
They should be neat and clean to dance at Balls,
To look to this under my duty falls.
Thus said she, not once hinting hopes to wed,
But her Design he further sounding said;
Ask what thou will, it is thine; within, who wait?
Harness my Mules, bring my best Chariot straight:
His word's a Law, the Servants all obeyed,
And what the King commanded ready made.
The Princess from her Chamber brings a Vest,
And puts in her Carroch, the Queen a Chest,
With several Cates and Wine in a Borach,
And to her mounting did a Violl reach
Of perfumed Oil to use when she had washed.
Taking the Rains her Mules Nausicaa lashed,
They stretch away, not bearing Vests alone,
But all the Damsels her attended on.
When to the pleasant Fountain they drew near,
Where they might wash all seasons of the year;
Where cleansing streams like purest Crystal spout;
There they alight, and sweating Mules take out,
And on the Margents of the purling Flood,
Drove to sweet Grass, their Chariot next unload,
And foul Weeds throw into the Crystal Spring,
Which in full Troughs they trample in a ring;
Each the Buck plying with a tab'ring Foot;
All clear from spots, discoloring stains and smut,
They their white Regiments in Files and Ranks
On pollish'd Pebbles spread, on Sea-wash'd banks,
Themselves then Bathed, Perfumed, and neatly decked
To Dinner went, where sitting they expect,
Until the Sun whiten their Weeds and dry:
When Feasted well, they lay their Chaplets by
To play at Ball: amidst her Virgin-train,
The Princess first warbled a pleasant strain.
So walks Diana ore the Mountain tops,
Through A Mountain in Peloponnesus, small in compass, but high and steep; part
of which being violently thrown down by an Earthquake almost ruined the whole
City of Sparta, as Pliny in the 2. Book of his Natural History. From hence was
Diana called Taygetea.
Tayget or the A Mountain in Arcadia, in which there were diverse Groves
abounding with wild Beasts, as Ovid writes in the 2. of his Metamorphops,
Dumque feras sequitur, dum saltus eligit aptos,
Nexilibusque plagis Sylvas Erymanthidos ambit,
Incidit in matrem --
Whilst he hunts Beasts, and shady Groves besets,
Erymanthian Woods beleaguring with Nets
He on his Mother lights --
And therefore properly feigned by the Poet the place of Diana's recreation.
Erimanthian Cops,
Amongst Goats and Deer delighted to resort,
The rural Nymphs about the Goddess sport,
Whilst joy invades Latona's silent Breast,
She by the shoulders taller then the rest.
Now ready to return, just when they should
Their Mules conjoyn, and up their Garments fold;
Minerva then contrived a handsome slight
Ulysses to awake, that so he might
The Virgin see must him from thence convey;
Who the Ball serving, earnest at her play
Unto another, something missed her aim;
Which she not catching, fell into the Stream:
At this they shreek, the cry Ulysses wakes,
Who to himself, then sitting up, thus speaks;
Ah me, who here reside? a Race unjust!
Rusticks not ruled by reason, but their Lust,
Or those who, civilliz'd, Celestials fear?
That thus a cry of Nymphs invades my ear,
Dwelling in Mountains, or more blessed aboads,
Among Flowery Meads, watered with Crystal Floods:
Or are they Men? I Will see. This said, he steals
From sheltring shrubs, and with a Branch conceals
His modest parts; then up he runs amain,
Like a huge Lion beat with Wind and Rain,
Who forced by want, his eyes like Beacons, falls
On Sheep, Beevs, Deer, breaks Houses, storms high Walls;
So to the Virgins drawing near he shows,
Horrid with scurffing Brine and parched Owse.
To shelter all dispersed fly, except
Alcinous Daughter; she her station kept,
By Pallas Instigation bolder made.
Ulysses here a while consid'ring staid,
Should he draw near, fall humbly at her Knee,
Or at some distance move, she pleased would be
Him to the City to direct, and cloth.
The last advice, he first approves on, loath
By drawing near her modesty to invade.
Then thus the King implores the royal Maid;
If thou art Mortal or Celestial Blood,
Pity great Queen, but if sprung from a God
Who plants the Sky, Diana the art, Joves race,
Such thy majestic Person, Mien, and Face:
But if that thee some Earthly Princess bare,
Ah! then thrice happy thy relations are;
When thee'mongst meaner Stars they see advance,
Crowning each Figure in a Courtly Dance:
But he is most happy who shall thee Espouse,
And conqueror lead triumphing to his House;
Since I nere Beauty saw like thine before,
Which I the more I view, admire the more:
But late at Delos I a There is frequent mention of this Palm, near the Altar
of Apollo in the Island Delos, so admirable for its height and beauty.
Callimachus in his Hymn upon Apollo, speaking of his return upon his
anniversary festivals at Delos, (...).
(...); (...)
(...), (...).
Phoebus the door strikes with his beauteous Foot,
The Delian Palm tree nods, perceive you not?
Mark how the Swan sings sweetly in the Air.
And Cicero says, that in his time there was there to be seen a fair Palm,
which the Natives believed to be that here commended by Ulysses. Aut quod
Homericus Ulysses Deli se proceram and teneram Palmam vidisse dicit, hodie
monstrant candem. At this Palm Latona brought forth Apollo, as Homer in one of
his Hymns delivers it, (...),
(...), (...)
(...), (...)
(...)
(...).
Rejoice Obless'd Latona that did bear
King Phoebus, and the beauteous Forrester.
Her in Ortygia, in rough Delos him,
Leaning against Cynthus Mountain near the stream
Of Inopus, under a spreading Palm.
Which is signified too by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Illic inclinans cum
Palladis arbore Palmae,
Edidit invita Geminos Latona noverca

Palm beheld,
Next Phoebus This Altar of Apollo was built of the Horns of Goats which Diana
slew in Cynthus a Mountain in the Island of Delos, according to Callimachus,
(...)
(...), (...)
(...), (...)
(...), (...).
Horns of the Cynthian Goats Diana brought
From hunting, Phoebus the Altar built and wrought:
With Horns the basis, and did Horns provide
Fastening the Altars joints on every side.
Whom Ovid follows in his Epistle of Cydippe's, and admires no less the
Structure of the Altar, then the Palm adjoining, Miror and innumeris structam
de cornibus aram,
Et de qua pariens arbore nixa Dea est.
The Altar built with Horns my wonder bred,
And Tree on which she leaned when brought to Bed.

Altar, which like thee, excelled
With a fair Train As he went to Troy: for Lyeophron mentions the arrival of
the Grecian Fleet there, in their passage thither, not at their return.
I thither came, and such
Our dangerous Voyage proved, I suffered much,
Such and so great a maze curdl'd my Blood,
Viewing that Plant, the glory of the Wood;
As now the strange Astonishment I meet,
Fearing my self to prostrate at thy Feet;
Last Night I landed here, twenty Days tossed
With Winds on Waves, from the Ogygian Coast.
And now some God enforced me on this Shore,
Perhaps to make my miseries the more:
To see of woes a period I despair,
Though great and many my past suff^rings are.
Pity me, Madam, pity most accursed,
One that has felt of Fortunes spite the worst,
Since first I thee implore: I know not one
That tills these fields, or dwells within yon Town.
Show me the way, and if so well y' are stored,
A Vest, though torn, to cover me afford,
Which Heaven repay thee in a loving Spowse,
Obedient Servants, and well ordered House;
Which will displease thy enemies to hear,
But Music to thy Friends and Kindreds ear.
She thus replied; I should be, Stranger, loath
To tax thy Folly, Cowardice, or Sloth;
Jove where he pleases good or ill bestows,
And now perhaps accumulates thy woes,
Which will with patience thee become to bear:
But since thou in this plight art landed here,
A Vest thou shall not, nor what ere else want,
That may beseem a woeful Supplyant:
And I Will conduct thee to our Walls, and tell
Who plant these Coasts; here the Pheacians dwell,
Alcinous Daughter I, He who now raigns
Absolute Monarch ore these fertile Plains.
This saying, thus she calls her Damsels! Stay,
Why fly you frighted from a Man away?
Suppose you him a Foe, no Mortal shall
In hostile manner on these Confines fall:
Us far from all commerce the Gods maintain,
Guarded with thundering Waves, amidst the Main.
This a poor stranger, him it would behove
To comfort; such beloved are of Whence Jupiter had the Epithet of (...) and
Hospitalis, as being the revenger of all wrongs done to strangers, and the
protector of their safety. Virgil Aeneid. 1. Jupiter, hospitibus nam te dare
jura loquuntur,
Hunc laetum Tyriisque diem Trojaque profectis
Esse velis, nostrosque hujus meminisse minores.
O Jove (for thou protect'st all Guests they say)
Make to both Nations this a happy day,
Which always let posterity Record.
Cicero in his Oration for Dejotarus, Si veneno te interemisset, Jovis quidem
illius HOSPITALIS numen nunquam celare potuisset, homines for^asse celavisset:
Had he Poisoned thee, he might perchance have concealed it from men, but he
could never have hid it from the deity of Jupiter HOSPITALIS.
Jove.
Small gifts to them seem great, bring him some Food,
And Bathe him sheltered in the Crystal Flood.
Stopped with these summons, they each other call,
Then placed him warm against a sunney Wall,
A Shirt, a Vest, and Coat, Ulysses brought,
And with rich Oil a golden Vyal fraught:
Next, to the pleasant River him conduct;
When his attendants thus did he instruct;
So favor me to walk aside a while,
Till washed and sweet I am, with perfumed Plutarch in his Symposiacal
discourses makes this question, why the Poet, who gives peculiar Epithites to
all other moist bodies, should particularly give that to Oil which is common to
all the rest; to wit, moist or liquid. To which is replied; That as that is
most properly called white, which least partakes of any other Color, so that
is most properly called liquid or moist which does least partake of any dry
parts; which is the property of Oil; as he there proves at large, lib. 6. c. 9.
Oil;
Me to be naked among so many Maids,
Bathing my self, my modesty disswades.
Advised thus, they all withdraw abashed;
Whilst he his Neck and ample Shoulders washed
From froathy Brine, which like dry Scurf lay spread:
Cleansing from clotted Owse, his Hair and Head:
When he had 'noynted with the rich Unguent,
Put on those Garments fair Nausicaa sent,
Minerva renders him more tall and fair,
Curling in rings like Daffadills his Hair:
So shows, bout Silver a gilt border, wrought
By one whom Vulcan and Minerva taught:
With so much beauty did the Goddess grace
His spreading Shoulders and majestic Face.
Who walking thence in comely Weeds arrai'd,
The Queen admiring, to her Damsels said;
This worthy Person sure at our aboads
Had nere arrived, contemned of all the Gods.
Mean seemed he first when he himself addressed,
Resembling now one of the ever blessed.
I well could be content to be his Bride,
If pleased he in our Palace would reside:
Some Food for him prepare. This said, they set
Before Ulysses Wine and sav'ry Meat:
And he who long had Fasted, highly Feasts,
Whilst they their Garments folding up, and Vests
Laid in their Chariot, and their Amongst the ancient Grecians and Latins
there seem to have been a different use of Horses and Mules: the former were
used in Chariots of War, as appears through the whole Iliads; and in public
Races, as in the Olympic and Nemean games: the latter in Chariots for private
use and Journeys. Aeschines in his Oration against Ctesiphon (...) he let out
to them three Chariots of Mules: and Synesius in his third Epistle, (...),
ascending the Chariot led by Mules.
Mules put in
Thus mounting, to Ulysses spoke the Queen;
Now, Sir, be pleased to rise, nor time neglect,
And thee I Will to my Father's Court direct;
Where the Pheacian Princes thou shall see:
And since thou prudent art, advised be;
Follow the tractings of my Chariot Wheels,
Till we have past these cultivated Fields;
And thou will soon unto the City reach,
With strong Towers flankerd, and a double Beach;
Where narrow entrances on either side
Within enlarge, where Vessels Land-lock'd ride:
The Forum near, and Neptunes Temple, all
Of Pollish'd Stone, environed with a Wall.
There has our Arcenal in several stores,
Magazind, Cordage, Canvase, Masts and Oars.
We Bows and Quivers mind not, but stout Ships,
Trusting in them, we plow the swelling Deeps.
So shun aspersion and the carping Crowd,
They commonly uncivil are, and proud,
Who thus their Verdicts spending us would taunt;
What Stranger's this, Nausicaa's Ga-llant?
Where found she him? Sure from another World
By Fate this Stranger on our Confines hurled,
She means to Wed, none us inhabits nigh;
Or else some God descended from the Sky,
And will at her request a Mortal Wed,
None but a Foreiner must enjoy her Bed;
She to our Primer Youth, and Nobles shy,
Returns for Love some scornful reperty.
Thus would they at my reputation strike;
And I should spend my censure much alike
On any, Parents not consenting, dare
Be seen amongst Men, before they Wedded are:
Do thus, and soon my Father shall transport
Thee to thy long-wish'd home, and Native Port.
A Path to Pallas Grove and Fountain leads
Close by the Road, guirt in with Flowery Meads,
My Father's Ground and Orchards there, so near
The Town, that thence you may one hollowing hear:
There stay until thou think we are at home,
Then with all speed up to the City come;
And for the Royal Palace then enquire,
Whose Walls not like Pheacian Towers aspire,
And the lest Child will show thee; then walk in,
First making thy addresses to the Queen:
Leaning against a Column, by the Fire
She sits, and Purple spins, Attendants by her:
My Fathers Throne and hers almost conjoyn,
Who God like feasting, drink delicious Wine:
There her Petition; if she condescends,
Thou soon shall see thy Native Soil and Friends.
This said, she lashed her Mules, and guids the Reins,
They Print with Iron-shood-Hoofs the dusty Plains,
They soon Ulysses and her Maids outstrip,
She not till Night indulgent to the Whip:
When Pallas Fane they reached, Ulysses stayed,
And thus devoutly to the Goddess Prayed;
Hear me Jove's Daughter, to my Prayer ah! list,
Who me so late against Neptune did assist,
And brought alive to the Pheacian Shore.
The Goddess heard her Supplicant implore,
But yet for him not publicly appeared,
Because her Uncle's anger much she feared,
Who raging would not be appeased, before
Ulysses landed on his Native shore.
scene from book 7 Honoratissimo Domino Do: Johanni Boteler Tabulam hanc
LMDDDIO Lib 7.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Alcinous Garden, Palace, where unseen
Ulysses makes addresses to the Queen:
The Cloud dispersing, he appears; all
Are struck with admiration through the Hall.
The pitying King harkens to his request:
All promise fair; Arete knows his Vest.
THus to his Patroness Ulysses prayed,
Whilst to the Palace came the royal Maid.
Entering, her Brothers round about her pressed,
Took out her Mules, and carried in the Vest.
She to her Chamber went, where her old Maid
A fire, Eurymedusa, kindled had,
Whom in her prime they from Though the Poet makes the Island of the Phaeacians
a kind of Vtopia, yet from this place Eustathius observes that the true
position of it might be ghess'd at, Apirus here being the proper name of the
Country afterward called Epirus.
Apira sent,
And did to Alcinous a choice Gift present,
Born in a Vessel through the boyst'rous Main,
Where, worshipped as a God, the King did Reign:
She bred his daughter; who her Chamber air'd,
Nor to keep neat and handsome labor spared.
Whilst on Ulysses going, Pallas shrouds
Her Minion in a Cloak of Sable Clouds,
Lest the affronting The vulgar sort of People are prone to use opprobrious and
contumelious words against strangers, as having no Commerce or society with
them: King Danaus tells his daughters, who fled with him out of Egypt into
Greece, among the rest of his instructions, Aeschylus Supplic. (...)
(...)
All men are ready Strangers to abuse:
And easy we opprebrious language use.
Wherefore Venus shrouds the Trojans in a Cloud, as Minerva her Ulysses, when
they were to pass through Carthage, Virgil. At Venus obscuro gradientes aere
sepsit,
Et multo nebulae circum Dea fudit amictu:
Cernere ne quis cos, neu quis contingere p^sset,
Motirive moram, aut veniendi poscere causas.
But Venus with black Mists them walking shrouds,
And covers with a Cloak of sable Clouds,
Lest any should or touch them, or discern,
And by delays their cause of coming learn.

Rout should on him set,
Roughly examine, and as evilly treat.
No sooner he into the City gets,
But him Minerva like a Virgin meets,
Bearing a Pitcher; when Ulysses said;
Direct me to the Palace, pretty Maid,
Where Reigns Alcinous, who these Realms commands;
I a poor Stranger come from foreign Lands,
Know none who in this Town or Country dwell.
Then said Minerva; Sir, that can I well,
My Father lives close by, but I desire
For your own good, of none else to inquire;
Since we to Travelers that come from far,
Uncivil and Inhospitable are:
For we boast Ships plow Brine, as Birds the Skies
On Wings divide, or nimbler Fancy flies.
This said, away before she nimbly trips,
He, following close, reprints the Goddess steps,
And through the City went, unseen of proud
Pheacians, hid with an obscuring Cloud:
Where he their Port and stately Ships admires,
Their Forum, Bull-warks crowned with lofty spires.
But when they to the Royal Palace came,
This is the Court said the Celestial Dame,
And thou shall find our Princes Feasting there,
Venture amongst them boldly, and not fear:
Courage all business aids. When thou art in,
Thou shall behold Arete first, our Queen.
She and the King of one extraction are,
To Neptune, Peribe Nausithous bare,
Eurymedon's youngest Child, who Giants swai'd;
But he his People and himself destroyed,
Rhexenor and Alcinous he begot,
Rhexenor, only Son, Apollo shot,
Who left one Daughter in his royal House,
Out of this Genealogy it appears that Arete, was both the Wife and Niece of
Alcinous: Which Spondanus would have observed, he having no where else found
mention of Marriages in those Relations. But whosoever shall peruse the
Orations of Demosthenes, and the rest of the Greek Orators, shall find such
Marriages ^o have been frequently practiced by the Grecians.
Arete, whom her Uncle made his Spouse:
They both Admirers of each other are,
Nere such a loving, nere a happyer, pair.
Her Children with her are, and People took,
And on the Queen, as if some Goddess, look.
Who when she through the City drives her Coach,
With joyful acclamations all approach,
And their affections with loud shouts proclaim,
Nor are her Virtues gloss'd by flattering Fame;
She hears debates, their Causes too disputes,
Chides the Litigious cutts of tedious suits.
If her thou please, and once she condescends,
Thou soon shall see thy Country and thy Friends.
This said, the bright-ey'd Virgin thence departs,
And fertile Scheria, crossing Seas, deserts,
Flying to A Town in the district of Athens, celebrated for the famous Victory
the Athenians obtained there over the Medes and Persians.
Marathon's Athenian Port,
There entering The King of Athens.
Erectheus royal Court.
But on he going, stopped with some Dispute,
Ere he on Brazen Pavements set his Foot:
For all the House shon like the radiant Moon,
Or glorious luster of the Sun at Noon.
The inward Court conducting to the Hall,
Environed with a high and Brazen Wall,
A Sapphire Turret crowned the Golden Doors,
Which hung on Silver Jaumes over Brazen Floors;
The Silver Threshold had a Golden edge,
On each side Dogs, which Vulcan from the Wedge
Had Anvil'd out of Silver, mixed with Gold,
Immortal Guards, and never to be Old:
Seats round the Walls were Canopi'd in state,
Where all the Year their Princes Feasting sat.
Where Golden Boys each held a blazing Torch,
Lighting them to the Altars through the Porch:
Fifty fair Damsels baked, or busy at
Their Looms, with Shuttles nimbly running, sat,
Like unto Poplar, leaves; the Oil distills,
And liquor'd work grows moist on shining quills:
So much as the Pheacians all outstrip,
In steering through the watery World a Ship;
As much their Women at the Web excel,
And had in Pallas Arts no Parallel.
Close to the Gates, well hedged on either side,
A stately Orchard was, four Acres wide:
There pregnant Trees to Heaven high forehead shoot
Laden with Pears, and store of blushing Fruit,
Olives and Figs, green, budding, ripe appear,
Cherished with Western Breizes all the Year,
Peach succeeds Peach, Pears, Apples, bloomed and big,
Grapes, after Grapes, a green and mellow Figg;
Whilst here, Vines ripen, there, ripe clusters load
The yielding Branches, ready to be trod.
Amongst these were two Silver Fountains; one
Through all the Alleys of the Orchard run,
The other through his Palace gliding down,
First serves his House, and after served the Town:
Such was Alcinous Court. With gazing tired,
When he enough these wonders had admired,
He ventures in, and found them turning up
To Athenaeus in his first Book notes that the ancients at the end of their
entertainments, when they went to their rest, used to sacrifice to Mercury, as
being the President of Sleep: which custom was after wards altered. Jupiter
(...)(the God of Marriage) succeeding in his room.
watchful Hermes a Libation Cup,
Which, when they go to rest, they him present
Through all the Palace. On Ulysses went
Veiled in a Cloud, until he came unseen,
Where sat Alcinous and his beauteous Queen:
Then kneeling, on her knee his hand he laid,
When straight dissolved the circumfused Shade,
All silent, wondered, with amazement struck,
Beholding him, who thus imploring spoke;
Thou who renowned Rhexenor's Daughter art,
I, who have acted long a woeful part,
To thee and royal Spouse a Suppliant come,
And all these Princes Feasted in this Room:
Long may you live and Blessed, and may your Race,
When dead, enjoy your Honors, Wealth, and Place:
But me with speed send to my Native Soil,
Who, far from Friends, endured much woe and toil.
This said, down on the Ashes near the Fire
He sat, whilst the Spectators all admire:
At last Echenius, an ancient Lord,
Of all the eldest, sitting at the Board,
For Eloquence, and much experience, famed,
The silent Princes thus discreetly blamed;
Uncomely it is, Alcinous, and unfit,
On the un-swept Because that was in the protection of Vesta, a Goddess highly
reverenced and worshipped by the Ancients. Tully lib. 2. De not. Deorum, Vestae
nomen sumptum est a Graecis: ea est enim quaillis 'E^iz dicitur, visque ejus ad
aras and focos pertinet. The name Vesta is borrowed from the Greeks, which they
call 'E^iz, whose protection is over Altars and Fires And that this was the
custom of Supplyants, is testified by Apollonius in his Argonanticks, (...)
(...).
About the fire they placed themselves all mute:
Such postures best with humble supplyants suit.
^o when Themistocles, jointly persecuted by the Athenians and Lacedaemonians,
was forced to render himself to the mercy of Admetus King of the Molossi, whom
he had formerly offended, in token of subjection and begging his pardon and
protection, he cast himself down before his ^ire, Plutarch.
Hearth, a Stranger thus should sit:
At your commands, Attendants ready are,
To place him better, in a studded Chair:
Bid Heralds power out Wine, that so we may,
Afresh to Jove our due Libations pay,
Who such poor Pilgrims often accompanies;
And let the Board be stored with fresh supplies.
Alcinous raised him by the Hand, this said,
And to a Silver-studded Chair conveyed,
And from his place Laodamus removed,
His Son, who next him sat, and most beloved.
Water a Virgin, King Alcinous Sewer,
Powers in a Basin from a Silver Ewer;
Next she sets Manchet, having spread the Board,
Which she with store of various Dishes stored:
Whilst Wine and Cates hunger and thirst allai'd,
Fill Bowls Pontonous, Alcinous said,
That we to Jove may glad Libations pay,
Who often assists poor Pilgrims in their way:
This said, the Tables he with Wine supplies.
When all had drank as much as might suffice,
Alcinous said; You Princes, I Will impart
The intimating dictates of my Heart;
Since it grows late, and we well Feasted are,
Each to repose in his own House repair,
And we to morrow shall with more resort,
Treat civilly this Stranger in our Court,
And to the Gods larger Libations pay:
Then We'll consult how we this Pilgrim may,
Driven by cross Fortune on our happy Isle,
Send home in safety to his Native Soil:
Then let the Parcae do, when we have done,
What, when his Mother brought him forth, they Spun.
Most sure the Gods design some business here,
For still before they accustomed to appear,
When Hecatombs we offered, as a Guest,
They would with us sit down and freely Feast;
And if one met them Traveling alone,
To him they always would themselves make known,
Because to them we are supposed as near,
As the proud Cyclops to the Giants were.
Then to the King Ulysses thus replied;
Such cares Alcinous, please to lay aside.
I am no God descended from the Sky,
But such as you, a woeful Mortal I:
Only of Sorrows I much more have shared,
All which the Gods for hapless me prepared
And at convenient time I shall relate,
But now, though grieving, suffer me to eat;
Natures repair, the Bellies interest will
Nere acquiesce, but calls and clamours still.
Though now my Soul with sorrows is transpierc'd,
Yet I must hunger satisfy, and thirst,
And former Mis'ries in Oblivion drowned.
But would you please at leisure to propound,
A means that the through Billows may transport,
To my own Country and my Native Court,
Where my dear friends my Dying Eyes might close,
You make me blessed after so many Woes.
His speech by them approved; off they lay
Farther inquiries till the ensuing Day:
When all with Wine well satisfied were,
Each to repose in his own House repair;
And leave Ulysses in Alcinous Court,
By the King sitting, and his dear Consort:
Whilst the Attendants thence the Boards conveyed,
And routed Dishes, thus Arete said;
Knowing the Vest and Garment he had on,
By her, and her fair Damsels Wove and Spun;
Be pleased to satisfy me, noble Guest,
From whence you came, and where you had that Vest;
You said that you were driven on our Coast.
Then he replied; Impossible almost,
Great Queen, it is my sufferings to relate,
So many were imposed on me by Fate.
Though my Soul shrink at what my Tongue must say,
And flies the sad remembrance, I obey.
TO Ogygia, where no God nor Mortal else
But Atlas Daughter, fair Calypso, dwells,
My Fortune drove me, that scarce ere indulged,
When Jove my Ship with dreadful Thunder bulg'd:
Where my relations perished in the Flood,
Nine days upon my turn'd-up Keel I rowed,
And on the Tenth the Gods so kindly dealt,
They drove me on those Confines where she dwelt,
Who treated me, and promised that she would
Make me Immortal, never to grow Old:
But her Allurements little did persuade,
Yet seven long Years with her confined I stayed,
Moyst'ning my Garments with a briny Flood,
Which the Immortal Nymph on me bestowed:
But in the eighth she came and me enjoined,
By Jove commanded, or her changing mind,
Home to repair; and in a Boat dismissed,
And did with all things needful me assist,
And a fair Wind that served me seventeen days,
The eighteenth I did Pheacian Mountains raise,
Which me orejoy'd expecting there relief,
Who had a second part to act of Grief,
Which Neptune gave me: he the Winds enraged,
And briny Mountains'gainst my course engaged,
Nor me lamenting would rough Waves afford
Place in my Boat, but washed me overboard:
Piecemeal my Vessel, Winds and Billows tore,
On Waves I floated, till I reached your Shore:
There Landing, charged ith'Rear with watery Rancks,
By Rocks bruised and inhospitable Bancks,
Thence back I Swam, where I a Creek did find,
Free from rough stones, fenced both against Waves and Wind,
Night drawing near, up to a Grove I crept,
And, covered ore with Leaves, there soundly slept
All Night till Noon: But when the Sun began
His Western stage from the Meridian,
Your Daughters Damsels sporting, me did wake,
And I address to her did humbly make;
A Princess who for Beauty, Shape, and Mein,
Might challenge Venus, or the Forest's Queen:
Nor could I hoped more favor in my Flower,
When Youth and Feature boast their conquering power;
She Treated, Bathed me in the Crystal Flood,
And these rich Garments, which thou see, bestowed:
She did not what she ought, replied the King,
That did not thee up in her Chariot bring.
Then said Ulysses; Sir, not reprehend
The guiltless Virgin, fearing to offend,
Advising me to follow, nor would I,
Lest so it might create a jealousy
In thee: full of suspicion Mortals are.
When thus Alcinous did himself declare;
I am not scandalized at trifles, who
Ambitious am, what is handsome still to do.
Ah that the Gods would such a Son afford
To me! and my dear Daughter such a Lord.
And would thou here remain, I with thy Spouse
Would riches grant thee, and a stately House:
But none shall thee detain in our Aboads
Against thy Will, and pleasure of the Gods,
But send thee home: To morrow thou shall know;
Taking repose, suspens'd from Toil and Woe,
If so thou please, plowing the briny Deep,
Thou shall thy Native Country reach in Sleep,
Were it as far as the Euboean Shore,
The farthest Land, they say, that they explore,
Who see those Lands where Radamanthus reigns,
Where Earth-born Tityus was the Son of Jupiter and Elara, the Daughter of
Orchomenus, whom Jupiter, fearing the jealousy of Juno, hid in the bowels of
the Earth, until the time of her delivery, whence he was supposed to be Terrae
filius. Apollonius in his Argonauticks, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
There Phoebus shooting Tityus as he streve
To force his Mother to lascivious love,
Divine Elara gave the Monster birth,
But he was nursed by the all-fostering Earth.
Homer writes him here to live in Enboea, but the rest of the Ancients agree
that he lived in the Country of Phocis; for there he had his Temple and was
worshipped; there also was a Den called (...) from his Mother Elara, as Strabo
relates. There too was his Sepulcher, according to Pausanias.
Tityus tortured complains,
They the same day, and without labor, reach
Those Coasts, and enter with full Sails our Beach.
Judge then what Ships and Seamen here we boast,
That swift as Swallows fly from Coast to Coast.
When thus Ulysses prayed; Jove, grant the King
His good Design may to perfection bring,
Alcinous grant immortal Fame, and me
My dear Relations and my Home to see.
Arete then commands them make a Bed,
And Purple ore and Royal Tap'stry spread.
Damsels, with Tapers lighted, straight withdrew,
And in the outward Porch her Bidding do:
Returning they then to Ulysses said;
Sir, You may go to Rest, your Bed is made.
He much desiring sleep gladly arose,
And in resounding Portals took repose.
Alcinous lay in Lodgings farther in,
On a soft Couch prepared by his Queen.
scene from book 8 Nobilissimo Domino Dno Philippo Stanhop Comiti ^e
Chesterfeild Baroni Stanhop de Shelford Tahulam han^ LMDDDIO Lib. 8.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE EIGHTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Counsel called, Alcinous moves the Cour^,
That they the Stranger should safe home Transport.
They Feast, then Sport, Ulysses all out flung.
Their Bard the scapes of Mars and Venus Sung:
The Grecian Steed. Ulysses Weeps: His name
Then they desire to know, and whence he came.
NO sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With Rosy Fingers, Days Portcullice drawn,
But up Alcinous and Ulysses rose:
Preceding all in state, Alcinous goes
Then to the Guild, which ranged before the Fleet;
The Concourse there on pollish'd Marble sit.
Like the Kings Herald Pallas walks the Streets,
And all concerned, thus summons as she meets;
You Chiefs and Princes who these people sway,
Haste to the Hall, to hear what he will say,
Who to Alcinous Court so lately came,
And like a God through swelling Billows swam.
Thus expectation heightened, Young and Old
Filling their seats, with wonder him behold;
Whilst on his head and shoulders Pallas sheds
Celestial Rays; his ample Bosom spreads,
Taller he grows, his Limbs more Brawny seem,
A reverential aw and high esteem
So to obtain, and better that he might
Perform those Sports, to which they would him invite.
When all well settled and attentive were,
Thus said the King; You Chiefs and Princes here
Assembled, thus on this occasion, list
To softer dictates of my yielding breast;
This Stranger here, who now your aid implores,
If from the East he came, or Western Shores
I Am not informed, but grant a Vessel may
Him to his Native Soil with speed convey:
None, whosoere my Court shall entertain,
Shall long, for Transport waiting, here remain.
Let straight a well Rigged Galley tight and staunch,
Fifty two Youths, all primer Seamen, Launch,
Oars, Sails prepare, strong Tackle and a Mast;
Then at my Palace let them break their Fast:
This for the Youth: But you our Princes shall
Receive this Stranger in our royal Hall,
Not any must refuse, and bring along
Demodocus, whom with Celestial Song
Some God inspired, who gains from all the Bays,
For well-set Notes, and best composed Lays.
This said, he rising, forth the Princes leads,
And for Demodocus the Herald speeds.
Twice twenty six, as he commanded, went
To Margents of the barren Element:
Soon as they were aboard they launch their Ship,
Erect their Mast, and hoyse their Yard a-trip;
They thong their supple Oars, their Sails expand,
Afloat their Vessel leaving, straight they Land,
And to the Palace with great Concourse throng,
The Gates and Ways were filled with old and young,
For whom Alcinous, well-fed Bullocks two,
Eight brawny Swine, and twelve fat Wethers, slew,
Which neatly dressed, a royal Treatment made:
To Court Demodocus the Herald lead,
On whom a Muse bestowed both good and ill;
Deprived of The ancient Grammarians believe that the Poet does describe
himself here under the name of Demodocus; as Didymus and Eustathius observe.
For that himself was blind is generally delivered by Historians, particularly
by Herodotus in his life of Homer. The Acts of Heroes which Demodocus sung,
they refer to Homers Iliads.
Sight, but much improved his Skill.
Him 'midst the Hall he against a Column placed,
In a rich Chair with Silver Studds inchac'd;
Hung ore his head, his Golden Harp well strung,
Upon a Pin, and showed him where it hung:
Near on a Table placed of antique Mould
A brimming Bowl, to Drink when ere he would.
Then all fell on, and plentifully fare:
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
The Bard inspired, the acts of Heroes Sung,
At whose resounding Fame Heavens Arches rung,
Ulysses and Achilles Homer does in this Poem interweave several passages of
the Trojan War which he omitted in his Iliads, whereof this is one, neither
does he here tell us the subject of this strife between Achilles and Ulysses,
which Didymus thus relates; At Table the question was started in what manner
the City of Troy was to be taken; Achilles counseled to take it by storm;
Ulysses by stratagem: This was the contention. But in Quintus Smyrnaeus this
contest is betwixt Ulysses and Neoptolemus, after the death of Achilles: in
whom Neoptolemus to the proposition of Ulysses, (...)
(...)
(...), etc.
O Chalcas, valiant men fight hand to hand,
But who the Foe far from the Walls withstand,
Subdued with fear, we justly may contemn;
Let us not think of Plot or Stratagens;
Foremost let us with Javelins try it ont,
They are the best in Battle are ^ost stout.

strife, when at
A treatment of the Gods, they Feasting sat;
But glad was Agamemnon, when he heard,
How thus the Valiant'st of their Princes jar'd;
Phoebus to him predicted so before,
In Pythia vent'ring on his marble Floor,
When two such Chiefs should at a Feast contend,
Their tedious War and Miseries should end.
This Story the inspired Poet Sung,
But ore his Face, concerned Ulysses flung
His Purple Vest, veiling his honored Head,
Lest they should spy those briny Tears he shed.
When the learned Bard closed with concluding Chords
Harmonious Notes set to Heroic words,
His face he shows, drying those trickling Floods,
And powrs a franck Libation to the Gods.
But when the Chiefs desired, that he once more
Would Sing, what them delighted so before,
Again his manly Brow Ulysses veiled,
And with his Mantle trickling Tears concealed:
Which straight Alcinous found, and sitting near,
Thus said, whilst he his deep-fetch'd Sighs could hear;
Renowned Pheacians, who with Sails unfurled
Plow Azure Mountains through the watery World,
Since we are satisfied with plenteous fare,
And Music crowning Feasts, let us repair
Now to the Cirque, where all who boast, their Skill
And Strength may show, that our brave Guest may tell
His Friends at home, none dare with us contest
At Running, Dancing, Wrestling, and the The Cest is a piece of Brass tied
about the hands of the Combatants with Leather thongs when they went to Cuffs.
Several forms of them are to be seen in ancient Statues.
Cest:
The King, this said, leads through the yielding throng
The Princes, whilst the Harp Pontonous hung
Upon a Pin, then guids the learned Bard
Forth to the Forum, where they all repaired,
And sitting down, appointed places fill,
Whence many rose to show their Strength and Skill,
Acronius, Ocyall, and Elatrus first;
Nautus, and Prymneus, from the Concourse burst;
Anchialus, Eretmus, Ponteus join,
Proteus, bold Thoon, and Anabasine;
Amphialus, Euryalus, Naubolides the fair,
Whose Shape did with Laodama's compare:
Alcinous Sons rose last to purchase Fame,
Halius, Clytonius, and Laodame.
These run a Race; they Start, and swift they fly,
Whilst Clouds of dusty Atoms dim the Sky:
And straight Clytonius got as far before,
As Mules will Oxen, plowing up twelve-score:
Like winged Lightning he out-stript the Wind,
And soon left all Competitors behind.
Others their skill in Wrestling put to test,
Among whom Euryalus obtained the best.
Amphialus at Leaping none out-goes:
The ponderous Quoit farthest Elatrus throws.
Not any could with Laodame compare
Wielding a Cestus. When they heated were,
Trying their Strength and Skill, the Prince thus said;
Let us this noble Stranger, Sirs, persuade
To show his Art, he has been Courtly bred:
His Thighs are brawny, well his Shoulders spread,
His Person well compact, and strongly Built:
But he who has so many Sorrows felt,
May find impairs: not Sickness, Want, nor Age,
Impeach us more then Seas and Tempests rage;
When they Dispute, the stoutest are convinced,
Then spoke Euryalus, Brother well thou hint'st,
Try if thou can him to our Sports persuade.
Laodamas then to Ulysses said;
Come, Sir, be pleased to give a Taste of what
You in these Pastimes are most Skilful at;
To have such parts a Traveller behooves;
What more the growth of spreading Fame improves,
Then Natures bounties polished with Art;
Come shake off eating Sorrows from your Heart:
Not long will be your stay; Launched is your Ship,
Ready your Men, and your furled Sails a-trip.
Why ask'st thou me, Ulysses then retorts,
Who more inured to Sorrow am then Sports?
Much I have suffered, and must more endure,
But I, an humble Supplyant, would procure,
To Waft me home, the King and People's aid.
To whom Euryalus then roughly said;
Thou have no Courtly qualities to spare,
Nor gentile parts, though they so numerous are,
But look like one who used to Travel, have
Preferment got, and rul'st before the Mast,
Make their accounts, and covetous keep short
Their Meat and Pay; sure thou no Horseman art.
Whom frowning on, Ulysses thus did cool;
What ere I am, thou bablest like a Fool,
And do uncivilly a Stranger use:
Jove not on all men equal Gifts bestows,
That not so much we praise for outward parts,
As for his That is, his deformity is recompensed by his Eloquence and Grace in
Speaking. So says Sappho of her self in Ovid, Si mihi difficilis formam Natura
negavit,
Ingenio forma damna rependo meae.
If Nature has denied me beauty, yet
That want I shall supply with ready Wit.

Eloquence and nobler Arts;
Whom for his modest speaking, Rich and Poor,
Love and admire, and as a God adore:
The other, though his form Celestial seem,
Prates like a Dunce, and loses all esteem:
So thou may Heaven for thy fair outside thank,
Who art a scribl'd Volumn, or a Blanck:
But since my patience the have provoked, and spoke
What ill beseems thee, and I worser take:
I not so ill-bred am as now thou say,
But stood amongst the primer Heroes placed,
Whilst in my Flower; but Crazed I Am now grown stiff,
My Spirits with accumulated grief,
And toil, much wasted, where I often engaged,
Whilst bloody Mars or cruel Neptune raged;
And since thou have provoked me thus, I will
Make trial of my long neglected Skill.
Not casting off his Vest, this said, a Stone
He snatcheth up, a far more ponderous one,
Then the Pheacians use: The heavy Flint
With violence went, as Pluto had been in it,
And flying ore their Heads, They stoop, it goes,
Then breaks new Ground beyond all former throws:
When in a Humane shape the illustrious Maid,
Fixing a mark, thus to the Concourse said;
A blind Man may discern how much thou have
Out-gon the rest, none here shall mend this Cast.
These words boy'd up Ulysses sinking Heart,
Glad he had found a Friend would take his part:
And thus he mildly said; My Masters throw,
This I not question but I can out-go,
And since I am provoked, I dare the best
To Wrestle, Run, or poise the ponderous Cest,
Except Laodamas my dearest friend,
I challenge all who will with such contend;
None but a fool, and such they are abuse,
And thus uncivilly a Stranger use.
At any of your Exercises I
Here challenge forth the proudest, and defy;
With skill and strength I draw an able Bow,
To reach at random the advancing Foe:
When we at wary distance held dispute,
Me only Of Philoctetes's skill in Archery, as also of his Army, the Poet
makes mention in his Iliads, (...),
(...);
(...).
These Philoctetes, skilful at his Bow,
Lead in seven Ships; each fifty Men did row:
These were good Archers, cunning, ftout and strong.
When he was deserted by the Grecians in the Isle of Lemnos, by his Bow he
found himself provision according to Ovid in his Metamorphosis, lib. 13. Et
nunc ille, eadem nobis juratus in arma,
(Heu pars una Ducum) quo successore sagittae
Herculis utuntur, fractus morboque fameque,
Venaturque aliturque avibus, volucresque petendo,
Debita Trojanis exercet spicula fatis,
Now Philoctetes who in the same War
Engaged with us (oh his unhappy Star!)
Who used Alcides Bow, poor hungry soul
With sickness broken, lives by hunting fowl.
To kill small Birds those Darts does now employ,
Which have been the destruction of Troy.

Philoctetes could out-shoot,
And Trojans Gall; let none with me compare,
Who now tread Earth, and breath Etherial Air.
I Will not with ancient Heroes have to do,
Such as Alcides, and King of Oechalia, in the Island of Euboea, who profer'd
his beautiful Daughter Jole to any who could match him in the skill of Archery;
wherein being overcome by Hercules, and denying to stand to his proffer was
slain by him, the City razed, and his Daughter carried away Captive. This is
the History of Eurytus according to the rest of the Greek Writers; but which
differs something from this relation of Homers.
Eurytus; who
With Deities in shooting would contend:
Eurytus so met his untimely end,
And never in his Palace aged grew;
Him emulating vexed Apollo slew.
As far as you can shoot I Will cast a Spear;
At running I may worsted be I fear,
But still at Sea and always under Sail,
My limbs grow stiff, my Knees and Anckles fail.
This said, admiring all, none silence brake,
When to Ulysses thus Alcinous spoke;
Moved by that temper guards thy noble Breast
Well, though provoked, thou have thy self expressed,
That have rude terms with modest glancings checked;
None on thy parts will cast a mean respect,
Who to good Breeding has the least pretense.
Now, Sir, be pleased to give me Audience,
That thou to other Heroes may report,
When with thy Wife and Children, at thy Court
Feasting thou sitt'st, What mighty Jove imparts,
On us intailing Wealth and noble Arts.
We Wrestle well, and strongly wield the Cest,
At Running are, and Navigation best,
We always Treat; love dances and the Lyre,
Soft Beds, warm Bathes, and change of rich Attire.
Our Dancers bid prepare, that he may tell
His Friends at home, how much we all excel:
Let one straight for Demodocus repair,
And bring his Harp, of which pray have a care.
This said, thence for the Lyre his Herald goes:
Nine Masters of the Revels then arose,
Who drove the People back, and more room made.
The Harp brought in, Demodocus not stayed,
But went into the midst; prime Youth advance,
And placed in Figures, round about him Dance.
Ulysses much their Movings did admire,
Whilst he sung sweetly to his charming Lyre
The scapes of The Greek and Latin Poets do luxuriate in this Theme of the
Adultery of Mars and Venus: we shall only take notice of Ovids description of
it in his 2. Book De art amandi; Fabula narratur toto notissima Coele,
Mulciberi capti Marsque Venusque dolis.
Mars pater ins^^o Veneris turbatus amore,
De duce terribili factus amator erat, etc.
There is a Tale through all Heaven known well yet,
Vulcan took Mars and Venus in a Net:
^corch'd with the Goddess flames, the God of War,
From a stout Leader, turns a soft Amor:
Nor she, then whom no Goddess is more kind,
Proved coy or ill-bred, but affections joined.
How often the giggling wanton merry made
At Vulcans feet, and hands hard with his Trade?
To Mars walked limping in her Husbands pace,
Each Beauty mingled with a several Grace.
At first their sweet Embraces were concealed.
And bashful modesty their Love-tricks veiled.
But by the Sun (who can deceive the Sun?)
His Wives escapes were to her Husband known:
When round their amorous Bed sly Vulcan sets,
Which no Eye could perceive, ingenious Nets;
To Lemnos then a Journey feigns: they met,
Both naked ly infolded in the Net.
Vulcan the Gods then summons to the sport,
Venus was weeping ripe, as they report.
They could not hide their Faces, nor conceal
Parts with their hand, which Modesty would veil.
When Hermes smiling said; Stout Mars on me
Thy Fetters lay, if burdensome to thee.
He scarce for thy sake, Neptune, them unties:
When Mars to Crete, Venus to Paphos flies.

Mars and Venus, how he sped,
When first she brought him to her Husbands Bed:
How their stolen sports the Sun to him declared,
And how the news the Jealous chafing heard;
Who at his Forge straight Anvil'd out a Chain,
Whose Lincks not force nor cunning could constrain:
Then raging to his Chamber went, and spread
The artificial Gin about his Bed:
The Cordage, like the threads that Spiders spin,
Could not b' Immortals be, nor Mortals, seen.
Then feigned to An Island near unto Thrace, where Vulcan was received when he
was thrown down from Heaven, according to our Poet in his Iliads; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
He once did take me by the foot, when I
Came to thy aid, and threw me from the Sky;
All day I was ae falling, and at night
Did almost out of breath in Lemnos light;
There the kind Sintians pitying took me up.
Whence ever after it was held Sacred to him: but the Mythologists rather think
it, because there were frequent eruptions of Subterraneous Fire in that Island,
with many other Symptoms of heat; amongst which is reckoned by the later
Writers, that Earth vulgarly called terra sigillata fetched from thence, but
which was not known in the time of our Poet.
Lemnos (which he most did love
Of all his Seats) that straight he would remove.
Mars takes the hint, wounded by conquering Love,
And went to Venus, new returned from Jove:
Then by the fair Hand gently wringing, said;
Dear, let us repose now on your royal Bed,
Vulcan's from home. She not rescents, this said,
But Mars unto her Husbands Couch conveyed,
From whence they could not stir, nor rise again:
Soon they perceive all struggling proved in vain.
The Sun told Vulcan they were in the toil,
Who never went unto the Lemnian Soil:
He, stepping ore his Threshold, not contained
His grief and rage, but thus alowd complained,
That all the Gods his hideous Cry might hear;
O Jove, and all you blessed powers, draw near
That you may see, how much I injured am,
Because I halt, thus indigent and lame,
By my lascivious Wife, who in my stead
With Mars, Ah me! contaminates my Bed,
Because his Limbs are straight: nor is it my fault,
But those begot me, that I thus do halt.
See how they dallyingly, devoyd of shame,
Of which wronged I, a sad spectator am:
But I believe these Lovers I shall keep,
Longer then they would willing be a-sleep;
My Art secures them in a Brazen Chain,
Till Jove repay me her vast Dower again;
Which I made over, taking to my House
His beauteous Daughter, my Lascivious Spouse.
This said, the Gods all to his Palace have,
Phoebus and Neptune, Hermes; but the Chaste
Goddesses stirred not: entering they all smiled,
Beholding them by Vulcan's Art beguiled,
When one thus said; Deceit not still succeeds,
For now lame Vulcan nimble Mars out-speeds;
The swiftest of the Gods, by one that halts,
Lies liable to be According to the law of Athens, to which the Poet seems to
allude, the punishment of Adultery was death; as appears out of Pausanias,
where he says, that according to the institution of Draco the Athenian
Lawgiver, there was impunity granted to those that should any ways revenge
themselves upon the deprehended Adulterer. The same was the Law of Solon
afterward, (...), If any one seize on the adulterer of his Wife, let him use
him as he please. Wherefore when Eratosthenes begged his life of him whose Wife
he had abused, he answered him, (...), It Is not I that kill you, but the Law of
your Country: But as it was lawful for the injured person to slay the offender,
so was it in his power too, to suffer him to commute, (as we now speak) whence
the same Erat^sthenes, in Lysias, (...), Begged and entreated that he would not
kill him, but exact a sum of Money from him. And this was the case of Vulcan:
for since Mars, a God, could not be put to death, he requires a pecuniary
Mulct, the price of his Adultery:
Mulcted for his faults:
Thus talked they, when to Hermes Phoebus said;
Might we not Mercury, thee with ease persuade,
Although thou were in all those Fetters tied,
Thus to repose by Cytherea's side?
Then he; Should thrice as many me infold,
And all the Gods and Goddesses behold,
I should not be ashamed, nor quit my place,
Thus resting in fair Venus sweet embrace.
The Gods all smiled, but Neptune did persuade
Mars to enlarge, and thus to Vulcan said;
For thy demands, unto my promise trust,
Free him, the Immortal Gods are always just.
Then he replied; Words, Neptune, are but Wind,
Bare promises for Prisoners meanly bind.
How shall I make thee pay, if him I free?
Then Neptune said; Thy Action lay on me,
If he refuse I shall: Vulcan replied;
In such Security I will confide.
This said, he loosed them: Mars enraged, bent
His course to Thrace was accounted the feat of Mars, because the People of
that Country were a Warlike generation: Eustathius. I know not whence Ovid,
when he Translates these Verses, names Crete for Thrace, Vix precibus, Neptune,
tuis captivae resolvit
Corpora: Mars Creten occupat, illa Paphon
He scarce for thy sake, Neptune, them unties:
When Mars to Crete, Venus to Paphos flies.

Thrace, Venus to Paphos was a City in the Island of Cyprus, whence Venus was
called Paephia. (...),
(...).
Whose Temple there remained in the time of Strabo; as he testifies in his
Geography.
Paphos went,
Where she a Grove and perfumed Altars has,
Where her the Graces did Anoint and Bath,
Suppling with Oil, such as the Gods refreshed,
And with rich Garments curiously dressed.
Thus Sung he, which Ulysses pleased and all
The joyful throng. Alcinous then did call
Forth Halius, and Laodamas to Dance:
These in this Art most famous, straight advance,
Soon as they had a purple Ball received,
Which skillful Polybus had neatly Weaved,
This one throws up, the other, ere it fall,
Takes Cap'ring ere he comes to ground the Ball;
Then in a figured Dance they neatly moved,
Whose Garb and Footing highly all approved,
In murmuring Humms, a loud applause they had;
When thus Ulysses to Alcinous said;
Renowned Prince, you have made good your boast,
That the best Dancers, this your happy Coast
Breeds, in the World; whom I must needs approve,
Since me amazement struck to see them move.
Then to the Princes thus Alcinous said;
For this our worthy Guest, let me persuade,
That we an hospitable Gift prepare,
Twelve Kings here Reign, and we the thirteenth are;
Let each a Golden Talent him present,
A Vest and Robe, which all together sent,
He may receive at once, so to our Feast
Repair a joyful, and a welcome Guest;
Euryalus must satisfaction make,
With Words and Gifts, because he rashly spoke.
This said, the Princes his Advice commend,
And straight their Heralds with rich Presents send.
Euryalus then; Sir, to your Guest I will
Confess my fault, and your commands fulfill:
And I Will this Faulchion give him richly Guilt,
And Ivory sheath. This said, the Silver Hilt
Him he presents: then thus, What words soere
I fondly spoke, hence let a Whirlwind bear:
And may the Gods thee, harrass'd with much toil,
To thy dear Wife return and Native Soil.
Ulysses then replied; May the same Gods
Grant thee all blessings in thy own Aboads;
And that this Sword no more thou shall desire,
Which thou bestow'st, thus reconciling Ire.
This said, the Sword he 'thwart his Shoulders flings,
And growing dark, rich presents from the Kings
Their Heralds carried to Alcinous House,
Which straight his Sons set by his beauteous Spouse:
He leading, all the Chiefs in order sat,
Then spoke Alcinous to his Royal Mate;
Rise straight my Dear, and choose a handsome Chest,
In which first lay a Robe and curious Vest:
And bid them for this Stranger get a Bath,
Then let him all those costly Gifts he has
Received from us, see carefully put up;
Then him we'll Feast, and I Will this golden Cup
Present, that me he may to memory call,
Jove and the Gods Libating in his Hall.
This said, Arete straight her Damsels did
Command, to set a Trevet on with speed;
On which the largest of her Caldrons fix,
Then put in Water, and put under Sticks,
Whilst from her chamber down she brought a Chest,
In which the Princes Gifts, the Bowl, and Vest,
Alcinous gave too, in she folding laid,
And her own Presents adding, thus then said;
Now He bids him bind the cover of the Chest: for Keys were not in use in the
time of our Poet, but were invented afterward by the Lacedamonians.
Mail your Trunck, Sir, well, lest whilst you sleep
Secure, transported through the swelling Deep,
Something be lost. Ulysses straight obeyed,
And up the Chest, as Circe taught him, made.
Then to a Bath chaste Virgins him invite,
Which he straight entered with no small delight:
For never since he left the Ogygian Queen,
Who Bathed him often, had he warm Water seen.
When he had washed and noynted, him they dressed,
Put on his under Garments and his Vest:
Then went he to the Feast. Nausicaa, by
A Pillar standing, his approach did spy,
Whom much admiring when she had surveyed,
Hail noble Stranger, hail dear Sir, she said;
When thou behold'st thy Friends and dearest Wife,
Remember me who first preserved thy life.
Then smoothly he replied; Best Princess, may
So Jove me to my Native Soil convey,
Where I shall thee there as a So faith Virgil, in the form of a Shepherd, of
Augustus: -- Deus nobis hac otia fecit.
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus; illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab evilibus imbuet agnus.
This quiet, Shepherd, from a God we found:
For he shall be my God: often from the Dam
I Will bath his Altars with a tender Lamb.

Goddess serve,
Whilst Breath I draw, who did my Life preserve.
This said, he next Alcinous took his Seat,
Whilst they rich Wine commix'd, and served in Meat,
The Herald in Demodocus conveyed,
And against a Column placed; Ulysses said
Then to Pontonous (Carving from the Chine,
A savoury Morsel of a well-fed Swine)
This to Demodocus be pleased to bear,
And tell him, though unfortunate we are,
Yet I a Poet honor, and admire
Their Raptures, since the Muses them inspire.
This said, the Herald brought him what he sent,
Which he received with no small content.
Then all fell on, and plentifully fare:
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Ulysses, to Demodocus, thus says;
Sir, You I must beyond all Mortals praise,
Since Pallas you, or Phoebus taught so well
Those Miseries, which the Greeks at Troy befell,
To sing as if thou had been Spectator there;
Of Epeus Horse could I now something hear,
Which he by Pallas aid so rarely wrought,
Which within Walls Ulysses cunning brought,
Pregnant with Grecian arms, and Trojan Fate:
If this thou truly could to me relate,
I, through the World, should trumpet thy Deserts,
Whom some kind power inspires with heavenly Arts.
This said, He sung, and in an Epick Strain,
Told how the Greeks launched to the boyst'rous Main,
Fir'ing their Camp, and how they lurking hid,
Throug'd round Ulysses in the mighty Steed,
When that the Trojans had with all their power,
Drawn the stupendous Monster to the Tower,
There they consulted if the hollow Oak
Should be ripped up, or tumbled ore the Rock,
Or let him stand: on this they fixed, since Troy
Fate had decreed the Grecians should destroy:
And how those Caverns leaving, down they came,
And plundered Ilium fired with hostile flame:
Whilst Menelaus and Deiphobus had married Helen after the death of his
Brother Paris, which exasperated Menelaus so far, that he seems to have
designed his slaughter beforehand: but that Ulysses accompanied him in this
encounter, is not related by Quintus Smyrnaeus, who delivers it thus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Deiphobus then Menelaus sped,
Who found him slumbring in fair Helens Bed,
Who frighted thence did in the Palace hide,
But he rejoiced to see his Faulchion died.

Ulysses went
Where lay Deiphobus, with dire intent.
A dreadful conflict in his Court they had,
But soon were Conquerors by Pallas aid.
Thus sung the Poet, whilst Ulysses steeps
His Cheeks with tears, and as a Woman weeps,
Her dearest Lord embracing on the Plain,
For's Country fighting, and his Children slain,
Or seeing him in Deaths Convulsions ly,
Falls on him groaning with a doleful Cry;
But they strike on, and drag the Prisoner, where
If he survive, must feel more Toil and Care:
So sad Ulysses briny tears distills,
Perceived by Alcinous, and none else,
Who sitting nearest heard him Sigh and Groan:
Then to the Princes thus their King begun;
You Peers and Princes now assembled here,
Give order that Demodocus forbear:
Perhaps his Notes not pleasing are to all
The joyful Feasters in our royal Hall.
Our Guest in sighs strikes Diapazons, such
Are his regrets, he answers every touch,
Lavishing Tears since he begun his Song;
The Laws of Hospitality not wrong;
And since this Banquet we for him prepared,
Our Supplyant as a Brother let us regard.
Now, Sir, be pleased you would your self declare,
Where you were born, and what your Parents are,
And your Aboads, that so we may instruct
Our Ship, you to your Country to conduct?
We use nor Helm, nor Helm's-men; our tall Ships
Have Souls, and plow with reason up the Deeps;
All Cities, Countries, know, and where they list,
Through Billows glide, veiled in obscuring Mist:
Nor fear they Rocks, nor danger in the way;
But once I heard my Sire Nausithous say,
Neptune enraged, because we did transport
So many People safe, from Port to Port,
Returning he one Vessel sunck, which still
Shadows our City like a mighty Hill.
The Gods their pleasure do: But let me know,
From whence thou came, and whither you would go;
If amongst Rusticks, Impious and Poor,
Or civil Nation who the Gods adore:
You wept hearing Demodocus relate,
In well-set Notes, the Greeks and Trojan Fate;
These are the Gods designs, and all must die,
And make bold Tales for their Posterity:
But tell me, have you in the Grecian Host
At Troy, a Kinsman, Friend, or Brother lost?
Though often a dear Companion's loss we more,
Then our own Blood or near Allies, deplore.
scene from book 9 Nobilissimae Dominae D:ae Elizabethae Comitissae de
Chesterfeild Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 9



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE NINTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
His tedious wandering, and his various Fates,
Ulysses to the Assembled Peers relates;
Ciconians, Lotophagie, and how tossed
By Storms, he fell on the Cyclopian Coast.
Huge Polyphemus eats six Men, he burns
His Eye out, scapes, and thence revenged returns.
THEN said Ulysses; Most renowned King,
To hear a Poet his own raptures Sing,
With such a ravishing and Heavenly Voice,
As would both Mortals and the Gods rejoice,
Heightens your Entertainment, and our Souls
Cheers, more then laden Boards, or flowing Bowls.
But since you would rather hear my woeful Tale,
And me afresh past Miseries bewail,
Ah, how shall I begin! what first relate!
How tossed and harras'd by relentless Fate:
Laertes Offspring I, Ulysses am,
My Person you preserved, the Stars my Fame;
My Kingdom Ithaca, Neritos Hill,
Checkered with Groves, I Pasture on and Till.
Many rich Isles ly scattered there among Floods,
One of the Echinades, afterward called Dolicha, as we have already proved out
of Strabo.
Dulychium, A City in Cephallenia, under whose name the Poet here denotes the
whole Island.
Samos, A fruitful Island, now called Zant.
Zanthus, crowned with Woods,
Which Barren, yet breeds hardy Youth and bold,
Then which, no Land I rather would behold;
Though fair Calypso I, and Circes Bed
Enjoyed, both Amorous, courting me to Wed:
Whose Wealth, nor Charms, nor flatt'ries wrought on me;
I longed my Native Country more to see,
My Parents and relations to behold,
Then Riches to enjoy, and Roofs though Gold.
But I shall now discourse what little joy
The Gods prepared for us, launched off from Trov.
First we Ciconia reached with prosperous Gales,
Where Ismarus took, A City of Thrace, inhabited by the Ciconians, who came to
the assistance of the Trojans, as appears in the second of the Iliads, where
among the rest of the Trojan Auxiliaries, (...)
(...)
Euphemus led the valiant Cicons on.
Grandchild to glorious Ceas, Troizens Son.

we put to Sword the Males,
Our Prize their Riches, Wives, and Daughter made:
Then I bid have aboard, they not obeyed,
But Sheep and Cattle slaughtering on the Shore,
Heightened with Wine their high distemper more.
Mean while the fleet Ciconians gave the Alarm,
And suddenly the neighboring Confines Arm,
Far more and better Soldiers; who put to it,
Would quit well managed Steeds and fight on Foot:
Early on us they fall; nor could the Spring,
Must'ring her Leaves and Flowers, such numbers bring.
Then Jove deolard'd, what he designed before;
Who much had suffered, now must suffer more.
They March to us in Bodies deep and lange,
And with sharp Spears, on th Oceans Margents change,
Whilst Morning grew, and sacred Day arose,
So long we matched our overpow'ring Foes:
But when the Sun declined into the West,
The desperate Enemy had much the best;
And six from every Vessel there were slain,
The rest got off, and plowed the boisterous Main.
But ere we plied our Oars, or Canvase spread,
We thrice It was the opinion of the ancient Grecians, that the Souls of those
who were unburied, were not admitted into the common Receptacle, until the
Funeral Rites were performed. We have an example of this, Il. 23. in Patroclus.
(...)
(...)
(...)
Me ah! interr, who am from Stygian Coasts,
And longed-for paessage driven by happier Ghosts.
Virgil also AEneid. 6. Hac omnis quam cernis inops inhumatasepulti; que turba
est sepulti;
Portitor ille Charon, hi quos vehit unda
Nec ripas datur horrendas, nec rauca quieruns fluenta,
Transportare prius quam sedibus ossa
Centum errant annos, volitantque haec littora circum.
Those woeful Souls thou see, are not pulcherd Interred;
That Is Charon; those he waits are se
None are transported ore these horrid Graves; Waves,
Until their bones find quiet in their
A hundred years they on these Coasts remain,
At last a long expected passage gain.
Wherefore, when any were slain in a foreign Country, when their Friends had not
opportunity of performing the Funeral Solemnities, they called over the names
of the Dead, inviting them, as it were, to return with them, where they had an
honourary Monument, and all Rights performed as if the bodies of the Dead were
there present. Pindaer. Pyth. Od. 4. -- (...)
(...)
(...) --
(...)
Thou may appease the wrath of severe Gods,
For Phrixus he commands to the abonds
Of King AEetas to bring home his Soul.
Where the Scholiast notes, that It was the Custom of the Grecians, though they
procured not the bodies of the dead, yet by certain Ceremonies to recall their
Souls, who dyed in a strange place, and to transport them into their own
Country along with them. Eustathius also observes upon this place, that the
Athenians, whenever they lost any men at Sea, went presently to the shore,
called thrice the names of the slain, and raised a Cenotaphium, where they made
their Parenta^ia.


invoked the Manes of the Dead,
When Jove a Tempest raised, and in a trice,
Muffl'd with Clouds both Earth, the Sea, and Skies,
And we dispersed, off from our Course were born,
Our Masts were shattered, Sails and Tackle torn,
Our fripery up we hurled, and fearing Death,
Draw near the Shore, there toyling out of Breath
Two Nights and Days we lay; the ensuing Dawn
Again we raised our Masts, clapped Canvase on,
And then the prosperous Winds our Fleet had bore,
Perhaps in safety to my native Shore,
But doubling A Promontory in the Morea, where Navigation was so dangerous,
that it become a Proverb, (...).
When you sail by Malea, forget your home

Maleas point a Tempest bare
Us from The nearest Island to Malea, in which there was a secure Port, and a
City of the same name with the Isle.
Cythera back: nine days we were
Tossed with cold Winds upon the raging Main,
The tenth, the The Ancients agree not in the seat of these Latophagi.
Artemidorus says that they inhabited the Deserts of Africa, South of
Mauritania, from the Atlantic Ocean even to Cyrene. Others say, that it is the
Island Menyn^, which lies before the lesser Syrtis, which is here denoted:
because there is abundance of those Lotus trees in that Island, which bear a
very pleasant fruit; and an Altar of Vlysses's still remaining.
Lotophagian Coasts we gain,
Who feed on Flowers; we dined, and watered there:
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Two then, to make Discovery, I sent,
Of our prime Men, with them a Herald went;
Who found the Lotophagi planted there,
They pleasant Lotus did for them prepare,
Not meaning harm; for they who Lo^us eat
Nere mind returning to their native Seat:
These, whilst they shreek, acting distracted Pranks,
I forced aboard, and fastened to their Banks;
Then shipped I all the rest, lest they should eat
Sweet Lotus, and their Native Soil forget.
Who settled, brushed the briny deep with Oars:
At last, we sad reach the The Cyclops inhabited the Mountain of AEtna, and the
Country of the Leontini in Sicily. So Euripides understood it; in whose Cyclops
(speaking of the approach of Ulysses, and his Followers, to the Den of
Polyphemus) Silenus thus complains. (...)
Tiros (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Unhappy Strangers the are who ever came,
Net knowing what a Master's Polypheme,
Arriving at the inhospitable Cave,
Whose raging gorge must be the wretches Grave.
But quiet be, that they may give account
From whence they came to the Sicilian Mount.
They were so called, because they had a round eye in the middle of their
foreheads, according to Hesiod, (...)
(...)
The name of Cyclops was on them bestowed,
From one round eye, which in their forehead stood.

Cyclopian Shores,
Who the Gods trusting neither Plant nor Sow,
Where all things without human Labor grow,
Wheat, Barley, Vines, whose Clusters fill the Press,
And timely Showers from Jove give large increase.
These by no supreme Power, or Laws, are tied,
But in vast Caves on Mountain tops reside:
And their own Courts, and Wives, and Children sway,
Not minding Kings, nor Parlements obey.
An Isle, this lay distant amidst the Floods,
Stored with fat Goats, and Clothed with shady Woods
By Swains untrackted, and fierce Huntsmen, who
Through Forests, Hills, and Dales, their Game pursue.
This Ground no fleecy Flocks, nor Cattle feeds,
Nor Plow breaks up, but fattens wanton Kids;
They build no Ships, who plow with sails unfurled
The briny Ocean round about the World:
Their own they keep, nor seek to people more,
Nor want they have, verging with Meads the Shore;
So light the unforced Soil, so fat the Ground,
It would with Vines, and purest Wheat, abound:
Land lock the Bay, where Ships might safely Ride,
Without an Anchor, or a Cable tied:
Just in the Harbors mouth a Fountain flows,
Shaded with Aldar: ere the Moon arose,
Hither We came, some God did us assist,
Obscured with Night, and covered with a Mist,
Ere well aware by a swollen Billovv hurled
Upon the Shore, straight we our Sails unfurled,
Then landing, on the Oceans margents lay,
In sweet Repose, expecting blessed Day.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers days Portcullice drawn,
But we admiring walk along the Shore,
Whilst kinder Nymphs put mountain Goats up store
Us to refresh; for Bows, and Spears we sent,
And in three Companies divided went:
Venson we slew; Twelve Ships our Fleet, they Nine
On each bestowed, and Ten fat Goats on mine.
Till Night we feasting sat, and rich Wine dranck;
And though our full Borachios were grown lanck,
Some yet remained which we at Ismar had:
We drawing nigh the Cyclops Isle survaid,
Hearing their Goats, and Sheep, grown Night we lay
Upon the Shore expecting blessed Day.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn
With rosy fingers Days Portcullice drawn,
When to the rest I said; Stay on this Shore
Till with my Vessel, I yon Isle explore,
If Rusticks dwell there, Cruel, and Unjust,
Or Civil People who in Gods do trust.
Aboard we go, and weigh, in ordered Rancks
Brushing the briny Spry upon their Bancks.
Drawn near the Shore, a Cavern we survaid,
Which Laurel covered with a pleasant Shade,
Where Sheep, and fat Goats lay: cut from the Rocks
Appeared a Court built high with Pines, and Oaks.
Here a Huge Giant dwelt, who kept alone
His Flocks, a Monster that conversed with None:
Who a prodigious size showed when he stood,
Like a tall Mountain crowned with stately Wood.
Then twelve stout Men along with me I took,
The rest commanding to the Vessel look,
And a Borachio full of mighty Wine,
Which It seems that the City of Maronea in Thrace, near adjoining to Ismarus,
received its name from this Maro.
Maron gave me who kept Phoebus Shrine;
Who dwelt near Ismarus; because his life
We had preserved his Children and his Wife:
Fearing the God he in a shady Wood
Residing, many Gifts on me bestowed;
Seven golden Talents, and a Silver Cup,
And twelve large Vessels filled with rich Wine up.
None of his Servants, Man, nor Woman, knew
This but Himself, his Wife, and She that drew.
When this they drank, they Twenty Pliny in his Natural History observes (from
Matianus a Roman Consul, who had been at the place) that there was the same
vigor, and strength, then in Maronean Wine, which is here mentioned by the
Poet. He says, that it is black and odoriserous, and pinguifies with age.
times as much
Water commix'd, then none ere tasted such,
Or smelt the like; whose odorous Perfume
So Charmed, none could abstain from't in the Room.
This and a Knapsack I with Viands took,
And for the horrid Monster went to look.
The Cave we found, but found not Him within,
He fed his fleecy Flocks upon the Green.
There we admired his Cheeses on the Shelves,
His Lambs and Kids, each shut up by them selves;
Here the new weaned, and there the new yean'd lay,
The Pans, and Dishes, full of Milks, and Whey.
Here they advised me straight from thence to slip
With Kids, and Lambs, and Cheeses, to our Ship,
Which I would not (but better it had been)
Till Him I saw, whom would we never had seen,
Whose horrid Look, so much us all aghast:
We make a Fire, and bold his Cheeses taste;
And there we sat expecting his Return,
Who brought a Log that must at Supper burn,
Which thundered as he threw it on the Ground:
Amazed, we fly, and dark Recesses found,
There his full udderd Ewes he milks, his Pails
Frothing run ore, but first shuts out the Males,
Then with a mighty Stone all Entrance bars;
Which two and twenty though all four-wheel'd Cars
Could not remove: when all were milk'd, the Lambs
And wanton Kids He lets forth to their Dambs.
Half of his milk makes Cheese, the other half
He puts in Vessels for his Supper safe.
All this with speed performed, a Fire he made:
And spying us where we stood trembling, said;
Strangers, who are you? from whence came you, say?
Merchants are you, or have you lost your Way?
Or Piccaroons, who wander through the Floods
To make a Prey of Honest Peoples Goods?
At his huge Voice, and horrid Looks, dismayed,
Trembling we stood: when thus to him I said;
We Grecians are, returned from Ilium,
With cross Winds tossed on Billows, sailing Home
To several Shores (as Jove thought fit) we boast
Our selves to be of Agamemnon's Host,
Whose Fame surmounts the Sky, who overthrew
Proud Troy, and mighty Nations did subdue:
And We thy Hospitality request,
As is the Custom to a woeful Guest:
Revere the Gods, and thy Assistance lend,
For favoring Jove poor Strangers does befriend.
Then roughly He replied; a Fool thou art,
Or Stranger, I not value Gods a --
We Cyclops, not Jupiter's Mother (that she might conceal him from Saturn, who
devoured all his Children as soon as they were born) exposed him privately at
Olenus, a City in Boeotia, where he was nursed by a Goat. So says Aratus; (...)
(...)
The sacred Goat, that fester'd Jove, they all.
The Olenian Goat of Jupiter now call.
Whom Ovid follows lib. 2. Fastorum, Oleniae surget sidus pluviale Capellae,
Quae fuit in cunis officiosa Jovis.
Then the moist Sign the Goat shall rise, who love
Showed in his Cradle to Almighty Jove.
Which Goat, after its death, was translated into a Sign of the Heavens, and
Jupiter made his Shield of the Skin of it. But Moera the Poetess, says; that
he was nursed by Pigeous, for which they were made that Sign in the Heavens
from them called Phiades. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Jove bred up was in Crete, which no God knew:
But he in comely Shape, and Stature grew:
Him Pigeons fed, and to the blessed Great
Divine Ambrasia from the Ocean brought.

Goat-foster'd Jove regard,
We are for him, and all Heavens Court, too hard:
Not thee, nor thine, on Jove's account, I Will spare,
Unless I will, nor for his Anger care:
Where thou have left thy Ship, inform me well,
Is she aboard the Shore, or nearer, tell.
Senting his Drift, I to evade, thus spoke;
Stern Neptune bulg'd my Vessel against a Rock
That guards your Coast: Us winds and Billows bore
From imminent Danger, to this pitying Shore.
He raging, not replied, but at us flew,
And in his mighty Paw straight snatched up two
Of us like Whelps, and dashed against the floor,
Sprinkling the ground with reeking Brains, and Gore;
And like a Lion, them in piecemeal tears,
And eating, nor their Bones, nor Bowels spares;
Whilst weeping, we the woeful Sight beheld:
Soon as the Monster had his Belly filled
With human flesh, and stuffed with Milk, and Whey,
Amidst his Flocks, stretched on the floor he lay:
I drawing near, resolved to act my part,
Whip out my Sword to run him through the Heart:
When I bethought, should we the Monster kill,
We not the Stone, with all the strength, and skill,
Which barred the Gate could stir; Sighing, we stay,
The Event expecting of the blessed Day.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy fingers days Portcullice drawn,
But straight he makes a fire, and milks the Dams,
Next, turning loose to them their Kids, and Lambs;
His work being finished, up he takes two There were six of Vlysses's
Companions devoured by Polyphemus, according to our Poet, yet Euripides, and
Virgil, who have transcribed the Story out of him, mention but two; the one in
his Satyr called Cyclops, (...)
(...)
(...)
When all things ready were for Pluto's Cook,
Two of my men for slaughter up he took.
The other in the third of his Aeneids; Vidi egomet duo de numero quum corpora
nostro
Prensa manu magna medio resupinus in antro
Frangeret ad saxum, sanieque aspersa natarent
Limina: vidiatro quum membra fluentia tabo
Manderet, and tepidi tremerent sub dentibus artus.
I saw, when he two of our stoutest men
Seized in his mighty hand, and midst his Den
Laid on his back, against a Pillar brained,
And with foul goar, the sprinkled Pavement stained.
He would devour Men's bloody quarters raw,
I in his teeth the warm flesh trembling saw.

more
Of us, and eats them, as he did before:
Thus having Breakfast, out he drives his Flock,
With ease removing from the pass, the Rock,
Which close again with as small pain he puts,
As one the cover of his Quiver shuts:
And whistling, to the Mountain goes, and me
Leaving unpinion'd: studying how to be
Revenged, imploring Pallas to assist
Amongst many Plots I laid, this seemed the best;
Close by his Stall, a Pole a drying laid,
Which for the length, and size, when we surveyed,
We to the mainmast of a stately Ship
Compared, that plowed with twenty Oars the Deep;
From this I cut an Ell, which straight I gave
My Friends to pollish down, and neatly shave,
Whose Point I hardened in the Fire, then thrust,
Of which his Cave had store, amidst the dust,
Then we drew Lo^s, who should with me draw nigh,
And when he slept, with this to pierce his Eye;
It fell to four, and I the fifth Man made;
At Night, his Flocks he to his Cave conveyed,
And put up all his Bleaters in the Coat,
Either suspecting, or some heavenly Plot,
Then shuts his Gates, and milks his Kids, and Lambs,
Next, turns them loose to their unburthen'd Dams.
His business done, resolved on them to sup,
Two more of us he snatched; when with a Cup
Of mighty Wine, toward him I drawing, said;
When you have fed, taste this; let me persuade,
That you what drink we had aboard may know.
This I present, that you may pity shovv,
And us dismiss: if thus you cruel prove,
Who will address to you, or offer Love?
This said, the Bowl he takes, up all he Quaft,
And pleased, thus spoke; Give me another Draught,
Then let me know thy Name, that straight I may
Thee with some Hospitable Gift repay.
Cherished with showers, we have rich wine, and pure;
But this is Nectar, and Ambrosia sure.
Three times this said, I swelled his empty Cup,
As often he turns th'exhausted Bottom up.
When I perceived the Wine begin to take;
And He grevv mellow, thus I mildly spoke;
Thou ask'dst my Name, which I shall let thee know,
Keep Promise, and some Gift on me bestow:
My Name is Nemo, so my Parents all,
My Kindred, me, and best Relations call.
Then He replied; Thee I shall kindly treat,
Thou shall good Nemo, be the last I Will eat.
Of all thy Friends; my Promise I will keep.
This said, surprised with all-conquering Sleep,
Bending his Neck, he lay upright, and cast
Gobbets of Flesh and Wine; then I made have,
And in the Fire the Stake sharp-poynted put;
My Friends then cheering, took it out Red hot,
We drawing near, inspired by some God,
With wondrous Courage round about him stood,
They thrust it in his Eye, which deep I gored,
And skrewing in, as with an Augre bored;
Like one that works upon a Naval Keel,
And with a Thong, and Wimble, shows his Skill;
So in his Eye the blazing Bar we turned,
Blood gushing out his singed Eyebrows burned,
The Crystalline, that guards his Eye Balls, hist,
Dark Smoke arose, and an unsavory Mist;
And as a Blacksmith in the Water slacks,
Then takes out hissing his edge hardened Ax;
So sung the Olive-stake fixed in his Eye:
He roars, the Cave resounds, we frighted fly;
He plucks it bloody out, and against the Walls
Tormented throws, and Neighboring Cyclops calls;
Who near in Caves, on Mountain tops did dwell,
They gather straight, Alaram'd at the Yell;
And round about his Gates inquire what made
Him roar so loud, who thus then troubled, said;
Why shriek'st thou Polyphemus, thus, in deep
Of silent Night, and hindrest us from Sleep?
Has any forced from thee thy Flocks, or laid
To take thy Life some Plot, or Ambuscade?
Then He replied; Ah! Nemo me has Slain.
Then they; if Nemo hurts thee never complain.
If Jove on Thee some heavy Sickness lay,
The Burden bear, and to great His Father whom he begot on the Nymph Theosa,
as we have already seen in the first of the Odysses. (...)


Neptune pray.
Thus they departing said; and pleased smiled
That the dull Cyclops thus my Name beguiled,
But he with trembling Hands, and many a Groan
From the Caves entrance moved the ponderous Stone:
Then sat with palms extended 'midst the Gap,
Lest any of us amongst his Sheep should escape.
He thought me shallow sure, whilst I contrived
From Danger how my Friends might be repriv'd
Life at the Stake, our Danger great, and near.
At last this quaint Designment seemed most clear.
He stately Rams had, large, well fed, and full,
Kings of the Flock, and clad in purple Wool:
These silently I bound with Osiers stripped
(On which well twisted the dire Monster slep'd,)
Three in a breast, he in the midst bore one,
The other two on each side guard their Man,
The greatest of these Breeders forth I cull,
And at his Belly hanging grasp the Wool,
In this sad Posture we much sighing stay,
And holding fast, expect the blessed Day.
No sooner had the Daughter of the Dawn,
With rosy Fingers Days Portcullice drawn,
But to their Pastures forth he drove the Males,
Easing the Ews swollen Teats in frothy Pailes,
He all their Backs, though pained extremely, felt,
But that we kept their Bellies warm, never felt;
When the last Ram, laden with Me, and Wool,
Marched forth, stroking his Back; why art so Dull,
Now to be last, he said? still used to lead,
With pace majestic, to the flowery Mead,
And far before selected tender Buds,
The Van conducting to the Crystal Floods;
And always first repairing home at Night:
Now thou art Lag, would thou I had my Sight,
Which Nemo, and his Accomplices put out
When he with Wine surpised me, who no doubt
Shall never escape; would thou could speak, and tell
Where the Wretch skulks, and Him to me reveal:
His Brains my Floor should sprinkle e're we part,
Which would remove some Sorrow from my Heart:
This said; He let him pass; and I with speed
Loosing my self, next my Associates freed;
And to the Ship our fleecy Prey we drive,
Our Friends rejoiced that we returned alive,
Yet wept for those were lost: then I bid staunch
Their tears, and with our Prize to the Ocean launch:
All go aboard, and sitting on their Banks,
Sweep up the briny waves in ordered Ranks.
When we were off so far as one might hear,
A loud Voice call, thus I begin to jeer;
Cyclops, not well thou did a Stranger treat,
Who kindly made address, his Friends to eat,
Thou that devourd'st thy Guests, this falls on thee,
On whom the Gods, and Jove, revenged be.
Raging at this, He a torn Mountains top
Threw at our Ship, and aimed it at the Poope,
The mighty Stone close by the Rudder fell,
And Waves percust in briny Billows swell,
Which back to land our Vessel almost bore;
With a long Pole I forced her off from Shore,
Commanding them to Shove; no Toil they spare,
When to the Offine we were twice as far,
I would have spoke, but me m'Associates did
Persuade with winning Language, and forbid,
Vex him no more; if the great Stone had hit,
Which forced us on the Shore, we had been split:
If thou should speak again we ruined are,
Such is his Strength, and he can throw so far,
Yet all their Rhetoric could not me dissuade,
But to him raging, thus I boldly said;
If how thou lost thy Eye the art questioned, fay
Ulysses did it, King of Ithaca.
Then thus he braid; Telemus the son of Eurymus, according to Ovid, who
mentions this Prophecy of our Poet. lib. 13. Metamorph. Telemus interea
Siculum delatus in aquor,
Telemus Eurymides, quem nulla fefellerat ales
Terribilem Polyphemon adit, lumenque qued unum
Front geris media rapiet tibi, dixit, Ulysses.
Telemus sailing the Sicilian Sea,
Eurymus Son, well skilled in Augury,
Told Polyphemus, one Ulysses shoud
Put out that eye which 'midst his forehead stood.
The same Prophecy is mentioned too by Euripides, but he conceals the Author
of it.

(...)
(...)
(...)
Ah the ancient Prophecy, which said that you
Coming from Troy should put my Eye out's true.

Telemus me foretold,
Who amongst the Cyclops prophesi'd of Old,
By one Ulysses I should lose my Sight;
Him some Gygantick Prince of matchless Might
Then I supposed to be; but now I find,
An Elf, a Coward, Dwarf, has made me Blind.
But land again Ulysses, that I may
To thee an hospitable Gift repay;
And I my Father Neptune will implore
To send thee safe unto thy Native Shore,
And heal my wounded Eye, which none else can
Of Heavenly Extract, or the seed of Man.
Then I replied; Would I Commission had
To send thy Soul to the Infernal Shade:
Then Neptune should not thy lost Eye restore.
This said, His Father thus did he implore;
Great Neptune hear thy Of-springs earnest Prayer,
Let not Ulysses ever Home repair:
But if the Fates resolve his Country He,
His Court, and Friends, shall view, Late let it be:
Drowned his Companions first, then let him come
In a strange Vessel, to more Mischief Home.
Thus Cyclops prayed, and Neptune heard his Prayer:
Then up he takes a Stone, greater by far
Then first he threw, and whirling round, lets slip
With mighty Force, and aimed it at the Ship,
Which like a Rock close by the Rudder fell,
And Waves percust in briny Mountains swell,
Which from those Confines Us to the Ocean beat:
But when we reached the Isle, where lay our Fleet,
Where sat our Friends expecting on the Strand,
We run our Vessel in, and joyful Land,
And Polyphemus Flock by Divident
The people shared; the Ram they me present,
Which I to Jove, who rules both Earth, and Skies,
Offered, but he contemned our Sacrifice;
Who then contrived how to destroy our Fleet,
And all my Friends: There sat we till Sunset
Feasting, and drinking Wine; but when the Day
Nights Curtains closed, down on the Shore we lay
In sweet Repose: No sooner had the Dawn
With rosy Fingers Lights Portcullice drawn,
Then I commanded them without Delay,
To go aboard, they went, and Anchors weigh:
Then placd in order on their Bancks, they sweep
The briny Surface of the foamy Deep,
And with sad Hearts for our Companions lost
We take the Offine, and forsake the Coast.
scene from book 10 Honoratissimo Domino Dno Gulielmo Cauendish Baroni
Cauenersh de Hardrwick Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO lib: jo: Fo: 13^:



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Faction; They unrip Ulysses Sack;
Imprisoned Winds burst forth, and drive them back.
Laestrygon Giants; The Circaean Shores
Ulysses spies, the Inchantress turns to Boars.
He threats to kill her, Love the Quarrel ends,
Twelve days She Feasts him, then to Elysium sends.
AND came to the The Poet mentions one only of the Aeolian Isles, the Seat of
Aeolus's Empire, which were seven; Strongyle, Euonumus, Didyme, Phoenicodes,
Ericodes, Hiera, and Liparae, as they are enumerated by Diodorus Siculus in his
fifth Book, and Pliny in his third; neither does he deliver the proper name of
it (for they are mistaken, which from this place call it Aeolia.) Strabo says
it was Strongyle. (...), Strongyle is so called from the roundness of its
figure. This, they say, was the Seat of Aeolus. Him Pliny follows, lib. 3.
Tertia Strongyle a Lipara M. Pass. ad exortum Solis vergens, in qua regnavit
Aeolus, Strongyle lies a mile East of Lipara, where Aeolus reigned. It lies
between S^^ily, and Italy, in the Italian Carts call^^ corruptly Strombolo.
Aeolian Isle, where Aeolus dwelt,
A floating Isle guirt in a brazen Belt,
With Walls environed of Sea-polish'd Stones:
Twelve his fair Race; Diodorus Siculus mentions not any Daughters of Aeolus,
but has recorded the names of his Sons, here omitted, viz. Astyochus, Xuthus,
Androcles, Pheraemen, Jocastes, and Agathyrnus.
six Daughters, and six Sons,
He at his Court in Nuptial Rites conjoined,
Who with their royal Parents supped, and dined,
With various Dishes feasted to the height:
Their perfumed Roofs all Day resound, at Night
Sleeping on Tap'stry-Quilts, in Beds of Gold,
Their Wives in sweet embraces they infold.
We to the City, and the Court repair,
A Month with him we entertained were,
Whilst he inquires of Troy, and our Retreat,
Our tedious Siege, and Voyage, Irelate:
But when I begged his License to depart,
He granting gave me, sowed with wondrous Art,
A stuffed up It was the saying of Eratesthenes, that we should then know where
Aeolus reigned, when we found out the Cobblers name that stitched up this
Bottle, in which the Winds were contained. It was his opinion, that the whole
relation concerning the Cyclops, Laestrygones, Phaeacians, etc. and this of
Aeclus, was merely a figment of the Poets: but they that have examined it more
accuratly, do find a real History, though obscurely, intimated in the Romance.
Diodorus Siculus says that Aeolus married Cyane the Daughter of Liparus, whom
he succeeded in his Dominion; a Pions, Just, and Hospitable Prince; he by
observing the driving of the Smoke which ascended out of the fiery Caverns,
with which the Island Lipara abounds, could foretell the motion of the Winds,
according to Strabo and Pliny; from whence he is feigned by the Poet to have
the dominion of them. Him Virgil follows, Aeneid. I. -- hic vesto Rex Aeolus
antro
Luctantes ventos, tempestatesque sonoras
Imperio premit, and vinclis ac carcere fraenat.
-- here King Aeolus reigns,
And the rebellious Winds in Prison chains.
And Dionysius in his Perieges^s, (...)
(...)
Great was the Grant to Aeolus assigned,
To rule the gentle, and the boisterous Wind.

Bag, a nine years Oxes Hide,
In which were Storms, and struggling Tempests tied.
Empowered by Jove, the Winds King Aeolus swaies,
Provokes their Fury, or their Wrath allaies.
This on our Deck he bound with silver Wire,
So that no Breath could issue, nor respire;
And sent fair Gales to give our Vessel speed,
But by our Folly we our selves undid:
Our Voyage lost, nine Days, and Nights, we steered,
When on the Tenth, our Native Coasts appeared;
And we, drawn near, beheld the smoke arise:
There lulling sleep closed up my weary Eyes,
For still I steered, nor would the Helm forsake,
That we the sooner might our Voyage make.
When thus one murmuring spoke; Silver, and Gold,
This Bull-skin-Cloak-bag fardled up must hold:
No meaner Present Aeolus ever made.
Against me another frowning, then inveighed;
Ah how our Chief They prize; of what Renown
Where e're he comes, in Country, Court, or Town;
What Pillage fell at Ilium to his share,
When we return as poor as e're we were?
This Aeolus gave in Friendship to conjoyn:
Come let us search this Gold and Silver Mine.
The unhappy Counsel takes, and they accursed
Unlose the Bag, and forth loud Tempests burst;
A cross-wind plows the Main, and with strange force
Them weeping drove from their intended Course;
When I awaked, alaram'd from my Dream,
Considering whether I in this extreme
Should drown my self, or silent yet survive,
Till Waves had swallowed me with them alive:
But patient I endured, and covered lay,
Till we were driven to the Aeolian Bay.
Whilst their loud Sighs out-voyc'd the mouthing wind:
There landing, we a Crystal Fountain find,
And straight repast they for themselves prepare:
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
I with a Herald and one more addressed
My self to Aeolus, sitting at a Feast,
Then with his Sons, and Daughters, and fair Queen:
All were amazed beholding us come in,
And stopping at the Door admiring, spoke;
What evil Spirit drove Ulysses back?
Whence come thou? We dismissed thee with great Care,
That thou might to thy dearest Home repair.
Then sadly I replied; Back through the Deep,
Wronged by my Friends, and overpowr'd by Sleep,
I am enforced once more to beg your Aid:
I in such melting Language did persuade.
All silent were, when the angry King thus spoke;
Be gone thou worst of Men, this Isle forsake,
I must not aid, nor harbor, one whom Fate,
And all the Court of Just Celestials hate:
In an ill Hour thou hither came, Depart.
Thus he Dismissed me with a broken Heart;
And we from thence in sad Condition sail,
No hopes of our Return, our Spirits fail.
Six Days, and Nights, through briny Waves we steer,
The seventh, to us King King of Formiae, a City of Campania, from whom the
Aelii, a Senatorian Family in Rome were descended, and received the Sur-name of
Lamia, as Horace testifies Carm. lib. 1. Od. 17. Aeli vetusto n^bilis ab Lamo,
Quando and priores hinc Lamias ferunt
Denominatos, et nepotum
Per memores genus om^e fastos.
Autore ab illo ducis originem
Qui Formiarum moenia dicitur
Princeps, et innantem Mari^ae
L^ttoribus tenuisse Lyrim;
Late tyrannus.
Brave Elius from Lamus King a Stem
Our Annals say, thy house descends from him,
From him deriv'st thou thy Originals,
Who first built Formiae, with such lofty Walls,
And Lyris ruld, that washed Myrica Strands
With Silver Waves; who there had large Commands.

Lamus Walls appear,
And Laestrygonian Ports, where Shepherds keep
Their Flocks by turns, and he that does not sleep,
Watching by Night, they double his reward;
This looks to Sheep, Another feeds the Heard.
The Port we enter, guarded on each side
With jetting Rocks, within the Harbor wide
The opposing Shores extend, the Passage straight,
Winds never roll here, Waves to unruly height:
There in close order the whole Navy lay,
And filled the Bosom of the winding Bay;
I only road without, where fast I made
My Vessel to a Clift, then round survaid
Upon a Summit, but no Works I could
Of Men, nor Beasts, or Pasturage behold,
But rising Smoke: straight I a Herald sent,
And two with him, along the Path they went.
Where from the Mountains they Materials drew:
Antiphates Daughter at the spring they view,
King of the The Poet has omitted the names of the persons murdered, but Ovid
has preserved one of them, Achamentdes; for thus he makes him speak; Missus ad
hune ego sum numero comitante duorum,
Vixque fuga quasita salus comitique mihique:
Tertius e ^^bis Laestrygonis impia tinxit
Ora cruore suo --
I, and two more to him were sent, but two,
I and my Mate, escaped with much ado,
The third, the Laestrygoni^ns gullet died
With h^s own gore.
He was afterward left on land in the Country of the Cyolops, and saved by
Aentas who landed there, as Virgil writes at large in the third of his Aeneids.
Laestrygonians; to this Stream,
Artacia styled, the Town for Water came.
They drawing nigh inquire, who ruled that Land,
What King, or Potentate, there bore Command,
She with them to her Fathers Palace hies;
Where entering, they, of a prodigious size
A Woman saw, Huge, like a Hill, they all
Amazed stood, whilst she forsakes the Hall
To fetch the King her Husband, whom She brought,
Descended from Lamus, and King at this time of the Laestrygones. Ovid Metamor.
lib. 14. Inde Lami veterem Laestrygonis, inquit, in urbem
Venimus: Antiphates terra regnabat in illa.
From thence the ancient City we attained
Of Lamus, where Antiphates then reigned.

Death threatening, and with dire Destruction fraught.
Straight one he snatched, and for his Supper dressed,
Whilst to the Fleet, affrighted, fly the rest:
But He the Town alarms; the People heard,
And Laestrygonians numberless appeared:
They, not resembling Men, but Giants vast,
Upon our Ships torn Rocks, and Mountains cast:
Straight a sad Noise flys ore the Harbors Banks
Of dying Men of shattered Decks, and Planks,
Which they as Fishes slew to serve their board,
Whilst I, my Falchion drawing, cut the Cord:
Their Oars I bid them ply their Lives to save,
Death at their Heels: They brush the briny Wave,
And soon our Ship the open Sea enjoyed,
But all the rest the Laestrygons destroyed.
Hence with sad Hearts we sail, so many lost,
Till we at last reached the An Island in the Hetrurian Sea, so called from Aea
a Town by the Phasis, 15 miles from the Euxine Sea, from whence Circe fled
thither. Apollonius in his Argonauticks, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Stoutly from thence through breaking Waves they bore,
And passing viewed the Ausonian Tuscan Shore;
Then came unto the famous Aeaean Bay,
Where near the Shore they Anchors cast; here they
Found Circe washing in the sea her head.
This Island was called from her Circeius. But Pliny observes, that that which
in Homer's time was an Island far remote from Italy, and in Theophrastus age a
mile distant, is now part of the Continent. Strabo says that in his time there
remained the Temple of Circe, and a Goblet of Vlysses's, some dark remains of
this relation.


Aeaean Coast.
There the bright Goddess dwelt, Circe the fair,
Brother and Sister Hesiod follows the genealogy of our Poet in his Theogonia,
(...)
(...)
To the Sun Perse, the Oceans Daughter bare
Etes, and Circe with the golden hair.
But Diodorus Siculus lib. 5. makes Circe the daughter of Aeetas.
Aeetas and Circe were;
Sprung from the Sun, Persa their Mother styled,
Daughter to Oceanus: some Stars more mild
There put us in; there lay we to repose
Two Days, and Nights, harras'd with Toyls, and Woes:
But the third day, I with the breaking Dawn
Took up my Spear, my good Sword guirded on;
Then from a Summits top survaid each where,
If Men had been, or if some now were there;
Thus gazed I, and about me round did look,
At last methought I saw a rising Smoke,
Which was from Circe's Palace in a Wood.
There long consulting with my self I stood,
Considering what to do, what Course to take:
My varying thoughts this Resolution make;
My Ship first to revisit on the Shore,
Refresh my Friends, then send some out to explore;
On my Design thus walking to the Road,
Pitying our sad Condition, some kind God
Put from the Grove a Stag, whom Phoebus Beams
Enforced to water at refreshing Streams;
At him, thus stalking on, my Spear I threw,
Quite through his Chine the well aimed Javelin flew:
The struck Deer falling, grovels on the Ground,
Whilst I my Lance draw from the deadly Wound;
The Quarry left, I Branches plucked, and hard
With winding stretched to a sufficient Cord,
Which on my Neck tied by the Feet I bore,
Leaning upon my Spear, down to the shore;
Well on my shoulder him I could not get
With the other hand, the Monster was so great:
Before the Ship my heavy load I laid,
And my Associates comforting, thus said;
To Pluto's Court, dear Friends, we shall not yet
Be summoned, nor to Nature pay our Debt,
Let Us now be merry, now lets eat, and drink,
No more of Want, nor our Misfortune think:
There needs small invitation to a Feast,
They all appear, nor wanted I a Guest:
The admire the Stag, so fat, and fair a prize.
When they enough had banqueted their Eyes,
They wash their Hands, and Dinner ready get,
Then sat we feasting, till bright Phoebus set,
With richest Wine, with well-fed Venson store;
And growing dark, we quartered on the Shore.
But when the rosie-finger'd Morn arose,
I to my Friends refreshed, did thus propose;
My fellow sufferers, you who undergo
With me, and bravely too, Woe heaped on Woe;
Since we no certain The vulgar interpretation of this place, amongst the
ancient Grammarians, supposed two parts of the heavens only to be here
signified, the East, and West; But Strabo has confused that opinion out of
several places of our Poet, whom we have chose here to follow, Iliad 12. (...)
or darkness is taken (...)
(...)
If they to the Sun the right hand take their flight,
Or to the left, the seat of lasting Night.

North, nor South have found,
Nor where the inlightning Sun posts under Ground,
Nor where his Rise; yet our own Interest
Let us with Care pursue, and Cast the best.
I saw, when I on yonder Prospect stood,
A little Isle environed with a Wood,
And through a shady Grove, ascending Smoke.
This said; they tremble with fresh Terror struck,
And to their minds the Laestrygons recall,
And Polyphemus that huge Cannibal,
Whilst down their Cheeks tears in a Deluge glide:
Yet I in two my Company divide;
Eurylochus had half, the rest I take;
And Lots we cast, the brazen Helmet shake:
Eurylochus the Country must explore
With Twenty two, they weeping leave the Shore,
And Circe's Palace found, where Lions stormed,
And Wolves about the gates, from In this story of Circe the Poet delivers the
opinion of the ancients concerning Witches, and Enchantments, viz. that they
had power to transform the bodies of men into other Animals. Herodotus writes
thus of the Neuri, or Leiflanders, These may be supposed to be Wizards: for the
Scythians, and those Greclans that live in Scythia, report that once a year,
for some few days, they are all transformed into Wolves, and afterward return
to their own shape: They persuade not me to believe what they say; nevertheless
they do both affirm it and swear to it. So Virgil in his Pharmaceutria, Has
herbas atque haec Ponte mihi lecta venena
Ipse dedit Moeris: nascuntur psurima Ponto.
His ego sape lupum fieri, and se condere sylvis
Moerin --
For me these Herbs in Po^tus Moeris chose,
There every powerful Drug in plenty grows
Transformed to a Wolf I often Moeris saw,
Then into shady Woods himself withdraw.
Several modern examples of this nature are to be found in Bodinus, Petrus
Mamorius, and Henricus Coloniensis. But Pliny, not unjustly, imputes it to the
credulity of the Greeks, amongst whom there could no Lie be so impudent as to
want a Witness.
Men transformed:
These Monsters set not on them though, but Tame,
Wagging their Tails, on fauning gently came:
Like vanting Hounds, who leap about their King,
Who from a Feast does them sweet Morsels bring:
About them so huge Wolves, and Lions leaped:
They frighted at the horrid Monsters, stepped
Into the beauteous Goddess Portal, where,
Her at her Web they sweetlysinging hear
Notes so delicious, to a Thread so fine,
That we may call both Song, and Web, divine.
Polytes Hemer mentions but one of them who were transformed, Polytes, but Ovid
has preserved the names of two more, in whose Metamorphosis Achaemenides thus
speaks; Sort sumsis lecti; fors me fidumque ^olyten
Eurylochumque simul, nimiique Elpenora vini.
Bisque nevem socios Circaea ad moenia misit.
To me Polytes and Eurylochus join,
By Lot chose, and Elpenor given to Wine,
With eighteen more to Circe's Palace sent.

then, one whom I deerly loved,
And most esteemed, thus his Associates moved;
Some Goddess, Sirs, within, or Woman sings,
Plying her Loom, how the arched Pavement rings!
Let Us make Address: this said, aloud they call,
The Gates she opening, leads into the Hall;
They rashly following, on the Inchantress wait,
Eurylochus staid, expecting some Deceit,
Whilst she the Strangers sets in stately Chairs,
And Cheese, Flower, Honey mixed with Wine prepares:
Before them Bread steeped with dire Drugs she set,
That they their Native Country might forget:
When well the had fed, often ebbed the sparkling Cup,
Whisking her Wand, in Stys she pens them up,
Transformed to grunting Swine in brisly Hair,
Their Minds the same, so lay they weeping there,
Whilst she brings Mast, and Acorns for their Food,
Such as they feast on, grovelling in the Mud.
Eurylochus fled to the Ship to tell
What woeful Accident the rest befell,
But could not speak one word, though fain he would,
Grief pierced his Heart, with Tears his Eyes oreflow'd:
With these sad Symptoms, ready to expire,
We throng about him, and the Cause inquire.
When this account he of his Fellows makes;
We went, renowned Ulysses, through the Brakes,
As Thou commandedst us, until we found
A Court of polished marble Moted round,
There plying of her Web, as we drew near,
A Goddess, or a Woman's Voice we hear,
They call aloud, her self, the beauteous Queen
Opens the Gates, and kind invites them in:
They rashly entering, all upon her wait,
Whilst I stood still, suspecting some Deceit,
But straight they vanished, and appeared no more,
Though long I stayed expecting at the Door.
This said; I guirt my Sword, and took my Bow,
And straight commanded him the Way to show:
But he holding my Knees strove to dissuade,
And much lamenting, to this purpose said;
O take not me along, but leave me here,
Your Curiosity will cost you dear;
For I am sure, I never shall see again
You, noble Sir, nor any of your Train:
But let us lanch with speed, fly while we may,
Whilst we have power to escape the Evil Day.
Thus he requested, when I thus replied;
Stay then Eurylochus, and here abide,
Rest and refresh thyself; but I must go,
Invincible necessity says so.
This said, I from my Vessel did descend,
But as through sacred Vales my Course I bend
Toward Circe's Court, when I was almost there,
In's own shape Hermes did to me appear,
A brisk young gallant with a golden Wand,
And speaking, took me kindly by the Hand;
Unhappy! is this place to Thee unknown,
That thus Thou wandrest through these wilds alone?
Thy Friends transformed to Swine, here coup'd in Sties
Lie under Circe's dire Arrest; advise
First with Thy self, come thou their Bail to be?
She Will stay thee sooner then thou set them free:
But I will thee preserve, take Thou this Dose,
And keeping safe, venture into her House:
This all her preparations quite disarms.
I Will tell thee where she puts her poys'ning Charms,
She Will set before Thee Bread, and Wine, in which
Dire Compositions are that straight bewitch:
But this will stop the working, straight it shall
Kill the strong mixture: Come, I Will tell Thee all;
When with her wand she offers Thee to strike,
Thy Falchion draw, and do to her the like,
Threatening to kill; Then daunted she will invite
Thee to Love sports, and pleasures of the Night:
The Goddess not refuse, that so thou may
By her gained Favor get thy Friends releast:
Then make her swear she by no other Charm,
Shall of thy strength, and courage thee disarm.
This said, an Herb plucked from the tender mold
He gave me, and its Virtues did unfold:
Sable the Root, bloomed with a silver Flower,
Which Gods call There were several antidotes to Enchantments known to the
Ancients. Tzetzes, (...), Moly, Laurel, and the sea-star, have an antipathy to
all manner of Magic. Dionysius reckons the Jasper amongst them, in his
Periegesis, (...)
(...)
It brings forth Crystal, and the Jasper bright,
Which Ghosts, and Spectrums, puts to flight.
Pliny says that no Enchantments can hurt that house to whose Posts, or Nails
is affixed Stella marina dipped in the blood of a Fox. Amatus Lusitanus affirms
that the herb Moly grows in the fields of Naples. Melchior Guillandinus kept
one of them among the rest of his Rarities, which was brought out of Egypt, who
says, that it is drawn out of the Earth by a Dog, tied to it for that purpose,
who is immediately suffocated; which comes something near to what our Poet
writes here. Apion the Grammarian declared publicly, that by the virtue of
the herb Cynocephalia, by the Egyptians called Osyrites, he had charmed up the
Ghost of Homer, to inquire of him who were his Parents, and what his Country,
but that he durst not declare his answer. Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 30.
Moly, scarce by Mortal power
To be plucked up, but Gods can all things do:
Thence to Olympic Turrets Hermes flew,
I through the Grove to Circe's Palace went,
Much troubled, doubtful what might be the Event.
Drawn near the House I call, the ready Queen
Opens the Gates, and kind invites me in,
I sadly follow, where a Chair she placed,
And Footstool for me curiously enchac'd:
A golden Goblet then with dire intent,
Full of bewitching liquor did present:
I ebbed the Bowl, but no effect it had,
When with her Wand she striking me thus said;
Go amongst thy Mates, and fill you nasty Sty;
At this I draw my Sword, and at her fly,
As her I would have slain, a loud she skreeks,
And running in, tears trickling down her Cheeks,
My Knees embracing thus a Supplyant spoke;
Who art, whence come thou, of what wondrous Stock?
I am amazed thou art not yet transformed,
Who e're tastes this is to some purpose charmed:
Thou art the first escaped that e're did sip,
Or let one dram oth' Bottle pass his Lip:
What wondrous Antidote thus steeled thy Heart?
Sure you are Ulysses that so subtle art,
Whom Hermes often told me I should enjoy
Returning from the Sack of wealthy Troy:
Put up that Weapon, must we have a bout?
In Bed, with other Arms, let us fight it out;
There charge me home, I dare your worst of spite,
All Duels their Love seconds, and Delight.
To her enticing, I this answer give;
How thy alluring words may I believe,
And Thee embracing my Revenge decline,
Who keep'st my friends coup'd up, transformed to swine?
Thou have some farther reach with powerful Charms
To conquer me left naked in thy Arms:
To venture to thy Bed I shall be loath,
Unless thou please to take the Stygian Oath,
That thou have no Design on any Score
To injure me. This said, the Goddess swore;
Bound with her Vow we enter the Alcove,
There conquering Fears, and Jealousies Hesiod in his Genealogy of the Gods
names two sons which Ciree bare to Ulysses, though our Poet mentions but one
years stay with her, (...)
(...)
(...)
Circe the Suns race to Ulysses bore Agrius, and Latinus.
Hyginus in his Fables calls them Nausithous, and Telegonus.

with Love.
Mean while four Maids, whose office was to keep
The Palace clean, the Rooms to dress and sweep,
Fall to their work, Nymphs all, who haunt the Woods,
Fountains, and Rivers posting to the Floods.
This ore the Benches royal Tap'stry cast,
And bordering under with fine linen graced;
That near the Seats covers a Silver board,
Then lades with golden Dishes, whilst the Third
Mixed in a gilded Vessel purest Wine,
And makes with golden Bowls the Cupboard shine.
The Fourth brings water, on, a Trevet sets,
Kindling a lusty fire, the Liquor heats.
Then near the steaming Caldron me she placed,
And on my Head and Shoulders water cast,
My Body bathed, refreshed thus after Toil,
She supples ore with odoriferous Oil;
Then on she puts my Coat, and Vestments, neat,
Sets me a Footstool, and a silver Seat,
Bids me fall too; but I distrust the Cates,
Fearing they were not Food, but rather Baits.
When Circe saw me thus demurely sit,
Nor would of various Plenty touch one bit;
Ulysses, said she, Why sit'st thou so mute,
Like one Forlorn, nor wilt thy Spirits recruit
With wholesome Wine, and this our Fare though plain
Suspect'st thou still? Thou Jealous art in Vain,
Thou know that I have sworn the mighty Oath.
Then I replied; What Man would not be loath,
Madam, that Common sense has, or a Soul,
To touch these Meats, or lift that golden Bowl,
Before he see his dear Relations freed,
Set them at Liberty, then bid me feed:
When They appear on then I Will boldly fall.
This said, She takes her Wand, and leaves the Hall,
Opens their Styes, where straight we might behold
Huge Boars, who seemed at least full nine years old,
With counter Charms the Inchantress 'noints them all;
Straight their rough Hair, and horrid Brissles fall,
And they their Shapes resume, more young, and fair,
Plumper their Cheeks, their Limbs more Brauny were;
They knowing me, by each hand grasping clung,
Whilst with loud Joy the arched Ceilings rung.
Then moved b'indulging pity Circe spoke;
Now of thy Ship some care Ulysses take,
First, draw her up, and freed from boyst'rous Storms,
In neighboring Caves thy Tackle stow, and Arms,
Then straight return, and bring those left behind:
All doubts, and fears, thus banished from my mind,
Straight went I to my Vessel, where I found
My woeful Friends in Tears and Sorrow drowned;
As well-fed Heifers play at Prison-Base,
About their Mothers coming home from Grass,
Lowing they frisk, their Stals the Wantons shun;
Weeping with Joy, so they about me run;
As glad as if their Voyage they had made,
And landed were at Home, when thus they said;
So much we joy to see Thee now return,
As if arrived we were, where we were born;
But where, and how our dear Associates died,
Ah tell us, Sir: I cheerfully replied;
First draw our Vessel up from Winds and Waves,
Our Arms and Tackle stow, in neighboring Caves,
Then follow me where you in Circe's Court,
Shall to your Friends, and plenteous Boards resort.
Straight all prepare, Eurylochus dismayed,
Refused to go, and thus to stop them said;
Ah hapless Friends have you not Woes enough,
But you will adventure under Circe's Roof!
She will transform you all to salvage Boars,
Fierce Wolves, or Lions, so to guard her Doors:
As Cyclops when Ulysses in a Brave
With Twelve of us adventured in his Cave,
Half perished there by his wild Plot forsooth.
My Reason then almost orepowr'd my Wrath:
Though my dear According to Eustathius he had married Ctimene the Sister of
Ulysses.
Kinsman, I without remorse
Had left him there adecollated Coarse:
But they with mild persuasions pressed me hard
To leave him there, let him the Vessel guard,
And lead us on to sacred Circe's Court.
This said, we leave the Vessel, and the Port,
Neither Eurylochus behind us staid,
But fearing my Displeasure, he obeyed.
Those whom I left in Circe's Court, mean while
She bathed and 'noynted with delicious Oil,
Clothing in comely Habits, whom we found
Set at a Feast; the arched Roofs resound.
With joyful Tears, when they their Friends survaid
In such a Posture, Thus then Circe said,
No more Renowned Ulysses now complain,
I know your sufferings on the boyst'rous Main,
And what by Men more rough, you felt Ashore:
Now eat, and drink, and wasted Spirits restore;
Be as you were, when first your native Soil,
Rough Ithaca, you left; nor your Exile
To memory more, nor tedious Travels call,
What e're, be merry, and forget them all.
Encouraged thus the Goddess I obeyed,
And a whole year there banqueting we staid,
At various Dishes, and delicious Wines;
But when the Sun had posted through twelve Signs,
His annual Progress through the Zodiac,
Thus then my Friends, their minds imparting, spoke;
Your Country, Sir, it is now ah more then time
To call to mind, if e're your native Clime
And lofty Palace you to see intend:
This said, I to the Motion condescend.
Then all the Day we Feasted; but when Night
With dusky Troops had put days beams to flight,
They to their Chambers went, and I repair
To Circe's Lodgings: Her then finding there,
I kneeling as an humble Supplyant, said;
Goddess, make good the Promise thou have made,
Me to dismiss when willing to depart;
And now my Friends, when e're thou absent art,
Importune me with Tears thy Court to leave.
She kindly to my Suit this Answer gave;
Renowned Ulysses, dear as if my Spouse,
Thou shall no longer tarry in my House
Then thy own pleasure thee inclines, but know,
That first thou must another Voyage go,
Where Proserpine, and Pluto, keep their Court,
And there to blind Tiresias Ghost resort:
Hell's Empress gave his Shade a The Fable of Tiresias is diversely reported by
the Grecians. Callimachus says, that as he was hunting on the Mountain
Helicon, he unfortunately saw Minerva the Virgin Goddess, washing her self in
the Fountain Hippocrene, for which he was struck blind; But to whom she gave
the gift of Prophecy while he lived, and obtained the same for him Proserpina
after his death. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Tiresias, then a Youth, came with his Hounds
Up steep Parnassus Heliconian grounds,
Who thirsty went to drink, unhappy he
Saw there, what was not fit for him to see
When Pallas vexed, Who sent thee hither, said,
And straight eternal night his Eyes did shade,
Yet Thee I Will make a Prophet, far beyond
Any before, when on the Stygian Strand
Alone thou shall have prudence, thy pale Ghost
Shall also honored be of Pluto most.
The relation is different in Ovid, Hyginn^, and Didymus.
solid Mind,
Whilst others fleet like Waves, or empty Wind.
I felt my Heart Strings crack at what she said,
Up sat I weeping, and so much dismayed,
That I no longer wished to live, nor see
Days cheering Beams, no Comfort now to me.
But when a briny Deluge I had shed,
And wearied grovelling postures on her Bed,
I faintly thus; But who shall show the Way?
Does any to the Devil go by Sea?
Then she replied; Dear be n't so much aghast,
Take thou no Care, only erect thy Mast,
Unfurle thy Sails, and Boreas shall transport
Thee, with fair Winds, to the Infernal Port.
But when some time the have plowed the foamy Brine,
And see a Grove sacred to Proserpine,
Of Poplars, and of Sallowes, there abide,
And on that Gulphy Oceans Bosom ride,
And walk thy self to Pluto's dismal Court,
Where Acheron and Phlegeton consort,
Where black Cocytus and the Stygian Wave,
Beating the Rocks, with mingled Billows rave:
Here when thou com'sta Pliny takes notice, that there is not the least
footstep of Magic in the whole Iliads of Homer, but that his Odysses consists
almost of nothing else. He seems to have learnt it in Egypt; for there it had
its origination, from thence carried into Cha^daea, and afterward into Persia:
where it flourished, 6000 years before the Death of Plato, according to
Eudoxus, and Aristotle, no credulous Authors; before the Trojan War, 5000
according to Hermippus. Ostanes the Magician, accompanying Xerxes in his
Expedition against Greece, sowed the seeds of this portentous art; And it is
certain. says Pliny, that ^e not only kindled a desire of this Art in the
Grecians, but made them mad after it. Aeschylus, who lived at that time, raises
the Ghost of Darius in his Tragedy called, The Persians: there he delivers the
preceding Sacrifice very agreeable to this of our Poet's, I suppose taken from
thence, thus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Milk of a Virgin Heifer bring with thee,
And Honey clear dropped from the Be,
A maiden Fountains Crystal tears, and next
With drink of an old Vine unmixt,
And of the golden Olive Tree the fruit,
Whose branches still with Summer suite,
And folded Flowers, the beaxteous birth
Of the all-producing Earth.
There follows also the Hymn with which the Ghost is evocated, but too large to
be here transcribed.


Hole dig deep and wide,
Then a Libation, for the Dead provide,
With Honey, and Wine, cast water in, and mix
Pure flour, imploring wafted Souls ore Styx:
But when thou shall to Ithaca return,
With richer Presents, a Chaste Heifer burn;
Yet with a Ram Tiresias Ghost invoke,
A black Ram, King, and Father of the Flock:
But after thou have prayed to the Renowned
Nations of Pale Shades wandering under Ground,
A Ram, and black Ewe, sacrifice to them,
And backwards go to the Infernal Stream;
There wander many Souls of those are dead:
Then call on those attend thee, and with speed
Command them flea those slaughtered Sheep lie there,
And their Skins burning make a zealous prayer
To Pluto, and fair Proserpine: but sit
Thou with thy Falchion drawn there, not permit
The pressing shadows of pale Ghosts draw near
To taste sweet blood e're thou Tiresia hear,
Who straight appearing then will thee instruct,
How Home thy Ship in safety to conduct.
Now rose Aurora in her golden Throne,
When Circe put my Vest, and Habit, on;
She a White Gown guirds round her slender Wast
With a bright Zone, her Brows a Fillet graced.
Then went I forth, thus calling One by One;
No more now sleep indulge, Let us be gone,
Circe consents. All muster in a Thought,
And them I off in Health, and Safety brought,
Except Elpenor, who the youngest there
Had little Courage, and as little Care;
Who lying by himself, after a Cup,
In sweet Repose, suddenly starting Up,
Hearing the Noise of those who ready were,
Hardly awake dropped backwards ore the Stair,
And broke his Neck: when to the rest I spoke;
We must dear Friends another Voyage make
E're we unto our Native Country sail;
Circe commands me, and I must not fail:
To Pluto, and dire Proserpine, we must,
There to consult Theban Tiresias Dust.
This broke their Hearts hearing me thus declare,
And weeping down they sat, and tore their Hair.
But Grief never Voyage helped, no time let slip,
Down we lamenting go unto our Ship.
Mean while fair Circe to our Vessel came,
Leaving a Black-Ewe bound up with a Ram,
Unseen of any: What Celestial would,
That their Addresses Mortals should behold?
scene from book 11 Honoratis^imce Dominoe Do Marice Gandish Tabulam hanc
LMDDDIO Lib jj Fo j55



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses sails to the Infernal Coast.
A Stygian Sacrifice, Tiresias Ghost
First warm blood drinks, and thence directs him Home.
Male, Female shades about him thronging come,
Their Stories tell; Souls tortured; Gorgon's Head
Fearing to see, he hasts to Sea, and fled.
SOON as we reached the strand, we lanch our Ship,
Erect our Mast, and hoyse our Sails a-trip,
Aboard the Cattle putting, we deplore
Our sad Misfortune, and forsake the Shore:
When Circe sent us straight our promised Gale,
A Constant Friend impregnating the Sail.
Whilst we our stations keep, and banks designed,
Trusting the Steers-man, and so fair a Wind,
All Day we went till Night her Flag unfurled
Spreading her sable Ensign ore the World,
And Waves, we to the Oceans Confines plowed.
The Cimmerians were a miserable people, inhabiting the Schythian Bosporus,
living incav'd in the rocks, the air ever dull and obscure by reason of the
distant Sun, and high hanging Mountains, whence sprung the Proverb of Cimmerian
darkness. These our Poet has transported into the furthermost Northern parts
bordering on the Ocean, and fitly out of relation to their obscure mansions
made them the inhabitants of those parts where the descent is into the dark
regions of Hell: perhaps out of a Poetical revenge; for Strabo observes that
those Barbarians had made an inrode into Aeolit, and Ionia, the Country of
Homer, about that time. From hence Ovid feigns the Mansion of Sleep among the
Cimmerians; Est prope Cimmerios longo spelunca recessu
Mons cavus, ignavi domus and penetralia Somni,
Quo nunquam radiis oriens, mediusve, caden^ve
Phoebus adire potest; nebula caligine mixtae
Exhalantur humo dubiae crepuscula lucis
Near the Cimmerians lurks a Cave, in steep
And hollow Hills, the Mansion of dull Sleep:
Nor seen by Phoebus when he mounts the Skies,
At height, nor stooping; gloomy mists arise
From humid earth, which still a twilight make.

Cimmerians here, absconded with a Cloud,
And gloomy Mists reside, which not the Sun
With piercing Rays could dissipate at Noon;
Nor rising, nor when He arched Heaven forsakes,
But still hung round, in everlasting Blacks.
Arriving here, our Vessel we put in,
Our Cattle eased, then lanch'd to Sea agin,
And to that Coast Circe directed bore;
Eurylochus there, and Perimed, a shore
The Offerings brought, I drawing from my side
My Falchion, dig'd a Pit four Cubits wide:
Then round about I empti'd brimming Bowls,
Libations to all departed Souls.
First Wine, and Honey, next pure Wine I pour,
And Water after, mixed with finest Flour;
Then all the Nations haunt the Stygian shore,
With franck-Libations humbly I implore,
Assuring Them, at my returning Home,
A Virgin Heifer, and a Hecatombe.
But with a Ram Tiresias I invoke,
A Black one, King, and Father of the Flock.
Then ore the Pit the Sacrifice I slew;
Warm That this Magical art of evocating the infernal Ghosts, was in use
anciently among the Grecians, and in repute, we have already shown: we shall
only now take notice of the means they used to raise them: among which, there
was constantly effusion of blood. Ovid. in his Metamorphosis, l. 7. Haud procul
egesta scrobibus tellure duabus
Sacra facit, cultro^que in vellera gutturis atri
Conjicit, and patulas perfundit sanguine fossas, etc.
Out of the Earth Aeetia two Pits
Then forthwith digs; and sacrificing slits
The throats of Black-fleec'd Rams: with reeking Blood
The Ditches filled, and poures thereon a Flood
Of Honey and new Milk, from turn'dup Bowls.
Papinius Statius in the fourth Book of his Thebais,
Principio largos novies tellure cavata
Inclinat Bacchi latices, et munera verni
Lactic, et Act^os imbres, suadumque cruorem;
Manibus aggeritur quantum capit arida tellus,
First in the Trench she pours in Wine, and next
With flowing Bowls, Milk, blood, and Honey mixed.
So much she pours into the dig'd-up holes,
As they contained, an Offering to All Souls.
But what Credit the more judicious gave to this Black-art, may be seen in
these words of Pli^ in his Natural History^ A^idst these manifold vices
whereunto the Emperor Nero had betaken, and sold himself, a principal desire
he had to have the Gods (forsooth) and familiar Spirits at his Command:
thinking that if he could once have obtained to that, he had then climbed up to
the highest point of Magnanimity. Never was there man that studied harder, and
followed any art more earnestly, then he did Magic. Riches he had enough under
his hands, and power he wanted not to execute what he would; yet he gave it
over in the end without effect: an undoubted, and peremptory Argument to
cenvince the vanity of this Art, when such an one as Nero forsook it.


blood gushed forth, and round pale shadows drew:
There Boys, and Girls, and Old Folks I discerned,
And Infants still with Trifling Griefs concerned;
And Valiant Heroes, slain in Battle, viewed,
Their Arms Transpiec'd, with recent Blood imbrew'd.
About the Pit They throng, when doleful Cries
Elsewhere I heard, pale Fear did me surprise.
Then Those attended on me straight I bad
To flea the Cattle which They slaughtered had,
And throw in flames, to prosper my Design,
Imploring Pluto, and fair Proserpine:
But I with drawn Sword sat, nor would permit
Shades for Blood thirsting, once to touch the Pit,
Until Tiresias I consulted had:
When first drew near Elpenor's woeful shade,
Whom uninterr'd we left in Circe's Court,
His Rites neglecting, hastening to the Port.
I weeping, thus to poor Elpenor said;
Came thou a Foot unto this dismal shade
Sooner then I could here at Anchor ride?
To me his state deploring, he replied;
Renowned Ulysses, this unhappy Soul,
My sad Fate hither sent, and the other Bowl
In Circe's Court; I starting from my Bed,
Going down the Ladder with a giddy Head
Dropped backward ore, my Neck broke as I fell,
There lay my Corpse, my shadow flew to Hell.
By those far distant are I Thee require,
By thy dear Wife, thy Son, and aged Sire,
Since well I know Thou with a leading Gale
Must back to the Aeaean Confines sail,
There I conjure Thee me to mind recall,
Nor leave me there without a For it was the opinion of the Grecians that the
Soul was not received into the place of its repose, before the body obtained
its funeral Solemnities, as has been already observed.
Funeral,
Lest Thou incense some of the powers Divine:
With me my arms burn, and what e're was mine,
My Tomb upon the Oceans margents rear,
That aftertimes of my sad Fate may hear;
And fix upon it my It was an ancient Custom to leave some memory of the life
of the deceased upon the Tomb: Archimedes, an eminent Mathematician, had a
Sphere and Cylinder inscribed upon his Sepulchral Stone, of which he had
written such excellent Speculations in his life time. Virgil, of Misenus. At
prius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulchrum
Imponit, suaque arma viro, remumque tubamque,
Monte sub acrio, qui nunc Misenus ab illo.
But Prince Aeneas a huge Tomb did raise
On which his Arms, his Oar, and Trumpet lays
Under a mighty Hill, which now they call
From him Misenus, and for ever shall.

Sepulcharal Oar,
With which so often I tug'd from Shore to Shore:
These his Requests I answered thus; Thy Will,
Ah hapless Wretch! I Will punctually fulfill:
Thus sitting we each others Fate deplored,
Whilst ore the Blood I flourished my Sword.
On the other side Elpenor muttering staid;
When straight appeared my Mothers woeful shade,
Autolychus Daughter, Autoclea, whom
I left alive, sailing for Ilium.
Her I beholding wept, and pitied much,
But would not suffer sacred Blood to touch
Before Tiresias came, whose honored Shade,
Appearing with a golden Scepter, said;
Why come thou hither, and forsak'st the Day,
Pale Ghosts, and dismal Regions, to survay?
Lay by thy Weapon, and the Pit forsake,
That I warm Blood may drink, then Truth I Will speak.
I sheathed my Sword, and drawing off, obeyed;
Who when warm Draughts his Thirst had quenched said;
How to sail home in safety thoud'st inquire,
Which Jove may easy make, but Neptune's Ire,
His Polypheme, whose Eye Ulysses struck out with a Firebrand.
Son by thee struck blind, may much obstruct;
Patience thy Ship, and Men, shall home conduct:
You and your Friends must your desires contain,
Soon as you land, (and leave the gloomy Main)
On the Sicily, so called from its trigonal figure, whose Ensign in the ancient
Coyns was three Legs triangle ways, as may be seen in Goltrius's Medagles of
Sicily.
Trinacrian Isle, you will see there run
Herds Of which he speaks more at large in the following Book.
consecrated to the all-seeing Sun:
If them you spare, and thy Return regard,
Safe shall your Voyage be, though long, and hard:
Which if you kill, you all shall be destroyed,
But if thou Death by Miracle do avoid,
In a strange Ship, all lost, Thou late may come,
Where greater Mis'ries thee attend at Home:
There proud Corrivals revelling in thy House,
Wasting thy Wealth, to marry with thy Spouse,
Presenting gifts, Her courting Day, and Night,
But thou shall be revenged to the height;
And after that, by subtilty or steel,
The have made the Suitors thy just Vengeance feel,
Then thou must sail where thou a Nation shall
Find, who not knows the use of seasoning Salt,
Nor Tiresia very obscurely describes the Country whither Ulysses was to
traveil after his return: but I find that the ancients generally interpreted it
of Epirus, not far distant from Ithaca. Pausanias in his description of Attica,
(...): etc. Pyrrhus being highly conceited of his strength, encountered the
Carthaginians ( the most experienced of all the Barbarians in the Sea, being
descended from the Phoenicians) in a Naval fight, his Armada consisting only of
Epirots, who, when Troy was taken, knew not the Sea, nor use of Salt, as Homer
testifies. These that knew not the Sea, were ignorant of the use of Salt,
according to our Poet; whence it may be conjectured that Homer knew of no other
Salt, but what was made out of Sea water. The other token of their ignorance of
the Sea was, that they should not know an Oar, but call it by the name of an
instrument with which they winnowed Corn.
Seas e're saw, nor Ships with painted Prores,
Nor sails expanded, nor well polished Oars:
And this will be the sign; when on the Way
Thou one Incount'erst traveling that shall say,
A Winnower he upon his shoulder has,
There fix thy broken Oar, and Neptune's wrath
With a fat Ram appease, a Bull, and Boar,
Then home returning all the Gods implore.
Then fear not, till from Sea According to this Prophecy is the story of
Vlysses's death related by Didymus, Telegonus, the Son of Ulysses by Circe, had
a Spear made by Vulcan, which was the bone of a Seafish called in Latin
Pastinaca Marina, with which he slew his Father unknown to him. Not unlike was
the Prophecy concerning the Emperor Titus; that his Death should come from the
Sea, who was poisoned by a Sea Hare.
Death thee arrest,
When thou grown old have made thy people blessed:
These Fortunes Thee will certainly betide.
Thus said Tiresias; and I thus replied;
These, Heaven decrees, and ever fixed Fate,
But say blessed Prophet, and the Truth relate;
I see my Mothers Shade, who not her Son
Will speak to, nor so much as look upon:
Silent she sits by sacred Blood; ah, how
May she poor shadow her dear Offspring know!
Then He replied; take this from me, who e're
Of Shades thou sufferst to the Blood draw near,
They will to what so e're thou asks, reply,
Or far from thee, if thou withstand'st them, fly.
This said, Tiresia vanished from my Sight
To Pluto's Court, and Seats of lasting Night:
But I that Posture kept in which I stood,
Until my Mother tasted sacred Blood;
Who straight her Offspring knew, and weeping, said;
How alive came Thou to this dismal Shade?
To see Dark Kingdoms is for mortals hard,
With mighty Rivers, and the Ocean barred;
Which none on Foot will suffer; sure Thou have
Hither by Sea, through raging Billows, past.
Wandering from Troy, why did thou hither come,
So much time spent, and have not been at Home,
Nor seen thy Wife, who lives as if Divorced.
Invincible Necessity enforced
Me, dearest Mother, to these parts, I said;
And to consult Theban Tiresias shade.
I never reached Greece, nor touched my native Coast,
But always wandered with Afflictions crossed,
Since I to Troy with Agamemnon went,
And there our time in restlest Leagure spent:
But dearest Mother say, and truth relate,
How came thou hither? by what cruel Fate?
By sickness, or the Quiver bearing Maid
Sent with her Shafts Thee to this Dismal shade?
Next t^ll me of my Son, and Father's Fate:
Keep they in their Possession my Estate,
Or swallowed up by some incroaching Lord,
Who think, I Am drowned, or perished by the Sword?
How stands the Affection of my dearest Spouse?
Remains she with my Boy, and keeps my House,
Or else become some other Prince's Bride?
I strictly thus inquiring, she replied;
Thy Wife keeps home, afflicting still her mind,
And has perpetual Grief her self designed,
Consuming Night and Day in Tears for thee:
Thy Goods, and House as yet in safety be:
Telemachus in quiet governs all,
And often makes Princely treatments in thy Hall:
Thy Father in the Country still remains,
And Royal Weeds, and Furniture disdains;
In sordid Rags when Winter chills the Skies,
He on the Hearth, as Slaves, amongst ashes lies:
But when grown warm, he in his Vineyard strows
Leaves for his Couch, there taking sad Repose,
Mourning thy Fate till aged grown: but I
By neither of these Casualties did die:
Skilful Diana with her gentle Dart,
Not, in her Progress, struck me to the Heart;
Nor Sickness brought me to that low Estate,
My Soul, and Body thus to separate;
But the great Care, and Love of thee, and thine,
Cost me my life, for I away did The later Poets say, that out of excessive
grief she strangled her self, when she heard that Ulysses was destroyed by
Nauplius. Eustath.
pine.
Stirred by Affection when she thus had said,
I stepped in to embrace my Mother's shade:
Thrice I attempted, and as often fail,
She fled me like a Dream, or nimble Gale.
Orepowr'd with Grief whilst thus I strove, in vain,
Of her Unkindness thus did I complain;
Why meet'st thou not, dear Mother, my embrace,
That here we may in this most dismal place
A Comfort find, and in the midst of Grief
Conjoyning hands, though small, get some Relief?
This all the Favor Proserpine bestows,
To show thee only to augment my Woes?
Then thus to give me ease, she seemed to strive;
Oh thou the unhappiest of all men alive!
Hell's Queen not Thee deludes, but it is the sad
Condition of all Mortals, once being dead,
Bodies no more to assume, when on the Pyre
Their Corpse are Ashes turned in funeral Fire;
When breath no more refrigerates our Hearts,
Like a swift Dream our fleeting Soul departs:
But haste thou to the Living, and the Light,
And these bold stories to thy Wife recite.
Thus we discoursed whilst Heroins drew near,
That Wives, and Daughters of great Princes were,
About the blood they gather, driven on
By Proserpine, whom I then one by one
Resolved to question, then before the Pit
With my drawn sword, them singly I admit;
Who after they had drank, it was their task,
To tell me what so e're I pleased to ask.
First I to Tyro spoke, who answered, thus;
In The eldest Daughter of A River in the Morca descend^ng from a ^ountain called
Salmon^, which seems to have borrowed its name from Salmoneus King of that
place.
Salmonius,
Cretheus Spouse; once with This is he who was thunderstruck by Jupiter
according to Virgil in the sixth of his Aentids; because out of a desire to
assume to himself divine honor, he had with Machines, and ^ire-works
endeavored to imitate I hunder and Lightning. I saw Salmoneus as he tortured
sat,
Who Lightning could, and Thunder imitate,
B^andishing flames he in a Chariot rode,
Through Greece in triumph honored like a God,
And did immitable Fire and Rain
With Brass, and speed of horn'd-hooft Horses feign;
But through the Clouds at him great Jove did aim
A^^ hunder-bolt poynted with piercing flame,
Not with slight Squibs or Crackers on him fell,
But with a Whi^l wind tumbled him to Hell.

Enipeus took,
To whom all Rivers seem a shallow Brook:
Sporting on margents of his pleasant Stream.
Neptune his shape assuming, turned to him,
Comprest her midst the Edies of the Sound,
Like a Hill, curtain'd with a Billow round,
Who there concealed lay, by a God embraced,
Whose Virgin Zone dissolved in sleep he cast,
When he well-pleased had all his Love-tricks played,
He by the Hand her taking, kindly said;
Rejoice in my Affection, e're a year
Fills up his Periods, Thou two Sons shall bear;
These breed up well, and now go Home, my Name
To none disclose, Know thou I Neptune am.
This said, He dives, and breaking Billows rore;
To whom she Pelias, and Neleus bore,
Joves Champions both, Pelias himself did style
A City in Thessa^y.
Iolcus Prince, the other governed Being driven by his Brother from Jolcus; he
planted a Colony here.
Pyle.
But she to Cretheus other Children bare,
Aeson, and Pheres, Amathon the fair.
Next her I saw Antiopa, Asops Race,
Jove himself prided in her sweet embrace.
He Zethus, and They first lived in'a small Town ^a^l^d Eutrens, afterward
removed to Th^b^s, which they were forced to bulwa^k ^ound for fear of the
Phlegya potent enemies nee: hand. The Poets generally say that Amphion played so
swee^ly on his Harp, that the very Stones and Trees spontaneously followed it
to the building of the Walls of Thebes. Horace in his Art of Poetry. Dictus and
Amphion Thebanae conditor Vrbis
Saxa movere sons testudinis, and prece blanda
Ducere quo v^llet --
Amphion, who built Thebes made stones advance,
As they report, and to his Music dance
And lead them where he pleased with moving Strains.
By which they fignified that he by the sweetness of his discourse, and
carriage had mo^lified the more fierce and barbarous people, and persuaded them
to a Politic Society.
Amphion had by Her,
Who with seven Gates the Walls of Thebes did rear,
And fortified with Bul-warks round about,
Although the people were both strong, and stout.
I saw Amphitryo's Spouse, Alcmena, there,
Whom Jove impregnating, Alcides bare;
And Creon's daughter, I Megara spied,
Who had been stout Amphitryo's Of-spring's Bride.
I Oedipus Mother Epicasta saw,
She spous'd her Son, against Nature, and all Law:
He kills his Laius, being informed by the Oracle of Apollo that he should be
slain by his own Son, caused Oedipus, as soon as he was born, to be exposed to
be destroyed, either by wild Beasts, or Famine: but the Shepherds taking pity
on him, caused him to be educated: who being arrived to maturity of age went to
Thebes to inquire after his Father, whom he met by the way; and in a quarrel,
being ignorant who it was, slew him: and afterward married his Mother Epicasta
(so called by Homer, by the later Poets Jocasta.) This story was the subject of
two Tragedies of Sophocles.
Father, and his Mother Weds,
Fame of the incestuous Marriage each where spreads:
He in sad Posture ore the Thebans reigned,
His Conscience touched, his Reputation stained:
She with a Cord, and lofty Beam, her Fates
And Grief concluding, entered Pluto's Gates:
But Him she left 'midst sorrows uncontrol'd,
And all the Woes a Mother's Furies could.
Next, I fair Chloris saw, whom Neleus Wed,
Paying dearly for the enjoyments of her Bed,
Amphion's daughter, who Orchomen swayed,
Whom Minyos, and sandy Pile obeyed,
To him she Nestor, Chromius, Pericles bare,
And beauteous Pero, one so wondrous fair:
Whom all the neighboring Princes came to Woo;
But He not her on any would bestow,
Could not to him This story of Neleus, and Pero, is very obscurely delivered
by our Poet, which was this: Iphiclus had seized upon the goods of Tyro, the
Mother of Neleus, among which were many beautiful Oxen, which Neleus afterward
demanded of him, but could not obtain them. His daughter Pero, being a Lady of
great beauty, was courted by all the neighboring Princes, but he refused to
espouse her to any one, unless he could recover those Oxen detained by
Iphiclus. Bias persuades his brother Melampus, a Prophet, to undertake the
business for him, who in the enterprise was taken; and imprisoned; but after
some durance there, having discovered to Iphiclus how he might have children by
his Wife, who had till then been barren, received the Oxen for his reward.
Iphiclus Cattle drive;
Which once a Prophet promised to contrive;
But him a woeful Fate, a cruel Chain,
And Rusticks more unmerciful detain:
But when the ever circumvolving Sphere,
Months, Days, and Hours had wound up in one Year,
Then Iphiclus freed him ( Jove would have it so)
After he did, what he desired, know.
Next, saw I Leda, Tyndarus Spouse, she bare
Castor, and Pollux, who such Champions were:
These by Jove's will When Castor was slain by Lyncens, his brother Pollux
petitioned Jupiter to grant him immortality: which when he could not obtain, he
imparted to him an equal share of his own. Virgil Aeneid. l. 6. Si fratrem
Pollux alterna morte red^mit,
Itque reditque viam toties --
If Pollux could by an alternate death
His Brother ease, and tread so often one path.

alternate live, and die,
This lies inhum'd, whilst that ascends the Sky,
At once they rise and set, this under ground
Whilst that in heaven remains, with glory crowned.
Next saw I Iphimedia, who confessed,
Though Aloes Wife, that Neptune her comprest:
Two Sons she bore him; Otus, and the fair
Ephialtes, with whom none could compare
Except Orion; both were Giants vast,
In nine years grown, nine Cubits in the Wast,
And nine Else tall, these fell with Heaven at Ods,
And a Rebellion raised against the Gods:
Ossa they on Olympus strove to lay,
Pelion on The attempt the rebellious Giants made upon Heaven, has been the
subject of whole Poems: but these are distinct from them, as appears by Virgil
in the 6 of his Aeneids, though some late writers do confound them. Hic genus
antiquum Terrae, Titania pubes.
Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo.
Hic and Aloidas geminos, imneaenia vidi
Corpora qui manibus maguum rescindere coelum
Aggressi, superisque Jovem detruders regnis.
Here Young Titanians be, Earths ancient race,
With thunder struck down to the lowest place:
Here I the two Aloides beheld,
Whose mighty size all Fictions far exceli'd;
These, though but Mortals, stormed high Heaven, and strove
To drive from his Celestial Kingdoms Jove.

Ossa, so to make their Way,
Which had they been of age, and fuller growth,
Heaven they had took, but Phoebus slew them both,
Before the callow Down upon their Chin,
Or marks of Manhood on their Cheeks were seen.
Phedra, and Procris; Ariadne there,
I Minos Daughter spied, whom Theseus bare
From her own Crete toward Athens fertile Soil,
But could not her obtain in An Island near unto Crete: but the Expositors
generally take it to be the Isle Naxus, anciently called Dia, as Pliny
testifies. Here Phadra died suddenly (for that the Poet means by her being
slain by Diana) in her passage to Athens.
Dia's Isle:
Diana her with Virgin Darts did kill,
Since Bacchus charged her with the attainting Bill.
I Mera, Clymen saw, Eriphyla,
Who her dear Husband did for gold betray.
Their names, nor Character I cannot recite
Of all those Ladies in a Winters Night.
But since for my Return you take such Care,
Grown late let me down to your Ship repair.
This said, all silent sat, extremely took
With this Discourse, when thus Arete spoke;
His Person and his Mind you may compare,
And though our Guest, yet you the Honor share
In his Acquaintance; therefore if you please,
Send him not home with trifles, such as these,
Dispatched in have, since you in your Aboads
Have riches store by favor of the Gods.
This said, the eldest of the Princes there,
Echenius, his Judgment did declare;
Not fondly, nor with Fancy indigest,
The Prudent Queen has now her self expressed;
Follow her Counsel, and the King obey,
Do as he does, and say as he shall say.
Then thus Alcinous answered; Let it be,
And what you have propounded I Will Decree.
If I Am your King, and you my People sway,
Our Guest with us shall till to morrow stay,
Though he would be gone, till we a Present make,
Fit for Us to bestow, and Him to take.
Then Home dispatch him with all special Care,
Of which, your King the greatest part shall share.
When thus Ulysses did his Mind impart;
Thou who the glory of thy People art,
Should thou command me here a Year remain,
Rich gifts receiving, sure I Will not complain;
I rather would, and better much for me,
With Coffers full my Native Country see,
Then they would all me love, and honor more,
Subjects contemn their Princes when grown Poor.
When thus renowned Alcinous replies;
We not on Thee, as one that carries Lies,
Ulysses, look, though there be many such,
Who wandering tell what scarce indures the Touch,
And are believed, but you your Story cloth
In Language that speaks Truth, and Music both;
For with that Emphasis Thou do relate
The Grecians Fortune, and Thy own sad Fate.
But pray go on, saw you not any there,
Who in the Trojan Leagure slaughtered were:
It Is early yet, and tedious is the Night,
More of the wondrous Passages recite;
I could with Patience hear Thee till the Dawn,
Then with Thy own sad story pray go on.
Ulysses then replied; Thou, who as far
Out-shines thy People, as the Sun a Star,
Times for Discourses are, time to forbear;
But if that you desire the rest to hear,
I should be much unwilling to deny;
Therefore our miserable Misfortunes I
Shall reckon up, and who escaped the Main,
And Trojan Wars, were by the Clytemnestra, the Wife of Agamemnon; but others
understand it either of Helena, or Cassandra.
Adultress slain.
Soon as the Female shades dispersed were,
The Ghost of Agamemnon did appear,
And others thronged about me of his Train,
That by Aegisthus in his Court were slain:
Soon as He blood had tasted, me he knows,
When from his Eyes a briny River flows,
And forth he kindly stretched to me his Hands,
Which Nervless failed, nor answered such commands;
I, as I saw him, wept, and much dismayed,
Pitying our Valiant General, thus said;
Renowned Agamemnon, ah! what Fate
Brought thee to this Condition, this sad State?
Was it by Neptune, He who curbs the Main,
And checks like gentle Gales a Heurican?
Or by Profane at the Altars lost your Lives?
Or fighting for your Country, and your Wives?
Thus questioned I, and thus the shade replies;
Renowned Ulysses, Laertiades,
Neptune not me subdued, who curbs the Main,
And checks at pleasure a fierce Heurican,
Nor fighting for my Country lost my Life,
But sly Aegysthus, and my cruel Wife,
Inviting to a Banquet, on they fall,
And slew me like a Bullock at the Stall.
And my Attendants, full of Cates, and Wine,
Together slaughtered, fell like fatted Swine,
For some great Person that keeps solemn Feasts,
Or else at Nuptials highly treats his Guests.
Thou often hasts great Execution seen,
In many Fights and bloody Battles been;
This had thou seen thou would have fetched a gron;
Cups, Goblets lay, and Tables overthrown,
The marble Pavement all with gore besmeared;
I Priamus Daughter, poor Cassandra heard,
Whom near me cruel Clytemnestra slew,
Dying my hands upon my Sword I threw,
Whilst my stern Wife from me, disdaining flys,
Nor would in Deaths Convulsions close my Eyes.
What can more odious be, what more abhorred,
Then she that plots the Murder of her Lord?
I thought glad well-come to have found at Home,
TO have seen my Children, Friends, and Servants, come
Thronging about me, but this Crime will blast,
And an Aspersion on all Women cast.
To Atreus Offspring, I replying, said;
Great Mischiefs Jove by treacherous Wives has laid:
Many for Helen were in Battle slain,
But thou by Clytemnestra's subtle Train.
This said, He gave me this short Reparty;
Ah, never, never too Uxorious be,
Nor to thy Wife thy Secrets e're reveal,
Feed her with Tales, but thy Concern conceal:
But yet Thy Spouse, Ulysses, I except,
She has a Breast, where Counsels may be kept.
We left her newly married, going to War,
She her dear Offspring at her Bosom bare;
Who now grown Man, amongst Princes takes his place,
Whom Thou shall see, and be in thy embrace:
But my fine Wife, my Son not let me see,
E're she presented my own Tragedy.
Yet one thing I Will advise thee, which thou must
Lock in thy Bosom up; No Woman trust:
Surprise her Unexpected, that you may
E're looked for land in your own Ithaca.
But now be pleased, me some Account to give;
Hear'st Thou if still my dear Orestes live
With Menelaus in the Spartan Soil?
Or else at A City in Boeotia, which according to Eustathius was an Asylum, and
therefore a proper place of refuge for Orestes. It was also a place of great
strength, where the neighboring Cities deposited their Treasures for security.
Strabo.
Orchomen, or sandy The seat of Nestor (...) the great lover of Agamemnon, who
he thought might entertain his Son in his Exile.
Pyle?
For yet he musters not among the Dead.
Thus He inquired, and I, replying, said;
Why ask'st thou me, I no account can make,
What happened him, nor will on hearsay speak.
Thus in sad Language, sadly we discoursed,
And mutual Sorrows, Though it might not unjustly be supposed that there is
nothing further meant here then the reasonable suspicion of Achilles, yet it
appears that the true story of Pelens is here delivered: for he was deposed
from his Crown by Acastus, but afterward restored to it again by his
Grandchild Neoptolemus, (or Pyrrhus) according to D^ctys Cretensis lib. 6.
Tears on Tears enforced,
When up to me Achilles shadow drew,
Antylochus, and pale Patroclus too,
And Ajax, who in person all excelled,
Unless Pelides, the unparalled;
Who knew me straight, and thus lamenting, said;
Why comes Ulysses to the infernal shade?
Ah, what misfortune brought thee to these Coasts,
Amongst fleeting shades, and miserable Ghosts?
Then I replied; Oh thou, greatest in Fame
Of all the Greeks, I to Tirefia came
Consulting him to know, how best I may,
A Passage gain to my own Ithaca:
I never found Greece, nor reached my Native Soil,
But always wandering through a World of Toil;
But no Age did or shall produce one more
Happy then you, whom we did all adore,
Like the Gods living; nor need'st thou complain,
Who after Death in dismal shades do reign.
When thus the Prince me interrupting, spoke;
Thou of the Dead a weak Discourse do make;
I rather would a Rustic be, and serve
A Swain for Hire, ready almost to sterve,
And living, be amongst all misfortunes hurled,
Then Dead, an Emperor in this shady World.
But of my Son I fain would something know,
Came he to the Ilian Liegure? yea, or no.
Of my dear Father's Fortunes something say,
If yet the Myrmidons his power obey,
Or have they shook his Scepter off, and hold
Unfit to govern, now grown Weak and Old.
I am not now as when I fought at Troy,
And Regiments could in my Rage destroy.
Ah! would I were at Home a while, his Crown
I should restore, and beat proud Rebels down.
Then what I knew, I thus to him declared;
I of thy Father Peleus have not heard,
But I of Pyrrhus shall such truths recount,
That Miracles, and Fiction far surmount.
Him I attended from the An Island not far distant from the Coasts of Thessaly,
where Pyrrhus was born, and educated with Lycomedes, a Kinsman of Achilles's.
So Sophocles and Strabo. They err who take Scyros for an inland Town of the
Dolopes in Thessaly.
Scyrian Coast,
In a stout Vessel to the Grecian Host,
And him unto our Counsel did admit,
Where well he spoke, and showed his forward Wit.
Nestor and I could seldom Him confute:
And when drawn forth, we were in hot Dispute,
He lagg'd not 'midst the Ranks, but forth alone
Still charged the Trojans, giving place to none.
He many Heroes slew in bloody Fight;
I cannot them, nor all their Names recite,
Which did his Sword with reeking blood imbrew:
But first renowned Eurypylus he slew,
Round whom fell many Strabo says, that in these Verses the poet has left a
Riddle behind him, not a History: for I find no mention of any people called
Cetians, or any account of the (...). Indeed this place has been Crux
Grammaticorum. We shall only say thus much of it; that though the name of the
people were lost, yet there remained some footsteps of it in those parts from
whence Eurypylus came, the brook Cetium, which p^obably took its name from
them. As for the (...), Dictys Cre^ensis s^ies that Priam had promised
Eurypylus, as a reward of his assistance, his Daughter Cassandra in marriage,
with the golden Vine Jupiter had pre^ented to the Kings of Troy when he took
away the beautiful Ganymed.
Cetians in that Strife,
And all forsooth, about a promised Wife.
Memnon in shape did only him exceed;
But when we entered that stupendous Steed
Epeus built, where I Commission had
To govern in that dismal Ambuscade,
There our Greek Princes wept, and trembling sat;
But Pyrrhus never grew pale, nor moved one jot,
Nor dropped one Tear, but much he me implored
To let him forth, still brandishing his Sword,
He with his Spear alone would Troy attaque.
But when we Priams wealthy Town did sack,
He went to Sea, and did great Booty share,
Safe, without harm, as happens often in War,
Although engaged amidst their stoutest Foes.
Achilles Ghost, this said, thence marching goes
Proudly with joy through flowery Medows, on,
Informed by me he had so brave a Son.
Then other shades drew near me, and relate
Their various stories, and unhappy Fate.
But Ajax woeful Ghost far off, alone
Still raging stood, vexed I had him orethrown,
When for Achilles Arms we pleaded so,
Which were judged mine by When all the funeral Solemnities were over, Thetis
offers the arms of Achilles to be disposed of to him that best merited them. So
Quintus Smyrnaus, following the steps of our Poet, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
'A (...), etc.
In her Skie-colour'd 'Veil then Thetis speaks,
I amenting for Achilles to the Greeks;
N^w since the gifts are thus disposed all,
O^der'd by me for my Sons Funeral.
Let him appear brought off the Corpse, and he,
As valiantest, shall take these Arms from me.

Pallas and the But according to Ovid this controversy was decided by the
Commanders of the Crecian Army. A se Tantalides onus invidiamque removit.
Argolicae que duces mediis consistere casi vis
Jussit, and arbitrium litis trajecit in ^mnes.
Atrides, to avoid the hate of these,
The Princes bids to sit before his Tent,
And puts the strife on their Arbitrament.

Fo.
Ah! would I had been conquered in that Strife,
Rather then such a Hero lose his Life,
Who next to great Achilles were the Flower
Of all the Greeks, their Champion, and their Tower.
To whom I mildly said; Ajax, it is fit
That after Death old Quarrels we forget,
Arms so destructive, forged by angry Fate,
To ruin Thee, and raise such dire Debate.
For thee the Camp did put on Mourning all,
And wept, as at Achilles Funeral.
The blame must lie on Jove, who us did hate,
And so imposed on Thee this heavy Fate.
Draw near great Prince, and swelling wrath allay,
And hear what I in my Defense can say.
He not replied, but mixed amongst other Souls,
Seeming to blow up yet revenging Coals*
But I more earnest grew, inquisitive,
With others to discourse were not alive.
When I saw Minos, Joves illustrious Son,
With golden Scepter, sitting on a Throne
Where he heard Causes, and pale Spirits plead
Their Privilege, and Customs of the Dead:
And next Orion hunting ore the Plain,
Beasts which in desert Mountains he had slain,
Armed with a Club massy with steel, and strong.
Pausanias, in his travails through Phocis, says that at Panopeus a C^ty of
that Country, he saw the Sepulcher of Tityus, which contained two furlongs of
ground, and something more, which was, as he conjectures, the origination of
this Fable.
Tityus I saw lie there nine ackers long:
Stern Vultures on his mangled Bosom perch,
And tired on's Liver his torn Bowels search;
Nor could he drive the Torturors from their Prey,
Because Jove's Wife Latona on her way
To It Is to be observed from hence, that Latona was President of the Oracle at
Pytho, (or Delphos) as well as her Son Phoebus, from whom he seems to have
received it: although Aeschylus says that the Mother o^ Latona, Phoebe,
delivered it him, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
The third there Phoebe sat, brought forth
To Titan by the ^^eming Earth,
Who gave to Phoebus, at they fame,
At birth a present, and her Name.
For otherwise I understand not her journey thither. She seems to have come
from Delos into Boeotia; (for so is Phoebus journey thither describ^d) from
whence in the way to Phocis lay the City Panopeus, in a Straight mentioned here
by Homer, whom the King of the place, Tityus, attempted to ravish in her
Passage.
Pytho, near sweet Panopeas side
He would have forced. Next Tantalus I spied
Suffering a horrid torment, standing in
A pleasant River close up to his Chin,
Who thirsty, often as he desired to drink,
Dry Sands appear, and swelling Billows shrink
Beneath his Feet, forced by some angry God,
About his Head, Trees which rich fruit did load,
Pears, Aples, Figs, and Olives, in a throng,
Their various kinds in dangling clusters hung.
Often as the Old Man strove, one of them to catch,
A Wind concealed, or blew out of his reach.
There Sisyphus I cast my Eye upon,
In cruel torture lugging a huge Stone,
Struggling with all his strength, his Hands, and Feet,
Up a steep Hill endeavoring to get;
But soon as he attains the Mountains Crown,
It, with a Vengeance hurried, tumbles down:
Then from the Plain his task he does repeat,
Smoke hides his Head, all over in a Sweat.
Next him I saw the great Herculean Shade,
But he himself in Heaven Jove's Daughter had,
Bright Hebe, and now feasts' among Deities:
About him Ghosts now clamoured, like the Cries
Of frighted Fowl; He like the Night marched on,
His Bow bent, to the Head his Arrow drawn,
Frowning, as if his Shafts he would have dealt,
Athwart his Shoulders hung his golden Belt;
Which Lions, Bears, Battles, and slaughter fill,
The like was never wrought, nor ever will.
He knew me straight, and having well survaid
The gentle shadow, pitying me, thus said;
Poor Prince Ulysses, Thou like me were born
The mocking stock of Fate, and Fortune's scorn.
I, though Jove's Son, much Misery endured,
By one much meaner then my self procured:
Amongst many toyls which my strong Nervs did stretch
He sent me hither, Cerberus to fetch:
This was the greatest task he put me too,
Yet from the infernal Gates the Dog I drew,
By Hermes, and the bright Minerva's Aid:
Thus saying, he retired to the Shade.
I firmly kept my Station to behold,
Some ancient Heroes who had died of Old,
Theseus, Pirithous, Sons of Gods I saw,
Who near with Concourse, and huge Clamor draw:
I sat surprised then with trembling fear,
Suspecting that the At whose sight the Spectators were struck dead. Aeschylus.
(...)
(...)
(...).
Near these three winged Sisters sat,
Whose snaky tresses Mortals hate*
Which who ere sees concludes their Fat.

Gorgons Head was there,
Thence straight my Friends I called, our selves bestirred,
We loose our Cables, and straight got aboard:
Placed on our Banks, we down the River glide,
Fair Winds attending, and a nimble Tide.
scene from book 12 Honorat Dom: Do^ Rogoro Barony de Broghist Tabulam hanc
Comiti de Orrory Regi a Sacris Consilys LMDDDIO Lib: 12



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TWELFTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Sirens: Ulysses stops his Peoples Ears;
Tied to the Mast their charming Song he hears.
Escaped Charybdis, He on Scylla fell,
Who sweeps ore six. The Sun's fat Beeves they kill,
Then put to Sea: a Storm his Men all drowned;
Astride his Keel Calypso's Isle he found.
SOON as our Vessel the Lands end had cleared,
For Circe's Isle, we to the Offine steered,
And plowing Waves through the broad Ocean run
To Mansions of the Day and rising Sun:
Our Voyage finished, straight on softer Sand
We bed our Ship, and nimbly leap to Land;
Where on the plushy Margents we repose.
Soon as the rosie-finger'd Morn arose,
A Party I to Circe's Palace send,
That down might poor Elpenor's Corpse attend:
Wood straight being cut, his Funeral Pyle we rear,
At the sad Office shedding many a Tear:
Soon as his Corpse and Arms consumed were,
On a raised Hillock we a Column rear,
And over that fixed his Sepulchral Oar,
Finished his Rites. But Circe knew before
We had our Voyage made, down in a thought
She, with her Virgin Train attended, brought
Store of fresh Viands, Wine, and purest Bread,
And cheerfully amidst them standing, said;
You living entered the dark Court of Dis,
All else but once, you Dead will enter twice;
Now eat and drink rich Wine, feast this whole Day,
And with the early Dawn you shall away,
And I will so direct you, so instruct,
That shall through Sea and Land you safe conduct,
Unless your evil Counsels you dissuade:
We take the gentle Offer that she made,
And there sat feasting, and carousing Wine.
But when the Sun did toward the West decline,
They on the Decks, grown sleepy, took Repose,
She leading me by the hand, in private goes;
Of all my Observations then inquires;
I satisfaction gave to Her Desires.
Then she replied; You have performed your Part,
But what thou now hear'st, Cabin in thy Heart.
First thou the Sirens shall discover, which
All Comers with enticing Notes bewitch:
Who their sweet Voices hear, remind no more
Their Wives, their Children, nor their Native Shore:
In Meadows chanting, they amongst dead Men's Bones
Crown rotten Skins, and heap up Skeletons.
But when thou sailest by them, look that There
Thy Followers Ears Thou stop, that none may hear,
With yielding Wax: but if Thou have a mind
To hear enchanting Ditties, let them bind
Thee Hand and Foot, and with strong Cordage fast
About Thy middle tie unto the Mast:
So thou may hear the The Sirens were Queens of those Islands, which be in
the bay of Pestano, not far distant from Capreae, who held many places on the
neighboring Continent, especially the Promontory of Minerva; so called,
because during their Reign an Academy was there erected for the propagation of
Learning, which became so famous for Eloquence and all liberal Sciences, that
it gave an invention to this Fable of the sweetness of Voice, and attracting
Songs of the Sirens. But Archippus tells of a certain Bay contracted within
winding Streights, and broken Cliffs, which by the s^nging of the Winds, and
beating of the Billows, report a delightful harmony, alluring those who sail by
to approach, when forthwith, thrown against the Rocks by the Waves, they are
swallowed in the violent Eddies.
Sirens melting strains:
But if Thou should command them lose Thy Chains,
And set Thee free, then bid them harder tie.
But when these dire Inchanters are sailed by,
Then thee I shall not punctually instruct
In the other Course Thou may thy Self conduct,
By little Hints, how Thou may find the way.
Two lofty Rocks stand jetting to the Sea,
Beaten with Billows groaning in their fall,
Which Rovers the immortal Deities call;
Ore which no Birde're flew, nor swiftest Dove
That bears There was a long controversy among the ancients about the sense of
this place, till they agreed in the Exposition of Moero of Byzantium; who by
the word (...) will not have Pigeons here signified, but the Pleiades. And that
the Pleiades were so called by the antientest of the Gre^k Poets, appears out
of some Fragments preserved by Atheneus: Simonides. (...)
(...),
(...).
And Aeschylus the Tragedian,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which because by their rising and setting they foretold to men their Harvest
and Seed-time, they were feigned by the Poet to carry Provision also to the
Gods.
Ambrosia to immortal Jove.
But when a Pigeon falls upon that Rock,
He sends another to supply the Flock.
None ever escaped this place; who e're drew near,
Both Ship and Men by storms strest swallowed were.
Only the Argo which to Aeta sailed,
Against mouthing Winds, and roaring waves, prevailed,
And she had proved to those dire Rocks a Scoff,
But Juno kind to Jason brought Her off.
Here two steep Cliffs; one scales the Sky, and shrouds
His spiry Forehead in a Shash of Clouds;
Where, nor in Spring, nor Autumn, e're is seen
A gentle Season, nor the lest Serene.
This place no Mortal e're ascended yet,
Nor shall, though they had twenty Hands and Feet.
This Rock more smooth then Touch, or pollish'd Stone,
Has a deep Cave that views the setting Sun,
To which no nearer sail then one may shoot
At Random height, and reach her Sea-wash'd Foot.
Here Scylla lurks, and direly yauning yelps,
Like a whole Litter of stern Lions Whelps.
This horrid Monster (no inviting sight)
Would Mortals, nay the Gods themselves, affright.
She Twelve misshapen feet wide splaying spreads,
Six Necks extending, armed with horrid Heads:
Three set of grinding Teeth her gullets guard,
On each of them sits purple Death prepared.
She lying in her Cave prodigious Snouts
Shoots forth, and round the Rock for Fishes scouts,
Dolphins, and Dog-fish, she on any falls,
And often light Breakfasts makes on mighty Whales.
None e're sailed by her that so well could watch,
But from the Stern she one at least would catch.
Near this a lower Rock Thou shall behold,
Which Fig Trees with their spreading Leaves infold.
There dire Charybdis briny Billows sups,
Thrice disembogues, as often redrinks her Cups.
Then come not near, for in that long-breathed Quaff,
Neptune not with his Trident gets Thee off.
But Thou more safety may near Scylla find,
Thy Bark with full Sails, and a Favoring Wind,
With loss of six at most, gain Passage shall,
But this sad Monster swallows ship and all.
Thus she advising, gently I replied;
Best Goddess tell me how may I avoid
This dangerous Hagg, and be revenged, if she
Should injure any that relates to me.
Then she replied; Thou talk as if thou were
In Battles, or else storming of some Fort:
None could revenge, e're of immortals brag,
She Deathless is, an everliving Hag,
Invulnerable: you Fool your self to try
Your strength against hers, it is the best course to fly.
Her if you will charge she will muster all her Power,
And Thee, and Thine in guzzling Throats devour.
Sail thou from thence, and Crateis implore,
Who that accursed Monster Scylla bore;
And she will her in all her Fury stop.
But when at Sicily you Anchors drop,
The Sun's seven Flocks, seven Herds, a goodly breed,
(Fifty in each there in fresh Pastures feed)
These never pregnant are, nor ever die.
Two Nymphs Phaetusa, and bright Lampety,
Whom to the Sun divine Neaera bare
In Sicily, and educated there,
And Shepherdesses, ordered them to keep
Their Father's Herds, and silver-fleeced Sheep;
If them you spare, and your return regard,
Your Voyage shall be safe, though long and hard;
But if thou any of these Cattle kill,
Thy Ship, Thy Friends, Thy Ruin I foretell:
And if thou scap'st thy Self, Thy Native Coast
Late thou shall reach, All thy Associates lost.
Whilst thus she said, Aurora made Approach,
Eastern-Hills guilding with her golden Coach:
Thence to her Palace then the Goddess bends,
I to my Ship; There I exhort my Friends
To go Aboard, and Cables lose; They straight
Entering, upon their Banks in order sat,
Brushing the briny Spry, a prosperous Gale
The Goddess sent, a Friend that did not fail,
Whilst we our Stations keep, and Banks designed,
Trusting the Helms-man, and so fair a Wind.
When thus I told them with a heavy Heart;
Sirs, not to one, or two, must I impart
But unto all, what Circe does advise;
Which if you follow, grown by knowledge Wise,
We shall-escape, or else are all undone.
First, you the Sirens flowery Meads must shun,
She us commands; Next, You must shut your Ear,
Lest their bewitching Voices you should hear:
But me in Cordage you must fetter fast,
And firmly fixing, bind unto the Mast,
Then if I beg to lose me, harder bind:
Thus I declared to them the Goddess Mind.
Mean while, we to the Siren's Two small Isles between Italy and Sicily, from
them called Sirenusae.
Confines sail,
Plowing up Billows with a handsome Gale,
When a flat Calm smoothed ore the glassy Deep,
The Winds all hushed, the Ocean fell a sleep:
They rising furle their Sails, next them safe stow
Betwixt dry Hatches, then sit down and row.
A mighty Ball I cut of yielding Wax
In Pellets, which I kneading found relax
In my warm Hands, and ready now to run,
Helped with the radiance of the warmer Sun;
With which their Ears I luted up; me fast
They fettered up, and tied unto the Mast.
Then rowed they on as far as you might hear
One shout aloud, they hearing us, draw near:
Impulsive Oars beating the silent Main.
Thus they inviting me, did entertain;
Ulysses, glory of the Greeks, draw near,
Thy Vessel stay, and our sweet Voices hear;
None ever past this way, and went from hence,
E're they had feasted their Auricular Sense:
Then they departed pleased, and wiser too,
We know what Trojans suffered, and what you,
Which Fate in ten years Siege on each side hurled,
And all Transactions of the busy World.
This Song so much transported me, that I
Commanded straight they should my Cords untie:
Eurylochus and Perimedes rise,
And bind me faster; on our Vessel flies
Till their Notes losing, I my Senses found;
Then they their ears unstop'd, and me unbound.
This Isle thus left, I saw a hazy Smoke,
And a swollen Sea, and heard rough Waves that broke:
They frighted, leave their Oars, the Vessel stopped,
Wanting the impulse, as if w' had Anchor dropped:
Then I bestirred my self, and did persuade,
And kindly to encourage them thus said;
Good skill in Danger, Friends, you well may own.
This is not greater then when with a Stone
Up Cyclops penned you in his dismal Cave:
Take my Advice, this Danger too we'll wave,
And make of it for aftertimes a Tale,
Now mark my words; and all at once, not fail,
Sit on your Banks with plyant Oars to sweep,
As if one man, the surface of the Deep:
Then if Jove please we soon shall safety find:
But Helms-man, hoe! this charge bear in thy mind,
Because thy care the Vessel must protect;
Without yon Smoke, and Waves, thy course direct,
Nor too near to that Rock, lest there we hit,
And on her skirts, hid under Water, split.
Thus up I cheered them, and they straight obeyed,
But I no mention of dire Scylla made,
Lest by additional fears surprised, they
Should slack their Oars, and hinder the ships way.
Circes commands, I in this Puzzel had
Forgotten too, who me to arm forbad:
I guirt on steel, in each hand took a spear,
And leaped up to the Prow, supposing there
The Craggy Scylla to behold (which cost
Me after dear, when my best Men I lost)
But none I saw, though round my Eyes I cast;
So onwards to the narrow Straight we past.
Scylla on this side briny Seas does quaff,
On that Charybdis drinks the Ocean off;
Which when she Vomits up, she murmurs more
Then Liquor, in a Chaldron boiling ore,
Laving the lofty Rocks with frothy Suds:
But when she guzzles up the swelling Floods,
All shakes within, Rocks thunder, and drawn near,
The Earth beneath, and glittering Sands appear.
This dreadful sight did much my Friends amate;
For there they saw, expected there their Fate.
Mean while dire Scylla six of them, unmatched
For gallant Parts, quite ore the Hatches snatched.
I from the Prow beheld them, where I stood,
Turned to psie-turvy, tumbling in the Flood,
With Feet above, now hands; They called to me,
Which I ready to burst with Grief did see.
As when a Fisher standing on a Rock,
The scaly Fry takes with his baited Hook;
In goes the Horn, up comes the struggling Fish,
Which panting he casts by to be his Dish;
So up she whips them whilst they loud implore,
With reared up Hands, and eats them at her Door.
At Sea, and Land, amongst Woes unparalled,
This was the saddest sight I e're beheld.
From Scylla and Charybdis swift We fly,
And straight unto that famous Isle drew nigh,
Where Phoebus fleecy Sheep, and Cattle were,
Whose Bleats and Bellowing out at Sea, we hear.
Tiresia and Circe I remind,
Who with so many Cautions me enjoined
To wave that Coast belonging to the Sun:
Then with sad Heart, thus I to them begun;
Now hear me, Sirs, You who have suffered much,
On Phoebus Isle we must not dare to touch;
Hence Us Tiresias bad, and Circe, fly;
For here attends our greatest Misery,
And utter Ruin; Steer from hence I said:
They at these words extremely seemed dismayed,
When roughly thus Eurylochus breaks out;
Ulysses, You that are so strong, and stout,
Who indefatigable wilt never tire,
Thy Body Adamant, thy Sinews Wire,
Yet suffer us, consumed with Care, and Toil,
To sup, and sleep in this delightful Isle,
And not all Night to lie at Sea, advise,
When darkning Clouds, and bitter storms arise.
What if the Winds conspire against us, must
Thus we our selves to unruly Elements trust?
Lets here refresh, and Nights good Laws obey,
And when the Dawn appears our Anchors weigh:
His words The approve, and straight cry One and All;
Then I perceived some God contrived their Fall:
And thus I to the Company begun;
You may compelme, since I am but One,
Therefore I Will swear you, sacred Vows should bind,
If any of their Herds, or Flocks, you find,
Not one to kill, but quietly that Meat,
With which fair Circe-victual'd us, to eat.
This said, as I commanded them, they swore,
Then to the bottom of the Harbor bore,
And near a pleasant Fountain leaped to Land,
Their Supper straight preparing on the Strand.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
They played a sad Game, vieing many a Tear
For their dear Friends alive snatched from their Ship
By Scylla, till orepowr'd by conquering sleep.
But when the third part of the Night was spent,
The Stars descending, Jove a Tempest sent,
Which Earth and Sea with mustered Vapors shrouds,
Hanging Heavens Arches round with sable Clouds.
But when the rosie-finger'd Morning rose,
Our ship drawn up, we in a Cave dispose,
In which the Nymphs their fair Recesses had,
When thus to my Associates I said;
Our Ship dear Friends has yet Provision store,
Forbear these Beeves, lest we too great a Score
Pay to exacting Gods, they will cost us dear;
They are the Suns, who all does see and hear.
Thus I advised them, and persuaded too,
When a whole month South and South-East winds blew.
So long as any Bread or Wine remained,
So long from Sheep and Bullocks they abstained:
And when they had all their Provision spent,
They both a Hunting, and a Fishing, went,
A Birding too; No means they did neglect:
Dire Hunger much the Belly did afflict.
Then I apart implored the Gods, that they
Would Passage grant, nor more prolong our stay:
Whilst thus I prayed, well sheltred from all Winds,
Me gentle sleep in silken Fetters binds.
Eurylochus, who still to Mischief led,
Dear Fellow Sufferers, hear me, then said;
All Deaths to Mortals bitter are, like Gall,
But starving, that is the bitterest of all.
The fattest of these Bullocks let us fell,
And offer to the Gods in high Heaven dwell;
And when our Native Country we obtain,
Lets promise to the Sun a stately Fane,
And to adorn it richly be engaged:
But if he, for their slaughter much enraged,
Will grant no pardon, but our Vessel bulge,
Nor any other Gods will us indulge:
How e're amongst Waves better at once be lost,
Then longer languish on a desert Coast.
The Counsel takes, They all applaud the advice,
The primest of the Cattle in a trice
They fell upon, then grazing near their Ship;
They stand about, and sacrificing, strip
Soft oaken leaves, for they no Barley had,
Then kill, and flea; and after they had prayed,
They to the brawny Thighs lop'd off affix
a double Cawl, and Lean with Fat commix;
And Water, since they had no Wine, they threw
On burning Altars, as Libations due.
The Houghs consumed, They the inwards eat, then cut
The rest in pieces, which on Spits they put.
When Sleep to freedom did my Sense restore,
I hastened to my Vessel near the shore:
But when that I drew near, the Wind from thence
A steam brought pleasant to the famelick sense:
Then to the Gods I thus complained; Oh! Jove,
And all you happy Powers that dwell above,
My People whilst I slept have done a Deed,
A Villainy that does all Crimes exceed.
Lampete brought this Tidings to the S V N,
And told him the strange mischief they had done:
Who much incensed thus implored the Gods;
Oh Jove, and all who dwell in blessed Aboads,
Revenge me on Ulysses cursed Train,
Who impious, have my primest Cattle slain;
Whose sight more pleased me in my Progress hurled,
Then all the Pomp, and Glory of the World:
Right me with speed, We have already taken notice that Homer has industriously
mentioned all the more abstruse Arts, and Sciences which were believed in his
time, as Necromancy, Witchery, Natural Portents, and the like: so in this place
he gives an instance of predictive Prodigies; in which the ancients were
superstitiously credulous. When Pyrrhus King of Macedonia waged War with the
Romans, in the Beast which he sacrificed, the Heart, the principle of Life, was
wanting; by which the Priest foretold the i^l success of that undertaking, and
P^rrhus accordingly was expelled out of Italy. With the like relations the
Greek and Roman History abound, collected together by Conr. I y^^sth^nes in his
Book of Prodigies: we shall only take notice of those which foretold the death
of C^sar, as recorded by Virgil, who enumerates two and twenty in the first of
his Geo^gicks, -- ille (Sol) etiam coecos instare tumultus
Saepe mon^t, fraudemque and aperta tum^s^ere bella.
Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam
Cu^ caput ^bscura nitidum ferrugine texit,
Implaque ^ternam timuerunt saecul^ noctem.
Clandestine tumults he does often foreshow,
And open War from secret Plots to grow.
He, pitying Rome and Caesar's funeral, spread
A mourning Veil ore his Illustrious Head,
That the impious age eternal darkness feared.
At Sea and Land what wonders then appeared?
Both howling Dogs and fatal Fowl presaged.
How often we smoking Aetna saw enraged,
Who from dire breaches the Cyclopian grounds
With Fire-bals, and a Pumice-Deluge, drown
Germany heard from Heaven a sound of Arms,
And the Alps trembled at unused Alarms.
A mighty voice in silent Groves was heard,
And ghastly Spirits wondrous pale appeared,
Before dark night obscuring shades did make,
And Oxen then (who will believe it?) spoke.
Earth gaped, swift Rivers stood, Brass Statues swet,
And weeping Ivory made the Temples wet.
Eridanus, the Monarch of the Floods,
Tears down, and drowns in violent Edies, Woods.
Then Beasts inspected entrails threats foreshow'd,
And purple blood from Silver Fountains flowed,
And then the populous Cities did resound
With howling Wolves which walked their nightly round.
From serene Sk^es it never lightened more,
Nor such dire Comets e're were seen before.
Again, Philippi Roman Squadrons saw,
With equal Arms, for dreadful Battle draw.
The Prodigy which comes nearest to this of our Poet is that mentioned by
Herodotus, the leaping and capering of dried Salt-fish, as if they had been
Fish newly taken; by which they on the place did conjecture, that Protes^laus,
though dead, should notwithstanding revenge himself on those that murdered him.


or else these glorious Beams
Shall gild Hell's Mansions and the Stygian Streams.
Then Jove replied; Thou still must Mortals light,
And still beat up all quarters of the Night:
They shall with red-hot Thunderbolts be slain,
Their Ship I Will burn in the middle of the Main.
This bright Calypso did to me unfold,
Which she assured me Hermes Her had told.
When I drew near, I blamed them One by One,
But found no Cure to undo what has been done.
The Beasts were slaughtered by their joynt-consent,
When straight the Gods held forth a dire Ostent:
Their Skins did (g) creep, their Flesh on Spits did low,
And roasting, bellowed like an Ox or Cow:
Yet six whole days my Men there feasting sat,
Those Cattle slaught'ring, tenderest were, and fat;
But the sev'nth Morning, Jove the Wind asswag'd,
Calming cross Tempests that so long had raged:
When straight we went aboard, we launch our Ship,
Erect our Masts, and hoise our Sail a-trip,
Leaving that hapless Isle: No land now nigh,
Nothing in Ken but the broad Sea, and Sky:
With Tempest big, Jove musters sable Clouds,
And with strange Darkness, Air, and Water, shrouds;
Nor long the Clouds, imprisoned Winds contain,
But straight breaks forth a dreadful Hurrican.
The Whirling-gust our shrouds and tackle rends,
Sweeps down our arms, and oars, our Mainmast spends;
Which on the Helms-man lighting, hit so full
Him on the Head, it shattered all his Skull,
Down from his Seat he like a Diver sunk,
And his Soul flying, leaves a senseless Trunk.
Then on our Ship Jove dreadful Lightning threw,
Which twirl'd her round, and up our Hatches blew,
All places filled with Sulphur, out they leap
Swimming, transformed to Mews about the Ship:
A God stopped their return, but I did sit,
Until her Keel the dreadful Tempest split,
And from the bottom tore the broken Mast,
Which, belted with-a lusty Thong, hung fast,
Which binding on the turn'd-up Keel, I rod,
Born with rough Winds upon the boyst'rous Flood.
When Western-Winds their Fury had asswag'd,
Arose a Southern-Tempest, more enraged,
Which back again me overpowr'd with Woes,
On swelling Waves to dire Charybdis blows.
All Night I floated, with the rising Sun
I did to Scylla, and Charybdis run,
Who briny Billows in Potations sup;
But a tall Fig Tree reaching, I got up,
And Bat-like clung by Branches which did bend,
Nor could firm footing gain, nor yet ascend:
The Roots were deep, and spreading Branches made
A Curtain which did dire Charybdis shade:
Here did I hang until my Keel, and Mast,
She, to my wish, up disemboguing, cast.
But when to Supper joyful home does trudge,
After long Causes heard, the weary Judge;
Then gladly I, the Mast, and Keel, espied,
And slipping down the middle, got astride;
Then rowed off with my hands, when Jove took care
That I should escape, nor Scylla spy me there.
Nine days I floated, on the Tenth at Night,
On the Nymphs Isle, Ogygia I did light,
Who kindly entertained me in her Cave,
Of which last Night a large Account I gave;
Which to your Queen, and You, would tedious be,
Once more to hear, and small Content to me.
scene from book 13 Honoratissae: Dominae de Orrory Tabulam D Margaritae
Comitissae han^ LMDDDIO Lib: 13.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Pheacians land Ulysses in his sleep
With all his Gifts. Neptune transforms their Ship.
He his own Home not knows. Pallas appears,
And Him with Counsel, and kind Language cheers.
Conceals his Wealth, and carrying on their Plot,
Gives him a Hoary-Beard, and threadbare Coat.
THIS said, they silent on each other look,
Extremely with his wondrous Story took.
Then spoke the King; Ulysses, since the Fates
Brought Thee a Stranger thus within our Gates,
Through sad Adventures both by Sea, and Land,
We'll not return thee like a Vagabond.
You, who so er'e that is here, I All enjoin,
That feast with me, and drink delicious Wine,
And hear our Poet sing, what more y' intend
This Stranger to present, in Coffers send.
Refined Gold he has, and presents store
By us presented unto him before,
Each in a Tripode, now and Charger lay;
Which sess'd upon the People, let them Pay:
Easy are Burdens when on many laid.
All condescend to what Alcinous said,
Then to their Houses went to their Repose.
Soon as the rosie-finger'd Dawn arose,
Laden with treasure to the Ship they have;
Which straight Alcinous saw in order placed
Beneath the Banks; with such Convenience stowed,
It could not hinder any whilst they rowed.
Thence to Alcinous Treatment all withdrew,
Who to great Jove a well-fed Bullock slew;
And highly feasted there both Old and Young,
Whilst their sweet Poet heavenly Raptures sung.
But to Ulysses, earnest to be gone,
The Sun seemed tedious, and the Day too long.
His Supper so expects the hungry Swain,
Who Furroughs ploughs, to propagate sown Grain;
And for the World's bright Torch descending waits,
Then weary, gladly falls on coursest Cates:
Ulysses so at the Sunsetting glad,
Thus to the King, hemmed in with Princes, said;
Thou, who the Glory of thy People art,
Since it is your will such kindness to impart,
Dismiss me with those Gifts you are pleased bestow,
Which to your Bounty, and the Gods, I owe,
A fair return for, since you will Me transport
In safety to my Wife, and Native Port.
Ah! may you here in Plenty spend your Lives,
Your Sons, and Daughters, and your dearest Wives;
Whilst Heaven on them all Virtues showers at Home,
And no misfortune on the Public come.
This Speech the approve, and straight an Order made
Him to dismiss who could so well persuade.
Then thus Alcinous to the Herald spoke;
Pontonous, a Goblet ready make,
Filled with rich Wine, that we may Jove implore,
Our Guest to Convoy to his Native shore.
This said, full Bowls he dealt about the Hall,
Who on the Gods, they thus libating, call.
Then from his Seat Ulysses started up,
Presents Arete with a flowing Cup;
And complementing highly, thus begins;
May thou bealwaies Happy, best of Queens,
Till Age and Death comes, incident to all:
But I returning, at your Footstool fall,
Kissing your Hands; Oh, may you to your King,
Children, and People, daily Comfort bring.
This said, Ulysses to the Vessel went,
His Herald him to attend, Alcinous sent,
Arete Damsels; This a curious Vest,
And Wastcoat carries, That a Carved Chest,
The third brings Wine, and Manchet, to the Ship;
The joyful Company no time let slip,
But set the good Provision up, then spread
Clean sheets and Blanckets ore a well-made Bed:
No sooner entered but he takes Repose,
They settle to their Banks, and Cables lose.
But he, whilst Oars the briny Billows swept,
Like one in Death's eternal The whole Allegory of this Poem of our Poet is
this; Ulysses in quest of true felicity, the Ithaca and Penelope here
signified, labors under many and grievous calamities. He has several
Companions, who through Lust, Luxury, and other Vices, miscarry in the
Enterprise; himself alone escapes, and by the assistance of the Pheacians is
transported by Sea in his sleep to his longed-for Country. The Pheacians, which
signifies black, ^a^^^, are the Mourners which attend at his Funeral; the Ship
his Grave, which is afterward converted into a Rock, his Funeral Stone; his
Sleep decyphers Death, through which alone Man arrives at his eternal Repose.
Slumber slept.
Not swifter Charioteers their Chariots work,
Lashing their lose-rein'd Horses through the Cirque;
Who with long stretches soon devour the Plain,
Then they were carried ploughing up the Main.
Steady and swift as long-wing'd Falcons fly,
That seize all Birds that cut the yielding Sky,
Bearing a Hero through the foamy Floods,
Able to sit in Counsel amongst the Gods;
Who had so many hard Adventures past,
In bloody Battles, or by Tempests tossed,
Now soundly slept, forgetting former Woes:
But when the glorious Morning Star arose,
The glittering Harbinger, which tells the Approach
Of bright Aurora in her golden Coach,
Then drew they near Ulysses Native Soil,
And Port, they Phorcus was the Son of Pontus and Terra, according to Hesiod in
his Genealogy of the Gods, (...)
(...)
(...)
He was one of the Rulers of the Seas,
and had his Temple in this Haven;
from whence it received its appellation

Phorcus from the Sea-God style,
This two broad sides extends, and opening does,
Though rough the Margents, make the Water smoth:
There without Cable, tall Ships land-lock'd lie,
And highest Springs, and loudest Winds defy.
But in the bottom of the Bay, they had
An Olive, casting ore a Cave, a shade,
In which the Nymphs, styled Naiades, reside:
Within stood Bowls, and Goblets petrifi'd,
And there whilst huming Bees filled all the Rooms,
They marble Shuttles plied in rocky Looms,
Where, wondrous to behold, they purple wove:
Fountains within two Portals were above,
That toward the North still Mortals entered at:
Egress and Regress through the Southern-Gate
Gods always had, and never by Men profaned.
Here up they run their Vessel on the Strand,
And leave with plyant Oars half-drie, their Ship,
Then to the shore from well laid Hatches leap.
They first Ulysses from his Cabin bore
In Quilts, and purest linen covered ore,
And fast a sleep on Sea-wash'd Margents laid,
And all those Gifts which the Pheacians had
Presented him on Pallas score, they put
Out of the Way, under an The Olive Tree was sacred to Minerva, the Patroness
of Ulysses, and therefore aptly feigned by our Poet to keep his deposited
Treasure.
Olive Root,
Lest any should before Ulysses wake,
Stumbling on them by Fortune, Notice take.
This done, their Sails they for Pheacia set:
But Neptune old picques not forgotten yet,
Thus to the Thund'rer said; Oh! Jove, no more
Amongst the Gods will Mortals me adore,
When the For Phaeax, King of the Island, from whom they were called Pheacians,
was Son of Neptune, and Corcyra the Daughter of Asopus.
Pheacians mind me not at all,
Who from my Stock had their Original.
I thought Ulysses plagued with Woe, and Want,
Should hardly e're return, such was your grant:
They him in sleep on's Native shore have left
With Gold, rich Vests, and many a costly gift
By them presented, which he does enjoy,
More then his wealthy share of plundered Troy.
When the Clouds Muster-master thus replied;
On this account, me Neptune do thou chide?
No God shall thee despise, it is more then hard
To throw Aspersions on so great a Lord:
But if that any Mortal thee shall slight,
I will revenge thy Cause, and do thee Right.
Thee these I leave to pardon, or chastize.
When thus the shaker of the Earth replys;
Then by your Leave, a tempest raise I will;
But Brother, under your Correction still;
And their fair Ship returning Home with Joy,
Entering their Land-lock'd Harbor I Will destroy:
That they no more shall Mortals thence transport,
She like a Mountain shall choke up their Port.
Then Jove replied; Do Neptune what you list,
I shall be more then Neuter, and assist:
I Will bring forth all the Town, as lookers on,
To see a Ship transformed into a Stone.
They shall admire how such a mighty Fort,
Raised like a Mountain, should besiege the Port.
Thus ordered Neptune, thence with high Content,
To Scheria, and The Island inhabited by the Pheacians, afterward called
Corcyra, now Corfu in the Venetian Gulf.
Pheacian Bulwarks went,
And there remained until the well-trim'd Ship
Drew near the Harbor, with all Sails a-trip:
Then in a trice transformed her into Eustathius notes that the ancients report
there lay a Rock near unto the Isle, representing the form of a Ship; which
occasioned the figment of our Poet: but certainly by this trans^^^tation he has
delivered his opinion conce^ning that secret of Nature, the trans^^^ming of one
species into another; Wood into Stone, by Water, signified here by Neptune. For
this kind of transmutation is not lately discovered, but was known unto the
ancients. Ovid in his Metamorphosis says that among the Cic^^es, a people of
Thrace, there was a River that congealed the bowels of those who drank thereof,
and converted whatsoever it received, into Stone. Flumen habent Cicones quod
potum saxea reddit
Viscera, quod tactis inducit marmora rebus.
Ciconian streams congeal his Guts to Stone
That thereof drinks, and what therein is thrown.
It seems to have had a slime of that nature which unites, and indurates. So
the dust of Puzzolo, being touched by water, is presently petrified.
stone,
And fixing there, went off when he had done.
When the Pheacians this strange Sight survay'd,
They sadly viewing one another, said;
Ah! who has fixed this Vessel in the Main,
The cause not knowing, Thus they all complain;
Then said Alcinous; This Chance of Old
My inspired Father often to me foretold,
That Neptune angry, that we did transport
A foreign Prince unto his Native Court,
Would change the Ship returned, into a Hill.
These his Predictions, thus the Fates fulfill.
This Prodigy must us instruct, no more
Strangers to waft to any other Shore:
And twelve fat Bullocks to great Neptune kill,
That pitying, he remove this mighty Hill,
As he advised, to him they Offerings made,
And all the Princes, and the People, prayed.
But when Ulysses waked, long absent he,
Not his own Country knew, nor well could see:
With grosser mists Pallas so dimmed the Air,
That things refracted, seemed not what they were,
Lest that his Wife, or Friends, should find him, e're
He made the Suitors reckon for their Cheer.
The Pile and Prospect of the place seem changed;
The Harbor, Ways, the Rocks, and Trees estranged.
Whilst He his Native Country thus beheld,
His Thighs He beating, briny Tears distilled,
Lifting his Hands to Heaven, aloud complained;
Where am I now? what place is this? what Land?
Fallen once more am I amongst a Race unjust,
Stern, and injurious, only ruled by Lust?
Or pious Souls that Hospitable are?
Where shall I hide these Riches? whither bear?
Where go my self? would I had still remained
Amongst the Pheacians, or been entertained
By some kind Prince, who pitying, me from Toil
Had sent attended to my Native Soil:
I know not what to do, nor this great deal
Of Wealth, from greedy persons to conceal.
I will no more, You Gods, my Judgment trust,
These sly Pheacians false are, and unjust,
Who leave me on an unknown Coast, whom they
To his own Country promised to convey.
Revenge me Jove on them, Thou, who do all
Such cheating Sycophants to strict Audits call.
But I will see what Goods I lack, well may
Such Sharks themselves, for me transporting, pay.
His Tripods, and his Chargers, ore he told,
Vests, and rich Mantles, Silver, Brass, and Gold:
All found he there, then creeping near the Shore,
Whilst his misfortunes thus he did deplore,
Pallas drew nigh him, like a Youthful Swain,
Such Sons of Kings keep Flocks upon the Plain:
His Vest well lined, his Sandals neatly tied,
Armed with a Spear; whom when Ulysses spied,
He joyfully thus said; Your Servant, Sir;
You being the first that I encountered here,
No Look, no Posture of an Enemy, have;
Preserve this Treasure, and me also save;
Since as a God, or Genius of the place,
I supplicate Thee, and thy Knees embrace:
And I beseech you, Sir, inform me well,
What Land, what People in this Country dwell;
Whether this be Peninsula or Isle,
Or, near the Sea, the Main-lands gleby soil.
Then she replied; The art in Experience Young,
Or else some Stranger, have not here been long,
That ask'st what Country's this; it is not so poor,
But it is well known to every Neighboring Shore,
Nay, where so e're the Sun, in progress hurled,
Gilds with Day-beams the North, and Southern World.
Our Grounds are Rocky, we have little Plain,
But that well clothed with Vines, and golden Grain:
This Country dews, and frequent showers not wants,
Feeds Goats, and Cattle well; all sorts of Plants
Cast pleasant shades; where they to watering come:
Ithaca's name has, Friend, reached Ilium,
Which they report far distant from this Isle.
Glad he had landed on his Native Soil,
His Joy dissembling though, he thus replied;
And spoke at random things both ore, and wide,
Still acting subtle parts; Beyond the Sea,
Sir, I in Crete much heard of Ithaca,
And now brought hither with my whole Estate,
My Children left, since I unfortunate
It is observed by Eustathius that this relation is not consonant to the
ancient Histories, but on purpose invented to make him more acceptable to the
Suitors, having slain the Son of Vlysses's Friend: but something of History is
contained in it: for Idomeneus, King of Crete, was Commander of some Forces in
the Trojan Expedition, as appears in the second book of the Iliads, (...)
(...)
Idomeneus ruled the Cretan Bands,
From Gortyns Bulwarks, and the Gnossian Strands.
and, though the ancients have not retorded it, yet from hence I conjecture
that Orsilochus was slain according to this relation, though not by Ulysses.
Orsilochus slew, Idomeneus his Son,
Who all their swiftest Youth could far outrun;
Who would have forced from me my Trojan share;
Purchased in War with so much Toil, and Care,
And miseries upon the boyst'rous Main,
Because his Father on the Trojan Plain
I did not serve, others commanding there.
I in the Field with a sharp-poynted Spear,
Way laying him, with one Companion, slew,
When Night ore Heaven her sable Mantle threw.
My sudden Flight, and his sad Fortune hid,
None of my going knew, nor his being Dead:
I got aboard in a Pheacian Ship,
With this you see, of which they had a snip;
Who promised to transport me through the Main
To Pyle, or Elis, where the Strabo observes that Hecataens Milesius makes the
Epeans distinct from the inhabitants of Elis, and says that they assisted
Hercules in the destruction of that place; but adds also that it is not at all
incredible that two different people should unite into one body, and one name
too, in process of time. Our Poet calls them by the same name too in his
Iliads; at the end of the 2 book, where he reckons the Grecian Fleet. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Who in Buphrasium, and fair Elis dwell
Who Hermin, and the Myrsin Plains did till,
The Olenian Rock from Alisium sent,
In forty Sail, with these the Epeians went.

Epeians reign;
Up to a Harbor which they not designed
They run their Vessel, forced by adverse Wind
Against their Wills, intending no Deceit;
At Night there landing, neither drink, nor meat;
Once thought upon, though we had fasted long,
But weary on the shore themselves they flung,
Where me they left, surpised in charming Sleep,
With all my Goods, and lanch'd into the Deep,
And straight for the Sidonian Confines bore,
A woeful Wretch upon this unknown shore.
Wringing my Hand, then with a smile the Maid,
Her own Celestial Form assuming, said;
Thou Wilt prove too hard for who e're plays with Thee
And Cheat for Cheat stake, though a God he be;
Nor want Thou now here, in thy Native Soil,
Feigned stories, by Thy Stars taught to beguile.
But of this Theme to say more I am loath,
Since at Contrivements we are Skilful both;
For dextrous Slights amongst Mortals, Thine's the prize,
My ready Wit's well known in the arched Skies':
Yet Thou not Pallas know, whose Care, and Love,
Labored Thy harder Fortunes to improve.
I gave Thee Favor in Alcinous Eyes,
And once more hither come, Thee to advise
How Thou these costly Presents may conceal:
But I Will a greater Consequence reveal.
In Thy own Palace, which The art now so near,
Many affronts Thou must with Patience bear,
Walk there disguised, would Thou be secure,
And silent, what Thou see, and hear'st, endure:
With that same Temper thou so often have tried
Meet their Affronts. When thus the King replied;
Thou may, O Goddess, well Man's Knowledge escape,
That can transform Thy self to any shape:
I know how much to Thee I stood obliged,
When our great Army Trojan Walls besieged;
But after we did Priam's City get,
From thence then sailing Jove dispersed our Fleet,
And I, best Lady, Thee no more did see,
Or dreamt Thou had the least Concern for me;
But wandered as my wavering Fancy led,
Until the Gods me from all Sorrows freed;
And amongst Pheacians me Thou did instruct,
And me encouraging, did to the Court conduct:
Thee, by thy Father, Virgin, I implore,
To tell me if this be my Native Shore:
For I suppose it is some other Soil,
And Thou would my Credulity beguil.
Am I at Home? Me Hopes, and Fears divide.
When thus to him the illustrious Maid replied;
Thou always do new Doubts, and Scruples start,
Yet my Ulysses I shall never desert,
Who Prudence, and Complacency may boast:
Another coming to his Native Coast,
Would long his Children, House, and Wife, to see;
Thou never inquir'st, nor car'st where e're they be:
Thou would have ventured for Her heretofore,
Who with salt Tears bedews her Chamber-floor,
And Night, and Day, does in thy Absence mourn,
I knew, though hard to Sense, Thou should return;
But not against my Uncle durst engage,
Whose Bosom burns with unextinguish'd Rage;
Nor could thy lost Associats quench the Fire.
But Thou shall see what so thou do desire:
This is the Port of Phorcus, the old Sea-God,
Crowned with a spreading Olive, like a Wood:
Near this a Cronius observes that the Cave here described agrees not with
History; there being no mention of it in any, of those who writ the
Topographies of that Isle. Wherefore the Grammarians have labored to find out
the Allegory, or Intention of the ^oet veiled under this obscure Description. A
Cave was the Symbol of the World among the ancient Theologists, as Porphyrius
on this place proves out of Plato, in the seventh of his Polity, and Empedocles
in his Physics, where speaking of the World, he says, (...) The two doors are
the two Tropicks; the North, through which the Souls descended when they were
to be united to a Body; the South, through which they ascended when they were
separated: The Nymphs weaving their purple Webs upon Rocks of stones, signified
the Souls framing its garment of Blood, and Flesh, upon the solid foundation of
the Bones: Honey was accounted purgative; and therefore in some initiations the
Hands were washed with it instead of Water, and the Tongue was cleans'd from
all its offenses. By the Olive, sacred to Minerva, the Goddess of Wisdom, which
grew near to the Cave, was signified, that this World was not formed by chance,
but by some intellectual Being, separated indeed from it, but whose seat was
near, upon the head of it. This Olive being (...) constantly flourishing, did
aptly denote the perpetual descension, and ascension of Souls, for which this
Cave was consecrated.
Cave, sacred the shady Grot
To Naiades, rooff'd with a grassy Plat,
Where often to them Thou Hecatombs have paid:
There Is Mount Nerytus with a Forest clad.
Pallas, this said, dispersed the gloomy Mist,
The Coast appearing, glad Ulysses kissed
His Native Soil, and kneeling on the shore,
Thus did the Nymphs with reared up Hands, implore;
You Naiades, I thought without dispute,
Never you to see, whom I with Joy salute,
And shall, as heretofore, your Altars lade,
If by Permission of the Heavenly Maid,
My Son yet lives. The Goddess then replied;
Scruple no more I say, in me confide.
But let us straight into this Cave convay
Thy Wealth, and careful, up in safety lay,
There we'll consult what is best to do. This said,
Into the Vault walks the Celestial Maid,
Whilst in Ulysses all his Riches gets;
Gold, Silver, Vests which He in order sets;
Gifts which to Him the kind Pheacians gave:
Then rolled a stone in the entry of the Cave.
Pallas, and He then on an Olive-Root
Complotting sat, both in a High Dispute;
The Haughty Suitors ruin to prepare.
Then Pallas said, Thou must take special Care,
How them to master, who now court thy Spouse,
And three years now kept Revels in thy House,
Contriving Joynters, whilst she pressed with Cares,
Now for Thy coming Home hopes, now despairs,
Yet Treats them fair, promising each Address,
Sends them kind words, but thinks of nothing less.
Ulysses then with a deep Sigh replied;
I here shall Perish, as Spondanus was unhappily mistaken in the meaning of
this place, who thought that Ulysses had here delivered how by the assistance
of Minerva he escaped some imminent danger, in the Palace of Agamemnon; who
never came thither, as appears by the whole series of this book: but it is
clear that Ulysses says only this, That he had been murdered, like Agamemnon,
in his own Palace, had it not been for the advice of Minerva. Now the manner of
the death of Agamemnon he had learned from Agamemno's ghost in his descent into
Hell, as it is at large delivered, Odyss. 11.
Atrides died,
In my own House, if Thou not me conduct:
But me to be revenged on them, instruct:
Ah help me now, and stand in my Defense,
As when we took Troy's lofty Battlements:
Then of three hundred I Will not be afeard,
But backed by Thee, the proudest Rival beard.
The illustrious Goddess then to him replied;
I shall be present, and with Thee will side,
And make no doubt, we shall with Brains, and Gore,
Of those devour thee, stain thy Palace floor.
But Thou must not be known where Thou art seen,
Therefore I Will rivle up thy smoother Skin,
And soil thy brighter Tresses, and so cloth,
That whosoever beholds thee, Thee shall loath,
When to thy Son, and Wife, Thou do appear,
And proud Corrivals, Thy bright Eyes I Will blear;
But to Subulcus first, who tends thy Swine
Make thy Address, He sure to Thee will join;
He thy Relations loves, Him Thou shall find
Feeding with Mast his brisly Herd, behind
Corax was an inhabitant of Ithaca, who in pursuit of a Hare fell down a Rock,
and broke his Neck, from whom it had this appellation. Arethusa his Mother,
hearing the sad news of her Son's death, hanged her self near a Fountain, from
her called Arethusa. Eustathius.
Corax's Rock, where Arethusa springs,
And he to watering, his fat Cattle brings:
There stay with Him, till He shall Thee instruct,
And I Will thy Son, from Sparta Home conduct;
Who went to Menelaus Court, where He,
Late his Addresses made, in Quest of Thee,
Ulysses then; Why tel'st Thou not me all,
Since well you know what e're may Him befall?
Whether at Sea he met his sullen Fate,
Or Harpyes have devoured his Estate?
The Goddess him thus answered, be content
Him I abroad to purchase Fame have sent,
He in Atrides Palace takes his ease,
In safety, there commanding what he please,
But the Corrivals a dire Plot contrive
To murder him, e're he at Home arrive,
But some of them before shall meet their Fate,
Who in a Raunt now ruin thy Estate:
Thus saying, the Goddess touched him with her Wand,
Straight his clear skin all rivled up, and Tan n'd,
His golden Hair a sudden Frost did hoar,
And his plump Cheeks Old Age straight crusted ore,
His sparkling Eyes she blear'd, then straight she dressed
Him in a tottered Coat, and sordid Vest,
Peec'd, patched, and stained, with sooty Smoke, and Dirt,
And with a Deer's pill'd skin his Belly guirt.
Gave him a Staff, and worn in holes a Scrip,
Hanging it in a twisted leather slip,
Accoutred thus the Goddess left him there,
And to his Son in Sparta did repair.
scene from book 14 Honoratissimo Domino D:ae Johanni King Baroni De kingston
Jabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 14.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE FOURTEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Eumaeus first in Rags, Ulysses spies;
Rates off the Dogs, barking at his Disguise:
Him as a Beggar kindly entertains,
And of the Suitors Revel-rout complains.
This, tells the coming of his absent Lord;
That, of his Stories not believes a Word.
BUT from the Port a rough way through the Cops,
Among Clifts he went, and wood-cloath'd Mountain tops:
Where Pallas told him that Subulcus dwelt,
Who with his Lord more faithfully had dealt,
Then any Swain, to husband his Estate;
And straight he found him sitting at his Gate,
Which in fair Prospect, on a rising Ground
He built with Stone, and hedged with Quick-sets round,
At his own cost; because the King, and Queen,
And old Laertes, long had absent been,
Which he surrounded with a standing Guard
Of Oken Pails, the staves both strong, and hard:
Twelve ample Styes within convenient reach
He there had built, Fifty fat Swine in each:
The pregnant Females in their Chambers kept,
Their brisly Husbands in the Portals slept.
Many of these had ryoting Suitors spent,
To whom the fattest still Subulcus sent:
Three hundred yet and sixty there remained.
Four Dogs as fierce as Lions he maintained,
Who always slept attending on the Hogs,
Himself then sat ord'ring a pair of Brogues,
From a py'd Bullocks Skin, three others there
About their Styes, and several business were.
The fourth he with a Swine to the Palace sent,
That might the Suitors Feast with high Content.
Soon as the Dogs had spied him coming on,
With open mouths they at Ulysses run:
But cunning, he sits down, and drops Didymus on this place says that (...),
it is a natural Defense for the aversion of Dogs, to sit down, and lay a^^de
the Weapon out of oneshand, as not intending to set upon them. Pliny has the
like observation in the eighth Book of his Natural History; Impetus canum and
saevitia mitigatur ab homine considente humi, The fierceness, and rage of Dogs
is mitigated by a man's sitting on the ground.
his staff:
Nor was he then from those stern Warders, safe,
Had not Subulcus leaped up to his Aid,
And thrown aside the Shoes were almost made,
Palting with stones the bawling Party back:
Who when he had secured the King, thus spoke;
The Dogs, O Father, gave a fierce assault,
And if the had hurt Thee, to had not been my Fault,
The Gods for me have sadder business found.
Here I with Groans, and Sighs, lie on the Ground,
Lament my King; whilst others in his House,
Devour his Cattle, and his Wine Carouse;
Whilst he in want by various Fortunes hurled,
Wanders about the many-peopl'd World,
If yet he live, and see the rising Sun.
But to my Cottage go with me, old Man;
And when Thou art refreshed with wholesome Fare,
Say whence Thou came, and what thy Sufferings are.
This said, Eumaeus in Ulysses led,
And straight a wild Goats skin, and Branches spread,
Him placing on that Couch: Ulysses glad
At this his first so kind Reception, said;
O Jove, and all you Gods, grant his Request
Whatever; who now so kindly treats his Guest.
Eumaeus then; It is not fit that we
Should Strangers, though they poorer are than Thee,
Drive from our Gates; Jove to all those in want,
In Forma Pauperis gives a special Grant:
But small our Treatments are, and mean our Boards,
Still fearing Young, and Domineering Lords.
Ah! his Return the Gods obstructed have,
Who loved me well, and this Possession gave:
He to his Servantskind was, he a House,
And Fortune gave me, with a Virtuous Spouse,
Since, his Estate Jove here has much increased,
And my small Labors not a little blessed,
Much more the King improved had my Estate,
Here had he stayed; but he has met his Fate.
Ah! would that Helen's Race had perished quite,
For whom so many Heroes fell in Fight:
And he went with Atrides to destroy
Proud Ilium, and the Walls of lofty Troy.
This said, he guirds his Coat, and forth he hies;
Then choosing two fat Porkers from their Styes,
Slaughters them both, and next a quick Fire gets,
And to Ulysses, roasted on the Spits,
Straight carries hot, sprinkled with finest Eustathius notes, that the Custom
here mentioned of sprinkling flower on the meat when brought to Table was long
since laid aside.
Flour,
And in a Mazer lusty Wine did pour.
Then placed against him, said; Sir, taste such Fare
As only fit for us poor Servants are:
The fattest for the Suitors we select,
Who want Consideration, and Respect.
The blessed Gods all cursed Designs abhor,
But still for Just, and Pious actions, are:
Yet some there be that others Realms in vade,
And, Jove conniving, Home their Vessels lade.
Yet often their Bosoms are with Conscience stormed,
Sure they have heard, or by some God informed
Of his sad Death; Else would they not resort
To his fair Queen, and Riot in his Court,
But take their Leaves, who know not how to spare;
So many Feasts as Days and Nights there are.
Not one, or two fat Victims serve their turn,
Who never from eating, but to drink adjourn.
He had a fair Estate, his Riches such,
That none about him could boast half so much,
No not to the twentieth part would theirs amount,
Which, now I Am in, I shall to Thee recount:
Twelve Herds of Cattle the main Land does keep,
As many Goats, and Swine, and fleecy Sheep.
Goats eleven Herds in the other Field are bred
By lusty Swains, and Jolly Shepherds, fed.
They from each Herd one every day afford,
And still the fattest, to supply the Board:
And from my Charge, to amplify their Feast,
I send the fattest Porkers, and the best.
This said, on fell He, eat, and drank rich Wine,
His Brains still working on his main Design.
His Spirits recruited well, well cheered his Soul,
Subulcus gives him an oreflowing Bowl:
And joyful he so fair a Progress made,
Who is this wealthy Person, Friend, he said;
So bold, and has so ample an Estate,
Who at the Trojan War received his Fate,
As thou believ'st; Tell me, there is no such ods,
(Since Jove knows all, and the immortal Gods)
But I have seen him in my Travels, hurled
By various Fortunes, through the peopled World.
None, Father, hither comes, Eumaeus said,
But so the Queen, and his dear Son, persuade;
And to supply their Present wants, devise
Stories to please them, and a thousand Lies.
Who e're lands here, they to the Court repair,
And with a handsome Tale still ready are:
She entertains them, and inquiry makes,
Her sparkling Eyes brimful with briny Lakes,
As Women use, wanting their dearest Lord:
Could thou put in one comfortable word,
She would new sheath thee, thou should soon be dressed
In a Court Mantle, and a comely Vest.
But, ah! on him Dogs have, and Vultures, fed,
And piecemeal rent; Ah! it is too true, he is dead,
Or hungry Fish devoured him far from Land,
And now his Bones lie sepulchred in Sand,
There he remains, whilst his Relations grieve,
But I Am so much concerned, I loath to live,
I, such a Royal Master never shall get,
Should I return unto my Native Seat,
Where dwelt my Parents, I, my breeding had,
Their Loss I should not so much mourn, though sad
For such Misfortune I enough should be,
As for my Prince, whom, I despair to see,
Whom, I with Reverence nominate, and Him,
Put in the highest place of my esteem.
Then said the King; Who never will Credit give,
Are worse then those too easily believe.
I dare affirm, and positively swear,
That soon renowned Ulysses will be here.
But Him that brings the joyful News, reward,
When you behold Him in His Palace Yard:
To Him a Coat, a Vest, and Mantle grant,
Till then, He Will not demand it, though He want:
Who in necessity a Lie will tell,
I hate him worser then the Gates of Hell.
Witness, Oh! Jove, the greatest of the Gods,
Ulysses Table, Hearth, and high Aboads,
That what I say shall come to pass, and here,
Thou shall thy Master see, within a Year,
Nay, in a Month, arriving at his House,
To punish those, thus wrong his Son, and Spouse.
Then said Eumaeus; For this Tidings, thee,
I never shall reward, nor Him e're see:
But talk of something else, and mind thy Drink,
Still am I sad, when of my King I think:
Yet I Will believe thee, and Ulysses may
Return, for which, I, and Penelope, pray,
Laertes, and his Son, that hopeful Plant,
Telemachus, whose Fortune I lament:
Whose Courage, Wit, and Person, to be such,
As his brave Ant-cestors, I dare avouch:
Whom now some God, or Mortal did beguile,
Sending to seek his Father, far as Pyle:
Whom now the Suitors watch for, to deface
The Name, and memory, of the Arcisian Race:
But we'll be patient, He may fall, or fly,
And be protected by Divinity.
But, Father, now thy own sad Fortune tell,
Recount at large, what may inform me well,
Who the art, thy Parents, and thy Native Land,
What Ship thou came'st in, by what People manned.
Since none on Foot come hither, neither Ride.
When smartly thus Laertiades replied;
Should I thus at thy Table sitting here,
Eating and Drinking, tarry a whole Year,
Whilst others ply thy work, 'twould be too short,
To make of my sad Tales a mere report,
Which by Heavens will I long have undergon.
I born in Crete, though poor, a rich man's Son,
Who bred me with his own Legitimate race,
Although his This was the custom of the Athenians: for although in the infancy
of their polity, Women were all in common, yet Cecrops their King, long before
the time of Homer, had abolished it, and ordained that one man should be the
Husband of one Wife, says Athenaeus, (...): but withal, though he allowed them
but one Wife, yet he denied them not a plurality of Concubines: and the
difference was according to Demesthenes (...), (...). The Concubines were kept
for pleasure, to revel abroad with their Lords; the Wife for legitimate
procreation, and a prudent governess of the Family.
Concubine my Mother was,
Castor, my Father, on the Cretan Shore,
Of old the people did as God adore:
His Fortunes great, his Sons of fair report.
But when his Fates sent him to Pluto's Court,
His Children share his Wealth, and Lots they draw;
Our Poet seems in this relation to follow the Laws and customs of the
Athenians: for it was Solons Law; that the Father should not have the right of
making his Will, who had any male-Children legitimate living: (...): but that
the estate should be equally divided amongst them, (...), that all the
legitimate Son; should have equal shares of their Fathers estate: by which the
illegitimate were totally excluded. This appears plainly in Aristophanes, in
Avibus, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I Will tell you Solon's Law; Bastards are not,
When they have Children are legitimate,
Accounted of the Blood; if none there are,
The nearest of his Kindred shall be Heir.
And presently after he tells Hercules, who was a by-blow of Jupiter, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
None of your Father's goods belong to you,
For you are a Bastard, none by Law ar^ due;
It Is Neptune will obtain your Sires estate,
Since he is Brother and legitimate.

A Pittance give to me, not due by Law.
Then looked on as deserving, I a Spowse,
And beauteous, Married, of a noble House.
I did not then contemptible appear,
As now in my distress you see me here:
Of which some marks you yet may see, though hurled
In Want and Misery, about the World.
For me both Mars and Pallas Valiant made:
And when I chose bold Men for Ambuscade,
Lay'ng Traps to catch the Foe, this Bosom never
Thought of pale Death, nor Symptoms knew of fear;
But with the foremost always took my chance,
And in the Front still interchang'd my Lance:
So loved I War, but valued Plow and Cart,
Which makes our Children Wealthy, not a --
But I loved Ships, and Wars, the Shaft and Spear,
And whatsoere to others dreadful were:
Me to these dire delights the Stars inclined,
But other Men are of an other mind.
Before the Grecians had Beleagur'd Troy,
Nine times as Captain they did me employ
In several Ships, against all Privateers,
And Foreign force; success crowned my desires;
By which I purchased no mean Estate,
Was loved, admired, and honored through all Crete.
Then Jove engaged us in a Fatal strife.
Where many a valiant Hero lost his life.
Idomeneus then and me the employ,
Both Adm'rals, to conduct their Fleet to Troy.
And there was no disputing, no Reply,
Fame of the Expedition flew so high:
Nine Years there lay we, a hard Siege endured,
The tenth we took their Town, so well immured;
And Plundered Troy by a religious Cheat:
Thence Sailing home, great Jove dispersed our Fleet,
And for my pains, poor me, more wretched made.
A Month at home I with my Children staid,
My dear Relations, and my dearer Wife,
And at full Tables lead a merry life:
Then I, forsooth, must see the Egyptian Land,
Nine Ships I Rigged, well Victual'd, and well Manned;
Six Days my Friends I treated to the height,
And paid the Gods each their peculiar Rite;
The seventh from Crete we with a Northern Gale,
As down the Channel of a River sail.
We nothing wanting, stiff and Tight our Ship,
Clap all our Canvass on, our Sails a-trip;
The fifth Day It is a great error in Giphanius and Spondanus, who take (...)
here for the name of the Country of Egypt; when both Strab^ and diverse others
of the Ancients have abundantly proved the contrary, partly out of this very
place. These Pliny follows in his Natural History; N^e ante Nilus quam se totum
aquis concordibus rursus junxit. Sic quoque etiamunm Siris, nominatus per
aliquot millia, and in totum Homero Egyptus, aliisque Triton. Which River never
takes the name of Nile before his waters meet again and accord all whole
together. And even so was he aforetime named Siris for many miles space; and of
Homer altogether Egyptus, and of others Triton, whom Ammianus Marcellinus
follows in his History. Whence it may very probably be conjectured, that the
name Nile for the River of Egypt is later then our Poet, it being not mentioned
in all his Works; yet in use presently after him, it being found in the works
of Hesiod, as Eratosthenes affirms.
Nile we reached; I ordered there
My lusty Lads straight up the River Steer:
Our Anchors dropped, a party I command
To search the Creeks, the Caves, and winding Strand:
But they to Natures rougher dictates yield,
And fall to Plunder the Egyptian Field;
Their Women took, their tender Infants slew,
More then a rumor to the City flew;
They hear the cry, and with the early Dawn
In complete ^rms, out Horse and Foot were drawn:
There Jove my Party worsted, they gave ground,
And were by Foes coup'd up, as in a Pound:
Where many slaughtered were, the rest were lead
Thence Captives: Then Jove put it in my head,
(Would I had rather died, paid Natures debt,
Who still thus suffer, with despair beset)
To give my self a Prisoner up and yield:
Down I my Javelin laid, my Helm and Shield,
And running to the King, his knees embraced:
He pitying, me in his own Chariot placed,
And drove off Weeping from the Vulgar rage,
Whom nothing but my Death could then assuage.
For Hospitable Jove he well did know,
Loved mercy to a quarter-begging Foe.
Seven Years I there remained, whist riches flowed,
Rich Gifts the whole City upon me bestowed:
But in the eighth came a Phenician, who,
An old Trapanner, cheating tricks well knew:
He with persuasions lead me by ^^e Ear,
To go with him into Phenicia, where
I at his House should well be entertained;
I went, and there with him a Year remained:
But when that Months and Days had filled the Sphere,
And Time set forth the circumvolving Year,
To Libya me in a stout Ship he sent,
Freighted with Goods, but to no good intent;
He Spirited me over, on account
To sell me, for a Sum that did amount.
I ventured with him, though my Heart did fail,
And had as far as Crete a favoring Gale:
But angry Jove shipwreck contrived, and death.
Thence sailing, yet fair Winds not out of Breath,
Until we nothing saw but Seas, and Skies:
When suddenly a sable Cloud did rise,
Dark grew the Flood, it thunders, ligthens, rains,
The dismal notes filled up loud Heuricanes:
Then with a flaming Bolt Jove struck our Ship,
And they like Sea-Mews floated on the Deep:
There up and down on bounding Billows born,
Since Jove decreed they never should return.
But me with this Disaster much aghast,
Trembling, my arms he flung about the Mast,
Which boyst'rous Winds, and Billows, nine Days bare,
Locked up in my embrace, I know not where;
The tenth, an ore-grown Wave, the Night being dark,
The poor remains drove of my bulged Bark
On The Thespretians were a people of Epirus, bordering upon the Seacoasts,
over against Corcyca, not far distant from Ithaca.
Thesprots shore, King Phidons dearest Son,
To fetch me off, both cold, and tired, did run,
And to the Palace lead me by the hand,
Then straight to Cloth me gave a strict command.
And there I first of your Ulysses heard:
He me acquainted with how much regard
By him he had been treated in his way,
Resolving suddenly for Ithaca,
And what huge Wealth he had acquired told,
Iron and bright Brass, with Ingots of pure Gold,
With which ten Generations well might shift,
Which he had in the King's Exchequer left;
But he was gone, he said, to At Dodona in Epirus was the most ancient and
famous Oracle of Jupiter. The story of it is thus related by Herodotus, the
antientest of the Greck Historians, who seems to have been inquisitive after
the original of it. The Priests of Jupiter, at Thebes a City of Egypt, told me
that the Phoenicians had ^oln away formerly two of their Priestesses, and sold
one of them into Libya, the other into Greece, which Women first constituted,
as they understood, Oracles in those places. But the Priestesses at Dodona say,
that there flew two black Pigeons from Thebes of Egypt; the one into Libya, the
other to them; which lighting on an Oak, said with a humane voice, that there
ought to be an Oracle of Jupiter there. They, supposing it to be a divine
command, caused one to be built there. The rest of the Dodineans agreed with
them in the relation. My opinion of them, faies Heredotus, is this; If it be
true that the Phoenicians carried away these two holy Women, and sold one of
them into Libya, the other into Hellas; it seems to me that this Woman was sold
to the Thesprotians in the Country now called Hellas, before Pelasgia, where
during her slavery she consecrated the place near a neighboring Oak: it being
probable that she who had been consecrated to Jupiter in Egypt, would retain
the memory of him here. Now these Women Were called by the Dodoneans (...),
Pigeons, because using an unknown language they seemed to speak like Birds: but
that this after a while spoke with a humane voice, because she by conversation
had learned the Greek tongue. When they say the Pigeon was black, they signify
that the Woman was an Egyptian. The Oracle at Thebes in Egypt, and that in
Dodcua, are very like one another.
Dodon's Grove,
There to consult the sacred Oak of Jove,
Now absent long from home, to be advised,
Should he return in public or disguised;
He swore to me his Ship and Men were clear,
That him should to his Native Country bear,
But he before, a Vessel touching there,
For A small Island near Ithaca, one of the Echinades, right over against the
mouth of the River Achelous.
Dolicha bound, put me in, and with care
Entreated them, in safety to convey
To King Acastus through the briney Sea.
There these pure Villains a contrivement laid
To make me wretched, and their Prisoner made.
No sooner had they lost the sight of Land,
They by the sequel made me understand;
First stripping me of my fair Coat and Vest,
Then clothed in Rags, which thou so tottered see;
Reaching your Coast at night, they left me fast
Bound in the Ship, and Landing took repast:
But me the favoring Gods from Fetters freed,
I on my head wrapping my totterd Weed,
To Shore descending by the Rudder, Swam,
And far from them to sheltring Copses came:
There close I sculk'd whilst privy search they make,
And sighing, pried in every Bush and Brake,
Until they thought more labor were in vain;
Then they neturning Launched into the Main,
The Gods for me then played their second part,
And sent to thee, thou who so worthy art,
That now I hope to live for better days.
When thus Eumaeus to Ulysses says;
Your story and particulars are such,
That I confess, poor man, they move me much:
But how shall I a wanderer believe,
Or any credit to such hear-saies give?
Since one in thy condition flattering tales
To tell, and smooth Romances, most availes.
What hopes have I of his return, what odds?
When in close Juncto a whole Court of Gods
Complot against him, nor would they at Troy,
Nor him amongst his Friends at home destroy:
For then the Greeks had him interred in state,
Which had been much Renown, and glory great
Unto his Son; now Harpyes on him dine
Wanting due rites; and I, forsooth, keep Swine,
Nor go to Court unless the Queen commands,
Or else when Strangers come from foreign Lands,
They busy then about him in a Ring,
At once ask Questions and lament their King,
Whilst others Feast upon Ulysses score;
So I shall be inquisitive no more.
Late an There is a certain allusion in the Greek word which could not be
expressed in English. (...)signifying a beggar, the condition of the person
here spoken of, as well as a native of the Country of Etolia. The like we find
in Aristophanes, (...).
Aetolian Homicide that fled
His He alludes to the custom of the A hinians, who punished all Homicide,
though unwittingly committed, with Exile for one year. This appears by these
Verses of Euripides in his Hippolytus; (...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
Where the Scholiast observes, It is the custom that those who committed
Homicide should be banished for the space of a year. When Hercules in his
distraction had slain two Sons of Iphicles and one of his own, as soon as his
passion was over, he was desired by Iphicles and Licymnius to absent himself
for one year, (...)(says Nicolaus Damascenns) as the custom is, and then to
return to Thebes again. page: 334.
Country, thus my credulous fancy fed,
He wandering up and down, I entertained,
And for my real kindness, me with feigned
And idle Stories, like returns thus made,
Who at Idomeneus Palace said,
H' had seen our King new sheathing his crazed Fleet,
By tempests tossed, and that next Spring from Crete,
Or Summer at the farthest he would come
With all his Friends, laden with Riches home.
So thou like him would tickle me in th'ear,
With Tales not working on me, though I hear:
But thee I pitying, kindly though shall treat,
Nor laws of Hospitality forget.
When thus Ulysses to Eumaeus said;
Will neither Oaths nor Evidence persuade
Thy unbelief; a bargain let us contract,
And the Gods witness this our Deed and Act:
When under these thy Roofs the King shall rest,
Then I demand a Coat and comely Vest;
That to Dulichium I well clad may Sail
To my concernments of no small avail:
But if he come not as I said before,
Order thy Servants then to throw me ore
A Precipice, that others may beware
To tell such stories that delusions are.
Subulcus then replied, Sir, all my aim,
Now and hereafter, is an honest Fame:
Therefore I Will save whom ever I invite,
Nor take his life, in justice though I might;
Else Jove will much offended be with me,
Breaking his Laws of Hospitality:
But now to Supper come my weary Mates,
And we have ready course, yet wholesome, Cates.
Whilst thus they bandied smartly reparties,
The Swineherds came, first shutting in their Sties
The brisled breed to fatten with repose;
A cry amongst the sunly Porkers rose,
Of which he bids them choose one of the best,
Better to entertain their wandering Guest.
And we with him our selves will recreate,
Long suffrers now, under too hard a Fate:
Who title want, unpunished here make spoil,
And we have only Labor for our Toil.
This said, he cuts some Wood, and they lay hold
Of a fat Swine, at least was five Years old,
And straight the Brawn near to the Hearth he brought,
Who always of religious duties thought;
By good thoughts prompted, casts the brisly Hair
Into the This cutting off a lock of Wool was, says Eustathius, (...) to
preserve the memory of antique clothing, (...), of Hair and Pelts. The like
Ceremony or Rite was used in Sacrifices at the striking of a League, as appears
in the 3. of the Iliads, (...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...), etc.
Straight Agamemnon and Ulysses rise,
The Heralds in rich habits, as the guise,
The Rites prepared, and Wine commix'd with Wine,
Pour on the Princes hands, which they con^oyn.
His Knife Atrides drawing, which well strung.
Always behind his Swords broad Scabbard hung,
From both the Lambs curld foreheads cuts the hair,
Which straight the Greek and Trojan Princes share.
The meaning of which Rite is delivered by Sophocles,

(...)
(...)
(...)
That let the false unburied be,
Bath he and his posterity
Cut off, as is this lock by me,

Fire, making a Zealous Prayer
To all celestial Deities, that Home
His King Ulysses may in safety come:
Then with a knotty Stake he fetched his swinge,
Fells the fat Swine, whose Throat they cut and Singe,
And straight divide the Joints Eumaeus placed,
Which well with Fat and Lean he interlac'd:
Part in the Fire, commix'd with Flower he threw,
They the cut Collops spit, and Roasted, drew,
And in a Charger dish'd, Eumaeus Carved,
Who always points of equity observed;
Dividing all into seven equal shares,
To the To the Nymphs, says Eustathius, because they, as Presidents of the
Fountains, Rivers, and Groves, provide food for Cattle; to Mercury, because he
is patron of Shepherds. Both these has Simonides also joined together, perhaps
taken from hence, (...),
(...).
To the Nymphs sacrifice and Maia's race,
For Shepherds live by their especial grace.

Nimphs and Hermes he with zealous Prayers
Sets by one part, distributing the rest
In order due, but honoring most his Guest;
Which he received as kindly, the whole Chine
He placed before him of the white-tooth'd Swine.
Ulysses said; Eumaeus, would thou were
In as much favor as with me thou art,
With mighty Jove, that thus have me supplied.
To whom Subulcus cheerfully replied;
Sir, please your self with what is here, pray fall too,
God gave us this, God who in all things do.
This said, first Fruits he pays the powers Divine,
His King presenting with a Bowl of Wine.
Next his own share, then bluntly takes his Seat,
To the rest Mesaulius distributes the Meat,
In his Lords absence him he kept alone,
Both to Laertes and the Queen unknown;
Him of the The Taphians inhabited some of the Islands called Ethinades, near
unto Ithaca.
Taphians, bartring Goods he bought.
To Meat prepared all fell too as they ought.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Mesaulius takes away their broken Fare:
On Couches then themselves they entertained;
Dark grew the Night, it Blew, and sadly Rained,
When thus Ulysses said, trying his Friend;
If any of you me a Coat would lend,
Or persuade others, sure it would do well;
On which occasion I Will a Story tell:
Both Fools and Wisemen, warmed with sprightly Wine,
Act Buffons, Sing, in Antic Dances join,
And often speak words had better not been said;
But now I Am in, I Will on, nor be dismayed.
Ah! would I were as Young, that Vigor had,
As when your King, and Menelaus laid
Near T^roy an Ambush, they in chief, I, third:
But when we came to lofty Walls immured
Among shrubs, and Weeds, down in the plashie Fields
We lay, under our Arms, and ample Shields:
Dark grew the Night, and Boreas cold did blow,
Ushering a shower of Sleet, of Hail, and snow.
Our Targets all in Crystal cases, shined,
Then they had on their Coats, and Mantles lined.
Under their Shields they quiet lay at rest,
I, like a Fool, had left behind my Vest.
I only had a Jump on, thin, and slight,
Nor dreamt how cold might be the ensuing Night:
Of which three quarters spent, when toward the West,
Declining, Stars descended to their rest,
Your King I pinched by the Elbow, lying near,
And whisperd thus to him, who straight did hear;
Out, long I cannot dear Ulysses, hold,
But here shall perish, killed with bitter cold,
Wanting a Coat, deceived by some God,
In a thin Cassock I shall be destroyed.
After he had my words considered well,
Who both in Field, and Counsel did excel,
With a low Voice thus whispered in my Ear;
No more, lest any of the rest should hear;
His head then leaning on his Elbow, spoke;
A Vision told me we recruits should lack,
Adventuring so far now from the Fleet,
Lets with all speed some one or other get,
That to the Camp may to our General run.
Up Troas started straight, Andraemon's Son,
And left behind his well-lin'd purple Vest,
In which I lay till gilded was the East.
Had I that strength, and youth, as then I had,
Amongst you soon I should be better clad,
Either for Love, or Fear; There Is small respect
For one in tattered Weeds, thus poorly decked.
Thou well and wisely have thy self expressed,
Eumaeus said; Thou shall not want a Vest,
Nor ought for one in thy Condition meet,
Well as we may to morrow Thee we'll fit,
We know no change of Suits, nor to be brave,
So many Backs, so many Coats we have,
The Prince will then what e're he please bestow,
And you your Pasport give where e're you will go.
This said, He near the Chimny made his Bed,
And ore a shaggy Goats and Sheep Skin spread:
There lay Ulysses, over whom he threw
His upper Weed, soft, and well quilted too;
With which himself against any Change he arms
Of cloudy Skies, or Winters bleaker storms.
So slept Ulysses amongst youthful Swains:
But sleep not long Eumaeus there detains,
Out straight he goes, which made his Master glad,
That he in absence such a Servant had.
First ore his shoulder his good Falchion hung,
And over that a well-lin'd Garment flung,
A Goats Skin next athwart, then takes his Spear,
With which he neither Thieves, nor Dogs, did fear.
Under a Rock where He his Porkers kept,
Then took Repose, whilst they, well sheltered, slept.
scene from book 15 Honoratissimce Domince Tabulam hanc Do katherince kingston
LMDDDIO Lib 15 Fol 2JJ.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE FIFTEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Minerva to Telemachus appears,
Gives him good Counsel, and abates his Fears.
The Princes leave of Menelaus take.
Ulysses and Eumaeus long awake,
Their Stories tell. Telemachus sets Sail,
And scapes the Suitors with a favoring Gale.
BUT straight to Sparta went the Illustrious Maid,
And to Telemachus her self conveyed,
T'advise him home, and how all Plotts to shun,
In Bed she found him, with old Nestors Son,
In Menelaus Court; Nestorides
Slept soundly, but sweet Sleep not him did seize:
Such care in solitary night he took
About his Father, t'whom thus Pallas spoke;
Telemachus, thou must not longer stay,
Leaving thy House and Fortunes thus a prey
To haughty Rivals, lest they share thy State,
And all consuming, thou return'st too late.
Leave to depart of Menelaus get,
At home thou shall thy Mother find as yet,
Whose Semus and Anletes, according to Enstathius.
Father and her This is not a Fiction of Minerva's, but a true relation of what
passed; as appears by Penelopes Speech in the nineteenth Book. The like is
delivered by Ovid in Penelopes. Epistle to Ulysses;; Me paeter Icatius viduo
discedere lecto
Cogit, and immensas increpat usque moras
Increpet usque licet, tua sim, tua dicar oportet:
Penelope conjux semper Ulyssis ero.
Icarius my Father would compel
Meleave my Widows bed, much blaming still
My long delays: and let him still me blame,
Still I Will be thine, Ulysses Wise I am.

Brothers urge to Wed
Eurymachus, as worthiest of her Bed,
Who best can settle her a plenteous Dowr:
So thy imbezzled state they will devour.
Women are fickle, and their second Spouse
Shall with her former Childrens goods, his House
Replenish, nor regard their Husbands Dust.
What ere thou have of Value, that entrust
Unto some careful Damsel, till the Gods
Give thee a Wife, and fix in thy aboads.
But this be sure to Cabinet in mind;
To Murder thee the Suitors have designed,
Lying to intercept thee in the way,
'Twixt dusty Either a City on the island of Cephallenia. or else the name of
the Isle it self, between which and Ithaca the passage was very narrow, fit for
the Suitors designs: Artemidorus Ephesius, in a fragment of his Geography extant
in Porphyry, measures it thus; From the Port of Cephallenia Eastward lies
Ithaca distant 12. stades; which Island is 85. stades in circuit, etc.
Samos and steep Ithaca;
But first the Earth shall some of them intomb,
Who seek thy ruin, and thy state consume.
Off from those Isles by Night steer thou at large,
And what ere tutelar Power has thee in charge,
Shall a fair Wind to wait on thee command.
But soon as thou shall reach thy native Land,
Thy Ship and Men run up into the Town,
And to Subulcus Cottage first go down:
He loves thee well, he who thy Swine does keep,
There in the Farm all night in private sleep;
Him to thy Mother send, who long has mourned,
TO acquaint her thou in safaty art returned.
This spoke, to Heaven her self she thence conveyed,
But he Pisistratus a-waking, said;
Rise dear Nestorides, arise I pray,
Let us put in our Steeds, and drive away.
To whom thus then his dear Companion spoke;
Though we have have, such have what need we make,
To ride by Night ere Dawn; Stay till the King
Puts up the Gifts, which he intends to bring,
Safe in our Chariot, and he us dismiss
With gentle Language, such a Friend he is,
And us with such civility does treat,
That whilst we live we never must forget.
Thus as they held dispute, the blushing Dawn
Purpled the East, in her guilt Chariot drawn;
And from his Bed straight Menelaus rose,
Leaving fair Helen to her own repose:
Of which, soon as Ulysses offspring knew,
He slipped on's Coat, and ore his Shoulders threw
His upper Weed, and out in have he made,
To whom he thus, meeting in the Entrance, said:
O thou who here the sole Commander art,
Your License grant, that home I may depart:
My Genius prompts me, here not to abide.
To whom thus Menelaus then replied;
Be sure Telemachus, I shall not long
Detain thee here, desiring to be gone:
In Hospitality I not think it right,
Fond of our Guest to be, or too much slight:
I for the Golden Mean am; it is all one
To thrust one out, would rather not be gone,
Or keep him sits on Thorns; sure better it is
To treat Guests well, and when they please dismiss.
Stay but until thou in thy Chariot may
Behold those Gifts that I present Thee, placed:
Our Maids within straight something shall prepare
To breakfast, good, though short hour Bill of fare,
And long your Journey; I, to mend your Dish,
Shall to both Honor, Wealth, and Fortune wish,
And would you farther Greece, and Argos view,
I Will in my Chariot ride a-long with you,
I Will show you many Towns, and not in vain,
Who Will us presenting, kindly entertain.
Give each a Tripode, Caldron, or at least,
A pair of Mules, or golden Bowl enchas'd.
Then said Telemachus; Renowned Sir,
Who to thy People Rudder art, and Star,
Fain would I Home, to my own House repair,
Because I left no faithful Steward there,
Whilst they my Goods imbezzle, and abuse,
Seeking my Father, I my self may lose.
When Menelaus this did understand,
He to his Queen, and Servants gave Command,
Cates to prepare, of which were store within.
Eteoneus started from his Bed, comes in,
Whom Menelaus earnest did desire,
He lodging next him, straight to make a Fire.
Spits are laid down, the business he attends,
And to his perfumed Parlour then descends
With Helen, and his Megapenthes the Son of Menelaus, not by Helen, but by a
Slave, as appears in the beginning of the fourth book, (...)
(...)
(...), etc.

Son; but when drawn near,
Where lay their Goods of greatest worth, they were,
A Cup, and Silver Charger, then from thence
Atrides takes, and gives unto the Prince
To carry as a Present to his Guest,
Whilst the fair Queen opens another Chest
Full of rich Vests, which she her self had wrought,
And culling among the bright'st, one forth she brought
Whose splendour so out-shin'd all others far,
It in the bottom glister'd, like a Star.
Thence went they forth, straight to Ulysses Son:
Then said Atrides; Now you may be gone,
If Jove so please, great Juno's thundering Spouse.
The best of what is precious in my House,
Here I present this Goblet of pure Mold,
The Body Silver, the bright Margents Gold,
By Vulcan wrought, which the Sidonian King
Did at his Court me as a Present bring,
When thither I returned, the same as free,
I, dear Telemachus, bestow on Thee.
This said, his hand he with the Goblet fraught,
Whilst Megapenthes him the Charger brought,
To him the Veil Helen presenting, spoke;
This Token of my dear affection take,
Which at thy Marriage give thy beauteous Spouse,
Till then, let thy dear Mother in her House
Keep safe for Thee: Now may a prosperous Gale,
Impregnat to thy native Port thy Sail:
Which He with Joy accepting, in the Box
Pisistratus, the work admiring, locks.
Then to the Hall Atrides them convaid.
Soon as their Seats they filled, a comely Maid,
That they might wash, poured streams like Crystal pure,
In a bright Basin, from a silver Ew'r:
Then spreads the Table, sets on Bread, and placed
Dishes well cooked, and pleasing to the Taste.
Eteoneus their just Proportions karv'd,
And Megapenthes at the Cup-board served.
Straight they fall too, and plentifully fare.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Telemachus and Nestor's Offspring got
Their Horses in, and mount their Chariot;
And through the founding Portico they drove.
That they might their Libation pay to Jove,
And Favor beg from all the Powers Divine,
The King presents them with a Bowl of Wine,
And standing thus before their Horses, spoke;
Farewell my youthful Princes, merry make,
My Commendations to King Nestor bare,
Who as a Father had of me a Care,
In that long business of the Trojan Siege.
Telemachus then; How much you me oblige
I shall acquaint him, Ah! could I as well
Returned to Ithaca my Father tell
Of all your kindness, and rich Presents show,
Which you on me are pleased to bestow.
Thus whilst they take their Leaves, at parting just
A stately Goose up a stern Eagle trust
At the Barn door, and carried through the Skies,
Women and Men pursuing with loud Cries,
And on the It is evident from this place, and several others, that in Augury
the right side was accounted successful, as on the contrary, the lest, ominous,
and unfortunate. Iliad. 12. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
And now to speak my mind I shall not spare,
This day the entrenched Enemy forbear:
Bad I suspect that this event will be
Since we this towering Engle here did see,
Grasping a speckled Serpent, by us glide,
Through yielding air, on our sinister side.
But when any observation was made from Heaven, the left side was esteemed
fortunate. Virgil AEneid. 9.

Audiit, and culi genitor de part serena
Intonuit la vum --
Because says Servins on the place, When we look up, what is our left, is the
right side of Heaven.


right side of the Chariot flew:
With joy the Omen glad Spectators view.
When to the King Pisistratus thus spoke;
Of this strange Sign a judgment please to make,
If our Concern or yours it signify.
Whilst Menelaus studied a Reply;
Helen preventing him, thus said; Hear me,
The Gods are pleased I should the Augurer be;
As from the Hill this Eagle stooping, did
Snatch up a Prey her Aerie to feed:
Ulysses so shall Home return e're long,
And call t'account all those that do him wrong.
Then thus Telemachus to Her replied;
Be this from Jove that warms fair Juno's side,
Then as a Goddess I will honor Thee.
This said, he whips his Steeds, the Horses free,
Swift through the City with a looser Rein,
In a trice hurries them into Campaign:
The jolted Teem-pole rattles all the way,
Till Nights black Regiments obscured the Day.
To Diocles Court at Pherae on they trot,
Whose Sire Orsilochus, Alpheus got,
Where they all Night well treated took Repose.
But when the purple-finger'd morn arose,
They joined their Steeds, and mounted, ply the whip,
The Ports resounding, they the Wind outstrip.
When near to Pyle their Journey almost don,
Telemachus thus spoke to Nestors Son;
Dear Friend, may I with thee prevail at all,
Our selves we Fellow-travellers may call;
By our Sires freindship, and our equal age,
And Love begot, thus posting Stage from Stage,
At my Ship land me, least your Father stay
Me' against my will, whom business calls away.
This said, Pisistratus a while did muse
How thus to serve him, and himself excuse:
And thus at last concludes; he turns his Steeds,
And to the Ship on sea-wash'd margents speeds;
Then by the Stern he thrusts into the Hold
Atrides costly Presents, Vests, and Gold,
Then said; Now get aboard, but order some
That wait on you, to march before me home,
And tell the old man, well I his humor know,
His bounteous soul would never let thee go,
Till entertaining he presented thee;
To balk his House thus, sure he will angry be.
This said, he drives on his free mettal'd Steeds,
And through the City to the Court proceeds:
When to his Friends Telemachus thus spoke;
Get straight aboard and all things ready make,
That we may in our Voyage speed. This said,
His Orders, as one man, they all obeyed,
The Ship they entered, on their Bancks they sat,
All at their work, whilst he did invocate
His Goddess Pallas on the lofty Stern,
When he One drawing near him could discern,
Flying for refuge, who a man had slain,
A Prophet, one of grave Melampus was eminent among the Gracians for
predictions, which continued in his Family, as the art of Physic in
Esculapius's, as appears by this Relation, compared with another in Pausanias,
where he says, that Eperastus the Prophet was descended from Melampus. (...)
(...)
After his Death; at AEgisthaena he had a Temple consecrated to his Memory,
where on his yearly Festival the people sacrifie'd to him. Concerning his
Imprisonment, and enlargement we have already spoken Iliad eleventh. Hesiod
writ the History of his life in his book called from his name (...).
Melampus strain,
Who once in Pyle a fair Estate enjoyed,
And fled from thence great Neleus wrath t'avoyd,
Who in one year by Rapine and a Cheat,
Had purchased to himself a vast Estate;
Whilst in a Dungeon he in Chains lay bound,
For Neleus Daughter, in deep sorrows drowned,
Almost distracted, never could take rest,
Such Snakes Erynnis shot into his Breast:
But he escaped Death, and did from Phylax get
The bellowing heard, so paid the unjust debt
On Neleus, then to his Brother's House,
From thence he brought his long desired Spouse;
To Argos then he went, where better Fate
Increased his Power, augmented his Estate;
There Pratus King of Argos, his daughters being suddenly possessed with a
raging fury, offered one of them with part of his Kingdom for a portion to him
that should cure them, which was effected by Melampus by the virtue of Ellebore
(from him called Melampodium says Pliny) for which he received the propounded
reward, and succeeded Proetus in the Kingdom of Argos.
married he, and built a stately House,
Had Antiphat, and Mantius, by his Spouse.
Antiphates got Oicles the great,
And Oicles Amphiaraus gat:
Both Jove and Phoebus his admirers were;
But he never lived to Age, and silver Hair,
He died at Thebes upon a Female Plot.
Alcmaeon and Amphilochus he got
Mantius, Polyphides and Clytus had
But in Aurora's golden Chariot rod,
Clitus snatched up, and took, for Beauty, place
In Heaven amongst Gods, and the Celestial Race.
But Phoebus Polyphides raised high,
Above all men inspired with Prophecy,
Amphiaraus dead: He did retire
To Hyperesia was a Cityof Achaia, so called from Hyperes the Son of Lycaon.
Eustathius.
Hypersie, to avoid Paternal Ire.
His Son, Theoclymenus was his name,
Now to Telemachus for Refuge came,
And found him as he sacrificing prayed,
On the high Stern, and thus imploring, said;
Thee since I find thus offering on this shore,
I by thy Sacrifice, and God, implore,
Thy Self, and Friends, to let me know your Name,
Your Country, Parents, and whence now you came.
Then said Telemachus, the Truth I Will say,
Stranger, I boast my Birth in Ithaca,
My Sire Ulysses, if he yet survive,
And fill the Musters up of those alive,
For whom long absent I have been in quest,
And him to seek this ship and men impressed.
To whom Theoclymenus thus replied;
So I from Home about a Homicide,
Fly to thy Refuge; His Relations such,
That me to apprehend, they promise much.
Since I must wander, my sad Fates Decree,
And am as banished, take me home with Thee,
Lest I be slain, for me they close pursue,
My Blood, their vengefull Weapons, to imbrew.
When thus Telemachus kindly to him spoke;
If Thou art willing, I Will not drive Thee back,
Come Thou aboard, and Thee from hence I Will bear,
And whatsoever we have be pleased to share,
The Prince from him his Javelin takes, this said,
And down amongst Poles, and other Tackle laid,
And from the Decks up to the Stern conveyed;
Then placing next himself, They anchor weighed,
Telemachus bids them to their Tackle stand,
They readier are to do, then he command.
They raise their Mast, and hoyse their Sails a-trip,
Whilst with fair Winds Minerva wings their Ship.
On each side broken Billows thunder loud,
Whilst foamy brine the Ship in furrows plowed.
Now the Sun setting, Darkness all ore spread,
They Phera past, and where the Epeians swaid,
To Elis came, and Thoae are Islands which lie East ward of Ithaca, as
Cephallenia, where the Suitors lay privily to intercept Telemachus, Westward:
They are part of the Ethinades, according to Strabo, and the inhabitants served
under the same Prince in the Trojan expedition. But Stephanus in his book de
Vrbibus, says, that the Isle Dulichium was called (...), which Homer plurally
called (...). the signification of those two words being the same, viz. sharp
pointed.
Thoae Isles forsook,
Fearing his Death, or to be Prisoner took.
Mean while Ulysses and the other Swains,
Once more with Cates Eumaeus entertains.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Ulysses tried Eumaeus if he were,
Still in one Humor, or if colder grown,
TO advise him from his Cottage to the Town:
And thus he said; Eumaeus, and the rest,
Because I would not be a tedious Guest,
I to the City earnestly entreat
To go to morrow, there an Alms to get;
Advise me well, and let some one instruct
Me on the way, and through the Town conduct,
Lest I should wander, whilst from street to street,
Alms I from charitable people get,
And to the Court I Will, if I can thrust in,
Venture, and something tell the Virtuous Queen.
I Will among the haughty Suitors, who perhaps,
From heaped up Dishes, me may throw some scraps,
Amongst themselves They bountiful may be,
But what I Will tell thee think on it as from me;
Hermes confers on us our better parts,
Fortune, and Honor, and all Liberal Arts:
Few dare their strength with me at grasping, try,
Dry Wood I cleave, and cut, make Fires Nose high,
Well roast I Meat, and skinck rich Wine, and kerve,
As We the meaner sort, the better serve.
Eumaeus started at the motion, said;
What fond Conceit thy Judgment has betrayed.
Have thou a mind, poor Stranger, there to die?
The Suitors insolence invades the Sky,
Their high Affronts, and Injuries such they be,
They have no Waiters, Gentlemen like Thee,
But fresh Young Men, accoutred Al-a-mode,
Their hair kem'd out, in their plump cheeks fresh blood,
Such them attend, not better taught then fed,
Who load the boards with Dishes, Wine, and Bread:
But stay; not I, nor any here desires
Your absence, Us your Company not tires,
And when Telemachus returns to Court,
Thee he will cloth, and, where thou will, transport.
To whom then thus Ulysses made reply;
Ah would great Jove loved thee as well as I,
That me wandering and poor have entertained,
What Is worser then to be a Vagabond?
An empty belly business ill designs,
When in the Juncto Grief and Error joins,
But since my leisure well admits my stay,
Now something of Ulysses Parents say,
Whom aged grown He left, if yet they breath,
Or else descended to the House of Death.
Eumaeus then Prince of the Rustic Youth,
Said, I Will inform Thee of the certain truth,
Laertes lives, but still imploring Jove,
From that Condition him he would remove,
Much grieving for his absent Son, and Wife,
Who pining for Ulysses lost her Life.
Whom he espoused a Maid, so broke her Heart,
And He now almost ready to depart.
May none that loves me die a Death so sad,
And she for me great kindness always had.
Long as she lived it was her daily use,
To send for me, inquiring after News:
For with her youngest Child Ctimena, she
Had fostered, nor much less esteemed, me:
But after both were grown to marriage state,
At Samos she provided her a Mate,
And on her settled a great Joynter there:
Me, she with Shifts, and Vests, and Sandals fair,
And all things fitting sent into the Field,
And still for me the same affection held;
Which now I want: But yet the Powers Divine,
I hope, will better Days for me design;
Yet here I eat and drink, a Stranger treat,
Though nothing of our Queen I can relate
That Is fit to hear, of which I may complain:
A pack of Roysters in her Palace reign.
Yet of my Servants often she questions asks,
And one by one, inquirs their several Tasks;
Then makes them eat and drink, and something bear,
To them at home that may their Spirits cheer.
When thus Ulysses to Eumaeus spoke;
Did Thou thy Native Country e're forsake,
And Parents? I am earnest now to know,
Or was your City sacked by any Foe?
Where your Relations dwelt, or keeping Sheep?
By enemies were Spirited through the Deep,
And here disposed of, at no little price.
Eumaeus then, the Rusticks Prince, replys;
Since you will my story know, I would enjoin
Your silence, siting ore a Bowl of Wine,
The Nights are long, there is a time to rest,
Or to hear pretty Tales, or pleasant Jest;
Repose before the hour did never good,
Much sleep the Brain distempers, and the Blood,
But whosoe'r would rather go to Bed,
Let him his Charge forth in the morning lead,
Breaking his Fast, whilst here we drink, and eat,
And stories sad alternately repeat.
Those who have suffered much, and traveled far,
Recounting former Griefs delighted are.
So now my Tale I Will tell; There is an Isle
Beyond One of the ancienter names of the Island Delos, because, according to
the Fabulists, Asteria, to avoid the embraces of Jupiter, transformed her self
into a Quail, in Greek called (...) and leaping into the Sea was changed into
an Island, whence Delos is obscurly described under the title of (...) the
winged Quail, by Lycophron in his Cassandra, (...)
(...).
Tremo the Monument near the winged Quail,
Waves of the Egean Sea shall never assail.
Or rather, according to Phanodemus, in Athenaeus, from the great number of
Quails found in that Island.
Ortygia, which they An Island near to Ortygia, memorable for nothing but that
it brought forth Ph^recydes the Philosopher, Master to Pythagoras; though
commended by our. Poet both for Health and Plenty: but in this he seems to
describe the Saturnine age, of which there is no other mention in him. Certes
Hesiod expresses it in sense not much differing from this of Homer's. (...)
(...)
(...)
They lived like Gods, without or toil or care,
Nor felt they drooping age when old they were,
But strong and active, they delighted still
To dance, and died as if asleep they fell.

Syria style,
Not great, but fruitful, Vin'yards store they plant,
Much Corn, and Pasture have, and know no want,
Nor sad Diseases, which poor Mortals have;
But when grown old, full ripened for the Grave,
By Phoebus and Diana they are slain,
Insensible of Sicknesses, or Pain.
Two Cities there divided all the Land,
Which Ctesius my Father did command.
Voyages hither the Phenicians made,
And with Toys freighted, drove a subtle trade.
My Father there kept a Sidonian Dame,
Well bred, and fair, at these do Merchants aim,
And her from washing did aboard entice,
There won to wanton Dalliance in a trice:
When condescending, she had quenched Loves Flame,
He asked her who she was, and whence she came.
She said that Arybas her Father dwelt
In Sidon, where no Poverty they felt:
But me the Taphians from thence convaid,
And to the King her selling, well were paid.
Then her Gallant to his new Mistress, spoke;
Sail with us to thy Native Country, back,
That thou thy Parent's stately House may see,
Who yet are both alive, and wealthy be.
Then she replied; If solemnly you will swear,
That me in safety you will to Sidon bear:
At this all there, not one of them were loath,
But took the Solemn Covenanting Oath.
Then thus she said; If any of you meet
At yonder Fountain me, or in the street,
Or at the Palace, in the Old Man's Hall,
Not the least notice take of me at all;
Lest angry, He should me in Chains secure,
And you by Folly your own Deaths procure:
But when you victual'd, and well freighted are,
Straight me inform, I, Gold, and what so e're
Lies in my Trust, shall straight from thence convey,
And my young Master, at the Gates at play,
Fostered by me, who when you come abroad,
May of more value prove, then all your Load.
This said; She left them, there a Year they stayed,
Acquiring Riches by a mighty Trade.
But when their Vessel They had freighted well,
They to the Palace sent one, Her to tell,
A cunning Snap, that no man could suspect,
Bringing a golden Crown with Amber decked:
On this my Mother, and her Women look,
Much with the Beauty, and Invention took;
Beating the Price; He winks, no time let slip,
She takes the Sign, and steals down to the Ship:
But in the Portal me she snatches up,
A curious Table, and a Golden Cup,
With which my Father often his Friends did Treat,
Before they marched unto the Judgment Seat,
And three Cups more she in her Bosom hid,
And I a Not her Son, as Spondanus on the place conceived, but the prince whom
she nursed, or governed. The name indeed of his Mother is not delivered by our
poet, but Euphorion calls her Panthea, others Penia, or Danae.
Child went with her as she bid.
Just when the setting Sun obscured the Way,
We came where the Herodotus notes that the Phoenicians were the first that
carried away Captives in this Manner, and enslaved Men, and Women, which was
the occ^sion of the Wars afterward between Asia and Europe; and therefore are
aptly here made the subject of this figment.
Phenician Vessel lay.
Them all aboard, They steer their Course designed,
Plowing vast Billows, with a favoring Wind:
Six Days and Nights the foamy Brine we plow,
But when the seventh morn showed her shining Brow,
Diana killed the Strumpet, down she fell,
And like a Sea-mew dropped into the Well:
Ore board they threw her to be Fishes food,
Whilst I sat weeping to this Port they stood,
Where dearly me they to Laertes sold,
And so this Country first did I behold.
Then said Ulysses; Me, Eumaeus, much
Thy Fortunes sadly thus related, touch:
But Jove has mixed thy Lot, that thou so good
A Master have, who Raiment grants, and Food:
Though mean, Thou have enough, when I am hurled,
In Want, and Woe, despised, about the World.
Thus various Discourses they recite,
Spending with little sleep the tedious Night.
But when the Dawn appeared, all Danger past,
Telemachus furled his Sails, and struck his Mast,
And rowing in their Vessel straight-they Moor,
And safely harbored, they all went a shore;
There eat and drink, and plentifully fare,
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Telemachus thus to his Mates begun;
Now to the City up your Vessel run,
I Will to the Fields, and to my Rusticks walk,
And there with them on Country business talk.
I, in the Morning down to you will come,
And give you Breakfasting, your Welcome Home.
When Theoclymenus to the Prince thus spoke;
But where shall I, Sir, my Addresses make?
Shall I some noble Person here attend,
Or to the Queen, and thy own Palace bend?
Then gravely thus Telemachus replys;
Not to my Mother, I would thee advise,
Though nothing thou could want, but yet I fear,
It would be worser in my Absence there.
Besides, my Mother is but seldom seen,
By those make Court, she plys her Web within:
But I Will direct thee unto Polybus Son,
Eurymachus, by all now looked upon
As the most fit Penelope to wed,
And have the Honor of Ulysses Bed:
But Jove knows best, whether those Nuptials may
Not be prevented by a Fatal Day.
This said, a The Falcon was peculiarly, as other Birds to the rest of the
Gods, sacred to Apollo, whence Aristophanes in one of his Comedies, -- (...)
(...),
(...),
Jove who new reigns as King, bears on his Crest,
An Eagle, Pallas with an Owl impressed, I hoebus a Falcon.
Which the Grecians seem to have borrowed from the Egyptians: of whom thus
writes Aelian; There were certain Priests of Apollo which were called (...)
Feeders of Hawks: For they are peculiarly consecrated to Apollo, either by the
swiftness of their flight, s^gnifying the motion of the Sun (that is, Apollo,)
or else, (...), because Hawks alone of all Birds, can without pain look
directly against the beams of the Sun. Herodotus says, that they were had in
so great honor in Egypt, that whosoever killed one of them, though
unwittingly, was certainly put to death. lib. 2. c. 65.
Falcon, Phoebus Messenger,
Flying, a Dove did in her Pounces bear,
Pluming her Quarry, Feathers dropped, and The ancient Augurs prognoslicated from
Birds several ways: either from their manner of Flight, or Wing, which Birds
were called Praep^t^^, or else by their Note or Cry, which were called Oscines;
or else from their fighting with, or devouring, one another, which were called
by the Latins Volsgr^: which last sort of Augury is here mentioned, where the
Eagle, the Ensign of a King, betokened Ulysses King of Ithaca; the Pigeon the
suitors, those whom Ulysses was to erg^ge with.
blood,
Amidst the ship, and where Telemachus stood.
Then him aside Theoclymenus takes,
And gently wringing by the Hand, thus speaks;
From some kind Power this happy Omen came,
For I, dear Prince, in Augury skilful am:
No other Stock here Regal power shall gain,
But you and yours for ever here shall reign.
Then thus Telemachus replied; Ah, would;
Dear Sir, thou could what thou have said, make good,
I should so bountifully play my part,
That who e're hears should say, Thou happy art.
To Pyreus then his Confident, he said;
My Orders Thou have punctually obeyed,
Conduct this worthy Stranger to thy Home,
And love, and honor him, until I come.
Then he replied; Though long thou shall remain;
He shall have no occasion to complain.
This said, they went aboard, and Cables lose,
And on their several Banks themselves dispose;
Whilst on Telemachus his Sandals knits,
From whence it hung, down his strong Javelin gets.
Their Anchors weighed, their Vessel lose, they sail,
Up to the City with a leading Gale:
As them the Prince enjoined; But he on Foot,
Went merrily on until he reached the Coat,
Where lay the Porkers which Subulcus kept,
And He, a Friend toth' Princes, soundly slept.
scene from book 16 Honoratissimo Domino Do Gulielmo Caulfeild Baroni de
Charliemont Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib: 16



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Telemachus up to Eumaeus goes,
Who treats Ulysses kindly, and not knows.
Suitors return, their Enterprise in vain.
Pallas Ulysses turns to Himself again.
He to his Offspring does Himself reveal.
Penelope rings Antinous a Peal.
EVMAEVS and Ulysses, by Daybreak,
Kindle a Fire, and The ancient Grammarians observe that there were three usual
times of eating in the times of the Heroes; the former meal is called by Homer
(...) in this place, and but once more, that is Iliad 24. (...). yet we must
not think that this meal was unusual because that word is but twice found in
Homer, for he calls it by another name common to other meals, Dinner and
Supper, as may appear from these places (...), for, says Athenaeus, they
fought at break of day. So on Odyss. 1. (...)
(...) --
Eustathius, (...), it is manifest that in this place (...) signifies the
morning Repast.
Breakfast ready make,
And sent the rest forth with their grunting Crew:
When near Telemachus, the Cottage, drew,
The Dogs about him fawn, the King this saw,
And heard one nearer yet, and nearer draw.
Thus then Ulysses to his Swain begun;
Some Friend is near, some Person sure, well known,
The Dogs at him not bark, though very near:
Now you the trampling of his Foot may hear.
Scarce spoke, when ore the threshold steps his Son,
To whom, surpised Eumaeus forth did run,
And lets his Mazer brim'd with rich Wine fall,
To Embrace his Master entering now the Hall,
Kissing his Hands, his Cheeks, and sparkling Eyes,
Whilst down fell Tears in briny Deluges.
A Father so receives his dearest Son,
Come from far Countries, had been ten years gone,
His only Darling, gotten in his Age,
For whom his Sorrows he could never assuage:
Eumaeus so his Prince did entertain,
And him saluted ore and ore again,
And often, as if escaped from Death, embraced:
Then thus with glad Condolements at the last;
Come thou alive? I thought, my dearest Prince,
Never to have seen after you sailed from hence:
Be pleased to enter, that I may delight
In thy glad Presence, and thy joyful Sight,
Who amongst us too seldom, ah! we view,
Took up with Suitors, and that ranting Crew.
Then said Telemachus; At that I aim,
And now on such a business hither came.
Remains my Mother still within her House,
Or changed Condition with another Spouse?
And now by this my Father's empty Bed,
Well This is an hyperbolical speech used by the Gretians when they signified
neglected, and deserted, not further used: From whom the L^tines borrowed it:
So Plautus in Aulularia. -- an ne quis aedes auferat?
Nam hic apud nos nihil est al^ud qu^sti furibus
Ita inaniis sunt oppl^tae atque araneis.
Will not this house be stolen? For nothing's left
Worth stealing; it is of all things else berest
But Spiders Webs.
and Catullus of his empty Purse, -- nam tui Catulli
Plenus sacculus ^st arantarum.

Spiders may with Nets and Cobwebs spread.
To whom the Rusticks Monarch thus replied;
She patient in thy House does still abide,
And Day and Night her sorrows never cease,
Paying in Tribute briny Deluges.
Thus whilst he spoke, he took from him his Lance,
And He into the Parlour did advance,
And for his Son, Ulysses straight gave place,
Which thus Telemachus refusing, says;
Pray Sir, sit still, be pleased to keep your Seat,
Eumaeus shall for me another get.
Ulysses reassums his Chair, this said,
And he with Boughs, and Skins, a new one made.
The Prince thus settled, he supplies the Board,
With cold Meats, and with Bread, and Wine well stored,
And sitting down, they plentifully fare.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
Telemachus thus to Eumaeus said;
Whence came this Stranger hither, how convaid?
Of what great Family himself he Boasts?
Since he on Foot could never reach our Coasts.
Then to the Prince the Rusticks Monarch spoke;
Well as I can a true account I Will make:
From Creet, he says, him cruel Fates have hurled,
Through diverse Fortunes round about the World;
And now some God his Course did hither shape,
Here from a Thesprot-Ship he made escape,
And found me out: Do with him what you please,
For he is your humble Suppliant, he says.
Then thus Telemachus himself declared;
You put me on a business something hard.
How can I give at home this Guest respect?
Since I am Young, Power wanting to protect
His Person from their Insolence, and Scorn.
My Mother's mind by various thoughts is born,
Whether she still will keep my Father's Court,
Preserve his Bed, and her own fair Report,
Or let her noblest Suitor her espouse,
And carry with rich Presents to his House.
But since he is thy Guest, I Will him afford
A Coat, a Vest, new Sandals, and a Sword,
And sign his Pasport wheresoe'r he goes;
Mean while amongst you let him here repose.
I Will send him Clothes, and Diet too, lest he,
To thee and thine too burthensom should be.
I, amongst the Suitors would not any trust,
Such are their high affronts, and so unjust
Which I must suffer in, though never so strong,
For many may a single Person wrong,
Then said Ulysses; Sir, since now I may,
Be pleased to hear on this, what I can say;
I much am troubled, Sirs, at this Report
Of ryoting Suitors in Ulysses Court,
Who in perpetual Rants devour, and swill.
Sir, act they thus with, or against your Will,
Or have you else incurred your Peoples hate,
By Revelation from the Book of Fate?
Thereunto moved by Brothers, and Allies,
In whom we trust when Differences arise?
Ah! would that I as Young, and Lusty, were,
As now You seem, that art Ulysses Heir!
Or if himself in here should wandering Chop,
Which I despair not of, but rather hope,.
This Head I Will wager, should I on them fall,
If suddenly, I did not rout them all:
But should they me ore power, I rather would
Die in my House, then such dire acts behold;
Strangers ill treated, Virgins wronged, our Wine,
And Meat devoured, and all, on no Design:
Then spoke the Prince; Sir, I Will the Truth relate;
I never yet incurred the Peoples Hate;
My Brother I not blame, nor dear Allies,
In whom we trust when Differences arise.
Jove pleased our Stock should still produce but The Genealogy of Telemachus,
is here imperfect, but preserved entire by Eustathius, I know not out of what
Author, thus; Telemachus the Son of Ulysses, and Penelope; Ulysses the Son of
Laertes, and Anticlea; Laertes of Arcisius, and Chalcomedusa; Arcisius of
Jupiter, and Eurucdia.
One:
Laertes was Arcisius only Son,
None had Laertes but Ulysses, he
Left in his Court a tender Although Homer mentions but one son of Ulysses, yet
the Author of the Telegonia, an ancient Writer, mentions another, Arcesilans:
and Sophocles one called Euryalus, slain by Telemachus.
Infant, me,
Who now am haunted with this spightful Train,
The primer sort who in these Islands reign;
Who Three Islands lying round Ithaca: for by Samos is here meant Cephallenia,
as we have already observed out of Strabo.
Samos, or shady Zacynthus sway,
Dulichium, or our rocky Ithaca,
My Mother court, consuming her Estate;
She not refuses, nor will chose a Mate:
But what we have these Roysters now enjoy,
Abuse our Palace, and would me destroy.
Heaven's Will be don: But go thou straight, and tell
The Queen, I Am come from Pyle, am safe, and well,
And I till thy return shall tarry here:
Be sure when thou inform'st her, none are near
To catch the News, the Suitors many be,
And always brewing mischief against me.
Eumaeus to Telemachus then said;
Sir, your Commands with care shall be obeyed:
But as I go along be pleased to say,
Shall I acquaint Laertes in my way?
Who would, though much he for Ulysses mourned,
Look on the Laborers, and often not scorned
To taste their homely Cates; But all this while
That thou were absent, and have sailed to Pyle,
He will nor eat, nor drink, but sighs, and groans,
And pining sits, consumed to Skin and Bones.
Then said the Prince, We his tormenting Grief,
Not yet can ease, with cordial relief,
Till better we informed may make it appear,
That my dear Father will be shortly here.
But to the Court do thou directly bend,
And tell the Queen she may a Servant send,
May him the News in private bear. This said,
On he his Sandals knits, and ready made,
And hasting forth, Minerva not beheld,
Who in a Woman's shape her self concealed:
But straight she forth before Ulysses starts,
A Beauty skilful in all Female Arts:
Neither did her Telemachus epsy,
Gods to appear to every one are shie.
But her Ulysses, and the Dogs, beheld,
And mute, they fled, where they themselves concealed:
She beckons to Ulysses, he obeyed,
And drawing near to her, thus Pallas said;
Disclose thy self, Ulysses, to thy Son,
And carry Fate, and dire Destruction,
To the proud Rivals; I my self shall be
Ready, both to assist, and counsel Thee.
Then with her golden Wand she touched his Vest,
Which newly washed, became his manly Breast,
Which larger grew, his Cheeks waxt plump and fair,
His Beard turns brown, and black his hoary Hair.
Thus to himself transformed, in he goes,
And to his Son amazed, himself then shows;
Who looking round, much wondering, and afraid,
Lest he some God should be, thus trembling, said;
You are so altered, Sir, from what you were,
Neither the same your Clothes, nor Person, are;
You are some God, descended from the Skies:
If so, be pleased that we may sacrifice,
And to thy Deity golden Gifts prepare,
That Thou our woeful Family would spare.
Then thus the King did to his Son reply;
Why call'st thou me a God, no God am I,
But I thy Father am, whose Bowels yern,
About these Suitors, and thy sad Concern.
Kissing his Son, this said, Tears, which before
Broke not their Sluices, now bedewed the Floor.
But yet the Prince could not himself persuade,
He saw his Father, but thus doubting, said;
The art not Ulysses, but some Drolling God,
That me would yet with more afflictions load:
Thou art some Deity, no Mortal could
Cast aged limbs thus in a That is, so suddenly. For the Ancients did conceive
it to be in the power of man by virtue of Herbs, and Minerals, to retrive
decayed nature, and to restore it to its former strength, and vigor: as
appears by the story of Medea, who by a Medicine boiled in a Cauldron composed
of sundry Herbs, and Roots, and precious stones of like nature, with the dew of
the Night, and spume of the Moon, and the flesh, and wings of Schreech-owls,
and other ingredients, restored Old Aeson to his Youth again; thus at large
described by Ovid in his Metamorphosis; -- stricto Medea recludit
Ense senis jugulum, veteremque exire cruorem
Passa replet succis; quos postquam combibit Aeson,
Ant ore exceptos aut vulnere, barba, comaeque
Canicie posita nigrum rapuere c^lorem:
Pulsa fugit macies, etc.
Medea cuts the old man's throat, out scrus'd
His scarce-warm blood, and her Receipt infused,
His mouth, or wound, sucked in. His Beard, and Head
Black hair forthwith adorns, the hoary shed.
Pale color, morphue, meager-looks remove,
And under-rising flesh his wrinckles smooth.
His ^imbs wax strong and lusty. Aeson much
Admires his Change: himself remembers such,
Twice twenty Summers past. With all, endu'd
A youthful mind, and both at once renewed.

Youthful mould.
Now you were Gray, your Garments rent, and bare,
Now one of the Celestial List appear.
When thus the King to his dear Offspring said;
Be not surpised with Wonder, nor dismayed,
Thou never shall see another Father here,
Whose absence now has finished twenty year,
Tossed and turmoil'd, through Seas, and Countries, hurled,
Returning to his Home, through all the World.
But this Minerva did, she shapes can fain,
And me thus change unto my self again;
Now a Young man, in comely Habit decked,
The Gods can us ennoble, or deject.
This said, no longer the Young Prince forbears,
But hugging of his Father, shed salt tears,
And he his Son in strict embraces kept,
And both alike ore one another wept.
As Eagles cry, with bitter sorrow, stung,
When Rusticks bear away their callow Young;
So from their Eyes did briny Rivers run
In joyful Spouts until the setting Sun,
Had not the Prince thus to Ulysses said;
How were you hither, Royal Sir, convaid?
From whence? what Master did your ship command?
For hither sure you could not come by Land.
Then to his Offspring thus the King begun;
I Will tell Thee, tell Thee all, my dearest Son,
Me the Pheacians through the Ocean bore,
And sleeping left upon my Native Shore,
With Gold, and Silver store, with Robes, and Vests,
Put up in Fardels, or kept safe in Chests:
Which in a Cave the Goddess did conceal,
And bid me now I should my self reveal,
That we may plot against the Enemy.
But stay, how many of these Roysters be,
That I may know, and gravely then advise,
If them our selves w' are able to chastise;
Or whether we should draw to us more aid.
Then thus Telemachus to his Father said;
Sir, I have heard what Fame you always gave,
Valiant to be in Field, in Counsel grave:
Well you advise, but it is beyond my Hope,
That two with many Valiant men should cope;
Not two, nor ten to one, but many more,
Which I, well as I can, will reckon ore:
Twice twenty six from the Dulichian State,
With six Attendants, on her Answer wait;
From Same, Valiant Striplings twenty four,
And from An Island in the Ionian Sea, not many Leagues distant from Ithaca,
now called Zant.
Zacynthus, we count twenty more,
Ithacans twelve, are early there and late,
On whom the Herald and the Phemius the Son of Terpius, Odyss. 22. (...)
(...)

Poet wait:
Two more there are that Dishes marshal up,
And at their Elbows when they Dine, and Sup.
If we should charge all these, our selves then might
Fall unrevenged, in the unequal Fight;
But if y' are able, some more Forces list,
And who most willing are us to assist.
Then said Ulysses; Thee a truth I Will tell,
Of which, when the art informed, consider well;
If Jove and Pallas pleased, would us assist,
What need we muster others in the List?
Then said the Prince; If They be on our side,
With a sufficient Party w' are supplied.
They sitting on Olympus, have the Ods,
Both of poor Mortals, and Immortal Gods.
Then said Ulysses; Now the time draws near,
When who shall have the better, will appear
In cruel fight 'twixt us, and that proud Crew,
Whose blood our Walls, and Weapons shall imbrew.
But with the Dawn return Thou to the Court,
And there with Drols, and Buffoons, talk, and sport,
Whilst me Eumaeus to the City leads,
Clad like a poor Old man, in tattered Weeds:
But if Thou see that there they me abuse,
Keep down thy swelling Breast, and Patience use:
Though through the Hall they by the Feet me drag,
And ore me punching with their Javelins, brag,
Retain Thy self, and them with Language fair,
Advise they would such foolish tricks forbear:
But they will still go on, nor Thee obey,
Because draws near to them the fatal Day.
But one thing more now closet in thy mind,
Which Pallas, who devises well, designed;
When I shall nod, what ever arms do ly
About the House neglected, lay Thou by
In thy own Chamber; If the Suitors ask,
With gentle Language, our dire Purpose mask.
Tell them they are removed, being spoiled with smoke,
And smutted, nothing like those Weapons look
Ulysses left, when he to Ilium sailed,
With sooty smoke their glittering luster foiled,
Next, I, what Jove commands, do Thee enjoin;
If we should quarrel, warmed with lusty Wine,
And splendid Banquets turn to bloody Fights,
Arms are enticing, and dire Steel invites,
For us two Swords, two Shields, two Javelins leave,
To Charge, whom Pallas will, and Jove deceive:
Next, if from us Thou do Thy stock derive,
And art my Son, tell this to none alive.
This from Laertes, and Eumaeus, we
Must keep, and all, nay from Penelope:
Next, Thou, and I, must first the Women find,
And then how our Domestics are inclined;
Which of them us still honor, and still fear,
And which for me and my Concerns do care.
When thus to him the Gallant Youth replys;
Sir, knew you me, you would not Cowardice
Lay to my charge: This hard to us will prove,
W' have many great impediments to remove,
And long, and hard, you know would be the Task,
To take them One by One, and questions ask,
Since they all settled, and contented are,
To eat Thee up, and what Thou have, not spare.
But first, to move the Women I advise,
Who Thee, stirred by Femality, despise,
The Men pass over, Them to try forbear,
Till Jove discovers what a Pack they are.
Thus they amongst themselves discoursed. Mean while
The Ship that brought Telemachus from Pyle,
And all his kind Associats, up They bore
Into the Harbor, laying close ashore
Their Arms, and Tackle, and rich Presents bare
To Clytius House, and left in safety there,
And straight sent to Ulysses Palace, One,
TO inform the Queen Telemachus was gone
Up to the Field, least that the Queen salt Tears
Should pay, no Custom due, to Tyrant Fears:
The Herald, and Eumaeus, met full Butt,
Each ready with their Message, piping hot:
Entering the Court, the Herald could not hold,
But the glad tidings to each Gigglet told;
Whilst up Eumaeus to the Queen did run,
And told her what commanded had her Son:
His Errand told, Eumaeus then at large,
Porsakes the Court, and goes unto his Charge.
But this bad News the Suitors much amates,
And out they went, and sat before the Gates,
And in close juncto there their business weighed,
When thus Polybus Son Eurymachus said;
Telemachus has a great business don,
Of which, we twenty would have laid to one:
Let our Consult be brief, no time let slip,
But with all speed send forth a well-rig'd Ship,
Them to inform, and hasten to come back.
Amphinomus saw their Vessel as they spoke,
Bare to the Port within embracing shores,
Furling their Sails, and lifting up their Oars.
Then smiling, said; Yonder our Friends appear,
We need not send advice, for they are here.
Some God informed them, or his ship in view,
Infatuated, they could not pursue.
This said; The Princes rising, went a shore,
And lusty Sailers their stout Vessel moor.
Then to a frequent Council they all throng,
Not suffering one to speak, nor Old, nor Young.
When thus Antinous said; Heaven mocks our Hopes,
All Day some sat on windy Mountain tops,
And at Sunsetting, him to intercept,
We tacked about at Sea, and never slept,
That we at once might take him, and dispatch,
Whom sure a Guardian Deity does watch,
And thus convai'd unto his Native Shore.
But now our business do, lose time no more,
If we would finish what we have designed;
The Young Man's parts are great, and high his mind:
To us the Peoples favor now grows small,
Let Us do his Work e're he a Council call,
There us he will charge, and the whole Court incense,
How they conspired the Murder of a Prince,
Which they will so take, that us they will exile
To live unhappy in a foreign Soil:
Let Us intercept him e're he reach the Town,
And share his Wealth, and Fortunes, as our own;
To's Mother all the movables afford,
And whomsoe'r she choseth for her Lord:
But if this Counsel you not well receive,
Let him enjoy his Father's state, and live;
Then we no more must banquet in his House,
But each at Home seek out some wealthy Spouse.
This said, all silent were, when Nisus Son
Amphinomus, Dulichium's Prince, begun,
Whose Courtship best Penelope did please,
Who still Dissentions labored to appease.
Kill not Telemachus, the Royal Heir,
But to the Gods for That is, Let us consult some Oracle: for the Grammarians,
in stead of the word (...), read (...), prothecies, Oracles. (...) was the name
of the Mountain in Epirus, on which the Temple of Jupiter was built in Dodona,
so much celebrated for Responses, whence the word afterward signified a
Prophet, as in Lycophron, (...). Now Eustathius elsewhere observes, that the
Grecians had often deposed their Princes upon the mere command of an Oracle.
Counsel first repair.
If Jove his Death's Commission please to sign,
Boldly go on; If not, the Fact decline.
Pleased with the advice, up they their Council broke,
And in Ulysses Hall their places took.
Mean while the Queen, to ease her troubled Breast,
To the Conspirators her self addressed;
Medon had told her all; Chafed, she descends,
Her comely Damsels on each hand attends:
Veiling her Cheeks, she at the threshold staid,
And thus aloud taxing Antinous, said;
Accursed Antinous, thou who'art so much
Famed for good parts, and yet have nothing such;
To kill my Son, why have thou Plots prepared,
Nor have to Jove, and Piety, regard?
And evil thus for good repay'st, nor know,
When first thy Father Eupithes, says Eustathius.
sheltered on our Coast,
Fearing the people, who against him raged,
When with the The Taphians inhabited some small Islands near to Ithaca, one of
which was Taphos, afterward called Taphiusa. They were formerly called
Teleboae, noted for Piracy.
Taphian Pirates he engaged
Against our Thesprot Friends, him the had destroyed,
Plundered his House, and his Estate enjoyed,
Which then Ulysses hind'ring, saved his Life,
And now you eat him out, would wed his Wife,
Murder his Son, and me with Sorrow kill:
You, and the rest forbear, his blood not spill.
Eurymachus then, Polybus Son, replied;
Best Queen, on my Integrity confide,
Lay by your fears, none here, whilst I draw breath,
Shall hint the smallest motion for his Death;
Who e're attempts, by all the Gods I swear,
Shall purple, with his reeking Blood, my Spear.
Often on his Lap Ulysses me has set,
Given me sweet Wine, and many a savory bit:
Therefore thy Son I love, and most admire,
What e're the Princes shall against him conspire,
I bid him not to fear, nor mind their Ods,
When I have on my side offended Gods.
Thus he persuades, and yet his Death conspires.
Thence to her Chamber the chaste Queen retires,
Where for her Lord, her Cheeks salt Rivers steep,
Till Pallas cast Her in a golden Sleep.
Eumaeus, e're the Day his Course had run,
Came back unto Ulysses, and his Son;
And in the Cottage Supper they prepare,
Slaught'ring a Yearling Porker, fat, and fair.
But Pallas did behind Ulysses stand,
And Old again made, touching with her Wand,
And clad in Rags, lest he his King should know,
And back to the Queen with the glad Tidings go.
Telemachus then to Eumaeus said;
What News in Town, are from their Ambuscade
The Suitors rose, or in the Field now lie
Passing to seize me? Then Eumaeus; I
Not my self troubled questions more to ask,
But straight returned, having performed my Task.
Where from thy Vessel I did one behold,
Who the glad News first to thy Mother told.
And near the City on a Called Hermaeum from the Statue of Hermes, ('that is,
Mercury) standing on it. Eustathius.
Hillock's side,
Up to the Port, I saw a stout Ship glide,
With Men, and Arms, fit to receive a Foe,
These I suppose are they, more I not know.
Telemachus on's Father smiled, this said,
And from Eumaeus turned aside his Head.
Their Labor done, their Supper straight they dressed,
Nor wanted Will to make a sumptuous Feast.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
They to their several Dormitors repair.
scene from book 17 Edoardo Bysshe de Surey Equiti Aurato Smalfeild in Comitatu
Tabulam hanc IMDDDDO Lib. 17.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Telemachus leaves the Farm, and walks to Town,
Ulysses follows in a Beggars Gown.
Argus his Dog, his Lord disguised knows.
To crave an Alms he'mongst the Suitors goes:
They fill his Scrip, but Him Antinous strikes.
His Son's Resentments, and his Queen's dislikes.
SOON as in the East appeared the blushing Dawn,
The Prince his curious Sandals did clap on,
Takes up his Spear well-fitted to his Hands,
And going forth, Eumaeus thus commands;
I go, that first my Mother me may see,
Who, nor from Tears, nor Sorrow, will be free
Till I a Visit make; But You I bid,
This hapless Stranger to the City lead:
There up, and down, He craving Alms, may go,
Plying those few, are willing to bestow:
I am not able, thus ore powered with Grief,
To give to every one in want, Relief.
This if he like not, he may worser fare,
They are good Friends, that no Dissemblers are.
Then thus Ulysses to his Son replied;
I here desire no longer to abide,
In Towns, our Scrips, and Bottles, often are filled,
Alms drop but thin, and coldly, in the Field,
No longer here I lingering shall stay,
But what my Master orders, shall obey.
Be pleased Eumaeus, show me to the Town,
Since thin my Vest, and threadbare is my Gown:
I at a little Fire my self would warm,
Lest me thus clad, the morning Dew may harm;
They say the City is far off from hence.
Forth went, this said, with speed the active Prince,
And going against the Suitors, Plots contrived:
As soon as at the Palace He arrived,
Against a Column he his Javelin placed,
And ore the Marble threshold stepped in have,
Whom Euryclea', dressing up the Hall,
Ord'ring the Chairs, and Seats, spied first of all,
And weeping, to him ran, Damsels, a throng
Embracing gather, and about him hung.
Penelope from her Appartment came,
Like bright Diana, or the Cyprian Dame,
And with glad Tears to his embraces flies,
Kissing his rosy Cheeks, and sparkling Eyes,
And like a tender Mother, questioned thus;
Art come my Dear, come my Telemachus;
I never thought alas to see Thee more,
When Thou for Pyle forsook'st thy Native Shore:
But tell me what has happened since you went
To seek your Father without my It Is apparent, that according to Homer,
Telemachus travailed without the knowledge of Penelope; wherefore I take that
to be the meaning of Ovid in Penelope's Epistle, Ille per insidias pene est
mihi nuper ademptus,
Dum parat, invitis emnibus, ire Pylon.

Consent.
Then said the Prince; Mother, let Sorrows rest.
Nor Passions stir fermented in the Breast,
It is enough that Death not seized me has,
Go up with your Attendants to your Bath.
Then vested in your Homer usually expressed that purity of mind required of
those that made their supplications to God, by the washing of the Hands, as
Odyss. 12. (...)
(...)
(...)
But here he adds another rite of the same nature, the putting on of clean
garments, not to be observed in any other part of his Works.
cleanest Garments come,
And offer to the Gods a Hecatomb,
Imploring Jove, what he begun, to end;
But I must to the Change to call a Friend,
That came with me; Gone with Pyreus Home,
Ordered to treat him well, until I come.
This said, Penelope took her Son's advice,
Bathed, and fresh Garments put on, in a trice,
And with a Sacrifice the Altars loads,
Jove's aid imploring, and all favoring Gods.
The Prince walks forth, armed with a glittering Spear,
His Dogs, his faithful Guard, attendants were?
Pallas with heavenly rays his Temples decked,
That all admired his Mein, and brave aspect;
Whilst round about the Suitors fauning, throng,
Gall in their Bosoms, Honey in their Tongue.
He their Crowd waving, to old Mentor bends
Alitherse, and Antiphas, his Father's friends.
Whilst they together there discoursing, sat,
Pyreus up to them the Stranger brought:
Telemachus not his respects delaid,
But up he stands, when thus Pyreus said;
Your Gifts let Damsels to the Palace bear,
Which by the Spartan King presented were.
Pyreus then Telemachus replied;
How may they there secured, as mine abide!
Me the proud Suitors plot to murder there,
That they may my Paternal Fortunes share,
I Would rather thou, then they should them enjoy,
But if those would destroy me, I destroy,
Send them with joy then to my House: This said,
He by the Hand the Stranger Home convaid.
As soon as they within the Palace drew,
Their Vests aside on Beds, and Seats, they threw,
Then to sweet Baths they went, where cleans'd from soil,
Damsels their skins suppled with perfumed Oil;
Then on them richer Vests, and Mantles cast,
And leading out, in Chairs prepared, placed.
Water to wash their Hands a Virgin Sewer
Pours in bright Silver, from a golden Ewer:
Next, spreads the Table, sets on Bread, then placed
Dishes in order, grateful to the taste:
Plying her Loom, his Mother there did cull.
The softer Fleece, and carded purple Wool,
Whilst fall too, and plentifully fare.
When Thirst and Hunger satisfied were,
My dear Telemachus, the Queen then said,
I Will now retire, where I Am no sooner laid
On my sad Couch, but trickling Tears distill,
Which wash my Pillow, and my Bosom fill,
Since my Ulysses sailed to Ilium,
But you will not tell me e're the Suitors come,
What you abroad have of your Father heard.
Then thus Telemachus himself declared;
Mother, I will the truth to you relate;
We went to Pyle, where Nestor us did treat,
And used me as a Father would his Son,
Returned from travel, had been absent long:
Such was my joyful Welcome, such our Cheer;
But of my Father he did nothing hear,
If dead, or yet alive: But me he sent
To Menelaus, Horse, and Chariot, lent:
There I fair Helen saw, upon whose score,
Trojan and Grecians with commixed Gore
Died Phrygian Plains; The King of me enquires
Wherefore I came, I told him my desires;
When thus to me the Royal Spartan said;
A feeble Wretch so fills a Heroes Bed,
A Hind so in a Lions Den, her Fauns
Secures, then wanders fertile Vales, and Launs,
When he returning straight devours them all;
So would Ulysses on these Suitors fall.
Would Phoebus, Jove, and Pallas, Him assist,
As when at Lesbos, entering the List:
He threw Philomelides on his Back,
When joyful shouts rung like a Thunder-crack.
To these Corrivals he would prove as kind,
They soon should sad, and bitter Nuptials find.
But to the Point, in pity of thy Youth,
I Will not extenuate, nor wave the Truth;
What Proteus; whose account of Ulysses, delivered Odyss. 4. is here verbatim
repeated.
Proteus told me, shall not be concealed,
Who said, That Him he in an Isle beheld,
Whom, against his will, Calypso did detain,
No means to see his Native Soil again:
There he laments, wants Shipping, Men, and Oars,
That should transport him from enchanted shoars.
Such was the account he gave, from thence the Gods
With fair Winds sent me to my own Aboads.
This, new Commotions in her Bosom made,
To whom Theoclymenus thus then said;
Best Queen, Your Son knows little, but I Will tell,
That am Prophetic, and shall Truth reveal,
Jove I attest, the greatest of the Gods,
Thy Hospitality, and these Aboads,
Arrived, Ulysses now abscondeth near,
And all their Plots, and Villainy does hear,
Whose sure Destruction now he has contrived,
I saw the A pigeon devoured by a Falcon, mentioned in the latter end of the
fifteenth book.
Omen just as we arrived,
And to thy Son my Observation made.
Ah! could Thou make this out, the Queen then said,
I such returns, and kindness should impart,
That all should say, a Happy man thou art.
Whilst thus they talked within, just at the Gates
The Rivals Javelins threw, and played at Coyts,
Where they before their Consultation held.
But when near Supper, Sheep come from the Field,
Medon whom they loved best, and did attend,
Still at their Feasts, said; When your Game you end,
That we your Supper may prepare, walk up,
It Is not accounted wholesome late to sup.
This said, they all went in, their Vests and Coats
In their Seats laying; Sheep, and well-fed Goats,
And fatted Swine, with a huge Ox they dressed,
Then having sacrificed, prepared to Feast.
Mean while Ulysses, and Eumaeus, made
Have to the Town, when thus the Swinherd said;
You to the Town desire to walk to Day,
As our Lord bids, and Lords we must obey:
But I had rather you would here abide,
But then my Master would be sure to chide.
Come, let us now make have, the Day grows Old,
And closes of the Evenings often prove Cold.
Kindly himself Ulysses thus expressed;
Your Orders, Friend, I closet in my Breast,
So let us march, lead you, and I Will attend.
And since we must make have, your staff me lend:
You say the way is rough, and I may slip.
This said, He ore his shoulder threw his Scrip,
Which worn in Holes, hung on a twisted Thong,
His staff He lends him, and they walk along,
And leave the Farm, by Dogs, and Rusticks watched,
Then like an Old man leaning, poor and patched,
In Beggars habit, on he leads the King,
Through rough ways, near the Town, unto the Spring,
From whence the City all their Water had,
Which These were three so^s of P^elerans: From the one the Island, and City
received its name, Ithaca; from the other, the Mountain Neritum; and from the
last, a place called Polyctorium.
Ithacus, Nerit, and Polyctor made,
Planting a Grove of pleasant Trees about,
Cold crystal falling from a marble Spout:
And to the These Nymphs were of three several kinds among the ancients, as
Homer in one of his Hymns distinguishes them, (...)
(...)
(...)
Those here meant, are the Naiades, or Ephydriades, whom antiquity called the
daughters of the Ocean, because all Fountains have their origination from
thence.
Nymphs above an Altar placed,
Where weary Travelers offered as they past,
There he Melanthus, Dolius Son oretook,
Leading the Goats, the primest of the Flock,
Must Suitors feast, which two Swains after drove:
Whom thus he taunts; which much the King did move:
One Villain leads another, it is Joves Will,
That like to like must go together still.
Where, Swin-herd, leadst thou this thy hungry Mate,
Who begging scraps, has crowching at the Gate,
His shoulders broke; how he a Feast would rout?
Chargers, and Swords fit no such heavy Lout:
But lend him me, and he shall sweep my Coats,
Look to my Flocks, and feed my tender Goats,
And Whey shall swill until his belly sag,
But since he will not work, but rather beg
To feed his hungry Paunch, let him beware
He go not to Ulysses House, lest there,
About his Head, their Foot-stoles fly as thick
As Hail, whilst him about the Hall they kick.
This said, he strikes Ulysses on the Hip.
But he stood firm, him up he could not trip:
Who ready with his staff to knock him down,
And teach more manners to a Buffle-head Clown,
Patient, forbears: which as Eumaeus spies,
Rateing him first, his Hands raised to the Skies,
He thus begins an Execrating Prayer;
You Fountain Nymphs, Joves beauteous race, if e're
Ulysses offered you the brawny Thighs
Of well-fed Lambs, and Kids, in Sacrifice,
Ah! grant me my Request, that He may come,
Conducted by his better Angel, Home:
He Will spoil your Pride, which wandering up and down
You boast, both in the Country, and the Town,
Whilst wicked Swains destroy the numerous Flock.
When thus Melanthius the Goat-herd spoke;
For what Thou say, Dog, I shall thee convay,
In a good Ship e're long from Ithaca,
For whom, I bart'ring, should my Garner fill.
Would Phoebus, this Telemachus would kill,
Or let the Suitors Him to day dispatch,
They long may look, that for Ulysses watch.
This said, muttering Replies, He left them there,
And to the Court, with speed, made his Repair,
There amongst the Suitors for a place He pressed
Against Eurymachus, who loved him best:
Who from their several Messes, him afford
Choice Cates: Waiters with Bread supply the Board.
Eumaeus and Ulysses then drawn near,
A well-strung Harp, and Phemius singing, hear:
The King by the Hand taking Eumaeus, said;
This Court of old was for Ulysses made,
You easily may know it at first sight,
The Hall adorned, the Wall and Trench not slight,
The double Gates are fortified so well,
They mock all Force or Power of Humane skill,
But many sure invited Guests are met,
And merry, now at plenteous Tables set.
I a good Treatment smell, the Harp I hear,
Which heaven ordained The Grecians were so far addicted to the study of
Music, from the very foundation of their Commonwealths, that their common
discourse became afterward Musical: but they especially used it in their
Temples, and at their Banquets, and Entertainments: whence is that of Horace,
concerning the Harp, Divitum mensis and amica Templis Nor does Homer ever
describe a Banquet without it. Which Custom Virgil translated out of him, into
the Banquet of Dido; -- cithara crin^tus Iopas
Personat aurata, docuit quae maximus Atlas.
Hic canit erraentem Lunam, Solisque labores,
Vnde hominum genus, and pecudes, unde imber and ignis,
Arcturum, etc.
-- whilst curled Iopas plays
Upon his golden Harp, great Atlas lays.
He changing Moons, and the Suns labors sung,
Whence Men, and Beasts, whence
Showrs and Lightning sprung,
The Bears, Triones, Kids foretelling Rain;
Why Winter's Suns run headlong to the Main.
The Instrument chiefly at that time used was the Harp, called by our Poet
(...) and (...) Quintilian lib. 1. Institut. Orat. Vnde etium ille mos, ut in
conviviis post coenam circumferretur lyra. Whence rise the Custom that at
Banquets after Supper a Harp was carried about. Pind. Olymp. 1. speaking of
Hiero King of Syracuse, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
He loves sweet Music best,
Such as is usual at a Feast:
But take me down the Dorick Lyre
From the nail.

Companion to good Cheer.
Then thus Eumaeus to Ulysses said;
You know, who have so long experience had,
But now let us consult what is best to do;
Either do Thou first in the Palace go,
And walk up to the Hall, and here I Will stay,
Or tarry here, and I will show the Way:
But be not long, lest whoever Thee first spies,
Shall strike, or drive away, thus I advise.
Then said the King; Discreetly do thou say,
Go Thou in first, and here a while I Will stay:
I Am used to stripes, my sides are hard with Blows,
My Heart grown steel, enduring Woes on Woes,
Turmoil'd in Battles, tossed on swelling Seas,
Banging, and Kicks, are flea-bitings to these.
The hungry Belly in each Corner hunts,
For which we suffer many sad Affronts:
To feed the Paunch, stout Ships we man, and rig,
With mischief, and our enemies ruin big.
Whilst such Discourse amongst themselves they had,
His Dog pricks up his Ears, and raised his Head,
Argus, whom often before he went to Troy,
Ulysses fed, for others to enjoy.
With him in's absence the young men were wont,
Wild Goats, and swifter Hares, and Deer, to hunt:
But now he lay in a dejected state,
Upon a Dunghill just before the Gate,
That Mules, and Steeds congested with their Dung;
Which Swains on the improving pasturage flung.
There lay poor Argus, full of Ticks, and knew
His Royal Master, as toward him he drew,
Wagging his Tail, and couching close his Ear,
But could not stir; at which he stole a Tear,
Which hiding from Eumaeus, thus he said;
I wonder here this Dog his Bed has made,
He has been large and fair, of swiftest Breed,
And such as Princes at their Tables feed.
Then he replied; This once fair, fat, and young,
Did to Ulysses (Dead I fear) belong,
When he to Troy with Agamemnon went,
You would admire his swiftness, strength, and scent:
Through Groves and Thickets, He the Game, in view,
Or hunting on the Foot, would swift pursue:
But now grown Old, absent, or dead his Lord,
The Women negligent, not him regard:
Servants when that their Masters absent are,
To execute their Duties, little care.
Half of their industry Jove takes away,
Slaves care not what comes on it, where is none to obey.
This said, He ventured through the arched Gate,
And went directly where the Suitors sat:
But Argus Eyes the sullein Prcaae sealed,
When he his Lord Pliny in his Natural History, Vivunt Laconici (canes) annis
denis, foeminae duodenis; caetera genera quindecim annos, aliquando viginti.
The Laconian Dogs live ten years, the Females twelve: other sorts live fifteen,
sometimes twenty: in which he follows Aristotle. But Aelian in his History of
Animals, produces the life of a Dog to fourteen years only.
twenty years past beheld.
When first Telemachus Eumaeus saw
Coming, He beckoned, nearer him to draw:
But He looking about straight took his Seat,
Near where the Cook distributed the Meat
About the Hall unto the Feasting Crew,
And near Telemachus his Table drew,
When seated by himself, the Herald brought
His Dishes, and the Board with Manchet fraught,
Straight after him Ulysses, hung in Rags,
Enters the Hall, his Bottles, and his Bags:
Like an old Beggar down within the Gate,
Before the Ashen Portico, he sat:
His back against the Cypress Entrance staid,
With rich Crotesk engraven, and boscade.
Telemachus then to Eumaeus spoke,
And a whole Manchet from the Charger took,
With as much meat as both his Hands could hold;
Bear to yon Stranger this, bid him be bold,
And round of all the Suitors Alms implore,
Bashfullness suits not Persons that are poor.
Thus ordered, straight Eumaeus him obeyed.
And drawing near, thus to Ulysses said:
The Prince, this Plate, and Manchet, sends to thee,
Advising, that you would their Charity
From all the Suitors, round the Hall, implore,
Modesty suits not Persons that are poor.
The Prince, Ulysses said, Jove happy make,
And prosper all things He shall undertake.
And with both Hands, this said, puts up the Meat
In a foul Wallet, lying at his Feet.
Mean while the Poet heavenly raptures sung,
And Supper ended, up his Harp he hung.
Then various prattle, ecchoing Voices made,
When Pallas drawing near Ulysses, said;
Now craving Alms among the Suitors go,
That Thou their several Characters may know,
But how so e're He spared none of them all.
Then craving Alms, He speaks about the Hall,
At each ones back, He like a Beggar stands,
Importuning them with extended Hands.
The Princes all Him pity, and admire,
Ask whence He came, who He might be enquire.
When thus Melanthius the Goat-herd spoke;
Hear me you worthy Heroes, that here make
Addresses, hoping to espouse our Queen;
This sturdy Beggar I before have seen,
Eumaeus brought Him here, but I not know,
Whether He may be called a Friend, or Foe.
When thus Antinous, Subulcus chid;
Why did Thou to the Town this Vagrant lead?
Have we not yet enough of such fine Guests,
A pack of wandering Rogues at all our Feasts?
Think Thou it fit to bring one here to sup,
Would us devour, and eat thy Master up?
When thus Eumaeus on Antinous fell;
Sir, this your speech is not digested well,
Whoever invites a Stranger, treats him fair,
Those who be Tradsmen, or Mechanics are;
A Poet, or Physician, or whose Voice
At Banquets, makes both Poor, and Rich, rejoice:
Such famous Men are entertained by all,
That none: are pinched by Poverty, they call
Of all that is here; You worst to please still be,
Still finding faults, but piquing most at me:
But I regard not you, nor all your spleen,
Whilst here the Prince dwells, and our gracious Queen,
When thus Telemachus to Eumaeus spoke;
Be silent Sirrah, and no answer make,
Antinous loves to meddle thus, and brawl,
Himself to trouble, and disturb the Hall.
Then turning toward Antinous he went on;
You use me as a Father would his Son,
That from my House driving poor Strangers, still
Officious art, but sure it is not Jove's Will:
Give him an Alms, I beg it, neither fear,
My Mother, Sir, nor any Waiter here,
But this not your Design, you will rather stay,
Devour't your self, then any give away.
Then thus Antinous boldly did retort;
Sweet Prince, your speech methinks is something smart,
If each should give as much as I bestowed,
At Home, three months, Cates would his Table load.
Here threatening, he a Footstool up did whip,
Whilst all the rest with Doles filled up his Scrip.
Ulysses then e're his retreat he made,
Stopping before Antinous thus said;
Dear Sir, your Charity to me impart,
Sure thou art Rich, so like a Prince Thou art,
Therefore on me you better may bestow,
And I shall praise thee wheresoever I go.
I once was wealthy, had a fair Abode,
And often on Strangers what I had bestowed:
I many Servants kept, had all things which
Make People Happy, and accounted Rich:
But Jove destroyed it, who does what he list,
And me with Crusing Privateers dismissed:
For Egypt we a tedious Voyage had,
At last, we in the pleasant River rode,
Then to the Company I gave Command
To moor their Ships, and by no means to land,
And sent forth Spies, that should the Country view;
But they ore daring, the poor Natives slew,
And fell to plunder the Egyptian Field,
The Women ravished, tender Infants killed:
The Country to the City gives the Alarms,
Who with the Dawn drew forth in glittering Arms,
Both Horse, and Foot shining in steel complete,
And so Jove pleased, that straight they us defeat,
Not any stood, but all the Field forsook,
Many they kill, and many Prisoners took.
To do their Drudgeries, me to Although Cinyras be King of Cyprus in the
Iliads; yet he being dead, this Dmetor the son of Jasus seems to have reigned
in his room. Eustathius.
Metor gave,
Who reigned in Cyprus, there to be his Slave:
From thence I hither, as you see, forlorn,
Ventured through Worlds of woes, still Fortunes scorn.
When thus Antinous himself expressed;
What God this wandering Rogue sent to our Feast?
Stand farther off, lest Thou at once do see,
Egypt, and Cyprus acted ore by me,
Thou impudent and lying Rascal, go,
Thou beg'st of each, and All on thee bestow:
There is no spare, no pity, none forbid
To cut large slivers from another's Bread,
Since there is no Want. When thus Ulysses spoke;
Sir, in your Judgment sure you are mistook:
In your own House, you scarce would He exprobrates to Antinous by this
expression, his Inhospitality, of which Salt was the Symbol among the ancients,
which was therefore first brought to Table, and last carried away.
Salt afford,
That art thus pinching at another's Board;
That from such Plenty wilt not me Carress
With one small bit of Bread, in my Distress.
At this Reply Antinous, almost mad,
Frowning on Him, in much Distemper, said;
Thou never shall unpunished leave this Court,
That dare so sawsily to us retort.
Then with his stool him on the shoulder struck,
But he the fall took, standing like a Rock:
Nor more was moved at Antinous blow.
Then silent, thinking on Revenge, did go
Back to the Door, there sitting down, he laid
His full Scrip by, then to the Suitors said;
Hear you that court the Queen, and here now Feast,
The sudden Dictates of my troubled Breast;
Men are not grieved when they receive a stroke,
Fighting to save their Cattle, or their Flock;
But from Antinous I my payment have,
By ill-advising Hunger forced to crave:
But if the Gods the Poor revenge, then He
May Death espouse, before he married be.
Then he replied; Sit quietly, and eat,
Or else be gone, lest Thee the Waiters treat
In a worse manner, who dare thus retort,
Kick, cuff, and drag Thee round about the Court.
They all disliked, he so much on him took,
Then one of them to him thus boldly spoke;
I must confess, Antinous, a dislike,
Objects of Charity any one should strike.
What if some God It was the opinion of the ancients, that the Gods often
assumed a humane shape, in which, they viewed the world, and the actions of
mankind. So Ovid lib. 1. Metamorth. of Jupiter, Contigerat nostras infamia
temporis aures,
Quam cupiens falsam, summo delabor Olympo.
Et Deus humana lustro sub imagine terras, etc.
The Times accused (but as I hoped, belied)
To try, I down from steep Olympus slide.
A God transformed, like one of human birth,
I wandered through the many-peopled Earth.
'Twere long to tell what Crimes of every sort
Swarmed in all parts; the truth exceeds report.
These all received this opinion of theirs from Homer, and he from the
Egyptians, who believed the world to be full of Gods, or Angels.
from Heaven descended be,
Who often as despicable seem as He?
And the World wandering, make a harder shift,
That they the just from the unjust may sift.
These words Antinous did but little touch,
But poor Telemachus was troubled much,
To see his Father beaten, nor forbears
To wet the marble Pavement with salt Tears;
Yet he sat silent, working out his Plot.
But when Penelope this News had got,
That one was struck, she to her Damsels said,
Would Phoebus at his foot Him dead had laid.
Eurynome replied; Let me too pray,
May none of them e're live to see the Day.
Then said the Queen; They all are of one Pack,
And no invention to our ruin lack.
But this Antinous plays the Devil and all,
A Poor Man craves their Charity in my Hall,
Ready to starve, they fill his Wallet full,
He takes him ore the shoulder with a stool.
This sense the Women of the Business had,
Set in their Chamber, whilst Ulysses fed.
The Queen then thus did to Eumaeus call;
Go for that Stranger, sitting in the Hall,
And bring him straight up hither, I desire,
That I may bid him Welcome, and enquire,
If e're our Lord he heard of, or did see,
Who, like him, a poor Wanderer may be.
Then he replied; Ah! would this prattling Throng,
Madam, were silent, or without a Tongue.
Such his Discourse, that me he much delights,
I kept him in my Cotte three Days, and Nights.
He first escaped from Sea, to me repaired,
All his sad stories yet I have not heard.
As when some rare Musician sweetly sings,
Touching from Heaven inspired, concording strings,
Ravishing all with his Celestial Voice;
So did his sweet discourses me rejoice.
In fruitful Crete, where Minos Offspring swaies,
He with Ulysses met, who now, he says,
Among the Thesprots, living, and in health,
Prepares to come, and fill his House with Wealth.
Penelope then; Go fetch him hither straight,
They now are in the Hall, or at the Gate,
Or where they list, following their various sports,
Their own Estates preserved, in empty Courts,
Their Servants stinted with Crab Wine, and Bread,
Whilst here they on Varieties are fed:
Our Beevs, and Goats, our fatter Sheep they kill,
And all the day our richest Wine they swill,
Havoc they make, and none dares be so bold,
Amongst their loose Ryots, once to bid them hold.
None like Ulysses, who this Pestilence
Would quickly, with a Vengeance, drive from hence.
He, and his Son, if e're He live to see
His Native Soil, would soon revenged be.
This said, Telemachus sneez'd aloud, whilst round
The ample Hall re-ecchoings resound.
But the Queen smiling said; Eumaeus, call
Straight the poor stranger hither, in the Hall:
See Thou not how my Son scarce draws his Breath,
That sneezing was counted ominous by the Greeks and Romans, we find by many of
their Histories When Themistocles was ready to offer sacrifice to the Gods,
there were brought before him three Captives of noble descent, and richly
habited; whom when the Prophet Euphrantides had viewed, seeing the flame of the
Sacrifice large and ^lucid, and hearing a sneezing on his right side; taking
Themistocles by the hand wished him to make a Victim of those three Youths unto
Bacchus Omestes, by which he should obtain security and victory. So X^nophon
relates how the whole Army promised themselves success upon a sudden sneezing.
Mention of which is more frequent in the Poets. Catullus, Hoc ut dixit amor,
sinistra ut ante
Dextram sternuit aporobationem.
Nunc ab auspicio bono profecti
Mutuis animis amant, amantur.
When Cupid this had spoken, He
Then sneez'd, good must the Omen be;
So going from a happy sign,
The Lovers in affection join.

Sneezing so often; the Omen carries Death,
The Suitors are involved in one sad Fate:
But what I promise, do not Thou forget.
If Probabilities to me He tell,
I with a Suit and Coat shall cloth him well.
Eumaeus straight Penelope obeyed,
And drawing near him, hapless Pilgrim said;
The Queen calls for Thee, who though full of Woe
Something about her absent Lord would know,
And She, if her what is probable Thou tell,
With a new Suit, and Coat, will cloth thee well:
Thou shall no more about a begging go,
What e're Thou want, she freely will bestow.
Then thus Ulysses said; Eumaeus, I,
Icarius Daughter well shall satisfy
Concerning him, Her I can well acquaint,
For we a-like felt Miseries, and Want.
But much these Ranters me with fear surprise,
Whose Pride, and Folly, scales the starry Skies;
One struck me without Cause, nor did the Prince,
Nor any here, rebuke his Insolence.
But let the Queen be patient, till it is Night,
And I at large shall, what I know, recite
Near a good Fire; My Clothes are of the worst,
Which well you know, who entertained me first.
Eumaeus with this Answer coming in
Without the Stranger, smartly said the Queen;
Why have Thou not this Guest, Eumaeus, brought,
Is he mistrustful, fears some Female Plot?
Or is he Modest, in another Court?
Blushes not well with wandering Pilgrims sort.
Eumaeus then; Madam, the excuse he made,
Seems what, in Prudence, any might have said,
That he this boyst'rous Crew might better shun,
You would be patient till the setting Sun:
For you to will be convenienter, best Queen,
To talk with him in private, nor be seen.
Then thus Penelope her self expressed;
Sure this is no Buffoon, nor simple Guest,
For never such a Crew together got
Of Mischiefs, that do naught but mischief Plot.
The Queen thus having showed her Discontent,
Eumaeus thence amongst the Suitors went,
And to Telemachus then drawing near,
He softly whispered thus, that none might hear;
Now Sir, I must unto my Charge repair,
But to your safety look, take special Care:
Many they be, in mischief All conjoyn,
First Jove destroy them by their own design.
Then said the Prince, I Will do what you advise,
Just, Father, are your Fears, and Jealousies:
But early bring fat Offerings for our Feast,
And leavet' Immortal Gods, and Me, the rest.
This said, The Prince again resumes his Seat,
Subulcus then fell too, and drank, and eat,
Then walks he to his Charge, and leaves the House,
Full of proud Feasters, who rich Wine carouse,
Dancing, and Singing, Merry to the height,
Till bright-day fled from sable-ensign'd Night.
scene from book 18 Domino D:nc Gulielmo Hanvard de Tandridge Equiti in
Comitatu de Suny Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 18.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Irus, a sturdy Beggar of the Town,
Quarrels his King; They fight, He knocks him down.
Public the Queen in Gorgeous Dress appears,
Where She her Suitors both trappans, and jeers.
A Stool Eurymachus at Ulysses throws:
The loud Disturbance Flowing Cups compose.
BUT then a Beggar came, who long in Town,
And through all Ithaca begged up and down:
Deep could he Gussle, and much Gormandize,
Yet wanted strength, though of the largest size.
His Mother Him Eustathius observes that it was the Custom amongst the
Grecians, that the Mother should give the name to her Child: which I find
confirmed by Euripides in a Fragment preserved by the Scholiast of
Aristophanes; (...). (...);
What name the Child, the Mother the tenth day.
On the tenth day after the birth of their Children they made a Feast, and then
give a name to their Children, according to Euripides in his Tragedy called
A^geus,
Arnaeus named, whom all,
For carrying speedy Errands, Irus call;
Who thought to drive the King from his own Gates,
Whom in a baffling humor, thus He rates;
Dotard, be gone, hear'st not the Feasters sense,
That I should drag Thee by the heels from hence?
Warned, I say rise, else we'll the Cause decide
With dint of fist. He frowning, then replied;
I hurt not you, I hinder none to give,
Nor any one their Charity to receive:
Here Is room for more; is it fit, Thou snarling Dog,
Rogues should with one another play the Rogue?
Heaven make us thankful, here is enough for both:
No more, lest I begin, though I am loath,
You Will find too soon, an Old Man's ponderous Fist
Shall make your mouth die with fresh bloodyour breast:
Then I Will alone here till to Morrow stay,
And you will scarce take this House more in your way.
Then he replied; Rascal, Thou well can brag,
But look no better then a withered Hag.
I Will on your moldy Chops your Pasport sign,
And drive your Teeth out, as from Corn, the Swine.
Prepare thy self, that all may here behold
The Younger Beggar triumph ore the Old.
Thus sitting, They out in rough Language broke,
Of which Alcinous first notice took,
Then smiling, thus to his Companions said;
Yonder Is such sport, the like we never had,
The Beggars ready are to play a Prize,
Let Us set them on. At this they all arise,
And in their Seats their upper-Garments fling,
And thronging round the Champions make a Ring.
Then said Antinous; Hear me I desire,
Goats Puddings are now lying on the Fire,
Well stuffed with blood, and suet, ready dressed,
And he who in this Duel gets the best,
Shall first make choice, and always with us eat,
And keep all Beggars else without the Gate.
Antinous motion all the Concourse took,
When sly Ulysses cautiously thus spoke;
It Is hard for me, consumed with Grief, and Age,
With such a sturdy Youngster to engage;
But since the Belly, which never counsels well,
Says, I must fight, and Hunger does compel;
All that are present take the Solemn Oath,
That none help Irus here, but let us both
Try our own proper strength, two against one,
Though never so Valiant, may be orethrown,
This said Ulysses, and they swore; when thus
Unto his Father spoke Telemachus;
Stranger, If Thou by a brave Confidence
Art moved, not doubting but to drive him hence,
Fear none that stand behind thee, or before,
Whoe'r strikes Thee, shall fight with many more.
I, and Eurymachus, and Antinous, shall
Be on thy side: This motion pleased them all.
Whilst up to's twist his Shirt Ulysses ties,
And round his Wast, showing his brawny Thighs,
His Breast, and Arms, and spreading shoulders bare,
Which Pallas made more rossid, plump, and fair.
The Suitors wondering at his Manly make,
Thus looking then on one another spoke;
Irus, I doubt, will by this Bargain lose,
What Thighs, his Rags now off, the Old man shows!
Thus said they, whilst the Waiters Irus dressed,
And lead him forth, with extreme Fear possessed,
A trembling Ague his whole body shook,
When thus Antinous to Irus spoke;
Tremblest Thou boaster (hope for no relief)
To fight an Old Man, spent with Age, and Grief?
But this I threaten, and it shall prove true,
If He the better have, and Thee subdue,
I shall transport thee to Epirus then,
Where King He was King of Epirus, son of Euchenor and Phlogea, who put out the
eyes of his daughter Metope, or Amphissa, corrupted by Aechmodicus, and set her
to grind Corn, made for that purpose of Iron, saying she shouldthen recover her
sight, when she hadground that to flower. Inviting afterward Aechmodicus to a
banquet, caused all the Members of his body to be cut off: At last falling into
extremity of Madness, died by devouring his own flesh. Others say that Echetus
lived in the time of Homer, by whom being ill treated, he poetically revenged
himself by this relation, as he did on Thersites in his Iliads.
Echetus reigns, the worst of men;
Who shall cut off thy Ears, thy Nostrils slit,
And thy raw Dowsets give the Dogs to eat.
These threatenings more increased his aguish Fear,
But in they drew, and high their Hands they rear.
Ulysses then considered, I or no,
If he should kill the Rascal at one blow,
Or lay him on the Pavement with a Cuff;
The last seems best, and such Rebuke enough:
Lest the Spectators so his strength should find.
Then to it they went, His business thus designed.
First Irus Him on the right shoulder struck;
But Him Ulysses such a whirret took
Under the Ear, a Bone broke with the blow;
Straight from his mouth a purple stream did flow,
He on his Back lay, in a deadly Swound,
Gnashing his Teeth, and kicking of the Ground.
Clapping their Hands aloud, the Suitors laugh,
Whilst by the Heels Ulysses drags him off,
And setting by the Wall in the outward Court,
Gave him a staff, still giddy, to support.
Here Sirrah, Dogs and Swine drive from the Door,
Y' have no Commission to keep out the Poor;
The worst Thou shall receive from me, Thou have.
This said, His Scrip he ore his shoulder cast,
Which hung down at a Thong, then on the Floor,
Resumes his place, just where He sat before:
The Suitors then all thronging in, and glad,
Thus to Ulysses, much delighted, said;
May Thee great Jove, and the Immortal Gods,
Who has thus driven from us, and these Aboads,
This sturdy Rogue, this gormandizing Beast,
Grant whatsoever Thou shall of them request.
But we'll to Epire, shipped, the Rascal send,
To Echetus, who governs like a Fiend.
This said, Ulysses at their Vote rejoiced,
Antinous the Paunch before him placed,
Stuffed well with blood and fat; Amphinomus brought
Him in a Basket two Loaves, piping hot,
And with a Golden Bowl presenting, spoke;
Bold Stranger, may the Gods thee happy make,
And give such Riches as thou had before;
For, Father, now thou art exceeding poor.
When thus Ulysses said; Sir, I believe,
That Character which all your Fathers give,
May be called yours, Dulichian Nisus aim,
Though rich, was always to preserve his Fame,
Since thou his Offspring, like him, prudent art,
This for a special Maxim I Will impart;
What ever breaths, and on the Earth does crawl,
Man is the unworthiest Creature of them all,
Who a defiance to bad Fortune gives,
And says, he n're shall suffer whilst he lives:
But when changed Fates Usher the evil Day,
Then he must bear't with Patience, as he may.
Such vain Opinions among weak Mortals be,
So Poverty, unlooked for, fell on me.
I once was rich, so much in Wealth did trust,
I, on mere humor, loved to be unjust:
Such Confidence in my Relations had,
None without Power are impiously bad:
But here at plenteous Boards, some never give thanks,
And such you Suitors seem, who play mad pranks,
Courting his Wife, making of all a Spoil,
Who may e're long, his Friends, and Native Soil,
With joy revisit: Stay not till he come;
Ah! may some God before conduct thee Home!
When ever he returns, your long love-sutes
He Will cancel straight with blood in smart Disputes.
This said, libating first, he Gold turns up,
Returning then with thanks the well-ebb'd Cup.
But he went in, and troubled shook his Head,
Struck with his own presages, almost dead.
Not so he escaped, but trap'd in Pallas snare,
His blood distained Telemachus his Spear.
Minerva then Penelope possessed,
To show her self, in gorgeous habit dressed,
TO inflame the Suitors, and be honored more,
Both of her Son and Husband, then before.
Then smiling on Eurynome she said;
A sudden motion does my mind persuade,
That to these proud Corrivals, whom I hate,
I should appear, and show my self in state;
And to inform my Son, that he should not
Converse with them who his Destruction plot.
Then she replied; Madam, I like it well
That your Intelligence your Son you tell;
Go then, and him with their Designs acquaint,
But bath first, and your Cheeks a little paint,
Appear not blemished, those small Trenches fill,
Worn by perpetual tears, and weeping still;
For such a Son thou should the Gods implore,
To see him grow in Virtue more and more.
When thus to her the Queen straight made Reply;
Persuade me not to bath, my Cheeks to die,
The Gods that wounding Beauty quite destroyed,
Since he to Ilium went, I then enjoyed.
Antinoe and Hippodamia straight
Call hither, only they on us shall wait,
To go alone will Modesty invade.
Forth goes the old Matron, and her Queen obeyed.
Then Pallas drove a better Plot, and fast
A sleep Penelope too wilful cast,
Then brought her Heavenly Gifts, Love to acquire,
That all the Greeks her Beauty should admire,
That Fucus used to cleanse her Face from specks,
With which Love's Queen removed impeaching frecks,
When with the Graces she intends to dance;
Then fatter made, Her stature did advance.
To these advantages Her skin did show,
Whiter then polished Ivory, or Snow.
The Queen thus heightened, the Celestial Dame
From thence departs, and in Her servants came,
And with their noise the slumbering Queen did wake,
Then Her Cheeks drying with her hands, thus spoke;
I drousie, in a pleasant slumber fell,
Would me Diana could so sweetly kill,
That I my Lord no longer might lament,
Wasting my self with Grief, and Discontent.
Because his Peer he has not amongst them all.
This said, she straight descends into the Hall,
Two Damsels her attending: when she drew
Near to the Portal, straight the amorous Crew,
Her Beauty spying through a slender It was the Custom of Greece, as now in
Spain, that both Wives and Virgins should have their faces covered. Whence
Libanius. mentioning the destruction of Troy, (...). The head of the Woman was
without a Veil, for the destruction of her Country had taken away the
consideration of Modesty. And this appears out of a Comedy of Xenarchus's. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
So on the contrary, it was the fashion for Courtizans to walk open faced, as
may be seen in Callimachus's hymn on Venus; and in the Comedy forementioned.
Whence the Athenians, who punished adultery with death; made this caveat; that
whosoever was taken with any Woman, Wife, or Virgin, who walked unveiled,
should not be counted an adulterer.
Veil,
Trembling, surpised with conquering Love, grew pale,
Wishing th'enjoyments of her happy Bed.
Then to her Son Telemachus she said;
Thy judgment fails thee, and thou want that heart;
For which, when Thou a Child, so praised were:
Now Thou art past a Boy, a Man full grown,
That whoe'r sees will say, a Heroes Son
Thou need'st must be, when they Thy Features scan.
When Thou of Him have but the outward Man,
And nothing of his Virtues know at all,
Who such Affronts endur'st in Thy own Hall;
That a poor Stranger, who in Charity
W' are bound to comfort, should thus injured be.
Who ever we receive under our Roof,
From wrongs it should protection be enough;
Thine's the Disgrace, and the example bad.
When thus her Son unto his Mother said;
I Am not offended at your high Discourse,
But yet I understand better from worse,
As well as when a Child, but cannot here,
With greatest Prudence ought distinguish clear:
Me they would ruin, Plots on Plots are laid
For my Destruction, and I have no aid.
By joint Consent young Irus, and our Guest,
This Combat had, the Stranger got the best.
Ah! that great Jove, Pallas, and Phoebus, would
We in like case your Suitors might behold,
Some in the Court, and some within the Hall,
With palsied Heads in Death's Convulsions, fall,
As Irus now in the outward Porch does sit,
Shaking his Head, as in a drunken fit:
He cannot stand, nor able to come back,
Who locomotive Faculties does lack.
They such Discourse standing together had,
When to the Queen Eurymachus thus said;
Icarius Daughter, sair Penelope,
If all our youthful Princes You should see
In this your The word in this place, (...), is a general word for Greece, as
(...) for the Grecians, which with several Epithets signifies several
partciular places, as (...) Thissaly, (...). So in this place (...)signifies
Peloponnesus, or the Morea, according to Strabo; from Jasus, son of Jo, King of
the place.
splendour, many Suitors more,
Would early wait to morrow at your Door;
Since Nature you her Masterpiece designed,
In so much beauty casing such a mind.
Then said the Queen; those parts that I enjoyed,
Features, and Virtues, deathless Gods destroyed,
With which I so much took my dearest Lord,
When he with Agamemnon went aboard.
Would he returning rule this Life of mine,
My Honor, and my Beauty more would shine,
Now Fortune's bitterer blasts has all bereft.
When he, me, and his native Country left,
Me by the right hand taking, said; My Dear,
We shall not all return from Troy I fear,
They say the Trojans Valiant be in War,
Throw Jav'lins well, and able Archers are,
On foot, or mounted, to no Nation yield,
Who in a trice will clear a bloody Field,
Nor know I if my Fate will drop me there,
Then all that is mine I leave unto thy Care:
But my dear Father, and my Mother mind,
Be in my absence, Love, to them more kind:
And when our Son shall come to Age, espouse
Then whom thou will, and leave to him thy House.
Now all has happened what my Husband said.
The Night draws near, that I the Nuptial Bed
Must venture in, although so much abhorred;
Since Jove has took away my dearest Lord.
But something grieves, that now I will unfold,
The Custom here of Suitors, was of Old,
Who some great Dame, or rich man's Child, wouldwed,
Courting to enjoy the honor of her Bed,
Fat Beevs, and Sheep, and richer Presents sent,
To feast her Friends, but not her Fortune spent.
This over-hearing, made Ulysses glad,
That thus dissembling she did them persuade
To send their Gifts, and costly Presents in.
When thus Antinous did first begin;
Icarius daughter, fair Penelope,
What ever presents we do send to thee
From us be pleased with kindness to receive,
Returns ingratful be of what we give.
But we'll no other business undertake,
Till one of us you choose, and Husband make.
All to his motion gladly condescend,
Their Heralds with rich gifts the Queen attend,
Antinous sent a Vest, joined to each fold,
A Button, which a dozen were all Gold.
Eurymachus a golden Chain, so bright
With Amber, like the Sun it cast a Light.
Eurydamas two servants, Pendants brought,
Set forth with Orient Pearl, and rarely wrought.
A Carkenet Pisanders Herald bare:
Each sent her something, beauteous, rich, and rare.
The Queen thence to her Chamber went, and they
Who waited, up with Her the Gifts convey.
In Dancing, Singing spent, and all Delight,
Till golden Day sunk, vanquished by Night,
But They went on, still varying several sports,
Three Lamps were placed to light the gloomy Courts,
Nourished with dry materials round about,
That they might clearly shine, and not go out,
Which Damsels snuft, and with fresh fuel fed:
To whom the King offering his service, sed;
You servants of your absent Lord, go in,
And there attend the Pleasure of your Queen,
In Her Apartment silver fleeces cull,
And carded, her present the purest Wool:
And I Will supply, and feed these Lamps, should they
Be merry here until the Break of Day:
All pains I conquer, make a sport of Toil.
This said, the Damsels on each other smile,
But first to him Melantho gigling said,
Dolius proud daughter, whom the Queen had bred
As her own Child, but she a Wanton proved,
At all not at her Ladies sorrows moved.
She with Eurymachus had don the Feat,
And in uncivil Terms thus on him set;
Sure thou art mad, nor sleep wilt any more
On a Smith's Forge, or Stall, or at some Door;
But prat'st amongst Young Princes boldly here,
Nor Symptom have of Modesty, nor Fear,
But full of Wine, Thou them do entertain
With trifling Talk, or stories false and vain,
Or prid'st Thou that Thou Irus did ore throw,
Another comes that will not take it so,
Shall with a Vengeance beat Thee from the Door,
And with thy own blood paint thy Bosom ore.
Then frowning he replied; The Prince shall know,
Bitch, what thou say, and Thee shall punish too:
At these his threats they much affrighted, all
From thence ran, trembling, and forsook the Hall,
Saying, they feared the Stranger true had spoke.
Then to preserve the Lamps he undertook,
Looking about, contriving in his mind,
How he might finish what he had designed,
Nor longer temper them did Pallas grant,
But that they should him suddenly affront,
That so his Choler they might more provoke.
When first to him Eurymachus thus spoke,
And smiling on his Fellows, did begin;
Hear me all you that court a Royal Queen,
And to the dictates of my Soul attend,
Some God this Man to Ulysses House must send,
His Looks majestic, his Deportment fair,
His Ey-brows thick, not clothed with scattering Hair,
Then turning from them to Ulysses spoke;
If thou will serve, Thee to my Farm I Will take,
Good shall thy Wages be, nor shall thou want,
To keep my Hedges pruned, my Trees to plant;
Sandals I shall bestow, and neatly cloth;
But those who idly live all works do loath:
Thou rather would a begging go, and put
More Victuals still in thy ungodly Gut.
Then to Eurymachus Ulysses said;
'Twixt us I would there were a Wager laid,
Or in the Spring, or in the longest Day,
Which of us with a Sith should mow most Hay;
We'll begin fasting, nor to labor yield,
But when Night calls to supper, keep the Field:
Or let us for the Plough our Cattle Yoke,
When we have both well fed our big-bound stock,
Then Thou shall see me up long Furrows tear:
Or if Jove Peace should turn to cruel War,
Then to the Battle boldly I Will advance,
With Cask, and Shield, in either hand a Lance;
Not as you say to fill my greedy Gut:
But such Affronts on me you always put.
You think, forsooth, that no man is your match,
Who has converst with none but thy own Batch.
But should Ulysses come, sooner then spied,
These Gates would seem too narrow, although wide,
To make escape, rather then be engaged.
At this Retort Eurymachus enraged,
Thus frowning, made Reply; Rascal, I shall
Thee to account for saucy Answers call,
Who with such Impudence, and at no rate,
Among Princes thus unmannerly dare prate,
And full of drink, thy self do entertain
With wondrous Raptures, and Discourses vain;
Or prid'st Thou that poor Irus down you struck?
Thus talking loud, up he a Footstool took,
Ulysses to Amphinomus Knee did duck,
Fearing Eurymachus: the thrown Tripos struck
A Skincker on the Hand, down on the Ground
The Goblet drops, the bruised Brims resound:
He on his back lay roaring, with the Fall,
Which made a great disturbance in the Hall.
When one of them thus to another said;
Ah, would this wandering Rogue had perished,
E're he came here, quiet we were before,
This Devils Brat puts all in an uproar:
Fooling with him the pleasure of our Feast
We loose, nor well our savory Dishes taste.
When thus Telemachus did his mind declare;
Your full Bowls work, or you distracted are,
Or else the Devil in you this stir does keep,
Since y' are well treated, pray go home and sleep:
No man I Will force, but so much I desire.
This said, biting their Lips they all admire
Telemachus, that he so boldly spoke:
Whom thus Amphinomus did undertake,
Not any should be moved, or take dislike
At saucy words, nor should a stranger strike,
Nor any Servant of Ulysses Train,
That are appointed us to entertain.
Now let the Skincker with a full Bowl come,
And when we have libated, all walk Home,
And to the Prince his care this Stranger leave.
This said, the Suitors the advice receive.
Mulius the Goblet carries through the Hall,
Amphinomus Herald, and straight served them all,
Paying Athenaeus observes that in Homer, libations to the Gods were usual as
well after Meals as before, whom Plato follows in his (...), for he says, that
after they had supped, they made their libations to the Gods, and honored them
with their usual Hymns. The like does Xenophon: only in Epicur^^'s Banquet no
mention of offerings, or libations. Thus far Athenaeu^.
Libations to the Powers Divine,
They troul the goblet full with richest Wine,
Thus after flowing Bowls, and plenteous fare,
To rest, they to their several Homes repair.
HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE NINETEENTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses and his Son convey forth all
The Arms and Spears that were about the Hall.
The Queen descends, Her Husband entertains,
Not knows him: He a woeful Story fains.
Euryclea bathes his Feet: His Ancient Maid,
Knows her Old Master by a Scar He had.
BUT still within the Hall Ulysses sat,
Plotting with Pallas the proud Su^ors Fate:
Who thus spoke to his Son; It will behove,
That all these Arms we from the Hall remove,
And carry in; And if why so they ask,
That we the better may our business mask,
Tell Them the are taken down, because the Dust,
And Smoke, their brightness with a sulein rust
Has much impeached, not like the same they were
Ulysses had, sailing for Troy, left there:
Or say a Revelation from the Gods
You had, if they by chance should fall at Ods,
With Wine distempered, and turn Nuptial Rites
To bloody Banquets, He counsels to have the Arms removed, least the very sight
of them should tempt the Suitors to a quarrel, as the sight of a Woman a Man
unto Lust. In omnire (says Vlpius) and ad om^em rem multum valent oculi. In,
and to all things the Eyes are of great prevalency.
itch of steel invites.
Telemachus these his Commands obeyed,
For Euryclea calling next, thus said;
In their Apartments, Nurse, the Women shut,
Till the King's arms I in my Closet put:
Soiled the are with smoke, which I a careless Boy,
Left hanging here, e're since he went to Troy.
When Euryclea thus to him begun;
Ah! would thou had that prudence of a Son,
Who in his Fathers absence being the Heir,
Should of all Houshould-businesses take care.
But when I Am gone, who, lights you out and in,
When not a Female-waiter must be seen?
Telemachus then said; This Stranger shall,
I Will have no idle Persons haunt my Hall:
Whoe'r eats here shall work, be what he may.
His Orders she did punctually obey,
And first, to shut the Gates she had a care,
Whilst in, Ulysses and his Offspring bare
Helmets, and Shields, and Lances, whom before
Pallas in gold a blazing Taper bore.
Telemachus then to his Father said;
Prodigious beams, oh, Sir! my Eyes invade:
The Walls, the Seats, the Beams, and Pillars shine,
As if they were a fire, some Power Divine
Has left those Seats, where they in Heaven reside.
When to his Son Ulysses thus replied;
Be not inquisitive, nor more enquire,
This often do they who plant Olympus spire.
Go thou and sleep, but here I shall remain,
That I thy Mother, and her Female Train,
May questions ask; she grievs and nothing knows.
This said, Telemachus went to his Repose,
Where he in Morpheus golden Fetters lay,
And soundly slept until the blessed Day:
But in the Hall the King with Pallas staid,
To finish up the Plot which they had laid.
When the fair Queen down from her Chamber came,
Like bright (b) Diana or the He compares her to Venus for the beauty of her
Face, to Diana for the proportions and comeliness of her Body: for in that was
her excellence: Odyss. 6. (...)(Dianae) (...)
(...)
(...)
Whom Virgil follows Aeneid the first.
Qualis in Eurotae ripis, ant per juga Cynthi,
Exercet Diana choros, quam mill secuta
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades, illa pharetram
Fert humero, gradiensque D^as supereminet omnes.
As on Eurotas banks, or Cynthus top,
Diana Dances leads; a beauteous Troop
Of Mountain-Nymphs attend on every side,
Her golden Quiver at her shoulder tied,
Walking, she all the Goddesses exceeds.

Cyprian Dame,
Against the Fire her Chair of state they placed,
Which Ismarus with Gold, and Ivory graced,
And straight a Footstool for her they brought in,
Which soon they covered with a dapled Skin;
There sat the fair Penelope in state,
And all her Damsels round about her wait.
A Table spreading they with Manchet store,
And Cups, in which proud Suitors drank before:
This a Fire kindles, That lays on more Wood,
Which in a Pilemight light, and warm the blood:
When thus Melantho at Ulysses flew;
Stay'st Thou still here to see what Women do,
And us thus in our Privacies molest?
Sirrah, be gone, and quickly too, y' are best,
Or we with Firebrarnds shall your Pasport seal:
Then thus Ulysses frowning, on her fell;
Why do Thou me so spightfully thus taunt,
Minx, is it because I better Garments want?
I poor, crave Alms of those that best can spare,
And many such poor Wanderers there are:
I once had Riches, and a fair Abode,
A part of which, often I on those bestowed
That wanted; Many Servants I employed,
What styles men Rich, and Happy, I enjoyed:
But Jove was pleased my state to ruin quite,
Therefore take heed to exercise such spite,
And make of others Poverty a sport,
Who brave now amongst the Maids of Honor art.
You may be out that now in Favor are,
The King may come, of whom we not despair,
But should he not, and if no hope we had,
He has a Son, who, by Apollos aid,
Will suffer no such Giglets in his Court,
To make of woeful Pilgrims thus a sport.
Penelope observing what they said,
Thus in rough Language rattl'd up her Maid;
Audacious Drab, how in my Presence dare,
Thou speak such words; nor a poor stranger spar'st?
On your own head the Plot may fall, you lay,
Know Thou not well, did Thou not hear me say,
From him I hoped Intelligence to have
Of my dear Lord, would sorrow give me leave?
Then to Eurynome thus spoke the Queen;
Bring a Chair hither covered with a Skin,
That I what he can better tell, may hear;
For Him I Will sift, and question very near.
She straight obeys the Orders of the Queen,
Brought a high Chair, and covered with a Skin.
Ulysses there sat down, his Reverence made,
To whom Penelope thus mildly said;
Sir, first be pleased to tell me who you are,
Your Nation, Town, and Parentage declare.
Then he replied; Not any You can blame,
The World your Honor knows, the Stars your Fame;
Like a Just King, who fearing Joves Commands,
Maintains in happy Union many Lands;
Where several Grains they in deep Furrows throw,
Whose Fruit on Trees beyond Abundance grow,
Pregnant his breed, Fishes the Sea afford,
His people both with Wealth, and Virtues stored.
Therefore, best Madam, ask not who I am,
Nor who my Parentage, nor whence I came,
Lest my own sorrows me too deeply touch,
Recounting to you, I have suffered much:
In a strange House it fits not to be sad,
And to weep always, and lament, as bad:
Some of your Maids may take offense, or you,
Saying the Maudlin, Wine with Tears can brew.
Then thus Penelope to him replied;
The Gods my Parts and Beauty then destroyed,
When first the Greeks against Troy an Army sent,
And with them my dear Lord Ulysses went.
Should He return to rule this Life of mine,
My Fame would grow, and more my beauty shine:
But now in Tears, time, and my self I spend,
And my Misfortunes follow without end;
Whoe'r Dulichium, or The name of the Island Cephallenia, (in the Italian
Charts now called Zapolania) from the chief City thereof.
Same sway,
Woody Zacynthus, or rough Ithaca,
Court me and vex my House, that no regard
I Strangers give, nor who attend, reward,
Nor means Petitioners to answer find,
Still troubled for Ulysses in my mind.
Them, hasting Nuptials, still I did deceive;
And by some Godinspir'd, obtained leave,
E're any of the Suitors I espouse,
A curious Web to finish in my House.
My Princely Suitors, thus to them I said;
Since you suppose my dearest Lord is dead,
Delay our Marriage till that we have don
Laertes Herse-cloath which I late begun,
Lest I incur some Grecian Ladies Hate,
Without, to interr one of so great Estate.
Thus I the hauty Suitors did persuade,
By Night unrav'ling what by Day I made.
Three years I mocked their Hopes, and held them on;
But when the fourth with finished months begun,
My careless Women let them in, they chide,
So I must finish what I could not hide.
Now no means left dire Nuptials to avoid,
No Counsel, neither Friend to be employed.
My Parents, they, forsooth, still put me on,
And wasted state of my displeased Son
Now grown a Man, fitting to rule his House,
Whose Cause I hope Jove will himself espouse.
But pray Sir, tell me who you are, and Stock?
Y' are not descended from an Oak, or Rock.
Then thus Ulysses civilly replies,
O Thou the Spouse of Laertiades,
No more me of my Stock, and Parents ask,
Though you on me impose so hard a Task,
To reckon up those sorrows fell so thick,
They like my Tears would pose Arithmetic:
I shall declare who have so long been hurled,
Bandied in sufferings round about the World,
Crete a fair Isle, guirt with the Ocean round,
Well planted, and with What here is ninety, in his Iliads is a hundred, (...)
(...), etc.
Phaestians and Rhytians, and who in Crete,
Did in a hundred famous Cities dwell.
Idomeneus, who did much ex^^l
In feats of War, and bold Me^iones,
In forty Vessels brought through briny Seas
Which dissonancy the ancient Writers have several ways attempted to
reconcile. Some say the number of the Cities were a hundred in the time of the
Trojan War, but that Leucas King of the Island demolished ten, for terror to
the remainder. But Ephorus, an ancient Historian, says that ten Cities were
built by the Dorians, whom Althamenes planted there after the Trojan War; to
whom Strabo assenteth. Others think that the number hundred is used
indefinitely for a great many, as in the Lemma of Rome, in an ancient Coin (...)
Ninety Cities crowned,
Greeks, That is Natives of Crete, such as came not from other Countries to
settle there.
Eteocrets, and Cydones there commix'd
The There is great diversity of opinion among the ancients in the explication
of this Epithet. Andron, one of the antientest of the Greek Historians, says
that Doris, from whence this Colony came, consisted of three Cities, and
therefore the Dorians are called by Homer (...): which certainly is the meaning
of the Poet, though Strabo admits it not: because, says he, Doris consisted
not of three but four Cities: but both Thycydides and Diodorus Siculus agree
with Andron the later in his eleventh book, (...). After a few days the
Phocians waged War against the Dorians; descended from the Lacedaemonians, who
inhabit three Cities, Cytinium, Boeum and Erineum, lying under the Mountain
Parnassus. After the same manner does the latter enumerate them in his first
book.
triple Dorians, and Pelasgians fixed,
Gnossos the greatest City of that Land,
Where Minos nine years Joves great Favorite reigned,
He bold Deucalion, and Deucalion me,
And King Idomeneus got, but He
In the Armado that the Grecians sent
Against the Trojans, with Atrides went,
Idomeneus Younger Brother am,
I, whom you see thus poor, Aethon my Name:
There I Ulysses saw, and Him did treat,
He forced by adverse Winds, put in for Crete,
Sailing for Troy, bruised by rough A Promontory of Pelopounesus lying
South-east, not far distant from Crete, where Navigation was so dangerous that
it became a Proverb, (...). Strabo also notes, that the Italian and Asian
Merchants chose rather to carry their goods by land over the Isthmot at
Corinth, then trust them to those Seas.
Malean Waves,
He in A station for Ships belonging to Minos King of Crete, according to
Strabo: others say, it is a River of that Island. Eustathius.
Amnissus near Lucinas Caves
Anchored, and hardly escaped with Tempests tired,
And for Idomeneus straight inquired;
He said he knew him well, did much esteem.
Ten days on this account I treated him
With whatsoever my Palace could afford:
The eleventh, He with his Followers went Aboard,
Whom I with Corn, and Wine, and Beef supplied.
There in the Bay twelve days Wind-bound they ride,
So loud rough Boreas blew, they could not stand,
Neither to Sea, nor yet recover Land,
Kept by displeasure of some angry God,
The thirteenth day, calm, they forsake the Road.
Thus like the Truth, he fains a handsome Tale,
At which she faints, and weeps, grows wan and pale,
Melting like Snow upon the lofty Hills,
Which milder Wind sends down in petty Rills,
Whose mustered Waves, Rivers to Oceans swell;
So from her Cheeks a briny Deluge fell,
For her Lord weeping; fitting by her side,
And pitying her he equal sorrow vy'd;
But kept his bright Eyes dry, like horn, or Steel,
Though he within did like Compassion feel.
When she had wept enough, and dried her Eyes,
Blubbered with briny tears, she thus replies;
Pray Sir, be pleased I may some questions ask,
Which called to mind, will be an easy Task.
You in your House, you say, my Lord did Feast:
What Habit had he on, what fashioned Vest?
Such things I long to know: what kind of Man,
And who those were that him attended on?
Then he replied; Madam, it is hard to tell
These Niceties, and to remember well,
Now twenty years being past, since Crete he left;
But I, well as I can, shall make a shift.
Ulysses then had on a purple Vest,
With Loops and golden Buttons neatly dressed;
Before he had within a It appears from hence that the art of working all sorts
of Animals to the life in Vests, Hangings, and the like, was very ancient among
the Grecians; which surely they must have learned either from the Sidonians, or
Egyptians, as they from the Persians or Indians: for that sort of work was most
usual in those Countries. Aristophanes in Ranis, (...)
(...)
Mine not like yours prodigious Monsters be,
Such as are wrought in Median Tapestry.
The like we find in Sidonius, Peregrina det supellex
Cteliphontis ac Niphatis
Juga^ texta belluasque
Rapidas vacant panno,
Acuit quibus furorem
Been ficta plaga cocco, etc.
From Ctesiphon straight get enough,
And Niphates fair houshold-fluff,
Wrought with Hills, and Wild-beasts, which
The empty prospect may enrich;
Who, by well feigned wounds enraged,
Seem more desperately engaged:
From Javelin fixed in their sides,
Blood in bloodless Rivers glides;
Where the Parthian with such arc
Ore his shoulder throws his Dart;
His Horse now charging, then retreats,
And flying, so his Foe defeats.

Landscape drawn,
A Hound, who greedy, seized a trembling Faun.
The curious work Spectators all admire,
The Dog and Hind both wrought in golden wire:
He seemed to hold fast by the Throat his Prey,
The other panting, strove to get away.
What he wore under showed so fine and thin,
As a dry Onyons perspicable Skin,
So soft, it like the Sun shot golden Beams,
Admired much by our most skilful Dames.
But, Madam, pray this Caution take before,
I cannot say that here such Clothes he wore,
Or that some Friend, or Stranger, did present
The wondrous Habit, when to Sea he went:
For many did Ulysses much esteem,
Since few of all the Greeks resembled him.
I Him presented with a curious Sword,
And purple Vest, and sent them both aboard.
The Herald that Ulysses Ushered,
Was somewhat older, more his shoulders spread,
More swarthy his Complexion, curled his Hair.
More of Ulysses honored then all there
That followed him, his Parts kept up his Fame,
And as I take it Eurybates his Name.
When this exact Description she had heard,
A-fresh she weeping, thus Her self declared;
You in sad plight were, when you did attend
For Alms here, but be now my honored Friend.
That Vest I him presented, which thou say,
He then had on, with golden Buttons graced.
But him alas I shall behold no more,
Nor he e're see his House, and Native Shore;
Who went to Troy, enforced by cruel Fate,
That cursed Town, whose very Name I hate.
To her, Ulysses comforting, replies;
Thou the fair Spouse of Laertiades,
Preserve thy Beauty, nor thy bright Eyes blind
With blubbering Tears, I am not of your mind,
But any would her former Lord deplore,
Whom young she married, t'whom she Children bore:
But you much more, for your dear Husband, may
Lament, for he was like a God, they say.
But cease from Grief a while, and list to me,
I am plain Tell-Troth, and shall be as free,
Me an assured Information gives,
Ulysses now hard by the Thesprots lives,
Amongst wealthy People, ready Home to sail
With store of Wealth, and Goods of great avail;
But all his Friends, and his stout ship were lost,
Swallowed in Waves, near the That is, the Coasts of Sicily', so called from
its three Promontories, Pelorus, Pachinum, and Lilybeum.
Trinacrian Coast.
For angry Jove and Sol them in the sound,
For slaughtering of his sacred Cattle, drowned,
He on his Keel reached the Pheacian Shore,
Where him they all did like a God adore:
Rich Gifts they gave him, would have sent him home
In safety, who before this might have come;
But what seems profitable t'him, seems fit,
By Traveling a great Estate to get:
None knows more then Ulysses, now alive,
Nor will with him in useful Science strive.
This Phidon, Thesprots King, to me declared;
He swore his Ship was rigged, his men prepared,
That soon would set him on his Native shore:
But me he sent in a stout ship before,
Bound for Dulichium: and there your Lord
Showed me a mass of Riches, such a Hoard,
Which would ten ages his whole charge defray,
Which safe then in that Kings Exchequer lay.
He to the sacred Oak in Dodons Grove
Went to consult the Oracles of Jove,
Whether he should to his desired Home,
Private, or like himself, in Public come.
So he is in safety, and will soon be here,
Which, if you make a question of, I Will swear
By Jove, the best, and greatest of the Gods,
E're long he shall behold his own Aboads,
Where I a stranger find your Charity:
What I averr, effected straight shall be.
Ulysses here shall land within a Year,
Nay, in a Month, or little more, be here.
Then straight Penelope this Answer made;
Ah! would thou could make good what thou have, said,
With friendship I, and bounty would my part
So act, that all should say thou happy art:
But as my mind misgives, even so I fear,
I never shall behold Ulysses here,
Nor thou get Home; these Rulers fit not thee,
Not like my Lord, if any such there be,
That would each Stranger courteously receive,
And hardly to depart would grant him leave:
When he had bathed, he would show him to his Bed,
Cause Rugs, and softer Blankets ore him spread,
That warm, He might repose till the approach
Of bright Aurora in her golden Coach;
And in the Morning washed, and would anoint,
And him to sit with his own Son appoint.
Him whosoe'r did use with Disrespect,
Be what he would, He sure was to be checked.
How could you know I other Dames excel
In ord'ring House-affairs, in ruling well,
If meanly clothed with them thou should sit?
Man's life is short, and if not, should be sweet.
But those who cruel after Rapine thirst,
They live to hear themselves by all men cursed,
And after Death have Maledictions store:
But those who charitable help the poor,
Strangers shall through the World their Fame resound,
And be for Liberality renowned.
Then thus Ulysses to his Queen replies;
O thou the spouse of Laertiades,
I warmer Rugs, and Blankets thought unfit,
Since I set sail from snow-crown'd Hills of Crete,
Brushing with plyant Oars the briny wave,
I like such Lodgings as I used to have:
Many long Nights in Cottages I lay,
Expecting Comforts of the blessed Day;
I cleansing, nor refreshing Baths think fit,
Nor any of your Maids should touch my Feet,
Unless one Old, who woes like mine has felt,
And Fortune with her as unkindly dealt:
That she should wash my Feet; I could abide.
Then to Ulysses thus the Queen replied;
You have, dear Sir, so well your self expressed,
That I never entertained a worthier Guest,
That better spoke, or more discretion had;
I have a Prudent, and an Ancient Maid,
Which at his Birth my poor Ulysses first
From's Mother took, and diligently nursed.
Go, Euryclea, and the Pilgrim bath,
Who Feet, and Hands, so like my Husband has,
And may with him contemporary be,
They soon look Old who suffer misery.
This said, the Old Nurse, whilst Tears in rivulets ran,
Which she concealed, this woeful speech began;
Oh my dear Son! oh cruel Jove that do
Declare thy self against pious men and just;
For none so often as he the brawny Thighs
Of Beevs, and Goats, to thee did sacrifice,
Imploring that his This was the only end of all the Devotions, Victims, and
Offerings to the Gods among the ancients, the happiness of this present life;
the particulars whereof are set down by Juvenal in his tenth Satyr, and Persius
in his second. Da spatium vitae, multos da, Jupiter, annos,
Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris-
Prima fere vota, and cunctis notissima templis
Divitiae ut crescant, ut opes, ut maxima toto
Nostra sit aroa foro --
Me many years, O Jove, and longlife grant,
Marriage we pray, nor Children let us want:
Our first request, and in most Temples known,
We may grow wealthy, and full Coffers own.
So Persius,
-- O si
Ebullit patrui praeclarum funus, and O si
Sub rastro crepet argenti mihi seria detro
Hercule, pupillumve utinam quem proximus haeres
Impello, expungam: namque est scabiosus and acri
Bile tumet, Nerio jam tertiae ducitur uxor.
Oh that I could my Uncle's Funeral see,
Or silver-pot find, Hercules, by thee;
Or that Brat bury to whom I Heir am next,
That scabby Elf, with itchy Choler vexed.
Netrius has his third Wife now interred.

Glass might longer run,
That he grown Old, might breed his hopeful Son,
But now there is little hope of his Return:
So such proud Giglets made of him a scorn,
When to their House he did for Alms resort,
As now these Minxes make of thee a sport.
Who to avoid these scoffs, and grosser Wit,
Not suffered them, but me, to wash your Feet,
Which me the Queen commanding, I obey,
For your own sake, as for Penelope,
Since something I amongst troubled motions call
To mind, I know not what, but out it shall:
Here many woeful Travelers have been,
But none so like Ulysses have I seen:
Such a shaped Body, Voice, and Feet he had.
When thus Ulysses to the Old Woman said;
Madam, they say, who ever saw us two;
W' are strangly like, so fancy just as you.
This said, the Old Woman straight did Water heat,
He near the Hearth, turned from the light his Feet;
For suddenly it came into his mind,
That she the scar above his Knee might find.
His doubts proved true, she spied it, long before
Made on Parnassus by a salvage Boar,
When he to Autolychus, his Grand-sire, came,
Who bore for Cheats, and slight of Hand the Name,
Hermes his Patron gave Him special Gifts,
That he out-did the World at cunning Shifts.
Because so often he the brawny Thighs
Of Lambs and Goats to him did sacrifice.
Coming to Ithaca, his Daughter there
He found delivered of a hopeful Heir.
Euryclea set the Babe upon her Knee,
Noble Autolycus, The seventh or tenth day after the birth of a Child was the
Feast of Lustration or Expiation, when, all the Kindred being invited to a
Banquet, the Name was imposed. The Ceremonies used at this solemnity are partly
expressed by Persius, in his second Satyr, Ecce avia, aut metuens Divum
matertera, cunis
Exemit puerum, frontemque atque uda labella
Infami digito and lustralibus ante salivis
Expiat, urentes oculos inhibere perim.
Tunc manibus quatis, and spem macram supplice voto
Nunc Licini in Campos, etc.
The Grandmother, or Aunt, the Child up takes,
On's Lips and Brow an Expiation makes
With Spittle on her middle finger, which
Averts the bane of ill eyes which bewitch:
Then dandling in her Arms prays for its health,
Begs him Licinius Lands, and Crassus Wealth.
May Kings and Queens wish him the adopted Son:
May him all Virgins love that look upon.
And whatsoever he treads on be a Rose.
but their chief Superstition was in the choice of a Name, which they looked
upon as an omen of their future Felicity.
name the Child, said she,
Hinting that he is of thy renowned Race:
When thus Autolycus to the Parents says;
Dear Son and Daughter, I shall give the Name:
Who hither, hated by so many, came,
Ulysses call him, and when fit to come,
Send Him to me, and my Relations, Home.
Where I shall many Gifts the Youth present,
Then send him back to you with all Content.
He went, expecting Gifts of great esteem,
Autolycus and his Son's receiving Him
With greatest Kindness that can be expressed,
But more his Grandmother then all the rest,
Old Amphithea him in strict embrace,
His fair Eyes kissed, his Head, his Brows, and Face.
Autolycus his Sons then whispering, bid
A Feast prepare, which with all speed they did:
And first an Ox of five years old they got,
Whom straight they flea, and then in quarters cut:
Then the divided joints on Spits they fixed.
And roasted well, they drew, and served up next.
Thus sat they feasting till the Sun did set,
Naught wanting that could make a noble Treat:
Grown late, each went unto his own Repose.
But when the rosie-finger'd Morn arose,
Autolycus Sons straight forth a Hunting go,
Their Dogs with them, and Young Ulysses too.
And soon wood-cloath'd Parnassus crown they scale,
There found a Flat, cooled with a briezing gale,
When the Sun, rising from the gentle Main,
Tinsel'd the Meads, and tip'd the blushing Grain,
They in the bottom were, before them went
Their well-nos'd Dogs, who followed close the scent.
Autolycus sons with young Ulysses were,
In their strong Hand each brandishing a Spear.
Here in a thicket lay a huge Boar, where
No winds could penetrat, nor piercing air,
Nor could the Sun shoot through one radiant Beam,
Nor Showers that fall in Deluges extreme.
So built it was and roof'd all ore with Leaves:
The noise of Dogs, and Hunters he receives,
As they drew night, and scorning to retire,
Draws forth all brissled, and his Eyes like fire.
Ulysses first against him did advance,
And stoutly charged the Monster with his Lance:
But the Boar gaunch'd Him with a cruel Gash
Above the Knee, and tore away the Flesh,
But missed the Bone, whilst him Ulysses paid,
And his sharp point ran through his Shoulder blade:
Down falls the Beast extended on the Ground.
Autolycus Sons straight dressed Ulysses Wound,
And binding with a Pliny in his Natural History spends a whole Chapter in
enquiry whether Charms are available in Physic or no: whose words, as far as
they shall tend to our purpose, we think fit to transcribe. Dixit Homerus
profluvium sanguinis vulnerato femine Vlixem inhibuisse Carmine; Theophrastus
ischiadicos sanari, etc. Homer has written that Ulysses being wounded in the
thigh staunched the blood with a Charm: and Theophrastus testifies that there
be proper spells to cure the Sciatica. Cato has left in writing, that there is
a special Charm for dislocations, whereby any bone put out of joint may be set
again. Attalus avoucheth for a certainty, that if a man chance to epsy a
Scorpion, and do no more but say this one word DVO ( that is, two) the Serpent
will be still and quiet, and never sho^t forth his Sting.
Charm, the bleeding stayed,
Thence to their Fathers Palace have they made.
Autolycus and his Sons there curing Him,
Dismissed with many Gifts of great esteem:
And he to Ithaca well pleased did come,
His Parents glad to see Him safe at Home,
Him many questions asked, and how he had
Received that Scar, them this account he made;
How on A Mountain in Achaia, called by the later Greeks corruptly (...).
Parnassus him a Boar had gaunch'd,
And how the blood his Cosen-Germans staunch'd,
Wiping his legs. This the Old Woman found,
And letting fall, the Chargers sides resound,
Down drops she backward, and the liquor sheds,
Sorrow and Joy at once her Breast invades,
Her Eyes brimful of Tears, she could not speak,
At last, from troubled thoughts thus forth did break;
Thou art Ulysses sure, that Prince I Nursed,
And though I bath my King, knew not at first.
This said, she turned to the Queen, and did prepare
To tell her that her dearest Lord was there:
But her the Queen not in this posture spies,
Pallas on other Objects cast her Eyes:
Whilst on her Throat her hand Ulysses laid,
And thus, her drawing nearer to him, said;
Dear Nurse, why will you ruin me, who bred
Me with such care, and at your Nipple fed?
Who through a World of Miseries and Toil,
The twentieth year, have reached my Native soil:
But what Thou know, what God puts in thy Heart,
There lock up, nor to any one impart:
For this I Will promise, and it shall be don,
If the proud Suitors are by me ore-thrown,
Although my Nurse, thy Life I shall not spare,
But thou shall like these flouting Giglets fare.
Then Euryclea thus her self declared;
How escaped these words thy Teeth, that Ivory guard?
You know my Constancy and Courage well,
My Bosom firm as Rock, my Heart as Steel,
But I Will inform what is fit for you to know,
If Jove so please the Suitors you ore-throw:
I Will point out all those Harlots in your Court,
That you dishonor, making Crimes their sport.
Then he replied; Nurse, who they are never tell,
That pains I Will spare thee, them I know too well,
And all their Characters; Pray silent be,
And the whole business leave to Fate and Me.
This said, a Laver to the Hall she bore,
For all the Liquor she had spilt before.
When with pure Oil she suppled had his Feet,
Ulysses to the Fire then drew his Seat,
And ore the Cicatrice his Garment spread:
When thus Penelope to her Husband said;
I here in talk, Sir, longer you would keep,
But now the time draws nigh indulging sleep,
Which should to wasting Sorrow give relief,
But my sad Fortune aggravates fresh Grief.
All day my flowing Tears scarce find an ebb,
Viewing my Servants how they ply their Web.
But when Night comes, and all the House at rest,
A thousand Sorrows sting my troubled Breast.
As when Tereus King of Thrace, infected with the vice of his Country, burns
with love of Philomela (daughter of Pandarus, according to Homer, by others
called Pandion) his Wifes Sister, and in the heat of his Lust ravished her.
Which his Wife understanding, studies a strange revenge, murders her own son
Itylus, or Itys, and feasts her Husband with his flesh: Which being made known
to him, he pursues the two Sisters, who are feigned to have! been changed into
Birds, for their speedy flight unto Athens, by which they escaped the revenge
of Tereus; Philomela into a Nightingal, and Progne into a Swallow: in that no
Nightingals are seen in Thrace, as hating the Country of Tereus; nor Swallow
ever builds there, as is observed by Pausanias. The Nightingal chanting in the
solitary Woods, is feigned to bemoan the death of her son Itylus, by which the
Poets generally express extreme grief, and lamentation. The wholestory is
elegantly described by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, but it is too large to be here
transcribed.
Pandareus Daughter in the Spring,
Perched amongst thick branches, doleful notes does sing,
Her Son lamenting Itylus in vain,
This story is otherwise related here then amongst the late Greek and Roman
Writers, thus; Pandarus had three daughters, Merope, Cleothera, and Aedon;
Aedon was married to Zethus, by whom she had Itylus; whom she slew out of a
mistake, intending to have murdered Amaleus, son of Amphion, her Husbands
Brother.
Zethus fair Offspring, in her fury flain.
So I with wandering thoughts perplexed am,
Should I my Husbands Bed, and my own Fame,
My Son's Estate, Servants, and House, preserve;
Or wed some Prince, who best might me deserve,
And with a wealthy Joynter me endow.
My Son whilst under age would not allow
That I should wed, and leave him here alone;
But now a man, he prays me to be gone:
And much incensed, rather desires my Room,
Because my Suitors his Estate consume.
Sir, you have skill in Dreams, I Will mine repeat,
I twenty Geese picking up Corns of Wheat,
With pleasure looked upon, when from the Hill
A mighty Eagle with a dreadful bill
Upon them falling, the whole Flock there slew,
Breaking their Necks, but he thence mounting, flew.
I in my sleep much grieved, did weeping lie,
And many Women more as well as I,
Because the Eagle had so many slain:
But he sat perching on the House again,
And with a humane Voice to me thus said;
Icarius daughter, be not so dismayed,
This not a Dream, no fleeting Fancy this,
But certain Truth: The Suitors are the Geese,
And I that then appeared to thee a Bird,
Am now arrived, Ulysses thy dear Lord,
On all thy Suitors just Revenge to take.
This said, the wondrous Dream did me forsake;
But looking out my Cacklers I did see,
Feeding on Corn, where they were wont to be.
Then he replied; Madam, there is no need
To clear your Dream, himself Ulysses did;
Who said, your Suitors by his hand should fall,
Nor one escape a woeful Funeral.
Then she replied; Dreams hard are to explain,
All prove not true, but idle some, and vain:
This aenigma of the two Gates of Dreams is several ways resolved by the
Interpreters. Porphyry says that the Soul being free from the employments of
the Body in time of sleep, is busied about other Objects, which yet it views
not perfectly and clearly, but as it were through a Veil drawn before it by
that dark Nature to which it is united: which when it admits the sight of the
Soul into the truth of the Objects, it is said to be of Horn, whose substance
is of that nature that being attenuated it is pervious to the sight; but when
it hinders and repels it, it is said to be of Ivory, which is of so solid and
compact a body, that after most accurate attenuation it remains impenetrable to
the Eye. Others by the horny Gate understand the Eyes, whose first tunicle is
said to be (...) like Horn; by the Ivory Gate, the Teeth; signifying that what
we speak may be falfe; but what we see, is infallibly true. This expression of
our Poets, Virgil follows in the sixth of his Aeneids, Sunt geminae somni
portae; quarum altera fertur
Cornea; qua veris facilis datur exitus Vmbris;
Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephanto,
Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia Manes.
There are two Gates of sleep; One made of Horn,
Through which, true Visions to the Skies are born;
The other Ivory, polished purely bright,
Whence false Dreams sally to ethereal light.
And Ausonius in his Ephemeris, Divinum per hibent vatem sub frondibus Vlmi
Vana ignavorum simulacra locasse soporum,
Et geminas numero portas: quae fornice eburno
Semper fallaces glomerat super era formas,
Altera quae veros emittit cornea visus.
The Poet placed dull Dreams (as fame receives)
And fancies slight, under an Elms thick leaves,
Two Gates close by; the one of Ivory, where
Deceitful forms pass to ethereal air;
The other Horn; from whence true Dreams go forth.

Two Gates there are of Sleep, One made of Horn;
The other polished Ivory does adorn,
From whence vain words their flattering hopes pursue,
But Visions issuing through the Horn prove true;
So this sad Dream I hope may prosperous be,
And joyful prove both to my Son, and me.
But with one secret more Thee I Will entrust;
When that unhappy Day shall come, which must
Me separate from my Ulysses Court,
I Will for my self provide a little sport;
In order I Will set Axes in my Hall,
Each of them has their Annulets, twelve in all,
With which at distance he a shaft could shoot;
Now to this Trial I Will the Suitors put:
And he that best my Husbands Bow can bend,
And through a dozen Rings his arrow send,
Him I will marry, and forsake this House
Furnished so well, although my former Spouse
In Dreams will haunt me. Then the King reply's;
Thou the dear Spouse of Laertiades,
Put off this Trial, since the time draws near,
Madam, that your Ulysses will appear;
Lest practicing, they by experience know,
As well as he, to draw your Husbands Bow.
Then spoke the Queen; Here I could stay all Night,
And less in sleep, then thy discourse, delight;
Though woeful Mortals that on Earth reside,
Must Rest and Toil alternately divide.
But I Will to my Apartment now retreat,
Where I with nightly Tears my Pillow wet,
E're since Ulysses went to the Trojan War,
Whose very Name, to mention, I abhor,
There I Will repose: For you we'll Carpets spread,
Here on the Floor, or help you to a Bed.
This said, to her Chamber straight she did ascend,
Her Maids in order the fair Queen attend:
There weeping for her Lord she lay, till fast
In deep and pleasant Sleep her Pallas cast.
scene from book 20 Thomce Stanley de Hartford Arm Tabulam Cumberlon in
Comitatu hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 20.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TWENTIETH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Revengeful Cares awake Ulysses keep:
He hears his Queen in her own Chamber weep.
Pallas appears, advising Him to rest.
Ominous Thunder prologues a sad Feast.
Theoclymenus fore-tels the Suitors Fates,
For which, they Vote to turn Him out of the Gates.
BUT in the Porch the King to take Repose,
First ore himself a Bullock's rawhide throws,
Next Sheepskins that were newly slaughtered, got:
Eurynome over all casts a warm Coat,
He Plots contriving, long awake did lie,
Until the Suitors Mistresses came by,
Laughing, and talking of their Young Amors
He much concerned at these so impudent --
Bethought himself should he do well or ill,
Such Harlots in their high debauch to kill,
Or let them yet be prostituted Drabs.
His Heart did seem to bark, it fetched such Throbs,
Like a fierce Spannel suckling of her Whelps,
A Stranger spying, rages, snarls, and yelps,
Ready to seize; such thoughts his troubled Breast
With tumu^t filled, when thus himselfh' expressed;
Be patient, Thou have worser things endured,
By Polyphemus, in his Cave secured,
When six of thy Associats he devoured;
Yet his huge strength by Prudence I ore-pow'r'd,
And those expecting the like death, did save,
And with my self freed from the Monsters Cave.
The swelling passions of his Mind, this said,
He strove to settle, they his Will obeyed:
But he still waking lies, and tossed, and rowls,
As one a Pudding broils upon the Coals,
Well stuffed with fat, and blood, left it should burn,
Never lets it rest: So did he restless turn,
Contriving how the Suitors to destroy.
Pallas descending then from seats of Joy,
Like a fair Lady, drawing near him, spoke;
Why troubled thus keep'st thou thy self awake?
This is thy House; thy Wife, and Son, are here;
A Son, that should by thee be prized dear.
Ulysses then replied; Celestial Maid,
Thou to the purpose have divinely said:
But how alone I should (that makes me watch)
So many proud Corrivals over-match,
Who always are, as in a body, joined.
Besides, this, more then that, distracts my mind,
How to come off my self, if Jove decree,
That singly I of all revenged be.
Then Pallas said; Should any mortal give
Thee Counsel, Him Thou rather would believe,
Though His advice were impotent and lame,
Then me, although I thy Protectress am.
But what I tell thee now, I shall make good;
If fifty drawn up Squadrons round thee stood,
Thou should disperse them with thy sword and shield,
And drive their Sheep and Cattle from the Field.
Wave troubled thoughts, and take some small Repose,
Often from much wanting high distempers grows.
This said, she closed his eyes, which done, retires
To seats of bliss, that Crown Olympic Spires.
Mean while his Queen vexed with like Cares, and Fears
Sitting, her soft bed drowns with briny Tears.
When she had wept till she could weep no more,
Thus she the Chaste Penelope does properly invocate Diana here, because she was
reputed to be the author of sudden death to Women, as Apollo to men; as we
have already observed. The imprecation of the Danaides, rather then to marry
with the sons of Pelasgus their Cousin-Germans, is not unlike to this, in
Aeschylus. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), etc.
Ah let me die noos'd in a fatal Chord,
Ere a loathed Husband I receive as Lord.
First let the Devil rule, let him me bear
Into the middle region of the Air;
Or else a sullein Rock all over hide,
Before against my Will I am a Bride.
Or may I food for Dogs and Vulturs be,
From such dire mischiefs death will set me free.
Come Death, come cruel Death, conclude my Fate,
Rather then Nuptials with the Man I hate.

Diana did implore;
Virgin; Jove's Daughter, grant me this Request,
To shoot thy deadly arrow through my Breast,
Or snatch me hence with a swift Heurican,
Far as the confines of the flowing Main:
There let me be amongst dismal mansions hurled,
And Seats of Darkness in the lower World,
Such be the Storm as that the Gods employed,
When the Pandarian Parents they destroyed,
And left their tender Orphans almost dead,
Fair Venus them with Chese, Wine, Honey, fed:
But Juno gave them 'bove all Women, place,
Adding to beauty a majestic Grace,
To them Diana granted other parts,
And Pallas skilful made in her own Arts,
Whilst Heaven bright Venus scaled, of Jove to know,
The great dispenser of our Weal and Woe,
With whom these beauteous Virgins should be matched
Them Harpyes in a winged Tempest snatched,
And to the infernal Hags presented straight,
That they on them, and their dire works might wait:
So may the Gods snatch me to shades of Woe,
Or chaste Diana kill me with her Bow,
That I my dear Ulysses may behold.
Ah, let the earths dark Bosom me infold,
Before that I a meaner Person wed.
What Is worse then Day and Night thus Tears to shed,
And when all else drowned in forgetful sleep,
Their Daily cares, I thus sit up and weep,
Methought this Night One to my Bed did come,
Like him that sailed from hence to Ilium:
I overjoyed, believed all to be true.
This said, from Eastern-Hills the Morning grew:
But her Ulysses heard, whilst Tears she shed,
And dreamt like her, with him she was in Bed.
Straight rising, in the Chairs the Skins he placed,
And the Ox-hide into the Portal cast,
And thus to Jove, with hands up lifted, prayed;
O Jove, who me ore Sea and Land convay'd,
Some human Voice within, ah, let me hear;
Without, another sign let strike my Ear.
Thus prayed Ulysses, and Jove heard his Prayer;
Answering in That Thunder was a testimony of prayer being heard and answered,
we find a pertinent example in Virgil, where when Old Anchises, seeing the
lambent flame upon his Grandchild Iulus's head, lifted up his hands to Heaven,
and prayed to Jove for help and direction, he was thus answered, Vix ea fatus
erat Senior, subitoque fragore
Intonuit lavum, etc.
Scarce had the grave Sire spoke, when suddenly
It thundered prosperous, etc.
So does Claudian make Thunder a token of the Divine approvement of the
election of Probus and Olybrius to their Consulships, Vt sceptrum gessere manu,
membrisque rigentes
Aptavere togas, Signum dat summus hiulca
Nube Pater, gratamque facem per. ina^e rotantes
Prospera vibrati sonuerunt omina nimbi.
As soon as robbed and sceptered, Jove aloud
His signal favor thunders from a Cloud:
Successful Lightning through heavens arches shines;
Both at the Inauguration happy signs.

Thunder from a serene Air.
The happy Omen made the King rejoice,
When at the Mill he heard a Woman's Voice.
Alternatly there twice six Damsels still,
Six taking their Repose, six plied the Mill;
Grown'd Wheat and Barley, and all kinds of Grain,
Man's marrow, which does human life sustain:
But this the weak'st, her Task yet had not done,
Who wondering at the Thunder, thus begun;
O Jove, thou King and Father of the Gods,
Thou thunder'st strangly, when there are no Clouds.
This signifies, make good thy happy sign,
And I a wretch will in my wishes join;
Let this day be to all the Day of Doom,
That feasting here Ulysses state consume;
Who me have tired with Toil, and sitting up,
To grind, and sift; Ah may they never sup.
Joves Thunder and her Vote the King ore-joy'd,
His hopes confirming, all should be destroyed.
The Damsels then began themselves to show:
Some bring in Wood, some make the Fire and blow.
Telemachus then from his Bed arose,
Puts on his Vest, and ore his Falchion throwns,
Buckles his Sandals, up his Javelin takes,
And going forth, to Euryclea speaks;
Had thou for this our Guest so small esteem,
That thou not with a Bed would furnish him?
My Mother better Lodgings would provide
For meaner Persons. Then the Old Nurse replied;
Blame not thy Mother; here the Pilgrim sat
Drinking rich Wine, eating whilst he could eat,
And when grown late, she to her Damsels said;
Go make the Pilgrim's Bed; which he forbad:
But he, as one Unfortunate and Poor,
Refused well-furnish'd Lodgings for the Floor.
He in the Porch on an Ox-hide did rest,
Covered with Skins, and I threw ore a Vest.
The Prince went forth, this said, armed with a Spear,
Two Dogs his Guard, and bold Attendants were,
Unto the Counsel; when the ancient Maid
Grave Euryclea, to the Damsels said;
Dress up the Hall with speed, and That is, persum'd Oil to be sprinkled about
the room: which Eustathius upon the place, notes to be an ancient custom from
these Verses (whose Author he names not) (...)
(...)
(...)
Open the Lodgings, make the Chambers sweet,
Then make the Beds well, and a good Fire get,
And then a bowl of pleasant Wine me fill.
And Athenaeus says of Demetrius Phalereus, Governor of Athens, that he (...)
caused perfumed oil to be sprinkled upon the ground.
perfumes get,
And purple Cushions put in every feat:
Let some the Boards with Spunges neatly cleanse,
Others the Cups, and golden Goblets wrense,
And fetch pure Water for the Rival Guests,
The Prince this day highly intends to feast.
Thus gave she order; They, the ancient Maid
Their Governess, saluting first, obeyed.
Twice ten went to the Fountain, others dressed
The stately Hall, whilst in the Suitors pressed,
Who Billets cleave; others came from the Spring.
Eumoeus in did three fat Porkers bring,
Which had at freedom plentifully fed;
Who smiling, thus then to Ulysses said;
Art thou in Favor with the Suitors more,
Or use thee scornfully as heretofore?
The King then to Eumoeus thus replied;
Would Heaven take Vengeance on them for their pride,
That with such insolence thus riot here,
Against all Conscience, Modesty, or Fear.
Melanthius came, whilst thus Ulysses spoke,
And brought fat Goats, the primest of the Flock:
Them to the Portal fast two Herders made,
Who drolling then thus to Ulysses said;
What Good Man Troublesome, art thou here yet,
Know thou not how out of these Doors to get?
Thou who so saucy art amongst Lords and Peers,
Stay'st thou until the art plucked out by the Ears?
Will naught but blows serve such a greedy Guest?
Are there no other Houses where they feast?
Ulysses thus affronted nothing said,
But kept down struggling rage, and shook his Head.
Philetius third, amongst the Swains a King,
A For the Oxen, and other of the Cattle, were fed in Epirus, the Continent
over against Ithaca, as appears from these Verses in the 14 book, (...),
(...)
(...).
The Island it self being an unfruitful and barren Country: betwixt which and
the Continent there was but a narrow passage.
Barren Heifer, and fat Kids did bring,
(The Vessel brought them ore that goes betwixt,
Carrying all Persons over who came next)
And them did near the ecchoing Portal tie,
Thus spoke, then to Eumoeus standing by;
What Stranger's this hither so lately came,
What Country, who his Parents, what his Name?
Though poor he seems, his Looks majestic are,
They often suffer Want who wander far;
And Gods do Kings often sad Examples make.
Him by the Hand then taking, thus he spoke;
Welcome grave Father, may thou Wealthy be,
Who now art pinched with Want and Misery.
O Jove, of all the Gods thou take least Care,
For woeful Mortals though thy Race they are,
And giv'st them as their Birthright Toil and Grief:
When I remind, how wanting all Relief,
Ulysses may thus wander up and down,
Without a Vest, my Cheeks salt Rivers drown;
If yet he live, but he, alas, is dead
Long since descended to the infernal shade:
Thinking of him I almost am distrought,
A Boy he me from Cephalenia brought
His Herds to wait on, now a numerous Breed;
And these forsooth must proud Corrivals feed,
Who scorn his Son, and Providence deride,
And will our absent King's Estate divide.
My Bosom prompts me something should be don,
Lest cureless Mischief light upon his Son,
To drive his Cattle amongst Strangers, where
More dangerous it can not be then here,
And from these proud Corrivals, though long since,
(Intolerable is their Pride and Insolence)
To have escaped: But still I hoped the King
Might Home return, and their Destruction bring.
Then thus Ulysses; Swain, thou prudent art,
Discovering both a Bold and Loyal Heart:
This I shall say, and what I say I Will swear,
By Jove, and by this House, in which we are,
And all the boards of Hospitality,
Ere long thou here shall King Ulysses see,
If so thou will Audits with them to clear,
In bloody reckonings paying for their Cheer.
Then he replied; Oh! Jove but make this true,
Then should thou see what I for him would do:
And so Eumaeus prayed to all the Gods,
To see Ulysses in his own Aboads.
Whilst these amongst themselves discoursed thus,
They plotted how to kill Telemachus;
But as the place and manner they discust,
An Eagle, bad the sign, a Pigeon trust.
Startled at this, Amphinomus then said;
Let your what e're Contrivance off be laid,
And for a plenteous Feast your Humors fit.
This said; they to his Counsel all submit,
And the whole Gang straight to the Hall repairs,
Laying their Mantles down on Stools, and Chairs.
Sheep, Goats, and Swine, the Heifer there they slew;
And the inwards roasted, dealt to each his due.
Their Wine well mixed, their Bowls Eumaeus fraught,
Philetius Bread in curious Baskets brought,
Melanthius diligent Skinks about to all,
Their Meat served up, they to the Dishes fall.
The Prince dire Plots contriving, then thought sit
Ulysses at a little Board should sit,
His Meat before him, in a golden Cup
Wine pouring, thus he cheers the Pilgrim up;
Drink now with Princes here, I Will thee maintain,
Against whosoe'r thy Poverty shall disdain:
Nor shall this Palace prostituted be,
My Father built it for himself and me.
To spare your Tongues and Hands I all advise,
Lest Quarrels from Disturbances arise.
All bite their Lips, and him no answer make,
The Prince admiring, who so boldly spoke.
Then said Antinous; Princes, keep your Seats,
And though he threaten, not regard his threats;
Since it is Jove's Pleasure him a while to save,
Let us till then Revenge and Answer wave.
Telemachus cared not what Antinous said,
The Heralds This was the first day of the month, or New Mood (for the ancient
Greek months were Lunar) which was a public feast day among the Grecians, and
therefore fitly contrived for this action of Vlysses's, that while the whole
City was abroad at their public Entertainments, the Suitors might find no
assistance from thence. Didymus T (...), etc. They conoeive that the New Mood
is sacred to all the Gods, for our An-cestors dedicated it to the God^, because
it was the first of the Month, attributing justly all beginnings to them;
whence they offered their First Fruits to all the Gods. Now it was proper that
that day should be consecrated to Apollo (that is, the Sun) he being the cause
of light.
through the City then convaid
A Hecatomb; People in Throngs attend,
And toward Apollo's Grove the whole Concourse bend.
When all the Meat was roasted, dish'd and mess'd,
Down sat the Princes to a plenteous Feast,
Of which Ulysses had an equal share,
The Waiters by the Prince so ordered were.
But Pallas the proud Rivals urged once more,
With Scoffs and Taunts, such as they used before,
To move the King, and his Revenge inflame.
A cross-grained Suitor, Ctesipus his Name,
Whose Father had in Same a fair House,
Trusting Paternal Wealth, he to espouse
Absent Ulysses Wife, amongst others, made
Common Address, thus to the Suitors said;
Hear me you Princes, what I shall declare;
This Stranger has with us an equal share,
Nor is it fit to question whosoe'r
Telemachus treats, or hither makes repair:
But we may add; I Will something more bestow,
That he may give a servant e're he go,
Of's Liberality to be a proof.
This said, at him he threw a Bullocks Hoof,
Snatched from the Basket; he his Head declined,
Avoids the Blow, much troubled in his mind:
The cloven-foot rebounds against the Wall.
On whom Telemachus thus did roundly fall;
Your Actions, and your Breeding, seem alike,
Or else you would not a poor Stranger strike,
It Is well he escaped, else Thou thy due desert
Should have, and this my Spear should pierce thy Heart;
Then for thy Nuptial Rites thy Father should
Have made thy Tomb, or any who so bold
Durst in my House commit a Crime so vild,
Know now I am of Age, and past a Child,
And can distinguish Good from Bad: but yet,
You may behold me here with patience fit,
Whilst you devour these Cates, my Wine drink up,
It Is hard for one with many men to cope:
Therefore I wish you would more civil be,
For Death it self seems better far to me.
Should you all thrust your Swords in me at once,
That would be easier then these high Affronts;
To strike our Guests, our Women to abuse,
As if this Palace were a Common Stews.
This through the Hall a general silence made,
When thus at last Young Agelaus said;
When words are spoke, so well with Reason sure,
Sharp Reparties avoid, and rough Dispute;
For shame, to affront a Stranger, Sirs, for bear,
Or any Servant that Attendants are:
But to Telemachus and the Queen I Will make
A motion, which may both parties take;
As long as we believed Ulysses might
Return, and here enjoy his Native right,
So long she might refuse: that he should land,
We cannot now expect, or understand,
Therefore move thou thy Mother to espouse,
Whom best she likes, then shall we leave thy House,
And thy Paternal State, thy Self to guide.
Then thus Telemachus to him replied;
By Jove and my dear Fathers wants and Woes,
Who dead, or wandering lives, I Will not oppose
My Mothers Nuptials, but use all my Power
Her to persuade, and to secure her Dowre:
But against her Will I would not her remove,
Such acts not acceptable are to Jove.
Here Pallas stirred loud laughter in the Hall,
All merry were, but knew no cause at all.
Their Meat straight bloody grew, and briny lakes
Stood in their Eyes. Theoclymenus then speaks;
Ah, Sirs, you are involved in mists, sad Shreeks
Invade my Ears, salt Tears run down your Cheeks,
The Walls with Blood besprinkled, red the Posts,
Thicker then Atoms walk infernal Ghosts
About the Porch, the entry, and the Hall,
The Sun's eclipsed, and Darkness covers all.
At these expressions they extremely laughed,
When thus Eurymachus the Stranger scoffed;
This Fellow's mad; Go lead him to the Gate,
That he may Home, because he thinks it late.
Then Theoclymenus thus to him replies;
Send none to lead me out, for I have Eyes,
And Ears, and Feet, I thank you, and each Sense,
I without leading shall depart from hence:
Because I see that your Destruction's near,
Not one shall escape just Vengeance that are here,
Not one of you who in Ulysses Court,
Make of uncivil Actions thus a sport.
This said, he went, without once taking leave,
Whom straight This is he to whom Telemachus recommended Theoclymenus when he
left his Ship, and went into the Country to his servant Eumaeus; Odyss. 15.
Pireus kindly did receive.
The proud Corrivals laugh, and look about,
And both Telemachus, and Strangers flout.
When to the Prince a haughty Youth thus spoke;
None worser choice in chosing Guests could make,
A Wanderer, One that loyters in thy Hall,
That eats and drinks, but never works at all,
An Idle person, a vain load of Earth;
The other a Prophet, and forsooth holds forth:
But I Will advise, which may advantage be,
Let them be shipped with speed for Sicily;
There for no little sum they may go off.
Thus said he, but the Prince not minds his Scoff,
But looked on's Father when with stretched out Arm,
The Suitors charging, he would give the Alarm.
But fair Penelope in her Chair of State,
In private, at convenient distance sat;
Where her Gallants she could distinctly hear,
Mixing their Bits and Cups with many a Jeer,
They had abundance, and so merry made,
But never sharper sauce their Dishes had:
A Goddess, and a Valiant Prince decreed,
They for accumulated Crimes should bleed.
scene from book 21 Edwardo Sherborne Armigero Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 2j.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TWENTY FIRST BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ulysses Bow all Love-sutes must decide:
The Queen will be the ablest Archers Bride,
But none the Bow could bend: for Lard they call:
But strive in vain, the tough Yew baffles all.
Ulysses takes the Bow, Jove from the Skies
Thunders, He shoots, and bears from all the Prize.
BUT Pallas here carrying on Plots designed,
Then puts it in Icarius Daughters mind
To fetch the Suitors down Ulysses Bow,
To try their strength, and prove their overthrow.
And up she hastens drawing forth a Key,
The Handle wrought with brass and Ivory;
Her Maids attending her in order, they
Ascended where Ulysses Treasure lay,
Gold, Brass, and polished Steel, a glorious show,
Thence takes she forth his Quiver, and his Bow,
And deadly Shafts, when he to Sparta went,
Him Iphitus meeting did to him present,
At Ortilochus Court, where they in Messen met.
Ulysses came to claim a public Debt,
Three hundred Sheep, and Shep-herds too, which they
Had to Pausanias observes that Messene here is not the name of a City, but of
a Country. (...), etc. Before the battle at Leuctra between the Thebans and
Lacedaemonians, I think there was no City called Messene I do partly conjecture
so from the Verses of Homer, who in the Catalogue of those that went against
Troy, reckoning Pyle, Arene, and others, makes no mention of Messene, The
Verses are these, 'O (...)
K (...).
(...),
Who dwelt in Pyle, and those Arene stored,
And Thryos, where Alpheus you may for'd
Who did in Aepy's lofty Walls reside,
In Cypariss, and Amphigen abide.
But it is wore apparent (says he) in his Odysses, where speaking of the Bow
of Iphitus. T (...)
(...) --
At Ortilochus Court they in Messene met. For Ortilochus's house was not in the
City Messene, but at Pherae, which himself declares in Pisistratus 's journey
to Menelaus. 'E (...)
(...) --
This Country received its name from Messens daughter of Triopas, Wife of
P^lycaon.
Messena shipped from Ithaca.
Him Young, his Father, and the Peers oth' Land
Sent thither, satisfaction to demand:
But Iphitus came upon his own affairs,
Seeking twelve sturdy Mules, and twice six Mares,
Which after that his sad Destruction proved,
(He came to visit Hercules, who moved
On some pretense, him at a Treatment killed,
And hospitable Boards with blood defiled,
Then the same Mules and Mares, his prize he made,
And in's own Stables as good Booty staid)
Which then he sought when he Ulysses met.
He this Bow gave him, which before the great
Eurytus drew, who when of life bereft,
To his dear Son in his own Palace left.
Ulysses him a Lance gave, and a Skain;
But neither either e're did entertain:
For at the Table great Alcides slew
Renowned Iphitus, at an enterview.
Of this Ulysses had so much esteem,
He would not bear it to the War with him:
But kept in the remembrance of his Friend,
And never did but in's own Country bend.
But when she came up to his Room apart,
Well-floor'd with Oak, and planish'd with much art,
Whose Portals and fair Thresholds had no match, Hercules took them not from
Iphitus, but had bought them of Autolycus, who had stolen them from him.

There she puts in the Key, and draws the Latch:
The Bolt shot back resounds, whilst she unlocks,
As in the Meadows lows a well-fed Ox.
The Queen then enters, where in Cedar Chests
Her Wardrobe lay, store of perfumed Vests:
There straight, Ulysses Bow and Quiver she
Takes down, and sitting, lays upon her Knee,
Weeping a main: but when sh'had eased her Woe
With briny Tears, down went she with the Bow,
Quiver, and Shafts, of which some deadly were.
Two Damsels down the ponderous Coffer bear,
Where the King's Annulets, Brass and Silver lay.
The Queen when near the Suitors, makes a stay,
Just at the Entrance of the stately Hall,
There casting ore her Cheeks a slender Vail;
On either hand attended by a Maid,
She boldly thus to the Corrivals said;
Proud Suitors, hear me, You in this my House
Daily feast high, and richest Wine carouse,
In my Lords absence, I Will no more delay,
Nor by pretenses cause your longer stay:
But you that me would marry, and now Court,
Let Us end our serious Difference in Sport;
And here Ulysses Bow shall be your Law,
Which, who can handle best, and ablest draw,
And through these twice six Annulets shall shoot,
He shall my Husband be without dispute:
I Will Home with him, this House no longer keep,
Which still I shall remember in my sleep.
This said, She bids Eumaeus carry in
The Bow and Annulets where they might be seen,
Which he placed, weeping when the Bow he spied,
Whose Tears thus proud Antinous did deride;
Pox on thee Coxcomb-Rustick, why do cry,
Wherefore, forsooth, put finger in thy Eye?
To move the Queen, who, now her Husband's dead,
Shall find fresh comfort in another's Bed:
Eat thou thy meat in quiet, or else go
And whine without, and leave with us the Bow.
The Prize propounded will be hard to bear,
As it is to bend Ulysses Bow I fear:
Not one of us but seems a mere Jack-straw,
To what Ulysses was when him I saw,
Whom I remember well, when but a Boy.
Thus said he, hoping though the Prize to enjoy,
Who was the first Ulysses Arrow felt,
And with him most dishonourably dealt,
And more then others did the rest provoke.
To whom Telemachus thus boldly spoke;
Sure Jove has made me mad, my Mother says,
And her but seldom idle passion swaies,
That she will marry, and this House forsake,
Yet I Am not troubled, but still merry make.
Well Sirs, begin, she is ready, such a piece
You shall not match though you should search all Greece
In If Argos in this place signifies Peloponnesus, as some interpreters do
conjecture, then by a Poetical figure he enumerates some of the parts together
with the mention of the whole: for Pylus and Mycene are Cities in Peloponnesus:
which figure is very frequent in Homer. So Iliad. 2. 'O (...).
These from Dulichium, and the Echinades.
for Dulichium is one of the Islands of the Echinades. So Odyss. 11. -- (...)
Through Greece and Phthia.
The like we find in the Poets who next followed him. Hipponax, K (...).
And Al^man in his Lyricks,
For both Amathus and Paphus were Cities of Cyprus. But it may here he taken
for that part of Greece peculiarly so called, or for the City Argos it self.
Argos, nor Mycene, nor in Pyle,
Ithaca it self, Epire, or any Isle.
Which you all know, I need not speak her praise.
Now lay by all Excuses and Delays,
Nor hancker long that you your Dooms may know,
But first I Will try if I can bend this Bow,
The Prize endanger by my Strength and Art,
Nor when my Mother shall from me depart,
I shall not grieve, nor of her loss complain,
But take the Prizes which I shall obtain.
This said, his purple Mantle off he threw,
And standing up lays by his Falchion too,
First he the Rings sets in so just a Line,
That their Circumferences, and Centers join,
Then fixed in Earth, all wonder he excelled,
In ordering what he never yet beheld.
Then standing forth he twangs the string, then hales;
Three times he tries his strength, as often fails,
Still high his hopes, the Prize he should obtain.
His fourth attempt then had not proved in vain,
But that Ulysses winked, and took him off;
When thus Telemachus at himself did scoff;
I shall but prove a dull and heavy Beast,
Or else too young am, not fit to contest
In martial sports, whom any one may worst:
But who here stronger are then I, draw first.
Against the Wall he set the Bow, this said,
And on the floor close by the Arrow laid,
Then reassumed the place he had forsook.
When thus Antinous to the Concourse spoke;
Let us in Order move, and all conjoyn,
That he shall first begin sits next the Wine.
Antinous thus advising, none oppose.
Liodes first, Oenops's Offspring, rose,
Who was their Priest, and next the Goblet sat,
Who much did them and their abuses hate.
He first received the Bow and Shaft by Law,
Then standing forth attempted it to draw,
But failed; his Hand the stiff string weary made;
Not used to shoot: then thus to them he said;
Some other take this Bow; it will not bend,
This to the Shades will many Suitors send:
And better die then live; thus with a Scoff,
After a long suit to be shaken off:
And here perhaps are some that hope to win,
Then bear in triumph hence the beauteous Queen;
But this Bow tried will finish all Dispute,
Remove your Leagure, to other Dames make suit,
And let her marry whom she please. This said,
He on the Board the Bow and Arrow laid,
When thus Antinous his mind declared;
How escaped these words thy teeth, their Ivory guard?
Must to the shades this many Suitors send,
Because thou want the strength the Yew to bend?
Thy Mother no such person bore, that can
Handle an able Bow, and play the Man:
But here are several brisker Youths that shall.
This said, he to Melanthius thus did call;
A little Fire go in and quickly get,
And close before a Chair and Cushion set;
Then bring the roll of Lard that lies within,
That warm they may the suppling stuff work in:
Then we may bend the Bow, and get the Prize.
This said, a Fire he kindles in a trice,
A The Chair was for the Archer to sit in, when he shot, the scope or mark
being too low for them to shoot standing. And this appears afterward when
Ulysses takes the Bow, The Lard served to moisten and mollify the dry Bow,
that thereby it might the easier yield and bend; not to anoint the Arms of the
Archers, that their Nervs being thereby corroborated they might draw it with
the greater strength; a great mistake in Zuinger and Spondanus.


Chair and Cushion set, and brought the Lard,
They fall to work, no pains the Suitors spared
To make it yield, with chasing in grown warm:
But all in vain, none had so good an Arm.
Antinous and Eurymachus, who were
The Suitors Princes, and the strongest there
Attempted; not as if concerned at all,
Eumaeus and his Swain stole out oth' Hall:
After these two some have Ulysses made,
And to them, past the Gates, and Entrance, said;
Eumaeus and Bubulcus, Friends you be,
Shall I now hold my Tongue, or else be free.
What if your King should suddenly appear,
By some strange Miracle transported here.
Would you the Suitors, or Ulysses aid?
Say what your Inclinations would persuade.
Bubulcus then replied; O Jove would thou
Bring this to pass, that is thus in question now,
And that some God would hither him transport,
Then thou should see that I would make some sport.
Eumaeus so implored then all the Gods,
To see Ulysses in his own Aboads.
After he found he faithful Servants had,
Thus he to them himself discovering, said;
I that so much have suffered now am here,
In my own Country after twenty year,
I know that none of all my Servants do
Wish that I should return, but only you:
For which, what I Will confer I Will not declare;
If by Jove's means these Roysters conquered are,
I Will give you Wives and Wealth, your Houses build,
And you shall both be Friends, and Brothers styled
To my dear Son: but you not to deceive,
Behold the mark which me the wild Boar gave,
When with Autolycus his Sons I went
A hunting ore A high Mountain in Achaia.
Parnassus steep ascent.
Here he to them the Cicatrice did show,
Which after they beheld, and well did know,
They weeping hung about him in embrace,
Kissing his Shoulders, and his Head and Face:
Such Complements they had not finished yet,
Shedding glad Tears, at lest till Sun had set,
Had not he thus forbid, lest any should
Come forth, and in this posture us behold,
And tel't within; no longer kindness show:
And now let us in, but not together go,
First I, then you, and this shall be the sign.
For the proud Suitors, as one man conjoyn,
I shall nor Bow nor Quiver touch at all:
Bear them to me Eumaeus, through the Hall,
And put them in my Hands; The Women tell,
That they must shut their Doors, and bar them well:
But if that any of them hear within
Sad Groans and Cries, with a confused Din,
Let them not stir, not what is the matter ask,
But there in quiet go on with their Task.
Philetius, of the Palace Gates take Care,
Locking them up, well bolt and strongly bar.
Back to the Hall, this said, Ulysses goes,
And re-assumes his seat from whence he rose.
Next in Eumaeus and Philetius go:
When bold Eurymachus takes up the Bow,
And at the Fire well-suppling, warmed, but had
The same success; at which extremely mad,
With a deep sigh his Passion thus expressed;
I for my self not moved am, nor the rest,
Nor to be baffled thus, not much it galls,
By which we lose expected Nuptials:
Address our selves to several Dames we may
In other places beside Ithaca,
But that none here can draw Ulysses Bow,
This to our shame Posterity will know.
Then thus to him Antinous replied;
Not so grieve, Sir, we better shall provide,
Now is Apollos Festival you know,
Who farthest shoots, and draws the silver Bow:
Let us compose our selves, these trinckets all
Stand, as we leave them, in Ulysses Hall;
None I suppose will meddle with them there:
But let the Skinker Wine in bowls prepare,
That we Libating may take up the bow,
And let Melanthius the Goat-herd go
Early for Goats, the best of all the Flock,
With which we'll offer Phoebus, and invoke;
Then we shall venture once more for the Prize.
They all approve Antinous advice.
For their Hands water straight the Heralds brought,
Others got Wine, and empty Goblets fraught,
When they had drank, and their Libations paid,
Ready for Action, sly Ulysses said;
You bold Corrivals, hear what I Will impart,
Although the sudden Dictates of my Heart;
Eurymachus and Antinous, I request,
Because the last said well, and counseled best,
Early let Phoebus Victory bestow
Where he shall please, but let me touch the bow;
That I may by Experience find, if still
I have the same dexterity and skill
I once enjoyed, or whether they are lost
In misery, wandering thus from Coast to Coast.
This word did all their angers much incend,
Mistrusting he the able bow might bend:
To whom in ranting Terms Antinous said;
Unlucky Stranger, art Thou still stark mad,
Is It not enough with Princes here to feast;
All privileges having of a Guest,
And hear'st our Table-talk, which none before
Enjoyed, like thee, a Vagabond and Poor?
Wine put into thy Head this fond design,
Distempers rage that rise from too much Wine.
So Wine Pirithous was King of the Lapithites, a people of Thessaly dwelling
about Pindus and Othni, who invited the Centaurs, not far distant from him, to
his Nuptials; one of whom, Eurytion here (by others called Eurytus) enflamed
with Wine, and supriz'd with the incomparable beauty of the Bride; offered to
make a rape upon her, which bred a sudden Quarrel betwixt the Centaurs and the
Lapithae, described at large by Ovid in the 12 of his Metamorphosis, Now
Eurytus, more heady then the rest,
Foul rapine harbors in his salvage breast,
Incensed by beauty and the heat of Wine.
Lust and Ebriety in outrage join.
Straight turned up Boards the Feast profane, the fair
And tender Spouse now haled by the Hair.
Fierce Eurytus Hippodame: all took
Their choice, or whom they could; sacked Cities look
With such a face. The Women shreek, we rise,
When Theseus first; O Eurytus unwise!
Dare thou offend Pirithous as long
As Theseus lives? in one, two suffer wrong.
The great-soul'd Hero, not to boast in vain,
Breaks through the throng, and from his fierce disdain
The rape repris'd. He no Reply affords,
Such facts could not be justified by words, etc.
The Centaurs from the navel downwards carried the shapes of Horses, begotten
by Ixion on a Cloud, formed like and mistaken for Juno: representing the vain
pursuit of imaginary glory, attempted by unlawful mean^, and the prodigious
Conceptions of Ambition.
Eurytion in Pirithous House
Distracted, taking a too deep Carouse;
When on the Lapithae he mad did fall,
Raising so high Disturbance in the Hall:
But they inflamed with the like raging fit,
Cropped both his Ears, and up his Nostrils slit,
And by the Heels they dragged him out a Door,
After mixed slaughter had imbrew'd the Floor,
But for his insolence he first did pay.
I in proviso this shall only say;
If thou but offer'st once this Bow to touch,
No longer Thou shall cram and swil so much
Amongst us here; but shipping, thee we'll send
To King Echetus to mankind no Friend;
Which if you would avoid and quiet are,
With us sit still, but not with us compare.
Antinous, then Penelope replied;
It is not fit thus strangers to deride,
If once the are Guests, and we them Favor show.
Think Thou if he should draw Ulysses bow,
That therefore him I should my Husband make?
He cannot hoped, feed no such gross mistake.
When to the Queen Eurymachus thus sed;
We not believe, Madam, that him you will wed:
But we fear scandal, when the baser sort
Our actions shall thus to our Shame report.
Such Princes who would value at a straw,
Who court his Wife, whose Bow they cannot draw?
Others will say, a Beggar thither got,
And through the Annulets his Arrow shot:
Which shall infix a high disgrace on us.
The said the Queen; Not so Eurymachus,
None ever found the peoples favor yet,
And thus deboshing, up their betters eat.
How can they you disparage then at all?
He has a goodly Person, strong, and tall,
And him to be of fair extract we know:
Let him then try his Strength, and take the Bow.
If Phoebus please that he obtain the best,
I shall present him with a Coat, and Vest,
A Sword, a pair of Sandals, and a spear,
That he nor Dogs nor Men shall need to fear,
And I Will his Pasport sign for him beside.
Then to his Mother thus her Son replied;
Madam, none here more powerful are then I,
Whom I think fit, my Fathers Bow shall try:
Not any of the Chiefs of Ithaca,
Nor those that in more fertile Elis sway,
Shall drive me from my resolution, so
If me it please, him I Will present the Bow.
But Mother, now be pleased to walk in,
Look to your Webs, see how your Damsels spin,
Leave Men's affairs to me; Sure in this Hall
It Is my concern to rule and order all.
The Queen, her Son's direction much admires,
And straight to her Apartment thence retires,
There for Ulysses weeps, till her at last,
Into a pleasant Sleep Minerva cast.
But straight Eumaeus lifted up the bow,
At which, the proud Corrivals angry grow:
When some of them thus to Subulcus said;
Since Thou to bear the Bow down art so mad,
Thee thy own Dogs shall eat, those which thou breed'st,
And with such care amongst thy Porkers feed'st,
If Phoebus and the immortal Gods to us
Be at to morrows Feast propitious.
In the same place the Bow again he sets
Thus ranted out, amazed at their Threats.
The Prince then from another side oth' Hall,
Thus rated him; Obedient unto all
None well can be, take up the Bow, be gone,
Else thee, although I Am Younger, hence I Will stone
To thy own Farm: Ah! could I but as well
With these that riot here as with thee deal,
I with a mischief soon would send them hence,
Who act with so much pride and insolence.
When here the jolly Suitors not retort,
But smile, converting anger into sport.
And to the King the Bow the Swain convaid:
Then from the Prince to Euryclea said;
Shut fast your Doors, and if you hear within
Sad Groans and Cries with a confused Din,
Let them not stir, nor what is the matter ask,
But there in quiet go on with their Task.
The Prince thus ord'ring, she with speed obeyed,
And all the Doors fast in an instant made.
As soon Philetius steps out of the Hall,
Locks up the Gates, and outward Portals all.
There he the Cable of a Vessel found,
With which he faster all the former bound:
Then entering, sits down where before he sat,
The King observing; who the bow had got,
Turning and tossing lest the Eustathius on this place, (...). The Bow they
say, as it appears, was made of Horn, not like the ancient Scythian Bows, of
wood: But I see no necessity for this interpretation, because the Horn may be
understood of the two tips of the Bow, which usually were made of that material.
Horn were bored,
With eating worms, in the absence of its Lord.
When one amongst them him observing, spoke;
Sure by this bow he would another make,
He turns it up and down so in his Hands;
Skilful in mischief are most Vagabonds.
He Will take a Pattern, he looks on it so often.
Whom thus another proud Corrival scoft;
May Fortune him a special Favor send,
And not before, until this bow he bend.
Thus jeered the Suitors whilst Ulysses bore
The able bow perusing it all ore.
A Skilful Harper so, before he sings,
Winds up and down with ease concording strings,
Pitching the Sheeps-gut either high or low:
As did Ulysses ordering his strong bow.
Then taking up, he twangs the well-stretch'd string,
Which like a Swallows shriller Voice did ring:
At which, the Suitors pale as ashes look,
And, thundering, Jove them with more Terror struck:
But the dire Omen glad Ulysses made,
Because the God thus promised him his aid.
And up he takes a Shaft lay on the Board,
His Quiver after many did afford,
Which among the Suitors must as Favors go,
Then with strong Arms he drew the yielding Bow:
The well-aim'd Shaft through the first Annulet sent,
Through all the rest just in the Center went,
And so a free and easy passage made.
When to Telemachus Ulysses said;
Not any here, Sir, now your Choice should scoff,
I Have done the business, and am well come off:
My former strength, nor old experience wants,
I am above the scornful Suitors Taunts.
But now it is late, and supper-time invites
To singing, music, and what else delights;
Which more then Cates concerns a liberal board:
Then wincks on's Son, who straight puts on his Sword,
His Javelin takes, then draws in Arms complete,
Down to his Father standing near his Seat.
scene from book 22 Gulielmo Ford Armigero Joannce filice Henrici Tabulam hanc
et Uxori Ipsius Dent de Biker Arm: LMDDDIO Lib 22.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TWENTY SECOND BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The King Antinous shoots; All think it Chance.
Eurymachus Quarter asks. The Prince's Lance
Amphinomus kills; He to his Father gets,
Who with a few on all the Suitors sets.
Pallas appears: Corrivals slaughtered all.
Women dress up, and cleanse from Blood, the Hall.
BUT now the King himself from tatters strips,
And with his Bow and well-fill'd Quiver leaps
On the broad-threshold; out his Shafts then shakes
Before his Foot, then to the Gang thus speaks;
This Game is won, though difficult to win,
But now a harder match we must begin;
Which will, if Phoebus help, make up two Games.
This said, a Shaft he at Antinous aims,
Who by both handles held a Dionysius the Thracian notes that from this place
of Homer, where Antinous is slain whilst he is lifting the Cup to his mouth,
grew the Proverb among the Grecians, (...).
Many things hap betwixt the Cup and Lip.

golden Cup,
In jocund posture, ready to turn up,
And take a deep Carouse, then little thought
At's Elbow Death should spoil so sweet a Draught.
The Prince of Suitors, amongst his merry Mates,
Of slaughter little dreamt, and sullen Fates.
Ulysses Shaft found in his Throat no check,
Till the sharp point transpierc'd his tender Neck.
He stagg'ring backward, down the Goblet throws,
A purple Fountain conduits from his Nose.
Down comes the Table, spurned ore with his Feet,
Making a muss of Drink, and Bread, and Meat.
Up start the Suitors as they saw him fall,
And sudden murmur flies about the Hall:
About the Walls they look, and search each where,
If they could find a Shield or single Spear.
When thus enraged they Ulysses blame;
Thou do not well, Villain, at Men to aim;
No more shall thou amongst us for Prizes shoot:
The have killed a Person, who without dispute
Was Prince of all the Youth in Ithaca:
Therefore on Thee shall Dogs and Vultures prey.
The Suitors blabber'd thus, supposing still,
That he had slain Antinous against his Will:
Nor did it in Consideration fall,
Now one Calamity would swallow all.
When frowning, thus Ulysses made Reply;
No more, you Dogs, shall you believe that I
Will never return to my own House, from Troy:
Who wast my Goods, and would my Wife enjoy,
Her Women prostituting when you please,
Jove slighting, and the whole Court of Deities,
Nor injured men regard, nor future Fame:
Death without mercy I to all proclaim.
This said, pale fear puts on his trembling shape,
Each look about how Death they may escape,
Only Eurymachus made this saint Reply;
If Thou our Ithacan Ulysses be,
Thy threats are just, these Trespasses we own,
Both in thy Court, the Country, and the Town;
But here Antinous lies, the only Cause,
Who made us break all Hospitable Laws,
He neither wanted Nuptials, nor desired,
But Supreme Power his hot ambition fired,
Which Jove would not, he reached at absolute Sway,
To be first Monarch of all Ithaca,
Laying a Plot to kill thy only Son,
By Death prevented now; Take pity on
Our sad Condition, once thy People styled,
That we united, may be reconciled:
For what we here have in such Riot spent,
Each of us twenty Bullocks shall present,
And Gold, and Silver send in Loads to thee;
Till then, it is fit Thou thus incensed should be.
Then frowning on him thus Ulysses spoke;
If ore to me your Heir-ships you would make,
And what is your own, what else you may enjoy,
I would not hold my Hands, but all destroy:
Under my just Revenge you here must lie,
All I can grant you now, is, Fight, or Fly;
Hopes to get off let idle Fancies shape,
But I believe not one of you shall escape.
This said, their Knees relaxed, cold Agues shook,
When thus Eurymachus to them trembling, spoke;
Sirs, He Will not spare you; Such a cruel Foe,
With a full Quiver, and a deadly Bow,
Will pick us out, and One by One us kill,
Recall your Valors, Sirs, and draw your Steel;
Against his shafts, for Targets Tables take,
Imbodied sure we something on it shall make.
If many can from one once clear the Hall,
The Town alarmed we'll to assistance call,
And He shall soon this undertaking rue.
This said, Eurymachus his Falchion drew,
And raging like a tempest on Him set:
Ulysses shoots Him under-neath the Teat,
Which in his Liver fixed, he drops his Sword,
Water and Wine down tumbles with the Board;
His Forehead, struck against the Earth, rebounds,
His Seat, with clattering of his Heels, resounds;
Whilst an eternal Darkness closed his Eyes.
Amphinomus next at stern Ulysses flies,
Drawing his Sword, so his Escape to make:
But Him Telemachus ran through the Back,
As he against his Father did advance:
Out at his Bosom came the Handsel'd Lance,
Whilst with his Forehead He salutes the Floor,
The Spear Telemachus draws blushing with Gore,
With all the speed he might, fearing least they
Should get that Lance, or wound Him in his way.
Then to his Father swift as Lightning made,
And drawn up to Him, thus rejoicing, said;
Sir, I shall straight for you a Target get,
And with two Javelins, and a Helmet fit:
And that these Swains may better stand the storm,
I shall as soon them both completely arm.
Then said the King; Dear Son, no time neglect,
Fetch them whilst these my Arrows me protect;
Lest, when alone, they force me from the Gate.
This said, the Prince went to his Chamber straight,
Where Hung the Arms; From thence He laden bears
Four shields, four Helmets, and eight glittering Spears:
First he himself, and then his Servants arms,
To guard their King, dispensing feathered storms.
But He, so long as any Shafts he had,
So well he aimed, that each shot left one dead;
And thick they lay, weltring in purple gore.
But when the shooting-King had Shafts no more,
Against the Wall his useless Bow he sets,
And ore his shoulder his bright Target gets,
And with a glittering Cask his Brows impails,
Graced with a waving Grove of Horses Tails:
And straight each Hand arms with a glittering Spear.
Above the Threshold two fair Windows were,
Under, a Path; which through the Palace lay,
To the next Town a near and private way:
Good, this Ulysses bids Eumaeus make,
When Agelaus to the rest thus spoke;
O Sirs, let one up to the Window get,
And call aloud for Help; some hope there is yet,
That he who killed so many, we may kill.
Then out Melanthius cried; you counsel ill,
For near that passage stands you sturdy Lout,
Who will not let you once your Head thrust out.
But I will arms down from the Chamber bear,
For sure the Son and Father left them there.
This said. Melanthius hastens up the Stairs,
And thence twelve Shields, and plumed Helmets bears,
And twice six Lances: straight the Suitors arm.
Ulysses trembled at this fresh alarm:
Seeing them shine in steel, and Javelins shake.
He a hard task had now to undertake,
Then to Telemachus he said; Ah! Son,
Some of the Women has this Mischief don,
Or else Melanthius. Who made this Reply;
Sir, it is my fault, no others, only I
To blame am, that the Chamber Door's not locked,
Nor to so great a Charge no better looked;
But dear Eumaeus, go, and straight them shut,
And mark, if any Women were in the Plot,
Or if this feat were by Melanthius played.
Whilst among themselves they such Conjectures made,
Melanthius went again more Arms to bring.
Eumaeus spying him, drew near the King,
And to him said; Melanthius, that vile wretch,
Whom woe suspected now, went more to fetch:
What shall I do: if I the stronger be,
Shall I dispatch, or bring him down to thee?
That to a strict account Thou him may call,
Till in just punishments he pays for all.
To whom Ulysses, troubled, answered thus;
The Suitors I must, and Telemachus,
Keep here within, who would be gone; Him take,
And tie his Hands and Feet up to his Back:
Then up a Pillar draw him with a Chain,
To linger there in worse then Ulysses, it seems, thought not Death a
sufficient punishment for those grand misdemeanors, of his Servant, unless
accompanied with torture: whose example is generally followed by more severe
Princes. Suetonius does write thus of Tiberius the Roman Emperor, Sed and
Tiberius mori volentibus vim adhibuisse vivendi dicitur; Nam mortem adeo leve
supplicium putabat, ut cum audisset unum ex eis, Carnulium nomine, anticipasse
eam, exclamaverit, Carnulius me evasit: It is reported that Tiberius used to
force those to live that desired to die: for he thought Death so slight a
punishment, that when he understood that Carnulius had died in prison, he
exclaimed, Carnulius has escaped me. So when a prisoner desired of him that he
would hasten his death, he answered, that he was not yet friends with him.
Which Seneca in one of his Tragedies has well expressed, Qui morte cunctos
luere supplicium jubet,
Nescit tyrannus esse: diversa irroga.
Miscrum veta perire, felicem jube.
He that all punishes with death, not knows
To act the Tyrant, different ways impose,
To the happy Death, life to him full of woes.
Whence Minerva complains Odyss 1. that Neptune studying to revenge the
excoecation of his Son upon Ulysses, would not put him to death, (...)
(...).
Neptune not kills Ulysses on this score,
But forced him wander from his native shore.

dying pain.
What they commanded were, they straight obey,
And at the Chamber Door in ambush lay,
Whilst he about did search, more Arms to get,
They on each side the Entrance close beset:
When to the Door he came, his Arms well-fill'd,
Bearing a stately Crest, and antique Shield,
Which had of old youthful Laertes been,
But now the braces ripped were from the Tin.
They took and dragged him in, then on the ground,
Him backwards by the Hands and Feet straight bound,
And as Ulysses them commanded had,
Then with a Chain fast to a Column made,
Him hoysting up unto a Beam they tie.
Whom thus Eumaeus scoffs; There may thou lie,
As on a Bed all Night, till the approach
Of bright Aurora in her golden Coach:
Then 'twill be time in thy fat Goats to drive,
To feast the Suitors, if thou art alive.
This said, They left him hanging in the Chain,
Then armed, and the Door locking, went again
Down to Ulysses: Thus encouraged more,
They now so many faced that were but four.
To their assistance the illustrious Dame
Minerva, then transformed to Mentor, came.
Ulysses seeing her, rejoicing, said;
Let, Mentor, now old friendship thee persuade,
And former Kindness here with me to engage
Against this Crew; we are of equal Age:
But he supposed it was Minerva yet.
On the other side, as much the Suitors threat:
TO whom first thus rattling Agelaus said;
Mentor, let not Ulysses thee persuade
Him to assist, and against us to fight,
Since we resolve on thee to wreek our spite.
When we the Father and the Son have slain,
Then thou shall die, that dare his Cause maintain:
Thy Head lopt off, thine and Ulysses states,
We'll share, and drive thy Sons out of thy Gates:
Nor shall thy Daughters, nor thy Wife here stay,
They shall be banished out of Ithaca.
Pallas at these expressions more enraged,
Ulysses thus with harsher Terms engaged;
Thou not so strong, nor so courageous art,
As when nine years so well thou play'dst thy part
At Troy, the beauteous Helen to re-gain,
And have so many Valiant Heroes slain,
And by thy Stratagems took'st strong bul-wark'd Troy:
Thou coming now thy Kingdom to enjoy,
Dare not engage with these; Come stand by me,
And what these Braggars are thou soon shall see;
And how I Will former Benefits repay.
Thus said she, though not gave them yet the Day,
But let Ulysses and his Offspring try
Their Strength and Valor against the Enemy.
Up to a golden Beam she takes her flight,
And like a The reason why he likeneth her to a Swallow, is, lest the Suitors
should suspect the appearance of some God for the assistance of Ulysses, which
they could not now reasonably do; it being agreeable to the nature of those
Birds to be conversant among the Beams of Houses.
swallow perched to see the Fight,
When Agelaus Old Damastors Son,
Eurynomus, and Young Amphimedon,
Demoptolemus Polyctorides
And Polybus, amongst the Suitors, these
For Strength and Courage did the rest transcend,
And living yet, did well themselves defend,
The rest slain with Ulysses Arrows were,
Thus to renew the Fight did others cheer.
Mentor is fled, who talked and seemed so stout,
And they are left alone to fight it out.
We six, each at Ulysses cast his Lance,
Him let us wound, and then defy all Chance.
At once all threw, as he did them enjoin,
But straight Minerva frustrates their Design.
This on the threshold lights, another stuck
Fast in the Gate, the fourth the Wainscot struck.
When they had escaped this threatening storm of Spears,
Ulysses thus those were about him cheers;
At Random throw amongst that impious Throng,
Who us would kill, whom they before did wrong.
This said, They all at once their Javelins threw,
Ulysses, Demoptolemus first slew,
The Prince Euryades, Eumaeus, Elate,
Pisander from Philaetius meets his Fate,
These on the floor in Deaths Convulsions lie,
The rest withdrawn into a Corner fly:
They follow plucking Javelins from the slain,
Whilst the Corrivals throw their Spears in vain.
What e're the attempt, Pallas made fruitless all;
This hits the Floor, the Gate this, that the Wall,
Telemachus Hand Amphimedons Javelin rac'd,
The point the Skin scarce piercing, over-past.
Eumaeus shoulder; Ctesipus his Lance,
Flying ore his Target, did a little glance,
And scarce blood fetching, lighted on the Ground,
Groves of fallen Spears hedge in Ulysses round,
Which the whole Gang of Suitors at him threw;
Amongst them then Eurydamas he slew,
The Prince Amphimedon, Eumaeus Polybus,
Philaetius on the Breast hit Ctesipus,
And with these words persu'd his well-aim'd Spear;
Thou love high Language and delight'st to jeer,
Leave boasting speeches, fitter for the Gods,
Who can perform, and have of thee the Ods;
Take this return for the hospitable Hoof
Thou sent'st Ulysses under his own Roof,
Craving thy Alms: But then Ulysses slew
Agelaus running with his Javelin through,
Telemachus Leocritus struck there,
Quite through the Navel with a driven Spear,
Reeking the point, in's Back a passage sound,
Who falling, with his forehead beats the Ground.
Then Pallas on a step her Target raised,
At which, all were confounded, and amazed;
Who like a Herd of Cattle take their flight,
When in the Spring the By this similitude of an Ox molested with the Fly
called Oestrum, or Asilus, is represented the extremity of terror and
affrightment. So Virgil in the 3. of his Georgicks, Et lucos Silari circa,
ilicibusque virentem
Pluribus Alburnum volitans, cui nomen Asilo
Romanum est, Oestrum Graii vertere vocantes,
Asper, acerba sonans, quo tota exterrita silvis
Diffugiunt armenta.
A Fly about the Groves of Silarus haunts,
And high Alburnus, green with stately plants,
Asilus called by Romans, but the same
The Greeks style Oestron by an ancient name,
Extremely fierce and loud, whose spite to shun,
To sheltring Woods affrighted Cattle run,
And with their bellowing strike Heavens arched round.
Which Groves and shallow Tanagrus resound.
With this dire Monster, Juno long ago
Her spite did on the Inachian Heifer show,

Fly does them affright:
But the other Party on like Vultures rush,
When the affrighted Quarry leaves the Bush,
And them to escape from Heaven so hard beset,
Takes the Champaign, and falls into the Net:
No Quarter there, no hope in Strength of Flight,
They kill them straight who in such sport delight:
So they promiscuously upon them all,
Breathless and panting, without Mercy fall,
Dashing their Heads together, the whole Floor
With Bodies filled, and stained with purple Gore.
Liodes then Ulysses knees embraced,
And thus himself on the King's Mercy cast;
Me I beseech you hear, and pity show,
I with your Women never had to do,
I sat amongst my Patrons, and still bid
Them to abstain from those foul acts they did;
And now they suffer for their Pride and Lust,
At acts, I always scrupled, were unjust,
With them let not their guiltless Chaplain lie,
No such Example make Posterity.
Then frowning on Him, thus Ulysses said;
Art thou their Chaplain? Then Thou often have prayed
In my own Court, far off the Happy Day
Might be, of my Return to Ithaca,
That thou might wed, and pregnant make my Wife;
Expect not therefore I will save thy Life.
Then from the Ground He up a Falchion caught,
Which Agelaus dropped, by Him dispatched:
With this He took him on the Neck so just,
His Head lop'd off lay muttering in the Dust:
But Phemius, who the Suitors against his Will,
Forced both to sing and play, He did not kill;
Holding his Harp he stood by the upper Gates,
And of two ways, which best was, cogitates;
Should he for Refuge to Jupiter (...), so called from (...)signifying the
enclosure or out-wall encompassing the Courtyard: for, as Athenaeus observes,
(...) is constantly to be taken in Homer for the Courtyard; which afterward
among the later Comedians signified a Palace: as in Diphilus, 'A (...),
(...).
Favor in Palaces to seek to have,
Is for a Beggar, Exile, or a Slave.
In this place was the Altar of Jupiter (...); for when Ulysses had commanded
Medon and Phemius to leave the Hall, and go (...), -- (...),
(...).
They straight obeyed, and the dire Hall forsake,
And to the Altar of great Jove they make.
So is the Altar whither Hocuba and Priam fled, described by Virgil to be sub
Dio in the open Air, Aed^bus in mediis, nudoque sub atheris axe
Ingens Ara fuit, juxtaque veterrima laurus
Incumbens Arae atque umbra complexa penates:
Hic Hecuba and natae nequidquam altaria circum
Praecipites atra ceu tempestate columbae
Condensae and Divum amplexae simulacra tenebant.
Amidst the Palace, in the open air,
An Altar stood, an ancient Laurel near
Embraced the Gods with a declining shade:
Here Hecuba and all her Daughters fled,
As Flocks of Pigeons from a Tempest have,
And round the Statues of tho Gods embraced.
Now that this Altar was that of Jupiter Herceus appears from Tryphiodorus At
the Altar of Herceus sick of breath,
Bold Pyrrhus put the aged King to death.
And Ovid in his Ibis, speaking of Priam, Cui nibil Hercaei profuit ara Jovis.
Whom the Altar of Hercean Jove not saved.
Joves Altar run,
Where old Laertes and his only Son
So often had sacrifie'd; or whether He
Should cast himself down at Ulysses Knee:
The last of these advices seemed most sound.
Amongst Cups and tumbled Chairs upon the Ground
His Harp he leaves, since dangerous are Delays,
This is a most exact description of the Grecian (...), that I wonder there
should be that difference among the ancient Grammarians, in he explaining of it.
And thus his Knees embracing, Quarter prays;
Save me Ulysses, and my Blood not spill,
You Will soon Repent if Phemius you kill,
Who sings to Men and Gods; Jove does inspire
My Muse, and adds a spirit to my Lyre:
I Will chant like Phoebus, a celestial air
Shall ravish Thee; ah! Sir, my life then spare.
Telemachus thy Son will tell thee all,
How I against my Will played in thy Hall,
Enforced, I sung at their disordered Feasts,
Ore-pour'd by many, and uncivil Guests.
Telemachus heard how he for Quarter prayed,
And hasting near, thus to his Father said;
Hold Sir, ah! hold; Him Innocent, ah! spare;
And Medon too, who still of me took Care,
If by Philaetius, or Eumaeus, He
Not yet be slain, nor in the Charge by Thee:
Him Medon heard, who skulking lay unseen,
Under a Chair, wrapped in a Bullock's Skin:
Straight up he starts; and throws off his disguise,
And at his Prince's Knees, thus Quarter cries;
Ah! I am here, thy Father, ah! engage,
Lest me he kill, persuing in his Rage,
On the proud Suitors score, who his Court spoiled,
And thee contemned, as if thou were a Child.
Then smiling, said Ulysses; Take my Word,
And since my Son has saved thee from the Sword,
Learn this that thou and others may beware,
Good Deeds successful more then Wicked are:
But go thou forth, and Phemius take along,
And sit without, free from this slaughtered Throng:
Then I Will an end here of this business make.
Both straight obeyed, and the dire Hall forsake,
And by the Altar of great Jove they sat,
Looking about, expecting still their Fate.
Ulysses then strict search made every where,
If any had escaped, and living were.
Many he found weltring in Dust and Gore,
Like new-drawn Fishes lying on the Shore,
Wishing their watery Coverlet in vain,
Whilst the hot Sun concludes both Hope and Pain:
Just so in heaps the slaughtered Suitors lay.
When thus Ulysses to his Son did say;
Call Euryclea, my Telemachus,
That she may take some orders straight from us.
The Prince his Father with all speed obeyed,
And the Door opening to his Nurse thus said;
Dear Euryclea, who here govern'st all,
My Father calls, make have into the Hall.
His Voice she hearing, opens straight the Door,
Following Telemachus who went before;
Where amongst the Dead the King she found, all ore
Besmeared with blood, sprinkled with Dust and Gore;
Like a huge Lion, who a Bull had slain.
His shaggy Breast and Cheeks warm blood did stain,
Who with a terrible aspect appeared,
Ulysses Hands and Feet were so besmeared:
Soon as the dismal business she did spy,
She straight began to raise a joyful Cry
At the dire work, Ulysses straight forbad,
And Her with kind words comforting, thus said;
Conceal your Joy, and dearest Nurse refrain,
From triumphing ore these that here lie slain:
Fate, for foul Crimes, presents them this reward,
Whose Pride not any Person living spared:
Be they or Good or Bad, be what they may,
For their offenses now in Death they pay.
Straight number up those Women, who my House,
And me dishonored, and my virtuous Spouse.
Then Euryclea said; Dear Son, I shall,
I Will give you in a strict Account of all:
Twice twenty five young Damsels are within,
All taught to work, to card, to weave and spin.
Amongst these only twice fix faulty be,
Who scorn thy chaste Penelope and me:
Telemachus, but now of age, not yet,
His Mother thought to govern Women fit.
But I will up and tell the Queen, who fast
Asleep some gentle Deity has cast.
Then he replied; Wake her not yet, but all
Those your kind-hearted Women hither call,
Who in my absence here have been so bold.
This said, She went and the Kings Order told.
Eumaeus, and Philaetius, and his Son
He calling to him, thus to them begun;
Bear hence these Bodies, bid the Women come,
And cleanse the Seats, the Tables, and the Room,
And with wet Spunges every Chink make clean:
And when the House is put in order, then
Lead forth those Strumpets, twixt the Hedge and Gate,
And there with Steel cool their intemperate Heat,
Until their lustful Blood the Pavement warms,
Who hugged the Suitors in lascivious Arms.
By this the faulty Female-Troop appears,
A loud complaining, drowned in trickling Tears.
But first they bore the Bodies from the Hall,
And laid in private by the Palace-Wall.
Ulysses bids the Women, when the had renc'd
The Chairs, and Tables, and with Spunges clens'd,
That they the Lumber, Spears, and Targets all,
Promiscuous fallen should bear out of the Hall.
The Prince and his two Swains swept clean the Floor,
The Dust the Damsels carried out oth' Door;
The House well-deck'd, the guilty Females they
Betwixt the Quick-set, and the Gate convey.
There drove them up, from whence they could not fly.
Then said Telemachus; They shall not die
Here by the Sword, that is a Death too brave,
Who both on me, and my Dear Mother, have
Cast such Reproach, our Palace common made,
Where lewd Pranks they with lustful Gallants played.
This said, a Rope on a cross Beam he bound,
High, lest their dangling Feet should touch the ground,
So their expanded Wings, a Dove, or Thrush,
Shakes in the Net, concealed within a Bush,
Entering the Hedge caught in unhappy Beds,
So noos'd, in woeful order hung their Heads,
Shaking their Feet, till suffocated Breath
Fate finished in dishonorable Death.
Next to the place they forth Melanthius get,
There cropped they off his Ears, his Nostrils slit,
His Members they cut off, his Hands and Feet,
And raging threw for hungry Dogs to eat.
After that they had washed and finished all,
They to Ulysses went, yet in the Hall;
Who thus to ancient Euryclea said;
Bring It is generally delivered by Historians that Epimenides first brought
into Greece the Rites and Ceremonies of cleansing or expiating Houses and
Fields polluted with human blood. So Diogenes Laortius writes in his life: but
we find here some footsteps of that superstition long before the time of
Epimenides. Of personal Lustration the most accurate description, now extant,
is this of Claudians in his Panegyric to Honorius the Emperor, Lustralem sic
triste facem, cui lumen odorum
Sulphur coerulco nigroque bitumine-fumat,
Circum membra rotat doctus ^urganda sacerdos,
Rore pio spargens, and dira fugantibus herbis,
Numina terrificumque Jovem Triviam que precatus
Trans caput aversus manibus jaculatur in Austrum
Secum rapturas cantata piacula taedas.
The Lustral fire brand so, whose blazing smoke
With Pitch and Sulphur black and azure look,
The Priest, well-skill'd in Expiations, bore
About his Limbs, and sprinkled him all ore
With holy Dew, and Herbs expelling bane,
The Gods imploring, Jove and bright Diane,
Then ore his Head into the South he throws,
With which all Spells and dire enchantment goes.
When any Country or City was to be cleans'd, the Sacrifice was first led round
the same, as appears out of Polybius, (...), They appointed a purgation, and
led the Victims round about the City and Country adjacent: whence those sacra
were called by the Romans, Ambarvalia. But that Sulphur was peculiarly used we
have the testimony too of Pliny in his Natural History, Sulphur habet and in
religionibus locum ad expiandas suffitu domos, Sulphur is employed
ceremoniously in hallowing of Houses: for many are of opinion that the fume and
burning thereof will drive forth all Enchantments: and of Juvenal, Satyr 2. Tet
bellorum animae, quoties hinc talis ad illos
Vmbra venit, cuperent lustrari si qua darentur
Sulphura cum taedis, and si foret humida laurus.

Sulphur straight, and let a Fire be made,
To air the Room; And then entreat the Queen,
With all her chaster Damsels to come in;
Not one of all her Train must stay behind.
She thus replied; This is not well-design'd;
But I Will a Robe first, and a Mantle bring;
Such Weeds not fit the Person of a King,
You must not so appear. Then he replied;
However Fire and Perfume straight provide.
Old Nurse, this said, dispatched, and in a thought,
Fire in a Censer, and sweet Sulphur brought.
Whilst he the Hall and Chamber did perfume,
She went and told them all, the King was come;
They came with Tapers, clustering in a Throng;
About his Neck, his Hands and Shoulders clung,
Kissed and embraced, glad Tears their Cheeks bedew.
He takes all well, who their Affections knew.
scene from book 23 Seorgio Wharton Armigero Tabulam hanc LMDDDIO Lib. 23.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TWENTY THIRD BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Old Nurse ore-joy'd up to the Queen does go,
And waking, tells, Ulysses stayed below.
Penelope, with female Fancies fed,
Long scruples, till the King describes their Bed.
Transported then she leaps into his Arms:
Pallas Night almost spent prolongs by Charms.
BUT Old Nurse hasts up to the Drawing Room,
To tell Penelope the King was come.
Nimbly she trip'd, not feeling strength decayed,
Then standing near her Pillow, thus she said;
Rise dearest Daughter, rise Penelope,
That thou may him behold thou long'st to see,
Ulysses, who, though late, at last is come:
Those Roysters all are killed, who here at Home
Devoured his state, and did his Son deride.
The Queen, her not believing, thus replied;
Dear Nurse, the Gods thus make thee rave, who can
Make Wisemen Fools, and wise the Foolish man,
They Hand in Hand conjoyn Folly and Wit,
They thus distract thee, who were once Discreet.
Why did Thou wake me grieving, from so deep
And pleasant, such a golden-fetter'd sleep?
I never had the like, since Ulysses.
all my Joy
Went to that hateful Siege of cursed Troy.
Leave me: If any else had been so bold
To break my Rest, and me such Tidings told,
I should have sent her back with worser News:
But, Euryclea, Age shall Thee excuse.
Then thus Old Nurse replied; I wrong not you,
My dearest Daughter, all I say is true:
The King is come, and now within thy Court,
That Stranger whom the Suitors made their sport.
Telemachus knew all before, but hid
The whole Concern, as Him his Father bid;
That the proud Crew examples might be made.
At this ore-joy'd, she leaped out of her Bed,
And the Old Woman shedding Tears embraced,
Dear Nurse, then said, Is this all true thou say?
How came He hither? How could He alone
The Rivals worst, so many against One,
Who always ready, stood upon their Guard?
Then she replied; I neither saw nor heard,
More then their dying Groans, we trembling, all
Our Chambers kept, till me your Son did call
Down to his Father, where the King I found
Hemmed in with heaps of slaughtered bodies round.
You had admired to see, how there he stood,
Like a stern Lion smeared all ore with Blood.
In the outward Court they lie heaped in a Pyre,
The Room's perfumed: He standing by a Fire,
Entreats your Presence, and sent me to call;
Make have, that there we may be joyful all:
Now make glad periods to all Sorrows past,
Since what so much you longed for's come at last.
He is in Health returned to his own House,
Finds well his hopeful Son, his Virtuous Spouse,
And all the Havoc which the Suitors made,
For It with their Lives they have full dearly paid.
Then thus, Dear Nurse, Penelope replied;
Boast not, nor my Credulity deride.
Thou know that nothing can more welcome be,
Then his Return, both to our Son and Me:
But it is not as thou say. This cursed Crew
Some God incensed, for their Offenses, flew;
Since they all Strangers used alike, nor had
Regard to any either Good or Bad:
They justly suffered, but Ulysses lost
Will never, I fear, review his Native Coast.
How escaped such words thy teeth, their Ivory guard?
Euryclea said, You Are of Belief too hard.
He in the Hall stands by the Fire, nay, more,
I saw his scar got by a Salvage Boar,
When Him I bathed; which I to you had told,
But on my Throat, he starting up, laid hold.
Come, follow me, and if I tell a Lie,
Let me with new-invented Torturs die.
Then she replied; No Mortal e're could sound
The Gods Decrees, nor plumb those Deeps profound.
But let us go that I may see my Son,
The Suitors killed, and Him by whom 'twas done.
This said, the Queen descends, much troubled, should
She question Him, and at some distance hold,
Or leap into her dearest Lord's embrace.
But through the Hall she passing, took her place
Against the opposed Wall, a little higher,
Where by a Column stood, before the Fire,
The King, expecting when the Queen would speak:
But long she sat, nor once would silence break,
Gazing on him, whom, in mean Garments clad,
She knew not, when Telemachus thus said;
My Mother, no, ah! thou too cruel art,
Why sitt'st thou from my Father thus apart,
And wilt not speak, nor the least Question ask:
For any other Lady 'twere a Task,
Too hard, from her dear Husband to abstain,
Now after twenty years returned again,
Through Worlds of toil, of misery, and want;
You have a Heart harder then Adamant.
Then thus replied the Queen; Dear Son, I find
Such strange Confusion in my troubled mind,
I cannot speak, nor question what I would,
Nor dare look up his Face once to behold.
If this Ulysses be, which yet I doubt,
Rather in private I would find Him out:
He has some marks, which if we were alone,
Would better be to me, then others, known.
Ulysses at the Quaeries that she made,
Smiling, thus to Telemachus then said;
Son, her advise with me apart to go,
Then we may one another better know:
Shabby my Looks, so mean my Garments be,
Now for her Lord she will not acknowledge me.
But now let us consult what is to be done,
If any amongst these People kill but He alludes to the Laws of the Athenians,
who punished all Homicide, though unwittingly committed on the meanest of the
people, with Exile for one year. This appears from these Verses of Euripides in
his Hippolytus, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
When Hercules in his distraction had slain two sons of Iphiclus's and one of
his own, as soon as his passion was over, he was desired by Iphiclus and
Licymnius to absent himself for one year (...)(says Nicolans Damascinus) as
the Custom is, and then to return to Thebes again. pag^ 202
One,
Seldom but few in his behalf will stand,
He flying, straight forsakes his Native Land:
But we have many slain, the greatest too,
In Ithaca, resolve what is best to do.
When to his Father thus his Son replies;
You, Sir, best know, you are ablest to advise,
No Mortal whosoe'r, as goes the Fame,
Better then you, Sir, plays an after-game:
Lay you your Plot, and we'll do what we can,
Nor Valor want we, if it be in Man.
When thus the subtle King himself expressed;
I Will speak my Judgment, what to me seems best:
First let us bath, then put rich Garments on,
The like must be by all the Women done:
Let Phemius march before us in great state,
As if we Dances were to celebrate;
That some may say without they Nuptials hear,
As they pass by, or those inhabit near,
E're flying Fame the City give the Alarm
Of this their Deaths, or we walk to the Farm,
And there consider in the shady Grove
What Is best to do, and what seems best to Jove.
Their King they, as the Oracle, obeyed;
All bath, and in rich Habits ready made:
The Women dressed themselves in gay Attire,
And Phemius, as at Nuptials, ^ouch'd his Lyre:
Sweetly he sung, their light Feet beat the Ground,
And Dancing, make the arched Hall resound:
Then some did say that heard without the Gate,
The Queen had chosen now a Princely Mate,
And would no longer keep so great a House,
Nor more expect her so long-look'd-for Spouse:
So some did say, but nothing knew. Mean while
Eurynome baths, and noints with purest Oil
Ulysses, and in Royal Habit clads,
And to his Face and Person, Pallas adds
Beauty and Size, and on his Tresses sets
Luster that shone like purple Violets:
As Gold and Silver by some Artist wrought,
Whom As the Poets feigned all Artists in general to receive their skill from
Minerva; so in particular those that dealt in Metals, from Mulciber, that is,
Vulcan: and therefore they are both nominated in this place. What the Ancients
meant by Vulcan, we find in these Verses of Orpheus, (...),
(...).
Nymphs water, Vulcan Fire, Ceres Grain,
But Neptune and Enosichthon are the Main.
Whence because all Metals are by the medium of Fire subjected to the Artists,
they were esteemed to be under the protection of Vulcan.
Mulciber or bright Minerva taught,
On's Head and Shoulders she such splendour strow'd,
That from the Bath he marched out like a God,
And where he sat, that place resumes again:
Then thus he spoke unto his self-willed Queen;
Beyond all Women thou unhappy art,
Since Heaven has so obdurated thy Heart.
What other Woman would be kept off so,
From her dear Lord, who, through a world of Woe,
The twentieth year himself to her addressed?
Nurse, go and make my Bed, that I may rest:
Thy soul is steel, or else thy Heart would ache.
When to the King Penelope thus spoke;
I never, Sir, affected was with Pride,
Nor Rich admire, nor thee, though Poor, deride:
But I remember well what then thou were,
When me thou left'st, if such a one thou art.
But Euryclea, go and make that Bed
In the great Chamber which Ulysses made
Himself, with so much Art, soft Blankets let
Be put on straight, and a rich Coverlet.
Thus said the Queen, her dearest Lord to try.
But He offended, made this rough Reply;
Strangely you talk, your Order's something od,
Who can remove that Bed, unless some God?
Celestials may by their Supernal Power,
But never Mortal shall, though in his Flower:
This as a signal framed I with much Art,
And greatness, none but I performed that part.
A stately Olive in my Court did sprout,
With spreading branches, like a Beam about.
This, when I had our Wedding-Chamber built,
With well-lay'd stone, well plastered, seil'd, and guilt,
Made able Doors, close by the Root I lopt,
And off luxurious Boughs, and Foliage cropped;
Then with an Augre bored, and by a line
I cut and joined whate'r I should conjoyn:
So of this Olive I my Bed-sted made,
With Ivory, Silver, and with Gold in-laid,
And strongly corded then with It seems in the time of our Poet, before the use
of Cordage, they bound their Beds with Thongs of Leather; beautified with
colors answerable to the quality of the Person.
purple Thongs,
This the great signal which to me belongs;
Nor know I, Madam, if you used it yet,
Or else removed it in some sullen fit.
Thus doubts removed, weeping, she quits her place,
And throws her self into her Lord's embrace:
There she with Kisses smothering Him, his Neck
Embracing, said; Thy rage, Ulysses, check,
Since thou so prudent art, and know that we
Shared equal Woes, divorced by Fates Decree,
From joys of Marriage in a spightful hour,
I, in my prime, Thou in thy sparkling Flower:
Be not offended that I thus delaid
Thy dear embrace, that always am afraid,
Lest some (for many such Contrivements lay)
Me with dissembling Language should betray.
This similitude, consisting of seven verses in the original, is generally
accounted spurious by the Grammarians, as not answering to what preceded: some
there be, who by another sort of interpunction make another sense corresponding
with the argument, thus; Holen had never consented to the enticements of a
Stranger, had she considered what I have said, but because she was cheated (
Venus representing Paris in the form of Menelaus her Husband) the Grecians
undertook the expedition for her recovery: pardon me therefore if I be
sollicitous to know your person before I acknowledge you for my Husband.
Helen had never offended as she did,
And changed her Husband's for a foreign Bed,
Had she but dreamt the Greeks should e're transport,
From Ilium, her to Menelaus Court:
But Jove into that error let her fall,
Because she not considered at all
The mischiefs that might happen, which has wrought
So strongly, and on us these sorrows brought.
Your Bed, which you described, I not deny,
Me has convinced, which none but you, and I,
And Actoris, (my dearest Fathers Gift,
When I his Roofs for this your Palace left)
E're yet beheld; She keeps locked up and barred.
Now I believe all what before seemed hard.
This said, a gentle Grief his Wrath disarms,
He weeps, his Queen embracing in his Arms:
As when the Sky after a Tempest cleers,
And Coast to storm-strest Mariners appears,
A few escaping swim unto the Land,
And their bulg'd Vessel bedded, leave in Sand,
Their bodies wrapped in Weeds, the shore they reach,
Their weary Limbs reposing on the Beach;
So glad was she her Husband to behold,
Nor could her Arms from his embrace unfold:
And in this Posture they had been till Day,
But that Minerva stopped Aurora's way,
Not suffering her from the Ocean to approach,
Nor her swift steeds join in her golden The Poets attribute a Chariot to the
Sun in regard of the swiftness of his motion, and to express what is beyond the
object of sense by that which is subject unto it. His Horses, as their names
express, are no other then Light and Heat, whereof the Sun is the fountain.
Homer here allows him but two, but the rest do generally attribute four to him:
Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Interea volucres Pyrois, Eous, and Aethon,
Solis equi, quartusque Phlegon hinnitibus auras
Flammiferis implent, etc.
Mean while the Suns swift Horses; hot Pyrous,
Light Aethon, fiery Phlegon, bright Eous
Neighing aloud, inflame the air with heat,
And with their thundering Hoofs the barrier beat.

Coach,
Lampus and Phaeton, who quick Light convay
To Mortals, called the Horses of the Day.
When thus Ulysses to his Queen begun;
My Dear, our business yet we have not done,
A world of several Labors we must through,
All which necessity compells unto:
For so Tiresias me foretelling, said,
When I descended to the infernal shade,
How we in safety might return t'enquire:
My Dear, in private let us now retire,
Where we may please our selves in gentle rest.
When thus the Joyful Queen her self expressed;
Your Bed shall ready be, Sir, when you please,
But since the Gods you convoyed through the Seas,
To your own Palace, and your Native Land,
Since well your future state you understand:
Now tell me what I must here-after hear,
Better to know, then not know, what to fear.
Then he replied; Why my ensuing Fate
Would thou, dear Wife, that I should now relate?
But I shall tell thee and the Truth recite,
Which neither me nor you will much delight.
I many populous Cities must explore,
Still carrying in my Hands a handsome Oar,
Until I find a People saw not yet
The swelling Main, nor I find that the Ancients generally interpreted this
place of Epirus, not far distant from Ithaca. So Pa^sanias in his description
of Africa, (...), (...). etc. Pyrthus being highly conceited of his strength,
enco^ntred the Carthaginians ( the most experienced of all the Barbarians,
being descended from the Phenicians) in a Naval Fight, his Armada consisting
only of Epirots, who when Troy was taken knew not the Se^, nor use of Salt, as
Homer testifies. These that knew not the Sea, were ignorant of the use of Salt,
according to our Poet: whence it may be conjectured that he knew of no other
Salt but what was made of Sea water. The other token of their ignorance of the
Sea was, that they should not know an Oar, but call it by the Name of an
instrument wherewith they winnowed Corn.
Salt use with their Meat,
That know not how to steer with sails a-trip,
Nor handle Oars, that Wings are to a ship,
My sign shall be when first I meet a Man,
Mistakes the Oar I carry for a Van:
Then in the Country I should fix my Oar,
And there great Neptune, the Ocean's King, implore,
Offering a Lamb, a Bull, and pregnant Sow;
From thence then Home, to my own Palace go,
And there whole Hecatombs must sacrifice,
To all the Gods who plant the ample Skies.
Then Death, from Sea, shall me, grown Old, arrest,
When I am happy, and my People blessed.
I this response had from Tiresias shade.
Then to the King Penelope thus said;
If Thee thy Age the Gods more tranquil Doom,
Then we preceding Sorrows may ore-come.
Betwixt themselves they such Discourses had,
Mean while, their Bed, Nurse and Eurynome made,
And lighted Lamps; when they had finished all,
Back Euryclea goes into the Hall,
Eurynome, bearing a Taper, led
Them to their Chamber, and their Marriage Bed,
Then left them to themselves, where the ancient Feat,
Love's sweetest Lesson, they with joy repeat.
When the Young Prince, and his bold Swains forbid
Them longer Dance, as ordered, so they did.
Thence, weary, then to their Repose retired,
But when they had enjoyed what both desired,
They fell into Discourse; his well-pleased Spouse,
Tells him how much she suffered in his House;
What Revel-rout the Suitors there did keep,
Devouring his best Beevs, and fattest Sheep,
Drinking whole Tuns of Wine: but he relates,
A Series of his Sufferings, and sad Fates,
Pleased with his Tale, in sleep she could not fall,
Nor close her Eyes, till he had told her all.
Who first recounts, how the The Ciconians were a people that inhabited
Ismarus, a City of Thrace, as we have already seen in the 9 of the Odysses.
They were assistant to the Trojans, reckoned up among Auxiliaries, Eu (...).
'T (...).
Euphemus led the valiant Cicons on,
Grandchild to glorious Ceas, Troizen's Son.

Ciconians he
Ore-come; next, what the The Lotophagi were inhabitants of the Island Menynx,
which lies before the lesser Syrtis, so called, because they fed on the fruit
of the Lotus tree, of which there is great abundance in that Isle.
Lotophagie be;
How Cyclops used him, how he Him did treat,
Who without mercy his Companions eat.
How Aeolus Home, him kindly feasting, sent,
But Fate did his arrival then prevent;
Back from his Native shore a Heurican
Bore him, lamenting, through the boisterous Main:
Of Of these Giants, see Odyss. 10. where the story is delivered at large.
Laestrygonian Giants he tells then,
How they destroyed his Ships, and all his men:
How with one Vessel he escaped to Sea:
Next, tells her Circe's Charms and Subtilty:
Then how he went to Pluto's Dismal Gates,
What of Tiresias he inquired, relates:
There all his Friends and Mother he beheld,
Who bore and fostered him a little Child:
Next, Sirens heard, Charybdis rocky Cape,
And Scylla past, whence seldom any escape:
Then how his men the Sun's fair Cattle slew;
How Jove his Vessel up with Lightning blew,
All his Associats swallowed in the Sound;
How he escaped, the Isle Ogygia found,
Where fair Calypso Him to be her Lord,
Long courted, treating both at Bed and Board:
That Him she would immortal make she said,
Never to be Old, but all would not persuade.
Next how He came to the Pheacian shore,
Whom there they all did as a God adore:
Of Gold and Garments a rich Present made,
And then by Sea to Ithaca convay'd.
As thus he talked: sleep seized him unawares
In golden Chains, which cures Heart-eating Cares.
But Pallas then another Plot contrived,
When sleep enough his Spirits had revived,
And his dear Wife's embraces; Daun's approach,
From Sea she hastens in her golden Coach,
Conveying Light to Mortals: from his Bed
Ulysses rising, to his Queen thus sed;
We both have surfeited with Grief, my Dear,
Thou in my absence many troubles here;
But me the God's wearied with Woe and Toil,
Crossing my Passage to my Native Soil:
Now in one Bed we former Comforts find,
Next to Domestic cares let us turn our mind.
What sheep the wasting Suitors did consume,
I Will take so many as shall fill their Room:
The Greeks that number shall for me provide,
Till all my Coats and Stals are re-supply'd:
But I must go now to the Field, to give
My Father Comfort, who for me does grieve.
But, Dearest Wife, Thee I command, although
Thou art Discreet (for straight the Fame will go
Of these proud Suitors slaughter to the Town)
To keep within thy Chamber, nor come down,
Nor see, nor speak with any there. This done,
He arms himself, the like commands his Son,
Eumaeus, and Philaetius, and all there,
That straight in glittering Armor they appear,
All clad in Steel were, straight their King the obeyed,
Opened the Gates, whom forth Ulysses led:
Now the Sun rose, whom Pallas though convay'd
Forth from the City covered with a shade.
scene from book 24 Johanni Markham Armigero Tabulam hanc LMDDDO Lib. 24.



HOMERS ODYSSES.
THE TWENTY FOURTH BOOK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Hermes conducts to Shades the Suitors Ghosts,
Greek Heroes meet them on the Infernal Coasts.
Amphimedon and Agamemnon talk.
Laertes found in his own Garden walk.
A War begins. Eupitheus sad Decease.
Pallas like Mentor makes a lasting Peace.
CYLLENIAN He has this Epithet attributed to him from the Mountain Cyllene in
Arcadia, where he was especially worshipped.
Hermes leads to the infernal Strand,
The Suitors Mercury was feigned to pass between Jupiter and Pluto, fetching
Ghosts from the under-shadows, and carrying them thither, because he taught
that no man came into the World, or went out of it, without the Divine
appointment. Which office we find generally attributed to him by the Poets.
Virgil, Aeneid. 4. -- bac animas ille evocat Orco
Pallentes, alias sub tristia Tartara mittit:
Dat somnos adimitque, and lumina morte resignat.
With this pale Souls from Erebus he calls
And others in sad Tartarus inthrals.
Procures, and Sleep repels; shuts dying Eyes.

Ghosts, armed with his golden Wand,
With which He seels up Mortal's Eyes from Cares,
And opes again to follow their Affairs.
He drives them on, they after murmuring flock
Like Bats, who in the belly of a Rock,
When any one drops from their Order, out,
All fluttering, rise; and Humming, fly about:
So Hermes lead them muttering through broad ways:
They reach the effluxes of the swelling Seas,
Then Leucas rock, thence on their Course they keep
To the Sun's Portals, and the Town of sleep,
And straight they enter in a flowery Mead,
Where, after Death, departed souls reside:
And first the shades they of Achilles found,
Patroclus and Antilochus so renowned,
And Ajax for his Valor honored most,
Except Pelides of the Grecian Host.
About Him nearer the pale Suitors drew,
And Agamemnon with his slaughtered Crew,
Lamenting, who were by Aegisthus slain,
To whom Achilles shade did thus complain;
Atrides, we supposed that thundering Jove
Most Thee, of all the Grecian Chiefs, did love:
Because so many thou did lead, and such,
Who Troy subdued, where they endured so much,
And were Thou, ah! so barbarously destroyed?
But none that is born can sullen Fate avoid.
Would Thou had died with Honor in Command,
And met thy destiny on the Phrygian Strand,
Then had the Grecians bravely Thee interred,
And Thou great Glory on thy Son conferred:
But now on Thee a sadder Death did seize.
Then He replied; Renowned Aeacides,
Thou far from Greece fell'st on the Trojan Plain,
Many on both sides in thy Rescue slain,
Whilst in a dustie Whirlwind Thou did lie,
Thy Valor lost, forgot thy Chivalrie:
All day we fought, and had not then given back,
Had not Jove scared us with a Thunder-crack:
Then off we bore Thee laying on a Bed,
Bathed and anointed, on thy Corpse we shed
Rivers of Tears, and offered Thee our Hair:
Thetis with all her Nymphs then did repair,
For they our Sorrows to the Sea could hear,
Such Vollying Groans arose from Grief, and Fear;
And we had thence with our whole Navy fled,
But that Old Nestor, grave in Counsel, did
Our rashness stop, and thus to us did say;
Fly not for shame, once valiant Grecians, stay;
His Mother, with her Sea- Nymphs in a Train,
Comes to lament her Offspring, from the Main.
These words straight dissipate their Panyck fears,
The Old Nereus, from whom the Sea- Nymphs were called Nereiades.
Sea-gods daughters thronging round thy Hearse
Their Griefs with Cries and floods of Tears expressed,
Covering thy Corpse with an immortal Vest.
There the nine Muses sung alternatly
Thy Funeral-song, thy woeful Elegy.
Thou could not see an Ey of all were there,
So sweet, so sad their Notes, without a Tear.
There seventeen Days, and Nights, we never slept,
Whilst the immortal Gods, and Mortals wept;
On the eighteenth we kindled thy lofty Pyre,
Casting fat sheep and Cattle on the Fire,
And thee imbalm'd with Honey and pure Oil,
And the Gods Vests consumed upon the Pyle;
Both Horse and Foot, completely armed, surround
The crackling Flames, whilst doleful Cries resound.
The Fire once out, thy It was an ancient and long continued custom, among both
Greeks and Romans, to burn the bodies of the dead, to put their ashes into Urns
either of Stone or Metal, and to enclose them in their Sepulchers. Iliad 23.
(...),
(...).
Ah! in that golden Vrn our Relics save,
Which thee thy Goddess-Mother Thetis gave.
Soon as the Ashes fell, with tears and groans,
They in a golden Vrn enclose his bones,
Which Wrapped in Linen at Achilles Tent
They leaving, next design the Monument.
The same we find in use among the Romans, mentioned by Tibullus. -- Non hic
mihi Matter
Quae legate in moestos ossa perufta sinus.
compared with these of Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Quodque rogis superest una
requiescit in Vrna. And what the fire had left lay in one Urn.
Bones we gather up,
And early luting in her golden Cup,
With Wine and Oil thy Mother we present,
By Vulcan wrought, which her This Cup was given Thetis by Bacchus for her kind
treatment and reception of him, when being pursued by Lycurgus, he took
sanctuary in the Sea. Which Vulcan bestowed on Bacchus for his entertainment
given him in the Island Naxus.
Lyaeus sent;
In this promiscuously thy Bones they laid,
With thy Patroclus relics, but they had
From Antilochus distance, whom thou honour'd'st most
After thou had thy dear Companion lost.
Over your Urns we did a Mountain rear,
And consecrated then your Strabo says that the Tomb of Achilles was extant in
his time, at the Promontory Sigeum, with a Temple also dedicated to him; the
Tombs also of Patroclus and Antil^chus; to all of whom the inhabitants of new
Ilium sacrificed.
Sepulcher
Near the broad Hellespont, that all may see
That now sail by, or shall here-after be.
Thy Mother graced with Games thy Funeral-Rites,
And to rich Prizes our prime Chiefs invites.
I have seen many Hero's Obsequies,
And Princes emulous to win the Prize,
But none like Thine, Thou would admire to have seen,
What Thetis there the silver-footed Queen
Placed for Rewards, so thy immortal Name
Stands in the Records of eternal Fame.
But what gained I by War, that lost my Life,
At my Return by Aegisthus and my Wife.
Thus they discoursed, when the pale Suitors Ghosts
Hermes had brought to the infernal Coasts:
All wondered at them much when near they drew.
Amphimedon, Atrides shadow knew:
For Him in Ithaca He treated had,
To whom thus first pale Agamemnon said;
Melanthius Son, what to the shades has sent
These of one Age, all Persons eminent?
None that their handsome- Mein, and Habits see,
Can judge them less then Princes Sons to be.
Whether did Neptune them with storms engage,
And swallowed amongst rough Billows in his Rage?
Or by Profane at the Altars lost their Lives,
Or fighting for their Country, and their Wives?
Pray tell me, for I boast my self your Guest,
Since to your Palace I my self addressed,
Moving Ulysses there with us to Join,
And Menelaus, on our Trojan War.
grand Design.
A month at Sea, and lingering there we stayed,
E're we the City-sacker could persuade.
When thus Amphimedon's shadow made reply;
What thou rememberst now I not deny,
But I to thee our Tragedy shall relate,
And how we suffered under cruel Fate.
We long did court absent Ulysses Spouse;
Marriage, though loathsome, she would not refuse,
Nor yet comply, but fostering secret Hate,
Our Death's she plotted, by untimely Fate:
But thus her Suitors first she did deceive;
She had forsooth a curious Web to weave,
And thus to all said; Though my Lord be dead,
Suspend your suit, and urge me not to wed
Till this be wrought, that when his sad Fates call,
Must serve Laertes for his Funeral Pall:
So shall no Grecian Lady me asperse,
That I with naught adorned his Funeral Hearse.
Thus did the Queen our easy minds persuade,
By Night unraveling what by Day she made,
Holding three Summers thus, and Winters on:
But when the fourth year's gliding Spheres begun,
One of her Women her design revealed,
And buisie her, unweaving we beheld.
Discovered thus she ends what she begun,
And showed it us more glorious then the Sun.
Fortune at last Ulysses Home convaid;
Some time he at his Swine-herds Cottage staid,
There came his Son Telemachus, mean while,
In a stout ship, returned from sandy Pyle.
Where they, as soon as he had thus arrived,
The unhappy Suitors woeful Deaths contrived.
They to the City came, Ulysses last,
But first Telemachus to Court made have;
By Eumaeus led, the King came strangely dressed,
Like an old Beggar in a tattered Vest,
Leaning upon a Staff, not any there
Knew him disguised, though they our Elders were:
In his own House him did we strike and scoff,
Yet he bore all, and patiently came off,
And well our Buffoonries and Drolling took.
But when incensed Jove did him provoke,
That He his Son bid all his Arms convey,
And keep in Private under Lock and Key,
Moves his dear Wife to fetch his Bow and Steel,
To shoot for her, which after we did feel,
Which our Destruction proved and Overthrow:
For none of us could draw Ulysses Bow,
Nor bend, had not of it the lest Command.
But when the tough Yew came into his Hand,
Then we all ranted not to let him ha'it,
Though he should never so much for it entreat,
Only Telemachus bids Him try his skill:
He bends the Bow, and shoots through all the steel:
Then standing up, he forth his Arrows got,
And frowning direly, first Antinous shot,
Then deadly shafts dispensing through the Hall,
Many he kills, thick they together fall.
Aloud they groan, and falling smear all ore
With reeking Blood, and Brains, the marble Floor.
Thus finished we our woeful Destiny,
Our Bodies in his House neglectedly,
Nor none of all our Friends know where they are,
That they might of our Funerals take care.
Then thus Atrides Ghost to Him replies;
Oh Thou renowned Laertiades,
Thou by thy Prowess have thy Wife regained,
And she has well her Chastity maintained,
For which, Penelope shall bear the Name,
For ever in the Registers of Fame.
Songs of Icarius Daughter they shall write,
Shall Mortals, and Immortal Gods delight,
But Clytemnestra, daughter of Tyndareus and Leda, who slew her Husband at his
return from Troy, as is already delivered. Odyss. 11. (...)
(...) --
But Aegisthus and my wicked Wife slew me.
Tyndarus Daughter, my accursed Spouse,
Her own dear Lord murdered in his own House.
Scriblers of thee shall hateful Ballads frame,
The whole Sex aspersing with eternal shame.
Amongst themselves such sad Discourse they found,
In Pluto's dismal Kingdoms under ground.
But they went through the City to the Field
Laertes had with so much labor tilled;
There stood his House with Cottages beset,
Where all his Servants sleep, and drink, and eat;
There was an aged Sicilian Woman there,
Who of the Old Man took especial Care:
Then to his Son and Swains Ulysses spoke;
Go to yon House, and a fat Porker take,
One of the best, and there for supper dress;
But to my Father I Will my self address,
To try if He, when I my self shall show,
After long absence, me at first will know.
He to his servants gave his Arms, this said,
Then to the Palace with all speed they made.
Mean while Ulysses marched the Garden round,
Yet in those spacious Walks not Dolius found,
Nor any of his sons, nor servants there,
At Hedging they and trimming Quick-sets were:
But found his Father Cicero in Catone majore m^ntions this place thus; At
H^merus ^^ertem colentem agrum and cum ster^^ rantem facit: He seems to have
r^^d (...), otherwise it is a slip of his Memory.
pruning of a Plant,
A sordid Mantle on, both thin and scant,
About his Ankles course Gamasshoes tied,
Which He against scratching Brambles did provide,
On his Hands Mittens, lest they might grow red,
A Goat-skin Bonnet on his woeful Head.
Ulysses knew Him straight with sorrow pined,
And Age, that loads the Body and the mind,
Weeping he near a stately Pear Tree stood,
Contriving with himself whether he should
Kiss and embrace his Father, and mean while,
Tell how He came unto his Native Soil;
Or else enquire of him, and Questions ask:
The last seems best, and the more easy Task,
His Humor first with rugged terms to try:
To whom Ulysses, this resolved, drew nigh,
Who digging round a Plant, hung down his Head,
When to his Father thus Ulysses said;
Old Man, thou play'st most skilfully thy part,
That show such Care, such Industry, and Art:
No Plant, no Fig Tree, Olive, Vine, nor Pear,
But both in rank and file well-ordered are;
Yet let me tell Thee, nor be angry though,
Small Cultrature do on thy self bestow:
Thee Age and Melancholy has decayed,
Thou show in tatters thus as thou were mad,
Or does thy Master in such weeds thee cloth,
As due rewards of Negligence and Sloth?
There Is Majesty on thy Brows, thy Limbs are large,
A Kingly Office fitter to discharge,
If thou would bath, and eat, and drink; for Rest,
And soft Repose are for the Aged best.
But Old Man, tell me, and the Truth impart.
Whose Garden keep'st thou, and whose Servant the art?
And one word more, that I informed may be,
If I Am in Ithaca, as one told me,
A simple Rustic, whom in the way I met,
And could no more out of the Fellow get.
About a Friend, alive, if still he breath,
Or Dead, descended to the House of Death.
Pray listen, Sir, and well me understand,
I fairly treated him in my own Land,
Not any Guest did e're to me resort,
Found kinder Entertainment in my Court:
He told me he was born in Ithaca,
Laertes was his Father he did say.
When to my House himself he first addressed,
I lead him in, though I had many Guests;
And hospitable Gifts, such as I could,
Presented him, ten talents of pure gold,
A silver Goblet graven, and refined,
Twelve Tap'stry pieces, twelve fair Vests, unlin'd,
As many Robes and Mantles for his wear,
And four young Damsels, all well-bred and fair,
Which he himself selected from the rest.
His Father weeping, thus himself expressed;
Thou art a Stranger sure to this our Coast,
That ask'st such questions; all thy Gifts are lost,
Since here unjust and wicked People reign,
And whatsoever he had, thou gav'st in vain;
But had thou found Him living here, he would
Have made a fair Return of what he could:
For He is just, and scorns ungrateful shifts,
Had laden thee with hospitable Gifts.
But, good Sir, say, and do not me deceive;
How long since is it your Friend you did receive,
He was my Son, though most Unfortunate,
Whom far from Friends, his Country, and Estate,
Or Fishes have devoured in the Sea,
Or Beasts, and Birds, ashore, have made their Prey:
Nor could his Parents weep upon his Hearse,
Nor his dear Wife, whom Fame could never asperse,
Deplore him dying, nor close up his Eyes,
Which honorable makes his Obsequies.
So much be pleased I may you engage,
To tell me where you dwell, and Parentage,
Where lies your Vessel, that you hither brought,
Or did some Strangers ship you hither freight?
Then hoysing sail you on this Coast did leave.
Then said the King, a brief account receive.
King Aphid's son from Alybas, or Alyba, a City in Italy, afterward called
Metapontium. Eustathius observes that the proper names in this place are on
purpose feigned by the Poet. Alybas from (...), to denote his Wanderings abroad,
Aphidas, to signify his munificence, which appears in his present to Ulysses,
and Polypemon to denote the multitude of his sufferings in these his Travails.
Alybas I came,
As Sicily I past, Eperitus my Name,
Missing my Course, against my Will I stood
For Ithaca, my ship lies in the road.
Five years it is since from me Ulysses went,
Glad Omens to his Voyage gave consent:
We of each other joyfully took leave,
Hoping to give rich Presents, and receive
When next we met. This said, a dismal Cloud
Of darkning sorrow did his Temples shroud;
With both his Hands Casting of Dust upon their heads seems to have been a
symptom of extremity of grief and sorrow among the ancients. So is Achilles
described lamenting the death of his dear Patroclus, Iliad 18. (...)
(...)
(...) --
A cloud, this said, upon his Brows he hung.
Dust on his manly Face and Forehead flung.
Then falling down, his golden Tresses tore.
And with his Royal habit swept the floor.
Whom Virgil follows Aeneid 12. Demittunt mentes, it scissa vest Latinus
Conjugis attonitus fatis, urbisque ruina.
Caniciem immundo perfusam pulvere turpans.
Their Courage fails, the King his garments rent,
At his Wifes fate, and ruined Town struck dead,
Throwing foul Dust upon his silver-head.

Dust on his Head he threw,
Poud'ring his silver Hair, deep sighing too.
At this Ulysses moved, short breath did draw,
When Him he in so sad a posture saw,
He kissing, and embracing, said; I Am here,
Whom, Sir, you have not seen in twenty year:
Now weep no more, no longer thus complain,
The insolent Corrivals are all slain,
And dearly paid for all their mischiefs done.
Then said Laertes; If thou art my Son,
How came thou hither? I Will some token see,
That I may be persuaded thou art He.
Then to his Father thus the Son replies;
Sir, on this Cicatrice first cast your eyes,
Got by a Boar, when I a hunting went,
Where you, Sir, and my dearest Mother sent
Me to her Father, promised Gifts to have,
Which his word keeping there he kindly gave.
All Plants within thy Orchard well I know,
What Trees I begged, and which thou did bestow:
When I a boy, with thee went up and down,
Their several names thou told'st me One by One,
Pear Trees thrice ten, twelve aple, forty Fig,
Vines fifty, gave me with full clusters big:
Of every sort, you some on me bestowed,
Which seasonable showrs with Fruit did load.
This said, He trembling did the Scar behold,
Then did his Child in strict embrace infold,
Who fainting, then supported by his Son,
Recovering Spirits thus ore-joy'd begun;
I know, O Jove, now Gods in Heaven reside,
Since these proud Suitors punished are for Pride,
We stand must on our Guard, for much, I doubt,
Against us the whole City will draw out,
And send to the For the Cephallenians were Masters of several Isles;
Cephallenia, Ithaca, Zacynthus, etc. as appears from the enumeration of them
Iliad 2. (...)
(...),
Ulysses the stout Cephallenians led,
Whom Ithaca, and steep Neritus bred,
Who in the Crocyl and Egylipe dwell,
And those that Samos and Zacynthos till.

Cephallenians for aid.
Fear not, Ulysses to his Father said;
Nor such things Value I more then a Pin,
But to yon House we'll go upon the Green,
My Son, Eumoeus, and Philoetius there
I sent, that they our Supper should prepare.
This said, they walked together, as designed,
Where with Telemachus the rest they find;
Then dressing Meat, and mixing Wine; mean while
Laertes Maid him baths, and 'noints with Oil,
Clothed in a Royal Vest, whom Pallas straight
Made Plump, and Fatter, adding to his Height.
Come from the Bath, his Son admiring stood,
To see his Father look so like a God:
To whom he said, Some Power with wondrous Art
Has made Thee Fat and Fair, as e're thou were.
Then He; Would Jove, Phoebus, and Pallas, make
Me such as when I Nericus is the ancient name of the Island Leucas, which
Strabo calls (...), which at first was a peninsula under the command of the
Acarnanians, but afterward made an Island by the industry of the Corinthians,
called Leucas from Leucadius the brother of Penelope.
Nericus did take,
When I the Cephallenians did sway,
And had well-arm'd with thee been Yesterday:
Those Suitors I my self had all destroyed,
And thou thy Palace had with joy enjoyed.
Thus they discoursed amongst themselves: mean while
The Rusticks come from their agrestick Toil.
Supper prepared, they down in order sat
On several Seats, and fall unto their Meat:
When Dolius and his Sons enter the Hall,
Weary, the old Sicilian them did call,
And special care of Him and His she took,
And much to Dolius, ancient grown, did look.
When they Ulysses saw, and knew, they all
Stood wonder-struck, like statues in the Hall:
To whom Ulysses in kind Language said;
Father, sit down, and be not so dismayed,
Fall to your Supper now, no time neglect,
We tarried for you, and did long expect.
Dolius, this said, no longer wondering stands,
But to Ulysses running, kissed his Hands,
And thus ore-joy'd, unto his Master spoke;
Sir, since you are come, for whom we long did look,
Some God has brought you to your Native Soil,
Let him convert to joy all former Toil.
Knows, Sir, Penelope that you are here?
If not, let me the joyful message bear.
When thus Ulysses said; Old Man, she knows,
Fall to thy Victuals, and no time now loose.
This said, down sat he in his polished seat;
Whilst Dolius Sons about Ulysses get,
And his Hands kissing, thence they straight retire,
And sat in order near their aged Sire.
Thus they at Supper sat, whilst flying Fame
Did through the Town the Suitors Deaths proclaim.
Soon as they heard, together all resort,
And sighing went up to Ulysses Court:
Then they the bodies carrying, straight interr.
To other Cities some transported were
In Fishermen, who home their Bodies sent:
Which done, they all to Consultation went.
When they convened a frequent Court had made,
Eupithes rose, and to the Concourse said;
He for his Son ready with Grief to burst,
Antinous, whom Ulysses slaughtered first,
When thus he spoke, Tears trickling down his Cheeks;
Great works this Prince has finished for the Greeks:
He lanch'd a Royal Navy from our Coast,
Manned with brave men, and them and all has lost,
And now has many Cephallenians slain,
But ere he Elis, where the Epeians reign,
Or Pyle shall reach, let us his Escape prevent,
Or else for ever we may all repent:
This our Posterity will brand, if you
Not punish those your Sons and Brothers slew.
I shall in Life no longer pleasure have,
But with Grief laden sink into my Grave:
Let us his Transportation straight prevent.
This said, they all the Business much resent:
When to the Council Medon made resort,
And Phemius early from Ulysses Court:
Then standing in the midst, all were dismayed,
When Medon thus to the great Council said;
You Ithacans assembled now, hear me,
Ulysses not against the Gods Decree
This work has done, I saw a Deathless God,
Who like Old Mentor at his Elbow stood;
And when he cours'd the Suitors through the Hall,
That Power assisting, they in Heaps did fall.
These words the General Concourse much dismayed,
When thus the Hero Alitherses said;
For only he foresaw this rising Storm,
And gravely thus their Judgments did inform;
You Ithacans, now hear what I Will relate,
You are the Cause of their untimely Fate:
Mentor and Me you scorned, when you me chid,
Nor would the madness of your Sons forbid,
Who such high Mischiefs acted in his House,
Wasting his State, wronging his Virtuous Spouse:
They thought Him sure, that never He would return,
Let me advise you straight, this Court adjourn,
Nor Him oppose, lest worser you betide.
This said, they clamouring in Factions side,
But there the discontented Party stayed,
This Speech not pleased, but what Eupithes said,
And straight they arming, their Design pursue,
And forth in glittering Regiments all drew:
Eupithes the distracted Squadrons led,
Revenged He for his Son would be, He said:
But there He died, and never returned again,
When thus to Jove Minerva did complain;
O Thou who govern'st all, so favor me,
That I may know thy undisclos'd Decree:
A lingering War design'st Thou in that Isle,
Or will Thou else both Parties reconcile?
Then He who often Heaven with black Clouds does mask
Said; Daughter, why such Questions do thou ask?
What er'e thou have designed, never proved in Vain,
Has not Ulysses all the Suitors slain?
Do as thou will, and let all Quarrels cease,
And let them join in everlasting Peace:
They now being punished, let Him always reign,
They shall forget their Dear Relations slain,
And as before in blessed Union join,
Where Peace and Riches shall with Justice shine.
This said, He sends willing Minerva down,
She shoots like Lightning from Olympus Crown.
When they with Meat and Drink were well-suffic'd,
Ulysses thus the Company advised;
Go forth, and see if any draw this way.
Straight Dolius Son, as bidden, did obey:
And He a Party on the Threshold saw,
Then shouts; Ulysses, arm, they near us draw.
This said, themselves they for the Fight prepare,
Ulysses four, six Sons had Dolius there,
With these Laertes and old Dolius arm,
Age not exempts when suddain's the Alarm.
When all in complete Steel the King beheld,
Through open Gates he draws into the Field:
To them, like Mentor, the Celestial Maid
Conjoyns her self, at which Ulysses said;
Thus to his Son; Thou Wilt see in this Contest,
Who boldest are, themselves behaving best;
But do not Thou thy Ancestors disgrace,
Who never in Valor gave to any place.
Then he replied; Dear Father, you shall see,
I neither shall dishonor Them, nor Thee.
At this, Laertes much rejoicing, said;
You Gods, I hear now that which makes me glad,
That I have such a Grandchild, such a Son.
Then to Laertes Pallas thus begun;
O Arcesiades, when thou have prayed
To Jove's fair Daughter, the Celestial Maid,
Then throw thy Lance: this said, he makes his Prayer,
She gives him Strength, and first he throws his Spear,
Which pierced Eupithes Cask, and Skull, to ground
The Old Hero falls, his rattling Arms resound:
In rush Ulysses and his Valiant Son,
And at them with their Swords, and Javelins run,
And with huge slaughter they their way had made,
When Pallas loud to stop their Fury said;
Hold, hold, you Ithacans, from War abstain,
Part without bloodshed, let no more be slain.
Thus Pallas said, and Fear surpised them all,
And from their trembling Hands their Javelins fall
Upon the Ground, the Goddess threats aloud,
They fly, and to the Town for safety crowd;
Ulysses follows close the routed Crew,
And after them like a swift Eagle flew;
Then Jove at them his dreadful Thunder shot,
Which lighted just before Minerva's Foot,
When to Ulysses thus the Goddess says;
Jove's Offspring, stand, stand Laertiades,
No farther in this War thou must engage,
Lest thus displeasing, Jove thou should enrage.
The King at Pallas threatenings makes a stand,
And joyfully obeys the Maids command.
Pallas, like Mentor, as she had designed,
Thus them again in happy Peace conjoined.
FINIS.

