Mr. Denzell Hollis, HIS SPEECH TO THE LORDS, Concerning the settling of the
Queen of BOHEMIA, and her Electorall Family, in their Right and Inheritance,
with Restitution for their Sufferings.

July 9. 1641.

LONDON.

Mr. Denzell Hollis HIS SPEECH TO THE LORDS, Concerning the settling of the
Queen of Bohemia, and her Electorall Family, to their Right and Inheritance,
with restitution for their sufferings. July 9. 1641.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, have commanded
me to let your Lordships know, that they have taken into their serious
consideration, his Majesty's proposal unto them of the Manifest, in which he
is graciously pleased to declare his pious intentions concerning his Royal
Sister, the Prince Palatine her Son, and the rest of the Electorall Family.

They do with all humbleness acknowledge his Majesty's favor, in
communicating unto them any part of his Royal thoughts, and asking their
advice and Counsel, in a business that does so nearly concern him; as needs
must the happiness, nay the subsistence of these distressed Princes, of so
glorious an extraction, their veins being enriched with the same blood, (that
is) from so Royal Ancesters, derived with glory into his Sacred Person.

And in that relation, the House of Commons looks upon them with an eye of
tenderness, wishing that every drop of that Princely blood, may ever be
Illustrated with Honor and Happiness: That his Majesty may be Crowned with
this blessing, To see nothing but Glory in himself, and in all that bow unto
him.

To hear then, that these Princes, so nearly allied unto the King, should
suffer that which is so unworthy of them, instead of Honor, of Greatness, to
find Oppression, instead of a fortune answerable to their Birth and Relation,
to have their ancient Patrimony torn from them, and detained by a hand of
Violence, is a thing which makes our ears to tingle, and our hearts to rise
within us.

My Lords, The Loyal Subject of England is so well tuned in a sweet agreeing
harmony to the Person of his Prince, that he is affected with the least touch
upon any part of the Princely string, and answers it instantly with a sound
proportionable; if it be good and pleasant, with joy and exultation; if harsh
and displeasant, with sorrow and lamentation; but a sorrow not womanish, and
fatuant, but accompanied with indignation, and vigorous magnanimous resolution,
to be avenged upon whosoever dare give offense to our Royal Sovereign.

This then is enough to make us zealous for the redress of the Prince Electors
wrongs, to desire (with impatience) to see him reinvested in his rightful
possessions, were there nothing else to move us to it, but our love and
affection, and our duty to the King.

But my Lords, There is yet another motive, which has a strong irresistible
operation with us; and it is the consideration, how much this is of importance
to the good of Religion, the advancement of the Protestant party, and the
redeeming many souls from their Antichristian bondage; which has a double
aspect; and relates to us, not only as we are fellow members with them of the
true Church, which obliges us to a care and defense of them, and gives us an
assurance of a reward in heaven: But does more particularly concern us in point
of Policy and Reason of State, by supporting our Allies, to advance this
Kingdom to the highest pitch of Greatness and Reputation, to make us
formidable abroad to the enemies of our Church and State, and so enjoy Peace,
and Safety, and Tranquillity at home.

For my Lords, the Protestant Religion, and this Kingdom, are like Hyppocrates
Twins, that must both live and die together.

It is madness to think this State can subsist, if Religion be subverted; and
as great a madness to think our Religion can continue here, if we suffer it to
be destroyed and eradicated out of our neighbor Countries; which can no more
be, (that is our Religion and this Kingdom be preserved) when our neighbors
of the same Religion and Belief with us be consumed, than a Fort can hold out,
when all the outworks be taken; or the heart preserved, when a Gangrene has
seized on the outward parts of the body.

My Lords, as the true Religion is in the truth, the heart of England, which
gives it life, and makes it flourish with strength and power* so is England,
(in politic respect) the heart of the Protestant Religion in all the other
parts of Christendom; and upon occasion, must send out supply into all the
neighboring Countries, professing the same Religion with it; which (to be
themselves in safety) must be under the Protection of this Fort, under
Contribution to this Garrison.

And on the other side, if these Countries be one after another invaded and
possessed by the enemies of our Religion, that great Tie of Religion between
us, and those Bonds be dissolved, which only can unite and strengthen our
mutual affections and relations; as if they got one part, their appetite will
increase soon to swallow up another.

First, the Palatinate; then the other parts of Germany; afterward the Low
Countries; and then let us think in what condition England will stand? It will
be left as a Cottage in a Vineyard; as a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumers; as a
besieged City, when all the Defenses are gone; it will soon fall to be a prey
to the enemy.

My Lords, This consideration likewise works with the Commons of England; and
as the Wiseman is to have his eyes in his head, and look before him; so they do
look before them, and had rather see this evil met half way, than stay till
it come to them; rather see the eating Gangrene of the Austrian ambition in
Germany, than tarry till it seize upon the vital parts of this Island, and the
death of Religion inevitably follow.

This business took up a serious debate, and after much time, and many
Arguments spent upon the Subject, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
assembled in Parliament, came to this Resolution which was here read. This they
have commanded me to represent unto your Lordships, and desire your Lordships
will join with them in a tender of the like advice unto his Majesty, and
approbation of his Royal Intendments.

And likewise, that his Majesty may be moved in the name of both houses, to
recommend this busi^esse unto his Parliament of Scotland, to have the consent
and furtherance of that Kingdom, that as we be brethren in mutual affection,
in an equal tie of duty and allegiance unto the King our Sovereign; so we may
be brethren also in the same tender care, and loving zeal, for the good and
support of his Majesty's kindred, and their restitution, with their ancient
Inheritance, and the safety of the reformed Churches.

FINIS.

