HOMER'S Odysses. Translated By THO. HOBBES of Malmsbury. With a Large PREFACE
Concerning the VIRTUES OF AN HEROIQUE POEM. Written by the Translator.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1675.

TO THE READER. CONCERNING The VIRTUES of an HEROIQUE POEM.
THe Virtues required in an Heroic Poem (and indeed in all Writings published)
are comprehended all in this one word Discretion.

And Discretion consists in this, That every part of the Poem be conducing,
and in good order placed to the End and Design of the Poet. And the Design is
not only to profit, but also to delight the Reader.

By Profit, I intend not here any accession of Wealth either to the Poet, or to
the Reader; but accession of Prudence, Justice, and Fortitude, by the Example
of such Great and Noble Persons as he introduces speaking, or describes
acting. For all men love to behold, though not to practice Virtue. So that at
last the work of an Heroique Poet is no more but to furnish an ingenuous Reader
(when his leisure abounds) with the diversion of an honest and delightful
Story, whether true or feigned.

But because there be many men called Critiques, and Wits, and Vertuosi, that
are accustomed to censure the Poets, and most of them of diverse Judgments: How
is it possible (you will say) to please them all? Yes, very well; if the Poem be
as it should be. For men can judge what is good, that know not what is best. For
he that can judge what is best, must have considered all those things (though
they be almost innumerable) that concur to make the reading of an Heroique Poem
pleasant. Whereof I Will name as many as shall come into my mind.

And they are contained, first, in the choice of words. Secondly, in the
construction. Thirdly, in the contrivance of the Story or Fiction. Fourthly, in
the Elevation of the Fancy. Fifthly, in the Justice and Impartiality of the
Poet. Sixthly, in the clearness of Descriptions. Seventhly, in the Amplitude of
the Subject.

And (to begin with words) the first Indiscretion is, The use of such words as
to the Readers of Poesy (which are commonly Persons of the best Quality) are
not sufficiently known. For the work of an Heroique Poem is to raise admiration
(principally) for three Virtues, Valor, Beauty, and Love, to the reading
whereof Women no less than Men have a just pretense, though their skill in
Language be not so universal. And therefore foreign words till by long use they
become vulgar, are unintelligible to them. Also the names of Instruments and
Tools of Artificers, and words of Art, though of use in the Schools, are far
from being fit to be spoken by a Hero. He may delight in the Arts themselves,
and have skill in some of them; but his Glory lies not in that, but in Courage,
Nobility, and other Virtues of Nature, or in the Command he has over other men.
Nor does Homer in any part of his Poem attribute any praise to Achilles, or any
blame to Alexander, for that they had both learnt to play upon the Ghittarre.
The Character of words that become a Hero are Property, and Significancie, but
without both the malice and lasciviousness of a Satyr.

Another Virtue of an Heroique Poem is the Perspicuity and the Facility of
Construction, and consists in a natural contexture of the words, so as not to
discover the labor but the natural ability of Poet, and this is usually called
a good Style. For the order of words when placed as they ought to be, carries a
light before it, whereby a man may foresee the length of his period; as a torch
in the night shows a man the stops and unevenness in his way. But when placed
unnaturally, the Reader will often find unexpected checks, and be forced to go
back and hunt for the sense, and suffer such unease, as in a Coach a man
unexpectedly finds in passing over a furrow. And though the Laws of Verse
(which have bound the Greeks and Latins to number of Feet, and quantity of
Syllables, and the English and other Nations to number of Syllables and Rhyme)
put great constraint upon the natural course of Language; yet the Poet, having
the liberty to depart from what is obstinate, and to choose somewhat else that
is more obedient to such Laws, and no less fit for his purpose, shall not be
(neither by the measure, nor by the necessity of Rhyme) excused; though a
Translation often may.

A third Virtue lies in the Contrivance. For there is difference between a Poem
and a History in Prose. For a History is wholly related by the Writer; but in a
Heroique Poem the Narration is, a great part of it, put upon some of the
persons introduced by the Poet. So Homer begins not his Iliad with the injury
done by Paris, but makes it related by Menelaus, and very briefly as a thing
notorious; nor begins he his Odysses with the departure of Ulysses from Troy,
but makes Ulysses himself relate the same to Alcinous, in the midst of his
Poem; which I think much more pleasant and ingenious, than a too precise and
close following of the time.

A fourth is in the Elevation of Fancy, which is generally taken for the
greatest praise of Heroique Poetry; and is so, when governed by discretion. For
men more generally affect and admire Fancy than they do either Judgment, or
Reason, or Memory, or any other intellectual Virtue, and for the pleasantness
of it, give to it alone the name of Wit, accounting Reason and Judgment but for
a dull entertainment. For in Fancy consists the Sublimity of a Poet, which
is that Poetical Fury which the Readers for the most part call for. It flies
abroad swiftly to fetch in both Matter and Words; but if there be not
Discretion at home to distinguish which are fit to be used and which not, which
decent, and which undecent for Persons, Times, and Places, their delight and
grace is lost. But if they be discreetly used, they are greater ornaments of a
Poem by much than any other. A Metaphor also (which is a comparison contracted
into a word) is not unpleasant; but when they are sharp, and extraordinary,
they are not fit for an Heroique Poet, nor for a public consultation, but
only for an Accusation or Defense at the Bar.

A fifth lies in the Justice and Impartiality of the Poet, and belongs as
well to History as to Poetry. For both the Poet and the Historian writes only
(or should do) matter of Fact. And as far as the truth of Fact can defame a
man, so far they are allowed to blemish the reputation of Persons. But to do
the same upon Report, or by inference, is below the dignity not only of a Hero
but of a Man. For neither a Poet nor an Historian ought to make himself an
absolute Master of any man's good name. None of the Emperors of Rome whom
Tacitus or any other Writer has condemned, was ever subject to the Judgment of
any of them, nor were they ever heard to plead for themselves, which are things
that ought to be antecedent to condemnation. Nor was (I think) Epicurus the
Philosopher (who is transmitted to us by the Stoics for a man of evil and
voluptuous life) ever called, convented, and lawfully convicted, as all men
ought to be before they be defamed. Therefore it is a very great fault in a Poet
to speak evil of any man in their Writings Historical.

A sixth Virtue consists in the perfection and curiosity of Descriptions, which
the ancient Writers of Eloquence call Icones, that is Images. And an Image is
always a part, or rather the ground of a Poetical comparison. As (for example)
when Virgil would set before our eyes the fall of Troy, he describes perhaps
the whole Labor of many men together in the felling of some great Tree, and
with how much ado it fell. This is the Image. To which if you but add these
words, So fell Troy, you have the Comparison entire; the grace whereof lies in
the lightsomness, and is but the description of all (even of the minutest)
parts of the thing described; that not only they that stand far off, but also
they that stand near, and look upon it with the oldest spectacles of a
Critique, may approve it. For a Poet is a Painter, and should paint Actions to
the understanding with the most decent words, as Painters do Persons and Bodies
with the choicest colors, to the eye; which if not done nicely, will not be
worthy to be placed in a Cabinet.

The seventh Virtue which lying in the Amplitude of the Subject, is nothing but
variety, and a thing without which a whole Poem would be no pleasanter than an
Epigram, or one good Verse; nor a Picture of a hundred figures better than any
one of them asunder, if drawn with equal art. And these are the Virtues which
ought especially to be looked upon by the Critiques. in the comparing of the
Poets, Homer with Virgil, or Virgil with Lucan. For these only, for their
excellency, I have read or heard compared.

If the comparison be grounded upon the first and second Virtues, which consist
in known words and Style unforced, they are all excellent in their own
Language, though perhaps the Latin than the Greek is apter to dispose it self
into an Hexameter Verse, as having both fewer Monosyllables and fewer
Polysyllables. And this may make the Latin Verse appear more grave and equal,
which is taken for a kind of Majesty; though in truth there be no Majesty in
words but then when they seem to proceed from an high and weighty employment of
the mind. But neither Homer, nor Virgil, nor Lucan, nor any Poet writing
commendably (though not excellently) was ever charged much with unknown words,
or great constraint of Style, as being a fault proper to Translators, when they
hold themselves too superstitiously to their Authors words.

In the third Virtue, which is Contrivance, there is no doubt but Homer excels
them all. For their Poems (except the Introduction of their Gods) are but so
many Histories in Verse; whereas Homer has woven so many Histories together as
contain the whole Learning of his time (which the Greeks call Cyclopaedia) and
furnished both the Greek and Latin Stages with all the Plots and Arguments of
their Tragedies.

The fourth Virtue which is the height of Fancy, is almost proper to Lucan,
and so admirable in him, that no Heroique Poem raises such admiration of the
Poet, as his has done, though not so great admiration of the persons he
introduces. And though it be a mark of a great Wit; yet it is fitter for a
Rhetorician than a Poet, and rebelleth often against Discretion; as when he says

Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. that is,
The Side that Won the Gods approved most,
But Cato better liked the Side that lost.


Than which nothing could be spoken more gloriously to the Exaltation of a man,
nor more disgracefully to the Depression of the Gods. Homer indeed makes some
Gods for the Greeks, and some for the Trojans; but always makes Jupiter
impartial. And never prefers the judgment of a Man before that of Jupiter; much
less before the judgment of all the Gods together.

The fifth Virtue, which is the Justice and Impartiality of a Poet, is very
eminent in Homer and Virgil, but the contrary in Lucan. Lucan shows himself
openly in the Pompeyan Faction, i^^eighing against Caesar throughout his Poem,
like Cicero against Cataline or Marc Antony; and is therefore justly reckoned
by Quintilian as a Rhetorician rather than a Poet. And a great part of the
delight of his Readers proceeds from the pleasure which too many men take to
hear Great Persons censured. But Homer and Virgil (especially Homer) do every
where what they can to preserve the Reputation of their Heroes.

If we compare Homer and Virgil by the sixth Virtue, which is the clearness of
Images (or Descriptions) it is manifest that Homer ought to be preferred,
though Virgil himself were to be the Judge. For there are very few Images in
Virgil besides those which he has translated out of Homer, so that Virgils
Images are Homers Praises. But what if he have added something to it of his
own? Though he have, yet it is no addition of praise, because it is easy. But
he has some Images which are not in Homer, and better than his. It may be so,
and so may other Poets have which never durst compare themselves with Homer.
Two or three fine sayings are not enough to make a Wit. But where is that Image
of his better done by him than Homer, of those that have been done by them
both? Yes, Eustathius (as Mr. Ogilby has observed) where they both describe
the falling of a Tree prefers Virgil's description. But Eustathius is in that,
I think, mistaken. The place of Homer is in the fourth of the Iliads, the sense
whereof is this:

As when a man has felled a Poplar tree
Tall, straight, and smooth, with all the fair boughs on;
Of which he means a Coach-wheel made shall be,
And leaves it on the Bank, to dry in the Sun;
So lay the comely Simoisius,
Slain by great Ajax, Son of Telamon.
It is manifest that in this place Homer intended no more than to show how
comely the body of Simoisius appeared as he lay dead upon the Bank of
Scamander, straight, and tall, with a fair head of hair, and like a straight
and high Poplar with the boughs still on; and not at all to describe the manner
of his falling, which (when a man is wounded through the breast, as he was with
a Spear) is always sudden.

The description of how a great Tree falls, when many men together hew it
down, is in the second of Virgil's Aeneads. The sense of it, with the
comparison is in English this:

And Troy, methought, then sunk in fire and smoke,
And overturned was in every part:
As when upon the mountain an old Oak
Is hewn about with keen steel to the heart,
And pli'd by Swains with many heavy blows,
It nods and every way it threatens round,
Till overcome with many wounds it bows,
And leisurely at last comes to the ground.
And here again it is evident that Virgil meant to compare the manner how Troy
after many Battles, and after the losses of many Cities, conquered by the many
Nations under Agamemnon in a long War, and thereby weak'ned, and at last
overthrown, with a great Tree hewn round about, and then falling by little and
little leisurely.

So that neither these two Descriptions, nor the two Comparisons can be
compared together. The Image of a man lying on the ground is one thing; the
Image of falling (especially of a Kingdom) is another. This therefore gives no
advantage to Virgil over Homer. It Is true, that this Description of the Felling
and Falling of a Tree is exceeding graceful. But is it therefore more than
Homer could have done if need had been? Or is there no Description in Homer of
somewhat else as good as this? Yes, and in many of our English Poets now alive.
If it then be lawful for Julius Scaliger to say, that if Jupiter would have
described the fall of a Tree, he could not have mended this of Virgil; it will
be lawful for me to repeat an old Epigram of Antipater, to the like purpose, in
favor of Homer.

The Writer of the famous Trojan War,
And of Ulysses Life, O Jove make known,
Who, whence he was; for thine the Verses are,
And he would have us think they are his own.
The seventh and last commendation of an Heroique Poem consists in Amplitude
and Variety; and in this Homer exceeds Virgil very much, and that not by
superfluity of words, but by plenty of Heroique matter, and multitude of
Descriptions and Comparisons (whereof Virgil has translated but a small part
into his Aeneads) such as are the Images of Shipwracks, Battles, Single
Combats, Beauty, Passions of the mind, Sacrifices, Entertainments, and other
things, whereof Virgil (abating what he borrows of Homer) has scarce the
twentieth part. It is no wonder therefore if all the ancient Learned men both
of Greece and Rome have given the first place in Poetry to Homer. It is rather
strange that two or three, and of late time, and but Learners of the Greek
tongue should dare to contradict so many competent Judges both of Language and
Discretion. But howsoever I defen^ Homer, I aim not thereby at any reflection
upon the following Translation. Why then did I write it? Because I had nothing
else to do. Why publish it? Because I thought it might take off my Adversaries
from showing their folly upon my more serious Writings, and set them upon my
Verses to show their wisdom. But why without Annotations? Because I had no hope
to do it better than it is already done by Mr. Ogilby.

T. HOBBES.

HOM. ODYSS.
LIB. I.
TEll me, O Muse, the Adventures of the Man
That having sacked the sacred Town of Troy,
Wandered so long at Sea; what course he ran
By winds and tempests driven from his way:
That saw the Cities, and the fashions knew
Of many men, but suffered grievous pain
To save his own life, and bring home his crew.
Though for his crew, all he could do was vain.
They lost themselves by their own insolence,
Feeding, like fools, on the Suns sacred Kine.
Which did the splendid Deity incense
To their dire fate. Begin, O Muse divine.
The Greeks from Troy were all returned home,
All that the War and winds had spared, except
The discontent Ulysses only; whom
In hollow caves the Nymph Calypso kept.
But when the years and days were come about,
Wherein was woven his return by fate
To Ithaca, (but neither there without
Great pain) the Gods then pitied his estate,
All saving Neptune, who did never cease
To hinder him from reaching his own shore,
And persecute him still upon the Seas
Till he got home. Then troubled him no more.
Neptune was now far off in Black-moor land
(The Black-moors are the utmost of Mankind,
As far as East and West asunder stand,
So far the Black-moors borders are disjoined.)
Invited there to feast on Ram and Bull.
There sat he merry. The Other Gods were then
Met on Olympus in a Synod full,
In the house of Jove, Father of Gods and Men.
And first spoke Jove, whose thoughts were now upon
Aegistus death, which he but then first knew,
By the hand of Agamemnons valiant Son,
Who to revenge his Fathers blood him slew.
Ha! How dare mortals tax the Gods, and say,
Their harms do all proceed from our Decree.
And by our setting; when by their crimes they
Against our wills make their own destiny?
As now Aegistus did Atrides kill
Newly come home, and married his wise;
Although he knew it was against my will,
And that it would cost him one day his life.
Sent we not Hermes to him to forbid
The murder, and the marriage of the wife,
And tell him if the contrary he did
Orestes should revenge it on his life?
All this said Hermes, as we bad him. But
Aegistus, for all this, was not afraid
His lust in execution to put.
And therefore now has dearly for it paid.
Then Pallas moved on Ulysses part,
And said, O Father Jove, the King of Kings,
Aegystus fate was fit for his desert,
So let them perish'all that do such things.
It Is for Ulysses that I live in pain,
Poor man, long absent from his friends, forlorn
In a small Isle, the Center of the Main;
Kept from his home does naught but grieve and mourn.
The Isle is beautified with goodly trees.
And in it dwells a Nymph. Her Fathers name
Atlas, that all the depths of The Ocean sees,
And bears up the Pillars of the same,
And Heaven and earth to boot. His daughter it is
That with fair words and gentle courtesy
Detains Ulysses. And her meaning is
Forever there to have his company.
Whilst he, alas! even dies for very grief.
To see the smoke of Ithaca he wishes,
And would take that for some, though small relief.
And yet you are not moved. Were not Ulysses
^is Sacrifices on the Trojan shore
Both free and bountiful? They were, you know,
(...) the Argive Camp, I dare say, no man's more.
Why therefore, Father, should you hate him so?
^o her, the mighty Jove made this reply.
Child, what a word is this that you let fall?
^o I neglect Ulysses, or do I
Ulysses hate, that amongst mortals all
For wisdom and for piety excels?
Neptune that backs and shakes the earth, it is he
Whose breast with anger and revenge still swells
Against him, for his Sons calamity,
The God-like Polypheme, Cyclops the great,
Whom on Thoosa, Phorcys daughter brave
Neptune the King of Waters did beget,
Embracing her within a hollow cave;
And him Ulysses has deprived of sight.
For which, though Neptune do not him destroy,
He crosses him with dangers day and night,
And drives him up and down out of his way.
But well, let us that are assembled now
Bethink us how to bring him home. It Is odds
'Twill cool his rage. He has not strength enough
To Oppose the power of all the other Gods.
Then Pallas said, O Jove, of Kings the King,
Since the blessed Gods have thought good, and decreed
Ulysses to his native soil to bring,
Let Us Hermes send unto the Nymph with speed,
In th'Isle Ogygia, to let her know
Our sentence, that she may the same obey.
And I to, Ithaca mean while will go,
And cause his Son to call without delay
The Common Counsel; and to make him bold,
To warn his Mothers Suitors to be gone,
And feast no longer on his Herd and Fold,
As they before had insolently done.
To Sparta too, I Will send him, and to Pyle
T'enquire about his Fathers Navigation,
That in the world by Travel for a while
He may acquire a greater reputation.
This said, upon her feet her shoes she binds,
Ambrosian Golden shoes, that do her bear
On land and water swiftly as the winds.
And takes in hand her brazen-headed Spear;
A heavy, massy, and strong Spear, the same
Wherewith, when angry, she the armed bands
Of mighty men of War does easily tame.
That was the Spear she carried in her hands.
Then from the high Olympus leapt she down
T'Ulysses house, and stood in the Hall-door
In The shape of Mentes that possessed the Crown
Of The Taphian people, whom he reigned o'r.
And thence beheld the Suitors in the Court
Sitting upon the hides of beeves, which they
Themselves had killed, and wanting other sport,
Playing at Chess they passed their time away.
Mean while their Officers and Serving-men
Were busy mingling water with the wine,
Others the meat divide, others make clean,
Set up and rub the Tables till they shine.
Telemachus now with the Suitors sat
Fancying, in case his father should appear,
Brought home by the Gods or by some lucky fate,
How then these knaves would slink away for fear;
And he again recover his estate,
And in his own land rule without a Peer.
He was the first that spied the Goddess, and
Then presently he hast'ned to the door;
Receives her Spear and takes her by the hand,
And both go in, she after, he before.
You shall (said he) stranger be welcome here:
But first let us sup, and afterward we will find
Sufficient time both for me to inquire,
And you to tell your business and your mind.
When they were come into the stately Hall,
Her Spear within a case he sets upright
^a pillar, in which case the Spears were all,
His father left behind going to fight.
^hen led her to a chair, which stood upon
A dainty Carpet curiously wrought,
and put t'her feet a stool to rest upon,
And for himself a handsome stool he brought:
^hen did a Maid in a fine golden ewer
Bring water for their hands, and pours it on
^ver a Basin large of silver pure,
And set a table to them, for both, one.
from others seats remoter than to fear
Their rudeness might offend her, or that they
Might peradventure listening overhear
What he and she did of Ulysses say.
Another sets on bread and other things
To eat, such as in her charge were at home.
But flesh of many sorts the carver brings,
And the cup-bearers often go and come.
Then came the Suitors in, and took their places
All on a row. To each a table stands,
And golden boul, one way look all their faces,
The waiters bring in water for their hands.
The Maids in baskets bring both bread and meat
On which they lay their hands with great good will,
And heartily and hastily they eat,
And to the brim their cups the Servants fill.
When they of hunger had plucked out the sting,
The lusty Suitors thoughts converted were
To dancing, and to hear the minstril sing,
Sports that are consecrated to good cheer.
To Phemius the minstril that was by
Unwillingly, forced by the unruly throng,
They brought a Cittern, and he presently
Began to play, and then to s^g a song.
But to the Goddess Pallas, in her ear
Telemachus began to speak his mind,
Not being willing any else should hear.
Excuse me, Friend, that I say what I find.
You see the care of these men what it is,
Singing and dancing. And no wonder, since
That which they spend is not their own, but his
Whose bones lie somewhere naked far from hence
Unburied, it may be on the ground,
There rotting as he lies in the dew and rain,
Or else at Sea, perhaps, if he be drowned,
The waves his body roll upon the main.
If him at home the best of them should meet
Safely arrived in Ithaca, he would
Much rather wish, I think, for nimble feet
Than to be rich in garments or in gold.
But Oh! He Is dead, and of some cruel death;
And though some tell us he is coming home.
It Is comfortless, for he is bereaved of breath.
To Ithaca I never shall see him come.
But let this pass, and tell me truly now
Your own, your Fathers, and your Countries name,
And further I desire you will let me know,
Whence are the Mariners that with you came
Unto this Town, and tell me this likewise
Where rides the good ship that brought you to it.
For verily I can no way devise
How you should come on horsback or on foot.
And tell me were you never here before,
Nor saw my Father whilst he here abode?
For strangers came to visit him good store
As having much converst with men abroad.
I Will clearly speak (said Pallas) t'every thing.
My Father was Anchialus, and I
Me^tes, my City Taphos, and I King;
My people to the Oar themselves apply.
At present bound I am to T^mise
For Brass; and Iron I carry with me thither.
Under mount Neion, not near Ithaca
My Ship at Reithrus rides safe from weather.
As for your Father, we were mutual Guests,
(Ask the old Lord Laertes) from our youth.
With one old Maid alone his meat to dress,
He lives at's Country House, he will tell you truth.
There creeps he in his Vineyard up and down.
And I came hither now, 'cause I was told
By some, his Son Ulysses was in Town.
But it is not so. The Gods do him withhold
From his dear wise, and native Country still
Within an Island, where the Savage men
By ^orce detain him, much against his will:
But all in vain. He shall return again.
For I presage, and come it shall to pass,
That am no Prophet, nor Birds understand,
Though he were tied there with Chains of Brass,
He shall get loose and see his native Land.
But say, are you indeed, that are so grown,
His Son? Your heads and eyes are like (I mark)
For we were well to one another known,
But 'twas before he did for Troy imbark
With other Princes of the Argive youth;
But never saw him since. That I Am his Son
(Said he) my Mother says But who in truth
Knows who 'twas that got him? I think none.
If I might choose my Father, I would be
His Son that grows old on's own estate.
But whom they tell me is my Father, he
Of all men is the most unfortunate.
Then said the Goddess, Howsoe'r that be,
The Gods will never nameless leave your kind,
That are the Son of fair Penelope,
And so well framed in body and in mind.
^ut say, What Feast is this, and who these be.
You have no cause to feast. Their conversation
^leases me not. It Is rude, unmannerly.
What is it a Wedding. or is it a collation?
^riend, since you ask (said he) take the whole Story,
This house was rich, my Father being here,
But th'unkind Gods have taken hence that glory:
For where he is, a word we cannot hear.
^ess had I grieved, if he his life had lost
With other Arg^^e Lords under Troy wall,
^r (the War done) among* those that love him most.
Then had he had a noble Funeral,
At which th'Achaean Princes would have been,
And the honor had redounded to his Son.
But now alas! devoured by Harpies keen,
Unheard of and unaskt-for he is gone,
Leaving me here behind to sigh and groan.
Besides, the Gods have given me other care
Bitter enough. It Is not for him alone
My heart is rent. There other mischiefs are.
How many Lords within these Is^es do sway
Same, Dulichium, Ithaca, and Zant,
So many Suitors duly every day
For marriage with my Mother the house haunt.
Whilst she can none put off, and will none marry,
They spend my corn and wine, and cattle kill,
And eating here and drinking still they tarry,
And me perhaps at last they murder will.
Then Pallas said, Is It so? It Is time indeed
Your Father hither were come back again,
Having so long been absent hence, with speed
To lay his hands upon these shameless men.
Oh! that just now within the gates he stood
Of th'outer Court, I would desire no more,
Armed with two Spears, Buckler, and Helmet good,
Such now, as I have seen him heretosore.
From ^phy^^ he took our house in's way,
Where first I saw him merry drinking wine.
For he had been with Ilus, him to pray
To give him for his shafts a medicine,
Wherewith to make them all they wound to kill.
But he refused, fearing the powers above.
And 'twas my Father gave t'him for good will:
For why, he did him very dearly love.
If such as then, Ulysses should appear
Amongst the Suitors now, short lived, I ^row
They Would be, and have but bitter wedding cheer.
But when he shall come home, Gods only know,
Or whether you shall see him any more.
Mean while consider by what means you may
Get the unruly Suitors out of door,
That so oppress you, and your house annoy.
And first observe what I shall you advise.
Convoque the People to the Marketplace;
Protest the Gods against their injuries,
And let the whole Assembly know your case.
Say, if they needs will wed her, let her go
Back to her Father, who the match should make,
And offer for her what is fit; and so
Which of them she likes best him let her take.
And for your self, I think it your best way,
In a good Bark of twenty Oars abroad,
T'enquire what men can of your Father say,
Or what some lucky sign from Jove may bode*
Go first to Pyle, enquire of Nestor; Then
To Sparta. Ask of Menelaus, whom
Of all which had at Troy commanded men
The Gods t'Achaia brought the latest home.
If of his safety and return you hear,
How much soever they waste your estate,
Endure their riot yet another year.
If dead, come back, and fairly celebrate
His Rites, and give your Mother whom she will
For Husband. Then bethink you, how you may
By open force, or howsoever kill
These shameless Suitors that your means destroy,
Be fooled no more. You're now at man's estate.
Aegistus show Orestes Father. He
Aegistus slew. Who does not this relate
With honor to Orestes memory?
And you, my Friend, you are a goodly man.
Take heart. Gain honor. I must now be gone;
My crew with patience no longer can
Stay for me; therefore think what is to be done.
Your counsel (said Telemachus) is such
As might become a Father to his Son.
I Will not forget it. Though your have be much,
Stay yet a while; be not so quickly gone.
Wash and take food, and then go merrily;
And with you a fair Present from me take,
Whereby to keep me in your memory;
Such as kind friends to one another make.
Then said the Goddess, Now I cannot stay.
As for your Present I will not deny it,
But take it at my coming back this way,
How much soe'r you mean t'oblige me by it.
This said, she mounted from him to the Sky
In likeness of an Eagle, to his wonder,
Who thought it was some God, and grew thereby
Bolder, and on his Father more did ponder.
And streightway to the Suitors went, who were
Now come again into the house, and seated
A Song which Phemius then sung to hear,
Containing how the Grecians retreated
Unfortunately from the Trojan shore
By Pallas doings whom they had offended.
Penelope that heard it and was more
Concerned than they all streightway descended.
She entered not but in the door did stand
Veiled with a Scarf which on her head she wore,
Having a waiting woman on each hand,
And to the singer thus said, weeping sore.
Phemius you have better Songs, why sing you then
This sad one? Fitter 'twere the deeds to tell
Of mighty Gods, and mighty deeds of men,
Which sure would please the Company as well.
Sing one of those, and let them hear and drink
Give over this. You touch my interest,
And wound my heart in forcing me to think
Upon my husband, of all Greeks the best.
Then said Telemachus, Good Mother why
Should not the Singer choose what Song to sing,
Whose part it is to please the Company?
It is not he that does the evil bring.
It Is none of Phemius fault, but the Act of Jove
Who deals to all men, all things as he please.
Should he not sing the Songs that men most love
The new'st? The Greeks sad passage o'r the Seas?
Be patient, many more besides u^y^^^s,
Come short ^om Troy by one fate or another,
No^ are you the only wi^e her husband misses.
Many men else are lost. Therefore good Mother
Go to your w^k again above, and see
Your (...) censuring of Songs
Unto us men, and specially to me,
To whom the greatest power here belongs.
Then to her Chamber up she went again
With her two Maids, and there began to weep,
Being for her dear husband in great pain,
And wept till Pall as closed her eyes with sleep.
Men while the Suitors into clusters ran,
And one t'another his thoughts uttered
With noise enough. But there was not a man
That did not wish to have her in his bed.
Then to them spoke Telemachus; Do You hear
Proud Suitors of my Mother, let us I pray
Give ear unto the Singer, and forbear
Clamor. To morrow is the Council day,
There I shall warn you publicly, no more
To haunt my house, but each man home to go,
And there to feast by turns on your own store;
And if you be not willing to do so,
But your own means to spare, shall think it best
To feast your selves on one man's substance all,
And ruin his estate, go on and feast
While I upon the Gods for vengeance call.
O that the mighty Jove would so ordain,
That all men's actions might be repaid
As they deserve! Then should you all be slain
Within my doors. After he this had said,
The Suitors bit their lips, and silent mused
At the strange boldness of Telemachus,
And at the Language which the Youngman used,
To which none answered but Antinous.
The Gods (quoth he) have taught you a high strai^
Of Language, and undaunted Oratory.
But if their meaning were that you should reign
Here, o'r us all, I should be very sorry.
Telemachus replied, Think what you will.
If Jove consent, why should not I be King?
What harm is it; with wealth my house to fill,
Besides the honor it will with it bring?
In Ithaca there many Princes be,
You Will say, would be as glad to rule as I.
No matter, whosoe'r be King, not he,
But I am King in my own Family.
Who (said Eurymachus) shall have the hap
To reign in Ithaca is hard to guess,
It lies yet folded up within Joves lap.
None shall, Telemachus, you dispossess
Of house, or land, or goods, by violence,
As long as there in Ithaca be men.
But tell me who that was, that now went hence,
Where he was born, and where he dwells, and then
His errand, whether business of his own,
Or some news from Ulysses brought perchance,
And went so soon away, to avoid being known.
He was no mean man by his countenance.
Then said Telemachus, My Father's dead,
We never shall again see one another.
With Messengers I trouble not my head,
Nor Soothsayers that do but sooth my Mother.
The man my Fathers old acquaintance was,
Mentes Anchialides, and his Town
Taphos, and he thereof the ruling has.
His people for their Trade by Sea well known.
Thus said he, though he doubted not at all
But 'twas some God. Mean while the Suitors staying
For th'evenings coming on, to dancing fall,
Or listen to the minstrel's Song and playing.
The evening came, the Suitors went away,
Telemachus went also to his bed
In a warm stately Chamber, where he lay
Ranging the many cares he had in's head;
Euryclea a Torch before him bore,
Daughter of Ops, now old, but at the time
Laertes did her purchase heretofore
For twenty Oxen, she was in her prime.
He honored her as if sh'had been his wife;
But from her bed perpetually forbore,
To Avoid suspicion, and domestic strife.
Sh'had nursed Telemachus, and loved him more
Than did the other Maids, and now she stands
To light him. He unlocks the door, goes in,
Takes off his Coat, puts it into her hands,
She foldeth, brusheth, hangs it on a pin.
Then forth she went, and by a silver ring
Pulls to the door. And there all night he lay
Remembering Pallas words, and pondering
Upon the business of the following day.
LIB. II.
SOon as the Rosy Morning did appear,
Telemachus himself arrayed and shod,
Puts on his Sword, and takes in hand his Spear,
And out he went appearing like a God.
And straight unto the Cryers gave command,
To call the People to the Public place.
The People met. And then with Spear in hand
He to them takes his way; and followed was
By two white Dogs. Then takes his Fathers Throne;
His Elders gave him way; all on him gaze.
For why, the Goddess Pallas of her own
Had let Authority upon his Face.
The first that spoke was old Aegyptius,
Stooping with age, of great experience:
One Son of his whose name was Antiphus,
Went to the Siege of Troy, but coming thence
He died in the Savage Cyclops jaws,
When with Ulysses he was in his den.
Euronymus one of the Suitors was;
The others with their Father dwelled then.
But still he grieved was for Antiphus.
The tears ran down his cheeks, and weeping he
Rose up, and said unto The Assembly thus,
Ye men of Ithaca, I pray hear me;
Since we to Ulysses sent with Ships,
We never convoked were to Parliament.
What need have young or old men of our Lips?
And who is he that now does us convent?
Has he informed been of some Invasion,
And unto us the same would first report?
Or on some other Public great occasion
Would give us Counsel? The Gods bless him for it.
Telemachus then presently up stands,
Though well contented with his Fathers praise.
The Crier puts the Scepter in his hands.
And to Aegyptius first he speaks, and says,
Here am I, that the people have convok'd.
Nor do I any news or counsel bring.
But by my private sufferings am provoked.
Which here I offer t'your considering.
Is it not grief enough, my Fathers loss,
That ruled like a Father to us all,
But that I must yet bear a greater cross,
To see his house to utter ruin fall?
My Mothers house the Suitors daily fill,
And of the best of you they Children are.
She wedded must be with her Fathers will.
But to her Father go they do not dare.
But in my house continually they stay,
And Sacrifice my Beeves, and Goats, and Sheep,
My wine exhaust, and much they cast away.
For why, Ulysses lost is on the deep.
And I my self unable to defend.
But shall I so be still, or once be able
To bring upon these men unjust their end,
Whose injuries no more are tolerable?
Take it to heart. Think how 'twill taken be
By other States. Fear from the Gods some change,
That are not pleased with such iniquity,
And may in closer order make you range.
By Jove I you adjure, and Themis, who
Convokes Assemblies, and revokes again,
Forbear these evil deeds your selves to do,
And of your Sons the liberty restrain.
Leave me to suffer misery alone.
Hurt none but me. Unless my Father have
In hatred of you some great evil done,
And for revenge these men such power you gave.
But better 'twere for me, that you than they
Should spend my Treasure and my comings in.
For if among so many men it lay,
Begging I might from them the value win.
But for my case no help can now be found.
So said Telema hus in choler high,
And from him threw the Scepter to the ground.
Nor could fotbear to left fall tears and sigh.
The People piti'd him, but silent sat.
None but Antinous durst answer make.
Telemachus, said he, too passionate
You are, and too much liberty you take.
The Peoples hatred you would very fain
Draw to the Suitors, and procure them shame.
But from your Mother comes all your pain;
And therefore her, not us you ought to blame.
Three years are gone and past, the fourth is this,
Since she her Suitors baffled has with Art,
Putting each one in hope by Messages,
And Promises that he had gained her heart.
Moreover, setting up a Beam to weave,
Suitors (said she) since dead Ulysses is,
Stay yet a little while, and give me leave
To make an end but of one business.
I must for old Laertes make a Cloth,
Which in his Sepulcher he is to wear.
To Offend the wives of Greece I should be loath.
For to accuse me they will not forbear;
But say I very hasty was to wed,
If I go hence and not provide a shroud
Wherein Laertes may be buried.
Out of such wealth, that might have been allowed.
Her Suitors all were well content. And then
All day she wove, but ere she went to bed,
What she had wov'n, she ravell'd out again.
Three years her Suitors thus she frustrated.
In the fourth year her women her betrayed,
And in we came, whilst she the web undid.
And then to end it she could not avoid.
Since now her purpose could no more be hid.
To your complaint the Suitors answer thus,
(Take notice of it you and all the rest)
Send back your Mother to Icarius.
There let her marry whom they both think best.
But if she think to vex us longer yet,
Caring for nothing but for Pallas Gifts,
To have the reputation for wit,
And skilfulness in curious work and shifts,
Wherein the Achaean wives she does excel,
Both old and young, Trro, Alcmen', Micen',
Although with us she has not dealed well.
But if to use us so she longer mean,
So much the longer with you we shall eat.
Which to Penelope will be a glory.
But we consume shall so much of your meat,
If long we stay there, that you will be sorry.
For so long as she dodges with us thus,
No whither from your house will we depart.
Then to him answered Telemachus,
Antinous, I never shall have the heart
To send my Mother hence against her will.
Abroad my Father is, alive or dead.
That I her Father should repay, were ill,
For forcing her to leave her husbands bed.
And from the Furies I shall suffer worse.
For if I force her from my house to go
Whether she will or not, she will me curse.
And men will of me be revenged too.
If it displease you that she stays here,
You have your remedy; you may go home
And, every one make all the rest good cheer
By turns, and into my house never come.
But if you needs will feed on me alone,
I can but to the Gods, for vengeance call,
And reparation for what is done.
Which may enough be to destroy you all.
This said, two Eagles coming were in fight,
And when they were the Marketplace just o'r,
Th'Assembled heads surveying, stopped their flight,
And on their broad and levelled wings they soar.
Then having torn themselves both neck and cheek,
They to their right wing rise and fly away.
What this should mean The Assembly was to seek.
And to them thus did Alitherses say.
Hear me ye men of Ithaca (said he)
And you the Suitors that are most concerned.
Destruction is rouling toward ye,
Although it be not by your selves discerned.
Ulysses from his Friends will not be long.
And now from Ithaca far off is not,
Seeing what daily done is in the throng.
And how to kill the Suitors lays his plot.
Nay many more beside the Suitors may
Of their misfortune chance to have their part.
If they desist not soon and come away.
I speak not this at random but on Art.
For all must come to pass I told him then,
When with the Argive Lords he went to Troy,
That after twenty years he should again
Return with pain, his men all cast away.
Then said Eurymachus, Old man go home,
And there to your own Children prophecy,
Lest to them any harm hereafter come.
A better Prophet for these things am I.
Under the Sun be many Birds that fly,
And yet not all of them do fortunes tell.
Ulysses far hence dead is certainly
I know not where. I would thou were as well.
For then you would give over to inflame
Telemachus, who but too angry is;
In hope to get some Present for the same,
If you will give it. But I tell you this,
If any old man with his wisdom dare
To set against us any young man here,
He shall be sure himself the worse to fare.
And when it is done he shall be never the near.
We'll set a Fine upon your head so wise,
Which you to pay will not be well content.
I my self will Telemachus advise
His Mother may be to her Father sent,
To make the match, and on the Dower agree,
Such as becomes him to his Daughter dear.
Till that be done no hope at all I see
The Suitors should desist. For they not fear
Telemachus, as haughty as he is,
And full of words; and much less do they care
For such deceitful Prophesies as this,
For which you only the more hated are.
Mean while Telemachus his Goods decay,
And he shall never make them up again
While she persists her Suitors to delay,
And make us all expect her love in vain.
And it is her virtue makes us thus to strive
Amongst our selves who shall her favor win.
For many other Ladies we could wive,
And be sufficiently delighted in.
Then said Telemachus, No more will I
This matter to you press, or to the Woo'rs.
You and the Gods know all, I do not lie.
But I demand a Bark of twenty Oars.
For I intend to travel for a while,
To hear what men can of my Father say.
To Lacedamon I will go, and Pyle,
Or seek from Jove some notice of his way.
And if alive he be and coming home,
Though to my cost, I Will stay another year;
If dead he be, then back again I Will come,
And Rites of burial will give him here
Splendid and well becoming his estate,
And let my Mother her own liking take.
Having thus spoken, down again he sat.
And then Ulysses old friend Mentor spoke,
With whom Ulysses left his house in trust.
Hear me, Ye Ithacesians, said he.
Let no King ever be hereafter just,
Nor to his People soft and gentle be,
Since you Ulysses have so soon forgot,
That ever ruled us like a Father kind.
But I the Suitors so much accuse not,
Although on force and fraud they set their mind.
(For against Ulysses goods which they devour
They stake their heads in hope he will never come
As you, that many are, and have the power [home)
To check them sit as if you all were dumb.
And then rose up Leocritus and spoke,
Mentor, said he, more busy much than wise,
That would about a Supper quarrel make.
Ulysses were he here I Would not advise
To seek by force the Suitors to remove.
For though he much be wished for by his wife,
She would not of his coming well approve;
But he the sooner be deprived of life.
And you the people now may hence retire.
Mentor and Alitherses will provide
A Bark for what place ever he will desire.
And if at Ithaca he mean to abide,
No news he will hear of him a great while.
But never t'Ithaca shall come again
If he to Lacedaemon go or Pyle.
This said, dismissed and scattered were the men.
And to Ulysses house the Suitors went,
Telemachus to the Seaside, and prayed,
O God that gave me Commandment
To pass the Seas can not now be obeyed.
I am both by the Town and Woo'rs delai'd.
Then in the form of Mentor, Pallas came,
And standing by Telemachus, she said
With such a voice as Mentor's seemed the same.
If in you you retain the Spirit brave
Your Father had to make his word his deed,
Then also the assurance I shall have
To tell you in your Voyage you shall speed.
But if Ulysses Son you be not right,
For ought I know you may this labor spare.
Few Sons exceed or reach their Fathers might,
But commonly inferior they are.
But since in you I see your Fathers Wit,
I hope your Voyage shall have good success.
Therefore no more with th'Woo'rs in Council sit,
Expect from Fools to have no more redress,
That see not their own end that is so nigh.
Nor shall you long be forced here to stay.
For with a good Ship furnish you will I,
And with you will my self go all the way.
Mean while go you into your house again,
And put up store of Wine and of cold meat,
And good bread, which the marrow is of men.
I Will for you Mariners together get.
In Ithaca are good Ships old and new
Good store, of which I will go choose you one,
The best of all that come within my view
And make it ready that we may be gone.
This said, to 'th'house returned Telemachus.
The Woo'rs in killing Cattle were employed,
And straight unto him went Antinous,
And laughing, took him by the hand and said,
Telemachus, bold and brave Orator,
Fear from us neither evil word nor deed.
Eat and drink merrily as heretofore,
We'll see you furnished with what you need
Both Ship and Men, and see you soon convei'd
To Pyle, that of your Father you may hear.
Telemachus then answered and said,
Antinous, can I be merry here?
Do You think that yet too little was the wrong
The Suitors did me, my estate to waste,
When I perceived it not, as being young?
But since I grown am, and my childhood past,
And somewhat know, and more hear others say,
I Will do my best to bring them to their end,
Whether yet I go to Pyle or here do stay.
And yet to go to Pyle I do intend,
And think my passage will not be in vain.
For I go like a Merchant not a Guest,
As if to me no Ship did appertain.
It must be so. The Suitors think it best.
This said, his hand from his hand he snatched out.
And then the Suitors that were in the Court,
Some give him evil words, and others flour,
And one another with him make good sport.
He Will come from Pyle with Succors, God knows what
(Said one) or Sparta, which shall on us fall.
Or poison bring from Ephire; and that
Put in the Temperer shall kill us all.
Who knows (then said another) if he go,
But he his Fathers fate may also have
Whilst seeking him he wanders to and fro;
Which would to us no little trouble save.
His goods amongst us we should soon divide,
And to his Mother leave his houses free
And him she chooses to lie by her side.
Thus they derided him. Then down went he
Into a large and high rooft room where lay
In Chests packt up great store of cloth of Gold,
And Garments very many rich and gay,
And many Barrels of sweet wine and old,
Which for Ulysses were preserved there
When he returned to his native Soil.
In the same room many brass Vessels were,
And many Barrels of sweet smelling Oil.
And double were the Locks upon the door,
Whereof the Nurse Euryclea had the Key.
Telemachus called for her, and says to her,
Come Nurse, this night I am to go away.
Fill me of wine twelve Pitchers of the best
Next to that which you for my Father save,
And fine flour twenty measures a^ the lea^^,
In good thick leather satchels let me have,
Quickly. For when my Mother is a bed
To Lacedemon and to Pyle I go,
That of my Father, if alive or dead
There any news be, I the same may know.
Euryclea then wept and sob'd, and said,
Dear Child, why will you go from hence so far
Alone? Your Mother you will make afraid,
Of whom so dearly you beloved are.
Your Father far off is already dead,
And by the way the Suitors seek to kill you,
And share your goods amongst them by the head.
I pray stay here and do not go. Why will you?
Nurse, said Telemachus, be of good cheer.
It Is by the Counsel of a God I go.
And I require you solemnly to swear
You Will not my going let my Mother know.
Telemachus to the Suitors went again,
And Pallas in his likeness to the Town,
For his transporting to procure him men,
From house to house she goes up and down.
And of Noemon borrowed a Bark,
Who not unwillingly it to him lent.
And now the Sun was down, the Streets were dark,
And down to the Sea side the Goddess went.
And the good Ship into the Sea they hale,
And in it stow all that was needful for it.
The Mariners were there together all,
And ti'd the Ship at far end of the Port.
Mean while the Suitors merrily carouse,
And Pallas then their fancies to confound,
From the Seaside went back into the house,
And from their hands the Cups threw to the ground
And with the love of sleep possessed their eyes,
And made them nod and let their eyelids down.
And not long after from their seats they rise,
And for that night took lodging in the Town.
Then like to Mentor both in Form and Voice,
Telemachus he calls out of doors.
Your men are ready at the Port, she says,
There they expecting you sit with their Oars.
Then out they went, and Pallas led the way,
And found the Rowers ready on the Beach.
Telemachus then said, Come back I pray,
To the house with me, our Victual thence to fetch.
Which well put up I there have ready laid.
But nothing of it does my Mother know,
Nor any else but I and one old Maid.
Then with Telemachus to the house they go,
And to the Ship at once bring all away,
And stow it as Telemachus thought fit.
Pallas and he embark without delay,
And at the Stern they both together sit.
And now the Mariners their Tackle ply.
First in the midst they set the Mast upright,
And it unto the Ship with strong ropes tie,
And then their Sails they hoise up to their height.
Which Pallas with a lusty gale from West
Kept full all night. The Ship the Sea then gores.
The water swiftly running from her breast
By both her sides wounded and broken roars.
And then unto the Gods they offer Wine,
And to them all were praying for a while,
But specially unto their Guide Divine.
Then ^all'd all night, and were next morn at Pyle.
LIB. III.
UP from the Sea the Sun leapt to the Sky,
To hold the light up before Gods and men.
Telemachus with all his Company
Unto the Town of Pyle arrived then.
Then Nestor had a Sacrifice in hand
To N^ptune, and upon the Sea side stood,
And with him store of people on the sand.
Black Bulls he eighty one had to him vowed.
Nine seats there were, five hundred to each seat,
And to the same nine Bulls appointed were.
The Entrails broiled upon the coals they eat,
The Thighs to Neptune burnt to ashes were.
The Ship then came within the Port to land,
And disembarqu't, upon the shore they staid
With furled Sails the Ship did by them stand.
Then Pallas to Telemachus thus said,
Telemachus, by no means bashful be.
For wherefore did you undertake this task,
But of your Father to hear certainty?
To Nestor then directly go and ask,
If of Ulysses any thing he know.
He Will tell you truly. He Is too wise to lie.
Mentor (said he) I Am young, and know not how
With one so old to answer and reply.
Telemachus (said Pallas) do not fear.
You Will somewhat prompted be by your own breast
(You never by the Gods neglected were)
The God that loves you will supply the rest.
Then up to Nestor they directly went,
And Pallas foremost. All about him there
They found upon the Sacrifice intent,
(His Sons and Lords) to hasten the good cheer.
Some broaching, and some roasting were of meat.
And presently about the Strangers come,
And with their hands salute them, and entreat
To sit. And then Pisistratus went to'em,
Saluted them, and took them both by th'hands,
And for them (since there was no empty seat)
Laid Sheepskins with the Wool upon the sands;
And of the Entrails gave them part to eat.
And to her hand held up a Cup of Wine.
To Neptune (said he) offer up your Vow,
For he expressly is the Power Divine,
That we to worship be assembled now.
And having drunk, give it to this man's hand,
That he may also give the Gods their due,
For all men of the Gods in need do stand.
And I thought fit to give it first to you,
'Cause you are the elder, the other young as I.
Then Pallas from his hand received the Cup,
And pleased was to see his Equity.
And then to Neptune sent her Prayers up.
Neptune (said she) have to my Prayer regard.
First Nestor and his Sons with Honor bless,
And of his people the Hecatomb reward.
And give Telemachus and me success.
Thus prayed she, and gave for what she prayed.
And to Telemachus then gave the Cup.
And he to Neptune the same Prayer said.
The meat being ready now and taken up,
And into Messes cut, themselves they feast.
And when of hunger extinct was the force,
Then to his Guests Nestor his speech addressed.
Friends, said he, now we time have to discourse.
Tell me who are you, whence do you cross the Main?
Is it for Traffic? Or do you pleasure take,
As Pirates walk at Sea, to and again,
Others to spoil to set your lives at stake?
To this Telemachus with confidence
(Which into him the Goddess did inspire,
The better to obtain Intelligence,
And reputation to himself acquire)
Answered: O Nester Neleiad^s
The Glory of the Greeks we hither came
From Ithaca on no State-business,
But of my Father to seek news from Fame.
Unblest Ulysses who at Ilium
Together with you fought before the Town.
Of the other Chiefs we hear what is become.
But where Ulysses di'd is still unknown.
Whether as Land he ^^ain were by the Foe,
Or by the Sea devoured he has been.
But at your knees we hither come to know,
What you since then have heard of him or seen.
Wandering about, born to calamity.
Let no respect, or pity mitigate
Your Story, howsoever sad it be.
Nothing but naked truth to me relate.
And I beseech you for my Fathers sake,
If he before the Town of Troy did well
Perform the Service he did undertake,
That nothing but the very truth you tell.
O Friend, said Nestor, since you bring again
To memory our miseries at Troy,
Under Achilles first by Sea, what pain
We suffered then; and after when we lay
And sought before King Priam's Royal Seat
What we endured, what Great Men we lost.
The doughty Ajax, and Achilles great,
That were the Chief of all the Argive host.
The valiant Patroclus, and my Son
Antilochus, both valiant in fight,
And if an enemy were put to run
Before him, he could hardly escape by flight.
But numberless were our sad chances there;
No mortalman can count them one by one.
And if you five or six years should stay here,
You Would, weary be of asking, and be gone.
Nine years we plots contrived to take the Town,
Which Jove made prosperous with much ado.
Ulysses had for plotting the renown.
For none compared himself your Father to.
If it be true you are Ulysses Son;
And I confess, hearing you speak your mind,
And steadfastly your person looking on,
Much respect for you in my self I find.
While we together were at Troy, we never
In Council or Assembly disagreed,
But what was for the Argives good we ever
Endeavored what we could to get decreed.
But when of Troy we had destroyed the Town,
And back unto our Ships again were come,
Then Jove upon the Greeks began to frown,
Intending to them ill returning home.
For few there were amongst them just or wise,
But on themselves they drew down their own fate.
Which made the Goddess Pallas to devise
To set the two Atrides at debate.
Then of the People they a meeting call
At almost Sunset, and the people came
(Having their heads with wine disordered all)
The Atrides told them why they called the same.
Where Menelaus votes to cross the Seas,
And each man to his Country to repass.
(...) this advice his Brother did not please.
To stay there yet a while his counsel was.
^d first a Hecatomb to Sacrifice,
The Goddess Pallas anger to appease.
^t Agamemnon therein was not wise.
Men cannot change the will of the Gods with ease.
^hile they contending were with words unmeet,
One part arose resolved to stay all night,
^d in the Morn to go aboard the Fleet,
And each one toward his home to take his flight.
^d shipped our Captive Women and our Prey.
One half we were, and came to Tenedus.
^e other half with Agamemnon stay.
And Pallas then again divided us.
^d one part back to Agamemnon went.
But I with all my own Ships homeward fled.
Knowing that Jove to the Greeks evil meant)
So did the Son of Tydeus Diomed.
(...) ^esb^s to us Menelaus came,
Where we which way to go consulting staid
^us within, or else without the same.
And for direction to the Gods we praid
(...) the wide Sea t'Enboea they bid sail,
That we in safety be the sooner might.
^d sent us therewithal a lusty gale
Which brought us to Gerestus when 'twas night.
^d there to Neptune we burnt many Thighs.
On the fourth day the Ships of Diomed
(...) Argos came. The same Wind stayed in the Skies
Till I at Pyle was safe delivered.
(...) came I home, sweet Child, and cannot tell
Which of the Greeks came safe home, and which not.
^t what has since been told me I know well
(And so far as is reason you shall know it.)
^e Myr^^ydons, they say came safely home,
Conducted by stout Neoptolemus.
^d Philoctetes very well did come
Unto his Fathers house Pallantius.
^omeneus to Crest brought all his men
That were not slain at Ilium in fight.
How Agamemnon, when come home again,
was butchered, I need not to recite.
Nor how he came, nor of Aegistus plot,
Nor yet how bitterly he smarted sor't.
It Is good, you see, to have a Son begot,
That can revenge his Father in that sort.
And you, my friend, that tall are and well made,
Be valiant, and get amongst men good dame.
Telemachus then answered and said,
O Nestor, but my case is not the same.
Sharp the revenge was of Atrides Son,
And far and wide will matter be for Songs,
But from the Gods such power I have none
To be revenged of the Suitors wrongs.
O Friend (said Nestor) since I have been told,
That many who your Mother seek to marry,
Without your leave do with your house make bol^
And spending of your substance daily tarry,
Is it because you are therewith content?
Or are you forced to bear such injury
Because your people are against you bent,
Provoked thereto by some Divinity?
But who knows but at last they may be paid
For all the Injuries which they have done,
And insolence, by the Achaeans aid,
Or peradventure by your self alone?
For if of you Pallas as careful were,
As carefully she did your Father guide
At Troy (a God to man never did appear
So plainly as she there stood by his fide.)
If Pallas were so kind to you, you would see
The Suitors quickly would forget to woo.
Then said Telemachus, 'Twill never be,
Although the Gods should give consent thereto
Telemachus, said Pallas, what a word
Have you let fall? A man may be with ease
Though far off, to his native Soil restored
By any of the Gods, if so he please.
And I at home had rather lose my life
Fighting than sitting as Atrides di'd,
Slain by Aegistus and his own bad wife,
Basely by them in whom he did confide.
And yet the Gods unable are to save
A man from death, although he be a friend,
Whose end the cruel Fates determined have.
Then said Telemachus, Let Us make an end
Of this discourse. Ulysses latest day
Determined by the Gods already is,
And I to Nestor somewhat else will say;
For three men's Ages do but equal his.
O Nestor, I would fam informed be
How Agamemnon was of life deprived.
And Menelaus, where mean while was he?
And how Aegistus had the Plot contrived.
Was it that Menelaus too long stayed,
Aegillus ventured on a better wight?
I Will tell you all the truth (then Nestor said.)
And yet what you your self have guessed is right.
For why, if Menelaus coming home
Aegistus in the house alive had found,
He never had at Argos had a Tomb,
But eaten been by Dogs above the ground,
And Fowls of Prey Nor had he had the pity
Of th'A^give women, nor lamented been,
But lien had in the fields far from the City.
For why, a viler act was never seen.
For when at Troy we ended had the strise,
Long time it was before we came away.
Then Siege laid he to Agamemnons wife,
And secretly hidden in Argos lay.
And she at first refused, and counsel took
Of a Learned man, whom Agamemnon left
Going to Troy his wife to overlook,
But soon Aegistus him of life b^ref^.
For in a desert Island he him killed,
And left him for a booty to the Kites,
And then unto Aegistus she did yield,
And richly were performed the wedding rites.
Then on the Altars many Thighs they burn,
And with them Rich men's baubles, and gold stuff.
For why, for so unhop't for a good turn,
They thought they could not thank the Gods enough.
Now coming Menelaus was and I,
And were as far come as to Sunium,
When Phrontis, his good Steers-man chan^'d to die,
The best that in a storm ever Ship brought home,
And hindrance of his coming this was some
To bury him. But when he put to Sea,
And was with all his Ships in safety come
Under the windy Mountain of Malea,
Then an ill passage for them Jove provided.
The wind then whistled, and the water danced,
And into two parts was the Fleet divided;
And one part to the Coast of Creet advanced.
Where Cydons dwell, near Jarda^ rivers mouth.
There in the Sea stands a stone upright
That breaks the water when it rolls from South,
So that it comes to Phaestus without might;
And there the men came in and saved their lives.
But all the Ships upon the Rock were split.
The other part the wind to Egypt drives
With Menelaus. Five ships were in it.
Whilst Menelaus did in Egypt stay,
And visit Princes, and their gifts received.
Aegistus made the Argives him obey,
And Agamemnon of his life bereaved.
And sev'n years in Mycene reigned he.
But then Orestes came, whom they not knew,
From Athens to them unexpectedly,
And there the slayer of his Father slew.
And feasted the Argives at the Funeral
Of him and her. That very day did come
King Menelaus, his Ships laden all
From Egypt with his costly Presents home.
And you, my Friend, take heed you do not stay
Too long abroad, leaving your goods among
So many Knaves that waste them every day,
And will consume them utterly ere long.
But go to Menelaus who came last,
And wandering has among much people been.
A Bird could hardly so much Sea have past
In a years time, as wandering he has seen.
Therefore to Sparta go with Ship and Crew.
Or if by Land, my Coach is ready for ye.
Also my Son shall go along with you
And ask of Menela^s all his Story.
He Is wise. Besides the truth h^^l nothing say.
This said, the Sun was down, and dark the Sky.
Ne^tor, said Pallas, you before us lay
That to which we have nothing to reply.
Now slit the Tongues, and let wine tempered be,
That we may offer to The Immortals all.
The light is gone, and need of sleep have we.
So Pallas said, and they to offering fall.
The Waiters then brought water for their hands,
And young men to them all brought tempered wine.
The Tongues lay on the fire Each one up stands
And offers wine unto the Powers divine.
And when the Offering was at an end
Telemachus and Pallas were about
To go aboard, and there the night to spend.
But Nestor on the other side cried out,
The Gods forbid that you should lie aboard
As if I were a man so rude or poor
As not good bedding for a friend t'afford.
Since then I have of Rugs and Bedding store,
And many Sons alive with me at home,
That able are my friends to entertain,
And it is Ulysses Son that is to me come,
Surely this night he shall with me remain.
O Nestor, then said Pallas, that is right.
And at your house to lodge for him it is best.
But at the Ship I needs must lie this night,
His purpose to make known to all the rest.
Amongst them there no old man is but I,
The company t'encourage that expect
Telemachus. Not with Authority.
But my advise they will follow for respect.
The next day with the Caucons I must be
About an old and not a little debt.
And then that he may Menelaus see,
With strong swift horses on his way him set.
This said, the Goddess Pallas went away
In likeness of an Eagle to the Skies.
The people star'd, and knew not what to say,
And Nestor wondering saw it with his eyes.
And took Telemachus by the hand, and said,
A good man you will be Telemachus
And valiant, that are by a God convoyed:
And this same God that guided you to us,
Is none but Pallas daughter of great Jove,
That did at Troy your Father always guide.
Let me and mine, O Goddess, have your love,
And amongst men a Noble Fame and wide.
A Heifer on your Altar shall be laid
That never bare yoke, a yearling from the field;
And gilt shall be her horns. So Nestor prayed.
And Pallas hea^ing, to his Prayer did yield.
And Nestor to his house then led them all,
Both Sons and Sons-in-Law, and being there,
They sat on Chairs and Couches in the Hall.
Then Nestor bids one fill the Temperer
With Wine that aged was eleven year,
From out a Vessel first uncovered then*
And when the Wine and water mixed were,
Then Nestor prayed and offered. And when
The Offerings to the Goddess ended were,
The rest unto their lodgings went away.
Telemachus by Nestor stayed was there,
And in a soft and costly bed he lay.
And near unto him lay Pisistratus,
Who of the Sons of Nestor was the last,
And Nestor in the inmost part of the house,
Where, by the Queen his wife, his bed was pla^*
Soon as Aurera did the day restore,
The old Knight Nestor rose up from his bed,
And sat upon the Bench before the door,
O^ marble white and smooth that glistered.
His Father used to sit there before,
King Neleus, but that since he was dead,
And that King Nestor now the Scepter bore
There sat he now, and to him gathered
Were all his Sons. Echephron, Stratius,
Perseus, Aretus, Godlike Thrasymed.
Pisistratus. (Dead was Antilochus.)
Along with them Telemachus they led.
Then to his Children Nestor spoke and said,
Do quickly, Sons, what you shall from me hear.
A Vow I made to Pallas must be paid,
Who did to me so visibly appear.
Let one of you unto the Pastures hie
And bid a Herdsman bring a Heifer home;
One to Telemachus his Ship quickly
And bid his Mates, save two, all hither come.
Another bid the Gilder hither come,
To gild the sacred Heifers horns with speed.
The rest stay here to look to things at home,
That all things may be ready that we need.
Seats, dry wood, and fair water. So said he.
Then busy were they all. The Heifer came,
And all Telemachus his Company.
The Gilder came, Laerces was his name,
And every tool that to his Art belongs,
And necessary is, had in his hands;
His Anvil, and his Hammer, and his Tongs.
And Pallas also now amongst them stands.
Then fell the man to work on Nestors Gold,
And so elaborate it was when done,
That it might please the Goddess to behold.
Then came in Stratius and Echephron,
And by the horns they led the Heifer in.
The Basin and the Ewre, and Barley white
Aretus brought; and with an Axe full keen
Stood Thrasymed ready the Beast to s^ite.
Then Nestor prayed, and from the Heifers head
Cut off some hair, and into th'fire it threw
Then prayed the rest; and Barley sprinkled
Upon the fire, and Thrasymed then slew
The Heifer with his Axe, and cut in twain
The tendons of the neck, and down she fell*
And Nestor's Wife and Daughters shout amain
To see the sacred act performed well.
Pisistratus then cuts the Victims throat,
And up they held it to let out the blood
Into a Pail which Perseus thither brought,
And to that purpose ready with it stood.
The life together with the blood out^lies.
Then from the Body they the Bowels draw,
And next cut off the Shoulders and the Thighs.
As is of Sacrifice the Ri^ual Law.
And them slit into two parts they display,
And cover them all over with sweet fat.
Shoulder on Shoulder, Thigh on Thigh they lay.
And Nestor on the Altar burns that.
And with it on the fire black wine he poured.
By him a spit was ready with five points.
The fire the Thighs, the men th'Entrails devoured,
The rest divided was in smaller joints
To roast on Spits. Telemachus the while
Into the Bath retired, and was there
Well bathed, and anointed with sweet Oil
By P^lycaste Nestor's daughter dear.
And in a Robe and Coat clad gloriously,
And came as if no mortal he had been
Into the Hall, and sat down Nestor by.
The meat now ready straightway was brought in.
Then in the young men came to fill them wine.
When they with flesh and wine were satisfied,
Then to his Sons, said Nestor, Children mine
The Horses to the Coach see quickly ti'd.
Away they go, and to ^he Coach they set
The Horses swift; and in it bread and wine
A Maid laid in; and with it choi^est meat,
Which none but God-fed Kings eat when they dine.
Up to the Seat then went Telemachus
(The Seat was large and capable of two)
And after him went up Pisistratus,
And Whip and Reins he took his hands into.
Touched with the Whip, the Horses take the way,
And all the day long made their Harness shake.
The Sun went down, dark were the Streets. Then they
At Pherae were. And there their rest they take.
There Diocles, Orsilochus his Son,
Son of Alphaeus them did entertain,
And with fair Gifts presented them each one.
But soon as Morning did appear again,
Their Horses to the Coach again they tie,
And from the Porch drive them into the way.
Touched with the Whip again away they fly.
The Sun now down, and ended was the day.
LIB. IV.
ANd then to Lacedaemon come were they,
And drove up to the House of Menelaus.
At home they found him. For there on that day
A double Wedding celebrated was.
One, of his Daughter; fair Hermione,
Whom he before at Troy had promised
Of Neoptolemus the Wi^e should be.
And on this day the same accomplished.
And her he sent unto the Myrmidons
Where reigned he. To Pthia she was brought.
And then the second Wedding was his Son's,
Whom on a woman bond he had begot.
And Megapenthes named. (For Helens bed
Fruitless was after fair Hermione.)
And he Alector's daughter married.
Of Lacedaemon Citizen was he.
And now they merry sat that bidden were,
Making good cheer, and hearing Voice and Fiddle,
And wondering at two Tumblers that were there.
That moving to the time stood in the middle.
Mean while by th'Horses th'utter Gate without
Telemachus stood and Pisistratus.
Then Ete^neus by chance came out,
A careful Servant of Menelaus.
And having seen them, in he went again,
And being near to where his Master sat,
O King (said he) there are without two men
Like Great men's Sons with their Coach at the Gate*
Shall I take out their Horses? Or shall I
Tell them where they may lodged be elsewhere?
At this Atrides grieved, made reply,
Eteoneus, sure once you wiser were.
Have we not often by strangers heretofore
In our necessity relieved been?
And I pray God it may be so no more.
Go, loose the Horses, and the men bring in.
This said, he went again with Servants more.
Takes out the Horses. Ties them to the Mangers,
And throws before them Provender good store.
Sets up the Coach, and then brings in the strangers,
Who at the beauty of the house amazed.
(For bright it shined as the Moon or Sun)
And when they had sufficiently gazed,
To where the Bathing-room was walked on.
After they were well washed and anointed,
And clothed with soft nappy Cloak and Coat,
That they should near him sit the King appointed,
And near unto his Throne their Chairs were brought.
A Maid the Golden Basin and the Ewre
To wash their hands over a Caldron brings.
(The Caldron also was of silver pure)
Another on the Table laid good things.
Another Bread. The Carver also cuts
Of every sort of meat the choicest bits,
And them on trenchers on the Table puts.
And Menelaus pointing to it sits.
And heartily invites them to fall to.
Eat now, said he, we shall have time enough
When you have supped to ask you where and who.
Your Ancestors are not obscure I know.
Such Children are not got by wretched men.
And as he spoke he took from his own Mess
As much as both his hands could comprehend
Of good Chine-beef, and gave it to these Guests.
And then they laid their hands upon their meat.
But when their hunger and their thirst was gone,
Telemachus that near sat to his seat
Whispered Pisistratus, You, Nestors Son,
Do you not mark the splendor in this house.
Of Brass, Gold, Amber, Silver, Ivory?
Such sure the house is of Olympius,
So many and so glorious things I see.
But Menelaus heard him. Let, said he,
No mortal man with Jupiter compare.
His house decays not, nor goods wasted be.
What men compare with me I do not care.
For why, my Goods I paid for very dear
With pain and peril in my coming home,
And wandering up and down at Sea eight year
Before I could into my Country come.
I was in Cyprus and Phoeaicia,
Came to the Cydo^s and Erembians,
To Egypt and to Ethiopia,
And to the sertile grounds of the Libyans.
Where every year the Sheep three times do breed,
And all the Lambs fall horned from the Dam.
Nor master nor his man there stands in need
Of Cheese or Milk, or tender flesh of Lamb.
While I my Goods amongst them wandering got,
I lost my Brother by his Wife betrayed.
And therefore in my riches glory not.
And all this to you have your Fathers said.
Absent, I lost my house, and much rich stuff.
Had I my fellows saved I led to Troy,
I Would been content with the third part thereof.
So all to all I Have little cause of joy.
For all my Friends at Troy lost grieved was I,
And sometimes wept, yet sometimes also not.
For quick of tears is the satiety.
But one there is, when he is in my thought
I neither food nor sleep desire to take.
For all the while we were besieging Troy,
None suffered so much for the Argives sake
As did Ulysses, nor so often did pray.
And more perhaps he is to suffer yet.
Long stays he, and whether alive or dead
He be, I can from no man notice ge^,
Nor from my sorrow be delivered.
Mean while as for a Son of life berest
La^rtes weeps. So does Penelope.
Telemachus whom young Ulysses left,
Spends his best age in pain and misery.
This said, Telemachus before his eyes
Held up his Purple Robe, the tears to hide
Drawn from him by his Fathers Miseries.
And Menelaus when he that espied
Considered whether best it were or no
To tell him first what he had heard or seen
About his Father, or what he would know
To let him ask. But Helen then came in
Like to Diana in great Majesty.
Adreste came in with her with a Chair.
Alcippe a soft Carpet laid nigh.
Her Basket brought in was by Phylo fair.
A^ Thebes in Ae^ypt it was given her
By Polybus his wife Alcandre, when
King Menelaus traveling was there,
And Polybus gave to him Talents ten
Of Gold, and Lavers two of Silver fine,
And two three-sooted Caldrons of good Brass.
Then by Alcandre t'Helena Divine
A silver brim guilt Basket given was
With fine and curiously-spun thread pressed full
With Distaff on it more thread yet to spin
Beady invested with soft Purple wool.
This was the Basket Phylo then brought in.
Then Helen sat, and by her Husband told
What thitherto had past, I know, said she,
King Menelaus; now I them behold
The Guests that are come to you, who they be.
But shall I tell you what I think or no?
I Will tell you true. I never yet saw one
So like another, as this man is to
Telemachus, Ulysses only Son.
Whom when with other Greeks to Ilium
He went to setch away this Monky me
By bloody War, he left a Child at home.
Then Menelaus spoke. Since you, said he,
Have put it in my mind, I think so too.
His eyes, his feet, his hands, his head, his hair*
Are like Ulysses his, who I Would tell you now
What m^sery for me he suffered there,
But that it makes him weep and hide his eyes,
Then to Atrides said Pisistratus,
The truth to you, O King, I Will not disguise.
This is Ulysses Son Telemachus.
But jealous of his tongue and fearful is
Before a man experienced and wise,
Lest he should say something at first amiss,
And lay his weakness open to your eyes.
Nestor sent me along with him for guide,
Because he so much longed you to see,
And hear what of his Father was betide,
And by you helped and instructed be.
Unhappy is the Child whose Father's gone
And this is now Telemachus his case.
For of Ulysses news he can hear none,
Who to defend him left none in his place.
How, how! then said Atrides, I have here
The Son of one that I esteemed most,
And for my sake suffered and did more there
Than any other in the Argive Host.
To whom I meant, had we come safely home,
To show more kindness than to any-one
Of all the Greeks. As Soon as we were come
I had to Argos brought him and his Son;
Built them a City; made both but one State,
And laid the Cities round about us waste;
And often there with one another safe;
And only death our friendship had displac't.
But by the Gods these thoughts are rendered vain.
They have Ulysses from his Country kept.
This said, from tears they could no more abstain.
Joves Daughter Argive Helena then wept,
And Menelaus and Telemachus.
Nor could Pisistratus his tears restrain,
But on his Brother thought Antilochus,
That by the fair Aurora's Son was slain.
And him remembering, to Atrides spoke.
Atrides, often have I heard Nestor tell,
(As often as we did of you mention make)
That you amongst men in wisdom do excel.
I pray you think not I take any pleasure
To act at Supper-time the rites of mourning.
For that another time we shall have leisure;
Unless we look no more to see the Morning.
Not that I weeping for the dead condemn,
Or cutting off of hair. It is a debt
We owe to our dead friends. And one of them
My Brother is, whom I cannot forget.
He was not of the Greeks the meanest man.
For swift he was of foot and bold in fight
(Which you than I much better witness can)
To kill his Foe in battle or in flight.
Dear friend, Atrides answered, you have said
What might an older man have well beseemed
To say and do; and Nestor's stock bewrayed,
Whose wisdom is of all men's most esteemed.
It Is easy to discern the race of one
To whom a happy life the Gods shall grant,
As unto Noble Nestor they have done,
Long life, and Sons discreet and valiant.
Let Us put off for the present tales of sorrow,
And to our meat again our minds apply.
Bring water for our hands. Betimes to morrow
We'll talk of this Telemachus and (...)
This said, Asphalion came in with water*
They washed, and on the meat their hands they laid,
But in the mean time Helena Joves Daughter
An Antidote into the wine convei'd.
An Antidote that virtue had to keep
The man that drank it mixed with his wine
So as for all that day he should not weep,
Nor for what ever should befall him whine:
No though his Father or his Mother di'd,
Or Friend or Brother slain were in his sight
By cruel enemies that them envied.
Such was of Helens Medicine the might,
Which t'her in Egypt Thon's wife given had,
Where many Drugs of wondrous virtue grow,
Some here, some there, and some good, and some bad*
For all men there the Art of Physique know.
For why, from Paean sprung are all those men.
The Antidote put in, she bad the wine
Be born about. And then she said again,
King Menelaus offspring of Gods divine,
Descended from the Gods are also these.
And Jove good fortune gives sometimes to one,
And sometimes to another, as he please.
For he can do whatever can be done.
Feast then, and merrily together sit,
And please your selves with Stories. I Will tell one,
And which as to the time, is not unfit,
Of what at Troy was by Ulysses done.
I will not tell you all the pranks he played,
But only how he came into the Town,
With canvas Mantle o'r his shoulders laid,
Bloody with stripes, from no hand but his own (...)
And by the name of Dectes there did pass,
And as a slave went freely up and down,
When such man in the Fleet at all none was.
And was to every one but me unknown.
I questioned him, and he at first was shy.
But when I bathed him and anointed had,
And clothed, and taken an Oath of secrecy,
He told me what design the Argives had.
Then having gotten much Intelligence,
And many of the Trojan people slain,
He safely to the Fleet departed thence
Leaving their Wives lamenting there in vain.
But I was glad. For changed was my mind,
And grieved by Venus to have been made so mad,
To leave my Child Hermione behind,
And my good Husband when no cause I had.
Then Men^laus said, Your Story, Wife,
Is to the purpose. Countries I have seen
Many; and often with Heroes in my life
In Councels sitten; but was never in
The place where any like Ulysses sat.
In The Wooden Horse, I Will tell you what he did.
(No man did ever such a thing as that)
The Princes of the Army there lay hid
Death and destruction bearing into Troy.
Some Demon then that was no friend to us,
Made you come forth our Counsel to destroy.
And with you also came Deiphobus.
And thrice about the Wooden Horse you went,
And called to us every man by name,
And our Wives voices so did represent,
As not to be discerned from the same.
In The midst Ulysses, Diomed, and I
Heard well your call as we together sat,
And ready were to go forth, or reply;
But by Ulysses hindered were of that.
But Anticlus had answered certainly,
Had not Ulysses when he heard her call,
Laid hand upon his mouth immediately,
And held, till you were gone. That saved us all.
'Twas much (then said Telemachus) but this
Was not enough the man alive to keep
Though made of steel, whose end determined is.
But now, O King, the time is come for sleep.
Then Helen to her women order gave
To see their Beds made ready, and lay on
Fair Pu^ple Rugs, and under them to have
Soft Blankets, and fine Coverlids upon
Before the house in Chambers o'r the Gate.
But in the Inmost of the Palace lay
King Men^laus with his Royal Mate,
And rose again together with the day.
And when he had himself attired and shod,
And hung his trusty sword had by his side,
Out of his Chamber came he like a God
And to Telmachus himself applied.
Telemachus said he, what brings you
To Lacedaemon o'r the Sea so wide?
Public or private business? Tell me true.
Telema^hus unto him then replied.
To you, King Menel^^, I am come
T'enquire what of my Father is be^ide.
My house is full of Enemies at home,
That me consume; and there resolve to abide.
In The fields they fruitless make my husbandry.
My st^^k they eat, and would my Mother wed.
This made me come to know the certainty
Whether my Father be alive or dead.
Whether you saw him after he left Troy
Wandering abroad. (For he was born to woe.)
Or of him any thing heard others say.
Let tenderness hide nothing that you know.
If in the Argive Host he useful were
I^ Counsel or in Battle, when need was,
Tell me the truth be it never so severe.
To this, much grieved, answered Menelaus.
Yes, yes (said he) there many entered be
Into a strong man's house while he is away.
And are in hope to dwell there constantly,
Though not so valiant, as he, be they.
As when a Stag and Hind entering the Den
Of th'absent Lion lulls his whelps with tales
Of Hills and Dales, the Lion comes again
And tears them into pieces with his nails;
So shall Ulysses all those Suitors slay.
Oh that the Gods, Apollo, Pallas, Jove,
Amongst the Suitors set him would one day,
Such as when with Philome^id he strove,
And threw him flat, and made the Argives glad.
If such as then Ulysses should be there,
Short would their lives be and their wedding bad.
But to the matter whereof you would hear,
I can say nothing upon certainty,
And my own knowledge. But what I was told
By Proteus. And tell I will no lie,
Nor any thing of what he said withold.
Before the Land of Egypt Pharos lies,
An Island, and therein a Haven good
Against whatever wind shall chance to rise.
And ready to depart my ships there stood.
A days sail distant stands it in the Main;
But 'cause the Hecatomb I offered not,
The Gods a long time did me there detain.
For they are angry when they are forgot.
There twenty days together we were pent,
Though fain we would have put again to Sea;
And our Provision had quite been spent,
But that I then met with Idothoe.
She daughter is of Proteus. And he
A Herdsman old of Neptune is, and has
The charge his Sea-calves kept and fed to see.
His daughter met me when alone I was.
My Company their dinner to provide,
With Angle-rods were fishing on the strand.
Then said she to me standing by my side,
Why stay you here and nothing take in hand
To help your self, as if a Child you were,
Or negligent, or loved misery,
Suffering your self to be so long pent here?
Or can you no way find to be set free?
What God you be soever (answered I)
Thus much unto you I must plainly say,
That in this Isle I stay unwillingly,
And for my freedom to the Gods I pray.
But tell me you (for Gods know every thing)
What God is it that to this place me ti'd;
And what it is that must me from it bring.
I Will tell you then, said she, and nothing hide.
By an old Sea-God haunted is this Isle,
Called Proteus, that nothing says untrue,
Servant to Neptune. Whom if by some wile
You could but catch and hold, he would answer you
To all you ask. And he my Father is.
He Will tell you how to get your Ships to Sea;
And how you shall get home. He knows all this,
And what is there done. So said Idothoe.
But how (said I) is it possible for man
Upon a God Immortal to lay hold,
When he foreseeing it avoid it can,
If how to do it he be not by you told?
I Will tell you (said she) how it may be done.
Hidden in the Curls of the Sea each day
Brought in by Zephyrus, he lands at Noon,
And on the sand himself to sleep will lay.
About him will his footless Sea-calves lie,
And of the brine abominably smell.
And thither bring you in the morn will I,
And how to place your selves instruct you well.
For three more must come with you lusty men,
Whom you shall choose from out your company.
The old Sea-God his flock will number then,
And having done, in the midst of them will lie,
Just as a Shepherd lies amongst his sheep.
Now waver not, but bold and constant be.
As Soon as you shall see he is asleep,
Lay hold on him, and keep it constantly.
For he in diverse shapes will with you struggle.
He will be any Serpent that he please.
Himself he will into Fire or Water juggle.
Therefore hold fast, left he your hands disseize.
When of himself he shall contented be
In his first form the matter to debate;
Take off your hands, and set the old God free.
Then of your business him interrogate,
What God it is that has your hurt contrived.
How you shall put to Sea. Which way go home.
This said, into the Sea again she dived.
Then full of thoughts back to my Ships I come,
And supt. And when we supped had 'twas night.
Then slept we by our ships upon the sand.
But when Aurora had brought back the light,
Then went I with my three men to the strand,
And prayed to the Gods; my men I chose,
Such men as for the purpose fit I thought.
Idothoe then from the Sea arose,
And in her hand four Sea-calves skins she brought
All raw, her Father thereby to betray.
And with those skins upon us on the shore
Scraped hollow by her, like Sea calves we lay.
And there our lodging had been very sore,
(For so abominably do they stink,
That no man near them can endure to lie.
Is it good lying with a Whale do you think?)
But that she for it had a remedy.
Ambrosia she with her brought, and laid
The same unto our Noses one by one,
Which the ill savor of the Fish allai'd.
And thus we lay expecting till 'twas Noon.
Then all at once the Sea-calves came ashore,
And there themselves they bedded orderly.
At noon came Proteus, and counts them o'r,
And first were counted my three men and I.
Then lay he also down. And by and by
He fell asleep. Then we unto him ran,
And laid hands on him with a hideous cry.
And he to show his wondrous Art began.
A shaggy Lion first he seemed to be;
And then a Dragon; then a Leopard;
And then a Boar; then Water; then a Tree.
But still we kept our hold, and pressed him hard.
He weary was at last, and then he said,
Atrides, how came you by so much skill
To hold me thus? What God has me betrayed?
What needed you to vex me? What Is your will?
What need, said I, have you from me to hear,
That bound am to this Isle, and know not how
To put to Sea, nor what God holds me here,
When you can tell me (for Gods all things know.)
Then back, said he, to Greece you cannot come,
Till you to Egypt do return again,
And pay to all the Gods a Hecatomb.
That done, you shall pass safely o'r the Main.
Thus Proteus said. But that I must go first
Back into Egypt, an ill and long way,
My heart to hear it ready was to burst.
It Is hard, said I, but I Will do all you say.
But tell me of the Argives first, if they
With their good Ships came all in safety home,
That I and Nestor left behind at Troy.
How many by the way they lost, and whom.
Some of them escaped, said he, and some are lost.
But of the Princes lost are only twain
In their return. (Upon the Trojan Coast
You know who di'd.) And one the Gods detain.
First Ajax ships by winds were laid aground
At Gyrae, Rocks that on the Deep look down,
And against the Sea protection there had found,
However Pallas did upon him frown,
But that a high provoking word he spoke.
I Will pass, said he, although the Gods say no.
And Neptune then the Rock he sat on brake.
Both he and it into the water go,
Where, when he had drunk brine enough, he di'd.
Your Brother also safely past the Sea,
And came to Argos. (Juno was his Guide.)
And when he was come near to Mount Malea,
Forced by soul weather he disbarked, where
Thyestes formerly his age had spent.
But now his son Aegistus dwelled there.
The Gods then changed the wind, and homeward went.
Full glad he was, and kissed the ground for joy,
And from him fell the tears abundantly.
Aegistus that long sought him to destroy,
Had placed a man on purpose to descry
Th'arrival of the Fleet; whom he had hired
To watch upon a Hill a year together,
For Talents ten of Gold that he required,
And tell him when the Fleet from Troy came thither.
The Watchman saw them, and to Aegistus went
And gave him notice of their coming in.
Aegistus then to effect his bad intent,
Chose twenty lusty men, and them within
An Inner-room he placed out of sight.
And a great Supper bids his men provide;
Then down went, Agamemnon to invite,
With Horses and with Coaches to th'Seaside,
And brought him up to Supper in great state.
Then rose the Traitors that in ambush lay,
And killed him as he at Supper sat.
Not any man alive went thence away
That with Atrides or with him took part.
When of his Story he had made an end,
To break with pity ready was my heart.
In streams down on my cheeks the tears descend.
I wished never more to see the Sun,
And weeping on the sand my self I rolled.
But when my Lamentation was done,
Then Proteus said again, Your weeping hold.
Tears are no remedy. But make baste home.
There lives Aegistus, or if he be slain
Already by Orestes, you will come
To his Interment. This cheered me again.
And then I asked further of him this,
Since you have told me what is become of two,
Tell me, the third that stays abroad, who it is,
Alive or dead; though that will grieve me too.
It is (said he) Ulysses. Whom I saw
In th'Island where Calypso dwells, of the Shore
Weeping, who fain would come to Ithaca,
But with him neither has a Ship or Oar.
And you, O Menelaus, shall not die
In Argos (for it is otherwise decreed)
But be conveyed t'Elyzium. For why,
Of Jupiter you wedded have the Seed.
There humanes lead their lives in greatest ease.
No Snow nor Frost there is. Refreshed there
They are by Zephyr's rising from the Seas.
And Joves Son Rhadamanthus dwells there.
This said, into the Sea he went again.
But I with thoughts confused in my head
Returned back unto my ships and men.
And soon as we had supped the night was spread.
Then back again into the Nyle we go,
And offered to the Gods a Hecatomb;
When we their anger had appeased so,
For Agamemnon there we raised a Tomb.
When this was done, for Argos we set sail,
And quickly to our native Soil we came.
The Immortal Gods gave us a lusty gale,
And all the way continued the same.
Telemachus, yo've heard all I can say.
But must not therefore streightway take your leave.
Until th'eleventh or twelfth day you must stay,
The Presents I intend you to receive.
A Chariot you shall have and Horses three,
And a fair Cup embossed to offer wine,
That in your Vows you may remember me.
Then said Telemachus, I here have li'n
Long time already. And my men at Pyle
Are weary of expecting me. Else I
Could stay a year, and never all that while
My mind have on my house, or Family.
So much I taken am with your discourse.
But let my Present be some Monument:
To Ithaca I Will never carry horse,
They for the Plains are more convenient.
Large Plains, which you have here in many places,
And where store is of Wheat, and Rice, and Lote.
In Ithaca there is no ground for races,
Nor Pastures good enough to feed a Goat.
In th'Isles about it, gallop can no Horse.
In th'Isle it self, nor gallop, nor be fed.
When he had made an end of his discourse,
Atrides smiling on him stroak'd his head.
It Is spoken, said he, like a gallant man,
And that descended is of Noble blood.
I Will give you other Presents (for I can)
In place of these, that shall be full as good.
A Monument kept in my Treasury,
Of massy silver a fair Temperer,
The work of Vulcan, which was given me
At Sidon, by the King, when I was there.
Whilst they together thus discoursing staid,
The bidden Guests, fat sheep, rich wine bring in,
And bread their Wives upon the Tables laid,
And about Supper busy were within.
And now the Suitors at Ulysses house
Were throwing of the Stone and Darts. And by
Antinous sat and Eurymachus
Chief of the Woo'rs. Then came Noemon nigh.
Unto Antinous he spoke, and said,
When will Telemachus return from Pyle?
My Ship I lent him, and am now afraid,
I shall have need of her my self the while.
For over into Elis I must pass.
Twelve Mares of mine there go, and with the same
Twelve unbroke Mules, their Foals, at grass.
And some of them I would fetch home and tame.
At this they star'd. For never dreamed they
That in good earnest he would go to Pyle,
But in the fields would with some Herdsman stay,
And there from us conceal himself a while.
Antinous then asked, When parted he?
What Company went with him hence? His own
Servants and Husbandmen (for that might be)
Or youngmen of the best account in the Town?
And tell me further, was it willingly
You lent your ship? or were you forced thereto?
To this Noemon did again reply,
I lent it willingly. What should I do?
Who would not yield to such a man's request
(When he has need and asks) as well as I?
And with him went of Ithaca the best,
And Mentor chief of all the company.
If he it were not, 'twas some Deity.
For (which is strange) I saw him yesterday
Before the Sun was mounted half the Sky.
Yet went the ship the night before away.
This said, he went his way. Antinous
And the other sat there yet, and wondered.
The Suitors left their sport, sat down, and thus
Antinous the Case then opened,
And in an angry tone, with fiery eye,
It Is true, said he, Telemachus has done
A work to us of great indignity.
We thought he never could that way have gone.
We many are, and men. Yet he a Boy
Has got a Ship, and of our men the best.
Bu^ may Jove him, before he us destroy.
Give me a good ship, ever we be oppressed,
And twenty able men. And in the Strait
'Twixt Ithaca and Same I will lie,
And for their coming back from Pylus wait,
And entertain him with hot coming by.
The Suitors all were pleased with the Plot,
And then they 'rose together and went in.
But Medon had heard all. Which they knew not.
For he without the Court was, they within.
And to inform Penelope he went,
And when she saw him coming in a door,
Medon, said she, what are you hither sent
To bid my Maids trouble themselves no more,
With how the Suitors they shall entertain;
But only for themselves make ready meat?
Lest when they hither come to sup again,
It prove the last that they shall ever eat.
Telemachus his wealth you wasted have,
As if your Fathers never told you how
Ulysses with them did himself behave
That never did unkindness to them show
In Deed or Word. Although a liberty
Kings often take, one man to love or hate
Above another, without telling why.
But he cause of offense to no man gave,
But of good turns received heretofore
Your nature altogether senseless is.
O Queen, said Medon, would it were no more.
But I must tell you somewhat worse than this.
The Suitors have conspired to kill your Son
(Which Jove avert) as he is coming home.
For he to Pylus is and Sparta gone
T'enquire what of his Father is become.
This said, Penelope was stricken dumb,
And filled were with tears her eyes. But when
Her voice at last again was to her come,
She spoke to Medon, and him asked then.
Medon, said she, why went my Son away?
What need had he upon the Sea to ride?
Meant he his name amongst men to destroy?
And Medon to her then again replied,
I cannot tell. Perhaps encouraged
By some of the Gods, or Presage of his own
T'enquire about his Father whether dead,
Or on what Coast he is by fortune thrown.
This said, her tears she could no longer hold,
And lets her self sink down upon the Sill.
Then came her Maids about her, young and old.
Did ever Gods, said she, bear such ill will
To any woman as they bear to me?
Why deal they with me worse than with the rest?
O my dear Husband! What a man was he!
All manly virtues lodged in his breast.
Through Hellas and through Argos known was he.
Of him the Gods unkind me first berest.
And now away my Child must taken be
That to sustain the House at home was left.
Sluts that you are, and of his going knew,
Why was it not to me discovered?
For had I of it been informed by you,
I had him staid, or he had left me dead.
To Dolius let one or other go
(The Servant which my Father gave to me,
And with Laertes at the Lodge is now,
And of my Garden has the custody)
And tell him what the Suitors are about.
That he may to Laertes tell the same;
And he unto the people may come out,
And them against these wicked men inflame;
Then spoke Euryclea. Dear Child, said she,
Kill me, or let me live as you think best;
No longer shall the truth concealed be.
I knew all this. So did none of the rest.
I furnished him with all that he commanded,
Sweet Wine and Flour. But first he made me swear
I would not tell you till it was demanded,
Or that the same by others told you were;
For fear lest with much weeping hurt you take.
But wash, put on clean Garments, and up go
Into your chamber, and your Prayers make
To Pallas, who your Son to save knows how.
The grieved old Man, why should you further grieve?
Hated is not Arcesius his seed
By all the Gods. For I cannot believe
But some of them will help them in their need,
And both their Houses and their Lands protect.
This stopped her sobbing, and her weeping staid.
Then went she up, her self she washed and decked,
And to the Goddess Pallas thus she prayed.
O Goddess, if you well accepted have
The Victims by Ulysses sacrificed
Upon your Altar here, his Son now save,
And bring to naught what th'Wooers have devised.
Her Prayer granted was. Then shouted they.
The Suitors heard it in the Hall, and one
T'another said, It Is for her Wedding Day.
She knows not we intend to kill her Son.
Thus said they, but upon no ground at all.
Alcinous then spoke. Madmen, said he,
Such words as these what mean you to let fall?
What if within they should reported be?
Come rise, thus; gently, and the work effect
To which we all have given our consent.
Then did he twenty able men elect,
And down unto the waterside they went.
And first of all they laid their ship afloat,
And in it with white Sails the Mast they laid,
And fit their Oars. Then in their Arms were brought.
The Mast then reared was, and the Sails displaid.
Then went they t'Anchor in the open Sea,
And staid till night. And then aboard they eat.
Then to her Chamber went Penelope
Grieving, and tasting neither drink nor meat,
Casting about whether more likely 'twere
Her Son should escape the Suitors hands, or die.
Just as a Lion that enclosed were
With Toils about, would cast which way to fly.
When her sad reckoning s^eep had blotted out,
Dissolved her strength, and closed had her eyes,
Pallas another business went about.
She made an Idol in a woman's guise,
Like to the Daughter of Icarius
Wife of Eumelus (at Pher^ dwelled he)
And sent the same unto Ulvss s house,
T'allay the sorrow of Penelope.
In at the Key hole then the Idol goes
Into her Chamber, and stood at her head.
Penelope, said it, amidst such woes
How can you sleep? But now be comforted.
You must no longer weep nor grieved be.
For from the Gods you no such cause shall have.
For of your Son the safe return you will see.
To this Penelope then answer gave.
Sister, said she, it is strange to see you here.
You come but seldom. For far off you dwell.
And now you bid me weeping to forbear,
When how much cause I have you cannot tell.
A good and noble Husband I have lost
That had a Lions heart within his breast.
Hellas and Argos of his valor boast.
What Virtue is there that he not possessed?
And now my Child at Sea is in a Tub,
And has no skill in Fight or Parliament.
I fear extremely left he meet some rub.
For him more than for the other I lament.
What may befall him on the Sea I dread;
And what at Land, if ever to Land he come.
For many Foes he has that wish him dead,
And wait to kill him as he comes home.
To this again replied the Idol dim,
Take courage, be not frighted for your Son.
He has a Guide that takes care of him.
A better would be wished for by none.
It Is Pallas. For of you she pity takes.
And what I said, I said by her Command.
Penelope again this Answer makes,
Who ere you be, answer one more demand.
Is my poor Husband yet alive, or no?
Then said the Idol, That I do not find.
Nor will I tell you what I do not know.
Then through the Keyhole went, and turned to wind.
Then wak't Penelope, and joyful was
To Have had a dream so evident and clear.
Then o'r the humid Plain the Suitors pass,
Destruction to Telemachus to bear.
'Twixt Ithaca and Same, middle way,
There lies an Island, and but small it is,
Yet has it on each side a good safe Bay.
There watched the Wooers. It Is called Asteris.
LIB. V.
UP rose Aurora from Tithonus bed,
Before the Gods and men to bear her light.
The Gods were then to Counsel gathered,
And Jove amongst them, of the greatest might.
And there before them Pallas open laid
The painful life Ulysses did endure.
O Jove, and all ye blessed Gods (she said)
Henceforth his people let no King enure
To gentle Government, but keep them down,
And to their honesty no longer trust,
That of Ulysses are forgetful grown,
Whose Government so gentle was and just.
And now ^^e pent up lies in an Isle
Where dwells Calypso; and to come away
Has neither Ship nor men, and all the while
Weeping for sorrow forced he is to stay.
The Suitors also seek to kill his Son,
And lie to meet him in his coming home.
For why, to Pyle and Sparta he is gone,
To hear what of his Father is become.
Why Child (said Jove) why say you this to me?
'Twas you that sent Telemachus away.
And you consenting were to our decree,
Ulysses should come back and th'Wooers stay.
Go you and bring Telemachus from Pyle,
And send the Suitors home that lie in's way.
And Mercury (said he) go you the while
And tell the Nymph Calypso what I say.
The Gods in Council sitting ordered have,
Ulysses shall return to Ithaca.
And first upon a Raft himself shall save,
Without a Convoy, in P^acia
In twenty days; and there be honored,
And to his Country richly sent away,
With Brass and Gold, and Garments furnished,
More than his share had mounted to at Troy,
Though he had brough^ it thence all safely home.
For why, by Destiny ordained it is
That to his friends he honorably come.
No sooner Jupiter had spoken this,
But that his Shoes upon his feet he binds,
A^brosian, Golden Shoes, wherewith he flies
On Land or Water, swi^^e^ than the winds.
Then takes the Rod wherewith upon the eyes
Of Mortals, he lays on or takes o^^ sleep,
And with his Rod in hand jumpt down to th'Hill
Pie^ius, and thence into the Deep.
And over the wide Sea he passed, till
At last he was arrived at the Is^e
Where was the Nymph Calypso resident.
And like a Cormorant was all this while
That hunts the Fishes. Then ashore he went.
And coming to her Rock found her within.
Upon the hearth a fire was of sweet wood.
There did she sing, and as she sung did spin.
About the Cave many sair Trees there stood.
Beech, Poplar, and the Cypress of sweet smell;
And many Birds, Hawks, and Sea crows, and Owls
Within their branches used were to dwell;
And (such as haunt Seawater) other Fowls.
The Rock it self with Vines was covered,
And Grapes abundance hanging were thereon.
Four Springs arow four ways clear water spread.
Sweet Meadows were about it many a one
Stuck full of Violets and Flowers gay,
Which, though a God, he saw with admiration,
And for a little while he there did stay
Pleased with the beauty of the habitation.
And then into the spacious Cave he goes.
At the first sight Calypso knew him well.
For perfectly one God another knows,
How far soever they asunder dwell.
Ulysses ^ow was gone out to the Shore,
To look upon the Sea that kept him in,
To sigh and weep as he had done before.
At Hermes coming he was not within.
To Hermes seated in a glistering Chair
The Goddess fair Calypso then begun,
Tell me beloved Hermes your affair.
If it be possible it shall be done.
Come nearer, and with food you self restore.
Then sets she him a Table, and lays on
Of Nectar and Ambrosia good store.
Then Hermes took his Food, and having done,
Goddess (said he) since me (a God) you ask,
You may be sure I tell you shall no lie.
Jove sent me against my will. For such a task
Who undertake would, think you, willingly?
For first a horrible long Journey it is;
And then no Town to bait at by the way
On Hecatomb or lesser Sacrifice.
But what God is there dares Jove disobey?
There is, said Jove, a man that staid is here
Of th'Argives that besieged Ilium
The most unhappy. There they staid nine year.
The tenth they took it, and were coming home.
But by the way they Pallas had offended.
And she against them raised stormy weather,
In which Ulysses Mates their lives all ended.
But he himself by storms was driven hither:
Him Jupiter would have you send away.
For he is destined not to die from home,
Nor any longer from his Friends to stay,
But back unto his house and Country come.
Calypso troubled at it answered,
Malicious ye Gods, and jealous are,
That think much Goddesses should Mortals wed.
See but how hardly did Orion fare,
After Aurora was become his wife.
How angry at him, O ye Gods, were you,
Until Diana took away his life,
With Shafts invisible before 'twas due.
And so when Ceres with Ia^sion
Themselves delighted with the gift of Love.
How soon it was by the other Gods made known,
And with a Thunderbolt he slain by Jove!
And now they angry are with me. And why?
Because I taken have a man to bed
Who in the Sea had perished, had not I
Received him in my house and cherished.
For when his Ship with Thunder Jove had split,
And all his Company away were cast,
Him on the Mast unto the Rudde^ (...),
The wind and waves brought (...) at the last.
And here I him received and lov^ (...),
And meant to give him Immortality.
But since Jove will not let him with me dwell,
And I cannot resist him, Farewell he.
But o'r the Sea I shall not him convoy.
For in my power I have no Ship, no^ men
That have the art to walk in liquid way.
Prompt him I will how to get home again.
It Is well, said Mercury, send him now hence.
The manner how, is left unto your will.
Be wise, and do not Jupiter incense
Lest he upon you bring a greater ill.
This said, away went Mercury. And she
Unto Ulysses went to the Seaside.
Himself lamenting sitting there was he.
And when she came his eyes were not yet dried.
For now he loved the Nymph less than before,
And lay with her a nights unwillingly.
A days he weeping sat upon the shore,
And on the unbounded Sea often cast his eye.
Then to him said the Nymph, Poor man, alas,
No longer weep, but fall your work unto.
For on a Raft you are the Sea to pass,
And I will tell you what you are to do:
Cut down great Trees, and them together join
With bands of brass, and on them make a Deck*
And on it I will lay both Bread and Wine
And water fresh, hunger and thirst to check.
And Garments I will give you, and a Wind,
That you my safe go home and speedily;
Unless the Gods be of another mind.
For stronger they and wiser are than I.
At this Ulysses troubled was and said,
I looked for a Convoy me to want:
For on this Sea a man would be afraid
Though in a Ship; much more upon a Raft,
I will not therefore pass upon a Raft
Unless to do me no more hurt you swear.
And when he had said that, Calypso laughed,
And of his head she stroaked down the hair.
You are (said she) a true bird of the nest,
As by your answer very well I see.
By Heaven and by Earth I do protest,
And Styx, which is the greatest Oath can be,
I Will never any thing hereafter do
That shall procure you hurt in any case.
And what at present I advise you to,
I would my self do, were I in your place.
For why, the Fates I also must obey,
And in my breast no iron heart I bear.
This said, he turned and homeward took her way,
And on her steps Ulysses followed her.
When they were come together in the Cave,
She made him sit where Hermes sat before.
And meat and wine the best that Mortals have
The Maids upon the Table laid good store.
Before Calypso they laid other meat,
Ambrosia and Nectar, food divine.
There face to face they sit, and drink and eat.
When she refreshed him had with meat and wine,
Noble Ulysses (said she) you that long so
To see your House and Wife without delay,
If what you were to suffer you did know
Before you there arrived, you would stay
And live with me here, and Immortal be.
Nor than that Wife for whom you take such care
Less fairer or less wise can you think me.
Women with Goddesses cannot compare.
Goddess (said he again) I know all this.
Penelope I not compare with you
In form or stature. For she mortal is,
And you Immortal. Yet (though this be true)
I cannot choose but wish my self at home.
And though I were to perish in the Deep
By th'anger of the Gods, and never come,
I Would rather suffer that, than always weep.
For patience long since I learned have
Sufficiently in tempest and in fight.
This said, they both in one part of the Cave
To sleep went, where in Love they took delight.
And when the morning was again displayed,
Ulysses clothed himself with Cloak and Coat.
The Nymph her self in a great Robe arrai'd
Of dainty stuff with Gold all over wrought,
Which on her loins a golden Girdle ti'd,
And covered with a golden Scarf her head.
And how Ulysses o'r the Sea so wide
Should safely pass, she there considered.
Then puts a Plainer and an Axe in's hand
Two-edged, with a Have of Olive tree.
Then showed him where the greatest Trees did stand;
And all the way before him walked she.
And when they were arrived at the Wood,
Beeches they find, Poplars, and Fir-trees high
Already dry, that lie light on the Flood.
Calypso to her Cavern back did hie.
Mean while Ulysses twenty Trees brought low,
And hewed them, and plained them skilfully,
And laid them on the ground all in a row,
At corners square, and of one length they lie.
And then with Wimbles back Calypso came.
Then pierced them, and set them one to one.
And with strong joints and nails fast bound the same.
And by the time that all this he had done,
As a good ship as broad it was and long.
Then for his Decks he placed stoops upright
On every side, and many to be strong;
And laid upon them planks at equal height.
Then made his Mast, and set it up on end,
His Rudder, and a place to sit and guide,
And laid on boughs from waves it to defend,
And all his Cordage made of good Cow-hide.
And then with Levers set his Raft afloat.
Four days in making of the Raft he spent.
When he had done, and all his work had wrought,
Upon the fifth the Nymph away him sent.
But first she bathed him, and with clothes arrai'd
Fine and persum'd. Then wine of pleasant taste
One Goat-skin full upon the Raft she laid,
And one of Water, greater, by it placed.
And Sweetmeats, and good Flesh of every kind.
And after he his Sails had hoist and spread,
She filled them with a warm and cheerful wind.
Then he astern sat down and governed.
And on Boots looked and Pleiades,
And on the Bear, which people call the Wain,
Which dogs Orion rising from the Seas.
But she her self never dives into the Main.
This Bear she bad him leave on the left hand.
Then seventeen days he sailed, on th'eighteenth day
He came in sight of the Phaeacian Land
In that part where it nearest to him lay.
Which looked as 'twere upon the Sea a skin.
But now by Neptune, who returning was,
Ulysses Raft from Solymi, was seen.
For o'r those Mountains Neptune was to pass.
Who wounded at the sight, with anger keen,
Thus said unto himself, What, what, I find
While I in Ethiopia have been
The Gods about this man have changed their mind.
The Isle Phaeacia is near at hand,
In which he destined is himself to save.
But yet, I think, before he be on Land
He struggle shall with many a lusty Wave.
Then with his Trident he the Sea enraged,
And made a Night of Clouds the Sea upon,
And against Ulysses all the Winds engaged.
And from their Quarters they came out each one,
Eurus, and Notus, Zephyr, Boreas
Each one a mighty Wave against him rolled.
And then Ulyss^s heart near broken was,
And with himself, himself he thus condol'd.
Ay me, what will become of me at last!
I fear the Nymph Calypso all this knew,
Who told me then, that as I homeward past
I should meet danger. Now I find it true.
With what thick Clouds Jove covered has the sky!
In what a tumult is the Sea! And how
On every side the Winds the Water ply
And storm! My death (I see) is certain now.
Thrice, four times (Argives) happy were you, who
For Agamemnon's sake were slain. Would God I
At Troy in Battle my life lost had too,
In The shower of Spears about Achilles Body.
Then had I had a noble Funeral,
And great among the Greeks had been my Fame,
But now a wretched death will me befall.
For ever will unhear'd-of be my name.
This said, he dashed was against a point of Land,
Which with great force whirled the Raft about.
And then the Rudder flew out of his hand;
And he into the water was cast out.
Of diverse Winds then followed one great blast,
And Sail and Tackle o'r broad far off bears,
And in the middle breaks in two the Mast,
While he was in the Sea o'r head and ears.
At last he raised his head above the pickle
(His heavy Clothes a while had hindered him)
Then from his hair into his mouth did trickle
The brine, which he spits out, and falls to swim.
And when he had his Raft recovered,
And placed himself in the midst; then both together
The Wind uncertainly them carried
From place to place, now hither and now thither*
Just as the wind in harvest blows Pease-straw
Upon the plain field whilst it holds together;
So on the Sea without a certain Law
Ulysses Raft was driven by the Weather.
In this distress by I^o he was seen
A Sea Nymph and Immortal she was then,
Though Woman (Cadmus Daughter) she had been.
And now in Figure of a Water-hen,
She sat upon the Raft and to him spoke.
What means Neptune that he hates you so?
Do what he can your li^e he shall not take;
Do what I bid you. Off your Garments throw,
And quit the Raft. And to Phaeacia
Swim with your hands. And there you s^^ll find^ rest.
For so it is ordained by Fatal Law.
Here take this Scarf. Apply it to your breast.
And fear not death. But when you come to Land
Throw't in the Sea as far off as you can.
Then turn. This said, she put it in his hand,
And diving there alone she left the man.
Ulysses grieving to himself then says,
What is it now I am advised unto!
Ay me! Some other God now me betrays
To quit my Raft. I know what I will do.
For since my refuge is so near at hand,
Such Counsel I will not too soon obey.
But do what does with greatest reason stand.
Upon my Raft I mean so long to stay
As it shall hold together and be one.
But when the Wind has broken it in pieces
I Will swim; since better counsel I have none.
While with himself consulting was Ulysses,
Neptune with wind the Water sets upright
Into a high and formidable wave,
And threw it on the Raft with all his might,
Which all the parts thereof asunder drove.
Just as the wind scatters a cock of hay,
So scattered was Ulysses Raft of Trees.
Whilst he on one of them astride did stay,
And of his Garments there himself he frees.
Then Ino's Scarf applies he to his breast,
And on the troubled Sea himself he laid
With open arms. To Swim he now thought best.
Which Neptune seeing, thus unto him said,
Go wander now upon the Sea in woe,
And do not make account that this is all.
This said, away to ^ae did he go,
Where many men that need him, on him call.
When he was gone Pallas the Winds did lay
All but a lusty gale of Boreas,
And broke the Waves before him all the way,
That to Phaeacia he might safely pass.
Two nights and days perpet^al he ^wam,
And was of drown^ng all the while afraid.
But when the morning of the third day came,
The Air was calm, and all the Winds allai'd.
And now unto the I^le he was so righ,
That from a high Wave he could see the shore,
And glad he was. As when about to die
^'n has a man long time by sickness sore,
Is by the Gods recovered suddenly,
Glad a^e his Children; So Ulysses was
To see the so-much wished for Land so nigh,
And thither made what haste he could to pass.
When he was gotten so near to the shore
That one might hear another when he calls,
Torn by the Rocks he heard the water rore.
(Loud is the Sea when on hard rocks it falls.)
There neither haven was nor place to Land,
But upright Banks and Cliffs, and Brows of stone.
And every where too deep it was to stand.
And now again quite was his courage gone,
And speaking to himself he said, Ay me,
This is the Island. Jove has brought me to it,
That what must help me only I might see,
But not upon it ever set my foot.
There is no landing here Rocks high and steep*
And unaccessible are all about.
The Sea below so ^ugged is and deep,
That from it there will be no getting out.
If I'should cry, some mighty wave, I fear,
Against some rugged Rock will carry me,
And make me find but woeful landing there
Amongst so many sharp stones as there be.
But if I swim a^ong the Coast to find
Some Port or Beach though stormy to land on,
I fear I shall again by some great Wind
Far off from shore into the Sea be blown;
And there by some great Fish devoured be
(For many such are fed by A^phitrite)
Which Neptune may command to swallow me.
For well I am acquainted with his spite.
While he thus doubted, came a mighty wave
That cast him to the Bank amongst sharp stones*
But for the Counsel Pallas to him gave,
He torn his skin and broken had his bones.
A Rocher with his arms he then embraced
And held it till the wave rolled back again;
And thought the danger of it now was past.
But then the same wave bore him to the Main.
As looks a Polypus when he is dragged
From out his hole, stuck full of stone and sands*
So, when Ulysses left his hold, were shag'd
With broken skin all over both his hands.
And now, had not Athena given him wit
He perished had. For up his head he puts*
Above the briny Sea, and having spit
He with his stretched arms the water cuts.
And swam along the shore; but kept his eye
Continually upon the Land, to see*
If any landing place he could espy.
At last before a Rivers mouth came he;
And knew it was a Rivers mouth. For there
Within the Land smooth water might be seen,
And 'twixt the Rocks a pause there did appear.
And here Ulysses thought fit to go in.
And in his mind unto the River spoke.
Hear me, O King, from Neptunes rage I fly,
And of a Man distressed some pity take,
That at your knee and Stream here prostrate lie.
The Immortal Gods their Suppliants respect,
When they before them humbly lay their want.
What ever your name be, do not me neglect
That am afflicted, and your Suppliant.
This said, the Stream stood still and saved the man.
But weary were his knees and arms. And Brine
Abundance from his Mouth and Nostrils ran.
And all his body swelled was. And in fine
Speechless and breathless was he like one dead.
But when he came unto himself again
The Scarf he to the Stream delivered,
Which carried it again into the Main.
And Ino took it then into her hand.
Then on a Bulrush-bed himself he laid,
And glad he had escaped, kiss't the Land.
But fearing still unto himself he said,
Ay me, what will become of me at length!
For in the Rive^ if I spend the night,
So much already wasted is my strength,
With Frost and Dew, I shall be killed quite.
If up the Hill I go into the Wood,
And in some Thicket there lie warm and sleep,
I fear I shall for Beasts and Fowls be food.
At last concludes into some wood to creep*
A Wood there was unto the River nigh;
Two Thickets in it were; of Olive one,
The other was of Phylia close by,
So ^win'd they were together that nor Sun,
Nor Wind, nor Rain to the ground could find a way.
Between them of dry leaves a bed made he,
And over head and ears there close he lay.
For leaves there were enough for two or three,
To keep them warm although cold weather 'twere.
As when a man takes up a brand of fire
In Country House, few neighbors dwelling near,
To warm himself withal if need require;
So buried in dry leaves Ulysses lay.
And then Athena closed up his eyes
With sound and gentle sleep to take away*
Sad thoughts suggested by his miseries.
LIB. VI.
THere slept Ulysses. But Athena went*
Unto the people of Phaeacia,
Who once dwelt near a Nation insolent,
The great Cyclopses in Hyperia,
And by the odds of strength were there oppressed.
But by Nausithous transplanted were
To Scheria, that they might live at rest.
Who built them Houses, and a City there,
And fortified the same with strong Walls round,
And Temples built, and gave them shares of land.
But he departed was, and under ground.
And now Alcinous had the Command.
His house it was the Goddess went unto,
And int'a Chamber gay (where lay abed
A Godlike Maid asleep) with less ado
Than could a gentle wind have entered.
This the Kings Daughter was Nausicaa.
Within the door shut close, on each side one,
Two of her Waiting-maids asleep she saw,
And as the Graces fair to look upon.
Then standing at Nausicaa's Beds-head,
In form of Dymas Daughter, there she stayed,
Who of her age was, and most favored,
And to Nausicaa she spoke, and said,
Careless Nausicaa, what do you mean,
When to your Wedding Day you are so near,
To let so many Garments lie unclean?
You would be glad your self fair clothes to wear,
And give to them that are to lead you out.
For even such things as these procure good fame
Amongst the people that dwell round about.
Your Parents also take joy in the same.
Come therefore, to the River let us be gone
By break of day; For I will with you go,
And help, that you the sooner may have done.
I Am sure your Wedding is not far off now.
For sought you are in Marri'ge by the best
Of all the Town where your were born and bred.
Go early to your Father and request
You may with Mules and Coach be furnished.
That Aprons, Gowns, and Mantles you may bear
Unto the washing place. For far it is to it,
And for your person so it is comelier
Than to be seen to go so far on foot.
This said, the Goddess up to Heaven went,
Where is the dwelling of the Gods in bliss.
A pure and undecaying Firmament
Which by no wind moved or shaken is,
Nor wet nor slabber'd is with shower of rain,
Nor clouded, nor approached unto by snow;
But Bright and shining always does remain.
Here dwell The Immortals, and no sorrow know.
Thither went Pallas. Then Nausicaa
Awaked, and through the House went to relate
Unto her Parents what a Dream she saw.
Her Mother by the fire side spinning sat
With distaff laden with fine purple-wool.
Her Father going out, she met in the Hall
Called by the Lords sitting in Council full,
And waiting for him to consult withal.
And to him said, Pray Father shall not I
Allowed be a Coach your Clothes to bear
(Which in the house sulli'd and spotted lie)
Unto the Riverside to wash them there?
For you your self when you to Council go
Would gladly have your Garments clean and sweet.
Your five Sons, whereof two be wedded now,
Would fain with clean clothes at the Dancings meet.
So said Nausicaa. But to her Father
To talk of Wedding she forbore for shame.
Yet what she thought on he could easily gather,
However she distembled had the same
Dear Child (then said her Father) you shall have
Both Mules and Coach with handsome covering.
Unto his Servants then command he gave
To see it done. And out the Coach they bring,
And to it set the Mules. Then came her Mother,
And laid in things to eat, of relish fine,
And such-as eaten are with bread, much other;
And in a bag of Goat-skin pleasant wine.
When in the Coach the Garments all were placed
Nausicaa went up into her seat,
And with her took (when their toil should be past)
A curse of Oil to help wash off the sweat.
Then out, with whip and reins in hand did drive.
And then with strained limbs and clatt'ring feet
The Mules soon at the Riverside arrive,
And pasture for them there was very sweet.
And there the Mules first they unharnassed,
Then pusht them off to graze on the Bank-side.
The Clothes in Pits with water covered
They tread, and who should fastest tread, they vi'd.
Then on the Beach the Garments wet they spread
Upon the cast-up Pibbles one by one.
Then washed they and dried themselves, and sed;
And left the Garments drying in the Sun,
And after they with food were satisfied,
It came into their minds to play at Ball,
And spend the time so till the clothes were dried.
The tune Nausicaa sung for them all.
As when upon Mount Erymanthus high
Or on Taygetus stands Artemis,
And many Rural fair Nymphs playing by.
But she than all the rest much taller is;
And the wild Boars and Hearts delights to see,
But more her Mother Leda to see her.
For though they fair were all, yet fairer she;
So showed Nausicaa and her Maidens there.
And when 'twas time that they should homewards go,
And that the Clothes into the Coach were laid,
And Mules set to, Athena thought on how
Ulysses should awake and see the Maid,
And be conducted by her to the Town.
Nausicaa then throws the Ball and misses;
The Ball unto the River falls down.
Then shout the Maids. At that awakt Ulysses.
And sitting up unto himself he said,
Ay me, where am I now? Amongst men unjust,
And such as of the Gods are not afraid?
Or good and godly men, whom I may trust?
But female are the voices which I hear.
Are they some Nymphs that haunt the Mountains high,
Or keep the Meadows green, or waters clear
Or are they Mortals whom I am so nigh?
But why go I not out my self and see?
Then with strong hand he wringed off a bough?
With many leaves upon it from a Tree,
To cover what became him not to show.
Then as a Lion confident and bold,
Howe'r it blow or rain with fiery eyes
Comes from the Mountain to a Herd or Fold,
And on the Flock at last his fortune tries;
So came Ulysses boldly from the Wood
Stark naked, fore'd to it by necessity,
And in the presence of the Maidens stood.
The sight was terrible and made them fly.
Nausicaa fled not, but hid her eyes.
Off stood Ulysses with himself to weigh
Whether to speak from thence was the more wise,
Or else himself before her feet to lay.
To stay there right at last resolved he,
Lest she should take his coming near her ill.
Then said, O Queen, I beg upon my knee
That you with patience hear my Prayer will.
You are a Goddess, or of Humane race.
If Goddess, you can then no other be
Than Artemis Jove's Daughter. In your face
Such beauty is; in height such Majesty.
If mortal, and of Humane race you be,
Thrice happy are your Parents and your Brothers
How glad in the Processions they will see,
How much they are more graced by you than others.
For such a branch I never saw with my eyes
On mortal stock. To see it I am amazed.
But once a Palm at Delus saw arise
In the same manner, and long on it gazed.
(For that way went I once well followed,
Which the first cause was of my trouble sore)
And then, as I do now, I wondered,
For I had never seen the like before.
T'approach unto your knees I was afraid,
Or show my self. But such is my estate.
For twenty days upon the Sea I strai'd,
And here in storms was thrown ashore by Fate
From th'Isle Ogygia last night, and fear
I am to suffer yet more misery,
And that the Gods will persecute me here.
And since my landing you the first I see.
Now pity me, O Queen, and show we where
The City stands. And t'hide my nakedness
Give me some rag if there be any here.
And may Jove you with all you wish for bless,
A Husband and a House, and Concord good.
For man and wife to live in Unity
Is the great'st blessing can be understood.
It joys your friend, and grieves your enemy.
Nausicaa then speaks, and to him says,
You seem to be a good man and discreet.
But Jove on good and bad such fortune lays,
Happy or otherwise, as he thinks meet.
And since distress is fallen to your share,
You must contented be to suffer it.
But seeing to this place arrived you are,
You shall have Raiment, and what else is fit.
The City I will show you, and the name
The people of this Isle are called by.
Phaeacians they are called. And I am
Daughter of him that has The Authority,
Alcinous the King. And then she cried
Aloud unto the Maids to make them stay.
Why (said she) run you so away and hide?
Do You think the man will carry you away?
For why, no Enemy can come in hither,
The Gods so with the Sea have walled us in.
Nor stranger dwells here. But by evil weather
To come to land this man has forced been.
Let Us do him good. From Jove come Beggars all.
And welcome to them is what ever they get.
Our givings to him will be very small.
Go therefore set before him Wine and Meat,
And wash him in the River, in such part
As covered is from wind. And then they did
(When they had given one another heart)
Set him in such a place as they were bid.
And gave him th'Oyl to scour his skin withal,
And by him a good Cloak and Coat they laid,
And then they bad him to his washing fall.
Ulysses answered then, and to them said,
Stand further off, I pray fair Maids; for I
My body naked am ashamed to show.
Then stand they off, and tell their Mistress why.
(For washing he must have put off his bough.)
Then washed he his head andshoulders wide,
And with his hand from's head stroak'd down the brine,
And with the Clothes that laid were by his side
Arrai'd himself, that comely were and fine.
Then Pallas to him came, and made him look
Taller and broader than he was before;
And from his Hair the color gray she took,
And made it like the Hyacynthine flower.
As one by Vulcan or Athena taught
Gold upon Silver skilfully had spread;
So Pallas on Ulysses beauty wrought,
And graceful Majesty upon his head.
Then sat he on the Sands. Nausicaa
Then said unto her Maidens, Do you hear,
How poor he looked the first time we him saw.
And now how like a God he does appear.
And by the Gods, it may be, he was sent
To dwell amongst the people of this place.
With such a Husband I could be content
(If he would stay) and think it no disgrace.
Go Maids and set before him Wine and Meat.
Away they went, and did as she them bad.
And he fell to, and heartily did eat.
For long before he nothing eaten had.
Then harnessed the Mules and set them to,
And folded and put up the Garments all.
Nausicaa went up with Maidens two.
And then unto Ulysses did she call.
Rise, Stranger to the City let us go,
That I may send you to my Fathers house,
Where all the best Phaeacians you will know.
But hear you (for I think you cautelous).
Whilst in the Fields the Coach is on the way,
Amongst my Maidens follow it apace.
But when you see it near the City, stay
And that you may well understand the place,
A Tower there is, you will see it, for it is high.
There 'twixt two Havens is a narrow way,
You Will see it by the Masts, for Ships there lie.
Near it the people meet of the Market Day.
And there a Temple fair of Neptune stands,
Of freestone from the Quarry hewn and fit.
For the Phaeacians employ their hands
On Shipping, and no other Art but it.
For Bows and Arrows they care not a pin,
But for such things as serve to pass the Seas.
Ships, Cordage, Oars they take their pleasure in,
And spend their time and labor upon these.
I am afraid these men will censure me,
And say (for Censurers are many here.)
This handsome and tall fellow who is he,
That Is with Nausicaa, from God knows where?
Where did she find him? Must he marry her?
From some far Country he is landed here
Wandering by Fortune, or a Traveller.
For sure I am no such man dwells near.
May be some God from Heaven descended is,
And to live with her always hither come.
So, then to wed a Stranger better it is,
Since she thinks none is good enough at home.
For many seek her, and the best men here.
So will they say, and 'twill to be my shame.
For if another that had done it 'twere,
I should my self condemn her for the same.
For it is unseemly a sair Maid to see,
That subject is t'her Parents Government,
Converse with any man, unless she be
First married, or their Parents give consent.
And therefore, Stranger, if you mean to be
Convoyed by my Father to your home,
Do as I tell you. Near the way you will see
A Grove of Poplars. When you thither come
You Will find my Father's Vineyard, from the Town
As far as one that Holla's heard can be.
And when you thither come, there sit you down
Till at my Fathers house you think are we.
Then to the City go; ask where does dwell
Alcinous. For you shall meet with none,
Though but a Child, but can inform you well.
So well his house is known to every one.
And there go in, and on, until you find
My Mother. Whom you will by the fire side see
Spinning; and Maids at the same work ^^hind
The Pillar under which sits working she.
My Fathers Chair by the same Pillar stands
Where, when he drinks, like a God he is.
Pass by it to my Mother, and your hands,
If you mean to get home, lay on her knees.
If once her favor you can but obtain,
You need not fear, but you your friends shall see,
And to your house and Country come again.
This said, her Whip upon the Mules laid she.
The Mules start swiftly from the Rivers side,
For nimble was the motion of their feet.
But she for those who went asoot, did guide
The swiftness of their pace as she thought meet.
When they were come t'Athena's Sacred Grove,
The Sun went down; and there Ulysses stayed
And to the Goddess, Daughter of Great Jove,
That he might good reception find, he prayed.
Hear me Jove's Virgin-Daughter, hear me now,
Since still you did refuse to help me then,
When Neptune sought at Sea my overthrow,
Grant that I may be welcome to these men.
Thus prayed he, and was by Athena heard,
Though to him face to face she would not come,
But of her Uncle Neptune was afear'd,
That never forgave him till he was at home.
LIB. VII.
WHilst there he prayed, Nausicaa went on,
And stayed her Coach the utter Gate without,
And like to Gods her Brothers came each one,
From out the house, and her stood round about.
The Mules they freed, th'Apparel they took in,
Nausicaa straight to her Chamber went;
Eury^edusa made a fire therein;
Who taken by Rovers on the Continent
Was given to the King Alcinous,
That like a God was honored by ^he Nation
Of the Phaeacians at home. And thus
She of Nausicaa had the Education.
A fire she made her, and her Supper brought.
Ulysses then into the City went.
Pallas of Air made him such a Coat,
As he could not be seen; lest insolent
And sturdy Townsmen should him mock and jea^,
Or ask him Questions, who, what, or why.
But when he was unto the Gate come near,
Pallas appeared to him openly,
Like a young Maid with Pail upon her head.
Ulysses then spoke to her, and said thus:
Sweet pretty Girl, will you be pleased to lead
Me to the house of King Alcinous?
For I a stranger come and no man know,
Nor ever in my life was here before.
Yes (then said Pallas) I will you it show,
For it is the next unto my Fathers door.
Go softly, thus, and I will lead the way,
For our folk Strangers do not well endure,
But in good Ships their honor wholly lay,
And the wide Sea to pass themselves enure.
For Neptune given to them has this gift,
That their good Ships fly like to thought or wind.
This said, the Goddess led with motion swift;
And on her steps he treading went behind.
And through the people so he past unseen.
For why, the Goddess allas, for good will,
A wondrous mist of Air had wrapped him in.
Then looking at the House he there stood still.
The Havens and the Ships he wondered at;
The Marketplace, and Walls so thick and high.
Then Pallas said, Alcin^us house is that.
There sup the King and Queen now merrily.
Though you a Stranger be, fear not, go in.
The bold than fearful always better speed.
And first of all the House you will find the Queen.
Arete is her name. Both from one seed
Descended are she and Alcinous,
In Periboea Child of Eurimedon.
The God of the Seas begot Nausithous
Who two Sons had; Alcinous was one.
The other was Rexenor, who no Son
But one fair Daughter only left behind.
Arete was her name. Besides her none.
Alcinous and she in Wedlock joined.
And he to her so much respect does bear,
As no man living to a Wife bears more.
And honored is by all her Children dear.
The people like a Goddess her adore,
And bless her when she comes into the street.
And loving to them all is also she.
For a wise woman is she and discreet.
When they fall out she makes them to agree.
If you her favor can but once obtain,
You need not fear but you your friends shall see,
And safely to your Country come again.
And when she this had said, away went she
O'r Sea, to Marathon in Attica*
T'Erectheus house. And he now was to enter
Into the house. But long he laid the Law
U to himself before he would adventure.
Entering he saw the Walls lined round with brass,
And fringed about with color of the sky.
The door within golden all over was,
And all ^ppear'd like Heaven to the eye.
The Door-posts Silver g^ ^hold,
The Lintle-tree upon them silver too.
The Sill was b^ass, the Ring to pull it, Gold.
And by the Door great Dogs were standing two.
Of silver one, the other was of Gold,
As Watch before the Royal Gate to stay,
Immortal Dogs that never can grow old.
And round about them all, Thrones every way,
All covered with a dainty Stuff and fine,
The work of Women's hands. There used to eat
The King and Lords, and drink and make good che^^.
His Riches was a never-dying Teat.
About the Altar were set Boys of Gold
That to the Guests, as soon as it was night,
With burning Torches they the Light might hold.
For now the Sun had born away his light.
Fifty Maidservants were at work within,
Some at the Mill were grinding wheat for bread,
And others with their Distaves sat to Spin,
And others Cloth were weaving with the thread.
Like to the Leaves of a high Aspen-tree
Their fingers went. So much they did excel
In all the works, that taught by Pallas be,
The Women that in other places dwell;
As do these men all other men surpass
In all things that belong to Navigation.
For Wit and Art more Pallas given has
To them, than Women of another Nation.
Close by the House a dainty Orchard is
Apiece and senc'd with hedge and pale about,
Of Pear, Pomegranate, Apple, Olive Trees,
And Fig Trees* For the season never goes out
Summer nor Winter, for by Zephyrs some
Are made put forth, and others ripened;
Pears after Pears, Apples to Apples come;
Grapes are by Grapes, Figs by Figs followed.
And in it was the Vineyard of the King.
Grapes in some places by the Sun were dried,
In others stayed till Vintage ripening.
Upon some Vines no flower yet was spied.
And Grapes on some to blacken now began.
Green beds of Herbs there were on every side;
And through it from two Springs the water ran,
And to and fro the one did winding glide.
The other to the House his stream did bear,
And under ground was to the Town conveyed,
And rose a Fountain for the people there.
And when Ulysses had all this surveyed,
Then went he in, and found them in the Hall
Sitting at Supper, and to Mercury
There offering up of Wine. Which last of all
At Bedtime men do offer usually.
And on he went up to the King and Queen,
And both his hands upon her knee did lay.
Pallas had kept him in the Mist unseen.
But thither come the Mist straight fell away.
Amazed they were when first they saw the Man*
And like to men that had been stricken dumb.
Ulysses then ^'Arete thus began.
O Queen Arete, to your knee I come,
And to the King and those that with you sit.
May the Gods grant you all much happiness,
Long life, and your Possessions to transmit
T'your Children, and your Honors still possess;
And may you me send presently away
Unto my House* Long absent I have been.
This said, he sat down by the fire. And they
Said nothing, such amazement they were in.
At last old Echineus spoke, that knew
Both what in former times* and now was fit.
O King Alcinous is it good think you
To let the Stranger in the Ashes sit?
We silent sat to see what was your will.
Pray make him rise, and to a Chair him bring,
And bid the Squire to temper Wine and fill,
That we to Jove may make our Offering.
Who with poor strangers keeps Company.
And bid the Maid before him set such meat
As she within has in her custody.
This said, Alcinous rose from his seat,
T'Ulysses went, and took him by the hand,
And to a Chair him led where sat his Son
L^^da^as, to whom he gave Command
To give him place, although he loved none
So dearly as he loved Laodamas.
Who next unto him used to sit at meat.
Then by a Maid brought in a Basin was
And Ewr of Gold, to wash ere he did eat.
Another Maid before him laid bread,
And other good things on his Table laid,
And heartily thereon Ulysses fed.
Alcinous then to the Squire said,
Temper the Wine, Pontonous, that we
Wine-Offering to Jove may offer up,
In whose protection all Suppliants be,
And round about presented be the Cup.
Then went about the Wine from one to one.
And when the Sacred Offering was over,
Then said Alcinous, Since we have done,
Let Us go to bed, and soon as we discover
Aurora rising, hither come again,
And make unto the Gods a Sacrifice,
And this our Stranger farther entertain,
And how to send him to his house advise,
That safely he may go, and joyfully,
And swiftly to the place where he would be,
How far soever hence his dwelling lie,
Nor on the Sea delay or trouble see
Until his Native Country he be at.
But what his Fate is after he is there,
B^t good or evil he must suffer that.
But if it be some God that sits here,
It Is only our Devotion t'approve.
For to that end Gods let themselves be spied,
To sit with men at Holy Feasts they love,
And not themselves in Caves like Giants hide.
To this Ulysses said, O King, lay by
That thought of yours. With Gods I Will not compare,
For Body or for Mind. Of Misery
If man can boast, to boast among them I dare.
For I more Tokens can produce of Woe
Than any man that shall with me contend
Though all I tell not that I can. Yet so
I fain would of my Supper make an end.
No Creature is so fierce as is the Gut,
And so loud barketh, when it is forgot,
That out of mind it never can be put,
But will be heard whether one will or not.
So it is with me that am afflicted sore,
Yet still my belly bids me eat and drink,
And forget all I had endured before,
And on my misery no more to think.
And so, since now I hunger to go home,
Forget not with a Ship me to supply
To morrow. For were I once thither come
I could be well contented there to die.
When this was said, he was by all commended.
He speaks discreetly, let him then, said they
A speedy conduct have. When all was ended,
The rest unto their Houses went away.
Only Ulysses staid, and by him sat
The King and Queen. Tables removed were,
And all that to the Supper did relate.
The Queen then marked what Garments he did wear,
And that she and her Maids had made them, knew.
Stranger, said she, Who are you? Whence? and more,
The Garments you have on, of whom had you?
Had you them on then when you came ashore?
Grievous (said he) O Queen is your Command,
That calls again (when past it is) my pain.
Yet will I answer make to this demand.
An Island lies far hence in the Main,
^gygia it is called. Calypso there
The Daughter fair of Atlas lives alone,
Nor God nor Man she has to dwell with her;
And I by Fate upon that Isle was thrown.
^or Jove my good Ship had with Thunder split;
My fellows in the Sea all perished.
^^t I the Rudder had, and held by it.
And thus nine days and nights I wandered,
And thrown was on that Isle the tenth at night.
Calypso there received me and fed;
^^d Immortality have had I might,
If I had with her there inhabited.
(...) I to that would never give consent.
Yet there by force I stayed seven years
^or want of Ship and Men) in discontent,
Washing the Clothes she gave me with my tears.
(...) eighth year come, she did my going press.
Whether by Joves command I cannot say,
Or whether 'twere because she loved me less.
Then on a Raft of Trees I came away.
Bread and sweet Wine upon the Deck she laid,
And Garments gave me fair, and a good Wind.
And good for seventeen days the weather stayed.
On th'eighteenth near your Coast my self I find.
And glad I was, though still unfortunate.
For more I was to suffer by and by.
For Neptune rai'sd against me in his hate,
A Storm of Winds with furious Waves and high.
And then I forced was the Raft to quit.
The Trees asunder floated here and there,
The Storm so broken had and scattered it.
Then swam I. Against the rocks the waves me be^
And falling off, they cast me back again.
Again I swam, and to the River came.
And there I saw the landing smooth and plain.
And from the Wind defended was the same.
There landed I half dead, and now 'twas night,
Then up I went and in a Thicket lay
Covered with leaves abundance dry and light.
And slept till almost spent was the next day.
For then the Sun was setting. There I hear
The Voice of Women playing by the Brook.
And going out I saw your Daughter there,
That like a Goddess come from heaven did look.
To her I made my Prayer in this distress.
Wisely she answered and beyond her age
(For th'younger commonly consider less)
And gave me food my hunger to assuage.
Of her I had the Garments I have on.
Nay stranger (answered Alcinous)
'Twas in my Child an indiscretion,
That she not brought you with her to my house.
To this Ulysses answered and said,
'Twas not her fault we came not both together.
She bad me. I would not, but was afraid
What you and they would think that saw me (...) (...)
For jealous and mistrustful mortals be.
To this again Alcinous replied,
from such ill thoughts I always have been free.
O Jove, and Pallas make you here abide.
Such are you, and our thoughts so well agree,
That you Nausicaa should have for Bride,
^f you would with me live here willingly,
And for you House and Wealth I would provide.
^ut against your will I will not make you stay.
(From such iniquity the Gods me keep)
To morrow shall be ready your Convey,
And till then go you to your bed and sleep.
And here be men, that when the Wind shall fail,
Can row you on how far soe'r you will go.
Their hands can do as much as any Sail,
Although beyond Euboea they must row.
For farther no Phaeacian ever went.
But thither once they carried Rhadamant,
Of Tityus to see the punishment,
Son of the Earth that terrible Giant,
Yet that long Voyage cost them but a day
Going and coming all the way at ease.
But you your self, when you are on the way,
Will see how stoutly our men plough the Seas;
This said, Ulysses joyful was, and prayed,
Make all this good O Father Jove (said he)
The Glory of the King will be displayed,
And quickly in my Country I shall be.
Whilst they together thus discoursing stayed
Arete bad the Maids to make his bed,
And see fair purple Rugs upon it laid,
And under them soft woolly Blankets spread.
Then went away the Maids into the Porch,
And made his Bed, and soon came back again,
And stood before Ulysses with a Torch.
Come Stranger, said they, all is ready. Then
Ulysses to his Bed went willingly.
Alcinous in a room lay far within,
Where formerly he used was to lie,
That was prepared for him by the Queen.
LIB. VIII.
SOon as Aurora was again espied,
The King Alcinous rose from his bed.
Up rose Ulysses and came to his side,
And to the Public place the King him led,
To sit in Council with his Princes there,
And being there they lat together nigh.
Pallas the while that did great favor bear,
TO Ulysses welfare always had an eye,
In likeness of Alcinous his Squire
(Who by his Office did the Council call)
Their favor for Ulysses to acquire,
Went through the Streets, and there unto them all
Said one by one, Make haste. To Council go,
A Stranger new come to the King you will see
That like a God Immortal is in show.
This said, unto the Councel-House they flee.
And filled was the House, and every Sear,
And of his person all admired the Grace.
For Pallas made him had more tall and great,
And laid more Majesty upon his face.
To make him welcome to those men she meant,
And gain him honor at their Exercises
When they should put him to experiment.
Alcinous unto them then arises.
Hear, said he, Princes of Pheacia,
This Man (who it is, or whence, I cannot say,
Cast here ashore) till then I never saw.
Since it is our Custom, grant him a Convoy.
For no man yet unto my house did come
By force of weather wandering on the Main,
Lamenting and desiring to go home,
That can affirm he sought our help in vain.
Come then, let us launch a good new Ship, and choose
Out two and fifty lusty Youths to row.
And let them ready have their Oars to use,
And to my House, when that is done, let them go.
And you the Princes thither come with me,
That we may well the stranger entertain.
And let the Singer too sent thither be,
To give us sometimes of his Art a Strain.
This said, the Princes to his house he led.
The Squire unto the House the Singer sent.
The fifty two as they were ordered
Down to the Haven where the Ship lay went.
The Ship they launch, and up they set the Mast;
And then the Yards and Sails they hoised high;
Their Oars, where they be placed should, they placed.
This done they let her in the water lie.
Then also to the House went these men up.
The Porches, Court, and Rooms with men were filled
Some old some young. The King to make them sup,
Two Kine, eight Swine, and twice six fat Sheep killed,
These flayed and dressed, and to the Tables brought,
Came in the Singer, whom the Muses kind
Had taught to sing divinely. But, could not
Or would not him preserve from being blind.
Pontonous the Squire then led him in,
And set him by a Pillar in the Hall,
And hung his Fiddle o'r him on a Pin,
And how to reach it showed him withal.
Sets him a Table and a Basket by,
And a great Bowl of Wine before him placed
To drink as often as he should be dry.
And when their thirst and hunger was displac't
The Singer sung the Song in most request,
How once Ulysses and Achilles great
In high and bitter Language did contest
When at a Sacred Feast they sat at Meat.
And how King Agamemnon pleased was,
To see the two best of the Greeks fall out.
For Phoebus told him so 'twould come to pass
When he at Pythos asked him about
The Issue of the Fleet designed for Troy.
This Song Demodocus sung to them then;
Which to Ulysses was of little joy;
But he his tears to hide before those men
Before his eyes his Cloak of Purple drew.
And when the Singer ceased, his eyes he dried,
And from before his face his Cloak withdrew,
And of the Wine performed the Sacrifice.
And when the Lords called for the Song anew,
(For they to hear him took no small delight)
His Cloak again before his eyes he drew,
And as before again he sob'd and sighed.
Alcinous, none else, observed it,
And well enough could hear him sigh and groan.
For he the nearest there did to him sit,
And would not to the Princes makeit known.
But speaking to them all said only this,
Since you with feasting are well satisfied,
And Music (which to Feasts annexed is)
Let now our men's activity be tried,
That when the Stranger is where he does dwell,
He to his Friends and Countrymen may tell
How much we do all other men excel
At Wrestling, Buffets, Leaping, Running well.
Then went the King and Princes out a door;
The Squire then took the Singer by the hand,
And hung the Fiddle where it hung before,
And him led out amongst the rest to stand.
Unto the Place they went; and followed were
By people numberless the sport to see.
And many lusty Youths amongst them there,
Stood out to show their great ability.
Out stood Elatreus, and Acroneus,
Eretmeus, Thoon, Nautes, and Prymneus,
Ambasineus and Amphialus,
Proteus, and Ponteus, and Anchialus.
Ocyalus, warlike Euryalus,
And he that of them most their eye did please
(Except the first Son of Alcinous)
For Countenance and Shape Nauholides.
And then Alcinous his three Sons rise,
Laodamas, Halius, Clytoneus.
And first they all contended for the Prize
Of who at Running could his Feet best use.
Then start they all at once, and swiftly run
As if they flew. And here the Victory
The Kings Son Noble Clytoneus won,
And past them all a lands length very nigh.
Euryalus at Wrestling was the best.
Amphialus at Leaping Victor was.
Elatreus surpassed all the rest
To throw the Stone. At Cuffs Laodamas.
When all was done Laodamas up stood.
Come friends, said he, let us the Stranger try
If he at any of these Games be good;
For in his person no defect I^py.
His Thighs, his Knees, his Arms, his Neck are strong^
Nor over-aged yet he seems to me.
Only he has endured the Sea so long,
As for that cause he may excused be.
For than the Sea nothing more potent is
To break a man how strong soe'r he be.
Go, said Euryalus, it is not amiss
T'invite him to it, and his mind to see.
Then to Ulysses said Laodamas,
Come Stranger, Father. Pray, your virtue sho^.
It Is no dishonor for you in this place
To show your skill at any Game you know,
As long as Feet and Hands continue strong
Come try, and cast your careful thoughts away.
Your Convoy ready is. 'Twill not be long
Before you shall be set upon your way.
Laodamas (then said Ulysses) why
To these your Games invite you me in scorn,
Upon whose heart so many sorrows lie,
And am to nothing with much haraship worn,
And publicly a uppliant now sit,
And to the King and People grief profess?
Think you that Pastimes for such men are fit,
As from their Country wander in distress?
Then spoke Euryalus, uncivilly.
No, no, said he, I do not think you are
Much used to Pastimes of Activity,
But rather one that of a Ship takes care
That Merchantmen from place to place convays,
And mindful of your fraught are, and can tell
Which are to sudden wealth the nearest ways,
What Merchandise will not, and what will sell,
And in such boisterous Games has little skill.
Ulysses frowning on him then replied,
My friend, such words are indiscreet and ill.
The Gods their Gifts as they think fit divide.
To one, of Beauty they deny the grace,
But give him Language steady and discreet,
Whereby he honored is in the Public Place,
And men gaze on him going in the street.
I another they have given a fair aspect,
Like that of the Gods, but have denied him wit.
So find I in your person no defect;
Only you want the Grace to say what is fit.
Your words have put me into passion.
In these your Games you say no skill have I.
I thought my self inferior to none
Whilst on my youth and hands I could rely.
But tamed now my strength is with much woe
Wandering at Sea and often hurt in fight.
Yet of your Games I Will make a trial so,
Weak as I am. So much your words me bite.
This said, he took up a much greater stone
Than that which the Phaeacians had flung
Nor hollow as a Coyt, his Cloak still on.
And when above his head he had it swung,
Swiftly away the Stone flew with a hum,
Which made the brave- Phaeacian Seamen couch,
As o'r their heads they heard it singing come,
And out went all the other marks by much.
For Pallas in the likeness of a man
Did set a mark at where the stone did light,
And said the difference be discerned can
By feeling, though a man had lost his sight.
And to Ulysses, said she, Do not fear
That any man i'th'Town shall out-throw this.
Ulysses very glad was this to hear,
And that amongst them stood one friend of his.
Then of himself, began to speak more high.
Come Youths throw first as far as I have done,
And then as far or further throw will I.
And for the other Games come any one
Since your sharp words provoked me have thereto,
Buffets, or Wrestling, or to run the race,
And see if you at these can me outdo,
Any of you except Laodamas.
For I to him am come as to a friend
Of whom I hope for succor in my need.
He were a fool that with him would contend
Without whose help his business cannot speed.
But of the rest not any I refuse;
And will contend with them for Mastery.
For I know all the Games the best men use.
To use the Bow none abler is than I.
When many of us had a mind to kill
Some noted Foe, and all at once did shoot,
Though every one of us had the same will,
My Arrow was the first that found him out.
At Ilium in trials of the Bow
None found I better than my self but one.
'Twas Polyctetes. Of those that are now
I think my self inferior to none.
With those of former tim I Will not compare,
As Hercules, or Eurytus that durst
Challenge Apollo. Apollo took a care
That Prize should not be played, and killed him first,
As far as other men can shoot an Arrow,
So far I able am to dart a Spear.
But lodging I have had at Sea so narrow
That I may be outrun by some man here.
So said Ulysses; and all silent sat
Except the King, who thus unto him said,
Stranger, there is no man here offended at
The words you say. For open you have laid
Your Virtue, when you were thereto constrained
By the unjust reproaches of this man.
For such it is as by none can be stained,
But those that nothing say discreetly can.
And hear me farther what I have to say,
That the other Hero's you the same may tell,
Who with you and your Wife shall feasting stay,
In what from other men we bear the bell.
For Cuffs and Wrestling, not much praise we merit,
But our good Ships and Feet are wondrous swift.
And these Gifts from our Fathers we inherit,
Dance, Song, Feasts, Fiddle, and of Garments shift,
And Baths, and Beds. Dance you that dance the best
Before the Stranger, that his friends among
He may say how much we exceed the rest
Of men, in Ships, in Running, Dance, and Song.
Fetch out the Fiddle. Then the Squire went in
To fetch the Fiddle. And the Judges rise
In number nine, who had elected been
By public vote, of Games to hold Assize.
And order took for large room in the middle,
And made it to be plained well and even.
When this was done, then brought out was the Fiddle,
And by the Squire was to the Singer given.
Then came the Youngmen that had learned to dance,
And of their age were yet but in the flowr,
And to the midst of the place advance.
Their feet play up and down like drops in shower,
Such sparkling feet Ulysses never had seen.
The Singer as he played sung the Song
Of Mars and Venus, and what love had been
Held secretly between them all along.
And how in Vulcan's house they used to meet;
And what he gave her; how the prying Sun
As they embraced each other chanced to see it,
And told her Husband Vulcan what was done.
How Vulcan to his Forge in anger went,
And on his Anvil hammered out strong Chains,
Which neither could be broken, nor relent.
And when he made an end had of his pains,
Into the Chamber went where stood his bed.
His Net of the Bed-posts, and the Beams he threw
Like Spider-webs about a Chamber spread;
And then to go to Lemnos made a show.
So subtle were the Chains and finely wrought,
They could by none, although a God, be seen.
How Mars to watch his going failed not.
When Vulcan was gone out, then Man's went in.
How Venus entered in, new come from Jove,
And by him sat. Mars took her by the hand,
And to her said, Let Us go to bed, my Love.
Vulcan is now at Lemnos gone a land.
And how they went to bed and made the Net
Fall down upon, and hold them as they lay.
And how they knew no way from thence to get,
But must till Vulcan came to free them stay.
How Vulcan from hard by came quickly in.
For back he came before he was half way.
For by the Sun advertised he had been,
And angerly turned back without delay;
And roaring, to the Gods, he said, Do You see
What work is here, and how unseemly it is?
And how Jove's Daughter does dishonor me
Because my Limbs are maimed, and whole are his?
I grant he is fair, nor does as I do halt.
Ought she to love him therefore more than me?
For that my Parents is, and not my fault.
But come ye Gods all, and their Posture see.
I hate the sight, yet they must not therefore
Hope ever the sooner for that, to be free.
The Net will suffer them to move no more,
How keen soever on their love they be.
And till her Father shall the Dower repay
Which for the Girl although incontinent,
I paid him down, 'cause fair, she was and gay,
There they shall lie. This said, the Gods straight went
To Vulcan's house. Neptune and Mercury,
And with them with his Silver Bow, Apollo,
And many others. But (for modesty)
No Goddess could persuaded be to follow.
As Soon as they perceived had the craft,
Which standing in the door they had surveyed,
At first aloud they altogether laughed.
And by and by to one another said,
I see that evil works do ill succeed.
The slow has gotten of the swift the better.
Vulcan of Mars the God of greatest speed.
And that by Arts which make his Ransom greater.
And how Apollo did the Question put
To Mercury, if he content would be
In such strong chains with Venus to be shut,
While all the Gods are standing by and see.
How Hermes said, O Phoebus, that I were
In Mars his place, and did with Venus lie,
And thrice as many Chains about us there,
Though all the Gods and Goddesses stood by
And how the Gods at this laughed out again,
Save Neptune only, who did never cease
T'importune Vulcan and his wrath restrain,
And that he would the God of War release;
And that himself would pay him what was due
If Mars did nor. How Vulcan said again,
If Mars should fly, shall I imprison you?
Unsure the Suretiship is of fled men.
And that again Neptune replying said,
Though Mars should run away, yet I will not.
And how that Vulcan at the last obeyed,
And Mars and Venus out of prison got,
And he to Thrace went, but to Cyprus she;
Where she a Temple and an Altar had,
And by the Graces that her Servants be
Bathed and Anointed was and Godlike clad.
These of the merry-Song were the Contents.
Ulysses was well pleased with the same.
And of the rest delighted was the Sense.
Alcinous then called out by name
Laodamas and Halius to dance.
None else for either of them was a match.
And they into the midst themselves advance
The one to throw a Ball, the other to catch.
One threw't up high reclining on his hip;
The other of the same the downfall watch't,
And taking from the ground a lusty skip,
His feet above ground, in the a^r it caught.
When this was done, they laid aside the Ball,
And danc d with often changes on the ground,
Applauded much by the Spectators all,
Who with their praises made the place resound.
O King (then said Ulysses) what you said
Of how your men pass all the world beside
In Noble Dance, can never be gainsaid.
I see it to my wonder justified.
The King well pleased to the Princes spoke.
A worthy man the stranger seems to me.
Let Us think, upon what Present him to make.
Twelve Princes in Phaeacia there be,
And I the thirteenth am. Let Us every one
Bestow on him a handsome Cloak and Coat,
Besides a Talent of pure Gold. That done
Let it be all together to him brought,
That he at Supper may sit cheerfully.
And you Euryalus go speak him fair.
For what you said before was injury.
Go therefore with some Gift your fault repair.
This said, to fetch the Gifts they sent the Squire.
Then said Euryalus, O King, since it is,
That also I Present him, your desire;
I will for reconcilement give him this
My Sword, with Scabberd all of Ivory,
And silver Hilt. The Present is not poor.
And giving it, O Father though' (said he)
I said amiss, pray think upon it no more.
And may the Gods restore you to your Land,
Since absent from your Friends you live in pain.
Ulysses took the Sword into his hand,
And to Euryalus thus said again,
And you my Friend, may you still happy be,
And of this Sword for ever need have none,
Which reconciling you have given me.
And as he speaking was he put it on.
The Sun now set, the King no longer tarri'd,
But with the Lords went to his house to Sup.
Along with them the Squires the Presents carried
Unto the Queen Arete to lay up.
Alcinous then said unto the Queen,
Let a fair Chest be streightway hither brought,
And for the Stranger see there be laid in
A comely and a well washed Cloak and Coat,
And of warm water let a Bath stand by,
That washing he may see the Presents there,
And sit at Supper the more joyfully,
And hearken to the Song with better cheer.
And I will give him this my Cup of Gold,
That offering up unto the Gods the Wine,
As often as he does the Cup behold,
He may both for his own health pray and mine.
This said, the Maids commanded by the Queen,
Set up a Caldron with a triple foot,
Then make fire under, and pour water in.
Keen was the fire, and soon the water hot.
Mean while the Queen came in, and with her brought
A curious chest, and into it laid in
The Gold, and with it every Cloak and Coat,
That by the Princes given him had been.
And then unto Ulysses said, Take care
You bind it fast, lest you be robbed by one
Or other, whilst aboard you sleeping are,
Lest any thing should missing be and gone.
And when she thus had him admonished,
Ulysses of the Chest pulled down the lid,
And girt it with a Cord of various thread,
Thereby to know if any it undid.
For that trick he by Circe taught had been.
A Woman then unto Ulysses said,
There stands your Bath. Which way you please go in.
Then went he in, and not a little joy'd.
For after he had left Calypso's house
Warm and sweet water he had never seen,
But rolled by Neptune always was in ^ouse;
But had with her carefully treated been.
When him the Maids washed and anointed had,
Out from the Bath he came amongst the men
With a clean Cloak and comely Garments clad.
To th'Door the bright Nausicaa came then,
And to Ulysses said, Stranger farewell,
And may you safely at your Land arrive.
Remember that into my hand you fell,
And owe to me that you were kept alive.
O (said Ulysses) Daughter of the King,
To you the Ransom of my life is due.
And if the Gods me to my Country bring,
As to a Goddess I will pray to you.
This said, he went and sat down by the King.
And now the Meat in Messes some divided,
Others the lusty wine were tempering,
And by a Squire the Singer in was guided;
And at a Pillar in the midst made sit.
Ulysses half a Chine of Pork and sat
Cuts off, and in the Squires hands puts it,
And said unto him, Give the Singer that.
Singers through all the world have reputation,
And well respected be in every land.
The Muses teach them Song, and love the Nation.
Then went the Squire and put it in his hand.
Demodocus received it and was glad.
Then fell they to the Meat before them laid.
When Thirst and Hunger overcome they had,
Unto the Singer then Ulysses said,
Demodocus, you all men else excel.
The Muses sure did teach you, or it was
Phoebus himself. For you have sung so well
The Acts that did 'twixt Greeks and Trojans pass,
And all related that they did at Troy,
Or suffered there, or when they homeward came,
As if your self beheld had their annoy,
Or had from some Spectator heard the same.
Stand forth, and sing now of the Horse of Wood
Made by Epeius, but by Pallas helped,
Stufft by Ulysses full of Warriors good,
Which in Troy-Town destruction to it whelp't.
If this you sing in order as 'twas done
I Will make make the World with your just praises ring.
Then at the Gods Demodocus begun,
And how the Fleet went off the shore did sing;
And how they fired their Tents; and how the Lords
Of Greece, i'th'Councel of the Trojans sat
Enclosed and hidden in the Horse of boards,
That by the Trojans was setch'd in in state.
The Trojans sitting round about debate.
And many a foolish speech they uttered.
And on three points they there deliberate.
And voted what the Gods determined.
The three points which were most insisted on
Were whether they should cut the Horse in twain,
Or throw it down the Rock it stood upon,
Or let it to appease the Gods, remain.
I'th'end they all resolved on the last.
For by the Fates it was determined
That Ilium should then be laid waste,
When o'r its Walls a great Horse entered,
And in his belly brought the enemy.
And how the Argives from the Horse came out,
How diverse ways they went and cruelly
Killed and burned as they went about.
Ulysses then, like Mars, with M^elaus
Unto Deip^obus together hie.
And for a while, there sharp the Battle was;
But to Ulysses fell the Victory.
This sung Demodocus. And then upon
Ulysses cheeks the tears ran down apace.
As when in fight a woman looks on,
And sees her Husband fallen on the place,
That ^ought had for his Town and Children dear;
There sprawleth he, she o'r him falls and cries,
But back and shoulders is well basted there,
And carried captive by the Enemy.
As woefully as then this woman wept,
So woefully Ulysses now sheds tears.
But from the King it was not secret kept,
Who sitting next him all his groaning hears.
And speaking to the Princes sitting by,
Let us, said he, Demodocus release.
His Song not pleases all the Company.
It makes the Strangers sorrow to increase,
And brings some grief or other to his mind.
Then let him hold; that we and he together
May in this meeting equal pleasure find.
The cause we met here was his coming hither,
That we might give him Gifts and send him hence.
A Guest is as a Brother to be used,
As all men know that but pretend to sense.
And you my Guest you cannot be excused,
If vou not answer truth to all I ask.
Say what is the name your Parents call you by.
You must no longer now keep on your Mask.
Children newborn not long unnamed lie.
Tell me your Land and City where it is,
That my good Ship may know where you would be;
For in Phaeacia no Steersman is
Nor Rudder as in other Ships you see.
Whither men bid them go they understand,
And pass in Clouds concealed o'r the Main,
And where the Havens be in every Land.
No fear they have of perishing or pain.
And yet my Father to me once did say,
That with our Convoys Neptune was offended,
And that one day our good Ship to destroy
As it returned homewards he intended.
And from men hide our City with a Hill.
But whether that shall be performed now,
I cannot tell. It lies in Neptunes will,
And not concerns you at all to know.
But tell me now what Lands you wandering saw,
What Nations, and what Cities you came to;
What kind of people, Civil, or without Law,
Civil or kind to Strangers, Godly or no*
When you heard sung the woeful Fate of Troy,
Why did you weep? The Gods that built the Town
Decreed thereat much people to destroy,
And that their Fate should be sung up and down.
Lost you some Kinsmen there or near Ally,
Which might in time of danger you bestead?
Or some good friend? A wise friend standing by
Is worth a Kinsman in a time of need.
LIB. IX.
TO this Ulysses said, Renowned King
Alcinous, methinks delightful it is
To sit as we do here, and hear one sing,
And specially so good a Voice as this.
I, for my part, do never more rejoice,
Than when I see men sitting at their meat
Cheerful, and listening to a pleasant voice,
And see the Cups go osten, and retreat.
This is a thing that I love best; but you
Had rather hear the dangers I have past,
Which fright me yet, and do my pain renew.
But which shall I tell first? which next? which last?
For they be many. First my name I Will tell,
And place, that whensoe'r you thither come
You may there lodge, although far off I dwell,
And am uncertain of my getting home.
I am Ulysses Laertiades,
And far and wide I am reputed wise
Amongst men that love subtle conveyances,
And known I am by Fame up to the Skies.
My place is Ithaca, in which is store
Of Wool. Mount Neriton is clothed with wood;
A goodly Hill, and many Islands more
(...) close about it, yielding store of food.
Dulichium, Same, and the woody Zant,
On The East of Ithaca are s^ituate.
Another Island, which is called Ant,
Lies Westward of it, but is low and flat.
Rocky is Ithaca, and upeven ground;
But breeds able men. Nor have I known
The man that to his own mind ever sound
A Country that was better than his own.
From mine Calypso kept me in a Cave
To Have been her Husband; so did C^rce too:
But neither of them my consent could have,
So much could love of my own Country do.
For though far off I might have better Land,
Yet should I from my Kindred absent live.
But now it is time to let you understand
What passage to me Jove was pleased to give.
From Tray to Ismarus we first were blown
Within an Isle, Cicons the Natives are;
And soon we plundered and burnt the Town,
And of the Plunder each man had his share.
The Wives we prisoners made, and to the Sword
We put the men: And then without delay
I did command them all to go aboard;
But they, Fools as they were, would not obey
For they to kill, eat, drink, themselves apply,
Beeves, sheep and wine, which they had on the beach.
Cicons mean while to Cicons so loud cry,
That to the Continent their voices reach.
And presently came others, numberless
As leaves in Summer; stout and men of skill,
To fight on Horsback with much readiness,
Or else on foot, according as they will.
Jove had decreed us mischief, and the hour
Was come: And just before our Ships we fought;
Spears were our Weapons, which with all our Power
We lanced on both sides with courage stout.
Whilst the Sun mounted we resisted well,
But after Noon they pressed us so sore,
That with the falling Sun ou^ courage fell;
And then in haste we thrust our Ships from shore.
From out of every Ship six men we lost:
And then with heavy hearts our Sails we horse,
And grieved for our Fellows left the Coast;
But first to every of them called thrice
Whom slain by The Enemy we left behind.
Then Jove with Clouds both Land and Water vails,
And night came on us with a furious wind
From the North-part of Heaven, and tore our Sails
In three's and four's, and all our Ships were tossed
Hither and thither, side-ways with the blasts,
And one another way hindered and crossed.
Then took we in our Sails, and down our Masts,
For fear of death, and laid them on the Decks,
And with our Oars rowed our Ships to Land;
Two nights and days we stayed, while grief did vex
Each mind, and labor tired had each hand.
But when the Morn had led forth the third day,
We then set sail, and left their course to the wind,
The which (we sitting still) did them convey
According as the Steers-men had designed.
And I had safely come to Ithaca,
Had not the North-winde with the tide of the Sea,
When I was come to the Cape of Malea,
Forced us without the Isle of Cythere.
The horrid Winds now found me on the Main,
And tossed me into one another hand:
Nine days together I endured this pain,
Upon the tenth they cast me on a Land
Where dwell a People called Lotophagi,
That have and live upon a fruit full sweet
^th' Continent. We went ashore; there I
Made them take in fresh water for the Fleet.
Then having quickly supped, I chose out two
Of my Companions to go and see
What men they were; with them I sent also
A third, who went as Messenger from me.
They quickly went; but mingled with those men
Who meant no harm, but gave them Lote to eat,
Which made them hate returning back again,
And suddenly their Country to forget:
And with the people there resolved to stay,
Forgetting home for love of Lote. But I
Sent those that quickly fetched them away
By force, and under hatches did them tie.
The rest I ^ad unto their Ships ^o haste,
Lest eating Lote they should return no more.
Aboard they quickly come, and each one placed
In order, beats the gray Sea with his Oar.
Then to the Land of Cyclopses we row;
Men proud and lawless, that rely for food
Upon the Sky, and neither plant nor plow;
Yet have they Barley, Wheat, Wine very good,
Unplow'd, unsown, fetched up by showers of Rain.
They have no Courts of Council, nor of Right.
On huge high hills themselves they entertain,
And in their rocky bellies pass the night.
Each man gives Law to his own Wife and Brood.
Nor do they much for one another care.
Before the Port an Isle lies clad with wood,
Not very near, nor from it very far.
Wild Goats in great abundance were therein:
Because there dwell'd no men that might them kill,
Nor wretched Hunters ever enter in,
To tire themselves running from hill to hill.
For the good Ship with the Vermilion Cheeks
The Cyclopses have not, nor Art to make
All that is needful for a man that seeks
Trade, and to pass the Seas must undertake.
The Island else they quickly might adorn.
The Land is good; to th'Sea sweet Meadows lie,
And plentifully would yield Wine and Corn,
If it were helped with good Husbandry.
Anchors and Cables in the Port needs none,
Nor any Rope to tie the Ship to Land;
And when the Master thinks fit to be gone,
With the first Wind they take the Oar in hand.
Within the entrance rises a sweet Spring
From ou^ a Cave, shaded with Poplars tall;
Thither to shore our Ships we safely bring.
Some God was Guide. Nothing we saw at all.
Dark night it was, and nothing to be seen;
The Air about us thick, and from the Sky
The Moon could not shine through the Clouds between,
No^ Waves, nor Isle appeared to any eye.
Then took we in our Sails, and went to Land,
And waited for the coming of the day,
And in the mean time slumbered on the Sand:
But when we saw appear the morning gay,
Admiring th'Isle, we walked to and fro,
Whilst the Nymphs (sprung from Jove Aegioch^s)
Refreshment on my Soldiers to bestow,
Down from the Mountain brought the Goats to us.
And presently from out our Ships we take
Our Bows and Arrows keen, and came away,
And of our Company three Troops we make;
Then shooting, soon we had a lovely prey.
Our Ships were twelve, to which they equally
Divide the Spoil; for every Ship had nine,
Save only mine had ten: Then merrily
All day we sit and feast on Flesh and Wine.
For we had Wine enough as yet unspent,
Of that we got and brought away with us,
Which every man had into Budgets pent,
Then when we took the Town of Ismarus.
Close by we saw the Land of Cyclopses,
And smoke, and heard the voice of the men, and Sheep
And Goats. 'Twas night, and on the Sand of the Sea
Our selves till morning we refresht with sleep.
But when the Rosy morning 'gan t'appear,
My Fellows I together called, and spoke:
You, my Companions, by the Ships stay here;
I with my Ship and Crew will undertake
A trial of this people, whether wild,
And proud, and insolent their Nature be,
Or whether they be men of nature mild,
Godly, and loving hospitality.
This said, I went aboard, and had my Crew
Imbarque themselves. Aboard they quickly come,
And sitting each man in his order due,
With stroke of Oar they made the gray Sea foam.
Arrived, we of a Cavern saw the door,
Both high and wide, and sheep and goats there lay
Abundance sleeping. It was shaded o'r
With boughs that downward grew of Laurel gay.
Before it was a Court well fenced with stone
And lusty Oaks, and many a Pine Tree high.
In The Cave a Giant lodged, who used alone
His sheep to feed, no other Cyclops nigh.
It was a huge and ugly Monster, and
Looked not unlike a rocky Mountains head
That does amongst other hills asunder stand,
With a great Perriwig of Trees o'rspread.
Then bad I my Companions to stay
And guard the Ship, save that by lot a dozen
I took of them along with me, and they,
By chance, were the same men I would have chosen*
With me I took a Goatskin full of Wine,
Pleasant and strong, by Maron given me,
^vanthes Son, Priest to Phoebus Divine,
At Ismarus, to save his Family,
Fearing the God in whose Grove he did live.
For which sev'n Talents of pure beaten gold,
And a large Silver Bowl he did me give
Freely, besides twelve Budgets of Wine old,
Pure, pleasant, precious drink it was, which none
Knew of besides himself, his Wife and Maid;
Of the Menservants that he kept, not one.
Which when he drank, he usually allai'd
With water pure, full twenty times as much.
And when a man so tempered had his Cup,
Yet still the fragrant smell thereof was such,
He hardly could forbear to drink it up.
This Goatskin I took with me in a Cafe,
Expecting of some great and ghastly man,
That knew nor Law, nor Right, to see the face;
And landing, quickly to the Den we ran.
We entered in, but did not find him there;
But gaze we did at every thing with wonder:
Shelves full of Cheese as much as they could bear,
Pens full of Sheep and Goats, each sort asunder,
Old, younger, young'st; all Vessels to the brim,
Pans, Trays, and Milking-Pales were full of Whey.
My men desired me not to stay for him,
But make what haste I could to get away,
And take some of his Cheeses from the shelves,
And sheep from out the Pens, and then to go,
And setting up our Sails to save our selves.
But I would not, though it had been better so.
But I desired to see the man, and try
If from him some good gift I might obtain;
But they with fear were ready for to die,
And could not think upon him but with pain.
Then kindled we a fire, and killed and fed
On Flesh and Cheese, and for his coming staid.
He came, and a great burden carried
Of withered Boughs, which at the door he laid.
His Supper with this Wood he meant to d^ess,
And threw it down with such a h^deous noise,
As frighted us to the innermost recess
Of The Cave; there lay we, and suppressed our voice.
Into the Cave he comes, he and his Flock,
All that was milch; the Males he left without,
Rams and He goats, and the Door with a Rock
Stops up, which two and twenty Carts scarce mough^
Bear above ground, and then to milking fell;
But first he sets unto each Ewe her Lamb,
In order due, to see them suckled well,
And each young Goat he puts under her Dam.
Half of the Milk he turned to Curds, and put
Them into Wicker-Baskets to set up:
The other half he into Tankards put,
For dr^nk to serve him when he was to sup.
When he had ended all his business,
He made a fire, and thereby spr'd us out.
What are you, says he, whence do you cross the Sea^?
Is it on business, or do you rove about
As Pyra^s walk at Sea, to and again,
And are content to set their lives at stake,
So they may mischief do to other men?
Out hearts di^mai'd before, this language bra^e.
We feared his hollow voice, and body great;
But yet I made him answer, and said thus;
We are Achaeans, making our retreat
Homewards from Troy, out Winds have forced us
Upon this Coast (for Jove would have it so.)
We are a part of Agamemnons Bands,
Whose glory for his sacking Troy, is now
Renowned both far and wide throughout all Lands.
And now our selves we prostrate at your feet,
Hoping for some good thing as Visitants;
Such as all men have commonly thought meet;
Or for the Gods-sake, as to Suppliants.
As Suppliants we before you here do lie,
With whom, and strangers, Jove still goes along.
He is the God of Hospitality,
To punish whosoever does them wrong.
Thus I. But he replied with fell intent,
Stranger, thou art a fool, or come from far,
That counsel'st me to fear the punishment
Of Jove, or for the blessed Gods to care.
The Cyclopses care not at all for Jove
Aegiochus, or any other Gods.
For why, we stronger are than those above;
And if we strength compare, we have the odds.
No no. It Is not the fear of Jupiter
Can me from thee, or these with thee restrain,
Unless I please. But tell me truly where
The Ship that brought you rides, and do not fain.
This was to sound me. But I saw his mind,
And a deceitful answer did intend.
My Ship was wreckt by Neptune, and by wind
Thrown against the rocks, at the Lands furthest end.
Where all besides my self and these were drowned.
To this he answered nothing, nor said more;
But snatching up a couple from the ground,
Knocks out their brains, like whelps against the floor.
Then cuts them into joints, and on them fed:
Nor did he flesh, or bone, or entrails leave,
Like hungry Lion on the Mountains bred.
Then weep we, and to Jove our hands up heave
To see such work, and have no remedy.
When he with humane flesh his belly deep
Had filld, and drunk the milk that stood him by,
He laid himself along amongst his sheep,
And slept. And then I saw I might him slay:
'Twas but to draw my good Sword from my side,
And gently on his breast my hand to lay,
And to the hilts the Sword in's body hide.
Upon new thoughts that purpose I gave over;
For certainly it had destroyed us quite:
So great the stone was that lay on the door,
That to remove it was past all our might.
So there we sighing staid for day: and when
The Rosie-finger'd morning did appear,
He made a fire, and milkt his flock again,
And the young Kids and Lambs new suckled were.
When all his work was at an end, and past,
Two more of my Companions he takes,
And on those two he quickly breaks his fast,
And for his Flock the way he open makes.
For easily he took the stone away,
And then again with no less ease he did
Set up the same, and in its right place lay,
Than of a Quiver one would do the Lid.
His flock with noise he drives up to the hills,
And in the Den leaves us to meditate
How to revenge (with Phoebus help) our ills.
At last within my breast this counsel sat.
Near one of the Pens there lay an Olive Tree,
Straight, and the boughs cut off, which when 'twas dried,
D^signed was a Walking-staff to be
Of the great Cyclops; which when we espied,
Of some good Ship we thought might be the Mast,
Or of a Bark of twenty Oars or more,
That Neptunes ^ugged waters might have past
With a great burden safe from shore to shore.
Of this a fathom I cut off, and gave it
To my Companions to ^aper it:
They smoothed and taper'd it as I would have it;
I sharpn'd it at point as I thought fit.
Then in the fire the same I hardened well,
And laid it by with Dung all covered over,
Which in the Cave from so much Cattle sell;
For sheep and goats there always were good store.
From all my Company, who did not fear
To help me thrust this Bar into his eye,
I took out four by lot, and such they were
As I my self did wish; the fifth was I.
At Evening he returns with his sheep,
Into the hollow Cave he brings them all:
Without, he neither sheep nor goat did keep,
By Presage, or upon some Heavenly Call.
Then with the stone the Caves mouth up he dams,
And milks his she-goats and his Ews each one;
And suckles all his young Kids, and his Lambs.
But after he his work had fully done,
Another couple of my men he took.
Then having in my hand an Ivy Kan
Of good black Wine, I thus unto him spoke:
Cyclops, since you have eaten flesh of man,
Here, drink this good black Wine upon it, and see
What excellent good drink we had aboard,
Whereof I Have hither brought a taste to thee,
Hoping you will some kindness me afford,
And some assistance in our Voyage home.
But so intolerably furious
You are, that no man will dare near you come,
Knowing how cruel you have been to us.
When I had said, the good Wine he drank up,
And was extremely pleased with the same:
And straightway calling for another Cup,
Tell me (quoth he) right now what is thy name;
And I will give thee that shall please thy heart.
We Cyclopses have Vines that yield good Wine,
Which from the Earth by ^ain from Heaven start:
But this some branch of Nectar is divine.
When he had said, I gave him Wine again.
Three times I filled the Kan, and he as often
Drank't off. But when it came up to his brain,
Then spoke I to him gentle words and soft.
Cyclops, since you my name desire to know,
I Will tell it you, and on your word rely.
My name is Noman; all men call me so,
My Father, Mother, and my Company.
To which he soon and sadly made reply,
Noman I Will eat you last, none shall outlive you
Of all that here are of your Company;
And that is the gift I promised to give you.
And having said, he laid himself along
With bended neck, sleeping and vomiting
Gobbets of Humane Flesh, and Wine among.
All he before had eaten uttering.
The Bar with Embers then I covered,
Till (green as 'twas) with heat I made it shine;
And with few words my men encouraged,
Left any should have shrunk from the design.
The Bar now hot, and ready to flame out,
And (though green wood) yet glowing mightily,
To him my Fellows carried, now stout,
And set the point thereof upon his eye.
But I my self erecting with my hand,
Twirled the Bar about, with motion nimble,
As Joyners with a string below do stand.
To give a piercing motion with a wimble.
So whilst the Brand was entering, I it turned.
The blood that down along it ran was hot;
And with his Eye the Lids and Brows were burned,
And all his Eye-strings with the fire did strut
As when a Smith has heat his Axe or Spade,
And quickly quenches it while hot it is,
To harden it, it makes a noise; so made
His great moist Eye the glowing Brand to hiss.
He roared so as made the Rocks resound,
And from his Eye, he pulled with both his hands
The burning Brand, and threw it to the ground;
And so a while he there amazed stands.
And thence for more Cyclopses calls; and they
(Who dwelt about in every hollow Cave)
Came in, some one, and some another way;
And from without the Den asked what he would have.
What ails thee Polyphemus so to cry
In dead of night, and make us break our sleep?
Goes any one about to make thee die,
By force or fraud, or steal away thy sheep?
Then Polyphemus answered from his Cave,
Friends, Noman kills me. Why then, said they,
We have no power from sickness you to save;
You must unto your Father Neptune pray.
This said, they parted each one to his own
Dark Cavern: Then within my self I laughed
To think how with my Name the Mighty Clown
I so deceived had, and gulled by craft.
The Cyclops for the stone now groap'd about,
Found it, and threw it down, though pained sore;
Thinking to catch us at our coming out,
Sitting with Arms extended in the door.
Such fools he thought us: but I formerly
Had thought upon the course I was to take;
And all my cunning, and my Art to try,
Since no less than our lives was now at stake,
This Counsel 'twas that in my breast then sat;
Male sheep there were within the Cave well fed,
Fair, big, and deeply clad in wool and fat,
And these, with twigs taken from Cyclops his bed,
I bound together three and three; each three
Bore one under the middlemost fast bound:
One Ram, by far the best of all bore me
Under his breast, my hands in deep wool wound.
Thus hung we constantly, expecting day.
The morning came, the Males to pasture hie,
(The Ews with strutting Udders bleating stay)
Their Master sitting there in misery,
Laid's hand upon their backs as out they past,
Never thinking of their Bellies we were under.
Mine heavy with his wool and me came last,
To whom the Cyclops said, seeming to wonder,
Why, silly Ram, art thou the last to come
Out of the Cave, that formerly was ever
The foremost to go out, and to come home,
And foremost at the going to the River;
But now at last? Is It for thy Masters eye,
Which Noman and his Fellows have put forth?
O could thou speak, and tell me where does lie
Hidden within, that Noman nothing worth,
I soon would with his brains besmear the floor,
And ease my vexed heart within me so,
Which Noman has within me wounded sore.
This said, he let the Ram that bore me go.
Got forth a little from the Den and Yard,
I left my Ram, and set my Fellows free:
Unto my Ships I brought part of the Herd,
That to our Fellows we might welcome be,
We that escapt: But they began to weep
For those we left behind us dead, till I
Commanded them to fetch aboard more sheep,
And after that their Oars again to ply.
They brought in more, and each man takes his seat,
And in due order, with his Oar in hand,
The water gray into a foam they beat,
And rowed us a little way from Land,
As far as one that hollows can be heard;
So far I stood from shore, I hollowed then;
Cyclops, Cyclops, why were you not afraid
To kill and eat, as you have done, my men?
For since you strangers do so ill entreat,
And of the Gods themselves no reckoning make,
You ought to have expected vengeance great,
And that your wicked deeds should you overtake.
The Cyclops then provoked with this mock,
Threw a great stone at us with all his might;
And first he swing'd round over his head the Rock,
Which just behind the Rudder chanced to light;
And so much stirred the water falling in,
That what with th'eddy and'tide from the Main,
Brought back to th'Land, and sure we dead had bin,
But that I quickly thrust it off again.
Then bad I my Companions to row
Still further off, till we were out of fear.
They pli'd their Oars again; and we were now
At twice the distance that before we were.
And then again I to the Cyclops spoke,
(Though my companions would have hindered me)
Why (say they) will you still the man provoke?
How great a stone, how far he throws, you see,
How near to Land we were, how near to die.
If he but any one of us hear speak,
A Rock will straightway from him hither fly,
And knock our brains out, and our Vessel break.
So said they; but with me could nothing do,
I was resolved to vex him bitterly.
Cyclops, quoth I, if any ask thee who,
What was his name that robbed thee of the eye,
Say 'twas Ulysses, Prince of Ithaca,
S^n to the old Laertes. He it was.
At which the Cyclops howling answered, Ha,
I see old Prophesies are come to pass.
For Telemus Eury ^d's that here
Dwelled, and telling Fortunes went about,
Told me I'should by name Ulysses fear,
As he that one da^ should my eye put out.
B^t I some strong and in ^y man expected
Of Stature great, sho^d come to do that deed,
And never such a little W^tch suspected,
Nor ever did of being drunk take ^d
But come Ulysses nearer, that I may
Give you a precious gift as you de crve,
And also to my Father N^ptune pray.
That you upon the Seas he would preserve.
For I his Son, and he my Father is,
And to my sight again restore me can;
He, and no other of the Gods in bliss,
Nor any Power on earth. So said the man.
Cyclops (quoth I) I would I could as well
Send thee now down to Pluto's ugly Den
Deprived of life and Soul ^'th' deepest Hell,
As I am sure thou never shall see again.
Then held he up his hands to Heaven and pra^d,
Hear me, O Neptune, if thy Son I be,
And thou my Father truly, as it is said,
Grant that Ulysses never more may see
His Native Soil; or if perhaps by fate
It be decreed he shall return again,
Let him return both wretchedly and late,
His ships and men lost, and at home meet pa^*
His prayer granted was; and then he threw
A greater stone, first swinged o'r his head,
Which by good chance above the Vessel flew,
But almost to the shore us carried.
When we were come into the Isle again
Where all the rest of our Fleet then abode
Expecting our return, in grievous pain,
And wondering why we were so long abroad;
Then with our sheep we landed on the Beach,
And amongst the Barks divided them with care,
Their just and equal number unto each,
That no Ship might be wronged of his share.
On me my Fellows over and above
Bestowed a Ram, which on the Sand there right
I made a Sacrifice to mighty Jove;
But in my Offerings he took no delight,
And was contriving how to make away
My Ship and Fellows, and destroy them quite.
There on the snore we sat and spent the day
With flesh and Wine, from morning unto night.
All night we slept upon the shore; and when
The morning had again the day restored,
I presently commanded all my men
To loose the Ropes, and put themselves aboard.
Aboard they go and beat the Sea with Oars,
All for their Fellows which were eaten, sad.
And forward to the Main we take our course,
For that we had our selves escaped, glad.
LIB. X.
AT the floting I^^e Aeolia we landed,
Where Aeolus the Son of Hippotas
Beloved of the Immortal Gods commanded,
His House was walled all about with brass.
Th'ascent unto it was all one smooth stone.
Twelve were his Children, six Sons and their Wives;
In Wedlock he had joined them one to one,
And with him in his house they led their lives.
And made good cheer; all day the house they make
To ring with mirth, and smoke with boiled and roast,
At night their Loyal Wives to Beds they take,
Richly set out with coverings of great cost.
A month he entertained me with delight,
Asked me of Troy, and the Argive Fleet, and ^ow
The Greeks got home. And him I answer'd-right
To every thing as far as I did know.
And when I left his house, he was content
T'assist me friendly in my Voyage back
With a West-wind, and all Winds else he pent
Into a tough and strong Neats-leather sack.
(For Jove had made him Master of the Winds,
To hold their breath, or blow as he thought fit)
And with a silver string the Sack he binds:
No Wind could stir but as I ordered it.
But all this did no good for want of wit.
Nine days we sailed sore-right, and came so nea^
To th'Coast of Ithaca, that we could see it
By the light of Beacons that were fired there.
But then with weariness I fell asleep;
For I had never till now the Helm let go,
Nor sufferd any else my place to keep,
I longed to see my Native Country so.
Mean while my Fellows to discourse begin,
Thinking much Gold and Silver was ^th' Sack
By Aeolus Hippotades put in,
Which now to Ithaca I carried back.
And, Oh did one unto another say,
How much this man is loved where e'^ he comes!
He brings from Troy a great share of the prey,
Though we go empty-handed to our homes.
Now Aeolus has given him God knows what.
Come quickly let us while we think upon it,
And sleeping ^e upon the Deck lies flat,
Undo the Sack, and see how much there is on it.
This wretched Counsel taken by the Crew,
The Budget they undid, to see my store;
And then at once the surious Winds out-flew,
And whistling, snatched our ship away from shore.
My Fellows wept, I studi'd which was best,
To fall into the Sea and end my pain,
Or patiently to live among the rest.
I chose to live, as better of the twain,
And hoodwinkt laid me down in the ship. At last^
We sound our selves upon the Aeolian shore
On which the unruly Winds our ship had cast,
Just at the place where we set forth before:
And there we landed, and short supper made
With my Companions on the rocky shore.
I one man with me, and a Herald take,
And went up to the Porch before the Door
Of th'Hall, where Aolus sat banqueting
Amongst his Sons and Daughters. They admired.
What Wind, said they, did you now hither bring?
We furnished you for what place you desired.
Some Devil crossed you. Softly I replied.
Of our misfortune other cause was none
But my men's folly, who the Bag unti'd
The whilst I slept; you can repair what is done.
Their Father answered at another ra^e;
Hence Rascal, hated of the Gods above:
I entertain none whom the Gods do hate.
Away, I say, the Gods thee do not love.
Thus sighing we were sent away. And though
We were already tired with the Oar,
To Sea we put, and forward still we row,
Six days and nights entire, never giving over.
Upon the seventh day we landed near
To Le^^rig nia, the Royal Seat.
Of L^m^^s and his Race. The Herds-men there,
When from the field they bring their sheep or neat,
Hollow to those at home; then they a-field
Their Cattle drive. To one of little sleep
The fire of the place does double wages yield,
By tending one day Cows, another sheep.
For it is seated just 'twixt day and night.
Into the Port we came, the which within
On eath side was beset with Rocks upright,
Whereof two made it narrow coming in.
My Fellows with their ships were in the Port
Near to the City. For the Sea was still,
And not a Wind stirring of any sort.
But I kept mine without, suspecting ill,
And with a Rope had ti'd it to the Rocks.
Then up a h^ll I went to look about,
But could no sign espy of Man or Ox.
Then down I came again, and straight sent out
T^enquire what kind of people lived there.
A Herald then and two men more I sent,
Who as they going on the highway were
That from the woody hill to'th' City went,
Met with the Daughter of Antiphates
That was of Lestrigonians the King.
She had fetched water from Artacies;
Artacies the name was of a Spring.
They asked her of the King and of the People.
Her Fathers house she shows. They thither hie,
And find the Queen there looking like a Steeple,
And straight abhorred her as a Prodigy.
Then she her husband from the Marketplace
Calls home; who straight intended to dispatch'em,
And laid his hands on one; but in that space
The rest escaped by flight, he could not catch'em.
But then he raised with a mighty shout
The Town and Country, who in numbers great
Liker to Giants than to men, came out,
And with huge stones of a man's weight they beat
My men and ships. A woeful noise and wild
I heard of dying men, and tearing planks.
When they had slain my men, they them enfil'd,
And carried them like Fishes hung in ranks.
While they did this, I had no other hope
To save my self, but quickly with my Sword
(My ship being ti'd to th'Rocks) to cut the rope,
And make what haste I could to get aboard.
My Crew into the Ship leapt all at once,
And rowed for life, till they got far enough
From land, to stand in fear of throwing stones,
And glad they had escaped, onwards row.
The rest, both ships and men, all perished.
Next at Aeaea Isle ashore we run,
Where the wise Goddess Circ' inhabited,
Aeetes Sister, Daughter of the Sun
And Perse Daughter of Oc^anus.
There in a good safe Harbor quietly
We rest our selves. Some God conducted us.
There full of grief two days and nights we lie.
Soon as the Morn had shown us the third day,
With Spear in hand, and Sword girt at my thigh,
Up to a Mountains top I took my way,
Some word of man to hear, or work to spy.
Through the thick wood I saw a smoke arise
About the place where the House of Circe stood:
Then with my self I did a while advise
What I should do At last I thought it good
To make my people all to dine, and then
Safely with company to go or send.
So back I came unto my ship and men.
But by the way (some God was sure my Friend)
A gallant Stag came by, whom heat and thirst
Invited had down to the Stream Divine.
At him I quickly threw my Spear, which pier^'t
Both his sides through, close beneath the Chine.
Down dead he falls. On's neck my foot I set,
Plucked out the Spear, and laid it on the ground.
To make a Rope, I Twigs and Rushes get,
And his four feet together fast (...) bound.
Within h^s legs I place my head, and bear
His body on my neck. 'Twas hard to rise,
Leaning with both my hands upon my Spear.
He was too great to take up otherwise.
I threw him down of the shore and cheered my Crew.
Friends (quoth I) though our present state be bad,
Death shall not come, I hope, before it is due.
Come, let us ear and drink, and not be sad,
This said, they straightway from the ship descend,
And gaze ^po^'^, for 'twas a mighty Beast:
And when their wondering was at an end,
They washed their hands, and dressed it for their feast.
And all the remnant of the day till night
We made good cheer with Wine and Ven'^on store.
After the Sun had born from us his light,
We laid us down to sleep upon the shore.
But when the Rosy Morn appeared again,
I said to all my men, who grieved were:
My Ma^es, although I have endured much pain,
I must entreat you patiently to hear.
We know not where is West or East, nor where
The Sun does rise or set, nor where we be.
To me does little hope as yet appear:
And theresore we must go abroad and see.
In a low Island, rising through the Trees,
I saw a smoke when I stood on the Hill.
Though I had uttered no more words but these,
They heard them with a very evil will.
Of Cyclops and Antiphates they speak
That had devoured their Fellows formerly:
And ready were their hearts with grief to break.
They weep and whine, but without remedy.
Of my Companions then two Bands I make;
Of one Eurylochus had the Command,
The charge of the other to my self I take:
And two and twenty men were in each Band.
Who should go first abroad, and who should stay,
We were content should be by Lot defined.
To go, fell to Eurylochus. Away
They weeping went, we weeping stayed behind.
Down in a Dale they Circes Palace found
Built of square stone. The place was full of shade.
Lions and Wolves about it lay of the ground,
Whom Circe tame with Magic Arts had made:
These fl^w not at my men, but laid their Noses
Upon them lovingly, and waged their tails
As Dogs salute their Masters. Circe's Doses
So much above their Natures fierce prevails.
Eurylo^hus in the Door stood with his Band.
The Goddess Circe busy was within;
For she a wondrous fine work had in hand,
Past art of man, and sung as she did spin.
Then did Polites, whom I loved most dear
Of all my Crew, speak out unto them all:
My Friends, quoth he, somebody sings there,
A Goddess or a Woman Let us call.
This said, they call, and she sets open the Gate,
Bids them come in. Fools as they were, they enter
All but Eurylochus. Without he sat,
Suspecting somewhat, therefore durst not venture.
She places them, and sets before them food,
Cheesecak^s of Cheese, and Honey, Flour and Wine;
But had mixed something with it not so good
Of wondrous Virtue with an ill design.
For with a Wand, as soon as they had dined,
She drove them to the sties, and there them pent^*
For body, head, hair, voice, all but the mind,
Right Swine they were, and grunted as they went.
There to them threw she Acorns, Crabs and Bran,
The things wherewith Swine commonly are fed.
Eurylochus stayed long, but not a man
Came out to let him know how they had sped.
Then back he comes: at first he could not speak,
Though he endeavored; he grieved so,
The sighs and sobs his words did often break,
Till urged by us that longed the truth to know.
At last he said, Renowned Ulysses, we
Passing the woods as we commanded were,
In a dark Vale a stately Palace see;
A Goddess, or a Woman, dwells there.
We called, and straight she opening the Gate,
Bids us come in. They ill advised enter
All but my self. Alone without I sat,
Suspecting fraud, and durst no further venture.
Lost they are all: for if they could, I know
Some of them would have come and brought me word,
For I staid long enough. This said, my Bow
I took, and at my side my trusty Sword,
And bad him guide me back the self-same way.
Then fell he at my feet on both his knees,
And weeping me entreats to let him stay;
Your life, quoth he, amongst the rest you will leese.
To this I said, Eurylochus stay you
Here at the ship (since you are frighted so)
Eating and drinking with the rest of the Crew;
Necessity compels me to go.
This said, I went along the shore, till I
Was at the entrance of the Valley, where
The house of Circe stood. Then Mercury
Encountered me. In form he did appear
Of a fair youth, whose Beard but now began
In a soft Down to peep above his face,
Which is the prime of beauty in a man.
Alas, said he, what make you in this place
Amongst trees and shrubs? For I can tell you this,
Your Mates at Circe's house are lodged in sties,
They now are Swine; you will of your purpose mis^.
You cannot set them free though you be wise,
But rather you will with them lie. But well,
I Will give you such an Antidote as you
Need not to be afraid of any Spell;
And will besides, her purpose to you show.
To make you drink she will temper you a Cup,
Which shall not (for the Antidote) bewitch you;
And when she sees that you have drunk it up,
With her long Wand she presently will switch you.
Then to her with your naked Sword in hand,
As if you purposed to cut off her head.
Then she will shriek, and weep, and trembling stand,
And buy her life with proffer of her bed.
You must not then refuse the Goddess love,
If you intend your Fellows to restore:
Yet make her swear by all the Gods above
She never will attempt to hurt you more.
Then gave he me the Herb. The Flower was white,
The Root was black; the Gods do call it Moly,
And gather it, who have no stint of might.
For men to think to find it is a folly.
Then Hermes parting mounted to the Sky,
And I to Circe's house went on my way,
And musing stood a while, but by and by
I called, and she came forth without delay,
And calls me in. I enter with sad heart;
There in a glorious Chair she made me sit
Studded with silver-Nails, and carved with Art;
Then puts a low Stool to it for my feet,
And brought the Potion in a Golden Cup,
Which she had tempered to her bad design.
And soon as ever I had drunk it up
She switch'd and bad me go lie with the Swine.
Then start I up with my drawn Sword, and make
As if I purposed to cut off her head.
Then did she shriek most fearfully and quake,
And weeping to me these words uttered:
Who, whence are you? what is your Fathers Name?
That this drink works not, is very strange.
If any else but tasted had the same,
He soon had of his figure found a change.
But you a stubborn heart have in your breast.
Are you Ulysses, that should hither come,
As Hermes told me often, and be my Guest,
When from the Trojan shore he sailed home?
Put up your Sword; and that we may confide
In one another better without dread,
Let Us to my Chamber go, and side by side
Compose the things we differ in a bed.
Circe (said I) Oh how can I be kind,
When you to Swine my Fellows turned have?
And now you have me here, it is in your mind
To make ^e tame, and keep me for a slave.
I Will not come near your Bed, unless before
You take an Oath by all the Gods above
You Will never go about to hurt me more.
This said, she swore, and I gave way to love.
On Circe Waiting-women four attended
To do the service of the house, and were
From sacred Rivers, Springs and Groves descended;
Each had her proper work assigned her.
One does the Chairs with coverings array;
Another does the Silver Tables spread,
And on each one of them a Basket lay
Of Gold, and into it she puts the Bread.
The third does in a Silver Flagon mix
The Wine and Water in a Silver Pot:
The fourth to make a fire brings in the sticks,
And for a Bath makes ready water hot.
Circe her self the water tempered
Into a just and comfortable heat,
And poured it on my shoulders and my head,
Washing my limbs, till I my toil forget.
And when I ba^hed and anointed was,
She put upon me a fair Coat and Vest,
And led me in, into the dining-place,
And to my Chair and Table me addressed.
One Maid a golden Basin, with the Ew'r,
To wash our hands over a Cauldron brings;
The Cauldron also was of Silver pure.
Another loads the Table with good things:
Another on the Table sets on bread,
And then the Goddess Circe bids me eat.
But other dangers running in my head,
I had but little stomach to my meat.
Which she observing said, Ulysses, why
Do you thus sullenly your meat refuse,
And like a dumb man sit? Do You think that I
Intend against you some new Art to use?
Have I not sworn? To which I answered,
Oh Circe, how can I be pleased do you think
(When you my Fellows keep disfigured
And pounded up in Hog-sties) t'eat and drink?
If you mean well, set them at liberty,
And in the shape of men before my eyes,
That I may look on them, and they on me.
With Switch in hand then out of doors she hies
And opens all the Prisons; out they come,
And were to look to Pigs of nine years old.
She drives them with her Wand into the room,
And makes them stand there while I them behold.
Then Circe went amongst them, and each one
Smeared with an unguent which straightway did make
Their hair fall off, and undid all was done;
And presently a humane shape they take,
Greater and fairer than they had before.
They knew me all, my hand with theirs they pressed.
So glad they were, their eyes for joy ran o'^e.
The whole house wept, and Circe with the rest.
This past, the Goddess said, Ulysses, go
And bring your Ship a-land, and let her lie;
Your goods within the rocky Caves bestow,
And make haste back with all your Company.
This pleased me well. Down to the Sea I hie
Where my Companions I weeping find;
But soon as I appeared they presently
About me came, their care now out of mind.
As when from Pastures fat a Herd of Cows
Well-fed return at evening to their home,
Their Calves will not be kept within the house
But play, and skip, and round about them come:
So did my Fellows soon as they me saw
Come skipping out of the ship, with no less joy*
Than if they had been come to Ithaca
Their Native Country from the Town of Trey.
Our joy (said they) Ulysses cannot be
Greater when we at Ithaca arrive,
Which we so wish for, than it is now to see
That you from Circe are returned alive.
But tell us, pray, how di'd our Fellows there.
But first (said I) hale up your Ship to Land,
And in the Rocks hide all that is loose in her,
And come with me to Circe out of hand.
There shall you see your Fellows how they live;
In want of nothing that they can devise.
To these my words my Fellows credit give;
Eurylochus alone thought otherwise.
Wretches (said he) what mean you? will you go?
Have you a longing to be Lions ^ame,
Or Swine, or Wolves, and being transformed so,
To live at Circe's house, and guard the same?
Remember Cyclops, and how all they sped
That dared to put themselves within his Cave,
By too much valor of Ulysses led.
Bethink you well how you your selves may save.
When I heard that, I drew my Sword, and meant,
Although he were my Kinsman very nigh,
To Have made his head fly. But of that intent
I was made frustrate by the Company
That interposing spoke me fair, and said,
Let him stay here, but we'll go every man,
While he looks to the ship, since he is afraid.
Thus having said, to march they straight began;
Nor staid Eurylochus behind, for I
Had so a^^righted him he went with the rest.
Mean while at Circe's house my company
Were bathed and oiled, and clothed with Coat and Vest.
Feasting we found them in a stately Hall.
But when we saw them, and heard every thing
That had besaln them, suddenly we all
Wept out so loud, as made the house to ring.
Then Circe said, Ulysses why do you weep?
I know your sufferings both at land by men,
And what you have endured on the Deep.
Drink wine, eat meat, and merry be again.
Recruit your hearts with courage, till they be
As strong as when from home you first set-out;
Put all your danger out of memory,
Nor trouble more your weari'd minds with doubt,
These words of Circe did our spirits cheer,
And made us willingly fall to our meat.
Both then and every day throughout the year
In Circe's house we freely drink and eat.
But when the season was come round about,
And months and days of th'year had made an end,
Then my imparient Fellows called me out,
And said, Strange man, do you no more intend
To see your Country Ithaca? Shall we
For ever stay with Circe here? Have Fates
Decreed that you your house no more should see,
But perish here together with your Mates?
This my Companions said, and said but right.
Then what remained of the day we spent
Eating and drinking merrily. At night
They to their own beds, I to Circe's went;
Where prostiate at her knees, I press her hard
To keep her word, and let me go my way;
My mind, said I, is going thitherward
Now, and my Fellowsask me why I stay.
Renowned Ulysses (answered Circe) here
Against your will with me you shall not stay.
But ^re you go unto your Country dear,
You must a Voyage make another way.
You must to th house of Hades first repair:
For with Tiresias the Prophet blind
You must consult concerning your affair.
He knows what course the Fates have you designed.
Though blind his eye, yet is his judgment clear.
For why, to him Proserpina alone
Has granted to peruse Fates Register,
And know the History of things not done.
The Ghosts to him stand up when he goes by.
At this my heart was ready even to break,
And in the bed long time I weeping lie,
And turned, and wished for death. At last I speak:
Circe (said I) who shall me thither guide?
Never man yet to Hell went in a ship.
Then to me Circe presently replied;
Ulysses, let not that thought break your sleep.
You need but set your Mast up, hoise your sail,
And then sit still; you shall not want a Wind:
For Boreas to wast you will not fail.
When you are come to The Oceans end, you will find
The woody shore and Grove of Proserpine.
There the tall Poplar, and soft Willow grows;
And there it is your Bark you must put in.
Then go along the shore to Pluto's house.
And you shall see where into Ach^ron
Coc^tas falls, which is a branch of Styx,
And with it also Pyriphlegeton,
And a great Rock where the two Rivers mix.
Close by that place make with your Sword a Pit
A Cubit wide, and round about it pour
Wine mixed with honey, and pure Wine after it;
Then water pure, and over all throw Flower.
Such is the drink that is offered to the dead.
And further to them you must make a Vow,
That when you be at home, and out of dread,
You Will gratify them with a barren Cow.
But to Tiresias you must alone
Promise at your return to kill a Ewe
All over black. The Ceremonies done
Which to the dead by common law are due,
Then of the Ram and Ewe let out the blood
Into the pit; their heads to Hell-ward place,
And turn your back, and so go towered the Flood.
Then shall you see the Ghosts come out apace.
Bid your Companions mean while to flay
The slaughtered Sheep. To Pluto must you, and
To his Queen Proserpine your prayers say,
Then sit down at the pit with Sword in hand.
Let none come near the blood until you see
T^resias the Theban Prophet come.
'Twill not be long before he with you be;
He Will tell you all the ways to bring you home.
This said, Aurora had the light displayed,
And Circe clothed me with a Coat and Vest,
And with a pure white robe her self arraid,
With a Gold Girdle girt beneath her breast;
And put upon her head her Vail. Then I
Went through the house to make my fellows rise,
And gently said unto them severally,
Let Us go; for Circe now does so advise.
And well content they were. But safe away
I could not bring them all. For there was one
Elpenor, neither forward in a Fray,
Nor yet of very much discretion;
Heated with Wine o'r night, himself to cool,
Up to the houses top he went to sleep;
But waked with noise the rest made, like a Fool
Never thought of coming down the stairs steep
Backward; and so to the earth he headlong sell,
And broke his Neck-bone, and lay dead o'th'ground.
And his Soul leaving him, went down to Hell.
The rest came forth, and stood about me round.
To these I said, You think without delay
That we to Ithaca are going now;
But Circe bids us go another way,
Of old Tiresias the mind to know,
The Theban Prophet, who is now in Hell.
This broke the very heart strings of my Mates;
They sob and tear their hair, but cannot tell
How to avoid what is once decreed by th'Fates.
Then to our ship we weeping went. Mean space
Circe a Ram and black Ewe there had ti'd
Unseen to us, we found them on the place.
For Gods, but when they list, cannot be spied.
LIB. XI.
WHen we were come unto the Seaside, where
Our Ship lay which we should into the deep;
We rear our Mast, pull up our Sails, and bear
Aboard with us one Male, one Female sheep.
And so for Hell we stood, with fears in mind,
And tears in eye. But the fair Circe sent
To bear us company, a good fore-winde
That kept our Sails full all the way we went.
To Winds and Steerage we our way commend,
And careless sit from morning till 'twas dark;
Then found our selves at The Oceans farthest end,
Where up to Land the wind had forced our Bark.
Here dwell the Cimbers hid in Clouds and Mist,
Whom thou, O Phoebus, with thy golden Eye,
No^ coming from the Sky to Earth e're see,
Nor when from Earth thou mountest to the Sky;
But live, poor men, under a horrid night.
Here seek we for the place of which the wise
Circe had told us, and soon on it light,
And thither fetched the sheep for sacrifice.
Then with my Sword i'th'ground I dig'd a Pit,
And round about it Wine with Honey pour;
And round again pure Wine pour after it,
Then water pure. Over all I sprinkle flour:
And vowed to those feeble folk, to kill
As soon as I to Ithaca should come
A barren Heiser, and the Altar fill
With many more good things I had at home,
And promised to Tiresias alone
A fat black Ewe, the best in all my Coats.
When I my Vows and Prayers had ritely done,
Of both the Victims straight I cut the throats.
Their reaking blood streamed down into the Pit;
Out come the Ghosts, Maids, Youths, decrepit Age,
And tender Virgins, they all sented it;
And Warriors clad in goary Arms, all rage,
And rushing out of Hell, with hideous cry,
About the blood bustling they go and turn,
Which not a little frighted me. Then I
Bad flay the Victims, and their bodies burn,
And say their Prayers to Pluto and his Queen.
With Sword in hand I sat on the Pits brink,
Resolved till I Tiresias had seen,
That not a Ghost a drop of blood should drink.
First came my Soldier Elpenor's Spirit,
Which left the body just when we set sail,
So that we had no leisure to inter it.
His heavy fate I did with tears bewail.
How now (quoth I) Elpenor? art thou here
Already? Could thou me so much outstrip?
I first came forth, and left thee in the Rear.
Have thou on foot out gone my good black ship?
Then said Elpenar, Issue of Jove, Divine
Ulysses, I had come along with th'Bark,
But that the Devil and excess of Wine
Made me to fall, and break my neck in the dark.
I went to bed late by a Ladder steep;
At top o'th'house the Room was where I lay:
Wak't at the noise of parting, half asleep
Headlong I hither came, the nearest way.
Now I adjure you by your Father, and
Your Wife, and Son, and all his Seed to come
(For I assured am that you will land
Where Circe dwells before your going home)
To see I have the Rites due to the dead.
Fear th'anger of the Gods above, and burn
My body with my arms, from foot to head,
And cast on earth to cover over my Urn.
This done, for men hereafeer sailing by,
Raise me a little Tomb of Earth by th'shore,
That they may easily see where it is I lie.
Lastly, upon it upright plant my Oar.
All this (quoth I) I Will do upon my word.
Thus we discoursed amongst the shades. He stood
While I continued with my naked Sword
To keep the Sprights from tasting of the blood,
Then came Auticlia my Mothers Ghost.
Alive I left her when to Troy I sailed
To fight against it in the Argive Host.
Now seeing her, exceedingly I wail'd.
And though I grieved were to keep away
My Mother from the loved blood; yet still
In the same posture patiently I stay,
Till I might know Tiresias his will.
Then came the Soul of old Tiresias,
And of the Gilded-Staff he had in's hand.
Poor man (quoth he) perceiving what I was,
What brought thee hither to this ugly Land?
Stand back a while, and take your Sword away,
That I may drink, and the Unerring word
Of Fate deliver to you. I obey,
Retire, and up I put my trusty Sword.
Then said the good old Prophet, You are come,
Honored Ulysses, to inquire of me,
What the Gods say about your going home.
I tell you true, 'twill not be easily.
I think you will not escape at Sea unseen
Of angry Neptune, who I do not doubt
Will do his worst, and make you feel his spleen,
For Polyphemus eye which you put out.
Yet for all that, you may to Ithaca
Safely return, if you can but command
Your passion when in the Isle Torinacia,
An Island lying in your way you land.
There feed the Kine of the all-seeing Sun,
And Flocks of goodly Sheep. Hurt none of these,
Then shall your Ship her course with safety run (...)
At length to Ithaca, though not with ease.
But if you touch them, I denounce a wrack
To your good Ship, and death to all your Crew.
And though your self may happen to come back
At last, and this unhappy Fate eschew;
'Twill be alone, and in a ship not yours;
Besides that, when you are returned home
You Will fall into the danger of the Wooers,
Who for your Wives and Meats-sake thither come.
But you will be revenged of these; and when
You shall have made away these Wooers, go
With Oar on shoulder, to a Land where men
Inhabit, that the brit y Sea not know,
Nor ever mingle salt with what they eat,
Nor ever saw the ship with crimson face,
Nor yet those Wings which do the water beat
(Called Oars) to make your good ship go apace.
Now mark me well, when thou shall meet a man
Just at the end of Neptunes utmost bound,
Bearing upon his shoulder a Corn san,
Stick down thy lusty Oar upon the ground;
There Sacrifice to the Worlds Admiral,
For new admittance, a Ram, Boar, and Bull;
Then home again, and offer unto all
The Gods by name an hundred Oxen sull.
Your death will not ungentle be, for which
Age shall prepare you, and your Soul unglew
Insensibly. Your people shall be rich
Which round about you dwell. All this is true.
Tiresias (quoth I) when he had done,
It Is well. My Mother yonder I epsy
Amongst the shades; she knows not her Son;
What shall I do to make her know it is I?
That (quoth he) I can tell you easily
What Soul soever you admit to drink,
To what you ask will make a true reply;
Those you put back, back into Hell will slink.
The Prophet having thus my fate foretold,
Into the house of Pluto back retired.
I over the blood my former posture hold,
But let my Mother drink as she desired.
She knew me then, and wept. My Son, said she,
How came you to this place of ours so dark?
The Ocean and so many Gulphs there be
'Twixt you and us, that but with a good Bark
No living man can pass Come you but now
From T^oy, and all this while have wandering been
You and your Company? You have I trow,
Your wife Penelope by this time seen.
Mother (said I) the cause I came this way
Was to ask counsel of Tiresias.
Since I with Agamemnon went to Troy,
In Ithaca or Greece I never was.
But Mother, tell me pray you, how came you
Unto this place? was it by sickness long?
Or did Diana with a death undue
Send you down hither to this feeble throng?
And tell me if my Father and my Son
Remain as formerly in their estate;
Or that some Prince of Greece my wife have won,
Supposing me now cast away by Fate.
Tell me besides, whether Penelope
Remain at home together with my Son,
Assisting him to Rule my Family;
Or whether she be married, and gone.
Your wife (said she) does still continue there;
For your long absence weepeth days and nights.
Your Son still holds his own, and makes good cheer;
Often he invited is, and often invites.
Your Father from his Vineyard never budges;
Rich Coverlets and Bedding he refuses;
Never comes to th'Town; in Winter with his Drudges
To lay him down and sleep by th'fire he uses.
In vile array in Summertime he creeps,
Till Vintage pass, about his Fruit Trees round,
And visits them each one; at night he sleeps
On Bed of heaped leaves upon the ground
Thus lies he grieved and pining with the thought
Of your sad fate, afflicted too with age.
The like sad thoughts me also hither brought.
I neither died by Diana's rage,
Nor any long consuming Malady;
But very woe, thinking that you were dead,
My Noble dear ulysses, made me die;
My Soul thus hither from my body fled.
When she had spoken, I would very fain
Have taken her in mine arms; three times I grasp'^
At the beloved Shadow, but in vain.
Mine arms I closed, but did nothing clasp.
Sore grieved hereat, I said unto my Mother,
I am your Son, why do you fly me so?
Why may we not embracing one another,
Although in Hell, give ease unto our woe?
Has Proserpine, my sorrows to augment,
Sent me a Phantome in my Mothers stead?
Oh no (quoth she) my Son, sh'ad no intent
To Abuse you. It Is the nature of the Dead.
We are no longer Sinews, Flesh and Bones;
We are Substances Incorporeal.
All that is consumed in the Funeral fire: when once
That Is done, it in it self stands several;
Flies like a Dream. No, go your ways to th'light,
And tell all I have told you to your Wise,
That she may know in this perpetual night
The dead enjoy an everlasting life.
When we had thus discours't, the Ladies came
Sent out by Proserpine to taste the blood,
^aughters and Wives to Princes of great Fame,
And round about me at the Pit they stood.
But I to know each one that came to drink,
Studi'd a while; then thought this counsel best,
With Sword in hand to abide upon the brink,
Whilst one was drinking to keep off the rest.
There was not one but I inquired her name
And Pedigree. All told me who they were.
And first of all the well-born Tyro came,
Who said Salmoneus was her Ancestor,
And that of Cretheus she had been the wi^e,
And on Enipeus had enamored been
Once on a time whilst she remained in life,
On Enipeus fairest stream that e're was seen.
Upon whose Bank Neptune that chanced to spy her,
On Enipeus sweet stream drew her aside,
And at the Rivers mouth laid him down by her
Between two Waves raised high, their deed to hide.
When he Loves work had done, Thou shall (said he)
E're th'year be ended, bring forth-Children twain,
Who Princes both of great Renown shall be.
I Neptune am; the Gods never work in vain.
See you that they be educated well
Till they shall be at man's estate arrived.
So go you home: my name you must not tell.
This said, into the rolling Sea he dived.
Her time being come, she was delivered
Of two great Boys, Neleus and Pelias,
Who for the service of high Jove were bred.
One King of Pyle, the other of Iolcas was.
The Noble Lady Tyro, besides these,
Did many other goodly Children bear:
Amatheon, and Aeson, and Pheres;
But these her Husband Cretheus Children were.
Next came the Daughter of Aesopus (who
Through Theban fertile Plains and Meadows runs)
Antiope. Of Jove she boasts too,
That by him she conceived had two Sons;
Their names were Zethus and Amphion. They
The Founders were of The^^s; with Walls and Towers,
And sev'n strong Gates they senc't it every way
Against Invasion from all Neighboring Powers.
Amphitrions wi^e Alcmena there I saw,
That loved by Jove brought Hercules to life,
And the King Cretheus Daughter Megara,
That was the Mighty Hercules his wife.
I saw there also the unfortunate
Mother of Oed^pus, Jocasta bright,
That blindly did a horrid act, by fate,
Which the Gods pleasure was should come to light.
Not knowing him, she married her own Son;
Not knowing him, he his own Father slew:
When they perceived both what they had done,
She hanged her self; her Furies him pursue.
Chloris I saw, whom Neleus did wed
For beauty, got by the Son of Jaseus;
And with great Dowre he gained her to his bed;
Her Father Amphion ruled Orchome^us.
She Queen of Pyle, by Neleus had three Boys:
Nestor, Chronius, Periclu^i^us;
And one fair Daughter to make full their joys,
Pero by name, for beauty wondrous.
The Princes round-about were Suitors to her;
But Iphiclus had Neleus Cattle taken,
And Neleus was resolved to bestow her
On him that could his Herds fetch back again.
There was a Prophet undertook the Talk;
But taken by Clowns, and into Prison pent,
For answ'ring Iphiclus t'all he could ask
Was freed, and did the thing he underwent.
I saw the Wife too of Tyndareus there,
Fair L^da; she two Twins unto him bare,
Pollux good Cuffer, Castor Cavalier:
Twins, and alive, though underground they are*
And have obtained of their Father Jove
Both to be Canonized Gods; but so,
As he that is to day in Heaven above,
Shall be to morrow amongst men below.
Iphimedea, Alciaeus Wife
I saw, that did two Sons to Neptune bear,
Otus, and Ephialtes; of short life,
The greatest, and the fairest that ever were
Except Orion; each at nine years old
Between the shoulders was nine Cubits wide,
And was in length nine Cubits four times told,
And all the Gods in Heaven terrified;
And threatened them with War, and Heaven to storm.
They Ossa set upon Olympus high,
And Pelius on Ossa; and so form
Against the Sky a mighty Battery:
And surely they had stormed it had they been
At man's estate. Their Beards were not yet grown*
Apollo killed them with his Arrows keen,
E're on their Cheeks appeared any down.
Phaedra and Procris there I also saw,
And Minos Daughter ^riadne, whom
Theseus was bringing toward Attica
From Creta; but he could not bring her home,
Diana killed her in Dia Isle
On Bacchus quarrel. There I did behold
Mera and Clymene, and th'Woman vile
Eryphile that her own Husband sold.
To name the Ladies all I saw, would make
My Tale to last all night. It Is bedtime now
Here or aboard, though not till you think fit;
Till you think fit, and give command to row.
This said, the Company deep silence seized,
Delighted with the things they heard him speak,
The Queen her self Arete no less pleased,
At last resolved the silence thus to break.
Princes, what think you of this man so rare,
His look, his stature, and his Noble heart?
My Guest he is, but you have all a share
In the honor of this Visit. E're he part
Make him a Present to relieve his need.
Be liberal, have no respect to thrist;
For you the Gods from fear of want have freed
With wealth abundant. Do not pinch your Gift.
Old Echineus said, The Queen says right;
We shall do well her counsel to obey:
But since in King Alcinous lies the migh,
It Is better first to hear what he will say.
Then said Alcinous, It shall be so,
Unless I bear the name of King in vain;
Let not the Stranger till to morrow go;
Till we prepare our Gift he must remain.
As for his Passage we will all provide,
And chiefly I that do the Scepter bear.
To whom the wise Ulysses thus replied:
Renowned Alcinous that Reignest here,
Though a whole year you should command my stay,
It will not trouble me. Nay, that I Would choose,
Since you intend to send me rich away:
For I am sure I shall no honor lo e
By coming richly home. Kings that have store
Of wealth, are better commonly obeyed,
And by their Subjects are respected more,
Than those whose Treasuries and Chests are void.
There be (the King said) many* that can lie;
But there is form and sense in all you say:
Both your own Fate you tell with Harmony,
And of the Greeks with whom you went to Troy.
I should be well content to sit up here
All the night long, so you would undertake
To tell me every thing that you saw there.
To him Ulysses then did answer make:
Renowned King Alcinous, you know
There is a time for talk, a time for rest;
But since you long to hear, I Will tell you now
Whom else I saw, and what Fate them oppres^.
And first the saddest end of those that had
Escaped the fury of the Enemy,
And in their Countries landed were and glad,
Were murdered by a woman's Treachery.
The Female Ghosts scattered by Proserpine,
Some one way, some another, thither came
Atrides Soul, first of the Masculine;
And others with him, whose Fat^s were the same.
No sooner he the blood had tasted, but
He knew me, sorely wept, and would have cast
His arms about my waste, but could not do it:
For now alas his strength was gone and past.
I grieved to see him, and thus to him said:
King Agamemnon, what Fate brought you hither?
Were you by Neptune on the Sea b^tra^'d,
And hither sent by sury of the weather?
Or landing to find Booty, met with Death?
Or else besieging of some Town were slain?
Or for ^a^r women were bereaved of breath?
Then Agamemnon answered me again:
Noble Ulysses, I lost not my life
By Neptunes sury, nor in fight at Land
For Boo^y or for women; but my wife.
Did basely kill me by Aegistus hand.
A^ my first landing he invited me,
And slew me ^hen when I at Supper sat.
Just as a man would kill a Cow, so he
Killed me. There Is no such woeful death as that.
My Friends were butchered like so many Swine,
Which when within a mighty rich man's Hall
Numbers of men invited are to dine
At Wedding, or at Feast, are made to fall.
You very many men have seen to die
In ranged Battle, and in single fight;
But never felt such pity certainly
As you had felt, had you but seen this sight,
How we amongst Tables on the ground did lie
That ran with blood. But my heart most did ru^
To hear Cassandra, Priams Daughter cry,
Whom close beside me Clytemnestra sl^w.
Then though I were at the last gasp, I trid
If groaping I might find my fallen Sword:
But the cursed woman pusht it from my side.
I di'd, to close mine eyes she would not afford.
Nothing so cruel as a woman yet
Did nature e're produce; a thought so ill
In any other breast did never fit,
As her own loving Husbands blood to spill.
Yet this my Wife, to the Eternal shame
Of all the Sex, not only of the bad,
But even of those that have no evil Fame,
Be^rai'd my life, and of my death was glad.
Jove meant to Atreus Seed (said I) great sp^ght
By Woman-kinde. By H^llen first. At Troy
For her sake many lost their lives in sight,
And Clytemnestra now did you be^ray.
Therefore (said Agam^m^on) never trust
A woman more, although she be your own.
Tell her not all you think. Somewhat you must*
And somewhat keep t'your self, to her unknown*
But you Ulysses need not fear your wife,
Icareus Daughter, fair Penelope;
She loves you better than to take your life:
A wife so wise will scorn disloyalty.
When we for Troy set forth together, then
She gave suck to your Son; but he is grown
A man by this time, and takes place with men;
Is rich, and one day shall his Father own,
And he and you at home embrace each other.
But I was not allowed my Son to see;
But was first murdered by his wicked Mother.
Now hear ye, If you will be ruled by me,
Let no man know beforehand, when and where*
You mean to land in Ithaca. Beware
Of suffering your Bark in sight t'appear.
Remember still, Women unfaithful are.
But tell me, have you nothing all this while
Heard of my Son Orestes? whether he
At Sparta with his Uncle be, or Pyle:
For dead he is not, I know certainly.
Alas (said I) Atrides, How should I
That wandering was at Sea, hear any news
Whether alive or dead he be? Or why
Should I with Tales uncertain you abuse?
Discoursing thus, and weeping, there we stood,
When Great Achilles Soul appeared to us;
And with him also the two Spirits good
Of stout Patroclus, and Antilochus.
The Soul of Ajax, Son of Telamon,
Was also there, who 'm^ngst those Warriors tall*
The goodliest Person was, except the Son
Of Peleus, who did much excel them all.
Achilles drank, and presently me knew,
And said, Ulysses, what brought you to Hell?
What Plot upon the Dead you hither drew,
Where none but shades of wretched mortals dwell?
Achilles (said I) I was forced to come
T'inquire of the VVizard, old Tiresias,
What the Fates say about my going home,
Whether or no, and how 'twill come to pass.
For since I came from Troy I have not seen
Nor Itha^a, nor any Grecian shore:
For tossed and crossed at Sea I still have been;
But you are now as well as heretofore.
Like any God we honored you at Troy,
And here among the Ghosts you are obeyed.
Death has not changed your state. You still enjoy
A Regal Power. To this Achilles said:
Talk not to me of Honor here in Hell;
I Would rather serve a Clown on earth for bread,
Than be of all things Incorporeal
That are, or ever shall be, Supreme Head.
But tell me of my Son Neoptolemus,
Whether he came to Troy, and how he sought;
And of my aged Father P^leus,
Whether he keep his place, or be put out.
For since much time his vigor has decai'd,
Some Foe, it may be, has usurped his place
I^ Pthia, and in Hellas where he swai'd,
And put him with his people in disgrace.
But were I now above, and strong as then
When for the Greeks I ^ought at Ilium,
And slew so many of their bravest men,
And to my aged Fathers house should come;
If there I were, 'twould not be very long
Before I made some of their hearts to ache
That go about to do my Father wrong,
And would by force his Honor from him take.
When he had done, I made him answer thus:
Concerning Peleus* I can nothing say;
But of your Son, stout Neoptolemus,
I know enough; 'twas I brought him to Troy
From Scyros Isle. In Council always he
First spoke his mind, and never spoke but well.
Nestor, and I sometimes, and only we
The Advice he gave were able to refel.
In fight he sought no shelter in the throng,
But ever out he ran before the rest,
To show his courage and his strength among
Those Foes that were in Troy esteemed the best.
The names of all he slew I cannot tell;
They are too many. But 'twas by his Sword
That Great Eurypylus in Battle fell,
Of all the Trojan Aids the goodli'st Lord,
Excepting Memnon. After, when we were
Within the Wooden-Horse concealed, and I
The power had of ord'ring all things there,
I never saw your Son to wipe his eye,
Or to wax pale, as many of us did.
He ever longed to be set on land
From out the hole in which we all lay hid;
And to his Hilt he often put his hand,
And often to his Spear. And when at last
We won and rifled had the Town of Troy,
He home into his Country safely past,
His ship well laden with his part of the prey.
And which is more, he came off safe and sound,
Though Mars each way threw deaths and wounds about
Amongst the crowd, he never received wound
Neither from them that shot, nor them that fought.
This said, the swift Achilles Soul retired,
Strutting into the Mead of Asphod^l,
Proud of his Son, to hear what he desired.
Then other grieved Souls their stories tell.
Only the Soul of Ajax stood off mute
And sullen, because I did from him bear
Achill^s Armor in that sad Dispute,
Where Pallas and the Trojans Judges were.
I would I had not had that Victory,
Which cost the life of him that was the most
Admired by all, for form and Chivalry,
Except Achilles, in the Argive Host.
I gently to him spoke. Ajax, said I,
Forget that cursed Armor now at last;
And since you dead are, let your anger die:
For why, the Gods determined had to cast
Those Arms amongst us for a punishment,
Offended with us, what e're was the matter,
And used them as an Engine, with intent
Our greatest Tower, which was your self, to batter.
For whom the Argives did lament no less
Than for Achilles, Thetis Son. Come nigh,
And hear what I can answer, and suppress
Your mighty heart a while. So ended I.
To this just nothing he replied, but went
Int' Erebus amongst other Shadows dim;
Yet there, I think, he would have been content
To speak to me, if I to speak to him.
But I desired other Souls to see.
Then Minos there, the Son of Jove I saw
With Golden Scepter, dealing Equity
To Souls that stood, and sat to hear the Law.
Next after him I saw the Great Orion;
A mighty Club he carried in his hand;
And hunted the wild Boar, and Bear, and Lion,
Which when he lived he had killed on Land.
There also saw I ^itius. He lay
Upon his back, strerch'^ out full acres nine.
He the fair Leto had upon the way
To Pytho injured; Leto Jov^s Concubine.
Two Vultures on his breast, on each side one
Sat dipping of their Beaks into his Liver.
He stirs not, but lets them still alone;
And thus devouring it, they stay for ever.
And Tantalus I saw up to the Chin
In water cleas, and longing sore to drink;
But as he bowed himself to take it in,
Some Devil always made the water sink.
Close over his head hung pleasant Fruit, and ripe
Pears and Pomegranats, Olives, Apples, Figs;
Which ever when he ready was to gripe,
A sudden wind still whiskt away the Twigs.
And Sisyphus I saw, who against the Hill
With hands and feet a heavy stone does roll;
But when unto the top he brings it, still
The naughty stone salls back into the hole.
Then to it he goes afresh, with no less pain
He heaves and sweats, and dusty is all over;
And when it is up, he labored has in vain,
For still it serves him as it did before.
Then Hercules I saw, I mean his Spright,
For he is with th Immortal Gods above,
And taken has to wife Hebe the bright,
Daughter of Juno, and of Mighty Jove.
The dead about him made a fearful cry,
Like frighted Fowl. A Golden Belt he wore
With wild Beasts wrought, and slaughters cunningly,
The like shall never be, nor was before.
He saw, and knew me presently, and spoke;
Renowned Ulysses, why left you the light?
Alas, were you constrained to undertake
This task, as I was, by a meaner Wight?
Who, though Joves Son I was, did me constrain
Full many other labors t'undergo.
But he thought this would put me to most pain,
The Infernal Dog upon the Earth to show.
I did it though, and dragged him up to th'light,
By Mercury's, and by Athenas aid.
Having thus said, he vanished out of sight
Amongst other Phantoms. But I still there staid,
Hoping more Hero's of the old time to see;
And more had surely seen of Heavenly Race,
Theseus, Pirythous, whom t'had pleased me,
If longer I had dared to keep my place.
For then, from out of Hell, with hideous cry,
Thousands of Souls about me gathered,
And frighted me; but most afraid was I,
Lest Proserpine should send out Gorgons Head.
Then went I to my Ship and Company,
And for a while our Oars at Sea we pli'd:
But after we were on the Main, then we
A fair Gale had, and past the Ocean wide.
LIB. XII.
THence over The Ocean back we come away,
And at the Isle Aeea we arrive.
There are the Bowers of Aurora gay;
There it is that Phoebus does the day revive:
And there we disimbark upon the Sand,
And having slept a while, attend the day.
When day was come, my Fellows I command
To fetch Elpenors body dead away.
With wood from off a Promontory near,
Weeping, his body we to ashes burn
Together with his Arms, and the earth we rear
(To be a Monument) upon his Urn;
And on the same we fix his Oar upright.
These Ceremonies done, came the Divine
Circe, that knew we landed were that night.
Her Maids brought to us bread, and meat, and wint.
And standing in the midst, Poor men (said she)
That come from Hell, and thither must again;
Twice-mortals, take your food, and merry be
With flesh and lusty wine, forget your pain.
To morrow you shall sail again, and I
Will to you all your dangers open lay,
Lest you by some malicious subtilty,
By Land or Sea, should perish by the way.
This pleased us well, and all day long we sat
Eating and drinking Wine, until 'twas dark,
And somewhat e're we saw it evening late,
My Mates lay down to sleep beside the Bark.
Then Circe led me by the hand aside,
And asked me all that I had seen in Hell;
Nor any thing at all from her I hide.
It Is well, said she. Now hear what I you tell.
First you must pass the Sirens, who invite
All Passengers that Sail before the place
To land. But whosoever lands, that night
Of's Wise and Children never more sees the face.
These Sirens in a Meadow sit and sing,
Where dead men's bones in heaps about them lie
Rotting, and rivel'd skins lie scattering.
Pass on, and their enchanting Music fly.
Command your Mates to tie you to the Mast;
And that if you make signs to be set free,
They heed you not, but bind you still more fast,
That you alone may hear their melody.
Dam up your Fellows ears with chased wax.
When you are gotten out of hearing quite,
And have the Sirens far off at your backs,
Another danger soon will come in sight.
Two ways ^here are; but which of them to take
I Will not advise you, both of them are naught.
Your self upon the place your judgment make,
Of which I Will give you only a short draught.
Two Rocks there be that with inclining brow
Hang over the Sea, which roaring runs between;
By th'name of Wanderers the Gods them know,
Because in changed posture they are seen.
Whereof the one does to such height ascend,
That never any Birds that way take wing,
Nor fearful Doves when they to Heaven tend,
Ambro^ia to The Immortal Gods to bring.
One of these Rocks does vanish now and then,
But Jove still sets another in its stead.
This way never ship did safely carry men,
But dashed was against the Rocks, and perished.
The good ship Argo only passed that way
To and from Co^chos safely; yet that too
Had perished, but that Juno did convey
The same (for love she bare to Jason) through.
The other Rock unmoved, with pointed head,
Pierces the Clouds, and reaches to the Sky
In Winter, and in Summer's covered,
And wrapped up in Mists perpetually.
Nor could a mortal man climb up unto't,
Although he were indu'd with twenty hands,
And with as many nimble feet to boot,
So smooth it is, and so upright it stands.
In The midst of the Rock you will see a Cavern dark
That looks Westward. That way you must row.
The mouth of the Cave is more above your Ba^k
Than the youngest man can shoot to with a Bow.
There it is that Scylla dwells and barks: her voice
Like to a Lions whelps voice is; but she
A mighty Monster is; 'twould not rejoice
A God, much less a man her shape to see.
Twelve feet she has in all, and ugly ones.
Six huge long necks; and to each neck a head.
And in each head for teeth sh'has rows of bones,
And every row of them envenomed.
Half of her body in the Cave she hides;
But all her Heads she puts out, and watches
For Dog-fish, Dolphins, and what Fish besides
The Sea affords, and Whales she sometimes catches.
Never did bold Sailer boast that passed that way,
That he had escaped safely by her Den;
Or that a mouth of hers did want its prey,
But from him snatched away some of his men.
The Rock that is opposite is not so high,
But there the passage is exceeding narrow.
For you, ^lysses, if you please to try,
From side to side can easily shoot an Arrow.
Out of this Rock grows a great Sycamore,
Under the which Charybdis hidden lies,
And suddenly the water does devour,
And suddenly again she makes it rise.
Thrice in a day the water rises high,
And thrice a day again the same does fall.
But when it falls, take heed you be not nigh;
Keep Scylla-side; better lose six than all.
When she had made an end: Goddess, said I,
Tell me I pray you when I have got free
From the evil which Charybdis means me, why
On Scylla I may not avenged be.
Fie, fie, quoth she, are you at ^ighting still?
Dare you against the Gods oppose your might?
For Scylla is an everlasting ill.
Row on apace, and save your selves by flight.
Against such a Monster remedy there is none,
But row as fast as e're you can away.
For if you stay to put your Armor on,
She Will stoop again, and take another prey.
Row swiftly on, and to Cratais cry,
That in her Belly the ^oul Monster bore,
And she will keep her in as you go by,
That she shall not assault you any more.
Next at Thrinacia-Isle you shall arrive,
Where feed the Suns broad-horned Kine and sheep.
Sev'n Herds there be, in each one ten times five,
As many Flocks, which Sols two Daughters keep,
Phaetusa and Lampetio Divine;
Their Mother was Neaera that did bear
And bring them up, and to them did assign
The keeping of their Fathers Cattle there.
These if you suffer quietly to feed,
You shall get home again, though with some pain;
But if you hurt them, know it is decreed
Your ship and men shall perish in the Main.
And though your self you save, your ship you will loose,
And Mates, and in your passage find delay.
This said, the Rosie-finger'd morning rose,
And Circe up the Island went her way.
But I went to my ship, and called my Crew
To come aboard. Aboard they quickly come,
And sitting each man in his order due,
With stroke of Oars they make the gray Sea foam.
The Goddess Circe also was so kind,
As when we were gone off, and sails had spread,
To fill them with a favorable wind.
So sat we while the Steers-man governed.
Then to my Mates with heavy heart I spoke:
Not one or two of you alone must hear
What Circ^ said, but all, that you may take
Your own advice, since it is a common fear.
You must not hear the Sirens melody,
But row with all your might till we be past.
To me alone she gives that liberty,
But so as first you bind me to the Mast.
Bind me you must upright both hand and foot,
And so as I may not the knot unknit:
And if I wink upon you to undo't,
Then take more Cord and bind me faster yet.
Whilst I my Fellows thus informing stood,
The Island of the Si^ns came in sight:
For nimble was our ship, and the wind good;
But suddenly we were becalmed quite.
Some D^mon sure had laid the Waves asleep.
Then took we in our Sails, and laid them by,
And with our Oars in hand provokt the Deep,
And in a milky path we forward ply.
Then from a Ball of Wax I pinch a bit,
Chase it, and into the ears of one it put;
And so to all in order as they sit.
Which soon was done* ^he weather being hot.
Then straight they rise and b^nde me to the Mast
At th'arms and feet: the knot behind they tie;
And then upon their seats themselves they placed,
And rowed till to the Island we were nigh.
When to the Island we were come so nigh,
As that a man that hollows may be heard,
The Sirens knowing when we should come by,
Had tuned themselves, and had their Song prepared.
Come, come, much praised Ulysses, come away,
The brigh^est glory of the Greeks come near:
No mortal man did ever come this way,
That did not to our Music lend an ear.
Delight they sound, and wisdom carrid hence.
Stay, stay your good black ship, ^orbear a while
To beat the Sea; please and inform your sense.
Come, disimbark your selves upon our Isle.
We know what feats of Arms were done at Troy
Between the Greeks and Trojans all along.
We know what is done on the whole earth every day.
Come, come a-land, and listen to our Song,
And this they sung with so much harmony
And sweetness in their voices, that I fain
Would have recovered my liberty,
And to them winkt, to be set loese again.
But 'twould not be. My Mates regard my words,
And not my winks, and sit still at the Oar.
Euryloch^s and Perimede bring Cords,
And bind me harder than they did before.
When we had left the Si^ens at our backs
So far as not to hear them any more,
My fellows from their ears pull out the Wax,
And me unto my liberty restore.
We had not sailed far, when there appeared
An angry Sea before us all in smoke;
And thumping of the mighty Waves, we heard
Upon the stubborn Rocks at every stroke.
Besides, the Sea so mighty loud did roar,
As with one dismal Hum it filled the Ear,
And made my Mates each one let fall his Oar,
So much their senses were benumbed with fear.
Still stood the Bark. Then I among them go
With gentle words, new courage to convey
Into their failing hearts, to make them row;
And passing by, to every one I say:
My Friends, we all have dangers past,
And greater much than what we now do fear.
Remember how from Polyphemus vast
By my good conduct we delivered were.
I do not doubt but you remember it.
My counsel therefore also now obey.
Row close along the shore, the Gods may yet
Deliver us, but by no other way.
But you that have the guiding of the ship,
Steers-man, to you I speak, mark what I say,
Steer her without the smoke; for if she slip
Aside, though little, we are cast away.
This said, my Fellows speedily obeyed.
Of th'Monster Scylla not a word I told;
Lest they should throw away their Oars, dismal'd,
And for their shelter run into the Hold.
But Circe's counsel I had quite forgot.
I armed my self, and took into my hand
Two Spears, though she expressly had said not;
And looking upwards at the head I stand.
But she appeared not. I looked so high
And long upon the hideous Rock, my sight
Began to fail, and now we were close by
That dismal straight, which does us all affright.
Here Scylla stands, and the Charybdis dire
Lies vomiting the Sea, which sings and dances
Like water in a Kettle over the fire,
And vapors to the highest Rocks advances.
But when the Sea it sucketh in again,
It sounds like thunder in the hollow stone.
And we could see the bottom very plain;
Sandy it was, and black to look upon.
Whilst we our eyes upon Charybdis fix,
And stand amazed at the horrid sight,
Suddenly Scylla stoopt, and snatched up six
Of the best men I had to row or fight.
I from the ship that never stirred my eye,
Soon saw their sprauling arms and legs^ air,
And heard them lamentably to me cry,
And name me in their uttermost despair.
As fishers in a Horn mix fraud and food,
And from the Bank at the end of a long Wand,
To catch the Fry cast it into the Flood,
Then pluck them up, and throw them on the land:
So lifted were my Mates. Of my mishaps
This was the saddest I did ever see,
When she my men cham'd in her ugly Chaps,
Roaring and holding out their hands to me.
From Scylla we unto the Island row.
Where feeding were Sols sacred Sheep and Kine.
Before we landed I could hear them low;
Which brought into my mind the Prophesi^
Of old Tiresias the T^^ban Bard,
That counseled me this Island for to shun:
Of Circe also I like counsel heard,
And not to land in the Island of the Sun.
Then speaking to my Fellows, Friends, said I,
This Island sacred is to Sol; this place
Tiresias and Circe both bid fly,
And not to disimbark in any case.
For if we do, for certain they declare
The greatest mischief that e're men befell:
Therefore keep cut to Seaward, and beware
Of landing here, and then we shall be well.
But then Eurylochus to me began:
You have, Ulysses, a hard heart, quoth he;
There is no labor but you bear it can;
Your limbs of stubborn steel composed be.
But you consider not your Mates are tired
With their continual tugging at the Oar,
And that refreshment is and sleep required,
Which is not to be had but on the shore,
But you would have us wander in the night,
When in the night the greatest winds arise,
The bane of ships; and when deprived of light,
To save our selves we can no way devise.
What if great winds should blow from South or West,
Which often happens, though their King not know
Or not consent? Therefore I think it best
To night to sup ashore, to morrow row.
So said Eurylochus, and was commended
By all my Mates: and presently I knew
One Demon or another had intended
To ruin me, together with my Crew.
Then said I to Eurylochus, 'Twere vain
To strive against so many men alone.
But you shall take an Oath that you will abstain
From hurting of the Cattle of the Sun.
Of Circe's meat there is left us yet good store.
This said, they took the Oath; which having done,
They put into the Harbor, and ashore
They sup. And when their hunger now was gone,
Their Mates remembering that in the hollow Rock
By th'monster Scylla were devoured, they weep
And wail, and with their hands they knock
Their breasts, and in that posture fell asleep.
The Stars had climbed a third part of the Sky,
When with a Whirl-winde Jove together fetched
The Clouds from every part, and suddenly
On Sea and Land a dismal night was stretched.
And when the Rosy fingered morning came,
Our Ship we to a hollow Cave advance,
Wherein the Sea-Nymphs Seats and Couches have,
And where they are accustomed to dance.
Thither I called my Mates, and said again:
Friends, we have meat and drink aboard, be wise,
And from the Herds and Flocks of Sol abstain,
Who hears all we say, and all espies,
To this did my Campanions all assent.
But for a month there blew no other wind
Than South and East; so that we there were pent
I'th'Island longer than we had designed.
My Mates, whilst they had bread and meat aboard,
Forbore to meddle with the Sacred Kine:
And fetched in what the Island did afford
Of Fish and Fowl, to have wherewith to dine.
Up I into the Island went aside,
The Conduct of The Immortal Gods t'implore,
That some of them 'twould please to be my Guide,
And me unto my Country to restore.
And in a place desended from the wind
I washed my hands; and then with tears and sighs
Before the Gods I poured out my mind,
And they a sweet sleep poured on my eyes.
Mean time Eurylochus bad counsel gives
To his Companions. All deaths, quoth he,
Are ha^eful to what thing soever lives:
But death by hunger is the worst can be.
Let Us kill some of the fattest of these Cows,
And sacrifice unto the Gods on high;
And to appease the Sun, let us all make Vows
To build a Temple to his Deity
Enriched with Gifts. If not content with this,
For a few Cows displeased he seek our death,
For once to gape and die, far better it is
Than strive with hunger till we lose our breath.
This said, my Fellows all his counsel take,
And chase Sols sacred Herds, that grazed hard by;
And then for recompense their Vows they make
To build a Temple to his Deity.
But when they made their Vows, Chaplets they wear
Of tender leaves plucked from the spreading Oak.
White Barley they had none, the which men bear,
When in their danger they the Gods invoke.
After the Vow persorm'd, the Kine they flay,
And take their Thighs and cover them with sat;
And one of them upon the other lay,
To burn upon the Altar. After that,
Their Offering of Drink they poured upon
The Altar, as the Sacrifice they burn.
It ought to have been of Wine; but having none,
They poured on water fair, which served the turn.
When th'Entrails by my Fellows eaten were,
And fire consumed had the Sacrifice,
The rest they roast on Spits, and made good cheer.
Just then it was that sleep ^orsook my eyes.
And back again I walked down toward the shore.
But coming near, perceived the vapor rise
Of roasted meat. Then to the Gods I rore,
You give'me sleep, and take away my life;
So strange a thing my Mates the while have done.
Swiftly Lampetio to Heaven flies,
And carries up the news unto the Sun.
The Sun in choler all the Gods defies,
Unless they right him of this injury.
Jove Father, and you other Powers Divine,
^evenge me of Ulysses Company
That have so insolently slain my Kine.
It was my joy to see them in the Morn,
And in the Evening, ^re I went to bed.
Revenge me, O ye Gods! of this their scorn,
Or I Will go down to Hell and light the Dead.
No Phoebus (answered Jove) hold up your light
For Gods and Mortal men to see their way.
As for the men that did you this despite,
Their ship at Sea with Lightning I Will destroy.
At this discourse in Heaven was Hermes by,
And heard his Father make this sad Decree:
And he again told all this History
To th'fair Calypso, and she told it me.
When to my Fellows I was come, I rate
Them all full bitterly, and one by one;
But all in vain, for now it was too late:
The Gods by Signs detested what was done,
The skins did creep. the flesh of the Spits did low,
Both raw and roast. Six days in th'Isle we staid
Feasting on Phoebus Kine, the seventh we row;
For then the fury of the wind was laid.
When we were out at Sea we fix our Mast,
And up into the wind our Sails we draw,
And had the Isle so far behind us cast,
That nothing else but Sky and Sea we saw.
Then Jove, when far from Land he saw our ship,
Just over it a dismal black Cloud hung,
Which made it dark as night upon the Deep;
And then our good ship run not very l^^g.
For presently from West a sudden blast
Came roaring in, and vehemently strains
And breaks the Cordage that upheld the Mast;
Which falling down, beats out the S^eerers brains.
He drops into the Sea. The Mast hang^ over
At Stern. The Yards lie cross the sink.
And all the while both Heaven and Sea did rore
With Thunder loud, which made our hearts to shrink.
And by and by into the ship Jove threw
His Thunderbolt, which whirled it round about.
It smelt of Sulphur rank; and all my Crew
Into the Sea it suddenly threw out.
They like to Gulls from wave to wave were born,
But I kept still aboard, till at the last
The Rudder from a-stern the ship was torn,
And fell into the Sea, and with it the Mast.
The Mast had hanging on it broken Ropes,
Wherewith I bound them both together fast,
And sat upon them as my latest hopes,
Until the fury of the Storm was past.
The storm now laid, th'wind came about to th'South,
And carried me before it, till the Sun
Next morning rose; and then we were i'th'mouth
Of dire Charybdis, just when she begun
To swallow up the Sea. Then up leapt I,
And on the spreading Sycamore laid hold.
But to it I could not climb; the boughs so high
I could not reach: And far off was the root.
There by the hands I hung, expecting when
Charybdis should cast up the Sea, and bring
The Rudder and the Mast to the top again.
Mean while, in The Air I patiently swing.
What time the Judge arises from his seat,
Ending the brabbles of contentious men,
And all come weary home to take their meat,
Then came my Mast and Rudder up again.
And I into the Sea close by them drop.
Then having soon recovered them, again
I place my self a-stride, once more, a top;
And with my hands I rowed on the Main.
If Scylla this had seen, undoubtedly
I had been lost. But 'twas the^grace of Jove,
That all this while she did not me espy,
But kept her self retired in the Rock above.
Thus wandered I at Sea nine days outright.
Of The tenth at night the Gods brought me to land
In the Isle Ogygia, where Calypso bright
Received me with a charitable hand.
But how she treated me, I need not say;
You and the Queen already know it well,
From the Relation I made yesterday;
Nor do I love the same Tale twice to tell.
LIB. XIII.
THis said, all silent and delighted were.
Alcinous then said, Ulysses, since
You safely to me are arrived here,
You shall not lose your way in going hence.
But Princes you that daily with me sit,
Drinking good Wine, and hearing Music sweet,
And given to the Stranger have what is fit,
I Will tell you what yet farther I think meet.
Garments he has a Chest-full, and good store
Of Gold Plate, and of other Gifts he has.
Take my advice. Let each man give him more,
A Caldron, or a three-foot Pot of Brass.
I know to each man 'twill be too great largess,
But by the Peoples Contribution
We'll make amends. The Town shall bear the charges.
The motion pleased, and 'twas agreed upon.
Then went they every man to his repose,
And soon as Morning did again appear,
Aboard the Ship the Vessel they dispose.
Al^inous himself directed where.
And then into the Palace they return,
And Sacrifice to Jove a well-sed Beast,
The Thighs upon the Altar there they burn;
And with the rest they make themselves a Feast.
Demodocus before them sung and played,
Who for his Art was famous in the Town.
Ulysses to the Sun looked up, and staid
Longing and wishing that it would go down.
As one that has at Plough been all the day,
Hungry his Belly, feeble is his knee,
Beholds the setting of the Sun with joy;
So glad Ulysses was Sunset to see.
Then to Alcincus and all the rest,
Offer, said he, unto the Gods their Wine.
I have already all that I request,
And many Gifts, which may the Powers Divine
Make happy to me. Let me now depart,
That I may see my dear Wife and my Friends.
And blessed may you stay here with joy at heart,
Comfort your Wives, and obtain all your ends.
And strong and worthy Children may you have;
Nor amongst the people trouble or disease.
This said, they praised him all, and counsel gave
The Stranger to conduct safe over the Seas.
Alcinous then called for Wine; and bad
Pontonous present it to each one,
Until unto the Gods all offered had,
That so Ulysses sooner might be gone.
Ponto^ous brought Wine, and carried it
From man to man; and each man drank his Cup,
Blessing the Gods in order as they sit.
When all had drunk, Ulysses stands up,
And speaking to Queen Arete he said,
Happy for ever may you be, O Queen,
I take my leave. Be you for ever joy'd
In King Alcinous as you have been,
And in your Children and your people all.
And when he this had said, away he went.
Alcinous did then a Squier* call,
Whom with Ulysses to the Ship he sent.
Arete to her women sent. One brought
Fine bread and store of black wine of the best,
Another brought with her a Cloak and Coat.
Another brought, to lay them in, a Chest.
Which by the Mariners were quickly stowed
Aboard the good Ship, with the wine and bread.
And for Ulysses many Rugs they strow'd
Of The Deck, a stern, with linen at his head.
And then aboard he went. When he was la^n,
Their Seats they take, and parted from the Strand,
Re^lining dashed with Oars the liquid plain,
While sleep Ulysses bound had foot and hand.
As when four Horses gallop over a plain
The way runs swiftly by the Coaches side;
So did the good ship mount upon the Main,
And to the Stern the water swiftly glide.
A Hawk could harldly with it have kept pace,
A Hawk that of all Fowl the swiftest flies;
So swiftly ran the ship on The Oceans face,
And with her breast the rising water slice;
Bearing a man for wisdom like a God;
That past had fearful Billows on the Deep,
And many bloody paths of War had trod,
The thought whereof was now removed by sleep,
Above the Earth now risen was the Star
Days Messenger, and brightest of the Sky;
The Ship was then from Ithaca not far.
A Port there is, which from a Deity
Is called Ph^rcys; a Sea-Deity.
Two jetting Rocks defend it from the wind,
When once within a ship will safely lie.
There needs no Cord a floting ship to bind;
At the Ports head grows a large Olive Tree,
And near it an obscure and pleasant Cave,
Where the Nereiades delight to be,
And there they Bowls of Stone, and Beakers have.
The Bees make honey there. Besides there be
Long Beams of stone, whereon the Nymphs do weave*
Rich Pu^ple Garments, wonderful to see,
And Fountains which their running never leave.
Two Doors there are, one North, Men go that way;
The other to the South more Sacred is,
The Immortals here go in, and none but they.
The Gods have to themselves reserved this.
All this Ulysses Convoy knew before;
And here the ship arrived safely lands,
And half her length lay dry upon the shore.
Such was the strength of those Ph^acian hands.
The lusty Seamen when they landed were,
First took Ulysses sleeping as he lay
Bedding and all, and to the Land him bear,
And lay him from the Sea a little way.
Then they unship his Goods, Gold, Vestures, Brass,
Gifts given him by the Phaeacians;
Which at the foot of th'Olive-Tree they place,
Out of the way, lest Passengers should chance
To steal them while Ulysses was asleep.
When this was done the Convoy stayed not,
But rowed out the ship into the Deep;
Nor Neptune had Ulysses yet forgot,
But said to Jupiter complaining then,
What honor from the Gods can I expect,
When the Phaeacians that are but men
(Although descended from me) me neglect?
For though Ulysses I destroyed not,
Because his coming home you had decreed;
Yet that he should be brought home thus, never thought
Asleep, and painless, and with so much speed,
Enricht with Gold, and Brass, and Vestures store,
As much as had come to his share at Troy.
This the Phaeacians have done, and more;
In this licentiousness they take a joy.
Then answered Jove. Neptune, what is this you say?
The Gods neglect you not. It cannot be
That are the eldest and of greatest sway
Of any of them. If Man injure thee,
To take revenge enough your own power is.
I will not hinder you, do what you please.
To Jupiter then Neptune answered this.
I could, O Jove, have been revenged with ease,
But that I feared you would offended be.
And now I Will tell you what I mean to do.
As Soon as I the ship returning see,
I Will fix it, that they may no more do so.
Besides, their City with a Hill I Will hide.
O but (said Jupiter) were it my case,
When from the City people all espied
The ship hard by, I would a Rock there place
In likeness of a ship not far from Land,
To make men wonder, and then round about
The City make a mighty Mountain stand.
This said by Jove, the God of Seas went out
To Sch^ria (where the Phaeacians
First planted were.) The ship came swiftly on,
And on it Neptune laid his mighty hands,
And roots it in the Sea, turned into Stone.
The Rowers the one another say, What Is this?
Who has our good ship fixed in the water?
And yet above the water still it is.
Thus said they, but knew nothing of the matter,
Then spoke Alcinous. Performed (said he)
Is what long since I heard my Father say,
That Neptune angry was that Strangers we,
Who e're they were, did to their homes convey,
And threatened had with a great Hill to hide
The City, and destroy the Passage-Boat.
This by my Father then was Prophesi'd.
And now, you see, at last about it is brought.
Therefore be ruled by me Convoy no more,
But let us unto Neptune Sacrifice
Twelve chosen Bu^cks, and his grace implore
To set no Hill there. So did he advise.
And then to Neptune they their Prayers make
Standing at The Altar, King and Princes all.
And now Ulysses lying was awake,
But to his mind the place could not recall.
For Pallas had about him cast a mist,
That at his coming he might not be know^;
But she her self instruct him as she list,
Till he the Suitors all had overthrown.
All things seemed to him other than they were,
Paths, Highways, Creeks, Havens, Trees and Rocks,
And rising up he was he knew not where,
And with his open hand his thigh he knocks.
A^ me (said he) whither am I come now?
To civil or to wild and lawless men?
Where shall I hide my Treasure? whither go?
Would I were at Phaeacia again.
To other friends I might have gone from thence,
And ^thaca obtained a Convoy.
Here for my Treasure I see no defense.
Left here to others they will be a prey.
I see the Princes of Phaeacia
Are not so just as I took them to be;
They promised to set me at Ithaca,
But have to some place else transported me.
Jove that sees all, and punishes the ill,
Will be revenged also of these men.
But come, my Presents number now I will
The Seamen may have ta'^e some back again.
His Garments and his Plate then numbered he,
And nothing missing was of all his pels.
Then walked he sostly along by the Sea
Lamenting and bewailing of himself.
And then came Pallas to him. She had on
The Body of a Shepherd young and tender,
As if she had of some Prince been the Son;
Lined was his Coat, the thread was fine and slender.
With Dart in hand, and fine shoes on his f^et.
^lysses who beheld her was much joy'd,
And forth himself advanced, her ^cet.
And first he to her spoke, and thus he said:
Joy to you be, and good will toward me;
Save for me these my Goods, and save me too.
You are the first I meet here; at your knee
I bow my self as men bow Gods unto.
Tell me (I pray you) true, What Land is this?
What Town? The Inhabitants what men?
An Isle, or of the Continent a piece?
To this the Goddess answered again.
Simple you are, or very far hence dwell,
To ask what Country this is. For it is not
A place obscure; for known it is very well
Both East and West, though but a little spot,
And rugged ground, not fit for galloping;
Yet Corn it bears abundantly and Wine;
And is well watered both with Dew and Spring
And nourishes great Herds of Goats and Kine.
Of wood of every sort there is good store.
Though from A^haea far men say is Troy,
Yet Ithaca is talked of on that shore.
These words unto Ulysses were great joy.
And to the Goddess then he answered
(Falsely; on Fables keeping still his hold,
As one that always Plots has in his head)
I have (said he) of Ithaca been told
Fa^ hence in Crete, and now am thither come
With these my Goods, but leaving to my Child
About as much as I brought out from home,
And here I am alone, a man exiled.
For of Idomeneus I killed the Son
Orsilochus, sor swiftness of his feet
So excellent, there was not any one
That could out run him in the Isle of Crete,
Because I had refused a Command
Under his Father at the Siege of Troy,
And would command my own, he took in hand
To have deprived me of my share of the Prey,
Which to my dangers and my deeds was due.
For which, by night with one Companion
Near the Highway I with my Spear him slew,
And in the dark escap'^ when I had done.
And to Phoenicia by Sea I went;
And hired with a good part of my Prey
To Pylus or to Elis to be sent.
But adverse winds forced us another way.
And wandering there arrived in the night.
And straight into this Por^we brought the Bark.
Never thought of Food, though very well we might,
But went ashore, and lay down in the dark,
And there I slept. The Mariners mean while
Take out my Goods and lay them on the shore,
And back unto Sidonia they sail,
And after that I never saw them more.
At this the Goddess smiled, and stroak'd his head,
And in a woman's shape before him stood,
Of stature tall and like to one well bred,
The cras^ that catches you had need be good.
You cannot though at home your wile^ f^go,
And your famed Stories, though there be no need;
So close they stick to you from top to toe.
But now no more of that. For it is agreed
Amongst Mortals you, amongst Immortals I
For Counsel and Invention excel.
Did you not know me that perpetually
Have at your need assisted you so well?
And now am come to help you to secure
The rich Phaeacia^ Presents you have here,
And tell you what at home you must endure;
Affronts and scorns, you shall find many there.
Then said Ulysses, Difficult it is
For any mortal man though very wise
To know a God, that can their form dismiss,
And when they will, put on a new disguise.
When the Argive Army was besieging Troy,
Goddess I know how gracious you were then.
But after (the Town sacked) we came away,
And scattered had the Gods our ships and men,
And I was wandering on the Ocean wide,
I never saw you, never had your aid,
Save at Phaeacia you were pleased to guide
Me to the Town, and hasten me dismayed.
But I beseech you (for still do I doubt
This is not Ithaca that I am at,
But some place else, and that you go about
With comforts feigned my sorrows to abate.)
Tell me if this my Country be indeed.
Pallas said then, Suspicious still you are.
I cannot theresore leave you in your need,
Since wise you be, and willing to beware.
Another man that had been along away,
Had straight gone home to see his Wife and Son;
But that for you is not the safest way,
Nor had it yet been opportunely done.
Know how she will take it first. She keeps within,
And spends in weeping both the night and day.
I know full well the Fates his coming spin,
But that his Mates shall first be cast away.
But with my U^kle N^e had no mind
To be at odds, that in such choler is;
For making of his Son the Cy^l^ps blind.
But come, Fill show you Ithaca. First, This
The Port of Phorcys is, This the Olive Tree,
There near it is the gloomy Cavern, where
The Nymphs Naiades invoked be.
And by you in that Cave much worshipped were.
The Hill so clothed with wood is Neriton.
This said, the Mist dissolves, and then Ulysses
His Native Country joyful looks upon,
And falling on his knees the Soil he kisses.
And then to the Naiades he prayed,
Hail Daughters of High Jove Naiades,
Never to have seen you more I was afraid;
But often we shall again, if Pallas please
To give me life, and prosper my dear Son,
Your Altar fill with Gists as heretofore.
The Goddess Pall^s when his Prayer was done,
Answered, Let that thought trouble you no more.
But come, let us now see how your Goods to save,
Now presently. 'Twere well that they were laid
Within some Rock at bottom of the Cave.
Then went she in, and Caves in Cave surveyed.
Ulysses brought into the Grot his Store,
Garments, and heavy Brass, and Golden Plate;
Which Pallas placed, and laid a Rock of the door,
And then in counsel both together sat
The Suitors to destroy. Pallas first spoke.
Ulysses (said she) think on how you may
Your just revenge of the proud Suitors take,
That use your House and Substance as their prey;
That marry would your Wife by force. But she
Still keeps them off with hopes and promises,
Expecting your return continually,
But than of Marriage think of nothing less.
O, said Ulysses, But for your advice,
I died had as Agamemnon did.
But now, O Pallas, find out some device
How of the Suitors best I may be rid.
And by me stand inspiring courage stout,
As when we pulled Troys head-gear off her head.
For then to master them I should not doubt
Three hundred though they were. Then answered
The Goddess Pallas, By you I will stand;
You cannot fight, but I shall of it know,
And bring unto you such a lucky hand,
That with their Blood and Brains the ground shall flow.
Come, First ^'ll make you to men pass unknown,
I Will shrink your skin that is now so fair and fresh,
And from your head take off that hair so brown,
And cover will with such array your flesh
As men shall hate the sight of. Then your eyes
I Will shrivel up, that were so full and bright,
That in this habit th'Woo'rs may you despise,
Nor your wife know you standing in her sight.
Then go you to the Master of your Swine
That loves you and your Son and your Consort,
And to direct you to him take this sign.
He Is at Crow Rock, thither the Swine resort,
And t'Arethusa's well. For why, the Oken
Berries with that sweet water make them fat.
Stay there till to him you your mind have spoken,
And well informed your self of your estate.
To La^edaemon I the while will go,
To call your Son Telemachus away,
Who thither went by Sea, that he might know
What Menelaus there of you could say.
Then said Ulysses, Goddess, since you could
Have told him all your self, why did you not?
Meant you that also he be wandering should
While other men stay feeding on his Lot?
Trouble not you your self with him, said she.
I sent him and went with him with intent
To show him to the World abroad. And he
At Sparta treated is to his content.
It Is true, the Suitors with a Ship are gone
To wait for, and to kill him, by the way.
But I believe before that that be done,
Some will lie low that now your goods destroy.
And as she spoke, she stroakt him with her Wand.
And rivell'd seemed his skin (which was before
So sleek and fair) as if it had been tanned.
And gray his hair, rivel'd his eyes all over.
And then she gave him an ill-favored Rag
Torn, foul, and smutted filthily with soot,
And over that the pill'd skin of a Stag,
And Satchel full of holes then added to it
With twisted string. And up their council brake.
The Goddess Pallas thence to Sparta past,
To bid Telemachus his leave to take
Of Menelaus, and go home with haste.
LIB. XIV.
BUt he in rugged way, over Mountains sleep,
Through Woods obscure unto Eumaeus went,
Whose Office was the herds of Swine to keep;
And of his Servants was most diligent
And found him in the Porch before the Door.
The house was handsome, and high-built and great,
Nor to it was adjoined any more,
Well fenced from wind it was, and a warm seat,
Built by himself on purpose for the Swine
Of his good Lord Ulysses that was gone,
With Stone that hew'n was from the rocky Mine,
Besides those of Laertes and his Son.
And with a quickset-hedge enclosed round,
And Pales of heart of Oak the hedge without
Set close together, and stuck deep in the ground.
And thus the house was senced round about.
Within the Court twelve lodgings were for Swine,
And every one of them h^ld five times ten;
And there the female and the teeming ly^n.
The males lay-out, but much diminisht then,
For the proud Suitors eaten had the rest,
Eum^us having sent in every day
One of the fattest of the Herd and best,
And yet three hundred and threescore were they.
Near to the Swine four Dogs were ever lying,
^^ke to wild Beasts; and by Eumaeus fed.
Himself was feather to his foot applying,
Made of a good Cow-hide well colored.
Three Dogs attending were the Herd. The fourth
Convoying was a Swine unto the Woo'rs,
The other three ran fie^cely bawling forth
When they Ulyss^s saw come near the doors.
Ulysses wisely then his Staff lets fall,
And presently sits down upon the ground.
But had Eumaeus not come in withal,
An unbeseeming fortune he had found.
Who letting fall the leather for his shoe,
Running and rating came in to his aid;
And snatched stones up abundance at them threw,
And then he to Ulysses spoke and said,
Old man your self almost to death you brought
By those accursed Dogs, and me to shame,
As if my sorrow great enough were not,
But that there must be added to it blame.
While sitting here I for my Master weep,
And feed his Swine for other men to eat,
He somewhere swallowed up is in the Deep,
Or wandets up and down for want of meat.
But come, Old man, into the Lodge let us go,
That when of meat and wine you have your fills,
You may then tell me when^e you are, and who,
And how much you have suffered of ill.
This said, he led him in and made him sit,
And under him he store of rushes laid,
Over that a Goa^skin, thick with hair was it
Of which a speckl'd wild Goat had been flaid.
Ulysses glad to see the man so kind
And very hearty, answered and said,
May all your Prayers like entertainment find
With Jove for whatsoever you have prayed.
Stranger (then said Eumaeus) it was never
My custom any Stranger to neglect.
The poor and Stranger are in Gods hand ever.
Few are my Gifts, and but of small effect.
For Servants of young Masters stand in fear;
And by the Gods my old one fast is bound
From coming home. 'Twas he that gave me here
A house and fair possession of ground
As much as fits a Master to his Swain,
And helped me too contentedly to wive,
Which takes off a great part of my pain.
Also the Gods have made my labor thrive.
How happy had I been if he had stayed!
Accursed be that Helen and her Kin.
For, for Atrides sake he Anchors wai'd,
Himself much misery engaging in.
Having thus said, he girded on his Coat,
And fetched in two young Pigs: not long he staid,
But killed, sindg'd, jointed, roasted, piping-hot
Before Ulysses with the Spits he laid,
Then strows them over with the flour of Wheat,
And in an Ivy Bowl he tempers Wine;
And sitting over against him bids him eat.
Eat, says he, Servants food, the lesser Swine.
The great ones are the pampered Suitors fare.
The blessed Gods hate evil works, and love
Them that do well. But these men little care
For mercy or for vengeance from above.
Yet enemies and lawless men, when they
Disbark upon another Land, and there
With Prey their ship have laden, come away;
And of revenge stand always in great fear.
But these men know not, nor by Voice Divine
Assured are Ulysses now is dead;
Yet neither will go hence, nor have design
To seek by lawful ways his Wife to wed;
But stay and waste his Substance without hoe.
For not a day went over their heads that they
Did Sacrifice one only Beast or two;
And wine abundance drink and cast away.
Ulysses his estate and wealth was such,
In Greece nor Argos, no Prince in Epire,
Nor twenty had in Ithaca so much.
And if to have it reckoned you desire,
Upon the Continent twelve herds of ^ine,
Twelve herds of Goats, as many flocks of Sheep,
As many Swine-houses replete with Swine,
Which herdsmen of the Country there did keep.
And here, upon the Islands farthest end
There be eleven herds of Goats. Of these
The Goat-keeper does every day one send,
The best of all, the Suitors proud to please.
And daily I the best of all my Swine.
Thus said he. But Ulysses silent sat,
Eating his meat, and drinking of his Wine,
And plotting in his head the Suitors fate.
When he had supt, Eumaeus to the b^im
Filled up his Cup with wine. Ulysses then
Glad that Eumaeus so well treated him,
Drank, and the Cup deliv'ring back again,
Friend (says he) That so rich and valiant man
Your Master that was for Atrides lost,
If I have seen him, do you think you can
Know him? God knows I have seen many a coast,
Then answered he, There is no Stranger able
Nor with his Wife nor Son to get belief.
The news they tell both take but for a Fable
Invented by their want to get relief.
Many poor men come to Penelope,
And make her weep in vain with Tales untrue.
And where you think you shall rewarded be
With Coat or other Garment, so can you.
But he is devoured by Beasts or Fowls at Land,
Or Fish at Sea have on his body fed.
And on the Shore his Bones lie clad in sand.
But howso'ere it be, the man is dead;
And to his friends has sorrow left behind,
But to me chiefly, who, go where I please
Shall never such another Master find,
Nor ever be again at so much ease,
No, though I should unto my Country go
And Parents that have got and nourisht me;
To see them though I wish, I long not so
As I Ulysses long again to see.
Whom though now absent I call by his name,
He was so kind, and took such care of me,
That of such small respect I feel some shame.
A second Father he should called be.
Friend, said Ulysses, since so hard it is
To make you hope he will so soon be here,
Know that I have not rashly told you this.
What I have spoken I will also swear.
If true, with Coat and Vest my news require;
If not, then not, although ill raid am I.
Of him as of Hell-gate I hate the sight
That can by want be made to tell a Lie.
Know Jove the chief of Gods, and then the Host
That has provided for us this good Cheer,
And in Ulysses house does rule the roast,
Ulysses will be here sometime this year;
This Month expired, or the next begun,
And be revenged of the Wooers impudent
That have dishonored his Wife and Son.
Then said Eumaeus, Leave this argument.
For your good news nothing will be to pay.
Nor will Ulysses ever come again.
Drink wine, and no more on this subject say.
I cannot think upon him without pain.
And swear no more. True be it all you say.
To me Laertes, and Pe^elope,
And to Telemachus 'twill be great joy,
For whom my sorrows much augmented be;
He sprang up like a Branch to man's estate.
I thought he would in Prowess prove no less
Than's Father was whom he did imitate
In Wit and Figure and in Comeliness.
But now the Gods bereaved him have of Wit.
He Is gone to Pyle to hear what men there say
About his Father, whilst the Suitors sit
Waiting at Sea to kill him by the way.
But him let us leave a while with Powers above
Whether to let him die, or bring him back,
Waiting upon the pleasure of high Jove.
And now of your own woes untie the sa^k,
That I may know them. Tell me truly now
Your own, your Fathers, and your Countries name.
And further I desire you, let me know
Whence are the Mariners that with you came
Unto this Town, and tell me this likewise,
Where rides the good ship that brought you to it.
For verily I can no way devise
How you should come on Horsback or on Foot.
Then said Ulysses, Were we here alone,
And meat and drink for so long us attend,
And all the rest about their work were gone,
The year would sooner than my Story end.
Of Crete I am, and rich my Father was,
And many Children more he had. But they
Begotten were according to the Laws.
But of a Concubine the Son was I.
My Father was Cas^or Hylacides,
That was for wealth in Crete much honored,
And for his Children, but loved me no less
Than those he had begot in lawful bed.
When he was dead and gone, my Brothers proud
Divide his state amongst themselves by Lot,
And little of it they to me allowed.
But for all that a good rich wife I got;
My virtue won her. I no shun-field was,
Nor from my stock degenerate she saw
(Though from me now my strength be gone alas)
But you I think can know Wheat by the Straw.
For now with hardship I am much decai'd.
Mars gave me Courage, and Athena Skill
To beat up Quarters, and by Ambush laid
With Stratagems my Enemies to kill.
Of being sl^in I never had a thought,
But foremost still I leapt out with my Spear;
And of the ^oes to death I still one brought,
Unless his feet than my feet swister were.
And such I was in War. But Husbandry,
And keeping home, though that bred children store,
I ca^'d not for. But ships I loved to see,
And War, Darts, Bows and Shafts I loved more.
Yet horrible they be to other wights.
For, for such things the Gods have tempered me.
Many things are there wherein one delights,
Which to another man unpleasant be.
Before the Greeks went to the Siege of Troy
Nine times had I commanded on the Seas,
And always our Success was good that way,
And of the Prey I chose what did me please
Beside my share. And wealth came in ^pace.
Wise I was thought, and honored much in Crete.
And when Jove had decreed Troy to de^ace,
Id^meneus and I went with the Fleet,
Or else we must our credit quite have lost.
Nine years we fought, the tenth we took the Town.
And setting up our Sails we left the Coast,
And by the Gods were tossed up and down.
But Jove determined me more trouble yet.
For needs I would to Egypt go and trade.
A month I stayed at home, ^hen forth I set
With nine good ships, and an ill Voyage made.
For when six days I feasted had my Crew,
And to the Gods devoutly offered part;
A good strong wind from the North-Heaven blew,
And from the Coast of Crete we then depart.
Smoothly we sailed, safe our arrival was,
Nor man nor ship had any harm at all.
From shore to shore we did in five days pass,
And in the Nile we let our Anchors fall.
Then I my Fellows bad aboard to stay
And guard the ships, and some to places high
I sent to watch, but moved by lucre, they
On plunder and on rapine had their eye.
The fields they waste, and kill the men, and make
Women and Children captives. Then the cry
Arriving at the City, Arms they take,
And next day early to the field they hie,
With Horse and Foot then thundered the field.
Their Armor lightened. My men frighted were.
Some taken and made slaves; some flying killed;
And all the rest ran scattered here and there,
Then I (though t'had been better there to have di'd,
So many woes have since befallen me)
Pulled off my Helmet, laid my Spear aside,
And Buckler too, and kneeled at the Kings knee.
He rescued me, and home with him me brought
Sitting by him that did his Cha^io^ drive.
Though in their heat many to kill me sought,
Yet the King brought me to the Town alive.
Seven years I there remained and riches got.
For every man almost me somewhat gave.
Then thither came a Merchant that had not
His fellow in all Egypt for a Knave.
His house and riches in Phoenicia were,
And he with Lies enticed me to his home;
With him I went. And there I staid a year.
And when the Months and Days about were come,
He set me in a ship for ^ybia;
And there together with our goods we sat,
He cracking of the profit he foresaw,
And I suspecting, though it were too late.
With him I went. And when the ship was forth,
We steered our Course without the Isle of Crete,
For by good luck we had a wind full North.
But Jove determined had we should not see it.
For when the Island we had legt behind,
And nothing else appeared but Sea and Sky,
Jove fetched the Clouds together with a wind
Just over the Ship, and dark 'twas presently.
And therewithal into the Ship he threw
His Thunderbolt, which whirled it round about.
It smelt of Brimstone rank. And all the Crew
Into the Sea it suddenly cast out.
And they like Gulls from wave to wave were ^ost.
But Jove to save me, put into my hand
The Ships tall Mast which with my arms I crossed.
And after nine days came at last to land.
And in Thresprotia was cast on land;
And the Kings Son who chanced that way to pass,
Listed me up as I lay on the sand;
And by King Phedon well received I was.
He clothed me with good Garments Coat and Vest.
I asked him of Ulysses what he knew.
As he went home (said he) he was my Guest,
And what he then had gotten did me show;
Of Brass and Iron and Gold there was so much,
As might ten ages feed a man alone,
The Treasure that he showed me there was such.
But he, he said, was to Doaona gone,
There at the Holy Oak to be advised
(Since he from Ithaca so long has been)
Whether 'twere better to go home disguised,
Or so as to be known when he is seen.
The King to me in Holy Form did swear,
That for the Conduct of Ulysses home,
Both Ship and Mariners then ready were.
But when I went from thence he was not come.
A ship of that place in the harbor lay
Ready to part. The King bad land me there.
But they resolved were of another way;
Which made me yet more misery to bear.
When of that Land they were got out of sight,
To sell me for a slave they did agree.
My Coat and Vest they take from me there right,
And gave me the torn Coat and Rags you see.
Late in the Evening they were at the Land
Of Ithaca, and bound me fast in the ship.
But they to Sup thought fit upon the Sand,
And leaving me, out of the Bark they skip.
But from my Bonds some God sure set me free.
Then down I went and to the Sea applied
My breast, and round the ship swam speedily,
And in a great thick Wood my self I hide.
Sorry they were, and put to Sea again.
To stay and seek me they lost labor thought.
Thus by Jove's favor I alive remain,
And to the house of a good friend am brought.
Then said Eumaeus, I confess the Story
(Poor man) of this your wandering and your pain,
Has had the power to make me very sorry.
But of Ulysses what you say is vain.
I not believe a word. What needed you,
So wise a man as you appear to me,
In vain to tell me any thing not true;
When I my self am sure 'twill never be?
For all the Gods have shown themselves his foes,
That neither suffered him to fall at Troy,
No^ the War done, his best friends to compose
His Body for the Grave. For either way
He honorably buried had been
To the honor of his Son. But he is dead,
Unspoken of, devoured by Harpies keen;
And I despised sit here to see Swine sed.
And never to the City come, but when
Some news is brought unto Penelope,
And she send one to call me. I come then,
And many listening to the news I see.
Some grieved and wishing for his coming home.
Some that seek nothing but shot-free to feed.
And these men wish that he may never come.
But I of what they say take little heed.
Especially, since an Aetolian,
As he from place to place for Murder fled,
Came to my house, and I relieved the man,
And after found that I was cozened.
He said he saw him with Idomeneus
In Crete, and that for certain he would come
(His Fleet much hurt repaired) to his house,
Rich, at the next Spring, or the next Autumn.
Therefore, old man, since you are come to me,
Think not your Story any thing avails,
Nor that false hopes provoke my Charity.
My Bounty looks on want and not on Tales.
Pity, and fear of Jove my favors guide.
Ulysses to this answers him, and says,
Since you trust not my Word, nor Oath beside,
And in your breast resideth little faith,
Let Us make a Bargain. If Ulysses come,
Then a good Coat and Vest shall be my due,
And a safe Conduct to Dulichium.
If not, and that I told you prove untrue,
Then make your Servants threw me from a Cliff
High and upright, That others may beware
To cosen men into a false belief
Of things they know not, but uncertain are.
Then said Eumaeus, Yes, 'twere a fine deed,
And noble, t'entertain a man with love,
And with good cheer relieve him in his need,
Then kill him, and beg pardon then of Jove.
But now I wish the Swine from field were come.
For time it is of Supper to advise.
And while they talk, the Swains the Swine bring home,
And with great noise they pent are in the sties.
Then did Eumaeus to his servants call,
From out the Herd to choose one of the best
His far-come friend to entertain withal,
And mend their own fare also with the rest.
It Is long since others the work to us leave
To feed the Swine they eat. Having said that,
Out went he, for the Altar wood to cleave;
And they brought in a five-year-old Pig fat;
And laid it on the Hearth. Eumaeus there
Remembering well the Gods (for he was wise)
First from the forehead clippeth off the hair,
And in the fire the same did Sacrifice.
Then did he all the Gods above invoke,
That soon and safe Ulysses might arrive,
Next that he takes a piece of the clef^ Oak,
And at a stroke did him of life deprive.
Then others take the work into their hands,
And with keen steel they quickly cut his throat.
That being done, with many flaming Brands
They sindge from head to tail his hairy Coat,
And lay him open. Then Eumaeus came
And folded up the fleshy Thighs in fat.
And then into the Fire he threw the same.
The rest they cut in lesser parts. And that
They roast on Spits; and being roasted well
And takenup, on Chopping-boards they put it.
Eumaeus then (who thereat did excel)
As he thought fit, did into Messes cut it.
But one Mess for the Nymphs and Mercury
He set aside; and over that he prayed.
The rest he set to each one severally.
But to Ulysses the whole Chine was laid.
Jove (said Ulysses) be to you as kind
As you to me, and grant all your request.
Friend (said Eumaeus) now your Supper mind,
Such as it is. Gods give what they think best.
Then to the Gods he offered the first cut,
And filled a Bowl, and offered part of that.
The Bowl then in Ulysses hand he put.
Ulysses it received, and down he sat.
Mesaulius then sets before him bread,
Who thither brought from Taphos was to sell,
And had been by Eumaeus purchased.
Then heartily unto their meat they fell.
And when to eat they had no more delight,
Mesaulius took off the bread; and all
Prepared were for sleep. But cold the night
And Moonless was; besides much rain did fall.
Ulysses to the Company then spoke,
Tempting Eumaeus; and to get a Cloak
From him, or from some other for his sake.
Hear me Eumaeus (says he) and you folk,
I have a Tale to tell. This foolish Wine
To laugh and dance is able to provoke
Grave men sometimes that have no such design.
And to speak that which better were unspoke.
But out it shall, since I so much have said.
O, that I were as young and ^rong as when
Before the Town of ^roy the Watch we laid,
And lodged were amongst the reeds in the Fen,
By Menelaus and Ulysses led,
And me the third; the wind at North all night,
We ly^ with our Bucklers covered
With rain congealed, our Armor all was white.
And they slept well wrapped up in Cloak and Coat,
Safe in their Bucklers from the freezing wind.
But like a fool my Cloak I had forgot.
I did not think I should such weather find.
And when a third part of the night was gone,
I nudg'd Ulysses (who did next me lie.)
He felt me, and to him I made my moan.
Noble Ulysses, I am like to die,
The weather kills me, I have but a Coat.
My Cloak some Demon made me leave behind,
And of such cold quite took away the thought.
I cannot tell what remedy to find.
No sooner said, but remedy he found;
For able was he both to shift and fight,
And said unto me in a whispering sound,
Peace, lest we heard be by some other Wight:
And then with Head on Eldow, Friend, said he,
I dreamt we from the ships too far lie here.
Let some to Agamemnon go and see,
If he would have us rise and come more near.
Then up rose Thoas Son of Andraemon,
And down he laid his Cloak, the which I kept,
And swiftly did to Agamemnon run.
In The Cloak I wrapped my self and soundly slept.
Were I as young and strong as I was then,
Some one a Cloak would lend me for respect,
Or else for kindness, amongst so many men.
But now my Rags are cause they me neglect.
Old man, then said Eumaeus, You have told
Your Story well. Each word to purpose is.
To morrow shake your Rags against the cold.
Of what is needful now you shall not miss.
Of Cloak and Coat there is none of these has shift.
But when Telemachus from Pyle comes back,
From him you will have all you need, of gift.
And then you neither Cloak nor Coat will lack.
And be conveyed to what place you desire.
With that he rose; and woolly skins of sheep,
And shaggle Goatskins near laid to the fire.
And there Ulysses laid him down to sleep.
And over him a Cloak Eumaeus laid;
Both thick and soft it was, which he had kept
And with it in sharp cold himself arrai'd.
And thus Ulysses warmly covered slept.
By him the young men lay. But to the sties
Eumaeus went. For fit he thought it not
To lie far from his Swine, and out he hies.
Mean while Ulysses of his kindness thought,
Eumaeus first of all his Sword puts on
Over his great Shoulder. Then against the weather
A thick warm Cloak. And again that upon
A great Goats skin, the skin and hair together.
And then with dart in hand, for his defense,
('Against men and Dogs) well armed at the head,
To where the tusked Swine lay parted thence,
Within a Rock from wind safe covered.
LIB. XV.
ANd then to Laced^m^n Pallas went
To urge T^lemachus his leave to take
Of M^laus, to whom she had him sent,
And home again what speed he could to make.
Telemachus, and Nes^ors Son she found
Within the entrance of the house abed;
The Son of Nestor in a sleep profound.
Sleep came not in Telemachus his head.
Thought of his Father open kept his eyes.
Then Pall^s to him said, Telemachus,
To stay so long abroad you are not wise,
Leaving your Goods with such men in your house,
As lawless there your Substance do devour,
Lest afterward you to no purpose come.
Importune Menelaus with all your pow'^,
Or else your Mother you will not find at home.
Her Father and her Brethren bid her marry
Eurymachus. Of all he bids most high.
Take heed what Goods out of your house they carry*
You know what thoughts in Female breasts do lie.
They will their present Husbands house promote,
But for their former Children little care.
For he once dead, they have no longer thought
Of how his Children after him shall fare.
Therefore return you, and commit to some
Maid of your own for faith and care well known,
Such Goods as in your house you have at home,
Until you have a good wife of your own.
I tell you more; remember what I say,
The bravest of the Suitors lie in wait
As you return, to kill you by the way,
'Twixt Ithaca and Same in the Straight.
They Will fail, I think, of what they go about,
And sooner some of them their Graves shall find.
But howsoever stear the Isles without.
The God that keeps you will provide a wind.
And when at Ithaca you are on land,
Unto the Town your ship and fellows send,
But go you to Eumaeus out of hand,
Who, though he keep your Swine, is much your friend:
Then Pallas mounted to the sky. And he
Pisistratus awakens with his foot.
It Is time (said he) that on our way were we.
Let Us to the Coach, and set the Horses to it.
Then said Pisi^tratus, Too dark it is yet
To travel with a Coach. Let Us therefore stay,
'Twill soon be morning. Let Us our Presents get,
And by Atrides self be sent away.
For Guests use always to remember those
By whom they have been entertained with love.
This said, the morning by and by arose,
And Menelaus toward them did move.
Telemachus then puts on hastily
His Coat and Cloak to meet him on the way;
And when they were to one another nigh,
Telemachus first spoke, and thus did say.
O King, Atrides Menelaus, now,
Even now dismiss me, let me go my way.
Then said Atrides, Even now you shall go;
I purpose not to make you longer stay.
For I conceive it is not a good man's part,
To make too much or little of his Guest,
To hold him when he gladly would depart,
Or press him to be gone e're he thinks best.
In Hospitality this Rule is true,
Love him that stays, help forth the going Guest.
Stay then and take my Gift along with you,
And your Breakfast of what we have the best.
For he that will a great days Journey make,
Will find both joy and profit in his meat.
And if to visit Greece you pleasure take,
I Will with you go, and with you I Will retreat,
And to the Argive Cities be your Guide,
And be Presented by each Princely man
With whomsoever we at night abide.
Two Mules, a Gold Cup, a brave Pot or Pan.
Then said Telemachus, I needs must go,
(My Father seeking left my self I lose)
I have left none my Goods to look unto,
And robbed my Treasure may be by my foes.
When that was said, forth Menelaus goes,
To give unto his Wife and Maids command
For Breakfast of what then was in the house.
Then Boetheides who lodged near at hand
Came in; and, bidden by Atrides, cleaves
The wood, makes fire, lays down the roast.
Him to his business then Atrides leaves.
And down came to his Treasure of great cost,
He, and his Son, and Wife Helena. There
Within a Room lined with sweet smelling wood.
A Temp'rer to his Son he gave to bear
Of Silver pure, which amongst the Vessels stood.
And from a Chest where Robes for Matrons were
She took up one, with great variety
Wrought by her self, which she her self did bear,
Shining and bright as any Star in the Sky.
And forth unto Telemachus they come.
Then said Atrides, Jove grant your request,
And safely may you to Itha^a come home.
See here my Gift, of all I have the best.
It Is massy Silver gilt about the brim,
By Vulcan made; but then it was possessed
By the King of Sidon. I had it of him
When by the way from Troy I was his Guest.
Then Helen said, This Gift too take from me,
Of Helens handiwork a Monument,
To give to her that your dear Wife shall be.
Think it mean while as to your Mother sent,
Then gave it to Telemachus his hands.
IN the Coach Pisistratus then placed all,
And at the goodly Gifts amazed stands.
Atrides then led them into the Hall,
And made them sit, and while they sitting were,
A grave Maidservant from a Golden E^re,
To wash their hands pours on the water clear
Over a Basin all of silver pure.
One Tables sets, another lays on Bread,
And from their store many good things brings out.
The Messes Boetheides severed.
Atrides Son the Wine delivered out.
When their desire of Food was satisfied,
Up rose Telemachus and Nestor's Son,
And to their Coach they the swift Horses ti'd,
And in the Coach were, ready to be gone;
And were already got the Court without,
But after them Atrides followed,
And in his hand a Gold Cup he brought out
Of wine, and standing at the horses head,
Brave Youths (said he) to Nestor me commend,
That as a Father was to me at Troy.
Farewell, and may you to your Journeys end
With safety travel and arrive with joy.
Then said Telemachus, All this I Will say,
I wish at home I may so treated be
Within my Fathers house at Ithaca,
Besides the Presents you have given me.
As he said this, an Eagle dexter flew
And seized a great white tame Goose grazing near.
^he standers-by shouted and cried, Shue, shue.
But yet away the Eagle bore him clear.
And none but with the sight was well content.
Then to Atrides said Pisistratus,
This Prodigy, unto you is ^sent
From Jupiter? or is it sent to us?
While what to answer he was taking care,
Helen prevented him. I will, said she,
First tell you what hereon my own thoughts are,
And to my mind by the Gods infused be.
You saw the Eagle come down from the Hill,
Where nature placed him to dwell and breed,
And kill that Goose: So shall Ulysses kill
The Suitors that upon his Substance feed.
Or, it may be, already there he is
Devising for the Suitors some ill end.
O Gods, then said Telemachus, that this
Were so indeed! To you then should I send
As to a God my Vows. This said, away
They whip their willing Horses through the Town,
Which on the plain their Harness shake all day,
And were at Pheres when the Sun went down.
There Diocles Ors^ochus his Son,
(Ors^ochus by Alphaeus begot)
Dwelt, and of entertainment want was none,
Nor acceptable Presents were forgot.
And when the Morning had her self arrai'd,
Again they put their Horses to the Coach,
Which when the Whip they felt once, never stayed,
Till to the Town of Pyle they did approach.
Then said Telemachus to Nestors Son,
You promised, I your Father should decline.
But since we here are, how can that be done?
And therefore let us both our Counsels join.
Friends you and I, and friends our Fathers were*
One age we have; this Voyage is some tie.
Draw me not from my ship, but leave me here,
Lest the old man force me at his house to lie
In kindness, when I have such need to go.
This said, Pisistratus considered
What to make good his promise he should do.
And then this Counsel came into his head.
Turn off (said he) the Coach to the Seaside,
And Menelaus Gifts a Shipboard stow,
And get aboard. Your small stay here I Will hide.
So your departure shall my Father know.
For sure I am, if he know you are here,
So violent he is, he will hither come,
And call you to his house and stay you there,
And be a hind'rance to your going home.
And though away you will not be empty sent,
Yet will he doubtless very angry be.
This said, unto his Father home he went.
Telemachus then bad his Company
To see prepared all things for Sailing fit,
And go aboard; aboard went also he.
The Rowers on their Seats in order sit.
Thus they about their going busy be.
Then came a Stranger that a Prophet was,
And fled from Argos then for Homicide
And by descent was of Melampus race,
And stood near to Telemachus his side.
For this Melampus once had dwelt in Pyle
And rich, but fled by Neleus oppressed,
And bound he lay in Prison for a while.
But afterward he got himself releast,
And brought to Neleus his H^rds again,
And had his Daughter Pero for reward.
But left her with his Brother to remain
For wife. And then did* Pyle no more regard.
But went to Argos, where a wife he got,
And Children twain had, first Antiphates.
And he the valiant Oicleus begot,
And Oi^^eus begat Amphiareus,
That was beloved by Pallas and by Jove,
And yet he lived not till he was old.
He di'd at Thebes, betrayed by his love,
That him discovered for a Chain of Gold.
Al^maeon and Amphilochus he got.
But Mantius, Melampus second Son
Cleitus and Polyphides then begot.
Cleitus was fair, but Children he had none.
Aurora snatched him from the Earth when young.
For Mortals he in beauty did excel,
And placed him The Immortal Gods among.
And Polyphides Phoebus loved well;
And to him gave the Gift of Prophecy.
And since Amphiraus was dead and gone,
To foretell any thing with certainty
Upon the whole earth like him there was none.
Displeased by his Father Mantius,
At Hyperesia he prophesi'd.
His Son it was, called Theoclymenus,
That then stood by Telemachus his side,
When he the blessed Gods was praying to.
And said, Since worshipping I find you here,
By him you worship, tell me truly who
You are, your Father who, and dwelling where.
Stranger, then said Telemachus, I dwell
At Ithaca, born there; my Fathers name
Ulysses if he live; but who can tell?
And to hear news of that, I hither came.
Then answered Theoclymenus, And I
From Argos Town for killing of a man,
Pursued by his Kin, and ^ore't to fly.
Take me aboard that only save me can.
Welcome you are, then said Telemachus.
Aboard let us go, where you shall have such cheer
As we can make, and has contented us.
Then took and on the deck he laid his Spear;
And up into the Ship he went, and at
The Stern he placed himself, and close by him
The Stranger Theoclymenus down sat.
Then bids Telemachus the ship to trim.
And straight the Mast upright they set and bind;
And hoise their Sails with ropes of good Cow-hide;
And Pallas sent them a good strong fore-wind,
And swiftly did the ship the Sea divide.
The Sun was down, and doubtful was the light,
When he to Pherae came and passed by.
And then by Elis coasted he all night,
And came unto the Tho^ Islands nigh;
And thought upon the Suitors in his way.
Ulysses and Eumaeus supping sat.
And when their hunger they had put away,
The Tables gone they leisure had to chat.
And then Ulysses had a mind to know
Whether Eumaeus rather had he stayed
In The Lodge with him, or to the City go,
And to the Company he spoke and said,
Hear me Eumaeus and you all his Friends,
I stay here helping to consume your meat.
My mind me to the City rather bends.
For Bread and Wine there begging I shall get.
But I must then entreat you to provide
Some good man to go with me. Being there,
Necessity it self will be my guide
To find the houses where there is good chea,
And if I go unto Ulysses Doors,
Unto Penelope I can tell news,
And make my self well known unto the Woo^rs
And they to give me meat will not refuse.
I can do any service that they will,
(Thank Mercury to whom I owe that good)
Few be they can compare with me for skill
To make a Fire, o^ to cleave out Wood,
To roast and carve Meat, or Wine to give out,
Or any thing that Great Men's Servants do.
Ay me (Eumaeus said) Poor man, what thought
Is this of yours? Do You long to perish so?
As you must do, if y^ among them stay.
Their insolence is known up to the sky.
You are not like their Servingmen. For they
Are young, and are apparelled handsomely
With Coat and Vest. Their heads and faces shine
With Unguents sweet. Stay therefore here with me.
There Is none that at your staying does repine.
Nor I, nor any of my Company.
Telemachus when he comes home again,
Shall give you Garments, a fair Coat and Vest,
And good shoes also to your feet, and then
See you convoyed to what place you think-best.
To this Ulysses answered, and said,
O that Jove loved you but as well as I!
You have me from a wretched wandering staid.
The Belly brings to men much misery.
Then said Ulysses, Since I am to stay,
Say of Ulysses Parents, if you know
His Father and his Mother, whether they
Be both remaining yet alive or no.
To this Eumaeus said, La^rtes lives,
But woefully and weary of his life;
Still for the absence of his Son he grieves;
But more lamenteth the death of his Wife.
The loss of her was that first made him old.
She di'd for grief, thinking her Son was dead.
As sad a death it was as can be told-
May we from such death be delivered.
While she was living, though she grieved were,
When cause there was I could have a^kt her mind
Freely. For why, with her own Daughter dear
She brought me up, and never was but kind,
This Daughter Ctimene, when come of age
(For she the youngest was) to Same went
To a rich man given in marriage.
But I well clad in Coat and Vest was sent
(And shoes upon my feet) into the field,
For she a purpose had to do me good.
But now the time does no such kindness yield.
And yet the blessed Gods provide me food.
For they so well have multiplied my Swine,
That we have still enough of meat and drink,
And wherewithal to make a poor man dine,
Although the Suitors ^iot make them shrink.
But since this woe' Pe^elope befell,
It Is harsh to her to hear of business.
Yet Servants need her both to ask and tell
All that belongs to their Offices,
And also sometimes, may be, need they had
In The house to eat, and carry somewh^t home
Of that whereof Servants are most part glad,
And which unto their Lodges never come.
Ho, said Ulysses, since it does appear
You were a Traveller when but a Boy,
Tell me, I pray, what your Adventures were,
And what your sufferings were upon the way.
Was your Town plund'red by the Enemies,
And you brought hither as a part of the prey?
Or been by Thieves (for you were no ill prize)
As you kept Sheep or Cattle, brought away?
Then said E^s, Since to hear the Story
Of how I hither came it is your pleasure,
Sit patiently, the Wine there stands before ye.
For sleep and joy the long nights give us leisure.
It is not good too soon to go to bed.
For too much sleep is but a weariness.
The rest that will may go, and (morning spread)
Drive forth the Swine; which is their business.
Mean while let us sit here, and drink, and chat,
And Stories of our sad Adventures tell.
For much contentment there is even in that,
To them that suffered have and come off well.
But to my Story now. An Isle there is
Under the Tropique of the Sun, not great,
Called Syria, but very fertile it is,
Well stored with Kine, and Sheep, and Wine and Wheat.
Where Famine never entered nor Disease
Amongst the people. When a man was aged,
Dian' and Phoebus made him die with ease,
And gentle shafts the pain of death assuaged.
Two Towns it had. Their Laws were not the same;
But of them both my Father was the King.
Phoenician Merchants, Rats, then thither came,
And in their Ships did many Baubles bring.
There then was in my Fathers house a Maid
Phoen^cian born, that well could ^ow and spin;
As washing Clothes ^^e at the Seas-side staid
One of these Merchants soothed her into sin.
(For good work women may be made do that
If flattered well) And then he asked her name,
And whence she was. And truth she told the Rat.
From Sidon (said she) a rich Town I came,
And Daughter am of wealthy A^ybas.
But Taphian Thieves took me by force away,
As homewards from the field (...) going was,
And sold me to this man with whom I stay.
Then said the Merchant-man that did her wive,
Will you to Sidon home return with me,
And see your Parents? They are still alive,
And rich as heretofore. I will, said she,
If you and all your company will swear,
At Sidon you will set me safe ashore.
And when all sworn, and agreed on it were,
The woman spoke again, and this said more:
If any of you see me in the street,
Or at the Well, speak not at all to me,
Lest any of the house should chance to see it,
And tell my Master. Jealous he will be,
Put me in Bonds, and seek you to destroy.
Buy quickly what you buy, and ready be
And secret When you mean to go away,
Then send a privy Messenger to me.
For all the Gold I can l^y hand upon
I Will bring, and somewhat else Boat-hire to pay.
For I the charge have of my Masters Son,
Much profit he will yield if brought away.
Playing without I Will take him by the hand
And lead him to the Ship Much worth he will be
Transported into whatsoever Land
And home again (this said) returned she.
A year it was before these Merchants went.
Mean while they buy and lade the Ship. And when
They had their ^raught straightway a man they sent
To bid the Maid make haste away. And then
A man unto my Fathers house they sent,
A crafty Merchant with a Chain of Gold
And shining Amber, on which were intent
My Mother and her Maids. They much behold,
And take into their hands, and for it bid.
Mean while the man a nod gave with his head.
The woman quickly understand him did;
And by the hand me out a door she led.
Aboard went he. The woman looked about,
Saw standing on the Tables many a Cup
Left by my Father and his Guests gone out.
And presently she three of them rook up.
Out went she leading me that simple was.
The Sun went down, and dusky was the way,
And to the ship we unpursued pass
To th'Haven where the Merchants Vessel lay.
And then go they, and with them we aboard.
And sa^l'd before the wind six days and nights.
And to us Jove a fair ga^e did afford
Diana on the s^v'n^h the woman smites.
And suddenly i^to the Sink she fell
And her they throw into the Sea for cheer
To fishes. But the rest arrived well
At Ithaca. Laertes bought me there.
You see now how I hither came. Then said
Ulysses, Truly you have past much woe.
But Jove in part your sorrows has allai'd,
That in a good man's house a^ ease are now,
That gives you meat and drink with a good will.
With him you live a happy life. But I
Have longer wandering been, and must be still.
Thus 'twixt themselves did they say and reply,
Then went to sleep. The night was almost past.
And with the Morn Telemachus was nigh.
Quickly his Mates take down the Sails and Mast,
And row the ship to land, and there her tie.
Then on the Beach they quickly break their fast.
And with fresh water temper their old Wine.
And when desire of meat and drink was past,
I Will (said Telemachus) go to my Swine,
But to the City will return at night,
Next Morn I Will feast you with good flesh and wine,
Your labor in my Passage to requite.
And then said Theoclymenus divine,
What will you do mean while (I pray) with me?
Unto your Mothers house must I go too,
Or to some other man commended be?
Then answered Telemachus, No, no.
To bring you to my house in vain it were.
My Mother in my absence you will not see.
She seldom to the Suitors does appear.
At top o'th'house at work still sits she.
But I will recommend you to another
In Ithaca of best repute; his name
Eurylochus, and best he loves my Mother.
And what my Father did would do the same.
But folded up it lies yet in Joves lap,
Whether he first shall married be or dead.
As he this said, there did a Faulcon hap
(Apollo's Bird) to fly above his head
Dexter, and in his pounces held a Dove.
And as he plumed her the feathers fell
Scattered as they descended from above
(Which Theoclymenus observed well)
Betwixt Telemachus and the Ships side,
And to Telemachus said secretly,
This from the Gods is, and does good betide
Both to your self and your Posterity.
I knew that it portended at first sight,
No family but yours was here to reign.
O, said Telemachus, that that were right,
Such love, such gifts you then should from me gain,
As men that saw you should your fortune bless.
Pyraeus then his friend was standing by.
To him he then his Stranger did address:
You are my best friend of the company,
Unto your care this Stranger I commend
To be well treated till I come again.
Though long you stay (said he) I do intend
The best I can your friend to entertain,
And with some Gift. Then to the ship he goes,
He and his Mates. They on their Benches sit.
Telemachus then puts on his shoes,
And takes a Spear that for his hand was fit.
The Ship about they to the City row.
Telemachus pursuing his design,
On foot unto Eumaeus forth did go,
His faithful Servant, Master of the Swine.
LIB. XVI.
Eumaeus and ulysses risen were,
And men, for Dinner, sent out to fetch hogs,
And fi^e was made. ulysses chanced to hear
One tread without, and whining of the Dogs
That barked not. And to Eumaeus said,
Some one of your acquaintance now comes in.
I hear his feet. The Dogs are well appai'd.
These words scarce said, Telemachus was seen.
Eumaeus, who then temp'ring was of wine,
Lets fall his Cups, and meets him at the door;
Kisses his head and hands and both his eyne,
And presently with tears his eyes run over.
As when a loving Father sees his Son
That had been ten years absent, and for whom
He had lamented long, come home alone;
So glad was he Telemachus was come,
And hugged him as one that had escaped but than
From death, and weeping said, O are you come?
I never thought to see you more, sweet man,
Since first I knew to Pyle you went from home.
But come, come in dear heart, that I may fill
My self with looking, you're not ost among
Your Herdsmen in the field, but almost still
In The City, in the Suitors dismal throng.
Yes, said Telemachus, for why, I come
To see you, and to ask about my Mother,
Whether she still remaining be at home,
Or gone be with a Suitor one or other,
Leaving her Husbands Chamber and his Bed
With Cobwebs hung for want of furniture.
No, she yet stays (Eumaeus answered)
And great the grief is which she does endure;
And day and night the tear fall from her eyes,
Telemachus went in. His Father there
To give him place did from his Chair arise.
Sit still, said he, I Will find a Seat elsewhere
In my own house. This man will one provide.
This said, he past unto another Seat,
To which Eumaeus a Wool-fell applied
With Rushes under it. Then brought in meat,
Trenchers of meat roasted the day before,
And in a Basket sets on bread of Wheat,
And in an Ivy Tankard Wine good store.
And over against Ulysses takes his seat.
Then on the meat prepared their hands they laid.
When Thirst and Hunger nothing more required,
Telemachus unto Eumaeus said,
And thus about his new-come Guest inquired,
Father (said he) I pray you tell me now
His own, his Fathers, and his Countries name.
And farther I desire you let me know
Where are the Mariners that with him came
Unto this place. And tell me this likewise,
Where rides the good ship that brought him to it.
For verily I can no way devise,
How he should come on Horsback or on Foot.
To this Eumaeus answered again:
He says himself that he was born in Creet,
And seen the Cities has of many men,
Wandering about. For Jove so thought it meet.
Thesprotian Rats got him aboard their Ship,
And forced were in Ithaca to land.
There he found means to give them all the slip.
So came to mine, and from mine to your hand.
I give him you, as you think best to use.
To this again Telemachus replies,
That which you say, Eumaeus, is bid news.
How to receive him I cannot devise.
I am too young to save him with my hands,
If injury be done him by the Wooers.
And at this time my Mother doubtful stands,
Whether to stay within my Fathers doors,
And with the people her good name maintain,
Or with that Suitor wed and go away,
That to her shall afford the greatest gain.
But since the Stranger at your house does stay;
I Will give him Garments a good Coat and Vest,
A Spear in's hand, and good Shoes to his feet,
And him convey to what place he thinks best.
Or if to keep him here you think it meet,
I Will hither for him Garments send and food,
That he no charge be to your Family.
To set him with the Suitors it is not good
For me nor him, they so unruly be.
He Will be derided there, and I shall grieve,
But against so many men what can be done?
The strength of one man cannot him relieve.
Ulysses then made answer to his Son,
O Friend (said he) it bites my heart to hear
What of the Suitors in your house you say,
How against your mind they proudly domineer.
Is it because you willingly give way?
Or that your people by Divinity
Adverse are to you or your Government?
Or are your Kindred that should stand you by
In Quarrel and in Battle, discontent?
O, were I young and of the mind I am,
Or that I were the Great Ulysses Son,
Or he himself, and wandering hither came,
I Would have my head out off by any one,
If I were not revenged upon them all.
And though they were too hard for me alone,
I Would rather in my own house fighting fall,
Than daily see such ugly things there done.
Strangers abused; Maids tous'd ill-favourdly,
And Corn and Wine consumed without end,
And to no purpose foolishly. For why,
They never shall arrive where they intend.
Then said Telemachus, No word of the Gods
Has me deprived of the peoples love,
Nor any Brother is with me at odds,
Nor any other cause I know but Jove.
How many Lords within these Isles do sway,
Same, Dulichium, Ithaca, and Zant,
So many Suitors duly every day
For Marriage with my Mother my house haunt.
Whilst she can none put off, and will none marry,
They spend my Corn and Wine, and cattle kill,
And eating here, and drinking still they tarry,
And me perhaps at last they murder will.
But what they shall do none but God can tell.
But Father go you to Penelope,
And let her know I am arrived well.
And let no other person know but she.
And after you have told her tarry not.
Make haste. At your return I shall be here.
For many are they that my death do plot.
True, said Eumaeus, but not ill it were
To let Laertes know it by the way,
Who when his grief but for Ulysses was,
Did oversee his Workmen all the day,
But since by Sea to Pylus you did pass,
He neither oversees his Husbandry,
Nor eats his meat, as still he did before,
But groaning and lamenting woefully
Live^^* Telemachus did thus reply,
The case is hard. But grieved though he be,
Let him alone; go not out of your way.
For first I wish my Father here to see,
If in my choice to have my wishes lay.
But pray my Mother thither send a Maid,
T^ ^ell Laertes secretly the news.
When to him thus Telemachus had said,
Eumaeus on his feet ti'd on his shoes.
Ulysses and his Son now left alone,
Came Pallas to them. At the door she stood.
But by Telemachus she was not known.
Gods are not known but by whom they think good.
Ulysses knew her. Fair she was and tall,
And of a grave wise Matron had the look;
And by the Dogs perceived was. For they all
Whining and terrified the place forsook.
A sign t'Ulysses she made with her brow.
Then he went forth, and she unto him spoke.
Son of Laertes, wise Ulysses, now
Your Son with your design acquainted make.
And when you have the Suitors fate contrived,
Go to the City both. 'Twill not be long
Before I at your Combat be arrived,
And give you my assistance in the throng.
Then stroakt him over with a wand of Gold,
And presently his Rags were Cloak and Coat.
His Cheeks were plump. His Beard black to behold.
To which his goodly locks unlike were not.
This done, the Goddess mounted to the Skies.
Ulysses to the house again retired.
But from him then his Son turned off his eyes.
So much this alteration he admired.
He thought it was some God, and to him said,
You are some God descended from the Sky.
Your colour's better, better you arraid.
Save us. Our Gifts shall on your Altar lie.
And then Ulysses said, God I am none.
What all you with the Gods me to compare?
For I your Father am whom you bemoan,
And for whom you have had such pain and care.
And then embraced and kissed his Son, and wept,
So that the ground he stood upon was we^,
Though hitherto his eyes he dry had kept,
But by his Son believed he was not yet.
You're not (says he) my Father, but some Spright
That flatters me into more misery.
Of mortal men there is none that has the might
To do such things without a D^ity.
A God indeed can man's decay redeem.
You were but now an old man ill arrai'd.
And now like one new come from Heaven seem.
To this Ulysses answered and said,
Telemachus be not amazed too much.
Other U^ysses you shall never see.
I am the man, although my luck be such,
As after twenty year not known to be.
The change you see was by Athena wrought,
That made me what she list (for she can do it)
A Beggar old, or Youth in a fine Coat,
And handsome Cloak, and other Garments to it.
For easy it is for Gods, on mortal men
To lay on glory and the same displace.
This said, Ulysses sat him down And then
Telemachus his Father did embrace,
And then they b^th together wept and sob'd.
As Eagles or as Vultures when they see
Their Nests by Country* people spoiled and robbed,
And young ones ki^l'd before they fledged be;
So wept these tw^, and w^eping there had staid
Perhaps ^nth the closing of the day,
But that Tel^hus to Ulysses said,
Father, how came you to Ithaca I pray?
Where are the Seamen that set you a shore?
For sure I am you could not come by land.
In a good Ship, s^ ^he, I was brought over
From the I^le Phaeacia, and left of the Sand.
That ^ple, Strangers all that thither come,
Con^oy unto the place where they would be.
And when I was d^ous to go home,
At Ithaca asleep they landed me
Enrich^ with Presents, Garments, Gold and Brass.
And in a Cave I hidden have the same.
And, as I by Ath^ ^ei'd was,
The Suitors ^at^ to weave I hither came.
Tell me how many now they are. That we
Consider may if we two and no more
Shall be enough to get the Victory,
Or must we of some else the aid implore?
O Father (said his Son) you are renowned
For a good Counselor, and man of might.
But very hard the thing is you propound,
That two men should against so many fight.
They are not only ten, or two times ten,
But many more. Their number (let me see)
From out Dulichium two and fifty men;
And with them lusty Serving-men twice three.
From Same chosen men come twenty four.
Twenty from Zant, and twelve of Ithaca.
Medon the Squire, a Fiddler, and what more?
Two Cooks that of a Feast had learnt the Law.
'Twill be but ill revenge to fight them all.
Therefore I think it best to look for aid,
And some good Neighbor to assist you call.
To this Ulysses answered and said,
Consider then and cast it in your mind,
Whether we two, Pallas and Jove to boot
Will serve, or must we other Succors find?
Then said his Son, O Father, that will do it.
Those ^riends indeed would serve us very much.
Immortals against Mortals have great odds;
Higher they stand, and of themselves are such,
As would too hard be for all^th'oth^r Gods.
Yes, said Ulysses, if the Woo'rs and I
Come but to Battle once, 'twill not be long
Ere such good aids will have the Victory,
And make an end of this unruly throng.
But you Telemachus go early home
To morrow morning; mingle with the rabble.
I after you will with Eumaeus come
Like to a Beggar old and miserable.
Where if you see me used ill-favour'^ly,
Thrown at or pulled about the house by th'heels,
As unconcerned, endure it patiently,
What pain soever thereby your he^rt feels.
But yet with gentle words you may persuade them.
For sure I am they will not you obey,
The Gods Immortal have so stupid made them
As on themselves to bring their fatal day.
But now to what I say attentive be.
When Pall^s shall me prompt, I Will with my head
Make you a Sign. As Soon as that you see,
Let the Arms in the Hall away be carried.
And say (if any Suiter^ ask wherefore)
The fire has hurt them, and they are not now
Such as Ulysses left them heretofore,
When with the Greeks to Ilium he did go.
Or say, For fear some Quarrel should arise
By the indiscretion of one or other,
You thought the counsel would not be unwise,
To take them thence. One drawn Sword draws another.
But two Spears, two Swords, and two Shields keep still,
To take in hand when we the onset make.
Jove from mistrust and Pallas keep them will.
And farther from me this instruction take.
As I your Father am, and you my Son,
Of my return a word let no man hear,
Father, or Wife, or Servant any one.
To speak of it in company forbear.
But let us of the Maidservants you and I
Endeavor what we can to know the mind.
And your Menservants also I would try,
From whom you honor or dishonor find.
Father, then said Telemachus, you will see,
I am not lose of tongue. But it is not good
The men to question. 'Twill lost labor be,
Because without the house they have their food,
Though there they havoc of your substance make.
Do as you please. It Is a long business
Of every one of them account to take.
Inform your self of th'womens wickedness.
I would not willingly go up and down
To every Lodge, what there is done to see.
For our work done, theirs will be better known,
If you with Signs from Jove acquainted be.
Thus they discoursed. The Ma^iners mean while
Had brought into the Haven of the Town
The Ship that brought Telemachus from Pyle.
Then drew it up to land, the Sayls pulled down.
The Presents unto Clytius they bear,
And to Penelope a man they sent,
That of her Sons arrival she might hear,
And how unto Eumaeus Lodge he went,
And sent the Ship to put her out of fear,
Left she should for his absence longer weep.
Eumaeus was for the same business there.
He from his Lodge, the other from the Deep.
He told the Queen the arrival of her Son.
And to her Maids the other told the same.
And when they both their Messages had done,
Back to Telemachus Eumaeus came.
At this the Suitors vexed, looked down and sad,
And out of the Gates together went, where they
Amongst themselves a consultation had,
And to them thus Eurylochus 'gan say.
It Is very strange, Telemachus is come.
We thought he never should return again.
But since it is so, to call our Fellows home,
Let Us hire and man a Boat with Fishermen.
His words scarce out, Amphinomus comes near,
And turning toward the Haven them espied
Furling their Sails, and laughing said, The are here,
You need not any Messenger provide,
Some God sure told him of them, or else they
Saw the ship coming by, but were too slow
To overtake her. This said, they away
Down to the waters* side together go.
And up unto the land the ship they hale;
Their Servants what was in her bear away.
And then to consultation they sall,
Nor with them suffered any else to stay.
To them Antinous began and said,
The Gods Telemachus have strangely kept.
Our Scou^s from Morn to Night of the Mountains staid,
Nor on the land by night we ever slept,
But rowed up and down until 'twas day.
We thought he could not escape in any wise.
And yet some Demon brought him has away.
Come, let us how to kill him here devise:
For whilst he lives our work will not be done.
Crafty he is, and can his purpose hide,
Nor have we yet sufficiently won
The people of the Town with us to side.
The multitude to counsel he will call,
And ranting tell them that we go about
To murder him, and so inflame them all,
That from our Country they will cast us out,
And make us beg our bread. Which to eschew
Let Us kill him in the Fields, or in the Way;
Divide his goods amongst us as is due;
His Houses to his Mother leave we may,
To give to him with whom she means to marry.
If this you like not, but that he shall stay,
And have his Fathers state, then let us not tarry,
But each man to his own house go his way
And there contend who shall the best endow her,
And in her favor the superior be.
Or let the Fates dispose the happy hour
To whom she has a mind to. So said he.
Then spoke Amphinomus the Noble Son
Of the rich Nisus Aretiades,
Amongst the Wooers inferior to none,
And best of all Penelope did please.
Telemachus (said he) I would not kill.
It Is dangerous to slay the Royal Blood.
But let us first of Jove enquire the will.
If he Command, I Will do it* and say it is good.
If he forbid, I wish you to desist.
So said Ar^phin^mus, and 'twas thought fit.
And presently the Council was dismissed.
And then into the house they go and sit.
And now Penelope resolved ^'appear
Before her Suitors sitting in the Hall.
For to her Son she knew they Traitors were.
Medon that with them was had told her (...).
Down to the Hall she went, and in the Door
Having a Woman at each hand, the said,
And proud Antinous rebuked sore.
Antinous, you Traitor impudent (she said)
In Ithaca the Glory you have got
Of Wit and Eloquence. You are beli'd.
Madman, what ail you my Sons death to plot,
And to his Strangers here to show such pride?
Poor Strangers have their Pasport from the Gods.
To do them wrong is great Impiety.
And worse between themselves to be at ods.
You know your Father hither once did fly,
Fearing the People who^ he had offended.
Joining with Tophian Thieves to make a prey
Of Thesprote Cattle, and were here defended
Against the Thesprotes, though our friends were they.
They slain him had, and seized his estate,
But that Ulysses saved him, and now
For to requite him what do you, O ingrate?
You eat his cattle, and his Wife you woo,
And kill my Son, and daily me molest.
Desist, I tell you, and the rest persuade
To leave these evil courses, you were best.
To this Eurylochus then answer made.
Icarius Daughter, wise Penelope,
Fear not. None shall lay hands upon your Son,
As long as I am living and can see,
Who does, his blood shall on my Spear down run.
His Father often has set me on his knee,
And given me good Wine, and good meat roast.
Afraid of any Woo'r you need not be.
Telemachus of all men I love most.
Of death from Gods hand none can warrant you.
But as for us you may securely sleep.
So said he, and yet then his death did brew.
Away went then Penelope to weep,
And wept till Pallas came and closed her eyes.
And to Ulysses and his Son at night
Eumaeus came. A Swine they sacrifice.
And then did Pallas from the Sky alight,
And with her Rod returned Ulysses old,
And ill arrai'd, for fear he should be known
T'Eumaeus or Penelope, and told
By them to others, and abroad be blown.
Telemachus then to Eumaeus said,
Eumaeus, are you come? what news from Town?
The Suitors are they come that me waylaid?
Or do they for me still look up and down?
Then said- Eumaeus, I did not enquire,
Upon my Message only was my mind.
That done, to make haste back was my desire.
But there I chanced a Messenger to find,
Sent by your Mates-to tell Penelope,
And he the news t'your Mo^er first did tell.
I saw a ship that new came in from Sea,
But whether that were it, I know not well.
Aboard were many Arms and many men.
And though I were not sure, I thought 'twas it.
Telemachus on's Father smiled then,
But so as that Eumaeus could not see it.
Then came their Supper in, which they fell to.
A Supper good they had, and were well pleased.
And when their hunger had no more to do,
With gentle sleep their fear and care disseised.
LIB. XVII.
SOon as the rosy Morning did appear,
Rises Telemachus; his shoes puts on;
And takes into his hand his heavy Spear;
And hastes to the City to be gone.
And said unto Eumaeus, Father, I
Am going to the City, there to see
My Mother, that will never cease to cry,
And sob till in her sight I standing be,
But the poor Stranger guide you to the Town,
With broken meat and wine himself to feed,
Such as he gets by begging up and down.
I cannot maintain all men that have need.
Take It how he will. For I love to speak plain.
Then-said Ulysses, Sweet Friend, nor would I
Here in the Country willingly remain.
For Beggars wants great Cities best supply.
Here at the Lodge no service I can do.
And now to learn of others am too old.
With this man to the City I would go,
But warm me first I would. For very cold
This Morning is. I fear this hoary frost.
Far hence the Town is, and my Garments thin;
And which I reason have to fear the most,
My rags will to the air betray my skin.
Telemachus then speedily went home,
With mischief to the Suitors in his head.
And when he to the Palace-gate was come,
T'a Pillar sets his Spear, and entered.
Euryclea was covering Chairs in the Hall,
And saw him first, and straight unto him went;
And then the other women-servants all
Declared with much kissing their content.
Then like Diana or fair Ap^rodite,
Penelope came shedding tears of joy,
And on his shoulders laid her arms milk-white,
And kissed his head and eyes, and thus did say:
Telemachus my dear Child, are you here?
I never thought again your face to see,
Since of your Father news you went to hear
At Pyle by Sea, without acquainting me.
But tell me what at Pyle they of him say.
Mother (said he) pray let me take my breath,
My thoughts in great disorder are to day;
I come but now from out the jaws of death.
But with your Maids go to your Chamber now,
And in your fairest Garments you array,
And to The Immortal Gods all make a Vow
A perfect Hecatomb to them you will pay,
If Jove be pleased our losses to restore.
But I unto the Marketplace must haste,
To treat a Stranger whom I sent before,
And till my coming with Piraeus placed*
Penelope then to her Chamber went,
And put her self into her best array.
Her vows to all The Immortal Gods she sent
A perfect Hecatomb to them to pay,
If J^ve be pleased her losses to restore.
Telemachus in hand then takes his Spear,
And with two Dogs at's heels went out a door;
And Pallas made him like a God appear.
The people all admired him as he came;
The Suitors all about him gathered,
And spoke him fair, while in their hearts they frame
Plots and devices how his blood to shed.
But he his seat amongst them quickly quits,
To Mentor and his Fathers ancient friends
Altherses, Antephus, with them he sits,
And there the time discoursing with them spends*
Piraeus not long after comes in,
And brings his Stranger with him to the place,
Who there a very little while had been
But that Telemachus hard by him was.
Then said Piraeus to Telemachus,
Send of your women some to fetch away
The goodly Presents you left at my house.
No, said Telemachus, let them yet stay,
I know not yet the event of our affairs.
If th'Wooers kill me and my Goods divide,
I rather had they should be yours than theirs.
If I kill them, and God be on my side,
Then send them, and I Will take them joyfully,
And brought away the Stranger with him home.
And by and by the Suitors thither hie.
And when they all into the house were come,
On Couches and on Chairs their Cloaks they lay,
And presently into their Baths they go.
And bathed and oiled again themselves array,
And sat them down. And Supper ready now,
A Maid then water in a Golden Ewre
To wash their hands over a Basin brings.
The Basin also was of silver pure.
Another on the Tables lays good things,
That in her keeping were, and sets on Bread.
Penelope sat spinning in the door.
And then they heartily fell to and sed.
And when desire of meat and drink was over,
Unto her Son Penelop^ then spoke.
I will, said she, upon my bed lie down,
Though there I ever weeping lie awake,
Since he went with Atrides to Troy-Town,
Since you would not vouchsase to let me know
The news you heard, before these men came in.
Mother (said he) the truth I Will you now.
We went to Pyle, and Nestor we have seen.
And lovingly we entertained were.
For as a Father entertains his Son
Come home from far; so were we treated there,
And welcome to his Children every one.
But that Ulysses was alive or dead,
He met with no man that could tell him true.
But us to go to Sparta counseled,
And said, If any, Menelaus knew.
And us with Coach and Horses did provide
(Where we saw Helen, bane of Greece and Troy)
He also sent his Son with us for Guide,
And thither come received we were with joy.
Atrides of my coming asked the reason.
I told him all the truth. He answered then,
Oh ho, into the strong man's house by Treason
Are entered many weak and heartless men.
As when a Stag and Hind entering the den
Of th'absent Lion, lulls his whelps with tales
Of Hills and Dales, the Lion comes again
And tears them into pieces with his nails;
So shall Ulysses all these rascals slay.
Oh that the Gods Apollo, Pallas, Jove,
Amongst the Suitors bring him would one day,
Such as when with Ph^lomelide he strove,
And threw him flat, and made the Argives glad,
If such Ulysses once amongst them were,
Short would their lives be, and their wedding bad.
But of the matter, whereof you enquire,
On my own knowledge I can nothing say,
No^ will with rash conjectures you beguile.
I told was with Calypso he does stay
(By Proteus an old Sea-God) in an Isse,
And would come home, but wants both ship and men
To pass him over the broad back of the Main.
This said, we took our leaves, a fair gale then
Quickly convei'd us over the liquid plain.
After Telemachus had spoken thus,
Penelope her heart was ill at ease.
And then spoke to her Theoclymenus.
Wife of Ulysses Laertiades,
This man (said he) knows not, hear me. For I
Joves mind foresee. Jove first, and then the Ghost
That takes the care of this blessed family,
And dwelling in it does maintain the roast,
You know Ulysses is now in this Isle,
Sitting or creeping, and observes these Wooers,
What evil deeds they do. And he the while
The Destiny contriveth of the doers.
I saw the same at Sea by Aug^ry,
And said unto Telemachus no less.
Oh that the Gods would make it true, said she,
I Would so reward you that men should you bless.
While they together thus within discourse,
The Suitors were gone out to throw the Stone,
And Darts upon the Green before the doors
As they at other times before had done.
Now Supper-time drew near. Sheep home were brought
From every field. Then Medon to them spoke,
(Who amongst the Suitors had most favor got)
Come in, says he, and care of Supper take.
For of these Games, I see you have your fill.
In supping early damage there is ^one.
Agreed they were; none thought the motion ill.
They then into the Hall went every one.
On Couches and on Chairs their Cloaks they throw,
Great Sheep, fat Goats enough they sacrifice
And franked Swine, and from the Herd a Cow.
Mean while Eumaeus to the City hies,
Ulysses with him, to whom thus he said,
Come Father, let us to the City go,
Since it is my Masters will. You should have stayed
If my advice you would have hearkened to,
But the Commands of Masters are severe;
The time of the day already is much spent.
And though it will be late e're we be there,
I fear, e^e it be night you will repent.
And then Ulysses to Eumaeus said,
I hear, I understand, I pray go on.
Only of rugged way I am afraid,
Give me a good strong staff to lean upon.
Then on his shoulder he his Scrip did throw;
Given he had a great Staff to his mind,
And they two to the Town together go,
Leaving the Swineherds and the dogs behind.
Ulysses like a Beggar old and lame,
And all his Raiment ragged was and wretched.
But when they near unto the fountain came,
From which the Citizens their water fetched,
The fountain sweetly streaming and well made
B'Ithacus Neritus, Polector Kings,
That sheth from a high and chilling shade,
Where in a Poplar Grove arise the Spring^,
And there an Altar is, and on the same
The Passengers to th'Nymphs pay offerings.
When we were there, Melanthus to us came,
And Goats, the fattest of his Herds, he brings.
Whither now go thou with this Beggar here,
This trouble-feast, who begging scraps and snu^^^,
(Not Swords and Kettles) many blows shall bear
Of flying foot-stools, and get many cuffs.
Would thou would give him me my Lodge to keep
And lead my Goats afield with a green bough,
And live on Whey, and my Goat-houses sweep,
And his great knee unto such service bow.
But hang him, he has such a custom got
Of Idleness with begging of his food,
That labor for his living he will not.
But this I tell you, and 'twill be made good,
When he within Ulysses house appears,
Many a footstool in the Hall will fly
From out the Suitors hands about his ears.
This said, he passed and kicked him going by.
Ulysses still stood firm upon the path,
Thinking to strike him with his great Staff dead,
Or otherwise to kill him in his wrath.
But in the end his wrath he conquered.
Eumaeus then held up his hands and prayed:
Nymphs of these Fountains, Daughters of Great Jove,
If the fat Gifts here by Ulysses laid
Upon your Altars were received with love,
Grant that he may come safely home again
By some good Spirit to his house convai'd.
Then (to Melanthius said he) all in vain
Will be your triumph, and your pride allai'd,
Wherewith you to the Suitors daily go,
And Knaves remain the Cattle to abate.
Then said Melanthius again, O ho!
How boldly does this Dog, this Raskal prate.
Whom one day I shall from hence ship away,
And make of him somewhere abroad good gain.
Would the Wooers, or Phoebus, but as surely slay
The Son, as it is t'expect his Father vain.
When this was said, away he went apace,
And coming to the Suitors in the Hall,
Against Eurymachus he took his place,
Whom best he loved of the Suitors all.
And there the waiters set before him meat.
The Women of the Pantry brought him bread.
Ulysses and Eumaeus were not yet
Arrived, but near, for close they followed,
And of the Fiddle they could hear the din.
Ulysses said unto Eumaeus then,
It Is a fine House Ulysses dwelled in,
And easily known from those of other men,
The Court with Wall and Hedge is fenced strong,
Having strong Gates, with two Locks great and fast.
Some Feast here is; I hear the sound of Song,
And Fiddle, which with Feast the Gods have placed.
Then answered Eumaeus, It Is well guest,
And other things you mark as well as this.
But let us now consider what is best,
In that which at this time our business is.
Go you in first, and put your self among
The Suitors; or if you think better so,
I Will first go in, but do not you stay long,
Lest you of one another take a blow.
I hear, I understand. Go you in first.
The Seas and Wars have taught me patience.
Of all my sufferings this is not the worst.
Of blows and throws I have experience.
And may the Suitors henceforth have the same.
The Belly forces Mortals to much Woe.
But there is no force can the Belly tame.
It sets the good Ship on the Sea to go
Which the one another evil fortune bears.
While they discoursed thus before the door,
Ulysses Dog held up his head and ears,
Argus by name, that had been long before
Well looked to, ere Ulysses went to T^oy.
They with him cours'd the wild Goat, Deer, and Hare;
But all the while his Master was away,
The Servants of his keeping took no care.
But on the Dung before the Doo^ h^ lay,
Which there was heaped to m^ure Fields ^as,
From many Mules and Cattle fal^ away.
There lay the old Dog Argus full of Fle^s.
And as Ul^sses near was ^ouch'd his ears
And ^auned with his tail, but could not rise,
And which Eumaeus did not see, the tears
Ready to fall were from Ulysses eyes.
And then U^s to Eumaeus said,
This is a very well-shap'd Dog I see.
It Is strange ^o (...) ^im on a Du^gh^l said.
I know not whether also swi^t he ^e.
Or for his beauty only was he ^ed,
As Lords make much of Dogs for being fine,
And at their Tables see them cherished.
Then answered the Master of the Swine:
The Master of him is of life bere^t.
If now he were the same for shape and deed
He then was when Ulysses here him left,
You Would quickly see he had both strength and speed.
There was no B^ast he once saw in the Wood
That could escape him. For not only swift,
But also at a Sent was very good.
But now himself scarce able is to lift.
For why his Master being dead and gone,
He was not left unto the Woman's care.
And when the Master is not looking on,
Menservants of their duty careless are.
For half the virtue taken is away
Of whosoever is to service ti'd.
This said, into the house he went his way.
And Argus having seen his Master, di'd.
Telemachus, the first that saw him enter,
Unto ^^m^odded to come to his Seat.
A Chopping-board was near him by adventure.
He took up that, whereon to eat his meat.
And near Telemachus he placed the same.
A Waiter sets before him flesh and bread.
And after him Ulysses also came
Like an old Beggar torn and tattered.
And said (...) Eumaeus, Give the Beggar this,
And bid him go and try the charity
Of all the rest; and tell him hurtful it is
For Beggars to have too much modesty.
^us then straight went unto the Guest,
And said, Telema^bus does give you this,
And bids you try your fortune with the rest,
For modesty to Beggars hurtful is.
And then Ulysses to Eumaeus says,
God bless Telemachus and make him great,
And always grant him that for which he prays.
And then with both his hands received his mean
And as the Fiddle with the Feast gives over,
Ulysses when he eaten had his meat,
Sat quiet on the Sill and said no more.
But still amongst the Woo'^s the noise was great.
Then Pallas comes and stands Ulysses by,
And bids him try the Suitors as they sat
Which of them had, which wanted charity,
Though they the same men would be for all that.
Then rising up, before the first he stands,
And to the right hand onward still he goes
To every one, and holds up both his hands,
Like one that well the Art of begging knows.
They gave him meat, and wondered at the man,
And one another asked, Who is it, and whence.
And then Melanthius to speak began:
I saw him, said he, but^ little since
Brought hither by the Master of the Swine.
But who he is, his kindred, and his place,
It is not in my power to divine.
This said, Antinous in cho^er was.
O Noble Master of the Swine, said he,
What made you here to introduce this Guest?
Think you that yet too few the Beggars be,
That you must needs invite this trouble-feast,
Your Lords estate the sooner to eat up?
Good as you are (says he) you say not right.
No man a Stranger e're called in to Sup,
And him on no acquaintance did invite,
Unless he were a man that most men need,
Prophet, Physician, or Armourer,
Or Fiddler at a Feast; for when men feed
A Song does add delight unto the cheer.
These use to be invited every where.
Who ever called a Beggar in to eat?
But to the Servants you still cruel were,
And of them all you me the worst did treat*
But I care little whilst Penelope
Alive is, and Telemachus her Son.
Telemachus then had him silent ^e.
Eum^us (said he) let him now alone,
He loves to quarrel, and set others on.
Then to Antinous he turned and spoke,
Is this as from a Father to his Son,
To bid me, make my Guest my house forsake?
I Will never do it. Give him what Alms you will,
Nor shall my Mother, nor I, nor a man,
Nor woman that here dwells take it ill.
But eat than give, it seems you better can.
Then said Antinous, These words are great,
And passionate, but spoken without need.
If thus we all go on to give him meat,
He may himself three months together seed.
This said, his Footstool to his foot he drew.
Ulysses with his Scrip went to the Sill,
(For it was full) meaning to beg anew.
And first he tries Antinous his will.
Give a poor Stranger (says he.) You appear
Amongst the Achaeans here to be the best.
For like a King you look, and reason 'twere
You should in bounty exceed all the rest.
And I abroad your goodness will make known.
I could for riches once with most compare,
And kept a great and free house of my own,
And asked what want you, ^an, not what you are.
And many Servants had, and things that p^s
For happiness amongst us ^ls all,
Till t'Aegypt I by Knaves perswa^dd was
To Sail. In The Nile we let our Anchors fall.
There I my Fellows bid aboard to stay,
And guard the ships; and some to places high
I sent to watch. But moved by lu^e they
On Plunder and on Rapine had their eye.
The fields they waste, and ^he men, and make
Women and Children ^ves. Then the cry
Arriving at the City, Arms they take
And next day early to the fields they hie
With Horse and Foot The^ ^^nd'red the Field,
Their Armor lightened My men frigh^^d were.
Some taken and made slaves, some (...) killed,
And all the rest ran scattered here and there.
To The King of Cyprus I was made a Gift,
Dmetor by name, the King of Aegypt's Guest.
And to come hither thence, I made hard shi^^.
Then said Antinous, Stand off you're best.
What Devil to molest us sent this Rogue
Unmannerly, that with such impudence
To beg presumes here, and to cologue?
S^and off. Or ill at ease I Will send you hence.
They that have given have done foolishly,
And at another's cost been charitable.
No wonder in such super^u^^y.
Ulysses then retired from the Table.
O, O, said he, I had but little skill,
That from the Aspect have inferred wi^.
Not give (I see) a ^rum of salt you will
To a poor man that humbly alketh it.
Antinous at this enraged at the heart,
Looked on Ulysses angerly, and said,
To part hence safely thou not likely art;
Since to my face thou dare me thus upbraid.
This said, he threw the Footstool at his head,
Which touched his shoulder, but removed him not.
Then to the S^ll himself he rendered,
Shaking his head with vengeance in his thought.
Ulysses then unto the Suitors spoke.
A man (said he) not much is grieved a blow
In fighting for his Kine or Sheep, to take.
But he did for his Belly at me throw.
If any care the Gods of poor men have,
Antinous before he married be,
Is like enough to go into his Grave.
Antinous replies, Sit quietly
And eat your meat, lest taken by the heels
The Servants hale and drag you out of the Gate,
Or use you worse, your tongue so runs on wheels.
At this the rest all discontented sat,
And one among the rest unto him said,
Antinous, it was unjustly done
To use a Stranger so. The Gods arraid
In poor men's habits men's deeds look upon,
And notice take, who well does, and who ill.
Telemachus was grieved at the heart
For what was done, but did no tear distill,
But shook his head, and hoped to make them smart.
When what had passed was told Penelope,
Apollo strike him to the heart, said she.
If I my wish had, said Eurynome,
No Suitor of them all the morn should see.
Then said Penelope again, It Is true,
They all be enemies, and mean us evil.
But he the fiercest is of all the Crew,
And rages in the house like any Devil.
A Stranger in distress comes to the door,
Whom want constrained had to beg his bread.
The rest all give him somewhat of their store,
But he a Footstool throws at his head.
While she thus and her Women talking were,
Ulysses supping sat upon the Sill.
I fain (said she) would have the Beggar here.
Fetch him Eumaeus, talk with him I will.
I Will ask him if Ulysses he have seen,
For many men and Cities knows he.
Eumaeus then made answer to the Queen:
If once the Suitors would but silent be,
You would be pleased his History to hear.
Three days and nights he stayed with me an end.
And of his sufferings much he told me there
When new arrived; but came not to the end.
As when a man that knows the Art of Song,
Sings lovely words with sweet and well-tuned voice,
The man that hears him thinks not the time long;
So I in his strange story did rejoice.
He said Ulysses was his Fathers Guest,
In th'Isle of Crete where reigns Minos race.
Himself (he said) with many woes oppressed,
The Fates at last him tumbled to this place.
And that he heard Ulysses is hard by,
And that into Thesprotia he is come
Alive and well; enriched mightily;
With Treasure which he now is bringing home.
Then said Penelope, Go call me hither
The Beggar, I my self will ask him all.
And mean while let the Suitors chat together
Where they think best without or in the Hall.
For merry they must be, since they feed here,
And their own Corn and Wine and Cattle save,
And with our Cattle make themselves good cheer,
And on our Corn and Wi^e no mercy have.
For such as was Ulysses here is none,
That should defend us from their injuries.
But were he h^ther come, he, and his Son,
Would bring destruction on these enemies.
This said, it chanced Telemachus to sneeze.
She laughed, and for the Beggar calls again.
You see Eumaeus, Jove with me agrees,
And certainly slain shall be all these men.
Go call the Beggar, and say this from me,
If I find true what he shall to me say,
He shall with Coat and Vest rewarded be.
Eumaeus to the Beggar went his way.
And when he near him was, Father, said he,
Pe^elope desires to speak with you.
About Ulysses she informed would be,
And said, If she find all you say be true,
She clothe you will with a fair Coat and Vest,
Which you stand most in need of. But for food
By begging in the Town you will get it best,
Where they relieve you will that shall think good.
Ulysses to Eumaeus answered,
P^nelope I quickly can inform.
For he and I have jointly suffered.
But from the Suitors I much fear a storm.
Their insolence is known up to the Sky.
Just now a Footstool one threw at my head,
When given him no cause at all had I,
Nor could I by her Son be succored.
Therefore entreat P^nelope to stay
Until the Sun be set and Suitors gone,
And by the fireside hear what I can say.
You see what-wosul Garments I have on.
Then back Eumaeus went with his excuse,
And came without him to Penelope.
How now (said she) does he to come refuse?
They that are bashful but ill Beggars be.
Not so, O Queen (said he) he is discreet.
He prays you stay till setting of the Sun,
Fearing some danger from the Woo'rs to meet.
And for you also then 'twill best be done.
I see (quoth she) the Stranger wants not wit.
For in the world never so many men
Contriving mischief did together sit.
So said Penelope. Eumeus then
Went down and put himself into the throng,
And to Telemachus said in his ear,
I have been absent from my Swine too long.
I go, and to your care leave all things here,
And chiefly of your life to have a care.
Many there are that bear you evil mind,
And how to take your life contriving are.
But may they first their own destruction find.
Then said Telemachus, And so 'twill be.
Farewell. But I advise you first to dine.
The business here leave to the Gods and me.
Then dined he and went back unto the Swine,
Next morning with more Victims to return.
And full he left the Hall and Court with men,
Who there themselves to Song and dancing turn.
For less than half the day remained then.
LIB. XVIII.
THen came a Beggar to Ulysses Gate.
The man to see to was both great and tall,
Though but a lither fell w. Down he sat
Boldly within the Porch before the Hall.
He had a greedy Gut, and named was
At first Arnaeus, then Irus; for he went
On errants often, when ever there was cause.
The Wooers favor made him insolent.
This Beggar thought to drive Ulysses thence.
Do see those Princes how they wink at me,
And by the heels would have me plucked thee hence?
Though to do that I should ashamed be.
Go from the door Old man lest I should do it.
Up therefore quickly and be gone; arise
Before that with my fists I force you to it.
Ulysses frowning answered in this wise:
Strange man, I neither do thee harm, nor say
Thee any ill. Here Is room for thee and me.
I do not envy you the meat which they
Shall give you here, how much so e're it be.
Envy not other men; I think you are
As well as I a Beggar; but forbear
To threaten me too much. You're best beware,
Old as I am, lest I your lips besmear
And breast with blood, and so have better room.
For to Ulysses house I Am confident
Thou never wilt be able more to come.
This made the Beggar more impatient.
O (says he) how the Raskal prates! 'Twere well
To beat the Raskals teeth out, while his Tongue
Thus runs on wheels, till to the ground they fell.
Let these see fight the Old man with the Young.
Whilst in great heat they quarreled at the door,
They by Antinous observed were,
Who laughing said there never came before
Such sport to The House. The Beggars standing there
Will go to cuffs, I pray let us hold them to it.
Then up they start, and round about them stand.
There are of the fire good puddings full of suit,
Of these, let him that conquers lay his hand
On which he will. So said Antinous,
And have the privilege, and none but he
To beg within the Porch before the house,
And of our talk at meat a hearer be.
The motion pleased. And then Ulysses spoke:
The match is hard, an Old man against a Younger,
Yet this my belly bids me undertake.
And I Am acquainted more with blows than hunger.
But I must first entreat you all to swear
Not to help Irus, nor a heavy hand
To lay on me, but both of us forbear,
And justly 'twixt us both as Neute^s stand.
When all had sworn, then said Telemachus,
Stranger, if thou dare combat with this man
None else shall do thee hurt. Antinous,
Eurymachus, and I defend you can.
This said, Ulysses covered kept his gear,
But showed his shoulders wide, and his strong thighs.
His large breast and his brawny arms appear.
And Pallas standing by enlarged his size.
At which the Suitors greatly wondered,
And one unto another softly said,
Irus has pulled an old house on his head.
And Irus then was mightily afraid.
But yet by force the Servants brought him out,
His flesh still trembling on his limbs with fear,
Show not thy self a Coward and a lout;
Nor fear a man worn out with many a year.
For if he get the better, thou shall go
Unto King Takim, and there by his Law
Thy nose and ears, and privy parts also
Shall be cut off, and dogs shall eat them raw.
This made him quake more yet. Into the lists
They brought him so. Both ready were to fight.
Ulysses then thought how to use his fists,
Whether to beat him down or kill him quite.
But not to offend the Suitors thought it best
To strike him gently. And when they were near
Irus did hit Ulysses on the breast.
Ulysses Irus struck just under th^ear.
He broke the bones, at's mouth the blood gusht out.
He fell, squ^akt, shed his teeth. The Suitors were
With laughter almost dead, that stood about.
Ulysses dragged him to the utter-gate,
And set him to the hedge, as 'twere a Sign,
And put a Staff in's hand. As there he sat.
Ulysses bad him keep out Dogs and Swine.
Think not thy self quoth he, of Beggars King
(That art a very wretch) and wandering Souls.
This said; ore's head he threw the twisted string
By which his Scrip hung raged and full of holes.
Then sat him down in the Porch. The Suitors enter
All laughing in, and as they passed by
Greatly congratulated his adventure.
Stranger, said they, Jove and the Gods on high,
Grant thee whatever thou shall most desire,
That have relieved us from the Raskal there.
We'll send him to King Takim in Epire.
And glad Ulysses was his praise to hear.
Antinous a Haggas brought filled up
With fat and blood, and to it Amphino^s
Two loaves of bread, and with it a gilded Cup
Of lusty wine, and said unto him thus:
Hail, Father, Stranger, Rich and Happy be
As ere you were; though many miseries
Oppress you now. He answered him, I see
Amphinomus, you prudent are and wise.
So was your Eather. Nisus was his name.
Prince of Dulichium, both rich and wise.
You are his Son, as I am told by Fame;
Therefore I will a little you advise.
There Is not a weaker Creature lives of the ground,
Or goes, o^ c^eeps upon it than a man
Who whilst he is strong, and all his limbs are sound,
He makes account that fa^l he never can.
But when the Gods shall have decreed him woe,
He less indures it than another can.
Such is the nature Jove has as^^gn'd to
This weak and short-lived Creature called Man.
For I my self was rich, and lived in
Great plenty, and was very insolent,
Bold on my strength, my Father, and my Kin,
Therefore let no man be too confident.
But rather quietly God's Gifts enjoy.
These Suitors here bring this into my mind
Who of an absent man the Goods destroy,
And that at last unto their cost they will find.
For this I tell you (mark well what I say)
That he will soon, nay very quickly come,
And that will be to some a heavy day.
Pray God that at his coming you keep home.
This said, he drank, and to Amphinomus
Returned the Cup, who shook his head in vain.
For not long after by Telemachus
Amongst the rest of th'Wooers he was slain.
Then Pallas puts Penelope in mind
T'appear unto the Wooers, that she might
Before her Son and Husband honor find,
And further bring the Suitors thoughts to light.
Penelope then laughed not knowing why.
Eurynome (said she) my mind says go,
And show your self before the Company.
Which heretofore I never thought to do.
I hate them, yet I mean to go to th'door,
And bid my Son their company to shun
And mix himself with those ill men no more.
Dear Child, said the old woman, it is well done.
Go tell him whatsoever you think fit,
But wash away the tears first from your eyes,
And 'noint your Cheeks; they must sometimes remit
And hide their grief that will be counted wise.
You have your wish, your Son now is a man.
Penelope then answered her again;
Restored be my beauty never can*
'Nointing and washing now are all in vain.
The Gods, Eurynome, then took away
All beauty from me when Ulysses went
With Agamemnon to the Siege of T^^y;
Such words afford me now but small content.
Call Hipp^d^mia and A^^^nne.
For why, I am ashamed my self alone
Amongst so many men in sight to be.
They shall go with me, on each side me one.
But when the old woman was gone out, and staid,
Then Pallas poured sweet sleep upon her eyes,
And on her face a greater beauty laid,
And also made her limbs of larger size,
And whiter than the purest Ivory.
Having so done the Goddess rise to th'Skies.
Her Maidens coming made a noise, and she
Awaked, and with her hand she strok'd her eyes.
I Have had (said she) a very gentle sleep.
O that Diana such a gentle death
Would send me presently, nor let me weep
My life out, nor with sorrow give me breath,
Sorrow for my dear Husband, best of all
The G^e^ian Princes, and that said, then down
She goes to th Porch before the door of th'Hall
With her two Maids, she would not go alone
And so stood at the door within their sight,
But with her Scarf her Cheeks a little shaded.
A Maid stood at her left hand and her right.
When we appeared Love all their hearts invaded.
Her speech then to Telemachus sh'addrest,
Telemachus (said she) your Wit's less now
Than when you were a Boy. 'Twas then at best.
And backward more and more it seems to grow.
Now you are tall, and come to man's estate,
And 'counted are the best men's Sons among,
Of your discretion you begin t'abate.
Why else do you let your Stranger suffer wrong?
If you your Guests thus treat, what think you, can
Men say of you, that is good or honorable?
You Will be reproached and scorned of every man,
And taken for a man unhospitable.
Mother, said he, you well may angry be;
And yet I better know what is good and ill
Than heretofore. But these men hinder me.
I cannot without help, do all I will.
The Quarrel 'twixt my Guest and Irus was
None of the Suitors act, by chance it rose,
As they sat begging, from some other cause,
And Irus only bare away the blows.
O Jupiter (I wish) and all the Gods,
That all your Suitors were in Irus case,
(Who yonder sits like one that is drunk, and nods)
Either here right or in some other place,
Unable to go home. Penelope
And her loved Son so talked. And then
Eurymachus, if all the Lords (said he)
Which now through Arg^s bear rule over men
Should see you now, more Suitors you would have here
(For you do far, all Womankind surpass)
And come betime to taste of your good cheer.
None such for fair and prudent ever was.
No, no, said she. For when Ulysses went
With the Argive Princes to the War of Troy,
The Immortal Gods took from me my content,
And with it all these Ornaments away.
Were he come home that took a care of me,
I should more honor have and beauty so.
But now I lead my life in misery,
The Gods some evil on me daily throw.
My Husband when he parted hence to fight
For Agamemnon against the Trojans, laid
At taking leave on my left hand his right,
And all those words of counsel to me said:
Expect you cannot (Wife) that we that go
Over the Sea unto the Siege of Troy
Shall all come safe away. The Trojans know
How t'use the Dart and Bow too, as men say;
And are good Horsemen also, and can see
All their advantages in ranged field.
Therefore I know not what my luck will be,
Either to come again, or to be killed.
My Father and my Mother I therefore
To you commend, to see them cherished,
As they are now, or (in my absence) more.
And when Telemachus is grown, then wed.
Take whom your self like best, and leave this house.
This said, he parts. Ay me the time is come
I must embrace a Marriage odious,
And I must leave this my most blessed home.
Suitors were wont when they a woman wooed
Of Noble Parentage, to please her all
They could, and strive who most should do her good;
Mine daily eat and drink me up in th'Hall.
This said, Ulysses was well pleased to see
His wife draw Presents from them, and was glad,
And th'Wooers by her over-reacht to be
With her fine words, when other thoughts she had.
Then said Antinous: Penelope,
Fair and wise daughter of Icarius,
Receive what e're by us shall offered be.
It is not good, good Presents to refuse.
Yet till you choose some one whom you think best
To be your Husband, we resolve to stay,
And be each one of us your constant Guest,
And never absent from your house a day.
And with Antinous they all agree,
Who her presented with a fair, large, rich
And divers-colour'd Robe, with four times three
Buckles of pure and beaten gold, and which
As many clasps of Gold had joined fit.
Eurymachus his Present was a Chain
Of Gold and Amber-Beads alternate. It
Shined bright as is the Sunshine after rain.
Eurydamas two Pendants gave, of which
Each had three Gems and polisht very bright
And both for Art and Workmanship were rich,
Reflecting to the eye a lovely light.
Pysandrus Son of Poly^terides
Gave her a costly Necklace. All the rest
With some good Gift endeavored to please
The fair and wise Penelope the best.
This done, unto her Chamber up she went
With her two Maids that did her Presents carry.
Th'Woo'rs with dancing and with merriment,
(Their wonted pastime) for the Evening tarry.
The Evening came, and then the Lamps were lighted,
And Torches, and the Fir-staves long lain dry,
Which to that purpose had with Tools been fitted
And ready lay to light the Company.
The Lights the Maids took up by turns and bore them.
Then said Ulysses, Maidens, if you please,
To save your pains, I Will bear the Light before them.
I Am used to labor and can do it with ease
Though they should stay and sit up till to morrow.
You may go up unto the Queen and there
Sit and spin with her, and divert her sorrow.
At this the Wenches 'gan to laugh and jeer.
And one of them (Melantho) him reviled
With bitter words. Her Father Dolius hight.
Penelope did treat her as her Child
And in her company did take delight.
But yet she could not put away her grief.
The Wench was fair, and too familiar was
With Prince Eurymachus, one of ^he chief
Of all her Suitors. And this woman 'twas.
And thus she said, Sure (Stranger) thou art mad
That wilt not here nor elsewhere go to bed.
Is it because thou too much wine have had?
Or is it a humor in thy nature bred
To pra^ so boldly in such Company?
Thy Victory over Irus may pe^haps
Have made thee wild. A bet^e^ man than he
May chance to send thee hence with bloody chaps.
Ulysses looking ^ourly answered,
You b^tch, T^l^^a^hus shall streight-way know
These words. He Will cause thee to be tortured.
They fearing he would do it, away they go.
Ulysses ready stood to take in hand
A Torch when bidden; casting in his mind
How he might safely carry on the grand
Mischief against the Woo'rs he had designed.
And Pallas yet not suffered them to keep
Themselves in any bounds of modesty,
But fix Ulysses anger yet more deep.
Eurymachus then said to the standers by
To make them laugh, Ulysses to disgrace,
Hear Sirs I pray, what now comes in my thought.
The man comes opportunely to this place,
It Is sure some God that him has hither brought
To give us greater light. For from his head
Methinks I see arise another flame
Besides the flame the Torch gives, and so spread
Upon his bald pate doubled has the same.
Then says t'Ulysses, Man will thou serve me
To pluck up Thorns and Bry'rs, and Trees to plant?
Thou shall have meat enough, and clothes, and see,
And shoes, and whatsoever thou shall want.
But since thou have been used to idleness
I doubt thou never wilt labor any more,
But rather feed thy carcass labourless,
And wandering choose to beg from door to door*
This said, Ulysses answered him again:
Eurymachus, if we two were to try
Our labor, in alarge green meadow, when
The days are long, the weather hot and dry,
With equal S^thes from morning unto night;
Or with two equal oxen fed and strong
Were fasting put to plow to try our might
Which of us labor could endure most long;
Or if an enemy to day should land,
And I a helmet had sit for my head,
And Target, and two fit spears for my hand,
Then you should see whether I sought or fled,
And not reproach m' of sloth or poverty.
You are too cruel, and you do me wrong
And think your self a man of might to be,
Because they weaker are you live among.
But should Ulysses come and find you here
You Would think the door (though it be very wide)
As you are running out too narrow were.
So glad you would be your heads to save or hide.
To this E^rymachus with bended brow,
And furious eye, answered, Wretch that thou art,
And dare so saucily to prate. How now!
'Twill not be long before I make thee smart.
(...) it because thou too much Wine have had?
Or is it thy nature always to be bold?
Or is it to have beaten Irus makes thee mad?
This said, upon a Footstool he laid hold,
And threw it at him, but it hit him not.
Ulysses sunk on's knees, the stool flew over
His head, and a Cup Bearer next him smot
On the right hand, and down he falls of the floor.
Much the disorder then was in the room,
And one unto another next him said,
I would this Beggar hither had not come,
But somewhere else before had perished.
For what ado about a Beggar's here?
The pleasure of our Dinner all is lost.
Then said Telemachus, Can you not bear
(Madmen) your wine and cheer both boiled and ^ost?
When filled, why do you not go home and sleep?
Go when you will, I drive you not away.
^he Suitors at this boldness bit the lip,
And thought it strange, but yet did nothing say.
Then said Amphin^mus, Let Us not fall out
With any man for speaking truth, nor be
^ude and unkind. Cup-bearers, bear about
To every man the Cup of Charity.
And so go each man home, for now it is late
(Leaving the Stranger with Telemachus,
Whose Guest he is) and our selves recreate
With gentle sleep each one in his own house.
Then Meleus to each man presents a Cup,
Whereof unto the Gods they offered part.
When this was done each one his wine drank up,
And then unto their houses they depart.
LIB. XIX.
ULysses in the house remained; and staid
Contriving how the Suitors to destroy.
And streightway to Telemachus he said,
Carry the Armor in the Hall away.
And tell them gently (if they ask wherefore)
The fire has hurt them, and they are not now
Such as Ulysses left them heretofore
When with the Greeks he did to Ilium go.
Or say, for fear some quarrel might arise
By the indiscretion of one or other,
You thought the counsel would not be unwise
To take them thence. One drawn sword draws another.
Telemachus then calls his Nurse, and said,
Euryclea, shut all the rooms up fast.
Be sure to keep within door every Maid,
Till I my Fathers Arms have elsewhere placed.
The smoke does spoil them all. But I will now
Free them from soot. I Am glad (said she) at last
To see your husbandry. But I would know
Who it is shall light you when the Maids are fast.
My Guest (says he) this Stranger whom you see.
For here he seeds, and nothing has to do.
How far soever hence his dwelling be,
I think it is reason he should help me too.
The Nurse did what commanded she had been.
They laid up Helmets, Bucklers, Swords and Spears;
And Pallas with a Lamp came in unseen,
And up and down the Light before them bears.
Then (Father) said Telemachus, I see
The walls, beams, roof, and all the pillars shine
Like any fire, and certainly there be
Within the house some of the Powers Divine.
Peace (said Ulysses) be not curious,
The purpose of the Gods you cannot find.
Go you to bed. I must go through the house
To find the Women's and your Mothers mind.
Telemachus then to his Chamber went
In which before he wonted was to lie,
Leaving his Father in the house, intent
On how (with Pallas) to make th'Wooers die.
Forth comes Penelope into the Hall
More than Diana, more than Venus fair,
Her Maids upon her were attending all,
And set down for her a most stately Chair
Made by I^malius of silver plate,
And Ivory turned, white as any snow,
And Footstool thereto fixed. And there in State
Sat down the fair Penelope, and now
The Housmaids enter in and take away
The Tables, and the Bowls, the Cups, and Bread
Which (th'Wooers gone) about the room still lay;
And having made a fire there, went to bed.
Melantho then Ulysses bitterly
Rebuked again. Art thou here (said she) still,
To peep at th'Women in the night, and spy
What they are doing? An't may be have the will
To sstay all night. Go quickly. Get thee gone
Thou Have supt. Lest thou be driven out of door
With brands of fire. To this new insolence
Ulysses answered gentlier than before.
Why do you pursue me thus? Is it because
I am not fine, but have ill Raiment on?
The time has been I rich and wealthy was,
And Beggars I did much bestow upon.
Not looking on the men, but on their want.
And many Servants had. Of that which makes
Men called Rich, I knew not any scant.
But Jove not only Riches gives but takes.
Think therefore that your Beauty will decay,
Or of your Mistress you may lose the grace,
Or that Ulysses may come back one day.
And though he never return unto his place,
His Son Telemachus knows all you do;
Knows better now what is good, and what is worse.
Then be hereafter modester. Go to.
Penelope o'reheard all this discourse.
Bold Bitch (said she) I know what deeds you have done,
Which thou shall one day pay for with thy head.
Did not I tell thee when the Woo'rs were gone
That I to speak with him had ordered?
Eurynome, I Have much to say, said she,
Unto this man. Set here a Chair, that so
Sitting I may hear him, and he hear me.
For there are many things I Would from him know.
Ulysses sat. Penelope began.
The Question I will ask you first is this.
What is your name, and who your Parents be,
And further tell me where your Country is.
When she had said, Ulysses thus replies,
O Queen, through all the world your praises ring.
Your virtues known are up unto the Skies,
No less than of some great and happy King,
That maintains Justice, and whose fertile ground
Bea^s store of Wheat and Barley and whose Trees
Are charged with fruit, and all his sheep stand sound,
And under him a valiant people sees.
And therefore ask me what you will beside.
My K^^ and Country to my self I Would keep.
For then my grief I can no longer hide,
Or think thereon, but ready am to weep.
Which here would be no seemly thing to do.
For why, your Mads might peradventure think,
And you your self, it may be think so too,
My tears came not from sorrow but from drink.
Strarger (said she) my Beauty, Form, and Worth
T^Immortal Gods took from me then away
When first Ulysses with the Gre^ks went forth
To that abominable Town of Troy.
But were he here, that had the care of me,
I should more honor have, and beauty so.
But now I lead my live in misery.
The Gods upon me troubles daily throw.
For all the Lords that in these Islands be,
Same, Dulichium, and woody Zant,
And Ithaca it self, Suitors to me,
My house continually together haunt.
And there devour my Cattle, Corn and Wine,
So that of Strangers I can take no care,
Nor can my self dispose of what is mine,
Nor Messengers receive that public are.
But longing for my Husband sit and pine.
They press for Marri'ge, I to put it by.
Then came into my thought (some Power Divine
Sure prompt me) to set up a Beam. So I
A Beam set up, and then began to weave.
Suitors (said I) since dead Ulysses is,
Stay yet a little while and give me leave
To make an end but of one business.
I must for old Laertes make a Cloth,
Which in his Sepulcher he is to wear.
Toffend the Wives of Greece I should be Ioath.
For to accuse me they will not forbear.
They Will say I very hasty was to wed,
If I go hence and not provide a shroud
Wherein Laertes must be buried,
Out of his wealth. That might have been allowed.
My Suitors all were well content. And then
All day I wove; but ere I went to bed,
What I had wov'n I ravel'd out again.
Three years my Suitors I thus frustrated.
In the fourth year my women me betrayed;
And in they came while I the Web undid.
I could the wedding now no more avoid,
But I was rated by them much and chid.
What I am next to do I cannot tell;
My Father and my Mother bid me marry;
My Son is weary, and takes not very well
That th'Woo'rs devouring him should longer ^arry.
But for all this I long to know your Stock.
For sure you come not of the ^abled Oak,
Nor are, I think, descended from a Rock.
To this Ulysses answering thus spoke:
Wife of Ulysses, since you so much press
To know my Kindred and from whence I come,
Although the telling grieve me, I Will confess,
For I have now long absent been from home.
In the wide Sea a fertile Island lies,
Innumerable therein are the men,
Creta by name. Many diversities
There are of Tongues; and Cities nine times ten.
There dwell Achaeans and Cydonians,
And ancient true Creatans, Tribachic^s,
And also D^richs and Pelasgians,
Who diverse Dialects together mix.
And Cnossus the prime City was of these
Where Minos reigned; the great Minos that,
Who often used with great Chronides
Familiarly of old ^o sit and chat.
Minos my Fathers Father was, and he
De^calion begot. Deucalion
First got Idome^eus, and then got me.
He went to Troy. My name is Aitho^.
There 'twas I saw Ulysses. He came in
As he went homeward, and with much ado
T'Amphisus. For by winds he fore'd had ^een
This place, though no good Port, to p^t into.
Then straight went up, Idomeneus to see,
With whom he had acquaintance, as he said.
'Twas ten days after that, or more, that he
For Troy with the other Greeks his Anchors wa^'d.
I entertained him kindly with my own.
Gave him a handsome Present too, and then
I made him to be feasted by the Town
Upon the Public Charge himself and men.
Twelve days the wind continued at North,
Which kept the Fleet perforce within the Bay.
On the thirteenth th'wind changed, and came South,
And then they set up Sail and steered for Troy.
'Twas so like truth, she wept. As when the Sun
Dissolving is the Snow upon a Hill,
Innumerable s^reams of water run,
And the low Rivers of the valley fill:
So wept the for her Husband sitting by;
Who grieved and piti'd her, but never wept;
As hard as horn or iron was his eye,
And by design himself from tears he kept.
After with weeping she was satisfied,
Stranger, said she, I Will ask you somewhat now
By which most certainly it will be tried,
If you my Has^and as you say did know
O^ en^ertain'd him, and his company.
What kind of person was he, and how clad?
How served? To this Ulysses made reply.
Though twenty year ago it be, and bad
My memory; yet what I can recall,
I will relate. He wore a purple Vest
Unshorn, and lined. Before embroidered all.
Two clasps of Gold. And in it was expressed
A Hound that did between his forefeet hold
A Faun that sp^all'd and labored to get free.
Which was so lively done, and all in gold
Performed was, that wonder 'twas to see.
His Coat (I marked) so soft it was and fine
As is the fold of a dry Onion,
And as the Sun, did gloriously shine
And women gazed upon him many a one.
Such were his Garments, but I know not whence
He had them. You know better that than I;
Whether he so apparelled went from hence,
Presented by some of his Company,
O^ given to him somewhere by some Guest.
For he was much beloved far and near,
And of th'Achaears all esteemed the best.
Amongst the Greeks he harldly had his Peer.
And I him gave, a Purple double Vest;
A Sword and Coat edged with fringes trim,
And brought him to his ship. Amongst the rest
A ^^rald was; and I Will describe you him.
Round shouldered was he, curled was his hair,
Swarthy his face, Eurybates his name.
Ulysses to him much respect did bear,
Because their thoughts for most part were the same.
When he had done, she could no longer hold,
But wept again, and sorer than before;
For the found true the tokens he had told.
But when this shower of tears was passed over,
Stranger (said she) I piti'd you before;
Now as a f^iend you shall respected be.
'Twas I gave him th'Apparel he then wore
And the Gold Buckles, to remember me,
But I shall never see him more at home;
In an unlucky hour he crossed the Main
To that accursed Town of Ilium.
Then thus Ulysses answered her again:
O Noble Wife of Laertiades,
Blemish no more those your fair eyes with tears,
For your Ulysses. Set your heart at ease.
Not that your sorrow as a fault appears.
What Woman that her Husband of her youth,
And to whom Children she had born had lost,
Could choose but grieve and weep, although in truth
She could not of his Virtue greatly boast?
But that you would give ear to what I say.
I say Ulysses is not far from home;
He Is in Thesprotia hence a little way
Alive, enriched with Presents he is come.
His ship and men all perished in the Main,
Then when he left the Isle T^^inacie,
Because Sols Sacred Kine his men had slain,
Hurled they were by Jove into the Sea.
Ulysses only escaped; for sitting fast
Upon the torn-off Rudder by the Waves,
After much labor came to land at last
In the Isle Phaeacia. There his life he saves.
Much honor there and precious gifts he got.
They ready were to have conveyed him home
Safely to Ithaca, but he would not;
Else long ago he might have hither come.
But he thought best to travel longer yet,
And pick up Presents which way e^e he went,
Before his going home much wealth to get.
For at designing he was excellent.
Phidon himself King of Thesprotia
Swore to me this; and that both Ship and men*
Were ready to convey him t'Ithaca,
His Country. But he could not stay till then.
For now a Vessel ready to set forth
Stood for Dulichium. But he she^'d me all
Ulysses Treasure, which might serve, for worth
Ten ages to maintain a man withal.
But he (he said) was gone over to the Main,
There at Do^ona with Jove's Oak t'advise
How to return to Ithaca again;
As he was openly, or in disguise.
So then he is safe; and soon he will be here.
He cannot from his house be long away.
And which is more, I will not doubt to swear,
And witness call the Gods to what I say.
Hear Jove, of Gods the best, and highest; and the
The Guardian of the house that we are in.
Ulysses shall come to this place you know,
E're this month end, or when the next comes in.
Penelope than answered: Stranger, Oh
That this would so fall out, you then should see
Such friendship from me, and such gifts also,
That men should bless, and say you happy be.
But, Maids, go wash his feet, and make his bed,
Lay on warm Rugs and handsome covering,
His limbs to cherish till the day be spread.
Then wash and 'noint hi^ that my Son may bring
And set him in the Hall at Dinner by him.
For he that wrongs him shall not be allowed
To come into my house another time.
How angry at it e're he be, and proud.
Stranger, by this I mean to let you see
I better know to entertain my Guest
Than many women do, though poor he be,
Far from his home, and in vile Garments dressed.
To this Ulysses answered her again,
O Noble wife of Laertiades,
Since I left Crete, on Shipboard I have lain.
Soft and fine bedding give me little ease.
Many a night have I past without sleep,
And often slept have on a homely Couch,
The custom I have so long kept I Will keep.
Nor shall your Maidens my feet wash or touch
Such as wait on you, but if there be any
Old woman here that has endured much,
As I have done, and years have lived many,
I am content my feet be washed by such.
Then said Penelope, Never man came here
Within my house from foreign Country yet
So prudent as you are, whose answers were
To every thing so wise and so discreet.
There is a woman such as you desire,
That nursed and brought up that afflicted man,
Though she be very weak, she will make a fire,
And wash your feet, but nothing else do can.
Rise Euryclea, wash the feet of one
That Is like your Lord Such feet and hands were his,
VVoe makes men old as well as years that run.
So said Penelope. And the old woman rise.
And weeping held her hand before her eyes.
O my dear Child, O Jupiter unkind!
Who more devout, who burnt to him more thighs,
Or fatter, or does lesser favor find?
He prayed to live so long that he might see
Painless, the education of his Child
Telemachus, but granted 'twill not be.
He now perhaps is where he is reviled
And mocked by women in some great man's Hall,
As thou, O Stranger, have been scorned here,
And wilt not suffer any of them all
Either thy feet to wash or to come near.
I Will wash your feet as I am bidden by
Penelope, and for your own sake too.
It is not her command alone. There lie
Thoughts on my heart that urge me thereunto.
Poor Passengers come hither very many,
But one so like Ul^sses never came.
For Person, Voice, and Feet I never saw any
Come to this house that had so near the same.
Ulysses answered, Woman, so they say
All that have seen us both. It may be so.
She with her Kettle bright then went her way
For water wherewithal her work to do.
Cold water she brings in, and pours on it hot.
Ulysses sat by the fire, but turned that thigh
That had the scar to th'dark, that she might not
Find it and force him ^'appear openly.
She was not long about him when she spied
The Scar a Bore had made above his knee
When he was hunting on Parnassus side,
At's Grandsires in his Unkles Company.
His Grandsire was Autolycus, that was
His Mothers Father named Anticlia.
He in Hermetique Arts did most surpass,
And to his Daughter came to Ithaca,
That newly of a Son was brought to bed.
Euryclea laid the Child upon his knee.
Autolycus, you are to give, she said,
The Name. How shall it named be?
Then said Autolycus, Since I of many
Both men and women have incurred the blame,
A fitter name I cannot think on any.
Therefore I say, Ulysses be his name.
And when he is grown a man send him to me,
To Mount Parnassus, whither if he come,
He shall of what I have, partaker be,
And from me go not ill contented home.
And this the cause was that he thither went.
Autolycus and's Sons there take Ulysses
By the hand, expressing very great content.
Antithea his Grannam his head kisses
And both his eyes. Autolycus appoints
His Sons to have the Supper very good.
A Bullock sat they kill, flay, cut in joints,
Roast, and in Mesies distribute the ^ood.
And so they feasted till the day was done.
And when 'twas dark parted and went to sleep.
But when Aurora had proclaimed the Sun
Which ready was above the Hill to peep,
Then to Parnassus up the Hunters go,
The Hounds before went searching out the sent.
Autolycus his sons were there also.
Ulysses with them; next the Dogs he went.
And in his hand shook a longshaded Spear.
The Dogs drew towered a wood. So close it was
That neither rain nor wind e're entered there,
Nor yet the beams of the Sun could through it pass.
And heaps of withered leaves there lay therein.
Within this th^cket lay a mighty B^re.
Only the noise of Hounds and men came in,
When they were very near, and not before.
The Bore rusht cut, and fire was in his eye,
^led his neck. Ulysses ready was.
The Bore first wounded had Ulysses thigh.
The Spear did through the Boars right shoulder pass.
Slain was the Bore. And of Ulysses wound
His Unkles to^k the care, and skilfully
They caused it to be closed up and bound,
And wi^h a Charm the blood stopped presently.
His wound soon cured very glad they were
And him with many Gifts send glad away.
At home they ask, and he relates there.
The Story of the hunting of that day.
Euryclea on the wound had said her hand,
And well assured was 'twas none but he.
Which made the water in her eyes to stand.
And now her joy and grief one passion be.
Her Speech stuck in her Throat; her hand lets fall
Her Masters soot. That down the Kettle threw.
The water runs out about the Hall;
And knowing now what she but thought was true,
You are Ulysses, said she, O my dear.
And towered Penelope she looked aside,
As if she meant to say, Your Husband's here.
But Pallas that did mean the truth to hide
Still made the Queen to look another way.
And he with one hand stopped the Nurses breath,
With the other held her fast to make her stay.
Why Nurse, said he, mean you to be my death?
Since at your breast I nourished have been,
And none but you knows me in this disguise;
These twenty years I here was never seen.
Let none else know it in the house. Be wise.
For this I tell you, and will make it true,
That of the women some I mean to slay.
When by my hand the Gods the Woo'rs subdue,
If you bewray me, you shall fare as they.
Then said Euryclea, What needs this?
You know my heart can hold like stone or brass.
And who is honest, who dishonest is
I Will tell you, if your purpose come to pass.
No Nurse, then said Ulysses, tell not me.
You need not. I shall know them every one.
Permit all to the Gods, and silent be.
For they best know what best is to be done.
Then out she went more water to fetch in,
The first being spilt. He washed and 'nointed was.
And covered the place where th'wound had been.
And nearer to the fire his Chair he draws.
Then to them came Penelope, and said,
Stranger, I Will ask you but a little more.
It Is almost bedtime, and when we are laid,
Our grief in gentle sleep is passed over.
But all the day my tears are my delight,
Or of my women's work the care I take.
And after I am gone to bed at night
A thousand dismal thoughts keep me awake.
As Philomela sitting in a tree
Mourns with a lamentable voice and shrill
For Itylus, and turns restlesly,
Whom Zethus Son did by misfortune kill:
Just so my mind divided is in twain;
Whether to keep my Servants with my Son,
And my dear Husbands bed, and here remain,
Or marry one of the Suitors, and be gone.
To marry and be gone I could not yet,
My Son too young was yet to rule the estate.
And now grown up, it makes him vex and fret
To see them daily feast within his Gate.
I Will tell you now a dream; expound it you.
I Have twenty Geese feeding in the yard without.
A mighty Eagle from the Hills down flew,
And brake their necks; dead they lay all about.
The Eagle straightway mounted out of sight.
I dreaming wept. To see them at the trough,
Feeding on steeped wheat, I took delight.
And to bemoan me Ladies came enough.
And then methought the Eagle came again,
And on a Beam which through the wall did start
He sat, and said in humane Language plain,
Child of Icarius trouble not your heart.
The thing you see is real, not a dream.
The Geese the Wooers, I the Eagle was,
And now returned and sitting on the Beam,
I am your Husband, and will bring to pass
The death of all your Suitors. Then waked I,
And went into the Court my Geese to see,
And found them all there feeding heartily,
Unhurt, and well as they were wont to be.
Woman, then said Ulysses, no man can
Expound this Dream but as himself has done,
That says and does. Ulysses is the man.
The Suitors will be killed every one.
Then said Penelope, Dreams are without
Such order as to make a Judgment by;
And at two Gates, men say, they issue out,
The one of Horn, the other of Ivory.
Th^se that pass through the Horn, to men of skill,
Never say any thing but what is sooth;
But find a word of truth you never will
In those that come through the Elephantine tooth.
But I much fear that my Dream came this way.
For I have promised to quit this place,
And come already is th'unlucky day
That must determine who shall gain my grace.
Twelve Axes here Ulysses set a row
Like twelve Boats laid along upon their sides*
And at a distance standing with his Bow,
Through every one of them his arrow glides.
And this shall to my Suitors be the Prize.
He that most easily shall bend the Bow,
And through the Axes all his Arrow flies,
Leaving this blessed house with him I Will go.
Then said Ulysses, Let the Suitors try
If they can bend the Bow, and through shoot
Through th'Axes if they can, for sure am I,
Ulysses will be here before they do it.
Stranger, said she, whilst you discourse, my eyes
To sleep will never be inclined. But since
The force of Nature on all Mortals lies,
I up into my Chamber will go hence,
There is my Bed, washed nightly with my tears
Since first Ulysses went to cursed Troy,
Wailing my Husbands absence waked with fears;
And yours in what part of the house you will say.
This said, unto her Chamber up she went,
And with her all her Maids. And there she lies.
And for her Husband did afresh lament,
Till Pallas threw a sweet sleep on her eyes.
LIB. XX.
ULysses in the Court lay out adoors
On a Cow hide; and on him skins of sheep
New killed and s^crificed by the Woo^rs.
There lay he, but he could not fall asleep.
(...) a Rug laid on him too.
Out came the Maids that wont were to commit
With the proud Wooers gigling and laughing so,
And pleasing one another with their wit,
As made Ulysses in his mind to cast
Whether to start up quick and kill them all,
Or let them now go on and take their last
Farewell of those they had to do withal.
As when a Bitch stands by her Whelps and spies
A Stranger coming near will bark and grin;
So at this sight of their debaucheries
Ulysses heart provoked barkt within.
Hold heart, said he, when Cyelops eat my men,
Thou did endure till counsel set thee free;
The danger now is less. Hold out again.
And so it did, though he lay restlesly.
As one that has raw flesh upon the fire,
And hungry is, is ever turning it;
So turns he himself with great desire
Against th'Wooers to devise some mischief fit.
Then Pallas came and standing at his head
In Woman's shape, O wretched man, said she,
What makes you toss and turn so in your bed?
The house is yours, your Wife and Son here be.
Then said Ulysses, I was casting how
I might alone these Suitors insolent,
That always here are many, overthrow;
And if I kill them, then again invent
How to escape and save my self by flight.
To this the Goddess answered, and said,
Another man would trust a meaner wight,
Though mortal, and rely upon his aid.
But I a God immortal am, and say,
Though fifty Bands of men should us oppose,
You should their Herds of Cattle drive away.
Enjoy securely therefore your repose.
A torment it is to watch all night, to one
That is already drencht in misery.
Sleep then. This said, sweet sleep she threw upon
His eyes, and from him mounted to the Sky.
And now Penelope awaked and sat
On her bed weeping* Having wept her fill,
She to Diana prayed, and said, O that
You would now shoot your Arrow and me kill,
Or that some great wind me away might bear,
And over a Rock throw me into the Main,
Never to be heard of, or as the Daughters were
Of Pandareus, whose Parents both were slain
By the Gods. But Venus the Orphans nourished.
With Butter, and with Honey, and with Wine.
Jun^ with form and wit them furnished.
Diana gave them stature. Artifice Divine
Pallas them taught. Then Venus went to Jove
To get them Husbands; for best knows he
The Issue of Conjunctions in Love,
Whether for better or for worse they be,
While Venus absent was on that affair,
By Harpies foul away they carried be.
And given for slaves to th'Furies in the Air.
Oh that the Gods would so dispose of me;
Or else Diana send me under ground,
That I may with Ulysses be, and not
To please another meaner man be bound.
Grief all day long is but a woeful Lot,
And sleep is some amends. But unto me
It evil Dreams along with it does bring.
This night my Husband seemed in the bed to be;
No Dream I thought it, but a real thing.
This said, the Morning fringed had the Sky.
Ulysses musing lay upon his bed
With closed eyes, and thought she certainly
Knew who he was, and stood at his beds head.
Then rose he, and his sheep* skins bare away,
And Rug into the house, but the Cow-hide
He carried out, and then to Jove did pray:
Hear Jupiter, with lifted hands he cried.
O Jove and Gods, if by your will Divine,
Tossed both at Sea and Land, I hither came;
By fatal word within, without by Sign,
To me now presently confirm the same.
Jove heard his Prayer, and straight it thundered.
This made Ulysses glad. Then spoke a Maid
The fatal word. Twelve Maids to furnish bread
Were ^o grind wheat continually employed.
Eleven their work had done and went to bed.
The weakest still staid grinding, and thus prayed:
Jove who without a Cloud have thundered,
Grant me poor Maid my wish, and then she said,
O Jove that Father art of Gods and Men,
Let never more these wicked Suitors taste
Meat in this house, nor ever come again
That pain me thus. This Supper be their last.
Ulysses with this word, and with the Thunder
Well pleased was, and thought assuredly.
With Pallas help the Suitors to bring under,
And many though they were to make them die.
Then the other Maids came in and made a fire
Within the Hall. And then too from his bed
Telemachus rose, puts on his attire,
And Sword and shoes. His Spear with brazen head
He took into his hand, and stood in the door,
And to the Nurse Euryclea he spoke:
What meat, what lodging had this Stranger poor?
Or was there none that care of him did take?
My Mothers nature (wise as she is) is such
H^ghly to honor men of less desert;
But for this Stranger perhaps cares not much.
Then said Euryclea, She has done her part;
Wine he has had as much as he thought fit.
She asked him if he had a mind to eat.
He answered, that he had no appetite
To bread at present, nor to any meat.
She bad her Maids set up a standing bed.
But he, as one in love with misery,
Would none of that, nor bed, nor coverled,
But on the ground resolved was to lie,
And make his Scrip the Bolster for his head;
And for a Bed to take a raw Cow-hide,
And sheepskins with the wool for coverled
Without the door; and we the Rug applied.
This said, Telemachus with Spear in hand
To Council goes, and his Dogs followed him.
Then Euryclea gives the Maids command
The rooms of The House to dress up and make trim.
Rise Maids, said she, sprinkle and sweep the Hall,
Lay Cushions on the Chairs, with Sponges make
The Tables clean, the Temp'rer and Cups all;
And see of water that there be no lack.
Go to the Spring, and fetch fair water thence
Quickly. You know to day is Holiday.
The Suitors will not now be long from hence.
So said the Nurse. The women her obey.
For water to the fountain went twice ten.
The rest did diligently work within. (...)
The Maids that went for water came again;
And the proud Woo'rs by that time were come in.
And then came in the Master of the Swine
Eumaeus, three Swine frankt and fat he brought,
There to be ready against the Suitors dine.
In all his Swine-sties better there were not.
And he unto Ulysses kindly spoke:
Stranger how fare you amongst the Wooers here?
Do they more pity now upon you take
Than formerly; or still deride you there?
O, said Ulysses, that the Gods would give
These men what to their insolence is due,
Who in a house not theirs so lewdly live,
As if no modesty at all they knew.
Then came Melanthus from a place hard by.
He had the charge of the Goats, and brought the best.
And spoke unto Ulysses spightfully:
Art thou here still to beg, and to molest
The Company? Do You mean before you go
To taste my fingers? Is there no good cheer
In other places amongst the Greeks, and so
You mean to dwell continually here?
Then came a third, that charge had of the Kine,
Philoetius by name, with him he brought
A Heiser and more G^ats, on which to dine,
Over the water, in the Ferry-boat.
Philoetius asked Eumaeus in his (...)
Who Is this, that is ^^w come ^^ther, and from whence,
What Countryman, and what his Parents were?
For, for his person he may be a Prince.
God can make Princes go from Land to Land
And beg, when he will give them misery.
This said, he took Ulysses by the hand,
And spoke unto him kind and lovingly:
Father, I wish you as much happiness
As ever you enjoyed before. But now,
I see you are in very great distress.
O Jove! What God so cruel is as thou?
Though born thou were, yet pitiest not to see
The torments of mankind. To think upon
Ulysses makes me weep. It may be he
Thus begs somewhere, with such apparel on,
Or else he is dead. O then I am undone.
He set me over his Herds when but a Boy;
But infinite they are grown since he is gone,
Or man would quickly all Cow kind destroy.
But mine the Suitors force me to bring in
For them to eat, and never regard his Son.
The Goods to share already they begin
Of th'owner, that so long now has been gone.
And I devising was what I should do,
To take my Ca^tle with me and be gone,
And one or other Prince to give them to.
But that I thought would be unjustly done,
For they Telemachus his Cattle were.
Again, I thought it labor very sour
To stay and keep my Masters Cattle here
For others in his absence to devour.
So here abide I, and my self I flatter
With hope to see Ulysses one day come
Back to his house, and the proud Suitors scatter.
Thus laid the Ma^^er of the Kine. To whom
Ulyss^s said, Honest you seem and wise.
I therefore will a secret to you swear
By (...) on high you shall see with your eyes
Ulysses ((...) you wish to see him) here,
And all these domineering Suitors slay.
Then, O, said he, that Jove would have it so.
For I should let you see in such a fray
Quickly how much these hands of mine can do.
Eumaeus also did like Prayer make
To see Ulysses there. So ended they.
While they discoursed, the Suitors counsel take
How they might make Telemachus away.
Then over their heads an Eagle flew on high
Sinister, with a fearful Dove in's foot.
Then said Amphinomus, Let Us lay this by,
And think of Supper, for we cannot do it.
The Suitors all approved of what he said,
And in they went, and there on Bench and Se^
Within Ulysses house their Coats they laid,
And set themselves to kill and dress their meat.
Then from the Herd they sacrificed a Cow,
And many well-grown sheep, and goats well fed,
And many a very fat and pampered Sow
The entrails they roasted and distributed.
Eumaeus gave out Cups, Philoetius bread,
Melanthus from the Temp'rer filled out wine.
The Suitors on the meat before them fed
With Stomachs good, and drank the blood of the Vine.
Telemachus Ulysses in the Hall
Hard by the threshold sets, and there he sat
On an ill-favored stool at Table small,
And gave him his just share of th'entrails fat,
And for him filled a great gold Cup with wine.
Sit here, said he, and fare like other men.
Fear neither blows nor scoffs. The house is mine,
Ulysses is the owner of it. When
He first possessed it, he gave it me.
And you my Mothers Suitors, mock no more,
But keep the peace as long as here you be;
For else perhaps arise may trouble sore.
At first the Suitors knew not how to take
Telemachus his words, and silent were,
Admiring that such threatening words he spoke,
So many men provoking without fear.
But by and by Antinous said thus,
Since Jove appeared has in his defense,
Let Us put these threats up of Telemachus.
Else we should quickly spoil his eloquence.
So said Antinous. But Telemachus
Cared not at all for any thing he said.
When peace within doors was concluded thus,
In other Rites of the Feast they were employed.
The Hecatomb they bear throughout the Town
Into Apollo's shady Grove divine.
The upper-joynts in Messes they divide;
So filled their Tables and sat down to dine.
The portion of Ulysses was no less
Than other Suitors had, nor more. For why,
Telemachus had ordered every Mess
Should equal be, and men served equally.
Amongst the Suitors was a very Knave,
Ctesippus was his name, a rich man's Son;
And therefore hop^d Penelope to have
This man to th'Wooers made a motion.
Hear me you Suitors of Penel^pe:
This Stranger here is equal made to us,
And therefore reason it is that also we
Should love the Strangers of T^lemachus:
Lo, here is a Gift I Will give him, that he may
Bestow it, is it please him, on him or her
That empts the Chamber pots, or giv't away
To any of Ulysses Bondmen here.
With that he hurled at Ulysses head
A Cows-foot, but he turned his head the while,
And from the stroke himself delivered.
Then smiled Ulysses a Sardanique smile.
Telemachus his anger could not hide.
It Is well, said he, you did not hurt him here.
For else, believe it you had surely di'd
O'th place, run through the body with my Spear,
And never found a wife here, but a g^ave.
Therefore give over th^s behavior wild.
Of good and bad I now some kn^wledge have;
And do nor always take me for a Child.
What Is past I bear, the havoc of m^attle,
My Corn and Wine consumed lavishly.
It Is hard for one with many t'enter battle.
Use me no longer as an Enemy.
For fighting to be stain I Would rather choose,
Than see my Guests or Servants harshly used,
My women, as they pass about the house,
To be so basely tug'd, touz'd, and abused.
This said, a while the Suitors silent were;
But not long after, Agelaus spoke.
Let Us not, said he, against a truth so clear
Struggle, and what is said in ill part take;
Nor harshly use the Stranger any more,
Nor any Servant of Telemachus.
But yet I have a silly word in store
For him, and for his Mother, and for us.
Whilst there was hope Ulysses might come home,
The Suitors had done best at home to stay,
Expecting him, and not have hither come.
But since there is none, to's Mother he should say,
Take one of them for Husband; which you please,
And most shall give you. So shall he enjoy
His Fathers means, and eat and drink at ease,
And she with her new Husband go her way.
To this Telemachus replying says,
By Jove, and by my Fathers misery,
Who now is lost and dead, or somewhere strays
Far off from Ithaca, it is not I
That do my Mother keep from marrying
Whom she thinks good. I do advise her still
To take the man that shall most Treasure bring.
But I Will not make her do it against her will.
So ended he. Then on the Suitors faces
Pallas sets up a laughter not their own,
Nor to be stopped; their Senses she displaces,
Their meat was bloody, and their hearts were down.
What is it poor men, said Theoclymenus,
Your heads and faces are wrapped up in night;
You weep and groan; the Walls and Beams of the house
To me seem bloody; and left there is no light.
The Hall and Porch, methinks are full of Sprights
Ready to go to Hell; the Sun has lost
His place in Heaven, nor are there any lights;
And dismal darkness has the House ^ngrost:
At this they laughed. Then said Eurymachu^,
This Stranger is not very well, let him
By those that wait be guided from the House
To th'Market-place. For all within is dim,
I am, said Theoclymenus, not blind.
I can go to the Marketplace alone.
I have both eyes and ears, and feet and mind.
With these I can go hence. Guide need I none.
And go I will. For evil is hard by,
Which none of you the Suitors shall escape
That have so much abused the Family.
This said, he parts, and left the Woo'rs to gape
On one another, and with insipid jests
To vex Telemachus, and themselves please,
And all upon Telemachu^ his Guests.
The words that one of them then said were these:
Telemachus, of all men you're least able
To make an entertainment or a Feast.
For first you for this Beggar set a Table,
Who eats and drinks as stoutly as the best,
But can no work do, nor has any force;
A very burden to the earth. And this
A Prophet would be, and loves to discourse
Of Ill to come. My counsel therefore is
That you would put these Strangers both aboard
Some ship, and send them into Sicily.
They that way may some profit you afford.
Thus said the Woo'rs, but little cared he,
But silently the sign expecting stood
His Father should have given of falling on.
Penelope mean while sat where she could
Hear plainly what was said by every one.
And now the Suitors merry Supper made,
And laughing sat, and fed on much good cheat.
But After-Supper worse none ever had.
For of the wrong themselves beginners were.
LIB. XXI.
PEnelope the Suitors strength to try
Who soon'st could bend her Noble Husbands Bow,
And through the Axes make his Arrow fly,
And whom she was to marry now to know,
To a high Chamber up the stairs she went,
Wherein Ulysses precious goods did stand.
There hung upon a Pin the Bow unbent
The well made Kev she carried in her hand.
This Bow was g^ven him by Iphitus
At Sparta But U^ysses with him met
First at Messena. For it fell out thus.
Ulysses then was there about a debt.
Messena. men they ships had put ashore
At Itha^a, and thence had taken a Prey
Of sl^eep, wh^^n was in number fifteen score,
And with the Shepherds carried them away.
The was the ^au. Ulysses thither went.
'Twas a long way* and he scarce past a Boy.
But by his Father and the Lords was sent
Task ^epara^^^^ for this a^ ^y.
But Ip^^tus twelve Mares had lost Each one
A young Mule had that f^llow'd he behind
(Which of his ^eat^ were the occas^on)
And at Messena these he thought to find.
But as he was re^ back aga^n,
And came into the house of He^^ules,
That (...) first d^d him e^tert^^n,
And after, killing ^im his Ma^es (...) s^ize.
Th^^ was the man that to Ulyss^s gave
The Bow. And from him had a Sword and Spear.
But Hercules had sent him to his Grave,
^re they had tasted one another cheer.
This Bow he carried not to Ilium,
No^ ever had made use of it in sray.
But often had it (...) his hand at home.
For only as a Monument it lay.
Penelope now standing at the door,
Quickly the Bolt struck ba^k with her great Key.
The Valves fly open suddenly and roar:
As when a great Bull roars, ^o r^ared they.
Penelo^e went in, and up she stepped
Upon a board whereon were standing Chests,
In which amongst odours sw^e^ the clothes were kept,
The costly Ga^ments, Robes, and Coats and Vests.
Thence to the Bow she reach^ and from the Pin
She took it as it hung there in the Case.
And sitting down, her lap she laid it in.
Aloud she wept, and tears ran down apace.
And when she long enough had weeping been,
The Bow she did unto the Suite^s bear,
And Qui^er with it full of Arrows keen.
The Axes by her women carried were.
Then with her S^arf she shaded both her cheeks,
Having a Waiting Woman on each hand.
Unto her Gallant Suitors thus she speaks:
Hear me you lusty Suitors that here stand
Using this House not yours, continually
To eat and drink in, at another cost;
And for it do pretend no reason why,
But as contenders who shall love me most.
Lo here; to him I make my self a prize,
Who this good Bow with greatest ease shall bend,
And whose aimed Arrow through these Axes flies.
With him from this most blessed house I Will wend.
This said, E^m^^us th'Axes and the Bow
By her command unto the Suitors bears;
And as he went, his eyes for grief overflow.
Nor could Philoetius abstain from tears.
For which Antinous gave them this reproof:
You foolish Clowns, what ails you to shed tears?
Has she not for her Husband grief enough?
That you must add your sorrow unto hers.
Sit silently, eat and drink quietly.
Or if you needs must weep, go weep without.
Leave the Bow here, the Suitors strength to try,
And that it may be carried round about.
Not that I think there is any man among
Us all can bend it as Ulysses could
(For I remember him though I were young)
So said he, though he thought he bend it should,
And also shoot through the Axes every one,
Though he were only the first to be shot.
For he the other Suitors had set on,
And was the first contriver of the Plot.
Telemachus then to the Suitors spoke,
Sure Jove, said he, bereaved me has of sense.
My Mother tells me she will a Husband take,
And leaving me depart with him from hence;
And I here merry am that should be sad.
But be it as 'twill, the Game must now begin,
For such a wise as never Achaia had,
Nor in Mysen' or Argos was e're seen,
Nor Pyle, nor Ithaca, nor in Epire.
But what need I set forth my Mothers praise?
You know it your selves. Therefore I you desire
To put off all excuses and delays.
And I my self will be the first to try
This mighty Bow, whether I can or no,
And through the Axes make the Arrow fly.
'Twill grieve me less to let my Mother go;
^ince I have strength to bend my Fathers Bow,
Why should I doubt of governing his State?
And from him presently his Coat did throw
And Sword, and then fell to delineate
The ground whereon the Axes were to stand.
On one long line he set them all upright.
The Woo'rs admired the justness of his hand;
For why, the like was never done in his sight.
Then went he to the Sill to try the Bow.
Thrice he essaid it and was near it still,
And thrice again relenting let it go.
Once more had done it. But 'twas not his will.
For then his Father checked him with a wink.
Alas, then said Telemachus, must this
Be all my strength? Too young I am I think.
Come, let one take the Bow that elder is.
This said, the Bow and Arrow he laid by,
And to the Seat went where he ^t before.
Then said Antinous, The Bow let us try
In order as we sit. Let him therefore
Try first, whose Table next the Cupboard is,
And so to the right hand up one by one.
The other Suitors all approved this.
Leiodes was the first; so he begun;
His place was low'st. He to the threshold wen^
To try his force. But to his tender hand
And feeble arms the Bow would not relent.
Then down he laid it there, and lets it stand;
And to the Suitors spoke: This Bow says he,
I cannot bend, some other take it in hand.
It Is like of many Lords the death to be,
When by the strongest it comes to be manned*
For better it is to die than live and miss
The hopes you hither come for every day.
And what is it any of you hope but this,
That you Ulysses Consort marry may?
But when he shall this Bow have understood,
Let him some other Lady woo at ease
Amongst the Achaea^s whom he shall think good,
And let Penelope take whom she please.
This said, the Bow and Arrow he set by,
And to the Seat went where he sat before,
And by Antinous was angerly
As Soon as he had spoke, rebuked therefore.
What say you? That this Bow the death shall be
Of many Lords? Why so? 'Cause you have not
The strength to bend it? Others have, you will see,
But you for bending Bows were not begot.
Then to Mel^^theus he turned and said,
Let fire be made, and a great Chair set by it,
And let upon it Cushions be laid,
And let us have good sto^e of Tallow white
T'anoint and warm and supple make the Bow,
And ^y if we perh^ps may bend it then.
Fire. Chair, and Cushions came and grease enough,
But to no purpose; too we^k were the men.
Antinous yet and Earyma^h^^
Gave (...) not over; these two were the best
Of all the ^uiters that ca^e to the house.
No hope at all remained f^^ the rest.
Eu^aeus and Philoetius then went out
Together; after them Ulysses went,
And when they were the Gate and Court without,
Himself unto them to discover ^eant.
And fair he spoke them: Master of the Kine,
And you Eumaeus, Master of the Swine,
Shall I keep in, or speak a thought of mine?
To speak it out my heart does me incline.
What (...) Uly^^es should come suddenly
Brought by some God, and stand before this rout,
On whose side, his or theirs would you then be?
What your mind prompts you to speak freely out.
Then answered him the Master of the Kine,
O that the Gods above would have it so.
You Would see the virtue of these hands of mine.
The Master of the Swine then said so too.
When now the hearts of both of them he knew,
He spoke again and said, It Is I am he,
That after twenty years return to you;
And know you longed have this day to see.
Of all my Servants I find only you
That wish me here. If therefore it shall please
The Gods by me the Suitors to subdue,
I Will give you wealth enough to live at ease,
And Houses near me, and shall wedded live,
And Brothers of Telemachus shall be.
And that you may assuredly believe
Ulysses speaks it, you a sign shall see.
With that he pulled his Rags beside his thigh,
And lets them see the place the Boar had ^ent
Then when upon Parnassus Mountain high
He with his Unkles Sons a hunting went.
And then they fling their Arms about Ulysses,
And kiss his hand and shoulders, weeping sore;
And he again embraced them with kisses,
Nor had till Sunset weeping given over
But that Ulysses hindered it. Give over, said he,
Your weeping, lest that some one come out hither,
And tell within what here without they see.
Go in, but one by one, not all together.
First I Will go in, and then come you. Now mark.
I Will pray the Suitors I the Bow may try.
If to my motion they refuse to hark,
Give it into my hand as you pass by.
And you Eumaeus bid the women shut
The House-doors all, nor suffer any one
Of The men without the House his head to put.
And though within they hap to hear men groan,
That they stir not, but ply their business.
The utter-Gate Philoetius lock you fast,
That to the House there may be no access.
This said, into the Hall again he past,
And after him his Servants. Now the Bow
Was in Eurymachus his hand by th'fire.
He warmed and rubbed, and did what he could do.
But for to bend it he was never the nigh^.
At this he v^xt, and took it heinously,
And, O, said he, it is not for my own part
I troubled am, but for the Company.
It Is chiefly that, I take so much to heart.
Nor is it for a wife that I complain;
For in Achaia Ladies be enough,
But that we hope Penelope to gain,
Although we cannot bend Ulysses Bow.
Th^^ said Antinous, 'Twill not be so.
This day unto Apollo sacred is,
And not a day for bending of a Bow.
Therefore to lay it by is not amiss.
And let the Axes stand still as they do;
(For it is not like they will be stolen away)
And so go in and offer Wine unto
The God. The Bow may till to morrow stay.
And bid Melanthus in the morning bring
Goats of the sattest, and whereof the savor
May from Apollo of all Archers King,
For bending of the Bow procure us favor.
They all agree. Into the house they went.
The Officers for hands the water ho^;
The Waiters fill the Cups, and them present.
And when they drunk had each man what he would,
Then spoke Ulysses to the Suitors thus:
Hear me, ye Suitors, what I have to say,
Antinous, and you Eurymachus,
For to you two it is chiefly that I pray.
Since you the bending of the Bow remit
To the Gods to give to whom they please; and they
To morrow doubtless will determine it,
Let me now of the Bow make an essay.
That I may know whether my strength be spent,
And what I could before now cannot do.
Whether I still be firm or do relent
With hardship, and with want of looking to.
These words of his made all the Suitors mad
With fear that he indeed would bend the Bow.
Antinous gave him language very bad.
Thou wretched Stranger, is it not enough
That of our Feast thou have an equal part,
And that of our discourse (and none but thou
Stranger and Beggar) made a hearer art?
It Is wine that makes thee not thy self to know.
For wine serves all men so that drink too much.
Wine hurt Eurytion the Centaur great.
His carriage in Perithous house was such
Among the Lapithae sitting at meat,
That angry with it they were, and all arose,
And with sharp iron cut off both his ears,
And with the same they pared off his nose.
A way the cause of his own harm he bears.
From that day on, Centaurs and men are foes.
Themselves men hurt by wine immoderate,
So if you bend the Bow, your ears you will lose.
For you will find here no prating Advocate.
But to King Takim forthwith you shall go,
And he will of you make a cruel end.
Therefore sit still, and let alone the Bow;
Nor with men younger than your self contend.
Then said Penelope, I Would have you know,
Antinous, that you do very ill
To wrong Telemachus his Guest. What though
He bend the Bow, do you think I take him will
For Husband? I am sure you think not so.
Let none of you be sad with fear of that.
Then to her said Eurymachus, No no;
That Is not the thing that we be troubled at.
It Is of our Honor that we jealous be.
For how will men and women, think you, prate,
But that such Suitors woo Penelope
As could not bend Ulysses Bow, but that
A Beggar that past by by chance could bend it?
Which unto us will be no little shame.
Who (said she) live on others means and spend it,
Should not stand much on Honor and on fame.
Besides, this Stranger is well made and tall,
And of a great man says he is the Son.
Give him the Bow to try his strength withal.
For this I Will promise him, and see it done.
If he do bend it, I Will on him bestow
Good Clothing and a handsome Coat and Vest,
Shoes to his feet, Dart, Sword with edges two,
And send him to such place as he thinks best.
Then spoke to her Telemachus her Son:
Mother, to give the Bow or to deny't,
Is in my power, and hinder me can none
In Elis, or Achaia, or here right
From giving it unto this Stranger here,
If I think fit. But Mother, pray go now
Up to your Chamber, and look to your work,
And leave to us to dispute of the Bow.
She mused on, and thought his counsel wise;
And being in her Chamber sore did weep.
For th'absence of her Husband, till her eyes
By the Goddess Pallas closed were with sleep.
Eumaeus now had brought the Bow about,
And come it was to where Ulysses fat.
The Suitors all at once then cried out,
Swineherd, Rogue, Lout, what meanest thou by that?
If the Gods please to favor our design,
Thou shall be slain and carried out of sight,
And there devoured be by thy own Swine.
This put Eumaeus into a great fright.
Telemachus then roared on the other part,
Bear on the Bow (to obey all is not best)
I Will pelt thee (though that thou my elder art)
With stones home to thy Hogsties like a beast.
For I the stronger am. O that I were
But so much stronger than these Suitors all,
I soon of some of them the house should clear.
They laughed at this, and bated of their gall.
Eumaeus then took up the Bow again,
And gave it to Ulysses in his hand.
This done, Euryclea he called then.
It is, said he, Telemachus command
To lock the doors all; and that if you hear
Noise in the house of blows, or groaning men,
Let none go forth, but at their work stay there.
This said, Euryclea went in again,
And locked the doors. Philoetius likewise
Went silently and shut the utter-Gate,
And with a Ship rope that lay by, it ties,
And coming back sits where before he sat;
And looked upon Ulysses, who to know
What work the worms had in his absence made,
This way and that way turning was the Bow.
At this the Suitors one t'another said.
This Beggar surely has no little skill
(...) Bows or in Bow stealing, or of's own
He has one liked, or make one like it will,
He does examine it so up and down.
Another said, As he shall bend the Bow,
^o let him find, as he is begging, Alms.
So mocked they. When he viewed it had enough,
And holden it a while had in his palms,
He bent it. As a Fiddler does not spend
Very much labor the sheeps gut to strain;
So he, Ulysses his strong Bow to bend,
Did put himself to very little pa^n
Then with his left hand he the string essaid.
It sounded like the singing of a Swallow.
The Suitors then began to be afraid,
And mighty claps of Thunder straightway follow.
Joves Token very welcome was t'Ulysses.
Then to the Bow he set a shaft, and there
Sitting, shot through the Axes, not one misses.
The rest of th'Arrows in the Quiver were.
Then turning to Telemachus, he said,
I have not shamed you, nor have missed one Axe,
Nor long a bending of the Bow I staid.
You see then that the Woo'rs me falsely tax.
But now it is time for After suppering
Ere day be done, and taking such delights,
As Cups, Discourse, and pleasant Music bring;
For these of Feasting are the common rites.
Then to his Son with his eye he beckoned.
Telemachus that well him understood,
With Spear in hand and Helmet on his head,
Came unto him, and close by his Chair stood.
LIB. XXII.
ULysses then himself delivers
Of his soul Rags, and leaps up to the Sill:
With ^owe in hand and Arrows tipped with death,
And spoke to th'Wooers, boasting of his skill
Suitors, said he, this Match is at an end.
Jov^ speed me now. Another Mark have at,
Which none ere shot at yet. Apollo send
Me luck to hit. As he was saying that,
TO Antinous the Shaft he did address,
Who had the Cup in's hand about to drink.
Than of his death he thought of nothing less.
For one amongst so many who would think,
How strong soever, durst do such a thing?
The Arrow pierced his neck from throat to poll.
The wound received, he turns round staggering;
The blood streamed out; away he threw the Bowl;
And overturned the Table with his feet;
Both bread and meat lay scattered in the Hall.
The Suitors bustle and in clusters meet,
Of this great man amazed at the fall.
Then one of them unto Ulysses said,
Stranger, this was ill shot; thou killed have
The greatest man in Ithaca. Thou'st played
Thy last prize. To the Crows thou shall be cast.
But yet they held their hands; for why, they thought
'Twas done by misadventure, not contrived.
For proud and foolish they perceived not
The fatal hour was to them all arrived.
Then said Ulysses with a sullen eye,
Dogs, dead you thought me, and spent my estate;
With you my women you compelled to lie;
And would have wedded, whilst I lived, my Mate.
No ^ear you had neither of Gods on high,
Nor of revenge from any mortal man;
But now a vengeance to you all is nigh.
At this they frighted were and looked wan;
And each one peept about what way to take
To save his own life, if he could, by flight.
None but Eurymachus (...)' Ulysses spoke.
If you Ulysses be, you say but right.
Much harm is done you both in house and field;
But this Antinous Author was of 't all;
He set us on, and here lies justly killed.
For wedding of your wife his care was small.
His care was how to make himself here King
(Which Jove not suffered him to bring to pass;)
And to destruction how your Son to bring
He chiefly thinking and designing was.
And since that he deservedly is stain,
Spare your own people; we'll repair what is done.
And what is spent we will make up again,
And recompense with twenty Cows each one;
And Brass and Gold till you be satisfied.
If not, there is no man can your anger blame.
To this Ulysses with a ^our look replied
Your whole estates, and added to the same
How much soever you can elsewhere get
Too little is to bind me to desist,
Until the Suitors shall have paid their debt.
Two ways before you lie, take which you list,
To fight or fly, if you will death avoid.
But fly, I think you cannot. So said he.
Eurymachus then to the Suitors said,
The man will not lay down his Bow you see;
But since it is in his hand, and Arrows by,
And stands upon the threshold of the door,
His shafts will fly at us continually,
And till we all be slain will not give over:
Let Us therefore take up Tables for defense
Against his shafts, and (Sword in hand) run all
Unto the door at once and drive him thence,
And people of the Town together call.
This said, his Sword with double edge he drew,
And thundered him with words. But howsoever
A deadly shaft first from Ulysses ^lew
That entered at his breast and stuck in's liver.
Down fell his Sword, he turns himself quite round,
And throws his blood about him every way;
^icks down the Table, meat and Cup, to the ground.
And with his brow beating the floor he lay;
And sprawling made the Seat shake with his feet;
And endless darkness lay upon his eye.
Then rose Amphinomus and death did meet.
He thought from thence to make Ulysses fly.
But by Telemachus prevented was,
That slew him with his Spear upon the place.
From back to breast the well-thrown Spear did pass;
Down with a thump he falls upon his face.
Telemachus in the body left the Spear.
For why, he had good reason to mistrust
Amongst so many Swords, if he staid there,
He might be killed by some blow or thrust.
Then to his Father as he by him stood,
To fetch down Arms, said he, 'Twill do no harm,
Two Spears, a Buckler, and a Helmet good,
And both Philoetius and Eumaeus arm.
Run quickly, said Ulysses, while there be
Arrows remaining, le^t they force me should
To quit the door. Then quickly up ran he
Unto the room wherein the Armor stood.
Eight Spears, four Bucklers, and four Helmets good
He took, and to his Father came again.
And first he armed himself, and ready stood.
The two good Servants themselves armed then.
Ulysses Arrows till they all were gone
Killed each his man, and one by one they fall.
But when they all were spent and left was none,
He sets his Bow to lean against the wall.
Over his shoulder he his Buckle^ cast,
And puts his well-made Helmet on his head.
The two Spears with his hand he griped fast.
And then his posture he considered.
There was in the wall a certain window high,
By the S^l^ whereof a way lay to the Street,
To which he ^ad Eumaeus have an eye,
And near it stand. But one way was to it.
Then Agelaus to the Suitors said,
Why does not some man to that window have,
And to the people cry aloud for aid,
That so this Shooter may have shot his last.
Then said Meldntheus, No, no, it is in vain;
The street-door and the Court-gate stand so close,
That one good man the place may well maintain
Against how many s'ever them oppose.
But well, I Will fetch you Armor ^o put on,
And weap^s I will bring you out of hand.
For where they by Ulysses and his Son
Were laid, I know the room and where they stand.
Then up he went. Tw^ve Buckl^rs he brings thence.
As many Spe^^s, as many Helmets too*
The Su^^ers then prepared for their defense;
And now Ulyss^s knew not what to do.
But to ^elema^hus he turned and said,
Th'^ll women sure, o^ else Melanth^us has
For th'Wooers gotten Arms and us betrayed.
No, Father, answered he, my fault it was.
The door I left u^kt and but put to,
Which some body observed. Eum^us now
Go lock ^t fast W^thal consider who,
The women or Melanth^^s served us so.
Wh^ thus they talk, Melantheus went once more
To fetch down Arm^* (...) saw him then,
And told Ulysses, ^im we thought before
To be the man, is (...) go (...) a^en.
Shall I go now and kill him (if so be
I can) or bring him hither to you, to endure
What you think fit for all his villainy?
Then said U^ysses, We two will be sure
Telemachus and I, to keep these men
From going out, and therefore go you two
And bind his hands and feet together. Then
Betwixt his body and his legs put through
A Rope, and at his back tie boards: And so
Close to a Pillar hoise him up on high
Unto the beams of the house, that he may know
His fault, and feel his pain before he die.
Then up they went, and stood without the door
On each side one. Melantheus was within
At the far end, looking for Armor more.
And after there he long enough had been,
Out with a Helmet in one hand he came,
A Buckler in the other, great but torn.
La^rtes in his youth had born the same,
But now with lying it was moldy worn.
As he came out they seized him suddenly,
And in again they dragged him by the hair;
And then his hands unto his feet they tie,
And up they hoise him as they bidden were.
This done, Eumaeus said unto him jeering,
In that soft bed, Melantheus, easily
You will observe the Mornings first appearing,
That for the Woo'rs your Goats may ready be.
Then armed both, and locking up the Door,
And breathing courage to Ulysses come.
So that upon the threshold there were four;
But many were the Suitors in the room.
Then down unto Ulysses Pallas came
In Mentor's shape, to whom Ulysses said,
You are my friend, and our age is the same;
For old acquaintance let me have your aid.
Though thus he said, he thought it Pallas still.
The Suitors clamor'd. Agelaus spoke:
Mentor beware, the course you take is ill
Against us all Ulysses part to take.
For it is our purpose when these two are slain
Father and Son, that you the next shall be,
And of your rashness suffer shall the pain,
And with his Substance your own mix will we.
Nor shall your Sons, Daughters, or Wife live here.
Pallas was angry at these words of his,
And chid Ulysses then, and asked him where
His Courage was. And what, said she, is this
The man that bravely sought nine years at Troy,
And killed in fight so many gallant men,
And he whose prudence did the Town destroy;
And whines so at his coming home again?
Come hither Milk-sop, says she, stand by me,
And how your old friend Mentor shall require
The kindness you have shown him, you shall see.
Yet presently she would not end the fight.
For further yet she would the courage try
Both of Ulysses and Telemachus.
And in a Swallows shape she up did fly,
And sat upon a black Beam of the House.
Mean while the Suitors by Ag^laus,
Amphimedon and Demopt^lemus,
Eurynomus, Pisandrus, Polybus
The best of all the Suitors in the House,
(For many had been killed with the Bow)
Encouraged were. Friends, said he, let us be bold,
And at them all our good Spears let us throw.
So shall we make the man his hands to hold.
Mentor with theirs, his fortune will not mix,
He and those hopes are gone. Upon the Sill
There are but four. Let Us throw at once but six,
That if Jove please, we may Ulysses kill.
When he is gone, the rest we need not fear.
The Suitors all approved this advise.
And then they lanced every man his Spear;
But Pallas made it fall out otherwise.
For from the Beam she soon blew here and there
The flying staves, whereof one hit the door;
The two side posts, and the walls wounded were.
When of the Spears the danger was past over,
Then said Ulysses, Now our turn it is
To cast our Spears at this unruly rout;
That not content with former injuries
Do what they can to take our lives to boot.
This said, and taking aim, their Spears they threw.
Ulysses killed Demoptolemus.
Telemachus Euryades then slew.
Eumaeus with his Spear killed Elatu^.
Pisandrus by Philoetius was slain.
The Suitors then to the rooms end retreat,
And to the four gave time to take again
The Spears that in the wounds were sticking yet.
Again they lanced every man his Spear.
The Swallow on the Beam still puts them by;
And by the door, walls, posts received they were.
Telemachus and Eumaeus only
Had little scratches; one upon the Wrist.
Eumaeus on the shoulder. But the skin
Scarce broken was. And both the other mist.
And then the four amongst the throng threw in
Their Spears again. And then Ulysses slew
Eury am^^ And by Telemachus
Was sla^n Amphi^edon. Eum^us threw,
And killed Polybus Ph^^oetius
Then smot Ctesippus and through pierced his breast,
And over him insulting thus he said,
Bold Prater that in love art with thy jest,
And to say any thing art not afraid,
For the Cows foot to(...) thrown take that.
Ulysses killed too Damasto^ides.
Telemachus Le^ocrat^s laid flat
With Spear in hand. When they had killed these,
Pallas aloft held forth her frightful shield.
And then as Cattle stung with a gad-fly,
In heat of Summer run about the field,
So round about the Hall the Suitors fly
As when the Vultures stoop down from the Hill
Upon the Fowl; these couch close to the plain,
Threatened with heavy Clouds, they slay and kill,
These cannot fly away, nor turn again;
So they upon the Suitors fiercely fall,
And winding with them as they shift their ground,
They killing went. All gore-blood was the Hall,
And made with thumps and groans a dismal sound.
Leiodes then kneeled at Ulysses feet
To beg his life. I came, said he, as Priest,
And told them their behavior was unmeet,
And always gave them counsel to desist.
But nothing that I said would they obey,
And of their own destruction Authors are.
There Is not a woman in the house can say
I did amiss. Must I like these men fare?
To this Ulysses with a sour look said,
Did you come with the Suitors as their Priest?
Then surely for them you have also prayed,
That of my coming home I should have mist,
That with these men you daily might here board
Your self, your wife, and children. Therefore die.
With that he took up Agelaus Sword,
Which when he di'd fell from him and lay by.
And with it at a stroke cut off his his head.
But Phemius the Minstrel escaped free.
For thither he came not for meat or bread;
The Suitors forced him of necessity.
He had his Fiddle in his hand, and stood
Within the door, and studi'd what to do,
Whether unto Ulysses go he should,
Or out a door unto the Altar go
^'th' Court, whereon with many a sat beast
Ulysses often devoutly had served Jove.
And having paused, at ^ast he thought it best
To go t'Ulysses and his merry prove.
Then down he laid his Fiddle on the floor,
Between the Temp'rer and a studded Chair,
Then went and sell upon his knees before
Ulysses, and thus to him made his prayer.
Save me ^lysses, and consider that
If you me s^^y, ^t after you will grieve.
I am a Singer, but was never taught.
For Song to me ^he Gods did freely give.
I sing to Gods and men, and have the skill
To sing to you as to a God. Therefore
Of cutting off my head lay^y the will.
Bes^es, (...) can tell you more;
I was not (...) her drawn with smell of roast.
But many men and strong brought me by fo^ce.
Telemachus that knew this was no boast,
Cried out, Hold Father, 't^s not our best course
To slay the innocent, and I would ^ain
Save Me^on too, that loved me from a Boy,
And took care ^f ^e, if he be not slain
By coming in your or your Servants way.
Under a Seat (...) himself had laid.
And wrapped him^el^ up in a raw Cow-hide,
And hearing what T^achus had said,
Skipt nimbly ou^, ^^s C^w skin cast aside,
And falling at Telem^ his (...)
He to him said, (...) (...) here I stand.
Fo^^ear I pray (...) to you Fath^^ be
A means that also he may hold his hand.
For whilst his anger against the Suitors staid,
That wasted have his goods, and him despised,
Killing each way about him, I Am afraid
He might perhaps kill me too unadvised.
Ulysses hearing answered thus again,
Take courage man. There is no danger nigh.
And this remember and tell other men
That Justice better thrives than Knavery.
Go now into the Court and stay without
Both you and Phemius, that I may do
The business in the house I am about.
Then out into the Court away they go.
And on the Altar of the God they sat
Looking about, still searing to be slain.
Ulysses to be sure that none remain
Alive, and under Seats or Tables squat,
Searched well the Hall, and found they all were dead.
As fishes on the shore lie out, and by
The heat of Phaethon be murdered,
So did the Woo'rs one on another lie.
Then to Telemachus Ulysses said,
Tell Euryclea I would speak with her.
Telemachus his Father straight obeyed,
And scraped at the door that she might hear.
Nurse (says he) Mother of the Maids come out.
My Father to you somewhat has to say.
She heard him well, and presently without
More words the door she opened with her Key.
And found Ulysses standing amongst the dead
Besmeared with blood. As when a Lion has
Upon a Cow at pasture newly fed,
With goary breast and chaps; so dight he was,
The Old woman there beholding so much blood,
And Carcasses so many lying dead,
At such a mighty work amazed stood;
And was about to whoop, but hindered
Was by Ulysses. Hold, said he, within
Your joy, and let it not appear in vain.
To glory over dead men is a sin.
These men the Gods, and their own sins have slain.
For neither from above they feared the Gods,
Nor men respected good or bad beneath,
And therefore now have felt the Heavenly Rods,
And brought upon themselves untimely death.
But tell me Nurse how many women be
That me dishonor and do wickedness.
Fifty, said she, do serve Penelope,
And learn to work and wait, no more nor less.
Of these there twelve be that are impudent,
And care not for me, nor Penelope.
Telemachus was young; the Government
To him of Maids might not well trusted be.
But now I Will to my Ladies Chamber go,
Where she is asleep. Some God has closed her eyes.
To tell her you are here. But he said, No;
First call those women who do me despise,
And have behaved themselves dishonestly.
Euryclea obeys, and goes her way,
And called those women; Come away, said she,
Telemachus in the Hall does for you stay.
Mean while Ulysses called Telemachus
Unto him, and his saithful Servants two,
Trusty Eumaeus and Philoetius;
Hear me, said he, what I would have you do.
Make these lewd women carry hence the dead,
The Chairs and Tables in the Hall make clean,
And when that business they have finished,
Into the Court make them go forth again,
Into that narrow place 'twixt the house and hedge,
Till they forget the Suitors Venery,
Make them of your sharp Swords to feel the edge,
And for their stolen unclean delight to die.
Then came the women down into the Hall
Wailing, and tears abundantly they shed,
And presently unto their work they fall.
Into the Porch they carry out the dead.
Ulysses giving order stands by.
Telemachus then and Phtloetius,
Also Eumaeus do with shovels ply
The Pavement daubed with blood, and cle^nse the house,
Scraping together dust and blood; and that
The women also carry out adore.
But when this bus'ne^s now an end was at,
There rested for them yet one business more.
They brought them thence into the narrow place,
From whence there was no hope at all to fly.
You, said Telemachus, for the disgrace
Done to me and my Mother, must not die
An honest death. This having said, he stretched
Between two Pillars high a great strong Rope,
That with their feet the ground could not be reached.
Hung there, they sprawl'd awhile, but could not drop.
Then down they dragged Melantheus; and his Nose
And Ears with cruel steel from's head they tear;
And b^ake his Arms and Legs with many blows;
And to the Dogs to ear they threw his Gear.
Their work now done, they washed their hands and feet,
And to Ulyss^s in the Hall they went,
Who having found the place not very sweet,
For Br^mstone ca^d to take away the sent.
Eurycl^a, said he, fetch Brimstone hither,
And F^^e, and also wake P^n^lope;
And bid he^ Ma^^s come to me all together,
Bu^ hasten them to come. Then answered she,
Dear Child, it is well said. But first let me go
And bring you better Clothes, a Coat and Vest.
These Rags become you not. Then said he, No.
Bring me fire first, and after d^ the rest.
Then fire she brough and Brimstone presently,
Wherewith he aired both the Court and Hall.
The Nurse then up goes to the Rooms on high
To call the Maids. T'Ulysses they came all.
They weep and sob, and all embrace Ulysses,
And kiss his head and shoulders, shake his hand;
And he again saluteth them with kisses.
Weeping for joy they all about him stand.
LIB. XXIII.
The Old woman to the upper Rooms ascended,
To wake Penelope, and let her know
Her Husband was returned. Her joy amended
Much had her pace, and well she ambled now.
And standing at her head, Rise Child said she;
The Gods at last have granted you your wishes.
Come down into the Hall, where you shall see
The so long by you wisht-for man Ulysses.
The Suitors he has killed every one,
Who needs the Stewards of his house would be,
In despite of Telemachus his Son;
And live upon his Substance lavishly.
To her again Penelope thus spoke:
The Gods, Euryclea, sure have made you mad.
The Gods can wise men fools, and fools wise make:
The Gods have done you hurt, more wit you had.
You do me wrong, that know how little sleep
I have enjoyed since he went to Troy.
I never so well slept since, but still weep.
And now you come and wake me with a toy.
Be gone, if it had been any Maid but you
I should have sent her not well pleased away.
But to your age some more respect is due.
Go down again into the House you may.
Dear Child, said she, I mock not, for it is true.
Ulysses is in the house. That Stranger's he.
Telemachus and no man else him knew.
And known to others would not let him be,
Till they these proud and naughty men had killed.
Penelope then starting from the bed
Embraced the Nurse; her eyes with tears were fill^d.
And as yet doubtful still she questioned.
Euryclea is all this true you say?
Is he indeed come home? Be serious.
How could he the proud Suitors all destroy,
He being but one, they many in the House?
Nor saw, nor asked I, but I heard the groans
Of dying men; for up we all were shut
Within our doors, and looked up all at once;
And of our lives into a fear were put;
Till me your Son Telemachus called out
To come t'Ulysses. In the Hall he stood.
And there in heaps the slain lay him about,
That like a Lion stood besmeared with blood;
You would have joy'd to see him. Now they lie
In The Court all in one heap. But busy he
Is airing of the house, a great sire by;
And for to call you hither has sent me.
But come, that in each other you may joy.
For now at last your wishes granted be;
Ulysses come; your Son is past a Boy;
And their revenge upon the Woo'rs they see.
Nurse, answered she, triumph not out of Season.
For to be glad to see him in the house,
You know there none is that have so much reason,
As I have and our Son Telemachus.
But it is not truth you tell me. What you say
Will come at last to nothing else but this,
It was some God that did the Suitors slay,
Hating the sight of what they did amiss.
There never man came to them that can boast
He parted from them without injuries.
So by their wickedness their lives they lost.
Ulysses may have perished for all this.
Euryclea to this again replied,
Dear Child, what words are these that from you come?
Ulysses ^^ards ^th' Hall at the fires side,
And yet you say he never will come home.
But well, I Will tell you now a surer sign:
When I was washing of his legs and feet,
I saw where th'wound was given him by the Swine;
And had then told you had he thought it meet.
But with his hand for that cause stopped my breath.
Come, I will lay my life on it willingly.
If it be false put me to cruel death.
To this, Penelope did then reply,
The purpose of the Gods, wise though you be,
You know not, Nurse. But I Will go to my Son,
And there upon the place with him I Will see
What men are slain, and who the deed has done.
Then down she went consulting in her breast,
Whether at distance it were best to try,
Or else directly go unto the Guest,
And there receive and kiss him presently.
But when into the Hall she entered was,
Where sitting was Ulysses in the light
Of a good fire, she went and took a place,
That was to where he sat just opposite.
Ulysses looked of the ground expecting what
His wife would say, but long time she spoke not.
But gazing on her husband mute she sat,
As one that is in a trance, and has no thought.
But by and by surveying him she thought
'Twas he. But seeing him so ill arraid,
Her mind was changed. She thought that he 'twas not.
Telemachus his Mother chid, and said,
Mother, hard-hearted Mother and unkind,
Why sit you at such distance from my Father,
And have so little care to know his mind?
When many Questions you should ask him rather.
Another woman would not keep off so
From her own Husband that away had staid
Twenty years long, and suffered so much woe,
But at their meeting somewhat would have said.
Son (said she then) I am astonished so,
I cannot speak, nor look him in the face.
But whether he Ulysses be or no,
I shall be certain in a little space,
For we have signs between us of our own,
Which we shall soon know (...) mother by,
That to none living but our selves are known.
Ulysses to his Son then smilingly
Said, Let (Telemachus) your Mother try me,
Perhaps she know me better will anon.
The cause why now so little she sets by me,
Is that I have ill-favored Garments on.
But now-let you and I look well about.
Who kills one man, unless great friends he have,
Must leave his Kin and Country, and go out.
But we have killed both many men and brave.
Therefore consider what is to be done.
Father (said he) let that be your own ear.
So wise as you are men say there is none.
Our hands to do your pleasure ready are.
Why then I Will tell you what is best to do.
Put on your Coats; and let the women all
Into the Hall in their best Garments go;
The Minstrel play; and they to dancing sall;
That he that stands without, or dwells nigh
Unto the house, or travelleth that way,
When he shall hear such mirth and melody,
May think, This surely is the Wedding Day.
That so before this slaughter Fame have spread,
Depart we may from hence into the field,
And against the people of the Town make head,
And take such counsel more as Jove shall yield.
When this was said, the men their Coats put on.
The Damsels dress themselves, the Minstrel sung
And played upon his Fiddle, and each one
To dancing fell, with it the Palace rung.
And one that heard this as he stood without,
Said to another by him, She is Married.
Fie, Fie, she could no longer now hold out.
So said he, ignorant how things were carried.
Mean while Ulysses bathed and oynted is
B'Eurynome, and also richly clad
With a fair Robe and Coat. And beside this,
Taller and greater Pallas made him had.
And varnished with black his curled head.
As one by Vulcan and Athena taught
Gold-upon Silver skilfully had spread;
So Pallas on Ulysses beauty wrought.
Then from the Bath he like a God came in,
And sat him down before his wife again;
And with her to discourse did thus begin.
Woman (said he) to speak to you is vain.
Above all women hardened is your heart.
What woman else that had her Husband seen
After twice ten years absence thus apart
From him to sit, contented would have been?
Make me a Bed, Nurse, what should I do here?
Man, said Penelope. Nor mightily
I magnify nor scorn you. What you were
When you went hence, full well remember I.
But go, Nurse, make for him the bed that he
Himself framed, by the Chamber Door without.
Thus said she, but to try if that were he,
Yet grieved him to the heart, and made him doubt.
Woman, said he, who has removed my bed?
It cannot be but by a force Divine.
With my own hands 'twas wrought and finished,
To the end thereby it might be known for mine.
In The Court an Olive Tree stood great and tall,
Thick as a Pillar. I about it made
A Chamber. Of good stone I made the wall.
And cutting off the boughs the roof I laid.
And in the wall a good strong door I form.
When this done, I cut up by the root,
And smoothed with Iron Tools a lusty Corm,
And setting it upright fixed the bed to it,
And pierced the wood with wimbles where 'twas meet,
And laid on Silver, Gold, and Ivory.
A purple-thong unto the door I fit.
This is the sign for you to know me by.
Whether it still remain I cannot tell,
Or taken away and down be cut the Tree.
This said, and she the sign remembering well,
The tears rolled from her eyes. Thus weeping she
Acknowledges and runs to Ulysses,
About his neck her milk-white arms she lay^,
And both his shoulders and his head she kisses,
And, O Ulysses, be not angry says,
The Gods have given you wisdom, but denied
To satisfy our youth with mutual joy;
Take it not ill I have you thus far tried;
Since horror has possessed my mind always
Lest some deceitful man (for such there be
Too many in the world) should hither come,
And ^latt'ring bring me into infamy.
Helen of Argos would have staid at home
And not gone with the Adulterer of Troy,
Had she considered that the Achaea^ Lords
Might chance to come and fetch her thence away
Again into her Country with their Swords.
This speech inflamed his love, and wet his eyes.
As a man shipwrackt swimming for his life,
Rejoices when the Land he near him spies;
So welcome was Ulysses to his wife.
She hung upon him still, nor had let go
Till Morning but for Pallas, who would not
Let Phaeton and Lampus, th'Horses two
That draw the Morn, be set to th'Chariot.
Then said Ulysses to Penelope,
O Wife! my troubles ended are not yet;
For still there many more remaining be;
Long time 'twill be ere to the end I get.
Tiresias did tell me this in Hell,
When I went thither, of his Ghost to know
Whether I with my Mates should come home well
Or not to Ithaca again, and how.
But come, it is bedtime, let us satisfy
Our selves with sleep. Then said Penelope,
Your bed made ready shall be presently.
But since you mentioned have the Prophecy,
Tell me what said Tiresias. I know
You Will tell it me one time or other, why
If you will may you not tell me it now?
To this Ulysses did again reply,
Because you long to know it, I tell you then,
Tiresias advise^ me to go*
With Oar on shoulder to a place where men
Inhabit that the briny Sea not know,
Nor ever mingle salt with what they eat,
Nor ever saw the ship with crimson face,
Nor yet those wings which do the Water beat
(Called Oars) to make the good ship go apac^.
Now mark me well. When you shall meet a man,
Just at the end of Neptunes utmost bound
Bearing upon his shoulder a Corn-fan,
Stick down your lusty Oar upon the ground.
There sacrifice to the worlds Admiral
For new admittance a Ram, Boar, and Bull.
Then home again, and offer unto all
The Gods by name a hundred Oxen full.
Your death will not ungentle be, for which
Age shall prepare you, and your Soul unglew
Ins^nsibly. Your People shall be rich
Which round about you dwell. All this is true.
Then said Penelope, If this be all,
Since your old age the Gods will happy make,
The sorrow yet to come can be but small.
Whilst thus this couple the one another spoke
Mean while their bed with cov'rings soft was clad.
The Maids returned i'th'Hall before them stand.
Eurynome a Torch to light them had,
And carried it before them in her hand.
Then parting left them under Marriage-Law.
Telemachus and the good Servants two,
When they had to the Dancers said Hola,
Unto their Beds within the Palace go.
Ulysses and Penelope their joy
Converted had into a new content;
She to Ulysses tells the annoy
She suffered from her Suitors impudent;
What havoc they had made of Cows and Sheep,
And many Barrels of her Wine had wasted.
And he to her, what hurt of the Land and Deep
He done and suffered had. While his Tale lasted
Well pleased she was, and had no list to sleep.
He told her how the Cicons he had beaten;
How Love from love of home his men did keep;
How Cy^lops his Companions had eaten;
And in revenge how he had made him blind;
How, to convey him home he did obtain
Of Aeolus a leather-bag of wind,
Which breaking Prison blew him back again,
And how in (...) he lost*
His good ships all but one, in which he was;
Told her the w^^es of Ci^^^; what the Ghost
In Hell, said to (...), of ^re^^a^,
To whom he went his fortune for to know,
In a black ship; and with his Mother there
Discoursed; and saw many a one laid low,
That in the (...) Host had been his Peer;
And how he heard the tempting Sir^^s ^ing
(...) con^ort, and ^^^p'd safely by; and how
By (...), (...) ^iting,
And (...) (...) he did ^^^ely row;
How to (...) he came, and how
(...) ^ep^ him in a Care, where (...)
To be his wife did pro^^^e to bestow
Upon him Youth and (...).
Now to (...) he came, where he
Much honored was, and thence by Sea did come
(...) by (...) liberality
With (...) and Gold and costly Vest^res home.
And at these words sleep se^^ed on his eyes.
When (...) thought (...) satis^^d
With bed and sleep, ^^e makes the morning rise,
And day from (...) now no longer hide.
(...) rose, and speaking to his (...),
We have, (...) ^e, both of us had much ^o;
You for ^y absence weeping out your li^e,
And I, because the Gods would ^a^e it (...)*
(...) (...) we now again ^^^ted be,
Look to the goods with^^. My ^ol^* I Will ^^ll
Partly with booty from the Enemy,
And many also my Friends give me will.
Now to my grieved Father I must go,
And therefore with your Maids go up again.
^or ere the Sun be up, the Town will know
That in my House the Suitors all are slain.
Do not so much as look out, or enquire.
This said, he puts on Arms. To Arm also
His Son and his two men he did require.
Then they got up, and there stood armed too.
Then opened they the door and forth they went.
Ulyss^s ^ed the way Daylight was spread.
But Pallas out a Town them safely sent
Into the Field, and undiscovered.
LIB. XXIV.
MEan while unto the house came Mercury.
A Golden Rod he carried (...) his ha^^,
Wherewith he lays asleep a Mortal eye,
And opens it again with the same Wand.
And at the bloody-heap he calls away.
The Suitors Souls. They all about him fly.
And as the Rod directs them the way,
They follow all, but screaming fearfully.
As in some venerable hollow Cave,
Where Bats that are at roost upon a stone,
And from the ledge one ^hance a fall to have,
The rest scream out and hold fast one by one;
So screaming all the Souls together fly.
And first pass by Oceanus his Streams,
Then by Sol's Gate, and Rock of Leucady;
And then they passed through the Town of Dreams,
And in a trice to th'Mead of^ Asphodel.
And saw the Soul there of Peleiades
(For there the Souls of wretched Mortals dwell)
And of Patroclus and Nest^rides.
The Soul of Ajax Son of Telamon
Was also there, who amongst those Warriors tall,
The goodliest person was, except the Son
Of Peleus, who did much excel them all.
To these Atrides Soul came from hard by,
And theirs whose death had joined been with his
And by Aegistus hand were made to die.
Then to Atrides said Achilles this.
Atrides we thought you of all the Host
That came to fight against the Town of Troy,
Had been by the High Gods beloved most;
For in the Army you bore greatest sway.
Yet afterward the first you were to fall
T'had better been Commanding to have been slain.
Then had you had a noble Funeral,
And Tomb, whereby your glory might remain.
But now you di'd a miserable death.
To this Atrides Soul thus answered,
Happy were you at Troy to lose your breath
With other Argives that there perished
Fighting about you in your dusty Bed
Stretched out, your feats of Horsmanship forgot,
But fighting we all day continued,
And till we gained your Body ceased not.
Nor had we ceased then, but for the storm.
And then we bare your Body to the Fleet,
And there the blemishes thereof reform
With water fair and warm, and Unguents sweet.
The Greeks about you wept, and cut their hair;
Your Mother and her Nymphs then come and roared,
The Achaean Army was in such a fear,
That they were ready a'l to run aboard.
But Nestor, whose advice most current was,
Cried, Stay you Argives, this is not the noise
Of Armed foes, but Th it is now does pass
With all her Nymphs; of them this is the voice.
Then they all fearless staid. And the Nymphs stood
Mourning, and clothed him with Garments meet.
The Muses nine in turn with voices good
Singing, made all the standers by to weep.
And seventeen days both Gods and men we mourn
On the eighteenth we Sheep and Cattle slay.
And then in Godlike Clothes your Body burn
With many Unguents sweet that on it lay.
Both Foot and Horse many the Pile sustain,
And loudly shout, and Vulcan makes an end.
Only the Bones and nothing else remain,
Which with pure Wine and Unguents sweet we blend,
Your Mother sent the Urn, by Vulcan made,
But given her by Bacchus, and therein
Noble Achill's your white bones we laid,
Mixed with Patroclus you delighted in.
By yours, the ashes of Antilochus,
Whom next Patroclus was to you most dear,
We placed in an Urn apart, and thus
Over you all one Monument we rear,
High to be seen from Sea by them that now,
Or shall hereafter sailing be that way.
Your Mother also to the Gods did vow
To Have noble Prizes for the Lords to play.
At Princes Sepultures I often have seen
Proposed rich Prizes to provoke the strife
Of noble minds, but that like these had been,
I never any saw in all my life.
So after death renowned your name will be.
But what am I the better, to whom Jove
Did for my pains a wretched death decree
(Such was the pleasure of the Gods above)
B'Aegistus and my own wives bloody hand?
Thus they to one another talked in Hell.
There Mercury came to them with his Band
Of Woo'rs that in Ulysses Palace fell.
Of these Atrides knew Amphimedon,
(For he in Ithaca had been his Guest)
And speaking to him first, he thus begun.
Amphimedon what all'd you and the rest,
To come to this dark place so in a throng,
The flower of Ithaca, of equal years?
If purposely a man should seek among
Your people all, he should no^ find your (...)
Were you by Neptune drowned in the Main,
And hither sent by fury of the weather?
Or landing to find Booty were you slain?
Or fighting for fair women were sent hither?
Come tell me freely; I have been your Guest.
Know you not I t'your Fathers, house did come
With Menelaus, Ulysses to request
That he would go with us to Ilium?
Then said Amphimedon, I know it all,
And how we all deprived were of life,
I Will tell you true, and manner of our fall.
Ulysses absent, we all wooed his Wife.
She none denied, nor any married,
But casting how of life us to bereave,
To set a Loom up came into her head,
As if she somewhat did intend to weave.
She sets it up, and did begin to weave
Suitors (said she) since dead Ulysses is,
Stay yet a little while and give me leave
To make an end but of one business.
I must for old Laertes make a Cloth
Which in his Sepulcher he is to wear.
To Offend the Wives of Greece I should be loath.
For to accuse me they will not forbear.
They Will say I very hasty was to wed,
If I go hence and not provide a shroud.
Wherein Laertes must be buried.
Out of his wealth that might have been allowed.
The Suitors then were all content. And then
All day she wove, but ere she went to bed,
What she had wov'n she ravell'd out again.
Three years her Suitors she thus frustrated.
In the fourth year her women her betrayed;
And in we came while she the Web undid.
She could the Wedding now no more avoid.
The Robe when it was finished and done
She washed clean, and it before us laid.
As bright it shined as either Moon or Sun.
And then ill Fortu^e brought Ulysses home
To th House where dwelt the Master of the Swine.
And thither too Telemachus did come
From sandy Pylus safely through the brine.
And both together there our death contrive.
That done, they both unto the City come.
Telemachus the first was to arrive.
The Master of the Swine brought the other home.
Like an old Beggar with a Staff in's hand,
Apparelled in such miserable gear,
That, that was he, we could not understand,
Nor no man else, although he elder were.
We mock, we rare him, throw things at his head.
He patiently endured all his harms,
Until by Jupiter encouraged
From our the Hall he took away the Arms;
And in an upper Chamber locked them fast.
Then craftily he bids his Wife to send
To us his mighty Bow, our strength to taste.
Th's the beginning was of our ill end.
For much too weak to bend the Bow were we.
But when it was unto Ulysses brought,
Fearing by him left it should bended be,
We all at once cried out, Hold, giv't him not.
Only Telemachus cried, Let him try.
And then 'twas put into Ulysses hands.
Ulysses bent it very easily.
Then leapt he to the Sill, and there he stands;
And round about he looked upon us grim;
And first of all he shot Antinous,
At whom he took his aim, and killed him;
And with his Arrows, after, more of us.
And one upon another down we fall.
'Twas plain, some present God there gave him aid.
For then he followed us about the Hall
Till all on heaps at last he had us laid.
Of Groans and Blows it made a dismal sound.
And thus, King Agamemnon, died we.
Our Bodies yet there lie upon the ground.
Our Friends yet unacquainted with it be.
That else would wash our wounds and us lament,
Which to the dead are Ceremonies due.
Then said Atrides, O virtue excellent
Of your fair Wife. Happy Ulysses you,
That with great valor have her repossest.
My wife Tyndareus Daughter was not such.
Your consorts fame will be hereafter dressed
In noble Songs, and the Sex honor much.
But my wives name shall stand in Ballads vile,
And sung in filthy Songs the Sex disgrace.
Thus they discoursing were in Hell. Mean while
Ulysses comes to Laertes place.
About it many Lodgings were; wherein
His necessary Servants all were laid;
And there they fed, and sat, and slept. But in
The house it self one old Sicelian Maid,
That of his person always had the care.
Ulysses then, lest Supper they should lack,
Said to his two good Servants, For our fare
You must again unto the Town go back,
And fetch a Swine the fattest in the sties,
Mean while I Will to the Vineyard go and try
Whether my Father know can with his eyes,
After so long an absence, that it is I.
This said, his Servants armed homeward hie;
And to the Vineyard goes Ulysses then.
But Dolius he there could not espy,
Nor any of his Sons or of his men.
His Sons and Servants all abroad were gone
For thorns to mend the hedges of the ground.
Laertes in the Vineyard all alone
Placing of earth about a Plant he found.
On him he had a ^oul Coat full of patches,
And ugly Leather-Boots, those patcht also;
But good enough to save his legs from scratches.
Gloves of the same against the Briars too.
A Goatskin Headpiece he had on to boot.
Ulysses when he saw him in this plight
Worn out with age and so much sorrow to it,
Under a Tree stood weeping out of sight.
And then bethought him whether it were best
To Embrace and kiss him, and directly say,
I am Ulysses, or first talk in jest,
And give him time his person to survey.
Resolved at last, his Father he goes nigh,
Who with his head down, d^g'd about a Plant.
Old man, said he, your skill is good. For why,
Your Garden neither Art nor care does want.
Nor Plant, nor Fig, nor Vine, nor Olive Tree,
Nor so much as a Leek but prospers here.
One thing there wants (I pray not angry be)
You look not to your self. Ill Clothes you wear,
And also pale and yellow is your hue,
Which cannot be imputed to being aged.
It Is not because you do no work that you
^e little sets by that has you engaged.
There Is nothing in your aspect of a Slave.
The look and stature you have of a King,
And the appearance of a King would have,
If you, what is due to age had every thing.
Whose Servant are you, and who owns the ground?
And say if this be Ithaca or no.
For this man whom upon the way I found,
Is not so wise as certainly to know.
I as^t him of a friend that I had here
Whether alive he were or dead. But he
Whether he dead, or living still he were,
Unable was at all to answer me.
My house a Stranger on a time was at,
Which of all Strangers I did love the best;
That said he came from Ithaca, and that
Laertes was his Fathers name. This Guest
I entertained as kindly as I could
With Viands good, whereof I had good store.
And gave him Talents ten of well-wrought Gold,
And beside that I gave him these Gifts more:
A Pot for tempered Wine of Silver bright;
Twelve Carpets fair; twelve Robes; twelve Coats that were
All lined through; and twelve more that were light;
And four Maidservants, both well taught and fal^,
Such as he from a greater number chose.
Then said Laertes, Ithaca this is,
Now held by wicked men. But you will lose
Your Presents all, and of requital miss.
But had you found my Son Ulysses here,
He would have kept of Amity the Law,
And well required both your Gifts and Cheer.
But say, how long it is since you last saw
And entertained my Son, if yet he be;
But he at Sea devoured is by Fish
Far hence, or else to Beasts and Fowls is he
Somewhere, poor man, at Land become a dish;
Neither his Father nor his Mother by,
To wind him and to shed tears over his bed;
Nor yet his Wife weeping to close his eye,
Which are the honors due unto the dead.
Tell me also your dwelling and your name,
Your Parents and your City what they be;
And where the good ship lies in which you came,
And what men with you came in company.
Or with some Merchants in their ship, and they
Departing hence have left you here alone?
To this Ulysses answering did say,
I Will answer to your Questions each one.
My City's Alyba^, and of the same
A^^eidas is the King. His Son am I,
And called am Eperitus by name.
Far hence at the lands end my ship does lie.
And since Ulysses from me went away,
It Is now five years, and with good* Aug^ry
That we should meet again another day,
And joy in mutual hospitality.
This said, L^ertes overcome with woe.
Took up the scalding dust with both his hands,
And poured the same upon his head of snow,
And sobbing thick and weeping there he stands.
Ulysses heart up to his nos^rils swelled
With pity to behold his Fathers (...),
And to him leapt; and's arms about him held,
And said, The man you weep and mourn for so
Am I, come after twenty years again.
Give over sobbing now; for (though inhas^^).
I tell you must, The Suitors I have ^lain,
And made them of their crimes the fruit to taste.
Then said Laertes, If indeed you be
My Son Ulysses, let me see some sign
To know you by for certain. Then said he,
Behold the wound received from the Swine
On Mount Per^assus, when I thither went
T'Autolycus my Mothers Father, to
Receive the Gifts he promised me. You sent
Me thither, and so did my Mother too.
I Will tell you too what Trees you gave me when
I walking once was with you there. And I
A^^t you of all the Trees the names (for then
'Twixt man and Boy I was.) And severally
As I the Trees names asked, you told the same.
Pear Trees thirteen; Apple Trees half a score;
^ankles fifty (to the Vines you gave that name)
All of (...) (...) their season Berries bore;
And forty Fig Trees. The Old man knew it all;
Embraced his Son, and with abundant joy
Fainted, and sinking ready was to fall,
But that his Sons embraces were his stay.
Then coming to himself he said,
Jove Father and you Gods (Gods there are yet.)
The S^iters for their evil deeds have paid,
But now I fear the Town will on as set,
And with themselves make all the City rise
In (...). Then said his Son,
Fear not Of that we'll by and by advise.
(...) and (...) are gone
To get a Supper ready at your house.
This said, into the house they come away,
And find (...) and (...)
At work to cut out meat and Wine allay.
Mean while (...) o^l'd and ^athed is,
And by his Maid in seemly Garments clad,
And (...) standing by him added this,
A larger stature than before he had.
As of a God his presence did appear.
Ulyss^s seeing him admired, and said,
Father, you greater now are than you were,
Some God has Beauty on your person laid.
Then said Laertes, O ye Gods on high,
Jove, Pallas, and Apollo, had I been
Such as I was at Neritus, when I
Stormed the Town, and armed had come in,
When you and the proud Suitors were in fight,
I had made many of them bend the knee.
And you would have rejoiced at the sight.
So to his Son Ulysses talked he.
Supper brought in, they sit; and then came in
Old Dolius, sent for, from his Husbandry,
And his Sons weary. Working they had been.
The Nurse had bidden them come speedily.
They wondered to see Ulysses there.
But he to Dolius then gently said,
Pray for a while your wondering to forbear.
We hungry are, and long have for you staid.
Then Doiius embraced him, and said,
Since longed for you are come, and unexpected,
And to us by the Gods have been conveyed;
All hail; and by the Gods be still protected.
But tell me if Penelope yet have
The news received of your coming home,
Or shall we send her word? That labor save
(Replied Ulysses) for she knows I Am come.
This said, he sat him down. His Sons also
With decent words Ulysses entertain,
And lay their hands in his. That done they go
And by their Father sat them down again.
Now Fame divulged had the Suitors fate;
And people howling came in every way.
And gathered were about Ulysses Gate,
To setch the bodies of the dead away.
And those that out of Ithaca had lived,
To Fishermen they gave to carry home.
And staying on the place, though sorely grieved,
Amongst themselves they into counsel come.
Eupeithes Father of Antinous
That first of all slain by Ulysses was
Spoke first, and weeping for his Son, said thus.
See how much mischief this man done us has.
He carried hence our Ships and ablest men;
And lost them all, as one that had designed
Our utter ruin. Coming back again
He killed has those whom he left behind.
Come then, let us to him quickly, lest mean while
He should pass over the wide Sea, and get
Protection at Elis or at Pyle,
And we so shamed as we were never yet.
'Twill be a scorn to our Posterity
To let the murder of our Children so
Stay unrevenged, and put up cowardly.
For my part, to my Grave I Would rather go.
Come quickly then, lest we prevented be.
This said, the people for him pity had.
Then came in Medon, who had escaped free,
And Phemius that escaped to ^^and was glad.
And Medon to the Assembly spoke, and said,
Ulysses of himself could not have done
This mighty deed without the Immortals aid.
I saw when present I was looking on,
A God stand by that him encouraged,
In Mentors shape he plainly did appear;
And then about the room the Suitors fled,
And fell before Ulysses in their fear.
Next him spoke Alitherses, who alone
Saw Fore and Aft. Hear me, you men, said he.
Of this great slaughter I accuse can none
But even your selves that gave no ear to me,
Nor yet to Mentor. We you counseled
The license of your Children to take down,
That spent the Substance, and dishonored
The Wife of him that was of such renown.
My counsel therefore to you now is this,
Not to proceed, lest on your selves you bring
More mischief yet, and of your purpose miss.
So said he then, but little profiting.
For more than half with alalaes up start,
And cry aloud, To Arms, go on, proceed.
But quietly sat still the lesser part,
That with Eupeithes Judgment disagreed.
When they had clad themselves in glist'ning brass,
Without the Town they came to Randezvouze
In open field. Eupeithes Leader was,
Seeking revenge where he his life shall lose.
Then Pallas to her Father came, and said,
O Father, King of Kings, what do you mean,
The War shall last between them, or be staid?
To this her Father answered her again.
Child, why do you ask me that? 'twas your request,
The Suitors for their Insolence should pay.
Do what you please, but yet I think it best,
When you have done, that Peace for ever stay;
And ever reign Ulysses and his race.
Which to confirm, Oblivion I Will send
Of former Acts the image to deface.
Then gladly Pallas did from Heaven descend.
When now Ulysses and his Company
Removed had their hunger with good cheer,
Ulysses said, Some one go forth and see
Whether the Ithacesians be near.
And then one of the young men standing there
Went forth and saw them as he past the Sill;
And turning back, Arm, said he, they are here;
And then they all put on their Arms of Steel.
Ulysses and his Son and Servants, four,
Six Sons of Dolius. And the old men
Laertes were and Dolius two more.
Aged they were, but necessary then.
Then armed, Ulysses leading, out they go.
And Pallas both in person and in voice
Resembling Mentor in came to them too.
Ulysses seeing her did much rejoice.
And looking on Telemachus, he said,
Telemachus this Battle will declare
Who Courage has, who not. Be not afraid.
That you dishonor not your stock beware.
Father, said he, you shall see by and by,
You need not be ashamed of your Son.
Laertes this discourse heard joyfully
And to the Gods cried out in passion,
O ye kind Gods, and happy day is this!
O joy! My Son and Grandson are at strife
Which of the two the most Courageous is,
And ready to buy Honor with his life.
Then Pallas to Laertes said, My Friend,
Son of Arcesius, whom the Gods do love,
With all your force your Spear now from you send.
But pray first unto Pallas and to Jove.
He praid, and threw his Spear, which th'Helmet smot
Of old Eupeithes, and went into's head.
Down dead he fell; the Helmet saved him not.
His Armor rattled, and his spirit fled.
And then fell on, Ulysses and his Son,
Upon the foremost both with Sword and Spear,
And surely had destroyed them every one,
Had not Jove's Daughter Pallas then been there.
She to the People called aloud and said,
Hold Ithacesians. The Quarrel may
Without more blood be ended. They afraid
Of th'Heavenly voice began to run away.
Ulysses yet not ceased to pursue
The Captains of his foes, till from above
In Thunder Jove his sooty Bolt down threw.
Then Pallas said, Beware; offend not Jove.
And glad was then Ulysses to give over.
By Pallas were propounded terms of Peace
In Meutor's shape; and each part to them swore.
And thus it was agreed the War should cease.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
LIB. I. IN a Council of the Gods (Neptune absent) Pallas procures an Order
for the restitution of Ulysses. And appearing to his Son Telemachus in humane
shape, advises him to complain of the Suitors before the Council of the Lords,
and then to go to Pylus and Sparta to enquire about his Father. LIB. II.
Telemachus complains in vain, and borrowing a Ship goes secretly to Pyle by
night. And how he was there received. LIB. III. Nestor entertains him at Pyle,
and tells him how the Greeks departed from Troy; and sends him for further
information to Sparta. LIB. IV. His entertainment at Sparta, where Menelaus
tells him what befell many of the Greeks in their return; that Ulysses was with
Calypso in the Isl^ Ogygia, as he was told by Proteus. LIB. V. The Gods in
Council command Calypso (by Mercury) to send away Ulysses, on a Raft of Trees;
and Neptune returning from Aethiopia, and seeing him on the Coast of Phaeacia,
scattered his Raft; and how by the help of Ino he swam ashore, and slept in a
beap of dry leaves till the next day. LIB. VI. Nausicaa going to a River near
that place to wash the Clothes of her Father, Mother and Brethren, while the
Clothes were drying played with her Maids at Ball; and Ulysses coming forth is
fed and clothed, and led to the house of her Father King Alcinous, where being
received, the Queen after Supper taking notice of his Garments, gave him
occasion to relate his Passage thither on the Raft. LIB. VII. Alcinous
entertains him, and grants him a Convoy; and both he and the Lords give him
Presents. LIB. VIII. The next days entertainment of Ulysses, where he sees them
contend in Wrestling and other Exercises; and upon provocation took up a
greater stone than that which they were throwing, and over-threw them all. And
how the King asked his name, his Country, and his Adventure. LIB. IX. Ulysses
relates, first, what befell him amongst the Cicones at Ismarus. Secondly,
amongst the Lotophagi. Thirdly, how he was used by the Cyclops Polyphemus. LIB.
X. Ulysses his entertainment by Aeolus, of whom he received a fair Wind for the
present, and all the rest of the winds tied in a Bag; which his men untying,
flew out, and carried him back to Aeolus, who refusea to receive him. LIB. XI.
His Adventure at Lestrigonia with Antiphates, where of twelve ships he lost
eleven, men and all. How he went thence to the Isle Aeaa, where half of his men
were turned by Circe into Swine; and how he went himself with the other half,
and by the help of Mercury recovered them, and stayed with Circe a year. LIB.
XII. Ulysses his descent into Hell, and discourses with the Ghosts of the
deceased Heroes. His passage by the Sirens, and by Scylla and Charibdis. The
Sacrilege committed by his men in the Isle Thrinacia. The destruction of his
ship and men. How he swam on a plank nine days together, and came to Ogygia,
where he stayed seven years with Calypso. LIB. XIII. Ulysses sleeping is set
ashore at Ithaca by the Phaeacians, and waking knows it not. Pallas in form of
a Shepherd helps to hide his Treasure. The ship that coveyed him is turned into
a Rock; and Ulysses by Pallas is instructed what to do, and transformed into an
old Beggar-man. LIB. XIV. Ulysses in form of a Beggar goes to Eumaus the Master
of his Swine, where he is well used, and tells a feigned story, and informs
himself of the behavior of the Wooers. LIB. XV. Pallas sends home Telemachus
from Lacedaemon with the Presents given him by Menelaus. Telemachus landed,
goes first to Eumaeus. LIB. XVI. Telemachus sends Eumaeus to the City to tell
his Mother of his return. And how in the mean time. Ulysses discovers himself
to his Son. LIB. XVII. Telemachus relates to his Mother what be had heard at
Pyle and Sparta. LIB. XVIII. The fighting at Fists of Ulysses with Irus. His
admo^ition to Amphinomus. Penelope appears before the Wooers, and draws
Presents from them. LIB. XIX. Telemachus removes the Arms out of the Hall.
Ulysses discourses with Penelope. And is known by his Nurse, but concealed.
And the hunting of the Bore upon that occasion related. LIB. XX. Pallas and
Ulysses consult of the killing of the Wooers. Ulysses makes himself known to
Eumaeus and Philoetius. LIB. XXI. Penelope brings forth her Husbands Bow.
Which the Suitors could not bend, but was bent by Ulysses. LIB. XXII. The
killing of the Wooers. LIB. XXIII. Ulysses makes himself known to Penelope,
tells her his Adventures briefly; and in the morning goes to Laertes, and makes
himself known to him. LIB. XXIV. The Ithacesians bury the Wooers, and sitting
in Council resolve on revenge. And coming near the house of Laertes, are met by
Ulysses, and Laertes with Telemachus and Servants, the whole number twelve, and
overcome, and submit.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPist. page 4. line 20. for of Poet, r. of the Poet. Lib. 1. page 11. l. 7.
for m^an, r. men. p. 13. l. for Father, r. Fathers. p. 14. l. 1. between to and
Ulysses, put in Troy. p. 17. l. 36. for you, r. he. p. 19. l. 7. for as, r.
and. p. 20. l. 35. put out yet. p. 60 l. 1. for he r. she. l. 11. put o it you.
p. 65. l. 15. for cry, r. try. p. 76. l. 9. after air, put in had. p. 110. l.
1. for at, r. art. p. 144. l. 5 for night r. wight. p. 148. l. 27. between have
and dangers, put in many. p 18^* l. 30. for O^^lochus, r. Orsilochus. p. 184.
l. 31. for and, r. am. p. 185. l. 8. for Tho, r. Thoae. p. 221. l. 20. for
rise, r. rose. p. 225. l. 21. for see, r. see.


