MOTIVES TO A Good Life, JN TEN SERMONS.

By BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Edward
Forest, and Robert Blagrave. Anno Domini. M.DC.LVII.

TO THE Right Worthy, his Honored Patron, SR WILLIAM BVTTON, of Tocknam-Court
in the County of Wilts, Baronet, All Increase of Grace and Honor.
NOBLE SIR,
TO be a Favourer of Knowledge is from a Bounty of Goodness; yet the Honor of
many: to be a Favorite of Knowledge is from a Bounty of Nature; yet the Honor
of few: Each in it self is Happiness; Both in your self a Double Happiness.
The first of which being in the effects of it, as Freely, as Unexpectedly
derived of late unto my self, by that providence which works by man and for
him: I cannot but behold it as from God's Favor yours, and therefore with
reverent proportion endeavor an Imitation of our Gratitude to God; to whom we
must be thankful and speak Good of his Name. In which pursuit I may not
forget your happy Education for Arts in the University; for farther Prudence in
the studies of Our Law, I may improve the Expression of that Education by your
improvement of that Education in Foreign Travail, not only in Language, but
in Wisdom; learning from the French his Learning without his Vanity; learning
from the Spaniard his Gravity without his Arrogance; learning from the Italian
his Civility without his Impurity. I may not forget your more happy Retreat
from the Dangers of Travail, rescuing your self to your self in a retired
Eminency, and becoming by Virtue your own Memorial. Nor may I forget your
most happy choice of Marriage and the Blessing of that choice, your Noble
Consort, in whom the Ornaments of Nature portray the Ornaments of Grace, and by
Fame present them beyond the reflexe of Art. Your singular Goodness at the
Interring of a provident and Loving Father, blazoned not more your Birth, than
your Love: This was his Funeral, and his Funeral will be your Epitaph. I
should not insist on these particulars, were they not extracted from Gratitude
by your Merits, as Fruitfullnesse from Earth Enlivened by the Sun. This makes
me present something like Thanks and Life. Life indeed it is, a Christian
Life; which as it is man's Duty, should be his Study; From a practical Life
then I here present the Christian's Fear and Sorrow and Strife. I present his
Obedience to the Husbandry of God; though he Sotle, him and Plough him: The
Purity of Mind he must attain, or not attain Heaven, though this be not pure
in God's sight, and yet nothing shall enter into it that is impure: The
Meekness he must Imitate and Enjoy, or not Enjoy Him, in whose mouth was no
reproach, though reproached: The Innocent Prudence he must practice toward God
and Man, that would exactly be a man of God: The Covenant he must remember,
when he became a visible Christian, and make the Performance of it no less
visible: The Mystical Food he must delight in, it being delightful, though
food and Physique: lastly, The Love due for such Love, as made Christ Our
Jesus; whose Innocence could not deliver him to the Curse of the Law; whose
Love would not deliver him from the Curse of the Law. The Meditations upon
which Ojects, though to some they will seem Lifelesse, as the dead bones of the
Prophet; yet I shall wish they may prove, not Miraculously but Spiritually, of
power to raise up some to newness of Life. In which Desire and Hope, Noble
Sir, I shall always rest.

The Servant and Witness Of Your Merit, BARTEN HOLYDAY.

The Arguments of the Sermons.
1. Of Searching the Conscience and of the Last Judgment. page 1. 2. Of
Spiritual Sorrow. page 31. 3. Of The Christian's Strife. page 55. 4. Of God's
Husbandry. page 87. 5. Of The Misery of Uncleanness. page 107. 6. Of Racha.
page 135. 7. Of The Serpent and the Dove. page 157. 8. Of Baptism. page 183.
9. Of The the Bread of Life. page 213. 10. Of Anathema Maranatha. page 241.
Emendations.
Page 21. l. 5. read (...) p. 25. l. 6. posset. p 38. l. 20. (...) l. 24. held
p. 46. l. 27 fast. p. 48 l. 29. pretended. p. 49. l. 5. Lynceus. p 52. l. 21.
(...) p. 59. l. 10. the place. p. 60. l 12 and 22. Pausamas. l. 24. when he p.
63. l. 3 (...). p. 64 l 3. (...) l. 14. Pausanias. l. 24. Phil. p. 66. l. 6.
dele but l. 24 (...) 25. proverbiail. p. 68. l. 9. impl^^d. p 73. l. 17. the
wednesday. l. 25. del. ^ay. p 74. l. 22. Panarit p. 76. l. 11. in l. 17
consequence. p. 77. l. 11. strife l. 12. an. p. 81. l. 12 or wearing. p 88. l
30 which. p 89. l. 27. the dry p. 104. l. 1 (...) p. 113. l. 21 Sacrificer. p.
116. l. 26. natural. p. 121 l. 1. Roman by education. p. 122. l. 12. for
touch, r. with p. 123. l. 2. of p. 124 l 25. ^^menti^ns. p. 125. l. 18.
parictibus l. 22. Orleans. p. 126. l. 23 are. l. 24. speak. p. 138. l 9. (...)
p. 139. l. 29. were justly p. 146. l 7. better. l 17. there were; p. 147. l.
14. then is. p. 148 l 8 Gehinnom. l. 12. rugitus p. 149. l. 20 being not p.
157. l. 15. a wisdom. p. 160. l. 9 sweetness. p. 161. l. 12. the ancient. l.
14. (...). l. 24. too p. 164 l. 20 her l. 25 fall of. p. 165 l. 16. examine it.
p 166. l. 31. Barthena. p. 168. l. 8. diversities l. 23. simple. It l. 28
Prieras p. 170. l. 10. call them l. 29. divine nature. p. 171. l. 23. employ. p.
172 l 9. del. of. p. 173. l 26 was p. 175. l. 9. friend. p. 176. l. 4. learned.
l. 21. sec. l. 29. del. by p. 177. l. 4. masters. p. 178. l. 25. shall. p 185.
l. 1 from the l. 5. clean. p. 187. l. 7 drowned p 191. l. 9. Cyprian p. 193 l
3. that p. 194. l. 14. Christ? l. 16. sanctity, p. 196. l. 24. the Jewish. p.
198 l 22. perceptionem, p. 199. l. 1. spirit p. 200. l 16. Christians; they p.
201 l. 30. some others. p. 20^. l. 17. Cyril. p. 208. l. 3. his promise to. p.
209. l. 8. a seal p. 214. l. 31. three p. 215. l. 27. for of whom. p. 219. l.
7. instrument. l. 19. the bread. p. 221. l. 4. Sabbath. l. 19. opimitate p.
222. l. 24. drank p. 226. l. 24. us this p. 227. l. 27. del. with p. 228. l.
29. Paulinus p 231. l. 30 the Jaspar p. 235. l. 1. were p. 236. l. 31.
mystical p. 237. l. 9. on Couches l. 16. it, strictly. p. 243 l. 27. is, the
p. 244. l. 1. (my Lord): l. 9. Abimilech p. 245. l. 19. the l. 11. known p.
247. l. 9. characters l. 20. Son of p. 248. l. 7. were l. 25. them p. 249. del.
ap. 250. l. 2 (...) p. 252. l. 23. frequently p. 253. l. 21 Beginning l. 28
Civil. p. 154. l. 10. Hypocrisy p. 154. l 19. such p. 255. l. 6 anciently l.
27 (...) p. 258. l. 19. in the l. 28. too grievous to p. 259. l. 9. and 10.
Maran-athap. 264. l. del. to,

OF Searching the Conscience, AND OF The Last Judgment. A SERMON BY BARTEN
HOLYDAY Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

1 Cor. 11.31, 32. If we would judge our-selves, we shonld not be judged.

But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world.


NOTHING is more contrary to the nature of a man, then to Judge himself; and
there is nothing more agreeable to the nature of a Christian, then to Judge
himself. The Apostle therefore in this place teaches us how to correct the
stubbornness of nature, by the Discipline of Christianity; and to prevent
punishment, by punishment. He proposes here two Judgments; the judgment of
man, and the judgment of God: which two can never stand together; If man does
judge, God does not judge: If God does judge, man did not judge. But that man
might judge, and so prevent God's judgment, God has in mercy given unto man
the power to judge himself, the power of Conscience. That therefore we might
understand both our own power to judge, and our danger in the neglect of it, we
may first speak of our own judgment, or judging our selves, and afterward of
God's Judgment.

That we may judge our selves, God has endued us with power of Conscience,
which is that practical judgment of reason, whereby man knows, what he ought
to do or avoid: which God has so implanted in man's nature, that we may truly
say, it is an immortal gift in a mortal creature: since this accompanies him
both in this world, and in the world to come. And this judgment God has left in
man so entire, that it leaves man without all excuse; as S. Chrysostom says:
and it proves man to be created after the image of God, whiles he still
retains this evident and invincible truth of judgment, in despite of his will
to condemn his will in all unlawful acts. From whence it was no doubt, that
even the Philosophers, as Theophil. Antiochenus tells us, (against the
calumniators of the Christian Religion) did account Conscience amongst their
Gods. And it was an excellent speech of the old Stoique Epictetus, who said,
that when we are Children, our Parents deliver us to Schoolemasters, that we
may do no evil: and afterward for the same purpose, God delivers us to
Conscience. This indeed is the Law written in our hearts, as the Apostle
speaks, ( Romans 2.15.) Now our Conscience being given to us thus entire, we
must especially labor to preserve it so: which is by a perpetual Examination
of it. Which Examination is Commanded by the Prophet David ( Ps. 4.4.) Commune
with your own heart upon your bed. Qui in occulto lapsus est, erubescat, says
S. Ambrose, occasionally expounding those words; He that has sinned in secret,
let him blush for shame: because he has sinned in the presence of his own
Conscience, which perpetually beholds him. This was that, which made the same
Prophet cry out again, ( Ps. 5.3.) I acknowledge my transgressions, and my
sin is ever before me. (and my sin is ever before me) See, says S.
Chrysostom; O see this royal) Prophet at his Confession; he still sees his
Adultery and Murder; he sees his sin; yet God had forgiven his sin. He
still sees his sin: but God did not see it: nay, God did not see it: because
David did see it. If we write our sins against our selves, God will straight
blot them out; if we forget them, God remembers them. This made the holy
Prophet even the third time cry out, ( Ps. 77.5, 6.) I have considered the
days of old, the years of ancient times. I call to remembrance my Song in the
night: I commune with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. If a
man, says S. Austin, should with just reason take the pains to search for a
mine of gold, it would be judged an action of wisdom: but, says he, Quanta
homo habet intu, and non fodit! O what strange things has man within him, yet
searches not for them! But he should search for them, for all the secret sins
of his soul. He should search for them, says Athanasius, till-no more could
be found; and then he should persevere to search, that no more might be found.
We should continually judge our selves, as the Apostle says, that is, we
should continually search and examine our selves, as both S. Gregory and S.
Bernard expound it. And this examination must be Daily; yea and Nightly, we
must says devout Ephrem, judge at evening, of our day; and at morning, of our
night; of our night, we must judge of the holiness of it, by our preservation
from unholinesse: And we must do it with exact severity; Smite thy soul, says
S. Chrysostom, smite it; it will never be in danger of death by the stroke;
nay, it will escape death by the stroke. It is written, Judgment is before the
Lord, therefore trust thou in him, ( Job. 35.14.) He is judged before the Lord,
says S. Gregory, who in his life time judges himself: but he that stays 'till
the end of his life, non jam coram illo, sed ab illo judicatur; He is not
judged before the Lord, but by him. But a just man prevents God's judgment, as
S. Chrysostom observes in holy Job: who did continually offer Sacrifice for
the sins of his children, for their uncertain sins, their sins, that he knew
not; How much more careful was he, no doubt, to prevent God's judgment for
his own sins! The thoughts of the righteous are right, says Solomon, (Prove.
12.5.) where the Latin Translation has it, Cogitationes justerum judicia, the
thoughts of the righteous are judgments, severe and happy judgments passed
upon himself. S. Bernard therefore injoynes a part of every day to be set
aside for this examination, besides all other spiritual exercises. The very
Heathen were excellent in this examination; S. Ierom telling us, that the
Pythagoreans had an especial care and estimation of two seasons of the day,
the morning and evening; that is, says he, of those things which we have to do,
and of things, which we have done. Sencea also ( l. 3. de Ira. c. 36.) reports
his own practice; how that every night, being gone to bed, when the light was
removed, and his wife, who knew his custom, silenced her self, to leave him
to the silence of the night, he examined himself and his whole day; and
triumphs with himself in the peace of his sleep after such meditation; whereby
his mind, as he says, was always either praised, or admonished. Now we shall
the more effectually make this examination, if we will resolve, as S.
Chrysostom counsails us, every month to conquer a sin in our selves. For
thus, says he, we shall by degrees ascend unto heaven, as by Jacob's ladder;
not by visible steps, but by the secret increase of virtues. Let us still
remember the noble examples proposed in Scripture. If lust tempts thee, call to
mind the holy Joseph: and if it sets furiously upon thee, break violently from
it, and cry out unto thy self, soul remember Joseph: and if again it
returns, cry out again, soul remember Joseph; and he was proposed to be
remembered. If thou art tempted to distrust in God, being ready to be swallowed
up by thy enemies and despair, remember David; and if fear does yet assail
thee, cry confidently unto thy self, soul, remember David. Let us take
Cassianus his advice; let us first fight courageously against our greatest
sins: and the rest will be over come with an easy victory. Let us take also
that excellent counsel of S. Basil; let us compare the present day with the
former day: so to understand exactly our own proficiency. As the merchant uses
his books of account, says S. Chrysostom, Let us consider what speech we
have spent upon disgraces of other men; what upon foolish jests, what upon
uncleanesse; how we have employed our hands, our feet, our eyes. And let us
know, it is as absurd, to think our souls can be kept clean without such
searching, as to think our garments cab be kept clean without brushing, our
houses without sweeping, our gardens without dressing^; or to expect comeliness
and order in a City, without the eye of a Magistrate to discrie offenders, yet
for all our searching, we must not think we shall be free from all sin; we
cannot kill it, but we must suppress it. Whether thou will or no, the Jebusite
will dwell within thy borders, ( Judge. 1.21.) conquered he may be; cast out he
cannot be. Wherefore let every one examine himself, and then think he has
profited, says S. Bernard, not when he finds nothing, which may be reprehended;
but when he reprehends somewhat which he finds. Then have thou searched thy
self, not in vain, when thou find, that again thou have need of
Searching; And if thou do it always, when thou have need; thou do it
always. But this examination must be serious, it must be solemn: we must go
into the presence of God with all Humiliation, examining our selves in his
presence, by his Commandments, which will show unto us all the kinds of our
sins, as our memory must recall unto us the greatest acts of our sins; And
then, no doubt, but our examination will break forth into Confession; and we
shall cry out with the Leaper, Unclean, Unclean (Levit. 13.45.) Then let us
immitate the good Hezekiah (2 Kin. 19.14.) So let us acknowledge before him all
our sins, and beseech him as our merciful Physician, to deliver us from them.
Then will this mournful confession not go alone; It will be attended with a
Resolution to forsake even our most dearly beloved sins: it will make us pray
against our own heart; against our natural heart, but not against our
regenerate heart. It will make us pray more against the uncleanness of our
sin, then the punishment: which is the true mark of true repentance. Lastly:
this Resolution will at last proceed unto Execution; and will make us punish
our selves with holy Exercises: which are punishments to a sinner, as they are
delights to a repentant sinner. It will make us resign up all our Affections
unto God, that we may be a living and acceptable sacrifice unto him. Now
because man has but three things to offer unto God, his Soul, his Body, and
his Goods; this will make him offer up his Soul by Prayer, his Body by
Fasting, and his Goods by Alms. And since our Offering must be free from all
uncleanesse, which is our sin, this will make us put away all our sins:
which being principally reduced unto three, by S. John (1 Ep. 2.16.) unto the
Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of life, that is, unto
Lust, Covetuousnesse, and Pride; we shall put away these three, by the three
foresaid virtues; we shall put away lust by Fasting, Covetuousnesse by Alms,
and Pride by Prayer, by the humility of prayer. And when by prayer we shall
have obtained Perseverance in Prayer, in Alms, in Fasting, then may we with
truth to our own souls, say, we have judged our selves, and with triumph to
our own souls, say, we shall not be judged; we shall not be judged. This is
the benefit of the judgment of Man: but now behold if man's judgment prevent
it not, behold the horror of the judgment of God. And this we must also
seriously behold, it being a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, But if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged; we
should not be judged. The Judgments of God are by the Apostle distinguished
into chastizements, and the Condemnation with the world; with that World, the
world of the perseveringly unrepentant, for which our Savior prays not.
Chastizements may be inflicted, were inflicted even in the Apostle's time, on
some loose Christians; which by an impure access to the Lord's Table, not
discerning the Lod's Body, were sometimes punished with disease, and sometimes
with death. Yet even in those chastizements, in those judgments there might be
secret mercy; and even in death not the despair of a future life; punishment
here being usually inflicted, that we may judge our selves, and escape
punishment. And if we judge our selves, though here we may suffer the judgment
of Correction, we shall be sure to escape the horror of the last judgment, the
judgment of Confusion: which God has made so dreadful, that by the fear of
Hell, he might bring us to the fear of God; and by the Fear of God, he might
bring us to the Love of God; and that lastly by Hell he might bring us to
Heaven. That therefore we may be mindful to judge our selves, we must be
mindful of God's Last judgment; in which, is wonder enough for the most
profane, and for the most Curious! A judgment, which does exceed all
Persecutions, War, Pestilence, Earthquake, Famine, not only by Horror, but
by Eternity. And if we consider it, we shall find it Dreadful in all respects;
dreadful for the Secrecy, for the Suddenesse, for the Preparation, for the
Session itself, for the Execution! Dreadful for the Secrecy; which is so
wonderful, that the day and hour of that judgment is not known to Christ
himself, who shall be Judge in that day; It is not known to the Son of man.
Some go yet higher: It is not known unto the Son of God: It is not known
unto him, as he is God the Son, that is, according to his own personality,
but only according to his Nature by which the Father, and the Son are one. S.
Austin speaks more briefly, Pater scit: ideo hoc dixit, quia in patre and
filius scit. Thus only by his divine nature our Savior knows it in his humane
nature. It is the Speech of S. Gregory. In natura humanitatis novit Christus
diem judicii, sed non ex natura humanitatis. He knows it being man; not as he
is man. But this day was a secret, which he revealed not to his Disciples: but
to stay their curiosity, told them; It was not for them to know the times and
seasons, which the father had kept in his own power. Upon which words, says S.
Austin, In vain is all search to know the end of the world, since Truth it self
had made known unto us thus much for truth, that this truth is not to be known.
Dreadful also is this judgment for the Sodainesse. The former dreadfullnesse,
which was from the secrecy, was in respect of our Knowledge; but this from the
Sodainesse, shall be in respect of Preparation. A man may be prepared against
many things, that shall come secretly; but this shall also come suddenly; the
world shall not be prepared; In such an hour as you think not, the Son of
man comes (Matt. 24.44.) The day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night:
for when they shall say, Peace and safty, then sadaine destruction comes upon
them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape (1 Thessalonians.
5.2, 3. As in the days of Noah and of Lot, there was water and fire, though
not to purify, but confound: so shall it be by fire in the day of the Lord.
Indeed when he comes, what should stay his Judgment? for when he comes, shall
he find faith on the earth? As in the days of Noah, but eight righteous
persons were found, and as in the days of Lot, but half so many in the
Cities, which were then destroyed; so shall it be in the day of the Lord;
though not strictly so few, yet but very few shall then escape; the wicked
becoming fuel in that fire, and their number increasing it! when therefore the
signs of that day come, the world shall be surpised with fear and horror!
with such fear and horror, as shall be their first Hell! Dreadful is this
Judgment for the Preparation also: there shall be preparation for it in the
Heavens, in the Air, in the Seas, in the Earth! Preparation in the heavens, in
the Sun and Moon! They shall now be signs not of comfort, but of Judgment!
The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and the terrible day of the Lord come ( Joel 2.31.) Which ghastly
darkness in the Sun and Moon, the wicked shall not be able to neglect. And
though they did in this life neglect the signs of Gods Mercy, yet shall they
not be able to neglect these signs of his Justice! They shall not escape this
darkness by a figure, taking the Sun and Moon for the Church, which in the
time of Antichrist shall be Obscured; or phantastically making the Sun to
signify the Devil, and the Moon the Reprobate, as Origin implies: though
this last would be no comfort to them. They shall not escape this darkness by
saying, the Sun and Moon shall Seem to be dark'ned, because they shall be
Out-shind by the Glory of Christ at his coming: no, this darkness shall be a
sign, before the glorious coming of Christ. They shall not escape this
darkness, by making it only a kind of speech, to signify the Calamity of that
time: for, this were to make the signs rather in the earth, than in the
heaven. But our Savior says expressly, There shall be signs in the Sun
and Moon: Now, what signs were in them, if there were no Change in them? Nor
shall they escape it by quarrelling with the manner of effecting it: which
shall not be, as some have ridiculously phansied, by the vast clouds of smoke,
that ascend from the burning of the world: this darkness shall be before that
fire; or else there would be no body left to see that darkness; but it is said,
that at that dreadful sight, men's hearts shall fail them. Nor shall this
darkness be effected by an eclipse: the Astronomers can tell us, that by an
eclipse, the Sun and Moon cannot both at once be darkened: the Sun being
eclipsed by the interposition of the Moon, between his light and our eye; the
Moon being eclipsed by the interposition of the earth between the Sun and
Moon. Nor need we suppose the interposition of some clouds, or the like dark
bodies in that day, to hinder their light. He is able to deprive those glorious
bodies of their light: nay, which is a greater wonder, he is able, leaving them
their light, to take from them their power of sending-forth their light; as he
took away the power of burning from the fiery furnace, into which the three
children were cast. But shall we define the ways of the Allmighty, and appoint
him his Counsels? No more may we appoint the Continuance of this darkness:
which, whether it shall be longer then the darkness in Egypt, which lasted
three days; or shorter then the darkness at our Savior's Passion, which
lasted but three hours; we have no more use of such knowledge, then knowledge
of the Continuance. But this we know, that it shall be long enough, to prove
the instant approach of the Lord's coming; and to drive the wicked not into
repentance, but into desperation. But yet there must be more preparation in the
heaven, whiles preparation in the Stars! For the Stars shall fall from
heaven, ( Matt. 24.29.) though Reason and the Astronomer will undertake to
demonstrate, that a star is of that bigness, that the whole earth is not
able to intertaine a star or two; Besides, that the heaven is incorruptible,
and the stars fixed in that incorruptible body. Indeed there is no absolute
necessity to understand this Literally: but yet S. Austin thought it not
improbable; and S. Chrysostom not only thought it probable, but alleadges also
that of the Prophet, ( Isaiah, 34.4.) All the host of heaven shall be
dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together, as a scroll: and all their
host shall fall down, as the leaf falls off from the vine, and as a falling
fig from the figtree. What is this, says that Father, the Stars shall fall
from heaven, as the leaves fall from the vine? whiles the vine has fruit, so
long it requires the use of leaves to protect it; but afterward the leaves
fall away: so whiles there are inhabitants on the earth, the Stars in heaven
will be needful for the earth: but when night it self shall cease to be, then
likewise the Stars shall be no more. Which interpretation does no way
disagree, either with the wonder of that day, which shall be a day of wonder;
or with the omnipotency of God, who can easily make them less, and make them
fall, who of nothing made them into this bigness. Irreverent it were for us to
examine, whether he will do it by a miraculous compression of the substance of
a star, or otherwise, who can perform it so many ways, beyond the feeble
and ridiculous guess of Reason. Which literal interpretation if any man less
like of, he may take S. Anstin's; who by the falling of the Stars,
understands the preparation, that shall be, against that day, in the Air; For
he thinks, it more probable, that by this speech is meant, that the
Lightnings, flames, and fiery exhalations, which shall be before the last day,
shall be so dreadful, that one would think, the very Stars did fall from
heaven. And easily may the world be thus affrighted, when as there shall be
preparation in the very Powers of heaven, which shall be shaken. ( Matt.
24.29.) The powers of heaven; that is, as the Holy Fathers teach us to expound
it, The blessed Angels of God in heaven shall tremble with reverent fear,
before the day of judgment, at those dreadful wonders, which God will declare
in the very heavens! There shall be also preparation in the Seas. The Sea and
the waves shall roar. ( Luke 21.25.) The height of the waves shall frighten
those that dwell by the shore; and the Out-crie of the waves shall frighten
those that dwell afar off. There shall be preparation also on the Earth. The
Sibylls tell us, that at that time the beasts shall rune belowing, and roaring
through the fields and Cities; that the Trees shall sweat blood; and that the
Sea shall throw-up fish on the dry ground. Nay, the Scripture tells us, that
Men shall be more amas'd; that their hearts shall fail them for fear, and for
looking after those things that are coming on the earth ( Luke 21.26.) A
sinner shall then be like a bird, that has flowen about in the pleasure of the
fields, and at last falls into a nett: So shall the sinner fall into a snare;
he shall be caught. The pleasures of the wicked shall be like Jonah's gourd;
they shall for a time sit under the shadow of their honors, of their wealth,
of their pleasure: but these shall all pass away, and leave them to the fury
of the Sun of righteousness. God shall arm all heaven against them, and a
flood of fire, after all, shall be as a tenth wave; for there shall come also a
flood of fire! unto which the Prophet David seemed to allude. Psalm. 50.3. Our
God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him,
and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. But the Prophet Malachi is
more evident, ( cap. 3.1.) Behold the day comes, that shall burn, as an oven,
and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day
that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts. S. Paul told his
Thessalonians as much (1 Epist. 1.7, 8.) That when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, he shall take vengeance in flaming fire. S. Peter is more
particular; The earth and the works, that are therein, shall be burnt-up (2
Pet. 3.10.) and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. And the heaven it
self is reserved unto fire against the day of judgment (2 Pet. 3.7.) nay, that
the heaven shall be set on fire, and be dissolved. ( verse 12.) and that the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, ( verse 10.) well therefore may we
remember, what the Lord said by the Prophet Joel. (2.30.) I will show wonders
in the heavens, and in the earth, blood and fire, and pillars of smoke. Yet
concerning the order of this flood of fire, S. Austin places it in the end of
the day of Judgment, though others would have it before, that this face of the
world may be destroyed before that great Session. And then shall the sign of
the Son of man appear in heaven: which some think shall be some insigne of
our Savior's Victory. Some more particularly, though without warrant, think
that it shall be the sign of the Cross; and that, when darkness shall have
overcast the world, there shall appear in the East a Cross of Light to
foreshew the coming of the Lord. Others think this sign shall be the
glorious wounds in our Savior's body; at which sight in the day of Judgment,
the Jews especially may be confounded. Yet some others think it shall be that
Prerogative Glory, with which our Savior shall then appear. But since the
interpretation of this sign is kept as secret, as the day in which it shall
appear: Let us consider, how dreadful the Session it self shall be; A
Session, which shall be usherd with the mighty voice of an Archangell, and of a
Trumpet. It was the voice of a Trumpet, which the Jews did use in their wars,
in their Temple, in their Feasts, in their Assemblies ( Numb. 10.) It was with
the voice of a Trumpet, that the Law was given at Mount Sinai: but here the
dead shall hear this Trumpet and this voice calling them unto judgment. And
then shall they see the Son of man coming in the Clouds with power and great
Glory ( Matt. 24.30.) They shall see that humane nature, which was profaned on
earth: they shall see him come to be their Judge, whom once they judged; The
Jews, that would not know him, and the Heathen, and wicked Christians that
cared not to know him, shall now behold him not without horror, whom once they
beheld not without hate or neglect. But now they shall see him come in the
clouds with power and glory: with glory, for he shall come upon a throne of
clouds; with power, for he shall come upon a throne of clouds, the work of
his own hands; yea, all the wonders of that day shall be the works of his
power; and he shall come with power to judge the quick and the dead. He shall
come with glory, such glory, that all the Angels shall with reverent obedience
wait upon him; upon him, whom none but impudent and obdurate sinners durst
contemn. Will you see his glory? Moses shall show it to you, as it appeared to
the Elders of Israel; who saw the God of Israel, and there was under his feet
as it were a paved work of a Sapphire stone: and as it were the body of heaven
in his clearness ( Fxod. 24.10.) Will you see his glory? S. John shall show it
to you, as it appeared to Him: who saw a great white throne, and him that sat
on it; from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found
no place for them ( Rev. 20.11.) Will you see his glory, you shall see his
Kingdom: for then shall be fullfill'd that petition in our prayer, Thy
Kingdom come: That shall be the first day of his glorious Reign. Behold his
Assistants, Angels, Saints, more especially the Apostles, He shall come with
all his holy Angels ( Matt. 25.31.) Heaven shall be empty, says S.
Chrysostom, in the day of judgment: when all the Angels and the Saints of
heaven shall descend from heaven to attend the Lord Jesus unto judgment. O
glorious judgment! O dreadful Judge! before whom all the persons that have
been from the creation, and shall be till that day, shall in that day all at
once appear! when sin shall have no cloak; nay, when the body shall have no
covering; but all the whole world shall stand naked and trembling either with
horror, or reverence, looking-up unto the Lord of glory! He shall come with
all his Saints, who shall assist him in judging the world: Do ye not know,
that the Saints shall judge the world? (1 Cor. 6.2.) They shall assist him by
their holy lives, compared with the abominations of the wicked. They shall
assist him by their consent, and applause of his sentence against the wicked.
They shall assist him with honorable attendance, being taken up into the air
at the time of this judgment, and placed at his right hand. The Apostles more
especially shall assist him, in this judgment. Our Savior himself told them as
much. (Matt. 19.28.) When the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his
glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. And peradventure, as some reverently think, their seats shall be
glorious clouds proportioned to their excellency, who, though they shall judge
the World, which resisted or despised their Doctrine; yet more particularly
shall they judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. For when the Jews shall be about
to say for themselves, that they could not believe in Christ, because they were
commanded to keep the Law of Moses; the Apostles, says S. Chrysostom, shall
judge them; because they likewise did first obey the Law of Moses, and
afterward changed that obedience into Faith in Christ. So also meditates S.
Jerome. Nor shall they only judge Men, but also Angels. Know you not, says S.
Paul, that we shall judge Angels? (1 Cor. 6.3.) those wicked Angels, that
would have exalted themselves against the Almighty: Behold also the Solemnity
of this judgment, in the Continuance of it. For, to the glory of this Session
and of the Saints, before the face of the wicked, S. Austin thinks, that it
shall continue at least the length of a day. Unto which some would extend the
meaning of those words (Matt. 24.27.) As the Lightning comes out of the East,
and shines even unto the West: so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be; As if our Savior should spend the length of a day in passing from the East
unto the West, that so he might be beheld of all the world. But the safest
knowledge of these Circumstances must be obtaind not by the bold inquiry of
study, but by the modest expectation of experience; The method of the actions
in that day, being chiefly to be learned in that day: in which the sins of
the whole world shall be revealed. Which Manifestation of sins, shall be one
of the most wonderful actions of our Saviors power in that day: in which the
Lord will search the World as he said he would search Jerusalem, ( Zeph. 1.12.)
he will search it with candles; there is light in the search; he will not only
search, but also discover. Thou did it secretly, said the Lord by Nathan unto
David; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. But
how will the Lord in that day discover sin! even as the Sunne-beame pearcing
into a room discovers the dusty atoms, which before we saw not; he will
discover them as easily, as he can discover the multitude of fishes now hid in
the Sea, if it should but please him, as he speaks by the Prophet Isaiah
(50.2.) to drie-up the Sea, and make the rivers a wilderness and make their
fish die for thirst. But how will the Lord in that day discover sin? why, S.
Paul tells us (1 Cor. 4.5. that the Lord at his coming will both bring to light
the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
heart. It shall be done by the power of God, by the light of Revelation. Yet
how will the Lord in that day discover sin! why, the books shall be opened,
the books of men's consciences shall be opened they shall be opened, whether
they will or no; and they shall be read, not only by every man's ownselfe, but
also by all others; not only every man's sins shall be made known to
himself, but also to every man else; by the power of God and the miraculous
light of revelation, to every particular man; as S. Chrysostom, teaches us,
and S. Anselm; who says, that men's sins shall be seen, as the Sun is seen
by every eye; S. Basil says, they shall be so revealed, that they shall be
heard ((...)) of all Angels and men. And then will the Almighty pronounce
Sentence upon the works of men. In the last day of the Creation God examined
all his own works, and pronounced them all to be very good: and in the last
day of judgment he will examine all the works of men, but what judgment will he
pronounce of Them? Surely he will say, They are almost all very bad. Yea, he
will pronounce a more dreadful judgment upon the Authors of them; who shall
begin their pain, before their judgment is pronounced. For, as S. Bernard
says, The just shall be called first; Christ shall first say unto the
righteous, come ye blessed of my Father; that so the wicked, says he, may be
the more tormented; according to that of the Prophet David, (Ps. 112.10.) The
wicked shall see it and be greiv'd, he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt
away: the desire of the wicked shall perish. And then shall that burden of the
wicked be laid upon them, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire. O, what a
separation will that be! when the holy angels shall catch-up the Godly to
meet Christ in the air; (1 These. 4.17.) and then the wicked shall be cast into
a furnace of fire. In the beginning God divided between the light and the
darkness: So will he do at the last day. What is the light, in figure, but
the Just! what the darkness, but the wicked? So speaks the Apostle (Ephesians.
5.8.) Ye were sometimes darkness; but now are ye light in the Lord; that is,
you were once wicked, but now are righteous. In this world there is both light
and darkness: but in the end of the world, the light and darkness shall be
separated. In this world there are both good and bad: but in the end of the
world, the bad shall be separated from the good. Which separation is a part of
the Execution, for which this judgment is so dreadful. They shall depart from
the face of the Lord: but, O, whither shall they depart! shall they depart as
Cain, to be vagabonds upon the face of the earth? No; there is no return unto
the earth! though some have thought, but never proved, that the place of
torment shall be on the earth, and in the channels, where the Seas now swell.
But this is opposed not only by truth, but also by error, that error of some,
who because it is said, there shall be a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, have therefore believed, that the godly, at least a great part
of them, shall even here enjoy for ever a heaven on earth, beyond the Poetry of
the Millenaries. But can this earthly heaven agree with our Savior's
Ascension? will not this want its intended effect, if by the virtue of this,
the righteous also (the members of his mystical body) shall not ascend? when
therefore it is said, there shall be new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, we may understand it, not only of the Heavens (though some
margents would so instruct us) but also of the Earth; though with this
difference; that in the new heavens there shall be righteousness; and in the
new earth there shall be no more unrighteousness, the wicked, and consequently
wickedness, being taken away. But whither shall the wicked at last depart?
some have placed their Hell next under the Sphere of the Moon; induced by
mistake of the parable of Lazarus and the Rich man, between whom because there
is expressed a discourse, they have thought, that Hell borders upon Heaven. But
parables being in effect Similitudes, are not so properly intended for stories
of truth, as for the Illustration of it. Besides we need not for proof of the
possibility of the dialogue, imagine a neighborhood of these different places:
since it were as easy for the divine power to make the Ear to hear from heaven
to hell, as it was to make the eye of his martyr Stephen, accurately to
discern from earth to heaven. Besides, though their Imagination were granted,
it would not half serve the turn, the distance from the concave of the Moon
to the highest heaven, so much exceeding the space between the earth and the
Moon. Most men then considering the extreme opposition of the just and wicked,
have accordingly supposed the places prepared for them to be at an extremity
also of distance. The wicked then must depart from the face of the Lord; and
this is their pain of loss: and whither shall they depart, but into
everlasting fire? This is their pain of sense. The Lord shall swallow them up
in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. ( Psalm. 21, 2.) And so indeed
some literally think (as Abulensis) that the earth shall open, and swallow
them up into hell; and then shall close upon them; as it befell the three
rebels, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. In prosecution of which supposall, some
imagine, that in the midst of the earth there shall be prepared a hollownesse,
of capacity sufficient for the multitude of the wicked: and that since their
bodies naturally heavy, must descend toward the center, they shall there make
one unhappy mass, or lump, in eternal sorrow! But such wild phansy we may
rather restrain with the sobriety of that wise Jew, the Author of the second
book of Esdras, (chap. 9. v. 13.) Be thou not curious, how the ungodly shall
be punished; that is, to know what God would not have thee know. The humane
wisdom of Aristotle, did indeed examine the curious errors of the
Philosophers about the Soul: and the Christian wisdom of the learned
Irenaeus, studied the depths and madness of the Valentinians; counting the
knowledge of them as useful, as the defense vile; and teaching us more happily
to escape them, then to understand them. Led then by Scripture we may severely
know, that with fire the wicked shall be tormented; the power of which we must
acknowledge, though we know not the kind: and to them it may be said as it is
in Isaiah (chap. 5. 11;) Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your
selves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
that you have kindled. This shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down in
sorrow. Yet does not the same Prophet crie-out again, (chap. 33.14.) Who
amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? He implies not yet the impossibility of them, but the
horror. For in sorrow they shall lie down; they shall dwell with fire, they
shall dwell with death! with Eternal death! Seneca, though a Heathen could
say, Mors timenda erat, si tecum esse possit; Death were a terrible thing
indeed, if it could be a part of a man's household; if it could inhabit with a
man! And there it is so: death feeds upon them. It was the Lord that said,
(Deutr. 32.41, 42.) If I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on
judgment, I will render vengeance to my enemies, and will reward them that hate
me. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour
flesh. Here is the execution of the threatening; The worm of Conscience shall
feed on them: that worm bred out of the Corruption of their own foul sins.
Death shall feed on them. Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall
feed on them ( Psalm. 49.14.) These sheep shall become pasture: and, as
Innocentius says, as grass, when it is fed on, is not pull'd-up by the
roots, but only the blade of it is cropped, that so it may perpetually renew: so
shall the wicked, as the pasture of death, perpetually renew to be fed-upon.
And this apprehension of Eternity is that, which breaks the heart of the
wicked! The perpetual hills did bow, his ways are everlasting; says the
Prophet Habakkuk, (c. 3.6.) Incurvati sunt colles mundi, ab itineribus
aeternitatis ejus; says the Latin Interpreter: which some do mystically
understand of mighty sinners; that even the proudest and mightiest sinners in
the world stoop and are heart-broken with the remembrance of the eternity of
hell torments! Nor shall they have in that journey of eternity any companions to
comfort them; they shall have no companions but such as hunger, thirst,
watching, fire, darkness, devils, and desperation! Yet, will the Lord cast-off
for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever?
does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he
in anger shut-up his tender mercies? as the Prophet David asks ( Psalm. 77. v.
7.8.9.) You shall have the Lord's own answer by his Prophet Ezechiel, (c.
7.4.) Mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity; but I will
recompense thy ways upon thee. O then, let us tremble at God's judgment, that
we may never tremble under it. Let us avoid it, by meeting it. He that by
meditation continually fears hell, has least need to fear. Remember that
instruction of our Savior; Pray that your flight be not in winter, or on the
Sabbath Day ( Matt. 24.) That is, says S. Chrysostom, that it be not in such
a time, wherein thou can make no escape: In the winter the weather hinders
thee from flying, and on the Sabbath the Commandment stays thee. To all that
are unready in their account in that day of judgment, it shall prove a winter,
a Tempest: And they shall find a severer command, than on the Sabbath; they
must stay whether they will or no. Let us therefore judge our selves, that we
may not be judged; and that so, when the Lord Jesus shall appear, we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him, at his coming. Which grant, O thou
that shall come to be our judge; and by the judgment, which thou did suffer,
save us from the judgment, which thou will inflict; that we may give praises
unto thee, and to the father, and to thy blessed Spirit, world without end.

FINIS.
OF Spiritual Sorrow, A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

Ierem. 9.1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my People.


THE Desire of Sorrow may seem very strange: and yet it is not so wonderful,
as Happy. It is indeed contrary to Man's nature; and yet it tends to the
perfection of his Nature. The Soul is never moved by desire unto any thing;
but that which seems good; we may almost say, but unto that, which seems good
to the body; the soul in the body being commonly persuaded by the body. And yet
sometimes it desires sorrow; sorrow, which is contrary to the pleasure of
nature: the practice of sorrow before man's fall being unknown unto him; and
since his fall being hateful to him, Yet the Body, which oftentimes does
seduce the Soul, is sometimes also persuaded by it; and raised both to
apprehend and desire a pleasure in sorrow; Not that, which arises from the
mistaking melancholy of the body; but that which happily and judiciously
proceeds from the wisdom of the Soul; since as by sin we run to the
extremest distance from God, so by Spiritual sorrow we run to the
extremest distance from sin. This is the Art of Repentance! by which we may
also farther observe an excellent difference between the Stoique and the
Christian; The Stoique fondly intends to make man like God, by making him
without Passion, and so without Change, yet without Grace: the Christian on the
Contrary endeavors to be, neither without passion, nor without change, and yet
like God; whiles he labors to Sanctify his Passion, and therefore his change,
by grace. And this sorrow, when it does deeply affect the Soul, does not only
affect the Soul: but uses the Eyes instead of the Tongue, to declare itself;
as here our Prophet expresses his desire, to express such sorrow and such
Tears. In whose Lamentation we may first behold, The Nature of the sorrow;
which being expressed by the nature of a Change, we may view in it the things,
that must be changed; which will appear to be the Head and Eyes: as also the
things, into which they must be changed: which likewise will appear to be,
Waters, even a Fountain, yea a fountain of Tears. Next we may view the Object
of the Sorrow; or what it is, for which such Lamentation is to be made; which
though the Prophet says is the slaughter of the people; yet more vehemently he
expresses it to be the sins of the People, the Cause of the Slaughter. At the
foulness of which sight, the sight of sin, we likewise may be moved to a
like holiness of sorrow; whereby to wash away such foulness; The sight of
blood indeed may move us to Compassion; but the sight of sin more happily
unto Amendment. Let us first then view the Nature of the Sorrow described by
the parts affected and instructed by it, as it does thus sadly and wisely
express it self, O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears. The Head is the seat of Wisdom and of the sense; the sorrow then,
that proceeds from the Head, must be a sorrow, that flows from Reason; it must
be a sorrow, that affects the sense; and therefore a reasonable punishment of
our selves. And since from the head are derived the Nerves, by which both sense
and Motion is distributed to the whole body; the sorrow of the Head must affect
both the sense and motion of the whole body. And thus did sorrow affect the
good King Hezekiah, as he speaks of his own mournful pace, (Isaiah, 38.15.) I
shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my Soul. Man indeed is
made to be thus wise, thus sorrowful; his brain being for his proportion, both
greater and moister, then it is in other creatures. And as the Head is
frequently taken for those things, which are either First or Chief; so this
wise sorrow in the life of a Christian; will truly challenge such Excellency
and Priority. The Beginning of the year is in Ezekiel, (40.1.) called (...),
the Head of the year: but more truly may the sorrow of the Head be called the
Head, or beginning, of the year of man's Conversion. Nor does that in the
Original only signify the Head, but sometimes also (as in Lament. 3.19. the
bitterness of affliction, and sometimes (as Deuteronomy. 29.18.) the bitterness of
sin: to which last S. Peter alludes, Act. 8.23. speaking of Simon Magus; as
likewise S. Paul. (Heb. 12.15.) Indeed, this bitterness of Sorrow is most
agreeable to the Head, from whence the bitterness of Sin did before arise.
Which sorrow the head does sometimes express by the shaving of it, as in Job
(1.20.) as sometimes by the Motion, or shaking of it, as also in Job. (16.4.)
but most happily does the head express it by the Eye; which, as the
Philosophers observe, declares our Hate and Love; but we must add, most
happily, when in religious tears it shows our Love of God, by our hate of
sin. The Physiognomer tells us, that the best eye is a moist eye, that seems
to swim in his Orb: which is a surer rule in the Spiritual constitution of
it; and does not only teach us the complexion of the Eye, but also the Duty. A
closed eye, was, in the Poetry of the Ancients, used as the emblem of death:
and an eye dark'ned with repentant tears is a good emblem of our
Mortification; which is the death of sin. (...) an Eye, signifies also a
Fountain; a fountain being an eye of the earth, and an eye being a fountain of
the head. They are both alike also in the Abundance and speed of their waters,
which they send forth. And therefore Jacob's posterity is compared unto them (
Deuteronomy. 33.28.) The fountain of Jacob shall be upon a Land of corn and wine. The
Latin Interpreter has it, Oculus Jacob, the Eye of Jacob; to signify, that his
posterity should as speedily and mightily flow forth on the earth, as waters
gush out from the Eye, or fountain. Most aptly then does the Prophet here, in
his plentiful sorrow, wish that his head were waters. (...) which signifies
waters, is a word always of the plural number, to imply their abundance;
which, as some think, is expressed in the composition of the word, deriving it
from (...) the Sea, and (...) to trouble and make a tumult; intimating the
conditions of true sorrow; which is happily with abundance of tears, and with
the outcry of a holy lamentation. And aptly did he wish his head to be waters:
it was to wish a change, and yet a likeness; there being such similitude
between the brain and water; both of them being cold and moist. Some of the
ancient Philosophers hold, that all things had their beginning from the Water:
which made the Greek Lyrique sing, (...): which excellency may truly be
attributed to the waters of a holy sorrow; the after-workes of a righteous man
taking their beginning from such true repentance. These also being waters, upon
which the Spirit of God does move; and in both we may see the effect of his
cherishing providence: the waters by a singular blessing being singularly
fruitful; but these waters do bring forth more admirable fruits, the fruits
of the Spirit. The Ancient Heathen had a Belief of a divine power in water:
but in these our Sanctified waters we have an Experience of it. And the rather
does the divine power delight in these, because of their purity; these being
the only waters, that are troubled and yet pure. And so pure they are, that as
of all the mere elements there is none but the water, wherein we are able so
clearly to behold our own image: so are there none of our works, wherein we
are able so to behold the true image of our selves, as we may in the waters of
repentance. Now the best waters are not only clean, but also cleansing; nay,
truly Medicinal, and some Miraculous: and have not these waters these
qualities? these prerogatives? If a viper be bruised in water, it becomes, as
some tell us, a sovereign Physique against venom: and when our former sins
are bruised in the waters of repentance, such waters prove powerful antidotes
against the power of sin. Nay, you may see their miraculous power, whiles
they save us from sinking to the depth of hell: so that these will prove a
surer foundation, than those upon which S. Peter. ventured to walk; They had
not been a foundation, had not miracle been their foundation. Yet though the
waters of holy sorrow be rare with us for their power, they must not be as rare
with us for their use: but we must remember, that as water is the drink for
most living creatures; so holy David made these waters his drink. Indeed,
without these the Spiritual life decays; and as amongst the Romans, he that
had so highly offended, that he was forbidden the use of fire and water, was by
that signified to be a condemned person: so whosoever so offends God, that he
denies him the heat of divine love, and will not bestow upon him the waters of
repentance, or a mourfull desire of them, he shall by lamentable experience
find, that in Gods sight he is a condemned person. But these waters must not be
like those of the pit, or of the lake: they must be waters of the Fountain;
living waters, flowing waters. Now that Fountain Water is most pure and clear,
which flows from a rock: so commonly are the tears, that flow from the
hardest heart, when it is once changed into a Fountain; when God smites upon
it, with his rod. Yet it is chiefly when God first smites upon it; for, as the
waters issue from the Fountain with great violence, but pass with an
undiscerned motion in the course of the stream: so is it in the beginning and
progress of holy sorrow. And therefore in another, yet a like respect, they may
aptly be expressed by that: Lybian fountain of the sun, (as it was called)
the waters whereof were anciently said to be hott at the morning and the
evening, but at midday cold: such too commonly are the waters of repentance:
which at the morning of conversion, and the evening of life, more liberally
flow forth with a great heat of grace; but in the noonday of life, when we
are in the midst of health and strength, and consequently of temptation, then
are they oftentimes unhappily cold! Best therefore are they discerned, when they
are best; when they are first: for then are they chiefly like the fountain,
which amongst other names the Hebrews call (...), from digging, or cutting a
vein of water: and surely holy sorrow flows out so fast, that we may say, God
cuts a vein of tears. And you may remember, that Solomon most fitly ( Eccle.
12.6.) calls the Liver, which is the fountain of the veins, a fountain; or the
pitcher, says he, be broken at the fountain; that is, according to the
interpretation of the Chaldie paraphrast, till the gall be broken upon the
liver: such exquisite similitude there is between the swift motion of this
blood and a fountain; these waters being like those mentioned, Psalm. 18.15.
Those effusions of waters, as S. Ierom, renders it. The word is, (...) from
(...), to offer violence to ones self; expressing the violent speed of these
waters. Nor are they only violent, but also abundant, the fountain laboring to
express streams of water. Now that stream-water is heled to be best, which
flows toward the rising sun: so is that spiritual sorrow best, which flows
forth, as soon as the sun of righteousness first shines on the heart. And as
the waters of a stream, the farther they are from a City, are usually the
purer: so are the tears of those, that are most retired from the tumults of
the world. And since we say, a stream runs then with a full happy course,
when it drives-down whatsoever may hinder it in its course: so let our
spiritual sorrow freely flowout, till it overthrows all unlawful pleasures,
and all temptations whatsoever. But will you see, what kind of waters these
are? The fountain can scarce show them without a figure; this being a fountain
of salt-waters, a fountain of Tears. Some waters indeed are hot and saltish,
by reason of that, from which they pass: holy tears are of this nature, as
proceeding from the heatof divine love; and fulfill that Leviticall and
mystical command, ( Levit. 2.13.) In all thy offerings thou shall offer salt.
Nor do these waters want their special virtue; Euripides, being troubled with
the falling Evil, when he travailed into Egypt, was by the appointment of the
Egyptian Priests dipped in Seawater; and so was cured: such washing in the
salt-waters of spiritual sorrow is the best remedy against the spiritual
Epilepsie, the falling into sin. True tears, it is observed, only flow from
Man; as the truest tears only from the righteous man. Sometimes Joy sends them
out; when the heart opening itself, as if it would intertain what it loves,
sends forth such heat and Spirits to the brain, that it dissolves the Moisture,
and commands it passage by the eyes: which work the righteous also does
sometimes feel. Sometimes and most commonly Sorrow sends them out; when in the
Contraction of the heart, the heat and spirits so retire, that the moisture of
the brain being left without a guide, expresses its own sad and desolate
estate: but the tears of the righteous never want a guide; and though they
seem disconsolate, yet are they secretly guided by the true Spirit of comfort.
Sorrow does sometimes also keepe-in tears, when the heart is excessively
contracted; when it so calls in the vital heat, that the moisture of the brain
is merely congealed: such winter also does the righteous sometimes feel; and
only would shed tears, because he can not; and thus his will does weep, though
his eyes do not. It is indeed only Man's Intentive will that is the cause, why
only Man does weep: and good reason it is, since it was only his will, that was
the cause of his sin, and consequently an occasion of his tears. The soft
heart is naturally most ready to weep: and it is the soft heart, that is
spiritually most ready to weep. Yet if you would know the true cause of tears,
you may observe, nay for fear of error you must observe, that as tears flow
from the moisture of nourishment received into the body: so spiritual sorrow
flows from grace received into the Soul. Unto which grace of sorrow in our
Conversion, in the first point of conversion, the will is merely passive;
merely passive in respect of an inward change, though it has still natural
liberty, by which it is always active; active in general, to concur to an
Act of faith, as to an Act; not in special, as to such an act,, an act of
Faith. The Natural will can concur to the work of God, in respect of outward
means, as it can freely hear or not hear, the word preached, but the inward
efficient cause of conversion is the Holy Ghost. In which expression we may
understand all subordinate causes inservient in that work, though not working
by their own power, but by the power of God. And thus we may say, that
conversion is the work of Man, as he is the subject of it; but the work of
God in respect of the first motion. The will in this is like Elisha's eye;
which had a natural power to see, but it needed a supernatural power to
discern a supernatural aid of angels. An active Liberty then unto grace, the
will by mere nature can not claim: nor may we, though some do, attribute an
active power to the water in baptism, though Sacramental, (much less to the
tears in repentance) as if the water did concur actively and physically to
the production of grace. God does indeed sometimes exalt a natural agent to an
ability above his degree in his kind; but never above his kind. The first is to
help things in their Order; but the last is to destroy order. The God then of
Nature, and of order does not make a Natural agent the proper cause of a
supernatural Effect; which truth may save us from the magisteriall impositions
of mistaking Reason. Our Prophet here does wish for this sorrow: it was not
then according to the measure he desired, either in his own possession, or at
all in his power. The cause then of Spiritual sorrow can not be natural: and
as holy tears have thus their Cause from grace, so also have they their
Abundance. And here we may farther observe the apt wisdom of the Prophet, who
expresses his sorrow, a work of Grace, by similitude and parallel to the work
of Nature. Now in Nature there is not only a fountain that sends forth streams,
but there are also waters in the Cavernes of the earth, to nourish the
fountain: so must there be not only a fountain in the penitent eye, but there
must also be inwardly store of waters; He wishes therefore not only that his
eyes were a fountain, but also, nay first of all, that his Head were waters.
And if we consider the collection of waters, which are in the earth, we shall
find some affirm it, to be caused by Protrusion, as we may call it, by a
violent blast forcing those waters into the Pores of the earth; so S, Basil.
Some also we shall find, that attribute it to the attractive influence of the
Heavens; so Aquinas. Both which ways we shall find proportional to God's
manner of working in the Soul; whiles some he Thrusts into tears, by
Affliction; as some he Draws into tears by Love. And as the waters in the
earth, as some think, do serve to temper the veins of metal: so does the
secret sorrow of the heart serve to temper the hardness of the heart, that at
last it confesses it is waters, and the eyes, as a fountain, send forth streams
of tears. Now streams, as they pass, do commonly cleanse such places, as they
passe-through: so surely the tears of the truly penitent do not only wash away
his finnes, but they endeavor also to wash away other-mens, and consequently
the calamity due unto them. Which Object of sorrow we should next behold, if
through the darkness of sorrow we could behold it. But, alas, what pleasure is
in Destruction? which being contrary to nature: is also contrary to pleasure.
What pleasure in garments rolled in blood, which do afford more Horror, than
warmth? what pleasure in the tumult of the Battle; where not to be furious, is
to be Cowardly; where Mercy is held an Absurdity; and to be barbarous, a glory!
This is the prerogative, and the supererogation of the Sword! This claims
alone the triumph over the conquered: this usually alone over-acts the triumph!
Yet thus did the sword slight Judah to a slaughter! and wound the Prophet also
with Compassion. But is Judah, so destroyed, that it has left none like unto
her? Yet then her vices also were gone with her: but surely there will always
be a People, and but too like her; whiles as much in sin, as in an undeserved
love; and whiles in sin, too probably a Judah in Calamity! God will not want
a People; nor will they want faults! nay, by turning his Blessings into sins,
they make him turn them into Curses, the Punishment of sins. The deformity
of which, if, in the wisdom of your fear, you would behold, but in the
extremity of your fear can not, instead of the eye understand by the ear, and
the Prophet will tell you, that this his People, the people of Judah, were
liers, slanderers, slanderers of their brethren, deceivers; that their tongue
was a bow, a bended bow ( v. 3.) nay, and an arrow too; yea, an arrow shot-out.
( v. 8.) that when their tongue spoke peaceably, their heart laid wait. ( v.
8.) that their habitation was in the midst of deceit. ( v. 6.) Take ye heed
every one of his neighbor, says the Prophet, and trust ye not in any brother,
for every brother will utterly supplant. Hear him accuse them farther, They
proceed from evil to evil. ( v. 3.) you see their degrees! They weary
themselves to commit iniquity. ( v. 5.) you see their unhappy diligence! They
be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men! ( v. 2.) O what a Judah is
this? and shall such a Judah be found in our Judah? O, Let every Conscience be
its own Confessor, and whisper it self an answer, to amendment. And can we
desist then from bewailing our own sins and the sins of others? though
justly we may be as much oppressed with the number, as with the guilt! and
almost no less with the variety of the kinds, than of the acts! shall we then
only bewail the sins of the head and of the eyes? and only weep for the
sins of those parts, with which we weep? If we search the Head, we shall find
those waters, from whence arises the fountain, that sends forth the streams of
other sins. There shall we find the Understanding; and in that, sins of
defect and of excess; sometimes a disable Ignorance, and sometimes an Abuse of
great abilities! How many are there that sin by Sloth! and will not
understand the negligence of their own understanding! How many, that sin by
Pride! choosing rather to reason against God, then against any thing, that
shall dislike their Reason! If we look upon the Memory, we shall find it to
be Malicious and Perverse; by not remembering what we ought, and by remembering,
what we ought not! If we behold our Fancy, though by innumerable shapes it
can change it self, yet by none of them all can it excuse it self! Nay, it
will be glad, if it can make us commit, as it were, half a sin; a sin in
some sort without consent; a sin in sleep! if it can but prepare us to a
sin! But these are works of an invisible guilt! If we consider the Ear, O
how obedient it is, to the tongue of a flatterer! How vile a slave unto our
Pride! suffering itself sometimes to be board-through, to profess our servitude
under sin! Nay, even the Hair, which was made for an ornament of the head,
is often by the figure or the length, made a deformity? S Paul proclaims it to
be unnatural for a man to wear long hair; yet how many are there, that do
less esteem of his protestation, then of their hair! perchance it is because
they Believe not his word, or understand not the reason of his word: which,
notwithstanding their purpose, is founded upon God's purpose. When God made
man, (as Moses speaks) he made them male and female; and made the female
subject to the male: the Natural sign of which subjection is the woman's
hair; (as the civil sign of it was anciently a veil.) For the male then to
use this sign, what is it, but in part to confound the distinction of sexes,
which God has appointed? and is in clear judgment a more intimate violation,
whiles more unnatural, of God's purpose, then the promiscuous use of their
apparel. And when the contrary use in the form of the hair was practiced by
the Nazarites, it was by dispensation from the Lawgiver; not unlike Abraham's
intended sacrifice of his son: both which acts had otherwise been as odious,
as by God's pleasure they were made acceptable. If we consider the Nostrill, we
must confess, that the breath, which by divine favor they receive in as the
breath of life, they too often send forth by exchange, as the breath of scorn.
Besides sometimes with perfume they flatter the brain; and sometimes oppress it
with the Indian Smoke; which by custom becomes disease, unless Infirmity
excuses it into Physique. If we consider the Mouth, the Tongue, the Palate;
alas! Were not the bewailing of their sins a work of Grace, and the Numbering
of them but a work of Nature, we might think it more easy to bewail them,
then to number them! The mouth is the most washed part of the body: and yet in
the use of it, we may say, it is the foulest! The Tongue, that is placed so
near to Reason, does notwithstanding seldom make use of so happy a
neighborhood! The Palate, which God has honorably seated in the head,
unnaturally degrades it self by an obedience to the Belly! And may we not
then at the consideration of all these sins of the head, wish with our
Prophet, that our head were waters! But some there are, who not by miracle, but
by sin, turn the waters of their head into wine, nay sometimes, we may say,
into fire, often are they so out-raged with the calenture of the grape; That it
poses them to distinguish between their sin and their Punishment! And what
were it then, if, in a pretended fact, such fiery heads were covered with
mournful ashes? fire there were, we might safely confess: but might we not
add in the words of the Poet, though in another sense, that though there were
fire, yet it were sub cinere doloso? Should we call this Repentance, or a
cheat? But now if we should behold the sins of the Eye, we should quickly
find a wonder, not only of sin, but also of Prospect; and the eye would now
be satisfied with seeing: it would quickly be satisfied; and with holy tears
be willingly darkened at this sight. Nor will it only bewail its lust and
pride, but also the greatest part of its former sorrow, and now shed wise and
religious tears, for the foolish and carnal tears, which formerly it shed.
Thus will it do for its own sins; but not only for its own sins; but we
shall endeavor truly to crie-out with David's compassion, Mine eyes gush out
with tears, because men keep not thy Laws! Sorrow for our own sins, all men
will confess to be necessary: but sorrow for other men's sins, seems to some
men unnecessary, and to most men but voluntary. Yet this also is the duty of a
righteous man, to weep for the unrighteous. It is the duty of him, that would
be like unto God to weep when Men care not to be like unto God. It is his duty
to greive, when God is greiv'd; to greive for that, for which God is greiv'd!
Our will must be like his will; and therefore to weep also, when others men's
wills are not like his Will; It is an argument of excellent nature to bewail
the punishment of an offender: but it is an argument of excellent grace, to
bewail the sin of an offender; the cause of his Punishment. And these does
our merciful Prophet here compassionate; weep he does for the calamity of his
people: but he does so much the more greive for their sin, by how much their
sin was more grievous, than their calamity! And amongst the many sins,
which he here bewailes; one was, that they were not valiant for the truth upon
the earth. It is the more grievous sin to Oppose truth; but it is also a
grievous sin not to defend it. If we seriously consider it, is it not a
strange cowardice, for a man to be afraid to be on God's side! Did God ever
forsake his truth? or those, that did not forsake his truth? If the Pelagian
were again ready to equal Nature with grace; if the Arian were again ready to
deny the consubstantiality and coeternity of God the son; if the Donatist
should again pretend a possibility so to over-refine the Church, that it may be
without all spot; should we proudly become impure by the bold pretense of such
false purity? or should we turn politicians against God, and leave him to the
defense of his own truth? Or, say of his truth, as the Jews did of his Son,
Let him deliver it, if he will have it? If we discern any that prefer the
giddiness of their own reason, under the notion of sound Reason, before the
Sobriety of the holy writings and the Church; shall we presently either reele
out of the way, or stagger in it? About the eleventh year of this present
Century of the Church, a new starregazer (one Fabricius) in the upper Germany,
published (at Witteberge) by the virtue of a strange glass, a pretended
discovery of strange spots in the Sun: about which time in the lower
Germany, a like acute Novelist published pretented spots in the best Belgique
Church. But as the clearest-sighted, though of a less excellency then S.
Stephen's eye, judged those supposed stains through divine permission, to have
been by the grand Artist the devil, juggled into the starre-wise glass, not
into the Sun: so the best-sighted, though not so wonderful as Lyncius, yet
free from the Jaundice of Opinion, discerned through the right Optique of
sacred truth, the spots to be not in the Church, but in the Novelist; and so
that his mistakes were the stains. If then we see any departing from the
truth, shall not we depart from Them? shall we not rather partake with the
Prophet in his tears, than with them in such backsliding, as deserves such
tears? You see then enough, yea too much cause of sorrow and yet you can not
but see the little Effect it produces! And must we not confess this to be
very unnatural, that where there is so great cause, there is so little Effect!
where so much sin, so few tears for sin! O, let us then with severity look
upon our Own sins; let us with compassion behold other men's! and shall we
make ourselves so unhappy, as not to bewail our own unhappiness? shall we
weep for the death of our Friends Bodies, and shall we not weep for the death
of our Own Souls? That being for them but to fulfill the Law of Nature; but
this being for us to violate the Law of God! When David and his men saw Ziklag
burnt, and their wives and children carried into Captivity, it is said, they
wept, until they had no more power to weep (1 Samuel 30.4.) And shall not we
weep as much to see our Soul, which is the City of God, set on fire by vice;
and all the virtues and ornaments of our Souls to be lost! to be
Triumph'd-upon by the Enemies of our Souls? Surely, as the wind by gathering
many clouds makes a shower: so our mind by meditation collecting the many evils
of our own lives, and others, will easily cause a shower of tears! And indeed,
who would not willingly by a temporal sorrow, escape eternal sorrow? since in
this life a few accepted tears can wash away the greatest sins that shall be
remitted: but, after this life, eternal tears can not wash away the least
sins! Let us then cry here for the guilt of our sins, that we may not
hereafter cry for the punishment of them! Let us bemoan our selves like
Ephraim, repentant Ephraim, in this our Prophet ( chap. 31.19.) with a holy
indignation; Surely, after that I was turned, I repented: and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because
I did bear the reproach of my youth! Let us with the wise man, Eccles. 2.2.
crie-out of mirth, what does it? crie-out of the madness of it? The Septuagint
term it there, (...), the turning-about, the Giddiness of mirth! Let us turn
our hearts by Meditation toward Hell, that they may never be nearer to it,
than by Meditation! Can we remember how the Israelites mourned by the waters of
Babylon, and not imitate their mourning! The waters of Babylon, says S.
Austin, are the transitory pleasures of this world, by which the Godly mourn,
as in a strange Country, when they remember Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem! And
what more powerful Motives can we have for tears, whether we consider our
selves, or God, than Fear or love? both which God has provided for us. There
are, says S. Gregory, two causes of tears; the first, for Fear of Punishment;
the Second, for delay of our happiness: both which are intimated, according to
that Father, by that double blessing, which Caleb (as it is, Josh. 15.19.
bestowed upon his daughter Achsah, to whom he gave the upper and the nether
springs; the nether spring is Fear, the upper Love. To the same purpose did
Nazianzen observe, that Noah's flood came partly from the Earth, and partly
from Heaven: so, says he, the purging flood of tears comes partly from the
fear of Hell, land partly from the desire of Heaven, from the love of God. And
surely as waters which are distilled from the rose by the force of fire yeil'd
a sweet smell: so much more sweet are the waters of the head, which are
press'd-out by the heat of divine Love. It is indeed the Spirit of divine love,
that from the eyes forces holy tears; according to that of David, (Ps. 147.)
He causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow, The same Prophet says, ( Ps.
104.3.) God lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, that is, he covers
the upper part of the heaven, or air, with water: the just man is such a
heaven: whose upper parts, his soul, his head, his eyes, are overflow'n with
devout sorrow, whose tears do mystically fulfill that of the Psalmist, ( Ps.
148.4.) The waters that are above the heavens praise the name of the Lord; And
more admirably do these waters, the tears of the just, praise the justice, the
Mercy, and goodness of the Lord! Who will not then shed a few such tears, that
he may never shed any more tears? And since our Soul is the Garden of God, who
will not provide a Fountain of tears, to make it pleasant, for his
intertainment! who will not labor, who will not Rejoice, to shed such tears,
as God himself will wipe away? when he will change the darkness of sorrow into
the light of joy; the dark eye into a cheerful eye: when he will work such a
wonder in the Soul, as he has in the eye; by a marvelous raising of light out
of darkness; out of the apple of the eye! which the Hebrews call (...) amongst
other reasons, from the blackness, as the word also signifies; expressing
God's wonderful work in the composition of the eye: when as out of the apple
of the eye, which is the darkest part of it, he raises light! The apple of the
eye being so black or dark, that when in the Proverbs, (Cha. 7.9.) it is said,
in the black and dark night, it is in the Original, (...) as if we should say,
in the apple of the eye of the night. Yet out of the darkest sorrow God will at
last raise the most cheerful light. From an eye darkened with humble tears,
with innocent tears, such as are not afraid to approach to the throne of the
judge of heaven and earth; with powerful tears, which overcome him that is
almighty? which power vouchsafe, O Lord most powerful, to show in the
weakness of our tears; that by thy mercy their weakness may thus overcome thy
power: Change our heads into waters, that they may be clean; change our eyes
into a fountain, a fountain of tears so pure, that thou may see thine own
image in them, that so thou may delight in them, that we may for ever delight
in thee, delight with thee. To whom, O Father of mercies, with thy dear Son
our Savior, and thy Holy Spirit our Comforter in all our sorrows, be ascribed
all thanks for thy Power and Mercy, for evermore.

FINIS.
OF The Christian's Strife. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

1 Corinthians. 9. 25. Every man that strives for the Mastery, is temperate in all
things: Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.


MAN since his fall is much like the Devil before his fall, he has a great
desire unto mastery: in which desire he does but confess his fall; by which he
has changed that mastery it self, which he had, only into a desire of the
mastery, which he had. He had by creation a mastery over all the creaturs of
this inferior world: but by his fall he fell not only from the mastery of
them, but also of himself; and is now become aslave to his own desires, to the
distraction of his desires; his way and his eye never being together. His way
is still downward, still farther from that perfection from which he fell: but
his eye is still upwards toward that perfection, from which he fell. But as
his nature is corrupt, so is his desire; a desire of mastery, not because it is
a perfection, but because it is a Glory; and therefore he does more truly desire
the crown, then the strife. Yet this desire in man, though but like a virtue,
yet because like a virtue, finds opposition in man, and is kept down by greater
vice. And therefore though diverse have an appetite to the mastery in diverse
things, yet if their fear or sloth be greater then their desire, their desire
yields to their fear or sloth. But this natural desire, when most able, being
not able to aim at the true mastery, diverting to meaner objects, corrupts it
self into inferior and trivial appetites; and instead of seeking for mastery
in the true perfections of the mind, it either descends to strive for the
mastery in the vanities of the mind, or for the vain mastery in the abilities
of the body. Which trifling desires brake forth into the actions of those
natural men, the Ancient Heathen, especially the Greeks; and not only in their
business, but also in their games. Whereby they did prove indeed, that labor
is a part of man's curse, which they increased, whiles to their labor they
added vanity. For whereas it is one relief against the punishment of labor,
that man may propose to himself an end, which shall abundantly recompense his
labor, they were as Vain in the choice of their End, as they were unhappy in
their labor. Which vanity our Apostle perceiving in them, takes occasion to
teach Christian wisdom, from their Heathenish folly; by rectifying both their
labor and their purpose; and that we might the better understand his
instruction, he draws it from the nature of their practices. Amongst the
Corinthians were celebrated the Isthmian Games; in which after a great deal of
preparation they took a great deal of toil and all for a crown as corruptible
as their bodies: he teaches them therefore by a wise emulation, how to Imitate
that Labor and Correct it. He does not forbid them still to continue their
preparation; he does not forbid the^ still to continue their strife: but he
changes the kind of them, whiles he changes the reward of them; and proposes a
crown, which they might obtain, as much exceeding the crown which they
proposed to obtain, as Heaven and eternity exceed earth and time. That
therefore we may understand this instruction of our Apostle, we may first
consider the strife it self, the strife for the Masterie; then the Preparation
for the good performance of that strife, A Temparance in all things; And lastly
the End and purpose of that strife, a Crown, for them Corruptible, but for us,
Incorruptible. Behold then first the Strife. The Grecians a people of rare
natural excellency and Vanity, were so transported with the appetite of
Mastery, that there was scarce any thing done amongst them without great
strife, without great comparison; or, to draw a word from our Apostle in this
place, without great Agony; for so in effect he speaks, whiles he says (...),
it may be rendered, Every one that is in an agony for the mastery, which
contentions sometimes were even in vile things, (as at this day amongst us) as
for the mastery in drinking or Eating most: for, there was amongst them their
(...) and (...), as Athenaeus tells us. To which contentions amongst others,
the Apostle, it seems, did allude, when excellently he said, that Their glory
was their shame. But in this place he intends such bodily exercises, as were
rather Vain, then Vile: their various exercises drawn from the several
respects unto the body; as from the speed of it in Running, as in the precedent
verse he speaks of the Race; or from the Strength of it, as in wrestling, as
principally seems to be intended in this verse. But all was a strife; nay, we
may call it a Fight: for so our Interpreters render the same word. 1 Timothy 6.12.
Fight the good fight of Faith; the word being there also, (...). And that you
may more fully apprehend the wisdom of our Apostle in this comparison, it
will be necessary to take a view of the agreement of these two kinds of
Combats; of those outward contentions of the Heathen Grecians, and the inward
contentions of a Christian. If you will view the Place of their strife, you
shall find, the Race was performed in their (...), a plot of ground containing
in length an hundred twenty and five paces: which just length was chosen,
because Hercules, as their fable has it, run so far at one breath. And can
any thing better express the place or length of our Christian life? Our Strife
against sin, as the Apostle calls it, ( Hebr. 12.4.) Is not our contention
determined with the length of our life? And is not life, the life of the
strongest, usually determined within a hundred or sixcore years, though some,
as stories tell us, have out lived that number of years? If you will likewise
view that place, in which their wrestling was performed, which was their (...),
as Tertullian and S. Chrysostom call it, you shall find that no man was
admitted into it, but he that knew the manner of the strife, which was to be
there observed: and unless he himself, as also his parents, brethren and
teacher, did solemly before the statue of Jupiter in the Elaean Senate confirm
as much by an Oath. And into our place of wrestling which is the Holy Church,
anciently no man, who being of age and then converted to the Faith, was
admitted by baptism, but he that was known to have been instructed in the
manner of the Christian, or spiritual fight. The like was anciently undertaken
for Infants, the witnesses at whose baptism publicly gave their faith to God
and the Church, that as soon as they should be able to fight, they should not
want knowledge for their Christian fight. The Co^batants amongst the Heathen
fought always without the burden of their clothes, except what modesty
commanded; lest even the lightest should be some hindrance; nay, lest their
bodies should be a hindrance to them, they were anointed with oil. Thus
likewise the best Christian Combatants in all ages, have laid aside the outward
hindrances of wealth and business, when they have endeavored to be truly
admirable in the spiritual fight. They have likewise had the spiritual Oil,
which signifies Gods Grace as may be seen, Levit. 2.1. Psalm. 45.7. 1 John 2.20.
They have had a gracious subtilty of knowledge, whereby they were made quick to
prevent the devises and active sleights of Satan. There were Combats also
amongst them not only for men, but for Children as Pausanius (in his Eliaque
Remembrances) shows. And even the youngest Christians, when once they begin to
be able by knowledge to corect their own actions, shall instantly find the
Divill for an Adversary, and the combat of Temptations. Yet then there were
also diversities of fights; there being their lighter fights, (...), and their
weightier or more solemn, (...), as Dionysius Halicarnasseus, tells us. The
lighter were performed in the Morning and the more weighty in the afternoon,
as Pausanius has it. And have not the Christians also their diversities of
fights? Even thus the Christian in the morning of his Age he does but take
notice, that he has sin and Conscience, he shall have only some lighter
combats: but when once he is grown to the Afternoon of his life; when by age he
has both enougth sin and enough knowledge of sin; then he shall find those
(...), those heavy conflicts, those wrestlings of the whole body, of the whole
spirit, of the Man, the Christian! Amongst the higher conflicts of the
Ancients, there was one especially worth the noting, and that was their (...);
when each combatant bending inward the two upper joints of his fingers, did
only by Them, contend with his adversary, till he forced him to a faintness. A
kind of wrestling most fit for a Christian, upon occasion, to use with the
Devil; to keep him to this (...), at distance at the arme's end, nay at the
fingers end: for otherwise he will break in upon the Christian; and not only
hurt the hollow of his thigh; as the Angel of God or rather God, did Jacob's;
nor will he say, as the large Philistine unto David (1 Samuel 17.44.) Come to me,
and I will give thy flesh to the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the
field; no; he will prove himself to be a roaring Lion; He would himself
devour the Christian: who therefore must strive for courage and perfection, to
resist him! we must strive to be perfecti athletae and consummati: Seneca has
the same term for wise men, whom he calls consummatos sapientiae viros, men of
a finished or perfect wisdom. And has not our Apostle the like Ephesians. 4.13?
where he says, that the Christian must go on (...), unto a perfect man. Does
not S. James exhort to the like perfection (cap. 1.4?) Let patience have her
perfect work, that we may be perfect and entire wanting nothing. Amongst the
Grecians he that had skill and victory at all kinds of Combats, was, for his
perfection called (...); and surely unto such perfection must the Christian
labor, that in all kinds of Combats with their spiritual enemy, he may
contend with skill and Courage; for so shall he in his degree attain to that
aim of S. Paul, (...), unto a perfect man; unto such perfection, as in this
life we are capable of. But he must also Persevere in this contention unto the
end; according to that of our Savior ( Mat. 24.13.) He that shall endure to
the end, the same shall be saved: which our Apostle here shows by a double
Metaphor, of a Race in the former verse, and a wrestling in this verse. In the
Race there were drawn two white lines, the one in the beginning of it; at
which they that were to run, were first to stay till the sign was given; and
this line was called (...), as Pausanius tells us; and therefore Cassiodorus
calls it the Rule, because it made them begin upon equal terms; and this does
resemble but the beginning of our Christian race. But the other white line was
at the farther end, and did bound the race. And this line was called (...), as
it seems to be employed by Pindarus (in his Pythian Hymns;) and it was so
called, because it was always in their sight; their eye being still upon it,
till They were upon it. S. Paul does very clearly express both the thing, and
the name ( Plil. 3.14.) where speaking in this Metaphor, he says most exactly,
(...); I press toward the mark; as it is there rendered; Forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
(v. 13.) I press toward the make. It might be rendered in respect of the thing
it self, whence the Metaphor is drawn, I press toward the white Line; which
was the end of the race. So that a Christian's race is never ended till death;
He must give his name, anoint himself, begin to run, and continue running
till he comes to the scope, to the white Line. Thus does he likewise in this
verse especialy by a Metaphor of wrestling express the Perseverance; there
being no reward, but to the Conqueror. And therefore because it was the
presupposed end of all striving or wrestling, to strive for the mastery, our
Interpreters with singular wisdom did translate it here, to strive for the
mastery, though strictly the force of the word be only to strive. Which
necessary Perseverance in striving for the mastery is well expressed by the
custom of wrestling, which even to this day is retained in some parts of
Europe, as amongst the Gallicians, (in Spain;) where a set number of wrestlers
being appointed to enter the Lists, and he that is twice thrown departing, the
conqueror stays for a new adversary; and thus all striving successively, he
only is at the last the Conqueror, who of the set number is the last
Conqueror. It is indeed a practice unreasonable, and useful; if we consider
the moral of their perseverance. And surely the Labor and Constancy in our
Christian combat, our Apostle did more then intimate, when be exhorted
Timothy, io endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ; (2 Timothy
2.3.) to endure hardness; the word of the Apostle is (...), suffer evil, the
evil of affliction, or bodily punishment: suffer hunger and cold and Labor,
like a good Soldier. So did S. Paul himself in his high degree of Soldiery;
and so must the meanest Christian in his inferior proportion. And as those
ancient Gentiles did practice themselves before hand, against their great and
public combats, as S. Basil and Cassianus note; so must we count all
wrestling in our life time, but but a preparative to our last agony and
combat in death. Besides, all their practices were but bodily exercises, which
profit but little, as S. Paul speaks of them; (for of them he speaks 1 Tit.
4.8.) but ours are spiritual combats; we fight against Principalities and
Powers; and therefore it behooves us to make all advantage of example. And
since that the understanding is not ashamed to learn of the sense: so neither
must the soul be ashamed to learn of the body. As they then got bodily
strength for their wrestlings, by Preparation and a Temperance in all things;
so must we grow strong and cunning in a spiritual imitation of their bodily
temperance; which is the next thing to be considered, Their Temperance in all
things. And indeed so great was their Temperance to make them the more active,
that these words which our Apostle uses in this place, (...), He is Temperate
in all things, was a powerful speech amongst the Grecians. Now their common
temperance was from Lust and the ways unto it, wine and Glotonie: nay, their
Diet was so moderate, as Irenaeus describes it, that it never was unto satiety;
nay, it never was unto a full meal. And some were so exact, as Plato relates
of Diopompus and some others, that they would not let their stomachs try the
weight of any heavy meal, or but their backs the weight of any heavy clothes,
much less of any superfluous; lest they should thus dull the purity of their
spirits. And does not S. Paul ( Hebr. 12.1.) exhort us to the like exact
temperance, to a holy curiosity in our christian Race? Let us lay aside (says
he) every weight (every weight) and the sin which does so easily beset us,
and let us run with patience the race that is set before us. Is it not an
intimate speech, let us lay aside every weight? The ship that is but lightly
laden may happily escape in a tempest: but the heavy laden may quickly perish:
by temperance and fasting, says S. Chysostome, we shall lighten our vessel,
and more safely pass through the waves of this life. Let us then lay aside
every weight. We must says S. Jerome be circumcised in the flesh; which is
when in those things that concern the body, we cut off the Delight and reserve
only the necessity; making them ours, as S. Austin speaks, utentis modestia,
non amantis affectu; with the appetite of nature, not of wantonness. And thus
temperate we must be in all things. When in relative actions (concerning other
men) we show equality, we call it Justice: but when in the retired actions of
our souls upon our bodies we labor for equality, we call it Temperance;
which does assist reason in restraining the affections, the senses and the
parts of the body, from an abuse in pleasure. It restraines the Eye from a
license in prospect: for otherwise the eye finds out pleasures, and the fancy
multiplies them. It restraines Laughter, and saves it from folly; for when the
purer parts of the blood; the Spirits, are over acted into an excess, they
shake the body into an unseemely laughter: which commonly abounds in such
bodies, as have not enough Melancholy to make them wise. It restraines the
Tongue, and makes it, as it were, remember, that it is not an Instrument of
Invention, but only of Execution; which therefore must wait till it be implied
by Reason; and that Then it is but to declare the mind of Reason. It
principally restraines the Throat and Belly; these being as the Moabites, that
enticed Israel to Lust: and as the Body is a temptation to the Soul; So the
Belly and throat are a temptation, to the rest of the body. Wherefore we must
strive to get the mastery of These; and then we shall easily be the masters of
ourselves. Hence were those mighty endeavors of the ancient Christians, in
Chastity and Abstinence: by which whiles the Body is separated from the
pleasures of the body, the Soul, though not separated from the body, is in an
admirable manner elevated above the body; and attaines that happiness, which
in the body it properly but expects. But because the effect is taken away by
removing the cause, and lust is but the consequence of gluttony, hence was
that practice, and hence that necessity in all ages of the Church, of holy
fasting! This in some sort including a Temperance in all things; since a
temperance in this thing invite (...). Lord to give that universal blessing, A
Temperance in all things. It was a temperance in diet, that those Heathens
used; and it must be a temperance in diet, that Christians must use. The body
knows no mean; it is always in extremes; it is always either a Slave, or a
Tyrant. Therefore we must by fasting use it, as S. Paul speaks in the last verse
of this chapter; I keep-under my body, and bring it into Subjection; his own
word is of more power, (...), I bring it into Servitude. And this practice of
Fasting is as old as the world; nor was Man sooner permitted (in paradise) to
Eat, then he was commanded to Fast: neither was he permitted to eat all
fruit, though he did eat nothing but fruit. His happiness in Paradise, says
S. Ierom, was not dedicated without fasting; and so long as he fasted, so long
he was in Paradise: yet as by violating that fast he was cast-out, so with
fasting, says S. Basil, he may be well helped to return into it again. And he
that fasts, must not think, that whiles he fasts, he has no food: he may say
as our Savior did, I have food, that you know not of. And as it was his food
to do the will of the Father; so must it be ours, to do his will; which is to
Fast and keep-under our bodies. The fasting of the Body, says S. Chrysostom,
is the food of the Soul, and that food is the food of Angels, says
Athanasius. He that fasts must remember, says Theophilus of Alexandria, that
of the Apostle ( Romans 14.17.) The kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. And well may they rejoice,
when as the holy Angels, as S. Basil says, do in every Church keep a
Catalogue of the Fasters. And well may they rejoice; for would you escape Gods
judgments, Fast and remember Ahab; remember the Ninivites; who did not so much
proclaim their Fast, as they have proclaimed God's Acceptance of it. Would you
overcome and cast ont the Devil: fast; by this our Savior cast him out: nay,
some devils can not be cast out, but by Prayer and Fasting ( Matt. 17.21) The
proud Devil can not be cast-out, but by the Humility of Prayer; and the
unclean, the Lustful Devil, can not be cast-out, but by the Purity of fasting.
Yet I will not propose unto you the fast of Moses, of Eliah, of our Savior,
fasts of forty days: this were rather to bid you be miraculous, then devout.
But I may Bid you behold the holy Anna, the Prophetess: who having been a
widow about fourscore and four years, having renounced the world, and
departingnot from the Temple night nor day, but serving God with prayers and
fastings ( Luke 2.37.) was at last blessed in the Temple, with the sight of the
Babe Christ Jesus the Lord of the Temple! A reverend monument of temperance,
whether we consider her Sex, her Age, or her Devotion! A most reverend
monument of persevering temperance, and of a temperance in all things!
Excellent was the temperance of those holy women, which did despise the vanity
and pleasure of their looking-glasses, when they brought them all to Moses, as
is recorded, Exodus 38.1. Of which devout women it is there said, that they did
assemble by troops to the door of the Tabernacle; The Chaldie Interpreter
says, they came to pray; the Greek says, that they fasted; and others render
the Hebrew word, (...) they did war; and aptly might it be renderd to war,
that is, the Lords Spiritual warfare and service. So Moses speaks of the
Levites, that enterd-in to war the warfare, (as the Margent shows from the
Hebrew) that is, to perform the service, and to do the work in the Tabernacle
of the Congregation ( Numb. 4.23.) So speaks S. Paul to Timothy, that thou by
them might war a good warfare (1 Timothy 1.18.) And you may a little farther
note the blessing of those women, in some sort shadow'd-out in the gifts which
they did present. For, of their looking-glasses (as by custom of speech they
are called, though they were of brass, as the margent notes from the Original;
as in these times we have some of steel) Moses made a Laver, for the use of
the Tabernacle of the Lord; And thus the instruments, whereby they did adorn
their bodies, were changed into an instrument whereby through faith they might
Sanctify their Souls: as the Priest, by washing in the same, did purify his
body. And this temperance from outward things, in these holy women, did not, it
seems, decay amongst the Jews; nay, rather it increased even to a temperance
from the most tempting pleasures of the body. For so you may read of the
Virgins, that were shut-up in the Temple at Jerusalem; as the Author of the
book of Macchabies relates, ( Lib. 2. Cap. 3.19.) which virgins, S. Ambrose
says, ( Lib. 3. de virginibus) were deputatae, dedicated to the Temple at
Jerusalem. And, it seems, Anna the Prophetess was of the like devotion: who
did the more abstain from bodily food, says Tertullian, ut magis spiritualibus
deliciaretur, that she might the more exquisitely be delighted with the
Spiritual food. She did indeed so devoutly diet her self, as if being a
Prophetess she had foreknown, that she was to run a long race. No marvel
then, if the Christian Church, which was to exceed the Jewish, as much in
purity of life, as of knowledge, took all occasions to imitate holy fasts.
Hence was the ( Spring fast, or,) fast of Lent instituted, to imitate for our
proportion, our Saviors abstinence; not to attain the degree of it, but the
benefit. Indeed, if He fasted so, that had no sin, as S. Ambrose's devotion
argues, how ought we to fast, who without him are nothing but sin? And if he
fasted so for the sins of others, says S. Bernard; how ought we to fast for
our own sins? The space of Lent, as the piety of some has observed, is the
Tenth of the year (though strictly somewhat more:) which if by holy exercises
we Sanctify unto God, he will sanctify the other nine parts unto us. Besides
it will show our estimation of his fast; and make us remember, as S. Austin
says, the greatness of our wound, by the greatness of his fast; and the
greatness of his cure, by the greatness of our danger. Hence also did they
institute their quarterly fasts, that at those seasons they might be the more
fit; both for prayer for the food of their souls, by Gods blessing on the
Ministers of the Church, in that Age, at those times, to be ordained; as also
for Prayer and Thanksgiving for the food of our bodies, the fruits of the
ground: which principally at those times are either in the seed, or the blade,
or the ear; either rotting, ripening or ripe; and therefore craving Gods more
instant and seasonable blessing. Hence also did they perform preparative fasts
against the memorials of the Saints, Saints regesterd in Gods word, such as the
attendants of our Savior in his life; not but that all true believers are
truly Saints, as having true sanctity; but neither of their degree, nor of
their glory; the divine wisdom making them stars of a greater magnitude in
the heaven of the Church. And thus they did not only Remember those great
examples of holiness, but also Imitate them; and by the imitation of their
Sanctity, learned to increase their own. Hence also were their weekly fasts;
the wednesday fast (amongst other reasons) in remembrance of our Saviors
Innocence and Danger; it being on the day before his passion, that the great
consultation of the chief Priests and Elders was held against his life; as is
collected from the beginning of the 26. Chapter of S. Matthew; as also that on
that day be was by ointment prepared for his burial. Yet this fast, as
Tertullian says, did but passive currere, was but permitted in the Church,
rather than commanded. The Friday-day fast was instituted in a continual
remembrance of our Savior's death; as the Saturday-fast, in remembrance of his
Humiliation for our sakes in the Grave; as also for our preparation unto a more
holy celebrating of our Christian Sabbath. And surely as it were a great
offense to observe days and fasts with superstition in belief of Merit:
doubtless it is an acceptable Sacrifice unto God, to observe them with
devotion. For as the Apostle bids us fly all occasion of evil: so by the rule
of contraries, he implies, that we must gladly embrace all occasions of good;
all occasions, whereby we may make our Souls more obedient unto God, by making
our bodies more obedient to our Souls. Fast, and see how good and gracious the
Lord is! Hence were those frequent and private fasts of the Ancient Christians,
many of them making their entire lives an entire fast; and thus by fasting,
renderd their bodies sooner unto God, than unto nature. But where is now that
holy temperance? They fasted thrice a week; but we scarce once in the week
remember the practice or the benefit of it; and not once in a week have a wise
check for such neglect. They did not only fast from food, but after some fasts
from sleep also, as Eusebius shows, ( Histor. lib. 2.) striving not only to
forget the Delights of the body, but also the Body. They did not on a fasting
day eat till three of the clock after noon, as Epiphanius testifies (in fine
Parearii;) and in Lent not til five at evening; as S. Basil. ( Hom. 1. de
Jejun.) and others relate. But now religion amongst most men is grown so
cowardly, that not to dine, were not to fast but to starve; and to go
supperlesse to bed, is no longer devotion but beggary! And whereas they in
Chrian pity exempted from the fast, Old men and Children, Sick men and
Laborers, and likewise the poor both for piety and necessity; now most men
have thrust themselves into that privilege. So that now the rule it self is
lost; and we have scarce any thing left but the Exception. True it is, as S
Chrysostom says, we have a merciful Lord, that requires of no man beyond his
strength: but as true it is, we must not counterfeit; we must serve that
merciful Lord, according to our strength; we must serve him with all our
strength. I press not here the kind of the fast, which generally was from
flesh and wine, as S. Jerome ( contra Jovinianum Lib. 2.) and S. Basil ( hom.
1. de jejun.) show: But I press the wisdom of the Church, that thought it fit
for most; and the mercy of the Church, that thought it not fit for some. Yet
that great example in the Imperial city of Christians, Constantinople, in the
time of the, first the famous Justinian, and so within the first 600 years, is
not to be omitted, as it is not to be paralleled. There being then in the time
of a Lent a great scarcity of other provisions, the Emperor commanding flesh
to be killed and set to sale in the Shambles, not the man was found that would
buy or taste it, as Nicephorus an Ecclesiastical Historian relates ( lib. 17.
cap. 32.) which must necessarily argue the firm persuasion of their
conscienses. Which persuasion though it proceeded not from the authority of the
Scripture, yet was from the example and prudence of the Church. That Fasting is
commanded in the writings of the Apostle, says S. Austin ( Epist. ad casulanum
86.) I every where find; but the Time of fasting I do not find: we may add,
and the kind of fasting we do not find. But we may add also that excellent
rule of S. Jerome, ( epist. 18.) That Eccesiasticall Traditions which do not
hinder our faith (especially then such as increase our devotion) are so to be
observed, as they have been delivered to us by our Ancestors. Divine Authority
then commands the Thing: Humane authority adds nothing but the Circumstance.
And shall not the whole Christian Church use a Christian liberty in defining
the times, and kind of Fasting, rather than every single Christian in his
Solitary Opinion? Or shall any man approve the faith of the Church, and suspect
the wisdom of it, as defining Circumstances? yet he that cannot abstain in
the kind, may abstain in the quantity; in which a sanctified discretion may
be his Physician, and his Conscience his Confessor. True it is we shall not
merit by fasting: but it is also as true, that we shall certainly profit by it.
It Is a bad conscience, and a worse practice, that because we cannot merit by
fasting, we will be sure to merit by gluttony! Indeed we may merit by that:
but it shall be only the wages of sin! Our Prayers are not Meritorious: shall
we therefore live as without God? Our Faith is not Meritorious: shall we
therefore turn Infidels? Because Fasting is not meritorious, shall we
therefore become Gluttons? We fast not for merit, but for Obedience. It pleases
God: therefore it must please us. But some may say, that fasting is nothing
worth, if not joined with prayer; it is most true; but does he that bids you to
Fast, Forbid you to pray? Fast then, in Gods name, as you ought to fast; Fast
and pray. Nay he that truly fasts, does certainly pray; and he that truly
prays, doubtless does often fast. Or if Age, or Infirmity admits not a severe
fast, let it be mittigated into a constant and holy temperance; for he that
strives for the Mastery is Temperate in all things; being raised by the
glorious reward proposed to the Conqueror; which is a Crown; a crown
Incorruptible. Besides the winning of a Crown, the Grecians had a farther
purpose of labor afterward; which was to be the better serviceable for the
wars of their Country; (as Plato tells us in his eighth book, de Legibus:)
but the Christian whose life ends not but with his breath, has no more labor;
but on eternal rest. Yet before the Grecians got their corruptible crown, it
was to be adjudg'd unto them by the (...), Sueton in his Nerva calls them the
Bravistae, the judges of their contentions: who having taken an Oath to do
justice, sat on the ground observing the Combatants: and at the end of the
strife having commended the Conqueror, they let him take the Crown that was
provided for him, which as it may be conjectured, hung up in some eminent
place. And have not we a judge that humbles himself to behold our wrestlings?
And has he not sworn by himself that there is a reward for the righteous? and
will he not at the Last day call the Conqueror the Blessed of his Father? And
will he not let them take Crowns of Glory proposed to them in the Heavens? They
shall reach them at the end of their life by the hand of Faith. S. Paul speaks
in that Metaphor, in the verse before this text; So run, that you may obtain:
the Latin has it, ut comprehendatis; and S. Paul's own word intimates as much,
(...). But in the third to the Philippians, v. 14. he is more exact, where
speaking of himself he says, (...), reaching forth unto those things which
are before, I press toward the mark. And do not those words of our Savior
imply this Metaphor of a hand; The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; and the
violent take it by force. And the success of the strife shall be attended with
great solemnity. S. Chrysostom relates ( Orat. adversos Judaeos, 2.) that at
the Grecians Olympique Games the Spectators would come and sit from midnight,
and so continue all day in the heat of the sun, to see who would get the
Crown. And does not S. Paul say, The earnest expectation of the Creature waits
for the manifestation of the Sons of God. ( Romans 8.19.) He figuratively
attributes apprehension to the insensible creatures: but implies, that all
things do but as it were, wait in their natural courses till the day of
Judgment, wherein it shall be seen who are the Children of God; and on whom the
crowns that God has laid up for the conquerours, shall be bestowed; that being
the glory, which shall be bestowed on us, of which he speaks at the 18. v. of
that chapter. The reward amongst those Grecians is observed to have been
greater than their labor; it being commonly provided by great personages: but
the Christian's reward is infinitely greater, than his labor; and therefore the
Apostle calls it an exceeding weight of glory (2 Cor. 4.17.) Now that which the
Apostle calls amongst the Grecians, a crown was not always a crown, in the
strict sense, (though chiefly so) but sometimes it was a triumphant Garment
adorned with palms, so is the heavenly reward called sometimes a garment; as
Apoc. 3.5. He that overcoms, the same shall be clothed in white raiment. Yet
amongst those Grecians a crown was oftentimes the reward, and according to the
diversities of reward and contention, it was different; thus had they their
crowns of Laurel, Olive, Myrtle, Grass, Branches, Flowers; and some of matter
less corruptible: but all were corruptible for their glory; but the
Christian's crown is truly incorruptible. The Egyptians indeed had a kind of
crown, which by emblem might aptly express the excellency of the Christian's
crown; and that was a crown of Cinnamon enclosed in Gold. Gold in the Scripture
does frequently express Glory, and Cinnamon Grace; Spiritual grace, for the
sweet Odor of it. Prove. 7.17. and Cant. 4.14. And does not this excellently
express the triumph of the righteous in heaven? shall they not there have a
crown of Cinnamon enclosed in Gold? shall they not have grace enclosed in
glory? The Grecians did use to adorn with crowns their Temples, Altars,
Sacrifices, pots, and Gates; as Tertullian tells us (de corona militis:) and
shall not all heaven, every thing in heaven be crowned with glory? There shall
the Martyr have a crown for all his sufferings: a crown more precious, than the
world, which he overcame; a crown more precious than his sufferings! There
shall the Virgin find a crown, for the tedious victory over the lusts of the
body; which then shall be crowned, as a conqueror, because in this life it was
conquered. There shall the Preacher find a crown, for all his labors and
watchings; and shall then learn a new watching for all eternity, without all
labor. He that saved a Citizen had anciently an Oaken crown; it was a more
lasting crown: so shall the Preacher have, that saves a Christian, from the
enemy, the devil. And as they thus shall find a crown, so shall they as
certainly find a Kingdom; a Kingdom for Extent, both of itself, and of God's
Magnificence; a Kingdom large enough for every Saint! At the last resurrection
the earth shall hold all the children of men; the earth, which is but as the
18. part of one of the smallest of the fixed stars, (that is, of the sixth
magnitude) which are contrived into constellations; as received Astronomy,
received amongst Christians, teaches us. And since the greater part of men as
is generally feared without a paradoxe, will unhappily loose their part of
Heaven, about a fortieth part even of such a star may hold all that shall be
saved; there will be left a kingdom large enough for every Saint! They shall
find a Kindome for Sufficiency; in which they shall have God who is
all-sufficient, who will lay open to them the treasures of his allmightinesse!
which treasures he shall make theirs, as truly by possession, as they are his
own by Creation! They shall find a Kingdom for Glory, the Body shall there be
more glorious, than if it were all Eye! God will impart unto it a glory like
his own; It shall be clothed with light, as with a garment: and if it could
there admire any thing but God, it might fall into a just admiration of it
self! Lastly they shall find a Kingdom for Firmness; a Kingdom as
incorruptible, as the Crown that is laid up in it; which as S. Peter says (1
Epist. 1.4.) is an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for us. But shall not Heaven it self pass away? How
then shall the Crown and Kingdom, that is there, be eternal? surely, the
Heavens may grow old as does a garment; not in respect of any corruption as
wearing of them; but in respect of continuance they shall wax old, not because
they shall be corrupted, but because they shall be renewed. Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, ( Luke 21.) not the substance but the figure; the figure of
this world shall pass away 1 Cor. 7. There shall be a new Heaven. Apoc. 21.
but as there was at our Savior's coming, a new commandment, it was not
different from the substance of the old; but it was newly delivered; it was
refined; and now more clearly reached to the thought of the heart, whereas
before it seemed to extend but to the outward act. Thus shall there be a new
Heaven, that is, there shall be a renewed Heaven. It shall be renewed from the
old conditions of it: all the Heavens shall hereafter stand still; There shall
be no more Time, and so no more Motion of the Heavens, which is the measure of
time. True it is the creature is now subject to vanity. Romans 8. The Heaven is
subject to vanity, and does by motion serve for the use of inferior nature; it
serves for the production and corruption of things in this lower world; not
that it self in its own nature is subject to corruption. Nay, it shall be
freed from that bondage, whereby it now serves unto the corruption of other
things. It shall be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Children of God.
Romans 8.21. that is, when at the last day, all the Children of God (which shall
be till that day) shall be delivered into a glorious liberty; then shall the
Heaven also be delivered from that vanity of service; and with the liberty of
Gods Children find also a like proportional liberty! But we our selves shall
not only have liberty, but also Royalty; a Kingdom, and in that Kingdom a
crown. Yet shall every one have a crown? Does not S. Paul say that all run,
but that one receives the prize? Surely there is none that shall have a crown
by his own merit, but only our blessed Savior: but by the participation of his
merit, every one of the righteous shall also have one. We are the members of
Christ, or else we could never assend to Heaven. Nay we are not only one body
with him, but also one spirit; as the Apostle testifies, 1 Corinthians. Yet he
only shall have the most excellent, crown. Amongst the Grecians he only had the
most excellent the golden crown, that had sealed the walls, or entered a shipp,
or the fort of an enemy: and thus only our Savior shall have the golden, the
most excellent crown, since he only has entered the fort of our enemy the
Devil, by his victory over Hell! Thus then he only shall have the glorious
crown, and by his own merit. Yet we also shall have crowns, though all ours
shall in effect be his.

Since then there is so Glorious a reward proposed unto us; let us be temperate
in all things, that we may strive for the mastery; that by getting the mastery
we may get the crown. And since that our crowns are due to Him; let us imitate
the Elders, who sell down before him that sat upon the Throne, and cast their
Crowns before the Throne: So let us in thankful humility, cast down our
selves and our Crowns before his Throne, and let us say, Thy Kingdom come;
Our Kingdom come! And let us tryumphantly say with them, Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive Glory and Honor and Power! who have made us unto our God
Kings and Priests! To thee therefore with the Father and the blessed spirit be
ascribed the Crown and the Kingdom, for ever, for ever.

FINIS.
OF God's Husbandry. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

1 Cor. 3.9. Ye are Gods Husbandry.


THE first cause of Husbandry was sin; the painful tillage of the ground
being imposed on man for his transgression: since otherwise even good things
had grown of their own accord. And this punnishment was so necessarily laid
upon man, that as a labor, it was made a duty, God sending him forth of
Paradise to till the ground. ( Genesis 3.23.) So that now for man not to manage
the ground looks like a sin: and thus all gentler labors in other callings
we may count but Indulgence, by a gracious permission and exchange of penalty.
Yet God in his favor made this duty so honorable, that he made it the
frequent labor of the ancient Patriarchs. And even the Heathen so honored
this profession, that they highly honored them that honored this; which was
especially the practice of the Romans; amongst whom even the chief families
were descended from husbandmen; witness their Names drawn from several kinds
of grain, the subject of their employment, as the Fabii, the Lentuli, the
Cicero's; and others of the like Labor and Honor. But God himself did at
last so honor this labor, that as man was at first made a husbandman for the
Guilt of sin; so God himself vouchsafed to make himself a husbandman, to
take away the Power of sin. Man is a husbandman about the Earth, and God is a
Husbandman about man: The Earth is our Tillage, we are God's Tillage. Yet as in
a large estate the Lord usually imployes his Baily: so in the larger husbandry
of man, God is pleased to employ his minister, and by way of inferior
deputation and continual, to employ every man in the managing of himself. Now
whereas the professors of other Arts, do commonly reserve the mysteries of
their knowledge to themselves, for which too often, as well as for their skill,
they may justly and unhappily be called Crafts; the Husbandman on the contrary,
delights to impart his knowledge, that others may be instructed in their
spiritual husbandry, in the understanding of this duty, they may chiefly
consider the Nature of the Ground, that is to be husbanded; and the Manner of
the Husbandry: in which two we must employ study; and in which two we may then
expect Blessing. First then behold the Ground, on which we are to bestow our
labor; which yet without labor we shall find to be man. When God says we are
his Husbandry, you see he does remember us, that we are Earth. Now the Earth,
we know, is most remote from Heaven: and is not man so? mere natural man? Is
he not most remote from the Gracious thoughts of divine affairs? Yet as the
earth is capable of the Heavenly Influences: so is man capable of the
influences of Grace. The Earth is singularly fruitful producing many excellent
effects; for which cause the Gentiles made it a Goddess, attributing unto it
divine honors: in like manner have some Philosophical Christians been so
far enamored with the abilities of man, that they esteemed the power of
man's will in a manner equal to the power of God. But as the fruitfullnesse of
the Earth in the outward or inward parts of it, in the production of Grain or
Metal, is begun and finished by the influence of the Heaven: so is the
fruitfullnesse of man's soul, by the influence of Grace. And as the Earth is
encompassed with the Sea, by the penetrating moisture whereof as some think)
dry parts of it are made more firm and compact: so is man, as dry Earth, the
better compacted by the moisture of Grace. The Earth the more it is plowed and
stirred, the more fruitful it is; but if it be suffered to lie continually
fallow, instead of fruit, it shall bring forth weeds: so the soul, if
exercised and dilligently dressed, will prove very fruitful; but if it be left
follow, then shall it yield nothing, but the weeds of sloth. When the ancients
pictured the Earth, they did adjoyne the picture of a key, to signify that the
earth is opened in the Spring and shut in the winter: and does not man so
truly resemble the Earth? Does he not shoot forth in the spring of his youth?
and is he not shut up again in his old age? The Earth was also anciently
painted in the form of a woman sitting, and bearing a drum: which in their
conceit well expressed the winds enclosed within the Earth: this also does as
aptly express the nature of man, who is filled and disturbed with the passions
of his Mind. The Romans built unto Vesta, (in whom they expressed the Earth,) a
round Temple, in the midst of which was a perpetual fire: and does not this as
truly express Man? Is not his Body a consecrated Temple? and is not his Soul
as a perpetual fire? The same picture was also crowned with white garlands, to
signify the foaming waters, that continually incompasse and beat the shore:
and may not these as aptly signify the continual troubles, that beset and
offer violence unto man? And as Earth does thus signify man, so does dust,
which we may call dead earth (as having lost the livening moisture) signify
dead man: does not the Prophet imply as much, ( Ps. 30.9.) Shall the dust
praise thee, O Lord? Nor are men thus only like the earth in these properties,
but also for the many Differences of the earth, some ground is Mountanous, and
some low; some fruitful, and other barren: the like differences in their
conditions do men admit; some being proud and some humble; some being
fruitful of good works, and others as barren. Cato observed that kind of
ground to be the best, that lies open toward the Sun: so is that Soul the
most happy, that is truly inlivened with the warmth of grace. Varro tells us,
that if in land there be stones, sand, gravel or the like, it is over heated,
and will burn the roots of whatsoever comes in it: so are there some heates, as
of lust or wrath, that do especially wrong the very root, and disturb the
growth of grace in the heart. There is also some ground, that is still wet, or
weeping, as they call it; which excess of moisture hinders it from bringing
forth such fruit, as else it would: so are there some souls, that are so
overwhelmed with the tears of sorrow for their sins, that they are often
hinderd from a farther progress and fruitfulness in the duties of their
calling; such therefore should learn also a comfortable wisdom, and drain such
weeping ground: and by God's farther blessing it will prove more fruitful.
Your hardest ground indeed is commonly barren; but a mellow ground, that is
quickly resolved, yet not excessively, is both easily tilled, and most
fruitful: so surely is the soft and tender heart; it is a ground of least
labor, and of most fruit. But if any man would more fully and skilfully know
the infallible Signs of good ground, he must know, that if a clod (sprinkled
with water) does, when it is wrought with the hand, prove somewhat clammy, and
cleave to the finger without breaking or falling to the ground, it argues the
fatness and richness of the mould: so the Soul, which afflicted with sorrow
by the hand of God, does, notwithstanding not fall away, but cleaves the faster
unto God'^ hand that tempers it; will doubtless prove a rich, a fruitful
Soul. It is a sign also of good ground, if after a shower of rain following a
great drowth, the ground yield a pleasant savor: and so is it a sign of a
righteous Soul, when, having sufferd a drowth of God's favor, and afterward
being watered with the showers of his grace, it yields a grateful savor of
obedience and thankfulness to God; And of such will God say, as old Isaac of
Jacob, when he blessed him, (Genesis 27.27.) The smell of my Son is as the smell
of a field, which the Lord has blessed. There is yet one sign more of good
ground, and that is, if the crows and pies do in great numbers follow the
plow, scraping in the steps of the plow man: and it is likewise a sign of a
godly Soul, when the fowls of prey, wicked detractours do closely attend the
steps, the actions of the righteous. It is a sign of a bad ground, if it
brings forth loathsome and filthy weeds; but even in good ground some lighter
weeds may be found, as the thistle or the bramble: so that Soul, that has foul
and loathsome sins, as profaneness, drunkenesse or lust, is justly to be
termed a foul and loathsome soul; but even in a good soul there may be some
lighter faults, which like the thistle or the bramble may be sharp or
catching, and give offense, and yet the true substance and heart of the ground
be truly good. Has not experience made all men confess, that one kind of
ground, though never so good, bears not all things? so one good man, though
very good, has not all virtues. It is a part of the divine wisdom to leave
imperfection in all created goodness; nay, if it were not imperfect, it were
not created; How then can we marvel, if in the best of men be always found
some infirmities? Grace does mend Nature; but it takes it not away. And this is
the nature of the ground, which we are to husband: now, we must see the
Husbandry itself, or the labor we are to bestow upon it; which though it be
manyfold, yet it is chiefly twofold, Plowing and Sowing; since the bringing-in
of the Harvest is only God's work; but the two first are both His and ours. And
the first of these our labors, is about the plow, which the Prophet bids us
employ in our Spiritual husbandry, whiles so earnestly he bids us plow-up the
fallow ground of our hearts. Yet before this our labor, there is one more,
which God himself does commonly make his work, the better to prepare and enrich
the ground for our spiritual labor. Your best husbandmen lay soil upon their
ground, whereby they do deface and enrich it: so does God most commonly by us;
when he intends to make us fruitful, he lays disgraces and other afflictions
on us; whereby the ground of our heart is heated with devotion toward God, and
becomes more fruitful. But our spiritual labor begins with the Plow. Now a
chief time for plowing, as the husbandman tells us, is the Spring; the ground
being then mellow, and therefore easily wrought; and the weeds being then turned
up by the roots before they have seeded, will not spring easily again: in like
manner the Soul is best informed when it is young: then is it yiedling, and
best to be wrought upon; and vices then being well pluck'd-up, are never likely
to grow again. In the summer the ground is more hard to be plowed, and in
winter more foul: so the Soul in manly age is commonly too bold and obstinate
against instruction; and in old age it is too much troubled with the diseases
of the body, and the affairs of life. And as we must thus know the Season, so
we must know the Degree of the labor. When the husbandman dresses a Vine, or
an Olive Tree, he deals gently with it; but when he is to get-up the weeds in
his ground, he plowsdeep, that he may fetch-up the very roots: so must we deal
by our old and deepe-rooted sins; we must use a holy and an industrious
violence to our Souls. And as we must use violence, so we must use diligence.
It is observed, that when weeds are fulgrown, if you plow so thick, that you
can scarce see where the culter has gone, it utterly destroys the weeds: so is
it in a vicious Soul; if when the vices be grown to the highest, there be
such exact labor used, that every part of the Soul be carefully plowd-up, it
will prove, no doubt, the extirpation of all vices. Yet with this violence and
diligence we must use some skill. If the crust of the earth, in plowing, be
turn'd-up very broad, it remains still whole, whereby neither the weeds are
killed, nor can the ground be well harrow'd: So if a man's sins be too
broadly layd-open, his vices are not killed, nor can he well be smoothed again.
We must labor therefore rather to plow close, that so the ground may be the
more-finely broken. Yet as in plowing they commonly leave some baulkes, which
is the gross earth, that has escaped the plow: so in the examination of the
soul, there are many faults, which, though we search diligently, yet escape our
search. When new ground is broken-up, if it be rich and prepared for seed, it
is enough to plow it once, and sow it immediately, and harrow it; but if it be
gravelly ground, you must trifallow it, as they say, plow it oftener: so if a
man be of a towardly disposition, one serious examination may happily serve;
but if he be dry and hard, he must be more frequently and painfully plowd-up;
then you must iterare and tertiare, as the Latins speak; you must plow again
and again. Indeed, through many stirrings, your fallow is brought to so fine a
mould, as it shall need very little or no harrowing at all: so through many
examinations of the Soul, it shall prove so smooth, that without farther labor
it shall be ready to intertain the Spiritual seed. It is a received saying,
The oftener the ground is stirred, the better it bears. But as such labor must
be used upon some ground, so in some grounds it must be spared. For, you must
not plow in wet ground, nor in wet weather: no more must the spiritual
husbandman press the judgments of God, to a soul that is already overflow'n
with the tears of sorrow for sin. Besides, he must know how to help the
disadvantage of some ground, he works on. If one plow upon a hill, he must not
plow up and down, but overthwart, slopelong; for, thereby the inconvenience of
the steepness is helped, and the labor of the husbandman is lightened: so if
we are to tell great men of their faults, it may be done obliquely; They must
be plowed slopelong; for otherwise you cannot either very profitably, or very
easily work upon them. And as we must thus know how to Do our work, so must we
likewise know how to Examine it, when it is done. Now your skillful husbandmen,
when they would try whether, or no, they have plowed well, thrust down a rod
into the furrow; which if it pierce alike in every place, it shows that the
ground is well plowed: so when a man shall be tried, whether or no he will
forsake every one of his old pleasing sins, if he be tender-conscienc'd, and
in every point yields with a gentle obedience to the will and fear of God, then
it is a sign, he was ground well plowed; but if in one point he admits
persuasion, and not in another, it is a sign there is need of more labor to
be spent on him. And this is the first kind of our labor; the next and chief
in this husbandry, is Sowing. Upon the Season of which work, the success and
happiness of it does much depend; It is a common saying, that Soon sowing
sometimes deceives, but late sowing ever; a saying, that in the Spiritual
tillage is in part too true: since sometimes he, that in his youth has been well
instructed, does notwithstanding prove fruitless in his after-life: but lat^
sowing, I will not with the Husbandman, say does always-faile; but surely
though it be not always desperate, it is always dangerous; And therefore it
singularly behooves every man to have a care, that he be instructed betime. And
by such seasonable diligence, not only the success shall be in our wise hope
the surer, but also the expense of seed and labor shall be the less. For if
you sow betime, you may sow the thinner; but if you sow late in the year, you
must spend the more seed: so is it in the instruction of Man; if you instruct
him betime, though it should be but thinly, yet it may prove sufficient; but if
it be late ere he be instructed, then must the recompense be necessarily made
by the abundance of the instruction. Yet has there been no husbandman able to
give a certain rule, whereby to know justly what quantity of seed will serve
for an acre of all kinds of grounds, but it must be left to his particular
discretion, to judge what such ground at such a season will require: so is it
in the instruction of the Soul; the degrees of instruction to every particular
Soul, must be left to the wisdom of the Instructor. But for the frequency of
sowing, we have in the husbandry of the Soul a sure rule; since the righteous
Soul must be like that ground, which the old Latins called, Restibilis, which
is renewed, etc every year Sowed; (the Greeks call it (...)) his fruitfullnesse
continuing to the next year, yiedling his croppe every year: so must the
righteous Soul be yearly sowed, and yearly fruitful. Nor must there be a care
had only of the sowing, but also of the seed; now the best seed is the
weightiest, and that lies in the bottom; such is full: thus also the
weightiest instruction, the full instruction, is that, which will bring forth
most fruit in the Soul. The spiritual seed is the word of God; it is seed for
the Necessity and for the virtue: for the necessity, since without this be
sowed, there can be no fruit; and for the virtue, since it has the admirable
power to produce fruit; so that all the fruit is vertually in the seed. And as
the seed must be incorporated into the earth, and take root, and be conserved
and ripen in the earth: so is the word of God first sowed in the heart; then
must it take root, and be conserved, and come to a maturity in the heart; then
shall there be a happy and manifest fruit of both. And the more happy it
shall certainly be, if we strictly keep the Order of sowing; in which action it
is observed, that taking it out of the seedlip they must sow with an aequall
hand, letting the foot (especially the right foot) and the hand go together:
so must the spiritual seedsman disperse his instruction; but especially he
must be careful that his hand and his foot go together; that his hand do not
only sow the seed, but also that his foot go with his hand; that his doctrine
be always attended by his life; then is he a true, a skillful seedsman. And
then that wise proverb will be true of the seedsman, though it be spoke of the
master, that The best soil for the field is the Masters foot. Yet are there
also some other necessary labors of the husbandman; since to the dressing of
ground is not only required, that it be plowed and sowed; but that also
according to the seasons and order of the work, it be harrow'd and raked and
sometimes rol'd, for the breaking of the greater and the stiffer clodds; as
also that in perfect husbandry, it be throghly weeded. Such likewise is the
dressing of the soul; it is not enough that it be fearch'd and turned up, but
it must usually be broken under the threatenings of of the Law: it must
sometimes suffer a more violent affliction; and be both frequently and
diligently weeded. But above all it must be provided, that no thorns be
suffered to grow where the seed is sowed; since these unhappily choke the seed:
no more must we suffer in the husbandry of the soul, the cares the riches and
the pleasures of the world, which, as our Savior has told us, are dangerous
thorns, to spring up where the spiritual seed of God's Word is sowed. Thorns
choke the seed by drawing away the moisture and fatness of the earth from it:
so likewise those spiritual thorns injure the soul, by drawing away the love
of our hearts from God to them. Again, they choke the seed by keeping the
Sun and the showers from it; so that it has neither necessary heat nor
seasonable moisture: thus likewise do the spiritual thorns keep from us the
inlivening heat of God's Grace in his word; which otherwise would bring forth
in us the fruits of the spirit; they likewise turn away the seasonable showers
of Grace, even as a violent wind dos often drive a shower another way. Besides,
thorns do by intangling hinder the Corn, denying it a liberty of groth;
whereas otherwise it would rise higher: thus likewise do cares and wealth and
pleasures keep down the soul, which otherwise might ascend to the cogitations
of divine things. O then, whiles we have time, let us seriously intend the
husbandry of our own souls: let us plow up the fallow ground of our own
hearts; let us provide our selves of the best, the weighty seed, the immortal
seed of Gods Word and Grace; let us be sure also to prevent the weed and
thorn. Or else we shall with those negligent husbandmen fall a sleep, and
after the good seed has been sowed, suffer the envious man to come and sow
tares; but shall the seed of the word be sowed in vain? O let us remember that
of the Apostle to the Hebrews (12.15.) Look diligently, lest any man fail of
the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness spring up and trouble us. But
alas how vast a multitude is there, that is profoundly fallen a sleep in this
duty of love to their own souls? nay, that only prove themselves to have
souls, because they are a sleep, that is, not dead: How many lie so soundly a
sleep that they are scarce awake to Ambition, whiles the Devil does very
methodically and gradually sow in them the tares of Lust, Ignorance, Pride,
Opression and Blasphemous Novelty! but Oh, Let us remember not only the
prosperous growth, but also the end of such tares; which oftentimes are
suffered to grow as long as the wheat, even till the harvest! when it shall be
said, as it was by the Angel to him that sat upon a cloud, like unto the
Son of man, (Apoc. 14.15.) Thrust in thy sicle and reap, for the time is
come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe. O let us take
care that we may, be gathered as the wheat into the Barn; and not as the tares
to be made into bundles, and cast into the fire! The wicked, says S. Austin,
shall be gathered into bundles: the Usurer, says he, shall with his Wife and
Children, whom he nourished by usury, be bound into one bundle. The corrupt
Judge with his Notary, Advocate, and false witness, shall be bound in an other
bundle. The Harlot and her Lovers and her servantes, with the contrivers of
their Lust shall be bound in a third bundle! And thus shall they all, all those
tares be cast into everlasting fire! Now though it pleases God to use merciful
delay to put in execution such judgment, we must not use unmercifull delay to
put in execution our diligence. True it is indeed, as S. Chrysostom well
observed, that men are long in building but quickly destroy; but that God on
the contrary, does quickly build but is long ere he destroys. So in the
blessing of good ground God uses speed, but in the cursing of bad ground he
uses delay. The Apostle expresses as much ( Heb. 6.7.) The earth which drinks
in the rain, that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them,
by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God; There you see, is a present
blessing of the good ground. But that which bears thorns and briars (as it
follows in the next verse) terra reprobata est (so the Latin Interpreter has
it) it is reprobate earth, and is nigh unto cursing. It is not presently
cursed, but it shall be Cursed; there is Gods merciful delay of his judgment.
But this increase of his Mercy, must increase in us a diligence in our
husbandry; and since that no crop can be without seed, we must especially
endeavor to be provided of good seed; which as it is an absolute part of our
providence; so must it likewise be of our Thankfulness, since this seed is
both a necessary gift and a mere gift. That it is Necessary, we may
proportionally learn from the Earth; which though it brings forth wheat, yet
it cannot unless there be seed bestowed upon it: no more can the heart though
it has a possibility, bring forth any fruit if the word of God be not bestowed
upon it. And in like manner that it is a mere gift, we may as easily
understand, Good ground in the Parable ( Luke 8.) being not good by nature but
by grace; good, but not till grace be bestowed upon it: so grace both makes it
good, and brings forth also good fruit. It is not good according to any
precedent quality, but good according to God's favor; so truly good ground is
the Elect; not good before Grace, but by grace. And as seed though cast into
the Earth, sends not forth the corn, if it be not watered with the seasonable
showers of Heaven; so if the word received be not nourished by grace, we may
rightly say, it was never rightly received. And since this spiritual seed is
sowed in the heart by the ministers of God, and afterward watered by the
showers of Grace frequently descending with their labors, you must strive
always to be a part of that ground which receives the blessing. And if you
truly receive it, you will return thanks (...) is the first blessing of that
blessing, and the (...) fruits of good ground. We must bring our fir^^ fruits
unto God; and then the whole harvest will be blessed. We must bring them betime,
whiles they are yet even green: which was expressed in the name of the month,
in which they were offered; it being called the month of Abib, that is, of the
green ear of corn. ( Exodus 13.4) The Grecians called the same month of the
first fruits: (...), from (...) and (...); because then, in the spring, the
earth began to grow warm: And so must every Christian even in the spring of
his conversion when he grows warm with the heat of Grace, make that the
season of offering his first fruits. Yet afterward as he grows in age, he
must grow in fruitfullnesse: for as some say of wheat, that the longer it
stands it will yield the more; so doubtless it may be said of a Godly man, the
longer he lives, he will bring forth the more fruit. And as we must increase in
store, so we must also increase in true excellency; we must look that we bring
the best we can: as much was employed in that name, by which first fruits are
called in another place, namely, Lev. 2.14. where they are called, (...) our
Translation renders it, green ears; but it may be rendered ears of Carmel,
that is, such fresh and goodly ears of Corn, as grew upon plentiful and
flourishing Carmel, they must be like the offerings that Jacob bid his sons
carry down into Egypt ( Genesis 43.11.) they must be the best fruits, the word is
(...) which being drawn from (...) to sing with singular art and delight,
signifies such gifts, as might seem fit to be praised by the most eloquent
mouth and the most artificial song. Such must be the offering from our labor;
and then as the husbandman amongst the Israelites did for six years together
Till the earth, but the sev^eth year rested, eating that which grew of its own
accord: so whiles we are in this life, we must be diligently employed in our
spiritual husbandry; and when the seventh year the Sabbath year of Eternity
shall come, then shall we cease from our hard labor; and be fed with such
food, as God will provide for us without our Labor. O then let us labor so in
our life of grace, that here-after we may be at rest for ever in the life of
Glory. Which grant unto us, O most merciful Father, thou that art the Great
and True Husbandman, for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake; to whom with
thy blessed Spirit, three Persons and one God, be ascribed the Glory of Love
and Providence in the conversion of thy Elect, now and for evermore.

FINIS.
OF The Misery of Uncleanness. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
Spirit.


THe works of God, being the similitude of his Nature, were in their Creation
like his nature, truly good: and so truly good, that it was impossible for the^
in their creation to be bad. Thus, as God is pure, so likewise for his
proportion, Man was pure; and then was man the work only of God: but having
since fallen from that purity, though he be still the workmanship of God, yet
we may say, he is also his own work; since he is become unhappily, what God
made him not, unclean. In which estate, though he still retains such
workmanship, as expresses the power of God, yet does it fail to express God's
Holiness. But God, whose love is more constant, than man's vanity is
changeable, willing to restore man unto a purity, graciously remembers man,
that man may remember himself; as here by his Apostle he remembers the
Corinthians. It was the voice of God, Be ye holy, for I am holy. For the
execution of which command, the Apostle here teaches the Corinthians, an easy,
yet a happy way to perfect righteousness, by cleansing themselves from
Filthiness. Which that they may do seriously, he shows them how they may do
it skilfully: and that you likewise may be prompted to the Imitation, you may
be prompted to the knowledge. First then you may see what is to be removed,
Filthiness, All filthiness; the kinds whereof are according to the parts of
man, the filthiness of the Flesh and of the Spirit: not, but that every sin
defiles the whole man; but, that the unclenesse of some sins more appears in
one part, than in the other. Some more notoriously defile the Flesh, the Body;
as Intemperance and Incontinence; the one being a preparative to the other; the
blind miserably leading the blind into the pit. And these were the sins of
the old Heathen: amongst whom, for their less knowledge, though they were more
excusable, yet we may doubt, they were scarce more frequent. Some sins again
more notoriously defile the Soul, the Spirit, either in a false worship of the
false image of God; and such is Idolatry; or in a malicious worship of the
Enemy of God, and such is witchcraft, and the like impudencies of Satan: the
one pretending an imitation of God, the other hating an Imitation of him. These
likewise were the frequent though the great defilements of the Heathen: and are
they not a worse filthiness, whiles as frequent, amongst the Christians? And
though some of these crimes seem very different, yet Satan's art often linkes
them into a chain; though single they are large enough and powerful enough to
detain man captive: the strength of whose reason being maisterd by the strength
and subtilty of the wine, leaves him to the sigh of the wise, and the scoff of
the bad. And since the filthiness of vice, ugly and useful, may by the
wisdom of comparison, move us to virtue: we may cast an eye on such a concret
sinner, a drunkard in his drunkenness; which he does best, if we might so
speak, express, when he does worst express it, that is, most truly, when most
shamfully. And indeed he does it usually with such broad folly, that of all
kind of sinners he especially saves his enemies the ready and easy labor, to
call him fool: and it were some degree of happiness, if shame though without
grace, could keep him from this sin. But this sin that makes him sottish,
makes him impudent; and by the bold art of hell heartens him to deride all that
deride him! wherein he fares as does a madman: to whom, when the physician
offers the cure of his madness, he is ready to object madness to the
physician. But as the right physician is as wise, as skillful, to be more
busied about the cause and degrees, then about these effects of his patient's
malady, that so he may apply necessary physique: so does the true physician
of the Soul, not regard the perverseness of the drunkard, that resists cure,
but the necessity of the cure; and in despite of despite goes on in his
merciful duty, cryingout with the royal Prophet Isaiah (5.11.) Woe unto them,
that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that
continue until night, till the wine in-flame them (till the wine pursue them)
but regard not the word of the Lord ( v. 12.) Shall we wish, that They would
hear this, that will not intend to hear God? they that profane his Sabbaths,
but first themselves! preferring the ridiculous lispings of their overmoistned
associates, before the articulate wisdom of God's word! well may the Prophet
cry woe unto them: but they themselves shall hereafter cry woe unto
themselves! yet here also there is a woe to their estats; poverty shall be
their lot; and, which is the misery of their misery, not by oppression, but by
folly! a laboring man that is given to drunkenness shall not be rich; the
wise man could say ( Eccles. 19.1.) If the laboring drunkard shall be poor,
surely the lazy drunkard shall be a beggar. A woe there is here to their body
also, which they think they love; a woe to their mind, which they may know
they abuse. Who has woe, says Solomon (Prove. 23.29.) Who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness
of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixt-wine;
which at the last, as Solomon says, bites like a Serpent, ( v. 32.) Now the
Serpent, as Jacob describes him ( Genesis 49.17.) has one condition, to bite the
horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward: and does not wine bite and
overturn the drunkard at the last? you may see the filthiness of this sin in
the base estate of Soul, into which it casts one; the drunkard, as S.
Chrysostom says, being worse then a dog, or an ass (though one be filthy, the
other silly;) since neither company nor custom can make them drink beyond the
temperance of natural thirst. You may see the filthiness of this sin in S.
Austins judgment, who terms the drunkard a lake, that brings forth nothing but
frogs and filth. Indeed even the creatures bred in such filth, we may esteem
but a living filth: nor are the actions of a drunkard worth the name of life.
And therefore did S. Jerome commend an Orator, for saying of a drunkard raised
from sleep, Nec dormire excitatus, nec vigilare ebrius poterat; that he could
neither sleep being waked, nor a wake being drunk; thereby, as he says
reckoning him neither among the living, nor the dead. S. Basil compares him to
the Gentiles Idols, which, as David says, have eyes and see not. The wine, we
may grant, they see, but they will not see either the strength of That, or the
weakness of themselves. You may see the filthiness of this sin in the
expression of Seneca, whose wise Rhetorique calls it madness: and he wittily
proves it; since drunkenness, as he says, Intends all sin and discovers it!
Even righteous Noah by this was discovered: though happy he was because but
once discovered; and more happy, because he could be but once discovered. An
Act of frailty we find: a habit of it we find not. Lot, whom Sodom could not
overcome: wine overcame, even to a repeated Incest: nor had he any covering for
his fault, but his Ignorance, an unhappy mantle, wherewith his daughters covered
him and shamed him! Holofernes never drank so much at one time in all his life,
as in that night, in which he lost his head; but in which also he first lost
his wit. Job's children were at a feast, and too unhappily at the wine, when
the house fell on them: Job did fear they might fall by sin; they did not
fear, that the house would fall by their sin. It was at his birth-day-feast,
a time of wine and headiness, that Herod promised to the dancing damsel even
half his kingdom: but in an unlawful performance of an unlawful promise, he
gave her the head of the holy Baptist. Had he been at a cooler council than his
cups, he might happily have thought of an innocent aequivocation, he promised
her half his Kingdom; she demands All; and he gives her a value more than all,
the Blood of a Prophet! But if we look upon less offenders, yet great
offenders, may we not find some, whom excess in the wine does not satisfy,
without an excessive society in the excess? as if at the great reck'ning-day
it were not enough to have no bodies sins to answer for, but their own! But
such companions shall at last want neither wine nor company: nay, they shall be
made drunk, in the Prophets phrase, by God himself; he shall make them drunk
with (the wine of) wormwood. ( Lament. 3.15.) and as the royal Prophet
speaks; with the wine of aslonishment. ( Psalm. 60.3.) the wine of his wrath!
yea, he shall make them suck-up the dregs of it, the dregs of wine; a plague
more irksome even to the drunkard, than the want of wine, nay than sobriety!
where shall then be his riotings and false healths, by which he destroyed the
true health of his body, and made have to the destruction of his Soul? shall
the strength of the wine be of strength to defend his sin? shall the health
of his great Lord, to whom his deep draught is devoted, secure the health of
his body or mind? shall that be an acceptable quaffe to a Prince, that is
abominable unto God? O the folly of men says the wisdom of S. Ambrose,
speaking of those that drank healths to the Emperors; the folly of men! that
can think drunkenness to be the sacrifice of Loyalty! we may add that there
was indeed a Drink offering under the time of the Law; but it was not the
draught of the Sacrifice, but the Present. Even the Creator of the Vine stinted
his own sacrifice from the Wine at a pint and a half (a quarter of a Him,
Levit. 23.13.) So little did the most wise God choose from his own plenty! when
as the outrageous thirst of man, is too often not satissied, till oppressed!
Soberly and truly spoke S. Austin, concerning the drinking of Healths; if one
should be threatened with death for not pledging, better it were the body should
dye sober, than the soul be drunk: nay that even he that in his intemperance
should disgrace thy sobriety, after his intemperance would admire it; and such
disgrace that holy Father accounts Martyrdom. Memorable was the example, being
as well a glory as a pattern, of S. Ambrose, and S. Austin, whose
conscientious rigor shunned a feast as the danger of intemperance. He mistakes
wine, that takes it not as Physique: no more should we take than we must needs
take. But alas, though men begin to eat and drink for Health, they Commonly end
in pleasure, if not in riot; shadowing the baseness of pleasure with the
pretense of Health; till with delight they excuse themselves to death. A holy
age it was, when the Family and the Cattle drank of the same sobriety: yet
thus did Jacob and his children, and his cattle drink of the same well. ( John
4.12.) But so absurd now sin is become, that who need it least, drink most;
young men, strong men, adding as S. Jerome says, oil to fire. Indeed can they
by art more contrive an outrage? surely of more temperance have some heathen
been, else had not the Roman forbidden the use of wine, to all that were not
thirty years of age; if Aelian be not a Poet. But greater examples have we of
greater temperance, in the true worshippers of the true God. Famous were the
Rechabites, to whom their Father seemed to give a 'leaventh commandment, in a
perpetual abstinence from wine: which with such joy they did observe, that
their Obedience was the wine. Famous was Daniel in fear and temperance,
preferring water before Babylonian wine: this was holy water, which gave him
complexion more cheirefull, than the wine. Famous was the Babtist; who was not
filled with the joy of the grape, but of the Holy Ghost. Ask of the Fathers of
the Christian Church, and S. Jerome will tell us that the contemplative men of
Palestina would not, though ill, receive comfort from it: we may think they
thought it not Physique, but Disease. Ask S. Austin, and he will tell us, that
the Clergy generally abstained from wine; as if they had accounted it a Lay
comfort. Ask Eusebius, and he will tell us, that S. Mark diswaded all the
Alexandrian Christians from the use of it. He taught them not to condemn, yet
to avoid a Creature, which in the use was so near abuse. He did not deny the
blessing of the grape, though his Gospel was the story of a greater joy; yea
he taught the joy of it in our Savior's last supper; in which it was both used
and Sanctified. Indeed the Severian Heretics, as Epiphanius relates, thought
wine was begotten of the Earth by the Devil himself: perchance they might
think so, because it makes men outrageous like the Devil himself. But these
were men that were mad without wine; but in the wisdom of Christianity we
must acknowledge it to be both God's creature and his blessing; which may be
abused by disestimation, as by excess. Water indeed in the Southern
Countries, as more purifyed by heat, approaches nearer to health and diet: but
in colder climates being cold and earthy, a temperance in wine defends Age from
Disease and Excuse; nor can it, being temperance, be an Advocate for infirmity
to Excess. Into which he that is fallen, he that is sunk deep, may cry out
with David, as S. Austin applies it, Deliver me out of the mire -- neither let
the deep swallow me up. (Psalm. 69.14, 15.) And if one cannot get out at once,
let him, as one that is drawn out with less speed and more trouble, get out by
degrees: else shall he quickly sink one degree lower; from Drunkenness to
Lust; this being the next degree and filthiness of the Body. Our Adversary,
that was once an Angel of light and is now unnaturally become the Prince of
darkness, is now an enemy also to the light, especially to such light as may
preserve us from works of Darkness. The first thing therefore that he
endeavors against Man, is, to put out the light of Man's judgment; which by the
Apostle, (1 Cor. 4.3.) is in the Original aptly called (...), man's day, which
the Devil frequently first effects by Drunkenes. By which when the day of
reason is shut in, soon comes the night of lust, and consequently the works of
darkness; which does increase, whiles conceal, Filthiness. Which filthiness
Clemens the Alexandrian well expresses, when he compares a Lustful man unto a
Centaure, which according to the Heathens instructive fiction, was but half
man, and half beast, But S. Peter counts such men all beasts, naturally brute
beasts made to be taken, and destroyed. (2 Pet. 2.12.) The Prophet Jeremie more
particularly shows why they are beasts, whiles he compares them to neighing
horses (c. 13.17.) as David, before him did liken them to the horse and mule,
that have no understanding (2 Psalm. 32.9.) You see how they are corrupted in
their Intellectualls and Moralls; and are therefore defiled into beasts. Nor
are they only beasts, but very loathsome ones, S. Peter likening them to the
Dog delighting in his vomit; a filthy beast indeed, that casts away filthiness
and resumes it; nay to such a beast he likens them, as counts uncleanesse a
delight; such is the Saw wallowing in the mire. (2 Pet. 2.22.) a beast not only
filthy, but (as S. Chrysostom says,) such a one as fills other places where
she comes, with filth and stench; nor is only filthy without, but also within,
whiles she feeds on filth. Yet the lustful person is a worse beast, because a
more dangerous beast; a very Serpent, as S. Ambrose calls him; A serpent for
his pace; he creeps upon his belly; a serpent for his diet, dust is his food;
and earthy desires are the food of his lust; a Serpent for his shifts, rolling
himself into many foulds; finding out diversities of ways in his slides; a
serpent for his venom, from which Nature bids men fly, and Grace more. Yet is
he a Serpent but in similitude? or is he but thus nere unto a Serpent?, though
the most cursed beast? Surely a verier Serpent is not only near him, but in
him, even the Old Serpent the Devil. Nay, a lustful man, as S. Chrysostom. says,
is worse than a man possessed with the Devil; for such a one is pitied by all
men: but a lustful man is detested; since this man is possessed with the Devil
with his own consent. S. Peter expresses the manner of such possession, foul
and fearful! They have their eyes, says he, full of adultry and cannot cease
from sin (2 Pet. 2.14.) A sad society, sin and Perseverance in sin! you
may see how they are possessed, They have their eyes full of adultry: S. Peter
says, (...), full of an adultresse; as if the face of the harlot were still in
his eye! and possessed his eye with more delight, as the more cunning Devil!
This is the filthiness, this the possession of lust! a vice so odious even to
cleaner nature, that Heathens, some purer Heathens have abhorred it. Of these
was Cicero, who having excellently declam'd against lust, is as excellently
presented to us by S. Austin saying, All this is said by one, who knew not the
innocence of our first parents, nor the happiness of Paradise, nor the
resurrection of the body! Sure then at the last day even such Heathens shall
rise up in judgment against many Christians! And by their cleaner obedience to
nature, condemn some Christians foul disobedience unto Grace! Need therefore,
great need have such to cleanse themselves from such filthiness; since so
Dangerous it is for them not to cleanse themselves, and so hard to cleanse
themselves! you may see the danger in the Judgments which God has inflicted
for lust; revenging it with fire on the Cities of the plain; revenging it with
the sword on the Tribe of Benjamin; revenging it with the permission of Incest
and Rebellion, upon David in his children; revenging it with the loss of sight
and life, on weak Sampson; revenging it with the spiritual blindness of
Idolatry, on weaker Solomon! But such as persevere in such sins, shall
hereafter know, that as they would not here partake by cleanesse in the life of
Christ, so neither shall they hereafter partake by happiness in the merits of
Christ: to the knowledge of whom if as yet they are not come, they are then as
yet without the comfort, from hope of mercy, by ignorance: and if they have the
knowledge of him, then loose they the comfort from hope of mercy, by contempt.
You may see the difficulty of removing filthiness, in S. Jerome's expression,
who says, so hard it is, in carne non carnaliter vivere! to live as without
the body, whiles we are in the body! And he professes of himself, that in
himself he felt flames of desire, though by fastings, his flesh was dead, as he
speaks, before he was dead. You may see the difficulty in S. Austin's
complaint; who confesses, that the servitude of lust turns into custom, and
that custom defends it self by the name of necessity. Hard then it is to
cleanse from filthiness, yea so hard, that a greater miracle it is for Christ
by grace to renew a lustful man to purity of life, than it was for him to
raise Lazarus from death after four days burial. In this change, indeed, of
the body, a dead creature was made a living creature: but in the change of the
Soul, a dead creature is made like the everliving creator: that was a temporary
effect, chiefly of power; this an everlasting effect of infinite Mercy! S.
Cyprian's wisdom gives the reason of the difficulty to escape lust: others
sins, says he, seem harsh unto us; but pleasure kills us, whiles it flatters
us. Wherefore that we may Cleanse our selves from this filthiness, we must
resist the first motion to it: it being like a Serpent, as S. Ierom says; If
the head enters, the whole body follows. We must resist the first motion;
Blessed is he that takes thy children, O Babylon, that is, the first
temptations of lust, and dashes them against the stone, that is, Christ, as the
same father's judgment expounds it. We must, if a foul thought offers to defile
us, cry unto God, to God our Savior, Jesus, thou son of David have mercy on
us. We must crie-out to our own Soul, in the words of the Prophet (Psalm.
42.11.) Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within
me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. And at last, then we shall with the same Prophet, (
Psalm. 116. 7.) say also, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul: for the Lord has
dealt bountifully with thee. (verse. 8.) For thou have delivered my Soul from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. (verse. 9.) I will walk
before the Lord in the land of the living. Thus must we resist this dangerous
temptation: although indeed it is so dangerous, that we are not so properly
said to resist it, as to fly from it; which flight is not cowardlinesse but
victory. So Joseph fled; and though his garment was caught, his mind was not.
But if it comes to pass, that we cannot fly, then must we resist; and by
resisting, though with danger, yet because with danger, we shall with glory put
the temptation and the tempter to flight. But in a less terrible way, let us
fly; let us fly ill thoughts. S. Jerome mastered them by study and devotion. He
mastered the softness of lust, by the rugged study of the Hebrew language, as
unpleasing to a Roman, as the wilderness, in which he learned it. He maister'd
it chiefly by the Hebrew Scripture: which employed him in a high intention of
wit and holiness. Thus study teaches temperance, temperance chastity;
chastity, which is an advanced, a royal, an unconquered, an unwearied
excellency! It helps us to admire it and enjoy it; whiles also it teaches us,
that lust is a base, servile, cowardly, guilty Infamy. You shall find
chastity in the Temple, in the Field, on the walls of the city: you shall find
it praying, laboring, Combating: you shall find it hardened, dusty, swarthy:
but lust you shall find on a lazy bed in some fulsome house, that is afraid of
an officer. Chastity, says devout Ephrem, is a Rose, that with delight
perfumes the household; the chastity of parents, being, as Jerome says, the
comfort also and honor of the children. Conjugall chastity has a double
prerogative: it was in paradise and in the state of Innocence. A chaste man and
an Angel, says S. Bernard, differ in happiness, rather than in virtue: and
though the chastity of an Angel be happier, yet the chastity of Man is
greater; and Angel being, as without a body, so without temptation; and
therefore without pretense to the glory of such victory. And surely great
examples have some Times and Countries setforth; even of Kings, that have been
monastical without a monastery, deserting the liberty of their marriage, and
making continence their delight. Thus has our own story famed our great
confessor, Edward: thus Casiile the Second Alphonsus: thus Polonia, Bodeslaus:
and thus Germany an Emperor, the first Henry. Our Religion may make our faith
assent to the story; supposing first an unfeined continency and consent in
their royal consorts. No doubt they remembered, and our charity may believe
they understood that of the Apostle; Let them that have wives, be as if they
had none. It was in a time of distres; and also may imply a temperance as well
as abstinence; and not an abstinence without mutual consent; and no consent,
without an experimental gift of Continence. And therefore we can but touch
the Apostle's council, remember our Saviors also, Let him that can entertain
it, entertain it. And let no man in a mistaking appetite of holy fame, loose
what he seeks, and his safety too. But now shall petty sinners betraie easy
women by poverty to lust, and lie in confederacies of uncleanness not fearing
the Almighty; when as such mighty Princes as much feared his Majesty, as they
desired to imitate his purity? shall Job make a covenant with his eyes, not to
look upon a maid; and shall these make a Covenant with Hell, scarce to employ
their eyes in other objects? shall we by such beauties attain to the beauty of
Holiness? Often it is the judgment of God, to punish bodily whoredom, by
spiritual whoredom, letting the unclean fall from Whoredom to Idolatry;
which is a filthiness of spirit, no less dangerous than infamous. Idolatry
and Witchcraft were the great sins of the Gentiles: for which the wise Jew in
the book of Wisdom, tells us (cap. 12.3, 4.) that the first inhabitants of
the Holy Land were by God cast out. They thought to cast out Him, and cast out
themselves; their sin cast them out off that second Paradise; whence they
were driven, not by a fiery sword, yet by fire and sword. Joshua was an Angel,
a messenger, though not from Heaven, yet from God; and at that time zealously
cleansed the land as well from the sins, as from the sinners, the Idolater and
the Sorcerer; The Idolater that worshippes his own creature, and his Enemy an
Idol; the sorcerer that worships God's creature, but God's Enemy, the Devil.
Idolatry came in by the vain glory of men, if we take the report ( Wisd.
14.14, 15.) for when a Father afflicted had lost his Son untimely, he made an
Image for him, and honored him as a God, which was then a dead man, and
delivered to those that were under him, ceremonies and Sacrifices. Thus custom
grew to a Law. (v. 18.) then, when any would honor those that were absent, to
flatter them, they made images of them (v. 17.) And the diligence of the
Artificer, did help to set forward the ignorant to more superstition. (v. 18.)
And the workman himself was glad to flatter one in Authority, and therefore
made the more excellent work, by the grace of which he allured the multitude.
(v. 19.) Thus it arose from the pride and tyranny of great men, and from the
necessity and flattery of the meaner sort; as the wisdom entitled to Solomon,
excellently expresses it, (v. 21.) and happy had the true Solomon been, if the
image of this Doctrine had been still before his eye: this image would have
saved him from indolatry. Consonant to this doctrine does also Diophanes a
Lacedemonian (in his Antiquities) relate that the first that practiced this art
(of Idolatry) was a rich Egyptian for the loss of his son: whose Image for
the love and remembrance of him, he placed in his house; and adds, that if his
servants had at any time offended they ran to the Image, and crowned it with
flowers, and thus appeased the wrath of their Lord. A strange effect of
Idolatry, to find pardon by sin! But we need not assert this Egyptian
Original of Idols; nor with Isidore ascribe it to Ishmael; nor with the
Gentiles to Prometheus, nor more particularly with the Grecians, to Cecrops;
nor with some to Ninus; nor with S. Cyrill (against Julian) to Belus: the first
Idol was the Serpent in Paradise, whom our first Parents idolized by an
obedience against God; or rather the Devil himself was the first in Heaven,
where, by diverting his angelical intuition from admiring God's excellency to
his own, he became the first Idol and the first Idolater. And what shall we now
account an Idol? and image of God? he is incorporeall; and therefore not
subject to our eye: He is incomprehensible; and therefore not subject to our
understanding: He is infinite, and therefore not subject to the dimentions of a
statue. Besides, if he were visible; he has not revealed himself as visible;
and if he had revealed himself so, yet has he forbidden us to reveal Him. And
whatsoever images we make of the Deity, they are a lie; and so the true
occasion of sin and punishment. Pictures therefore in Christian times were
forbidden to be placed in the Spanish Churches; as appears by the Elibertine
Council, Canon. 36. in the time of Constantius, and Gallerius, as Baroniust
places it; and so before the Nicene Council. Which may show the early and
necessary providence of the Church, for the preserving the purity of Divine
Worship. And though some of eminent learning, as Bellarmine, Suarez and the
accurate Loaisas, would weaken the force of this Decree by a subtle
interpretation, telling us, it was to prevent the abuse of such pictures by the
Pagans, because, if so placed, the Christians when persecuted, could not in
their occasional flight carry them away: or, to prevent the defacing of them
by time, if made upon the plaistering of the walls, as they express it; we
need not such plaistering interpretations. Let the Council speak for it self,
which thus speaks, Placuit Picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere: ne quod
colitur and adoratur, in parietitibus depingatur: the reason we see was, that
God should not be painted, who was to be worshipped. And therefore the learned
Albaspina, a late Bishop of Orteano, writing on this Council, (though he says,
the Canon intends not statues, or the pictures of Saints and Martyrs, yet)
ingenuously confesses, the pictures of God and the Trinity, to be by this
Council forbidden to be placed in Churches. And not to omit the piety, and so
the value of this Council, it may be observed, that the aged and renowned
prelate Hosius of Corduba, was present at it, as the Subscriptions of the
Council witness. But some tell us, that Images were among God's own people,
the Israelites: yet as true it is that when they made them Images of God, they
sinned, and for that sin were punished. And whereas some term them helps in
the worship of God; can that be a help in God's worship, which is forbidden
by God? Better helps they might have made in those times, if they had made the
Images of such Israelites, as were then plagued by God for making Images. But
by making, as some think, the Image of God, they do not represent Him, but
abuse Him; and by having Him so, they have Him not at all. We may not worship
the likeness of any thing in Heaven: we may not then worship the picture of
our Savior, unless we will deny the truth of his Ascension, or the Morality
and so the Property of the commandment. Let us then worship our Savior with a
purer love: Let us not vainly seek Him in his Picture, but in his Precept:
There is the true likeness of Christ. Let us by holiness make our selves the
true picture of Christ; rather then make to ourselves the false picturs of
Christ. And as for the more solid, but as vain ware, Idols, let us with
severity hear Jeremi's derision of them (chap. 10.15.) They were upright as
the Palm tree, but spoke not: they must needs be borne because they cannot
go: be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in
them to do good. Let us hear how aptly the Wiseman (in the Wisdom of
Solomon. chapter 13.18.) derides the Idolater falling down before his Idol; For
health, he calls upon one that is weak: for life prays to one which is dead:
for aid humbly beseeches that which has least means to help: and for a good
journey, he asks of that which cannot set a foot forward. Hear also how
terribly the Prophet Habakkuk (2.19.) deals with such a one. Woe unto him,
that says to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise; it shall teach:
behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in
the midst of it. Great yet is the subtilty and Industry of Vasquez and other
Thomists, in the defense of Images, (for they cannot defend the^-selves:) but
Rachel taught the safe use of them when she hid them: and some Schoolmen of a
timorous and wary devotion, as Durand, Helcot, Biel, and others, dare not in
all points defend the Thomists defense of Images. To say, that not the Image is
worshipped, but God in it, or by it, is but the answer that the witty but
unhappy Julian made in the defense of the Heathen Idols; which (alas) Needs a
defense and finds none. The only Image that may be adored, is not the Picture
of our Savior, but our Savior; and all use of Pictures beyond Commemoration,
is abuse. But the practice of the first Church, may, or should, preserve us
from such enticing Impurity: as the horrible uncleanesse by commerce with
filthy Spirits, may hopefully preserve us from such Filthiness of the Spirit.
Yet were there diverse kinds of such uncleanesse, and so of such persons. The
prohibition of them is the story of them; and it is written Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.
where they are Numbered and Distinguished, whiles it is said, there shall not be
among the People of God any that uses Divination or an Observer of Times, or
Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, or a
Wizard, or a Necromancer. For all that do these things are an Abomination to
the Lord. The subtilty of man has made a Discovery of Humane fallacies: but
God's Wisdom makes a discovery of Develish fallacies: but both present rather
the Danger, than the Art; and so, though both rather the avoiding of them, than
the learning of them; and the Learning necessarily, but for the Avoiding. A
Diviner there must not be. He that foretells, pretends he foreknowes: which in
man in respect of humane affairs is not a work of Art, but of Inspiration. To
foreknow Man's purpose or lot, is God's prerogative. The Heavenly Lights cannot
impart this knowledge; though this knowledge has been sometime imparted by a
more Heavenly light. Yet with pretended Prophets did the Heathen consult;
seeking by a greater evil to be delivered from a less. The ceremony of the
Lie, which was the Art of the Art, was sometimes varied in the posture, as by
lying on the ground; as if Humility or rather Hell, should give them
instruction: sometimes in the Instrument, as in performing it with Sand, with
Stones, with Iron, with a staff, which the Deceiver carried in his hand, and
leaned on. My people, says the Lord ( Hos. 4.12.) ask council at their
stocks, and their staff declares unto them. The staff was at hand, but not
the Help: that was without sense; They without Reason, that prostituted their
reason, not to sense, but below it. An Observer of Times there must not be. The
Diviner was carried, as the Pride of his thought carried him to believe, by
inward motion; moving as he phansied he was moved, by the first Mover. But the
Soothsaier, as a lower Artist proceeded by observation of the Creature. This
was a slanderer of Heaven, by counting some days Luckie, some Unluckie; by an
opinion which he confuted by his own birthday, in which his own distinction was
confounded: being unluckie to himself, that was borne to be such a fool, as
to embrace such folly; but luckie to others that by his folly escape folly. An
Inchanter there must not be; an Observer of Fortunes, as some say, by Luckie or
Unluckie signs; as the falling of the salt, almost as sure a sign that it
self was spoiled, as that the Fortune Tellers wit was spoiled. Such also was a
Hare crossing one in his way; ill luck undoubtedly that he was not then,
rather a hunting than a travailing: yet good luck enough, if he lost not his
patience, as well as the Game. A Witch there must not be; and so neither a
Jugler, say the Hebrew Masters: this was to be beaten, the other stoned: the
one abused God; the other Men: but no Art could make them invisible enough, to
escape the stones or the scourge. A Charmer there must not be; one that uses
strange words over a Serpent, that it may not hurt a man; whiles the fool by
his strange words, becomes a worse Serpent to himself: nor one, that whispers
over a wound, as if he would by silence hide his pretense: nor one that reads a
verse out of the Bible, or lays the Bible upon a Child, that it may sleep.
Surely God's Word should rather awake men, than cast them into a sleep; and
being intended to produce faith, must needs affect the Hearing. Besides, Gods
Word is not Physique for the Body; unless remotely, by instructing to
Temperance: But indeed Life it is, as Solomon says ( Prove. 3.) unto the Soul.
And shall man intend to do more or otherwise, with God's Word, than God
intends? or, by abuse of God's Word, make God's Word, Man's Word? A Consulter
with familiar spirits there must not be: such Spirits were by divine permission
and judgment, so familiar, that they possessed the Consulter, and spoke out of
his Belly, as from a bottle, with a Jow voice; he whispered as out of the dust,
as God speaks by Isaiah (chap. 29.4.) A horrible possession, when as the
Consulter became a Hell! and yet though he was one, he could not escape another.
Such a confident Artist waved a Myrtle rod in his hand; til he heard one answer
him with a low voice. The Ceremony was the Deceit; The Myrtle is of admirable
use for the cure of the body, particularly for the clearing of the sight: yet
such was here the impudence of Satan, that by this pretense he would blind the
spiritual sight; so blind it that it should not be serviceable to preserve
either Soul or Body. This was Readiness sin, for which God killed him. (I
Chron. 10.13.) and for which God has threatened to cut off all such as inquire
of such: and happy is he that by being threatened, is but threatened. A Wizard
there must not be; or Cunning man; such did use senseless and impious
Ceremonies, as to put the bone of a certain bird, in their mouth; and burning
incense, fell down, and pretended to foretell, what should come to pass: as if
either a bird, that wanted reason, or a bone that wanted life, could do more
than man, that had Life and Reason, and instruct the mouth to tell as much as
God only can tell, and to foretell more than God will tell? What Incense can
sweeten such stench of Impiety? What falling down can save them from falling
into the bottomless Pit? These undertake to foresee things to come; and yet
foresee not their own destruction. This is the cunning of a Cunning Man; but
for whom the Devil is too cunning. A Necromancer there must not be; such slept
by a Grave, that in their dream, the Dead might teach them what they demanded
of him. Better it had been, they had slept in their graves; but, though alive,
they slept worse in sin. Their hope of instruction, was but of instruction in
a dream; and that instruction, but from the Dead. Knowledge implies Reason:
which in sleep is Disabled; by Death, Destroyed! The Grave might have been a
better instructor, than the Dead. Yet even such sins the old world had, and
by such sins the new world is still old; God's people were then bid to turn
from those, that would turn them from God: they were bid to turn and hearken
to the Prophet, whom God then promised to send. ( Deuteronomy. 18.15.) even our
Savior Christ; and a woe is threatened to them that shall not harken to him.
Christ is life; Christ is wisdom; the Wisdom of the Father. O let us not
then so mistake our selves, as to mistake wisdom: so mistake our selves, as
to mistake our Father, our Heavenly Father. Would drunkenness then defile us?
Let the shame of it save us from the shame of it. Would lust defile us? Let the
body by the danger of that Corruption be the Guardian, and so the safety of the
Body and Soul. Would Idolatry defile us? Let Reason tell us, we cannot make a
God; as Religion tells us, we must worship God. Would Witchcraft defile us? Let
the madness of our sin preserve us in our Wits and Innocence: preserve us
from such a sin, as is both the Guilt and the Punishment; a sin and a Hell.
And let the sight of Heaven, into which nothing that is unclean shall enter,
preserve us by Hope and Endeavor from Uncleanesse: that at the last being
washed from all uncleanesse by the blood of our Savior, who ascended into
Heaven; we as a part of his Church purified by his blessed Spirit, may be
preserved holy and undefiled unto God the Father. To which three Persons and
One God, be ascribed Holiness and Glory for evermore.

FINIS.
OF RACHA. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

Mat. 5.22. But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother, without a
cause, shall be in danger of Judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother,
Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but whosoever shall say Thou fool,
shall be in danger of Hell fire.


WHAT is more natural, than to please our selves? what more unnatural, than
to please others? Every man by corruption is his own God: and to please others,
counts it the worst Idolatry. He worshipps not an Idol, but to please Himself:
and whatsoever worshipps not him is the object of his Anger. He knows nothing,
but the Deity of himself; and the enemy of his Deity. Hence he counts all
offense against Himself, impiety; and a contempt of his Judgment, or at least
of his Will: and therefore to be angry with what displeases him, is to him not
Wrath, but Justice; and so is not an Act of Passion, but Religion. Thus thinks
he that is of no Religion; or whose Religion is but Nature, even Corrupt
Nature. Nature indeed whiles not corrupted, was Good; and so Passion, and so
Anger, was Good: it knew Then no Wrath, but for God; no Wrath alone for our
selves, but for God and our selves. Our Zeal sought then no honor, but God's
honor; as now by nature we seek no honor but our own. What is not our self
is slighted, What is our self is Adored. God then the great enemy of Idols,
would Un-Idol man; and by making him despise himself, make him worthy not to
be despised. The pleasure of Anger he will leave unto him; but also the
justice; he will leave him Nature; but Temper it with Grace. He will show him
the Nature of Just Anger. He will show him the Degrees of Unjust Anger: the
Degrees he will show; but also the Danger: and mercifully also he will show the
Degrees of the Danger. The Instruction needs not to Invite Obedience: the
Authority of the Instructor commands Attention; the Truth of the Instructor
Commands belief. The Example of Patience is here the Rule of Patience; our
meek Savior: The Law lop'd off the Bough; the Gospel strikes at the Root.
That forbid Murder; This forbids wrath; since by wrath we may at last proceed
to Murder; as Chromatius says. Here is presented to us a threefold sin
expressed by, Anger, Racha; and Thou Fool: here is represented to us a
threefold Danger; the Judgment, the Council, and Hell fire. The Danger is a
Quick Rhetorique; the sin a Slow one. The sin thinks it self Doubtful,
or Invisible: The Danger does Discover it, and Condemn it. And yet there is a
wrath not to be condemned; a wrath implanted in Innocent nature, and therefore
once innocent; and by a repair of Grace, there is an Anger still innocent.
Indeed the Stoique counted all Anger bad: and by an oversight was so vehement
against it without distinction that he was Angry, whiles he condemned anger;
unreasonably depriving Reason of the Attendance of the Passions; which nature
intended as subsevient helps in the performance of Reason's Commands. The
Peripatetique therefore was more considerate, who did not look only on the
Abuse of Passion, but also and chiefly on the use of it. From which difference
of Judgments it was, that Aristotle praised Anger; and therefore the Stoique
dispraised Aristotle. Hence was it that Cicero and Seneca condemned him as a
Flatterer; the Flatterer of his Scholar and Master, the Great Alexander; Great,
yet less then his Own Anger; but worse blinded they were with a mistake, than
they could have been with a moderate Anger. And if we will consult Reason and
Religion, They will give us a clear view of the difference of Anger: and not
only Teach, but persuade us to believe, that there is an indifferent, and a
Good, and a Bad Anger. Yet is the Indifferent Naturally Good, though Morally
Indifferent; which is not a Faculty, as if always in man; nor yet a Habit
proceeding from general acts; but a Passion by Nature bestowed upon the soul;
whereby it dilates it self toward what is Good, for the defense of it self,
and the Removal of what would Hinder such Defense. This is that naturally wise
(...) of the Grecians; that vidicative appetite in Natural Man, raised from an
unjust Contempt of Us, and Ours. And this Passion which is neither Irrational,
nor Destructive, is not only a distinct Passion from others, but also singular,
whiles not like a single Passion but a Compound; Indeed, it is not without
others: it is not without Sorrow, for wrong received: It is not without Desire,
to expel such sorrow: it is not without Hope; by which we desire just
vindication. This Passion aims at Trouble, to him that provoks it; it only
aims at it, as a Punishment due to the provocation. This Passion ascends above
other Passions, whiles it comes nearer to Reason: and so justifies it self by
wrong received; that Reason is almost as Ready to Mistake it self for a
Passion, as this Passion not to take it self for Reason. And for this cause as
it is nearer to Reason, so more Natural to Man. An inferior Desire belongs to
the Beasts, being also preserved by Food, and Propagation: above which Passion
Anger is; and yet is more Impetuous, than Concupisence; whiles it follows the
Motion of Choler: which is more Quick than Fire, being a living fire. Yet
though this Passion be Fierce, it is not Hateful; not so hateful, as Hatred.
Anger desires trouble; yet as it is Just; but Hatred aims at it as it is
Evil. Anger is diminished by Time; Hatred is Increased. Anger is Ingenuous; it
would have its revenge known: Hatred is Base; it would have its mischife
Concealed. Anger sets only upon the Living; Hatred pursues also the Dead; nay
Death, for snatching from it the pleasure of Revenge. But a more Noble Anger
yet there is, an Anger that is Good; Spiritually Good; an ^anger not without a
cause, (a lawful cause) which addition, S. Jerome thinks to be but an
addition, as only found in some copies: we may more safely say, though not
found in some copies, yet not such an addition. The Doctrine being warantable
is to be admitted; the exception then is not to be admitted. Which just anger
is sometimes termed Zeal; though Zeal sometimes be not so just; and such just
anger was called (...); and so not only acknowledged, but acknowledged Good.
Such was the Anger of mild Moses, when he stood in the Gate of the Camp, and
said, Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me; and caused to be slain
about three thousand men, for making the golden Calfe. He made the Sacrificers
a Sacrifice to their unreasonable God. Such was the Anger of Elijah, when he
caused Baal's Prophets, even four hundred and fifty, to be slain. They had
wretchedly destroyed other Souls, and now justly destroyed for the
destruction. Their God could neither give life, nor save life. Such was the
Anger of our Blessed Savior; He looked round about on them with Anger; being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts. (Mark. 3.5.) and though they were
not moved with Miracle, He was moved with Compassion, healing the man that had
a withered hand; and showing that a work of mercy is a Sabbath days work, that
aims not at man's gain, but God's Glory. He was angry, that they having reason,
would not use it; and having deseases, had neither the Mercy to cure them, nor
the Wisdom to seek cure. Such was the Anger of S. Paul calling the Galatians
fools; whom yet he called Brethren. Brethren they had been in the Profession
of the Gospel: Fools they were in deserting the Profession of the Gospel. He
told them they were bewitched: and were they not bewitched? when being not able
to bear the burden of the Law, they would not accept of the kindness of our
Savior, who would bear it for them? Angry then he was; yet not without cause;
and therefore is his Anger defended by S. Austin. Indeed such anger is the
defense of Anger. Such anger was again the anger of S. Paul, against Elymas the
Sorcerer, whom the Apostle called the Child of the Devil: and was it not
justly, when as he refused to be borne of God? and as he would not enjoy the
light of Grace; so Miracle and Justice would not let him enjoy the Light of the
Sun. For blind he was struck, and sought for some to lead him, that would
have hindered others from being lead, by them they sought not for. ( Act.
13.12.) Such once more was the Anger of S. Paul, against Ananias the high
Priest, whom he called a whited wall: his outside was his fairest side; and so
not Wrath, but Truth and Inspiration uttered it. S. Paul defended himself, and
the high Priest commanded that he should be struck on the mouth; but the mouth
of Paul, nay, of God, struck the Hypocrite. A Judge and Justice should be
Relative: but this man had the seat of Justice, but not the Conscience. Not
Rashness then, but Zeal, says Theophylact, moved the Apostle, adding this
Rule, that we are then rashly angry, when it is for Profit, or Glory. S.
Chrysostom likewise says, that just Anger is the mother of Discipline; and
that anger with just cause is not Anger, but Judgment. S. Paul said the same
before ( R^m. 4.) calling the Magistrate, the avenger, to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. And though the Guilty suffers evil, for his evil, this
is not to be angry with the Person, but the Fault, whiles with the person but
for the fault. But an anger there is, which is neither Good nor Indifferent,
but Bad: which if the Latin Critiques should help us to understand, as well
as the Philosophers, we might with some think Ira to come from Vro, it seems
such burning choler as Tracundia from Incendo, as if it were an Inflaming
Choler, it being esteemed the Habit of a Vice, whence arise wrathful Acts,
flames of a wrath, that seeks revenge beyond, and so against, Reason. Which has
moved some with Fancy, if noe Truth, to think it may come from Ire; when we
see how it makes a man run out of Himself, whiles out of his Reason. This
makes a men sometimes run without provocation; sometimes beyond it: Sometimes
without the Order, that Law prescribes; sometimes without that End, the Law
prescribes. This is the vice of which Solomon thus complains ( Pro. 27.4.)
Wrath is Cruel, and Anger is Outrageous; and so it becomes not only Odious, but
Monstrous; as if it would exceed both for the Kind and the Degree. This is
Wrath, this is that Wrath upon which the Sun must not go down: but why?
says S. Austin; Non enim erubescit in tenebris, cum super eam Sol occiderit.
When the Sun is departed, the blush too commonly is departed; as if Night
added impudence unto Wrath. But it may as truly imply, That the End of the Day
should be the end of the Guilt: that though it may unhappily last a day, it may
happily last but a day: that, though by the light it could not see its own
unseemlinesse, it may by the Meditation of the Night, by which yet too
frequently it is, if not Abated, Increased. This vice then must not break
forth against a Pagan: even He is a brother by Creation: and though he does not
as yet own his right Master; he may own him, and honor him. It must not break
forth against a Jew: God he acknowledges, though not the Son of God: he
confesses God to be his Judge; and by mercy may in time confess him to be his
Savior. This must not break forth against a Turk: who though he acknowledges
not Christ a God, acknowledges him a Prophet; and by a possible Unity in the
Faith, may by the Charity of Hope, be mantled-over with the title of Brother;
a brother sometimes less guilty than a Cain, or an Esau; and whiles more
natural than those Brothers, become at last Supernatural. Thus wrath without
a cause must not break out; no, nor be within us, to break out; Not in the
Mind since if it be in the mind it will soon be in the Body; and so in the
Tongue. This will Languagne wrath quickly; but must not help it, or rather
mischief it, to cry Racha. Our Savior as the most wise Master, spoke what was
understood by his Hearers: and therefore teaches us, that they teach us not
rightly, who would draw the word from the Greek, (...), a tattered garment, and
so sometimes, a patch or ragge; as if we called one a ragged fellow: which,
though it may be partly true in the sense; yet is not so in the derivation; as
if the Elder Language should borrow it of the Younger; or, as if we should
think that our Savior spoke Greek among the Jews. This teaches us to suspect
that Jew, that told S. Austin, the word was only an Interjection; not
signifying any certain thing, more than the indignation of the mind: but this
is denied by the many and certain significations which it has. This will not
admit Theophilact's exposition: who tells us, it is as much as Thou; implying a
Contempt; but this is an Interpretation as unwarrantable for its proportion, as
the contempt. This teaches us to doubt S. Chr. opinion: who counting it a
common word among the Jews; says yet, that it proceeds not from Anger or Hate,
but rather from familiarity, yet from some contempt; but our Savior makes it
the second degree of anger. Nor need we draw this word from their conceit, who
would have it come from (...), spittle; and so imply an unworthy person; sit
for a contempt, which our Savior suffered from the impious Jews: but this is
rather Imagination, than Judgment. Nor need we hear some, that more subtly
tell us, that Racha in the Chaldie, which was the tongue which the Jews
learned in their Captivity, signifies a millstone, as in the Hebrew (...)
milstones. This though admitted would not prevail for the admission of their
exposition of this doubt. This was indeed one of the Israelites taskes among
the Egyptians, as of the slaves among the Romans, to grind in their mills.
According to which sense some would have it import the upbrading of slavery one
to another, as if they should say, To the Mill, you slave. Yet this conceit
seems more Accute, than True: for though this might have been a Reproach to a
Jew, yet most unseemely it had been from a Jew. We may then with S. Jerome more
happily make it in value, the same with (...), which with the Greeks signifies
vain, or empty: which may be warranted by the Hebrew, in which (...) is to
attenuate or make thin: as (...) also signifies the thinness of the Temples
of the Head; as spittle also for the thinness is called (...). But more
nearely (...) in the Hebrew, is vain, or empty; whence (...) is judged to
come: and such are they called Judge. 11.3. which were gathered to Iephthah,
when he fled out of his Country; the word is (...) vain men; For with (...) it
is written, not with (...), as appears in the word Racha; which in the Hebrew
translation of S. Mathew's Gospel published by Munster, is likewise written
with (...) which serves to weaken the witty fancy of those that would have it
signify Milstones, (...) being written not with (...) but (...). The
Emptiness then, or Vanity employed in this word, is the reproach of a defect in
Nature, as a weakness in Judgment; or in ones Estate, as in a slender
Condition; either of which being at the divine disposal, may not without a
comparative degree of Anger, be objected; and therefore may justly fear God's
Anger for the Objecting. For, shall we call him Empty, that is filled with the
spirit of Love, as Chromatius speaks? Or shall we not honor the Judgment of
our Savior (the Wisdom of the Father;) who thus judges of such rash
judgment, such unadvised Anger, (...), without a cause, such anger to which
the angry man too inconsiderately yields? for from (...) (cedo) it comes,
implying the angry man's Iudulgence unto his Passion. Much less then, must we
dare to say, Thou fool. And seems not this offense included in the former? To
object the weakness of Judgment, is it not to say Racha? The weakness of
some judgment, judges thus of this most wise judgment: which yet, when
rightly understood, will teach us to judge rightly of this judgment. To
understand then Folly here, requires Wisdom; even the wisdom of God's Word:
which teaches us to know, that the Fool in God's account, is not one, that is
defective in his Wit, but in his Will: he that orders not his Life according to
the Rule of Life, God's Law; whose offense is not Silliness, but Sinfullnesse.
And shall we without cause thus censure another man? If some seem contemptible,
shall their Christianity also seem contemptible? Let us remember S.
Chrysostom's remembrance; was not Belshazzar, says he, deprived of his Crown
and Life, for profaning the vessels of God's Temple? And shall not we then
fear by such rash judgment, the loss of the beetter Crown, and Life, if we
profane the better Vessels of the Holy Ghost, the persons of Christians? shall
we then with some so view these degrees of sin, as also to Compare them with
some, that make the first only an anger in the mind? the second an Anger
expressed in words? the last an Anger in words, and more especially
disgraceful words? An anger only in the mind though it deserves the
Judgment, does not yet fear an Outward Judgment; whiles it is yet not an
outward guilt. A Guilt were; there an accuser, besides Conscience, there were
not. Judge then we may more strictly, the first to be anger in the mind, in
some degree according to the nature of Anger, expressing it self in some parts
of the Body also; as by the frown of the brow; the cast of the Eye; the
threatening of the Hand; or the spurn of the Foot: as if the Body were the
Picture of the Mind; or rather, as if the Body were the Passion. The second we
may judge to be such an Anger, as upbraides another, with a Slenderness of
Wit, or Wealth; as when we call one shallow pate, or Beggar. The third is to
call one Fool, not in the mistake of the people; but in a severer acception,
according to which it signisies a Wicked Person: which Accusasion, if without
cause, is the suparlative Anger here intended. Thus does the wisdom and Mercy
of our Savior present unto us the degrees of Anger: next he sets forth the
degrees of punishment; the Judgment, the Council, and Hell fire: which
terrors let us see; so see by contemplation, that we may but see them by
Contemplation. Some here by the Judgment understand the Judgment of
Conscience: but this judgment, is common to all degrees of anger: but what is
here intended belongs only to the First. Besides, our Savior speaks of
Outward danger, such as was subject to the sense; and so more easily subject to
the people's understanding. Some Court of Judicature is here intended: of which
there were diverse sorts. In one of which were three Judges, to whom belonged
the lesser causes; as private wrongs, pecuniary matters, and the like: but the
judgment of this Court is below the Judgment here due to the lowest unjust
anger; and so here rather supposed, than intended. In a second Court were
Twenty and Three Judges; this was the Less Synedrium; wherein Causes of Life
and Death were tried: and this was answerable to our Assizes: and one of these
Courts was in every City (as appears Det. 16.18.) according to the number of
the Inhabitants; the Less Court in the least City; the greater in the rest,
and so in lerusalem. The last was the Great Synedrium, wherein were seventy
Judges, besides the President, in imitation of Moses (Number. 11.24.) and here
were heard the most weighty and difficult Causes of all; it being the highest
and National Court; which was held only at Jerusalem. But the last punishment
due to the last degree of anger that is here expressed is Hell fire; or
according to the Original, the fire of Gehenna; which once was a pleasant
Valley adorned with a Grove on the East side of Mount Moria, near Jerusalem,
and watered with the brook Cedron. It was called Gehinnam, or the valley of
Hinnom, who was a Iebusite, whose son, as some think was the owner of the
place; as seems to be employed Joshua 15.8. For with some to derive it from
(...) vallis, and (...) rugibus, were more wit than truth; since the Name of
the place was more ancient than the Abuse. In which place was Molech, the Idol
of the Ammonites; of stature High; for Substance of Brass; for Contrivance
Hollow; and by some held to be the same with Saturn. It was of a stately size;
the Head whereof was like the Head of a Calfe; but the Body like the body of a
Man; whose arms were spread open, as ready to receive the children that were
offered in Sacrifice to him; fire being for that purpose put into the hollow of
the Idol; unto which the children being compelled to go, fell into a fire. To
this Idol belonged seven rooms for the several kinds of Offerings that were
brought unto him; the seventh whereof was for the Children: which as some
think, only passed between two fires, by way of ceremony, to testify their
conservation, and so there future service unto Molech. But others take the
Phrase, to pass between two fires, to signify they were burned. Indeed for
what purpose else had a certain place in the valley been called Tophet,
(mentioned in Isaiah chapter 30.33.) from (...) a drum; but because as it is
related, they beat drums to out-noise the cryings of the Children whiles
sacrificed, that so the Parents might not be terrifyed. For this was a free
Sacrifice, and therefore, as they believed, not to be disgraced with
unwillingnesse. And as for the custom of passing between two fires, it may yet
be admitted as a ceremony without the burning, in use also among the Heathen;
so that both are taken for truth; but the Burning is here intended. With this
impiety, though thus cruel, were yet even Ahaz and Manasses Kings of God's
People defiled; deserving to feel a worse Gehenna, that made others feel
This, Devilish was his worship, yet conceived to have been the (wretched)
Imitation of holy worshippers even Abraham and Isaac: Sathan's Art and Malice
making Cruelty be esteemed Devotion: the Heathen neighbors of Israel (as
appears Numb. 14.14.) being unacquainted with the affairs of Israel. But as
Molech signifies a Prince, and the Devil is by permission Prince of the Air,
so is he but for a time permitted. Bad Kings there were; and a good King there
was, even good Josias, who destroyed the graven Image of the Grove, which
Manasses had placed in the house of the Lord (2 Kings 21.7.) and burned it, and
stamped it to powder. ( chapter 33.6.) and brake in pieces the Images, and cut down
the Groves, and filled their places with the bones of men ( v. 14.) And in this
Vallie of Hinnom, as it is in Jeremy. chap. 7. did that Prophet break the
earthen Vessel, telling the Jews, that God would for their iniquity, so
break that City, and make it as Tophet ( Iere. 19.11, 12.) This was Gehenna,
the Gehenna of Fire: whence S. Ierom would infer, that there is also a
Gehenna of Cold. But, though it be true, that in Hell there shall be gnashing
of teeth, which we may conceive may be from the extremity of Cold: yet since in
the first Gehenna there was no extremity of Cold, it were an impropriety to
express that torment, though in Hell, by the condition of Gehenna. A Gehenna
of fire then, Hell is called; not to implie a Distinction, but a more powerful
expression. Which expression S. James also uses ( chapter 3.6.) when he says, that
the Tongue is set on fire of Hell: in the Original it is (...); is set on fire
by Gehenna, the same thing expressing both the sin of the tongue and the
punishment. S. John calls Hell a Lake of fire burning with brimstone ( Apoc.
19.20.) But most aptly does our Savior here call it the fire of Gehenna, for
the threefold representation, of the filthiness, the Burning, and the outcry
of the place. Will ye see the difference now in the punishment of Anger? In the
Judgment it is by some observed, that the Condemnation was uncertain; that in
the Council it was certain, though the Punishment uncertain: but, that in
Gehenna, both were certain. Will you next compare the sins and the
Punnishments? There may we with fear and wisdom observe, that our Savior
tries Anger, though expressed but by signs, in no less Court, than that of
Three and Twenty Judges, as if we should say, at the Public Assizes; and so
tries even the first degree of Anger without a cause, in the same Court,
wherein the Jews tried Murder. Next we may observe, that the Reproach
expressed by Racha, he judged worthy of a National Judgment, in the Council:
but wrongfully to object to any, a wicked Life, he judged worthy to be punished
Like a wicked Life, with the fire of Hell. Now all these things the Jews
understood: they were more known unto them than their sins. And shall not
then the Danger of anger be as well known unto us? a danger to the soul, more
visible than the Soul: a danger to the body, no less sure, than Death! Wrath
kills the foolish man, says Eliphaz the Temanite ( Job. 5.2.) yet if any
should hope, That may be long in doing, the wise man ( Eccl. 30.24.) will put
us out of that mistaking hope, telling us that wrath shortens the Life. Nay
before death it presents the distortions of Death; making man as unseemely as
his passion: in which condition the Looking-glass may be an unfeigned witness
and instruction. O how it exulcerates the Mind, says S. Ambrose; how it dulls
the sense? changes the speech; darkens the Eye; and disturbs the whole Body!
Many, says S. Chrysostom, I have known that by Anger have got diseases, many
that have lost their sight. Anger then must be a great disease, that is the
cause of diseases; and must be a great grief, that deprives man of the pleasure
of the eye. By frequent anger, says S. Austin to Nebridius, the Gall
increases; and reciprocally by the increase of the Gall, Anger again
increases. Does man then Love himself, he should then hate his passion, this
passion: and by a less evil he may thus be cured of a greater; and by the
policy of Morality make a less enemy help him against a greater. But if we
will not be so kind to our selves, we must be so just to another. Can any
consider how David used Saul, yet rather imitate Saul than David? shall good
example make us bad? shall we not rather by kindness make a brother, than by
anger loose him? Can any consider how Moses used the people, and be no better
than the people compared with Moses? Did not they Murmr? Did not he pray?
Were not they angry? Was he angry? Should they have been angry? should not he
have been angry? Their anger was his honor; his patience was their shame.
Though then we cannot be like Moses, let us not be like the people. Let us not
be so bad, as the people to Moses: let us not be worse, then the People to one
another. Can any consider, how Joseph used his brethren, and use his brother
worse, who is not worse than Ioseph's brethren? Can any consider how our
blessed Savior was used, that is, abused, how reviled, struck on the face,
spit upon, derided, crucified by sinners, though for sinners, and be angry with
his brother, happily a less sinner? happily a less sinner, if more happily
but because a less angry sinner? Will any man then as Tertullian speaks, come
unto Prayer, a Peace with God, without peace? will he hope for a remission of
his sins, yet without a remission of others sins? how shall he pacify God
his Father, if he be not pacified toward man, his brother? Will any man then
dare to hate his brother, when as God connot love two enemies? for, if God
loves the one, he loves him perfectly, and therefore he must perfectly hate the
other as his enemy. Will any man then be so angry with himself, as to be angry
with his brother? will any man so hate himself as not to love his brother,
when as love covers both our brother's sins, and our own? shall we loose Our
brother and our selves, nay, and our Savior too, for a reviling word? Oh, let
us rather pray with good S. Jerome; Lord deliver me from deceitful lips and a
lying tongue. Not from another tongue, says he, but from mine own. Another's
tongue hurts me not: it is mine own is my enemy; that is the sword that kills my
soul. I think to hurt mine enemy; and never take notice that I kill my self.
Wherefore, O Holy Spirit of Love, unite us as much by Love, as thou have done
by Faith; and touch our tongues with a Coal from thy Altar, that they never be
employed by us to the reviling of one another, but to the praising of thy holy
name, O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, to whom be ascribed all Praise for ever
more.

FINIS.
OF The Serpent and the Dove. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

Mat. 10.16. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.


THE Beams of Light flow not so naturally from the Sun, as the Exhortations
to Wisdom flow from the God of Wisdom; And such is here this exhortation of
our Savior to his Disciples. Yet unto such a wisdom here he prompts them, as
seems to respect as much their safety, as their Duty; and Wisdom that
consists not in Contemplation, but in Action; and though it looks upon God,
yet also upon man. Which diversity of Wisdom was anciently observed by
Heathens and Christians: That was their (...), wisdom; This their (...),
prudence. Thus could Plato and Cicero, teach; thus could the Alexandrian
Clement and S. Jerome Learn. Which last, our prudence toward men, is that
which here our Savior intends; it being in the Original, not (...), but
(...); be ye prudent; or with less ambiguity and more safety, as it is
rendered, Be ye wise. And that this is intended, is manifest from our Saviors
purpose: who sending his Disciples to work Miracles and Teach, teaches them
first, how they should behave themselves: clearly implying, that more than
man's wisdom is needful for Man in his conversation with man: and that we
need more than a Guardian Angel, even God's assistance by his Grace. He tells
them that he sends them as Sheep among Wolves; a thin Clergy to a numerous
Layty! that sometimes tears the fleece, and devoures the flesh. He bids them
beware of men: these are the Wolves; these are the worst Wolves, because Wolves
and Men; they have the wit of the man, and the Cruelty of the Wolf. He
foretells them, they shall be delivered up to the Counsels, now, where there is
the greatest Judge, there is the greatest cause, and where the greatest cause,
the greatest Danger. Nor only shall they be brought where many are to Judge,
and so where the variety may afford some hope of Mercy, but also occasionally
before Governors and Kings; and so where if the single judge be cruel of
Proud, he is sometimes a sentence without Appeal. And that they may be prepared
for such sufferings in Pody, and Mind, he does foretell them of being scourged
in the Synagogues; he does foretell them of stripes and shame: and therefore
exhorts them to such wisdom, as may be requisite in such Distress. And
surely such wisdom must be excellent, which must employ the memory to
advantage us, by what we have learned; and make our Experience our Own School;
which must employ the Understanding to apprehend the present particulars in
every action; making it the Eye and the Glass, for an exact view: which must
employ our Providence, in the Foresight and use of what things may happen. If
you will behold the train of this wisdom, you shall find it attended with
Docility; being apt to learn by the Eye and Ear. You shall find it attended
with subtility, whereby it will guess with speed and happiness. You shall
find it attended with Judgment, which will so argue out a third truth. You
shall see it attended with Wariness, which will prevent such Hindrances, as
would prevent our End. Lastly, you shall see it attended with circu^spection,
which will accurately consider every circumstance. See that ye walk
circu^spectly, not as fools but as wise ( Ephesians. 5.15.) If you will behold the
Actions of it, you shall see it admirable for Counsel, both in the Choice of
worhy purposes, and in moving the understanding to find means for the
attaining of them. You shall see it admirable for Judgment in the distinction
and choice of means and opportunity. You shall find it admirable for command:
whereby the Reason sets on work the will, for the speedy execution of the
design. These are the excellencies of wisdom; the price whereof is more than
of Gold and fine Rubies; ( Prove. 3.14, 15.) yet the one is admirably solid, the
other admirably transparent. The subtilty whereof is such, that it is able to
discern the Diversity of Spirits. (1 Cor. 12.10.) and so does not only exceed
the abilities of the Body, but also the natural abilities of the soul. The
swetnesse whereof is such, that it is as sweet as life; nay as Peace, the Life
of Life. (...), the minding of the Spirit, or the wisdom of the Spirit, is
Life and peace ( Romans 8, 6.) Forsake not wisdom and she shall preserve thee,
( Prove. 4.6.) see a preservation rewarded with a Preservation: see a labor,
that is its own reward. This is that virtue, without which all virtue is vice,
as S. Bernard says, this being the guide of all other Virtues, Affections,
Manners. This is that virtue without which, as S. Basil says, a man is like a
Ship without a Master, driven uncertainly with every wind; unless we shall
say, he is rather the wind, than the Ship; Passion, that is, Man, being so
impetuous without wisdom. This is that virtue, with which they that are
endued think nothing Evil, as Prosper says, but that which makes man evil; so
that they can smile at the Mistake, that miscalls Afllictions Evils. This is
the Virtue of which the Heathen, who speaks of many Gods, could say, Nullum
Numen abest, si sit prudentia; that he had all the God's on his side, that had
wisdom; he might have perfected his speech, had he but said, Ipsum Numen
adest; Even God is on his side, that has wisdom. The Light of the Body is the
Eye; and the truest light of the Eye is wisdom. But because precept is more
abstracted from the sense, our Savior gives his Disciples a pattern; the
example of the Serpent; Be ye wise as Serpents. Now of Serpents there are many
kinds: but in all there is a natural wisdom a subtilty, and almost in all
parts of them. You may see a subtilty in their Eye; an old Serpent being called
a Dragon from (...); implying the singular sharpness of his sight; which moved
Ancient Poets in their fictions, usually to make Dragons the Guardians of
Treasure. Hence also among the Grecians (...), A Serpents Eye was a Proverbiall
Title for a man of a clear understanding: which some think to be the reason,
why Serpents were sacred to Aesculapius; he being admirable for his Insight and
Discoveries in Physique. You may see a subtilty in their Ear; in the Obstinate
Deafness of the Addar; a race of the Serpent too: a Serpent that will not be
cousen'd; but stops the ear and will not hearken to the voice of Charmers,
Charming never so wisely ( Ps. 58.4, 5.) a motive to the Hebrews to call this
Serpent by an antiphrasis, (...) from (...) as some would have it, to persuade,
because this Serpent will not be persuaded. You may see a subtilty in their
Teeth; Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder in the Path, that bites the
horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. Jacob ( Genesis 49.17.) God
had said long before, that he should bruise the heel of the seed of the woman
( Genesis 3.15.) And therefore aptly there Jacob call the Serpent (...) from his
biting. You may see a subtilty in their Horns: for with small horns Nature
has formed one kind of them; as Pliny observes ( lib. 9. cap. 23.) which thence
is called (...) whose deceit is to hide his body and wag his horns, to allure
the birds to come and peck at them: which coming for their prey, become his
prey. Both which qualities are fitly expressed in another name which Jacob uses
for a Serpent; which is (...) which signifies both to Lurk and Tempt; the word
is also used in the Original ( Isa. 27.1.) You may see a subtilty in their
wings: for some Naturalists report, such are found in Aethiopia: and likely it
is, such were the fiery Serpents, which bit the Israelites ( Numb. 21.6.) and a
prediction we find of a flying Serpent, Isa. 14.29. which though some think to
be spoken but by a figure, not of wings, but of speed; yet well does it
express his subtilty, in his intentive prosecution of his prey. You may see a
subtilty in their Skine which they yearly cast, to renew their strength; a fit
emblem of the old Serpent the Devil, who can change himself into an Angel of
Light: and some Serpents to have the best names of the best Angels; the fiery
Serpents mentioned, Number. 21.6. being there called Seraphin; which is the name
of the most different reasons. The word signifies fiery; to express in the
Angels, their Glory, their Light of understanding, and especially their heat
of Love to their Creator: but in the Serpent it intends the extremity of his
venom, which sets on fire with torment, the person, whom he bites. You may see
a subtilty in their Appetite: it being noted of the Stellio, a kind of Serpent
too, that he has no sooner cast his skin, but he eats it up; as if he
understood the virtue of it; and as some censure it, did envy man, whom he
takes for his enemy so great a benefit; it being a special remedy, as some
have taught, against the falling sickness. You may see a subtilty in their
Hissing; the Basiliske being of that nature, that if other Serpents come near
him, he ceases not to hiss out threats, till they be gone; that he may pride
himself alone. From which domineering humor, as also from a white mark in
form of a diadem, upon his head, he has the name of Basiliske, and Regulus, or
the Kingly Serpent. And would not the old Serpent have gotten such a Royalty in
Heaven? would he not there have been a Basiliske? nay, when as thence he was
cast out, would he not have gotten the Dominion in Paradise over our first
Parents? You may see a subtilty, in their voice; at least you may find such
subtilty in the Paradice-Serpent; in whom you may see these special
subtilties. He tempted not our Parents, whiles God seemed present with them:
that he judged, might have spoild his plot. He tempted them not together; that
he perceived had been two to one. He tempted not first the Man: be saw his
Excellency; and knew not if, though alone, he might prove too hard for him. Yet
tempted he the Woman: she was by nature of a more moist, and so of a more
gentle temper; yiedling him the Hope, whiles the possibility, of some change in
her; and if she could be overcome, He and the Woman, would assault the Man.
This was the way to conquer man by halves. Indeed he conquered half Adam, when
he conquered Eve. And you may consider how he conquered her. He knew that God
had commanded them not to eat of the fruit of the tree in the midst of the
Garden; and as yet he saw their Obedience. He knew God had told them, that if
they eat of it, they should die; and he perceived their belief in the word of
God. Lastly, he understood her Fear of God, least she did offend; and her
fear of Death, if she did offend. He saw then that there were three things,
which he must overcome in her; her Obedience, her Faith, and her Fear. He sets
himself then to consider what order he should use in his assault; that is, how
he might prove himself a Devil. To overcome her Obedience whiles he Faith was
strong, he saw it was impossible; and to overcome her Faith, whiles she had
the Fear of God and Death in her, he judged as impossible. Thus then he
concludes: If he could overcome her Faith, her Obedience would fall it self:
and if he could overcome her Fear, her Faith would likewise grow weak of it
self. Her fear then is that, which he must first overthrow; yet so, that he
will also give a blow to her Faith. He comes then unto her, and cunningly
asks, yea, has God said; ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? See
his subtilty in these respects; He pretends an Ignorance, so to assume a
Liberty to ask a question. Next as he durst not at first tell a flat untruth,
by saying, God had not forbidden them; boldly and craftily he calls it into
question, as if he would make a doubt of it; yea, has God said, ye shall not
eat of every tree In the Garden? To which when she had answered, that they
might eat of all save one; but not of that one, least they dye; he denies not
the first part of her answer, which concerned God's prohibition of one Tree;
knowing that she knew the contrary, as well as himself; he replies therefore
only to the last part of her answer; which was a matter of Faith, that they
should not dye at all. But because this his reply was an untruth; Least she
should, as was most likely, examine with her self, he gives her not the
respite to collect herself; but to make her forget That, presently adds, that
in the day they eat thereof, they should be as Gods knowing Good and Evil;
which was too true; and God testifies the same, Genesis 3.22. Observe then ye may
the method of his cunning: first he brings but an imperfect Truth; then an
Absolute untruth; and lastly an absolute Truth; thus wrapping up the poison of
a Lie, like a sugared pill, in the pleasantness of Truth. Farther observe,
that he overcame her Faith, by overcoming her Fear; and overcame her Fear, by
the contrary passion, Hope. For such was the Issue of the Temptation: when he
had made her forget Fear by Hope, and seeing the tree to be good for food, and
pleasant to the eye; nay, such a tree, as could make one wise; she takes of
the fruit and eats, and makes her husband eat also; such is the society in
evil; the unhappiness of unhappiness. In which last action we may see, that
though in their fall they got a knowledge of good and evil, or rather only of
evil (since better knowledge they had of good, before) yet the wisdom they
now got, came far short of that wisdom by which they were overcome. Nay,
you may see, that the Devil knew they should by their fall obtain but a
wretched wisdom, and such a one, as upon even terms he should be able at any
time to overcome. This was the wisdom of the Serpent; a a wisdom almost in
every part. Yet may you see subtilty also in his whole body; which like a
Circle upon occasion, he wrappes as a defense about his head; his Head in which
his subtilty is principally resident. Lastly you may see a subtilty in his
honor: which doubtless for his wisdom has in all ages of the Heathen world,
been given unto him. He has been honored by the most wealthy Nations: did not
the Babylonians worship Bell and the Dragon? he has been worshipped by the most
powerful Nations: did not the Romans worship the Epidaurian Serpent? He has
been worshipped by the Fiercest Nations: was he not worshipped by the
Thessalians and the Epirotes? He has been honored by the Rudest Nations: was
he not worshipped by the Eastern Indians? For ancient times let Maximus the
Tyrian witness; for latter times let a travailor, Ludovicus Barthana witness.
Was he not worshipped by those that inhabit the darkness under the Northern
Pole? and within these three hundred years, by the Lithuanians, in the view of
Christendom? Did they not nourish Vipers for their House-Gods? Did they not
Sacrifice unto them Milk and Cocks? Let Cromer witness. Briefly, he has
been honored by the most witty Nations: did not the Athenians, the Masters of
Wisdom, worship a live Serpent? make it the keeper of their Tower? and offer
monthly Sacrifices to it, as to a God? All which varieties of Idolatries, must
we not Judge to be the relics of that subjection to sin and the old
Serpent; into which mankind fell in the fall of our first Parents? But still
you see the winning subtilty of the Serpent: and therefore easily now may you
understand the supreme wisdom of our Savior's precept, Be ye wise as
Serpents. Unto which wisdom whiles he exhorts us, behold him as a true
instructor, beginning the Practice. A principal point of wisdom it is, to
learn wisdom of our Enemy: and therefore a singular instruction is this, to
teach us to overcome the Serpent by imitating the Serpent; to overthrow his
cunning, by his own cunning. This is like the remedy found in the Serpent
against his own poison; some Physicians esteeming it as a special cure against
the biting of a Serpent, to put the intrailes of a Serpent into the wound. The
poison likewise of the Viper, as some tell us, is helped by the liver of a
viper. So the venom of the Scorpion in hot Countries, where they are
troublesome, is speedily cured by the oil of the Scorpion. Now this precept of
our Savior is such, as most will be ready to put in practice: in which that
they may not err, they must remember to take also the other part of the
precept with them; least otherwise, whiles they think to become wise, they
become guilty; like our first Parents in eating the forbidden fruit. It is
observed of he diversits of Physique, that Galen's is the safer, but slower in
Operation: but that of Paracelsus, which deals much in Mineralls, is much more
powerful, but more dangerous; so that the skill in the Paracelsian is, to know
how exactly to allay his Physique, by a judicious preparation and due
chastizing the virulency of the Ingredients. Now this precept of our Savior is
such Paracelsian Physique; the wisdom of the Serpent is a subtle Ingredient:
and therefore our Savior as a true Artist does most wisely moderate it with
the innocence of the Dove. Before therefore we see, how by example we should be
as wise as Serpents, we will, as our Savior does, join also the other part of
the precept; and first remember you, that you must also be Harmless, as
Doves. And harmeles; (...), Innocent, simple it is worth the observing, that
the Roman Church, when it intends to Canonize any one for a Saint, commands
that there be especial inquiry made, whether the person to be canonized were
famous for Simplicity of Life; as Sylvester Prierus notes out of Innocentius,
Hostiensis, and other Canonists, which Inquiry whether or no, it be made with
as true Innocence, as the command pretends to seek, I need not Judge: but sure
it is that the Inquiry is an eminent subtilty. Indeed simplicity is a virtue
which so moderates the Actions of man, and so refines the affections of the
soul; that S. Ambrose, not without a Sobriety of mind, aptly called it the
sobriety of the mind. Nay, it so sublimes man and purifies him from wordly
wisedeme, that the wise men of the world, as S. Cregory complains, count this
simplicity Folly; and by a license of speech, commonly call one of small
understanding, or, as they phrase it, a Fool, an Innocent. But this virtue is
most intimately expressed by devout Climacus; who calls it a habit of the mind
without variety. Without variety? what is that? Why when Beauty tempts the
innocent man, it works no variety in him; he remains still Innocent. When
envy tempts him to back-bite his brother, it works no variety in him; he
remains still Innocent. When sloth tempts him to forsake the industry of his
Devotion, it works no variety in him: he remains still Innocent. When injury
tempts him to revenge, it works no variety in him; he remains still innocent.
Innocence was that which God commended in Job: that which our Savior commended
in Nathaniel: that which he commended to his Apostles: that which his Apostles
commended to others. This our Saviviour expressed in his own example; and him
we should follow; Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who
when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, threatened not: but
committed himself to him that judges righteously (1 Pet. 2.22, 23.) Lastly,
this our Savior set forth unto us, in the perpetual and visible example of
the Dove. And surely the Dove is so harmless, that he may be tamed to the
hand; and he will innocently trust himself to man, less innocent. Nay the
wildest of them are so harmless, that they keep themselves, only at a
defensive guard, and that not by resistance, but by flight. Away they fly, yet
only to be out of the way, the way of danger. So harmless they are, that they
are still ready to receive harm: whence the Hebrews call to them (...) from
(...) to oppress, so easily they are made a prey, that make none. So Innocent
they are, that they love the light; the top of the house is the witness of
their Life. Thence, as Varro tells us, they were by the Latins called
Columbae; from Culmina: being thus like Truth; which, as Tertullian says, is
ashamed of nothing, but to be hidden. So Innocent they are, that they have no
Gall; by a happy defect so exceeding Nature. So Innocent they are, that in the
Leviticall Law, they were an acceptable Sacrisice at the purification of women
( Levit. 12.6, 8.) and so the blessed Virgins offering at her Purification. (
Luk, 2.24.) So Innocent they are, that they Beauty of the Church, is compared
to the eyes of the Dove. Behold, thou art fair my Love, behold thou art fair;
thou have Doves eyes ( Cant. 1.15.) So Innocent they are, that they express
the innocence not only of the Church, but of God himself; the Holy Ghost
assuming the shape of the Dove, when the divine, nature vouchsafed to descend
into similitude. Lastly, so innocent they are, that their purity may be
ghuessed at in the story of the Flood. The Raven it is said, being sent forth
did not return; but the Dove returned. Why the Dove, and not the Raven? Wise
direction has supposed the cause: the Raven, it is judged, sat upon some
Carcass, which he found floating: which the Dove does naturally abhor. Thus
may you clearly and quickly see the innocence of the Dove: but the wisdom of
the Serpent, was not easily discovered. He is a subtle beast, and a labor it
was to bring him from his lurking holes. But you must remember not only the
Serpent, nor only the Dove; but the Union of their qualities. The Necessity
whereof, you may see: it is a precept; and therefore a defect, not to have
both; whence that is of S. Jerome; Non multum distat a vitio, vel decipere
posse, vel decipi Christianum; To be able to deceive or be deceived was near a
frailty: and so S. Austin ventured to say, that these two, the Serpents wisdom
and the Dove's Innocence, must be so united, ut unum sine aliero, aut parum aut
nihil omnino proficiat; That the one excellency without the other, was of
little excellency. Besides, we improve not the gift of Nature, if we imply not
the sagacity which Nature often gives us. And therefore, said S. Ambrose,
Because Simplicity without Wisdom seems to most men rather an Infirmity, then
a Virtue, thou art here admonished, ut exequaris munus naturae; to employ
Natures Gift. Wisdom and Simplicity must be united, says Prosper; that by
our simplicity, we may not be able to circumvent others; and by our wisdom,
others may not be able to circumvent us. Let the Wisdom of the Serpent, says
S. Gregory, sharpen the simplicity of the Dove; and the simplicity of the Dove,
temper the Wisdom of the Serpent: we must have Simplicity with our Wisdom,
or else our wisdom is but deceit: and we must have wisdom with our
simplicity; or else our simplicity will be but a dangerous ignorance: since
without that, we shall not be able to judge of of the equity of our own
Actions, as S. Ambrose says. Lastly, by this union we shall perfectly
distinguish ourselves from the wise men of this world: who (as Tertullian says)
count us simple and not wise, because we are wise and simple; quasi statim
deficere cogatur a simplicitate sapientia; as if, says he, wisdom and
simpiicity were inconsistent. Thus by our Union of these, we shall contradict
the Rule of these wise Masters; and in some measure perform the Rule of our
Master and Savior. Difficult indeed it is, as S. Shrysostome implies,
discoursing, upon that question of our Savior, ( Mat. 24.45.) Who is a
faithful and wise servant? He proposes here, says that Father, a rare matter,
to find a man Faithful and Wise. If says he one would seek for a Faithful
Man, doubtless he might find many: if one would seek for a wise man, he might
find many; but if he would seek for a man both Wise and Faithful, such a one
no doubt he could not easily find. Difficult then this Union is; yet possible
it is; Behold Moses says S. Basil, Moses instructed in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, Moses honored with the Discourse with God; this Innocent Moses was
yet so wise, as to take the Counsel of Jethro, to make inferior Rulers over
the people. Thus indeed was his wisdom the More, whiles his care the Less.
S. Chrysostom yet exactly advances the Meditation: We admire not, says he so
much the wisdom of Jethro, that would advise Moses, as the innocent wisdom
of Moses; who though he was so admirable for counsel; though he was the
Prince of the People; though he was the friend of God; yet humbly despised not
to be advised by rude Jethro. But if you would see an absolute example, and
nearer to the sense of this exhortation; which is an innocent wisdom in
scaping the danger of men wicked and subtle; behold our Savior's carryage
among Scribes and Pharisees: behold his Escapes, his Questions, his Answers,
full of Divine wisdom: with which, though his Enemies would not be satisfied,
they could not choose but be amazed. Yet if this degree of wisdom be above
imitation, and seem as well to check, as to promote endeavor: propose to your
selves the wisdom of S. Paul; it is a high, and yet a lower wisdom. See his
wisdom ( Act. 16.) in the circumcision of Timothy; who was the Son of a
converted Jewesse, but his Father was a Grecian. Certain Pharisees, but
converted at Lystra; where the business was insisting upon the necessity of
Circumcision unto Salvation, raised such a trouble in those quarters, in the
beginning of the Church, that Paul being willing to have Timothy with him in
his travailes, upon a worthy report of him in the Church, did Circumcise him;
least the Jews should disdain him as a profane person. Now if we consider the
Action, Circumcision being a Sacrament of the Law, it was a^ the death of our
Savior, abolished, as S. Paul well knew: yet here it was used unto Timothy.
U^'d indeed it was for once, in such danger of the peace of the Church: there
was the wisdom of the Serpent; and afterward (as appears Act. 21.) an other
Legal rite was for a time permitted; and S. Paul himself was purified, with
others to avoid the great danger in giving a scandal to the Jews; yet that
himself might not be a scandal to the Church, he took occasion, writing to the
Galatians (chapter 5.2.) to teach the necessity of Abolishing Circumcision; since
otherwise Christ should profit them nothing. Here was the Innocence of the
Dove. He saw indeed, that the Jews, if Timothy were not circumcised, would
suspect him as an adversary to circumcision, and so they might recede from the
Christian Profession; unto the Jews therefore he became a Jew, that he might
win the Jews. But though he circumcised Timothy in this exigency, he
Circumcised not Titus, whose Parents were both Gentiles; least from him the
Gentiles might take up the Practice of Circumcision. Some Legal rites were
also permitted to the Jews till the Destruction of the Temple; that so by
degrees the Synagogue might be buried with honor; not like the Heathen
worship, which was presently to be destroyed; but as a worship once of God's
Institution for his own People the Jews for a time. This was again the wisdom
of the Serpent, and the innocence of the Dove. See the same S. Paul ( Act. 23.)
pleading for himself before the Council: where finding the multitude divided
in Opinions, he divides them farther in their Affections. The Saducie was an
enemy to the Resurrection; the Pharisie a friends to it: immediately he makes
the Pharisie his friend by his Profession of his belief; and so an Enemy to
his Enemy the Saducie. By this wisdom he escaped half the danger; and by the
tumult of his enemies and the Soldier an enemy to all tumults of the Jews, he
did at that time escape all the danger. Here was the Wisdom of the Serpent,
and the Innocence of the Dove. See the same S. Paul pleading at Caesarea before
Festus ( Act. 25.) where the Jews failing to prove their accusations, and
Festus yet asking him, if he would be tried at Jerusalem; he declined the
trial, in which most probably Number and Malice might overcome him; and thus
at least delaid danger, whiles Appealing to Caesar, for the present he
preserved both Life and Hope. Here was the wisdom of the Serpent, and the
innocence of the Dove. When also the next day King Agrippa and Festus heard
him, he called Agrippa by his title of Majesty: professed his own happiness
to have such a Judge; chiefly one so skillfull in all Customs and Questions
among the Jews. He omitted nothing that might advantage his Cause: worn the
King by praising him: praised him for a good natured man; for a Learned Judge;
for an upright Judge; by an Applause able to please Appetite, and Overcome
Prejudice: and this was the wisdom of the Serpent. But some will ask here for
the Innocence of the Dove: for seems not this a little smother than truth? Let
Josephus a Jew, a Priest, a Leaned Historian instruct us; and he will preserve
us from Suspicion and Error: and he will tell us so much in the praise of this
man. Agrippa, the great grandchild of Herod the great, that S. Paul may rather
seem the Historian; and the Historian a Poet: and thus ye see the Innocence of
the Dove. If you observe likewise S. Paul's answer to Festus, who at the same
time told him, that much Learning had made him mad; you shall find his Answer
to be his defense: I am not mad, says he, O noble Festus, but speak forth
the words of Truth and Soberness; and here was his wisdom. Being also
reviled, he reviled not again; but denied the accusation of madness; and
proved his denial by the sobriety of his denial. Nor was it only Sober, but
also Modest; calling him Noble, that called him Madman: and whiles he gave him
but his due title, you see his Innocence. So once more yet this great Apostle,
writing to the Hebrews, an Epistle, which some have too boldly denied to be
God's Word; which others have too hastily denied to be S. Paul's work; being
unlike the rest of his works in style and title: Yet if we consult with the
great Critique of the Primitive times, S. Ierom; he will tell us the Apostle
writ in Hebrew as to the Hebrews, omitting his name, being looked upon by by
the Jews, as an Adversary to the Mosaicall Rites. But the more ancient and
greatest Antiquary of the first Christian times, Eusebius, will farther inform
us, that S. Paul having written it in Hebrew, S. Luke rendered it in Greek, as
the style in this and S. Luke's writings may persuade. I need not mention an
Hebrew copy of this Epistle, published by Munster, having not authority to
advance it above a translation; the Greek being our Canon. And as for the
omission of his Title, which here might have been expected, Paul an Apostle to
the Hebrews; it is judged not only by Eusebius, but before him, as he
acknowledges, by the learned Clemens the Alexandrian, to have been, not only to
decline the prejudice of the Jews, but also not to seem to intrude into an
office which he seems not to claim; he being indeed the Apostle of the
Gentiles; but even Christ himself being the Apostle to the Hebrews, and
expressly called the Apostle and High Priest of our profession Christ Jesus, (
Hebr. 3.1.) And surely, though the Benefit of his Office concerned all Nations,
his Employment in it was only among the Hebrews. In all which you may see in
this great Politician S. Paul, both the Wisdom of the Serpent, in concealing
his Name; and the Innocence of the Dove, in his Love, by Instruction, unto all
men. What need we then seek dangerours matters, such as a Florentine
Discourser? Who writ he but as a Satyrist, and rather what some too near him,
did; then what others should do; has yet so much of the Serpent, that he has
scarce any of the Dove. A Boccaline, that with the Wisdom of the serpent
would subvert Oecumenicall Ambition, is a better serpent, than a Campanella,
that would promote it. Shall the serpent then have so subtle an Eye; and shall
we mistake every Fancy for a Truth? If a Posa would corrupt Religion; shall
there want a Vargas, to discover him? shall the serpent have so subtle an Ear;
and shall we fondly listen to every new Charmer? shall the serpent have such
subtle teeth; and shall ours be set on edge only to our own overthrow? shall
his Horns, as some kind of serpent has, be so subtle, to get a prey; and
shall our strength want subtilty to save us from being made a prey? shall his
wings (for some kind of serpent does not only creep) be more speedy to do
mischief, than our wisdom, in saving us from it? shall he change his skin
and renew strength; and shall not we renew our Lives, by changing them? shall
his Appetite take all advantage from his Enemy; and shall ours increase our
spiritual Enemies, against our selves? shall he drive away other serpents from
him; and shall we intertaine them in the Bosom? embracing Heresy and Vice to
our own Destruction? shall his Voice be able to master Man, that had
Righteousness by Creation; and shall not we be able to master the serpent,
that have a double Righteousness, of Sanctification by Christ's Grace; and of
Justification by his Merits? Briefly, skall his whole Body be so subtle, as
to defend his Head; and shall not we with all our power, defend the Godhead of
our Savior against the execrable Socinian^, and our holy Faith in Christ our
Head? And shall not the Innocence also of the Dove advantage our Innocence? He
loves the Light; and shall we love the works of Darkness? shall he be ready
to be Oppressed; and shall we be too ready to Oppress? shall he be without
Gall; and shall we be full of Malice? Were they a sacrifice to God; and shall
we be less acceptable? Were they a Resemblance of the Church; nay, of God; and
shall we have neither the likeness of either of them, nor the blessing? O let
us strive then to imitate the Innocence of the Dove, and Exceed it. Would we be
Heirs of the Kingdom of God? we must become as little Children: they cry not
for the want of Wealth, nor for the loss of it: they doat not on Beauty; no,
not on their own: subject they are to sickness, yet not to malice; as if they
were more free from sin, then from Disease: they raise not themselves to
Ambition; it is above the reach of the Mother's Breast. Such things then let us
do by the simplicity of Grace, as they do by simplicity of Nature. Let us
call to mind the first Christians; how the unity of their Faith produced even a
Community of their Goods: a rare victory of Grace upon Nature! By the blessing
of Love they were above the blessing of Propriety; showing the Bounty of the
Gospel to excel the Thrift of Law-Let us call to mind, how they improved
their Enemies into friends; making them by forgiveness, their Helps to Heaven.
Let us call to mind, that their sufferings were their Conquests; and Death the
beginning of Life Eternal. O grant us then wisdom, sweet Jesus, thou that art
the Wisdom of the Father: and grant us Innocence, O blessed Spirit, that
did vouchsafe to appear like a Dove, that we becomeing like the Dove, may
become like Thee: that by descending to us Here, we may Hereafter by the wings
of the true Dove, Innocence and Miracle, Ascend to Thee; the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to whom be ascribed Mercy and Wisdom and Holiness, for evermore.

FINIS.
OF BAPTISM A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

Galat. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.


THAT Likeness which we may see produced by Inferior Causes in their Effects,
is but an Imitation of the supreme Cause, God Himself: who is so naturally
good, that whatsoever he maks must needs bear some Image of that Goodness.
Thus when he made man, he bestowed upon him among many other, two chief
Perfections; a Holiness of Soul, and a kind of Absolutensse of Body; whiles a
body that needed not a reference to Apparel. But when man fell, he fell from
this double perfection, and at once became sinful and Naked. So that we may
say, he was not, as now, unhappily naked, when first he had no Clothes, but
when first he wanted them: and he stood not in need of a Covering for his Body,
till he stood in need of a Covering for his sin. Which when God, naturally
good, beheld, and saw the new dissimilitude between Himself and his Creature;
moov'd by his own goodness he intends a reparation of his Creature. And since
this dissimilitude, to speak in part figuratively, consisted in a Nakedness
of Soul and Body, it pleased him to provide for both, a Covering. And this he
did with such wisdom of Mercy, that he made the Covering of his Body, a
figure of the Covering of his Soul: and to teach our Understanding by our
Sense, sometimes he calls our Righteousness a Robe: which as the Apostle here
tells us, every true Receiver puts on in the Sacrament of Baptism; As many of
you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Which words duly
considered, may instruct us in the Nature of this Sacrament, and the Extent of
it. As man is Gods workmanship, and so should be his Image; so, as God is pure,
should man be pure; and therefore being defiled by sin, he should be now
purified. Thus though with the Leviticall Leper, he may cry unclean,
unclean; yet should he also cry with the great and happy sinner, wash me and
I shall be whiter than Snow. That indeed has a right cleanesse; the purity of
Snow being not only purity, but also Coolness; a figure of the pure
Coolness of the impure heates of Lust. Which purity was shadowed out unto the
Jew, in his frequent washings: whence the greatest pretenders of Sanctity among
the Jews, were the greatest Washers. The Pharisie was a man of a clear Hand
and Cup, and therefore thought himself also of a pure lip; in which
opinion, though he mistook his Outside for his Inside, yet he acknowledged a
washing necessary. Even Pilate, that had his hand in blood, would yet also have
his hand in water; and though that Blood be counted a cleanser, thought
Innocent blood the greatest stain; and that water would at least pretend his
Innocence, if not procure it. But alas had he understood the right Baptism, he
would with S. Peter's resolution, have desired not only the washing of the Hand,
but also of the Head and the whole body. Now under this figure, as the Jew had
been taught, so was the Christian to be taught. To the devoutest Jew, Washing
was but a Figure: to the Devoutest Christian it is not only a shadow of Grace,
but also the companion of it: and therefore it was not Ceremony but Charity
in S. Peter ( Act. 2.) to exhort his Converts to be Baptized. To understand the
Name, and so the better the nature of Baptism, it is from (...), properly to
Dippe, consequently to wash. Hence were the Pharisees, by Justin Martyr, called
(...), baptists, because of their frequent washings; which S. Mark also
mentioned (c. 7.4.) calling their washings of their cups, (...) So the Latin
Interpreter frequently renders it; as in S. Mark, (c. 7.) -- and a foro nisi
baptizentur, non comedunt; as likewise in S. Luke (chapter 11.38.) the Pharisie
began to say, Quare non baptizatus esset ante prandium: the use being then to
wash their hands and vessels, before they did eat; which appears ( Luke 2.)
to have been the Cause in Providing the many water pots at the Marriage of Cana,
according to the manner of the purifying of the Jews. The word was afterward
received into a Sacred use. In which sense also there are diversities of
baptism; a baptism there is of water, but it is of Tears, the baptism of
Repentance; with which that woman, as some think, was baptized, that with her
tears washed our Savior's feet. There is a baptism of Affliction, the
baptism of Martyrdom; the baptism of blood, as the Ancients called it: of
which our Savior speaks, ( Mat. 20.22.) can you be baptized with the baptism,
that I am baptized? There is a baptism of Fire; that is, of the Spirit; a
pouring out of the gifts of the Holy Ghost: which sometimes is given before
the baptism of Water; as appears in the story of Cornelius; where the hearers
of the Word received the Holy Ghost, Act. 10.44. and afterward were baptized.
v. 48. There is a Baptism also of the Flood, as it is termed; a baptism of
water; the Ordinary Sacrament; which may be called also the baptism of Blood;
since the power of it depends upon Christ's blood (1 Ioh. 1.7.) The blood of
Christ washes us from all sin. It may be called also the baptism of Fire;
since Christ's blood is applied to us through Faith, by the Holy Ghost. Thus
the inward baptism is of the Spirit, as the outward is of the Water. Which
last of Water and the Spirit, was before hand pointed out by many Types;
Foreshew'd it was in the Flood, that drowned the World, and preserved Noah. 1
Pet. 3.21. Foreshew'd it was in the passage through the Red Sea, in which
Pharaoh was drowned, and the Israelites Saved: (1 Cor. 10.6.) thus in this
Baptism is sin drow'd, and the soul preserved. Foreshew'd it was in the
Iraelites dwelling under the Cloud (1 Cor. 10.2.) such protection there is to
the true Receiver from the water of Baptism. Foreshew'd it was in the
Leviticall Washings; as the Apostle observes Heb. 9.10. By all which types,
besides the express Institution of our Savior, we may see the Element in
which this Sacrament is to be performed, is Water. Perversely then did those,
which S. Austin speaks of, baptize in Fire; literally taking, and so
mistaking, that, ( Mat. 3.11.) He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire. More subtly also than soundly, do some Schoolmen question, If
the Element of Water, as in case of necessity, may not be had, whether or no it
may not be supplied, by Wine or Vinegar or Sand; so vain are man's
Imaginations without God? when in Divine matters Fancy shall be presciption!
where the Element is denied, the Sacrament is denied; though not always the
blessing of the Sacrament. Presumptuously likewise do the Aethiopians first
baptize with Water, then with Fire. It is an unreasonable practice; yet were it
less fond, if it were senseless too: but they deliver this Sacrament of the
Gospel, as the Law was delivered with fire: when as the practice in this
Sacrament should be continued, as it begun, in water, only in water. What
wisdom is it then to put Salt into the mouth of the Infant; though to figure
out the salt of wisdom, by which he must be cleansed from the putrefaction of
sin? what wisdom to touch with spittle the Ear, though to instruct us,
that they must be open to instruction? what wisdom to use Milk and Honey,
though they shaddow-out his claim to the Substance and Possession of the
truest Canaan, which so excells the first, that excelled with these blessings?
what wisdom to add Oil for the anointing of the Brow, the Breast, the
Shoulders; though to implye the baptized must be thence forth a Champion of
Christ? what wisdom to bring a burning Tapor, to help the Baptized to see,
that he is translated from the Kingdom of Darkness to Light? what wisdom to
use Exsufflation, a puffing into the face of the Child, though used sometime in
ancient time; yet not by the Priest, but the person to be baptized, to show how
he defied Satan and his works, as Tertullian tells us. What wisdom then shall
we say this is? surely this is humane wisdom, and at best but Ceremonial
wisdom. None of these things, it is true, are in themselves evil; and some we
grant were anciently in use; and all significant. Yet looks not such a train
of Ceremonies more like the Pomp, we should renounce, than profess? We must
remember what God injoynes us to remember ( Deuteronomy. 12.32.) What thing soever I
command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it. Wisdom it is and Modesty, not to strive to be wiser then our Savior.
Divine institution needs not Humane Addition; Tradition quickly corrupting into
Superstition. Ezekiah brake the brazen Serpent, though made my Moses, when once
the people began to worship it: when the brazen Serpent began to do more hurt,
than in Moses his time the fiery Serpents did; though this were raised as a
remedy against them. They indeed killed but the body: but this the Soul; nay,
this did now kill the Soul, which at the first healed the Body. There is only
one sign, the memorial of our Saviors Death, which has longest lasted: not
as essential to this Sacrament, much less for Adoration, but for
Commemoration; the sign of an extended body, from which it first received its
form; worn once in the Banner of the Great Constantine, attended with a great
victory over the Enemies of Christ: yet this also according to the late and
diverse Judgments of diverse Churches, has been esteemed, or Disused. But the
Element in this Sacrament is only water: an Element out of which some ancient
Philosophers held all things were made: but surely by Water and the Spirit man
is new made. From which new life in water to the true receiver, Tertullian
called Christians, Pisciculos; Fishes; agreeable also to the Sibyls verses;
wherein the Initiall letters of this title of our Savior, (...), (Jesus
Christ, Gods Son the Savior) make in the Greek (...), a Fish; as S. Austin,
Prosper, and before them, Optatus have it. water also Cleanses, makes
Fruitful, allays the Thrist: thus does God's spirit allay our immoderate
thirst after earthly affairs. And as we thus see the Element, so may we see
the use of it in the manner of the Action. Anciently the Baptized had his whole
body covered in the water: this was Demersion; for the convenience whereof they
were usually baptized in Rivers, or Fountains; as afterward in every Church a
large vessel was provided, called (...), from the Amplitude of it; the word
signifying ( Ioh. 5.2.) a poole; from (...), to swim. In after times the
custom was only to Dippe the person lightly in the water. According to which
Rite, when in S. Matthew 28.19. it is said Teach all nations baptising them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; the word being
there (...); S. Cyprian, in an Epistle to Celsus, renders it by Tingentes,
Dipping them; Tertullian also before him, using the same word. In which
dipping, the delay under the water signified the Mortification of sin: as the
coming out of the water expressed a reviving to newness of life. Besides in
this manner of baptizing, the Infant was sometimes dipped but once; to signify
one God, and one Death of Christ: sometimes thrice, to express the Trinity of
the Persons, into which he was baptized, and the three days that our Savior
was dead. At last in the western Church, about the times of S. Gregory the
Great, a thousand years since, came in the frequent use of Aspersion, or
Sprinkling; upon the consideration, that the virtue of Baptism consisted not
in the plenty of the Water. Which Rite was also, though not frequently, in the
time of the Apostles; as is conjectured from Act. 2.41. where mention is made
of the Baptism of about three thousand in a day: which may seem to have been
thus performed for expedition. Which manner of baptizing was also defended by
S. Ciprian, about four hundred years, before it came into common practice.
Indeed, it aptly agrees with the word in S. Peter (1 Ep. 1.2.) (...), the
Sprinkling of the blood of Christ; which was shadowed out in the Law, ( Hebr.
9.13.) Which figure of Sprinkling with our Savior's blood, may help us the
better to understand the Nature of Baptism; which is here said to be into
Christ. And surely then we may see the Nature of it in the Necessity of it; as
the necessity in the Command ( Act. 2.38.) Be baptized every one of you. This
is indeed the Apostles Washing of Regeneration ( Tit. 3.5.) the true Receiver
being in this Sacrament as truly washed in soul as in body; not that
Regeneration is a washing, but as a washing. Baptism to the right Receiver, is
the powerful instrument of Salvation; the Moral instrument, not the Natural;
since what is merely Natural cannot produce what is Supernatural. It is to
all a sign of outward communion; it is to the best of all a sign of Inward
also: to those it is an entrance into the visible Church; to these into the
Invisible also. No man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven unless he be
borne again of water and the Spirit, ( Ioh. 3.5.) Necessarily of the Spirit,
less necessarily of the Water also: the spirit not depending upon the water;
the water necessarily depending upon the Spirit. The want of Baptisine Excludes
not from Heaven: the contempt excludes: the want of Circumcision in the
wilderness, did not exclude the Infant-Israelite from the Israel of God; but
being the Child of Godly parents, he was reputed the Child of God. Nor yet does
this make void the value of Baptism: It is the Instrument of Salvation, though
not the only, not the absolute instrument: it is the Ordinary Instrument.
Preaching of the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation ( Romans 1.16.)
though the dying Infant of righteous Parents, is admitted to Salvation without
this Instrument of Salvation; God showing the difference of his power, in the
difference of age. Some receive water and Grace; those are right receivers:
some water and not Grace; these are wrong receivers: some receive Grace and not
water; these though not receivers, are as happy, as receivers. To the right
receiver Baptism is not only a sign of cleansing, but a cleansing: but the
wrong receiver is but a Blackmore, whom Baptism does rather wash, than whiten.
It is the saying of S. Austin, Sacramenta in solis electis efficient, quod
figurant. To these, the Elect, it is both a sign and a Seal of Remission of
sins. To these Grace is given sometimes before Baptism, sometimes in it. To
these, Grace is augmented either in Baptism or after it. To these it is the
key that gives possession of the House, their Heavenly Mansion. To these it is
the turfe that gives possession of the Land, the land of Inheritance, the true
Canaan. To these it is the pure water, the figured, the blood of Christ ( Heb.
10.23.) Yea it is rather vertually this blood, than that water; a blood, that
purifies all but those that are guilty of it. Thus all that are inwardly
baptized, are baptized into Christ; though never any were baptized by Him; as
S. John testifies (chapter 4.2.) so that for a table, not a story we may take that
in Nicephorus (lib. 2. c. 3.) when he cites Evodius, Bishop of Antiochia,
affirming, that our Savior baptized S. Peter. The work is ancient enough: but
the corruption is like the publishing of the work, New enough and looks more
like the Art of a Correcter, then the integrity of an Author; since, when our
was reported to the Pharisees, it is also added, that it was by his Disciples;
Ioh. 4.12. but their baptism was into Christ. But Into Christ? what is that?
(...). He that receives a Prophet, says our Savior, ( Mat. 10.41.) in the name
of a Phrophet. Shall it here sound so? He that has been baptized in the Name of
Christ; that is, with Invocation of his name? and of the other persons in the
Trinity? Indeed that is commanded in Baptism ( Mat. 28.19.) But every one that
is so baptized, puts not on Christ. Into Christ? Is it into the Profession of
Christ? but many that profess him, put him not on; they but profess him. Into
Christ? It is into the Doctrine of Christ? but many, too many, that have been
Baptized into Christ's doctrine, have not conformity to such Doctrine. Yet is
it into the Doctrine of Christ? S. Paul finding at Ephesus certain Disciples,
(new converts) asked them, if they had received the Holy Ghost: and they
answering that they had not heard of a Holy Ghost, he asked them then, unto
what they had been baptized: and they replied, unto John's baptism (...), Into
John's baptism; that is, into the Doctrine, which he preached, and sealed with
baptism. Into John's Baptism; not into John, but By him; he being the first
that effectually baptized, as afterward other ministers, into Christ. Yet was
John's baptism into Christ, where it was attended with due form, and then
necessarily with due knowledge and Sanctity? it was into Christ. But may it not
seem to have been always without the Holy Ghost? is it not his own testimony,
Mat. 3.11. I baptize you with water but he that comes after me shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost? Truth it is: yet not that none of them, which were
baptized by him, were baptized also by the Holy Ghost; but such baptising was
not properly by John, but by the power of Christ working with him. The outward
ministry of John could apply the outward element; but it was the inward
ministry of Christ, that applied the Holy, Ghost. Besides, John did new baptize
them with water: but that time should come, when the Comforter should come. And
it specially alludes to the wonder at Pentecost, when our Savior baptized them
Not with water; but only with the Holy Ghost and with fire, the fiery tongues.
But why then did S. Paul. (Act. 19.4, 5.) baptize those disciples, that were
said to have been baptized into John's Baptism? Many are the Answers: S.
Ambrose his may satisfy. Those converts thought they had been rightly
baptized: but so it was not: they had not heard of the Holy Ghost. Besides, it
is said that they were Now baptized in the name of Jesus; implying that they
were not so before: so that in truth and effect, they were not baptized before.
To be baptized then Into Christ, what is it? Is it not a Profession of his
Doctrine, and a promise of an Imitation of his Holiness? It is, but more than
a promise it is; it is an Imitation of his Holiness, in a Conformity of Life
with Christ. It is to be baptized into the Death of Christ; as S. Paul speaks
( Romans 6. 3, 4.) that as our Savior was raised to a new life, so we to a
newness of life. We are by his death made partakers of the merits of his
death. To be baptized then into Christ, is to be Sanctified; to put on Christ,
so by an inward baptism, whiles we are covered with his Garment, we shall also
become a part of his Mystical Body. Which sanctified estate some thinking to be
attained, only by baptism, even outward baptism, would bring in an Absolute
and Indispensable necessity of it unto Salvation. This persuasion occationed
that custom with some even in the primitive times, to baptize men after they
were dead, if they dyed without baptism; as appears by the third Council of
Carthage (Can. 6.) by which it was forbidden. This occasioned also almost a
like custom among the Marcionites: who as Tertullian relates it, in case that
one dyed without baptism, some alive was baptized for him. The like some tell
us of the Jews; that if one of them dyed without expiation according to the
Law, Numb. 19.12. Some of his kindred were purged for him. But know we may, and
to our comfort, that baptism, though so excellent and necessary in respect of
God's command, if it may be had; is not absolutely necessary in respect of
Salvation; since this may be obtained though not ordinarily, without baptism.
Else should we be injurious to God himself; and bind his mercy absolutely to
outward means. We should as some, of more Opinion than Wisdom, presumptuously
and unmercifully esteem all Infants damned, that die unbaptized. We should
pronounce the like also of all such Infants as dyed before Circumcision. Which
is so odious, that the great Master of Theological Determinations, Peter
Lombard, would in part help it by an over free conjecture, thinking that in
case of necessity, they anciently circumcised the Child before the eighth day.
But this defense will not defend it self; the Masters of Jewish rites telling
us, that it might not be performed before that day. Besides, what should we say
then to all those, that for forty years dyed in the wilderness without
Circumcision? or all those Infants in the primitive times that died before
baptism: which as Tertullian tells us, for his time, was usually celebrated
but at Easter and Whitsontide? And though we may grant exceptions in those
first times in case of Necessity; yet many doubtless dyed without baptism.
And yet this custom continued in the Church eight hundred years, even to the
time of Charles the Great; as appears by Laws made at that time about this
Rite. Which has been long continued since in some degree in Rome itself, as
the pascall Ceremonies of that place imply, there being in the Laterane Church
Constantines Font, as they call it, preserved for the yearly baptizing at those
seasons such Jews, or other Unbelievers, as are converted to the Christian
Faith. In such cases then as before mentioned, more charitably it is
determined, as among others eminently by Aquinas, that Infants then have
baptismum flaminis, etsi non fluminis; the baptism of the Spirit, though not
of water. Not the want, but Contempt or Neglect of the Holy ordinance, hurts.
He that is not Circumcised shall be cut off from the people of God. Genesis 17.14.
It is understood of those chiefly, that were of age; and so, in effect, it
was, he that Will not be Circumcised. Thus, he that is not borne of water and
the holy Spirit, shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; that is, if he may
have the water of Baptism, and will not. The Thief upon the Cross was not
baptized, and yet he was Saved. Nay, we have no express testimony, that the
Baptist was baptized: though he says indeed unto our Savior, that he had need
to be baptized of our Savior: and yet we know the Baptist was sanctified in
the womb; though some think that he baptized himself; for so we know that
Abraham Circumcised himself; and the Minister in the Holy Communion
administers bread and wine unto Himself. Yet as some may be sanctified, which
were never baptized, so on the contrary, not all that are baptized, are
sanctified. Grace is not necessarily annexed to outward Baptism; Simon Magus
had baptism Act. 8.13. yet without Grace v. 21. Else we should make Simon, and
Judas the Iscariot Saints; since Grace is an Immortal seed; by which they that
have it shall live for ever; and as that which, was once a member of a Natural
body shall at last rise again a member of the body: so who by Grace is once a
member of the Mystical body, where of Christ is the Head, shall at last arise
a true member of the Mystical body. Grace then is not Physically annexed to
baptism; the element it self being not capable of it, that so it might impart
it. God only with the water at the liberty of his favor gives Grace. S.
Austin is clear in the approbation of this high truth ( Lib. 6. contra
Donatistas. cap. 24.) some says he put on Christ usque ad vitae
sanctificationem, some only usque ad Sacramenti preceptionem: this says he, is
common to the good and evil; that is proper only to the Good. Some then
according to his judgment put on Christ to Sanctification (which only indeed
is worthy of the bhrase, to put on Christ.) Some only Sacramentally, by an
outward Profession: which passage of S. Austin the master of the sentences, not
only alleadges, but approves. And surely S. Paul himself teaches us this
distinction ( Romans 2.29.) saying that there is a Circumcision in the Letter,
and in the Spirit? And with a like Reason may we not say, there is a baptism
in the Letter, and in the Spirit? As certainly then, as we are to Reverence the
Sacraments, as God's Institution, so not to Adore them. No less offense then
it were for us to adore the water in the one Sacrament; than it is for others
to adore the bread in the other Sacrament. But here some may ask, why the
Apostle compares our Baptism into Christ, to the putting on of a garment; in
answer to which demand may appear his wisdom, in drawing his expression from
a custom in those times in baptism. For when the person baptized came out of
the water, he was clothed with a white raiment; to which the Apostle alludes.
And as Col. 3.9. he speaks of putting off the old man, thereby signifying the
Mortification of sin: so by putting on the new man and the white garment, he
intends our reviving unto holiness. Nor is the comparison only true, but fit;
garments serving not only for necessity, but also ornament; as a sanctified
life implies not only a heat of Grace; but also a covering of the
unseemlinesse of sin. And as reason prompts us to keep the Garment: so does
Grace to to keep our Conversation undefiled. The garment that Adam made for
himself was but of fig leaves; but that of skins, which sufficiently covered
his nakedness was provided by God: thus the best covering that we our selves
can provide for our sins, is but the fig leaves of excuse; but that
sufficient covering, which God provides for us, is the precious roabe of
Christian righteousness. Which though it be sometimes like that, wherewith
Herod clothed and derided our Savior, exposing the Christian to the floute of
a Herod; yet is it indeed, like the glorious apparel of the Kings daughter (
Psalm. 45.13.) whose clothing was of wrought Gold; so glorious is the righteous
man in the eyes of God, and of Righteous men. But most like it is to Christ's
own garment, a seamelesse coat; so without division are the truly righteous;
those that have unfeignedly put on Christ. This is the Nature of inward
baptism: see the Extent; As many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. Mercy is Gods property: Charity must be the Christian's;
by this we must judge the Children of Christians, Christians they may be within
the Covenant; and may they not then be within the sign of the Covenant? Before
the Gospel children were partakers of Circumcision; when they understood not
Circumcision: and may they not under the Gospel be partakers of baptism,
though they understand not baptism? Were not all the Israelites baptized in
the Red Sea? (1 Cor. 10.12.) and were not the Infants a part of Israel? Did not
S. Paul baptize whole households? ( Act. 16.15. and 18.8.) and were not the
Infants part of the Household? And has not the practice of the Church been such
from the first times of the Church? and testified to be such, by the Monuments
of the Church? which to aleadge were of more trouble than necessity, especially
to them that esteem not authority; yet may we take notice of one instead of
all; and it is S. Austin's: who writing against the Pelagians ( De Peccatorum
Meritis and Remissione. l. 1. c. 26.) says, That they must not deny the
baptism of Children, they clearly seeing that to be, to oppose the Universal
Church. Yet some would exclude all children from this Sacrament; when as some
of them are Elect, and of such certainly is the Kingdom of God, and shall such
by scruple be excluded from the Sacrament, that signs unto such the Hope of
that Kingdom? But why, say some, should they not then be as well admitted to
the Supper of the Lord? But such may consider, that the Lord's Supper is strong
meat; Spiritual food, that requires an able wisdom in the preparation and
digestion, and so fit for Men; and so accordingly ministered as for Men, in
Bread and Wine; not as for Children, in Milk: though in this it might have
served both for Men and Children; if this had been our Savior's will. But
Baptism is not Food, but to the right receiver a new Birth, and so properly
belongs to Children; or, though to others of riper years, yet but new converts,
and so but babes in. Christ. But some would have none to have thus much hope of
Heaven, till all most half man's age were spent: so that no Man should have a
hope of Everlasting life, if he had not here an indifferent long life. But, say
some, an Infant is but Natural; and so, without faith, unfit for a Sacrament,
which has made some believe, that an Infant can actually believe; instancing in
the Baptist; who at the news of our Savior sprung in the Womb; and so affirm
him, then to have had a knowledge of our Savior; but this Assertion is rather
belief, than knowledge. That exultation in the womb was in the Infant an Act
of Gods power, not of his grace; which is allways with knowledge: which in a
body by nature not fitted, is to suppose grace to work not only above nature,
which it allways does; but also without nature, which it does not, being
allways employed in nature; and so no act of knowledge can be performed
without nature. But how far forth an Infant may be Spiritual, we may in
some degree understand, by understanding how far forth he may be Natural:
for unto all acts of natural knowledge he is not fit. The nature of faith then
in an Infant, supposed to be Sanctified, may be understood by the nature of
reason in him. Now in an Infant there is a Power (or faculty) of reasoning: in
riper age the Act of Reasoning; as lastly by many acts an acquired Habit of
Reasoning: where we may farther acknowledge the Act to be in Man only when
awake; but the habit to be in him, though he sleeps. Since Sanctification then
can not be without Faith, nor Faith without Reason; and that the Act of Reason
is not in an Infant; the Act of Faith is not in him. Yet since he may be
Sanctified, and so have Faith, the Power and Habit of Faith (infused abilities)
he may have: which declares not it self in Spiritual Acts, till Nature, till
Reason, which is subservient to it, declares it self in natural Acts. Since
then an Infant may be thus Spiritual, shall any Man look on him, as on that
which is merely natural; when as the Judgment of his charity should look upon
it with Hope? shall he look upon an object of charity, without charity?
Besides, to exclude Infants from Baptism, what is it but to leave the Children
of Christians, without the Holy sign of Distinction from the Children of
Infidels? Our Savior taught a sweeter intertainment of them, when he took
them into his arms, arms certainly of Mercy, whiles of the God of Mercy: and
was offended with such as were offended at Children. Indeed can they be
innocent that are offended with Innocents? He showed likewise in the Practice
of his first Church, the Solemnity of this Sacrament, in respect of such, as
were of Age; anciently such converts being against the seasons of Baptizing,
carefully instructed; whence they were called Catechumeni; as also Audientes
the Hearers, and frequently by S. Ambrose and S. Austin, Competentes, though
somewhat differently from the usual acception of the word; it signifying here
not an opposition, but a fellowship in their suite. From the event whereof,
those that had success, are by S. Gregory called, Electi; they being chosen
unto Baptism by Scrutinie. And there were made before baptism, six such
scrutinies in the time of Lent; and a seventh on Easter-eve; thus to discern,
if the persons to be Baptized, would, after the renouncing of Satan, seriously
continue in their dedication to God. The Persons to be Baptized did use also to
bring their names, the men standing on the right hand; the women on the Left.
In the time of the Elibertine Council (as appears. Can. 48.) the feet of the
persons to be baptized, were washed; and for Infants that were to be baptized;
it was a custom in the Spanish Churches, to bring them all before the day of
baptism, and wash their Heads; which day, for that cause was called,
Capiti-lavium, or, the Day of the Head-washing; and the usual day for it was
Palme-Sunday; as Isidore tells us. Such like rites does S. Cyrill of Jerusalem
also relate in his preface to his Catechism, all which were used as
expressions of the Solemnity of this Sacrament. Which was performed unto some
over the tombs of the Dead: to which that of the Apostle seems to allude 1
Cor. 15.29. What shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if the dead
arise not at all? it is in the original, (...); over the dead (to omit other
expositions) a custom, used by some as it is thought, to express, that they
should by baptism effectually received be dead to sin; and with the dead over
which they were baptized, enjoy a happy resurrection. We may farther see the
excellency of this Sacrament, in that it never is repeated; There is but one
Baptism says the Apostle ( Ephesians. 4.) because there is but one death of Christ;
but one Resurrection; but one Original sin to be in effect washed away,
whiles not imputed, by the blessing of the Inward Baptism. There is no return
to the Womb, nor to Baptism; says S. Austin: there is but one Birth, and but
one new birth. And as it is of such a nature in it self, so did God by miracle
sometimes honor it; many bodily diseases being cured by baptism, as S. Austin
relates; and thus as the stories of the Church tell us, the great Constantine
was cured of Leprosy. Which wonders mistaken, were the occasion of preparing
Holy water. Some thinking by the consecration of water to obtain the like
success. But such cures were extraordinary, and immediately wrought by God
himself, and but seldom, for the honor of God's own Institution in this
Sacrament. Such cures then being without promise, we cannot build our faith
upon such examples; and therefore not raise our expectations to such effects.
Yet such was the unwarantable devotion of some in those times, that they
received the water which had been consecrated for baptism, in vessels;
sprinkling therewith their houses and grounds: as if though they had not with
Moses the sight of a fiery bush, they would yet enjoy holy ground. A mistaking
also of this Sacrament occcasioned some to be baptized every day; whence they
were called Hemerobaptists (or, the Daily Baptizers) mentioned by Epiphanius;
thus while they thought by a wrong zeal to make themselves clean, they did by
their Heresy become more unclean. By the outward washing sin is not taken
away; by the inward washing sin is not taken away, the Dominion of it is
taken away: sin Remains; sin Reigns not. To this happy effect the Elect
are baptized; those of riper age in ancient times, not commonly changing their
Names, Ambrose and Austin being the Names of those Holy men, both before
baptism tisme and after: but Infants usually taking the names of Saints, to
prompt them, (yet without affectation) to a holy imitation. Nay, in an Arabique
translation of the Nicene Council, one Canon forbids the imposing of a Heathen
Name. And as the Church was thus careful of the Names of Infants, so much more
of their Education, anciently and mercifully providing fit persons for the
Infants sound instruction in Doctrine and Life, in case of the possible Heresy
or Death of the Natural parents; a Charity too unhappily corrupted by
Ignorance or Neglect; being in it self, if duly observed, a special wisdom
in the Church of God. Alike care was used by the most Judicious, to have this
Sacrament celebrated by one of the Clergy: which distinct title from the Layty,
needs not be proved, since it is approved, whiles acknowledged by a late Act
against great offenders, as Adulterers; which expresses their offense to be
felony without benefit of Clergy. Yet we will grant, that this Sacrament was
sometimes anciently administered by the Layty; nay sometimes by women, but
ancient practices must be as duly understood as imitated. Tertullian (de
Baptismo cap. 17.) admits Laymen to baptize in case of necessity, saying; Tunc
enim constantia succurrentis excipitur, cum urget circumstantia periclitantis;
in effect; Then must an extraordinary help be admitted, when an extraordinary
danger makes the exception. We may see then that this permission was but
extraordinary; and grounded but upon a falsely supposed Absolute Necessity of
Baptism; as then the Reason was erroneous, so likewise the permission.
Baptizing by women may seem to have had a double cause; the former in respect
of Infants in a supposed danger; and so with more mistake than charity; whiles
not with a right charity: the other in respect of women of riper age that were
converted; and this was in a modesty; a part of the celebration being ordered
by those that in the first times were called Diaconissae; a principal part of
whose office was, to prepare the women that were to be baptized: partly by
anointing their bodies, if we admit the testimony of the Constitutions
attributed to Clemens; and partly by dressing them with that civilitie, that
only the Brow of the Female was permitted to the eye of the Priest: who was
indeed the usual baptizer. Besides, women were separated, and so baptized, a
part from the men; as S. Ciril of Jerusalem teaches us in his Preface to his
Catechismes. But since that truth must be the Judge of all Custom, we may
remember that it was the judgment of a most learned and Royal judge, that
though the Minister be not of the Essence of the Sacrament, yet he is of the
Essence of the right and lawful Ministry of the Sacrament, taking for his
Ground, the Commission of Christ to his Disciples, Mat. 28.20. Go Preach and
Baptize. It was only their office to whom it was Committed: and surely the
Office was not ordinary, when as the memorial of the performance of it was
Extraordinary; the Day of every one's baptizing being anciently his Festival.
So Naziannan tells us: and therefore devout are the Exhortations both of S.
Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose, to move every Christian to an annual celebration
of that day by Holy meditations of this promise of God; by fervent prayers to
God, and Charity toward men: which moved the late great Cardinal Borromaeus,
a man eminent in his way of Devotion, (in the last Council at Millane) to
enjoin all his Clergy in that province, of which he was Archbishop, to move
the people under their charge to the holy celebration of the day of their
Baptizing. But if a love of God will not move us; let the fear of God move us;
the Original of this Institution presenting unto us our own unworthiness,
baptism being not a new thing before the time of our Savior, though by him
amplifyed and advanced by a new Institution. It was a custom before his
coming, among the Jews, when any of the Gentiles were converted to the Jewish
worship, to baptize them, so to express a purifying of them from Idolatry; as
their great Master Ben-Maimon teaches. But when the holy Baptist came, he
called to the like purifying the Jews themselves; implying them to be as foul
in God's sight, as the very Gentiles; and therefore to have need of a like, yet
a better purifying. Such is the happy receivers baptism into Christ; whereby
though he finds not Miracle, he shall find Wounder: it being to such, an
Illumination, (...), as the Greek Fathers call it. And speaks not the Apostle
so; Heb. 10.32. remember the former days in which after you were Illuminated,
ye endured a great fight of Afflictions! whence S. Cyrill of Jerusalem calls
his Instructions of Baptism, Catechismes of Illumination. And as it is to such
a purifying of the understanding; so is it also a purifying of the Affections,
it is a cleansing, without the mockery of a Pilate, or the Hypocrisy of a
Pharisie. To such it is a Grace, that bestows upon the soul a supernatural
being, which is the beginning of spiritual operations: and in its time truly
powerful. To such it is Seal, which he that sets upon the soul will own: it
is a Mystery which the soul more injoys, than understands. To such the calling
unto Baptism is a high calling; a Spiritual Glory; it is like the face of
Moses, when God had shined on him; a brightness from a brightness. To such it
is also spiritual fruitfullnesse, figured out at the Creation, when the Spirit
of God sat upon the waters, to make them fruitful. (...) is the word; he sat
as the Hen upon the egg, which she does warm with a lively heat. This was
the type of baptism; God's Spirit bestowing a warmth of Grace; a regeneration
of water and the Spirit. And since that such do put on Christ, grant O Lord,
that blessing to thine own Ordinance, that we may never defile our Christian
Roabe; but at last through thy Mercy, through thy bounty we may be clothed
with those white robes of Glory and Immortality, which thou have prepared in
Heaven, for such as shall keep their covenant with Thee here on Earth. To which
our God that has bestowed Baptism upon us, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost in whose name it was bestowed, be ascribed all Holiness, and Thanks, for
evermore.

FINIS.
OF The Bread of Life. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

John 6.34. Lord, evermore give us this Bread.


THE Lord, as he is all-sufficient; so is it He only, that is all-sufficient; yet
has he made each creature, and consequently man with a sufficiency, but joined
with want: the one being an act of his Bounty in the nature of the creature;
the other an act of his wisdom in the preservation of that nature. For such
want in man declares his perpetual dependence upon God: and such dependence
makes him have perpetual recourse to God. For man then to ask of God is
Natural: as it is most natural to ask those things, which most preserve
nature. Since then, that God has given man Life, Yet not without a conditional
necessity of Food; it is as natural to desire Food; as to desire Life. And
since the desire of life is naturally perpetual, Man naturally would have both
perpetual life and perpetual food. Which food though it be always in the
desire of Nature, is never in the power of it: all food of the Body, which.
Nature knows, being as mortal as the Body. Philosophy therefore never
distinguished Men from Beasts by the appetite and nature of Food; it being to
the Philosopher beyond all Paradox, to hold, that a man may become immortal by
Eating; nay that he should be made more immortal by Food, than by Fame. No
marvel then is it here, if the People, as natural men, marvel at our
Savior. They could have said that Adam by Eating dyed: but he only could say
that man by Eating might Live for ever. Yet this is the wonder which he tells
them; whiles he tells them of a Bread more wonderful than the Manna, which
their fathers did eat. That bread was the work of God; This bread was God:
This bread made that bread: He that eat that bread Dyed: he that eats This,
is made as immortal as the Author and the Wonder! At which news they call him
Lord; nor are ashamed to become beggars. They saw it impossible that this bread
should be sold: since none that could provide it, could have need to sell it:
nor, if it could be bought, could any be Equal to the price. In this Marvel;
we may see there marveiles; the Giver, the Lord: the Gift, in the Substance
and the Excellency, This Bread: the Desire and the extent of the Desire, Give
us evermore: of which the patron si the preface; Lord. A strange request it may
seem, to beg a man of himself; to make a patron his own gift. This implies,
that since our nature has been corrupted, our natural love of our selves is an
unreasonable love of our selves; when as for our own benefit we can be content,
that another, we may say, should be lost for us! Our Savior had said he was
the bread of Life; and yet of him they beg this bread, that is, Himself. It
was a bold request and yet a wise one. They perceived a wounder in it: and they
venture therefore to beg of Him that was able, as they believe, to perform a
wonder. He had indeed a little before performed a wonder; a wonder in bread,
feeding five thousand with five loaves. Manna was a wonderful bread: but every
person had an Omer full: when as here was but a loaf unto a thousand. Then the
miracle was prepared to their hands; but now the miracle was performed in their
hands; nay in their mouths: then they were fed after the performance of a
miracle; but now they were fed with it. They had before seen Corn grow; but
not till now beheld Bread grow; This imbolden'd them to ask This bread of the
Lord. And well might they orie, Lord, give us this bread; for whom might they
ask, whatsoever was possible to be given; but of Him, that was able to give
whatsoever was possible. He had by his power the dominion of his Creatures; and
by his will, the dominion of Himself. And well might they call him Lord;
Dominion implying as well Goodness, as Power. So among the Hebrwes, (...) and
(...) are as near in sense as in Derivation; the first fignifying a Lord; the
Last the Base, that sustaines any thing: which is agreeable to the wisdom of
our Ancestors, the Saxons, with whom the name Lord signified a Sustainer, as
by Noble hospitality, but strictly a Loafe-giver, anciently Hlaford; or founder
of bread. And does not the Lord sustain us with the staff of bread? as the
Prophet calls it, Psalm 105.16. making bread our principal sustenance! So did
the old Latins proverbially call the choice food wherewith old Age should be
svstained, Maxillae baculus, the staff of the Jaw. Wifely then might the
people here ascribe Dominion to our Savior; for, thus acknowledging his power,
they might hope to enjoy it, and yiedling themselves servants to such a Lord,
might invite if not engage him, to provide for them; nay, to make such
provision, as would argue the power and Love of such a Lord. And since his
Dominion must endure for ever; so likewise must his service, and therefore his
servants; which service if happily they could attain, attain they should also
immortallity. Since likewise this Love exceeded all other love, possibly it may
seem to beg Him of himself. By Natural Love indeed, Every man is his own
Favorite: but our Saviors love being above nature, they hope he will give them
even Himself: which was the bread, that he had told them off, and the End or
substance of their Desire, Bread; This bread. Which by way of excellency
signifies all food; being the chief of all, as that which strengthens the
Heart of Man. What therefore by one Evangelist is called Bread ( Mark. 6.36.)
is by another called victuals ( Mat. 14.15.) More particularly sometimes Bread
signifies Flesh: so the flesh that was burnt on the Alar to the Lord, is (
Levit. 3.11.) called (...) which though our last Translators render thereby the
food of the Offering made by fire; yet Levit. 21.22. they interpret the same
word by bread. We might almost say that bread not only signifies Flesh, but
also Bones; the Israelites bread in the Wilderness, their Manna being though
not so hard as bone, yet harder than Flesh: and though it melted with the heat
of the Sun; yet was so hard that they ground it in mills, or pounded it, before
they could make it into cakes. And surely the blessed bread which our Savior
here speaks of, which is himself apprehended by Faith, especially in his
blessed Sacrament, is so like their Manna, and is such mystical flesh and
bone; that we may say of it with admiration, as the Israelites of their bread
(...) What is this? The apprehension of which excellency has so transported
some, that they have changed their Reverence into Error; mistaking and
inverting our Savior's words. He said indeed, He was the bread of life: They
say, This bread of life in the Sacrament is so verily Christ, that it is not
bread: thus whiles they fear that they be not Devout; they do not fear to be
Idolatrous. Which seems not to agree with the old preface to this Sacrament;
Sursum Corda; Lift up your hearts; which rather excites to a Spiritual food,
by Faith; than to a corporal food by sense. Bellarmine indeed would hence
conclude a corporal feeding in this Sacrament; when as he might rather have
concluded the Contrary; it being done in Remembrance of our Savior, and so of
our Savior corporally absent. And though some reformed Divines fearing
disadvantage, have thought this passage not meant of the Eucharist, yet partly
Calvin (in respect of Spiritual feeding) and more clearly the judicious Peter
Martyr, think it conveniently understod in this place: indeed to eat
Sacramentally, Mystically, and Spiritually, are terms not opposite, but most
consistent and congruous. And though our Savior says here, he he is the bread
of Life, and speaks this along, time before he instruted his blessed Supper,
yet is it apparently but a prediction of that spiritual blessing, which before
his passion he bestowed upon his Church. Notwithstanding even in ancient time
some curious Ceremonies crept-in; the Receivers in a Reverence of the bread,
being first to wash their hand; as Maximus tells us; S. Cyrill (of Jerusalem)
bids them come not with open palms but with their singers closed together,
their left hand being placed upon the right; so in the hollow of their hand, as
in a throne, to intertaine so glorions a King: which custom continued in the
East a long time. Damascen more wisely bids them lay their hands in form of a
Cross, to remember the manner of our Saviors death. Yet, were only the Men
permitted to receive it in their bare hand; the women receiving it on a clean
hand-karcher, which they called Dominicale, as receiving the bread mystically
Christ's body. And for the Laytie in general, they were not permitted to drink
the wine out of the Chalice; but to suck it up through a reed, or cane; which
form of Instruments they afterward made of silver; as in latter times, as
some tell us, when the Adored Bishop himself (the Roman) has celebrated this
Sacrament, he has received the wine through such an instrument of Gold. But
such niceness, as it was at first corrption; so from superstition it grew into
Sacrilege: not only the bread being taken from the hand of the Layty, and by
the priests hand, as some describe it, put into their mouths; but the wine is
quite taken from their mouths. Nay, in ancient times corruption so grew in the
Church, that they used to consecrate their bread, and not receive it; but kept
it upon the Altar enclosed in a silver Dove; a box made of that matter and
figure. Sometimes also the receivers carried it home, as S. Cyprian mentions,
there vainly and vilely keeping it and worshipping it, as Nazianzene relates:
and some of them every morning eat a part of it next their hearts. Sometimes
they were permitted to travel with it, as S. Ambrose shows: nay, with
profane vanity, they put it into the mouths of the dead; as appears by
prohibition of that Custom, in the third Council of Carthage, Can. 6. But we
may better see the excellency of this bread, in the Sacred figures, which
foreshew'd it. It was prefigur'd in the Bread and Wine, which Melchisedec
brought to Abraham. Melchisedec was king of Salem, which signifies peace; and
he was also the Priest of God. Christ is the Prince of peace, and our high
Priest to God. Melchisedec brought it to Abraham; and so in him typically to
all the seed of Abraham by faith: and he brought it to refresh him: so does
Christ by this bread much more refresh us. It was presigured in the Mosaicall
Law, in the Offering which they called (...) Levit. 2.1. an Offering of fine
flower, on which they poured Oil and Frankincense: and is not in this Offering
Christ mystically the bread, his Grace the Oil, and the Thansgiving the
Incense? It was presigur'd in Eliah's miraculous food, in the strength whereof
he travailed forty days (1 Kings 19.8.) until he came to Horeb the the Mount
of God. It was prefigured more famously in the Pascall Lamb, with the blood
whereof the Israelites doors were spinkled and protected. It was prefigured in
the blood of the Covenant, which Moses sprinkled upon the people ( Exodus 24.8.)
The Chaldie Paraphrast says, it was sprinkled upon the Altar, but for the
people: so was Christ's blood upon the Cross, but for us. Lastly it was
prefigur'd in Manna; which falling upon the ground, was covered with a Dew:
this dew is God's Grace; the Manna this bread; which is as it were wonderfully
covered with grace and mystery: whence among other reasons, some have thought
it to be called hidden Manna ( Rev. 2.17.) And as they were to gather the Manna
in the morning, before it melted by the heat of the Sun: so must we be
careful to provide this spiritual food, whiles we have time and means. For
as there is no Manna to be found on the Sabbath day; so can we have none of
this Bread and Grace after this Life. Manna is by David ( Palm. 98.25) called
Angell's food, not properly but figuratively by way of excellency; as if we
should say, if the Angels could eat, such food would they eat; as likewise it
is said the tongue of Angels for the most excellent tongue. But the tongue of
Angels, the most excellent tongue, is not able to express the excellency of
this bread: which we may truly call, though not the bread of Angels, yet the
bread of Saints; the food of the Righteous in this Life; who are the Saints of
the Church Militant. This is a liberal feeding, yet without hurt; we being fed
here as Tertullian expresses it, in a barbarous and excellent word, Opinitate
Domini Corporis; with the plentifullnesse, with the wealthinesse of the Lord's
Body, which here in a mystical and admirable manner is presented. And may we
not take up the words of the Israelites, not like Them in Distrust, but in
Admiration; Can God furnish a table in the Wilderness? Can he give Bread also?
Can he provide flesh for his people? ( Ps. 76.19, 20.) Lo here he has done it,
with more Mystery and Wonder! In this our food, if we eat it by Faith, in this
Wilderness of the world, and this Pilgrimage of our Life! Yet though this
bread be mystically Christ, it is Naturally Bread: and there is as truly the
substance of bread, as there are truly the qualities of bread; the color and
taste of bread; and as there are the dimensions of bread. The less hardy
Romanists, though they believe a change of the substance, yet they defended
their opinion with Devotion and pretense of miracle: but a finer race of newer
Artists project a possible defense, as well by nature, as by Miracle; whiles
they maintain, that an Accident may be sustained without a subject; making an
aptitude to inhere, a sufficient foundation; by a devise as new, and cunning as
the devisers. Were not this to make miracle to confound nature, rather then
exceed it? to make an Accident a Substance! so violating in their belief, the
distinctions of the Creatures, which the God of Nature has made Inviolable?
This bread then as it is naturally bread, so it is not Christ's natural body.
When our Savior drank this fruit of the Vine, and so eat this bread, with
his disciples, shall we say, he eat his own body and drank his own blood? and
shall we say he delivered twelve Christ's to his Apostles? And that they eat a
Mortal body; but others, since his Resurrection, a body Glorified? And shall
we say they eat him alive, and dank his blood before it was shed on the Cross?
Besides, was not he like to us in all things sin only excepted? and could
then his humane nature, as our nature, be in more than one place at one time?
Our Savior said, when he was to depart, that he would send a Comforter to us:
so that now instead of Christ's presence, we have the presence of the Holy
Ghost by Grace. Christ's presence after he was glorified, was to be tried by
the eye, and by the touch; in our Savior's Own Judgment. Luke 24.29. But
from such trial of his presence in the Sacrament, though since his
glorification, the new Artists will be as far, as they are from the Truth.
But we should remember, that when S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. had plainly expressed the
Consecration of the bread and wine, v. 24. and 25. he does notwithstanding in
the next words ( v. 26.) after the Consecration, as verily call them, the bread
and the cup. Thus is this blessed bread true bread, and mystically the wine is
his blood,: he is indeed the true Vine; mystically then also the wine is his
blood, and a part of this great Sacrament. Our Savior did Institute it in
Bread and Wine; and of the Wine particularly said, Drink ye all of this: which
if it be restrained only to his Disciples, and so only to the Clergy, then may
the bread also by the like reason be restrained only to Them; and so the Layty
shall be deprived of all the Sacrament. Or if it be said, that the Layty have
also the wine vertually in the bread, then should the priest have it only in
the bread. What is then the practice of the Roman party, but with an audacious
Sacrilege to alter the Institution of the Son of God, the wisdom of the
Father? as if he had not foreseen, or had not prevented all inconveniences, in
the celebration of this Sacrament. Let no man then leave out a part, least he
loose the benefit of all: and let that precept be here also remembered, since
here also it is of use; whom God has joined, let no man put a sunder: nor by a
jugle call confusion a Union. The Bread and Wine were consecrated successively;
not Wine In Bread, this is mixture, rather than union. The Sacrament was a
memorial and Representation of our Saviors death: in which his blood was
separated from his body: not then the Wine in the Bread represents it; but the
Bread, and then the Wine in respect of the order, and Consecration: this is the
Union which our Savior appointed. But if you would more comfortably see this
Bread, this excellent bread, behold instead of the Mystery of it, which you
cannot well behold, the ample benefit of it, which you may more easily behold.
And you may see the benefit even in the name of the Paschal Lamb: which was
not called so from the Greek (...), though the Lamb sufferd death: but from
the Hebrew, (...) a passing over; or, to express the swiftnes, a Leaping over;
yet not from the Israelites passing through the Wilderness to the Land of
promise: nor from their passing through the Red Sea: but from the Angels
passing over their Doors in Mercy, their doors sprinkled with blood; when he
destroyed the Egyptians. And so will God's vengeance pass over those, whom he
shall find sprinkled with the mystical blood of our Savior, imparted to us in
this merciful Sacrament. Unto which come all you, that would be delivered from
all your sins past; you that are at the Gates of Death, and this bread of
Life shall give you Life everlasting; and this Wine of life shall make your
hearts cheerful with an eternal joy. Come all you, that would be delivered
from sins to come: this shall not only take away the delight in smaler sins;
but also a consent to greater. Not to come at all to this heavenly food, is
certain death: to come but seldom, or with a small appetite, is a manifest
sickness in the soul. O then come frequently to this Sacrament and in time
you shall say, He has filled the hungry with good things! But come with
hunger; and then you may truly say, you keep a good diet; and as truly say,
you have got that by Grace, which the Physician denies in nature, a perfect
Health. Come all you that would conquer all Affections, and all Temptations,
that would lead you to such affections. Come hither, and you shall have peace
in all your affections; you shall have peace in all your Temptations. You shall
have that peace which the world cannot give; that peace which the world cannot
understand! Come all you that would be one body with Christ; a possibility, but
a miracle: Christ shall not be corrupted into you; that indeed is an
Impossibility: but you by grace shall be perfected into Christ; and that is,
though not properly a miracle, which is an outward act of power; yet the
happiest miracle. which is an Act of Spiritual power. Come all you that would
by Grace be one spirit with Christ: come, and you shall dwell with him, and he
in you; his Grace in you! Eat Christ, and thus become Christ's; ye shall be the
Adopted Sons of God, and Heirs of Eternity. And that you may the rather come
and raise a desire in your selves unto this bread; observe the desire which was
in the people, their Desire of this bread, Give us. Indeed now you have seen
the benefit, you may easily think, the people might well cry out unto our
Savior, Give us this bread; you will acknowledge their desire and excuse it;
nay, rather commend it by imitation. Yet when again you think upon the wounder
of it may you not think that our Savior might have justly answered them, as he
did the mother of Zebedeus children, ye know not what you ask? Surely, they had
but a little knowledge of it. Yet the wounder of the benefit may warrant their
desire; and condemn us, if we have not the like; yea, a greater Desire of this
heavenly food, since a greater knowledge we have of this Heavenly food; which
we should indeed hunt after. When the Prophet David says Ps. 78.25. Man did
eat Angels food; he sent them meat to the full; the word for meat is there
(...) properly venson; and so a meat caught with hunting: and surely with more
earnestness should we pursue after this food, with a holy appetite. No
marvel then, we may say, if they cry out, as if already they had learned the
substance of prayer, Evermore give us of this Bread; which must be broken
before it be given; and therefore the distribution of the bread in the
Sacrament, is called the breaking of bread. Act. 2.42. Yet is was the custom
of the Hebrews to say, they brake bread not only when they brake it with the
hand, but also when they cut it, and so^etimes when they did neither, but only
gave it. Yet some think this phrase arose from the fashion of the Jewish
Loaves, which they say, were usually made in the form of Cakes, broad and
thin, and that so it was their custom to break their bread. Which though it
might be true, is yet uncertain: for some of their loaves, as the Shewbread,
which was set upon the table of the Lord, were seven fingers thick; as the
Hebrew writers teach us. But in what manner soever the Jews brake bread, or in
what manner soever they gave bread, we know how they used the bread of life,
our Savior. Indeed they could not break a bone of him: and as they did not
break him, so neither did they give him: but we may say with the Prophet
Isaiah (c. 53.5.) they bruised him; but he gave himself, he gave himself to be
bread of life for us. And thus you see this bread is a gift, and therefore
justly requires Thanks. For which cause it is called the Eucharist, or the
Thanksgiving; not only to express, our Savior administered it with giving of
thanks, but also to express our duty of thanks, which ought most justly to
wait upon this Sacrament. The bread, says Origin, is called Thansgiving. S.
Paul calls the cup (...), the cup of blessing (1 Cor. 10.16.) he adds, (...),
which we bless, or which with blessing we consecrate; (...) with with the
Jews, is both to Bless and to be Thankful; they being commonly performed
together. And so Justin the Martyr, calls the Eucharist, (...), the food
consecrated, or blessed with thanksgiving. And well may they be thankful, that
are the receivers of it, if they but consider themselves, They that would here
have been receivers, were Jews; and may we not say, that to have given this
bread to Them, had been to cast the Childrens bread unto dogs? yet though
they were bad, they seem to have some desire to be good; and may seem somewhat
good already, whiles they wished good to one another; every one wishing this
bread not only for himself; but all of them asked it for all collectively;
Give us this bread; A desire that might have beseem'd them, though they had
understood the nature of a Communion. This is indeed a Communion not only by
our Union with Christ, but also with one another. We are all members of the
same body; as was aptly presigur'd in Manna, which is said to have been like
Coriander; which the Hebrews call (...) as some think, from (...) to gather and
order an army; the seeds growing in great number, and ordered as aptly as an
army of men. And is not this our Christian Manna, or Coriander, this
wonderful seed collected and ordered always in a Christian army of
Communicants in the Church Militant? It is a Communion also of the rich and
poor; and therefore in some places is usually celebrated with alms; in a good
Imitation of the Primitive Christians, who had their (...), their feast of
Love, at which they did use to feed the poor; and had a table in the Church to
that purpose; which also for the Charity at it, as Pontius Pautinus says, was
called the Lords Table. And in the time of Monica S. Austin's mother, there was
a custom upon festival days, to stay in the Church four and twenty hours
together; and every man having brought thither his meat, they gave after the
feast, what remained, unto the poor. Which custom, when Monica would have
used in the Diocese of Milan, S. Ambrose would not permit it, it being not
with them the custom to do so. Nor does this Communion make us love only the
poor, but also our enemies; the Pascall Lamb was to be eaten with unleavened
bread; and this bread must not be eaten with the leaven of malice, as the
Apostle shows 1 Cor. 5.8. The Heathen, though they reached not to the high
precept of the Gospel, to love their enemies, (charity being a thing unknown
unto the^) yet understood and practiced a moral reconciliation of enemies. For
which purpose they had their feast Charistia, as Valerius Max. tells us: which
principally was for the reconciling of Kinsfolk fallen out. Theirs was
Charistia; but ours an Eucharistia a happy love, or acknowledgement of Love.
Besides, it is a Communion for the great and Mystical Union, or collection of
so many unexpressible graces as are united in it, and imparted by it. If
therefore it were but for our own sakes, we should be persuaded easily, to
frequent it; and well might they here then extend their cry and their desire,
Give us this bread evermore. S. Luke relates Act. 2.42. That in the Apostles
time they did continue steadfast in prayer and Breaking bread, that is, in
receiving the Sacrament. For by this, as Ignatius tells the Ephesians, the
power of Satan grows less, and retires back, being more powerfully resisted by
the united devotion of so many Communicants. And as S. Luke expresses the
constancy of the Church in receiving the Sacrament; so Justin the Martyr (2.
Apol.) expresses the frequency, saying, that all in Towns and Villages met and
received it every Sabbath. S. Basil (ad Caesariam) says, it was the custom to
receive it four times in a Week. S. Jerome ( epist. 28.) testifies of the Roman
and Spanish Churches, that they received it every day: and S. Cyprian ( de
Orat. Dom. Sermon. 6.) witnesses as much for the African Church. And Tertullian
(de Oratione) understands this Sacramental bread, by our Daily bread in the
Lords prayer: so likewise does S. Ambrose ( lib. 5. de Sacram. cap. 4.) And if
this, says he, be Daily bread, why do thou take it but once a year? as some
in the East (or Greek Church) did use to do. Receive that daily, says he,
which may daily profit thee: and so live every day, that every day thou may
be fit to receive it. He that is not fit to receive it every day, will be less
fit to receive it once in a year. He will be most fit for the Sacrament, who
will most frequent it; the Sacrament being also a Preparative to it self. He
that has not a clean conscience, is not fit to receive it once a year says S.
Chrysostom. (in Ep. ad Hebr. hom. 27.) and he that receives it but once a year,
shall never likely have a clean Conscience, and so shall never likely receive
it once a year. Some think a man may sometimes abstain in reverence: yet such
may know, a man may frequent it with reverence. True it is that the Centurion
cried out unto our Savior, Lord I am not worthy, that thou should come my
roof. ( Mat. 8.8.) And yet again we know, that Zachaeus received him
joyfully. ( Luke 19.6.) He that would abstain from the Sacrament, for
Reverence; is, by his reverence fit to receive it. He that ceases to sin,
says S. Hilary, must not cease to Communicate: nay, therefore he must not cease
to Communicate, because he ceases from sin. But he that finds himself not
disposed to receive, must know that he is spiritually sick: and therefore he
must strive to dispose himself by repentance, that he may eat of this food,
and recover his health. He must remember, that to frequent the Sacrament, is
frequently to remember the death of Christ; and such remembrance ought to be as
perpetual, as it is grateful. The Godly man must be like God, as he is
described. Revel. 4.3. where he is said to be like a Iaspar and a Sardine
stone, and to be encompassed with a Rainebow like an Emerald. This mystically
implys the nature of God, the nature particularly of Christ, and the nature of
a Christian. The Iaspar is a green stone, and signifies flourishing perpetuity.
The Sardine is a stone like to blood and flesh; and aptly fignifies the
precious wounds in our Savior's body. And the union of these two, shows, that
those wounds must be still fresh in our memory: they must be as perpetually
remembered, as they are perpetually beneficial. The Rainbow is a sign of
God's covenant of Protection: and the Emerald a glorious and green stone much
of the nature of Iaspar, signifies likewise the perpetuity and Glory of that
protection. So that he who pepetually remembers in this Sacrament the bloody
Passion of our Savior, shall be both gloriously and perpetually encompassed
with divine protection. Yet for the frequency of receiving, we need not descend
to private prescriptions, but use that moderate devotion of religious
Congregations, which constantly communicate once a month; which practice, where
it may be, may be the hope and endeavor of every good Christian: a practice,
that may with a holy discretion, preserve both a Frequency and a Reverence of
this great Mystery; which to receive is not left to our careless liberty, but
is the Commandment of our blessed Savior, Do this in remembrance of me. And
as the Commandment is to all, so also the Duty; and therefore none to be
excluded, but notorious sinners; they must be great sinners, and known to be
great sinners. Judas was admitted to it by our Savior, as the Christian
Fathers generally believed (though S. Hilary indeed differed from that
persuasion:) and their collection from thence is very charitable; they
conceiving it to show unto us, that whiles a sinner is concealed, (as it was in
Judas his case) so long the Church must be so charitable, as to admit him; a
judgment that detests the rigor of private suspicion. Let us not then whiles
we would be over righteous, be unrighteous; and by thinking to exclude sinners,
increase their number and their Guilt. In what age, in some unhappy places, was
there ever, as of late years, such sad neglect of this blessed Sacrament, this
Remedy against sin? And in what age, in the midst of Zeal, was there ever
such various corruptions in religion? Is not the Cause, as well as well as the
Effect, Evident? Let not such, as, in charity I hope detest the Socinian,
become by a mistaking zeal partakers with him, in a contempt of the Sacrament.
To which, that we may come with Reverence, we must come with Faith; whereby we
shall discern the Lord's body; and work the true, the mystical
transubstantiation of ourselves by Grace, into Christ: so shall we be one with
him, and he with us. We must come with an Examined Conscience; sometimes, that
is occasionally, examined by the Minister, as in a Conscience very Ignorant;
and usually rather for Instruction, than Censure; but always examined by it
self. Let every man examine Himself, says the Apostle. The examination by the
Minister is more Charity, than command: and therefore we must beware, that we
Lord it not over the Lord's people. They are his people more than Ours: nor at
all Ours, but because His. Let us then chiefly examine Ourselves; and come
with a Consceince, as resolute to Leave sin, as to acknowledge it. Let us
come with sorrow, answerable to that Joy, which we took formerly in sin; The
Paschall Lamb was to be eaten with bitter herbs, (...) the Septuagint render
it, (...) now (...); as Theodorus Gaza, expounds it, interpreting the ninth
book of Aristotle, De natura Animalium, signifies Wild Lettice, (lactuca
agrestis:) which as Dioscorides tells us (lib. 2. cap. 130.) was a very bitter
herb. And likely it is, God did not leave the choice of the herb to the
liberty of the Jews; to whom in all other things he had so particularly
prescribed; and so S. Jerome every where renders it, lactuca egrestis. And
since this was a figure of the bitterness, or sorrow of the soul for sin,
which every one ought to bring unto the Secrament: it will be necessary to
know, what sort of the wild-lettice they did use. That which is Old and Grown
is not only bitter, but also full of prickles upon the back, or out side of the
leaf; so that it cannot be eaten: but the more young and tender sort was used
in medicine; and though it was bitter, yet it had a milkie moisture in it
(whence it is called Lactuca) and this being boild they eat with the Paschal
Lamb. Thus is there an Old and Grown sorrow for sin; a sorrow that goares
the soul; a sorrow, which we rather call despair: but this is not that, which
comes to the Sacrament: but we must bring the more gentle and tender grief,
which has the milkie moisture, a supple Comfort with the bitterness. We must
have sorrow, but we must have Hope: nay, we must have sorrow, and we must have
Joy. Yet must we come with Fear; remembering, that the surfeit of bread, is of
all surfets held the most dangerous; especially then the surfeit of this bread,
which they shall take, that unworthily take this bread. He that receives
unworthily, instead of bread receives a stone, or a Scorpion: usually it is
undigestable death. The Apostle indeed told the Corinthians (1 Ep. 11.30.) that
for unworthy receiving, many of them are weak and sickly, and some slept; that
is, God did strike some of them with infirmities of body, some with grievous
diseases, and some of them with the last sleep of nature, death it self. We
must come likewise with Humility: and then by the Humility of our Savior, we
shall obtain pardon for our pride. He washed the feet of his Disciples, nay,
of Judas, whom yet he pronounced to be a Devil. Can any man think, he has an
enemy worse than Judas, can any man think he can be so injured, as our Savior?
O, what humility then ought we to show toward the Lord of Glory, who showed
such humility toward a servant, toward his own servant and a traitor? And
that we may be sure we come not unworthily, we must come with a Desire, an
earnest desire, the true sign of a true receiver: we must not like profane
Livers, be glad to escape a Communion; but we must long for it, we must seek for
it. David professes such a search, and such a desire, in a like kind; when he
cries out ( Psalm. 132.6.) We heard of it in Ephratah: we found it in the
fields of the Wood. He speaks (as it appears v. 8, 10.) of the Ark of God;
which was a visible sign of God's gracious presence; and in which, as the
Apostle says ( Heb. 9.4.) was the golden pot of Manna. Now David had heard, he
knew, that the Arc had at the first been placed by Joshua at Shiloh, a City in
Ephratah, the Country of Ephraim, Iud. 18.1. but he found it in the fields of
the Wood, that is, at Kireath-jearim, or the City of the Woods, where it had
continued for the space of twenty years after it had been brought home from the
Philistines (1 Samuel 7.2.) Now you know with what pains and joy he went to
fetch it, and when he had it how he triumphed in the Music and in the Dance.
The like Desire and Labor and Joy we must come with, unto this admirable sign
of God's presence, unto this more admirable Manna. The Infant, says S.
Chrysostom, does with alacrity snatch the teat, fasten the lip upon it, and
suck with a most fixed impression: so must we, says he, like innocent babes,
suck the grace of Christ, and like the babe, cry when we want this spiritual
nourishment. The Jews made great have to be guilty of the blood of our
Savior: and shall not we make more have, to purge our selves by his blood,
from our Guilt? And if we truly purify our selves with his blood, we shall be
as careful of our behavior after our receiving, as we were before. Otherwise
we shall be but like the Jews; who brought our Savior into Jerusalem with
shoutes of joy, crying Hosanna, and afterward cried as fast, Crucify him,
Crucify him. We must not in the Morning drink the Lord's wine, and continue
at wine all the day after; nor must we expel the Joy of our soul, with the
Mirth and Riot of our Body. But we shall be certainly careful after the
receiving of it, if we be truly careful before. And if we be thus truly
careful to receive, we shall truly receive; we shall truly feast with Christ,
both in this Kingdom of his Grace and in the Kingdom of his Glory; wherein
this mstically feast shall be fullfilled, as it is said. Luke 22.16. by being
changed into that heavenly and eternal feast; in which, as our Savior speaks
Luke 22.30. we shall eat and drink at his table in his Kingdom. Then shall
we be like Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; not in a Limbus Patrum, or the Confines
of a Purgatory; but without a mistake of the speech, in an honorable place,
with a loving intertainment at a feast. The speech is drawn from the custom of
the Ancients, to eat lying in Couches, inclining so^ewhat on the left side,
and somewhat resting on the left elbow, the head of the second; lying in the
boso^e of the first; as of the third in the bosom of the second, the right
hand being at liberty; and whiles they eat being somewhat more erect, the table
being placed before the couch. Now for a Lazarus, a poor Jew, to sit at the
table, as we phrase it strictly to lie on the same Couch, and in the bosom
even of Abraham, the famous patriarch of the Jews; or for an Eleazar Abraham's
servant (in Hebrew the same with the Greek name Lazarus) to feast even in the
bosom of his great Lord Abraham, were such a union of the King and the Beggar,
or such a union of the Lord and Servant, as were no less a wonder than a
Feast! yet such shall be the entertainment of our Savior's Ghuests, as it is
said, Mat. 8.11. Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down
with Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; the Original is
more exact, (...), recumbent, they shall lie down, or feast on the same couch
with Abraham. In like manner it is said ( Ioh. 13.23. the Disciple leaned on
Jesus bosom: they were not then risen from the table, as may be observed in
the story of that chapter; and v. 25. he is said, to lie on Jesus breast. And
thus shall we be, not in the bosom of an Abraham, but indeed, of Christ
himsefe: and he will prepare a table for us; and we shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he shall make us drink of the
Rivers of his pleasures Psalm. 36.8. He will feed us with the fat of wheat, as
the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 81.16. and 147.14. according to the Original.
He will feed us with the fat of kidneys of wheat, as as Moses speaks, or
rather sings, Deuteronomy. 32.14. in a phrase almost as strange as the blessing. All
which blessings are Promised to us in this bread; all which are sealed unto us
in this bread; this being by faith the bread of Life: which evermore give unto
us, O thou that art both the bread and the Lord; that we being fed with this
bread, of Life in this life, may be strengthened to eternal Life, and to
eternal thanks; which, for thy bounty and thy Mercy in this bread, be rendered
unto thee O Lord, with the Father and thy Blessed Spirit, for evermore.

FINIS.
OF Anathema Maranatha. A SERMON BY BARTEN HOLYDAY, Doctor of Divinity.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1657.

1 Cor. 16.22. If any man Love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha.


TO show the beginning of Love, were to show the beginning of God; the first
Love that was, being God Himself: so that He, which first Loved, and he who
was first Loved, was the same; the First love then consisted in Identitie. Thus
whiles there was nothing but God, not only God was love, but all Love was God.
But when God made something, and that there was an Intelligent Nature that was
not God; then did there begin a love which consisted in similitude; and shows
it self to be but a derived Love. Which resemblance of the Creator in the
Creature, is in things merely Natural called similitude; as in Creatures
endued with a reasonable Will, it is called Love; which we may term a
voluntary reflection of Goodness in the Reasonable Creature toward the
Creator. So that for the Creature to Love God is as truly natural, as to be a
Creature: and to fall from the Love of God, is to fall from the similitude of
God; and so to fall from the nature of a Creature. Yet man thus fell: when God
to show his love and his Nature to be the same, and to be as unchangeable as
Infinite, renewed man; not by a new making of man, but by a making of himself
man; by an unexpected wonder of Mercy, making Man in part become his own
Savior. There ought then to be in renewed Man a new Similitude, a new Love,
the Love of Jesus, of this Savior. And since the Essence, the Nature of a
Christian, consists in this Love, he that has not in him this Love, has not in
him the nature of a Christian. And having not the nature of a Christian, he
cannot have the blessing of a Christian, and therefore he is as necessarily an
Anathema, or Accursed, as he is voluntarily not a Christian. So that a man is
made an Anathema by his unbelief; as he is to be declared an Anathema for his
unbelief. Which curse our Apostle seeing to be due to some, and foreseeing the
danger, which might be easily due to many, he uses in this place Indignation
and Mercy; making the same speech, which is a condemnation unto some, to be
only a Threatening unto others. Those that were guilty might feel it, and those
that were Innocent might Fear it, and by Fearing it not Feel it. That
therefore we may learn this Fear, we must learn to know this Curse: and that
we may know the justice of the punishment, we must know the justice of the
Duty, for the breach whereof, the punishment is due; all which being expressed
by the Apostle, we may see the Cause of the Duty; why we ought to love the Lord
Jesus Christ: we may see the Punishment for the Violation of the Duty,
expressed in the words, Anathema Maranatha: we may see also the Nature of the
duty; wherein it consists: that so knowing what it is to Love the Lord Jesus
Christ, we may understand our Innocence or Guilt. The Cause of the duty, the
duty of Love to our blessed Savior, is employed in the names of our blessed
Savior; names always used Devoutly by our Apostle; but here Eminently as
including the principal Reasons of the Love; a love due to our Savior for his
Dominion over us, he is the Lord: a Love due to him for his Love toward us; he
is Jesus, our Savior: a love due to him for God's Love toward Him; Christ he
is the Anointed of God. He is a Lord in the Highest sense, being the Ruler of
his People; he is a Lord in the nearest sense, being the Husband of his Church.
Indeed God says unto the People, Hos. 2.16. they shall call me Ishi, (my
Husband) and no more, Baali (my Lord:) not that he was not as well their Lord,
as their Husband, but, as S. Jerome observes, they should not call him their
Lord, by the name Baali, it being the usual name of their Idol-god. Being then
the Lord and Husband of his Church; his Church must have power on her head (1
Cor. 11.10.) (...), dominion; indeed, in a figurative speech, a veil, the
sign of his dominion. Which right was employed by Abimilech rebuking, Sara; he
is, says he, of Abraham, a Covering of the eyes unto thee, that is a veil,
the sign of the Husband's power; and therefore by the Hebrews is the veil
called (...) as some think, from (...) to have dominion; strictly to spread;
(...) being to have dominion. Thus should the Gracious behavior of every true
Christian be as a testimony of subjection to Christ our Lord; who extends to
us his Love, his Providence, his Protection. And most eminently is the title
due to our Savior, since in accurate use of the word Dominus, it seemed to
implie a divine excellency; as is noted of the frantique ambition of Domitian,
the Roman Emperor; who when he would be counted a God, caused himself to be
called Dominus (Lord.) But as the Name is due to our savior; so much more the
power; and as the power, so our acknowledgement of his power. And if Sozomen's
Ecclesiastical story be in no part Legend, we may hear him relate, that when
Joseph and the Blessed Virgin, who fled into Egypt with our Infant Savior,
were ready to enter the gate of Hermopolis (or Thebais) a tree of singular size
and beauty sudainly bended it self to the ground, as in Adoration at the
presence of the true Lord. This tree was before worshipped by the Heathen
Egyptians; the name of which kind of tree was Persis, as the historian says;
adding that this was the constant report of the Christian Inhabitants in his
time; as also, that the fruit, or Leaf or any part of the Bark of it healed the
sick. We may farther take notice, that Plutarch long before said, that this
kind of tree was consecrated unto Isis; that also the fruit of it was like a
Heart, and the Leaf like a Tongue; which may to us Christians by a devout
Emblem Aptly, though not Articulately, express, that the Lord our Savior
should be worshipped and Acknowledged with heart and Tongue. But with a
certainty of Truth and Wounder, declared he was to be the Lord, by miracle and
prophecy; the prophet Micha saying ( chapter 5.2.) that he was to be Ruler in
Israel; the word is (...) implying Dominion and a Proverb; this having then
Dominion in speech. Sometimes also it signifies a Byword; as Ps. 44.14. And
thus also was our Blessed-Saviour a Lord and a Proverb; yea he was for a
sign, that should be spoken against. Luke 2.34. Yet still he was the Lord. Our
Savior before his Incarnation was called God; says Anastasius sometimes Bishop
of Antiochia; but since his Incarnation he is called Lord: He is called Lord,
says he, since he has come in the flesh; wounded our enemies; overcome death by
death; freed us from the power of the Devil; taught the ungodly to acknowledge
God; received of his Father the Gentiles for an Inheritance; possessed the
utmost ends of the earth, reigning from Sea to Sea, and from the rivers to the
bounds of the earth! Since these victorys we may with truth and triumph call
him the Lord, Indeed he proved himself the Lord by Power and Mercy; by
destroying Sin, Death and Hell, which were our enemies; and by saving us, who
were his enemies! and therefore he is not only the Lord, but also Jesus: this
is his new name. Apoc. 3.12. as Jehovah was his old name; a name not known to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as God tells Moses, Exodus 6.3. though it was know
unto them, as appears, Genesis 15.7. and in diverse other places (as Genesis 26. 24,
25.28.13.) the meaning therefore was not, that they knew it not at all, but
that they knew it not in the same respect; that Moses knew it. Jehovah
expresses God's essence, which is truth it self; and therefore his truth in
the fulfilling of his promises: which were truth in Hope, to the Patriarchs,
but truth in possession unto Moses. Thus may we say, that his new name Jesus
was not known unto them of old; not that they were ignorant either of the Name
or the Promise: but whereas They looked Foreward to the Promise, we do look
Back to the Joy and wounder of the performance. That which was Faith in them,
is succeeded by sense in us; and we may say in the words of Simeon, Mine eyes
have seen thy Salvation! Luke 2.30. the Salvation of our Jesus, the true
Joshua. Yet the first Joshua was a type of Jesus in Name and Actions, says S.
Jerome. Joshua succeeded Moses; our Savior succeeded the Law: Joshua defended
the Gibeonites; our Savior the weak in Temptations: Joshua brought the
Israelites from the Wilderness through Jordan, into the Land of Promise; our
Joshua the elect Gentiles from Ignorance and Idolatry, through Baptism, into
the Heavenly Canaan. Lastly, their Joshua expelled the Canaanites into the
utmost parts of the West, even to the Pillars of Hercules, as they are called:
where they set up in their Phoenitian charracters an Inscription expressing
this sense; we are they who fled before the Robber Joshua, the son of Nun; as
Procopius, and before him Epiphanius relate. But our Joshua in victorious Mercy
has not expelled the Gentiles, but Gentilisme: and we are this day the
Inscription and Confession of his bountiful Triumph; and to discover the
Extent of his Mercy he has discovered a new West; from whence, no doubt, many
shall come, that shall feast with Abraham in the Kingdom of Heaven, An other
Jesus also there was of good renown (the Son Josedech) the first High Priest
after the captivity: but our Jesus was much more our high priest, after our
greater Captivity in sin! The name Jesus signifies a Savior; the shadow of
which sense was in others; but in our Jesus, the truth. Yet the obstinate Jews,
formerly malicious against the person of our Savior, are now as malicious
against his Name: in the writing whereof they would leave out the letter (...)
without which it cannot signify a Savior; when as for this cause it was given
him by the Angel Mat. 1.21. So that it is neither (...) as some would have it;
nor as the later Jews would have it; (...) but (...) (as it is in the Hebrew
Gospel of S. Matthew cap. 1.) from (...) as it is written, Isa. 45. 8. which
our English Interpreters render Salvation; but the Latin has Salvatorem; by the
Person instead of the Thing; as also Genes. 49, 18. where the Latin has
Salutare following the Greeks who have it (...); that so, as it was in the
concrete, they may understand our Savior; which word is used also by S. Luke,
(2.30.) in the song of Simeon. Yet we may observe, that the name of our Savior
is sometimes written (...) as in the Hebrew Ep. of S. Paul to the Hebrews, chapter
1. (which was the name of Joshua the son of Nun) ho being added by an
epenthesis, as Munster notes on the first of S. Matthew; and thus our Savior's
right name imports a Savior. But the Jews themselves acknowledged him a
Savior, even on the Cross; when they cried out he that saves others, let him
save himself. It was the fittest time to acknowledge him a Savior, he being
then performing the great work, his great work of our Salvation. The benefit of
which work, the work of Jesus, is most accurately expressed in those words of
the Lord, Exodus 34.7. He keeps mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, and
Transgression, and Sin. God spoke then of Himself, and so, aptly of our
Blessed Savior. Nor are the words empty or confused: but each has his just
distinction and weight, He forgives Iniquity, (...) the sin of man against
his Neighbor; his unjust dealing. He forgives Transgression, (...) Man's
Rebellion against God; his receding from the power of the Lord, that laid a
command upon him; and so aptly expresses the old offenee of our first parents,
their Disobedience, as the Apostle calls it, and our own offenses against the
Lord. He forgives, Sin, (...), as the Sepiuagint renders it: which though it
be of a large signification, yet here by way of difference, may fitly be taken
for that sin of sins, which is too nerely against Our selves; that sin,
whence others flow; that law in our members, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.23.
the sin that dwells in us v. 17. original sin. And thus does the Lord
Jesus deliver his people at the last from all kind of sin, Iniquity against
our Neighbor; Transgression against God; Sin against our selves. And as the
Lord did visibly show himself, passing by before Moses: so did the Lord Jesus,
who was represented in that vision, exhibit himself in the flesh visibly to
the world, as it were a passing by the World. At which wonderful sight, yea at
the remembrance of it, may not we likewise take up with a little change, those
words of almighty God, The Lord, the Lord God; the Lord, the Lord Jesus;
Merciful and Gracious, long suffering and Abundant in Goodness and Truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity and Transgression, and Sin!
Now as this work of our Savior was the Restoring of the world, so was it also
the ordering of it; and accordingly the Greek Fathers frequently call it, (...)
the ordering of a house hold, as Justin and Nazianzene express it: God in his
mercy, having by this provided for the world, as for his family. Which word
they might borrow from the Apostle Ep. 1.10. where he says, God did work,
(...), in the dispensation of the fulness of times; which might have been
rendered in his house-hold-goverment, or in the governing of his family, the
world, in the fulness of times. Nor has he only ordered the world, but also
Honored it; whiles Man in Jesus is united unto God. Here did God gather
together in one, all things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.10. all things, that is, Man, as
Irenaeus and S. Gregory expound it. He did it, that he might gather all things
together; (...), that he might Recapitulate, or bring to a Head all things in
Christ. Indeed, we are but the Members, he is the Head, the Anointed head: he
is God's Christ; or his Anointed. The eminency of Anointing, you may see in
the excellency of the persons anciently anointed among the Jews; the Priest,
the Prophet, and the King. Of which last Lactantius observed, that Anointing
was the sign of Royalty among the Jews, as the purple roabe was among the
Romans. All which respects concurred in the Anointing of our Savior: he being
a Priest, that offered Sacrifice for the sins of the World; he being a
Prophet, that declared the secret Counsel of his Father, concerning the
redemption of mankind; he being a King, in delivering Laws and affording
protection, to his Church. And being thus mystically anointed with the Holy
Ghost, he may more truly than Zerubbabel and Joshua the high Priest after the
Captivity, in the phrase of the prophet Zachary (4.14.) be called the Son of
oil. Nor was it without an emblem, that he ascended into Heaven from the
Mount of Olives, which then was also the mount of the Anointed. Oil is by the
Hebrews called (...) from the purity and shining of it. When therefore it is
said, Psalm. 104.15. that God gives man Oil to make his face shine; the
original imports to make his face shine more than oil; as the English
Interpreters observe. Indeed (...) a word drawn from the same original with
the former, signifies the Light at noon day, or, the most full light: and thus
is our Savior Christ brighter than oil, and the Meridian Light, that
inlightens the world. No marvel then, if the Gentiles whiles they were out of
the Govenant of Grace, so much envied at the glory of Christ, the anointed; so
much, that they endeavored to burn all books, that had the name of Christ in
them, especially the Sacred writings; compelling all that in the Dioclesian
persecution had such books, to deliver them up: whence such faint Christians
as delivered them, were called Traditores; as S. Austin in part implies against
the Donatists; and as appears by the first Council of Arles, Can. 13. and by
Arnobius, with others. But as those Gentiles were not able to blot out the
Sacred and Glorious name of Christ, so neither was Domitian with all the power
of his Malice and Cruelty before that, able to disgrace the name of Christian;
though because it was in honor of our Savior, and so signified a servant of
Christ, (the Anointed) he imposed that scorn and intended torment upon the
blessed Evangelist S. John, by causing him to be cast into a vessel of
scalding oil; Domitian's oil having no more power against the Christian, than
against Christ. And that we may know how to be true Christians, we may partly
learn it from the names, by which at the beginning of their profession they
called themselves; their usual name being Disciples; implying an obedience and
willingness to learn Truth: and so was an Instruction, as well as a Title.
They were called the Beleivers; not that they did disclaim holy works, which
are all good men's Duty; but that comparatively they disesteemed them; nothing
being meritorious but Christ, and by Christ, the Foundation of their Faith.
They were called Breathren; they were called Saints; intimating their Unity,
and Holiness, not in Pretense but Practice. But the most usual name of
Humility and Zeal, was Disciples: which yet was changed at Antiochia, by the
consent of the Apostles, into the name of Christians: upon occasion, as
Athanasius shows, of the divisions of those, that pretended to be Disciples.
Thus did their name declare and Remember them to be the worshippers of the
Lord's Anointed. The Heathens in disgrace, fequently called them the
Sibylists, as Origin tells us; the Christians so frequently alleging against
the Gentiles, the Sibylls verses. So Clemens the Alexandrian mentions S. Paul
alleging a Sibyl: which memorialls, it seems, were in those times known among
the Christians: which is the name by Apostolical institution; and never was
the name of any Sectaries: but among the Christians, the Apostoliques was the
name of a Sect of Heretics: And by as easy reason might the Catholics have
been so too. A Christian then being glorious in his Title, should remember,
that as the Ancient wrestlers among the Heathen, were anointed with oil, to
make them the more Active: so should we, to a better expedition, be anointed
with a spiritual Oil, which is Gods Grace. The Romanists anoint ^he
Christian when he comes into the visible Church by Baptism; and when by death
he is ready to go out of it; at which time they use their extreme Unction:
though the first be without warrant; as the last beyond the date of the
warrant, that only for a time, was once given: and now accordingly of no
effect. But instead of this unprofitable Anointing, we may see the benefits of
our Saviors Anointing, expressed unto us in the Olive Tree and in the Oil.
The Olive Tree is green even in the Winter, and was not thus our Savior
Christ, and is not also thus the Christian, of a constant flourish, even in
Calamities? The Root is Bitter: is not such the Biginning of the true Christian
Life? The Bark is Hard: Is not the life of the Christian fitly prepared
against all violencies? The Wood of it is firm and solid. Is not such the
Doctrine and Life of the Christian? The Flower, is singularly pleasant; the
Fruit, sweet and full of Juice: are not such the works of Fruitful
Christians? The Branch of the Olive, in a C^vell use was a sign of Peace, and
carried sometime by Ambassadors, when they Desired or Offered Peace, and God
himself made it a sign of reconciliation, unto Noah: when he made the dove
return to him with an Olive Branch. If likewise we consider the Natural use
of the Oil, we know that it refreshes man's Body. making him cheirfull: it
nourishes the Lamp, to give us Light: it keeps pure from rust the weapons of
our Safety. And does not Grace thus refresh the Christian soul! does it not
increase and continue the Light of understanding; preserving our spiritual
weapons, Fasting, Prayer, Alms, from the unhappy rust of sloth and Hypocrisy?
If troublesomely a door turns upon his hinges, with an ungrateful noise; does
not the oil give it a speedy willingness? And sometimes when we are averse
from devotion, does not Grace give expedition and cheirfullnesse of
performance? Does it not make us without murmuring to turn unto Christ? Does
it not make us as acceptable as it self unto Christ? Christ says to his Church
( Cant. 4.10.) The Savor of thy Ointments is better than all spices, yet much
were the Ingredients of the holy Anointing Oil Ex. 30.23. and with such
sometimes were women purified ( Esth. 2.12.) and the Dead embalmed (2 Chronicles.
16.14.) such were also a present for a King (2 Chronicles. 9.9.) nay for a Solomon:
there was no such spice as the Queen of Sheba gave King Solomon! And surely no
such acceptable present to Christ our Solomon, as his own Grace in the
Christian! By which the Christian is made a Christ: by Grace not by Essence.
Christ does anoint him as S. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 1.21. nor are we only
anointed by him but also with him: he being figuratively the oil it self, as
the Prophet Isaiah calls him. (c. 10. 27.) our translation has it, the
anointing; but the word is (...) literally, the Oil. Whosoever then will not
love the blessing of this Oil, which is not only the Sign, but also the Cause
of Joy: nor only of Joy, but also of Honor, (only especial persons being
eminently anointed) let him fall under the sorrow and shame of this curse,
which here our Apostle pronounces against him: let him be Anathema Maranatha.
To understand Gods word, necessary it is to understand Words: the
Interpretation of which, we are to expect, not from Revelation but from
Industry, the way of the divine providence in humane affairs. By which we may
know, that from (...), to Separate, comes (...) written with (...), a Gift
separated to God: and thus is the word (...) written and used Luke 21.5. in
which sense some wittily think (...), to be used for (...), above, the gifts
separated to holy use being usually hanged up, (as shields, crowns, and the
like, from an enemy) on walls and pillars, in thankfulness and honor. And
such a gift, for the separation of it, is by Suidas called (...), a
Taking-away; that is, from the use of man, to the use of God: as for the
Elevation, some Offering is called (...) Exodus 30.13. from (...) advancing: as
the Wave-offring is (...) Exodus 29.24. from (...) to Elevate. There is also
(...), written with (...): which being referred to (...), to Curse, signifies
that which is accursed, and so an execrable person: according to which writing
and sense, it is here used. The Gentiles indeed had a custom, when signs from
Heaven, or Judgments terrified them, to endeavor the appeasing of their Gods,
by leading some person out of the City, and killing him, as a Sacrifice for the
rest: and such a One the old Grecians called (...), whence it is, that
Hesychius makes this word of the same sense with (...), one that is separated
from the Communion of men. S. Paul employed such a sense and Custom. 1 Cor.
4.13. when he says, he was the Offscouring of all things, the word is there
(...), alluding to the former Custom of the Gentiles: who when upon occasion
they offered to the Sea-God Neptune, such a wretched person, used in the
casting of him from some Cliffe into the Sea, to cry, (...), Be thou our
Offscouring: as Suidas teaches us. And this may the rather appear to be the
purpose of the Apostle, from the ninth verse of that chapter: where he says, I
think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to
death, meaning that they should be used like accursed persons. The Hebrews
called such things, (...) destruction or devoting, from (...) to destroy
without pity: the word seeming as some observe contrary to (...) to love, or
have compassion; both words consisting of the same letters, but inverted: as if
the inversion of the letters were a figure of the inversion of the sense. Yet
in Devoting there were some degrees; sometimes all things being to be
destroyed, Man, Beast, and Goods: for thus they dealt with Idolatrous Cities.
Deuteronomy. 13. Sometimes they were to kill Man and Beast; but spare the Goods, Gold,
Silver, and Brass; as in Iericho's destruction. Sometimes they were to destroy
only the people, as in Hai's destruction, Josh. 8. But at last among the
Grecians, this word (...) came to an Ecclesiastical acception, signifying a
person Excommunicated from the Church; it being judged a fit word to express
the Separation, and in that the Curse of such persons. The Jews had also their
Excommunication, which was the casting of one out of their Synagogues, their
places throughout their Country, for Prayer, and the Exposition of the Law
upon their Sabbaths. Which punishment was such a shame that in our Savior's
time, it kept some from the Confession of the Faith, though not from the Faith.
In the primitive times there were degrees of such, as were separated from the
Church; of which were some of the Audientes; Hearers of the word preached:
among who^ were some indeed, that were not yet admitted to the farthar
blessings of the Church: those were by punishment, but Hearers; these had been
but Hearers. A second sort were Procumbentes; such as in prostrate manner asked
pardon of the Church, for some public scandal given by them to the Church. A
third were the Orantes, called also as S. Cyprian says, Abstenti; persons
after some offense, admitted only to the Prayers of the Church. A last sort
were such, as were once Communicants, persons admitted to the Lord's Supper;
but for great sins deprived of so great a blessing. To be removed from the
Lord's Table, was a great punishment; yet greater it was to be removed also
from the prayers of the Church: but how great was it then, not to be admitted
to ask pardon? The Libellatici were soonest Restored; the Church looking upon
their frailty, as well as on their Fault; they being such as for fear of
punishment had their names registered in the Magistrates Book (from whence they
are called Libellatici) aknowledging their consent to offer Incense to the
Gentiles Gods; but meeting with a dealing Judge, redeemed themselves from
trouble and the performance, by the persuasion of a Bribe. Their unwillingnesse
to offend, won the Church to a willingness to Restore them: Adulterers
indeed, as too too foul, were left for many years to be washed with their own
tears, in hope to be thoroughly washed in the blood of Christ. But such as
relapsed into Idolatry, were not readmitted till the houer of death, when as
much they were to leave the Church, as to re-enter it: and rather in a new hope
of the Church Triumphant, than a new possession of the Church Militant. This
manner of Excommunication was grievous indeed, and often attended with grievous
consequences; God permitting the Devil in primitive times, upon the
pronouncing of the sentence, to enter into the persons and torment them; as we
read of Stilico's secretary excommunicated by S. Ambrose. We may remember it is
called a delivering unto Satan 1 Cor. 4.5. Hymeneus and Alexander (1 Timothy
1.20.) were thus delivered up by S. Paul. And this Excommunication the Fathers
call a resemblance of damnation; S. Jerome terms it, a judging before the day
of Judgment; and S. Cyprian calls it, the death of the Soul. So grievous it
is, that S. Chrysostom thinks it to grievous too be exercised: since not
against the living, says he, because we must not prevent God's judgment.: nor
against the Dead, because they have their judgment already. Yet in this point
his Mercy was more than his Judgment; we having not only the permission, but
the Command in God's Word, and the practice of the Ancient Church: the greatest
Heretics having been struck with this sentence, by the greatest Councils. And
thus though it were very grievous, it was very necessary: and if more weight
may be given unto it, some think it added in the Word that is added,
Mara-natha; Let him be Anathema Mara-natha. Between which words some copies
have no point: and such it seems Oecolampadius liked; but instead of Maranatha
he thinks it should be Matha, and so expounds it by, Anathema Mortis; which may
be interpreted, One accursed to death. But Guess being too bold an attendant
upon the holy text; we must according to the Original read, (...); or as the
very ancient printed copy of Prevotius, with small difference (...), which as
S. Jerome says, is as much as Dominus noster venit, Our Lord is come. The
compound word is acknowledged to be rather Syriaque, than Hebrew; (...)
signifying then our Lord, (...) is come; or by the liberty of the Hebrew,
(which often uses the time past for time to come) shall come, yet some
understand it of the time past, which had been apt, if the Apostle had here
spoken of the Jews, who denied he was come: but speaking here to the
Corinthians, he seems not to speak to such as denied our Savior, but to such
as loved him not. According to which acception some make the sense to be, Let
such a one be accursed 'till the Lord shall come; Others, Let suh a one be
accursed, when the Lord shall come, or, be separated from the coming of the
Lord, that is, from the benefit of his coming, which is the deliverance of the
Just. This expression then of the Apostle, is an allusion to to the severest
curse among the Jews, in their Excommunication, to be inflicted at the coming
of their Messiah; a form of speech not unknown, as appears, to S. Paul's
converted Corinthians. Briesely then and clearly, we may take the first words
for the pronoucing of the Curse; the last for a confirmation of the curse; the
first being as the writing; the last as the Seal. The sentence is, whosoever
loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Accursed: the Confirmation is, Nay,
the Lord shall come, and at his coming prove this Curse a Truth. Thus speaks
the Apostle by an Aposiopesis, a figure attending upon Indignation, which is
the passion in which the Apostles Zeal here speaks. Let him be Anathema: do
only 1 Paul say so? Yea Maranatha; the Lord, shall come and say so! The Lord
whom he loves not, shall come and say so! Since then there is so great, so
certain a Curse, for all that do not Love the Lord, needful it will be to
know who are such: which we may know by knowing the nature of the Duty, or,
what it is to Love the Lord Jesus Christ. If we should ask most men, whether
they love the Lord our Savior, they would presently venture not to love him,
by their Indignation at the question. Yet notwithstanding such Disdain, one
might peradventure as easily pose them, as anger them. But not to tempt them to
the hazard of the Passion, and at once to save their Patience and Credit, they
may without being catechized, positively know, that the nature of true Love
consists in similitude; so that he which truly loves the Lord, is, to his
endeavor, like the Lord. And since our blessed Savior who is the Son of
God, is like the Father by his Nature, we likewise who are by Adoption the
Sons of the same Heavenly Father, must strive to be like unto him in
Holiness, He is holy, therefore we must be Holy. In this consists our
proportional similitude unto God! And that we may the more fitly resemble him,
we must fit our will unto his will; which being revealed in his commandment,
if we love Him, we must love his Commandment; and then we unfeinedly love it,
when we keep it. No other sign or Truth is there of our Love: if we observe
not what Christ Commands, we as yet love not Christ, that Commands it; And
therefore Clemens ( Epist. 2.) dares to say, he that keeps not the Lord's
Commands, Let him be accursed till the Lord comes. He is the Lord our Lord, we
are his Servants, whose actions being vertually in reference to him; the nature
of our love to him as to our Lord, consists in a conformity of our actions unto
His. How sadly then do they draw this curse upon themselves, that abuse God's
Word by Profaneness, or Heresy? Who abuse his command by obstinacy or
security? who abuse his Servants by oppression or contempt? endeavoring rather
to prove his Servants hypocrites, than to become his servants. Again, he is our
Jesus (our Savior) whose Love toward us being Infinite, we must in a sort
imitate the Infinity of his love, by a perpetual increase of our Love. Which
is surely increased by a remembrance of his Passion; which is performed
according to his own desire in a frequent Communicating at his holy table. Our
Savior has left that, as the sure mark of his friends: they are those that
frequently come and suppe with him. How sadly then do they draw this curse
upon themselves, who by contempt or neglect of that blessed provision, instead
of partaking with his friends in the merit of his Passion, partake with the
Jews in their guilt of his passion. In what condition also are they, who to the
merit of his Blood, dare add the merit either of their works, or will? Lastly
he is Christ, the Lord's Anointed; He is anointed as a King; and is the
Defender of his faithful Subjects: who then can be safe from his Curse and
Justice, that contemnes his Majesty in his command? He is anointed as a
Prophet: and who shall escape a curse, that resists God's will, in resisting
his prophet that declares his will? He is anointed as a Priest: who then shall
escape that curse, from which only our High Priest, the Son of God, can
deliver him? And as it is Duty to Love our Savior, so is it Wisdom: which we
must employ in the manner of our Love. Of which one degree it is to be called
after his Name: but a farther degree it is, a degree of wisdom, to be called
by a fit name. Some indeed, as some Eastern Christians, have from his name of
Lord (...) the title of Marani: some from his name Jesus; as the Jesuits, by
the choice of their Ignatius: but the Apostles chose to be called from his name
Christ, Christians. In the two first whereof we may see the weakness of men:
In the last we may see the wisdom of God, and the Godly. All the names of our
Savior implie excellencies; the first, his Dominion over his Church; the
second, his nature of a Mediator, whereby he saves us: These are prerogatives
as well as Excellencies; and therefore it is Humility and safety, for men
rather to decline, than assume such Appellations. Or if the name Jesuit may be
admitted, for the Pretense or Intent of an Endeavor to save souls; too
extreme an Arrogance it is, for a Sect of men to assume a title as peculiar to
themselves, which is as claimeable by all the Ministers of the Gospel. This
covetuous zeal is not allowable! But the name Christ, implying our Saviors
spiritual anointing; may for our proportion descend to us; may as a Holy oil
descend from the Head to the Skirts of the Garment: and so from Christ, we may
happily and fitly be called Christians. True it is, God has anointed him above
his fellows: yet a truth it is also, that his fellows are anointed: nay, they
were not his fellows if they were not anointed. And as he has anointed them
with Him; so has he anointed them by Him, and for his sake. Wherefore though
the name Christ and also Christian, may signify anointed; yet as the one name
is derived from the other; so is our Anointing derived from His. And since
this anointing includes all blessings, and all these blessings come by our
blessed Savior, let him be accursed that loves not our Lord Jesus Christ. The
word here for Love, is not (...), but (...); which signifies a less degree of
love than the former: and therefore he that bears not so small affection to
our Savior, justly deserves to be an Anathema. Yet the greatest part of such
as profess Christ, are rather content to receive his blessings, his outward
blessings, than his Commands: or if they receive them it is so unwillingly, that
we may fear they rather Endure him, than Love him. But our Apostle curses all
them that do not love him: among whom the Greek Interpreters generally
understand, all that offend God by grievous sins; such as Schismatiques,
Fornicatours, Eaters of meat offered to Idols, unworthy Communicants, Denyers
of the Resurrection, and the like. Need then we have to learn the nature of
love; and learn it we may from the Body, from that part of the body, the
Liver, which is by nature appointed as the Instrument and seat of Love. It is
the seat of Love, as Solomon implies Prove. 7.23. whiles he says, the
adulterer goes on, till a dart strike through his liver. The liver is the
fountain of the veins, and the first instrument of blood; the lappes or
extremities of it compassing and comforting the stomach: thus sacred Love
compasses and strengthens our spiritual appetite, and is as the fountain of
all devout affections! The Liver is made of blood, and it makes blood, so is
our spiritual love begotten by God's love of us; and then increases into
greater and new love of God: imitating in this the figure of the liver: which
is shaped like a crescent or the Moon in her increase! The liver makes blood
out of the purest and most aerie part of the matter it works upon: and thus
does spiritual love arise from the purer parts and contemplation of those
things it considers. The Liver is the chief seat of the nutritive faculty,
and by the veins conveighs blood to all parts of the body, so is love the
chief instrument of spiritual nourishment, dispensing a chierfull heat and
alacrity to all actions of a Christian! The temper of the liver consists in
heat and moisture, qualities which singularly prolong life: so the sacred
heat and living moisture of spiritual love shall maintain us into an
eternity of life! And as in the Liver is made that (...), or separation of the
profitable humors from the bad: so an intimate power and degree of spiritual
love, separates our thoughts from the corruptions and vain humors of the
World! The Hebrews call the Liver (...) Exodus 29.13. for the weightinesse of it
through the abundance of blood, which abundance is the material occasion of
the abundance of spirits; thus likewise holy love, which is the true spiritual
blood, is filled with the abundance of purer spirits, which are the quick
ecstasies and raptures of the soul! In the Judaicall Sacrifices the caul of
the Liver was to be burnt unto the Lord; not only to express, that we ought to
be purged from our natural Lust, but also that we should be purisyed into a
supernatural Love. O then let us love the Lord, who is as unwilling to curse
us, as he is able to do it: who cannot loose his true Dominion, though we
would loose our seeming obedience: who will judge all men with a Judgment,
that shall be Just, and yet Extreme: since all shall receive from him, an
everlasting reward. Let us Love our Jesus, our merciful Savior: who descended
from Heaven, that we might ascend to it: who descended to Us, that we might not
descend to Hell: who descended to the Infamy of the Cross, that we might
ascend to the honor of the Love of Jesus: Let us then bow the Knee to him that
bowed the Head for us and gave up the Ghost. And let us Love the Christ of God,
the Anointed; let us return unto him the holy Savor of his own oil,
wherewith he has anointed us: let us thank him for his Grace, with his own
Grace; let us at least make so cheap a recompense; this being the acceptable
art of Grace; whereby we shall not need to fear this our Apostle's Anathema;
but with Truth and Comfort cry Maranatha, The Lord shall come, he shall come
for our Deliverance. Which grant unto us most merciful Father; that when thy
Son, thy Christ, our Lord Jesus shall appear, we may have confidence and not
be ashamed before him, at his Coming! To whom with thee, O Father, and thy
blessed Spirit be all Praise and Glory now and for ever.

FINIS.

