THE Petty School.

SHOWING A way to teach little Children to read English with delight and
profit, (especially) according to the New Primar.

By C. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's Church
Yard, 1659.

THE Petty School.
CHAP. I. How a child may be helped in the first pronounciation of his Letters.
MY aim being to discover the old Art of teaching School, and how it may be
improved in every part suitable to the years and capacities of such children as
are now commonly taught; I shall first begin my discourse concerning a
petty-Schoole, and here or else where I shall not busy my self or Reader about
what a child of an extraordinary towardliness, and having a teacher at home,
may attain unto, and in how short a space, but only show how a multitude of
various wits may be taught all together with abundance of profit and delight to
every one, which is the proper and main work of our ordinary Schools.

Whereas then, it is usual in Cities and greater Towns to put children to
School about four or five years of age, and in Country villages, because of
further distance, not till about six or seven; I conceive, The sooner a child
is put to School, the better it is, both to prevent ill habits, which are got
by play and idleness, and to enure him betimes to affect learning and well
doing. Not to say, how the great uncertainty of parents lives, should make them
careful of their Childrens early education, which is like to be the best part
of their patrimony, what ever good thing else they may leave them in this World.

I observe that betwixt three and four years of age a child has great
propensity to peep into a book, and then is the most seasonable time (if
conveniences may be had otherwise) for him to begin to learn; and though
perhaps then he cannot speak so very distinctly, yet the often pronounciation
of his letters, will be a means to help his speech, especially if one take
notice in what organ or instrument he is most defective, and exercise him
chiefly in those letters which belong unto it.

Now there are five organs or instruments of speech, in the right hitting of
which, as the breath moves from within, through the mouth, a true
pronunciation of every letter is made, viz. the lips, the teeth, the tongue,
the roof of the mouth, and the throat; According to which if one rank the
twenty four letters of our English Alphabet, he shall find that A, E, I, O, V,
proceed by degrees from the throat, along betwixt the tongue and the roof of
the mouth to the lips contracted, and that Y is somewhat like I, being
pronounced with other letters, but if it be named by it self, it requires some
motion of the lips. B, F, M, P, W, and V consonant, belong to the lips. C, S,
X, Z, to the teeth. D, L, N, T, R, to the tongue. B, H, K, Q, to the roof of
the mouth. But the sweet and natural pronunciation of them is gotten rather by
imitation then precept, and therefore the teacher must be careful to give every
letter its distinct and clear sound, that the child may get it from his voice,
and be sure to make the child open his mouth well as he utters a letter, lest
otherwise he drown or hinder the sound of it. For I have heard some foreiners
to blame us Englishmen for neglecting this mean to a plain and audible
speaking, saying, that the cause, why we generally do not speak so fully as
they, proceeded from an ill habit of mumbling, which children got at their
first learning to read; which it was their care; therefore to prevent or remedy
betimes, and so it should be ours, seeing Pronounciation is that that sets out
a man, and is sufficient of it self to make one an Orator.

Chap. II. How a child may be taught with delight to know all his letters in a
very little time.
THe usual way to begin with a child, when he is first brought to School, is
to teach him to know his letters in the Horn-book, where he is made to run over
all the letters in the Alphabet or Christ-cross-row both forwards and
backwards, until he can tell any one of them, which is pointed at, and that in
the English character.

This course we see has been very effectual in a short time, with some more
ripe witted children, but othres of a slower apprehension (as the most and best
commonly are) have been thus learning a whole year together, (and though they
have been much chid and beaten too for want of heed) could scarce tell six of
their letters at twelve months end, who, if they had been taught in a way more
agreeable to their mean apprehensions (which might have wrought more readily
upon the senses, and affected their minds with what they did) would doubtless
have learned as cheerfully, if not as fast as the quickest.

I shall therefore mention sundry ways that have been taken to make a child
know his letters readily, out of which the discreet Teacher may choose what is
most likely to suit with his Learner.

I have known some that (according to Mr. Brinsl^y's direction) have taught
little ones to pronounce all the letters, and to spell pretty well, before they
knew one letter in a book; and this they did, by making the child to sound the
five vowels a, e, i, o, u, like so many bells upon his fingers ends, and to say
which finger was such or such a vowel, by changes. 2 Then putting single
consonants before the vowels, [leaving the hardest of them till the last] and
teaching him how to utter them both at once, as va, ve, vi, vo, vu, da, de, di,
do, du. 3. and again, by putting the vowels before a consonant to make him say,
as, es, is, os, us, ad, ed, id, od, ud. Thus; they have proceeded from
syllables of two or three, or more letters, till a child has been pretty
nimble in the most. But this is rather to be done in a private house, then a
public School; how ever this manner of exercise now and then amongst little
Scholars will make their lessons more familiar to them.

The greatest trouble at the first entrance of children is to teach them how to
know their letters one from another, when they see them in the book altogether;
for the greatness of their number and variety of shape do puzle young wits to
difference them, and the sense can but be intent upon one single object at
once, so as to take its impression, and commit it to the imagination and
memory. Some have therefore begun but with one single letter, and after they
have showed it to the child in the Alphabet, have made him to find the same
any where else in the book, till he knew that perfectly; and then they have
proceeded to another in like manner, and so gone through the rest.

Some have contrived a piece of ivory with twenty four flats or squares, in
every one of which was engraven a several letter, and by playing with a child
in throwing this upon a table, and showing him the letter only which lay
uppermost, have in few days taught him the whole Alphabet.

Some have got twenty four pieces of ivory cut in the shape of dice, with a
letter engraven upon each of them, and with these they have played at vacant
hours with a child, till he has known them all distinctly. They begin first
with one, then with two, afterward with more letters at once, as the child
got knowledge of them. To teach him likewise to spell, they would place
consonants before or after a vowel, and then join more letters together so as
to make a word, and sometimes divide it into syllables, to be parted or put
together; now this kind of letter sport may be profitably permitted among you
beginers in a School and in stead of ivory, they may have white bits of wood,
or small shreads of paper or past-board, or parchment with a letter writ upon
each to play withal amongst themselves.

Some have made pictures in a little book or upon a scroll of paper wrapped upon
two sticks within a box of iceing-glass, and by each picture have made three
sorts of that letter, with which its name begins; but those being too many
at once for a child to take notice on, have proved not so useful as was
intended. Some likewise have had pictures and letters printed in this manner on
the back side of a pack of cards, to entice children, that naturally love that
sport, to the love of learning their books.

Some have writ a letter in a great character upon a card, or chalked it out
upon a trencher, and by telling a child what it was, and letting him strive to
make the like, have imprinted it quickly in his memory, and so the rest one
after another.

One having a Son of two years and a half old, that could but even go about the
house, and utter some few gibberish words in a broken manner; observing him one
day above the rest to be busied about shells, and sticks, and such like toys,
which himself had laid together in a chair, and to miss any one that was taken
from him, he saw not how, and to seek for it about the house; became very
desireous to make experiment what that child might presently attain to in
point of learning; Thereupon he devised a little wheel, with all the Capital
Roman letters made upon a paper to wrap round about it, and fitted it to turn
in little a round box, which had a hole so made in the side of it, that only
one letter might be seen to peep out at once; This he brought to the child,
and showed him only the letter O, and told him what it was; The child being
overjoyed with his new gamball, catches the box out of his Fathers hand, and
run's with it to his playfellow a year younger then himself, and in his broken
language tell's him there was an O, an O; And when the other asked him where,
he said, in a hole, in a hole, and showed it him; which the lesser child then
took such notice of, as to know it again ever after from all the other
letters. And thus by playing with the box, and enquiring concerning any letter
that appeared strange to him, what it was, the child learnt all the letters of
the Alphabet in eleven days, being in this Character A B* C, and would take
pleasure to show them in any book to any of his acquaintance that came next. By
this instance you may see what a propensity there is in nature betimes to
learning, could but the Teachers apply themselves to their young Scholars
tenuity; and how by proceeding in a clear and facil method, that all may
apprehend, every one may benefit more or less by degrees. According to these
contrivances to forward children, I have published a New Prim^r; in the first
leaf, whereof I have set the Roman Capitalls (because that Character is now
most in use, and those letters the most easy to be learned) and have joined
therewith the pictures or images of some things whose names begins with that
letter, by which a child's memory may be helped to remember how to call his
letters; as A, for an Ape, B. for a Bear, etc. This Hieroglyphicall devise does
so affect Children (who are generally forward to communicate what they know)
that I have observed them to teach others, that could not so readily learn, to
know all the letters in a few hours space, by asking them, what stands A. for?
and so concerning other letters backwards and forwards, or as they best liked.

Thus when a child has got the names of his letters, and their several shapes
withal in a playing manner, he may be easily taught to distinguish them in the
following leaf, which contains first the greater, and then the smaller Roman
Characters, to be learned by five at once or more, as the child is able to
remember them; other Characters I would have forborne, till one be well
acquainted with these, because so much variety at the first does but amaze
young wits, and our English characters, (for the most part) are very obscure,
and more hard to be imprinted in the memory. And thus much for the learning to
know letters; we shall next (and according to Order in Teaching) proceed to an
easy way of distinct spelling.

Chap III. How to teach a child to spell distinctly.
THe common way of teaching a child to spell, is, after he know's the letters
in his Alphabet, to initiate him in those few syllables, which consist of one
vowell before a consonant, as, ab, eb, ib, ob ub, etc. or of one vowel after a
consonant, as, ba, be, by, bo, bu, etc. in the Horn-book, and thence to proceed
with him by little and little to the bottom of the book, hereing him twice or
thrice over till he can say his lesson, and then putting him to a new one.

In which course I have known some more apt children to have profited pretty
well, but scarce one often, when they have gone through the book, to be able to
spell a word that is not in it; And some have been certain years daily
exercised in saying lessons therein, who after much endeavor spent, have been
accounted mere block-heads, and rejected altogether as incapable to learn any
thing; whereas some Teachers that have assayed a more familiar way, have
professed, that they have not met with any such thing as a Dunse amid a great
multitude of little Scholars.

Indeed it is Tullies observation of old, and Erasmus his assertion of latter
years, that it is as natural for a child to learn, as it is for a beast to go,
a bird to fly, or a fish to swim, and I verily believe it, for the nature of
man is restlessely desirous to know things, and were discouragements taken out
of the way, and meet helps afforded young learners, they would doubtless go on
with a great deal more cherefulness, and make more proficiency at their books
then usually they do; And could the Master have the discretion to make their
lessions familiar to them, children would as much delight in being busied about
them, as in any other sport, if too long continuance at them might not make
them tedious.

Amongst those that have gone a readier way to reading, I shall only mention
Mr. Roe, and Mr. Robinson, the latter of whom I have known to have taught
little children not much above four years old to read distinctly in the Bible,
in six weeks time, or under; their books are to be had in print, but every one
has not the art to use them. And Mr. Cootes English-School-Master seems
rather to be fitted for one that is a Master indeed, then for a Scholar.

Besides the way then which is usual, you may (if you think good) make use of
that which I have set down in the new Primar to help little ones to spell
readily, and it is this.

1. Let a child be well acquainted with his vowells, and made to pronounce
them fully by themselves, because they are able to make a perfect sound alone.

2. Teach him to give the true valor or force of the consonants, and to take
notice how imperfectly they sound, except a vowel be joined with them. Both
these are set apart by themselves. (p. 2.)

3. Proceed to syllables made of one consonant set before a vowel (Sect, 5.)
and let him join the true force of the consonant with the perfect sound of the
vowel, as to say, ba, be, by, bo, bu, etc. Yet it were good to leave ca, ce,
ci, co, cu, and ga, ge, gi, go, gu, to the last, because the valor of the
consonant in the second and third sylables does differ from that in the rest.

4. Then exercise him in syllables made of one vowel set before one consonant,
(Sect. 6.) as to say, ab, eb, ib, ob, ub, etc. till he can spell any syllable
of two letters, backwards or forwards, as, ba, be; by, bo, bu; ab, eb, ib, ob,
ub; ba, ab; be, eb; by, ib; bo, ob; bu, ub; and so in all the rest comparing
one with another.

5. And if to any one of these syllables you add a letter, and teach him how
to join it in sound with the rest, you will make him more ready in spelling;
as, if before a b you put b, and teach him to say bab; if after ba, you put d,
and let him pronounce it bad, he will quickly be able to join a letter with
any of the rest, as, nip, pin, but, tub, etc.

To enure your young-Scholar to any, even the hardest syllable, in an easy way.

1. Practice him in the joining of consonants that begin syllables, (Sect. 7.)
so as that he may give their joint forces at once; thus,

Having showed him to sound bl or br together, make him to pronounce them, and
a vowel with them, bla, bra, ble, bre, and so in any of the rest.

2. Then practice him likewise in consonants that end syllables, (Sect. 8.)
make him first to give the force of the joined consonants, and then to put the
vowels before them; as, ble with the vowels before them sound able, eble, ible,
oble, uble, to all which you may prefix other consonants and change them into
words of one syllable, as, fable, peble, bible, noble, bubble: (with a b
inserted or the like. Where observe that e in the end of many words, being
silent, does qualify the sound of the foregoing vowel, so as to make words
different from those that have not e; as, you may see made, differs quite
from mad, beat from bet, pipe from pip, soap from sop, and cube from cub.
Whereby I think them in an error, that leave out e in the end of words, and
them that in pronouncing it make two syllables of one, in stable, bible,
people, etc. which judicious Mr. Mulcaster will not allow.

In this exercise of spelling you may do well sometimes to make all the young
beginners stand together, and pose them one by one in all sorts of syllables,
till they be perfect in any; and, to make them delight herein,

1. Let them spell many syllables together which differ only in one letter;
as, and, band, hand, land, sand.

2. Teach them to frame any word of one syllable, by joining any of the
consonants which go before vowels, with those that use to follow vowels, and
putting in vowels betwixt them; as, black, block; clack, clock.

And this they may do afterward amongst themselves, having several loose
letters made and given them, to compose or divide in a sporting manner, which I
may rightly term the Letter-sport.

When a child is become expert in joining Consonants with the vowels, then
take him to the Diphthongs (Sect. 9.) and there,

1. Teach him the natural force of a Diphthong (which consists of two vowels
joined together) and make him to sound it distinctly by it self; as, ai, ei,
etc.

2. Let him see how it is joined with other letters, and learn to give its
pronountiation together with them, minding him how the same Diphthong differs
from its self sometimes in its sound, and which of the two vowels in it has
the greatest power in pronouncation, as, in people e seems to drown the o.

And besides those words in the Book, you may add others of your own, till by
many examples the child do well apprehend your meaning, and so, as that he can
boldly adventure to imitate you, and practice of himself.

Thus after a child is thoroughly exercised in the true sounding of the vowels
and consonants together, let him proceed to the spelling of words, first of one
syllable (Sect. 10.) then of two (Sect. 11.) then of three (Sect. 12.) then of
four (Sect. 13.) in all which let him be taught how to utter every syllable by
it self truly and fully, and be sure to speak out the last. But in words of
more syllables, let him learn to join and part them according to these
profitable rules.

1. An English syllable may sometimes consist of eight letters, but never of
more, as, strength.

2 In words that have many syllables, the consonant between two vowels
belongs to the latter of them; as, Hu-mi-li-tie.

3. Consonants which are joined in the beginning of words, are not to be parted
in the middle of them; as, My-ste-ry.

4. Consonants which are not joined in the beginning of words, are to be parted
in the middle of them; as, for-get-ful-ness.

5. If a consonant be doubled in the middle of a word, the first belong's to
the syllable foregoing, and the latter to the following; as, pos-ses-si-on.

6. In compound words, every part which belongs to the single words, must be
set by it self; as, In-a-bi-li-ty.

And these rules have I here set down rather to inform the less skilful
teacher, how he is to guide his learner, then to puzle a child about them, who
is not yet so well able to comprehend them.

I have also divided those words in the Book, to let Children see how they
ought to divide other polysyllable words, in which they must always be very
careful (as I said) to sound out the last syllable very fully.

To enable a child the better to pronounce any word he meets withal in
reading, I have set down some more hard for pronuntiation; (Sect. 14*) in often
reading over which he may be exercised to help his utterance; and the Master
may add more at his own discretion, till he see that his willing Scholar does
not stick in spelling any, be it never so hard.

And that the child may not be amused with any thing in his book, when he
comes to read, I would have him made acquainted with the pauses, (Sect. 15.)
with the figures, (Sect. 16.) numerall letters, (Sect. 17.) Quotations (Sect.
18.) and Abbreviations Sect. 19) which being but a work of few hours space,
may easily be performed after he can readily spell, which when he can do, he
may profitably be put to reading, but not before; for I observed it a great
defect in some of Mr. R. Scholars, (whose way was to teach to read presently
without any spelling at all) that when they were at a loss about a word, they
made an imperfect confused sound, in giving the force of the consonants, which
if they once missed they knew not which way to help themselves, to find what
the word was, whereas if after a child know his letters, he be taught to
gather them into just syllables, and by the joining of syllables together to
frame a word, (which as it is the most ancient, so certainly it is the most
natural method of teaching) he will soon be able, if he stick at any word in
reading, by the naming of its letters, and pronouncing of its syllables to say
what it is, and then he may boldly venture to read without spelling at all,
touching the gaining of a habit whereof, I shall proceed to say somewhat in the
next chapter.

Chap. IIII. How a child may be taught to read any English Book perfectly.
THe ordinary way to teach children to read is, after they have got some
knowledge of their letters, and a smattering of some syllables and words in the
horn-book, to turn them into the ABC. or Primar, and therein to make them name
the letters, and spell the words, till by often use they can pronounce (at
least) the shortest words at the first sight.

This method take's with those of prompter wits, but many of more slow
capacities, not finding any thing to affect them, and so make them heed what
they learn, go on remissely from lesson to lesson, and are not much more able
to read, when they have ended their book, then when they begun it. Besides, the
ABC. being now (I may say) generally thrown aside, and the ordinary Primar not
printed, and the very fundamentalls of christian Religion (which were wont to
be contained in those books, and were commonly taught children at home by heart
before they went to School) with sundry people (almost in all places)
slighted, the matter which is taught in most books now in use, is not so
familiar to them, and therefore not so easy for Children to learn.

But to hold still to the sure foundation, I have caused the Lords Prayer
(Sect. 20.) the Creed (Sect. 21.) and the ten Commandments (Sect. 23.) to be
printed in the Roman character, that a child having learned already to know
his letters and how to spell, may also be initiated to read by them, which he
will do the more cheerfully, if he be also instructed at home to say them by
heart.

As he read's these, I would have a child name what words he can at the first
sight, and what he cannot, to spell them, and to take notice what pauses and
numbers are in his lesson. And to go them often over, till he can tell any
tittle in them, either in or without the book.

When he is thus well entered in the Roman character, I would have him made
acquainted with the rest of the characters now in use (Sect. 23.) which will be
easily done, by comparing one with another, and reading over those sentences,
Psalms, Thankesgivings, and Prayers (which are printed in greater and less
characters of sundry sorts) till he have them pretty well by heart.

Thus having all things which concern reading English made familar to him, he
may attain to a perfect habit of it. 1. By reading the single Psalter. 2. The
Psalms in meeter. 3. The School of good manners, or such like easy books,
which may both profit and delight him. All which I would wish he may read over
at lest thrice, to make the matter, as well as the words, leave an impression
upon his mind. If any where he stick at any word (as seeming too hard) let him
mark it with a pin, or the dint of his nail, and by looking upon it again,
he will remember it.

When he can read any whit readily, let him begin the Bible, and read over the
book of Genesis, (and other remarkable Histories in other places of Scripture,
which are most likely to delight him) by a chapter at a time; But acquaint him
a little with the matter beforehand, for that will entice him to read it, and
make him more observant of what he read's. After he has read, ask him such
general Questions out of the Story, as are most easy for him to answer, and
he will the better remember it. I have known some, that by hiring a child to
read two or three chapters a day, and to get so many verses of it by heart,
have made them admirable proficients, and that betimes, in the Scriptures;
which was Timothies excellency, and his Grandmothers great commendation. Let
him now take liberty to exercise himself in any English book (so the matter of
it be but honest) till he can perfectly read in any place of a book that is
offered him; and when he can do this, I adjudge him fit to enter into a Grammar
School, but not before.

For thus learning to read English perfectly, I allow two or three years time,
so that at seven or eight years of age, a child may begin Latin.

CHAP. V. Wherein children, for whom the Latin tongue is thought to be
unnecessary, are to be employed after they can read English well.
IT is a fond conceit of many, that have either not attained, or by their own
negligence have utterly lost the use of the Latin Tongue, to think it
altogether unnecessary for such children to learn it, as are intended for
Trades, or to be kept as drudges at home, or employed about husbandry. For
first there are few children, but (in their playing-years, and before they can
be capable of any serious employment in the meanest calling that is) may be so
far grounded in the Latin, as to find that little smattering they have of it,
to be of singular use to them, both for the understanding of the English
Authors (which abound now a days with borrowed words) and the holding
discourse with a sort of men that delight to flant it in Latin.

Secondly, Besides I have heard it spoken to the great commendation of some
Countries, where care is had for the well education of children, that every
Peasant (almost) is able to discourse with a stranger in the Latin tongue; and
why may not we here in England obtain the like praise, if we did but as they,
continue our children at the Latin School, till they be well acquainted with
that language, and thereby better fitted for any calling.

Thirdly, And I am sorry to add, that the non-improvement of childrens time
after they can read English any whit well, throws open a gap to all loose
kind of behavior; for being then (as it is too commonly to be seen,
especially with the poorer sort) taken from the School, and permitted to run
wildeing up and down without any control, they adventure to commit all manner
of lewdness, and so become a shame and dishonor to their Friends and Country.

If these or the like reasons therefore might prevail to persuade them that
have a prejudice against Latin, I would advise that all children might be put
to the Grammar-Schoole, so soon as they can read English well; and suffered to
continue at it, till some honest calling invite them thence; but if not, I
would wish them rather to forbear it, then to become there an hinderance to
others, whose work it is to learn that profitable Language. And that they may
not squander away their time in idleness, it were good if they were put to a
Writing-Schoole, where they might be, First helped to keep their English, by
reading of a chapter (at least) once a day; and second. taught to write a fair
hand; and thirdly afterward exercised in Arithmatique, and such preparative
Arts, as may make them completely fit to undergo any ordinary calling. And
being thus trained up in a way of discipline, they will afterward prove more
easily pliable to their Masters commands.

Now, forasmuch as few Grammar-Schooles of note will admit children into them,
till they have learned their Accidents; the teaching of that book, also
becomes for the most part a work for a Petty-Schoole, where many that
undertake to teach it, being altogether ignorant of the Latin Tongue, do
sorrily perform that task, and spend a great deal of time about it to little
or no purpose. I would have that book, therefore by such let alone, and left to
the Grammar School, as most fitting to be taught there only, because it is
intended as an introduction of Grammar, to guide children in a way of reading,
writing, and speaking Latin, and the Teachers of the Grammar-Art are most
deeply concerned to make use of it for that end. And in stead of the Accidents,
which they do neither understand nor profit by, they may be benefitted in
reading Orthodoxal Catechismes and other Books, that may instruct them in the
Duties of a Christian, such as are The Practice of Piety, The Practice of
Quietness, The whole duty of Man; and afterward in other delightful books of
English History; as, The History of Queen Elizabeth; or Poetry, as Herberts
Poems, Quarl's Emblems; and by this means they will gain such a habit and
delight in reading, as to make it their chief recreation, when liberty is
afforded them. And their acquaintance with good books will (by Gods blessing)
be a means so to sweeten their (otherwise sour) natures, that they may live
comfortably toward themselves, and amiably converse with other persons.

Yet if the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole have a pretty understanding of the
Latin Tongue, he may the better adventure to teach the Accidents, and proceed
in so doing with far more ease and profit to himself and learner, if he observe
a sure method of grounding his children in the Rudiments of Grammar, and
preparing them to speak and write familiar Latin, which I shall hereafter
discover, having first set down somewhat how to remedy that defect in reading
English, with which the Grammar-Schooles are very much troubled, especially,
where there is not a good Petty-Schoole to discharge that work aforehand. And
before I proceed further, I will express my mind in the two next chapters
touching the erecting of a Petty-Schoole, and how it may probably flourish by
good Order and Discipline.

CHAP. VI. Of the founding of a Petty-Schoole.
THe Petty-Schoole is the place where indeed the first Principles of all
Religion and learning ought to be taught, and therefore rather deserves that
more encouragement should be given to the Teachers of it, then that it should
be left as a work for poor women, or others, whose necessities compel them to
undertake it, as a mere shelter from beggary.

Out of this consideration it is (perhaps) that some nobler spirits, whom God
has enriched with an overplus of outward means, have in some places whereunto
they have been by birth (or otherwise) related, erected Petty-Schoole-houses,
and endowed them with yearly salaries; but those are so inconsiderate toward
the maintenance of a Master and his family, or so over-cloyed with a number of
Free-Scholars, to be taught for nothing, that few men of parts will daigne to
accept of them, or continue at them for any while; and for this cause I have
observed such weak foundations to fall to nothing.

Yet if any one be desireous to contribute toward such an eminent work of
charity, my advice is, that he erect a School and dwelling house together,
about the middle of a Market Town, or some populous Country-Village, and
acomodate it with a safe yard adjoining to it, if not with an Orchard or
Garden, and that he endow it with a salery of (at least) twenty pounds per
annum, in consideration whereof all such poor boys as can conveniently
frequent it, may be taught gratis, but the more able sort of neighbors may pay
for childrens teaching, as if the School was not free; for they will find it
no small advantage to have such a School amongst them.

Such a yearly stipend and convenient dwelling, with a liberty to take young
children to board, and to make what advantage he can best by other Scholars,
will invite a man of good parts to undertake the charge, and excite him to the
diligent and constant performance of his duty; especially, if he be chosen into
the place by three or four honest and discreet Trustees, that may have power
also to remove him thence, if by his uncivil behavior, or gross neglect he
render himself incapable to perform so necessary a service to the Church and
Commonwealth.

As for the Qualifications of one that is to be the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole,
I would have him to be a Person of a pious, sober, comely and discreet
behavior, and tenderly affectionate toward children, having some knowledge
of the Latin Tongue, and ability to write a fair hand, and good skill in
Arithmetic, and then let him move within the compass of his own orb, so as to
teach all his Scholars (as they become capable) to read English very well, and
afterward to write and cast accounts. And let him not meddle at all with
teaching the Accidents, except only to some more pregnant wits, which are
intended to be set forwards to learn Latin, and for such be sure that he
ground them well, or else dismiss them as soon as they can read distinctly,
and write legibly, to the Grammar School.

I should here have closed my discourse; and shut up this Petty-Schoole, were
it not that I received a model for the maintaining of Students from a worthy
friends hands (and one that is most zealously and charitably addicted to
advance Learning, and to help it in its very beginnings to come forwards to its
full Rise) by which I am encouraged to address my remaining words to the
Godly-minded Trustees and Subscribers for so good a work, (especially to those
amongst them that know me, and my School-endeavours) and this I humbly request
of them, that as they have happily contrived a Model for the education of
Students, and brought it on a sudden to a great degree of perfection, so they
would also put to their hands for the improvement of Schoole-learning, without
which such choice abilities as they aim at in order to the Ministry cannot
possibly be obtained. And for the first foundation of such a work, I presume to
offer my advise, that in some convenient places, within and about the City,
there may be Petty-Schooles erected, according to the number of wards, unto
which certain poor children out of every Parish may be sent, and taught gratis,
and all others that please to send their children thither may have them taught
at a reasonable rate, and be sure to have them improved to the utmost of what
they are capable. And I am the rather induced to propound such a thing, because
that late eminent, Dr. Bathurst lately deceased, Mr. Gouge and some others yet
living did out of their own good affection to learning, endeavor at their own
charge to promote the like.

CHAP. VII. Of the discipline of a Petty-Schoole.
THe sweet and orderly behavior of Children adds more credit to a School
then due and constant Teaching, because this speaks to every one that the
Child is well taught, though (perhaps) he learn but little; and good manners
indeed are a main part of good education. I shall here therefore take occasion
to speak somewhat concerning the Discipline of a Petty-Schoole, leaving the
further Discourse of Childrens Manners to Books that treat purposely of that
subject: as, Erasmus de moribus, Youths Behavior, etc.

1. Let every Scholar repair to School before eight a clock in a morning, or
in case of weakness before nine; and let him come fairly washed, neatly
combed, and hansomly clad, and by commending his cleanness, and showing it to
his fellows, make him to take pleasure betimes of himself to go neat and
comely in his clothes.

2. Let such as come before Schooletime take liberty to recreate themselves
about the School, yet so as not to be suffered to do any thing, whereby to
harm themselves, or Schoole-fellowes, or to give offense, or make disturbance
to any neighbor.

3. When Schoole-time calls, let them all go orderly to their own places, and
there apply themselves diligently to their books, without noise, or running
about.

4. When the Master comes into the School, let them all stand up, and make
obeisance so likewise when any stranger comes in) and after notice taken who
are absent; let one that is most able read a chapter, and the rest attend, and
give some littlt account of what they heard read; Then let him that read, say a
short prayer fitted for the School, and afterward let every one settle to his
present task.

5. The whole School may not unfitly be divided into four forms; whereof the
first and lowest should be of those that learn to know their letters, whose
lessons may be in the Primar. The second of those that learn to spell, whose
lessons may be in the Single-Psalter. The third of these that learn to read,
whose lessons may be in the Bible. The fourth of those that are exercised in
reading, writeing, and casting accounts, whose lessons may be in such
profitable Engglish-Books as the Parents can best provide, and the Master think
fittest to be taught.

6. Let their lessons be the same to each boy in every form, and let the Master
proportion them to the meanest capacities, thus those that are abler may profit
themselves by helping their weaker fellows, and those that are weaker be
encouraged to see that they can keep company with the stronger. And let the two
highest in every form give notice to the Master when they come to say, of
those that were most negligent in geting the lesson.

7. When they come to say, let them all stand orderly in one or 2 rows, and
whilst one says his lesson, be sure that all the rest look upon their books,
and give liberty to him that's next to correct him that is saying if he mistake,
and in case he can say better, let him take his place, and keep it till the
same boy or another win it from him. The striveing for places (especially)
amongst little ones, will whet them all on to more diligence, then any
encouragement that can be given them; and the Master should be very sparing to
whip any one for his book, except he be sullenly negligent, and then also I
would choose rather to shame him out of his untowardnesse by commending some of
his fellows, and asking him why he cannot do as well as they, then by falling
upon him with rating words, or injurious blows. A great care also must be had
that those children that are slow witted and of a tender spirit, be not any way
discouraged, though they cannot make so good performance of their task as the
rest of their fellows.

8 On Mundayes, Wednesdayes and Fridayes they may say two lessons in a forenoon
and two in an afternoon; and on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the forenoons they
may also say two lessons; but on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the afternoons,
and on Saturday mornings I would have the time spent in examineing, and
directing how to spell and read a right, and hearing them say the Graces,
Prayers, and Psalms, and especially the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments (which are for that purpose set down in the New-Primar) very
perfectly by heart. And those that can these well may proceed to get other
Catechisms, but be sure they be such as agree with the Principles of Christian
Religion.

9. Their lessons being all said, they should be dismissed about eleven a
clock, and then care must be taken that they go every one orderly out of the
School, and pass quietly home without any stay by the way. And to prevent
that too too common clamor, and crouding out of the School door, let them
rise out of their places one by one with their hat, and book in their hand, and
make their honors to their Master as they pass before his face, one following
another at a distance out of the School. It were fittest and safest that the
least went out the foremost, that the bigger boys following may give notice of
any misdemeanour upon the way.

10 Their return to School in the afternoon should be by one of the clock,
and those that come before that hour, should be permitted to play within their
bounds till the clock strike one, and then let them all take their places in
due order, and say their lessons as they did in the fore-noon. After lessons
ended, let one read a chapter, and say a Prayer, and so let them again go
orderly and quietly home, about five a clock in the summer, and four in the
winter season.

11. If necessity require any one to go out in the School time, let him not
interrupt the Master by asking him leave, but let him leave his book with his
next fellow above him, for fear he should else spoil it, or loose it, and in
case he tarry too long forth, let notice be given to the Monitor.

12. Those children in the upper form may be monitors, every one a day in his
turn, and let them every evening after all lessons said, give a bill to the
Master of their names that are absent and theirs that have committed any
disorder; and let him be very moderate in correcting, and be sure to make a
difference betwixt those faults that are vitiously enormous, and those that are
but childish transgressons; Where admonitions readily take place, it is a
needless trouble to use a rod, and as for a ferula I wish it were utterly
banished out of all Schools.

If one, before I conclude, should ask me, how many children I think may be
well and profitably taught (according to the method already proposed) in a
Petty-School; I return him answer, that I conceive forty boys will be enough
thoroughly to employ one man, to hear every one so often as is required, and so
many he may hear and benefit of himself, without making use of any of his
Scholars to teach the rest, which however it may be permitted, and is practiced
in some Schools, yet it occasioneth too much noise and disorder, and is no
whit so acceptable to Parents, or pleasing to the children, be the work never
so well done. And therefore I advise, that in a place where a great concours of
children may be had, there be more Masters then one employed according to the
spatiousnesse of the room, and the number of boys to be taught; so that every
forty Scholars may have one to teach them; and in case there be boys enough
to be taught, I would appoint one single Master, to attend one single form,
and have as many Masters as there are forms, and then the work of teaching
little ones to the height of their best improvement may be throwly done,
esecially if there were a writeing-master employed at certain hours in the
School, and an experienced Teacher encouraged as a supervisor, or inspector,
to see that the whole School be well and orderly taught, and disciplined.

What I have here writ concerning the Teaching and ordering of a Petty-Schoole,
was in many particulars experienced by my self with a few little boys, that I
taught amongst my Grammar-Scholars in London, and I know those of eminent
worth, and great learning that upon trial made upon their own children at home,
and others at School are ready to attest the ease and benefit of this method.
Insomuch as I was resolved to have adjoined a Petty-Schoole to my
Grammar-Schoole at the Token-house in Lothbury London, and there to have
proceeded in this familiar and pleasing way of Teaching, had I not been
unhansomly dealt with by those whom it concerned, for their own profit sake to
have given me less discouragement. Nevertheless, I think it my duty to
promote Learning what I can, and to lay a sure foundation for such a goodly
structure as learning is; And though (perhaps) I may never be able to effect
what I desire for its advancement, yet it will be my comfort, to have imparted
somewhat to others that may help thereunto. I have here begun at the very ground
work, intending (by Gods blessing) forthwith to publish The New Discovery of
the Old Art of Teaching, which does properly belong to a Grammar-Schoole.

In the mean time I entreat those into whose hands this little work may come,
to look upon it with a single eye, and whether they like or dislike it, to
think that it is not unnecessary for men of greatest parts to bestow a sheet or
two at leisure time upon so mean a subject as this seems to be. And that God
which causes immense rivers to flow from small spring-heads, vouchsafe to
bless these weak beginings in tender age, that good learning may proceed hence
to its full perfection in riper years.

FINIS.

