A NEW DISCOVERY Of the old Art of TEACHING SCHOOL, In four small TREATISES.
1. concerning A Petty-Schoole. 2. concerning The Ushers Duty In a Grammar
School. 3. concerning The Masters Method In a Grammar School. 4. concerning
Scholastic Discipline In a Grammar School.
Showing how Children in their playing years may Grammatically attain to a firm
groundedness in and exercise of the Latin, Greek and Hebrew Tongues. Written
about Twenty three years ago, for the Benefit of Rotherham School, where it
was first used; and after 14. years trial by diligent practice in London in
many particulars enlarged, and now at last published for the general profit,
especially of young Schoolmasters.

By Charles Hoole Master of Arts, and Teacher of a Private Grammar School in
Lothbury Garden, London.

London, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard, 1660

To the Right Worshipful, his most Reverend, constant, and truly loving Friend
Robert Saunderson D. D. and Rector of Boothby-Pagnell. C. H. wishes increase
of Grace, and perfection of GLORY.
SIR,
NOw I have by Gods blessing obtained (that which you can witness I have
seriously labored after) a thrice seven years experience in this despicable,
but comfortable employment of teaching School; I think it not amiss to
discover to the world, what method I have hitherto used, and which I resolve to
continue, so long as God shall enable me to undergo this profession of a
Schoolmasters, which at first I undertook, and have ever since persisted in,
by your encouragement.

How far this New Discovery is improved, since I made it at Rotherham, and
afterward writ it out at little Humbie, whilst I lived more retiredly in the
house of that Noble Knight, Sir William Brownelwoe, (whom I think my self ever
bound to honor for for his singular and undeserved favors to me in many
particulars) I refer it to you to consider. For as you sometimes then perused
it in Manuscript, so I hope you will (at your leisure) look upon it now in
print, and not like it much worse, then formerly.

For I may truly say, that besides what I have observed by reading sundry
Authors treating of this subjest, or gained by frequent and familiar converse
with men of known abilities, both in City and Country. I have profited most in
this Art of teaching, by my Scholars; who have been my daily instructers, how
to suit my method to their several capacities. And of all that ever I have
taught either in public School, or in my own, or others houses, in more
private manner, I have been beholding most to my London Scholars, who as they
are generally quick-spirited, and forward to learn, where the way is easy to
them; so are they soon apt to flag and be discouraged, when any difficulties
appear in their way. For their sakes therefore, (who by reason of many
Schools were sometimes occasioned to remove from one to another) I was
enforced to facilitate the most common way of teaching, according to what you
see, I have here endeavored in these small Treatises.

In the publishing whereof I beseech you, that I may not offend in making use
of your name, as well as my Masters; for as I was instructed by him at the
School, so I was by your means sent, and provided for in the University; and
though I can never be able to requite your care and pains on my behalf, yet I
have long desired, even whilst you are both living, to testify to the world,
that I am not forgetful altogether of your great benefits. If what I have here
done be liking to your self, I shall less need to care how others censure me,
or it; Forasmuch as you have known me since my first studies, and are
sufficiently able to judge of a way to come by learning, as having been your
self well methodized in your youth, and attained to that perfection in all
kind of knowledge, which many do much admire, but few can hope to exceed. But
I know to whom I write, and therefore I will not adventure into an Ocean of
what may be said of your demerits, especially to me wards, only I commend
this little work to your acceptance, as a Testimony of that unfeigned respect,
which I think my self ever bound to show toward you and yours; And I beseech
God (that has been pleased to exercise me in School-teaching, whilst you have
been put upon exercises in School Divinity, and so ordered that something of
what we have each done, is now laboring at the press; to continue our earnest
endeavors to serve him whilst we live, that when we dye, we may partake of
that blessed reward, which is reserved in heaven for all those that attend the
coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whose Grace I commend you and
all yours, and rest

Your humbly observant Kinsman, CHARLES HOOLE.
London, Dec. 24. 1659.
To his most Experienced, and truly Honored Master, Mr. ROBERT DOVGHTY, Head
Schoolmasters at Wakefield, C. H. wishes all health and happiness.
SIR,
IT is yet a question amongst Schoole-boyes, and not likely to be hastily by
them decided, whether K. Alexander was more bound to Philip his Father, that
begat him, or his Master Aristotle that instructed him? for of both he had
received unrequitable Benefits. Should I therefore not acknowledge that lasting
good, which with many copartners I obtained by your care and industry, I
should indeed be worse then ungatefull. And what token of thankfulness can I
tender, more welcome to your self, then this small Manual, which most nearly
concerns the profession of a Schoolmasters; a calling which has all kind of
good attending it, to make it commendable, as well as others.

For 1. If we look at the benefitting of Church and Commonwealth; wherein can
we better employ our time and study, then in traing up of children to become
serviceable instruments of much good in both? Nay, should a man but barely
respect himself, he may find it very profitable to augment his learning, and
not a little advantageous to the increase of his yearly Revenues.

2. What more pleasing variety can there be, then that of childrens
dispositions and fancies? what better Recreation, then to read and discourse of
so many sundry subjects, as we meet with in ordinary Authors? Besides, the
delight which is to be taken by our Scholars ready progress in a constant even
way, will far exceed all care and toil that can be bestowed in helping them to
profit.

3. Should I go about by those millions of Arguments that concur (as
Volunteers) to maintain the lawfulness of this calling, as commanded by God,
continued in all ages, practiced by the well-learned and truly virtuous,
commended by all good men, maintained and encouraged by most noble Princes, and
religiously disposed people; opposed only by the enemies of Gods truth, and
most disesteemed by persons that are altogether (for want of breeding) either
debauched, or ignorant. I might write a larger Volume, and to lesser purpose.

Ob. But alas, we that wholly undergo the burden of School-teaching, can tell
by our own experience, how laborious it is both to mind and body, to be
continually intent upon the work, and how irksome it is (especially to a man of
a quiet temper) to have so many unwilling provocations unto passion; what good
parts for learning, and right qualification in all points of behavour is
required of us; how small our yearly stipend is, and how uncertain all our
other incomes are. Again, we call to mind the too much indulgency of some
Parents, who neither love to blame their childrens untowardnesse, nor suffer
the Master to correct it; we remember their general ingratitude for the
Masters well-doing, and their open clamor for his least doing amiss; we
observe their common indiscretion in wholly imputing the Scholars less
profitting to the Masters more neglect, and their happy thriving to their own
only towardliness; not to mention their fond Ambition, in hastening them too
fast. Besides, the small account which the vulgar have, the too censorious eye
which the more judicious cast, and the slight regard which our young Academians
(for the most part) carry toward a poor Schoolmasters, make us sometimes
judge our calling (as many do) too mean for a Scholar to undertake, or desire
to stick too many years. We let pass childrens imperfections and
untowardnesse, which are indeed our daily torture; so that we could rather
wish, our selves might leave our charge, then advise any friends we have to
undertake it.

Answ. These we must acknowledge are very great discouragements, yet such as
attend a most necessary calling, and therefore must with Fortitude be
conquered, or resolutely undergone. Should the Mariner, because of danger, the
Husbandman because of toil, the Soldier because of hardship, the Magistrate
because of interruption, the Minister, because of many men's disordered
conversations, abandon their professions; it would then fare with a State, as
(the Tale says) it did once with the body, when the whole pined away, because
no member would discharge its proper function.

Neither can I say to whom I should more properly dedicate this Subject, then
to your self, who have now (as I suppose) for at least fifty years together,
and with general applause, performed the Task of a Schoolmasters,
notwithstanding much opposition, and many discouragements of every kind; who
have had continually in your charge many scores of Scholars, and have yearly
sent abroad, both to Trades, and Universities, great store of such as have been
thoroughly accomplished in their places. Nay, (give me leave to speak it) to
commend your known Dexterity in this excellent calling, there have been (I
think) as many, and those, as well-approved Schoolmasters your quondam
Scholars, as have been trained up by any one man in England. Amongst others I
help only to fill up the number, who have sometimes in public, and sometimes
in private, for nigh thirty years together, been exercised in teaching
Scholars, and have at last for mine own ease, and the satisfaction of some
friends, printed what Method and Order you once saw I had writ out, and which
upon your approbation, and my own further experiment, I have thought meet to
observe constantly, reserving ever the liberty of varying in matters of of
circumstance, as occasion shall require. And for some things (it may be) you
may rightly say (as I am ever bound most thankfully to acknowledge, that I was
your Scholar, seeing in them I have so nearly seemed to track that method,
according to which I was instructed by your self.

Daigne (I beseech you) to accept this small offer of a willing mind, and if
you find it helpful to you or yours, in any kind, to use it freely; where you
shall epsy the least defect, I hope you will please to censure it with
impartial mildness* This Petition also I prefer to them of better judgment,
as it happens to come into their hands.

The Lord continue you long in your eminent place, to do the Church and
Commonwealth most acceptable service, and to reap to your self much comfort
thereby, that when at last you shall have finished your course, you may receive
at Gods hands an immortal Crown, through Jesus Christ our Savior, in whom I
rest

Yours, in all observancy, Charles Hoole.
Dec. 24. 1659.
To all favorers of good learning, but more especially, to the Teachers of
GRAMMAR.
THere is no calling more serviceable to Church and Commonwealth, then this of
a Schoolmasters; none then it more perplexingly toylesome, where Art and
Discretion, the two essentials of a Schoolmasters, are wanting. Seeing we have
especially to deal with childrens imperfections, which are warily to be
observed and helped, not strictly to be censured.

That Constancy in a good Method is the mean to make a Scholar is by all
affirmed; but which Method, of many that are used, is the best, is not easily
determined. Sure we are, that the nearest, easiest, and plainest is most
grateful, and the rather if it lie along with the common-rode, which men are
generally loath to foregoe, though it be not always the readiest way.

It has therefore been mine endeavor to set on and proceed in such a course o^
teaching Grammar, and most useful and usually received Authors, with continued
Exercises; so as children might from the beginning understand their present
Task, and that also further to the succeeding work. I labor so (ever as they
learn) to acquaint them with the main matters, that in case of changeing
Masters, they may not sustain such discouragement and loss of time, as usually
betides, when children are not grounded in what they learn.

This I submit to more gentle censures, requesting where I mistake to receive
some better directions, not enjoining any man to tread in my steps, though
possibly some may like to follow me in this way, which I am resolved to keep
(whether in more public, or my private course of teaching) till I know a
readier; which who so has gone it, may do well to describe. Now the Lord of
heaven give a blessing to these weak endeavors, which if any man profit by, let
him give God the Glory, whose alone power it is, that has thus far enabled me
to perform, (what from a child) I have seriously desired. Et v^niam per laud
peto* etc.

A note of Schoole-Authours, most proper for every Form of Scholars in a
Grammar-Schoole, which are mentioned in this Book.
1. Authors useful for the first Form.
Classical. AN English Bible, or Testament. The Accidents. Sententiae
Pueriles. The principles of Christianity.
Subsidiary. ORbis Pictus. The common Rudiments of Latin Grammar. A little
Vocabulary English and Latin by C. H.

2. Authors for the second Form.
1. Classical. Lilies Grammar. Cato. Pueriles Confabulatiunculae. Corderii
Colloquia. The Assemblies Catechism.
Subsidiary, A Construing-book. Propria quae maribus, etc. Englished and
explained. An easy entrance to the Latin Tongue, commonly called the Grounds
of Grammar, by C. H. Englishes to be translated. A little Paper-book. 8o.

3. Authors useful for the third Form.
Classical. Lilies Grammar. The Latin Testament. Aesopi Fabulae. Janua
Linguarum. Castalionis Dialogi. Mantuanus. Helvici Colloquia. The Assemblies
Catechism in Latin. Perkins six principles.
Subsidiary. A construing-book. A Paper-book in quarto. A praxis of the Grammar
Rules. Gerards Meditations. Thomas de Kempis. Sancti Augustini Soliloquia.
Stockwoods Figura construed. Hamptons Prosodia construed.

4. Authors useful for the fourth Form.
Classical. The Latin Testament. Lilies Grammar. Elementa Rhetorices. Camdeni
Grammatica. Graecum Testamentum. Nomenclatura. Seidelius. Posselii Dialogi.
Shirley's Introductorium: Terentius. Janua Latinae Linguae. Sturmii Textoris
Epistolae. Ovidius de Tristius. Ovidii Metamorphosis. Buchanani Psalmi. The
Assemblies Catechism, Latin and Greek.
Subsidiary. The Latin Grammar by C. H. The posing of the Accidents.
Animadversions upon Lilies Grammar. Stockwoods Disputations. Mr. Pooles English
Accidents. Hermes Anglo-Latinus. Supplementa ad Grammaticam Mr. Birds Mr.
Shirleys Mr. Burleys Mr. Hawkins Mr. Gregory's Mr. Danes Mr. Farnabies
Grammar. A Paper-book in quarto. An English Rhetoric. Index Rhetoricus.
Susenbrotus. Compendium Rhetorices. Passoris Lexicon. Rudimenta Grammaticae
Graecae. Busbaei Grammatica Graeca. Clavis, and fundamentum Graecae Linguae.
Fabritii elegantiae Pueriles. Dux Oratorius. Erasmus de copia verboru^ A little
Dictionary English and Latin in 80. Walkers Particles. Willis Anglicismes.
Phraseologia Puerilis. Epistolographia by Mr. Clerk. Erasmus de conscribendis
Epistolis. Buchlori Thesaurus conscribendaru^ Epistolaru^. Verepaeus de
conscribendis Epistolis. Hardwicks Mantuan. Sandys Ovid. Herberts Poems.
Quarles's Poems. Oweni Epigrammata. Farnabii Epigrammata. Alciati Emblemata.
Pools English Parnassus. Clarks Dux Poeticus. Wits Commonwealth. Rosses
English Mythologist. Lord Bacon de Sapientia veterum. Natales Comes. Verderii
imagines Deoru^. Lexicon Geographicu^, etc. Holy-oakes Dictionary. Thomas
Thomasius.

5. Authors useful for the fifth Form.
Classical. Lilii Grammatica. Camdeni Grammatica. Elementa Rhetorices.
Aphthonius. Livii Orationes. Isocrates. Theognis. Justinus. Caesaris
Commentarii. Lucius Florus. Erasmi Colloquia. Janua Linguarum Graeca.
Virgilius. Aeliani Historiae variae. Epictetus. Farnabii Epigrammata. Nowelli
Catechismus.
Subsidiary. Franklin de Orthotonia. Scapula. Screvelii Lexicon. Vechneri
Hellonexia. Busbaei Cleonardi Scoti Chrysolorae Ceporini Gazae Vrbanii Caninii
Gretseri
Grammatica. Posselii Syntaxis. Demosthenis Sententiae. Posselii Apothegmata.
Garthii Lexicon. Rulandi Synonymia. Morelii Dictionarium. Billii locutiones.
Devarius de Graecis particulis. Posselii calligraphia. Plutarchus. Valerius
Maximus. Plinii Historiae. Medulla Historiae. Phoedri Fabulae. N^tales Comes.
Adagia Selecta. Erasmi Adagia. Bibliotheca Scholastica. Pierus. Causinus.
Alciati Emblemata. Reusneri Symbola. Diodorus Siculus. Tullii Sententiae.
Ethica Ciceroniana. Gruteri Florilegium. Orator extemporaneus. Vossii
partitiones oratoriae Textoris Officina. Lycosthenes. Erasmi Apophthegmata.
Polyanthea. Sylva Synonymorum. Calliepia. Huisse's Winchester's Lloyd's
Farnabie's Manutii
Phrases. Encheiridion Oratorium. Clarks Phraseologia. English Adagies.
Willis Anglicismes. Barrets Dictionary. Parei calligraphia. Walker's
particles. Cooperi Dictionarium. Flores Poetarum. Phrases Poeticae. Aerarium
Poeticum. Encheiridion Poeticum. Res Virgiliana. Artis Poeticae compendiu^.
Thesaurus Poeticus.

Authors useful for the sixth Form.
Classical. Lilii Grammatica. Camdeni Grammatica. Elementa Rhetorices. Graecum
Testamentu^. Buxtorfii Epitome. Psalterium Hebraicum. Homerus. Pindarus.
Lycophron. Xenophon. Euripides. Sophocles. Aristophanes, Ant. de Laubegeois
breviarium Graecae Linguae. Horatius. Juvenalis. Persius. Lucanus. Senecae
Tragoediae. Martialis. Plautus. Luciani selecti Dialogi. Tullii Orationes.
Plinii Panegyrica, Quintiliani Declamationes. Birketi Catechismus. Catechismus
parvus Hebraicus.
Subsidiary. Authors Grammaticae antiqui. Despauterius. Linacer. Melancthon.
Valerius. Alvarez. Rhenius. Sulpitius. Vossius. Tresmari exercitationes
Rhetoricae. Nie. Causinus. Paiot de Eloquentia. Turselinus. Hawkins particulae
Latinae Linguae. Tullii Plinii Senecae Erasmi Lipsii Manutii Aschami Politiani
Turneri.
Epistolae. Goclenii Analecta, and Problemata. Ausonius Popma. Becman de
Originibus. Tossani Syllabus geminus. Buxtorfii Lexicon. Schindleri
Pentaglotton. Buxtorfii Thesaurus. Pagnini Crinesii Torstii
Lexicon. Clavis Homerica. Lexicon Homericum. Eustathius. Pontani Progymnasmata.
Goodwin's Antiquities. Symmachi Epistolae. Libanius Sophista. Turneri. Baudii.
Mureti. Heinsii. Puteani. Rainoldi. Lipsii. Barclaii. Salmatii.
ORATIONES.

THE Petty-Schoole. SHOWING A way to teach little Children to read English with
delight and profit, (especially) according to the New Primar. By C. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's Church
Yard, 1659.

THE Petty-Schoole.
CHAP. I.
How a child may be helped in the first pronounciation of his Letters.
MY aim being to discover the old Art of teaching School, and how it may be
improved in every part suitable to the years and capacities of such children as
are now commonly taught; I shall first begin my discourse concerning a
petty-Schoole, and here or else where I shall not busy my self or Reader about
what a child of an extraordinary towardliness, and having a teacher at home,
may attain unto, and in how short a space, but only show how a multitude of
various wits may be taught all together with abundance of profit and delight to
every one, which is the proper and main work of our ordinary Schools.

Whereas then, it is usual in Cities and greater Towns to put children to
School about four or five years of age, and in Country villages, because of
further distance, not till about six or seven; I conceive, The sooner a child
is put to School, the better it is, both to prevent ill habits, which are got
by play and idleness, and to enure him betimes to affect learning and well
doing. Not to say, how the great uncertainty of parents lives, should make them
careful of their Childrens early education, which is like to be the best part
of their patrimony, what ever good thing else they may leave them in this World.

I observe that betwixt three and four years of age a child has great
propensity to peep into a book, and then is the most seasonable time (if
conveniences may be had otherwise) for him to begin to learn; and though
perhaps then he cannot speak so very distinctly, yet the often pronounciation
of his letters, will be a means to help his speech, especially if one take
notice in what organ or instrument he is most defective, and exercise him
chiefly in those letters which belong unto it.

Now there are five organs or instruments of speech, in the right hitting of
which, as the breath moves from within, through the mouth, a true
pronunciation of every letter is made, viz. the lips, the teeth, the tongue,
the roof of the mouth, and the throat; According to which if one rank the
twenty four letters of our English Alphabet, he shall find that A, E, I, O, V,
proceed by degrees from the throat, along betwixt the tongue and the roof of
the mouth to the lips contracted, and that Y is somewhat like I, being
pronounced with other letters, but if it be named by it self, it requires some
motion of the lips. B, F, M, P, W, and V consonant, belong to the lips. C, S,
X, Z, to the teeth. D, L, N, T, R, to the tongue. B, H, K, Q, to the roof of
the mouth. But the sweet and natural pronunciation of them is gotten rather by
imitation then precept, and therefore the teacher must be careful to give every
letter its distinct and clear sound, that the child may get it from his voice,
and be sure to make the child open his mouth well as he utters a letter, lest
otherwise he drown or hinder the sound of it. For I have heard some foreiners
to blame us Englishmen for neglecting this mean to a plain and audible
speaking, saying, that the cause, why we generally do not speak so fully as
they, proceeded from an ill habit of mumbling, which children got at their
first learning to read; which it was their care; therefore to prevent or remedy
betimes, and so it should be ours, seeing Pronounciation is that that sets out
a man, and is sufficient of it self to make one an Orator.

Chap. II.
How a child may be taught with delight to know all his letters in a very
little time.
THe usual way to begin with a child, when he is first brought to School, is
to teach him to know his letters in the Horn-book, where he is made to run over
all the letters in the Alphabet or Christ cross-row both forwards and
backwards, until he can tell any one of them, which is pointed at, and that in
the English character.

This course we see has been very effectual in a short time, with some more
ripe witted children, but others of a slower apprehension (as the most and best
commonly are) have been thus learning a whole year together, (and though they
have been much chid and beaten too for want of heed) could scarce tell six of
their letters at twelve months end, who, if they had been taught in a way more
agreeable to their mean apprehensions (which might have wrought more readily
upon the senses, and affected their minds with what they did) would doubtless
have learned as cheerfully, if not as fast as the quickest

I shall therefore mention sundry ways that have been taken to make a child
know his letters readily, out of which the discreet Teacher may choose what is
most likely to suit with his Learner.

I have known some that (according to Mr. Brinsl^y's direction) have taught
little ones to pronounce all the letters; and to spell pretty well, before they
knew one letter in a book; and this they did, by making the child to sound the
five vowels a, e, i, o, u, like so many bells upon his fingers ends, and to say
which finger was such or such a vowel, by changes. 2 Then putting single
consonants before the vowels, [leaving the hardest of them till the last] and
teaching him how to utter them both at once, as va, ve, vi, ve, vu, da, de, di,
do, du. 3. and again, by putting the vowels before a consonant to make him say,
as, es, is, os, us, ad, ed, id, od, ud. Thus; they have proceeded from
syllables of two or three, or more letters, till a child has been pretty
nimble in the most. But this is rather to be done in a private house, then a
public School; how ever this manner of exercise now and then amongst little
Scholars will make their lessons more familiar to them.

The greatest trouble at the first entrance of children is to teach them how to
know their letters one from another, when they see them in the book altogether;
for the greatness of their number and variety of shape do puzle young wits to
difference them, and the sense can but be intent upon one single object at
once, so as to take its impression, and commit it to the imagination and
memory. Some have therefore begun but with one single letter, and after they
have showed it to the child in the Alphabet, have made him to find the same
any where else in the book, till he knew that perfectly; and then they have
proceeded to another in like manner, and so gone through the rest.

Some have contrived a piece of ivory with twenty four flats or squares, in
every one of which was engraven a several letter, and by playing with a child
in throwing this upon a table, and showing him the letter only which lay
uppermost, have in few days taught him the whole Alphabet.

Some have got twenty four pieces of ivory cut in the shape of dice, with a
letter engraven upon each of them, and with these they have played at vacant
hours with a child, till he has known them all distinctly. They begin first
with one, then with two, afterward with more letters at once, as the child
got knowledge of them. To teach him likewise to spell, they would place
consonants before or after a vowel, and then join more letters together so as
to make a word, and sometimes divide it into syllables, to be parted or put
together; now this kind of letter sport may be profitably permitted among you
beginers in a School and in stead of ivory, they may have white bits of wood,
or small shreads of paper or past-board, or parchment with a letter writ upon
each to play withal amongst themselves.

Some have made pictures in a little book or upon a scroll of paper wrapped upon
two sticks within a box of iceing-glass, and by each picture have made three
sorts of that letter, with which its name begins; but those being too many
at once for a child to take notice on, have proved not so useful as was
intended. Some likewise have had pictures and letters printed in this manner on
the back side of a pack of cards, to entice children, that naturally love that
sport, to the love of learning their books.

Some have writ a letter in a great character upon a card, or chalked it out
upon a trencher, and by telling a child what it was, and letting him strive to
make the like, have imprinted it quickly in his memory, and so the rest one
after another

One having a Son of two years and a half old, that could but even go about the
house, and utter some few gibberish words in a broken manner; observing him one
day above the rest to be busied about shells and sticks, and such like toys,
which himself had laid together in a chair, and to miss any one that was taken
from him, he saw not how, and to seek for it about the house; became very
desireous to make experiment what that child might presently attain to in
point of learning; Thereupon he devised a little wheel, with all the Capital
Roman letters made upon a paper to wrap round about it, and fitted it to turn
in little a round box, which had a hole so made in the side of it, that only
one letter might be seen to peep out at once; This he brought to the child,
and showed him only the letter O, and told him what it was; The child being
overjoyed with his new gamball, catches the box out of his Fathers hand, and
run's with it to his play fellow a year younger then himself, and in his broken
language tell's him there was an O, an O; And when the other asked him where,
he said, in a hole, in a hole, and showed it him; which the lesser child then
took such notice of, as to know it again ever after from all the other
letters. And thus by playing with the box, and enquiring concerning any letter
that appeared strange to him, what it was, the child learnt all the letters of
the Alphabet in eleven days, being in this Character A B C, and would take
pleasure to show them in any book to any of his acquaintance that came next. By
this instance you may see what a propensity there is in nature betimes to
learning, could but the Teachers apply themselves to their young Scholars
tenuity; and how by proceeding in a clear and facil method, that all may
apprehend, every one may benefit more or less by degrees. According to these
contrivances to forward children, I have published a New Primar; in the first
leaf, whereof I have set the Roman Capitalls (because that Character is now
most in use, and those letters the most easy to be learned and have joined
therewith the pictures or images of some things whose names begins with that
letter, by which a child's memory may be helped to remember how to call his
letters, as A, for an Ape, B. for a Bear, etc. This Hieroglyphicall devise does
so affect Children who are generally forward to communicate what they know)
that I have observed them to teach others, that could not so readily learn, to
know all the letters in a few hours space, by asking them, what stands A. for?
and so concerning other letters backwards and forwards, or as they best liked.

Thus when a child has got the names of his letters, and their several shapes
withal in a playing manner, he may be easily taught to distinguish them in the
following leaf, which contains first the greater, and then the smaller Roman
Characters, to be learned by five at once or more, as the child is able to
remember them; other Characters I would have forborne, till one be well
acquainted with these, because so much variety at the first does but amaze
young wits, and our English characters, (for the most part) are very obscure,
and more hard to be imprinted in the memory. And thus much for the learning to
know letters; we shall next (and according to Order in Teaching) proceed to an
easy way of distinct spelling.

Chap III.
How to teach a child to spell distinctly.
THe common way of teaching a child to spell, is, after he know's the letters
in his Alphabet, to initiate him in those few syllables, which consist of one
vowell before a consonant, as, ab, eb, ib, ob ub, etc. or of one vowel after a
consonant, as, ba, be, by, bo, bu, etc. in the Horn-book, and thence to proceed
with him by little and little to the bottom of the book, hereing him twice or
thrice over till he can say his lesson, and then putting him to a new one.

In which course I have known some more apt children to have profited pretty
well, but scarce one often, when they have gone through the book, to be able to
spell a word that is not in it; And some have been certain years daily
exercised in saying lessons therein, who after much endeavor spent, have been
accounted mere block-heads, and rejected all together as incapable to learn any
thing; whereas some Teachers that have assayed a more familiar way, have
professed, that they have not met with any such thing as a Dunse amid a great
multitude of little Scholars.

Indeed it is Tullies observation of old, and Erasmus his assertion of latter
years, that it is as natural for a child to learn, as it is for a beast to go,
a bird to fly, or a fish to swim, and I verily believe it, for the nature of
man is restlessely desirous to know things, and were discouragements taken out
of the way, and meet helps afforded young learners, they would doubtless go on
with a great deal more cherefulness, and make more proficiency at their books
then usually they do; And could the Mayor have the discretion to make their
lessions familiar to them, children would as much delight in being b^sied about
them, as in any other sport, if too long continuance at them might not make
them tedious.

Amongst those that have gone a readier way to reading, I shall only mention
Mr. Roe, and Mr. Robinson, the latter of whom I have known to have taught
little children not much above four years old to read distinctly in the Bible,
in six weeks time, or under; their books are to be had in print, but every one
has not the art to use them. And Mr. Cootes English-School-Master seems
rather to be fitted for one that is a Master indeed, then for a Scholar.

Besides the way then which is usual, you may (if you think good) make use of
that which I have set down in the new Primar to help little ones to spell
readily, and it is this.

1. Let a child be well acquainted with his vowells, and made to pronounce
them fully by themselves, because they are able to make a perfect sound alone.

2. Teach him to give the true valor or force of the consonants, and to take
notice how imperfectly they sound, except a vowel be joined with them. Both
these are set apart by themselves. (p. 2.)

3. Proceed to syllables made of one consonant set before a vowel (Sect, 5.)
and let him join the true force of the consonant with the perfect sound of the
vowel, as to say, ba, be, by, bo, bu, etc. Yet it were good to leave ca, ce,
ci, co, cu, and ga, ge, gi, go, gu, to the last because the valor of the
consonant in the second and third sylables does differ from that in the rest.

4. Then exercise him in syllables made of one vowel set before one consonant,
(Sect. 6.) as to say, ab, eb, ib, ob, ub, etc. till he can spell any syllable
of two letters, backwards or forwards, as, ba, be; by, bo, bu; ab, eb, ib, ob,
ub; ba, ab; be, eb; by, ib; bo, ob; bu, ub; and so in all the rest comparing
one with another.

5. And if to any one of these syllables you add a letter, and teach him how
to join it in sound with the rest, you will make him more ready in spelling;
as, if before a b you put b, and teach him to say bab; if after ba, you put d,
and let him pronounce it bad, he will quickly be able to join a letter with
any of the rest, as, nip, pin, but, tub, etc.

To enure your young-Scholar to any, even the hardest syllable, in an easy way.

1. Practice him in the joining of consonants that begin syllables (Sect. 7.)
so as that he may give their joint forces at once; thus,

Having showed him to sound ^l or br together, make him to pronounce them, and
a vowel with them, bla, bra, ble, bre, and so in any of the rest.

2. Then practice him likewise in consonants that end syllables, (Sect. 8) make
him first to give the force of the joined consonants, and then to put the
vowels before them; as, ble with the vowels before them sound able, eble, ible,
oble, uble, to all which you may prefix other consonants and change them into
words of one syllable, as, fable, peble, bible, noble, bubble: (with a b
inserted or the like. Where observe that e in the end of many words, being
silent, does qualify the sound of the foregoing vowel, so as to make words
different from those that have not e; as, you may see made, differs quite
from mad, beat from bet, pipe from pip, soap from sop, and cube from cub.
Whereby I think them in an error, that leave out e in the end of words, and
them that in pronouncing it make two syllables of one, in stable, bible,
people, etc. which judicious Mr. Mulcaster will not allow.

In this exercise of spelling you may do well sometimes to make all the young
beginners stand together, and pose them one by one in all sorts of syllables,
till they be perfect in any; and, to make them delight herein,

1. Let them spell many syllables together which differ only in one letter;
as, and, band, hand, land, sand.

2. Teach them to frame any word of one syllable, by joining any of the
consonants which go before vowels, with those that use to follow vowels, and
putting in vowels betwixt them; as, black, bl^ck; clack, clock.

And this they may do afterward amongst themselves, having several loose
letters made and given them, to compose or divide in a sporting manner, which I
may rightly term the Letter-sport.

When a child is become expert in joining Consonants with the vowels, then
take him to the Diphthongs (Sect. 9.) and there,

1. Teach him the natural force of a Diphthong (which consists of two vowels
joined together) and make him to sound it distinctly by it self; as, ai, ei,
etc.

2. Let him see how it is joined with other letters, and learn to give its
pronountiation together with them, minding him how the same Diphthong differs
from its self sometimes in its sound, and which of the two vowels in it has
the greatest power in pronouncation, as, in people e seems to drown the o.

And besides those words in the Book, you may add others of your own, till by
many examples the child do well apprehend your meaning, and so, as that he can
boldly adventure to imitate you, and practice of himself

Thus after a child is thoroughly exercised in the true sounding of the vowels
and consonants together, let him proceed to the spelling of words, first of one
syllable (Sect. 10.) then of two (Sect. 11.) then of three (Sect. 12.) then of
four (Sect. 13.) in all which let him be taught how to utter every syllable by
it self truly and fully, and be sure to speak out the last. But in words of
more syllables, let him learn to join and part them according to these
profitable rules.

1. An English syllable may sometimes consist of eight letters, but never of
more, as, strength.

2 In words that have many syllables, the consonant between two vowels
belongs to the latter of them; as, Hu-mi-li-tie.

3. Consonants which are joined in the beginning of words, are not to be parted
in the middle of them; as, My-ste-ry.

4. Consonants which are not joined in the beginning of words, are to be parted
in the middle of them; as, for-get-ful-ness.

5. If a consonant be doubled in the middle of a word, the first belong's to
the syllable foregoing, and the latter to the following; as, pos-ses-si-on.

6. In compound words, every part which belongs to the single words, must be
set by it self; as, In-a-bi-li-ty.

And these rules have I here set down rather to inform the less skilful
teacher, how he is to guide his learner, then to puzle a child about them, who
is not yet so well able to comprehend them.

I have also divided those words in the Book, to let Children see how they
ought to divide other polysyllable words, in which they must always he very
careful (as I said) to sound out the last syllable very fully.

To enable a child the better to pronounce any word he meets withal in
reading, I have set down some more hard for pronuntiation; (Sect. 14) in often
reading over which he may be exercised to help his utterance; and the Master
may add more at his own discretion, till he see that his willing Scholar does
not stick in spelling any, be it never so hard.

And that the child may not be amused with any thing in his book, when he
comes to read, I would have him made acquainted with the pauses, (Sect. 15.)
with the figures, (Sect. 16.) numerall letters, (Sect. 17.) Quotations (Sect.
18.) and Abbreviations (Sect. 19) which being but a work of few hours space,
may easily be performed after he can readily spell, which when he can do, he
may profitably be put to reading, but not before; for I observed it a great
defect in some of Mr. R. Scholars, (whose way was to teach to read presently
without any spelling at all) that when they were at a loss about a word, they
made an imperfect confused sound, in giving the force of the consonants, which
if they once missed they knew not which way to help themselves, to find what
the word was, whereas if after a child know his letters, he be taught to
gather them into just syllables, and by the joining of syllables together to
frame a word, (which as it is the most ancient, so certainly it is the most
natural method of teaching) he will soon be able, if he stick at any word in
reading, by the naming of its letters, and pronouncing of its syllables to say
what it is, and then he may boldly venture to read without spelling at all,
touching the gaining of a habit whereof, I shall proceed to say somewhat in the
next chapter.

Chap. IIII.
How a child may be taught to read any English Book perfectly.
THe ordinary way to teach children to read is, after they have got some
knowledge of their letters, and a smattering of some syllables and words in the
horn-book, to turn them into the A B C. or Primar, and therein to make them
name the letters, and spell the words, till by often use they can pronounce (at
least) the shortest words at the first sight.

This method take's with those of prompter wits, but many of more slow
capacities, not finding any thing to affect them, and so make them heed what
they learn, go on remissely from lesson to lesson, and are not much more able
to read, when they have ended their book, then when they begun it. Besides* the
A B C. being now (I may say) generally thrown aside, and the ordinary Primar
not printed, and the very fundamentalls of christian Religion (which were wont
to be contained in those books, and were commonly taught children at home by
heart before they went to School) with sundry people (almost in all places)
slighted, the matter which is taught in most books now in use, is not so
familiar to them, and therefore not so easy for Children to learn.

But to hold still to the sure foundation, I have caused the Lords Prayer
(Sect. 20.) the Creed (Sect. 21.) and the ten Commandments (Sect. 23.) to be
printed in the Roman character, that a child having learned already to know
his letters and how to spell, may also be initiated to read by them, which he
will do the more cheerfully, if he be also instructed at home to say them by
heart.

As he read's these, I would have a child name what words he can at the first
sight, and what he cannot, to spell them, and to take notice what pauses and
numbers are in his lesson. And to go them often over, till he can tell any
tittle in them, either in or without the book.

When he is thus well entered in the Roman character, I would have him made
acquainted with the rest of the characters now in use (Sect. 23.) which will be
easily done, by comparing one with another, and reading over those sentences,
Psalms, Thankesgivings, and Prayers (which are printed in greater and less
characters of sundry sorts) till he have them pretty well by heart.

Thus having all things which concern reading English made familar to him, he
may attain to a perfect habit of it. 1. By reading the single Psalter. 2. The
Psalms in meeter. 3. The School of good manners, or such like easy books,
which may both profit and delight him. All which I would wish he may read over
at lest thrice, to make the matter, as well as the words, leave an impression
upon his mind. If any where he stick at any word (as seeming too hard) let him
mark it with a pin, or the dint of his nail, and by looking upon it again,
he will remember it.

When he can read any whit readily, let him begin the Bible, and read over the
book of Genesis, (and other remarkable Histories in other places of Scripture,
which are most likely to delight him) by a chapter at a time; But acquaint him
a little with the matter beforehand, for that will entice him to read it, and
make him more observant of what he read's. After he has read, ask him such
general Questions out of the Story, as are most easy for him to answer, and
he will the better remember it. I have known some, that by hiring a child to
read two or three chapters a day, and to get so many verses of it by heart,
have made them admirable proficients, and that betimes, in the Scriptures;
which was Timothies excellency, and his Grandmothers great commendation. Let
him now take liberty to exercise himself in any English book (so the matter of
it be but honest) till he can perfectly read in any place of a book that is
offered him; and when he can do this, I adjudge him fit to enter into a Grammar
School, but not before.

For thus learning to read English perfectly, I allow two or three years time,
so that at seven or eight years of age, a child may begin Latin.

CHAP. V.
Wherein children, for whom the Latin tongue is thought to be unnecessary, are
to be employed after they can read English well.
IT is a fond conceit of many, that have either not attained, or by their own
negligence have utterly lost the use of the Latin Tongue, to think it
altogether unnecessary for such children to learn it, as are intended for
Trades, or to be kept as drudges at home, or employed about husbandry. For
first there are few children, but (in their playing-years, and before they can
be capable of any serious employment in the meanest calling that is) may be so
far grounded in the Latin, as to find that little smattering they have of it,
to be of singular use to them, both for the understanding of the English
Authors (which abound now a days with borrowed words) and the holding
discourse with a sort of men that delight to flant it in Latin.

Secondly, Besides I have heard it spoken to the great commendation of some
Countries, where care is had for the well education of children, that every
Peasant (almost) is able to discourse with a stranger in the Latin tongue; and
why may not we here in England obtain the like praise, if we did but as they,
continue our children at the Latin School, till they be well acquainted with
that language, and thereby better fitted for any calling.

Thirdly, And I am sorry to add, that the non-improvement of childrens time
after they can read English any whit well, throws open a gap to all loose
kind of behavior; for being then (as it is too commonly to be seen,
especially with the poorer sort) taken from the School, and permitted to run
wildeing up and down without any control, they adventure to commit all manner
of lewdness, and so become a shame and dishonor to their Friends and Country.

If these or the like reasons therefore might prevail to persuade them that
have a prejudice against Latin, I would advise that all children might be put
to the Grammar-Schoole, so soon as they can read English well; and suffered to
continue at it, till some honest calling invite them thence; but if not, I
would wish them rather to forbear it, then to become there an hinderance to
others, whose work it is to learn that profitable Language. And that they may
not squander away their time in idleness, it were good if they were put to a
Writing-Schoole, where they might be, First helped to keep their English, by
reading of a chapter (at least) once a day; and second. taught to write a fair
hand; and thirdly afterward exercised in Arithmatique, and such preparative
Arts, as may make them completely fit to undergo any ordinary calling. And
being thus trained up in a way of discipline, they will afterward prove more
easily pliable to their Masters commands.

Now, forasmuch as few Grammar-Schooles of note will admit children into them,
till they have learned their Accidents; the teaching of that book, also
becomes for the most part a work for a Petty-Schoole, where many that
undertake to teach it, being altogether ignorant of the Latin Tongue, do
sorrily perform that task, and spend a great deal of time about it to little
or no purpose. I would have that book, therefore by such let alone, and left to
the Grammar School, as most sitting to be taught there only, because it is
intended as an introduction of Grammar, to guide children in a way of reading,
writing, and speaking Latin, and the Teachers of the Grammar-Art are most
deeply concerned to make use of it for that end. And in stead of the Accidents,
which they do neither understand nor profit by, they may be benefitted in
reading Orthodoxal Catechismes and other Books, that may instruct them in the
Duties of a Christian, such as are The Practice of Piety, The Practice of
Quietness, The whole duty of Man; and afterward in other delightful books of
English History; as, The History of Queen Elizabeth; or Poetry, as Herberts
Poems, Quarl's Emblems; and by this means they will gain such a habit and
delight in reading, as to make it their chief recreation, when liberty is
afforded them. And their acquaintance with good books will (by Gods blessing)
be a means so to sweeten their (otherwise sour) natures, that they may live
comfortably toward themselves, and amiably converse with other persons.

Yet if the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole have a pretty understanding of the
Latin Tongue, he may the better adventure to teach the Accidents, and proceed
in so doing with far more ease and profit to himself and learner, if he observe
a sure method of grounding his children in the Rudiments of Grammar, and
preparing them to speak and write familiar Latin, which I shall hereafter
discover, having first set down somewhat how to remedy that defect in reading
English, with which the Grammar-Schooles are very much troubled, especially,
where there is not a good Petty-Schoole to discharge that work aforehand. And
before I proceed further, I will express my mind in the two next chapters
touching the erecting of a Petty-Schoole, and how it may probably flourish by
good Order and Discipline.

CHAP. VI.
Of the founding of a Petty-Schoole.
THe Petty-Schoole is the place where indeed the first Principles of all
Religion and learning ought to be taught, and therefore rather deserves that
more encouragement should be given to the Teachers of it, then that it should
be left as a work for poor women, or others, whose necessities compel them to
undertake it, as a mere shelter from beggary.

Out of this consideration it is (perhaps) that some nobler spirits, whom God
has enriched with an overplus of outward means, have in some places whereunto
they have been by birth (or otherwise) related, erected Petty-Schoole-houses,
and endowed them with yearly salaries; but those are so inconsiderate toward
the maintenance of a Master and his family, or so over-cloyed with a number of
Free-Scholars, to be taught for nothing, that few men of parts will daigne to
accept of them, or continue at them for any while; and for this cause I have
observed such weak foundations to fall to nothing.

Yet if any one be desireous to contribute toward such an eminent work of
charity, my advice is, that he erect a School and dwelling house together,
about the middle of a Market Town, or some populous Country-Village, and
acomodate it with a safe yard adjoining to it, if not with an Orchard or
Garden, and that he endow, with a salary of (at least twenty pounds, per annum,
in consideration whereof all such poor boys as can conveniently frequent it,
may be taught gratis, but the more able sort of neighbors may pay for
childrens teaching, as if the School was not free; for they will find it no
small advantage to have such a School amongst them.

Such a yearly stipend and convenient dwelling, with a liberty to take young
children to board, and to make what advantage he can best by other Scholars,
will invite a man of good parts to undertake the charge, and excite him to the
diligent and constant performance of his duty; especially, if he be chosen into
the place by three or four honest and discreet Trustees, that may have power
also to remove him thence, if by his uncivil behavior, or gross neglect he
render himself incapable to perform so necessary a service to the Church and
Commonwealth.

As for the Qualifications of one that is to be the Teacher of a Petty-Schoole,
I would have him to be a Person of a pious, sober, comely and discreet
behavior, and tenderly affectionate toward children, having some knowledge
of the Latin Tongue, and ability to write a fair hand, and good skill in
Arithmetic, and then let him move within the compass of his own orb, so as to
teach all his Scholars (as they become capable) to read English very well, and
afterward to write and cast accouts. And let him not meddle at all with
teaching the Accidents, except only to some more pregnant wits, which are
intended to be set forwards to learn Latin, and for such be sure that he
ground them well, or else dismiss them as soon as they can read distinctly,
and write legibly, to the Grammar School.

I should here have closed my discourse; and shut up this Petty-Schoole, were
it not that I received a model for the maintaining of Students from a worthy
friends hands (and one that is most zealously and charitably addicted to
advance Learning, and to help it in its very beginnings to come forwards to its
full Rise) by which I am encouraged to address my remaining words to the
Godly-minded Trustees and Subscribers for so good a work, (especially to those
amongst them that know me, and my School-endeavours) and this I humbly request
of them, that as they have happily contrived a Model for the education of
Students, and brought it on a sudden to a great degree of perfection, so they
would also put to their hands for the improvement of Schoole-learning, without
which such choice abilities as they aim at in order to the Ministry cannot
possibly be obtained. And for the first foundation of such a work; I presume to
offer my advise, that in some convenient places, within and about the City,
there may be Petty-Schooles erected, according to the number of wards, unto
which certain poor children out of every Parish may be sent, and taught gratis,
and all others that please to send their children thither may have them taught
at a reasonable rate, and be sure to have them improved to the utmost of what
they are capable. And I am the rather induced to propound such a thing, because
that late eminent, Dr. Bathurst lately deceased, Mr. Gouge and some others yet
living did out of their own good affection to learning, endeavor at their own
charge to promote the like.

CHAP. VII.
Of the discipline of a Petty-Schoole.
THe sweet and orderly behavior of Children adds more credit to a School
then due and constant Teaching, because this speaks to every one that the
Child is well taught, though (perhaps) he learn but little; and good manners
indeed are a main part of good education. I shall here therefore take occasion
to speak somewhat concerning the Discipline of a Petty-Schoole, leaving the
further Discourse of Childrens Manners to Books that treat purposely of that
subject: as, Erasmus de moribus, Youths Behavior, etc.

1. Let every Scholar repair to School before eight a clock in a morning, or
in case of weakness before nine; and let him come fairly washed, neatly
combed, and hansomly clad, and by commending his cleanness, and showing it to
his fellows, make him to take pleasure betimes of himself to go neat and
comely in his clothes.

2. Let such as come before Schoole-time take liberty to recreate themselves
about the School, yet so as not to be suffered to do any thing, whereby to
harm themselves, or Schoole-fellowes, or to give offense, or make disturbance
to any neighbor.

3. When Schoole-time calls, let them all go orderly to their own places, and
there apply themselves diligently to their books, without noise, or running
about.

4. When the Master comes into the School, let them all stand up, and make
obeisance* so likewise when any st^anger comes in) and after notice taken who
are absent; let one that is most able read a chapter, and the rest attend, and
give some little account of what they heard read; Then let him that read, say a
short prayer fitted for the School, and afterward let every one settle to his
present task.

5. The whole School may not unfitly be divided into four forms; whereof the
first and lowest should be of those that learn to know their letters, whose
lessons may be in the Primar. The second of those that learn to spell, whose
lessons may be in the Single-Psalter. The third of these that learn to read,
whose lessons may be in the Bible. The fourth of those that are exercised in
reading, writeing, and casting accounts, whose lessons may be in such
profitable English-Books as the Parents can best provide, and the Master think
fittest to be taught.

6. Let their lessons be the same to each boy in every form, and let the Master
proportion them to the meanest capacities, thus those that are abler may profit
themselves by helping their weaker fellows, and those that are weaker be
encouraged to see that they can keep company with the stronger. And let the two
highest in every form give notice to the Master when they come to say, of
those that were most negligent in geting the lesson.

7. When they come to say, let them all stand orderly in one or 2 rows, and
whilst one says his lesson, be sure that all the rest look upon their books,
and give liberty to him that's next to correct him that is saying if he mistake,
and in case he can say better, let him take his place, and keep it till the
same boy or another win it from him. The striveing for places (especially)
amongst little ones, will whet them all on to more diligence, then any
encouragement that can be given them; and the Master should be very sparing to
whip any one for his book, except he be sullenly negligent, and then also I
would choose rather to shame him out of his untowardnesse by commending some of
his fellows, and asking him why he cannot do as well as they, then by falling
upon him with rating words, or injurious blows. A great care also must be had
that those children that are slow witted and of a tender spirit, be not any way
discouraged, though they cannot make so good performance of their task as the
rest of their fellows.

8 On Mundayes, Wednesdayes and Fridayes they may say two lessons in a forenoon
and two in an afternoon; and on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the forenoons they
may also say two lessons; but on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the afternoons,
and on Saturday mornings I would have the time spent in examineing, and
directing how to spell and read a right, and hearing them say the Graces,
Prayers, and Psalms, and especially the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments (which are for that purpose set down in the New-Primar) very
perfectly by heart. And those that can these well may proceed to get other
Catechisms, but be sure they be such as agree with the Principles of Christian
Religion.

9. Their lessons being all said, they should be dismissed about eleven a
clock, and then care must be taken that they go every one orderly out of the
School, and pass quietly home without any stay by the way. And to prevent
that too too common clamor, and crouding out of the School door, let them
rise out of their places one by one with their hat, and book in their hand, and
make their honors to their Master as they pass before his face, one following
another at a distance out of the School. It were fittest and safest that the
least went out the foremost, that the bigger boys following may give notice of
any misdemeanour upon the way.

10 Their return to School in the afternoon should be by one of the clock,
and those that come before that hour, should be permitted to play within their
bounds till the clock strike one, and then let them all take their places in
due order, and say their lessons as they did in the fore-noon. After lessons
ended, let one read a chapter, and say a Prayer, and so let them again go
orderly and quietly home, about five a clock in the summer, and four in the
winter season.

11. If necessity require any one to go out in the School time, let him not
interrupt the Master by asking him leave, but let him leave his book with his
next fellow above him, for fear he should else spoil it, or loose it, and in
case he tarry too long forth, let notice be given to the Monitor.

12. Those children in the upper form may be monitors, every one a day in his
turn, and let them every evening after all lessons said, give a bill to the
Master of their names that are absent and theirs that have committed any
disorder; and let him be very moderate in correcting, and be sure to make a
difference betwixt those faults that are vitiously enormous, and those that are
but childish transgressons; Where admonitions readily take place, it is a
needless trouble to use a rod, and as for a ferula I wish it were utterly
banished out of all Schools.

If one, before I conclude, should ask me, how many children I think may be
well and profitably taught (according to the method already proposed) in a
Petty-School; I return him answer, that I conceive forty boys will be enough
thoroughly to employ one man, to hear every one so often as is required, and so
many he may hear and benefit of himself, without making use of any of his
Scholars to teach the rest, which however it may be permitted, and is practiced
in some Schools, yet it occasioneth too much noise and disorder, and is no
whit so acceptable to Parents, or pleasing to the children, be the work never
so well done. And therefore I advise, that in a place where a great concours of
children may be had, there be more Masters then one employed according to the
spatiousnesse of the room, and the number of boys to be taught; so that every
forty Scholars may have one to teach them; and in case there be boys enough
to be taught, I would appoint one single Master, to attend one single form,
and have as many Masters as there are forms, and then the work of teaching
little ones to the height of their best improvement may be throwly done,
esecially if there were a writeing-master employed at certain hours in the
School, and an experienced Teacher encouraged as a supervisor, or inspector,
to see that the whole School be well and orderly taught, and disciplined.

What I have here writ concerning the Teaching and ordering of a Petty-Schoole,
was in many particulars experienced by my self with a few little boys, that I
taught amongst my Grammar-Scholars in London, and I know those of eminent
worth, and great learning that upon trial made upon their own children at home,
and others at School are ready to attest the ease and benefit of this method.
Insomuch as I was resolved to have adjoined a Petty-Schoole to my
Grammar-Schoole at the Token-house in Lothbury London, and there to have
proceeded in this familiar and pleasing way of Teaching, had I not been
unhansomly dealt with by those whom it concerned, for their own profit sake to
have given me less discouragement. Nevertheless, I think it my duty to
promote Learning what I can, and to lay a sure foundation for such a goodly
structure as learning is; And though (perhaps) I may never be able to effect
what I desire for its advancement, yet it will be my comfort, to have imparted
somewhat to others that may help thereunto. I have here begun at the very ground
work, intending (by Gods blessing) forthwith to publish The New Discovery of
the Old Art of Teaching, which does properly belong to a Grammar-Schoole.

In the mean time I entreat those into whose hands this little work may come,
to look upon it with a single eye, and whether they like or dislike it, to
think that it is not unnecessary for men of greatest parts to bestow a sheet or
two at leisure time upon so mean a subject as this seems to be. And that God
which causes immense rivers to flow from small spring-heads, vouchsafe to
bless these weak beginings in tender age, that good learning may proceed hence
to its full perfection in riper years.

FINIS.
THE Usher's Duty, OR A PLAT-FORME of Teaching LILIES Grammar. By C. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's Church
Yard, 1659.

THE Usher's Duty, OR A Plat-forme of Teaching Lilies Grammar.
CHAP. I.
How to help Children that are imperfect in reading English, when they are
brought to the Grammar-Schoole; and how to prepare them for more easy entrance
upon Latin.
THE want of good Teachers of English in most places where Grammar-Schooles are
erected, causes that many Children are brought thither to learn the Latin
Tongue, before they can read well. And this chiefly, to prevent their loss of
time with those that can teach them no further.

Now such Scholars for the most part become the greatest disgrace to the Master
of all the rest, partly because indiscreet and illiterate parents (I will not
say servants) that can scarcely read English themselves, become too severe
judges of his work, and partly because he seems to some to undervalue himself
by admiting Petties into his School. But for the toil and trouble that he has
in teaching such, I rather seek how to remedy it, then go about in words to
express it.

To help therefore that defect of reading English aright, you may take this, as
the most useful course.

1. Let them read a Chapter every morning, and every noon in the New Testament,
and at ten and four a clock, a piece of the Accidents, which will require (at
least) a quarter of a year to be read over, in case the children be very
imperfect, but in case they be any whit ready, it may be gone over in six weeks
time.

2. To exercise their slender memories at their first coming to School, and to
find them some little task overnight (to which they should be inured at the
first, that they may not take it more hardly afterward) let them commit to
memory some few staves of such Psalms in Meeter, as you in your discretion
shall think best to suit with their shallow apprehensions: Psalm. 1. 4. 12. 15.
19. 25. 34. 67. 100. 103, 104 119. are excellent for this purpose.

That they may be more perfect in their lessons before they come to say;

1. It were good, if you did now and then read a piece for their imitation,
observing the just and full pronounciation of each syllable, and making pauses
as they come.

2. But especially as they sit in their form, see that every one after another
read the Lesson twice or thrice over (the highest, because the most able
beginning to read first) and cause that every one attend diligently to what is
read, looking constantly upon his book, and let them have liberty (who can
soonest) to correct him that reads any word amiss, and to note it as his
mistake. But in this a care must be had that they make no noise nor disturbance
to the rest of the School.

3. When they come to say, let every one in that order you shall appoint
(beginning either with the highest or lowest, or otherwise) read the whole
Lesson, or a piece of it, as the time will best permit you to hear them, and
when the lesson is gone often enough over, you may propound a familiar and
short question or two out of it, thereby to make somewhat of its meaning stick
in their memories, and dismiss them to their places to ask one another the
like.

But because the Accidents as it is now Printed (especially that part of it
which concerns the conjugateing of verbs) is too full of difficult
Abbreviations for the most Children to read, or some Masters (that undertake
it) to teach; I have found a great advantage and ease by making use of the
examination of the Accidents, before I put them to read the Accidents it self,
especially with some more dull-witted boys, that I could not otherwise fasten
upon; and the way I used, it was this: I caused,

1. That Children should read over only the first part of it, which concerns
the Introduction of the eight parts of Speech, by taking so much at a time, as
they could well be able to read, and belonged to one or more particular heads
of Grammar. Thus in the first going it over, I made them acquainted with the
usual terms of Grammar-Art, so as to be able (at least) to turn to a Noun,
Pronoune, Verb, etc. and to what belong to them, as, to the Numbers, Cases,
Persons, Moods, etc. and to tell how many there are of each.

And in the second reading it over, I ta^ght them to take notice what every
part of speech is, and how it differs from others, and what things belong to
every one of them. And this I did by English examples, which best help to
instruct their understandings in the meaning of what they read, and confirm
their memories to keep it. Ex. gr. having showed them in their Book, that a
Noun is the name of a thing, and that it is substantive, or Adjective, and has
Numbers, Cases, Genders, Declensions, and Degrees of Comparison; I instance
several words, as, a horse, of men, sweet honey, with sweeter words, and let
the Children who can readiliest, tell me what belong to them. This is (as Mr.
Woodward very well expresses it in his Light to Grammar, chap. 2. To Teach a
Child to carry a Torch or Lanthorn in his hand, that thereby the understanding
may do its office, and put to memory to do hers; to slip into a Childs
understanding before he be aware, so as he shall have done his task, before he
shall suspect that any was imposed; he shall do his work playing, and play
working; he shall seem idle and think he is in sport, when he is indeed
seriously and well employed. This is done (says he) by Praecognition, for it
convey's a light into the understanding, which the child has lighted at his
own candle.

Now forasmuch as the way of working hereby is, when the inward senses of the
Child are instructed by the outward, and the more help one has of the
outward, the surer and firmer the instruction is within; I cannot but here give
notice of Mr. Comm^nius's Orbis Pictus, as a most rare devise for Teaching of a
Child at once to know things and words by pictures, which may also serve for
the more perfect and pleasant reading of the English and Latin Tongues, and
entering, a child upon his Accidents; if the dearnesse of the book (by reason
of the brass cuts in it) did not make it too hard to come by.

But where the book may be readily had (as who would not bestow four or five
shillings more then ordinary to profit and please a Son?) I would advise that a
child should bring it with him at his first coming to a Grammar-Schoole, and be
employed in it together with his Accidents, till he can write a good legible
hand, and then a Master may adventure to ground him well in Orthography, and
Etymology, by using that Book according to the directions already given in the
Preface before it, and causing him every day to write a Chapter of it in
English and Latin.

He that would be further instructed how by teaching English more
Grammatically, to prepare his Scholars for Latin, let him consult Mr. Pool's
English Accidents, and Mr. Wharton's English Grammar, as the best books that I
know at present, for that purpose.

CHAP. II.
How to teach Children in the first Form, the Grounds or Rudiments of Grammar
contained in the Accidents, and to prepare them for the Latin tongue with ease
and delight.
BEing here to deliver my mind concerning entering little ones, by way of
Grammar, to the Latin Tongue, (a matter which I may truly say has (ever
since* I began to teach) cost me more study and observation, then any one
point of my profession, and the more because I see few able Schoolmasters
vouchsafe so far to unman themselves as to mind it. I desire three things may
be considered by all that go about to enter children to Grammar-Learning, viz.
that

1. There is a great difference betwixt a man that teaches, and a Child that
is to be taught. For though I do not altogether hold with him that says a man
in his Childe-hood is no better then a bruitbeast, and uses no power but anger
and concupiscence; nor take upon me here to dispute whether a Child learneth
more by rote then by reason, yet this I dare aver, that the more condescension
is made to a Childs capacity, by proceeding orderly and plainly from what he
knows already, to what does naturally and necessarily follow thereupon, the
more easily he will learn. A man therefore that has the strength and full use
of reason, must conduct his young learner, to follow him in a rational way,
though he must not expect him to go aequis possibus, as fast as himself. And
forasmuch as a child is tender, a man must abate of his roughness; seeing a
child is slow of apprehension, he must not be too quick in his delivery; and
seeing a child is naturally awkward to his work, he must not be too
passionate, if he do amiss. Tullies observation is that, Quo quis doctior est,
eo iracundius docet; and Mr. Mulcaster gives notice that there is a number of
discoursers that can say pretty well to a general Position, but show themselves
altogether lame in the particular applying it, which is a thing that attends
only upon experience and years. He would therefore (and that rightly) have a
^rainer of youth reclaimed unto discretion, whose commendation Aristotle
places in the skill of specialities. And I would advise him that has to deal
with a child, to imitate the nurse in helping him how to go forward, or the
Gardener in furthering the growth of his young plant. Est and hac summi ingenii
maxima infirmitas non posse descendere, says a Teacher of eloquence; Tall
wits, like long backs, cannot abide to stoop, but whosoever is a
Schoolmasters, and would do his duty as he ought, must account it a point of
wisdom to condescend to a childs capacity, be it never so mean. How have I
delighted to see an Artist (I mean a watchmaker or the like) spend an hour or
two sometimes in findeing a defect in a piece of work, which he has afterward
remedied in the turning of a hand; whereas a more hasty workman has been
ready to throw the thing aside, and to neglect it as good for no use. Let the
Master ever mind where a child sticks, and remove the impediments out of his
way, and his Scholar will take pleasure, that he can go on in learning.

2. There is a great disproportion betwixt a Childs capacity, and the
Accidents it self. Children are lead most by sense, and the Grammar-rules,
consisting in general Doctrines are too subtle for them; Childrens wits are
weak, active, and lively, whereas Grammar notions are abstractive, dull, and
livelesse; boys find no sap, nor sweetness in them, because they know not
what they mean; and tell them the meaning of the same rule never so often over,
their memories are so waterish, that the impression (if any were made in the
brain) is quickly gone out again. Roat runs on apace and minds nothing so
much as play; and it is very hard to teach a child in doing of a thing to
heed, much less to judge what he does, till he feel some use of reason, in the
mean time, he will profit more by continual practice and being kept still (as
he loves to be) doing, then by knowing why, and being called upon to consider
the causes wherefore he does this or that.

Besides, it will clearly appear to any that shall but mind the confused order
(especially of the verbs) and the perplexity of some Rules and Examples, that,
that book was rather made to inform those of riper years, who knew something
of Latin before, with the reasons of what they knew, then to direct little
ones (as we do now) to use it as a rule about that, whereof they are ignorant
altogether.

3. It is one thing to learn the Latin Tongue, or any other Language, and
another to learn the Grammar, as a guide to it, or a means to attain the reason
of it; we see how readily children learn to speak true and proper English (and
they may also do the same in Latin by daily use and imitation of others, long
before they are able to apprehend a definition of what Grammar is, or any thing
else concerning it. And the reason hereof is, because the first is a work of
the imagination and memory, which are apt to take and keep impressions, having
the senses to help them, but the other belongs to the understanding, which for
want of the strength of reason to assist it, is hard to be wrought upon in a
child, and till the memory and understanding go hand in hand, a child learns
nothing to any purpose. Hence it comes to pass, that Grammar-learning (as it
is generally now used) becomes a a work of more difficulty and discouragement
both to Master and Scholar, then any study or employment they undertake, and
that many have striven to contrive more facill Grammars for their Scholars,
whereas indeed the right and constant use of any one that is complete, so as to
handle the s^bctjectum totale of the Art, does easily reduce all others to
its-selfe, especially after the Language is somewhat gained.

These things thus premised, I conceive it very necessary for all such as
undertake to teach Grammar to little children, to cherish and exercise those
endowments which they see do show themselves most vigorous and prompt in them,
be they memory, fancy, etc. and to proceed orderly and by degrees (for so
nature it self does) that they may be able to hold pace with their Teachers,
and to perceive how themselves mount higher and higher, and at every asscent to
know where they are, and how to adventure boldly to go forward of themselves.
And forasmuch as the Accidents is generally made use of as an introduction to
Latin Grammar, (which of it self is but a bare rule, and a very naked thing,
as Mr. M^lchaster has well observed) and it is one thing to speak like a
Grammarian, and another thing to speak like a Latinist, as Quintilian has
noted) it is fit that both the Accidents and the Latin tongue together should
be brought within Childrens reach, and made more familiar unto them then
formerly. And how this may be done even with those of seven years of age, or
under, I shall now go on to discover according to what I have tried, and do
every day still put in practice. But this I require aforehand (which Mr.
M^lchaster also wished for) that a child may have his reading perfect, and
ready in both the English and Latin tongue, and that he can write a fair hand
before ever he dream of his Grammar. For these will make him he shall never
complain of after difficulties, but cheerfully make a wonderful riddance in
the rest of his learning.

The commonly received way to teach children the first Rudiments of
Latine-Speech is, to put them to read the Accidents once or twice over, and
then to let them get it without book by several parts, not respecting at all
whether they understand it, or not. Thus they spend two or three years (for the
most part) in a wearisome toil to no purpose, not knowing all the while what
use they are to make of their book, nor what the learning of such a multitude
of Rules may tend to, and in the interim of getting the Accidents by heart (if
great care be not taken) they loose that ability of Reading English, which they
brought from the Petty-Schoole; and this makes the Parents cry out against
Learning Latin, and complain of their Childrens not profiting at the
Grammar-Schooles, whence they are therefore sometimes taken and sent back again
to a Mistress of Dame to learn English better. The conscientious Master all
the while striveing to the uttermost of his strength and skill to preserve his
credit, and not knowing well how to remedy this mischief otherwise, then by
hastening on the Children in this common road, does over-toyl (if not destroy)
himself, and discourage (if not drive away) his Scholars, by his too much
diligence.

Having therefore made sure that the little Scholars can read very well, and
write plainly beforehand, put so many of them as are well able to hold pace
together into one form, and begin to teach them their Accidents in an
understanding manner, thus,

1. Give them a glymps or insight into the introduction or first part of it, by
dividing it into twelve parts, and making them to take notice of the chief
heads in every one; whereof, The first may be, concerning the eight parts of
speech, of a Noun and its kinds, of Numbers, Cases, and Genders.

The second of the Declensions of Nounes substantives.

The third, of the declining of Adjectives, and their comparison.

The fourth, of a Pronoune.

The fifth, of a Verb and its Kinds, Moodes, Gerunds, Supines, Tenses, Persons
and conjugations.

The sixth, of the Conjugateing of Verbs in O.

The seventh, Of the Verb Sum.

The eighth, Of Verbs in OR.

The ninth, Of Verbs irregular, as Poss^m, etc.

The tenth, Of a Participle.

The eleventh, Of an Adverb.

The twelfth, Of a Conjunction, a Praeposition, and an Interjection.

By this means they shall know the general terms of Grammar, and where to turn
to any Part of Speech, and to what belongs to it in the Book. As they get their
Parts, make them one to hear another read it over in their seat as they sit
orderly; as they say, let every one read a greater or lesser share, as you
please to appoint, and make the rest attend to him that reads; after they
have said, one may take the examination of the Accidents, and out of it ask the
questions belonging to their present Part, to which the others may make answer
out of the words of their Accidents, which if they cannot readily do, he may
tell them out of his Book; and if your self sometime examine them in the most
familiar and general questions, it will help them to understand, and sharpen
their memories very much for the getting of that by heart, whereof they already
know somewhat.

2. When they get the Introduction memoriter, let them take but a very little
at once, that they may get it more perfectly in a little time, and this will be
a means still to hearten them on to a new lesson, but be sure that every lesson
end at a full Period; and that none may seem to be overcharged or hindered, let
always the weakest child appoint the task, and cause the stronger to help him
to perform it as he ought.

Forasmuch as your Scholars memories are yet very weak and slipperie, it is not
amiss to help them by more frequent Repetitions, especially at the end of
every part of speech, which they should examine so often over, till they can
answer to any thing, that is in their book concerning it. Then let them proceed
to the next in like manner, not forgetting to recall the more general and
necessary points to memory from the very beginning, and this will be a means
to make them keep all fresh in mind, and to be able to tell you what Part of
Speech any word is which you shall name, either in English or Latin, and what
belongs to it, which is one main end for which the introduction was made; you
may now and then exercise them in distinguishing the eight Parts of Speech, by
giving them a Period, and after they have writ it out, making them to mark
every word what part of Speech it by these figures, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

3. But as they get the introduction by heart, and learn to answer to the
questions raised out of it, an especial care and pains must be taken ever and
anon, to make them very perfect in declining Nounes, and formeing Verbs. Let
them therefore as it were by by-tasks, get the examples of the Nounes, and
Verbs very perfectly, which are set down in their Accidents.

Then, First let them decline the Articles severally or jointly, for by these
they may know the Gender, Case, and Number of a Noun, though many learned
Grammarians of late do leave them off as useless. Harum Musarum was formerly,
as much as to say that Musarum is of the Feminine Gender, Genitive Case, and
Plural Number; And whereas the Rule begins with the Genitive Case, do you
supply the Nominative thus,

2. Cause them with every example to join the Rule of the Declension, and
thereby to know the due Termination of every case in both Numbers, saying the
English sometimes before, and sometimes after the Latin, the Nom. case
singular of the first declension ends in a, as Nominative Hac Musa a song;
the Genitive in ae, as Hujus Musae of a song, the Dative in ae, as Huic Musae,
to a song, etc.

3. Let them give you the bare Terminations of every declension in each case in
both numbers, as to say, The Terminations of the first declension throughout
all cases in both Numbers are, Singulariter, Nom. a, Genesis ae. Dat. ae, Accuam,
etc.

The Terminations of the Nominative case singular of the five Declensions are,
of the first, a. of the second r, us, um- of the third a, c, e, i, l, n, o, r,
s, t, x. of the fourth us. of the fifth es.

The Terminations of the Genitive case singular of the five Declensions are, Of
the first ae, the second i, the third is, the fourth us, the fifth ei, etc. And
let them take especial notice of the endings of the Genitive case singular,
because thereby they may know of what declension a Noun is, when they find it
in a Vocabulary, or Dictionary.

4. Furnish them out of their Vocabularie or otherwise, with store of examples
for every several Declension, till they can readily decline any regular Noune;
but then especially mind them of the Voca. singular of those Nounes that end in
us of the second Declension, and of those that are of the neuter Gender, of the
second, third, or 4th declension, and what cases they make all alike in both
numbers.

5. Exercise them in declining Nounes so often, till they can tell you at once
the termination of any case in either number in one or all the declensions, and
say on a sudden what any Noune you name to them does make in any one case of
each Number in English or Latin. As, if you ask them of what declension, case
and number this termination os is, they can presently answer, that os is of the
second declension, Accu. case and plural number; or, if you ask them of what
Declension, Case and Number virtute is, they can answer, that virtute is of the
third declension, the Ablative case and singular number. So in English, if you
should say with a pen, they can tell you it is the Ablative case and singular
number, and therefore must be said in Latin Penna. Or if in Latin you should
say pennas, they can tell you it is of the accusative case plural number, and
must be said in English pens or the pens.

6. In declining Adjectives cause them to mind to what declension their
several genders belong, and after they can parse every Gender alone by it self,
teach them join it to a substantive of the same or a different declension, with
the English either before or after the Latin, thus; Singulariter Nominativo
Pura charta, fair paper, Genesis purae chartae, of fair paper, etc. Sing. nom.
novus Liber a new Book, Genesis novi Libri of a new Book, etc. Sing. Nom. Dulcis
conjux. a sweet wife, Gen Dulcis Conjugis, of a sweet wife, etc Edentula anus a
toothless old-woman, Genesis edentulae anus, of a toothless old-woman, etc.
Frigida glacies, cold ice, Genitivo, frigidae glaciei of cold ice, etc. Gravis
Turba, a troublesome rout, Genesis Gravis Turbae of a troublesome, rout, etc.
Magnum Onus, a great burden, Genesis magni oneris, of a great burden, etc.

7. Accquaint them well with the manner of forming the three degrees of
comparison, by showing them how the comparative and superlative are made of the
positive, according to the rules, and then let them decline an adjective in all
the degrees together throughout all cases and Genders in both Numbers, as well
English as Latin, thus; Sing Nom. durus hard, durior harder, durissimus very
hard; dura hard, durior harder, durissima very hard; durum hard, durius harder,
durissimum very hard; Genesis duri of hard, durioris of harder, durissimi of very
hard, etc. Sing. Nom. felix happy, felicior more happy, felicissimus, most
happy; felix happy, felicion more happy, felicissima most happy; felix happy,
felicius more happy, felicissimum most happy. Genesis felicis of happy, felicioris
of more happy, felicissimi of most happy, etc. then teach them to join a
Substantive with any one or all of the Degrees, thus, Injustus pater, a harsh
father, iujusta matter, an unjust mother, injustum animal, an unjust creature.
Indoctus puer, an unlearned boy. Indoctior puella a more unlearned girl.
Indoctissimum vulgus the most unlearned common people.

8. To help them the better to perform this profitable exercise of themselves,
let them sometimes write a Noun, which you appoint them, at large, and
distinguish betwixt that part of it which is moveable, and that which is
immovable; I mean betwixt the forepart of the word, and its termination,
thus: Sing. Nom. Mens-a a Table, Genesis Mens-ae to a Table. Dat. Mens-ae, to a
Table, etc. to the end.

Thus likewise they may be exercised in writing out Substantives, and
Adjectives, and forming the degrees of comparison, with which work they will be
exceedingly much delighted, when once they can write, and by once writing, they
will better discern what they do, then by ten times telling over; which makes
me again press hard, that either a child may be able to write before he be put
to the Grammar School, or else be put to learn to write so soon as he comes
thither. For besides the confused disorder it will make in a School, when some
children are fitted to undergo their taskes, and others are not, they that can
write, shall be sure to profit in Grammar learning, whereas they that cannot,
will do little but disturb the School, and hinder their fellows, and bring a
shame upon their Master, and a blame upon themselves, because they do not learn
faster. And, alas poor child, how should he be made to go that wants his
legs? if he go upon crutches, it is but lamely. And how should he be taught
Grammar, which is the Art of right writing, as well as speaking, that cannot
write at all? I wish they that take upon them to teach boys Grammar before
they can write, would but take upon them the trouble to teach one to speak
well, that cannot speak at all. But I say no more of this subject, for though
what I say have seemed to some a mere Paradox, yet upon trial, they have found
it a plain real Truth; and such as nay man in reason will assent to.

As for that which is generally objected, that whilst children are young, their
hands are unsteady, and therefore they should go on at their books, till they
grow more firm; it will quickly be found a mere idle fancy, when such
objecters shall see less children then their own every day practice fair
writing, and make more speedy progress at their books by so doing.

Now touching verbs.

1. Be sure that children be well acquainted with the different kinds of them,
distinguished, both by signification and termination; as also with their Moods,
Tenses, and Signs of them, and with the characteristical letters of the four
conjugations (which are a long, and e long, and e short, and i long.) And as
they con^ugate a verb, let them take more particular notice of its Present
tense, Preterperfect tense, and first Supine, because of these, all other
tenses are formed; and these therefore are specified in every Dictionary.

2. Let them first repeat over the verb Sum, according to four Moods only,
(the Optative, Potential, and Subjunctive being the same in all verbs) because
it has a proper manner of declincing, and is most frequently used, and will be
helpful to form the Pretertenses in the Passive voice, which consist of a
Participle joined with it.

3. Let them get the Active voice very perfectly by heart, and afterward the
Passive, (though they do it more leasurely, taking but one Mood at a lesson)
and let them not now repeat the paradigmes as they stand confusedly together in
their book, but sever them one from another, and go on with one at once, viz.
Amo, by it self, Doceo, by it self, Lego by it self, and Audio by it self,
through all Moods, Tenses, Numbers, and Persons, giving the English with the
Latin, sometimes putting the one before, and sometimes the other. And be sure
to make them mind all the signs in English, and the terminations answering to
them in Latin.

4. Then teach them to form only the first person singular of every conjugation
severally, both with Latin before English, and English before Latin; as, Amo
I love, Amabam I did love, etc. or I love Amo, I did love Amabam, etc.

5. Cause them again to form only the Present tense, with the tenses that
depend more immediately upon it, and then the Preter tense, with those that are
formed of it. And give them here to observe the Rule in their Accidents
touching the Formation of the Tenses, which is more easy to be delivered and
remembered, thus; All tenses that end in ram, rim, ssem, to, sse, are formed of
the Preter tense, and all the rest of the Present tense, according to the
Latin verse.

Ram, rim, ssem, to, sse; formabit caetera Praesens. 6. Make them to give you
the terminations of the first person singular throughout all Moods and Tenses,
of each several Conjugation, as to say, The terminations of the first persons
singular in the first Conjugation are o, abam, avi, averam, abo, etc. Then let
them run over the Terminations of all the Persons in both Numbers of every Mood
and Tense in the several Conjugations, as to say; The Terminations of the
Indicative Mood Present tense of the first Conjugation are, o, as, at, amus,
atis, ant. Of the Preterimperfect-tense, abam, abas, abat, etc.

7. Let them join the Terminations of the first person, with the signs of
every Tense in both voices, thus, o do, bam, did, i have ram had bo shall or
will, etc. or am, bar, was, us sum vel tui, have been, us eram vel fueram, had
been, bor, shall be, etc. throughout all the Conjugations. And let them withal
take notice how the three persons in both numbers differ both in signification
and ending, as I o and r, thou s and ris, he t and tur, we mus and mur, ye it is
and ni, they nt or ntur.

8. Let them repeat the Active and the Passive voice together, and compare them
one with another, as they form them in all persons throughtout each Mood and
Tense of every Conjugation, thus; Amo I love, Amor I am loved. Amabam I did
love, Amabar I was loved, etc.

9. Exercise them well in so many several examples of the four Conjugations,
as that on a sudden they can render you any Verb out of Latin into English,
or out of English into Latin, with its right Mood, Tense, Number, and person,
you telling them the first word of it, or they knowing it beforehand, as if
you say we have run, they can answer cucurrimus; or if you say, I shall blot,
they can answer maculabo, having learnt that Curro is Latin for to run; and
that maculo signifies to blot. To make them more fully acquainted with the
variation of a verb, it were good sometimes for them to write one out at full
length, both in English and Latin, making a line betwixt the alterable part of
it, and the termination (which remains alike to all, thus, Voc-o I call,
voc-as thou call, voc-at he calls, etc.

N. B. The Nouns and Verbs being thus perfectly gotten at the first, (till
which be done, the Preface before the Grammar counts not the Scholar ready to
go any further, and says it may be done with a quarter of a years diligence,
or very little more) the difficulty of the Latin tongue will be quite
over-past, and a child will more surely and heedfully learn them thus singly
by themselves, then by long practice in parsing and making Latin, because then
he is to attend many other things together with them, for the better
observation whereof, these will abundantly prepare him.

And because all children are not so quick-witted, as fully to apprehend the
various alteration of the Nouns and Verbs, till after long and continued
practice, it were good if a time were set apart once a week, wherein all the
Scholars (especially of the three lower forms, and those in the upper that are
less expert, as having perhaps come from a School wherein they were never thus
exercised) may be constantly employed in this most profitable exercise. And for
more ready dispatch, amongst a multitude, it is not amiss if they repeat them
through in a round word by word, saying every one in order after another, thus:
1. Sing. Nom Musa, a Song, 2. Genesis Musae of a Song. 3. Dat. Musae to a Song, 4.
Accus. Musam the song, etc. till they have gone through all the Declensions, and
Conjugations, and the forementioned variety of practice upon them, according as
we may observe Corderius in his Colloquies, to have given us a hint. And to
stir them all up to more attentiveness, the Master may (unexpectedly
sometimes) ask the case of a Noun, or the Mood and Tense of a Verb, of one
that he espieth more negligent in minding, then the rest.

As an Help to the better performance of this necessary task, I provided a
little book of one sheet, containing the Terminations and Examples of the
Declensions, and Conjugations, which the less experienced may make use of, till
they can exercise themselves without it; by the frequent impression, and ready
sale whereof, I guess it has not been unacceptable to those of my profession,
for the purpose whereto I intended it: and I have sometimes in one afternoon
made a through practice of all that has here been mentioned touching Nouns and
Verbs, without any wearisomness at all to my self, or irksomness to my
Scholars, who are generally impatient of any long work, if it be not full of
variety, and easy to be performed.

Some little pains would also be taken with the Pronounes, so as to show their
number, distinction, manner, of declining both in English and Latin, and their
persons: and then with the Participles to mind how their four tenses are
distinguished both by their signification and ending, and how they are
declined, like Adjectives.

Touching Adverbs, Conjunctions, and Interjections, they need only to tell of
what signification they are; and touching Prepositions, let them observe which
serve to an Accusative case, which to an Ablative, and which to both.

Now for the more orderly dispatch of this first part of the Accidents and the
better learning of every part of it, not by rote, but by reason; and to make
children more cunning in the understanding of the things, then in rehearsing of
the words, and to fasten it well in their memories; I have found it very
profitable to set apart two afternoons in a week (commonly Tuesdayes and
Thursdayes) for the examination of it all quite through, causing one side of a
Form to ask the questions out of the examination of the Accidents, and the
other to answer according to the words of their book, and whether they do this
exactly memoriter, or sometimes looking upon the book, it makes no matter; for
the often practice hereof, will be sure to fix it after a little while in their
understanding and memories so fast, that they will have it ready for use,
against they come to the second part of the Accidents, which concerns
Concordance and Construction.

N. B. When children first begin their Introduction, they may provide a little
vocabulary (if the Orbis Pictus be too dear, out of which they should be made
to read over a Chapter every day, at one or four a clock, and when it is read
over you may see who can give you the most names of things under one head, both
English and Latin, and let him that tells you the most, have some little
reward for encouragement, to draw on others in hope of the like, to do as well
as he. This profitable exercise was often used by Corderius, and is an
excellent mean to help children to store of words, which are indeed the subject
about which Grammar is conversant, so that to teach one Grammar without giving
him some knowledge of words, is to teach him to tie a knot, that has not a
string to tie it upon. They may say the Introduction for parts, and the
Vocabulary for lessons, (as you please) and when ever they go out about
necessitous business, be sure they say (at least) four words of those which
they have learnt, and let them always carry their Vocabulary about with them,
to be looking into it for words.

Thus then I allow one half year for boys in the lowest form, that can read
and write before hand, to learn the first part of the Accidents, and how to
call things by their Latin names, making use of a Vocabulary.

And then I would have them divide the whole Introduction into twelve parts,
(as they did at the first reading of it over) and repeat constantly every
morning one by heart, to fix it well in the memory: and for fore-noon lessons
(to be said about ten of clock) they may proceed to the second part of the
Accidents, commonly called the English Rules, for the perfect knowledge and
exercise whereof, they may profitably spend the succeeding half year.

In getting whereof, because custom has every where carried it (contrary to
those excellent directions given in the Preface to the Reader, of which Mr.
Hayne mentions Cardinal W^lsey to have been the Author) for children first
to read them over, and afterward to con them by heart as they stand in the
book, (making it a work merely for the memory, which some children are good at,
though they understand nothing at all; and therefore many unskilful Masters,
not knowing how to do otherwise, especially with boys that cannot write, let
them run on by rote, presuming that when they have got the Rules thus, they may
be afterward made to understand them by practice in parsing) I will go along
with the stream, and allow my Scholars to get them by heart, saying two or
three Rules at a time, as they do in most schools; and as they do this, I
would have them chiefly to take notice of the Titles, or Heads, and which are
the general Rules, and which are the Observations, and Exceptions made
concerning it, that by this means they may learn to turn readily to any one of
them that shall be called for. But that children may best understand, and
soonest conceive the reason of the Rules, and thereby be made acquainted with
the f^shion of the Latin Tongue, (which is the main scope that this part of
the Accidents aims at) I would have them daily exercised in the practice of
Concordance and Construction (which will also confirm and ready them in the
Introduction) after this manner.

1. Let them mark out the more general and necessary Rules (as they go along)
with their examples, and after they have got them perfectly by heart, let them
construe and parse the words in the Example, and apply the Rule to the words to
which it belongs, and wherein its force lies.

2. Let them have so many other examples besides those that are in their book,
as may clearly illustrate and evidence the meaning of the Rule, and let them
make it wholly their own by practicing upon it, either in imitating their
present examples, or propounding others as plain. Thus that examples to the
Rule of the first Concord may be first imitated; Praeceptor legit, vos vero
negligitis. The Master reads; and ye regard not. The Pastors preach, and
people regard not. I speak, and ye hear not. We have read, and thou mindest
not. And the like may be propounded, as, whilst the Cat sleeps, the Mice
dance. When the Master is away, the boys will play. Thou neglectest, when I
write. And these the children should make out of English into Latin, unto
which you should still add more, till they be able by themselves to practice
according to the Rule.

3. After they have thus gone over the general Rules, Let them together with
one Rule get its exceptions, and observations, as they lie in order, and learn
how they differ from the Rule, and be sure that they construe and parse every
example, and imitate, and make another agreeable to the Rule, observation or
exception, as is showed before.

N. B. Now forasmuch as little ones are too too apt to forget any thing that
has been told them concerning the meaning of a rule and the like, and some
indeed are of more leasurely apprehensions then others, that require a little
consideration of a thing before they can conceive it rightly, they may be
helped by making use of the second part of the Accidents examined; wherein,

1. The Rules are delivered by easy and short questions and answers, and all
the examples are Englished, and the words wherein the force of the example
lies are applied to the rule.

2. The examples are Grammatically construed, and all the first words in them
set down in the margent, and referred to an Index, which shows what part of
Speech they are, and how to be declined or conjugated. This I contrived at the
first as a means to prevent Childrens gadding out of their places, under a
pretense of asking abler boys to help them in construing and parsing these
examples, but upon trial I found it a great ease to my self for telling the
same things often over, and a notable encouragement to my Scholars to go about
their lessons, who always go merrilier about their task, when they know how to
resolve themselves in any thing they doubt.

4. When they have got the second Part of the Accidents well by heart, and
understand it (at least) so far as to be able to give you any rule you call
for, you may divide it also into eight parts, according to the heads set down
in the book, whereof, the

First, May be concerning the first, second, and third Concord.

The second, concerning the case of the relative, and the Construction of
Substantives.

The third, concerning the Construction of Adjectives, and of a Pronoune.

The fourth, concerning the construction of Verbs with a Nominative, and
Genitive Case.

The fifth, concerning the construction of Verbs with a Dative, Accusative and
Ablative Case.

The sixth, concerning the construction of Passives, Gerunds and Supines.

The seventh, concerning time, space, place and impersonals.

The eighth, concerning the Participle, the Adverb, the Conjunction, the
Praeposition, and the Interjection; which being added to the foregoing twelve,
the whole Accidents may be easily passed over at twenty Parts, and kept surely
in mind by repeating it once a month for morning Parts, and examining it every
Tuesday and Thursday in the afternoon.

As they made use of the Vocabulary, together with the first part of the
Accidents, so may they join Sententiae Puerilis, with the second; which book I
would have them to provide both in English and Latin.

1. Because it renders the Book more grateful to Children, who by reading their
Lessons in their Mothers tongue, know better what to make of them.

2. Because they are apt to mistake what they have been construed, especially
in words that have various significations.

3. Their memories being short, they must be told the same word as often as they
ask it ere they come to say, and when they come (perhaps) they cannot construe
one Sentence to any purpose.

As they learn this book, let them but take three or four lines at once, which
they should,

1. Construe out of Latin into Egnlish, and then out of English into Latin.

2. Decline the Nounes and form the Verbs in it throughout, and give the rules
for the concordance and construction of the Words.

3. Bring their lessons fair writ out both in English and Latin in a little
paper book, which will exceedingly further them in spelling and writing truly.

4. To fix their Lessons the better in their memory, you may ask them such
plain questions, as they can easily answer by the words in the Sentence.

5. Let them also imitate a Sentence sometimes by changing some of the words,
and sometimes altering their Accidents.

6. Give them sometimes the English of a Sentence to make into Latin of
themselves, and then let them compare it with the Latin in the book, and see
wherein they come short of it, or in what Rule they fail.

For though the main end of this Book, which is full of plain lessons, both of
honesty, and godliness, be to instill those grave sayings into childrens minds*
(some of which notwithstanding are too much beyond their reach) and it be not
perhaps so useful as some others are for the speedy gaining of Latin, yet by
being thus made use of, it may be very much improved to both purposes.

Here I think it no digression to tell, how I and some School-fellowes (yet
living, and eminent in their Scholar-like professions) were nusled two or three
years together in learning this book of Sentences. After we had gone over our
Accidents several times by heart, and had learned part of Propria quae maribus,
we were put into this Book, and there made to construe and parse two or three
Sentences at once out of mere Latin, and if in any thing we missed, we were
sure to be whipped. It was well, if of 16. or 20. boys two at any time could
say, and that they did say right, was more by hap-hazard, then any thing that
they knew; For we knew not how to apply one rule of Grammar to any word, nor
could we tell what part of Speech it was, or what belonged to it; but if the
Master told us it was a Noun, to be sure we said it was of the Nominative case,
and singular number, and if a Verb, we presently guessed it to be of the
Indicative Mood, Present tense, singular number, and third person; because
those coming so frequent, we erred the less in them. And an ignorant
presumption that we could easily say, made us spend our time in idle chat, or
worse employment; and we thought it in vain for us to labor about getting a
lesson, because we had no help at all provided to further us in so doing. Yet
here and there a Sentence, that I better understood then the rest, and with
which I was more affected, took such imimpression, as that I still remember it,
as Gallus in suo stirquilinio plurimum potest. Vbi dolor, ibi digitus, etc.

This I have related by the by, to manifest by mine own sense and experience
what severity children for the most part undergo, and what loss of time befalls
them in their best age for learning, when they are merely driven on in the
common rode, and are not (rather) guided by a dexterous, diligent, and discreet
Teacher, to understand what they learn in any book they are put into.

Now because all our teaching is but mere trifling, unless withal we be
careful to instruct children in the grounds of true Religion, let them be sure
to get the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments; First in
English, and then in Latin, every Saturday morning for Lessons, from their
first entrace to the Grammar School; and for their better understanding of
these Fundamentals of Christianity, you may (according to Mr. Bernards little
Catechism) resolve them into such easy questions, as they may be able to
answer of themselves, and give them the Quotations, or Texts of Scriptures,
which confirm or explain the doctrinal points contained in them, to write out
the following Lords day, and to show on Monday mornings, when they come to
School. In short then, I would have this lowest Form employed one quarter or
half a year in getting the Introduction for Parts and Lessons, and as long in
repeating the Introduction at Morning Parts, and reading the Vocabulary, for
After-noons Parts; saying the English Rules for Fore-noon Lessons. The little
Vocabulary for Afternoon Parts; and Sententiae Pueriles for Afternoon Lessons,
and the Principles of Christianity for Saturday Lessons. So that in one years
time this work may be fully complete, of preparing them for the Latin tongue,
by teaching them the perfect use of the Accidents, and helping them to words,
and how to vary them.

CHAP. III.
How to make children of the second Form perfect in the Rules of the Genders of
Nouns, and of the Preterperfect tenses, and Supines of Verbs, contained in
Propria quae maribus, Quae genus, and As in P^aesenti; and how to enter them in
writing, and speaking familiar and congruous Latin.
THe general course taken in teaching the Rules of the Genders and Nouns, and
Conjugating Verbs, is, to make children to patter them over by heart, and
sometimes also to construe and parse them; but seldom or never are they taught
the meaning of a Rule, or how to apply it readily to the words they meet with
elsewhere.

The volubility of the Verse does indeed help some quicker wits for more ready
repeating of them; but others of more slow pace, (that learn better by
understanding what they say) are apt to miscall every word in their Lesson,
because they cannot tell what it means; and let them, take never so much
pains about it, very little of what they are to learn, will stick in their
memories.

Some therefore have decryed this patching of Rules into a cobling verse;
others have thought it better to denote the Genders of Nouns, and the
Preterperfect tenses of Verbs by the Terminations of the first words, and some
have quite altered these Rules by expunging some words, and inserting others,
which they thought might better agree with them; But for my part, I like his
judgment well, that said it was impossible for any Grammarian to make better
Rules then these in Propria quae maribus, and As in praesenti; for though in
some things they may be faulty, as Quae genus is in very many, yet (as Mr.
Brinsley says of the Accidents) a wise Master is not to stand with his
children about mending of it, but only to make them understand the Rules, as
they are set down in the Book, which that they may well do, I propound this
expedient.

1. Let them for Fore-noon Lessons begin with Propria quae maribus, and then
proceed to As in praesenti, leaving Quae genus to the last, because it is of
less use, and harder for children to understand.

2. In getting these Rules at first, let them read them all distinctly over,
and take notice of the Titles or Heads, and mark out the most general Rules,
which they may learn before any of the rest; And to make them the better to
understand themselves, you may allow them an English Propria quae maribus, etc.
which they may compare all along with that in their Grammar, and if at any time
you perceive they do not well apprehend the meaning of a Rule, do you
illustrate it by instancing some words, that they have had in their Vocabulary,
or elsewhere. This will make them somewhat ready to turn to any Rule.

3. At the next going them over, they will be able to say four or six lines at
a time, memoriter. And then you may let them get all before them, and make them
after they have said a Lesson by heart, to construe it by the help of a
Construing-book, and to decline every Noun, and Conjugate every verb, by the
help of the Indexes annexed to the Propria quae maribus, etc. Englished, and
explained.

4. You may exercise them in this manner, by repeating more and more at a time,
till they can decline Nouns, and conjugate Verbs, and apply the Rules readily
to them; and having thus gained them, you may keep them, by dividing the whole
into ten parts, according to the Commonplace Heads; thus, the First may be at
Propria quae maribus, etc. De Regulis generalibus Propriorum, De Regulis
generalibus Appellativorum, De prima speciali Regula, and ejus exceptionibus
Masculinis, Neutris, Dubiis, and Communibus. The Second at Momen ^rescentis
penultima, etc. Syllaba acuta sonat, etc. De secunda speciali Regula, and ejus
exceptionibus Masculinis, Neutris, Dubiis, and Communibus. The third at Nomen
crescentis -- Sit gravis, etc. De tertia speciali Regula and ejus exceptionibus
Faemininis, Neutris, Dubiis, Communibus, and de Regulis Adjectivorum
generalibus. The Fourth at Quae genus, de variantibus genus, de defectivis
casu, Aptotis, Diptotis, Triptotis, and Vocativo carentibus. The Fifth, at
Propria cuncta notes, etc. de defectivis numero, plurali, and singulari. The
Sixth, at Haec quasi luxuriant, etc. de Redundantibus. The seventh at As in
praesenti, De Simplicium verborum praeterito primae, secundae tertiae, and
quartae Conjugationis. The eighth, at Praeteritum dat idem, and de Compositorum
verborum praeteritis. The ninth, at Nunc ex praeterito, etc. De Simplicium
verborum, and Compositorum Supinis. The tenth, De Praeteritis verborum in OR.
De geminum praeterium habentibus, De neutro passivi, De verbis praeteritum
mutuantibus, de praeterito carentibus, and de Supinum raro admittentibus. If
you add these ten to the twenty parts in the Accidents, they may run over the
whole thirty in six weeks; saying every morning one, except on Saturdays, which
are reserved for other occasions. Their Noon-parts may be in the larger
Vocabulary (which is commonly printed with the grounds of Grammar, in an easy
entrance to the Latin Tongue, in which they may peruse a whole Chapter at
once, and afterward strive who can tell you Latin for the most things
mentioned in it. And if at any time the words be not so obvious to their
understanding, because (perhaps) they know not the things which they signify;
do you tell them what the thing is, and explain the word by another that is
more familiar to them.

Their After-noons Lessons on Mondayes and Wednesdayes, may be in Qui mihi,
which contains pretty Precepts of good manners, much befitting children to
observe, and which are so common in every mean Scholars mouth, that a child
would blush to seem ignorant of them. In getting this,

1. Let them repeat two distichs at once memoriter, and if withal, you let
them get the English verses answerable to the Latin, and printed with the
Grounds of Grammar, they will fix the Latin better in their memories.

2. Let them construe the Lesson Grammatically, and to help themselves in that
more difficult work, let them make use of the construction made them at the end
of their Construing-Book.

3. Let them read the Latin in the Grammatical order, and sometimes into mere
English, and then let them parse every word according to that order, giving the
Rules for the Genders of Nouns, and the Preterperfect tenses, and Supines of
verbs; and applying those of Concordance and Construction, as they come in
their way.

4. To exercise them in true writing, it were good if they had a little
paper-book, wherein to write first the Latin, and then the English distichs at
full length, which they may show, when they say their Lesson.

5. To find them some employment after the Lesson, you may give them some
easy dictate out of it to turn into Latin; sometimes by way of Question and
Answer, and sometimes more positively; thus, What shall that Scholar do that
desires to be taught? He shall conceive the Masters sayings in his mind. Quid
faciet ille discipulus, qui cupit doceri? dicta praeceptoris animo suo
concipiet, or thus; A boy that is a Scholar, and desires to be taught, ought
to conceive the Masters sayings in his mind, and so as to understand them
well-Puer qui discipulus est and cupit doceri, dictae praeceptoris animo suo
concipere debet, atque ita ut eadem recte intelligat. And this you may cause
any one of them to read, and let the rest correct him in any word he has made
amiss, and be sure they can all give a rule for what they do.

After they have repeated these verses of Mr. Lilies so often over, that they
can say them all at once pretty well by heart, they may continue their
Afternoons Lessons in Cato, saying two or three Distichs at once, according to
the directions already given in the Preface to that Book in English and Latin
verse; and when they have gone through a book of it, let them try amongst
themselves who can repeat the most of it by heart, as we see Corderius did
sometimes exercise his Scholars, as it appears by his Colloquies.

Now forasmuch as speaking Latin is the main end of Grammar, and there is no
better expedient to help children in the ready exercise thereof, then frequent
perusal of Vocabularies for common words, and Colloquies for familiar phrases,
and such as are to be used in ordinary discourse; I think it very convenient to
make use of Pueriles Confabi latiunculae, both in English and Latin, on
Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the Afternoons instead of Lessons, thus,

1. Let them read a whole Colloquie (if it be not too long) at once both in
English and Latin, not minding to construe it verbatim at the first going it
over, but to render the expressions wholly as they stand, and are answerable
one to another, and this will acquaint them with the matter in the book, and
enable them to read both the Languages more readily.

2. At a second going over, let them construe it Grammatically, and then take
any phrase or sentence in the present Lesson, and make such another by it,
changeing either the words, or some of their Accidents, as the present occasion
requires; ex gr. As they say in the singular Number: God save you, Salve, Sis
salvus, jubeo te salvere, or ave; so make them say in the plural number, God
save you, Salvete, sitis salvi, jubemus vos salvere, or avete. So likewise when
they can say, I thank you, Habeo tibi gratiam, or habetur tibi a me gratia, let
them imitate, and alter it by saying, We thank your Father. Habemus Patri tuo
gratiam. My Mother thanks you, Sir. Matter habet tibi gratiam, Domine; or
Habetur tibi, Domine, a matre mea gratia.

When they have gone this book so often over, as to be well acquainted with its
phrases, Let them proceed to Corderius Colloquies, which they have also in
English and Latin, and which they may construe Grammatically, and cull the
phrases out of it, to make use of them, in common speaking Latin.

Let them have a little paper-book, wherein to gather the more familiar
phrases, which they find in every Lesson printed in a different character, and
let them by often perusal at spare times, and bearing them always about them,
get them so readily by heart, as to be able to express themselves in Latin by
them upon any meet occasion. And this way of exercising them to speak according
to their Authors expressions from their first entrance upon Latin, is the
best expedient that can be taken to avoid Anglicismes, which otherwise they are
very prone to, so long as they are directed only by Grammar-Rules, and enforced
to seek words in the Dictionary, where commonly they light upon that which is
most improper.

And that they may now do something of themselves by way of night exercise, let
them every evening translate a verse at home out of the 119. Psalm, which I
conceive is the most easy for the purpose of making the three Concords, and
some of the more necessary Rules of construction familiar to them. In making
their Translations,

1. Let them be sure to write the English very fair and true, observing its
just pauses, and let them also make the like notes of distinction in their
Latin.

2. When they come to show their Latins,

1. Let one read and construe a verse.

2. Let another tell you what part of speech every word is, as well English as
Latin, and what the English Signs do note.

3. Let the rest in order give you the right Analysis of every word one by one,
and the Rules of Nouns and Verbs, and of Concordance, and Construction. And
because these little boys are too apt to blur and spoil their Bibles, and to
make a wrong choice of words out of a Dictionary, which is a great maime and
hinderance to them in making Latin (and caused Mr. Ascham to affirm, that
making of Latins marreth children) I think it not amiss to get that Psalm,
and some other Englishes printed by themselves, with an Alphabeticall Index of
every word which is proper for its place. Right choice of words being indeed
the foundation of all eloquence.

On Saturdayes, after they can say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten
Commandments in English and Latin, they may proceed to the Assemblies
Catechism, first in English, and then in Latin, or the like. This second form
then is to be exercised,

1. In repeating the Accidents for morning parts.

2. In saying Propria quae maribus, Quae genus, As in praesenti, for Fore-noon
Lessons.

3. In reading the larger Vocabulary for Noon parts.

4. In learning Qui mihi, and afterward Cato, for Afternoons Lessons on
Mondayes and Wednesdayes, and Pueriles Confabulatiunculae, and afterward
Corderii Colloquia on Tuesdayes, and Thursdayes. And

5. Translating a verse out of English into Latin every evening at home, which
they may bring to be corrected on Fridayes, after all the weeks Repetitions
ended, and return written as fair as possibly they can write, on Satturday
mornings, after examinations ended. And thus they may be made to know the
Genders of Nouns, and Preter-perfect tenses, and Supines of Verbs, and
initiated to speak and write true Latin in the compass of a second year. So
that to children of betwixt seven and nine years of age, in regard of their
remediless inanimadvertency, I allow two whole years to practice them well in
the Rudiments or Grounds of Grammar, in which I would have the variation of
Nouns and Verbs to be specially minded, for till they be very ready in those,
their progress in other things will be full of uncertainties, and troublesomely
tedious, but if those be once well got, all other rules which have not
(perhaps) been so well understood, will more easily (as age increases) be
better apprehended and put in use.

CHAP. IIII.
How to make Children of the third Form perfect in the Latin Syntaxis
commonly called Verbum Personale; as also to acquaint them with Prosodia; and
how to help them to construe and parse, and to write, and speak true and
elegant Latin.
CHildren are commonly taught the Latin Syntaxis before they be put to make
use of any Latin book besides it; and so they but can say it readily by heart,
construe it, and give the force of its rules out of the examples, they are
thought to learn it well enough. But the very doing thus much, is found to be a
work too tedious with many, and therefore some have thought good to lessen the
number of the Rules, and others to dash out many examples, as if more then one
or two were needless; so that when a Child has with them run over this part
of the Grammar, it is well if he have learnt the half of it, or know at all
what to do with any of it.

I think it not amiss therefore to show, how it may be all gotten
understandingly by heart, and settled in the memory by continual practice,
which is the life of all learning;

1. Let those then of this third form divide their Accidents and Rules of
Nounes and Verbs into ten parts, whereof they may repeat one every Thursday
morning, and make way for the getting of the Syntaxe on Mundaies, Tuesdaies and
Wednes. for morning parts.

2. Let them repeat as many Rules memoriter, as they are well able, together
with all their examples; and to help their understanding therein, you may do
well to show the meaning of every rule and exception beforehand, and to make
them compare them with those in the English rules under the same head, and to
see which are contained in the Latin which are not in the English, and which
are set down in the English, which are left out in the Latin.

3. To help them to construe well before they come to say, let them make use of
their Construeng books, and that they may better mind what they construe, you
may cause them sometimes, when they come to say, to read the part out of Latin
into English.

4. In parsing, let them give you the word governing, and apply the word
governed according to the rule, and tell-you wherein the exceptions and
observations differ from the General rule.

5. Let them have a Paper-book in Quarto, in the margent whereof they may write
the first words of every rule, and exception; and let them have as many
familiar examples (some in English only, and some in Latin only) as may
suffice to illustrate the rule more clearly to them, and do you help them
extempore, to turn their English ones into Latin, and their Latin ones into
English; and having a space left under every head, let them fill it up with
praegnant Examples, which they meet with as they read their Latin Authors, or
as they Translate English Sentences into Latin.

I observe Melancthon and Whittington of old, and Mr. Clarke, Mr. Comenius and
others of late, to have made subsidiaries of this nuture, which because they
seem some what to overshoot the capacities of children, who (as Mr. Ascham
observes) are ignorant what to say properly and fitly to the matter, (as some
Masters are also many times) I have taken the pains to make a praxis of all
the English and Latin Rules of Construction and Syntaxis, as they lie in
order, and to add two Indexes* The first of English words, and the Latin for
them; The second, Of Latin words and the English for them, with figures
directing to the examples wherein they are to be used.

And for more perspicuity sake, I take care that no example may touch upon any
rule, that is not already learned, for fear of pussing young beginners in this
necessary and easy way of translating with the rule in their eye, which does
best direct the weakest understandings.

Now forasmuch as the daily reading of Latin into English is an especial
means to increase the knowledge of the Tongues, and to cause more heed to be
taken to the Grammar Rules, as they are gotten by heart; I would have those in
this form to read every morning after prayers, four or six verses out of the
Latin Testament, which they will easily do, having beforehand learned to
construe them word by word, with the help of their English Bible. In this
exercise, let them be all well provided, and do you pick out only one boy to
construe, and then ask any of the others the Analysis of a Noune, or Verb here
or there, or some rule of construction, which you think they have not so well
taken notice of as to understand it fully. Hereby you may also acquaint them
with the rule and way of construing, as it is more largely touched in the
following part of this chapter.

N. B. Those Children that are more industriously willing to thrive, may
advantage themselves very much by perusal of Gerards Meditations, Thomas de
Kempis, St. Augustins Soliloquies, or his Meditations, or the like pious and
profiting Books, which they may buy both in English and Latin, and continually
bear about in their pockets, to read on at spare times.

Their forenoone lessons may be in Aesopes Fables, which is indeed a book of
great antiquity and of more solid learning then most men think. For in it many
good lectures of morality, which would not (perhaps) have been listened to, if
they had been delivered in a plain and naked manner, being handsomely made up
and vented in an Apologue, do insinuate themselves into every man's mind.

And for this reason perhaps it is that I find it, and Gesta Romanorum which
is so generally pleasing to our Country people) to have been printed and bound
up both together in Latin, even when the Latin was yet in its dross. And to
let you see what Latin Aesop was there translated into out of Greek by one
Romulus, I will give you the first Fable, in his words;

De Gallo and Jaspide.
IN sterquilinio quidam pullus gallinatius, dum quaereret escam, invenit
margaritam in loco indigno jacentem, quam cum videret jacentem, sic ait; O bona
res, in stercore hic jaces. Si te cupidus invenisset, cum quo gaudio rap^isset,
ac in pristinum decoris tui fratum redisses? Ego frustra te in hoc loco invenio
jacentem. Vbi potius mihi escam quaero; and nec ego tibi prosum, nec tu mihi.

Haec Aesopus illis narrat, qui ipsum legunt and non intelligunt.

No sooner did the Latin Tongue endeavor to recover its pristine purity, by
the help of Erasmus and other eminent men of learning in his time, but the
Greek Copy of Aesop is translated by him and his Contemporaries, every one
striving to outstrip another in rendering it into good Latin; and it is
observable, that the Stationers Copy (which is generally used in Schools) is
a mere Rapsodie of some fragments of these several men's Translations; whence
it is that one and the same Fable is sometimes repeated thrice over in several
words, and that the style of the Book is generally too lofty in it self for
Children to apprehend on a sudden; I have for their sakes therefore turned the
whole Book, such as I found it, into proper English, answerable to the Latin,
and divided both into just periods, marked with figures, that they may more
distinctly appear, and be more easily found out for use or imitation; and
though I observed some words and phrases scarce allowable in many places of the
book, yet I was loath to make any alteration, except in a few gross errors,
and especially one that quite perverted the sense of the Fable, and appears
to be a mistake in the Translator from the Greek Copy, which is thus; (...)
which is well latinized by one thus, Aper and Vulpes. Aper quum cuidam adstaret
arbori, dentes accuebat. But the unknown Translator of this Fable (and the rest
that yet pass sub incerto interpret) reading perhaps (...) in stead of (...)
or finding that (...) does sometimes signify like an adjective, solitarius,
solitudines captans, etc. renders it into pure nonsense, and in other words
also differing from the Greek, thus; Singularis animal, and vulpes. Singularis
agrestis, super quadam sedens arbore, dentes acuebat. Which one having lately
translated into English verse, with the Picture before it, has prettily
devised a Rhinocerate to stand by a tree, and to whet his teeth against it;
whereas the Latin has it, super quadam sedens arbore, which is impossible for
such an huge beast to do. I have therefore put out the word Singularis, and
made it Aper agrestis, according to an ancient Greek Copy which I have, and I
English the clause thus; Lib 2. Fab. ^3. A wild Boar standing by a tree
whetted his tushes. This I have noted obiter, to acquaint the more judicious
with my reason of altering those words, and to save the less experienced, some
labor in searching out the meaning of them, seeing they pass yet uncorrected
in the Latin Book.

Let them procure Aesops Fables then in English and Latin, and the rather
because they will take delight in reading the Tales, and the moral in a
Language which they already understand, and will be helped thereby to construe
the Latin of themselves. And herein I would have them to take a whole Fable
and its moral at one Lesson (so that it do not exceed six periods) which they
should first read distinctly; secondly, construe Grammatically, and then render
the proper phrases; thirdly, parse according to the Grammatical order as they
construed, and not as the words stand. And then be sure they can decline all
the Nounes, and conjugate the Verbs, and give the Rules for the Genders of the
one, and the Preterperfect tenses and Supines of the other; as also for the
concordance and construction, either out of the English Rules, or Latin
Syntaxe, or both, as they come to have learned them.

Let them sometimes write a Fable fair and truly over, according to the printed
Book, both in English and Latin, and sometimes translate one, word by word in
that order, in which they construed it; and this will inure them to Orthography.

That they may learn to observe and get the true Latin order of placing words,
and the purity of expression either in English or Latin style, let them
imitate a period or more in a lesson, turning it out of English into Latin, or
out of Latin into English, thus; whereas they read in English. A Cock, as he
turned over a dunghill found a pearl, saying; why do I find a thing so
bright? and in Latin, Gallus gallinaceus, dum vertit stercorarium offendit
gemmam; Quid, inquiens, rem sic nitidam reperio? they may imitate it by this or
the like expression; As a beggar raked in a dunghill, he found a purse, saying;
why do I find so much money here? Mendicus, dum vertit stercorarium, offendit
crumenam; quid inquiens, tantum argenti hic reperio? By thus doing, they may
learn to join Examples out of their lessons to their Grammar Rules (which is
the most lively and perfect way of teaching them) and to fetch a Rule out of
their Grammar for every Example, using the Grammar to find Rules, as they do
the Dictionary for words, till they be very perfect in them.

Their Afternoons Parts may be to construe a Chapter in Janua linguarum, which
will instruct them in the Nature, as well as in the Names of things; and after
they have construed, let them try who can tell you the most words, especially
of those, that they have not met with, or well observed in reading elsewhere.
For Afternoon lessons on Mondayes, and Wednesdayes, let them make use of
Mantuanus, which is a Poet both for style and matter, very familiar and
grateful to children, and therefore read in most Schools. They may read over
some of the Eclogues, that are less offensive then the rest, taking six lines
at a lesson, which they should first commit to memory, as they are able.
Secondly, Construe. Thirdly, Parse. Then help them to pick out the Phrases and
Sentences, which they may commit to a paper-book; and afterward resolve the
matter of their lessons into an English period or two, which they may turn into
proper and elegant Latin, observing the placing of words, according to prose.
Thus out of the five first verses in the first Eclogue, Fauste, precor, gelida
quando pecus omne sub umbra
Ruminat, antiquos paulum recitemus amores.
Ne si forte sopor nos occupet ^lla ferarum,
Quae modo per segetes tacit insidiantur adultas.
Saeviat in pecudes. Melior vigilantia somno.


One may make such a period as this; Shepherds are wont sometimes to talk of
their old loves, whilst the cattle chew the cud under the shade; for fear, if
they should fall asleep, some Fox, or Wolf, or such like beast of prey, which
either lurk in the thick woods, or lay wait in the grown corn, should fall upon
the cattle. And indeed, watching is far more commendable for a Prince, or
Magistrate, then immoderate, or unseasonable sleep.

Pastores aliquando, dum pecus sub umbra ruminat, antiquos suos amores recitare
solent; ne, si sopor ipsos occupet, vulpes, aut lupus, aut aliqua ejus generis
fera praedabunda, quae vel in densis sylvis latitant, vel per adultas segetes
insidiatur, in pecudes saeviat; Imo enimvero, Principi vel Magistratui
vigilantia somno immodico ac intempestivo multo laudabilior est. And this will
help to prepare their invention for future exercises, by teaching them to suck
the marrow both of words and matter out of all their Authors.

The reason why I desire children (especially those) of more prompt wits, and
better memories, may repeat what they read in Poets by heart (as I would have
them translate into English what they read in Prose) is, partly because the
memory thrives best by being often exercised, so it be not overcharged; and
partly because the roundnesse of the verses helps much to the remembrance of
them, wherein boys at once gain the quantity of syllables, and abundance of
matter for fancy, and the best choice of words and phrases, for expression of
their mind.

On Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in the afternoon (after they have done with
Corderius) they may read Helvici Colloquia (which are selected out of those of
Erasmus, Ludovicus Vives, and Schottenius) and after they have construed a
Colloquie, and examined some of the hardest Grammar-passages in it, let them
all lay aside their books, save one, and let him read the Colloquie out of
Latin into English, clause by clause, and let the rest give it him again into
Latin, every man saying round as it comes to his turn. And this will make them
to mind the words and phrases before hand, and fasten many of them in their
memories. Help them afterward to pick out the phrases, and let them write them
(as they did others) in a pocket paper-book. Cause them sometimes to imitate a
whole Colloquie, or a piece of one; and let them often strive to make
Colloquies amongst themselves, talking two, three, or more together about
things familiar to them, and inserting as many words and phrases as they can
well remember to be proper for the present, out of any of their Authors; and
these they should show you fair written, with a note of the page and line,
where they borrowed any expression not used before, set down in the Margent of
their exercise. And this will make them industriously to labor every day for
variety of expressions, and encourage them much to discourse, when they know
themselves to be certain in what they say, and that they can so easily come by
Latin, to speak their minds upon any occasion.

But if instead of Mantuan, you think good sometimes to make use of Castalions
Dialogues, you may first make them read the history in the Bible by themselves
apart, and then hear them construe it Dialogue-wise, pronouncing every sentence
as pathetically as may be Afterward. One may read it in English, and the rest
answer him in Latin, clause by clause, as is already mentioned concerning the
Colloquies.

And to help them somewhat the better to construe of themselves, you may direct
them (according to the golden Rule of construing, commended, and set down at
large by industrious Mr. Brinsley, in the 93. and 94. pages of his Grammar
School) to take

1. The Vocative case, and that which depends upon it.

2. The Nominative case of the principal verb, and that which depends upon it.

3. The Principal verb, and that which serves to explain it.

4. The Accusative case, and the rest of the cases after it. And herein, cause
them to observe, that Interrogatives, Relatives, and Conjunctions, use to go
before all other words in construing; and that the Adjective, and the
Substantive, the Adverb, and the Verb, the Preposition, and its casual word, go
for the most part together. But be sure to teach them often, to cast the words
of a period into their natural or Grammatical order; according to which, they
must construe; and to know the signification of every word and phrase proper
for its place; and withal, let them have in mind the chief matter, drift, and
circumstances of a place, according to the verse.

Quis, cui, causa, locus, quo tempore, prima, sequela. Which bids one to
heed, who speaks, what is spoken, to whom he speaks, upon what occasion, or to
what end he speaks; at what time a thing was done or spoken, what went
immediately before, and what follows next after. And if either the construing
be against sense, or Grammar Rule, let them try again another way.

To exercise them in something (besides the getting of Grammar parts) at home,
let them every night turn two verses out of the Proverbs of Solomon into
Latin, and write out two verses of the New Testament Grammatically construed;
and let them evermore take heed to spell every word aright, and to mark the
Pauses, or notes of distinction in their due places, for by this means they
will profit more in Orthography, then by all the Rules that can be given them;
and they will mind Etymology, and Syntaxis, more by their own daily practice,
then by ten times repetition without it.

On Saturdayes, after they can say the Assemblies Catechism in English and
Latin, you may let them proceed with Perkins six Principles, and when they
have repeated as much as they can well by heart, you may cause them to read it
out of English into Latin, your self ever and anon suggesting to them the
propriety of words and phrases, where they are at a loss, and directing them,
after they have once made it Grammatically, to cast it into the artificial
order of Latin style. And then let them go to their places, and write it fair
and truly in a little Paper book for the purpose.

If out of every Lesson as they pass this little Catechism, you extract the
Doctrinall points, by way of Propositions, and annex the Proofs of Scriptures
to them, which are quoted in the Margent, as you see Mr. Perkins has done in
the beginning of the book, and cause your Scholars to write them out all fair
and at large, as they find them in their Bibles; it will be a profitable way
of exercising them on the Lords day, and a good means to improve them in the
real knowledge of Christianity.

Now forasmuch as I have observed, that children about nine years of age, and
few till then, begin to relish Grammar, so as of themselves to seek into the
meaning of Rules, thereby to conceive the reason of Speech; I now judge it
requisite for this form to be made thoroughly acquainted with the whole body of
it. Therefore, after they have gone over the plain Syntaxis, two or three times
by morning parts, as is showed, and have got it pretty well by heart, (for
which I judge three quarters of a year will be time sufficient) you may let
them divide the whole Syntax into 12 parts; reckoning them according to the
several Heads of it; thus: The first, De Concordantia Nominativi and verbi,
Substantivi and Adjectivi, Relativi, and Antecedentis. The second, de
Constructione Substantivorum, and Adjectivorum cum Genitivo. The third, de
constructione Adjectivorum cum Dativo, Accusativo, and Ablative. The fourth, de
constructione Pronominum. The fifth, de constructione verborum cum Nominativo
and Genitivo. The sixth de constructione verborum cum Dativo, and Accusativo.
The seventh, de constructione verborum cum Ablativo. The eighth, de Gerundiis
and Supinis, and de Tempore and Loco. The ninth, de constructione Impersonalium
and Participiorum. The tenth, de constructione Adverbiorum. The eleventh, de
constructione Conjunctionum. The twelfth, de constructione Praepositionum, and
Interjectionum. All which twelve you may add to the thirty parts in the
Accidents, and Propria quae maribus, etc. and let your Scholars bestow a
months time together in repeating, and examining the Accidents, and thus far
of the Grammar, (both for Parts and Lessons) till they have thoroughly made it
their own; and that they may the better conceive how it hangs together, and
what use they are to make of its several parts, you should often make them run
over the Heads of it, and give them an Analysis of their dependency one upon
another.

After this, they may more understandingly proceed to the Figures of words and
construction; the definitions whereof, and their Examples they need only get
by heart; and for that purpose do you note them out with a pen, and in
explaining of them, give as many examples as may make them fully to apprehend
their meaning. But when they have said the Definition of one or more Figures at
a part by heart, you may cause them to construe all they find concerning it;
and to help them in so doing, (they that are otherwise less able) may make use
of Mr. Stockwoods little book of Figura construed. Then let them go on to
Prosodia; for their more easy understanding of which, as they proceed in it:
you may tell them the meaning of it in brief, thus;

Prosodia, being the last part of Grammar, teaches the right pronunciation of
words, or the tuning of Syllables in words, as they are pronounced; and
therefore it is divided into a Tone, or Accent, a Spirit, and a Time, whereof a
Tone orders the tune of the voice, showing in what syllables it is to be
lifted up, and what to be let down, and in what both to be lifted up, and let
down; So that there are three Tones, a Grave, which is seldom or never made,
but in the last syllable of such words as ought to have had an Acute in the
last syllable, and that in the contexture of words in this manner; Ne si forte
sopor nos occupet. an Acute, which is often used to difference some words from
others, as una, together, sedulo, diligently, remain acuted at the end of a
Speech, and in continuation of speech have their acute accents turned into a
Grave, to make them differ from una, one, and sedulo, diligent. A Circumflex
which is often marked to denote a lost syllable, as amarunt, for amaverunt. A
spirit orders the breath in uttering syllables, showing where it is to be let
out softly, and where sharply; as, in ara an Altar, and hara a swine coat. The
mild Spirit is not marked, but the weak letter n being used as a note of
aspiration only, and not reckoned as a Consonant, serves to express the sharp
Spirit. There are three Rules of Accents, which are changed by Difference,
Transposition, Attraction, Concision, and Idiome. Time shows the measure, how
long while a syllable is to be in pronouncing, not at all regarding the Tone. A
long syllable is to be a longer while, and a short, a shorter while in
pronouncing. Of long and short syllables, put together orderly, feet are made,
and of feet, verses.

4. Now to know when a syllable is long or short, there are Rules concerning
the first, the middle and last syllables, so that if one mind in what part of
a word the syllable stands, he may easily find the Rule of its quantity.

The sum of Prosodia being thus hinted to them, they may get it by heart at
morning Parts; and if they cannot construe it well by themselves, they may be
helped by a little book made by Barnaby Hampton, called Prosodia construed. But
be sure that they can read you every part into English, and tell you the true
meaning of it. Your own frequent examination will be the best way to know
whether they understand it or not. And to prepare them for the practice of it
in making verses, I would first let them use it in learning to scan and prove
Hexamiter verses only, out of Cato, or Mantuan, or such Authors as they have
read, thus;

1. Let them write a verse out, and divide into its just feet, giving a dash or
stroke betwixt every one; and let them tell you what feet they are, and of what
syllables they consist; and why they stand in such or such a place; as, Si
Deus-est ani-mus no-bis ut-carmina-dicunt.
Hic tibi-praecipu-e sit-pura-mente co-lendus.


2. Let them set the mark of the Time or Quantity over every syllable in every
foot, and give you the reason (according to the Rules) why it is there noted
long, or short; as, Si^ Dus e^st an-mus no^ bi^, ut-carmna-di^ cu^nt.
Hi^c tb-prae^cipu-e^ si^t-pui-me^nt co-le^ndus.


Let them now divide Figura and Prosodia into six parts; The first, de Figuris
Dictionis, and Constructionis. The second, de Tonis and Spiritibus. The third,
de Carm number ratioue* and generibus. The fourth, de quantitate primarum
syllabarum. The fifth, de mediis syllabis. And the sixth, de ultimis syllabis;
which they may add to the forty two parts before mentioned, and keep by
constant repetition of one of them every day, till they can say them all very
well by heart, and give a perfect account of any thing in them.

Then let them begin the Accidents, and go through it, and the whole Latin
Grammar at twelve parts, only construing and giving an account of the
by-Rules, but saying all the rest by heart; so that the first part may be The
Introduction. The second, The Construction of the eight parts of Speech. The
third Orthographia. The fourth, Etymologia, so far as concerns the Species,
Figure, Number, Case, and Gender of Nounes. The fifth, concerning the
Declensions (including Quae genus) and the comparison of Nounes. The sixth,
concerning a Pronoun and a Verb. The seventh, concerning a Participle, an
Adverb, a Conjunction, a Praeposition, and an Interjection. The eighth,
Syntaxis, so far as concerns the Concords, and the Construction of Nounes. The
ninth, concerning the construction of Verbs. The tenth, concerning the
Construction of Participles, Adverbs, Conjunctions, Praepositions and
Interjections. The eleventh concerning Figures, Tones, and Spirits. The
twelfth, concerning the manner of Verses, and the quantity of Syllables.

Now in repeating these parts, I do not enjoin that only one boy should say
all, though I would have every one well prepared to do so; but that one should
say one piece, and another another, as you please to appoint either orderly
throughout the Form, or picking out here and there a boy at your own
discretion. According to this division, the whole Accidents and Grammar may be
run over once in a months space, and continued in the upper Forms, by
repeating one part only, and constantly in a week, so as it may never be
forgotten at the School.

This Form in short, is to be employed about three quarters of a year.

1. In reading four or six verses out of the Latin Testament every morning,
immediately after Prayers.

2. In repeating Syntaxis on Mondayes, Tuesdayes, and Wednesdayes, and the
Accidents, and Propria quae maribus, etc. on Thursdayes for morning parts.

3. In Aesops Fables for fore-noone Lessons.

4. In Janua Linguarum for Afternoon Parts.

5. In Mantuan for Afternoons Lessons on Mondayes and Wednesdayes; and in
Helvicus's Colloquies on Tuesdayes, and Thursdayes.

6. In the Assemblies Latin Catechism, on Saturdayes for Lessons.

7. In translating every night two verses out of the Proverbs into Latin, and
two out of the Latin Testament into English, which (with other dictated
Exercises) are to be corrected on Fridayes, after repetitions ended, and showed
fair written on Saturday mornings; but, because their wits are now ripened for
the better understanding of Grammar, and it is necessary for them to be made
wholly acquainted with it, before they proceed to the exact reading of Authors,
and making Schoole-exercises, I would have them spend one quarter of a year,
chiefly in getting Figura, and Prosodia, and making daily repetition of the
whole Accidents and Common-Grammar. So that this third year will be well
bestowed in teaching children of betwixt nine and ten years of age the whole
Grammar, and the right use of it in a method answerable to their capacities,
and not much differing from the common rode of teaching.

CHAP. V.
How to try children to the utmost, whether they be well grounded in the
Grammar; and how to go more expeditiously to work in Teaching the Latin
Tongue, to those that are at years of discretion.
IT is an ordinary course in most of our Grammar-Schooles, for the Usher to
turn over his Scholars to the higher Master, after they have gone through the
Grammar, and (with some) been exercised in construing and parsing here and
there a piece of the forementioned lower Authors, and in turning English
Sentences or dictates into Latin; but oft-times it comes to pass, that
partly through the Ushers want of skill or care to insist upon those things
chiefly, and most frequently, which are the most necessary to be kept in mind,
and partly through childrens want of heed, who are apt to huddle over all Parts
and Lessons alike, not observing what use they are to make of any one in
particular, more then other; there is no sure foundation laid for the Master to
build safely upon, which causes him (if he be not very discreet) to cast off
many boys as unfit by him to be further wrought upon, or continually to fret,
and grieve himself to see his Scholars so often mistake themselves in any Task
or Exercise that he sets them about. And the poor children, being all this
while sensible of their own imperfectness in the first Grounds, are daunted to
see their Master so often angry with them, and that they are no better able to
perform their work to his better satisfaction, which they would gladly do, if
they did but a little understand how to go about it. Some also preconceiting a
greater difficulty to be in learning, then they have hitherto met withal, and
not knowing how to encounter it, become utterly discouraged with the thoughts
of a new change, and choose rather to sorsake the School, then proceed to obtain
the Crown of their bypast labors; I mean the sweetness of learning, which
they are now to gain under the Master; For after children are once well
grounded by the Usher, they will go on with ease and cheerfulness under the
Master, delighting to read pure Language, and variety of matter in choice
Authors, and to exercise their wits in curious phansies: and it will be an
extraordinary comfort to the Master, to see his Scholars able to run on of
themselves, if he but once show them the way to perform any Task that he
propounds to them. It is necessary therefore for the Master, before he take
Scholars to his only charge, to see first, that they understand the Rudiments,
or Grounds of Grammar, and then the whole Grammar it self, and that they can
thoroughly practice them; but especially, to help those in the understanding and
exercise thereof, that by reason of sickness, or the like accident have bin
oftener absent, or that have not been so long at the School as their fellows,
or who by reason of their age or stature, will quickly think it a shame to be
left under the Usher behind the rest. Now to try whether a child be well
grounded or not, this course may be taken;

1. Let him take some easy Fable in Aesop, or any other piece of familiar
Latin, and let him construe it of himself according to the directions given in
my Grounds of Grammar, l. 2. c. 13.

2. Then let him write down the English alone, leaving a large space betwixt
every line, wherein he should afterward write the Latin words answerable to
the English; ex gr.

De seen vocante mortem.

Of an old man calling Death.

An Quidam
old man, senex
carrying partans
a bundle faescem
of sticks lignorum
upon super
his shoulders, humoros
out of ex
a Forest, nemore,
when cum
he was weary defessus esset
with the long way, longa via,
called vocavit
death, mortem,
the bundle fasco
being laid down deposito
on the ground. humi.
Behold! Ecce!
death mors
comes, advenit,
and and
asks rogat
the cause causam
why quamobrem
he had called vocaverat
him; se.
The^ Tunc
the old man senex
says, ait,
that ut
thou might lay imponeres
this hunc
bundle fascem
of sticks lignorum*
upon super
my shoulders. humeros.


3. Let him next tell you what part of speech every word is as well English as
Latin, and write them down (as I have also showed formerly) under so many
figures, joining the English signs to the words to which they belong;
beginning to reckon, and pick up first all the Nouns, and then the rest
orderly, after this manner.

1.
Senex an old man. Fascem a bundle. Lignorum of sticks. Humeros shoulders.
Nemore a forest. Longa long. Via a way. Mortem death: Fasce the bundle. Humi on
the ground. Mors death. Causam the cause.
2.
Quidam an or one: Se him Hunc this.
3.
Defessus esset, was weary. Vocavit, called. Advenit comes. Vocaverat, had
called. Rogat, asks. Imponeres thou might lay. Ait says.
4.
Portans carrying. Deposito being laid.
5.
Cum when. Ecce behold. Tunc then
6.
Que and. Quamobrem wherefore. Vt that.
7.
Super upon. Ex out of.
4. Let him decline any one or more Nounes, and Conjugate any one or all the
Verbs throughout; and then write them down at large, according to what I have
formerly directed, and is practiced in part in Merchant-Tailors School, as is
to be seen in the Probation Book lately printed by my noble friend, and most
actively able Schoolmasters, Mr. W. Dugard; only I would have him join the
English together with the Latin.

5. Let him give the Analysis of any word first at large by way of question and
answer, and then sum it up in short, as to say, or write it down thus;

The Analysis of a Noun Substantive.
What part of Speech is Lignorum of sticks.

Lignorum of sticks, is a Noun.

Why is lignorum a Noun?

Because lignum a stick is the name of a thing that may be seen.

Whether is lignorum a noun Substantive, or a noun Adjective?

Lignorum is a noun Substantive, because it can stand by it self in
signification, and requires not another word to be joined with it, to show its
signification.

Whether is lignorum a noun Substantive proper, or a noun Substantive common.

Lignorum is a noun Substantive common, because it is common to more sticks
then one.

Of what number is lignorum?

Lignorum is of the plural number, because it speaks of more then one.

Of what case is lignorum?

Lignorum of sticks, is of the Genitive case, because it has the token of, and
answers to the question whereof, or of what?

Of what Gender is lignorum?

Lignorum is of the Neuter Gender, because it is declined with this Article Hoc.

Why is lignorum declined with this Article Hoc?

Because all nounes in um, are Neuters, according to the Rule in Propria quae
maribus, Omne quod exit in um, etc. or Et quod in on vel in um fiunt. etc.

Of what Declension is lignorum?

Lignorum is of the second Declension, because its Genitive case singular
ends in i.

How is lignorum declined?

Lignorum is declined like regnorum; thus.

Sing Nom. Hoc lignum, Genesis hujus ligni, etc.

Lignorum is a noun Substantive common, of the Plural number, Genitive case,
Neuter Gender, and second Declension, like Regnorum.

The Analysis of a Noun Adjective.
What Part of Speech is Longa long?

Longa is a Noun.

Why is longa a Noun?

Because it is the name of a thing that may be understood.

Whether is longa a noun Substantive, or a noun Adjective?

Longa is a noun Adjective, because it cannot stand by it self in
signification, but requires to be joined with another word, as, longa via,
with the long way.

Of what number is longa?

Longa is of the singular number, because its Substantive via is of the
singular number.

Of what case is longa?

Longa is of the Ablative case, because its Substantive via is of the Ablative
case.

Of what Gender is longa?

Longa is of the Feminine Gender, because its Substantive via is of the
Feminine Gender.

Of what Declension is Longa?

Longa is of the first Declension. How is longa declined?

Longa is declined like Bona. Sing. Nom. Longus, a, um.

By what Rule can you tell that longa is of the Feminine Gender?

By the Rule of the Genders of Adjectives, At si tres variant voces, etc.

Longa is a noun Ajective, of the singular number, Ablative case, and Feminine
Gender, declined like Bona.

The Analysis of a Pronoun.
What part of Speech is Se him.

Se is a Pronoun, because it is like to a noun, or put insted of the noun
mortem, death.

What kind of Pronoun is se;*

Se is a Pronoun Primitive, because it is not derived of another.

Of what number is se?

Se it of the singular number, because it speaks but of one.

Of what case is se.

Se is of the Accusative case, because it follows a verb, and answers to
the Question whom?

Of what Gender is se?

Se is of the Feminine Gender, because the noun mortem, that it is put for, is
of the Feminine Gender.

Of what Declension is se?

Se is of the first declension of Pronounces, and it is thus declined. Sing.
and Plur. Nom caret. Genesis sui, etc.

Of what person is se?

Se is of the third person, because its spoken of:

Se is a Pronoun Primitive, of the Singlur number, the Accusative case,
Feminine Gender, first declension, and third person.

The Analysts of a Verb.
What part of Speech is imponeres, thou might lay upon?

Imponeres is a verb, because it signifies to do.

What kind of verb is imponeres?

Imponeres is a verb Personal, because it has three persons.

What kind of verb Personal is imponeres?

Imponeres is a verb Personal Active, because it ends in o, and betokens to
do, and by putting to r it may be a Passive.

Of what Mood is imponeres?

Imponeres is of the Subjunctive Mood, because it has a Conjunction joined
with it, and depends upon another verb going before it.

Of what tense is imponeres?

Imponeres, is of the Preterimperfect tense, because it speaks of the time
not perfectly past.

Of what number* is imponeres?

Imponeres, is of the singular number because its nominative case is of the
singular number.

Of what person is imponeres?

Impnoeres is of the second person, because its nominative case is of the
second person.

Of what Conjugation is imponeres?

Imponeres is of the third Conjugation, like legeres, because it has e short
before re and ris.

How do you conjugate imponeres?

Impono, imponis, imposui, imponere; imponendi, imponendo, imponendum;
impostum, impositu; imponens, impositurus.

Why does impono make imposui? Because Praeteritum dat idem, etc. Why does
imposui make impositum?

Because Compositum ut simplex formatur, etc.

Imponeres is a verb Personal Active, of the Subjunctive Mood, Preterimperfect
tense, Singular number, Second Person, and third Conjugation, like legeres.

The Analysis of a Participle.
What part of Speech is Deposito, being laid down?

Deposito is a Participle, derived of the verb Depono to lay down.

Of what number is deposito?

Deposito, is of the Singular number, because its Substantive fasce is of the
Singular number.

Of what Gender is deposito?

Deposito is of the Masculine Gender, because its Substantive fasce is of the
Mascuculine Gender.

By what Rule can you tell that deposito is of the Masculine Gender?

At si tres variant voces, etc.

Of what case is deposito?

Deposito is of the Ablative case, because its Substantive fasce is of the
Ablative case.

How is deposito declined?

Like Bonus a Noun Adjective, of three diverse endings; Sing. Nom. Depositus,
deposita, depositum.

Of what Tense is Deposito?

Of the Preter tense, because it has its English, ending in d, and its Latin
in tus.

How is depositus formed?

Of the latter Supine Depositu, by putting to s.

Deposito is a Participle, of the Singular number, Masculine Gender, Ablative
case, and is declined like Bonus, being of the Preter tense, and formed of the
Later Supine, of the verb Depone.

The Analysis of an Adverb.
What part of Speech is Cum when? Cum is an Adverb, because it is joined to the
verb defessus esset, to declare its signification. What siginification has Cum?

Cum has the signification of Time.

But why is not Cum a Preposition in this place?

Because it has not a casual word to serve unto.

Cum is an Adverb of time.

The Analysis of a Conjunction.
What part of Speech is que and? Que is a Conjugation, because it joyneth words
together.

What kind of Conjunction is que?

Que is a Conjunction Copulative, because it coupleth both the words and sense.

Que is a Conjunction Copulative.

The Analysis of a Praeposition.
What Part of Speech is ex out of? Ex is a Praeposition, because it is set
before another part of Speech in Apposition, as ex nemore out of a Forest.

What case does ex serve to? Ex serves to the Ablative case.

Ex is a Preposition serving to the Ablative case.



6. Having thus tried your young Scholar, how he understands the Introduction
or first part of his Accidents, (for whom, if you find him expert therein, one
example may serve, but if not, you may yet make use of more, until he can
perfectly and readily give you an account of any word) you may further make
trial, how he understands the Rules of Concordance, and construction in the
second part of the Accidents, by causing him to apply the Rules to every word,
as he meets with it in the Grammatical order, thus;

Quidam is of the Nominative case, Singular number, and Masculine Gender, and
agrees with its Substantive Senex, because the Adjective, whether it be a
Noun, Pronoun, or Participle, agrees with its Substantive, etc.

Senex is the Nominative case coming before vocavit, (which is the Principal
verb) because the word that answers to the question who, or what? shall be
the Nominative case to the verb, and shall be set before the verb.

Portans is of the Nominative case, Singular number, and Masculine Gender, and
agrees with its Substanlive senex, because the Adjective, whether it be a
Noun, etc.

Fascem is of the Accusative case governed of Portans, because Participles
govern such cases, etc.

Lignorum is of the Genitive case, governed of fascem, because when two
Substantives come together, etc.

Super is a Preposition, which serves to both the Accusative and the Ablative
case; but here it serves to the Accusative.

Humeros is of the Accusative case, governed of the Preposition super.

Ex is a Preposition, which serves to an Ablative case.

Nemore is of the Ablative case, governed of the Preposition ex.

Cum is an Adverb of Time. Defessus esset is of the Singular number, and third
person, and agrees with its Nominative case ill^ understood, because, A verb
Personal agrees with, etc.

Longa is of the Ablative case, Singular number, and Feminine Gender, and
agrees with its Substantive via, because the Adjective whether it be, etc.

Via is of the Ablative case governed of defessus esset, because All verbs
require an Ablative case of the instrument, etc.

Vocavit is of the singular number, and third person, and agrees with its
Nominative case senex, because A verb Personal, etc.

Mortem is of the Accusative case, and follows the verb vocavit, because
verbs transitives are all such, etc.

Fasce is of the Ablative case absolute, because a Noun or Pronoun Substantive
joined with a Participle, etc.

Deposito is of the Ablative case, Singular number, and Masculine Gender, and
agrees with its Substantive fasce, because The Adjective whether it be, etc.

Humi is of the Genitive case, because These Nouns Humi, domi, etc.

Ecce is an Adverb of showing.

Mors is the Nominative case coming before the verb advent, because The word
that answers to the question who or what? etc.

Advenit is of the singular number and third person, and agrees with its
Nominative case mors, because A verb Personal, etc.

Que is a Conjunction Copulative.

Rogat is of the Indicative Mood, and Present tense, because Conjunctions
Copulatives and Disjunctives most commonly, etc.

Causam is of the Accusative case, and follows the verb rogat, because verbs
Transitives are all such, etc.

Quamobrem is an Adverb of asking.

Vocaverat is of the singular number, and third person, and agrees with its
Nominative case ille understood, because A verb Personal agrees, etc.

Se is of the Accusative case, and follows the verb vocaverat, because verbs
Transitives are all such, etc.

Tunc is an Adverb of Time.

Senex is the Nominative case coming before the verb ait, because the word that
answers to the question who or what? etc

Ait is of the singular number, and the third person, and agrees with its
Nominative case senex, because a Verb Personal, etc.

Vt is a Conjunction causal

Imponeres is of the Singular number, and second person, and agrees with its
Nominative case tu understood, because A verb Personal, etc.

Hunc is of the Accusative case, Singular number, and Masculine Gender, and
agrees with its Substantive fascem, because the Adjective whether it be, etc.

Fascem is of the Accusative case, and follows the verb imponeres, because
verbs Transitives, etc.

Lignorum is of the Genitive case governed of fascem, because When two
Substantives, etc.

Super is a Preposition, which here serves to an Accusative case.

Humeros is of the Accusative case, because super is a Preposition serving to
an Accusative case.

7. Try him yet a little further, by causing him to turn an English into Latin
in imitation of this Fable, and to observe the Artificial order in placing all
the words, ex. gr.

A woman bearing a basket of plums upon her head out of a garden, when she was
weary with the heavy burden, sat down, having set her basket upon a bulk.
Behold! a boy came to her, and asked her, if she would give him any plums. Then
the woman said; I will give thee a few, if thou will help me to set this basket
upon my head.

Quaedam mulier prunorum calathum super caput ex horto portans, cum gravi onere
defessa esset, calatho super scamnum posito, desedit. Ecce! Puer advenit,
numque daret sibi pruna rogavit. Tunc mulier pauca tibi dabo, siquidem opem
mihi feres, ut hunc calathum super caput meum imponam, ait.

When you have found a child sufficiently expert in the Rudiments, go on also
to try how far he understands the whole Art of Grammar by this or the like
Praxis.

1. Let him take a piece of one of Castalions Dialogues, or the like easy
piece of Latin, and write it down according to his book, but as he writes it,
let him divide every word of more syllables, according to the Rules of right
spelling, and give you an account of every letter, and syllable, and note of
distinction, according to the Rules of Orthography, and of every Accent that he
meets withal, as also of the Spirits and Quantities of Syllables, according
to the Rules in Prosodia, ex. gr.

Serpens. Eva.
S. Cur ve-tu-it vos De-us ve-sci ex o-mni-bus ar-bo-ribus po-ma-ri-i? E.
Li-cet no-bis ve-sci fru-cti-bus ar-bo-rum po-ma-ri-i; tan-tum De-us no-bis
in-ter-di-xit e-a ar-bo-re, quae est in me-di-o po-ma-ri-o, ne ve-sce-re-mur
fru-ctu e-jus, ne-ve e-ti-am at-tin-ge-re-mus, ni-si vel-le-mus mo-ri. S.
Ne-qua-quam mo-ri-e-mi-ni pro-pte-re-a, sed scit De-us, si com-e-de-ri-tis de
e-o, tum o-cu-los vo-bis a-per-tum i-ri, at-que i-ta vos fo-re tan-quam De-os,
sci-en-tes boni, at-que ma-li. I-ta pla-ne vi-de-tur, and fru-ctus i-pse est
pul-cer sa-ne vi-su: ne-sci-o an sit i-ta dul-cis gu-sta-tu; ve-run-ta-men
ex-pe-ri-ar.

Now if you ask him, why he writes Serpens, Eva, Cur, Deus Nequaquam, and Ita
with great letters, and all the other words with little letters; he can tell
you (if he ever learned or minded his Rules) that Proper names, beginnings of
Sentences, and words more eminent then others, are to begin with a great
letter, and in other places small letters are to be used. If you ask him, why
he spelleth ve-tu-it and not vet-u-it, he will say, because a consonant set
betwixt two vowels, belongs to the latter.

If you ask him why he spelleth ve-sci, and not* ves-ci; he will answer you,
because consonants which can be joined in the beginning of a word must not be
parted in the middle of it.

If you ask him why he spelleth ar-bo-ri-bus, and not a-rbo-ri-bus, he will
tell you, because consonants which cannot be joined in the beginning of a word,
must be parted in the middle of it.

If you ask him why he spelleth vel-le-mus, and not ve-llemus, nor vell-emus,
he will tell you, because if a consonant be doubled, the first belongs to the
foregoing, and the latter to the following syllable.

If you ask him why he spelleth com-e-de-ri-tis, and not co-me-de-ri-tis, he
will tell you because in words compounded, every part must be separated from
another; and if you again ask him concerning the same syllable, why it is com
and not con, seeing the verb is compounded of con and edo; he will answer you,
because in words compounded with a Preposition, we must respect the ear, and
good sound.

Likewise if you proceed to examine him touching the notes of distinction, why
one is made, and not another; he will tell you, that a Comma (,) distinguishes
the shorter parts of a sentence, and stays the breath but a little while in
reading; that a Colon (:) divides a Period in the middle, and holds the
breath somewhat long; that a Semicolon (;) stays the breath longer then a
comma, but not so long as a Colon; that a Period (.) is made at the end of a
perfect sentence, where one may give over reading, if he will; and that an
Interrogation (?) denotes that there is a question to be asked.

If you examine him touching the Accents, why there is a grave Accent in
tantum, he will tell you, it is to make it being an adverb, to differ from a
noun; and that because of contexture of words, the accent which ought to have
been an acute, is turned into a grave.

If you ask him, why there is a circumflex accent in ea, he will tell you, it
is to denote that ea, is of the Ablative case singular, which has a long.

And if you ask him why ne've has an acute accent; he will tell you that ne'
has changed its grave accent into an accute, because the Participle ve has
inclined its own accent into it.

If you ask him why omnibus arboribus are not sharply uttered; he will tell
you, because they do not begin with h, which is the note or letter of
Asperation.

He will quickly show you whether he understands his Rules touching the
Quantities of Syllables, or not, by writing out a sentence or two, and marking
the syllables of every word, in this manner;

Cur vuuit vo^s Duus ve^sci^ e^x o^mnbus a^rborbus po^ma^i^? lce^t nobi^s
ve^sci^ fructbus a^rborum po^mari^ ta^ntum Dus no^bi^, inte^rdi^xt a a^ bo^^,
quae e^st i^n mdo^ po^maro^, ne^ vesc e^mur f^uctu e^us, ne^v tam atri^ng
e^mus, n^ ve^lle^mus mori.

2. Let him cast the words of his Author into the Grammatical order, and
analyze every one of them exactly according to Etymology, and Syntaxis which is
the usual way of parsing) after this manner.

Cur Deus vetuit vos vesci ex omnibus arboribus pomarii? licet nobis vesci
fructibus arborum pomarii; tantum Deus interdixit nobis ea arbore, quae est in
medio pomario, ne vesceremur fructu ejus, ne've etiam attingeremus, nisi
vellemus mori.

Cur is an Adverb of asking.

Deus is a Noun Substantive Common, of the Singular number, Nominative case,
Masculine Gender (because Mascula in er, etc.) of the second Declension, Sing.
Nom. hic Deus, Genesis hujus Dei. etc.

It makes its Vocative case o Deus, and wa^teth the Plural number, because
Deus verus caret plurali. It comes before the verb vetuit.

Vetuit is a verb personal neuter, of the Indicative mood, Preterperfect tense,
singular number, and third person, because it agrees with its Nominave case
Deus, by the Rule Verbum Personale cohaeret, etc. It is of the first
Conjugation, Veto, vetas, vetui; (veto quod vetui dat) vetare; vetandi,
vetando, vetandum, vetitum, vetitu; (Quod dat ui dat itum) vetans vetiturus.

Vos is a Pronoun Primitive, of the Plural number, the Accusative case, the
Masculine Gender, and the first Declension. Sing. Nom Tu, Genesis tui, etc. It
has the Vocative case, Et Praenomina praeter etc. It is the Accusative case
after vetuit, because verba Transitiva, etc.

Vesci is a verb Deponent like legi. Vescor, vesceris, vel vescere, pastus sum
vel fui, vesci pastus vescendus; because Sic Poscunt vescor, medeor, etc. It is
of the Infinitive mood, and Present Tense, without number and Person, and is
governed of v^tuit, because Q^ibusdam tum verbis, etc.

Ex is a Preposition serving to the Ablative case.

Omnibus is a Noun Adjective of three Articles, like Tristibus Hic, and haec
omnis, and hoc omne, because sub gemina, etc.

It is of the plural number, the Ablagive case, and Feminine Gender, and
agrees with its Substantive Arboribus, because Adjectivum cum Substantivo, etc.

Arboribus is a Noun Substantive Common, like Lapidibus, Sing. Nom. haec Arbor,
Genesis hujus arboris, etc. Grando, fides, etc. It is of the Ablative case,
Singular number, Feminine Gender, and third Declension, governed of ex the
Preposition, which requires an Ablative case.

Pomarii is a Noun Substantive Common, like Regni. Sing. Nom. hoc Pomarium,
Genesis hujus pomarii, etc. Omne quod exit in um, etc. It is of the Singular
number, the Genitive case, the Neuter Gender, and second Declension, and is
governed of the Substantive Arboribus, because Quum duo Substantiva, etc.

Licet is a verb Impersonal declined in the third person singular only, Licet,
licebat, licuit and licitum est, etc. Et licet add, Quod licuit, licitum. It
is of the Indicative mood, Present tense, singular number, and third Person,
and has no Nominative case, because Impersonalia praecedentem, etc.

Nobis is a Pronoun Primitive, of the Plural number, Dative case, Masculine
Gender, and first Declension. Sing. Nom. Ego, Genesis mei, It wants the Vocative
case, because Et Pronomina, etc. and is governed of licet, because In Dativum
feruntur, etc.

Vesci, ut supra.

Fructibus is a Noun Substantive Common, like manibus. Sing. Nom. hic Fructus,
Genesis hujus Fructus, etc. Mascul^ in er, etc. It is of the Ablative case, Plural
number, Masculine Gender, and fourth Declension, governed of vesci, because
Fungor, fruor, utor, etc.

Arborum ut supra in Arboribus, It is of the Genitive case plural, governed of
fructibus, because Quum duo Substantiva, etc.

Pomarii ut supra.

Tantum is an Adverb of quantity, made of an Adjective of the Neuter Gender,
because Aliquando neutra Adjectiva, etc*

Deus ut supra, but here it comes before the verb interdixit.

Interdixit is a verb Personal Active, compounded of inter and dico, conjugated
like legit, Interdico, is, xi, because Pr^teritum dat idem, etc. interdixi,
interdictum, because Compositum ut simplex, etc. It is of the Indicative mood,
Preterperfect tense, Singular number, and third person, and agrees with its
Nominative case, Deus, because Verbum Personale, etc.

Nobis, ut supra, but here it is the Dative case governed of interdixit,
because Dativum postulant, etc.

Ea is a Pronoun Primitive of the second Declension, Sing. Nom is, ea, id. Gen,
ejus, etc. It is of the Singular number, Ablative case, and Feminine Gender,
and agrees with its Substantive arbore, because Ad eundem modum, etc.

Arbore ut supra, but here it is the Ablative case singular governed of
interdixit, which verb does often govern a Dative case with an Ablative, though
we have no express Rule for it in our Grammar.

Quae is a Pronoun Relative, of the second Declension. Sing. Nom. Qui, quae,
quod. Genesis cujus, etc. It is of the singular number, Femine Gender, and third
Person, and agrees therein with its Antecedent arbore, because Relativum cum
Antecedente, etc. It is of the Nominative case, and comes before the verb est,
because Q^oties nullus Nominativus, etc.

Est is a verb Personal neuter Substantive, having a proper manner of
declining, Sum, es, fui, etc. because, Et a fuo sum fui. It is of the
Indicative mood Present tense, singular number, and third person, and agrees
with its Nominative case Quae, because Verbum Personale, etc.

In is a Praeposition serving to the Ablative case.

Medio is a Noun Adjective of three terminations, like Bono; Sing. Nom Medius,
media, medium, etc.

At si tres variant voces, etc. It is of the Ablative case, Neuter Gender, and
Singular number, and agrees with its Substantive, Pomario because Adjectivum
cum Substantivo. Pomario ut supra, but here it is of the Ablative case, because
in is a Preposition serving to the Ablative case.

Ne is an Adverb of forbidding, and governs a Subjunctive mood. Ne
prohibendi, etc*

Vesceremur, ^t supra in vesci; but here it is of the Subjunctive mood,
preterimperfect tense, plural number, and first person, like legeremur, and
agrees with its nominative case nos, which is not expressed, because
Nontinativus primae vel secundae personae, etc.

Fructu, ut supra; but here it is of the Ablative case singular, governed of
vesce rem^r, because Fungor, fruor, etc.

Ejus, ut supra in ea; but here it is of the Genitive case singular, and
Feminine Gender, governed of fructu, because Quum duo Substantiva, etc. Here
note that ejus is a Relative, and agreeeth with its Antecedent Arboris,
understood.

Ne've consists of two words, whereof ne is an Adverb of forbidding, and ve
is an inclinative conjunction.

Etiam is a Conjunction copulative.

Attingeremus is a verb Personal Active, like legeremus It is compounded of Ad
and tango, and makes at for ad for better sound sake, and tingo for tango,
because Haec habeo, lateo, etc. It makes the Preterperfect tense attigi and
not attetigi because Sed syllaba semper etc. and the Supines attactum, attactu,
because Compopositum ut simplex, etc. It is of the Subjunctive mood,
Preterimperfect tense, plural number, and first person, and agreeeth with its
Nominative case nos, which is understood, because Nominativus primae vel
secundae person^^, etc.

Nisi is a Conjunction exceptive, and serves to a Subjunctive mood, Ni, nisi,
si, siquidem, etc.

Vell^mus is a verb Personal neuter irregular, Volo, vis, volui, because lo
fit, ui, etc. Supinis care^, because, Psallo, volo, nolo, etc. It is of the
Subjunctive mood, Preterimperfect tense, plural number, and first person, and
agrees with its Nominative case nos, which is understood, because Nominativus
primae, etc.

Mori is a verb Personal Deponent of the third Conjugation, like legi. Morior,
moreris vel morere, mortuus sum vel fui, (moriorque mortuus) mori, moriens,
mortuus, moriturus. It is of the Infinitive mood, having neither number, nor
person, nor nominative case, and is governed of Vellemus, because Quibusdam tum
verbis, etc.

Thus let every particular boy in a form, practice a while by himself upon a
several piece of Latin, and it will show you plainly what he is able to do,
and make that the most negligent and heedlesse amongst them, shall know how to
make perfect use of his whole Grammar, though (perhaps) for all you could do to
him, he never heeded it before.

What I have hitherto mentioned touching the well gounding of children, has
chiefly respect unto Lilies Grammar, which is yet constantly made use of in
most Schools in England; and from which I think it not good for any Master to
decline, either in a private or public course of Teaching, for these reasons
following.

1* Because no man can be assured, that either his Scholars will stick to him,
or that he shall continue with them, till he have perfectly trained them up by
another Grammar.

2 Because, if children be made to change their Grammars, as often as they use
to change their Masters (especially in a place where many Schools are) they
will be like those that run from room to room in a Labyrinth, who know not
whether they go backward or forward, nor which way to take toward the door; I
mean, they may be long conversant in Grammar books, and never understand the
Art it self.

3. Because I have known many, and those men of excellent abilities for
Grammar-learning, who having endeavored to proceed by an easier way, then
Lilies is, have been quite decried by the generality of them that hold to the
Common-Grammar, and have had much ado to bear up the credit of their School,
though their Scholars have been found to make very good Proficiency, and more
then others.

4. Because, when a Master has grounded a Scholar never so well, if he (in
hopes of an exhibition or Scholarship, or other preferment to be had) be
removed from him to one of our greater Schools, he shall be made pro forma, to
get Lilies Grammar by heart, and to neglect what he has formerly learned, as
unnecessary and useless.

5. Because children in their tender age are generally like leaking vessels,
and no sooner do they receive any instructions of Grammar, but they forget them
as quickly, till by frequent repetitions and examinations, they be rev^ted into
them, and by assiduity of long practice brought to an habit, which cannot be
bred in them under two or three years time; in which space they may be as well
habituated and perfected by Lilies Grammar as any other, according to the
Platform of teaching it, which I have already showed, and by means of those
helps which I have published for the better explication of some parts of it.

Yet I do not deny, but a far easier way may be taken to teach children; First
the grounds and Rudiments, and afterward the whole Systeme of Grammar, then
that which is generally now in use according to Lilie, whom after I had
observed many eminent Schoolmasters (who have published Grammars of their own)
to condemn of many Tautologies, defects, and errors; and withal, to endeavor
to retain the substance of his Grammar, I essayed my self to see what might be
done in that kind, with an especial eye upon the slender capacities of
children, with whom I had to do. And after trial made, that such instruments
would forward my work, I was bold to publish first An easy entrance to the
Latin tongue, and then The Latin Grammar fitted for the use of Schools,
which, how I have for sundry years taught, together with Lilies Grammar, I
shall now briefly declare.

1. As children are going over the Accidents, and that part of the Grammar,
which concerns the Genders of nouns, and the Preterperfect tense, and Supines
of verbs, I make them one day to peruse that part of the Grounds of Grammar,
which concerns the eight parts of Speech severally handled, and another day
to read that which concerns their construction, and every Saturday morning to
run over their examination, which being but a Task of about half an hour, does
exceedingly help their understanding and memory in getting their every days
parts, and keeping them in mind; especially if they be made sometimes to look
upon their Synopsis's, and thereby to take notice how handsomely and orderly
the Rules hang together.

2. Likewise, as children proceed in Lilies Grammar (which commonly is but very
slowly, because it being all in Latin is hard to be understood, and being
somewhat long in learning, boys are apt to forget one end of it, before they
can come to another) I cause them to make use of the Latin Grammar, which I
fitted to the use of Schools together with it. This I usually divide into
twelve or sixteen parts, (letting the Appendix alone till they understand all
the rest) in reading of which I cause them to spend half an hour for the most
part every day, and by comparing what they read with that in Lilies Grammar, I
make them to observe how what they learn in Lily, ought rightly to be placed,
according to the true method of Grammar Art, which they see analyzed in the
Synopsis. They may first read it over in English only, and then in Latin and
English together, and afterward only in Latin. And because frequent
examination is a main expedient to fasten what is taught, I cause them every
Saturday morning, to make use of Examinatio Latinae Grammaticae, (which is now
lately printed) and let one boy ask the questions out of the Book, and the rest
answer him orderly out of the Grammars in their hands. And this I find, that a
natural and clear method of teaching Grammar, is the best means that can be
devised to open the understanding for the receiving, or to strengthen the
memory for the retaining of any instructions that can be given concerning it.
And I judge that method to be most natural and easy, which does at once lay
open the subject that it treats of, and enlighten a mean capacity to
apprehend it on a sudden; and which has withal a power in it self, that
whether the discourse upon the matter be more contracted or enlarged, it can
bring all that can be said of it under a few certain and general Heads, by way
of Commonplace; which being surely kept in mind, all other documents
depending on them, as particulars, will easily be remembered.

Thus have I freely imparted my thoughts touching the most familiar way that I
have hitherto known (either by my Masters, or my own practice, or any thing
that I have observed by reading, or converse with experienced Schoolmasters)
of teaching the Common Grammar, and making use of these ordinary School-books
in every form, which are taught in most Schools in England. And because it
belongs chiefly to the Usher in most of our Grammar-Schools, to teach children
to understand and make use of their Grammar, and by degrees to furnish them
with proper words or good phrase, that they may be able of themselves to write
or speak true Latin, or translate either way pretty elegantly, before they
come under the Master; I call this part of my discovery The Vshers duty,
wherein he may plainly see how he ought to respect the end, the means, and the
manner how to use every help or mean for the better dispatch of that which he
is continually employed about; viz. the well grounding of Children in Grammar
learning: which may be done in three years, with the ordinary sort of boys,
even those of the meanest capacity, if Discretion in every particular be used,
which is beyond any directions that can be given. So that under the Usher I
admit of three forms; The first of Enterers, The second of Practitioners, The
third of Proficients in the knowledge of Grammar.

Having done therefore with grounding children, (whose inanimadvertency is the
Teachers daily trouble (and not to mention their other infirmities) requires,
that they be held long in one and the same work, and be made ever and anon to
repeat again what they formerly learned) I shall next add somewhat concerning
teaching men at spare hours in private, with whom (by reason of their stronger
capacities, and more use of reason) a far speedier course may be taken, and
greater Proficiency may be made in half a year, then can be expected from
children in three years space. And what I shall here deliver is confirmed by
that experiment which I have made with many young Gentlemen, for these eleven
or twelve years together last past, in London; who being very sensible of their
own want of the Latin tongue, and desirous (if possibly) to attain it, have
thought no cost nor pains too little to be employed for gaining of it, and yet
in few months, they have either been so grounded, as to be able to help
themselves in a plain Author, in case they knew nothing before; or so
perfected, as to grapple with the most difficult and exactest Authors, in case
they had formerly but a smattering of the Language; and this they have obtained
at leisure time, and at far less expense, then they now prize the jewel at,
which they have. In teaching of a man then, I require none of those helps, which
I have provided for childrens uses, (though perhaps he may find benefit to
himself by perusing them in private) only I desire him at the first to get an
easy entrance to the Latin tongue, and by it I show him as briefly, orderly
and plainly as I can,

1. How he ought to distinguish words, so as to know what part of Speech any
word is.

2. To tell what belongs to every several Part of Speech.

3. To get the Examples of the Declensions and Conjugations very exactly, so as
to know what any Noun or Verb signifies, according to its Termination: and to
store him with words, I advise him to peruse a Chapter in the Vocabulary (at
least) once every day, and to observe the Latin names of such things as are
common in use, and better known to him.

4. Then I acquaint him with the most general Rules of Concordance and
Construction, and help him to understand them by sundry short examples
appliable thereunto.

5. Last of all, I cause him to take some of the Collectanea, and help him to
construe, parse, imitate, and alter them, until he be able to adventure upon
some easy Author.

After he be thus made well acquainted with the Grounds of Grammar, I bid him
to procure the Latin Grammar fitted for his use, as well as for Schools; and
together with it a Latin Testament, or Bible, and then I cause him to read
over his Grammar (by as much at once as he can well peruse in half an hour)
and be sure that he thoroughly understand it; and after every one of the four
Parts of Grammar, I give him a Praxis of it; by exercising whereof, he may
easily know how to use his Rules, and where to find them.

When by this means he can tell what to do with his Grammar, I turn him to the
Latin Testament, (beginning with the first Chapter of Saint John's Gospel,
because it is most easy) and there I make him (by giving him some few
directions, which he has, together with his Grounds of Grammar) to learn to
construe of himself six, eight, or ten verses, with the help of his English
Bible; and to parse them exactly according to his Grammar, and by going over
three or four Chapters, he will be able to proceed understandingly in his
Latin Bible without help.

Which when he can do, I advise him to get Corderius English and Latin, where
he is chiefly to take notice of the phrases, how they differ, in both
languages, and to imitate here and there a Colloquie, to try what good Latin
he can write or speak of himself. And now I commend to his own private reading,
Dialogi Gallico Anglo-Latini, by D^gres, Dictionarium octo-lingue, or the
Schoolmaster, Printed formerly by Michael Sparks, and Janua Linguarum, or
rather Janua Latinae linguae, and the like; by perusal of which, together with
Corderius, he may be furnished with copy of words and phrases, for common
discourse in Latin. Afterward I help him in reading Aesop's Fables, to
consture and parse, and imitate a Period, or more in (...) of them, thereby to
acquaint himself (...) the artificial manner of placing words. And when I see
he dare adventure upon the Latin alone, I make him read Terence over and over,
and to observe all the difficulties of Grammar that he meets in him, and after
he is once Master of his style, he will be pretty well able for any Latin
Book, of which I allow him to take his choice.

Whether he will read Tully, Pliny, Seneca, or Lipsius for Epistles. Justin,
Salust, Lucius Florus, or Caesar for History. Virgil, Ovid, Lucan, or Horace
for Poetry.

And when I see he can read these understandingly, I judge him able to peruse
any Latin Author of himself, by the help of Coopers Dictionary, and good
Commentators, or Scholiasts.

These Authors which I have mentioned* are most of them in English; as also
Livie Plinies natural History, Tacitus, and other excellent Books, which he may
peruse together with the Latin, and by comparing both Languages together, he
may become very expert in both. Yet I would advis^ him to translate some little
Books of himself; First out of Latin into English, and then out of English
into Latin, which will at once furnish him with all points o^ Grammar, and the
right use and orderi^^ of words, and in a short time bring (...) to the like
eloquence.

Mr. Ascham commends Tully de senctute, and his Epistles. Ad Quintum Fratrem,
and ad Lentulum, for this purpose.

If he would exercise himself in Oratory or Poetry, I suppose his best way is
to imitate the most excellent pieces of either, that he finds in the best and
purest Authors, (especially Tully and Virgil) till he can do well of himself
Horace and Buchanan's Psalms will sufficiently store him with variety of Verses.

And now if one should ask me before I conclude this Book, and begin with the
next, whether it be not possible for men or children to learn Latin, as well
as English, without Grammar-Rules.

I answer. First, that it is hardly possible, because the Latin tongue is not
so familiarly spoken, as English; which is gotten only by hearing and imitation.

2. That it is not the better way, partly because they that are well acquainted
with Grammar, know when they or others speak well, and when they speak ill;
whereas they that are ignorant of the Rules, take any Latin for good, be it
never so barbarous, or full of Solaecismes, and partly, because they that are
skilful in Grammar, are able to do something in reading Authors, or
translating, or writing Epistles, or the like, by themselves; whereas they that
learn Latin without any Rule, are able to do nothing surely if their Teacher
be away. Besides, if the Latin be once well gotten by Rule, it is not so apt
to be forgotten; as if it be learned only by rote, because the learner is at
any time able to recover what he has lost by the help of his own intellect,
having the habit of Grammar in his mind. Yet (I conceive) it is the readiest
way to the gaining of this Language; to join assiduity of speaking and reading,
and writing, and especially double translating to the Rules; for as the one
affords us words and phrase, and the other directs us how to order them for a
right speech; so the exercise of both will at last beget such an Habit in us,
that we may increase our ability to speak and understand pure Latin, though
(perhaps) the Rules of Grammar, be forgotten by us.

Having here done with the Vshers Duty, I shall (God willing) go on to discover
the Masters Method in every particular, according to what I have either
practiced my self, or observed from others of my profession. And I hope this my
slender discovery will excite some of greater practice and experience, to
commit also to public their own observations; by whom if I may be convinced,
that I have any where gone in an erroneous way, I shall willingly retract my
course, and endeavor to stere by any man's Chart, that I find more cast and
sure, to direct me. In the mean time, I commit my little vessel to the waters
all alone, and desire God, that whatever Dangers attend it, he would so protect
and prosper it, that it may safely arrive to the Port which I chiefly aim at;
viz. the honor and service of his divine Majesty, and the benefitting of both
Church and Common wealth, in the good education of children.

THE MASTERS METHOD, OR THE Exercising of Scholars In GRAMMARS, Authors, and
Exercises; GREEK, LATIN, and HEBREW. By C. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard; 1659.

CHAP. 1.
How to make the Scholars of the fourth Form very perfect in the Art of
Grammar, and Elements of Rhetoric; and how to enter them upon Greek in an easy
way. How to practice them (as they read Terence, and Ovid de Tristibus, and his
Metamorphosis, and Janua Latinae linguae, and Sturmius, and Textor's Epistles)
in getting Copy of words, and learning their Derivations and Differences, and
in varying phrases. How to show them the right way of double translating, and
writing a most pure Latin style. How to acquaint them with all sorts of
English and Latin verses, and to enable them to write faimiliar and elegant
Epistles either in English or Latin, upon all occasions.

THe Usher having thoroughly performed his Duty, so as to lay a sure foundation
by teaching Grammar, and lower Authors and using other helps for mentioned, to
acquaint his Scholars with the words, and order of the Latin tongue, as well
for speaking, as writing it: The Master may more cheerfully proceed to build
further, and in so doing, he should be as careful to keep what is well gotten,
as diligent to add thereunto. I would advise therefore, that the Scholars of
this fourth form may,

1. Every morning read six or ten verses (as formerly) out of the Latin
Testament into English, that thus they may be become well acquainted with the
matter, and words of that most holy Book; and after they are acquainted with
the Greek Testament, they may proceed with it in like manner.

2. Every Thursday morning repeat a part out of the Latin Grammar, according
as it is last divided, that by that means they may constantly say it over once
every quarter. And because their wits are now ripe for understanding Grammar
notions, where ever they meet with them, I would have them every one to provide
a Paper-book of two quires in Quarto, in the beginning whereof, they should
write the Heads of Grammar by way of common place, as they see it in my Latin
Grammar, and having noted the pages, they should again write over the same
Heads, (leaving a larger or less distance betwixt them, as they conceive they
may find more or less matter to fill them withal) in the leaves of their
Book, and insert all niceties of Grammar that they find, either in their daily
lessons, or in perusing other Books at spare hours, especially such as either
methodically, or critically treat of Grammar; amongst which I commend Mr.
Brinsley's posing of the Accidents. The Animadversions upon Lilies Grammar,
Stockwoods disputations, Mr. Pooles English Accidents, Hermes Anglo-Latinus,
Phalerii Supplementa ad Grammaticam, Mr. Birds, Mr. Shirleyes, Mr. Burleyes,
Mr. Hawkins, Mr. Gregory's, Mr. Haynes, Mr. Danes, Mr. Farnabies, and other
late printed new Grammars, (which they may read in private one after another)
will afford them several observations. As for Authors Grammaticae Antiqui,
which are commonly printed together; Dispauterius, Linacer, Melancthon,
Valerius, Alvarez, Rhemus, Sulpitius, Vossius, and the like, either ancient or
modern, they may take the opportunity to read them, after they come to higher
Forms, and pick out of them such pretty notes, as they have not formerly met
withal, and write them in their Common-place-booke. And because it may seem a
needless labor for every Scholar to be thus employed, and it is (almost)
impossible for one alone to procure so many Grammars, it were to be wished,
that in every School of note, there might be a Library, wherein all the best
Grammars that can be gotten, might be kept, and lent to those boys, that are
more industriously addicted to Grammar Art, and which intend to be Scholars,
that they may read them over, and refer what they like in them to its proper
Head. And to encourage them in so doing, the Master may do well at the first to
direct them, and afterward at leisure times to cast an eye upon their Books,
and see what they have collected of themselves. But be sure that they keep
their Paper-book fair, and that they write constantly in it, with a legible and
even hand.

3. Thus they may have liberty to learn Rhetoric on Mondayes, Tuesdayes, and
Wednesdayes, for morning Parts. And to enter them in that Art of fine speaking,
they may make use of Elementa Rhetorices, lately printed by Mr. Dugard, and out
of it learn the Tropes and Figures, according to the definitions given by
Talaeus, and afterward more illustrated by Mr. Butler. Out of either of which
books, they may be helped with store of examples, to explain the Definitions,
so as they may know any Trope or Figure that they meet with in their own
Authors. When they have thoroughly learnt that little book, they may make a
Synopsis of it, whereby to see its order, and how every thing hangs together,
and then write the Common place heads in a Paper-book (as I have mentioned
before touching Grammar) unto which they may refer; whatever they like in the
late English Rhetoric, Mr. Farnabies Index Rhetoricus, Susenbrotus, Mr. Horns
Compendium Rhetorices, or the like, till they be better able to peruse other
Authors, that more fully treat of the Art; as, Vossius's Partitiones
Oratoriae. Orator extemporaneus, Tesmari exercitationes Rhetoricae, Nic.
Caussinus. Paiot de elequentia, and many others; with which a School-Library
should be very well furnished for the Scholars to make use on, accordingly as
they increase in ability of learning.

These Elementa Rhetorices in their first going over, should be explained by
the Master, and construed by the Scholars, and every example compared with its
Definition. And the Scholars should now be diligent of themselves to observe
every Trop and Figure, that occur in their present Authors, and when they
say, to render it with its full definition, and if any be more eminent and
worthy observation then others, to write it down in their Common-place-book,
and by this means they will come to the perfect understanding of them in a
quarter of a years time, and with more ease commit it all to memory by
constant parts, saying a whole Chapter together at once; which afterward they
may keep by constant Repetitions, as they do their Grammar.

4. When they have passed their Rhetoric, you may let them bestow those hours,
which they spent about it, in getting the Greek Grammar for morning parts. And
because in learning this Language, as well as the Latin, we are to proceed by
one Rule, which is most common and certain; I prefer Camdens Greek Grammar
before any that I have yet seen, (though perhaps it be not so facill, or so
complete as some latelier printed, especially those that are set out by my
worthy friends, Mr. Busbie of Westminster, and Mr. Dugard of Merchant Tailors
School) in the first going over of which, I would have them to repeat only
the Greek letters, and their divisions, the Accents, and eight Parts of Speech,
the Articles, Declensions, and Conjugations, the Adverbs, Conjunctions, and
Prepositions by several parts, as they are best able to get them, and to write
down so much as they say at once in a fair Paper-book, very exactly observing
and marking every Accent, and note of distinction. And this will quickly enable
them to write or read Greek very truly, especially if they mind the
abbreviated characters, which are now lately printed at the end of most of
these Grammars. This work will take up about a quarter of a years time.

In the next half year, they may get over the whole Grammar in that order, as
it is printed. And in the interim thereof, they may make use of their Greek
Testament every morning after prayers, in like manner as they formerly used
their Latin one. They may begin with the Gospel of S. John, which at the first
you may help them to construe and parse verbatim, but after a while when they
have gathered strength to do somewhat of themselves, you may let them make use
of Pasors Lexicon, which they will better do, by help of the Themes, which I
caused to be printed in the Margent of the Greek Testament, which will lead
them to Pasor, to see the Analysis of any word in the Testament. Mr. Dugard
has lately completed his Lexicon Graeci Testamenti Alphabeticum, una cum
explicatione Grammatica vocum singularum in usum Tironum; nec non concordantia
singulis vocibus apposita, in usum Theologiae canditatorum; which were it once
committed to the press, as it now lies ready in his hand, would be a most
excellent help to young Scholars, to proceed in the Greek Testament of
themselves, in an understanding and Grammatical way. And I hope it will not be
long ere he publish it for common use. When they have gone over the Declensions
and Conjugations, and are able to write Greek in a very fair and legible
character, let them write out the Paradigmes of every Declension and
Conjugation, and divide the moveable part of the words, from the Terminatious,
as you may see it done in Mr. Dugards Rudimenta Grammaticae Graecae. After they
are thus acquainted with every particular example, they may write out all the
Declensions one by another, and the three voices of the Verbs throughout all
moods and tenses in all Conjugations, that so they may more readily compare
them one by another, and see what Tenses are alike, or which are wanting in
every voice. If these things were drawn into Tables, to be hanged up in the
School, they would help the weaker boys.

And to supply them with store of Nouns and Verbs, you may let them repeat as
many nouns as they can well get at once, out of Mr. Gregory's Nomenclatura; and
afterward as many Sentences as they can well say at once, out of Seidelius, or
the latter end of Clavis Graecae linguae, by the repeating, construing and
parsing, whereof they will learn all the Primitive words of the Greek Tongue,
and be able to decline them. And thus they will be very well fitted to fall
upon any approved Greek Author, when they come into the next Form. But if you
would have them learn to speak Greek, let them make use of Posselius's
Dialogues, or Mr. Shirleyes Introductorium, in English, Latin, and Greek. I
commonly appointed Tuesdayes and Thursdayes afternoones for this employment,
before or afafter my Scholars had performed their other Tasks.

5. Terence, of all the School-Authours that we read, does deservedly challenge
the first place, not only because Tully himself has seemed to derive his
eloquence from him, and many noble Romans are reported to have assisted him in
making his Comedies; but also because that Book is the very quintessence of
familiar Latin, and very apt to express the most of our Anglicismes withal.
The matter of it is full of morality, and the several Actors therein, most
lively seem to personate the behavior and properties of sundry of the like
sort of people, even in this age of ours. I would have the Scholars, therefore
of this form to read him so thoroughly, as to make him wholly their own. To help
them in so doing, I have rendered a good part of it into English, answerable to
the Latin line by line, in the adverse page, and I intend (God willing) ere
long to complete the whole, according to what I have formerly undertaken, and
promised.

This Author I would have the Scholars to read constantly every Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, for fore-noon Lessons, taking about half a
page at once, till they begin to relish him, and then they will easily take
more, and delight to be exercised in him in this manner.

1. Let them write out every Lesson very fair and exactly, as they see it
printed before them both in English and Latin. And this will be a means to
perfect them in Orthography, and to imprint what they learn in that Author in
their minds. They should have a Quarto Paper-book for this purpose, wherein
nothing else should be written.

2. Let them translate about four or six lines Grammatically in a loose paper,
that by this means they may better take notice of the way of construing.

3. Let them construe the whole Lesson both Grammatically, and according to the
phrase, and this will acquaint them with the proprieties of both Tongues.

4. Let them parse it according to the Grammatical order, examining every word
to the utmost of what Grammar teaches concerning it, and this will make them
thoroughly to understand Lilie, and sometimes to consult other Grammars, where he
comes short in a Rule.

5. Let them cull out the most significant words, and phrases, and write them
in a Pocketbook, with figures referring where to find them in their Author;
and set them ever and anon be conning these by heart, because these (of all
others) will stand them in most stead for speaking Latin, or writing
Colloquies and Epistles.

In reading of this book, it is not amiss for the Master to mind his Scholars
of the true decorum of both things and words, and how fitting they are for such
persons to do or speak, as are there represented, and upon such occasions as
they did, and spoke them. As in Andria, they may observe not only in general,
how apt young men are to be enticed, old men to chide, servants to deceive,
etc. but more particularly they may see how some men are more apt to be carried
away by passion then others are, and how different their natures are sometimes,
though their age and breeding may be the same. Thus they shall find Simo and
Chremes, two old Citizens, the one pettish and apt to overshoot himself in many
things, the other more call me and circumspect, and therefore better able to
pacify and advise others. Likewise, they shall meet with two young Gentlemen,
Pamphilus and Charinus, the one whereof, being very towardly and hopeful, was
drawn away by ill company, and thereby brought into much trouble of mind,
betwixt a fear to offend his Father, and a care to make amends for his fault
committed; but the other being rash and childishly disposed, is set upon what
he desires with such eagerness, that he will have it, though it be impossible
for him to obtain it, and he be utterly ignorant of using any means to come by
it. But above all, they will laugh at the knave Davus, to read how he presuming
upon his own cunning wit, displeases Sim^^, and ensnareth Pamphilus, and at
last brings himself within the compass of the lash. And, in this and other
comedies, they may observe many remarkable sayings and actions, which will hint
much to abundant matter of invention for future exercises. As when they hear
Davus cry Hem astutias! Fie upon craft! they may take an occasion to enlarge
upon the matter, as to say; One may quickly, perceive by Davus in Terence, what
a mischievous wit will come to, that does always busy it self to circumvent
and entrap others; for this fellow, after he had cozened his old Master, and
unhappily taught his Masters son to tell his father a lie, and entangle himself
in a double marriage, and saw his knavery could not help him to escape his own
danger, was ready at last to hang himself; and though he came off pretty well
with his young Master, by condemning himself, and asking forgiveness, and
promising to amend the matter he had utterly spoiled; yet in the height of his
jollity, the old man catches him at unawares, and without hearing him to speak
a word for himself, calls for Dromo, and makes him hoise him up, and carry
him away to the house of correction, and there to tie him neck and heels
together, and whip him smartly for the roguery he had done. Such Dictates as
these, the Master may give his Scholars sometimes to turn into pure Latin,
till they be able to make the like of themselves. And this is indeed to make a
true use of this excellent Author, according to what Erasmus directs in his
golden little book, de Ratione instituendi Discipulos, which is worth ones
perusal, that is exercised in teaching youth.

When you meet with an Act or Scene that is full of affection, and action, you
may cause some of your Scholars, after they have learned it to act it, first in
private amongst themselves, and afterward in the open School before their
fellows; and herein you must have a main care of their pronunciation, and
acting every gesture to the very life. This acting of a piece of a Comedy, or a
Colloquy sometimes, will be an excellent means to prepare them to pronounce
Orations with a Grace, and I have found it an especial remedy to expel that
subrustick bashfulnesse, and unresistable timorousness, which some children
are naturally possessed withal, and which is apt in riper years to drown many
good parts in men of singular endowments.

6. Their afternoon parts, on Mondays and Wednesdays, may be in Janua Latinae
linguae; which book should be often read over, because it will at once furnish
them with the knowledge of words and things, into the reasons of which, they
will now be more industriously inquisitive, then furmerly; because their
present years do teach them to be more discursive in their understanding, as
growing more toward men. And therefore in this book they should not only
first mind the signification, and Grammatical construction of words, but
Secondly, endeavor to gain a Copy of good and proper words for expression of
one and the same thing, as that they may not only tell you that domus but also
aedes is Latin for a house, and that decor, and pulchritudo are Latin for
beavty as well as forma; and in finding such Synonyma's as these, they may be
helped as well by Dictionaries, as by frequent reading. Thirdly, They may with
every part bring a piece of the Index tran^^ated into English. Fourthly,
Because ^hey must now begin to use their judgment in the right choice of
words, (when they find many heaped together) it were not amiss to let them
enquire the Original out of Rider's Latin Dictionary, or Beckman do Originibus
Latinae linguae; and to consider the differences that are betwixt words of the
same signification; which they may learn out of Ausonius Popma, Laurentius
Valla, Cornelius Fronto, Varro de lingua Latina, and the like books fit to be
kept in the School Library.

7. On Tuesdaies and Thursdaies in the after-noons, I would have this Form
employed in some of Tullies Epistles, (either those collected formerly by
Sturmius, or those of late made use of in Westminster School) but Sturmius's I
rather prefer as more easy to begin withal, the others may be used
afterward, together with Textors Epistles. And*

1. I would have them be exercised in double translating these Epistles, so as
to render many of them into good English, and after a while to turn the same
again into Latin, and to try how near they can come to their Author in the
right choice, and orderly placing of words in every distinct Period. And
because the Authors style and expression will in many particulars seem hard to
those that have not formerly read some of his Epistles, I have thought good at
first to give my Scholars a taste of an Epistolary style, by translating a
Century of select Epistles, out of Tully and other choice Authors, making the
English answer to the Latin, Period, by Period. And these I cause them to
write over, and in so doing, to take notice of the placing of every word, and
its manner of signification. By this means they both better themselves in
Orthography, and easily become so acquainted with Tullies expressions, that
they can adventure to construe any of his Epistles of themselves, and turn them
into English, as they see I have done the like before them.

2. Then do I cause them (as I said) to make double translations of themselves;
one while writing down both the English and Latin together, as they construe
it, (which some call Metaphrasis, an example or two whereof you may see in
Merchant Tailors School Probation) and another while, and most frequently,
writing the English out of the Latin by it self, which within ten days after,
they try how to turn into the like good Latin again. And this is the way that
Mr Brinsley so much commends, and Mr. Aseham was moved to think to be only,
or chiefly the fittest, for the speedy and perfect attaining of any Tongue.

3. After they are grown pretty quick in translating both ways, you may write
them down a little English Epistle of like matter and words to that in their
book, directed to some of their own acquaintance, which they may turn into
Latin, Period after Period, by themselves. To begin therefore with the first
Epistle in Sturmius, which may be writ down translated thus.

M. T. C. Terentiae, Salutem plurimam dicit.

Mark Tully Cicero, sends hearty commendations to (his wife) Terentia.

SI vales, been est, ego val^o.

If you be in good health, it is well: I am in good health.

Nos quotidie tabellarios vestros expectamus, qui si venerint, fortasse erimus
certiores, quid nobis faciendum sit, faciemusque te statim certiorem.

We everyday expect your Letter-posts: who if they come, we shall be perhaps
more certain, what we are to do, and we will certify you forthwith.

Valetudinem tuam cura diligenter, vale.

Look diligently to your health, farewell.

Calendis Septembris.

The first day of September.

And you may show them how to imitate it, (observing our English manner of
writing Letters) thus;

To his very loving Friend Mr. Stephen Primato at the Seven Stars near Newgate,
LONDON, these.
Amantissimo suo amico Domino Stephano Primatae ad insigne Septentrionum juxta
novam Portam Londinensem, hasce dabis.
Most sweet Stephen,
IF you be all in good health at London, it is very well; we are all very well
at Barnet: The Lord God be praised.

Stephane mellitissime,

Si vos omnes Londini valetis, optime est: nos quidem omnes Barnetae valemus:
Laudetur Dominus Deus.

I have every day expected a Letter from you, for this whole week together,
which if it come, is like to be very welcome to me, I pray you therefore write
to me, and let me know what you do, and I will write back again to you
forthwith.

Ego quotidie literas tuas, per hanc totam hebdomadem expectavi; quae si
venerint gratissimae mihi futurae sunt; oro igitur ut ad me scribas, and
certiorem me facias, quid agis, and ego statim ad te rescribam.

Give your mind diligently to learning: Farewell heartily.

Studio literarum diligenter incumbe. Vale feliciter.

Your most loving friend Robert Burrows.
Barnetae. October. 4. 1659. Amantissimus tuus amicus Robertus Burrowes.


They may imitate the same Epistle again in framing an answer to the
particulars of the foregoing letter after this manner; observing the form of
composition, rather then the words.

To his very much respected friend Mr. Robert Burrows near the Mitre at
Barnet, these deliver.
Observantissimo suo amico Roberto Burrows haud ita procul a Mitra Barnetae,
hasce dabis.
Dear Robert,
I Am very glad, I am certified by your Letter, that you and all our friends
are in good health. Lo, I have now at last sent you my letter, which I am
sorry, that I have made you so long to look for, before it came to your hand.
And forasmuch as you desire to know what I do, I thought good to certify you,
that I am wholly busied at my book, insomuch as I could willingly find in my
heart to die at my studies: so true is that which we sometimes learned in our
Accidents, To know much is the most pleasant and sweetest life of all. You need
not therefore truly (to speak plainly) persuade me further to give my mind to
learning, which I had much rather havee then all, even the most precious jewels
in the world. Farewell, and write as often as you can to

Your very loving friend Stephen Primate.


Charissime Roberte,
QVod ex tuis literis certior fiam, te, and omnes nostros been valere,
magnopere gaudeo. Ecce, nostras, jam tandem ad te misi. Quas, quoniam in causa
fui, ut diutius expectes, priusquam ad vos venerint, vehementer doleo. Cum
autem quid ego agam, scire cupias; certiorem te facere velim, me totum in
libris esse occupatum; usque adeo, ut vel emori studiis mihi dulce erit: Ita
verum est, quod e Rudimentis Grammatices olim ebibimus; Multum scire est vita
jucundissima. Non igitur opus est, ut ulterius mihi suadeas, studio literarum
and doctrinae incumbere, quae quidem (ut plane loquar) omnibus gemmis, vel
pretiosissimis cupidissime malim. Vale, and literas quam sepissime mitte ad

Amantissimum tui Robertum Burrows.


THus you may help them to take so much as is needful and fit for their
purpose out of any Epistle, and to alter and apply it fitly to their several
occasions of writing to their friends; and where Tully's expressions will not
serve them, let them borrow words and phrases out of the books that they have
learned, (but especially out of Terence) and take care to place them so, that
they may continually seem to imitate Tullie's form in writing Epistles, though
they be not altogether tied to his very words. And this I give as a Caution
both in speaking and writing Latin, that they never utter or write any words
or phrases, which they are not sure they have read or heard used in the same
sense, that they there intend them.

It were necessary for them, as they proceed in reading Epistles, to pick out
all such familiar expressions, as are incident to be used in writing letters,
and to note them in a paper book, kept for the purpose, digested into certain
places, that they may help themselves with them as they have occasion, you may
see a President hereof in Fabritius's Elegantiae Pueriles. And because the same
phrase, is not often to be repeated in the same words, they should now strive
to get more liberty of expressing their minds by learning to vary one and the
same phrase both in English and Latin, sometimes ex tempore, before the
Master, and sometimes amongst themselves by writing them down, and then
appealing to the Master to judge, who has done the best. To enter them upon
this work, you may first begin with Mr. Clarks Dux oratorius, and then make use
of that excellent book of Erasmus de cop a verborum, which was purposely by him
intended, and contrived for the benefit of Paul's School, and I am sorry to see
it so little made use of in most of our Grammar Schools in England.

To encourage them to begin to write of themselves, and to help their invention
somewhat for inditing Epistles, you may take this course at once with a whole
form together, which I have experienced to be very easy, and generally
pleasing to young Scholars.

1. Ask one of your boys, to whom, and for what, he is minded to write a
letter; and, according as he shall return you an answer, give him some general
instructions how to do it.

2. Then bid him and all his fellows let you see which of them can best indite
an English letter upon that occasion, and in how short a time.

3. Let them every one bring his own letter fairly written, that you may show
them how to amend the imperfections you find in it

4. Take his, that has done the best, and let every one give you an expression
of his own gathering, for every word and phrase that is in it, and let it be
different (if it may be) from that which another has given already before him.

5. As they give in their expressions, do you, or an able Scholar for you,
write them all down in a paper, making a note that directs to the place to
which they belong.

6. Then deliver them the paper, and let every one take such words or phrase,
as is most agreeable to the composition of an Epistolary style (so that he take
not the same that another uses) and bring the letter writ fair, and turned out
of English into Latin. And thus you shall find the same Epistle varied so
many several ways, that every boy will seem to have an Epistle of his own, and
quite differing in words from all those of his fellows, though the matter be
one and the same.

To help the young beginners to avoid Barbarismes, and Anglicismes, (to which
they will be very subject, if not timely prevented) you may make use of a
little Dictionary English and Latin in Octavo, which resolve's the
difficulties of Translating either way and Mr. Walkers useful Book of
Particles, which is lately printed; As a so Mr. Willis Anglicismes Latinized,
and Mr. Clerks Phraseologia Puerilis; not mention to Turselinus, or Doctor
Hawkins particulae Latinae orationis, which may be afterward made use of, when
Scholars grow toward more perfection in the Latin Tongue, and can read them
without your help. But for their further assistance in this most p^ofitable and
commendable kind of exercise; I commend unto you Mr. Clerks Epistolographia,
and Erasmus de conscribendis Epistolis; to which you may add Buchleri
Thesaurus conscribendarum Epistolarum, Verepaeus de conscribendis Epistolis,
and others, fitting to be reserved in the School-Library, for your Scholars to
peruse, and collect notes out of, at their leisure hours. He that will be
excellent in any Art, must not only content himself with the best Presidents,
which in many particulars may (perhaps) exceed a^l others; but also now and
then take notice what others have attempted in that kind, and sometimes he
shall find the meanest to afford him matter of good use. And therefore I would
advise that the Scholars in the upper Forms may often employ themselves in
perusal of all Tullies Epistles, and sometimes in those of Pliny, Seneca,
Erasmus, Lipsius, Manutius, Ascham, Politianus, and whatever they find in the
School Library, (which should indeed be very well furnished with Epistolary
books) that out of them they may learn to express their minds to the full,
upon any subject or occasion, to whomsoever they write, and to use a style
befitting both the mat^er and persons, be they never so lofty and mean.

After this Form is once well entered to write Epistles of themselves, they may
make two Epistles every week, (one in answer to the other) to be showed fair on
Saturdaies, so they do not exceed a quarter of a sheet on one side, because
great heed should be taken in the composing of them.

And let this Rule be observed in performing these and all manner of exercises;
that they never go about a new one, till they have finished that they began. It
were better for Scholars sometimes to do one and the same exercise twice or
thrice over again, that in it they may see and correct their own errors, and
strive to outdoe themselves; then by slipping from one work to another, and
leaving that in their hands incomplete, to get an ill habit of posting over
business to little or no purpose Non quam multum sed quam been, should be
remembered in Scholars exercises.

8. Their afternoon Lessons on Mondayes and Wednesdayes, for the first half
year (at least) may be in Ovids little book de tristibus, wherein they may
proceed by six or eight verses at a Lesson; which they should first repeat
memoriter as perfectly as they can possibly, because the very repetition of the
verses, and much more the having of them by heart, will imprint a lively
pattern of Hexameters and Pentameters in their minds, and furnish them with
many good Authorities.

2. Let them construe verbatim, and if their Lesson be harder then ordinary,
let them write it down construed.

3. Let them parse every word most accurately, according to the Gramatical
order.

4. Let them tell you what Tropes and figures they find in it, and give you
their Definitions.

5. Let them scan every verse, and after they have told you what feet it has
in it, and of what syllables they consist, let them give the Rule of the
quantity of each syllable, why it is long or short; the scanning and proving
verses, being the main end of reading this Author, should more then any thing
be insisted upon, whilst they read it. And now it will be requisite to try what
inclination your young Scholars have toward Poetry: you may therefore let them
learn to compose English verses, and to inure them so to do, you should 1. Let
them procure some pretty delightful and honest English Poems, by perusal
whereof they may become acquainted with the Harmony of English Poesy. M.
Hardwicks late Translation of Mantuan, Mr Sandys of Ovid, Mr. Ogleby's of
Virgil, will abundantly supply them with Heroic Verses; which after they can
truly and readily make, they may converse with others, that take liberty to
sport it in Lyrick verses. Amongst all which, Mr. Herberts Poems are most
worthy to be mentioned in the first place, and next to them (I conceive Mr.
Quarles divine Poems, and his divine Fancies; besides which, you may allow many
others full of wit and elegancie; but be sure you admit of none which are
stuff't with drollary or ribauldry, which are fitter to be burnt, then to be
sent abroad to corrupt good manners in youth

2. After they are thus become acquainted with variety of meeter, you may cause
them to turn a Fable of Aesop into what kind of verse you please to appoint
them; and sometimes you may let them translate some select. Epigrams out of
Owen, or those collected by Mr. Farnaby or some Emblemes out of Alciat, or the
like Flourishes of wit, which you think will more delight them and help their
fancies. And when you see that they begin to exercise their own wits for
enlargement, and invention, you may leave them to themselves, to make verses
upon any occasion or subject; yet to furnish them with Rhymes, Epithites, and
variety of elegant expressions, you may let them make use of the pleasant
English Parnassus, composed by the true lover of the Muses, Mr. Josuah Poole,
my quandam School-fellow at Wakefield, who like another Daphnis, may truly be
said (what I now sigh to write) to have been at the Blew house in Hadley
Parish, now daily in my sight, Formosi pecoris custos, formosior ipse.

When you have taugt them truly to scan and prove any kind of Latin verse,
and made them to taste the sweetness of poetizing in English; you may prepare
them them further for making Latin verses out of their present Authors thus;

1. Take a Distick or two, which they know not where to find, and transpose
the words, as different as may be from a verse, and when you have made one to
construe them, dismiss them all to their seats, to try who can return them
first into true verses, without one another suggesting. When they have all
dispatched, cause him whom you conceive to be the weakest, to compare what he
has done with his Author, and to prove his verses by the Rules of Prosodia.

2. You may sometimes set them to vary one and the same verse, by transposing
the same words, as many several ways as they can. Thus this verse may be
turned 104. ways.

Est mea spes Christus solus qui de cruce pendet. And sometimes you may cause
them to keep the same sense, and alter the words. Thus this Distick is found in
Mr. Stockwoods Progymnasma Scholasticum to be varied 450. ways.

Linque cupido jecur, cordi quoque parcito, si via Figere, fige alio, tela
cruenta loco. To direct and encourage your young Scholars in turning verses,
you may make use of the book last mentioned, and for further instructions
concerning making verses, I refer you to Mr. Clerks Dux Poeticus.

9. To enable your Scholars yet more to write good Latin in prose, and to
prepare them further for verses by reading Poetical books, which abound with
rich expressions of fancy, I would have them spend the next half year in
Ovids Metamorphosis; out of which Author you may make choice of the most
pleasing and profitable Arguments, which it is best for you your self to
construe and explain unto them, that they may dispatch the more at a Lesson,
and with more ease. When they come to say,

1. Let them repeat four or six verses, (which you judge most worthy to be
committed to memory) by heart.

2. Let them construe the whole lesson venbatim, minding the propriety of the
words, and the elegancie of every phrase.

3. Let them parse every word Grammatically, as they have used to do in other
Authors.

4. Let them give you the Tropes and Figures, the Derivations and Differences
of some words, and relate such Histories as the proper names will hint at,
which they may peruse before hand in their Dictionarie. And let them not forget
to scan and prove every verse, and to note more difficult quantities of some
syllables.

5. Let them strive (who can best) to turn the Fable into English prose, and to
adoru and amplify it with fit Epithetes, choice Phrases, acute Sentences,
witty Apophthegmes, livelie similitudes, pat examples, and Proverbial
Speeches; all agreeing to the matter of morality therein couched; all which
they should divide into several Periods, and return into proper Latin,
rightly placed according to the Rules of Rhetorical composition.

6. Let them exercise their wits a little in trying who can turn the same into
most variety of English verses.

Mr. Sandy's Translation of this book, in Folio, and Mr. Rosse's English
Mythologist, will be very delightful helps to your Scholars for the better
understanding thereof; and if to these you add Sir Francis Bacon's little book
de Sapientia veterum, Natales comes, and Verderius's Imagines Deorum, Lexicon
Geographicum, Poeticum, and Historicum; and the like fitting to be reserved for
your Scholars use in the Schoole-librarie) it will invite them like so many
bees to busy themselves sucking up matter and words to quicken their invention
and expression; And if you would have those in this form acquainted with
variety of Latin verses, and how to change them one into another, you may
sometimes exercise them in Buchan's Psalms, and partly out of Vossius's,
partly out of Mr. I loyd's Grammar lately printed, you shall find sufficient
store, and several kinds of verses to delight and profit them withal.

Whereas Wits Commonwealth is generally imposed upon young Scholars to
tranaslte out of English into Latin, and I observe it very difficult to be
done by reason of the many uncouth words and mere Anglicismes that are in it,
concerning which they cannot any way help themselves by common Dictionaries or
phrase-books; I have thought good to frame an Alphabetical Index of every
English word and phrase therein contained, with figures pointing to the Chapter
and verse where it is used, and showing what Latin or Greek expression is most
proper to be made in that place.

And this I would have annexed to that useful book, that by help thereof the
Scholars may of themselves be able to translate those pretty Sentences out of
English into Latin orderly composed, and afterward with the same ease out of
Latin into Greek. If the Stationers do not accord, that they may be printed
together, know, that the Index may be had single by it self, as well as the
book, and he that buyeth one cannot well be without the other; they are both so
necessary and nearly related to one another.

They in this Form may learn the Assemblies lesser Catechism in Latin and
Greek, which is elegantly translated into those Languages, by Doctor Harmar.

Thus then in short, I would have them employed. 1. In reading out of the
Latin Testament every morning, till they be able to go on with the Greek which
may then take place. 2. In repeating a Grammar part every Thursday morning. 3.
In Learning the Rhetoric when they have done that. 4 Camdens Greek Grammar on
Mondaies, Tuesdaies, and Wednesdaies for morning parts. 5. In using Terence on
Mondaies, Tuesdaies, Wednesdaies and Thursdaies for fore-noon lessons. 6. In
Janua Latinae Linguae for afternoon parts on Mondaies and Wednesdaies. 7. In
some of Sturmius, or Textor's Epistles, on Tuesdaies and Thursdaies
after-noons, and Shirley's Introductorium after taxes ended. 8. In Ovid de
Tristibus on Mondaies and Wednesdaies in the after-noons for the first, and in
Ovids Metamorphosis for the second half Year; They may translate four Verses
every night out of Wits Commonwealth, and say lessons on Saturdaies in the
Assemblies Catechism; and by the diligent improvement of these books to their
several uses, they may first become perfectly ready in the Latin and Greek
Grammar, and the Elements of Rhetoric. 2. They may get Copy of words and
learn to know their derivations and differences, as also how to vary phrases.
3. They may gain the right way of double translating and writing a pure Latin
style. 4. They may be helped in their invention, and easily taught to make all
sorts of English and Latin Verses, and to write familiar and elegant Epistles
upon all occasions; for the performance of all which works though more then
ordinary care and pains may seem to be required in the Master, and a great deal
of study and diligence may be thought to be exacted of the Scholars, above
what is usual in many Schools; Yet a little experience will evidence that all
things being orderly and seasonably done, will become easy and pleasing to
both after a very little while. And if the master do but consider with himself,
and inform his Scholars, that they shall all ere long reap the sweet of their
present labors, by a delightful and profitable perusal of the choicest Authors
both Greek and Latin, whom as they must strive to imitate, so they may hope to
aequalize in the most noble style and lofty strains of Oratorie, and Poesy; it
will encourage them to proceed so cheerfully, that they will not be sensible of
any toil or difficulty, whilst in a profiting way they pass, this form, and
endeavor to come to the next, which we intend to treat of in the following
Chapter.

CHAP. II.
How to teach Scholars in the fifth form to keep and improve the Latin and
Greek Grammars, and Rhetoric. How to acquaint them with an Oratory, style and
pronunciation. How to help them to translate Latin into Greek, and to make
Greek verses, as they read Isocrates and Theognis. How they may profit well in
reading Virgil, and easily learn to make good Theams and elegant Verses with
delight and certainty. And what Catechismes they may learn in Greek.

THough it may seem a needless labor to prescribe directions for the Teaching
of the two upper forms, partly, because I find more written concerning them
then the rest, and partly because many very eminent and able Schoolmasters
^mploy most of their pains in perfecting them, every one making use of such
Au^hors, and such a Method as in his own ^iscretion he judges meetest to make
them Scholars; not to say, that the Scho^^rs themselves (being now well
acquainted with the Latin and Greek Grammar, and having gotten a good
understanding (at least) of the Latin Tongue, by the frequent exercise of
translating and speaking Latin, and writing Colloquies, Epistles, Historical
and Fabulous narrations and the like, besides reading some School Authors, and
other helpful and profitable books, will be able in many things to proceed
without a guide, addicting their minds chiefly to those studies, which their
natural Genius does most prompt them to, either concerning Oratory or Poetry:
Yet I think it requisite for me to go on as I have begun, and to show what
course I have constantly kept with these two forms, to make them exactly
complete in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and as perfect Orators, and Poets in
both as their young years and capacities will suffer; and to enter them so in
the Hebrew, as that they may be able to proceed of themselves in that holy
Language, whether they go to the University, or are otherwise disposed on to
some necessary calling, which their Parents or Friends think fitting for them.

And first, I most heartily entreat those (especially that are my loving
Friends and acquaintance) of my profession, whose years and experience are far
beyond mine, that they would heartily peruse and kindly interpret what I have
written, seeing I desire not by any means to impose any thing too magisterially
upon them or others, but freely to communicate to all men what I have for many
years kept private to my self, and has by some (whose single judgment may
sufficiently satisfy me) been importunately thus haled to the Press; and if in
any particular I seem to them to deviate from, or fall short of what I aim at,
viz. a facilitating the good old way of teaching by Grammar, Authors, and
exercises; I shall take it as a singular token of love, that they acquaint me
with it, and if by this rush-candle of mine, they please to set up their own
Tapers, I shall rejoice to receive greater light by them, and be ready to walk
in it more vigorously. In the interim, I go on with my discovery, touching the
fifth Form, which I would have employed in this manner;

1. Let them and the form above them read daily a dozen verses out of the
Greek Testament before the saying of parts.

2. Let them reserve the Latin and Greek Grammars and Elementa Rhetorices for
weekly parts, to be said only on Thursday mornings, and so divided that they
may be sure to go over them all once every quarter. By this means they will
keep them in constant memory, and have more time allotted them for perusing
Authors and dispatch of exercises. You must not forget at every part to let
them have your help of explication of the most obscure and difficult places
before they say, and after they have said to make such diligent examination, as
that you may be sure they understand what they learn.

And to make them more fully acquainted with the Accents and Dialects of the
Greek Tongue, you may (besides those few Rules in their Grammar) let them daily
peruse a Chapter in Mr. Franklin's little book De (...) which is excellently
helpful to young Graecians, and when they grow stronger, that Appendix de
Dialectis at the end of Scapula, will be worth their reading and observing. It
would be good sometimes to make them compare the Latin and Greek Grammar
together, and to see wherein they agree, and wherein they differ, but
especially in the Rules of Syntaxis, and for this purpose Vechneri Hellonexia
will be of excellent use.

And as I have directed before, how Scholars should have a Common-placebook for
the Latin Grammar, so I do here also for the Greek, desire, that after it is
learnt, it may be drawn into a Synopsis, and that digested into Commonplace
heads, to which they may easily refer what ever they read worth noting, out of
any Greek Grammar they peruse. And that they may more freely expatiate in such
Books, it were good if they had Mr. Busbie's Grammar, Cleonard, Scotus,
Chrysolora, Ceporinus, Gaza, Vrbanius, Caninius, Gretserus, Posselii Syntaxis,
and as many as can be gotten both ancient and modern, laid up in the School
Library, to collect Annotations out of, as their leisure will best permits,
and you will scarce imagine to what exactness a boy will attain, and what a
treasure of good notes he will have heaped up in these two years time, if he be
moderately industrious, and now and then employ himself in collecting of his
own accord; and I may add, that Scholars of any ordinary ingenuitie, will
delight more to be doing something at their book, which they well understand,
then to be trifling and rambling up and down about idle occasions.

3. Forasmuch as it is usual and commendable to bring on children toward
perfection in the Greek Tongue, as they proceed in Oratorie and Poetry in the
Latin, I think it not amiss to exercise these two Forms in such Authors as
are commonly received, and may prove most advantageous to them in all these;
yet herein I may seem to differ from some others, that in stead of Grammar
parts, (which I reserve to be constantly repeated every Thursday) I would have
this Form to learn some lively patterns of Oratory, by the frequent and
familiar use whereof, and the knowledge of the Histories themselves, to which
they relate; they may at last obtain the Artifice of gallant expression, and
some skill to manage future affairs, It being requisite for a Scholar, more
then any man, (...), to be expert in speaking, and doing.

At first therefore for morning parts on Mondaies, Tuesdaies, and Wednesdaies,
I would have them exercised in Apththonius (if it can be gotten, as I desire it
may be reprinted) both in Greek and Latin. Out of which book, I would have
them translate the Fables and Themes (so as to finish at least every week one)
into pure English, and to repeat them (being translated) in both Languages,
that by that means they may gain the Method of these kind of exercises, and
inure themselves to Pronunciation. When they have gone over them, they may next
translate Tullies six Paradoxes, and pronounce them also in English and Latin,
as if they were their own-And afterward they may proceed in those pithy
Orations which are purposely collected out of Salust, Livy, Tacitus, and
Quintus Curtius, having the Histories of their occasions summarily set down
before them. And of these I would have them constantly to translate one every
day into English, beginning with those that are the shortest, and once a week
to strive amongst themselves, who can best pronounce them both in English and
Latin. I know not what others may think of this Task, but I have experienced
it to be a most effectual mean to draw on my Scholars to emulate one-another,
who could make the best exercises of their own in the most Rhetorical style,
and have often seen the most bashful, and least-promising boys, to outstrip
their fellows in pronouncing with a courage, and comely gesture; and for
bringing up this use first in my School, I must here thank that modest and
ingenious Gentleman Mr. Edward Perkins, who was then my Usher, for advising me
to set upon it. For I found nothing that I did formerly to put such a spirit
into my Scholars, and make them, like so many Nightingales, to contend, who
could (...) most melodiously tune his voice and frame style, to pronounce and
imitate the forementioned Orations.

4. Their forenoon Lessons on Mondays and Wednesdays, may be in Isocrates, and
to make them more attend the Greek,

1. Let them (at first especially) translate every Lesson by way of
interlineary writing according to the Grammatical order.

2. Let them parse the whole Lesson in that order, and give you the Variation
and derivation of the most difficult Nouns and Verbs throughout, and the Rules
of Syntaxe, and of the Accents.

3. Let them pick out the phrases, and more elegant words as they go along, and
write them in a Paparbook; and transcribe what Sentences they meet withal into
their Common-place-book. After they are well entered, you may cause them to
translate the Greek into elegant Latin, and on Fridayes, when they come to
repeat, to render their own Latin into Greek, which they should endeavor to
write down very true and fair without any help of their Author, who is then to
be thrown aside, but afterward compared with what they have done.

Three quarters of a year (I conceive) will be sufficient to exercise them in
Isocrates, till they get a perfect knowledge of Etymology and Syntaxe in
Greek; which they will more easily attain to, if out of this Author
(especially) you teach them to translate such examples most frequently, as may
serve to explicate those Rules, which are not to be found in their Latin
Grammar, and very seldom occur in the Greek one, which they commonly read.
And then you may let them translate a Psalm out of English into Latin, and
out of Latin into Greek, and compare them with the Septuagint Psalter.
Afterward you may give them some of Demosthenes's Sentences or Similies
(collected by Loinus) or of Posselius Apophthegmes in Latin only; and let them
turn them into Greek, which when they have done, you may let them see the
Authors, that by them they may discover their own failings, and endeavor to
amend them.

Their Lessons then for the fourth quarter on Mondaies and Wednesdaies should
be in Theognis, in which most pleasing Poet, they may be taught not only to
construe and parse, as formerly, but also to mind the Dialects, and to prove
and scan, and to try how to make Hex^meter, and Pentameter Greek verses, as
they formerly did Latin ones, out of Ovid de Tristibus. And here I must not
forget to give notice to all that are taken with this Author, that Mr.
Castilion's Praelectiones (which he sometimes read at Oxford, in Magdalene
College; and Mr. Langley late Schoolmaster of Paul's transcribed, when he was
Student there) are desirous to see the light, were they but helped forward by
some Stationer, or Printer, that would a little consider the Authors pains. I
need give the work no more commendations then to say, that (besides Mr. Langley
that writ it long ago) Mr. Busbie, Mr. Dugard, Mr. Singleton, and some others
of note, have seen the Book, and judged it a most excellent piece, not only to
help young Scholars in the understanding of Theognis, but also to furnish them
with abundant matter of invention, and to be a President to Students in the
Universities, whereby they may learn to compose such kind of Lectures upon
other Poets, either for their own private recreation, or more public reading.
Screvelii Lexicon Manuale, will be very useful to this Form for parsing their
Lessones and Garthii Lexicon (which is annexed to it) Rulandi Synonymia,
Morelii Dictionarium, Billii Locutiones, Devarius de Graecis particulis,
Posselii Calligraphia, for translating Latin into Greek, but nothing is more
availeable to gain a good style, then frequent imitation of select pieces out
of Isocrates and Demostenes, and translating one while out of the Greek into
Latin, and another while out of Latin into Greek.

5. For forenoon Lessons on Tuesdayes and Thursdayes, I make choice of Justin
as a plain History, and full of excellent examples, and moral observations,
which for the easiness of the style the Scholars of this Form may now construe
of themselves, and as you meet with an Historical Passage that is more
observable then the rest, you may cause every one of them to write it down in
English, as well as he can possibly relate it without his book, and to return
it again into good Latin. By this means they will not only well heed the
matter, but also the words, and phrases of this smooth Historian. And after
half, or three quarters of a year, you may make use of Caesar's Commentaries,
or Lucius Florus, in this manner; intermixing some of Erasmus Colloquies now
and then, for varieties sake.

6. Their afternoones Parts on Mondayes and Wednesday^s, may be in Janua
Linguarum Graeca, translated out of Latin by Theodorus Simonius, which they
may use as they formerly did the Janua Latinae Linguae; viz. after they have
construed a Chapter, and analyzed some harder Nounes and Verbes, you may let
them try who can recite the most Greek names of things, and tell you the most
Greek words for one Latin word, and show their Derivations and differences,
and the Rules of their several Accents. And to acquaint them the better with
all the Greek and Latin words, comprised in that book, you may cause them at
every part to write out some of the Latin Index into Greek, and some of the
Greek Index into Latin, and to note the manner of declining Nouns and Verbes,
as the Dictionaries, and Lexicons will show them.

7. Virgil the Prince and purest of all Latin Poets does justly challenge a
place in Schoole-teaching, and therefore I would have him to be constantly and
thoroughly read by this form on Mondaies and Tuesdaies for afternoon lessons.
They may begin with ten or twelve verses at a lesson in the Eclogues, which
they may first repeat memoriter, as well as they can possibly.

2. Construe and parse, and scan and prove exactly.

3. Give the Tropes and Figures with their definitions.

4. Note out of the Phrases and Epithites, and other Elegancies.

5. Give the Histories or descriptions belonging to the proper Names, and their
Etymologies.

But after they are well acquainted with this excellent Poet, let them take the
quantity of an Eclogue at once, not minding so much to con their lessons by
heart, as to understand and examine them well and often over, according to the
directions which Erasmus gives de modo repetendae lectionis, which Mr. Langley
caused to be Printed at the end of Lillies Grammar by him corrected, and Mr.
Clark has worthily inserted in his Dux Grammaticus. There are several
Translations of Virgil into English verse, by the reading whereof young
Scholars may be somewhat helped to understand the Latin better, but of all the
rest Mr. Ogilby has done it most completely, and if his larger book may be
procured to the Schoole-Library, the lively pictures will imprint the Histories
in Scholars Memories, and be a means to heighten their phansies with conceits
answerable to the Authors gallant expressions. After they have passed the
Georgicks by the Masters help, he may leave them to read the Aenead's by
themselves, having Cerda, or Servius at hand to resolve them in places more
difficult for them to construe; though Mr. Farnabies notes upon Virgil will
assist them ever and anon.

As they read this Author, you may cause them sometimes to relate a pleasing
story in good English prose, and to try who can soonest turn it into elegant
Latin, or into some other kind of verses which you please for the present to
appoint them, either English or Latin, or both.

8. On Tuesdaies in the after-noones you may cause them sometimes to translate
one of Aesops Fables, and sometimes one of Aelians Histories, or a Chapter in
Epictetus out of Greek into English, and then to turn its English into Latin,
and out of Latin into Greek. And on Thursdaies in the after-noons they may
turn some of Mr. Farnabies Epigrammata selecta out of Greek into Latin and
English verses, and some of Aesops Fables or Tullies Sentences into Latin and
afterward into Greek verses.

You need not always let your Scholars have these Greek Books, but sometimes
dictate to them what you would have them write, and afterward let them compare
their own doings with their author, to epsy their own failings, and this will
be a means to help them to write Greek truly of themselves; you may sometimes
dictate a Colloquie, or Epistle, or a Sentence, or a short History in English,
and let them write it in Latin or Greek as you spoke it, and by this you may
try their strength at any time, and ready them for extemporary exercises.

9. Now forasmuch as this form is to be employed weekly in making Theams and
Verses, which they can never well do, except they be furnished with matter
aforehand; I would have them provide a large Commox-place book, in which they
should write at least those heads which Mr. Farnabie has set down in his Index
Rhetoricus, and then busy themselves (especially) on Tuesdaies and Thursdaies
in the after-noons, after other tasks ended, to collect, 1. Short Histories out
of Plutarch. Valerius Maximus. Justin. Caesar Lucius Florus. Livie. Pliny.
Paraeus Medulla Historiae, Aelianus, etc.

2. Apologues and Fabies out of Aesop. Phaedrus. Ovid. Natales Comes, etc.

3. Adagies out of Adagia Selecta. Erasmi Adagia, Drax's Bibliotheca
Scholastica, etc.

4. Hieroglyphics out of Pierius and Causinus, etc.

5. Emblems and Symbols out of Alciat. Beza. Quarles. Reusenerus. Chartarius,
etc.

6. Ancient Laws and Customs out of Diodorus Siculus. Paulus Minutius,
Plutarch, etc.

7. Witty Sentences out of Golden Grove. Moral Philosophy. Sphinx
Philosophica. Wits Common Wealth. Flores Doctorum. Tullies Sentences.
Demosthenis Sententiae. Enchiridion Morale. Stobaeus. Ethica Cireroniana.
Gruteri Florilegium, etc.

8. Rhetorical exornations out of Vossius, Farnaby, Butler, etc.

9. Topical places, out of Caussinus. Tresmarus. Orator Extemporaneus. etc.

10. Descriptions of things natural and artificial, out of Orbis Pictus.
Caussinus. Plinius, etc. that I may not forget Textors Officina. Lycosthenes.
Erasmi Apophthegmata, Carolina Apophthegmata, and Polyanthea, which, together
with all that can be got of this nature, should be laid up in the School
Library for Scholars to pick what they can out of; besides what they read in
their own Authors,

Now the manner I would have them use them, is thus;

Having a Theme given then to treat of, as suppose, this;

Non aestas semper suerit, componite nidos.

Let them first consult what they have read in their own Authors, concerning,
Tempus, Aetas, occasio, or opportunitas, and then,

2. Let every one take one of those books forementioned, and see what he can
find in it for his purpose, and write it down under one of those heads in his
Commonplace book; but first let the Master see whether it will suit with the
Theme.

3. Let them all read what they have written, before the Master, and every one
transcribe what others have collected, into his own book; and thus they may
always have store of matter for invention ready at hand, which is far beyond
what their own wit is able to conceive. Now to furnish themselves also with
copy of good words and phrases, besides, what they have collected weekly, and
what has been already said of varying them, they should have these and the
like Books reserved in the Schoole-Library; viz. Sylva Synonymorum, Calliepia.
Huisse's phrases, Winchesters phrases, Lloyds phrases, Farnabies phrases,
Enchiridion Oratorium, Clerks Phraseologia, and his English Adagies; Willis
Anglicismes, Barrets Dictionary, Hulaet, or rather Higgins Dictionary; Drax
Bibliotheca, Parei Calligraphia, Manutii phrases, A little English Dictionary,
160. and Walkers Particles: and if at any time they can wittily and pithily
invent any thing of their own brain; you may help them to express it in good
Latin, by making use of Cooper's Dictionary, either as himself directs in
his preface, or Phalerius will more fully show you, in his Supplementa ad
Grammaticam

And to draw their words and matter into the Form of a Theme with ease, let
them have sound Patterns to imitate, because they in every thing prevail to do
it soonest, and sureliest.

First therefore let them peruse that in Merchant Tailors School Probation
book, and then those at the end of Winchesters phrases, and those in Mr. Clarks
Formulae Oratoriae; and afterward they may proceed to those in Aphthonius,
Rodulphus Agricola, Catineus, Lorichius, and the like; and learn how to
prosecute the several parts of a Theme more at large, by intermixing some of
those Formulae Oratoriae, which Mr. Clark and Mr. Farnaby have collected, which
are proper to every part; so as to bring their matter into handsome and plain
order, and to flourish and adorn it neatly with Rhetorical Tropes and Figures,
always regarding the composure of words; as to make them run in a pure and
even style, according to the best of their Authors, which they must always
observe, as Presidents.

But the best way (as I conceive) to encourage children at the first, against
any seeming difficulty in this exercise of making Themes, is this; After you
have showed them how to find matter, and where to help themselves with words,
and phrases, and in what order they are to dispose the Parts, and what
Formula's they are to use in passing from one to another; propound a Theme to
them in English and Latin, and let them strive who can soonest return you the
best Exordium in English, and then who can render it into the best Latin, and
so you may proceed to the narration, and quite through every part of a Theme,
not tying them to the words of any Author, but giving them liberty to
contract, or enlarge, or alter them as they please; so that they still contend
to go beyond them in purity of expression. This being done, you may dismiss
them to adventure to make every one his own exercise in English and Latin, and
to bring it fair written, and be able to pronounce it distinctly memoriter at a
time appointed. And when once you see they have gained a perfect way of making
Themes of themselves, you may let them go on to attain the habit by their own
constant practice, ever and anon minding them what places in their Authors (as
they read) are most worthy notice and imitation, and for what purposes they may
serve them.

10. Touching learning to scan and prove, and make all sorts of verses, I have
spoken in the former Chapter; now for diligent practice in this kind of
exercise, they may constantly comprise the sum of their Themes in a Distich,
Tetrastich, Hexastich, or more verses, as they grow in strength. For invention
of further matter upon any occasion or subject they are to treat upon, they may
sometimes imitate places out of the purest Poets, (which Mr. Farnabies Index
Poeticus will point them to, besides what they find in Flores Poetarum, and
Sabinusde Carminibus ad veterum imitationem artificiose componendis, at the
beginning of Textors Epistles, will further direct them) and sometime
paraphrase, or (as some term it) metaphrase upon a piece of an Historian or
Orator, endeavoring more lively to express in verse what the Author has
written in prose, and for this Mr. Horn has furnished you with two examples
in his excellent (...), de usu Authoris.

For variety and copy of Poetical phrases, there are many very good helps; viz:
Phrases Poeticae, besides those of Mr. Farnabies. Aerarium Poeticum,
Enchiridion Poeticum, Res Virgiliana, Artis Poeticae compendium, Thesaurus
Poeticus, and others, worthy to be laid up in the Schoole-Library. Textor will
sufficiently supply choice Epithites, and Smetii Prosodia, will afford
Authorities; (which is lately comprised, and printed at the end of Lilies
Grammar) But for gaining a smooth way of versifying, and to be able to express
much matter in few words, and very fully to the life, I conceive it very
necessary for Scholars to be very frequent in perusing and rehearsing Ovid and
Virgil, and afterward such kind of Poet, as they are themselves delighted
with all, either for more variety of verse, or the wittiness of conceit sake.
And the Master indeed should cause his Scholars to recite a piece of Ovid or
Virgil, in his hearing now and then, that the very tune of these pleasant
verses may be imprinted in their minds, so that when ever they are put to
compose a verse, they make it glide as even as those in their Authors, Mr.
Rosse his Virgilius Euangelizans will easily show how a young Scholar may
imitate Virgil to the life.

From this little that has been said, they that have a natural aptness and
delight in Poetry, may proceed to more exquisite perfection in that Art, then
any rules of teaching can reach unto: and there are very few so meanly witted,
but by diligent use of the directions now given, may attain to so much skill,
as to be able to judge of any verse, and upon a fit occasion or subject, to
compose a handsome copy; though not so fluently or neatly as they that have a
natural sharpness and dexterity in the Art of Poetry.

11. When they in this Form have gone thrice over the Assemblies Catechism in
Greek and Latin, they may proceed in Nowels Catechism, or the Palatinate
Catechism in Greek.

And now to sum up all concerning the fifth Form.

1. Let them read constantly twelve verses at least in the Greek Testament,
before parts.

2. Let them repeat the Latin and Greek Grammars, and Elementa Rhetorices, on
Thursday Mornings.

3. Let them pronounce Orations on Mondayes, Tuesdayes, and Wednesdayes, in
stead of parts, out of Livie, etc.

4. Let their fore-noons Lessons on Mondayes and Wednesdayes be in Isocrates,
for three quarters of a years space, and for the fourth quarter in Theognis.

5. Let their fore-noon Lessons on Tuesdaies and Thursdaies be in Justin's
History, and afterward in Caesar's Commentaries, Lucius Florus, or Erasmus
Colloquies.

6. Let their afternoon parts on Mondayes and Tuesdaies be in Janua linguarum
Graeca, and

7. Their after-noons Lessons in Virgil.

8. Let them on Tuesdaies in the afternoons translate out of Greek Aesops
Fables, Aelian's Histories, Epictetus, or Farnabies Epigrammata.

9. Let them be employed weekly in making a Theme, and

10. In a Copy of verses.

11. Let them say Nowels Catechism, or ^he Palatinate Catechism on
Saturdaies. By this means they will become familiarly acquainted with the
Latin and Greek Tongues, and be able to peruse any Orator or Poet in either
Language; and to imitate their expressions, and apply what matter they find in
them to their own occasions. And then they may courageously adventure to the
sixth and highest Form.

CHAP. III.
How to enter the Scholars of the sixth Form into Hebrew; How to employ them
in reading the best and most difficult Authors in Latin and Greek, and how
to acquaint them with all manner of Schoole-Exercises, Latin, Greek, or Hebrew.

THis sixth Form is looked upon as the main credit of a School, and the Master
commonly delights most in teaching it, because therein he seems to reap the
fruit of those labors, which he has bestowed formerly. His care therefore is
to exercise them in every thing that may complete a Scholar, that whether they
be privately examined, or upon any public solemnity required to show their
parts, they may satisfy them that desire an account, and gain to themselves
applause. And whereas I observe more variety in teaching this Form then the
rest, because every Master almost observes a several Method in reading such
Authors as himself best likes, I will not much trouble my self to declare
what others do, but as plainly as I can discover what course I have hitherto
taken to enable these highest Scholars to shift for themselves.

1. Make them read (at least) twelve verses out of the Greek Testament, into
Latin or English; or out of the English, or Latin Testament into Greek every
morning, before they say parts.

2. Let them repeat Parts (as they did before) out of the Latin and Greek
Grammars, and Elementa Rhetorices, every Thursday morning, and give account
what Grammatical or Rhetorical notes, they have collected and writ fair in
their Common place Books for those Arts. Besides the Books which I formerly
mentioned, I desire that Goclenii observationum ling^ae Latinae Analecta and
Problemata Grammatica, may he made use of for this purpose.

3. Their parts on Mondaies, Tuesdayes, and Wednesdaies, may be to learn the
Hebrew tongue, which is very necessary for all such as would be acquainted with
the Original of the Bible, and is not very difficult to attain to, because it
goes word for word with our English, and is not so copious in words as the
Greek and Latin. And whereas many defer the Hebrew to be learned at the
University, I may say it is rarely attained there by any that have not gotten
(at least) the Rudiments of it before hand, at a Grammar School.

Now for the entering of them upon this holy Language, I conceive Buxtorf's
Epitome is the best Introduction of Hebrew Grammar; partly because it is the
most used in Schools, and partly because most easy for young Scholars to
apprehend. Though some prefer Martinius others Bellarmine, others Amoma, others
Blebelius, and others Horologium Hebreae linguae, before it. Now in teaching
Buxtorfe, you may read your Scholars a part of it, and cause them again to
read it over perfectly in your hearing, and then let them get it by heart, as
they did other parts, and when they say, be sure to examine how well they
understand it. As they go over this Grammar, they should write out the letters,
and chiefest Rules; but especially the declining of Nouns and Pronounes, and
all the Paradigmes, of the Conjugations both in Hebrew and Latin Characters,
with their proper significations; and this will cause them to mind the
different shape of the Consonants and Vowels, and Accents, and help to
strengthen their memory in getting the Rules by heart. They may get every day a
certain number of Hebrew roots, together with their Grammar Parts out of some
Nomenclator or Lexicon.

After they have learnt the Grammar, you may exercise them in those Texts of
Scripture annexed as a Praxis at the end of it, which they must exactly
construe and parse, and write fair, by way of interlineary.

As they go over the Psalter, they may sometimes translate their lessons into
Latin, and read them out of Latin into Hebrew in a Paper-book. Then they may
with facility run along the Psalter, having Tossani syllabus geminus, to help
them in every word. Afterward they may proceed in the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes,
Job, of themselves; but be sure they be well acquainted with the Rules of
finding a Radix in Buxtorfe, or Pagnine, or the like useful Lexicon, which are
fit to be reserved in the Schoole-Library. Though it be found a thing very
rare, and is by some adjudged to be of little use, for School-boyes to make
Exercises in Hebrew; yet it is no small ornament, and commendation to a
School, (as Westminster-Schoole at ptesent can evidence) that Scholars are
able to make Orations and Verses in Hebrew, Arabic, or other Oriental Tongues,
to the amazement of most of their hearers, who are angry at their own
ignorance, because they know not well what is then said or written. As for
Orations, they may be translated out of Latin into Hebrew by help of Schind
leri Pentaglotton, Buxtorsius, Pagnine Crinesius, or Trostius's Lexicon; and
for Verses Buxtorf's Thesaurus will afford some Rules and Presidents, and
Aviani Clavis Poeseos Sacrae, all sorts or Rithmes.

They that are more industriously studious in the Hebrew, may profit themselves
very much by translating Janua Linguarum, into that language.

This that I have said may seem enough to be learnt at School, but if one
desire to learn those Oriental Tongues, in which the great Bible is now
happily printed, (by the great vigilancie and industry of Doctor Walton, who
has carried on the Work to the honor of this Nation, the comfort of the poor
Church of England, and the encouragement of good literature, in the midst of
distracting times) he may make use of Introductio ad lectionem Linguarum
Orientalium, and of the Lexicon (which I conceive ere this time is wellnigh
finished) made of purpose to explicate the words of the Bible according to
their several Languages; viz. Hebrew Chaldi, Samaritane, Syriack, Arabic,
Persian, Aethiopick, Armenian, and Coptick, which is a kind of Egyptian
Tongue.

4. Their forenoons Lessons on Mondaies and Wednesdaies, may be in Hesiods,
(...), which they may now construe and parse of themselves, by help of the
Latin translation, and Pasor opon it; or Screvelii Lexicon. Only your self
may now and then illustrate, some harder places out of Cerapine and
Melanctthon's Commentary published by Johannes Frisius Tigurinus. And cause
them to paraphrase in Greek upon such Lessons as are full of excellent matter,
and which are worth getting by heart.

When they have gone this over, they may proceed in like manner to Homer, in
which they may help themselves out of Clavis Homerica, or Lexicon Homericum, or
those Quorundum verborum Themata, at the end of Scapulae Lexicon. You may
illustrate the difficult places in him out of Eustathius's his Commentary, and
let your Scholars write some of his narrations in good Latin and Greek phrase.
Chapman's English translation of Homer will delight your Scholars to read in at
leisure, and cause them better to apprehend the series of his Poetical
discourses. When they are well acquainted with this Father of Poetry, (which
will be after they have read two Books, either of his Iliads, or Odisseus) you
may let them proceed to Pindar, and after they have tested some of his Odes, by
the help of Benedictus his Commentary; you may at last let them make use of
Lycophron, which they will better do, having Canterus or Zetzius to unfold his
dark meaning; and Longolii Lexicon to interpret and analyze most of his uncouth
words.

5. Their forenoone Lessons on Tuesdaies and Thursdaies, may be in Zenonophon
(...), for the first quarter, or somewhat longer, and afterward in some of
Euripides, and Sophocles Tragedies, which you please to pick out, to enable
them for the rest; and if to these you add a few of Aristophanes Comedies
which they may better understand by the help of Bisetus upon him, I suppose,
you may turn them to any other Greek Author, and they will give you a
reasonable account thereof, having but a little time allowed them, to
deliberate upon it, and necessary Subsidiaries at hand to help themselves
withal, in case they be put to a stand.

6. Their afternoons parts on Mondayes and Wednesdayes, may be in Ant. de
Laubegeois Breviarium Graecae Linguae, partly because the perusal of that book
will help them to retain all the Greek Vocabula's in mind, and partly because
those excellent Sentences being picked out of many Authors, will acquaint them
with most of the hard words, that they are like to find in them.

7. Their afternoons Lessons may be in Horace, wherein they should be employed.

1. In commiting their Lessons to memory, as affording a rich mine of invention.

2. In construing and parsing, and giving the Tropes and Figures.

3. In scanning and proving verses.

4. Sometimes in turning an Ode, or Epistle, into other kind of verses,
English, Latin, or Greek; sometimes in paraphrasing or enlarging the words in
an Oratorial style, as Mr. Horn does give some Examples in his little golden
book De usu Authoris.

Mr. Farnabie or Mr. Bonds Notes upon this Poet will encourage your Scholars to
proceed in him: And after they have read what you best approve (for he that
feeds cleanly, will pare his apple) in this Author, you may let them proceed
to Juvenall, and read some select Satyrs, by help of Farnabies notes, or
Lubines Commentary, and then let them read Persius quite through, which
besides the notes upon him, Mr. Holydaies English Translation will help them
well to understand. As for Lucan, Seneca's Tragedies, Martial, and the rest of
the finest Latin Poets, you may do well to give them a taste of each, and show
them how and wherein they may imitate them, or borrow something out of them.
Mr. Farnabies Notes upon them will be helpful to understand them, and Pareus,
or Taubman upon Plautus, will make that some merry Comedies of his, may be
easily read over.

8. They may read some of Luciani selecti mortuorum dialogi, on Tuesdaies in
the afternoons, and if those printed at Paris by Sebastian and Gabriel
Cramoisy, cum interpretatione Latina and Grammatica singularum vocum
explanatione were to be had, they might easily run them over, but (I suppose)
they will now be able to go on of themselves in perusal of those lately printed
by Mr. Dugard. After Lessons ended, they may benefit themselves by reading
Jacobi Pontani Progymnasmata Latinitatis, which will furnish them with good
expressions for speaking Latin, and acquaint them with some patterns for
exercises, which are not elsew here usually found.

9. On Thursdaies they may be employed in reading some of Tullies Orations,
especially those pro Archia contra Catalinam, and Philippicae; and afterward
they may peruse Pliny Panegyrica, and Quintilian's Declamationes. After Lessons
ended, they may busy themselves in perusing Goodwin's Antiquities, or the
like. And here I do heartily wish, as Mr. Horn has done formerly, that some
of better leisure and abilities, would make an Index Oratorius, like that Index
Poeticus of Mr. Farnabies, which may point at the marrow of matter and words,
in all the putest Orators that are extant, either ancient or modern, and that
those Authors might be reserved in the School Library, whereunto Scholars
may have recourse touching any subject, whereof they have occasion to treat in
their School Exercises.

10. In the mean time this Form should continue to make Themes and Verses,
one week in Greek, and another in Latin; and ever and anon they may contend in
making Orations and Declamaons, for which exercise the may find Helps and
Patterns in Mr. Clerks Formule Oratoriae, and Mr. Horn de usu Authoris.
Likewise to bring themselves to an habituated perfection of a good style, they
should be frequent in perusing and excerpting passages that may serve for their
occasions out of Tully, Quintilian, Livie, Salust, Tacitus, Quintus Curtius, or
the like ancient Orations; and acquaint themselves with those modern Orators,
whose eloquence we admire; viz. Turnerus, Baudius, Muretus, Heinsius, Pureanus,
Rainoldus, Lipsius, Barclaius, Salmatius, and others, to be laid up in the
School Library. Tesmarus, and Orator extemporaneus, will show them how to
dispose their matter so, as to make an Oration of any subject in Latin, ex
tempore; and Aphthonius, and Libanius Sophista, will furnish them with patterns
in Greek. For learning to write Greek Epistles, they may consult Isocrate's
Epistles, and Symmachus.

They should often also vie wits amongst themselves, and strive who can make
the best Anagrams, Epigrams, Epitaphes, Epithalamia, Eclogues, Acrosticks, and
golden verses, English, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; which they will easily do,
after a while, having good patterns before them to imitate, which they may
collect out of Authors, as they fancy them, for their own use and delight.

11. When they have done with Nowell, they may proceed to Birkets Catechism in
Greek, or our common Church-Catechisme in Hebrew, which was printed for the
company of Stationers in four Languages, A. D. 1638.

Thus have I at last done with my School-Discovery, in which I have proceeded
so far as to make any Author seem easy to young Scholars, in their future
progress at the Universities, where I would advise them (that have purses
especially) to provide themselves of all the Latin and Greek Orators, and
Poets, and what they cannot understand without a Commentary or Scholiast, to
procure those whereby they may best help themselves, and to have Stephani
Thesaurus, Greek and Latin; Suidas, Hesychius, Budaeus Commentaries, and the
like, ever at hand; that they may be sure to improve themselves in the Latin
and Greek Tongues, as well as to mind the daily study of Arts and Sciences,
which are delivered in them.

1. And would some able Tutour take the pains to describe a Right method of
study and in what Authors Students may best bestow their time for the first
four years; it would doubtless be a means to encourage them to go on to that
height of perfection, which we see few attain to, and those not until they he
ready to drop into their graves; and then they wish they could once run over
again their former studies, and tell how easily they could cope-gaine that
little measure of knowledge, which they have so industriously sought for all
their life.

The constant employment of this sixth Form is,

1. To read twelve verses out of the Greek Testament every morning before Parts.

2. To repeat Latin and Greek Grammar Parts, and Elementa Rhetorices every
Thursday morning.

3. To learn the Hebrew Tongue on Mondaies, Tuesdaies, and Wednesdaies, for
morning Parts.

4. To read Hesiod, Homer, Pindar, and Lycophron, for forenoon lessons on
Mondaies, and Wednesdaies.

5. Zenophon, Sophocles, Euripides, and Aristophanes, on Tuesdaies, and
Thursdaies.

6. Laubegeois's Breviarium Graecae linguae, for afternoons Parts on Mondaies,
and Wednesdaies.

7. Horace, Juvenal, Persius, Lucan, Seneca's Tragedies, Martial and Plautus,
for afternoons lessons on Mondaies, and Wednesdaies.

8. Lucian's select Dialogues, and Pontani Progymnasmata Latinitatis, on
Tuesday afternoons, and

9. Tullies Orations, Plinies Panegryicks, Quintisians Declamations on Thursday
afternoons, and Goodwins Antiquities at leisure times.

10. Their exercises for Oratory, should be to make Themes Orations, and
Declamations, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew; and for Poetry, to make Verses upon
such Themes, as are appointed them every week.

11. And to exercise themselves in Anagrauis, Epigrams, Epitaphs,
Epithalamia's, Eclogues, and Acrosticks, English, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.

12. Their Catechismes are Nowell, and Birket, in Greek, and the Church
Catechism in Hebrew. So that in six (or at the most seven) years time (which
children commonly squander away, if they be not continued at the School, after
they can read English, and write well) they may easily attain to such knowledge
in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew Tongues, as is requisite to furnish them for
future studies in the Universities, or to enable them for any ingenuous
profession or employment, which their friends shall think fit to put them upon,
in other places.

But having somewhat to say further, touching the well-ordering of a Grammar
School, (for I have here insisted chiefly concerning Teaching) I shall
endeavor to proceed in my next Treatise, with Schoole-Discipline.

In the mean time you may observe, that the Method which I have here
discovered, is for the most part contrived according to what is commonly
practiced in England and foreign countries; and is in sundry particulars
proportioned to the ordinary capacities of children under fifteen years of
age. The subject matter which is taught, is the same with that which is
generally used by Grammars, Authors, and Exercises: Touching Grammars, I
prefer Lilies for Latin, Camdens for Greek, and Buxtorf's Epitome for Hebrew,
not excluding any other that may conduce to the completing of Grammar Art. The
Authors which I prescribe to be used, are partly classical which every Scholar
should provide for himself; and because these are constantly learnt in most
Grammar Schools, I appoint them to be read at such times as are usually spent
in Lessons.

The Subsidiary Books are those which are helpful to children in performing
their tasks with more ease and benefit; and, because all the Scholars will not
have like need of them, and they are more then any one will desire to buy:
these should be laid up in the School Library, for every Form to make use on,
as they shall have occasion. Some of these serve chiefly to the explication of
Grammar, and are applied to it; some are needful for the better understanding
of classical Authors, and are appropriated to them; and others are very
requisite for the gaining of words, and phrases, and an ability for speaking or
writing elegantly, and such times are set apart for perusing of them, as are
commonly truanted away in idleness, or needless sport. Now by the joint using
of these together, I endevaour that a Scholar may have a pretty knowledge of
the Language which he learneth, as well as of his bare Grammar Rules, which
without it signify nothing. And therefore to help children more easily to gain
the Latin, I have translated such books as they learn whilst they get the
Grammar, into their own mother tongue, that by comparing, and using both
together, they may be able after good acquaintance with the Latin, to waine
themselves quite from English. He that desires further satisfaction concerning
the Translations which I have already made, may peruse that Advertisement, that
I caused to be printed before Cato's Distichs English and Latin.

And if any man shall think to tell me, that I seem to trouble my Scholars with
too many books at once, because a few, if well learned, will suffice to make a
Grammarian; I will give him here to consider;

1. That I have to deal with children who are delighted and refreshed with
variety of books, as well as of sports, and meats.

2. That a Schoolmasters aim being to teach them Languages, and Oratory, and
Poetry, as well as Grammar, he must necessarily employ them in many Books which
tend thereunto.

3. That the classical Authors are the same with other Schools, and
Subsidiaries may be provided at a common charge, as I shall afterward show.

The Scholars in a Grammar Schole may be fitly divided into six forms, whereof
the three lowest, which are commonly under an Usher, may be termed.

1. Rudimentaries, that learn the Grounds.

2. Practitioners, that exercise the Rules.

3. Proficients, that can speak and write true Latin. The three highest
Forms, are employed by the Master to learn the Greek and Hebrew Tongues,
together with the Latin, and to gain some skill in Oratory and Poetry, and
matters of humanity; and of these I may name the lowest Tertiani, the
middlemost Secundani, and the highest Primani, because they seem to differ one
from another in ability of learning, as these Roman legionary soldiers did in
strength and use of Arms.

This division I have purposely made, that whether one Master alone be put to
teach the whole, or have one, two, or more Ushers to assist him, he may
constantly train up his Scholars by one and the same Way of teaching, (altering
now and then only some circumstances, as his own Discretion shall better
direct him,) and, that every Scholar may from his first entrance to the
School, proceed with cheerfulness in learning when he sees plainly what he
is to do from year to year, and how others before him in a playing manner,
overskip those seeming difficulties, which he imagines in his mind. And
conceive it will be no small satisfaction to Parents, and a mean to cease the
indiscreet clamors of some against Schoolmasters, to see what method they
observe in teaching, and how their children profit by degrees, according to
their present apprehensions, and growth in years.

And now the God of heaven and earth, in whose alone power it is to give
increase; vouchsafe to bestow such a blessing upon our planting and watering,
that our young plants may grow up in all godliness and good learning, and
abound in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom only to know, is
eternal life. Amen.

SCHOLASTIC DISCIPLINE: OR, The WAY of ordering a Grammar-Schoole, Directing
the not experienced, how he may profit every particular Scholar, and avoid
Confusion amongst a multitude. By C. H.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon, in Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

CHAP. I.
Of the Founding of a Grammar School.
THe most of the Grammar Schools which I have yet taken notice of in England,
are of two sorts; The first I may call mixed Schools, where a structure is
made, and an allowance given of ten, twenty, or thirty pounds per annum, only
to one man to teach children freely, that inhabit within the precincts of one
Parish, or of three or four neighboring Hamlets, adjoining. And such Schools
as these very seldom or never improve Scholars further, then to teach them to
read and write, and learn some little (they know not what it means) in the
common Grammar; partly because the Master is overburdened with too many petty
Scholars, and partly because many parents will not spare their children to
learn, if they can but find them any employment about their domestic or
rureall affairs, whereby they may save a penny. In some places more populous,
an allowance is made to a Master of about twenpounds per annum to attend
Grammarians only, and ten pounds to an Usher, whose work it is to teach the
Petties: in such Schools as these, I have known some boys more pregnant
witted then the rest, to have proved very good Grammarians, and to have
profited so in the Latin and Greek Tongues, as to come to good maturity in
University studies, by a Tutors guidance. But the Masters of such Schools for
the most part, either weaken their bodies by excessive toil, and so shorten
their days; or as (soon as they can fit themselves for a more easy
profession, or obtain a more profitable place) after a few years quit their
School, and leave their Scholars to another charge, that either has his
method to seek, or else trains them up in another, quite different from that
which they had been used to. And thus through the change of Masters the Scholars
are either dispersed, or hindered from going on with that alacrity and profit,
which otherwise they might.

The second sort of Schools are those which are purely Grammatical, being
especially conversant in teaching the Art of Grammar. Now some of these have
yearly salaries for a Master and one Usher, where the Master is employed in
perfecting those Scholars, which the Usher has already grounded. And many of
these Schools, (especially if they be situate in places where accommodation is
to be had for Tabling) do happily train up many Scholars, which about sixteen
or seventeen years of age, are fit to besent to the University. But in regard
there is no preferment attending these Schools, the most pregnant witted
children are commonly taken thence, after they are well grounded, and disposed
on to other places, where they may gain it. So that of all others our
collegiate Schools or those that come nearest them, have the greatest
advantage of making most Scholars. For these having commonly large revenues
belonging to them, do not only provide sufficiently for a Master and one Usher
at lest, but also for a certain number of Scholars, which being for the most
part of the choycest wits, picked out of other Schools, and such as depend upon
hopes of advancement, do industriously bestirre themselves to attain what
learning they can, and submit themselves orderly to such Discipline as is there
exercised. But forasmuch as these greater Schools rather intend the forwarding
of such children as are already grounded, then busy themselves about mere
Rudiments; it ca^seth many parents to disperse their little ones abroad to
Tabling-Schooles, where (for the most part) there is but one man to teach a few
promiscuously hand-over-head, without any settled Method, and these changing and
removing ever and anon, as cause is offered, do seldom attain any stable
proficiencie in Grammar-learning. Yet in some of these, where an able
Schoolmasters is well seated, and provided with all fitting accommodations, so
as to entertain many Gentlemen's sons of good quality, and an able Usher to
assist him in Teaching. I have observed children to make double profiting, in
respect of other Schools, because they have the advantage to spend much of
that time at their books, which others trisle away, in running up and down
about home; not to say, that the constant eye of the Master is an especial
means to regulate them in point of behavior.

Now comparing all the Schools which we have in England, with some that I read
of in other countries, (that I may speak freely, and without offense to any
man, submitting my self herein also to the judgment of those of my Profession)
I do not know one that is so completed, as (perhaps) many might easily be,
with all necessary accommodations, and advantages to improve children to what
they are capable of, in their playing years, and wherein we evidently see, how
many places of education beyond the Seas, do quite outstrip us.

And therefore from what I have heretofore read in Mr. M^leasters Positions
concerning the training up of children, in chapter 40. (which he writ when he had
been twenty years Schoolmasters at Merchant Tailors School, which was erected
1561. being afterward head Master of Paul's, in 1600.) and what I have been
informed touching Mr. Farnabies improvement of a private Grammar School in
Goldsmiths Alley, now called New street, also Jew^n Street; and what I my self
have experienced for about fourteen years together, both in that place, and in
Lothbury Garden, I am induced to think, that it is a matter very feaseable to
raise many of our Grammar-Schooles to a far higher pitch of learning, then is
ordinarily yet attained to in England. For whereas in most of our
Grammar-Schooles (as I have noted) there is but one, two, or three Ushers
besides a Master, employed in teaching the Latin and Greek Tongues, and some
smattering of the Hebrew, together in one room, to six or seven Forms of
Scholars, who by reason of the noise of one another, (not to mention the
clamor of children) and the multiplicity of their Work, with several boys in
each Form, do both over-tire themselves, and many times leave things to the
halves; I conceive a course may be taken (especially) in Cities, and Towns of
greater concourse, to teach a great multitude of Scholars (as Corderius
professes to have taught 500. and I have been informed, that in some places
beyond Seas, 2500. are taught in one School) without any noise, in a pleasing
and profiting manner, and in their playing years; not only the English,
Latin, and Greek Tongues, (together with the Duties of Piety, and civil
behavior) but also the Eastern, and other needful foreign Languaguages,
besides fair writing, Arithmetic, Music, and other Preparatory Arts and
Sciences, which are most obvious to the Senses; and whereof their younger
years are very capable; that thereby they may be thoroughly fitted for
ingenuous Trades, or to prosecute higher studies in the Universities, and so be
able (when they come to man's estate) to undertake the due management of private
or public Affairs, either at home, or in other countries.

He that shall but consider the low ebbo that learning was brought to (by
reason of the Danish barbarism) in England, in King Alfred's days, who could
not find a Master in all his dominions, to teach him the Latin Tongue, (which
he began to learn at thirty six years of age, having begun to read English at
twelve, which his elder brethren, because less studious, could not attain to)
and the paucity of them that understood Greek, not much above threescore years
ago, when a Scholar yet living of thirteen years old from the School, was
owned as a better Grecian, then most of the Fellows of the College to which
he went; he that, I say, shall consider the former rareness of the Latin and
Greek Tongues in England, and now see how common they are (especially since
Queen Elizabeth's days, in whose time, more Schools were built, then there
were before in all her Realm) and withal, take notice what an excellent
improvement that noble-spirited Mr. Busbie has of late made at Westminster
School, where the Eastern Languages are now become familiar to the highest
sort of Scholars, will undoubtedly think (as I do) that our children may be
brought on to far more knowledge of Language and things, then hitherto they
have been, and that also in a more easy manner.

And forasmuch as I observe it as a great Act of Gods mercy toward his Church,
that, in this jangling age of ours, wherein too many decry learning, he has
raised up the Spirit of some, that know better what it is, to endeavor
heartily to advance it, I shall here address my words to such whosoever they
are, but more especially to the Honorable and Reverend Trustees for the
maintenance of Students. And as before I have hinted somewhat touching the
erecting of Petty-Schooles (whereof there is great need, especially) in London;
so I will here presume (and I hope it will prove no offense) to publish what I
have often seriously thought, and sometimes spoken with some men's approbation,
touching the most convenient founding of a Grammar-Schoole; that if it shall
please God to stir up any man's spirit to perform so pious a Work, he may do
it, to the best advantage for the improvement of Piety and learning. For when I
see in many places of this land, what vast sums have been expended (even of
late) in erecting stately houses, and fencing large parcels of ground for
Orchards and Gardens, and the like; and how destitute for the most part they
stand, and remain without inhabitants; I am too too apt to think, that those
persons which have undergone so great a charge, to so little purpose, would
willingly have disbursed as much money upon a public good, did they but
rightly know how to do it; since thereby their name and memory will be more
preserved; especially, if they have no children or posterity of their own to
provide for.

But to return to the contrivance of a School, which is to be in many things
(as I have mentioned) above the ordinary way of Schooling, yet gradually
distant from, and subordinate to University Colleges, which would thence also
take a further rise toward perfection in all kinds of Study and Action, For
the better grounded a Scholar is in the principles of useful matters, when he
comes to the University, the greater progress he will make there in their
superstructures, which require more search and meditation; so that at last he
will be able to discover many particulars, which have not yet been found out by
others, who (perhaps) have not gone so rationally to work, as he may do, having
obtained the whole Encyclopoedia of learning, to help him in all sorts of Books.

Such a School then as may be fit for the education of all sorts of children
(for we have seen the very poorest to have come to dignities of preferment by
being learned) should be situated in a City or Town of great concourse and
trading, whose inhabitants are generally addicted, and sufficiently
accommodated to entertain Tablers, and are unanimously well-affected toward
Piety, Learning, and Virtue. The place should be healthfully and pleasantly
seated in a plentiful country, where the ways on all sides are most commonly
fair, and convenient passage to be had from remoter parts, both by land and by
water.

The Schoole-house should be a large and stately building, placed by it self
about the middle of the outside of a Town, as near as may be to the Church, and
not far from the fields, where it may stand in a good air, and be free from
all annoyances. It should have a large piece of ground adjoining to it, which
should be divided into a paved Court to go round about the School, a fair
Orchard and Garden, with Walks and Arbors, and a spacious green close for
Scholars recreations; and to shelter the Scholars against rainy weather, and
that they may not injure the School in times of play, it were good if some
part of the Court were sheded, or cloystered over.

This Schoole-house should be built three stories high, whereof the middlemost,
for more freedom of the air, should be the highest above-head, and so
spacious, that it may contain (at least) 500. Scholars together, without
thronging one another. It should be so contrived with folding doors made
betwixt every Form, as that upon occasion it may be all laid open into one
room, or parted into six, for more privacie of hearing every Form without
noise, or hinderance one of another. There should be seats made in the School,
with Deskes before them, whereon every Scholar may write, and lay his book, and
these should be so placed, that a good space may be left in the middle of the
School, so as six men a breast may walk up and down from Form to Form. The
Ushers Pues should be set at the head ends of every Form, so as they may best
see and hear every particular boy. And the Masters Chair should be so raised
at the upper end of the School, as that he may be able to have every Scholar
in his eye, and to be heard of all, when he has occasion to give any common
charge, or instruction. There may be shelves made round about the School, and
boxes for every Scholar to put his books in, and pins whereon they may hang
their hats, that they be not trodden (as is usual) under feet. Likewise every
Form should have a Repository near unto it, wherein to lay such Subsidiary
books as are most proper for its use. The lowest story may be divided into
several rooms, proportioned according to the uses for which they are intended,
whereof one should be for a writing-Schoole, another for such Languages as are
to be taught at spare hours; and a third as a Petty-Schoole for such children
as cannot read English perfectly, and are intended for the Grammar-Schoole. A
fourth room may be reserved for laying in wood and coals, and the rest made
use on for Ushers or Scholars to lodge in, or the like occasion, as the Master
shall think best to dispose of them to the furtherance of his School. In the
uppermost story, there should be a fair pleasant Gallery wherein to hang Maps,
and set Globes, and to lay up such rarities as can be gotten in presses, or
drawers, that the Scholrs may know them. There should likewise be a place
provided for a School-Library, and the rest may be made use of as Lodging
rooms, for Ushers and Scholars. But the whole Fabric should be so contrived,
that there may be sufficient lights and chimneys to every Form and room. As
for an house of Office, it should be made a good distance: from the School, in
some corner of the close, where it may be most out of sight, and least
offensive.

The Masters dwelling house should be high the School, and should contain in
it all sorts of rooms convenient for entertainment and lodging, and necessary
offices that pertain to a great family. It should have a handsome Court before
it, and a large yard behind it, with an Orchard and Garden, and some enclosure
of pasture ground. And there should be two or three rooms made a little remote
from the dwelling house, to which Scholars may be removed and kept apart, in
case they be sick, and have some body there to look to them.

Now that every Scholar may be improved to the utmost of what he is capable,
the whole Grammar School should be divided into six Forms, and those placed
orderly in one room, which (as I have described) may be so divided into six,
that the noise of one form may not at all disturb or hinder another. There
should also be six able Ushers, for every particular form one, whose work
should be to teach the Scholars according to the method appointed by the
Master, and (that every one may profit in what he learneth) to be sure to have
respect to the weakest, and afford them the most help.

The Master should not be tied (as is ordinary) to a double work, both to teach
a main part of the School himself, and to have the inspection and government
over all; but his chief care should be (and it will be business enough for one)
to prescribe Taskes, and to examine the Scholars in every form, how they
profit, and to see that all exercises be duly performed, and good order
constantly observed, and that every Usher be dexterous and diligent in his
charge, and moderate in executing such correction, as is necessary at any time
to be inflicted for vicious enormities, but seldom or never, for errors
committed at their Books.

As for the maintenance of such a School, it should be so liberal, that both
Master and Ushers may think their places to be preferment sufficient, and not
to be enforced to look for further elsewhere, or to direct their spare hours
studies toward other Callings. It were to be wished therefore, that a constant
Salary of (at least) 100. l. per annum might be allowed to the Master, and 30.
l. 40. l. 50. l. 60. 70. l. 80. l. per annum to his six Ushers. The raising of
which maintenance, (to use Mr. Mulcasters words) as it will require a good
mind, and no mean purse; so it needs neither the conference of a country,
nor yet the Revenue of a Roman Emperor. Besides, the Master for his
encouragement, should have liberty to make what benefit he can by tabling in
strangers; and every of the abler sort of inhabitants in the Town, should pay
him (at least) 10. s. per quarter, for a sons teaching, but all the poorer
children should be taught gratis, on condition they be sent constantly to the
School, and that their Parents do engage they shall keep good order, and be
cleanly and neat in their apparel; that they may not seem to disgrace their
fellows, or to be disdained by them for their poverty.

It would withal be a great encouragement to these poorer sort of children to
learn, if some whom God has enriched with more then enough, would spend the
supererrogation of their wealth, (as Mr. Mulchaster terms it) in affording
exhibitions of 8. or 10. l. per annum toward keeping them at the School, or
sending them abroad as they are fit, to Trades, or Universities. They that go
thither, should have larger exhibitions allowed them, upon condition that they
employ more time then others in the study of Tongues, and critical learning;
for the promoting whereof I shall only propound Mr. Mulcaster's question in
his own words, which are these; If there were one College, where nothing
should be professed but Languages only, (as there be some people which will
proceed no further) to serve the Realm abroad, and studies in the University,
in that point excellently and absolutely were it not convenient? nay, were it
not most profitable, etc. As for what he writes further, (in Chap. 41. of his
Positions) touching the division of Colleges by professions and faculties; And
Mr. John Drury has lately published (in his reformed School) and his
Supplement thereto, concerning the bringing together into one Society, such as
are able to exercise themselves in any, or all kind of Studies, that by their
mutual Association, Communication, and assistance in reading, meditating, and
conferring about profitable matters, they may not only profit their own
abilities, but advance the superstructures of all learning to that perfection
which by such means is attainable; I refer the more judicious to their Books,
and leave it to the consideration of those that endeavor to promote
Schoole-teaching, whether such a School as I have now delineated, would not be
of great concernment to the Church and Commonwealth, where-out to pick more
able Schoolmasters, that by degrees have been exercised in teaching all sorts
of Scholars, for (at least) seven years together, then many men that have
scarce saluted, or are newly come from the Universities, can suddenly prove to
be. For I think it one thing to be a good Schoolmasters, and another thing to
be a good Scholar, though the former cannot well do his duty as he ought,
except he be also the latter.

I might here bewail the unhappy divertment of Jesus College in Rotherham, in
which Town, one Thomas Scot, alias Rotherham, (a poor boy in Ecclesfield
Parish) having had his education, and being advanced to the Archbishopric of
York, in the time of Edward the fourth, did out of love to his country and
gratitude to the Town, erect a College as a School, for a Provost who was to
be a Divine, and to preach at Ecclesfield, Laxton, and other places (where the
College demeanes lay;) and three Fellows, whereof one was to teach Grammar,
another Music, and the third Writing; besides a number of Scholars; for some
of whom he also provided Fellowships in Lincoln College in Oxford. But in the
time of Henry the eighth, the Earl of Shrowesbury (who as I have heard, was
the first Lord that gave his vote for demolishing of Abbeys) having obtained
Roughford Abbey in Nottinghamshire, (to the Prior whereof the Lordship of the
Town of Rotherham belonged) took advantage also to sweep away the Revnues of
Rotherham College, (which according to a rentall that I have seen, amounted to
about 2000. l. per annum) and after a while (having engratiated himself with
some Townsmen, and Gentlemen thereabout by erecting a Cockpit) he removed the
School out of the College into a sorry house before the gate, leaving it
destitute of any allowance, till Mr. West (that writ the Presidents) in the
time of Queen Elizabeth (and when Mr. Snell was Schoolmaster) obtained a
yearly Salary of ten pounds per annum, which is since Paid out of the
Exchequer, by the Auditor of accounts. I remember how often, and earnestly Mr.
Francis West, who had been Clerk to his Uncle, would declaime against the
injury done to that School, which indeed (as he said) ought still to have been
kept in the College, and how when I was a Schoolmasters there, he gave me a
Copy of the Foundation, and showed me some rentalls of Lands, and told me where
many Deeds and Evidences belonging thereunto were then concealed, and other
remarkable passages, which he was loath to have buried in silence.

But I only mention thus much touching that worthy Foundation, to show how
charitably some men have been addicted to cherish the roots of learning, and
how covetously others have been bent to destroy the whole body of it, even in
former ages; And I hope none will be discouraged from Pious undertakings, for
fear least his benevolences should in these, or after times be perverted, when
he considers that God looks upon the sincerity of his ends, and will
accordingly reward him, though what he religiously intended, may unhappily be
abused by others, contrary to his mind.

I shall now to end this Chapter, recite some remarkable passages of Mr.
Mulcasters out of his Positions (Chapter 40.) which I leave to the consideration of
others, to think how far they concur with what I have said, as well
concerning the foundation of a Petty, as a Grammar-Schoole.

If any well-disposed wealthy man, for the honor that he bears to the
murdered infants (as all our erections have some respect that way) would begin
some building, even for the little young ones which were no increase to
Schools, but an help to the elementary degree, all they would pray for him,
and he himself should be bound to the memory of the young infants, which put
him in remembrance of so virtuous an act.

The opportunity of the place, and the commodity of able Trainers, whereof a
small time will bring forth a great many, will draw many on, and procure good
Exhibitours, to have the thing go forward.

I could wish we had fewer Schools, so they were more sufficient, and that
upon consideration of the most convenient seats for the Countries, and Shires,
there were many put together, to make some few good.

The use of under-teachers is not, as we now practice it in Schools, where
indeed Ushers be Masters of themselves, but to assist the Master in the easier
points of his charge, which ought to have all under his own teaching, for the
chief points, and the same under the Ushers, for the more usual, and easy.

CHAP. II.
How the Master should maintain his Authority amongst his Scholars.
AVthority is the true mother of all due order, which the Master must be
careful in every thing to maintain, otherwise he may command what he pleases,
but withal, he must give the Scholars liberty to do what they list. Which what
an horrible confusion in their places, what insufferable neglect of their
tasks, what unrulinesse in point of behavior, what perpetual torment to the
painful Master, and his Ushers, and what unavoydable disgrace it brings upon
a School, let them that are Actors, or Spectators thereof, give testimony. 1.
That therefore the Master may have all his lawful commands put in execution
with due alacrity, and his decent orders deligently observed, I conceive it
requisite, that,

1. He be sure in all things to behave as a Master over himself, not only by
refraining those enormities and grosser faults, which may render him scandalous
to every one, but checking his own Passions, especially that of Anger; and if
at any time he seem to have cause to be provoked to it, and feel it to come too
violently upon him, let him rather walk aside a while out of the School to
divert it, then express it openly amongst his Scholars by unseemly words or
gesturs. He should indeed endeavor to behave himself unblameably in all
Christian-like conversation before all men, but so amongst his Scholars, that
they may have much wherein to imitate him, but nothing whereby to disgrace him.
And toward his neighbors, his affability should be such, as to win their love
and respects, so that they may be ready at all times to countenance the Masters
well-doing, and to vindicate the credit of him and his School, when they hear
it unjustly traduced.

2. When he commands, or forbids any thing to be done, he should acquaint his
Scholars with the end intended, and the benefits or inconveniences which attend
such, or such a course. For children have so much use of reason as to delight
to hear persuasive arguments of reason, though the declivity of corrupt nature
makes, that they do not much mind them, where there is no fear or a rod for
doing amiss. Yet sometimes it may be best to say only, Do this, or do it not,
where you think it of no concernment to them to know the reason, and would make
trial of their readiness to obey, without asking why or wherefore.

3. One main way to bring Scholars to a loving and awful respect of their
Master, is for him to show himself at all times pleasing and cheerful toward
them, and unwilling to punish them for every error; but withal to carry so
close an eye upon all their behavior, that he can tell them privately, betwixt
himself and them alone, of many faults they commit, when they think he knows
nothing, and let them see how he dare correct them for the like offenses when
they presume to commit them again, and especially if they behave themselves
stubbornely before their fellows. Yet to win a boy of a more stubborn spirit,
it is better sometimes to forbear blows, when you have him submit to the rod,
then to punish him so for a fault, as to make him to hate you, and out of a
despite to you to do the like, or a worse mischief. And when any general
misdemeanour is committed, the Master should show himself impartial toward
all, so as either to pardon or punish all. Bu in afflicting punishments, as he
should let none escape, so he should let the most untoward feel the most
smart; but beware he deal not rigorously, much le^^e cruelly with any; for that
will cause an utter dislike in all the Scholars toward the Master, fearing he
will deal so with them, in case they so offend, and thinking it to be no
argument of love, where severity of correction is used.

4. But nothing works more upon good natured children, then frequent
encouragements and commendations for well-doing; and therefore, when any task
is performed, or order observed according to his mind, the Master should
commend all his Scholars, but especially the most observant, and encourage the
weak, and timorous, and admonish the perversest amongst them to go on in
imitating their example, in hopes of finding as much favor at his hands, as
they see them to have.

5. In some places a Master is apt to be molested with the reproachful
clamours of the meaner sort of people, that cannot (for the most part) endure
to have their children corrected, be the fault never so heinous, but presently
they must come to the School to brave it out with him; which if they do, the
Master should there in a calm manner admonish them before all his Scholars, to
cease their clamor, and to consider how rash they are to interrupt his
business, and to blame him for doing that duty to which he is entrusted by
themselves, and others, their betters: But if they go about to raise scandalous
reports upon him, he may do well to get two or three judicious neighbors to
examine the matter, and to rebuke the parties for making so much ado upon
little or no occasion. Thus we shall see Scholars abundantly more to respect
the Master, when they know how grossly he is apt to be wronged by
inconsiderate persons, and that wise men are ready to vindicate his cause.
Whereas if they once see their Master liable to every bodies censure, and no
man take his part whatever is said of him, they themselves will not care what
tales they make to his utter disgrace, or ruin; especially, if he have been
any whit harsh toward them, and they be desirous to out-slip the reins of his
Teaching and Government.

CHAP. III.
Of Schoole-times. Of Scholars going forth of the School, and of Play days.
THough in many Schools I observe six a clock in the morning to be the hour
for children to be fast at their Book, yet in most, seven is the constant time,
both in Winter and Summer, against which hour, it is fit every Scholar should
be ready at the School. And all they that come before seven, should be
permitted to play about the School, till the clock strike, on condition they
can say their parts at the Masters coming in; else, they are not to play at
all, but to settle to their books, as soon as they come.

But here the Master is to take heed, that he be neither too rigorous with
those of weaker age or constitution for coming somewhat tardy; nor indulgent
toward those, who through manifest sloth, and frequent loytering, neglect the
hour. For in the one it will breed a daily timerousnesse, and in the other it
will make way to licentiousness; and on the one side Parents will clamor, on
the other side the School will receive disgrace. However the best is to be as
strict as possibly may be, in seeing that every Scholar come at the just hour,
and to note it as a punishable fault in him that comes late; except he bring a
note of excuse from his Parents, or Host's hand, and a promise withal, that he
shall not offend often in that kind.

It is not amiss for every Scholar in every Form to put down his name in a
book (kept common for that purpose) so soon as he comes to School every day,
that it may be upon record, whether he used to come with the foremost or the
hindmost, and how often he was absent from the School; likewise every Scholars
name should be called over according to the Bill every Schole hour, and they
that are present should answer for themselves, by saying Adsum, and his next
fellow should give notice of him that is absent, by saying Abest.

The common time of dismissing Scholars from School in the fore-noons, is
eleven a clock every day, and in the after-noons, on Mondaies, Wednesdaies, and
Fridaies, five a clock, but on Tuesday after-noons, four; and on Thursdayes,
three. Touching which, a care would be taken that the taskes of every Form may
be fully dispatched rather a little before those hours then after; that then
the Scholars which intend writing or cyphering, or the like, may go to the
Writing-schoole, as they yet use to do about London. Neither would I have the
Scholars to be so precisely observant of the clock, as just upon the first
stroke of it to rush out of the School: but notice being given to the Master
that it is stricken, and he having given the word for dismissing the School,
all the Scholars should come one by one orderly out of their seats according to
their Forms (the lowest beginning first, because they are commonly next the
door) and salute him with their hats in their hands, and so quietly depart out
of the School without thrusting, or striving one to get out before another. It
were good if there were hour-glasses in the School, to give notice how the time
goes on.

And for their ready going home, or to the writing School, there should be
private Monitors appointed to inform the Master, so soon as they return to the
School again, who they are that neglected their duty therein.

That space of intermission about nine and three a clock, which is used at
Westminster School, and some others, and is so much commended by Mr. Brinsley
(Chap. 33. of his Grammar School) cannot so well be observed, nor is it so
requisite in those Schools, in which Scholars meet not till seven in the
morning; for the variety of their several tasks, will take away that
tediousness that seems to accurre by the length of time, and those Subsidiary
Books provided for the lower Forms, will prevent the over-toyling of
themselves by their present work. And that those disorders which usually befall
in Scholars running forth in Schoole-time, may be somewhat remedied, this or
the like course may be taken.

1. Let it not be lawful for above one boy in twenty to go forth at once; and
at his going forth, let every one come to the Master, or that Usher to whose
charge he belongs, and in his hearing repeat four or six Vocabula's or phrases,
which he has not said before, and then lay down his book, with his name writ
in it in a place appointed within the Masters view, that so it may be known at
once, both how many, and who are out of doors, and how long they tarry abroad.
At their coming in, they should again repeat the like number of Vocabula's and
Phrases, as they did at their going fo^th.

The Master should do well now and then to send a privy spy, who may truly
observe and certify him, how every scholar spends his time abroad, and if
any be found to go forth upon no occasion, or to truant it without doors, let
him be censured or reproved, according to his demerits.

3. The granting of a Play-day, is to be referred wholly to the discretion of
the Master, who must in this be as fearful to work his Scholars hinderance,
and the Schools discredit, as willing by such a courtesy to gratify his
deserving friends; who if they be any whit reasonable, will be easily satisfied
with a just excuse of denial; but if they be unreasonably importunate, they
ought to be served with as unreasonable a naysay; so that Play-dayes should be
rarely granted, except to such as may seem to claim more then ordinary
interest in the School, and to whom the Master is bound to show his due
respects, especially before his Scholars.

In places of great resort, and where often solicitation is used to be made
for play (especially by mothers that come to visit their children which are
tabled at School) it were good that a piece of an afternoon were designed
constantly aforehand, on which (in case any suit should be made) the Scholars
might have leave to play; but if not, that ^hey be held to their Books. Yet if
^here have not a Play-day been granted, ^or a Holy day intervened for some
weeks together, the Master may of himself propound to his Scholars, that in
case they perform all their Tasks very well and orderly, so as to dispatch
them by such an hour on such a day, they shall play the remainder thereof, and
then (as at other times also when a Play-day is intended) ore of the upper Form
(at least) should make a Petitory Oration to the Master, or them that come to
crave play; and another, a Gratulatory speech, after leave is obtained.

Where both Thursdayes and Saturdayes in the afternoons are half Holy Days, I
think Tuesdayes the fittest, on which to grant play; in other places,
Thursdayes may seem the best. But this I leave to the discretion of the Master,
who knows what is most convenient for his own School.

Now in granting a Play-day, these directions may be useful.

1. That there be never more then one Play-day granted in one week, and that
only when there is no Holy Day in that week, and when the weather also is
clear and open, and the ground somewhat dry.

2. That no Play be granted till one a clock (at the soonest) when all the
Scholars are met, and Orations have been said.

3. That all the Scholars be dismissed orderly into some close (or other place
appointed for such a purpose) near the School, where they may play together,
and use such honest and harmless recreations, as may moderately exercise their
bodies, and not at all endanger their health.

And because some boys are apt to sneak home, or straggle from the rest of
their fellows out of their bounds, prescribed them to play in; you may do well
to give order to him that has the Bill of all the names, to call it over at
any time amid their sport, and to take notice of all such as have absented
themselves, and to give you an account of them, when they return into the
School; which should be upon Play-daies before five of the clock, that they
may bless God for his provident hand over them that day, and so go home. And
that the Master may sometimes see into the various disposition of children,
which does freely discover it self by their company, and behavior at play; he
may now and then take occasion to walk at a distance from them, or (if he come
nearer) to stand out of their sight, so as he may behold them in the throng of
their recreations, and observe their gesture and words, which if in any thing
they be not as becomes them, he may afterward admonish them in private to
behave, or speak otherwise.

But an especial care must be taken, and a charge accordingly often given, that
your Scholars do at no time play with any but their own Schoole-fellowes, or
other ingenuous children about home; which their Parents or Friends know, and
whom they are willing should be admitted into their company; for besides the
evil which may be contracted by learning corrupt discourse, and imitating them
in many shrewd turns: boys that are under little or no command, will be very
subject to brabble and fight with Scholars, and the rather because they know
the Master will not allow his Scholars at all to quarrel, and if they can do
them any maime, they will attempt it, that the Master may have occasion to call
them to account for it. So perverse is our corrupt nature (especially) where
education has no sway.

CHAP. IV.
Of Admission of Scholars; of Election of Forms and of Scholars orderly
sitting, and demeanor in their seats, when they are at School.
1. NO children should (as I have formerly said) be admitted into a Grammar
School, but such as can readily read English, and write a legible hand or at
least be willing to learn to write, and to proceed in learning Latin. And it
is therefore best to try, in the presence of their Parents or friends that
bring them, what they can do, by causing them to read or write if they can)
before them, that themselves may be Judges of their present strength or
weakness, expect proficiencie from them according as they see their capacity,
not hastening them on too fast, and rating at them daily, because (perhaps) in
their judgments they do not learn so well as their neigbours children

The best is to admit of young beginners only once every year, and then to
take in all that can be gotten from the Petty-Schooles; for company will
encourage children to adventure upon an uncouth course of learning, seeing the
more the merrier; and any discreet Parent will be easily persuaded to forbear
his son a while, when he considers it will be more for his profiting to have
company along with him, as he learneth, and he may be daily bettered in reading
English, and forwarded by learning to write, before he come from the
Petty-Schoole.

The fittest season of the year for such a general admission of little ones
into the Grammar-Schoole, does seem to be about Easter; partly because the
higher boys are usually then disposed of to Trades, or the Universities, and
partly, because most children are then removed from one School to another, as
having the Summer coming on for their encounagement.

When you have thus admitted a company of boys together, you may let those
that can read best, obtain the higher places, till they come to get the
Rudiments of Latin without book, and then you may rank them into a Form.
Because,

2. It is a main help to the Master, and a furtherance to all the Scholars,
that the whole School be reduced into Forms, and those also as few as may be,
respecting the different years, and capacity of each Scholar. And if there were
six hundred Scholars or more in a School, they might all sitly be ranked into
six Forms, by putting those of equal age and abilities together, and the toil
in hearing Parts, or Lessons, and perusing Exercises, (as I will show anon)
would not be much more with an hundred orderly placed, and well behaved in a
room to themselves apart, then with three or four single boys in several
employments. Not only because the Master or Ushers do thus at once impart
themselves to all alike, and may bestow more time amongst them in examining any
Task; but also because by this means Aemulation (as a main quickner of
diligence) will be wrought amongst them, insomuch as the weakest Scholar
amongst them will be loath to lagge always behind the rest; and there is none so
stupidly blockish, but by help of company will learn that which he would not
obtain being alone, and I have seen the very hindmost oftentimes to help all
his fellows at a dead lift. The Teachers constant care should be in every
Form, as to direct and examine every particular boy, so to help forward the
weakest, that in every thing he does, he may understand himself, and it is not
to be said, with what alacrity they will all strive to out-doe one another, so
that sometimes he that comes behind all the rest, will be as fit to make a
leader of the Form, as those that are the foremost in it.

To provoke them all therefore to emulation, and that none may complain, or
think himself injured by being left behind; use constantly once at the end of
a month, and when all your Scholars are together to ma^e a free new choice in
every Form, after this manner.

1. Let every Scholar in the Form give his own voice, concerning which boy he
thinks to be the best proficient, and ablest for the present to lead the
company; and having set him aside, let them all pass their voices again,
concerning whom they judge fittest to stand the next to him.

2. Then set these two opposite one to another, so as the better Scholar may
take the leading of the upper side, on your right hand, and the other, the
leading of the lower side, on your left hand.

3. And that there may not be much inequality in the sides, let the lower
leader have the first call, and liberty to take what boy he thinks the
strongest, out of all the rest, and then let the higher leader have the next
call, and liberty to take whom he likes; and so let them proceed to call by
course, till they have (like ball players) ranked all their fellows to their
sides, and so strongly and evenly set themselves in a posture one side against
another, that it may be hard for any one to judge, whether is the stronger.

By thus choosing amongst themselves, they will be all so well pleased, that
the Master shall never be blamed for endeavoring to prefer one boy before
another, or keeping of any back, that would seem to go faster then his fellows
at his Book. And indeed I have sometimes admired to observe the impartiality
and judgment of children in placing one another according to their abilities
and parts, waving all other by-respects by which men would be inclined to set
one higher, and another lower. Yet if sometimes they seem to mistake in their
judgment concerning a boy, that is but newly come amongst them; or to be too
partial against any other upon some general spleen, which is but very rare; The
discreet Master may after the election, correct the error by giving such a one
a place to his own liking, which he may keep till the next choice, except some
of his inferiors have a list to dispute with him for his place, and then he
must put it to the hazard, having a lawful time given him to provide
beforehand for the contest.

3. Let all the Scholars take their places in the School, according to their
several Forms, and let every one sit in his Form in that order in which he was
elected. It were good that the seats were so equally set on both sides the
School, as that the higher side of each Form, might keep the higher side of
the School, I mean, that on the Masters right hand; and the lower side of the
Form, the lower side of the School, which is that on the Masters left hand.
However, let the upper side take always the upper, and the lower, the lower
seats.

This placing of Scholars in an opposite manner, side against side, is good in
many respects, as,

1. To know on a sudden who is unruly in, or absent out of his place.

2. To have them ready paired at all times for Examinations, Disputations, or
Orations, or the like.

3. To keep order in going in and out of their seats to say, or in going home
from School, or the like.

4. To increase courage in the Scholars, who are delighted to let their friends
see, what place they keep amongst the rest, when they come to visit them.

As they sit in their seats, be sure to keep them continually employed, by
proportionating every task to the time and their strength, with respect to the
capacity of the weakest; for by this means, the strongest boys will have more
leisure to help, and see the weakest can do their work, for which purpose they
should be appointed sometimes to sit in the middle amongst the rest, that they
may more readily be consulted with, and heard of all. These should sometimes
construe, and sometimes examine over their Lessons, having their Grammars, and
Dictionaries, and other Subsidiary books to help them, out of which they should
appoint others to find what they enquire after; and this will be so far from
hindering their own progress, that it will-encourage them to go faster onward,
when they see how readily they can lead the way, and incite their fellows to
follow after them.

When in getting Lessons, the whole Form shall be at a Nonplus, let one of the
leaders have recourse to the Master or Ushers, or to whom they shall appoint
him to go for resolution. But I have found it a continual provoking of
Scholars, to strive who should learn the fastest, to let both the sides of one
Form, as they sit a part, so to look to provide their Lessons apart; and when
they come to say Parts or Lessons, or to perform Exercises, to bicker one with
another, and propound those things to be resolved in by their opposites, which
they observe the Master to have omitted, and they think they cannot tell. And
let it be constantly noted which side has the better all the week, that when
afterward* they come to a general dispute at the weeks end, for places or
sides, it may be considered.

CHAP. V.
Of saying Parts, and Lessons and of perusing Translations, and all other kind
of Exercises.
1. THe best time for saying Grammar Parts, or the like, is the morning, partly
because the memory is then the freshest; and partly, because children may take
the opportunity over night to get them perfectly at home. But forasmuch as
Vocabula's are more easy to be impressed in the mind, and require less pains
in getting, I conceive it not amiss, that children be continually exercised in
saying them for afternoons parts at one a clock, before which hour they may
prepare themselves aforehand (even) amid their play.

After parts said, the Master or his Ushers should immediately give Lessons to
every Form, or appoint a boy out of an upper Form to give Lessons to that which
is next below him, in his hearing; which he should distinctly construe once or
twice over, and note out all the Words, wherein the most difficulty of parsing
seems to lie, and name the Tropes and Figures, the Phrases, and other
elegancies that are to be found (especially) in higher Authors.

The Lessons should be got ready to be said against ten a clock in the
forenoon, and four in the after noon; at which time the Scholars should come
all orderly and quietly out of their Form, and taking their places where they
ought to stand, (so as one side may be opposite to another) they should all
make their salutes, and then say one after another, except they be appointed
otherwise.

For sometimes when you have occasion to make more hasty dispatch with a Form,
you may cause any one or more to say the whole Lesson, or by pieces; but be
sure that they all come very well provided, and that every one be intent upon
what another is saying, for which purpose you may note him that has been most
negligent in his seat, and ask him ever and anon, what it was that his fellow
said last.

To save your own lungs in asking many questions, and telling Rules, or the
like, you may let every two boys examine one another, and your self only help
them, when they are both at a mistake.

You may easily amend that common and troublesome fault of indistinct and
muttering speaking, by calling out a bold spirited little boy, that can speak
with a grace, and encouraging him to give the other an higher note for the
elevation of his voice: for this will at last enforce the boy you are troubled
with, to speak louder, and with a better grace; and to strive to pronounce his
words more distinctly, then the other did before him.

After Lessons are ended, you may let every one propound what questions he
pleases, for his opposite to answer, and this will be a means to whet them on
to more diligence in getting them, before they come to say.

In the three lowest Forms, or in others, where all have the same Translations,
or Dictates, you may cause only him whose performance you most doubt of, to
read what he has written both in English and Latin, and help him, as you
find his error, to correct it, and see that all the rest amend their own
faults accordingly. Afterward, you may let one parse it both in English and
Latin, and order them all to write it over again fair in a Paper-book for
themselves, and to give you also a copy of it neatly written in a loose paper,
every Saturday. And thus you shall have every one begin to lean to his own
strength, a thing very necessary in all kind of Exercises, though they do the
less. If you once take notice of any boys strength, you may easily judge of
what he brings, whether it be his own, or another doing.

But in the upper Forms, and where they have all several Exercises, it is
necessary that you peruse what every Scholar has done. And for this work, you
may set apart Saturday fore-noons, after Grammatical Examinations are ended,
and before they say their Catechismes. And that they may write them fair, you
should sometimes compare them with their Copy-Books, or such pieces as they
writ last, at the Writing-Schoole. Before they bring them to you to read, let
them peruse one another Exercise amongst themselves, and try what faults they
can find in it; and as you read them over, where you see a gross mistake,
explode it; where you epsy any oversight, note it with a dash, that they may
amend it; but where you see any fault, which is beyond their power to avoid, or
remedy, do you mildely correct it for them, and advise them to observe it for
the future. However, forget not to commend him most that has done the best,
and for his encouragement to make him read over his exercise aloud, that others
may hear it, and then to hang it up in an eminent place, that they may imitate
it; and if any one can afterward out-doe it, let his exercise be hanged up in
its stead. But if any one has lazily performed his exercise, so that it be
worse then all the rest, let it be cut in fashion of a leg, and be hanged up by
the heel, till he make a better, and deserve that that may be taken down. It is
not amiss also, to stir them up to more diligence, to have a
Common-paper-Book, wherein the names of all in every Form that have optime and
pessime performed their weekly exercises may be written, and that the one may
have the privilege to beg a Play-day once a month, or to obtain pardon for
some of his fellows; and the other may be confined to some task, when a
Play-day is granted.

CHAP. VI.
Of weekly Repetitions: Of Grammatical Examinations, and Disputations. Of
collecting phrases, and gathering into Common-place-Bookes. Of pro^ouncing
Orations, and Declamations.
I Have not in either of the foregoing Treatises made mention of any thing to
be done on Fridaies, because that day is commonly spent in most Schools, in
repeating what has been learned in the foregoing part of the week; which
custom, because it is a mean to confim childrens memories in what they learn,
I willingly conform thereunto.

After Chapter's therefore read in a morning, let them repeat their wonted
Parts, and afterward their Lessons, all which they will be able to say
together, out of their several Authors, so that some be made to repeat out of
one book, and some out of another.

For if due care be but had aforehand, that Scholars be very ready and perfect
in their daily taskes, it will take away all coil and timerousnesse, which
usually attends these Repetitions, and make that this day will become the
veryest play-day in all the week; when boys shall see that they have nothing
to do, but what they can do already, (at least) with a little looking of it
over on Thursdaies toward evening at home, what they have translated out of
any Author in Prose, should be read out of English into Latin, and what they
learn in Poets, should be said (as well as can be) by heart, both for the verse
and the matters sake, which will furnish them with Authorities, and sharpen
their invention for versifying.

After Repetitions ended, the Master should note all the Phrases and Sentences,
and other things observable in their Lessons, which they should transcribe into
Phrase-bookes, and Common-place-Bookes, for their constant use in writing or
speaking, or making Exercises, as we have mentioned already before.

And because the most leisure is gained on Friday afternoones, it will not be
amiss about three a clock to let every Form to dispute side with side, one
after another, after this manner.

1. Let every one propound to his opposite two or three questions, which he
thinks most difficult out of his weeks work, which if the other cannot answer
readily before he count six, or ten in Latin, let him be Captus, and the
questions be propounded to his next fellow. The lowest in the Form may begin
the dispute, and so go on to the highest on either side, who should keep
reckoning of those that are capt, and how often.

2. Besides their weeks works they may try, who can most perfectly repeat
memoriter, a part of the Grammar, or any Author which they read, or who can
recite the most Vocabula's under one head, or who can vary a phrase the best,
or imitate any piece of an Orator or Poet.

3. Some time would also be spent in Capping Latin verses amongst the lower
Forms, and Greek verses amongst the highest; for which they may provide
themselves out of a Capping-book, which seems to be made on purpose by
Bartholomaeus Schonborn or Gnomologicon Poeticum, made lately by Mr. Rosse,
besides which, they may contrive a little Book of their own, wherein to write
verses Alphabetically out of the best Poets.

Let that side which appears to be the Victor have the upper seat in the
School, till a new choice be made, except the other can win it from them
before, and bring them back with a hissing disgrace.

Amid these disputes, the Master must have a great care to suppress noise and
tumultuous clamor, and see that no boy stir out of his appointed place. For
they are apt to heighten their spirits heyond moderation, if the Masters
discretion do not settle them.

Let it be now lawful for any lower boy in a Form, to dispute with one above
him for his place. Mr. Stockwoods Disputations will be helpful to the upper
Scholars.

Now, that all your Scholars may be thoroughly grounded in their Grammar, so as
not to be apt to forget what they have learnt in it; let them all be exercised
in the examination of a part of it every Saturday morning thus;

1. Let the first and lowest Form examine the two next above them out of the
examination of the Accidents, asking them the Questions as they are in the
Book, and causing them to answer without book, and according to the Accidents.

2. Then let all those three Forms run over the Examples of the Declensions and
Conjugations, as I formerly showed, and try, who can pusle one another in
declining any hard Noun, or Conjugating and Forming any Verb, and give the Rule
of the Genders of the one, or Preterperfect tense, or Supin of the other; when
these have done,

3. Let the fourth Form examine the two highest Forms in Examinatio Latinae
Grammaticae, and sometimes in Elementa Rhetorices, and then

4. Let all these three Forms run over the Paradigmes of the Greek Declensions
and Conjugations.

5. Afterward the two upper Forms may bicker with one another touching Grammar
niceties, either Latin or Greek, which they have taken notice of, and
collected into a Common-place-book, as I mentioned before. But a principal care
must be had to bring all your Scholars to an habit of speaking Latin, and
therefore a strict Law should be made and observed, that every Scholar
(especially after he has been one quarter of a year at School) should either
learn to speak in Latin, or be enforced to hold his tongue. And to help the
little ones in so doing, besides those Phrasiuncula at the end of the Grounds
of Grammar, they should have Formulae loquendi quotidianae, such expressions as
are every day used (especially about the School) writ down in a little book,
that they may get them by heart at by-times. As for the other boys, they will
be better guided how to speak by the Rules of Grammar, and the constant use and
imitation of approved Authors. I conceive, the penury of proper words and good
phrase, with many Teachers, is a main reason why children are not as well
trained up to speak Latin in England, as they are in many places beyond Seas,
and the ready and frequent use of their Mother Tongue causes, that they are
hardly reclaimed from it to make use of another Language. Whereas, if whilst
they are at the School, they might hear little or no English spoken, nor be
suffered to speak it, they would quickly conform themselves to discourse in
Latin. As I have known French boys that understood not a word in English, to
be able in two or three months to talk it as readily, as they that were
English borne. Only at the first, one must wink at their improprieties, and
harshnesse in pronunciation of some words and phrases, and take their meaning
by what they speak, and after a while by custom and imitation of others, they
will speak in Latin, as properly as the best; especially after they have
gained the knowledge of Grammar, accustomed themselves to observe the style of
Latin Authors.

No day in the week should pass on which some Declamation, Oration, or Theme
should not be pronounced, about a quarter of an hour before the School be
broken up, and after Lessons are all ended in the forenoon. That by assiduity
in these exercises, the Scholars may be emboldened to perform them with a grace
before whomsoever, and upon occasion of any solemnity, or coming of Friends
into the School. There should be two standing desks set opposite in the midst
of the School, for boys to stand a^ when they pronounce.

CHAP. VII.
Of exercising Scholars in the Scriptures. Of using daily prayers, and singing
Psalms. Of taking notes at Sermons, and Examination after Sermons.
1. BEsides that course which we have prescribed before to every Form, of
reading part of a Latin or Greek Chapter before parts; it is necessary for
childrens more profiting in the Scriptures, to cause that an English Chapter he
read every morning at the beginning, and every night at the giving over
Teaching. And in this, every boy throughout the School should take his turn,
that it may be known how perfect he is in reading English readily, and
distinctly. Let him that is to read, take his place at a desk in the middle of
the School, and be sure he speak aloud, and let every one reverently attend to
what is read, the lower boys looking upon their English, and the higher upon
their Latin Bibles. Those also that are able to make use of the Septuagint in
Greek, may do well to procure them to look upon, especially seeing they are
now to be had at a far cheaper rate then formerly, bring but lately printed.
When the Chapter is ended, you may demand of one in each Form what he observed,
and let any one that is disposed, take the liberty to ask his opposite a
question or two concerning some passage in it. Mr. Pagets History of the Bible
will assist them herein, so they look upon it, before the Chapter be read; you
your self may do well sometimes to tell them what things are most remarkable in
that present Chapter. The Scholars of the upper Forms may do well to carry
Memoriale Biblicum constantly in their pocket, by which they may be put in
mind at all times, what passages they may find in any Chapter.

2. After the Chapter is ended, they may sing the first, threescore and second,
the hundred, or hundredth and thirteenth Psalm in Latin out of a little book
formerly printed at Oxford, which one of the head Scholars should distinctly
read unto them.

3. When the Psalm is done, the same Scholar should repeat those admonitions at
the end of Nowels Catechism, and then the whole School should rehearse those
Hymns, which are there, the higher side of the School saying one verse, and
the lower the next alternatum and conjunctis vocibus; and at last conclude with
one of those prayers for a blessing upon your endeavors.

These Prayers and Psalms would be all writ together both in English and
Latin in a little book, which would be necessary to be kept in the School,
for continual, and daily use.

Some course would be taken that the Master may have notice what Scholars omit
the reading of a Chapter at home every night after supper; but for this pious
exercise (I hope) every Christian Parent will be ready to call upon and
encourage their own Children, or others that are under their charge, as Tablers.

Now that the good Schoolmaster may more fully discharge his duty toward God
and his Church (who have both entrusted him with the education of their
children) to nurture and bring them up in the fear of the Lord; it were
expedient, if a course could be taken, that he might meet them all at the
School every Lords day in the morning, about an hour before Church-time, where
he may take the opportunity, to instruct them in Catecheticall doctrines,
according to what he may read in many excellent Books, that are as Expositions
of the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments, and not wild it in
a tedious, unmethodized discourse, concerning things unnecessary to be taken
notice of, and unmeet for children to be pusled with. And after a Psalm sung,
and a Prayer said, he may see them go all before him orderly by two and two to
the Church, where it is requisite that they should have a convenient place
appointed to sit in together by themselves, and all within the Masters view.
This would be an especial means to prevent that unreverent behavior in the
Church, which is too usual amongst Scholars, when they are glad to wander into
by-corners to sit down to rest (or rather chat) in, or are ever and anon
molested with quarrelsome lads, or unmannerly fellows, that are apt to
disquiet them, and thrust them out of their places. I have heretofore observed
how the ninth Canon of our Church religiously enjoynes every Schoolmasters to
see his Scholars quietly and soberly behave themselves in the Church, and
examine them at times convenient after their return, what they have borne away
of any Sermon, which he cannot well do, except he have them all confined to
one place, where himself may sit near them.

After Church-time ended in the afternoon, the Master may do well to see all
his Scholars go before him in like order to the School, where he should
examine them, what they have heard or writ at the Sermon. Now in repeating
Sermons, this course may be taken;

1. Let every one of the lower Scholars repeat the Te^t, or a Proof, or some
little pious Sentence, which was then delivered. And these he should get either
by his own attention at the Church, or by the help of his fellows afterward.
For there should be no stir made in the Church, upon pretense of getting
notes there.

2. Those in the four middle most Forms should mind to write the Text,
Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, Motives, and Directions, with the Quotations of
Scripture places, as they are best able.

3. These in the highest Form should strive to write as much, and in as good
order as possibly may be; your self now and then hinting to them some
direction, what method they should observe in writing Sermons, and that may
digest what they have written into that order, wherein they heard it
delivered; let them have a little time of respit amongst themselves, to compare
their notes one with another, and to supply their defects, and amend what they
have mistaken. Then

4. You may first cause one of your higher Scholars to read distinctly what he
has written, and afterward two or three of other Forms, whom you please to
pick out; and last of all, let every one of the lowest Form tell you what he
has observed of the Sermon.

These things being orderly done, you may enlarge a little upon what point you
think most necessary for them to remember, and practice, and conclude this holy
days exercise, with singing of a Psalm and devout prayers, and charging your
Scholars to spend the rest of the time in reading the Scriptures, and such
religious books as tend to their farther profiting in Christian piety, you may
comfortably dismiss them to their several homes, and expect Gods blessing upon
your endeavors for the week following.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Monitors Bill; and of rewards and punishments in a Grammar-Schoole.
THat no disorder or vice committed either at School, Church, or elsewhere,
may pass un-noted by the Master; he may cause his Scholars in the two upper
Forms, to play the Monitors in their weekly turns, from Friday to Friday.

They may make one Bill to serve for all the week, proportionable to the number
of Scholars of every Form, after this manner.

Nov. 1659 F. S. S. M T. W. TH. 1. G. C. J. O. T. P. 2. R. B. T. S. R. M. S. M.
3. C. N. T. C. R. W. J. C. H. P. 4. R. B. L. S. N. R. B. F. 5. H. L. S. S. R.
H. P. B. 6 ^. S. W. T. S. D. H. R.

Wherein you see the letters above denoting the days of the week, the letters
on the side show the place where every Scholars name should be written, and the
pricks within the lines, how every default may easily be marked with a pin, or
a pen. So that,

1. This Bill may serve as a Catalogue to be called over every day at
Schoole-houres to know who are absent, and may save a deal of trouble in
making little notes of Scholars frequent misdemeanors.

2. If you cause every Bill to be dated, and keep them by you, you may know at
any time who is the shrewdest, or most orderly boy amongst the rest, and give
public notice accordingly, that the one may be admonished to amend his
manners, and the other encouraged to go on in well-doing.

3. Besides, it will work the greater awe among all the Scholars, when they
shall know every fault they commit whilst they are at the School will be upon
Record, though the Master does never punish it.

4. You shall find it a means of much ease to your self, when you shall need
only to bid the Monitor t^ke notice of a neglect, or fault committed and let
it so remain, till some fitter opportunity or just occasion invite or or
(rather) enforce you to call to a reckoning.

5. For when you perceive any general disorder, or some gross thing is done,
which ought not to escape correction. you may call for the Bill, and then
censure those only for example, whom you find to be most often, and
notoriously peccant, suffering the rest (that you called forth) to escape with
an admonition to beware for the future.

Thus you shall gain your Scholars affections, when they shall see you
unwilling to punish any without great cause; and avoid that common outcry
which is wont to be made against a Schoolmasters, upon report of a multitude
of boys being whipped at once.

6. So many pricks as are found upon any boys name, may be said to deserve so
many jerks; but herein much discretion is to be used, that you seem not too
severe, nor prove too partial. You may sometimes tell your Scholars what faults
deserve more or fewer pricks; as idleness one, wandering forth one, fighting
three; swearing, four, or the like: which are to be noted in the Bill more or
less, according to the nature of the faults themselves.

He that is public Monitor in one of the two highest Forms may appoint two
private Monitors to himself in every other Form, which may give him secret
information of every mismedeanour committed in any place; and this will be an
especial means to keep all in very good order, with seldom and moderate
correction; a thing to be desired by every Schoolmasters for his own e{ase,
and his Scholars better encouragement.

Those Scholars in every Form, which are indeed the most studious and diligent
in their taskes, and constantly observant to keep good order, should often be
commended to their fellows, as patterns for them to imitat; and when any one
has performed any task or exercise better then ordinary, he should receive
some small gift at his Masters hand, as a new penknife, or a paper-book, or
the like signal Testimony of the Masters appprobation of what he has done.
Those Parents which are of more ability, may do well to allow the Master a
small sum of money to reward their sons diligence now and then, and to excite
them to the better performances of their taskes and exercises, which will
invite them to go faster on in learning, then a rod can drive them.

As for inflicting punishments even upon the meanest and worst of children, it
should ever be the most unwilling piece of work that a Master can take in hand;
and therefore he should not be hasty to punish any fault, whereof the Scholar
has not been praemonished, except it be such a notorious crime, as a boy
cannot but know beforehand; that he ought not to have done it. As for the
Ferula, I wish (and as I have already done) for many reasons, which it is
needless to commit to paper, that it might be utterly banished out of all
Schools. A good sharp birchen rod, and free from knot^; (for willow wands are
unsufferable, and fitter for a Bedlam then a School) as it will break no bones,
nor endanger any limbs, so it will be sufficient wherewith to correct those
that shall deserve it in the lower forms, and for the higher Scholars, that
will not behave as they ought to do, without blows; a good switch about their
shoulders would (in Quintilian's judgment) seem fitter then a rod elsewhere;
and his reason is so modestly agreeable to nature, that as I am loath to mention
it, so I wonder that it has not more prevailed with many discreet
Schoolmasters, who (I persuade my self) have often read it, and cannot but
approve of it as most Christian, however it dropped from a Heathens pen, But
Nobilis equus umbra virgae regitur. Ingenuous and towardly Scholars will not
need so much as the shadow of a rod. And toward others that seem to extort a
rod from the Master, whether he will or not, and (as I may say) will enforce
him to fight, he should generally use such clemency in his hand, as not to
exceed three lashes; in the laying on of which, he may contribute more or less
weight, with respect to the demerits of the fault. But of this he should always
make sure, that he never let the offender go from him with a stubborn look, or
a stomachful gesture, much less with a squealing outcry, or muttering to
himself; all which may be easily taken off with another smart jerk or or two:
but you should rather let him stand aside a little, and see how his stomach
will settle.

That a boy may at once know you dare adventure to whip him, and withal, how
little you delight in his skin; you may at some time, when he has cause to
think that he has well deserved a whipping, and when you have him ready for
the rod, pass him over with an admonition to beware another time; and if he
again be peccant in the same kind, you may give him more cause at present to
remember both his faults together, and for the future to avoid them.

This even and indifferent carriage in rewards and punishments, will make these
Scholars that have any ingenuity in them, less willing to offend, and incline
the rest to behave more dutifully, because they see their Master bear such a
loving mind toward them all, and to be sharp in punishing none, but those
that know they well deserved what blows they had.

As for those boys that do slight good order, and are apt to stir up others
to reject them, (which are usually those of bigger stature,) that perhaps, have
not been acquainted with your Teaching or Government, or know they shall
shortly remove from under your command) or those that without any cause love to
truant it abroad, or by other licentious demeanor bring disgrace to your
School, or offer any affronts to your self; I conceive your best way is (at a
fitting opportunity) to send for their Parents, or friends, with 1 or 2
Judicious neighbors to be by (where there are no Governors of the School) and
to let them justly know the fault, and adjudge what punishment such a boy
deserves; but if the Parents be unwilling to have him corrected for his
peremptory disorders, choose rather to send him home with them, then retain him
any longer to the disturbance of the School or your own unquiet. This you
shall find as an especial remedy to prevent such clamorous outcries of
supposed Tyranny, when every jerk that is given to a notorious unhappy boy for
his insolent misbehaviour, shall chance to be multiplied in the relating, (like
Scoggins Crows) from three to thirty. Which base obloquie and mis-report, what
hinderance it brings to the flourishing of a School, and what unseemly
disgrace to a worthy Master, I need not mention.

But, because such boys as these sometimes are apt to take it as an argument
of the Masters pusillanimity, thus to send for their Parents, who generally do
not love to hear of their childrens faults; the Master may take an occasion,
where he sees adamonitions will not prevail, to watch them more strictly at
every turn, and having found them to have committed some gross enormity, to
chastise them more smartly then ordinarily, yet so as to show no rigor. And if
after that he perceive them wilfully to rush into the same acts of lewdness,
let him fairly turn them out of his School, and signify the cause to their
friends: at whose entreaties he should never take them again, except they will
engage to forfeit a sum of money to be bestowed in public Books, in case they
offend in that nature again.

As for the lesser sort of children, that are apt to reiterate the same fault
too often, for which they have sometimes been already corrected; your surest
way to reclaim them is, after you have once given them warning, to whip them
for a fault, and if that will do no good, to double your strokes the second
time; but if a third time they come under the rod, and beg heartily for pardon,
(as commonly then they will do, fearing lest their punishment should be
tripled) you should not let them pass, except they can procure two of your more
orderly boys, or one that is in your favor for his constant well-doing, to
give their words for them, and to engage to be whipped for them, if ever they do
the like. If you see they get sureties to your likeing, you may let them escape
so; but if they cannot, you may adventure to take their own single words; and
the care of their sureties, and fear to displease you again, will so work upon
them, that they will seldom or never do the like afterward.

Such faults as are vitiously enormous, are to be duly punished with a rod,
according as the obliquity of the will appears in them, more or less; as for
such as are committed for want of understanding, they are to be remedied by due
instruction, but those that seem to offend through laziness, and careless
neglect, should be abridged of desired liberty, when others have leave to play.
The shutting of children up for a while into a dark room, and depriving them of
a meals meat, or the like (which are used in some Tabling Schools) as they are
not of good report, so they cannot be commendably or conveniently used in our
greater Schools.

But these things I leave to the discretion of every prudent Master, who is
able to judge of every particular action by its several circumstances, and to
take such course as he sees best availeable for the orderly management of his
own School, especially where he is not tied to any Rules of Government.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Scholars writing their exercises fair, and of keeping their books handsome.
And of erecting a Schoole-Library for the Masters Recreation therein, at vacant
hours.
THough the teaching of children to write a fair hand, does properly belong to
writing-Masters, as professors of that Art; yet the care of seeing that all
they write in Paper-books, and loose papers, by way of Exercises be neatly
done, does pertain to every Schoolmasters and therefore we shall here touch a
little concerning that, and also show what heed is to be taken about keeping
their Books.

The usual way for Scholars learning to write at the Country Grammar-Schooles,
is to entertain an honest and skilful Penman, that he may constantly come and
continue with them about a month or six weeks together every year, in which
time commonly every one may learn to write legibly. The best season for such a
man's coming is about May Day, partly because the days are then pretty long,
and partly because it will be requisite for such as are then getting their
Grammar Rudiments, to learn to write before they come to Translations. The
Parents of all other children would be advised to let them take that
opportunity to improve their hands, forasmuch as the benefit thereof will far
exceed the charge, and it will be a means of better order to have all employed
together about a thing so necessary. The Master of the School should often
have an eye upon them, to see what they do, and how they profit, and that they
may not slack in their other learning, he may hear them a part at morn, and a
lesson at noon before their Copies be set, or their books can be provided for
them; and proportion their weekly exercises accordingly, And that the stock
which they then get, may be better increased against the next year, the Penman
should cause them to write a piece, a day or two before he leave them, as fair
as they can, with the date above it, and their names subscribed underneath,
which the Schoolmasters may safely keep by him as a Testimony of what they can
perform, and take care to see that their writing for the future be not much
worse, This Pattern or Copy I formerly received from that industrious penman
Mr. Roger Evans, who had sometimes taught me to write; being a Scholar at
Wakefield, and afterward yearly taught my Scholars, whilst I was
Schoolmaster at Rotherham.

June 1. 1635.
A man cannot any way enter into the canonized rule, to come to Gods holy will
and kingdom, except he reform, and become acquainted with virtuous manners, in
most prudent sort that may be, etc.

Roger Evans.

But in London, (which of all places I know in England, is best for the full
improvement of children in their education, because of the variety of objects
which daily present themselves to them, or may easily be seen once a year, by
walking to Mr. John Tradescants, or the like houses or gardens, where rarities
are kept, a Book of all which might deserve to be printed, as that ingenuous
Gentleman has lately done his by the name of Musaeum Tradescantianum, a
Collection of Rarities; could Parents at home but half so well look to their
behavior, as the Masters do to their learning at School) it is ordinary for
Scholars at eleven and five a clock to go to the Writing-Schooles, and there to
benefit themselves in writing. In that City therefore, having the opportunity
of the neighborhood of my singular loving friend Mr. James Hodder, (whose
Copy books of late printed, do sufficiently testify his ability for the
profession he has undertaken, and of whose care and pains I have had abundant
trial by his profiting of my Scholars for (at least) twelve years together;
who had most of them learned of him to write a very fair hand; not to speak of
Arithmetic, or Merchants Accounts, which they gained also by his teaching at
spare times) In the Token-house garden in Lothbury, somewhat near the
Old-Exchange; I so ordered the business with him, that all my lower Scholars
had their little Paper-books ruled, wherein they writ their lessons fair, and
then their Translations, and other Exercises in loose papers in his sight,
until they were able to do every thing of themselves in a handsome manner. And
afterward it is not to be expressed, what pleasure they took in writing and
flourishing their Exercises, all the while they continued with me at the
School. This or a better course (perhaps) may be taken at other Schools,
where they have a Writing-Master constant and ready to attend them every day
throughout the year, as I have heard Mr. Farnaby made use of Mr. Tailor a
famous Penman, for the teaching his Scholars to write. If at any time a
Scholar does not write his Exercises in the fairest manner that he is able, his
punishment may be to write them over again, whilst others play. I have been
told of a Porter, that could neither write nor read, who if at any time he had
seen his son write his Exercises at home, in a worse hand then he thought he
was able to do, would tear them to pieces, and thus at last enforced the young
Scholar upon a very good hand of writing; which rude kind of dealing with a
child, though I would have no Parents to imitate, yet I would advise them
sometimes to look upon their childrens writing at home, and to encourage them
to do it in the neatest fashion. For as it will be an ornament to them in their
learning, and an especial furtherance of their Studies, or future employments
elsewhere, so it will be a great ease to the Master in the perusal of what they
have written; I, with some others, have bin sorry to see some of that reverend
and learned Mr. Hookers Sermons come in manuscript to the press, and not to
have been possible to be printed, because they were so scriblingly written,
that no body could read three words together in them. It is commonly objected
to the best Scholars in any of the three Professions, that they write the worst
hands, and therefore I wish that care may be taken to prevent that objection at
the School, to a future generation.

Now to train up Scholars as well in Calligraphy as Orthography, whilst they
write their Translations in a Paper-book, they should often be admonished,

1. To keep a large Margent on both ^^des, and to leave the space of a long
letters ^ength betwixt every line, and of a small ^^tters breadth, betwixt
every word: and to regard the Proportion of every particular letter, and the
difference betwixt j and i, and v and u, and above ^^l to beware of blotting or
soyling their ^ooks.

2. To make every Comma, Colon, Semicolon, Period, notes of Interrogation,
Parenthesis, and notes of Admiration, etc. in their due places.

3. To write all their words in an even line with the tops, bellies, and
bottomes of the letters of an even size, and when they have an occasion to
divide any word, to part it by its just syllables, making this mark Hyphen (-)
at the end of the line. And

4. In Latin to give an Adverb, or other word its note of difference, and the
like, as the Grammar will further direct them. But for directions in fair
writing, I refer him to that sheet which Mr. Hodder has caused to be printed
before his Copy-book, which will sufficiently commend its Author.

After they have once got an habit of these things, they will more easily
observe them in future Exercises, the neglect whereof will be harder to remedy
afterward, which I have seen too gross in some men's letters that have come
from the Universities.

As for Books; a care would be first had to procure those of a fair print in
good paper, and strongly bound; then the Master may more easily see that his
Scholars keep them all fafe and cleanly, and free from scribbling or rending, by
causing them at a time unexepcted to bring all their books before him, and to
show their names, together with a note of the price, fairly writ in the middle
of every one of them, as well as at the beginning or end. And that none may
squander his own or pilfer away another book, or have it carelessly thrown
about, or to seek, when he should use it, the Master may do well to make every
Scholar once a quarter to deliver him a Catalogue of his Books, with the day of
the month and his name subscribed, which he may lay by him, so as at any time
to call him whom he suspecteth to be negligent of his books, to a private and
particular account of them. That the School may be furnished with all kind of
Subsidiary books for the general use of all the Scholars (to be laid up in
Repositories or Presses, as so many little Libraries belonging to every Form,
and to be safely kept under lock and key) whereof the headst boy in each Form
should take the charge to deliver them out, and see they be brought in every
night without being abused; it would not be amiss, that every Scholar which is
admitted into the School, should give 12. pence (besides what is accustomed to
be paid to the Master) and every one at his removeal into a new Form should
give 12. pence likewise, toward the procuring of common books. The Master also
may do well to stir up his friends that come to visit the School, or
especially such as prevail with him for a Play-day, to contribute somewhat
toward the furtherance of childrens learning, as well as to be earnestly
importunate for that which may hinder it. But where a School is liberally
endowed, it would be good that a considerable stock of money were appointed to
be laid out yearly in all kind of Schoole-books, whereby the poorer sort of
children may have whereon to learn, and they, and all other Scholars, wherewith
to help themselves in their Lessons and Exercises.

And might I become a Petitioner to the forementioned Trustees, for the
maintenance of Students, or any that are both willing and able to promote the
growth of good learning, I should desire, that toward the better completing
of a Grammar-Schoole, there might be a little Library well furnished with all
sorts of Grammars, Phrase-books Lexicons, Dictionaries, Orators, Poets,
Histories, Herbals, Commentators, Scholiasts, Antiquaries, Critics, and some
of the succinciest and choycest Authors for matters of Humanity, Divinity*
Medicine and Law; besides those which treat of every Art and Science, whether
Liberal, or Mechanical, that he that is employed as a professed Schoolmaster
may thoroughly stock himself with all kind of learning, and be able to inform
his Scholars in any thing that shall be necessary for them to know. For every
new Master cannot at the first be provided of a good study of books, for his
own private use, and his Scholars benefit, neither indeed at any time can he
procure them, without great trouble and charge, especially, if he live at a
place far distant from London. I have observed it therefore as a great point of
discretion, as well as a matter of charity, in Mr. Calfe, that in founding his
Grammar-Schoole at Lewinham, he provided a Library for the Masters use, as well
as a house for him to dwell in. And I took notice of that charitably disposed
Gentleman, and Citizen Deputy Adams; that when he went about to erect a School
in his native country of Shropshire (if I mistake not) he consulted with Mr.
Langley, and brought him along with him to Sion College, to see what books he
judged most convenient to furnish a Library withal for the Schoolmasters
use, and I heard since he bestowed (at le^^) 100. l. in choice books for that
purpose. I only mention these two worthy persons (the former whereof is dead,
and the latter living in Lawrence Lane London) to let others see, that in this
present age of ours, we want not patterns of well doing, if any be desirous to
imitate them in their pious actions; and I hope God has already inclined the
hearts of many, as he has given them store of riches, to endeavor to
distribute and do good in this kind, even now whilst they live, in their
generation.

I will conclude this Chapter with that which I heard lately related, of a
cheap, easy, profiting, and pious work of charity, which one did, in bestowing
40. 8. per annum, toward buying English Bibles, which were to be given to
those children in the Parish, that were best able to read in them; and I do
verily believe, that were an annual sum laid out in procuring a certain
number of books, for such as should best deserve them in every Form at a Free
School, it would be a greater incitement to provoke children to learn, then
any persuasions or enforcements which are commonly yet used.

CHAP. IX.
Of Exclusion, and breaking up School, and of Potations.
I Should here add something touching those usual customs which are yet on
foot in most places, of Scholars excluding, or shutting out the Master once a
year, and capitulating with him about orders to be observed, or the like; but
forasmuch as I see they differ very much, and are of late discontinued in many
Schools, I will only mention how they may be carried on, where they yet
remain, without any contest, or disturbance, till at last they dye of
themselves.

1. Therefore there should be no Exclusion, till after Saint Andews day, and
that the Master know of it beforehand, that all things may be ordered
handsomely to the credit of the School.

2. That at the time of Exclusion, the Scholars behave themselves merrily and
civilly about the School, without injuring one another, or making use of any
weapons, whereby to endanger themselves, or do harm to any thing in the
School.

3. That the Heads of each Form consult with their fellows, what things they
would desire of the Master, and that they bring their suites to the highest
Scholar in the School, that he may prefer them to the Master writ fairly in
Latin, to receive his approbation or dislike of them, in a mild way of
arguing.

4. That the Master do not molest, or come amongst his Scholars, all the while
they are drawing up their Petition about Schoole-orders, nor trouble himself
concerning them, more then to hear that they keep good rule.

5. That every Scholar prepare all his Exercises, according to his Form, to be
ready to be hanged out before the School doors, or windows (or rather to be
hanged over his place within the School, against the Masters coming.

6. That the Master upon notice that all things are prepared for his coming,
go quietly to the School, being accompanied with some of the Scholars
Parents, and after he have before witness subscribed to their Petition at the
door, to enter into the School in a peaceable and loving manner, and receive
from his Scholars, (and also make to them) a short congratulatory Oration, and
so dismiss them to play.

By thus doing, a Master shall both prevent his Scholars, behaving themselves
against him, in such rude and tumultuous manner, as has formerly been used;
and give them and their Parents no occasion to grudge at him, for seeming to
take upon him too abruptly to break old use and custom; which so long as it
becomes an encouragement to their learning, may the better be indulged to
young Scholars, whilst no evil consequences attend it. It is yet a custom
retained in some Schools in the Country, for Scholars to make a Potation or
general Feast once a year; (and that commonly before Shrovetide) toward
defraying the charge whereof, every one brings so much money, as his Parents
think good to allow him, and gives it to the Master to be expended in a dinner
orderly provided for them, or in some kind of banqueting manner, which
children are commonly more delighted withal; and for this there needs no
further direction then to say, that it concerns the Master at such times to
be cheerful and free in entertainment of his Scholars (whether at his own
house or elsewhere) and to see that they keep such order and moderation
(especially in drinking) that it may rather be a refreshment and encouragement
to them (as it is indeed intended) then any occasion of distemper or debauched
behavior amongst them. And after thanks given to God for his mercy toward
them, in that particular expression of joy and rejoicing one with another, the
Scholars should all go together into the fields to take a little more liberty
of Recreation, then ordinary; yet with an especial regard had, that they catch
no cold, or otherwise endanger their bodies.

In London, and most other places, the usual manner remains of Breaking up
Schools (for a time of intermission of Studies, and visiting of friends) about
a week before Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide, till the week following those
holy days begin, at which time every Scholar brings something to the Master
as a token of his own, and his Parents gratitude, for his care and love toward
him. Now that the Master may also then testify his forwardness to requite
their courtesies, and encourage his Scholars, he should every Breaking up day,

1. Provide some fitting Collation to be imparted and distributed by himself
to his Scholars, who will thankfully take a small gift, as a token of more
singular favor at his hands, then another.

2. Invite his Scholars Parents, together with such Gentlemen and Ministers, as
he is better acquainted withal, as well to take notice of what his Scholars in
every Form are able to do, as to grace him with their company.

3. Let the Scholars in each Form be furnished with such Exercises as belong to
them, in loose papers, and have all their Translations writ fairly in their
books, to be ready to show to any one that shall desire to look upon them. The
higher Forms should entertain the company with some elegant Latin Comedy out
of Terence or Plautus, and part of a Greek one out of Aristophanes, as also
with such Orations, and Declamations, and Coppies of several sorts of verses,
as are most proper for celebrating the solemnity of the time at hand, and to
give satisfaction to the present meeting. The lesser boys should remain
orderly in their forms, to be ready to give answer to any one that shall
examine them in what they have learnt, or would know what they are able to
perform.

This, as it will be an encouragement to the Scholars to go on cheerfully at
their books, so will it be an endearment of their friends to the Master, and a
means to preserve the credit of the School against all virulous aspersions,
that are apt causelessly, and too often to be cast upon it, by unworthy and
illiterate persons.

It were necessary that such orders as you would have your Scholars duly to
observe, and the mulct to be undergone for every particular default, were
fairly written in a Table, and hanged up in some eminent place in the School,
that every one may at any time take notice of them, and learn more readily to
conform to your Discipline. I had thought here to have added another sheet or
two concerning Schoole-orders, and Scholars more decent Behavior; but
considering the present haste of the press in finishing the work, and fearing
lest this little Book should swell to too great a Bulk, I choose rather to
defer them till another opportunity. For, whilst I intended only to give a
few directions to the less experienced for the better ordering of Grammar
Scholars; I have run over most of the most considerable matters which concern
the managing of a School. Which, a man that is constant to his employment,
loving toward children, discreet in his behavior, a well grouuded Scholar,
and an honest Christian, desirous to serve God cheerfully in the calling of a
School Master, may undoubtedly perform without any extraordinary toil or
disturbance, either of mind or body. God in mercy enable me, and all that
labor in this necessary profession to persevere in our duty, whatever
discouragements may seem to attend it.

CHAP. X.
Of the Method of Teaching, which was used in Rotherham School by Mr. Bonner,
an experienced Schoolmasters there, who was thence chosen to Chesterfield,
where he died.
THat none may censure this Discovery which I have made to be an uncouth way of
Teaching, or contrary to what had been aforetime observed by my Predecessors at
Rotherham School (which is the same that most Schoolmasters yet use) I have
hereto annexed their method, just as I received it from the mouth of some
Scholars, who had been trained up therein all their time at that School, and
thence sent to the University; before I came thither to be Master,

The custom was,

1. To enter boys to the School one by one, as they were fit for the
Accidents, and to let them proceed therein severally, till so many others came
to them, as were fit to be ranked with them in a form.

These were first put to read the Accidents, and afterward made to commit it
to memory; which when they had done, they were exercised in construing and
parsing the examples in the English Rules, and this was called the first form:
of which it was required to say four Lessons a day; but of the other forms, a
part and a Lesson in the fore-noons, and a Lesson only in the after.

2. The second form was,

1. To repeat the Accidents for Parts.

2. To say fore-noons Lessons in Propria quae maribus, quae genus, and As in
praesenti, which they repeated momoriter, construed and parsed.

3. To say an after-noons Lesson in Sententiae Pueriles, which they repeated by
heart, and construed and parsed.

4. They repeated their tasks every Friday memoriter, and parsed their
Sentences out of the English.

3. The third form was enjoined first to repeat two parts together every
morning, one out of the Accidents, and the other out of that forementioned part
of the Grammar, and together with their parts, each one was made to form one
person of a verb Active in any of the four Conjugations.

2. Their fore-noons Lessons were in Syntaxis, which they used to say
memoriter, then to construe it, and parse only the words which contain the
force of the Rule.

3. Their fore-noons Lessons were two days in Aesops Fables, and other two
days in Cato; both which they construed and persed, and said Cato memoriter.

4. These Lessons they translated into English, and repeated all on Fridayes,
construing out of their Translations into Latin.

4. The fourth form having ended Syntaxis, first repeated it, and Propria quae
maribus, etc. together for parts, and formed a person of a verb Passive, as
they did the Active before.

2. For Lessons, they proceeded to the by-rules, and so to Figura and Prosodia.

3. For afternoon Lessons, they read Terence two days, and Mantuan two days,
which they translated into English, and repeated on Fridayes, as before.

5. The fifth form said one part in the Latin, and another in the Greek
Grammar together.

2. Their fore-noones Lessons was in Butler's Rhetoric, which they said
memoriter, an^ then construed, and applied the example to the definition.

3. Their after-noons Lessons were 2 days in Ovids Metamorphosis, and 2 days in
Tullies Offices, both which they translated into English.

4. They learned to scan and prove verses in Flores Poetarum, and repeated
their weeks works on Fridayes, as before.

6. The sixth form continued their parts in the Greek Grammar, and formed a
verb Active at every part.

2. They read the Greek Testament for fore-noones Lessons, beginning with Saint
John's Gospel.

3. Their after-noones Lessons were two days in Virgil, and two days in
Tullies Orations. They construed the Greek Testament into Latin, and the rest
into English.

7. The seventh form went on with the Greek Grammar, forming at every part a
verb Passive, or Medium.

2. They had their fore-noones Lessons in Isocrates, which they translated into
Latin.

3. Their afternoon lessons were 2 days in Horace, and 2 days in Seneca's
Tragedies; both which they translated into English.

8. The eighth form still cont^nued their parts in the Greek Grammar.

2. They said fore-noones Lessons in Hesiod; which they translated into Latin,
and afternoones Lessons in Juvenal, and afterward in Persius, which they
translated into English.

9. The ninth and highest form said morning parts in the Hebrew Grammar,
forenoons Lessons in Homer, and afternoons Lessons in some Comical Author.

Thus when I came to Rotherham, I found two or three sorts of boys in the
Accidents, and nine or ten several forms, whereof some had but two or three
Scholars in it; and one of these forms also was not very far from that which
was below it. So that I being to teach all my self alone, was necessitated to
reduce them to a lesser number, and to provide such helps for the weaker boys,
as might enable them to go on with the stronger. Besides, observing how barren
the Scholars were of proper words and good phrases, with which their present
Authors did not sufficiently furnish them for speaking or writing Latin, I
was enforced to make use of such books amongst the rest, as were purposely made
for that end, and having at last brought the whole School into a good method
and order, so as the Scholars learned with profit, and I taught them with much
ease and delight; I was persuaded to write over what I had done, that I might
leave it as a pattern for him that succeeded me; and this was the groundwork
of my Discovery.

The manner of giving Lectures before I came was,

1. For the two highest boys in the eighth form, to give Lectures to all the
lower forms, each his week by turns.

2. The highest Scholar in the School, gave Lectures to the second form.

3. Those in the highest form were commonly left to shift for themselves.

The manner of the Masters hearing Lessons was this;

1. The highest boy in the form at their coming to say, construed his Lesson
two or three times over, till he was perfect in it, that his fellows might all
learn by him, to construe as well as he; then every one construed according to
the order in which he stood.

2. They parsed their Lessons in that order, that they had construed it in.

3. They translated every day after the Lesson, and showed it altogether fair
written on Fridayes.

Their Exercises were these;

1. The four lowest forms translated at vacant times, out of some English book.

2. The higher forms, having a subject given them every Saturday, made Themes
and Verses upon it, against that day seven night.

The manner of collecting phrases was that every Friday in the afternoon, the
boys in the highest form collected phrases for the lowest forms, out of their
several Authors, which they writ, and committed to memory against Saturday
morning.

The set times for Disputations, were Fridayes, and Saturdayes at noon, and the
manner thus; one boy answered his day by course, and all his fellows posed him
out of any Author, which he had read before.

A part of Thursday in the afternoon, was spent in getting the Church
Catechism, and the six principles of Christianity made by Mr. Perkins.

Finding this method (which is used also in most Grammar Schools) to concur
in the main grounds with that which I had been taught at Wakefield, but not to
be so plain and easy, as that was to children of meaner capacities: I began to
seek (not so much to alter any thing, as) to supply what I saw defective in it;
having these and such like considerations often in my mind,

1. Though every man likes his own method best, yet none ought so far to be
conceited of his own, as not to search after a better for the profiting of his
Scholars.

2. Though one constant method must diligently be observed, yet trial may be
made of another at fit times, so it be done without any distraction to the
Master, or hinderance to his Scholars.

3. A new course of teaching must not be brought in suddenly upon Scholars,
that have been long trained in a worse, but by degrees.

4. Some modern Schoolmasters, seem to have gained a far more easy, and
nearer way of teaching, then many of the more ancient seemed to have.

5. Mr. Brinsley seems to have made a Discovery of a more perfect method,
then was in his time used, or is yet generally received. Mr. Farnaby, Mr. John
Clerk and some others, have facilitated the way further; but Mr. John Comenius
has lately contrived a shorter course of teaching, which many of late
endeavor to follow; and others have more contemplatively written what they
have thought of learning the Latin tongue in the easiest manner.

6. That for me it would not be amiss, by imitating these and others, of whose
learning and dexterity in teaching I had got some little experience, and
observing the several tempers and capacities of those I taught, to endeavor
to find out, and contrive such helps, as might make the most generally
received method of teaching by Grammar, Authors, and Exercises, more brief in
it self, and more easy and delightful to the Teacher and Scholar. And for
what I have done in this kind these Arguments were especial inducements. That,

1. It is not only possible, but necessary to make children understand their
tasks, from their very first entrance into learning; seeing they must every one
bear his own burden, and not rely upon their fellows altogether in what they
do.

2. It is possible and meet for every teacher so to ground his Scholars, as
that change of Masters may not much hinder their progress in learning.

3. Things most familiar and obvious to the senses are first to be learned, and
such as may be an easy step toward those which are next to be attained.

4. The most vocabula's, and phrases of ordinary discourse, may and ought to be
taught together with the Latin Grammar, and the lowest sort of
Schoole-Authours.

5. Boys ought to know the meaning, and how to make use of each Rule, as they
learn, yet so as not they be forced upon understanding of it.

6. The most useful books ought to be read, and may be taught after one manner
in every Grammar-Schoole.

7. Children must be furnished with store of matter, and able to write a good
style, and showed how to imitate their Authors, for making Exercises, before
they be put to use their own invention.

8. It is tyranny in the Master to beat a Scholar for not doing that which he
knows not how to go about; so that he must first know him to be well able,
and then he may more justly punish his neglect.

9. Many young Schoolmasters are more pusled about frameing to themselves a
good method, then toyled in the exercise of teaching School.

10. No man ever had such an acute and direct method, but another able Scholar
might observe and follow it.

11. Many Masters that are excellent in perfecting Scholars, have not the
patience to ground them, and many that have the skill to ground a Scholar well
in his Rudiments, are not of ability to bring him on to perfection in
Grammatical Exercises.

12. In many Schools, one Master alone bears the whole burden of teaching,
without any help of an Usher.

13. Every one that teaches a Grammar School, is not able to make a right
choice, nor knows he the true use of our best classical Authors.

14. It is a prime part of a Schoolmasters, to instruct his Scholars well in
the principles of Christian Religion, and to make them acquainted with the holy
Scriptures.

15. It is an utter undoing to many Scholars, to be sent ungrounded to the
Universities; and Parents are generally unwilling to have their children tarry
long at the School, and therefore it is good for Masters to make use of the
shortest and surest way of teaching.

16. It is very necessary, and has been ever wished, that some of our most
famous, and best Schoolmasters, would for the benefit of others set
themselves on work, to find out, and publish the exactest method of teaching,
which might be generally received, till a better were known; for by that
means they should do much good to the Church and Commonwealth, and somewhat
herein advantage themselves, seeing every Parent will be willing to have his
son taught, by one whom he knows to be constantly diligent in a good way of
teaching.

And the hopes that I conceived hereby to provoke my betters, has especially
encouraged me (at last) to yield to my friends importunity, in setting down
this Method of Teaching, and writing down also this for me of
Schoole-Government, which I heartily commend to Gods heavenly blessing, and the
candid censure of the more judicious, hoping that as I intend chiefly the
general good, so none will requite me with malicious obtrectation, which if
any shall do, I charitably pray for them before hand, that God would for
Christ's sake forgive them, and grant that I may not heed what they write or say
concerning me, or my labors, so as to be discouraged in my honest endeavors
for the public service.

(...). FINIS.

