THE NON-CONFORMIST'S CHAMPION HIS CHALLENGE ACCEPTED; OR, An Answer to Mr.
Baxter's PETITION FOR PEACE, Written long since, but now first published, upon
his repeated Provocations and importune Clamors, that it was never answered.

Whereunto is prefixed An EPISTLE To Mr. BAXTER; With some Remarks upon his
Holy Commonwealth, UPON His Sermon to the House of Commons, UPON His
Non-conformists Plea for Peace, And upon his ANSWER to Dr. STILLINGFLEET.

By RI. HOOK, D. D. Vicar of Halyfax.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Flesher, at the Angel and Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1682.

TO THE READER.
YOU will find the following Letter to Mr. Baxter long enough, and therefore I
shall say little by way of Preface. But to advertise you, That this Answer to
the Petition for Peace was written A. 1661. the same year the Petition was
published by Mr. Baxter, in the Name of the Nonconforming Commissioners, by
his Majesty empowered to treat with the Right Reverend Bishops, touching some
Alterations to be made in the Liturgy: and it is now only transcribed and
published without any material Alteration: This if you carry in your Mind in
the Reading thereof, 'twill prevent diverse Mistakes, which otherwise may be
made in the Mis-timing it, and particularly about the pretended great
Sufferings of the Non-conformists, of which, in the Petition, they make loud
and frequent, but false Complaints. The Episcopal Party having by them deeply
suffered for many years. But the Non-conformists at that time, having not
suffered in the least, and being as capable as the Conformists, would they have
submitted to the wholesome Orders of the Church of England, of enjoying Favor
and Preferment; unto which Mr. Baxter boasts that himself was courted. As to my
Remarks upon his Commonwealth, if he shall object, that he published to the
World his Desire that Book may be looked upon as Non Scriptus; and so he is not
concerned in the Seditious Theses by him laid down, and by me laid open. I
leave it to himself to judge whether such an insignificant Nothing (the wiping
his Mouth after so black a Crime) be to him a sufficient Purgation, to the
World a sufficient Satisfaction, and (which is most considerable) whether his
bare Wish, his Book were not written, be sufficient to undeceive and bring to
Repentance the many whom it may have corrupted and tempted to Rebellion. It Is
the Wish of one of Mr. Baxter's own Party for him, what Nero wished for himself,
That he had never known Letters. Truly it were to be wished, That, when
(Laboring under Sickness, as he says) he had written his Everlasting Rest, he
had gone to it: He has been so restless ever since, and so great a Troubler of
Israel; that without a deep Repentance of his dangerous Errors and Actings, I
fear he will come short of that Blessed Rest. There goes a Story, That Hugh
Peter's, riding in Querpo by Oliver's Coach, in a great Rain, and he offered to
lend him his Coat; he told him, He would not be in his Coat for a Thousand
Pound. Seriously, I would not be in Mr. Baxter's Condition for a Thousand
Worlds (holding his Principles) for all his great Pretensions of Godliness, and
frequent Appeals to the last Judgment; where those who are contentious,
uncharitable, fierce, heady, high-minded, who speak evil of Dignities, and
resist the higher Powers, though they have the Form of Godliness, will be
condemned, as well as the openly ungodly and profane. If he think me severe,
it is only in order to his Repentance (which I heartily desire) that I display
his Errors with some Plainness. And truly I judge Complements and soft Words
not fit for Bigots and Perturbers of Church and State, and open Revilers of the
Laws and the Government. I have often wondered at and pitied an old Statesman,
who, when he might live in Honor and Peace, is ever in Trouble, and cannot go
quietly to his Grave. And I have the same Passion for Mr. Baxter, a Statesman
too, But the Salamander can live no where but in the Fire. And a Person who
loves Suits, though they have wasted his whole Estate, if he had another, would
spend it all in Law. I would some of Mr. Baxter's Friends could persuade him to
leave off Controversies, and employ the Remainder of his Life in writing
Retractations, a Work proper and necessary for him, if for any other in this
quarreling and contradictious Age. I have offered you some Reasons why the
Episcopal Commissioners thought not fit to make Answer to the Petition for
Peace. The Reason why I have answered it is, To take down Mr. Baxter's
confident and frequent Boastings in his late passionate Writings, as if it were
unanswerable; and, to vindicate the Church of England; which, as one truly
says, whosoever has the Learning and Temper to consider and understand, does
know to be the brightest Image of primitive Purity and Worship, and the most
perfect Conjuncture of the most ancient and most holy Faith, that, since the
primitive Times of Persecution, any man had ever the Honor of suffering for or
defending. The God of Peace and Truth continue the True Religion with our
Peace, and cast out that Spirit of Contention, Division and Disobedience which
possesses the Dissenters; and give them the Spirit of Meekness, Humility and
Christian Subjection unto Authority.

ERRATA.
p. 20. for greeting read Grotius.

p. 26. for Caution, Canton.

p. 30. for shortly, surely.

p. 33. after Loud this stroke --

p. 37. for Savoy, saucy,

p. 39. (...).

p. 40. for Those Apostles, The Apostles.

p. 84. for That will contribute, That you will contri.

p. 87. l. 1. dele that.

p. 91. l. 5. dele England.

p. 103. for Reverend, Reverenced.

p. 105. in Marian, in the Marian.

p. 107. for vobis, nobis.

TO Mr. Richard Baxter.
SIR,
IF this Paper shall do any good or harm, you will have a share of the praise
or blame, since it had never seen the light, had it not been brought forth by
your midwifery. Meeting lately with your Nonconformist Pleas, The unanswered
Writings of 61. A Petition for Peace to the Bishops, which they never answered
to this day.
I found the Petition for Peace often in them mentioned; and again, more than
once in your Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet; and as often as you name it, you are
pleased to say, 'Twas never answered; whereby you would make the World believe
it is unanswerable: This brought to my remembrance, that I had by me your
Petition for Peace, and had answered it the same year 'twas published, but kept
it private, in expectation of an Answer from the Episcopal Commissioners, who
were most able and most concerned; but they not thinking fit to do it, for
reasons best known to themselves, and perhaps for some hereafter mentioned; and
the Liturgy of the Church, with some Alterations of the Convocation, being
shortly after by Law established; I laid by my Answer as needless, and scarce
thought of it more, till your bold and angry Plea caused me to seek it out
among many scattered Papers, and to review, transcribe, and expose it. I expect
(but without fear of its defensibleness) that you will quarrel at it; you are
known to be of a polemical humor and temper, of a hot Brain and hasty Pen; the
Hector of the Old Cause, the Non-conformists Pope: I wrong you not in the
Appellation: You have more than proved it in Acting the Pope. Yours are the two
Swords; and you have, with mighty valor, drawn them both. The temporal Sword
you have drawn against the King in the late Rebellion, and you glory that you
drew in with you many thousands: And in cold blood, near twenty years after,
you tell the World, you cannot see you were mistaken, nor dare you repent of
it, nor forbear the same if it were to do again in the same state of things.
And, Sir, may I be so bold as to ask you, Are you not this day of the same
mind, and wish the state of things were now the same, that you might be Doing
again?

Blessed be God, who has by Miracle taken from you the temporal Sword, and
restored it to the King whose it is.

But the spiritual Sword cannot be wrested from you, and this you are so daring
as to draw still against the Church, upon which you are ever and anon making
new Assaults: and here too you muster your holy Army, Two thousand Ministers,
and by the number of those Centurions, we may guess how many are your Legions.
Shall demonstrate to you further, how you take upon you the Pope, in both his
claims of highest Power? One over Kings, in your Holy Commonwealth; bounding
them all by your Laws for Government; or rather, binding them in your long and
heavy Chain of 380 Links. The other claim of highest Power over the whole
Church you do in effect make, of being its universal, infallible Head and
Guide; where, you say, Epist. to Non-con. Plea.
you have written a Treatise of The only true terms of Concord of all
Christian Churches, and of the false Terms, which they will never unite in, but
are the causes of Schism. Here speaks an Oracle; The only terms of true and
false Concord and Schism are in your Breast, and given out from your infallible
Chair; a rare and happy Catholicon; O that it may work the Cure. Sorry I am it
comes forth a little too late: had you published it in the vacancy of the Sea
of Canterbury, you had infallibly been made Papa alterius orbis.

When you penned the Petition for Peace, you proclaim to the World, you only
had the Spirit of fortitude, telling us how stoutly you stood up against the
Bishops for the Old Cause, when deserted by all your brethren in the Conflict:
But, I hope, you had not then attained the Spirit of infallibility, (if so, I
am upon a vain attempt; and your Petition, as you suggest, is unanswerable;)
and I have some ground to hope it; since the pious old Gentleman who wrote
Doctor Sanderson's Life assures us, Mr. Walton.
that the present Bishop of Chester told him very lately, that one of the
Dissenters (whom he forbears to name, but you intimately know him) appeared to
Dr. Sanderson to be so bold, so troublesome, and so illogical in the Dispute at
the Savoy, as forced the patient Bishop, then Moderatour to say, with an
unusual earnestness, that he never met with a man of more pertinacious
Confidence, and less Abilities in all his conversation.

Sir, you talk much of Peace and Love, Concord and Union, and the Cure of
Divisions and they are the Title of diverse of your Books, yet abundance of
judicious and peaceable person do think and say, that you have more opposed the
Peace of the church (and State too) and contributed to its Divisions, than any,
or all the party of your profession: Nay, that you are not at peace with your
own party, and where they express their dissent from you, though, never so
modestly, you treat them rudely and insolently; as anon I may give you an
Instance. At present I shall take the liberty to consider and offer you some of
my Sentiments upon two of those Discourses I now named, your Holy Commonwealth,
and your Plea for Peace.

For the first, truly I was seized with wonder and grief at the sight of your
Commonwealth, that seventeen years after our late Troubles began, and they yet
continuing, you having in prospect our lamentable Confusions, and leisure to
reflect upon the Ruins of the Church and State, and seeing the Kingdom
overturned by Rebellion, Sedition, Murder and Plunder, the Violation of all
the Laws and of all men's Rights, and the seizing, sequestring and selling, the
Estates of the King, the Bishops, and the most eminently loyal Subjects, and
after the horrid Assassination of the King himself, turned into several
monstrous forms, as the several powers and ambitious of several parties
prevailed; and seeing also the Church rent all into sects and factions, its
holy Doctrine polluted with monstrous heresies, its apostolical Government
plucked up root and branch, its most religious Form of public worship
abolished, and every gifted Brother left to his private mode; you could have so
little sense and pity (that I say, not piety) as not in the least to deplore
the Calamities of our Zion; Lam. 2.6, 7.
that God, in the indignation of his anger, had despised the King and the
Priest, cast off his Altar, abhorred his Sanctuary; Psalm. 74.4.
his Enemies roaring in the midst of his Congregations, and setting up their
Banners for tokens: That in all your tedious Book you not once lament our
Josiah, the Lord's Anointed, taken in the snares of wicked men. Though in the
beginning of it you resent the ill useage of the usurping Protector, to whom
you give flattering Titles. Nay, that you could cry up those who had contrived
and acted all these Mischiefs and Miseries, to be the Godly party, and theirs
the Good cause; and, as if there had been never such a thing as a Kingdom in
England, you should form as Utopian Commonwealth by Centuries of wild and
seditious Maxims. I may hereafter make some Animadversions upon your
Commonwealth: I will now only recall to your second thoughts a few of your
Theses, which speak it not very holy.

In your Preface, Romans the 13th. being objected unto you, you avow resistance
of the King, Thesis 1.
with an offer of your Head to Justice as a Rebel, if any can prove, that the
King was the Highest Power in the time of Division, and had Power to make that
War: That is, If any can prove, the King was in Authortiy above those who, even
when opposing him, acknowledged themselves his Subjects; and, turning Rebels,
he had Right by War to defend himself, and reduce them to obedience. ( Sir, you
may bless God, that the King's Son and Successor was like him; a most
merciful Prince, else your Offer might by his Justice have been taken.) All
Writers think Saint Paul means by the Higher Powers the Emperor (or, which is
all one, the King) and name him; and your self name him elsewhere, [ If a
heathen persecuting Nero must be obeyed,] and Saint Peter calls the King
Supreme, and yet you miserably shuffie off both, with saying, The Romans hated
the name of a King (as the Party you sided with did) and that it was neither
the intent of Paul or Peter to determine whether the Emperor or Senate was
supreme. But where the King is supreme, it is the will of God that the people
should obey him. May I remind you that St. Paul did determine it, when he
appealead not to the Senate, but to Caesar; and St. Peter did determine it,
when he calls the King supreme, and other Governors those who are sent by him.

Thesis 2.
You challenge any man to let you know now one Nation upon all the Earth that
has better Governors, in Sovereign Power as to Wisdom and Holiness conjunct,
than the Powers last laid by, that have been resisted and deposed in England:
and you tell us who you mean when you say, The Lord Protector, prudently,
piously, faithfully, to his immortal Honor, did exercise the Government.

But how he came in you say not: Blessed be God, he went out soon; his
Government was not immortal; and thanks to the King, not mortal to himself:
against his Piousness I have nothing to object, but that he was Protector: his
Prudence, I readily with you acknowledge and his Honesty too, in acknowledging
the King his father's Landlord and his own, and being ready to remove when the
Landlord demanded possession, which saved him his head; he being wiser than
you, not to offer it so rashly: As for your Challenge of the Wisdom and
Holiness of your Governors above all upon Earth; please you to send it into
Holland or Geneva, it will doubtless be accepted: but, though it displease you,
I must tell you the Earth never saw more wicked and cruel Usurpers than they,
nor a more vain and idle Challenge than yours. shall leave you and Mr.
Harrington to argue, whether the Army or Richard and his Senate were the wiser
or holier Governors, and, passing by Centuries, shall only remind you of a
few of your Theses which speak your Loyalty.

Thesis, 137.
If Providence statedly disable him that was the Sovereign from executing the
Laws, protecting the Just; it makes him an incapable subject of the Power, and
so deposes him; for a Governor so impotent is none; and if the People disable
him sinfully, by deserting him; yet he is dismissed and disobliged from the
Charge of Government; and Innocent members are disobliged from being governed
by him, though through the Sin of others.

138.
When Providence thus makes any incapable or indisposed, it destroys the
Power as in such.

141.
It Is the duty of a very weak though tolerable Governor, for the Common Good,
to resign his Place to one that is every way more fit, and liker to obtain the
ends of Government in a more excellent degree.

146.
If the person dispossessed, though it were unjustly, do after become incapable
of Government; it is not the duty of his Subjects to seek his Restoration.

If an Army of Neighbors or Inhabitants, or whoever, Thesis, 147.
(Turk or Pope) do though injuriously expel the Sovereign, and resolve to
ruin the Commonwealth rather than he shall be restored, and if the
Commonwealth may prosper without his Restoration; it is the duty of such an
injured Prince, for the Common Good, to resign his Government: and if he will
not: The People are with you the King's Judges. 148.
the People ought to judge him as made incapable by Providence, and not to seek
his Restoration. To the apparent Ruin of the Commonwealth, a Prince must give
up his Government, rather than fight for his Right to the spilling of Blood.

A rare Encouragement to Rebellion: It Is Mr. B's Divinity, the longest Sword
must carry it right or wrong; and Rebels may spill Blood to destroy their King,
but a lawful King may not, to preserve himself and his Kingdom. It seems David
was to blame to fight with Absalom for the recovery of his Crown and Kingdom.
What horrid Theses are these! Only the Commonwealth and Common-good (of which
the Common people, are Judges) comes in ever as a Salvo. Name me a Jesuit that
ever wrote at a higher rate.

When a People are without a Governor, Thesis, 150.
it may be the duty of such as have most strength ex charitate to protect the
rest from injury.

Just Protector Oliver's case, he found out a way that the People should be
without a Governor, and then his most strength was a mighty impulse to this
great Charity, to protect the People.

Providence, by Conquest and other means, 151.
does use so to qualify some persons above others for the Government, when the
place is void, that no other persons shall be capable Competitours, and the
persons shall be as good as named by Providence whom the people are bound by
God to choose or consent to. Examples Massianello.

The Rump, Oliver, Richard, Multitudes of wicked, In 160.
criminous persons how rich soever, should much rather be excluded from
choosing Governors than honest Beggars. This, this, this is the great Point
that the welfare of most Commonwealths does depend upon.

This, this, this will set Kingdoms and Commonwealths all on fire, he who is
wicked to one Party is godly to another; and to be rich when your Party reigned
was to be criminous and malignant, if loyal. But to prevent contention and
injustice, your high wisdom has found out an excellent Law.

Let all Pastors in England that are approved or tolerated have an Instrument
of approbation or toleration, and let no man be a Chuser or Ruler who is not
signified under the Pastour's hand to be a Member of his Church, or that shall
be cast out. Let every Parish have one or two of the wisest men, by the
superior Rulers, made Church-Justices or Censours, to meet with the
Church Officers, and to take cognizance of the Cause; and let all that are cast
out by the Church-Justices and Churches consent be registered and disabled to
vote.

If a People that by oath and duty are obliged to a Sovereign shall sinfully
dispossess him, and, contrary to their Covenants, choose and covenant with
another, they may be obliged by their later Covenants, notwithstanding the
former; and particular Subjects, that consented not with them in the breaking
of their former Covenants, may yet be obliged by occasion of their later choice
to the person whom they choose; when men by contrary Covenants have cast
themselves into a necessity of sinning, it may be a duty to choose the lesser
Sin.

Though a Nation wrong their King, yet may he not lawfully war against the
Public good on that account, nor any help him in such a War.

354.
Princes, if their Injuries by their Subjects are too great to be born, they
may lay down their Crowns at their pleasure. If a Nation injuriously deprive
themselves of a worthy Prince, the hurt will be their own, and they punish
themselves. But if it be necessary to their welfare, it is no injury to him.

Was ever any thing more seditious, wild and contradictious to it self?
Horresco referens: It Is no Injury (says Mr. Baxter) to a Prince, to deprive
him, though worthy: It Is no Sin: Only the Subjects hurt themselves. It may be
necessary to the Subjects welfare to injure a worthy Prince, and to hurt and
punish themselves.

355.
Is of the same Bran. Though some Injury to the King be the occasion of the
War, it is the duty of all the People to defend the Commonwealth against him,
yet so as they protest against that Injury.

This Protestation washes them white, and they now owe him no satisfaction for
their Injury, but may add Injury to Injury.

The People must side with the Parliament, 358.
against the King, till it be notorious that the Parliament have deceived and
betrayed them.

This you think not yet notorious, though the Parliament have murdered the
King, abjured his Successor and usurped the Government.

Names are not the only Notes of Sovereignty: 364.
If a King have the Title of Supreme Head or only Sovereign of his Dominions;
and yet a Senate have an essential part without the Name; they lose not their
part, nor is it to be judged by the Name: 375.
If the whole Family with whom the people were in Covenant be extirpated or
become incapable (by a stronger Power injuriously expelling the Family however
or by whom soever, as before you have told us) the People may new form the
Government as they please: that is, The good People of the Army, by whom the
Royal Family is extirpated.

Many more of your Theses, such as these, I might expose, but these are too
many: and it is next to incredible, that a person professing Godliness should
expose to the World such ungodly Positions, and endeavor to render Supreme
Majesty and Sovereign Power cheap and vile, ambulatory and open, to any
Invader, when God has declared Kings to be Sacred, not to be touched; will
have none to rise up against them; to all who resist them has threatened
Damnation. Well Mr. Baxter, you shall take it for a Politician, and all sober
and knowing persons will say, that Machiavel was no body to you; your Holy
Commonwealth has infinitely outdone his Profane Prince. But, Sir, I must do
you that right, to publish unto your honor, that there is one fair Pearl found
in your Dunghill; one Thesis, among abundance wretchedly wicked, which is
hugely honest and pious.

It is the Subjects duty to defend their Prince with their Strength and hazard
of their Lives against all foreign and domestic Enemies that seek his Life and
Ruin: the Reason, every man is to do it in his place and calling, Fidelity
requires it, the Common good requires it; else no man that is wise would be a
King or Governor; for if the People be not bound to defend him, he is but set
up to be the object of envy and a bait to the ambitious, to entice men to
invade him, and execute their fury on him.

I leave you to reconcile your other Principles and your Practice with this;
and so I shall take leave of your Holy Commonwealth, when I have considered
your Reasons of taking up Arms for the Parliament: and, I must tell you, the
most of those you call Reasons are undutifull and uncharitable Reflections upon
the King, his Council, his Army, and all his loyal Subjects, who stood up in
defense of his Majesty, the established Religion, and the Laws, against the
pretended Parliament, who by impious Arms invaded and violated them all.

You are pleased to bestow the good names of Ignorant, Drunken, and Ungodly,
upon those who approved not the Puritans intemperate Heat and fiery Zeal, and
the Parliaments bloody Reformation; and, very mannerly, you call the King's
Council Delinquent; and, as charitably, his Armies Impious and Popish; and yet
you confess your own godly-army as bad and worse.

In the Armies some of our hopeful Professors turned Drunkards, some turned
away from Ministers, Ordinances, Scripture Godliness, from Christ, and from
common Sobriety and Civility; some, that sped best, lament their Coolings and
Distempers.

You will not believe the Parliament began the War though the King gives you a
demonstration of it; but you determine the Question rarely well, in telling us,
your self begun it, and were the first Incendiary: The War, you say, was begun
in our Streets before the King or Parliament had an Army; and so you had the
honor first to be a General of your own creating, before Essex, without
Commission from King or Parliament.

The Parliaments causeless jealousies you justify; but the King's just Fears
you slight. To the Objection, The Tumults at Westminster drove him away; you
answer, Only by displeasing him, not by endangering him or meddling with him.
So the Parliaments Army, their Cannons and Muskets only affrighted, did not
endanger him. You have all faith for the Parliament, but none for the King, who
in his Meditations tells you he was more than displeased.

You say, The Parliament did not raise War against the Person or Authority of
the King. You might have as truly said, Their Army did not fight where the King
was in person; at Edghill, Newbery, and Naseby. O but, Their Commissions ran
for King and Parliament, and their Soldiers, if asked who they were for,
answered, for King and Parliament and the Solemn League and Covenant, all run
for King and Parliament.

What talk you of Commissions, equivocating Covenants, and dissembling
Declarations; when you fought against the King's person, took him, imprisoned
him, and, at last, murdered him. You may wash your hands with Pilate, and tell
us, Your horrid Cruelties were only consequents, not effects of the War: But
the Blood of the King, and his Loyal Subjects, which you spilt, will be upon
you, unless you wash it away by a deep Repentance. For your taking up Arms
against the King, you rely upon the authority of Mr. Prin, who pleaded the
Parliaments cause in revenge for his Ears, and in gratitude for their releasing
and bringing him to London in triumph; of greeting one of a foreign Country
and a great Common-wealths-man; of Barkly a Papist: and indeed from them you
learnt this wicked Doctrine. You might, had you been impartial, consulted Judge
Jenkins, your friend Hales, Dudly Digs, and, the never to be answered, Royal
Apology. These would have taught you, that the Laws of God and the Land forbid
in all cases resistance against the King, command subjection; but let these and
your other shows and faint shadows of reason vanish.

The most substantial one, which you chiefly urge and enlarge on, is, That the
King is not (as all his good Subjects have been taught to believe) the
Sovereign; but that the Parliament has a part in the Supremacy; an Assertion
directly contrary to the Oath of Supremacy, which you elsewhere confess secures
the King's Title against all foreign Claims of Pope or any other, and
consequently against all home-bread Usurpers, and every Member of Parliament
takes that Oath, and the Long Parliament, even when making War against the
King, confess themselves in their Declarations his Majesty's most loyal and
humble Subjects.

I dare not with you presume to talk at pleasure of Kings and Parliaments. I
have all due veneration for Parliaments next unto and under the King. But I
never learnt, that they were sharers in the Supremacy, and, I believe, it would
be a flattery as displeasing to a Parliament, as injurious to the King, to
ascribe unto it a part of the Sovereignty. One of yours tells us that formerly
the Name of a King was an Idol unto his Subjects; Mr. Masterson's Sermon of
Thanks for defeat of the Earl of Derby.
but now, by the courage of the Parliament, it is death to that man, and his
father's house, that durst name a King; and you make an Idol of the name of a
Parliament, and dare to say, that if you had known the Parliament had been the
Beginners, and in most fault; yet their Ruin is a Punishment greater than any
fault against a King (his Murder, and the Ruin of his Family, and all his
loyal Subjects) can from him deserve. And now, Sir, your Audacity begets in me
the Confidence to tell you, that your Rebellion was most foul, and the Arms you
bare were against both King and Parliament, for that you call so was an idol, a
nothing, no parliament; but only some corrupted members of it, which had by
tumults and threats frighted away, as the King, so all the sound and loyal
Members of Parliament, both Lords and Commons, and that in so great a number,
that they made a Parliament in Oxford. Now, seeing the Parliament thus divided,
a part against the King, a part as great for him, Prudence and Loyalty might
have taught you either to have sat still and bewailed the unhappy rupture and
division, and prayed for a closure and reconciliation; or to have joined with
the King and the loyal part of his Parliament: but of the Sovereignty of
Parliaments enough. I pray God grant the King and kingdom may nevermore see the
like to that you plead for, and served under with such a perseverance that, you
say, you would do it again in the same state of things.

Epist. to N. C. Plea for Peace.
Your honest Friend, when he saw here a Leg and there and Arm in the way, says,
as you tell us, it was time for him to stop. 'Twas in him a poor pusillanimity:
but such was your magnanimity, that Legs and Arms could not stop your Career,
you could undauntedly march on through blood and slaughters. 'Twas a cowardly,
cruel Triumph in your other honest Friend. Mr. Love, to flourish his
handkerchief dipped in the blood of that great Prelate, when dead, whose
venerable face he durst not have looked on when alive. But your valiant Sword
drencht it self in blood in the field of Mars. You were as bold as the brutish
brave horse in Job, Job 39.19, etc.
You clothed your neck with thunder; the glory of your nostrils was terrible;
you rejoiced in your strength; you went on to meet the armed man; you mocked at
fear, were not affrighted, nor turned your back to the sword; you said among
the trumpets, Ha, ha; and your Trumpet sounded as loud as they, Curse ye Meroz,
curse ye bitterly. Judge. 5.23. Jer. 48.10.
Cursed be the man that does the work of the Lord negligently; cursed be he
that keeps back his sword from blood. But it is time to sound a retreat.
Valiant Sir, had your Arms been no stouter than your Arguments, you had
forsaken the field, as you plainly do, when in the close of your Reasons for
the late War you confess, that every one of your Reasons is not a sufficient
medium to infer your conclusion: But altogether show upon what grounds you
proceed to dispute the point: So that you justify Treason upon the very same
grounds on which the noble Earl of Strafford was condemned, on pretense of it.
When none could be proved against him single, he must die for Treason
accumulative.

I shall ease your patience upon this subject, when I have reminded you, that
you have much mis-timed your Holy Commonwealth: Therein you show your self a
great Dictatour, but little a Politician, and less a Prophet; when you send it
forth in the dark and dismal night of confusion, and could not stay to take a
prospect of the morning; when (the blazing and affrighting Comets pestiferous
matter being spent) the Sun was ariseing in brightness and returning in glory.
But your zeal for the restoring your prudent and pious Richard blinded your
Eyes, and that heat put out the light, and so you thought the Commonwealth
would bring him in again. Well, yet you were not wholly forsaken in your
Politics: but when, though late, you discovered the Protectorship and the
Commonwealth expiring, and the King like to be restored, you expiated your
little errors by a great merit; you preached to the honorable House of
Commons in Parliament, and as in your Epistle, and elsewhere you boast, God and
they put upon you a great honor; the next morning after they acknowledged his
Majesty's Authority: But surely, Sir, 'twas no effect of your Sermon, but
their own Loyalty which wrought upon them to make that acknowledgment. You all
along in your Sermon reflect on the Royal Party as profane, and censuring the
Puritans and Precisians who dare not be so bad as they: Nay, you implicitly
accuse that Honorable House, Page 18.
as if there were some among them (and it is easy to guess whom you mean) that
would take that man as a Puritan and Phanatick, who would employ half so much
time for his Soul and the Service of the Lord, as they do in unnecessary sports
and pleasures, and pampering their flesh. And you freely tell them that, God
must have the precedence, Page 20.
and, as our Calamities began with Differencies in Religion, and still, that is
the Wound, that most needs closing; and, with grief and shame we see this Work
so long undone: Which plainly implies, you would have this Work done according
to your Covenant by the Parliament, before the King come in; and, putting a
high value on your self, and all of your mind, you declare, they shut you out,
if they would enforce you to administer Sacraments without discipline, and the
conduct of your own discretion; and, say you, Give first to God the things that
are God's, and then give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: that is,
first set up the Discipline before you admit Caesar: This was the method of
your Brethren in Scotland. And you here again caution and share the
Sovereignty. It Is right indeed as you say, A Papist must cease to be a Papist,
if he be truly and fully loyal to his Sovereign: and it is as true, A
Presbyterian must cease to be a Presbyterian, if he be truly and fully loyal to
his Sovereign: but you hide him under the general name of Protestant, and tell
us, so a Protestant must so far cease to be a Protestant, before he can be
disloyal: (you should have said, a Protestant truly conformable to the Church
of England) such a one can never be disloyal: But behold how rarely you prove
your nonconforming Protestant cannot be disloyal; for Romans the 13th. is part
of the Rule of his Religion: but unhappily there has been a difference among
us, which is the higher power, when those which have their shares in the
Sovereignty are divided? But whether we should be subject to the higher power
is no question to us. Very pretty pure Jesuitism. Sir, True Protestants of the
Church of England were never so unhappy as to differ about the higher power.
They all agreed it was the King; and that none did or ought to share with him
in the Sovereignty. It Is the Papist (whom you confess to be in your Counsels
and Armies) and you who unhappily differ, which is the higher power. They say,
not the King, but the Pope; you say, not the King, but the Parliament; and Romans
the 13th. is part of the Rule of their Religion as well as yours; and whether
they should be subject to the higher power is no more a question with them than
with you, and so you prove the Papists as good Subjects as your selves. This
then is your argument for your Loyalty. It Is no question with you, whether you
should be subject to the higher power; but unhappily you differ, and are
ignorant who is the higher power, to whom you should be subject? you did not
know whether England was a Kingdom or a Commonwealth, whether the King was
higher than the Parliament, whom he has power to convoke and dissolve when he
thinks fit: who call themselves his Subjects, and recognize his Sovereignty, by
swearing unto him allegiance: thus your unhappy and invincible ignorance, who
was the higher power, has led you more unhappily to take part with the lower,
but stronger power, and to resist and destroy the higher. May your timely
Repentance prevent the doom denounced Romans the 13th. But this, and your other
little slips in arguing, proceeded from your present want of advantages for
study.

Having and using Book but a Bible and a Concordance, as you say in your
Epistle; How vain, how false, how rankly smells it of the Pharisee? What want
of advantages for study in London? Could not all the public Libraries or
Booksellers shop furnish you with Books for A Sermon of Repentance? But
advantages though you wanted, you needed not. I must with you collaud your
Sermon, and cofess you have spoken well of Repentance, and home to diverse
particular Sins, and powerfully pressed several Duties: but that which was the
Duty of the Day, to lay open the Sin and deprecate the Guilt of the late
unparalled Rebellion, and the Murder of his late Majesty, our most gracious
and religious King, and the most injurious Expulsion of his present Majesty
from his Crown and Kingdoms, and to press his speedy Restoration; this has no
place in your Sermon. Surely your topical Head, had your Heart been for it, and
had you that respect for the King as for Richard, could from your Bible and
Concordance alone have so laid open the Sin and laid home the Duty, as at once
to have pricked and bowed the hearts of all Israel forthwith to send unto the
King, and say, Return thou and all thy servants: This, indeed, you faintly
confess was some little part of your duty, to have minded your Auditors what
Sins of the Land must be remembered and loathed in order to Peace and Healing,
but your Glass forbad you. It seems your time for a whole hour was employed in
a Work more proper and necessary than that which would conduce to the Peace and
Healing of the Nation.

But, Sir, I fear 'twas another kind of Glass forbad you, which would have
reflected them on you with so ugly a countenance, that you could not endure the
sight. The Sins of the Land you should have minded them of were gainful Sins,
the Goods and Lands the Godly Party had won by the Sword from the Wicked and
Delinquents, and to remember, so as to loath and vomit up these; oh, it would
break their tender hearts shortly. Though in your other Tenets you are, they
say, volatile, yet, as to your Politics, you are constant to your self: the
very same in your Sermon as in your Commonwealth.

And you are still the same in your Plea for Peace: As the review of the
Calamities and Cofusions of the Church and State, after seventeen years, could
work in you then no change, nor reconcile you to the banished King and Church
of England; so now, that for seventeen years more you have beheld the King and
the Church restored, which was the Lord's doing, and even done by Miracle, and
is marvelous in our eyes; it is grievous in yours; and, by a pretended Plea for
Peace, you proclaim a new War. Never did any man talk of Peace and cast about,
as you do, Firebrarnds, Arrows, and Death. Your Petition for Peace is advanced
to a Plea, and that Plea is all Satyr. Others, you say, are answering your
Book, I shall only take notice of your Epistle: And you begin with a furious
Charge against the Government: It is near seventeen years since Two thousand
Ministers of Christ were, by Law, forbidden the Exercise of their Office unless
they did conform; which they durst not do; because they feared God: Foreseeing
what Conformity would do to the destroying of Love and Concord, and of men's
Souls; weakening the Land, encouraging Popery, Heresy and Schism. Could ever
any thing be said in so few words by the greatest Boautefew in the world, more
seditiously, undutifully and uncharitably? Did ever the world see such a
Defiance of the Laws by a pretended Pleader for Peace, of which the Laws are
Conservatours, as this Herald denounces in the name of his Thousands?
Ministers of Christ! No minister of Antichrist could bring such a railing
Accusation against Rulers. These are they that speak evil of Dignities. What
can you say worse against a Dioclesian, than to forbid the Ministers of Christ,
not conforming, the Exercise of their Office?

To make Laws which they who feared God durst not obey; Laws which tend to the
destroying Love, Concord, yea, men's Souls; Laws encouraging Popery, Heresy and
Schism; Laws weakening the Land. It Is great pity the Land is not governed by
the Laws of your Holy Commonwealth. That Law of Christ, of Loving Enemies, our
most merciful King does but too strictly observe; he loves them but too much:
else ere this you had been called to a severe account for your vile Aspersion
of the Laws and Violation of the Majesty of the Lawgiver.

2. You accuse the Magistrates as Persecutours, and cry out of your Parties,
and your own Sufferings, which in your Petition for Peace you repeat ad Ravim
usque. The Penalties of Forty pounds a Sermon, and long Imprisonment in common
Gaols, and driving us Five miles from Corporations, and places where we lately
preached. The Laws and Canons imprison and excommunicate us ipso facto if we do
but give the Reasons of our Nonconformity. A loud Name The Law (or Canon) that
does so, for only giving the Reasons of your Nonconformity.

We are made their Scorn, and many want Bread, and they choose Beggary and
Scorn, and live only on men's Charity; therefore cannot be, as they are
accused, covetous or proud. The Romish Friars not only choose, but vow Poverty
and Scorn, yet you may perhaps think them covetous and proud.

But, Sir, How it is in your parts I know not, and am sorry to see you accuse
the rich and numerous Disciples of your separated Congregations of Covetousness
and want of Charity, in suffering their Teachers to want Bread and live in
Beggary. I must tell you, in our colder Climate their Charity is much warmer.
The Nonconforming Ministers are generally fat and full, rich, and build, and
buy Land. I profess, I know not any one, in the Country where I live, but is
able in Estate: and your self, blessed be God, have Bread enough and to spare.

But yet you are a Sufferer too under bitter Accusations and Persecutions, and
have lain in a Gaol among Malefactors -- You tell us not how long. And your
lying in a Gaol, being for your Disobedience against the Law, you were, as they
among whom you lay, a Malefactor. You know well, as you will be told anon, who
suffered by your sovereign Masters all this, and the loss of all their Estates
besides, for their Obedience to the Laws: and, Sir, I doubt not but, in your
Gaol, you had the like Visits and Comforts with Mr. Calamy from the Sisters.

3.You talk most scornfully and uncharitably of the Conforming Clergy, calling
them, The accusing Clergy, charging them with false Reports, Wrath, Cross
interest, and Tantum non with Malignity and Diabolism, and with Urging Rulers
to confine, imprison, excommunicate, silence, undo -- And of the Writings of
the most able for Conformity, whom you name, and tell us you have read many
more such: sitting in the Scorners Chair you say, Mr. Tombs has said more for
Anabaptistry; the late Hungarian for Polygamy: many for Drunkenness, Stealing
and Lying in cases of necessity than you ever yet read, for the lawfulness of
all you have here described. O Modesty! You should have said, than You ever yet
writ against the lawfullness of all you have here opposed. But you are most
concerned about the Counterminer. I hope you charge him not with those bloody
words you blot your Paper with; they are your own, not his; why then do you so
suspiciously bring them in with this invidious Preface, But I must say, If such
as the Counterminer will say? The Counterminer, indeed, calls things by their
own names: What is such, he calls Treason, Rebellion, Schism, Faction, Pride,
Obstinacy; and you, of all men, may pardon him, who speaks Truth just as you
speak your Errors; a little imperiously and insultingly. Thus your self ease
your mind, as you say some men do, by pouring out a Torrent of reproachful and
scornful words. Nay, you go higher, and give threatening words, not to suspect
that ill boding one, This unarmed Account is easily trampled upon: By which
some may think you would be preaching again in a Buff Coat, and with a Sword by
your side. Nor to mention again the Legs and Arms in the way; you conclude in
terrible, dangerous, menacing Language; If you will not hear, those will, whom
God will use to the Healing of these Churches.

Sir, I shall not comment on these strange words. But we have now (as you
formerly had) jealousies and fears from the timing of your Plea for Peace,
which you send forth after 17 years silence, and in the name of your Thousands;
in this critical conjuncture of affairs; that there is some Design on foot more
than ordinary; and for that you were resolute to put it out, notwithstanding
your prudent Friends persuaded you, silently to leave all to God, and assured
you, it would but exasperate: but persuaded you would not be; and exasperate
you would, even by a Plea for Peace; and with your Precious Balms you break our
Heads; and while you embrace, you smite under the fifth Rib; and you increase
our Doubts by your Quarrelling, and some of you Libelling the excellently
learned Dean of St. Paul's, a strong Pillar of the Church, whom you once
caressed.

I have done with your Epistle, and, as I told you, will not meddle with your
Plea. Only I ask you, Is this a likely Plea for Peace? wherein, not content to
urge the old Objections, you strain and set your wit and invention on the Rack,
to find out new Exceptions, and torture every joint and member of the Liturgy;
and multiply little scruples against Conformity, in infinitum; and the poor
Calendar cannot escape you. To show your skill in Astronomy, you pick quarrels
with the Almanac, which, as your Con. Non. Non. Con. brother Cheny tells you,
you had better let alone, and refer the matter to a Jury of Almanack-makers.
But this was a piece of Savoy wit, and you will not pardon it in a Brother: He
writing a very meek and modest Answer to your Plea, with all deference to your
person and worth; you expose him, Being excommunicate.
deride him as a Coward for flying, and not daring as you to choose the Goal:
you insult over him, trample upon him, and render him the most pitiful thing
that ever peept abroad in print: and, in your petulant Answer to him, you let
fly also very boldly against the Government: and yet, Sir, he is too hard for
you in diverse points of greater difference between you, as those of
Episicopacy, Reordination, Renunciation on of the Covenant -- And you in
effect fly the field, and leave him the victory: and though you slight him, you
confess you fear him. Being a Brother, though weak, yet you say, his
concessions and coming so near the Truth does give him more advantage against
your Party than the ablest of the Conformists, who will assault you with less
success than he: they having a kindness for him, will read him; but not the
other, having against them a prejudice.

And for that reason, the greater men, who you say are about to confute your
Book, may spare their labor; there being no hope to do good on your Party, as
you cunningly insinuate, to prevent a Confutation; and truly, for another
reason, they may let it alone; you having a singular way of writing (which your
intimate acquaintance with Schism has taught you) to divide and subdivide in
semper divisibilia: you are a great Captain, and never march into the field but
with hundreds following you; in your Holy Commonwealth, in your Pleas, first
and second, in your Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet, and generally, in all your
Books (besides your very frequent excursions to other matter) you do so
multiply Quaeries, Propositions, and Aphorisms, and have so many little heads
and minute particulars, that those who write against your Books must measure
and number atoms to trace you (...), which few will have the pleasure to do;
and if they only make Remarks and Animadversions, you will say, they do but
nible and cavil, and dare not fairly attack you by a full and just Confutation.
And I may add another reason: The excellent Dean of Canterbury has done your
work, and completely answered your Plea in two pages of his Sermon. Your whole
business in your Plea is to make the world believe, you are bound in conscience
to preach and exercise your Office, as you call it, after your own mode,
contrary to the Laws and Orders in the Church established. He there most
clearly demonstrates your Error, and with it that of the Papists.

I can not think that any pretense of Conscience warrants any man that is not
extraordinarily commissioned, as the Apostles and first Publishers of the
Gospel were, and can not justify that Commission by Miracles, as they did, to
affront the established Religion of a Nation (though it be false) and openly to
draw men off from the Profession of it, in contempt of the Magistrate and the
Law. All that persons of a different Religion can in such a case reasonably
pretend unto, is, to enjoy their private Liberty and Exercise of their own
Conscience and Religion; for which they ought to be very thankful, and to
forbear the open making of Proselytes to their own Religion (though they be
never so sure they are in the right) till they have either an extraordinary
Commission from God to that purpose, or the Providence of God make way for it,
by the permission of the Magistrate.

But this you call a Slip of his Pen, and pretend you have rectified it,
telling us, It Is the Duty of those who are set apart to the Office of the
Ministry, to preach the Gospel by way of discharge of that Office: We have the
Apostles express authority and example for this, who when they were threatened
and commanded to speak no more in Christ 's name, have left us their answer
upon record, We ought to obey God rather than man. We have also the Precedent
of the first three hundred years after these Apostles, when the Gospel was
nevev preached, but contrary to the will of the Magistrate, that is, against
the Laws and Edicts of the Emperors.

Instead of mending a supposed Slip of Dr. Tillotson's Pen, you have made a
foul Blot with your own: his Position is, No man, unless he has an
extraordinary Commission as the Apostles, ought to preach or make Proselytes in
affront to the established Religion of a Nation, and in contempt of the
Magistrate, and the Law prohibiting it.

You affirm the contrary, That all who have an ordinary Call to the Office
ministerial, ought to preach, though prohibited by the Laws and Edicts of the
Magistrate. And the Medium you make use of to prove it is the example of the
Apostles, who had an extraordinary Call and Commission.

This is your Argument, The Apostles (having an immediate and extraordinary
Call and Commission from Christ to preach the Gospel) did preach it;
notwithstanding the commands and threatenings of the Magistrate; therefore all
Ministers, having an ordinary Call, may preach, though by the Magistrate
prohibited. Thus you confirm the Doctor's assertion, pretending to confute it.
Having no proof or instance of ordinary Ministers preaching contrary to the
command of the Magistrate; you fly to the example of extra-ordinary Ministers,
the Apostles, the very thing that he asserts, that they may; others, not called
as they, may not preach against the Laws and the Edict of the Magistrate.

What you add of the Precedent of the first three hundred years after the
Apostles, is as impertinent as the other is weak, and nothing parallel to this
case. The Emperors then were Heathens, Persecutors of the Christian Religion,
made Laws against all preaching of the Gospel; yet all the Ministers preached
notwithstanding those Laws and Edicts. The King is now a Christian, the
Defender of the Faith, commands by his Laws the Preaching of the Gospel; only
the Laws require all Preachers to walk by the same Rule, and submit to the same
Order. You refuse to preach according to Rule and Order in Communion with the
Church; but will preach in Division from the Church, and in Defiance of the
Laws of a Christian Prince and the Orders in the Church established.

Sir, In your Reply to Dr. Stillingfleet You provoke any person to name that
Principle cherishing Rebellion which you have not renounced. Page 21.
I must tell you, this Principle of the Obligation of Ministers to preach and
do divine Offices after their own mode, in separated Congregations, against
the Laws of the Christian Magistrate and the Church, is a Principle cherishing
Rebellion, and you have not renounced it. And, in the said Reply, I do charge
you of dilivering a Principle more than cherishing Rebellion, the very same
with those in your Holy Commonwealth, and your Sermon to the House of Commons.

But I pray the learned Doctors pardon in thrusting my Sickle into their Corn,
you will find them well able to defend themselves against your angry assaults;
I shall take the boldness only to mention two or three of your exceeding
Vanities, and Extravagances in your Answers to the worhty Dean of St. Paul's.

You tell him, his logical faculty runs lamentably low; but, Sir, men think
yours runs miserably low, even to Dotage. When in your Epistle, you are so idle
as to muster up above twenty sorts of Disputants too hard for you, of which,
one you call the Universalist, who will prove you an Ass, because you are an
Animal. Sure, by this Vniversalist, you mean Mr. L'Estrange, who is a little
too free with you in his Answer to your Petition for Peace, which I doubt not
you have seen, though you forget your self, and call it unanswered; he is a
pleasant Gentleman, and you, being now upon the merry pin, might easily prevail
with him for an ingenious Descant upon the several Qualifications you give of
your One and twenty Disputants. Another sort of those Disputants you tell us
are, such as will not read or answer your fullest Defense already written, but
look you should begin a new.

Here, Sir, we think you are greatly out in your account; we believe there are
no Disputants of this sort; men are so far from looking you should begin a new,
that they wish you had never begun at all, and fear you will never end the
world's Trouble and your own contentious Disputing: and, How know you they will
not or have not read your Defense? and if they will not read or answer it, Why
are you angry? Are all men bound to read your Books? and if none will answer
you, you have the last word, and you know whom that pleases. But how those who
will not read nor answer you should be a sort of Disputants too hard for you
passes our shallow understanding. Pray, in your next, resolve this Ridle; and
be pleased to tell us, which of your many is your fullest Defense, and then
perhaps some may be so kind to you as to read and answer it. Another flash of
wit and piece of gayety I cannot but remark, coming from a person of your
Gravity, if you be, as I suppose you are, the Compiler.

We cannot but appeal to the Higher Powers to have it revised and judge -- when
we have been ordained already, as Timothy, by Laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, whether the Lawn be de essentia to the Ceremony, and the Hands
avail nothing without the Sleeves on.

Sir, St. Paul appealed to Caesar; you cannot but appeal to the Higher Powers.
It seems with you there are Higher Powers than Caesar.

And as you mistake the Object, so you do the Subject matter or Case of your
Appeal, which should be, Whether Timothy who was ordained by the Laying on of
the hands of the Prebytery -- was not again ordained by the Laying on of the
hands of St. Paul, and the Higher Powers may put you to prove your selves
ordained as was Timothy, which will be a little difficult, and your Quoeries
will be to them as hard; Whether the hands of the Presbytery were without
Sleeves? Whether Saint Paul had Lawn Sleeves? Whether Ordination be a Ceremony?
Whether a Ceremony has any thing belonging to it de essentia?

Important Quoeries all these verily, and fit to be revised and judged by the
Higher Powers, if you knew who they were; but alas you do not; as you complain
in your Sermon to the House of Commons. If then you would take my counsel,
refer it Brother Cheny.

One thing I am mighty sorry to see and say, This wise case is ushered in with
a gross leasing, when just before you affirm the case was such, That there was
no other than Presbyterian Ordination to be had here in the late times. Truly,
if your good will, might be taken for the deed, there was no other to be had.
But in the late times my self and hundreds more had Episcopal Ordination. See
more of this in answer to the Petit. for Peace.
But quoere whether it were valid, you having taken away their Lawn Sleeves and
Rochets and Rochets to which might be de essentia to the Ceremony.

One thing more I must observe, and then I shall end your Trouble; and it is my
own great trouble that I must observe it, and rebuke you for it; you say in
your Preface, Ans. to Dr. Stillingfleet, I am past doubt, that Richard Hooker,
Bishop Bilson, and Bishop Usher, where they now alive, would be
Non-conformists. And you said it before, as I remember, elsewhere. Sir, Your
being past doubt, puts us past our faith in your assertions; no body will
believe what you say while you talk at this rate, and blemish the precious
memory of such venerable Persons, two of them having been the highest Assertors
of Conformity since the Reformation, and have left us for it their Monuments in
writing incomparable and unanswerable. Pray, Sir, How came you by this
Plerophy? Have their Ghosts appeared unto you, and informed you that they have
been convinced in another world that they erred, in thinking there ought to be
Church Order and Uniformity in this? And, Have they told you (for no body else
could) what sort of Non-conformists they would be? Those of the first Edition
in Forty two, or those of the second, in Sixty two. Would they, when
Nonconformity, was rampant, have risen up against the King and Church, and,
with you, cried up the good Cause, and plucked up the perpetual Government of
Christ's Church and the Ecclesiastical Polity root and branch; and, in order to
a thorough Beformation, taken the Solemn, League and Covenant; and, with you,
taken up Arms for the Parliament? Or, Would they now (having answered only,
the old Objections when alive) be so staggered with your new ones, that that
one alone of the erroneous Calendar would be a flaming Sword to keep them from
entering? Sir, Hereafter talk things crediible; such Romances become you not,
What would your Censure be, should we affirm, we are past doubt that Mr.
Cartwright, Traverse and Brown, were they now alive, would turn Conformists?

One thing, in the Epistle to your Plea I omitted, is fit here to be remarked;
your Complaint; that you have been called on to tell what it is that you would
have; as if you had told it and we well knew it: But truly, Sir, it is a very
hard Question, which we think you neither have nor can tell. One thing you
would have to day, another to morrow; a little will content you when you are
under; but nothing will content you when you are uppermost. When you writ your
Petition for Peace you would have Bishop Usher's model; and could yield to
Bishops and Archbishops. When you writ your Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet, you
would have your Grievances proposed to the Higher Powers, and would have the
Higher Powers strip the Bishops of their Lawn Sleeves. We know by what measures
you proceeded in Forty one: from Petitioning to Protestation; thence to
Covenanting, to Arming, to Sequestring; till you had levelled all before you,
and overturned the Government of both Church and State. I am very unwilling to
mention your past Actings, but that you give us great cause to think you would
be acting the same things again; and do in effect tell us, What you would have.
But, What you would not have, you can better tell us. No Bishops, no Liturgy,
no Canons for decency and order in the public Worship: no King but upon such
terms; if you be the Casuists who resolved upon the prospect of the King's
Restoration; Baxt. Case. Con. These. 137, 181.
That in that state of things the King could not justify the resuming of his
Government, nor his people the submitting to it.

But your Nonconforming Brethren best know your mind. Let them tell you and
us what you would have had, when you had all. Pulpit Incend. Printed 1648. page
45. directed to the Presb. Ministers.
You complain of your Misery, Bondage and Slavery; of Oppressions, Sorrows and
Troubles of the Church, that is doubtless, of the Church Presbyterian, and no
other. What does all you? What troubles you? who does oppress you? have you not
Authority on your side? have you not all the Church livings in the Kingdom?
have you not Declaration upon Declaration, Ordinance upon Ordinance, Order upon
Order to back you? Is there the least show of Oppression, Sorrow or Cause of
complaint administered unto you, except it be because you are not suffered to
oppress, vex and gall your Brethren that join not with you? Can you feed upon
nothing but Blood, yea, the Blood of your Brethren? that though you have every
thing else, (that only prohibited,) you complain of Sorrow, Slavery and
Oppression; that you cannot enslave and lead into Captivity. Is this to kill
you with the Sword, that you cannot kill your Brethren with the Sword?

THE NON-CONFORMISTS CHAMPION HIS CHALLENGE ACCEPTED.
1. WHEN God had, in mercy and faithfulness unto David, delivered him from the
Sword of Saul, and set him upon the Throne of Israel, the first thing he
esteemed himself obliged unto in duty and gratitude, was, to set up God's
Kingdom and settle his true Worship in Israel, who had set up and settled him
in that Kingdom: To this end he brings the Ark of God in a Religious State and
Triumph to Jerusalem, which had been taken by the Philistines, and remained
some time with them in Captivity, and after lodged in obscurity in the houses
of Aminadab and Obededom. His gracious Majesty, our David, who has been a
parallel to King David both in his Persecution, and Restoration, is as truly
his parallel in Piety and holy Zeal for the true Religion; and has made it his
first Care, as soon as God brought him back to his Kingdom, to bring back the
Ark of God to Jerusalem, to restore the holy Doctrine, Worship, and Government
of our Church which had with himself been long banished: and, having in the
happy Examples of his most Royal and Religious Predecessors observed how
exceedingly this Church has flourished under the established Order for many
years, how eminently her Faith has been spread abroad in every place, how all
her Sisters of the reformed Church rejoiced to behold her order and
stedfastness toward Christ, Colos. 2.5.
The Daughters all calling her blessed; as also, finding by sad experience that
in these times of Trouble and Confusion (of which we may truly wish with Job,
Job 3.6.
That they were blotted out of times, and might not come into the number of
years) the plucking up of the established Order has been the loss at once of
Truth and Peace in the Church, and the cause of all the bitter Dissentions and
lamentable Divisions wherewith it has been wounded and dilacerated, and which
never could be cured or closed by any the Balms and healing Medicines applied by
Presbyterians, Independents, or any other who pretended to be our Physicians;
this, I say, his Majesty in his Princely and Pious Wisdom observing, has
restored to God's glory and his own great honor that Religion which had before
this Rupture obtained and long flourished.

2. But there is nothing can be so well devised, so warily composed, so
innocently established as to satisfy all Judgments, and anticipate all
Objections. That Manna wherewith God himself fed his people from Heaven, that
Angels food was soon loathed and despised. As it was at King James his coming
to this Crown, so at his present Majesty's, there are Dissenters and
Complainers, who, with great and loud Importunities, vehement Accusations, and
a mighty specious Zeal, cry out against the public Worship and Order to be
restored: His Majesty, imitating in the like case the example of that our
English Solomon, was pleased to give Commission for a Conference or Treaty
between some select persons of the Episcopal and Presbyterian Judgment, to
consider of the Form of public Worship, the Common Prayers of this Church;
and, if occasion be, to make such reasonable Alterations, Corrections and
Amendments therein, as should be jointly agreed upon to be needful and
expedient; and doubtless for the same reason with that of King James: Not but
that any thing in the Common Prayer contained might very well have been born
with by men who would have made a reasonable construction of things. But for
that in a matter concerning the Service of God we were nice or rather jealous
that the public Form thereof should be free not only from blame but from
suspicion, so as neither the common Adversary should have advantage to wrest
ought therein contained to other sense than the Church of England intends,
nor any troublesome or ignorant person of this Church be able to take the least
occasion against it. The Treaty wanting that Issue his Majesty and all good men
desired, and no Accommodation thereby effected, it is enquired and diversely
censured where the blame lies.

3. The Presbyterians charge the Episcopal Commissioners to be wholly in the
fault; and say, They have petitioned the Bishops, proposed their Alterations,
made their Objections against the Liturgy, replied upon the Bishops Answers;
finally, have cleared themselves, and given account to his Majesty of the whole
Transaction. But the Bishops have answered nothing to their Petition, have not
considered their Alterations, have said little to their Objections, and granted
as little by way of Concession: Therefore they profess, the Disappointment has
not been on their part, and that they have quiet in their minds, having
discharged their duty, and been Seekers and Followers of Peace. But for all
this fair flourish, it will appear to any Judgment that is not forestalled,
that it is on the score of the Presbyterians, and for the fault of their undue
managing thereof, that the Treaty has proved ineffectual; and this I shall
manifest by, first, answering their pretensions, and then considering their
Petition.

1. That the Bishops answered not their Petition, it was for good causes; what
they ask was not in the power of the Bishops to grant, the matter was
unreasonable, the motives weak and not worthy an Answer, being in number many,
but light in weight (as when they come to be examined will appear) and however
directed to the Bishops, the Petition was intended to gratify the people of
their own party, the design of it being popular, and the aim of it apparent to
keep up their Interest.

2. That they answer nothing to their new Form (which they call their
Alterations) a perfect Abolition of the Churches Form, was not their fault, but
their favor. They were obliged to the Bishops for their silence who might
justly have convented them instead of answering them; the very publishing of
that Form being a high Attempt against the Laws and a plain Violation of his
Majesty's Directions in his Commission.

3. That they say little to their Objections is, for that many of them had
little in them, were trivial and stramineous, and little or nothing have they
said in their Objections, but what had been said before by Cartwright and
others; and by Archbishop* Whitgift and Mr. Hooker abundantly answered.

4. That they granted little by way of Concession, they had great Reason, and
great Precedents: Great Reason; for,

1. The Compilers of the Common Prayer Book were holy, able, zealous and
orthodox Persons; and such an Alteration as they desired (as I said) in effect
an Abolition, had been to question their Piety and Ability, and to cast Dirt in
the Faces of those venerable Fathers, Confessors and Martyrs.

2. The Common Prayer Book was revised, approved and confirmed by diverse. Acts
of Parliament and Proclamations, in several Princes Reigns; to alter it after
their Model, had been also to cast Dirt in the Face of Supreme Authority, and
to question the Wisdom and Piety of the wisest and most pious Kings and
Parliaments.

3. It would have opened a gap to the Papists, who cry out against us for
Novelty and Inconstancy.

4. It was his Majesty's Order, That there should be as little Alteration as
might be, for that the people were acquainted with and accustomed to the Form
established.

2. They had great Precedents; for, 1. In Queen Elizabeth's time, it being
revised, very few alterations or additions were made: and, 2. In King James his
time also, who judged the Form so complete, that he would have some small
things rather explained than changed: nay more, admonishes all men, That
hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any farther Alteration.

5. For that the Bishops have said little, and the Presbyterians much, it makes
nothing for the one nor against the other; they are not the fullest vessels
that make the greatest sound; it is not the best cause that is most clamorous;
the Bishops cause was not their own more than the King's, the Parliaments, and
the Churches, having been by Law established and continued (except in the
Popish and Presbyterian Persecutions) ever since the Reformation. Therefore the
Bishops judged it needless to give themselves and the World the trouble of any
tedious Defense. But the Presbyterians, pleading against the Laws and
established Order, thought it necessary to bestir themselves and to make long
Apologies for so high an Attempt: Therefore they have left no Stone unturned,
have sent Paper after Paper and posted them through all parts of the Nation, to
keep up their Interest in the Party, and their Party's prejudice against the
Churches Liturgy. I suppose, it is hereby plain to all indifferent Judges, that
the Blame is not on the Bishops, but the Presbyterians, that the Treaty had not
its desired success. And to manifest it farther, since they justify
themselves, and wash their hands, and cry, We are innocent: They must be told,
1. That they have not duly prepared for an Accommodation before the Treaty: 2.
They have not demeaned themselves heartily and ingeniously in the Treaty.

1. They have not duly prepared for an Accommodation before the Treaty. There
is no hope of a fair Agreement between two dissenting Parties, so long as on
the one part there remain causes of Jealousy which will not be removed. Now
since the Prebyterians do lie under the Scandal of holding diverse Tenets in
reference to his Majesty, Episcopacy, and the Liturgy, to which if they still
adhere, they render themselves incapable of a Treaty; it highly concerns them
to purge themselves, by a full and free Declaration of their Judgments in those
particulars which have an immediate influence upon the Treaty.

1. Since the Presbyterians both from the Pulpit and the Press have taught,
That it is lawful to resist Kings, and have stirred up the People to arm
against their lawful Sovereign upon pretense of Reformation in Religion;
herein joining with the Jesuits, That Heretical Kings may be resisted and
deposed, as many of their Books and Sermons declare. For the undeceiving of the
People, and clearing themselves of the guilt of that antichristian and impious
Tenet, they were bound in duty and conscience to have publicly disavowed that
Doctrine, and to have published to the World, that they hold the Doctrine of
our Church, Romans 13.1.
That Kings are Sacred; above all coercive Power: 1. Pet. 2.17.
That they are Supreme; the Highest Powers: only punishable by God; and not,
upon any pretense of Liberty, Property, Law, or Religion, be it never so
specious, nay, be it never so real, to be resisted or opposed.

2. For that they maintain and publicly teach, the Civil Magistrate not to be
Superior to the Ecclesiastical Governors. Divine Right of Church Government.
They were obliged to make a public acknowledgment of the King's Supremacy in
all causes, and over all persons Ecclesiastical; in short, to have offered to
take the Oath of Supremacy. The Denial of which is a second Opinion wherein
some of them symbolize with the Papists.

3. For that they have in their Writings so publicly opposed the Episcopal
Government, covenanted against it, taken it away; and in the place thereof set
up another Government; they should expressly have owned the Episcopal Government
now restored, and have promised to be obedient unto it.

4. For that they had cast out and laid aside all set forms of public Prayer,
Ordination, and other Administrations, (their Directory being a very cipher,
neither used by themselves, nor imposed upon any other,) every Minister being
left to his own dictates in public holy Offices, they should previously have
declared their Judgments, that a set form of public Prayer is in every Church
necessary, to which all in that Church should be obliged.

5. For that their Party have taken away the Form of Prayer by Law appointed,
and forbidden all Ministers under great penalty to use it; they should have
declared, that the substance of it was agreeable to God's Word, only they
judged it needed some Alteration, and that if his Majesty with the Bishops
should consent to the Amendment of such things as by their joint Judgments
should be thought needful, they would submit unto it, and be obliged ever to
use it in their Ministrations.

These things were necessary should have been precedaneous to the Treaty, and
would much have conduced to an happy Accommodation: Such an ingenuous
Confession and Retractation beseemed them, and would have melted his Majesty
and the Bishops; and all good Christians would have wept with them, and
rejoiced for them, and embraced them with the same Affection that Joseph did
his repenting Brethren; and indeed it was a wonderful condescension in his
Majesty to appoint the Bishops, and a high Obedience in the Bishops to his
Majesty to treat at all with them without and before such a Confession. Surely
till they do retract those not only erroneous, but some of them prodigious and
most dangerous and unchristian Opinions, they in vain go about to persuade the
World that ^^ey cannot submit to our Liturgy upon the Principles of Conscience.
It Is not Conscience that swallows Camels, and streins at Gnats: it is not
Conscience that sees Motes, and winks at Beams: it is not Conscience that
neglects the weighty things of the Law, and tithes Mint and Cummin. Certainly
they must have abundance of Charity that can believe (be their words never so
smooth) that these men have no Motive but Conscience to oppose our Church
Ceremonies, do out of Conscience scruple at a Surplice, a Gesture, a Set form,
a Word obsolete or improper, whose Conscience could swallow Sedition,
Rebellion, could make War against their Sovereign King, could overturn all
Order both civil and sacred, and fill the Church and State with Blood and
Confusion.

One thing more which evidences their Insincerity as to an amicable Treaty, as
if they resolved it should take no effect, and feared lest Duty, Piety,
Conscience and Reason should work upon their Brethren to submit to the Form of
Worship now likely to be restored; they sent to all of their Judgments in the
Nation, to send up wha^ Objections they could make against the Common Prayer,
and advised them to hold off, and not to conform by any means, for their
standing out was the only way to obtain their own terms and liberty, their
numbers being so considerable, that, in case of their deprivation, there were
not Conformable Ministers enough to supply their places, and so the King and
the Church must be forced to indulge and continue them. Surely this was not
conscientious, and discovered their Design, to continue a Division and keep up
a Party: Though herein their Politics failed them; the Bishops sented the
Design, and provided for the Churches against the Vacancy.

2. They have not demeaned themselves heartily and fairly in the Treaty; which
themselves in their two Papers (the Petition for Peace, and the Grand Debate)
do make appear to all who are impartial and unprejudicate: Their publishing
them being directly against his Majesty's Commission which is, Our Will and
Pleasure is, that when you, with the said Archbishops, etc. shall have drawn
your Consultations to any Resolution, that you forthwith certify and present
to us in writing under your several hands the matters and things whereupon you
shall so determine.

1. His Majesty's Will and Pleasure is, that what is done by virtue of this
Commission, should be done jointly, by the Commissioners on both sides; but the
Presbyterian Commissioners set forth their Papers by themselves, without those
of the Episcopal.

2. That they should certify them in writing to his Majesty: They wave his
Majesty, and scatter their Papers abroad in Print among the People.

3. That they should present them under their several hands; here are no hands,
no names, but the general one of Commissioners.

4. That they should certify when their Consultations were drawn to any
Resolution, and present the Matters whereupon they should determine.

They, Ahimaaz like, run without their Errand, and presume to certify (us the
people, not Us the King) before any Resolusion, without any Determination:
Whether this be agreeable to the King's Commission, and conformable to his
Order and Appointment; let the World judge, let themselves judge. Nay, whether
it was not to appeal from his Majesty to those of their own Party.

But to close with their Papers: and, first, I shall consider the Objections
they make against the Common Prayers in general in their Grand Debate.

1. They say, They look upon the Common Prayer Book as an excellent and worthy
Work for that time, and after they contradict themselves and recall their
Charity, and stifle that Truth which brake from them; and say, As to our
Consciences, if we thought not the Common Prayer Book to be guilty -- And
again, We take it to be a defective, disorderly, inconvenient mode. What,
excellent and worthy, and yet guilty and disorderly, defective, inconvenient,
-- How are these consistent? Yes, for that time excellent and worthy: but at
this time guilty, defective, -- But pray what is the difference between that
time and this? must we change our Religion with the times? we have the same
Doctrine, the same Sacraments, the same Government; and why should not we have
the same Worship? must we have a temporizing worship? must our Devotions as our
Garments be changed after the new Fashions or Modes of times? what Guilt has
our Liturgy contracted by time? O that the times and men were such now for Zeal
and Piety as when the Common Prayers were composed.

2. They make Objections against the whole as well as the parts: and, is this
fair, to object against the whole of that, some parts whereof they were only
to amend? Their Commission was, That, if occasion be, they should make such
reasonable and necessary Alterations, Corrections and Amendments therein as
shall be agreed upon to be needful and expedient, -- with an express Advice to
avoid, as much as may be, all unnecessary Abbreviations of the Forms and
Liturgy, wherewith the People are altogether acquainted, and have so long been
received in the Church of England: where his Majesty would have only some
parts amended and corrected, if need be, and all unnecessary Abbreviations of
the Form avoided, they fly at the whole; their usual way of Reformation being
Root and Branch. For,

3. Instead of the old Book amended they offer us a new Model, not a Syllable
of the old in it; not one of the Churches Prayers is judged worthy to be joined
with theirs: These wise Master Builders can with less trouble and charge pull
down the House and build a new one, than repair the old; as if it had not one
Room convenient, all must down to the ground, and not so much as one stone in
the old Building must be used in the new.

4. They complain of the Length of the Common Prayer Book, and make theirs in
the ordinary Offices much longer, but for this they have a Salvo, That it may
be left to the discretion of the Minister to omit it as occasion shall require.

Behold their Liturgy, with a Liberty, that he who will use it may, and he that
will not may choose.

5. They would have it left to the Ministers choice to use their new Form or
the old, which is as much as to say, All of their Judgment shall be free from
using the Common Prayer; for you will easily believe they will like this new
Directory better; and then, what need this Treaty? and yet, give them their
due, they have no great fancy to their own Form: for,

6. They will have a farther Liberty. They desire there may be no such
Imposition of the Liturgy, as the Exercise of the Gift of Prayer be totally
excluded in any part of God's Worship: So then, a Set Prayer there shall be in
every part of God's Worship, and in every part the Minister may exercise his
Gifts and show his Parts, and strive to outgo this Set Prayer; and so the
Prayer shall be despised, and his Gifts extolled. Is the Church a place, the
Worship of God a season to exercise such Gifts in? Our Graces indeed should be
there exercised, which are best done in a Set-form. Gift of Prayer there is
none spiritual. That which is cried up to be such is nothing but an acquired
Art or Habit of ready speech, and tends more to Ostentation than Edification.
The Spirit of Prayer the Prophet tells us what it is, Zach. 12. v. 10.
A Spirit of Grace and Supplication, looking on Christ by Faith and Love, whom
by Sin and Unbelief we have pierced; and by a deep Repentance mourning for our
Sins, and beseeching God's Grace to be delivered from them by Christ's most
meritorious Sufferings. We may pray without the Spirit when we exercise the
Gift of Prayer; we may pray with the Spirit when we use a Form of Prayer. Sure
the Spirit does not ever withdraw or deny the Assistence of his Grace to our
Devotion when we pray the Lord's Prayer. The Spirit of Prayer requires not new
words, but new affections. Should I make it my End, or any part of it, when I
pray in public, to exercise my Gifts, I should justly fear to be judged of
God, and Men (if they knew it) an abominable Hypocrite and Pharisee.

7. They object, The whole Body of the Common Prayer consists very much of many
Generals, as, to have our Prayers heard; to be kept from all Evil, from all
Enemies and Adversities; that we may do God's Will; without any mention of the
Particulars wherein these Generals do consist.

Ans. 1. They make that an Objection which is a Propriety and Excellency. The
Common Prayers of the Church should be for common and general Mercies of which
the whole Church stands in need.

2. Daniel's Prayer for the Church in the Babylonian Captivity does consist not
very much, but altogether of mere Generals, without any mention of Particulars,
and yet it was graciously heard: and, do they not hereby accuse our Lord
himself? is not his Prayer made up of mere Generals? Sure so many grave Divines
should not make their Objections by Number, but by Weight, and due and sober
Consideration.

How little they considered this will farther appear in that,

3. They confess their Objection to be untrue, when they tell us that the
Litany is for Grace, Peace, Rain, Fair-weather, etc. and indeed I may challenge
our Brethren to show any Particulars needful for the Church to petition at the
hands of God in her public Worship omitted in the Litany.

8. They desire, That all obsolete words may be altered.

Ans.That may be soon done; for few or no obsolete words are in the Liturgy:
but does not God, do not we understand old and plain words? must we coin new
ones to please him and our selves? must we be rhetorical, quaint and curious;
complement God in our Prayers? Let us take unto us those words the Church has
from God's Word put into our mouths, and join with them our Hearts, and let us
not doubt but God will hear us graciously.

9. It troubles them, That the public Worship of God may not be administered by
any that dares not wear a Surplice.

Ans. Who are those tender ones that dare not? What a frightfull Bugg is a
Surplice, that you dare not wear it in the Administration of the public
Worship? Nay, you dare refuse to administer in God's public Worship, rather
than wear a Surplice. Your Master Beza was not so timorous, or dainty, Mihi
videtur Ecclesias minime deserendas propter Pileum, aut Vestes, aut aliquid
aliud hujusmodi vere medium aut indifferens: To me it seems that we ought not
to forsake the Churches for Caps, or Vestments, or any other such like thing of
a nature mixed and indifferent. Mr. Moulin was not so tender; could (as he
professed) willingly wear a Fool's-coat and Cap, so he might freely and
publicly administer God's true and holy Worship. Are not different and decent
Vestures by God himself appointed to his Priests in their public and holy
Ministrations? and, why may not the Governors of the Church command under the
Gospel the like decent and distinct Habits to Ministers which God commanded
under the Law? so as no Religion or Sanctity be placed in them, as we declare
there is not; but they are only enjoined for Comeliness and Gravity, suitable
to such Solemnities: Solemn Actions of Royalty and Justice have their suitable
ornaments enjoined, Hooker.
and they are unto them a Beauty, and beget from the People a Veneration; Are
they only a Stain in Religion? These general Objections against the Common
Prayers in their Grand Debate I thought good to consider, together with their
Reasons in their Petition of Peace, that they may see we do not slight nor fear
any of their Forces, but dare encounter their whole strength. Their particular
Objections against the parts of the Liturgy are long since by Mr. Hooker, and
others so convincingly answered; those which are old: and the new are so weak
and inconsiderable that they deserve not a sober Animadversion, and therefore I
shall not give the Reader the trouble of a Confutation. To expose a few of them
is enough, and he may judge of the rest by their Assize.

1. They desire, the word Minister, which is used in the Absolution and diverse
other places, may be used throughout, and not Priest and Curate.

2. The Confession (they tell us) is very defective, not clearly expressing
Original Sin, nor sufficiently enumerating Actual Sins with their Aggravations;
but consisting only of Generals; whereas Confession, being the Exercise of
Repentance, ought to be more particular: This is already answered.

3. The often repeating the Lord's Prayer, and the Gloria Patri comes within
compass of those vain Repetitions our Savior condemns; a vain Objection -- and
may be as well made against David, Psalm. 136. and against many other his
Psalms, as also against Moses, Solomon, and our Savior himself.

4. They would have that Petition in the Litany, Good Lord deliver us from
sudden Death, to be altered thus, Good Lord deliver us from dying suddenly and
unpreparedly.

5. They would have that Prayer, That it may please God to preserve all that
travel by Land or by Water, to be changed, and expressed indefinitely, all that
travel.

6. They express their dislike of Kneeling at the Reading of the Commandments;
did they never break any of them? and, is there not a Prayer subsequent to each
of them? Lord have mercy upon us.

7. They are offended at that Expression in the first Prayer before Baptism,
That God, by his Son our Savior's being baptized in the River Jordan, has
sanctified that and all other waters, to the mystical washing away of Sin. To
satisfy this nice Scruple, it is changed, and the word all left out. I shall no
further pursue these trifles, professing my great grief and astonishment, that
persons pretending to so great Gravity can possibly be guilty of such
Lightnesses. 'Twas a piece of pride and weakness in Calvin to charge our
Liturgy as containing in it Tolerabiles Ineptias. These and such like light and
trivial exceptions of our Brethren will to any sober Judgment appear Ineptiae
Intolerabiles. Leaving their Grand Debate, which I think, in the Prophets and
Apostles sense, may without uncharitableness be affixed not only as the Title,
but is much the Subject and Design too of their Paper. I go on to the
Consideration of their Petition for Peace.

Sweet is the name of Peace, and now, if ever, Sweet is the Peace of the State,
after so long Civil War, and the Peace of the Church, after so long Division
and Persecution. Peace is a Blessing of Blessings, not a single, but a
complicated Blessing. It Is Peace that puts us into, and keeps us in Possession
of all we enjoy. Saint Paul tells us of a Bond of Peace. Peace is the Bond of
our Liberties, Properties, Estates and Lives, and of that which should be to us
dearer than all these, our Religion. It Is this Religious Peace for which they
petition.

O that they had hearkened to the Petitions of others before: But then they
prepared for War, and sounded the Trumpet to Battle: Then to talk of Peace and
Accommodation was the mark of a Malignant: Then Curse ye Meroz was the Text:
And, O take heed of Treaties: Well it is happy if at last Thoughts of Peace may
be entertained. But, my Brethren, why petition you for Peace? is it not Peace?
if not, where is the blame? who are those which hinder Peace? Then is it Peace
in the Church, when the Magistrate is at Peace with the Church and a Defender
of the Faith; when Ministers are at Peace with themselves and join regularly in
their holy Ministrations, when Ministers and their People are at Peace, the one
teaching, and the other embracing sound Doctrine; when Magistrates, Ministers
and People do publicly, openly, freely, uniformly profess and hold the true
Christian Religion, do join and unite in the public Worship of God, serving
him with one mind and with one mouth, having the same Doctrine, the same
Worship, the same Government.

Now consider who they are which hinder this Peace. You need not petition the
Bishops; it is in your own power to grant your own Petition; and truly a
Petition for Peace though it have a pleasing Sound, yet carries a sad
Supposition; it suposes, 1. That you are not in Peace with the Church; and, 2.
it implicitly accuses his Majesty of Persecution. But to come to the matter of
your Petition, two things you pray:

1. That the Bishops will grant what you have in your Preface proposed, and
craved their Consent unto, the Alterations and Additions to the Liturgy now
tendered unto them, that being inserted as you have expressed, It may be left to
the Ministers choice to use one or other at his discretion, upon his Majesty's
Approbation, according to his gracious Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs.

Here they desire, That it may be left to the Ministers choice to use one or
other, the new or the old Form, and it is not hard to judge which will be
chosen; the old by all who are Episcopal, the new by all the Presbyterians: So
shall we have Altar against Altar; Common Prayer Book against
Common Prayer Book, confusion in all Parishes and Division; those who are for
the old, if the new be read, will leave their Minister, and go where the old is
read; and the like will they do who are for the new: So shall there be endless
Contestations between Ministers and Ministers, People and People; one pleading
for the old Form, and exploding the new; the other arguing for the new, and
despising the old: Is this to petition for Peace? nothing can be more against
Peace. Certainly we shall ever be two, and the Church divided, if we have two
Liturgies. And whereas they appeal to his Majesty's Declaration, his Majesty
speaks plainly enough his meaning, and more plainly in his Commission, that he
intends not two Liturgies be established, but only some Alterations in one and
the same Liturgy, some additional Forms to be left unto the Ministers choice,
to use one or the other at his discretion; and these Alterations and additional
Forms not to be made by the one Part separately, as yours are; but by those of
both Persuasions.

You farther Petition, since we cannot obtain the Form of Episcopal Government
described by the late Reverend Primate Ireland, and approved by many Episcopal
Divines, we may at least enjoy those Benefits of Reformation in Discipline, and
that Freedom from Subscription, Oaths and Ceremonies which are granted in the
said Declaration by the means of your charitable Mediation and Request.

Answ. 1. Why did you not then (when it was in your Power, and the Staff in
your hands) hearken to Bishop Usher and those Episcopal Divines? did you not
covenant against Episcopacy? do you not still judge your selves obliged to keep
your Covenant? did not a prime Leader of your Party, in his Sermon at the
Treaty at Vxbridge, call Episcopacy and the Common Prayer Book, The
Plague-soars of the Nation? did not his late Majesty of blessed memory offer as
great condescentions as could be desired to your Divines at the Isle of Wight?
and, did they not oppose and disown all Episcopal Government?

Hear his Majesty: I was willing to grant or restore to Presbytery what with
reason or discretion it can pretend to in a conjuncture, with Episcopacy, but
for that wholly to invade the Power, and by the Sword to arrogate and quite
abrogate the authority of that ancient Order, I think neither just as to
Episcopacy, nor safe for Presbytery, nor yet any way convenient for this Church
and State.

Behold what his Majesty was willing to do in yieldance to Presbytery; so as
Episcopacy might not be abrogated. Behold what the Presbyterians will do, they
will go no lower than to abrogate Episcopacy, and since they could not do it
by the Word, they will do it by the Sword. But,

2. Have you now really changed your minds? are you in good earnest? do you
speak Verbo Sacerdotum when you make us believe you desire to obtain an
Episcopacy? How does this consist with your Profession in your Grand Debate?
There you utterly disclaim all Episcopacy. These are your words, We doubt
whether men in the same Order do, by Divine appointment, owe obedience unto
those that gradually go before them; and they may scruple whether such making
themselves the Governors of their Brethren, make not themselves indeed of a
different Order or Office, and so incroach not upon the Authority of Christ,
who only makes Officers purely Ecclesiastical, and whether it be no
disloyalty to Christ, to own such Officers: Again, it is a matter of very great
doubt, whether a fixed Diocesan, being the Pastor of many hundred Churches, be
indeed a Governor of Christ 's appointment or approbation; and whether Christ
will give us any more thanks for owning them as such, than the King will gives
us for owning an Usurper.

He who can reconcile their Petition for Peace with their Grand Debate, the one
pretending for Episcopacy, the other renouncing all Episcopacy, Erit mihi
magnus Apollo. But the Instance you might have let alone of owning an Usurper.
Did you not own and set up an Usurping Parliament against the King? and, will
you not disown the most Lawful King that shall deny your Will and Way; Vide
Baxter's Holy Commonwealth.
and own the Greatest Usurper that will set up and yield his Neck to your
Presbyterian Government? But if you cannot gain your own, you would be free
from Obedience to any other; That we may at least enjoy freedom from
Subscription, Oaths, and Ceremonies, by the means of your charitable Mediation.
A modest and merry Request, That the Bishops will mediate with his Majesty,
that the Presbyterians may be free from Obedience to Episcopal Government. Were
your Presbyterian Government set up, would you allow the Freedom you ask? You
have preached and printed against Toleration: you would bind Kings with your
Chains, and Nobles with Links of Iron; you would be very shy to give the
Indulgencies and Dispensations your selves desire: Nay, you refuse them to your
Independent Brethren.

Your second Petition is; Seeing some hundreds of able, holy and faithful
Ministers are of late cast out, and abundance of Congregations in England,
Ireland and Wales are overspread with lamentable ignorance, and are destitute
of able, faithful Teachers; and seeing too many that are insufficient,
negligent or scandalous are over the flocks, we take this opportunity earnestly
to beseech you, that will contribute your endeavors to the removal of those
that are the shame and burdens of the Churches, and to the Restoration of such
as may be an honor and blessing unto them, and to that end that it be not
imputed unto them as their unpardonable Crime, that they were born in an Age
and Country which required Ordination by parochial Pastors without Diocesans.

Ans. 1. Is not this a Pharisaical strain through all your Papers, To cry up
your own Holiness, Faithfulness, Piety and Painfulness, and to reproach the
Conformists as Insufficient, Negligent, the Shame and Burden of the Churches?

Comparisons are odious unto you, but we dare appeal to the World, and to him
who can judge of Hypocrisy and Sincerity, that there are Episcopal persons
many far more Able, Holy, Painful and Faithful Ministers than any of the
Presbyterians; and many of the Presbyterians more Insufficient, Negligent and
Scandalous than any of the Episcopal; and if Accusations of others were a
Vindication of our selves, we could write Centuries as well as your White, and
name abundance of those you count and call Godly who are the Shame and Burden
of Churches.

And, to be plain with you, who trust in your selves, that you are Righteous,
Luke 18.9.
and despise others, you are all (none excepted) the Shame and Burden of the
Church: If to preach up Rebellion against the King, the Nursing Father of the
Church, to cast off the Apostolical Government of the Church, to eject all the
true Sons of the Church, to invade and possess your selves by Violence of all
the Revenues of the Church be any Shame, or Sin, or Burden to your tender
Consciences; whether it be so or no, it is so certainly to all who are truly
conscientious; and God grant your deep Resentment and timely Repentance may by
God's mercy wash away the Sin and Shame, and ease the Burden, which if not
now, you will one day feel very heavy and uneasy.

2. How can you tell us of hundreds of yours cast out, and your guilt not fly
in your faces? Did you not foresee we could retort, that thousands of Episcopal
men were cast out for their Loyalty and Constancy to the Religion in the Church
of England established, for not covenanting, for not contributing to the Schism
and Rebellion; we could name if need were thousands whose Learning, Piety and
Painfulness in their places Envy it self cannot accuse. Their only Crime being
their ample Revenues and competent Livings.

3. Seeing some hundreds are of late cast out, your Consciences know you affirm
an untruth, that there are none cast out, but such as were unjust Intruders
into other men's Charges, those who without and against Law were deprived, are
now by Law restored, and if any of them be unworthy, the Law is open, and may
they be prosecuted, and, if they deserve it, impartially punished; we justify
not any that are scandalous. O that all were holy who serve in the holy
Ministry; and here on my knees I beseech the most Reverend Fathers of the
Church, That those Ministers who are Conformists, but whose Lives are vicious
and scandalous, may notwithstanding their Conformity fall under the severest
Censures: Episcopacie has no such great Enemies as these pretended Friends.

4. But why all this Complaint of your being cast out by the Bishops? as if
they had cast you out, when you know and the whole Nation knows, that they were
cast out by Act of Parliament (the Bishops not sitting in that Parliament) or
rather removed from the unjust possession of other men's Churches, and the
lawful Incumbents restored. So that you smite his Majesty and the Parliament
through the Bishops sides.

You go on; Being conscious that we seek not great things for our selves or for
our Brethren; that we are ambitious of no greater wealth and honor than our
daily bread.

1. Do not those seek great things for themselves, in respect of Honor who
would be coordinate with Kings, and who would not be subordinate to Bishops,
disowning their Authority, their Ordination and Government, and challenging to
themselves an equal right to both? And for Wealth, you cannot but be conscious
that you have sought great things; the greatest Livings (though with the Ruin
of the Lawful Owners) the most wealthy places in Cities, Universities, and the
Country. Many of you had a rich Benefice, and a fat Lecture, or a Government in
some College: So that whatever you profess you lie as deeply under the Scandal
of Ambition and Covetousness as you would bring those who are Episcopal.

These are their Requests; 1. That they may have a Government and a Liturgy of
their own, different from that established; and if not, that they may be free
from that in the Church established.

2. That all Presbyterians may be placed in the choicest Livings, as holy, able
and faithful; and that Episcopal men, as they have been by them cast out, may
be kept out of their own Livings as scandalous, negligent and insufficient. How
can these Requests be denied, in number so few, in nature so modest, religious
and rational? for with twenty Reasons are these two Requests enforced; yet,
when well considered, will shrink up into almost as few as their Requests, and
will prove as ponderous.

R. 1. They tell us, they dare not use a Cross or Surplice, or worship God in a
Form which they judge disorderly, defective or corrupt, when they have better
to offer him, Malachi, 1.13.

To that Scruple of the Surplice I have already answered; and to that of the
Cross the Church has answered, Canon, 30. and those whom the Church cannot
satisfy, it is in vain for any private person to attempt it; and, whereas they
say their Form of Worship is better than ours, we must give every one leave to
have a love for the Creature of their own production, and the Text they allege
Malachi, 1.13. as the Reason why they judge our Form defective, and their own
better, speaks alowd the fondness of their Affection, blinding their Judgment.
Nothing could have been said more for our Form or against their own (supposing
the words any way applicable to either.) Are not you they that say the Table of
the Lord is polluted, his Meat is contemptible? Do not you say, What a
weariness is it? And ye have snuffed at it, and ye have brought (instead of it
your new Form) that which is torn, and lame, and sick; thus ye have brought an
Offering. The 2d, 3d, 4th and 5th Reasons, we had all before in their Request
and are now repeated as the Reasons of it, their Holiness, their Ableness,
their being cast out, their great Sufferings, their tender Consciences. But
though I have spoken to them before, I shall pass on them some Remarks, lest
they should judge we could not answer them.

2. There are few Nations under the Heavens of God, as far as we can learn,
that have more able, holy, faithful, laborious and truly peaceable Preachers
of the Gospel, proportionably then those that are now cast out in England; and
are like in England, Scotland, and Ireland, to be cast out, if the old
Conformity be urged.

And, 3. Whether it be equal to bring upon so many of them so great Calamities.
Again,

4. We would here remember you how great and considerable a part of the three
Nations there is that must incur those Sufferings. And again,

5. We may plead the Nature of their Cause, to move you to commiserate your
afflicted Brethren in their Sufferings.

Ans. The Bishops and Episcopal and Loyal Clergy have learned by their own
Sufferings to compassionate the Sufferings of others. But this Complaint of the
Presbyterians Sufferings is like that of Children who bite and cry, some can
endure much and complain little, some will cry out for little or nothing; and
they say they are most impatient in the least Sickness who have lived long in
health, not knowing what Sickness meant. Let me be bold to ask, Who of you are
the men that have suffered? what have you suffered? how long? and, under whom?
who have been your Persecutors?

1. Who are the men? Are all the Presbyterians ejected and sequestered? All the
Bishops and Loyal Clergy were generally cast out; unless Poverty were their
protection.

2. What have they suffered? Have they been deprived of their Livings wherewith
the Law invested them? Have they been silenced, plundered of their Goods,
Books, Papers, shut up in Prisons, banished, martyred? You know who suffered
thus.

3. How long? The Conformists have suffered in Silence and Patience near twenty
years together, and your pretended sufferings a few months (being in a capacity
to be restored when ever you will return to your duty) make more noise than all
the Sufferings of all the Episcopal persons all these years.

4. From whom? Have you suffered from your Brethren, from your fellow Subjects
without and against Law? There are, you know, who have thus suffered: But you
cannot say you have suffered any thing but what the Law inflicts, and surely
that is no note of Innocence and Sincerity, as you insinuate. If your Sincerity
be no more than your Sufferings, you have as little cause to boast of that as
to complain of the other, Non cruciatus, sed Causa -- Let it not displease you,
if I lay before you and the World a true and just account of your Sufferings
and Calamities: It Is shortly this; You and your Party had by Arms and Violence,
against all Law, Conscience, Justice and Charity, seized and possessed your
selves of the Estates of your King, diverse of the Nobility and Gentry, the
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, the Dignities and Livings of the Loyal Clergy, all
the honorable and wealthy Offices ecclesiastical and civil by Sea and Land;
these you held and enjoyed until God turned our Captivity, and the King and the
Church was happily restored, and then their Estates and Rights were restored,
and you enforced to quit them without the demand of Arrears or Restitution for
the time you enjoyed them, which was so long and the Revenues so large, that
abundance of you, being good Husbands and great Improvers, have provided well
against a Storm and got out of your Sequestrations and Purchases plentiful
Estates; so that of the Calamity of our suffering Brethren, and the Cruelty of
the restored King, Church and Laws, this is the most deplored and lamentable
account; The King, the Church and the Suffering Loyal Party will needs have
their Rights again; and so the Godly Party who invaded them must no longer
enjoy them; The Prey is plucked out of their Teeth, and they must vomit up the
sweet morsel. You must pardon me if, against my Genius, your loud and
redoubled Outcries of your mighty Sufferings enforce me to be plain with you,
and tell you your own.

In their Fifth, after their Preface mentioning their Sufferings, and in their
Sixth, they argue from the meanness of the things imposed in the Judgment of
the Bishops, and the ponderousness in their own.

It is in your own account, But for refusing Conformity to things indifferent,
or at the most of no necessity to Salvation: It is in their account, for the
sake of Christ. Do you think the Lord that died for Souls, and has sent us to
learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, is better
pleased with Reordination, Subscription and Ceremonies, than with the Saving
of Souls by the means of his own appointment?

Ans. 1. Do you think that the Lord who died for Souls, and has sent us to
learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not Sacrifice, is better
pleased with your Refusal to save Souls by the Means of his own appointment,
upon the Scruple of Ordination by Bishops, Ceremonies and Indifferent things,
than he would be if, submitting to them, you would preach the Gospel and save
Souls? Will this be a good Answer to the Lord at the great Day of Accounts?
Lord, I would have preached the Gospel, I would have endeavored the Salvation
of Souls; But I durst not wear a Surplice, I durst not use that declared
Indifferent Ceremony of the Cross, I durst not kneel before thee at thy holy
Table, I durst not be obedient to my Lawful Superiors who required these
things, and though I know that necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me,
if I preach not the Gospel; yet I thought my self obliged rather to dispense
with that necessity thou have laid upon me than submit to those indifferent
things they would lay upon me against my Christian Liberty, and to let
thousands of Souls perish, than hazard my own by Subscription and Ceremonies.
But,

2. The Offense of Refusing Conformity in things indifferent, is not to be
measured according to the things unto which we are to conform, which the Church
has declared her Judgment in that they are not to be valued for their own
sakes. But it is Pride, Contempt, and Disobedience to Lawful Authority to
oppose its Orders, and these are not so slight faults as you imagine; it was but
a light fault that Shimei made, in going out of the City, but he lost his Head
for it; it was but a light fault that Vzza made in touching the Ark, but he
lost his Life for it. But, say you, Though the Bishops call the things they
enjoin Indifferent, yet our Sentiments are otherwise. It Is in our account for
the sake of Christ, because we dare not consent to that which we judge an
Usurpation of his Kingly power, and an Accusation of his Laws, as insufficient.

Answ. It Is worth our Observation, that of Dr. Sanderson, that all their
Arguments against our Ceremonies are drawn from the Head of Christian Liberty,
and then with the same Breath they deny them to be things indifferent, and
often do they use this Topic in this Address.

2. He and others have proved the things to be indifferent (as the Church
declares them) which they can never disprove.

3. It Is for the sake of Christ that you disobey the Command and Example of
Christ; that you disobey the Magistrates of Christ, and the Government of
Christ, and the Orders of his Church.

4. You judge the Bishops Injunction of things indifferent an Usurpation of
Christ's Kingly power, and Accusation of his Laws as insufficient. But your
Apostle, Mr. Calvin, judges otherwise, as do the Bishops, That Christ has
given Laws for all things necessary in the Divine Worship. But as to things
pertaining to outward Order and Comeliness he has taught nothing expressly.
Those he has left to the Churches prudence. Has Christ given such Laws? Open
our eyes, show us, and let us see them: (Has he not) then, not the Governors
of the Church, but you, who judge he ought, do accuse Christ's Laws as
insufficient.

In their fifth Reason they say, Suppose they be mistaken, in thinking the
things to be so displeasing to God: yet it is commendable in them to be
fearful in displeasing him, and careful to obey him.

Ans. We see, be they right or wrong, whatever they opine and act is
commendable. Suppose they mistook in preaching us into Rebellion, in pulling
down Bishops, in taking away the Liturgy, in overturning the Foundations of
Church and State, yet their Zeal is commendable. May not all Zealots plead
thus? Suppose the Papists were mistaken in their Fiery Zeal to blow up the King
and Parliament, and in the Irish Massacre, yet their Zeal was commendable, in
designing to destroy those they judged the Enemies of their Church. Suppose
they be mistaken in worshipping the Saints, and their Images and Relics, yet,
since they think they please God, it is commendable. Suppose the Quakers
mistaken in denying Magistrates and Ministers, and all Authority in Church and
State, yet, in that they think they should displease God in owning those
Powers, it is in them commendable to disown them. Is this the Counsel you would
give to one who doubts and seeks your Resolution? Will this satisfy and
deliver him from doubting, to tell him, Suppose you were mistaken; yet, if you
think you are in the right, pursue your opion, it is commendable? Saint Paul is
a better Casuist, and gives other Counsel, Prove all things, 1 These. 5.21.
hold fast that which is good, abstain from all appearance of evil.

7. That, because men are forbidden to preach unless they conform, they are
tempted to infer, that Preaching being necessary to Salvation, and those things
called Indifferent, being made necessary to Preaching, and preferred before it;
therefore they are made necessary to Salvation, and preferred before that which
God has made necessary.

Ans. The Accusation is most untrue; those Indifferent things are not made
necessary to Preaching, much less preferred before it; and those who are
tempted thus to infer, because men are forbidden to preach, unless they dare
subscribe and use those things, therefore those things (called Indifferent) are
made necessary to Preaching, and preferred before it, are very weak Logicians.

Every thing that is required, is not required as necessary, as you have been
often told. Many things are required as expedient, as decent, as comely, as
orderly; so are our Ceremonies. Ministers are forbidden to read Prayers
without the Surplice, to preach without a Gown: The Judges are forbidden to sit
in Judgment, till they read their Commission; and are required to sit in their
Scarlet; will any hence be tempted to infer, that the Surplice and Gown are
made necessary to and preferred before Prayer and Preaching; and reading a
Commission, and wearing Scarlet Robes are made necessary to and preferred
before doing Justice?

2. Every thing that is made necessary to any End or Action, is not thereby
preferred before it. Methinks so many Learned Divines should know, that though
these Indifferent things should be made necessary by the Command of the Church
to Preaching, yet, it no way follows, they are preffered before it. The Means
sure is made necessary to the obtaining the End, yet is not preffered before
it. It Is, you will confess, justly forbidden, that Ordination should be given
to any without Examination and Imposition of hands, or that any should preached
without Ordination; yet, I think, you are not tempted to infer, that
Examination, Imposition of hands and Ordination it self, though necessary, are
to be preffered before Preaching. Follows their

8. R. which implies, we lay our Religion upon our particular Liturgy, and so
teach the Papists to insult, Where was our Religion 200 years ago? the
Common Prayer Book, as differing from the Mass Book, being not so old.

1. We thank you for your ingenuous Acknowledgment, (...)
that our Common Prayer Book differs from the Mass Book. A Mass-priest, (now
yours) turning from Popery to Presbyterianism, most impudently affirms them to
be the same.

2. Religion is made up of Doctrine, Worship and Government; our Liturgy is our
Form of Public Worship, and so a part of our Religion; and, being agreeable to
God's Word, nor Papists, nor your selves, can justly except against it. For
their Question, Where was our Religion 200 years ago? You might know, they make
it not so much upon the change of our Liturgy (themselves in Queen Elizabeth's
time for many years joining in it) as upon pretense we have changed our
Doctrine; and the Question as it has been often, and ad ravim usque, by them
asked, it has been by us as often and satisfactorily answered; and if we should
(as we do not) lay our Religion upon our Liturgy, it is most agreeable to the
Scriptures, where our Religion is, The Creed, Commandments, the Lord's Prayer
and Sacraments.
and contains all the Fundamentals of Religion; and your Mr. Calvin does
witness it for us, That the Common Prayer Book does excellently contain the
chief heads of our Religion.

The 9. is, A Request for Liberty upon on an Insinuation, That no Liturgical
Forms were imposed on any Church in the primitive times.

Ans. 1. Then sure, the now named, your much Reverend Mr. Calvin was either
ignorant of the Constitutions of the primitive times, or had other Sentiments
of them then you, who declares his Judgment contrary to you, Quoad formulam
Precum and Rituum Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo ut certa illa exstet, a qua
Pastoribus discedere in functione sua non liceat. As to the Form of Prayers and
Ecclesiastical Rights, I greatly approve that it be settled, from which it may
not be lawful for the Pastors in their Function to vary or depart.

2. You have surely heard of the Liturgies of S. Peter, S. James, and S. Mark,
and that of S. Mark, S. Cyril owns and comments upon in his Catechism, and S.
Cyril was a Bishop in the primitive times, living about the year of Christ 350.
and S. Basil, a famous and primitive Bishop too, was deeply censured and put to
make painful Apologies for a little Change he made in the usual
Church-liturgy: It was thought in him (says our Author) an unpardonable
Offense to alter any thing, in us, as intolerable, that we suffer any thing
unaltered in the Liturgy.

R. 10. And if you should reject (which God forbid) the moderate Proposals
which now and formerly we have made, we humbly crave leave to offer it to your
consideration, what Judgment all the Protestant Churches are likely to pass on
your Proceedings, and how your Cause and ours will stand represented to them
and to all succeeding ages.

Answ. Their moderate Proposals we have heard, which they now make, that they
may be free from the established Government and Liturgy of the Church, and
they, as Able and Godly, continued in the choicest Livings they had invaded;
and the Episcopal kept out, as Scandalous, Negligent and Insufficient.

What moderate Proposals they made formerly I am to learn, they know his late
Majesty made to them moderate Proposals, but was refused; and, they confess,
the Lord Primate of Ireland made moderate Proposals, but by them never accepted.

As to their bold Appeal to all Protestant Churches, presuming they will give
their Judgments for them, and against the Church of England's established
Constitutions; which they have the huge Confidence to prophecy even of the
Judgment of all succeeding ages. They might, without a Revelation, by their
Jugdment past and present have foreseen their Judgment for the future. The past
age has cried Grace, Grace to our happy, orderly and moderate Reformation in
Doctrine, Government and Worship; the Protestant Churches have given us the
Right Hand of Fellowship, have maintained sweet Communion with us, have in
Marian Persecution, received our Exiles; their most eminent Lights have sent us
high Congratulations; their ablest Ministers have, diverse of them, come over,
and with Joy beheld our Order; and some have lived and died amongst us.

What Judgment did Mr. Beza give? Let himself speak, Quod si nunc, -- If now
the Reformed Churches of England, being underprop'd with the Authority of
Bishops and Archbishops, do continue as this has hapened to that Church in our
memory, That she has had Men of that Calling, not only most notable Martyrs,
but also excellent Pastors and Doctors; let them truly enjoy that singular
Blessing of God, which I wish may be perpetual unto her.

What Judgment did Peter Martyr pass in the Case of Bishop Hooper, about the
Ceremonies? Did he not answer his Arguments? vindicate the lawfulness of them?
exhort him to submit unto them? The Judgment of Doctor Moulin you have heard,
and much more might be told you of the high Honor he had for the Church of
England. And, to come nearer, what Judgment the Protestant Churches passed upon
your Covenant, your Reforming the Church by the Sword, and in the Blood of the
Nursing Father and the Prime Pastor of it, with many Thousands more, you have
surely heard. Were they not ashamed, confounded and astonished at our Schisms
and Seditions, and Violations of all Authority Sacred and Civil? And, Have not
your Actions in the late lamentable times cast a Blemish upon the Honor of our
Nation never to be washed off? An Englishman daring scarce to look another man
in the face in a foreign Country, being under the Objection and Reproach of
Rebellion, Murdering their King, Changing the best tempered Monarchy in the
World into a puny Commonwealth, and that swallowed up soon into a Barbarous
Protectourship; and Abasing the most primitive and venerable Episcopacy into a
novel and contemptible Parity and Linsy-woolsey Presbytery, made up of
Preachers and Lay Elders, and that too straight undermined and baffled by a
Mushrome Independency: Pudet haec Opprobria vobis and dici potuisse, and non
potuisse refelli. This is the past Judgment of the Protestant Churches abroad
concerning our Church established, and you who ruined it, till God in mercy
restored it. For the Churches of succeeding ages; I think they will hardly
believe the History of ours. That such men as you, professing highest
Godliness, should, in a pretended zeal for it, preach up Sedition and Schism,
and embroil the Church and Nation wherein you were born and baptized in Blood
and Confusion: and, which seems more incredible, Appeal to all Protestant
Churches in your own Justification: nay, Supplicate the King (whose Royal
Father was martyred, and himself long banished for standing up in defense of
the Church which you opposed and by Force destroyed) to screen you from the
Church's Power, to grant you the chief Benefices in the Church, and give you
Liberty to be of another Church, to enjoy a Worship and Government of your own
Mode and Model.

But, my Brethren, how come you to make this loud Challenge? Why enquire you,
or rather, Why presume you, what Judgment the Protestant Churches will make of
our Churches proceedings? Sure your mighty Zeal and ardent Affection to your
Cause has clouded your own Judgment, and quite bereaved you of your Memory.
You mention often, and with seeming regard, his Majesty's gracious Declaration
touching Ecclesiastical Affairs: he therein tells you the present Judgment of
the Reformed Churches abroad, and, had you Faith to believe his Royal word, you
might have spared this Argument and Outcry, which you may blush for, and wish
you had suppressed. Hear his Majesty speaking their Judgment.

We do think Our self the more competent to propose, and, with God's
Assistence, to determine many things now in Difference, from the time We have
spent, and the experience We have had in most of the Reformed Churches abroad,
in France, the Low Countries, and Germany; where We have had frequent
Conference with the most Learned men, who have unanimously lamented the great
Reproach the Protestant Religion undergoes from the Distempers and too
notorious Schisms in Matters of Religion in England: And as the most Learned
among them have always, with great Submission and Reverence, acknowledged and
magnified the established Government of the Church of England, and the great
Countenance and Shelter the Protestant Religion received from it before these
unhappy times: So many of the have, with great Ingenuity and Sorrow, confessed,
that they were too easily misled, by misinformation and prejudice, into some
disesteem of it, as if it had too much complied with the Church of Rome;
whereas they now acknowledge it to be the best Fence God has yet raised against
Popery in the World; and We are persuaded they do with great Zeal wish it
restored to its old Dignity and Veneration.

You see what Judgment the Protestant Churches have passed upon the Church of
England, and her former Proceedings, and thereby may take an Estimate, what
Judgment they will pass on her present Proceedings, and how the Church's Cause
and yours will be represented to them: They will acknowledge and magnify, with
great Submission and Reverence, the established Government of the Church of
England, if you dare believe his Majesty, and consequently will censure you as
Schismatical and Disobedient, to refuse to submit unto it.

But I must not misrepresent you your Submission you profess.

If after our Submission to his Majesty's Declaration, and after our own
Proposals of the primitive Episcopacy, and of such a Liturgy as we here tender,
we may not be permitted to exercise our Ministry, the Pens of those moderate
Bishops will bear witness against you, that were once employed as the Chief
Defenders of that Cause, (we mean such as Reverend Bishop Hall and Usher) who
have published to the World, that much less than this might have served to our
fraternal Unity and Peace.

Ans. You before appealed to the Protestant Churches abroad, now unto two
Bishops of our own, and with like Success.

1. You say you have submitted to his Majesty's Declaration, you should have
instanced wherein. His Majesty there declares, That, having seen all the
Liturgies that are extant and used in this part of the World, he esteems that
of the Church of England to be the best, and well knows the Reverence the most,
or at least the most Learned in the Reformed Churches, have for it; he heartily
wishes and desires, until it be reviewed, and some Alterations and Additional
Forms made, the Ministers, who dislike some Clauses and Expressions, would not
therefore totally lay aside the use of the Book of Common Prayer, but read
those parts against which there can be no exception, which would be the best
instance of declyning those marks of distinction which his Majesty so much
labors and desires to remove.

Have you herein submitted to his Majesty's Declaration? Have you read any
thing of the Common Prayers, and thereby instanced your desire in compliance
with his Majesty's, to remove and decline those marks of distinction? What you
can lay hold of to your purpose in his Declaration, you greedily catch at, the
rest you pass by.

However you pretend to submit to his Majesty's Declaration, he therein
complains, your Party (of which you are the Leaders) have not dealt heartily
with him, that there are amongst them unquiet and restless Spirits who continue
their Bitterness against the Church, and endeavor to raise Jealousies against
his Majesty, and have unseasonably printed, published and dispersed a
Declaration to his Majesty's Reproach; and since the printing this Declaration
(you say you submit to) several seditious Pamphlets and Quaeries have been
published and scattered abroad, to infuse Dislike and Jealousies into the
Hearts of the People. Behold your Submission to his Majesty's Declaration.

You next tell us of your own Proposals of the Primitive Episcopacy, and your
own Liturgy. What your Primitive Episcopacy is, your Jus Divinum Ministrii
Anglicani speaks, That there is no Bishop in the sense of our Church, no
Episcopus Pastorum, but all Presbyters are equally, and in a parity, Episcopi
Gregis: and what your own Liturgy is, you have let us see such a one as you
would have for your selves, in opposition to that of the Church; and yet,
though you would have it, you will not be bound to use it neither; which is as
much as to say, If you may not have your own fancied frame of Government and
public Worship, and that with Liberty too, to throw them off when your fancy
changes, you receive mighty wrong, and, as you said before, all the Protestant
Churches, so you say now, all the World will think it strange. Bishop Usher you
mentioned before, you now bring him in again after Bishop Hall, and give them
the Titles of Reverend, Learned and Moderate. It Is well Bishop Hall (now he is
at rest) has from you so kind a Character: Time was when your combined Forces
were bent singly against him; you fought neither with small nor great, but
only with Bishop Hall; and when Smectymnuus was not able to dispute him down,
your Rabshakeh railed him down; and however you now complement him, you have
shown your present Esteem of him and of the Primitive Episcopacy, in reprinting
your Smectymnuus now, since his Majesty's Restoration; and if, as you say, he
and Bishop Usher have published to the World, that much less than that would
have served to a fraternal Peace; you publish to the World, you have been
obstinate and averse to Peace and Unity; who, when you had the Law in your
hands, would not hearken to those, by you confessed, Moderate Terms of Unity
and Peace, and your own Pens will bear witness against you, that you are now
justly repulsed, who would not yield when fair means of Accommodation were
offered as to Reordination, which you often mention, and here it comes in
again.

1. We deny your Presbyterian and Independent (so called) Ordination to be
really and indeed any Ordination at all; and till you prove it such, you charge
the Bishops falsely wih requiring Reordination.

2. Many who have been under your hands have of themselves (without being
required) judging your pretended Ordination a Nullity, desired Ordination from
the Bishops.

3. The Canon (supposed) of the Apostles touches not this Case, nor our
Bishops, who neither do re-ordain nor allow it. Re-ordaining, rightly so
called, being the Ordaining again of a Deacon or Priest by a Bishop, who was by
him known to have been by a Bishop before ordained.

4. Bishop Bancrost speaks of those who were ordained by Presbyters, where were
no Bishops to ordain them, as in many of the Reformed Churches abroad.

But we had Bishops till you pulled them down: Nay, blessed be God, we had
Bishops after you had pulled them down, and till his Majesty set them up again,
and those who would, in all the late times, might have had, and very many had
Ordination from their hands: it is therefore a most gross Untruth, and it is
strange, such Godly men as you should dare to utter and publish it, That your
young Preachers, by the old Presbyters sent, were born in an Age and Country
which required Ordination by Parochial Pastors without Diocesans: if there had
been no Bishops, you might then have said, the Age and Country required (lest
the Church should fail) Ordination from Parochial Pastors; but I say, and you
to your Sorrow know, there were Bishops all that time, diverse English and also
Scottish and Irish Bishops, who, though many of them were latent, yet were and
might be addressed to, and did all along confer holy Orders: there are at least
five English Bishops living to my knowledge, and you may know more, having the
Honor to be joined with them in Commission, which all good men are sorry is
not on your part managed temperately and humbly, prudently and piously, to the
Peace of the Church, by your selves chiefly (but for all our sins) long and
lamentably divided.

R. 11. Is a repeated Complaint of their Afflictions, and an Accusation of the
Bishops as their Afflictors, which is already answered.

The Twelfth and Fourteenth are the same, and shall be considered together.

The 13th is hammered on the same Anvil with the 11th; That they are the Godly
party, and afflicted; the Episcopal are cruel, and persecute them for the Cause
of Christ: How will Christ: take it of you to cast out from the Ministry, or
Communion of the Church, or to grieve and punish all that dare not conform to
you in these Matters?

Ans. How will Christ take it from you to cast out all Bishops and Episcopal
men who durst not conform to you in your Matters? The Bishops Proceedings are
by gentle methods: 1. They Admonish; 2. Suspend; 3. Silence; before they
deprive any; and none are deprived, but for foul and incorrigible Crimes: but
you eject at first, and totally, for no Crime, for no Breach of the Laws and
Orders, but even for that the Episcopal persons stand for the Laws and Orders
established.

You trod down the Stars of Christ's planting as the Stones in the street: All
those places of Scripture misapplied by you, may against you be rightly applied.

And whereas elsewhere they say to this purpose, Sad Experience tells the World,
that if the Ministers we are pleading for be laid aside, there are not
competent men enough to supply their room.

Ans. Their Care, that there be a supply of competent men to serve the Church,
is commendable and pious: But why did they not take that Care when it was in
their power, when themselves laid aside and cast out Thousands, to provide
competent men to supply their rooms? Indeed for competent and great Livings
they provided; but the places that were poor, if empty they filled them not, if
full by persons never so incompetent they amended it not. I believe it is a
measured Truth, never were so many places unprovided, never so many meanly
provided, as in those times since the first times of Queen Elizabeth, when
competent Ministers (as now required to be qualified) could not be had for many
places; one indeed I have heard of, having in Zeal helped to eject his Minister
out of a small Living, desired the Clerk of the Committee for plundered
Ministers, to commend a Minister unto them; he answered, O, none of us will
accept of that, you must provided as you can.

The 14th Reason, the same as I told you, and you may find with the 12th, tells
us the Constitutions of the Church are against their Judgment; and they have
not their Judgments at Command; and were they never so willing to believe they
ought to obey them, they cannot therefore believe the Impositions lawful
because they would, the Intellect being not free.

Ans. What is every body's Argument is no Argument. Thus may the Jew, the Turk,
the Papists, the Quakers plead for their own, and against the true Religion;
and thus your Independent Brethren have argued in their Pleas for Toleration,
which once you opposed; but now you sharpen your Goads at their Forges: You
bring an Objection, as made by us, that we may say, it is your own fault, that
your Judgments are not changed, and that the means have been sufficient, to
which you shape an Answer, such as it is, but which may make your selves blush.

That the Sword can easilier take this for granted, than the Tongue or Pen of
man prove. My Brethren, Quorsum haec? You might well have spared the mention of
the Sword; Why do you expose your own Miscarriages to the review of the World?
Who were those that drew the Sword for Reformation? Who called to Arm? Who
promised Heaven to all that would take up the Sword in that blessed Cause of
the Covenant? when you were then told of the Word and of the Laws, you could
answer with that Roman, Nunquamne nobis Gladiis succinctis Leges recitare
desinetis? Tell you us, who have our Swords by our sides, of the Laws? We tell
you, we have drawn our Swords to cut in sunder those Gordian Knots, your
Parchment Laws. So of late your Heroic Oliver to those who pleaded the Laws
and ancient Charters granted and confirmed by our Kings, Magna Charta, Magna
Far --

But, I pray you, what Sword do the Bishops, whom you plead with, use, but the
Spiritual? They are no Popes, who challenge Potestatem utriusque Gladii; They
are no Presbyterians, who are Coordinate Powers with Kings and Princes; and for
their Tongues and Pens, you must strike Sail, till you shall be able to
encounter and conquer those Worthies, Bishop Whitgift, Bishop Bilson, Dr.
Sanderson, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Mason, and many more such Generals in the Lord's
Host, with whom your Hildersham, Baines, Parker, Ames, Dod, Ball, Nichols, are
not to be named the same day.

15. We crave leave to ask, Whether your selves do not in some things mistake?

Good Leave have you, and you ask a wise Question, with a Consequence as wild:
in your Covenant you yoke Popery with Prelacy, and now you wittily and merrily
ask the Prelates, Whether they think themselves, as the Pope, Infallible; and
yet your Party proclaim themselves next to Infallible. I need not remember you
where they say, Loath we are to think that they who are most sound in Doctrine
should mistake in Discipline: Well, but the Prelates will confess, they may
mistake, are not infallible; What Is the Consequence? If you may mistake in any
thing, may it not be in such great things as these? and in the same breath you
say, These great things are the smallest, Ceremonies and Circumstances of
Worship. I conceive you speak this Ironically, otherwise your Inference is in
you a foul mistake: understanding men may mistake in great things; ergo they
may mistake in small things. However, on this Supposition you destroy all Power
in men to make Laws in great or small things, because Governors are men, and
may err and mistake in some things; ergo they may make Laws in nothing.

16. Whether this be doing as you would be done by? would you be cast out for
every fault that is as bad as this? Put your selves in their case, and suppose
you had studied, conferred and prayed, and done your best to know whether God
would have you to be re-ordained, and to use these Forms, Ceremonies,
Subscriptions, or not; and, having done all, you think that God would be
displeased if you should use them; would you then be used your selves as your
dissenting Brethren are now used or like to be?

Ans. This is their strongest and fairest Argument, drawn from the general Rule
of Equity and Charity, and it is easy to retort it, being much more strong on
the Bishops part. Put your selves in the Bishops case, and suppose you had
studied, conferred, prayed, and done your best to know whether God would have
you to preach Resistance against your Sovereign, renounce Episcopacy, cast out
the Church Liturgy; and, having done all, you think (nay, are sure, for
thinking will not do) that God would be displeased if you should do so; would
you be used your selves as your party used the Bishops? imprisoned, beheaded,
sequestered.

17. Reason is drawn from the Divisions caused by imposing things unnecessary,
and the Unity and Peace which would follow, if men might enjoy their Liberty,
and might have leave to serve God as his Apostles did; and upon these they
enlarge in four whole Pages: Nothing more affects us than to think of the
lamentable Divisions that have been caused and are still like to be, while
things unnecessary are so imposed; and on the contrary, how blessed an Unity
and Peace we might enjoy, if these occasions of Division were removed, and we
might but have leave to serve God as the Apostles did.

Ans. If it affect you so much to think upon the Divisions, it should affect
you to think that you have been and are the chief cause of them, and you might,
if your Will stood not in your way, remove them; but you mightily mistake both
the Cause and Cure of our Divisions, which are the direct contrary to what you
surmise. The Cause of our Divisions is the Liberty you desire; the Cure would
be your Obedience to the Church's lawful Impositions, and this not only
Reason but your own Experience might have taught you. You cast off the Reins of
Church Government, you set your selves at Liberty. Did this Cure your Divisions
and create among you Peace and Unity? No, after you had divided from the
Church, and cast off its Rule and Orders; you subdivided among your selves, and
broke all into pieces and parties; never did any Age see such lamentable
Divisions in this Church and Nation. But you accuse the Bishops, as if they
will not give you leave to serve God as his Apostles did: God forgive you this
as false as foul an Accusation. Do not the Bishops maintain, and the Church
steadfastly continue in the Apostles Doctrine? Do they not against the
Romanists, who would obtrude upon us their Traditions in conjunction with the
Scriptures, assert the Scripture alone to be a most perfect Rule of Faith and
Manners? Do they not serve God as the Apostles have taught? and so many you in
Communion with our Church. Truly if your meaning be, that they give you not
leave to serve God as Apostles, and no less or lower will serve you, than to be
as they, to give Laws to all the Churches, and to be under the Laws of none;
you must prove your selves to be such before you crave that leave: But though
you are not Apostles, yet you are Prophets, you foresee and foretell the
Sufferings of your Innocent Party -- Strange! What a Noise they make in almost
every Paragraph, lamenting and repeating their Sufferings? We are, against our
wills, enforced as often to let them know, and I wish they would rightly
resent, and lay it to heart, that the Bishops and Conformable Clergy have been
really Sufferers for many years, and in the Loss of all they had, and they the
Causes of their Sufferings, and for all those years enjoyed all Ease and
Plenty, and at this time of their present loud Complaint they have yet suffered
nothing, and are certain they shall not do, if they will return to their Duty,
all their former Miscarriages, being by his Majesty's Mercy buried in
oblivion; and if they will do so, they may be received into Favor, and are as
capable of all Preferments as any the truest Sons of the Church. I am unwilling
to remark the other part of their Prophecy, ripping up our Divisions (by their
Party raised and continued ever since the Reformation) they in effect threaten,
they will be their Sons and Heirs, and that we must not expect Peace, but look
for Misery and Division, unless they may have their Demands, to be as free and
high as the Apostles: and here, as their manner is, they heap up a multitude of
Scriptures, you may judge how pertinently by the first they allege, 1
Philippians, 14. There St. Paul says, Many of the Brethren in the Lord, waxing
confident by his bonds, were much more bold to speak the Word without fear.
This Text they cite to prove that the Bonds and Burdens and Displeasure which
is upon them from their Superiors, hinders them from serving the Lord without
fear. Saint Paul's bonds made these Brethren confident, and set them above
fear. But our Brethren, upon their mere fancy of Bonds and Burdens, are
faint-hearted, and with fear even distracted. The other Scriptures make as
little for them or against the Bishops: and so I shall pass them over.

The 18th and 19th Reasons are of the same Bran, yet again and again they cry
up their Abilities and their Godliness, and cry out of their Sufferings and
Persecutions, and the Ungodliness of all who are not of their way. I cannot
conceive the Reason, why this one Topic of their Sufferings makes up more than
Ten of their Twenty Reasons, and they bring it in over and over so very often,
but that they think no body knows or will believe they have suffered any thing,
and therefore they say it so often; or else by the loud and repeated Cry of
their own, they would drown the loud Cry of the Bishops Sufferings by them and
their Party, which yet the Bishops themselves pass by in Silence; but the World
cannot but take notice of with much concernment.

Let us yet hear them again.

In the 18th they call themselves the Holy Seed, and so many able Ministers
laid aside; and that many of them suffer; and that the Ungodly add Affliction
to their Affliction. And in the 19th, So many truly fearing God, being cast or
trodden down, are tempted to think ill of that which themselves and the Church
thus suffer by; and when so many of the worst befriend this way, because it
gratifieth them, it tends to make your Cause judged of, according to the
qualities of its friends or adversaries. Of their Sufferings enough, and too
much of their Godliness and the Ungodliness of all who are not of their Party.
We have heard often too, it is their strain and way, with the Pharisee, to stand
on their Tiptoes, and say, God I thank thee I am not thus and thus, I am not
such as this Publican.

The worst, they say, befriend that way.

1. That Is no proof of the evil of that way, rather of the goodness which
shines forth so apparently, that it convinces and even enforces the worst of
men to approve it, Video meliora, proboque.

2. Who are those worst? The King, the Parliament, and all the obedient Sons of
the Church, of all Estates and Qualities. This is usually their great proof,
that themselves truly fear God, their dislike of established Order; this their
evidence, that others have not the fear of God, their Obedience to those whom
God has set over them in Church and State. By the one they commend themselves,
by the other they condemn all but themselves; and that this is no untrue
Accusation they have made appear, in that they made no difference between the
best and the worst, but cast out all of the Episcopal way: Nay, as one of them
pleading before them the Sobriety and Unblameableness of his Life and
Conversation, they told him to his effect, He should fare the worse for that,
they liked not so well a sober as a scandalous Malignant, who gave their
Proceedings against him some color of Justice.

2. They tell us they are tempted to think ill of that they suffer by.

Ans. It Is easy to guess whence that Temptation is, a Criminal is tempted to
think ill of the Law, because he suffers by it; Ungodly men are tempted to
think ill of God, and murmur at him, because they suffer by his just Judgments
for their Wickedness: You are taught otherwise, Matt. 5.44.

20. We repeat what formerly we have said, That the Holy Ghost has already so
plainly decided the point in controversy in the Instance of Meats and Days,
Romans 14.15. that it seems strange to us that yet it should remain a
Controversy. A weak Brother, that makes an unnecessary difference of Meats
and Days, is not to be cast out, but so to be received, and not to be troubled
with such doubtful Disputations; despising and judging the Servants of the
Lord whom he receives, and can make to stand, and that upon such small
occasion, is unbeseeming true Believers.

Their 20th Reason is delivered with so mighty Confidence, that they would make
us believe it looks like a Demonstration. But it is scarce worthy the name of a
Reason. They tell us, The Holy Ghost has decided the Point in controversy
between us -- that they think it strange it is yet a Controversy. A strange
Presumption, whereby they at once condemn all the Conformists and
Non-conformists too in this Church ever since the Reformation. They think it
strange, it is a Controversy; and yet know, it is the great Controversy of
these 100 years: What Volumes have been written pro and con upon this Subject,
The Church's Power in things indifferent? their own it seems wanted the
Illumination of the Holy Ghost, who could not see and show that his plain
Decision, and so were fain to argue against the Church's Orders with their
slender Probabilities: And ours, in these charitable men's Judgment, were
Resisters of the Holy Ghost, in asserting the Church's Power to command for
Decency and Order, the Holy Ghost having plainly decided the Point against
them, that they had no such Power, the most reverend Whitgift, Morton, Hall,
Hooker, Mason, Sanderson. I wonder you did not demonstrate to this last, Dr.
Sanderson (who, I suppose, was a Commissioner on the Bishops part) his wilful
Sin and Error, in Preaching and Writing so earnestly for the Church's
Ceremonies, from this very 14th Chapter of the Romans: we look upon him as the
great Casuist of the Age; a most rare Preacher and Textuary; his Temper truly
Christian and primitive, charitable, humble, meek, modest even to diffidence;
his Discourses profound, and yet plain to the meanest capacity; nothing more
clear, more clean, more cogent and convincing: And we judge those two Sermons
of his, one upon the first of St. Peter, 2.16. the other upon Romans, 14.23. do
fully assert the Church's Constitutions by the Non-conformists opposed, and
fairly represent, and fully answer their Objections; and Master Hooker had with
as much meekness and strength done it before: you have Time and Numbers, if you
resolve to stand out, and not conform, to answer Mr. Hooker point by point;
your many hands may make the work light: but to make it short and easy, I
challenge a whole Smectymnuus of you to answer only Dr. Sanderson solidly and
soundly, and I shall promise you to renounce Conformity, and if you cannot (as
I know you cannot) you are self-condemned if you renounce not Nonconformity;
and now I shall be as highly confident as your selves, and shall affirm in a
direct contradiction to yours, that the Holy Ghost has so plainly decided the
Point in Controversy on the Church's part, that she has Power to command
things indifferent for Decency and Order in God's Worship, in the 1 Corinthians. c.
14. v. 40. That it is strange it should be yet a Controversy: Nay, the Church
had that Power as to outward Order and Decency to appoint Rites and Ceremonies
even when God himself had made Laws for Ceremonies, and those so many, that we
might have thought none could or might be added.

The Religious Kings and Governors of the Jewish Church enjoined diverse things
concerning God's Worship which were not by God commanded.

There was no Commandment of God assigning the Priests Order, Manner and Times
of Attendance in the Service of the Temple; yet David and Solomon appointed
them, and the Priests conformed and observed them. There was no Commandment for
Singers, Psalteries, Organs, Cimbals, Harps; yet David appointed for the Temple
this Music vocal and instrumental. There was no Commandment for the Feast of
Purim; yet Mordecai enjoined it, Hester set it forward, and the Jews
established it for succeeding Generations. There was no Commandment for the
Feast of Dedication; yet our Savior observed it. If therefore the Jewish
Church, when God himself had instituted abundance of Ceremonies, might and did
appoint others, besides those by God commanded, which were generally by all
without contradiction observed; surely a fortiori, the Christian Church, having
no Law of particular Ceremonies and Rites given by Christ, (since without
Religious Rites God cannot be publicly worshipped in any orderly and decent
manner) may, especially having a general Law to authorize her, 1 Corinthians. c.
14. constitute and appoint such Rites, and we must obey her Constitutions in
things neither commanded nor prohibited. But to come closely to their 20th
Reason, since, ad Triarios ventum est, it is their last, and that in which they
place their greatest strength.

The Holy Ghost (say they) has plainly decided the Point in controversy in
the Instance of Meats and Days, Romans 14. and 15. A weak brother that makes an
unnecessary difference of Meats and Days is not to be cast out, but so to be
received.

I shall here premise the weighty Monition of Dr. Sanderson, O beware of
misapplying Scripture, it is a thing easily done; but not so easily answered. I
know not any one gap that has let in more and more dangerous Errors into the
Church than this, that men take the words of the Sacred Text fitted to
particular occasions, and to the condition of the time wherein they were
written, and then apply them to themselves and others, as they find them,
without due respect had to the differences that may be between those times and
cases, and the present. Sundry things spoken in the Scripture, agreeable to the
infancy of the Church, would sort very ill with the Church in her fullness of
strength and stature. This Caution, directs me to tell the Petitioners, that
the Point and Case in controversy between us and them is hugely different from
that Romans c. 14. v. 15. in respect of the Time, the Persons, and Matter in
difference.

1. For the Time; The Jewish Church was now expiring, its Constitution
dissolved; The Christian Church, succeeding it, was in planting, in its
infancy; in this time, when the Church was not settled, and its Order not fully
established, the new Converts, being tender Plants, were to be tenderly used,
and all sorts, in pious Prudence, to be indulged; but not so in a Church
planted and settled, then and there all its Members are obliged to obey its
Orders, and not to cast them off upon pretense of Conscience or (Christian
Liberty; the Troubles at Francford they mention, though much to the hindrance
of the Reformation, because in the infancy and beginning of it; yet because in
the beginning of it, that Party which opposed the new-made Constitutions of our
Church were not so culpable as these Troublers, who, a hundred years after the
Orders of the Church had obtained and happily flourished, have invaded and
overturned all Order and Government, and now, that it is restoring, keep up the
same humor of opposing it.

2. The case is different in respect of the Persons differing about Meats and
Days; The one Party were weak, the other strong in Faith and Judgment of their
Christian Liberty: Now of whether endsort are our Non-conformists? The strong,
in modesty, they will not call themselves; and the weak, they will take it ill
to be called, being the Chieftains and Chosen ones of their Party, and giving
themselves the Title of Able and Godly, and who are now contesting with 20
Reasons (and this last in their esteem irrefragable) against the most Learned
Defenders of the Church's Orders. But if (as they seem to insinuate) they are
the weak Brethren, then their weakness deserves compassion, yet for that very
Reason (their weakness) owes submission to the better Judgment of the strong,
especially, they being ^ut Subjects and private persons, and obedience to the
formerly established and now to be restored Order: An yieldance there must be
on the one part, and whether the weak ought to submit to the strong, and obey
the Laws, or the strong must submit to the weak, and give them leave to trample
the Laws under their feet, let the weakest judge. But how long will these
Brethren be weak? Will they be Children of a Hundred years, after so long time
and teaching, and means of Instruction?

The Church (as says the Excellent Dr. Sanderson) has sufficiently declared
and published the Innocence of her purpose and meaning in enjoining the
Ceremonies; nor so only; but has been content to hear, receive and admit the
Objections and Reasons of the Refusers; and has taken pains to answer and
satisfy to the full all that ever could be said in that behalf; and therefore
it is vanity in these men to allege weakness where all good means have been
plentifully used for full information in the Points in doubt; so that we may,
without breach of Charity, conclude from so plain Premises, that not their
weakness, but wilfullness is the real Cause of their Refusal to conform.

3. The case is different in the Matter and Thing it self in controversy.
Those Meats and Days about whose observation there was variance, Romans c. 14.
were once, and a long time, not indifferent, but under Divine Precept, the one
commanded, the other prohibited; but our Ceremonies were always indifferent,
never under any Divine Precept, nor commanded, nor prohibited: The Reason why
those weak Brethren observed the Days and abstained from the Meats was, They
knew there was a Law of God for it, and they knew not that it was abolished:
But our weak Brethren have no such Reason to refuse the Ceremonies by the
Church enjoined, since they were never by any Law of God forbidden. Those weak
Brethren feared to sin where God had made a Law; our weak Brethren fear to sin
where God has made no Law, or rather, where he has made a general and
standing Law, that we should obey our Governors in their Ordinances which are
not contrary to his Laws. Let me add, the Point is greatly different in this
respect also; That the Apostle gives a Liberty only for a time, to use or not
to use those Legal Ceremonies, for afterward he cuts off that Liberty, and
forbids those Legal Observations to the Colossians and to the Galatians, and
that with great Severity: They were before Mortua, and allowed a decent Burial:
But now, after full Instruction that they were nailed to Christ's Cross and
buried in his Grave, they were Mortifera, 'twas deadly to raise or revive them;
and now, upon second thoughts, our Brethren, I hope, will see they have cause
to abate their Confidence; the Point in Controversy being very different about
the Jewish Rites and the Ceremonies of our Church.

Herein we cannot but discern and allow them to be like; In that, First, Those
Brethren, who judged the other, were weak, and so are these, though their
Reason stronger by much, they having the Law for them, these no Law.

Secondly, Those weak Brethren were in the Error, so are ours.

But, Thirdly, The Error of those directly contrary to the Error of these.
Those Brethren were zealous for the Ceremonies, these Brethren are zealous
against the Ceremonies. I shall end this Point in that solid and convincing
Answer of Mr. L'Estrange to this their 20th Reason, and I beseech them to read
and weigh it without prejudice to his person and manner of writing; he is smart
and pleasant, and does, I confess, Ludere cum Sanctis, (I mean only with such
Saints as our Brethren,) but I appeal to themselves whether he be not here
serious, and has not rightly interpreted the place, and stated the case, and
determined the Point in controversy.

Would our Divines persuade us, that the case of Meats and Days, whereof the
Apostle speaks, is of the same nature with that of Ceremonies which we are now
debating, or that a weak Brother is not to be distinguished from a peevish? See
how vast a difference lies between them, under the Law God himself put a
difference between Meats and Days, which difference ceast upon the coming of
our Blessed Savior: Some thought it still a point of Conscience to observe the
Law, and these the Apostle calls, Weak Brethren: Others again, that knew the
Law was abrogated, quitted these Scruples; and of these it is that St. Paul
says, We which are strong ought to bear the Infirmity of the weak: now mark,
That which was formerly imposed is now become a thing indiffrent, that is,
indifferent to the strong and knowing, not to those who were not convinced of
the Determination of the former Ty and Duty; and this is the true ground of the
Apostle's Tenderness here concerning Scandal, Destroy not him with thy meat for
whom Christ died.

See how their case now matches ours; They durst not eat, because they knew
that once they were bound, and they did not know likewise that they were now
discharged. Let our Reformers show as much for Ceremonies; Either that humane
Impositions (for Decency and Order he means) were ever forbidden, or that those
practiced in our Church are in themselves unlawful.

They next would father an Objection upon the Assertors of the Church's Orders
and Impositions -- If you say -- Rulers, Imposition makes Indifferent things
cease to be indifferent -- We answer -- But till they say as you would make
them, you may save your Answer, they are not obliged to a Reply; you may see
the Church's sense to be quite another thing than this you would impose upon
them, in Dr. Sanderson's Sermon, 1 Pet. 2.16.

To what you add from 1 Cor. 8.13. Paul was a Ruler of the Church himself, and
yet would deny his own Liberty rather than offend the weak: So far was he from
taking away the Liberty of others. The Answer is made already, the Case being
foreign, and nothing to our Controversy; The same now mentioned about eating
Meats offered to Idols wherewith the weak were offended. What is this to the
Point in controversy? We must deny our Liberty rather than offend the weak,
Ergo, the Church may not prescribe Rules about Indifferent things; and that
invidious and reflecting Passage added -- So far was he from taking away the
Liberty of others -- is as little to your purpose; you have been taught, and
might learn, that the Church, in prescribing Indifferent things, takes away no
man's Liberty: The things prescribed are in their own nature, and in the
Judgment both of the Imposer and the intelligent Observer of them the same they
were before, Indifferent. I obey the Church, yet preserve my Liberty, still
judging the thing Indifferent which it commands; and I obey not the Command as
any necessary part of Religion, but as the Church commands it, which I am bound
to obey for Decency and Order. They that make Laws concerning Indifferent
things have no intention at all to meddle with the nature of them, they leave
that in medio as they found it; but only for some reasons of convenience,
order the use of them, the Indifferency of their nature still being where it
was.

They are very unhappy in alleging that Scripture, Acts 15.28. which concludes
directly for the Church, against them, we may tell them in their own words, the
Holy Ghost has there so plainly decided the Point in controversy, that it
seems strange to us, that yet it should remain a controversy; they have here
thrown down all they have built; all their 20 Reasons fall and are broken in
pieces, as Dagon before the Ark.

This Chapter acquaints us, that some Jews, though converted to the Christian
Faith and embracing the Gospel, yet thought themselves bound to the Observation
of the whole Mosaical Law, and they thought the converted Gentiles so bound
also, and told them that, except they were circumcized, and kept the Law of
Moses, they could not be saved. Hereupon arises Dissension and Disputation, and
an Appeal is made to a Council at Jerusalem, which upon the hearing and
debating the Question determines, That the converted Gentiles should not be
obliged to Circumcision nor to the Ceremonial Law, but in yieldance to the
converted Jews, who were zealous of the Law, and to keep Peace with them, they
should abstain from some few things in their nature indifferent, but necessary
in order to Peace and Charity, from Meats offered to Idols, from Blood, and
from things strangled. Behold here the First and Greatest Council that ever was
in the Christian Church, to compose a Difference, meets, and makes a Law of
Abstinence from some things indifferent, and otherwise in themselves lawful.
This is plainly the Case, the Act of the Council and Decision of the Question,
and yet these men allege the Act of the Council to prove the quite contrary. I
am amazed to see how they change and clip the words, and pervert the sense of
the Scripture they cite for their ends, and, I fear, against their Conscience.
They say, the Apostles and Elders, Act. 15.28. declare unto the Churches, that
it seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and them to lay upon them no greater Burden
than necessary things; Do the Apostles and Elders so declare? then we yield the
Cause. Do they not? then ought they with Sin and Shame to yield it. They leave
out the word (These) because they know it made against them; limiting the
Church's Order to some few particular things, there presently named, Things
offered to Idols, Blood, etc.

Now whereas the Church makes a temporary Order for some particular things, and
declares thus, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no
greater Burden necessary besides these things or (these) necessary things:
They leave out that word (these) of main importance, and hugely against them,
and would make a standing Canon of their own, and father it upon the Apostles:
That the Church ought to impose no other then necessary things, and yet too by
their own confession, these things imposed were not simply in their own nature
unchangeably necessary, but by accident, pro tempore and loco; and whereas they
say, the Council imposed them, because antecedently necessary, The contrary is
most true: These things were not antecedently necessary, but only, as
themselves say, pro tempore, for the time. There being at this time a
difference risen about the Jewish Ceremonies, it was not necessary before the
Council now so determined, That the converted Gentiles should abstain from
things offered to Idols, strangled, and Blood; that Law belonging only to the
Jews, never to the Gentiles. Behold how rarely well these men argue, To prove
Church Governors may not determine in things indifferent for Order and Unity,
but all ought to be left to their own Liberty: They produce a Scripture which
proves most plainly, That Church Governors have, and may determine and
restrain those under them from the use of things indifferent; All the things
touching which the Council they produce do give order being indifferent, except
one, Fornication, which is of another nature, but with these prohibited, for
that the Gentiles allowed themselves in it, and scarce looked on it as a Sin:
This of their 20th and last Reason which I have thus at large considered, for
that they lay so much weight upon it, though it prove, as the rest, light in
the Balance; I shall, for a Conclusion of all, clearly evidence the Church's
Power to prescribe external Rites and Ceremonies for Order and Decency, and our
Obligation to conform unto them from the Judgment of two ancient Fathers, for
whom I suppose our Brethren have some Reverence; and if those cannot move them,
from the Judgment of a modern Father, for whom I am sure they have a high
Veneration; It Is St. Augustine's Rule, Prudenti Christiano eo modo agendum esse
quo agit Ecclesia ad quam devenerit, and his Mother having used, when she was
in Africa, to fast on the Saturday, and coming to Millan, where that Fast was
not observed, was doubtful what to do; hereupon her Son consulted Saint
Ambrose, who thus answered, When I am here at Millan, I do not fast on the
Saturday; when I am at Rome, I do fast on the Saturday; and unto what Church
soever ye come, keep the custom of it, if you be willing neither to give nor
take Scandal: From which Rule of St. Augustine and Advice of St. Ambrose, a
Learned person makes these Remarks: 1. That diverse Countries, professing the
same Religion, may have diverse Ceremonies. 2. That in Churches Independent one
is not bound of necessity to follow another. 3. That it is the Duty of every
private person to conform himself to the laudable Customs and Constitutions of
the Church wherein he lives or wherever he comes. You have heard the Judgment
of these ancient Fathers. Will you hear your modern Father Mr. Calvin, and he
delivers his Judgment so fully, and with so much strength and clearness asserts
the Church's Power to ordain external Rites and Ceremonies, that Master Hooker
himself could not say more or better.

Whereas many unskilful men, when they hear that Consciences are wickedly
bound, and God Worshipped in vain, by the Traditions of men, do at once blot
out altogether all Laws whereby the Order of the Church is set in frame.
Therefore it is convenient also to meet with their Error. Verily in this point
it is easy to be deceived, because at first sight it does not by and by appear
what difference there is between the one sort and the other: But I will so
plainly in few words set out the whole matter that the Likeness may deceive no
man. First let us hold this, That if we see in every Society of men some Policy
to be necessary which may serve to nourish common Peace, and to retain Concord,
if we see that in the doing of things there is always some orderly Form which
is behoofefull for public Honesty, and for very Humanity not to be refused,
the same ought chiefly to be observed in Churches, which are both best
maintained by a well framed disposition of all things, and without Agreement
are no Churches at all. Therefore, if we will have the Safety of the Church
well provided for, we must altogether diligently procure that which St. Paul
commands, That all things be done comely and according to order. But
forasmuch as there is so great diversity in the Manners of men, so great
variety in Minds, so great disagreements in Judgments and Wits; neither is
there any Policy steadfast enough, unless it be stablished by certain Laws; nor
any orderly Usage can be observed, without a certain appointed Form: therefore
we are so far off from condemning the Laws that are profitable to this purpose,
that we affirm, that when these be taken away, Churches are dissolved from
their Sinews, and utterly deformed and scattered abroad; for this which St.
Paul requires, That all things be done decently and in order, cannot be had,
unless the Order it self and Comeliness be established, with Observations
adjoined as with certain Bonds. But this only thing is always to be excepted in
those Observations, That they be not either believed to be necessary to
Salvation, and so bind Consciences with Religion, or be applied to the
worshipping of God, and so Godliness be reposed in them. We have therefore a
very good and most faithful mark, which puts difference between those
wicked Ordinances by which we have said, That the True Religion is darkened, and
Consciences subverted, and the lawful Observations of the Church, if we
remember that the lawful Observations tend always to one of these two things or
to both together, that in the Holy Assembly of the Faithful all things be done
comely, and with such dignity as beseems, and that the very common Fellowship
of men should be kept in Order, as it were by certain Bonds of Humanity and
Moderation; for when it is once understood that the Law is made for public
Honesty's sake, the Superstition is now taken away, into which they fall that
measure the Worshipping of God by the Inventions of men. Again, when it is
known, that it pertains to Common uses, then that false opinion of Bond and
Necessity is overthrown, which did strike a great Terror into Consciences when
Traditions were thought necessary to Salvation; for herein is nothing required,
but that Charity should with common dutiful doing be nourished amongst us. But
it is good yet to define more plainly what is comprehended under that
Comeliness which Paul commends, and also what under Order. The end of
Comeliness is partly, that when such Ceremonies are used as may procure a
Reverence to Holy things, we may by such Helps be stirred up to Godliness;
partly also, that the Modesty and Gravity which ought to be seen in all Honest
Doings may therein principally appear. In Order this is the first Point, That
they which govern may know the Rule and Law to govern well, and the People
which are governed may be accustomed to obeying of God, and to right
Discipline: Then that the state of the Church being well framed, Peace and
Quietness may be provided for. Verily because the Lord has in his Holy Oracles
both faithfully contained and clearly set forth both the whole Sum of true
Righteousness, and all the parts of the Worshipping of his Divine Majesty, and
whatsoever was necessary to Salvation; therefore in these things he is only to
be heard as our Schoolmaster. But because in outward Discipline and Ceremonies
his Will was not to prescribe each thing particularly, what we ought to follow,
because he foresaw this to hang upon the state of Times, and did not think one
Form to be fit for all Ages, herein we must flee to those general Rules which
he has given, that thereby all those things should be tried which the
necessity of the Church shall require to be commanded for Order and Comeliness;
finally, forasmuch as he has therefore taught nothing expressly, because these
things are not necessary to Salvation, and according to the manners of every
Nation and Age ought diversely to be applied to the edifying of the Church:
Therefore as the Profit of the Church shall require, it shall be convenient as
well to change and abrogate those that be used, as to institute new. I grant
indeed, that we ought not rashly, nor often, nor for light causes to run to
Innovation, but what may hurt or edify, Charity shall best judge, which if we
suffer to be the Governess, all shall be safe.

Now it is the Duty of Christian People to keep such things as have been
ordained according to this Rule with a free Conscience, and without any
Superstition, but yet with a godly and easy readiness to obey, not to despise
them, nor to pass them over with careless Negligence; so far is it off, that
they ought by Pride and Obstinacy openly to break them. What manner of Liberty
of Conscience, will thou say, may there be in so great observation and
wariness? Yes, it shall stand excellently well; when we shall consider that
they are not steadfast and perpetual stayed Laws whereunto we are bound, but
outward Rudiments for the weakness of Men, which though we do not all need, yet
we do all use them; because we are mutually bound to one another to nourish
Charity among us. Thus Mr. Calvin delivers his Judgment directly contrary to
yours, perfectly consentient to the Church of England, and we find his Practice
according with his Judgment; he put the Yoke of Discipline upon the Neck of the
Senate and People of Geneva, and bound them to it with an Oath; and he declares
for a Form of Prayers and Ecclesiastical Rites, and greatly approves that it be
fixed, from which it may not be lawful for the Pastors to depart in their
Function: you may now go and accuse Mr. Calvin (with our Church) as judging and
acting contrary to Romans 14. and to the Decree of the Apostolical Council,
laying both upon Pastors and People a great Burden of things not necessary;
and if you please to take a view of the Scottish Discipline, First and Second
Book of Discipline.
you will find there also a huge and heavy Burden, abundance of things which
you dare not say are necessary.

And to come home.

The Solemn League and Covenant, imposed by the long Parliament upon the whole
Kingdom, and taken I doubt not by your selves, is a most heavy Burden of
things, so far from necessary, that they are not lawful, nay highly sinful;
and if you have still the Confidence to say the matter of it was necessary, yet
you cannot affirm it of the Ceremonies enjoined with strictness at the taking
of it, which are more than all the Ceremonies by the Church enjoined to the
People in the whole Liturgy: They are no less than Five. Those who took the
Covenant were ordered, 1. to stand; 2. uncovered; 3. with the hand lifted up;
4. the right hand; 5. and that bared.

And may I here presume to ask you, Suppose a weak Brother, whose tender
Conscience could not swallow these solemn Rites, should affirm 'twas sinful in
the Parliament to lay upon them the Burden of these not necessary things, and
that he could not take the Covenant, unless you would allow him his Christian
Liberty to do it without these superstitious Ceremonies; whether would you and
the Parliament indulge him for his Tenderness, or reject and sequester him (if
well fleeced) for his Nonconformity? But whatever becomes of this Case, you
have in a solemn part of God's Worship (for so you judge the Solemn League and
Covenant) strictly enjoined several unnecessary Rites and Ceremonies, and so
you must necessarily condemn your selves, and renounce at least the Ceremonies
of your Covenant, or cease for ever to declaim against the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of England.

THE END.
Books Printed for and sold by Thomas Flesher, at the Angel and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
AN exact Description of all the Birds hitherto known; the Descriptions
illustrated by most elegant Figures, nearly resembling the Live Birds engraven
on 78 Copper Plates, with Three considerable Discourses, viz. 1. Of the Art
Fowling, 2. The ordering of Singing Birds, and, 3. Of Falconry. By Francis
Willoughby, Esquire. Fol.

Glossographia, or, A Dictionary interpreting the hard Words of whatsoever
Language, now used in our refined English Tongue; with Etymologies,
Definitions, and Historical Observations on the same: Also the Terms of
Divinity, Law, Physic, Music, Mathematics, War, Heraldry, and other Arts and
Sciences explicated. The Fifth Edition, with many Additions. By T. Blount of
the Inner Temple, Esquire;.

The Policy of Rome, or, The true Sentiments of the Court and Cardinals there
concerning Religion and the Gospel, as they are delivered by Cardinal
Palavicini, in his History of the Council of Trent; Englished out of French.
With a Preface. By Gil. Burnet, D. D.

Vade mecum, or, A Companion for a Surgeon: fitted for Sea or Land, Peace or
War: showing the Use of his Instruments, and Virtues of Medicines simple and
compound most in use, and how to make them up after the best method: with the
manner of making Reports to a Magistrate, or Coroner's Inquest. A Treatise of
Bleeding at the Nose: with Directions for Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, etc. By
Tho. Brugis, Doctor in Physic. The Seventh Edition, amended and augmented.
With an Institution of Physic, and Seven new Treatises, viz. Of Tumors,
Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, Dislocations, Lues-Venerea, Anatomy. By Ellis Prat,
M. D.

The Poetical History, being a complete Collection of all the Stories necessary
for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other ancient
Authors. By the Learned Jesuit P. Galtruchius. The Fourth Edition. 8o.

The History and Fall of Caius Marius, A Tragedy. By Tho. Otway. 4o.

The Painter's Voyage of Italy, in which all the famous Paintings of the most
eminent Masters are particularized, as they are preserved in the several Cities
of Italy, illustrated with the Heads of some of the most renowned Painters. By
Will. Lodge, Gent. 8o.

Euclidis Elementorum Libri XV. breviter demonstrati, opera Isa. Barrow,
Cantabr. Col. Trin. Soc. 8o.

A modern account of Scotland, with a true Character of the People and their
Manners. 4o.

Patience and its Perfect Work under sudden and sore Trials. By Tho. Goodwin.

The Christian Man, or, The Reparation of Nature by Grace. By J. F. Senault.

Reprinting, The Anatomy of the Body of Man, by Alex. Read, M. D. with many
Additions, in large 8o. illustrated with many Sculptures.


