The SPIRIT of CHRIST, AND The SPIRIT of the APOSTLES, AND The SPIRIT of the
MARTYRS Is Arisen, Which bears TESTIMONY against SWEARING and OATHS: For
which the Martyrs suffered in the time of the Ten Persecutions, and some since;
which we also, the People of God called Quakers, do now suffer for, as many
thousands have done, for keeping the Commands of Christ, who says, Swear not
at all.

And also, here you may see such Martyrs as could not put off their Hat or
Bonnet to the Pope, nor his Legate.

And an Example of one Martyr, that could not give Sureties, being Innocent.

So that you may see in this Book following [to swear not at all, no to take
Oaths, nor to deny putting off the Hat or Bonnet, nor to deny giving Sureties
(being Innocent) is no new thing] which is proved out of the Scriptures, and
Book of Martyrs.

You have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. But I say unto
you, Swear not at all, etc. but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay,
nay; for whatsoever is more, comes of evil,

Matthew. 5. But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven,
neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath: but let your yea be yea, and your
nay, nay, lest you fall into Condemnation,

Jam. 5.12. Published by Ellis Hooks.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the Blackspread-Eagle, at
the West End of Paul's, 1661.

The Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the Apostles, and the Spirit of the
Martyrs is arisen, Which bears Testimony against Swearing and Oaths.
THere was no Oaths before the Fall given to Man, but after the Fall; for in
the Law (after the Fall) among the Jews were the Oaths given and commanded,
which Christ by whom the World was made, which was before the Fall; who was the
Oath of GOD, of whom Oaths were typical in the Fall; who ends the Strife, and
brought into the Rest, and tied up to GOD: And Christ the Oath of GOD ends all
Oaths whatsoever that tied up to God, and brought into the Land of Rest,
outward Canaan, and ended the strife; which Christ, destroys the Devil, the
author of strife, who is the Rest himself, and is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life that brings up to God, and is God's Covenant, in which Man has Peace with
GOD, that destroys that which led out from GOD and CHRIST; He it is that
says, Christ who was the Oath of God, brings man to the pleasant Garden.
Swear not at all, neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor any other Oath, which
restores Man into the state that he was in, in the beginning before the Fall,
that does restore, into God's Image, and so in the Restoration there is no
Oaths nor Swearing according to the Doctrine of Him, but Yea and Nay to be
practiced in all their common occasions, and whatsoever is more is evil; So
Swearing now comes to be evil: And this is the Doctrine of Him that does
restore People up into the state that Man was in in the beginning, who is the
Substance that ends the Figures: and his Disciple that followed his Counsel,
who is the Everlasting Counselor, said, Above all things, my Brethren, swear
not at all; neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor any other Oath, James 5.
lest ye fall into Condemnation: but in all your communications, let your Yea
be Yea, and your Nay Nay; And this was the practice of them that followed the
Doctrine and Command of Christ in the Restoration, who was built upon the true
Foundation, that was first laid in the primitive amongst the true Brethren, and
held forth publicly: which Practice, Doctrine and Command of Christ Jesus and
the Apostles in the primitive times, many of the Martyrs followed, held forth
and practiced, amongst such as were degenerated and apostatized from the Life
and Power of Christ and the Apostles, though they professed the words; and now is
the Spirit of Christ Jesus, and the Apostles, and the Saints in the primitive
times, and the Spirit of the Martyrs risen, which does bear a Testimony against
all Oaths and Swearing whatsoever, amongst Heathens, Jews, and Apostate
Christians, both public and private, and keeps to Yea and Nay in all their
common occasions, as Christ and the Apostles, and Martyrs taught and practiced,
knowing whatsoever is more than Yea and Nay is evil; and such are condemned
that do swear, according to Christ's and the Apostles Doctrine. So we say
again, Christ and the Apostles and Martyrs Spirit is risen, which has been
dead, and is dead in and among the Apostates, that have the Form but deny the
Power, from which we turn away; but now is risen amongst Us, lives and is
alive; Glory and Honor to GOD through Jesus Christ, that does restore up to
the Beginning into the Image of GOD, as Man was before the Fall, bofore Oaths
were. So, see some Examples, see Genesis, there was no Command given to Adam
and Eve before the Fall concerning Swearing, neither from Christ that does
restore Man again, who ends the Oaths before the Law, and in the Law and
Prophets, to whom the Angels bow that swore: for Christ said, Swear not at all,
who is the Lord and Master; so it is better to obey Him than Man: And in all
your communication, let your yea be yea, and your nay nay; whatsoever is more
than this comes of evil, says he that restores, even Christ. And for further
example, see the Apostles, who practiced the Doctrine and Command of Christ,
and said, Above all things, my Brethren, swear not at all, lest you fall into
condemnation, Jam. 5. but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay in all your
common occasions. And though there were Swearing among the Jews, and other
heathenish Nations, before the apostate Christians got up to swear; yet the
Apostles and Brethren obeyed, and was to obey the Doctrine and Command of
Christ: So if Christ command one thing, and men another, it is better to obey
the Lord Jesus Christ the Life, who is the Restorer, Savior and Redeemer, than
men. And also see the Examples of the Martyrs that followed Christ and the
Apostles Doctrine in the night of the apostate Christians, from the Life of
Christ and the Apostles, who suffered among them, that had the form of
Godliness, but denied the power; See their Example as follows, for he that
had the form of Godliness but denied the power, among them have the Oaths and
Swearing come up, who persecuted and martyred them that lived in the power of
God; nevertheless the Martyrs could not yield to these Apostate Christians, but
kept the Doctrines and Commands of Christ Jesus, and kept to Yea and Nay in
their common occasions, and denied Oaths, and yielded up their Estates to the
Spoyler, and their Bodies to the Fire. And also see the Martyrs that suffered
and denied swearing by the Heathen Emperor's Good Fortune, and by Caesar's
Prosperity, which was the custom of the Romans at that time, and of diverse
Heathen Emperors: And now would not all people say, for obeying Christ's
Doctrine, that they disobey the Command of the Rulers, which commanded that
which their Master forbad, for the sake of which many did deny their Lives and
Estates for the keeping of his Commands. And that also, that people may now see
it is no new thing to deny Swearing and Oaths, take a few Examples of the
Faithful in Ages past.

G. F.

Swearing denied by the Martyrs.
POlicarpus who was (as it is said) John's Disciple, Vol. 1st. fol. 55.
and had been a Disciple eighty nine years, when he came to suffer Martyrdom,
the Proconsul required him to swear by the Emperors good Fortune, and by
Caesar's Prosperity, which was the custom of the Romans at that time. And diverse
Heathen Emperors set up their own Images to be worshipped, and their Persons to
be sworn by: but Policarpus denied, and said, he was a Christian, and would
show forth the Doctrine of Christianity if he desired the same, if the
Proconsul would appoint a day and hear it: For Policarpus refused to swear, but
kept Christ's Doctrine; so he was led away to be burned, being an old ancient
man, confessing himself to be a Christian. So at that time it seems Christians
did not Swear, as afterward they did in the Apostasy. See Acts and Monuments.

And Basilides a Soldier, and afterward a Martyr, being required to swear,
affirmed plainly, That it was not lawful for him to swear, for that he was a
Christian. So that it seems that it was the mark of a Christian not to swear.
See Eusebius, lib. 6. chap. 4. page 98.

And Justinian the Emperor appointed first, that men should swear By the
Gospel, and lay their hands thereupon and kiss it, saying, So help me God. And
here Christendom may see who are in the Apostasy, and who were the first
Inventors of this Swearing and the manner thereof; which the Teachers of these
latter Ages do ignorantly press for an Ordinance of God, since the Apostles
days.

See the old manner of the Papists Oath, Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. page 854.
which they use to require of People as the quality and fact required by a
Corporal Oath, taken upon the Evangelists, or upon the Relics of Saints, or
upon the Image of the Crucifix, etc.

Another manner of the Papists Oath: They caused them to swear by the
Evangelists, with their three middle fingers stretched out and laid upon the
Book, as a sign of the Trinity and Catholic Faith; Hen. 8ths days.
and the other two, the thumb and little finger, put down under the Book, in
token of damnation of Body and Soul, if they did not depose the Truth in the
matter.

Also in the days of Nero and Domitian, both Heathen Emperors and Cruel
Tyrants, was very great and sore Persecutions of the Christians, and they had a
form of an Oath for men to swear by the Inquisitor of their Inquisition, put
the Christians whom they persecuted, to swear by their form of Oath, whether
that they were Christians or no; but the Christians refused to swear,
confessing and saying, That they were Christians, and could not deny Christ nor
his Doctrine; and then, according to the Heathens Law, Sentence of Death was
pronounced against the Christians by the Proconsul, and forthwith the Sentence
was put in Execution by wicked blood-thirsty-men, who put the Christians to
death, some after one manner, and some after another, according to the wills of
these cruel Tyrants the Emperors.

And the Waldenses or Leonists (whose Names are so famous in the Reformed
Churches) and who are said immediately to succeed the Apostles, De Succes cap.
6.
and were the most ancient and true Protestants, professed it to be no way
lawful for a Christian to swear: In the Defense of whom, in the very thing,
Bishop Usher, late Bishop of Armath, Primat of Ireland, pleads their Cause
against the Papists and Jesuits, who are the Swearers and breakers of Oaths,
and yet pleads for Swearing.

The Plowman in his Complaint says, Vol. 1. page* 527.
Thou give us a Commandment of Truth, in bidding us say, Yea, yea, Nay, nay,
and swear for nothing. Thou give us also a Commandment of Meekness, and
another of Poorness; but Lord, he that calls himself thy Vicar on Earth, has
both these Commandments broken: for he makes a Law to compel men to swear; and
by his Law he teaches, that for a man to save his life may forswear and lie;
and so Lord, through the comfort of him and his Laws the People draws out to
swear and to lie; nay, oft-times to forswear them: Lord, here is little truth.
Further he says, Whether thou ordainest an Order of Fighters to turn men to
the Belief; other ordain that Knights should swear to fight for thy Words.

And it is one of John Wickliff's Articles, Vol. 1. page 586. Rich. 2ds day.
(whose Works were as much esteemed of by the Protestants in England and
Bohemia, as despised by the Papists and their Clergy, having his Bones taken up
and burned forty one years after his decease; and his Books were also burned:
and this Article, with many other, was condemned by the Council of Constance)
That all Oaths which be made for any Contract or Civil Bargain betwixt man and
man, be unlawful. John Hus and Jerome of Prague were condemed for holding
Wickliff's Opinions.

And Walter Brute, Vol. 1. fol. 653. Rich. 2d's days.
a Teacher among the People of God (in the Age of Scorners, called the Devil's
servant, or Lollard) against whom the Pope and King Richard the Second, and
then the ungodly Bishops made such ado to have the name of Truth extinguished,
and the Professors thereof cut off) this is Walter's Testimony as concerning
Oaths, I believe and obey the Doctrine of Almighty God, and my Master Christ
Jesus, which teaches that Christian men in the Affirmation of Truth should
pass the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees of the Old Testament, or
else he excludes them from the Kingdom of Heaven; for he says, Except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And as concerning Oaths he says, It has
been said of old time, Thou shall not for swear thy self, but shall perform
those things unto the Lord thou know. But I say unto you, Thou shall not
swear at all, neither by the Heaven, nor by the Earth, etc. But let your
communications be yea, yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever shall be more than
this proceeds of evil. Therefore as the perfection of the ancient men of the
Old Testament was not to forswear themselves: so the perfection of a Christian
man, is not to swear at all, because they are commanded of Christ, whose
Command in no case must be broken, although the City of Rome is contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, etc. A good Testimony of a blessed Martyr.

Hear it appears that the Swearing which Christ forbids, is not only profane
Swearing ( Exodus 20.7.) in the Common Communication, for that was forbidden in
the Law, where it is said, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, etc. but solemn Swearing, which was to be performed; and that was the
perfection of the Law. And Kings and Princes may take warning by this King
Richard, not to fulfill the cruel and bloody desires of their Prelates.

And Chrysostom, Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. fol. 701.
who was Bishop of Constantinople, in commendation of whom much is said in the
Ecclesiastical History, he blames them greatly that brought forth a Book to
swear upon, charging his Clark, That in no wise they constrain any body to
swear, whether they think a man swear true or false, saying that it is a sin to
swear well. Now I mentioned before that it was an Emperor that commanded first
that men should swear by a Book, and this Chrysostom reproves: So hereby it may
be seen by these Examples, that it is no new Doctrine to deny all Swearing: and
there has been a People very many years in the Low Countries that have denied
Swearing in any matter; therefore their Yea and Nay stands in Courts of
Judicatory equal with an Oath, they being men generally of known Integrity,
whose Yea is Yea, and Nay, Nay, in all places and matters, as hereafter you may
see.

Likewise Jerome, who was an ancient Father and Teacher in the Church, which all
the Protestants owned, upon that place, Matthew. 5.37. and James 5.12. these are
his words, It was permitted under the Law to the Jews, as being tender, as it
were Infants, that they were to offer Sacrifices to God, lest they should
sacrifice to Idols; so that they might swear by God, not that it was rightful
so to do, but because it was better to swear by the LORD, than to swear by
false Gods and Devils: But the great Evangelist in sincerity and truth admits
not of an Oath, since every true saying is equality thereunto.

In like manner does Theophilact, an ancient Father of the Church, whom the
Protestants own, and have often cited his Doctrine for proof upon the place in
controversy, says, Learn hence, that then under the Law it was not evil for
one to swear; but since the coming of Christ it is evil, as is Circumcision,
and in some, what ever is judaical; for it may become a Child to suck, and not
Man. So that Oaths pertained to the Jews, who were under the changeable
Covenant, and the mutable Covenant, which continued but for a time, till the
Seed Christ, the Oath of God was revealed; and where He is revealed and
witnessed, all the Judaical things, times and figures, and changeable
Ordinances have an end.

Likewise Ambrose upon Psalm 118, he says, None does swear aright but he that
knows what he swears: and the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, (that is,
concerning his Son, God's Oath, which ends the Oaths.) Upon Psalm. 110. Ambrose
says, Let him then swear who cannot repent of his Oath. And a little after
the said Ambrose says, Do not imitate him in swearing, whom you cannot imitate
in fulfilling. And indeed the principal Solution given by him is, Swear not at
all, and the aforesaid Waldenses who condemned all manner of Swearing as
unlawful, they made it their care to avoid Swearing and Lying, and hereby they
did give sufficient caution against all Inconveniences which might come thereby
as to Government in general; for whereas Testification or Assertion is made
without an Oath, is as sure as if it had been sworn to. And Biship Usher does
esteem that place of Matthew. 5. Swear not at all, to be a sufficient plea for
the Waldenses against Swearing. And therefore they who have any esteem of the
aforesaid Authors, and of their Doctrines, must not condemn the Quakers as for
novelties, or for broachers of new Doctrine: For Rinerius, one of the Popish
Inquisition, says, Among all the Sects which are or have been, there is not
any more pernicious to the Church (meaning the Church of Rome) than the
Waldenses, and that for three Reasons, first, Because of their Antiquity; and
secondly, Because of their Universality; and thirdly, In that they did profess
it no way lawful fer a Christian to Swear on any occasion. Which Doctrine was
contrary to the Church of Rome, which made Rinerius and Jansenius, two Papists,
so much envy the Waldenses in this thing, about the keeping the Commands of
Christ. And yet notwithstanding all this Cloud of Witnesses, both in the
Primitive times and after Ages, diverse who suffered as Martyrs, did hold the
same; and also the many Testimonies of them who have dyed in the Faith of
Christ and the Apostles, and kept the Testimony of the Commands of Christ.

And also it is recorded, that the Christian Martyrs in King Richard's days,
and in Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Sixth's days, and Mary's days here in
England, did bear a good Testimony against Swearing, and likewise did refuse to
swear, according to the Command of Christ, who said, Swear not at all.
Therefore I say, it is neither lawful, nor comely, nor sfe to break the Law of
Christ, which ends the Law and Commandment that commands Swearing, which Law of
Christ is the Law of the Spirit of Life, the Transgression of which is evil,
and the Penalty of which is Condemnation: So see some Examples as follows.

John Florence a Turner held, That all such as did swear by their Life or
Power, shall be damned, except they repent.

First, Vol. 1. page 871. Hen. 6ths days.
it is said, That Margery Baxter did inform this Deponent, That she should in
no case swear, saying to her in English, Dame, beware of the Be, for every Be
will sting; therefore take beed you swear not, neither by God, neither by our
Lady, neither by any other Saint: and if you do contrary, the Be will sting
your mouth, and venom your soul.

Above one hundred taken, Vol. 1. page 869. Hen. 6ths days.
whereof some were burned, some cruelly handled, and some were forced to
abjure, who said, It was not lawful to swear in private cases.

There it is said, That neither the Pope nor the Prelates, Vol. 1. page 896.
Hen. 4ths days.
neither any Ordinary can compel any man to swear by any Creature of God, or by
the Bible-book.

Woodman's Examination before the Bishop of Winchester.

Winchester said, Hold him a Book, if he refuse to swear, Vol. 3. page 823. Ma.
days.
he is an Anabaptist, and shall be Excommunicated.

Wood. I will not swear for you; Excommunicate me if you will: for you be not
meet to take an Oath, etc.

Winch. said, Thou art an absolute Fool, Page 822.
and an Heretic; Lay thy hand on the Book, and answer to such things as I lay
against thee.

Wood. I will lay no hand on the Book for none of ye all, I have nothing to do
with you.

Winch. This man is without Law, and cares not for the King nor Queen.

Woodm. I would you loved the King nor Queen no worse than I.

Woodman said to the Bishop of Chichester, Why my Lord, St. Paul says to
Timothy, A Bishop should be blameless; and you use much swearing, which is a
great fault in a Bishop, of all others, that should be an Example to the Flock.
Then he and his Prelates were in a Rage with him, because he reproved him for
his swearing. And this Richard Woodman was burnt at Lewis with nine more.

Some refused to take the Oath in the King's College, Vol. 3. page 766. Ma.
days.
and would not betray themselves.

At a Conference between the Bishop and Mr. Philpot, V. 3. p. 561. Ma. days.
and other Prisoners, the Bishop brought a Book for the Prisoners to swear
against Philpot, and the Prisoners refused to swear.

One Smith hearing Bishop Bonner swear, he said, Page 400. Ma. days.
Well sworn, ye keep a good watch (in reproof to him.) Then B. Bonner called
him, Master Controller, you catch me at my words, I Will catch thee as well I
warrant thee. So here he reproves a Bishop.

Bradford spoke against Swearing before the Chancellor, Page 286. Ma. days.
and would not take the Queens Oath: and then the Chancellor said, he went to
deny all obedience to the Queen, and make God's Word a Warrant for it; for he
will not answer the Queen in this sort, when she says, Swear now to the Bishop
of Rome. And yet Bradford said, He did not go about to deny all obedience to
the Queen, but denied obedience in this part, if she should demand it.

It pittieth me to hear the use of some in our Nation, Vol. 2. page 420. says
J. S.
as name themselves Spiritual, and name themselves Head Ministers of the
Church; who incontinent as a man comes before them, they call for a Book, and
do move him to swear; they will charge him by Virtue of the Contents of the
Evangelists.

They that will follow the Law shall be heard in open Court, P. 120. in Germany.
and taught how the matter is like to proceed, and counseled with new
Exhortations to stop their Process, if they will not be persuaded; and the
Judges seeing the matter ambiguous, that they cannot give Sentence, except by
virtue of an Oath made by one of the Parties they be first better certified;
then they will show the same before the Suitors, declaring what a chargeful
thing it is to swear a solemn Oath, for the love of some wordly profit, besides
an ill example that is given to a Multitude, it works to themselves happily shame
or dishonesty.

So that Juries and Swearing is well excluded out of Germany, and need not much
to be required; the Judges and Peers by Reason, and sober and fatherly
Exhortations persuading their Neighbors, to avoid God's Displeasure: As here
you may see the Magistrates of Middleburgh were to take Peoples Yea and Nay
instead of an Oath, by this which follows.

A COPY given forth by AUTHORITY IN MIDDLEBURGH.
WHEREAS there has been an Address presented unto his Excellency in the
behalf of certain of the Inhabitants of the City of Middleburgh, wherein
Complaint was made of the Magistrates of the said City, who not long since
caused the Shops of some of the said Inhabitants to be shut up, and
consequently has forbidden them Trading, though it be their only means to
maintain their Families by; and that this has been the Cause (to wit) their
refusing the taking the accustomed Oaths, as others have done; Yet nevertheless
it appears that for certain years past, they have paid all Taxes,
Contributions and Customs belonging to the City; even equal with other Citizens
and Inhabitants of the said City (though they had never taken the said Oath)
and that willingly; and therefore ought they now to have their Liberty, without
being molested in this particular; seeing they desire nothing else than to live
in the enjoyment of their Liberty of their Consciences, in order to which this
present War with the King of Spain was Raised by his Subjects, and which now,
by the help of God, is come so far, that the aforesaid Liberty of Conscience is
obtained; and therefore it would be an evil thing to take it away from these
People, who through their paying of Taxes and Contributions, and bearing of
other Burdens (besides the great hazard of their Lives and Liberties) has
helped to obtain it; And it appears that these People have declared, that they
are willing to be ruled according to the Ordinances of the City, yet
nevertheless the Magistrates do and have striven with them about the Oath,
which have not only extended to the expelling them out of the City, but
consequently to the forcing out of a numberless Company of others in Holland
and Zealand, with their Wives and Children, to their utter Ruin: and this
would not tend to any man's profit, but on the countrrry, it would be a great
apparent hinderance to these Lands, because Trading thereby, over all NATIONS,
would greatly decrease.

And forasmuch as these People do proffer, That their YEA shall stand insted of
an Oath, and the Transgression thereof to be punished as Perjured Persons:
Which thing his Excellency having taken into consideration, does therefore,
with the Advice of the Governor and Council of Zealand, Ordain and Confirm,
and by these Presents be it Ordained and Confirmed, That the Peoples YEA,
aforesaid, shall stand instead of an Oath, before the Magistrates of the
aforesaid City; And that the Transgressors of the same shall be punished as
Forswearers, or Perjured Persons. Moreover, His Excellency does Charge and
Command the Magistrates of Middleburgh, with all others whom it does concern,
For the future, not to burden these People aforesaid, any further with the
Oath, but that they shall open their Shops, and follow their Trading as
formerly they have done.

This was given forth in his Excellencies Name, and under his Seal, in the City
of Middleburgh in Zealand, the 26th of January, 1577.

Hear follows a COPY of another ORDER to the Confirmation of the former.

NOBLE, HONEST, HONORABLE, WISE, DISCREET, and Specially BELOVED.
WHEREAS there are certain men, Vide Religion Urgheit, fol. 68, 69.
as it is said, dwelling in Middleburgh, who with Complaints have at sundry
times been made known unto Us, how that you are daily molesting them, so that
in Quietness and Peace they cannot follow their Trading, thereby to get a
Livelihood for themselves and their Families, they being hindered from setting
open their Shops, under pretense of their Refusing the taking of the Oath, in
such a Form as other Citizens have done, the which we have already taken into
Consideration; And seeing that the aforesaid People do proffer to bear their
part of all reasonable Burdens with other Citizens, they themselves being
excused from bearing of Arms, so that you may order that for them at their
Charge, or such as you shall appoint, howbeit, not exceeding Equity and Reason.

But however we think that you are to be blamed, that you suffer them not to
live in Quietness and Peace, according to their Mind and Conscience, and
according to the Act, which, with the Advice of the Governor and Council, We
have formerly granted them, which they have showed unto You, as they say;
Nevertheless We have understood, that to this very day You will not observe it,
nor Our former LETTERS, We are therefore now finally necessitated to write
This, by which we do manifestly declare unto You, That it does not belong to
You in particular, to trouble your selves about the Consciences of any, if
there be nothing done by them, which tends to the scandalizing of any; and in
that particular we do not desire to respect or suffer any; And therefore We
expressly Charge and Require You, that from henceforth you forbear molesting
those People called ANABAPTISTS, or from hindering them from following their
Trades and their Merchandise, whereby they may get a Livelihood for their Wives
and Children; And see that from henceforth You suffer Them to Open their Shops,
and to follow their Business, as heretofore they have done: And see that Yon
take heed how that You Act contrary to This, or to Act as beforementioned; or
of taking any Fines of these People for the Cause aforesaid, while nothing is
Attempted by them, which might tend to the scandalizing of any man, they
bearing their reasonable Share of such Burdens as do belong to the City, as
well as others.

Written at Antwerp the 26th of July, 1578.

Concerning Swearing.
William Thorp's Examination before the Bishop.
Bishop. IT is certified against thee William Thorp, Acts and Monuments, Vol.
1. page 701. Hen. 6ths days.
that thou preachest openly at Shrewsbury, That it is not lawful to Swear in
any case.


Thorp. What I preached at Shrewsbury, I say now here, By the Authority of the
Epistle of James, and by the Witness of diverse Saints and Doctors, I have
preached openly in one place or other, That it is not lawful to swear by any
Creature, (though he had not said so altogether as he said) and I have preached
and taught according to the aforesaid Authors, that no body should swear in any
case; If that without an Oath he that is charged to swear might excuse him
without an Oath, Which was the Jews Oaths and true Oath, commanded by the Law
of God, which Law and Oath Christ ends.
to them that have power to compel him to swear, then he ought only to swear By
GOD.


The Clerk asked Thorp, Whether it was not lawful for a Subject at the bidding
of his Prelate, to kneel down and kiss the holy Ghost's Book, saying, Help me
GOD, and this holy Doom, for he would do after his cunning and power all things
that the Prelate commanded him.

Thorp. Ye speak full general and large, if the Prelat command to do an
unlawful thing, should he obey thereto?

Thorp said to the Bishop, I was once in a Gentleman's house, and there was
two, a Master of Divinity, and a Man of Law: these men spoke of Oaths; and the
Man of Law at the bidding of the Sovereign had power to charge him to swear; he
would lay his hand upon the Book, and hear his Charge; and if his Charge were
unlawful to his understanding, he would hastily withdraw his hand upon the
Book, taking there only God to witness, that he would fulfill the lawful Charge
after his power: and the Master of Divinity said unto the Lawyer, Certainly he
that lays his hand upon a Book on this wise, makes a promise to do that
thing that he is commanded, and is obliged thereby by Book-Oath then to fulfill
his Charge; for no doubt he that charge him to lay his hand thus upon a Book,
touches it, and swears by it, and kisseth it, and promising in this form to
do this thing or that, and will say and witness he that touches this Book and
kisseth it, has sworn upon that Book; and all other men that see that man thus
do, and also all those that hear thereof in the same wise, will say and
witness, That this man has sworn upon a Book: Wherefore the Master of Divinity
said to the Lawyer, It was not lawful either to give or take any such Charge
upon a Book, it is nothing but diverse creatures, of which it is made up;
Therefore to swear upon a Book, it is to swear by the Creatures, How mad the
Divines (so called) are now for Swearing, and how contrary to him they are.
and this swearing is ever unlawful. This Sentence witnesses Chrysostom the
Divine plainly, blaming them greatly that bring forth a Book to swear upon, and
charge his Clerks, that in no wise they constrain any body to swear, whether
they think they swear true or false.

Then the Archbishop and his Clerk scorned at Thorp greatly for his sayings,
and the Archbishop menaced him with great Punishment and sharp, except he
would leave his Opinion of Swearing; and he said, It is not mine own Opinion,
but the Opinion of Christ our Savior, of James, of Chrysostom, and of diverse
other Saints and Doctors.

Then the Archbishop bid his Clerk read this Homily of Chrysostom. So the
Clerk read the Roll till he came to that clause where he said, that it is a sin
to swear well.

The Examination of Elizabeth Young, (Martyr) before M. Hussy.
Hussy. Will thou not swear before a Judge? Vol. 3. page 910, 911. 912.



Eliz. I know not what an Oath is.


Huss. Then he began to teach her the Book-Oath.


Eliz. I do not understand it, and I will not learn it.


The Examination of Elizabeth before the Bishop of London, Sir Roger Cholmley,
Dr. Cook the Recorder of London, Dr. Roper of Kent, and Dr. Martin, as
concerning her Faith.
B. Bonner. Will thou not swear before a Judge? this is the right trade of the
Anabaptists.


Eliz. My Lord Christ says, Whatsoever is more than yea yea, or nay nay, comes
of evil. And moreover, I know not what an Oath is, and I will take no such
thing upon me.


Sir Roger Cholmley. Twenty pounds twice over it is a man in woman's apparel.


B. Bonner. Think you so.


Cholmley. Yes.


Eliz. I am a Woman.


Bishop. Swear her by a Book, seeing it is but a Question.


Cholmley. I lay twenty pounds it is a Man.


Dr. Cook brought her a Book, and commanded her to lay her hand thereupon.
Eliz. No, I will not swear, I know not what an Oath is: I am a Woman, and have
Children.


B. Bonner. That know not we; therefore swear.


Cholmly. Thou ill-favored Whore, lay thy hand on the Book; I will lay on
mine: so he laid on his hand upon the Book.


Eliz. So will not I mine.


Dr. Cook. Swear before us whether thou art a Man or a Woman.


Eliz. If you will not believe me, send for Women into a secret place, and I
will be tried.


Cholmley. Thou ill-favored Whore, nothing but Spirit and Faith, Whore.


Eliz. I told you how I believe.


Martin. Away with her, we have more to talk withal.


Richard Hume says, Vol. 2. page 16. Henry 8ths days.
That every man swearing by our Lady, or any other Saint or Creature, gives
more honor to the Saints than to the holy Trinity, and so he says they be
Idolaters.

In the second of the Ten Persecutions, ^reat Vol. ^ag. 34. An. 69, 70.
the cruel Laws and Condemnations of the Heathen Emperors against the
Christians, who had many Accusers for Lucre's sake, to have the Possessions of
the Christians, so incensed the mind of the Emperor, and were ready to accuse
them to have the spoil of their Goods, and that the Christians should swear to
declare the Truth, that was the Form whether they were in very deed Christians
or not? and if they confessed, then by their Law, Sentence of Death proceeded.
The kinds of death which they suffered were diverse and horrible, whatsoever the
cruelty of men's inventions could devise, for the punishment of man's body, who
were of the Christian Party, as I have mentioned before; first, Imprisonment,
Stripes, Scourging, Drawing, Tearings, Stonings, Plates of Iron and Brass laid
unto them burning hot, deep Dungeons, Rackings, Stranglings, Imprisonments, the
Teeth of Wild Beasts, This way in the time of the Ten Persecutions before there
was a Pope, who afterward also compelled to swear.
Grid-irons, Gibbets, Gallows, tossing upon the Horns of Bulls; and when their
bodies were thus killed, they laid them in heaps, and Dogs left to keep them,
that no man might come to bury them: for when they were thus slain, crucified,
cast to Wild-beasts, and into Fires, and cast to Tormentors, yet they kept
their Confession and would not go from it, but kept the Faith of Christ Jesus,
and could not be compelled to Swear, but kept the Doctrines of Christ and the
Apostles, who says they should not swear; and the more came to the Faith of
Christ: As a man cuts a Vine-tree, the more it grows; so did the Christians
grow. This was before there was a Pope, which afterward brought up Swearing,
against Christ's Doctrine and his Apostles, and so is the Antichrist: for the
Pope compelling to swear, made void, as much as in him lay, the Testimony of
the Martyrs in the Ten Persecutions.

In Clark's Book, titled A General Martyrologie. Vol. 1. p. 97. Page 103, 104.

Hunrick the King, in the seventh year of his Reign, having caused all the
Bishops in Africa on a certain day to meet at Carthage, among whom many refused
to swear at all, who having suffered very much, whereupon their just Complaints
were very grievous unto the King Hunrick, who afterward commanded the said
suffering Bishops to meet him at the Temple of Memory, and when they came
thither, they had this Writing delivered to them, Our Lord King Hunrick
lamenting your obstinacy, in refusing to obey his Will, and to embrace his
Religion, yet intends to deal graciously with you; and if you will take this
Oath, he will send you back to your Churches and Houses. Then they all said
with one consent, We are all Christians and Bishops, and hold the Apostolical
and only true Faith: [Mark, they that hold the true Faith, deny to swear at
all] and thereupon they made a brief Confession of their Faith. But the King's
Commissioners urged them without any further delay, to take the Oath contained
in that Paper. Whereupon they answered, Do you think us brutish beasts, that we
should so easily swear to a Writing, wherein we know not what is contained.
Then the Oath was read unto them, which was this, You shall swear, that after
the death of the Lord our King, his son Hilderick shall succeed him in the
Kingdom; and that none of you shall send a Letter beyond the Seas. If you take
this Oath, he will restore you to your Churches. Then some of them were willing
to take it; but others that saw further into the subtilty of it, refused it.
Then were those which would take it, commanded to separate themselves from the
other; which being done, a Notary presently took their Names, and of what City
they were; he did so likewise by the Refusers; and so both Parties were
committed to Ward; and shortly after the King sent them word, first; To those
that would have taken the Oath, Because that you (contrary to the Rule of the
Gospel, which says, Thou shall not swear at all) would have sworn, The King's
will is, that you shall never see your Churches more, but shall be banished
into the Wilderness, and never perform any Ministerial Office again, and there
you shall till the Ground. [And was not this a just reward upon such as denied
their Religion, and broke Christ's Command?] And those that would not take the
Oath, he banished also into the Isle of Corse to hew Timber for Ships, which
was 427 years after Christ, which was two hundred twenty three years before
there was a Pope, who afterward compelled Christians to swear.

The Persecution of tho Waldenses began in the year of CHRIST, 1160.
In the days of Pope Alexander the third, Vol. 2. page a 30. and 26.
some Christians, called Waldenses, refused to take any Oath, whereby they
should be enforced to accuse themselves, or their Friends.

Blandina and Ponticus suffered about the year 170, in the fourth Persecution
of the ten, before there was a Pope, because they would not swear.

Basilides a Captain, went with a fair Virgin to Execution, and he showed her
some favor, and she took it kindly, and said she would pray for him. Not long
after it hapened that Basilides was required to give an Oath from the Emperor;
but he plainly affirmed that he was a Christian; and at the first he was
thought dissemblingly to jest, but afterward he constantly and in earnest did
affirm the same: and they had him before the Judge, and committed him to Ward;
the Christians marvelled thereat, enquired of him the cause of his sudden
Conversion. To whom he answered and said, that Polimiena had prayed for him to
the Lord; and so he saw a Crown upon his head; adding moreover, that it should
not be long before he should be received, and so the next day was beheaded,
because he would not swear and give the Oath, but confessed himself a Christian.
This was before there was a Pope that set up Swearing in the first Persecution
of the ten, about the year 197. Eusebius, lib. 6. cap. 5.

In Q. Mary's days, they would have had Dr. Sands have entered into Bonds,
with two Sureties, when he was to be set at liberty: but he said he came a
freeman into Prison, and he would not go forth a bondman, and so he passed
out free.

In Henry the 8th's days, there were some spoke against Vows. And Seven were
burned, because in their Occupations they would not use any Oath, nor could
abide it in them that occupied with them.

In the Germans Complaint, they say, Vol. 1. p. 8.
That those that choose Bishops, and make them by an Oath, are plainly wicked
and unlawful.

Cornelius writing to the Bishop of the East Churches, Great Vol. page 59.
ordained that no Oath should be required or exacted of any head or chief
Bishop, for any cause, or by any power. Anno 255.

Bishop Cranmer refused to swear to Lady Anne; Great Vol. page School.
and also he says, That he was Judge of no man's Conscience but his own; and
that every man should give an account of his own, and not of another man's.
Anno 1556.

The Archbishop said, Great Vol. page 696.
There Is no Master of Divinity in England so great, if he hold this Opinion
before me, but I Will punish him, as I Will do thee, except thou will swear as I
will charge thee. The Clerk said, Will thou submit to the Ordinance, and lay
thy hand on the Book?

Thorp said, I heard a Master of Divinity say, That in such a case it is all
one to touch a Book, and to swear by a Book. And Chrysostom proves him worthy
of great blame that brings a Book to swear upon: And it must needs follow,
that he is more to ^^^^e that swears upon that Book.

Dr. Martin said, Vol. 3. page 910, 911.
That Elizabeth Young refused to swear upon the four Evangelists before a
Judge: for I my self, -- M. Hussy, have had her before us four times -- could
not bring her to swear.

Dr. Martin. Thou Rebel and traitorly Whore -- thou shall be wrackt -- handled,
thou shall be made an Example to all traitorly Whore-Hereticks; and thou shall
be made to swear by the four Evangelists.

Eliz. I will not swear, I know my duty by God's Word, Vol. 3. page 753.
to God, and to the Queen.

Also Thomas Rowland said, If he did curse and swear, then he was worthy to be
beaten.

Bish. Vol. 3. page 401.
Bonner swore [ By my Faith] to the Lord Mayor upon Robert Smith's Examination
the last time.

Rob. Smith at this word (which the Bishop coupled with an Oath) came in, and
taking him in the manner, said, It is written, Ye must not swear.

Then Bish. Bonner pointed to the Mayor, and called him Master Controller, and
threatened him.

In the days of Edward the Fourth, Vol. 1. page ^56.
three men were condemned to death for denying the Pope's Supremacy.

Men that make Oaths contrary to the Command of Christ, who is the Son of God,
whom God sent into the World to give a Law to the People; who is the Lawgiver:
Them that transgress his Commands by making Oaths, which break them again at
their pleasure: As instance, the Pope absolved the French King from his Oath
which he had made to the Emperor.

Blandina a woman, Vol. 2. page 24.
and Ponticus a youth of fifteen years old, Martyrs, could not be forced to
swear with all the wicked Cruelty of the Tormentors; Vol. 1. p. 62.
neither sparing the age of the Child, nor the sect of the Woman, but put them
to all the punishment and pain they could devise; and oftentimes would have
forced them to swear, yet were not able to compel them: as instance some as
follows. After her cruel Whippings, she was brought to the common Scaffold
and there thrown down to be torn with wild beasts, in the face of the People;
Being brought the seco^^ ^ime to the Scaffold, suffered all kind of Torments,
as though hitherto they had suffered nothing at all; they striving for the
Crown, suffered again more Scourgings, the trying of Wildbeasts, and what else
ever the frantic people cried for, and willed: above all the rest they brought
the Iron Chair, in which their bodies being set, they were so scorched, as on a
Grid-iron fried on the coals, which savoured with the savor of the frying
among the people; and yet for all that the Tormentors ceased not; but worked
more fierce, and mad to overcome the patience of the Saints, being made all the
whole day a spectacle unto the world, in place and stead of Games and Sights,
which was wont to be exhibed to the people.

And Blandina being brought forth again, was fastened to a stake and cast to
the ravenous beasts to be devoured; and whilst she seems to hang as it were
upon a Cross, by the fervency of her Prayer might comfort the rest of the
Saints, in which Agony she suffered all for the Glory of Christ: and when they
saw no Wild-beasts would come nigh her, thus hanging, she was taken down and
cast again into Prison.

Then Blandina, and Ponticus the Child were brought out every day to see the
punishment of their fellows, that they might be compelled thereby to swear, and
delivered then to Wild-beasts, and Torments upon Grid-irons; at length she was
put into a Net and thrown to a Wild Bull, and when she had been sufficiently
gored and wounded with the Horns of the same beast, felt nothing of all that
chanced to her, for the great hope and consolation she had in Christ and
heavenly things, and was thus slain; insomuch that the very Heathen men
themselves confessed that there was never Woman put to death of them, that
suffered so much as this Woman did.

And after that Ponticus the young youth had suffered all the Torments and
Pains, he gave up the ghost; who could never be compelled to swear by all the
Torments and Inventions of the Heathen. Oh! what have our Christians lost that
compel Oaths to Christians, seeing that so many suffered so many cruel Tortures
and Torments before they would swear, and throw away the Command of Christ our
Savior, which says they should not swear. So refusing to swear is no new
thing.

Concerning the Hat.
BIrry was committed by the High Commissioners, and removed by Habeas Corpus
into the King's Bench. They returned the Writ, with a Certificate, That they did
commit him for certain Causes Ecclesiastical: which general Cause the Court did
disallow.

They certified another time, That it was for Irreverent Carriage and Saucy
Speeches to Dr. Newman. The Court also disallowed of that Cause.

Birry put in Bail to appear de die in diem, and was discharged.

It was then holden, That if Birry did not put off his Hat to him, or give him
the Wall, that the same were not sufficient Causes to commit him. Mich. 3. Jac.
B. R. Birries Case. Hughes Repr. fol. 147.

In Henry the Eight's days, Vol. 2. page 569. Hen. 8ths days.
the Burning and Martyrdom of Kerby. As they had him out of Prison to burn him
he went on foot, and as he went he met with them going Processioning, but he
would not bow his Cap nor Knee; and the Officers being much offended at him,
one took a stick of a Faggot, when he was tied to the Stake, and struck him
that he sunk down.

Dr. Ridley, Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. page 1595. in Q. Mary's days
when he was examined before the Bishop of Lincoln, when he heard the Cardinal
named, and the Pope's Holiness, put on his Cap before the Bishop of Lincoln.

The Bishop said, That neither he, nor the Lords, in respect of their own
persons did look for Cap or Knee, but that they did represent such Persons, the
Cardinals Grace, Legate to the Pope's Holiness; Wherefore except you will your
self take the pains to put your Hand to your Head, and at the Nomination as
well of the said Cardinal, as of the Pope's Holiness, uncover the same, left
that this your Contumacy exhibited now before us should be prejudicial to the
aforesaid Persons, which thing we may in no case suffer, you shall cause us to
take the pains to cause some man to pluck off your Cap.

Dr. Ridley answered, But in that he is Legate to the Bishop of Rome (and
therewith put on his Cap) whose usurped Supremacy, and abused Authority I
utterly refuse and renounce, I may in no wise give obedience or honor unto him.

Lincoln replied, Mr. Ridley, you excuse your self of that with the which we
pressed you not, in that you protest you keep on your Cap, neither for any
Contumacy toward us, (who look for no such honor of you) neither for any
Contempt of this Audience; which, although justly they may, yet (I suppose) in
this case do not require any such obeisance of you, neither in derogation of
any honor due to my Lord Cardinal's Grace, for his Regal descent: for,
although in all the premises honor be due, yet in these respects we require
none of you; but only in that my Lord Cardinal's Grace is here in England,
Deputy of the Pope's Holiness (at which word the Lords and others put off their
Caps, and Mr. Ridley put on his) and therefore we say unto you the second time,
That except you take the pains your self to put your hand to your head and put
off your Cap, you shall put us to the pain to cause some man to take it from
you; except you allege some infirmity and sickness, or other more reasonable
cause, upon the consideration whereof we may do as we think good.

Dr. Ridley answered, The premises I said only for this end, That it might
appear why and for what consideration I used such kind of behavior, in not
humbling my self to you with Cap and Knee: and as for sickness, I thank God I
am as well at ease as I have been this long season; and therefore I do not
pretend that which is not, but only this, that it might appear by this my
behavior, That I acknowledge in no point (mark) that Usurped Supremacy of
Rome, and therefore contemn and utterly despise all Authority coming from him.
In taking off my Cap, do as it shall please you, and I shall be content.

Then the Bishop of Lincoln, after the third Admonition, (Mark) commanded one
of the Beadles (that is, an Officer of the University) to pluck his Cap from
his head: and so the Beadle took away his Cap.

Then the Bishop made an Oration, and asked him whether he would recant, and
submit himself to the Universal Faith. The same Faith as was his, is the
plucker off of Hats and Caps faith. They do not read that it was Timothy and
Titus practice to pluck off the Hats and Caps of people.

Dr. Ridley was brought before the Commissioners again. Second Sess. Page 1601.
Then the Bishop of Lincoln urged to Dr. Ridley again his not putting off his
Cap, or uncovering his head, in that the Cardinal was Legate to the most
Reverend Father in GOD, the Pope's Holiness (with that the Bishop, with all
then present, put off their Caps, but Mr. Ridley moved not his) you said you ne
could, ne would by any means be induced to give him honor: but sorasmuch as
this is the point, as we told you yesterday, why we require honor and
reverence of you; we tell you now, as we did then, Except you take the pains to
move your Bonnet, we will take the pains to cause your Bonnet to be taken from
you, except you pretend sickness, as yesterday you did not.

Ridley replied, I pretend now none other cause then I did yesterday; that is
only that hereby it may appear, that not only in word and confession, but also
by all my gesture and behavior, in no point I agree or admit any Authority or
Power that shall come from the Pope; and not for any pride of mind (as God is
my Judge) neither for contempt of you, or of this Audience, neither for
derogation of honor due to my Lord Cardinal's Grace, as concerning those
points which you speak of, that is, his Noble Parentage and singular graces in
Learning. And as for taking my Cap away, you may do as it shall please you, it
shall not offend me.

Then said Lincoln, Forasmuch as you do answer now as you did yesterday, we
must do also as we did then: and forthwith one of the Beadles very hastily
snatched his Cap off his head.

Dr. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Page 1699. An. 1556. March.
when he was with the Bishop of Gloucester, who was against him, and Cranmer
beholding the Bishop in the face, put on his Bonnet, making no manner of token
of obedience toward him at all. Whereat the Bishop being offended, said unto
him, It might beseem him right well, weighing the Authority he did represent,
to do his duty unto him.

Whereunto Dr. Cranmer answered, He desired the said Bishop to judge of him,
that he did it not for any contempt to his Person, which he could have been
content to have honored as well as any of the other, if his Commission had
come from as good an Authority as theirs. This answered he both modestly,
wifely and patiently, with his Cap on his head, not once bowing or making any
reverence to him that represented the Pope's Person; which was wonderously of
the people marked, that were there present and saw it, and marked it as nigh as
could be possible.

When they perceived that the Archbishop would not move his Bonnet, then the
Bishop of Gloucester: said to Cranmer, We are come to you as Commissioners,
sent by Commission partly by the Pope's Holiness, and partly by the King and
the Queen, to examine you in certain matters. And before the Commissioners Dr.
Cranmer in this his Examination all this while kept on his Cap.

Dr. Story pointing to the Bishop of Gloucestor, Page 1706.
said, That he ought rather to give reverence unto him. So the Archbishop
departed without any obedience exhibited to the Bishop, all the other rose up
and departed every one to his own.

Concerning Tithes.
SEE Lindwood, cap. de locato and conducto, fol. 117. verbo Portiones.

That before the Council of Lateran, Anno 1179, any man might have given his
Tithes to what Spiritual Person he would, but they are since decreed to be paid
to Parochial Ministers.

A Martyr suffered for speaking to a Priest in a Pulpit.
VVOodman was accused by the Bishop of Winchester for an Heretic, Vol. 2. page
1890. An. 1557.
which was for the breach of a Statute in Queen Mary's days, for speaking to a
Priest in the Pulpit; and being had before the Justices, Here you may see Q.
Mary's Law, which was made against the Martyrs, by which the People of God
called Quakers, have suffered by the professors, who have made use of the same.
they would have had him bound to his Good Behavior; and because he refused
it, they sent him to Prison. The words of the Statute, If any man do interrupt
any Preacher or Preachers, lawfully authorized by the Queens Majesty, or by any
other lawful Ordinary; that then every particular that so offends, shall
suffer three months Imprisonment: and furthermore be brought to the Sessions,
and there being sorry for the same, and also bound for his good abearing one
whole year, to be released; or else to remain in Prison.

And the said Woodman speaking something to the Commissioners that examined
him; he was afraid lest they should think he had granted something to them
concerning Judas, more than his Conscience did allow of, and thereby should
obtain his Freedom, and so the Gospel should have been slandered by him: for
the which cause he was in such a case that he could scarcely eat, drink, or
sleep for that space; as all his Prison-fellows (he said) could testify. And
he said, If that all you go to the Church of Satan, and there hear the
detestable Doctrine that they spit and spue out in their Churches and Pulpits,
to the great dishonor of God; if all you (said he) that come there had such a
Hell burning in your Conscience for the time as I had (said he) till I came
before them again, and had uttered my Conscience more plainly; I dare say (said
he) you would come there no more.

The Bishop of Winchester said, Where is there such spitting and spuing out of
false Doctrine, as you speak of?

Woodman said, In the Synagogue of Satan, where God is dishonored with false
Doctrine.

Bish. And I pray you where is one of them?

Woodman said, Nay, that judge your self; I came not hither to be a Judge.

THE END.

