A SPEECH, SPOKEN BY Mr. HAYLES, A STUDENT of University-Colledge of OXFORD,
And Son to the Honorable Sir Edward Hayles. With His Majesty's Gracious
Acceptance.
Most Dread Sovereign,
WE, Your Majesty's Humblest Subjests of this House, have the greatest reason
to rejoice in this your Majesty's presence, in as much as this being the most
Ancient College, and Mother of all the rest in your Dominions, has been
chosen out to begin the restitution of the Religion, which was first Planted
and Watered by so many Eminent, Devout and Learned Persons, of whom Four are
accounted Saints in our English Calendar; And we hope that as Providence has
reserved a Reformation to Your Majesty, after so long and Deplorable a Breach;
so You will be pleased to Protect and encourage this tender beginning amongst
Us: For the Winds and the Storms threaten us, yet being founded upon a double
Rock, the one of Perpetuity of the Church: The other of your Majesty's
Protection, We rest Fearless, and Resolve till it shall please our good Lord to
settle it in that Peace and Liberty which we confidently hope for in your
Majesty's Life and Government. Next, We with the rest of the Nation,
acknowledge your Majesty's great Goodness for that absolute Liberty granted to
all your Subjects, restraining nothing but what is Eternally contrary to the
Preservation of Peace and Justice.

You have only hindered confessed Wickedness and Violence to one another, which
could not have been committed without the Breach of all Laws, and utter
Confusion.

And though you leave the Duty toward God, to every Conscience, yet you have
hereby taken off the Vizard of Rebellion, and manifested to all the World, that
whosoever henceforth takes up Arms against your Power, must not pretend either
Reformation or Religion, or Injustice of the Government, as an Indulgence.

This, wherein your Majesty and your Copartners have the least Portion; it is,
Great Prince, an Excessive Kindness to your People, that your Self accepts
sparingly, what upon others you so Bountifully bestow; as if your Own Interest
were the least of your Care: And were the Nation United, your Own Self could be
content to be neglected. It is a long time since that the Wounds of this Nation
have been still wid'ned by Intressed Persons, applying only Corosives.

Your Majesty has by powering in Oil and Balm, began an Unction and Coalition
of the Parts. An Union at least in the concerns of the Nation, though not (as we
desire) an Unity in Religion. Yet so much of Religion too, as to be at Peace
with One Another.

And your Majesty is now, by your Majesty's giving Warmth and Vigor to these
desires, making the whole Nation Witnesses of the Sinerity of your Proceedings,
as well as that of your Piety, Prudence, and most wonderful Example, in all
Virtue, becoming either a Prince, or even a Private Person. We hope your
Subjects will be made more Cautious, when They see so much of an Excellent and
Divine Spirit, seconded with the Power and Piety of a Prince.

Nor will they pretend Conscience for Disobedience, when they perceive Him, who
Demands, to have better Conscience than Themselves.

Which Speech His Majesty was Graciously pleased, kindly to accept, etc.

London, Printed for A. M. 1687.


