FOR THE KING And both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT BEING A brief and general Account
of the late and present sufferings of many of the Peaceable Subjects called
Quakers, upon the late Act against Conventicles; for no other Cause but Meeting
together to Worship God according to their persuasions and Consciences.

For the Oppression of the Poor, and the Sighing of the Needy, I will arise
says the Lord, etc. Printed in the Year, 1675.

FOR THE KING And both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
WHereas many of the said People, have of late been, and still are greatly
disquieted, and severely used, many poor Families Ruined as to their
Livelihoods; the Fatherless and Widows greatly Oppressed; many honest
Tradesmen discouraged, Trading in many places much stopped and decayed; the Poor
wanting Bread, by reason of the great spoil and havoc that is made upon many
Innocent Industrious Families, only for the exercise of their tender
Consciences, as by the following Relation will appear: Which sufferings have
been occasioned by some idle and dissolute persons, who being not willing to
take pains for an honest Livelihood in the Creation, as other men do, are
turned Informers, going from place to place on purpose to find out such
Meetings; troubling the Magistrates, and instigating such as are willing to
gratify them, that they may make a prey upon the said Peoples Estates and
Livelihoods; ruining and destroying these Peaceable Protestant-Subjects, under
pretense of doing the King Service.

We therefore entreat your Patience to peruse the following account, and take
it into your serious Considerations, to afford the Sufferers some effectual and
speedy relief, by stopping such Inhumane proceedings for the future, that they
and their Families may not be utterly destroyed.

Huntington-shire, 1670.
FOr meeting together to worship God, Eighty persons have been fined at several
times 254 l. 5 s. for which there has been taken from them, Sheep, Cowes,
Horses, Hoggs, Wool, Oatmeal, Carts, Pewter, Panns, and Potts, and other Goods
to the value of 276 l. 5 s. Note, Tho. Lister was fined 2 l. For which they
took a Horse from him worth 6 l. and a Cow worth 2 l. they sold the Horse to
Hen. Williams called a Justice for 25 s. and the Cow to another Justices man
for 16 s. 6 d. Christopher Maidston, for being at two Meetings, fined 20 s. for
himself and his Wife, upon the Oath of John Blake, and Will Scot Informers, who
swore falsely, for the Woman was not at the Meeting. Jasper Lister, having all
his Goods taken away, he went to John Hieron, called a Justice, for a Bed,
which he refusing, he desired he might have a Blanket to cover him; but it
would not be granted, though he had Three Children, and himself so lame, that
he goes on Crutches, and when no body would buy the Goods in the Market, the
Justices would meet at an Inn, and sell them by the inch of Candle; selling
them to Informers, Justices and themselves, buying some, and their Clarks; and
their Kindred many times for a great deal less than half the worth of them.
Justice Hieron, coming to a meeting at Godmanchester, asked them what they did
there? one answered, meet to worship God; he said, you have said enough to
condemn your self, and all that be here, and fined them. John Arthur fined 5 l.
10 s. had all his Goods taken away, not leaving him so much as a Dish, or
Spoon, nor the Dung in his Yard, though he had sold it before for 6 s.

And when the Officers returned, that there was no Goods left, but Forms and
Stools, Rob. Apreice called Justice, bid them take the friends Coat off his
back, if he had two, and the other things they might carry out and set sire on
them.

Lincolnshire.
TAken for several meetings, Goods and Cattle (in the Years 1670. (72) and (74)
To the vallue of 391 l. 18 s 4 d. for 94 l. 10 s. fines. Will. Lewis a Priest,
and John Ward a Parish Clark Informers. One John Obrey, Priest of Anderby,
setting the Informers on, threatening that he will starve the Quakers by this
Act. Richard Frisby, and Edward Greaves two other Informers swore, that one
John Peachell spoke in the meeting, when not one word was spoken by him;
nevertheless, one called Justice Therrald fined him 20 l. The aforesaid
Distresses were taken, although no Testimony ever came in against them, but
that they were met together in peace and quietness, and no outward exercise of
Religion, nor pretense of any proved against them; and some of them never
called to answer, nor no witness sworn in their sight against them, but the
witnesses examined in private, and that counted a Conviction.

Cambridg-shire.
TAken from several persons in this County, in the Year 1670, 1673, 1674.
Goods, viz. Pewter-dishes, Wood, Brass, Linen cloth, Shop-goods, and
Working-tools, to the very Shoomakers lasts, and Women's Coats, Head-cloths,
Gloves and Patens, and Cowes, and Horses, in all to the vallue of 608 l. 16 s.
3 d. They took from George Thorrowgood of Ely, his Bed and Goverleds, and left
the poor man to lodge on straw, and afterward for standing in the street
before his own door, was fined 10 s. by Parteridge and Lamy called Justices,
for which his Sheets, Pillowbeers, and very Shirt was taken from him, though he
was very sick in body at that time. Edward Cook Miller, for 5 l. 5 s. fine, had
taken his two Loading Horses, his Household Stuff, to the Bedds and Bedsteads
the children lay on, and child's Cradle, to the vallue of 12 l. 15 s. so that
the children were fain to lie on Straw upon the Boards, by which means they
fell sick, and one dyed since.

Stephen Perry Tinker. Simeon Priest Barber.
The two grand Informers in this County.

Cornwall.
TAken from 69. Persons for 311 l. 5 s. fines laid upon them in the years
1670.1673, 1674. In Goods and Cattle, to the value of 497 l. 13. s. 8. d. Henry
Williams a poor man, stripped so near that they left him neither Breeches to
ware, nor Bed to lie on, and took his very Hatchet, he should work withal;
from another poor man, for 15 s. fine, they took his wives wearing apparel.

And there are lately several persons fined, to the value of 147 l. for which
distresses are not yet taken.

Also many are proceeded against upon an old statute against Popish Recusants,
and returned into the Exchequer for a Seizure, of two thirds of their Estates,
and a writ of enquiry sent down to Commissioners, to enquire into their Estates.

Darby-shire.
SIxty Persons fined also for Meeting 293 l 2 s. 8 d. or there abouts, had
taken to the value of 366 l. 4 s. 10 d. in Cowes, Swine, Shoes, Leather, Corn,
Hay, Household Stuff, to the Dish and Spoon, and working Gear; and from the
Smith his Bellows and Tools, sweeping all away, both within doors and without
William Cooper had taken his Cow, Corn, Hay, houshold-goods, to his wearing
Coat, and the meat he had provided for his Wife, and three small Children.

Norfolk.
TAken from several persons in the years 1670 and 1674, the value of 1244 l. 7
s. 5 d. In Cattle, Sheep, Household Stuff, and the Dung-Fork, Pitch-Fork, and
Daubing-fork; the Man's Doublet, and Breeches, the Wives Coats, and their Beds
from under them, that they were fain to lie on Straw; taking all at one House,
both within doors and without: the Justice bidding the Officers take all they
had, and then they should have down with them: And when they told the Justice,
there was little left to distrain for Fra. Landers Wives fine, but the bed she
lay on, being sick and like to die, (and she did die that night:) he said he
cared not, (...) take the bed from under her, and sometime after she was
buried: some caused her body to be taken up again, in an Inhumane manner,
breaking the Coffin, that they were fain to tie it together, and carried it
upon a pole, and set it in the Market Place, to the amazement of many People.

And about 12 persons being in a Room visiting their sick friend, (upon his
desire) and one of them speaking 5 or 6 words to him, the Informers swore
against them, and the sick man was fined 20 l. for having the said Meeting in
his house, and had 6 Cowes taken from him, and the others fined 20 l. for the
Preacher, which was also leavied.

John Patterson of Cockley Clay, had his Barn of Corn seized on, and 200 Sheep
taken, worth 80 l. and sold for 65 l. or thereabouts; Also many are lately
presented in this County, as Popish recusants.

Nottinghamshire. 1670, 1674.
TAken to the value of 695 l. 3 s. 6 d. in Cattle and Household Stuff, from some
all their goods, excepting a Barrel of Beer, a Cradle, and some Bread and
Cheese, which the Officers for pity hid, and told the women of it; the Justice
bid the Officers take three or four times as much as the fines that they might
allow good penny worths. They took from a poor fatherless Boy, his Coat and
Breeches; not leaving the Woman at one house a Stool to sit on to dress her
Child: Two persons appealing to the Sessions, they ordered them their money
again; but Pennistoni Whaley, called a Justice, fraudulently detains 60 l, in
his hands contrary to the orders of the Sessions.

Note, Colgrave the grand Informer, swearing falsely several times, as that
persons were at a Meeting, when they were not, and that there was preaching,
when there was not one word spoken; and that diverse were not worth 10 s. though
it was proved in open Court, they had Horses, Beasts and Sheep of their own at
that time.

Kent.
TAken goods worth 40 l. 18 s. 9 d. viz. Malt, Shoes, Bed, Bedding,
Earthen-ware, and household stuff; besides a great deal of goods, the vallue not
sent up, selling goods at under rate, viz. Thirty pounds worth, for 5 l. 15 s.

Cheshire, 1674.
SEveral persons have had their goods and Cattle taken to a great vallue, viz.
Cowes, Bacon, Cheese, Corn, Bedds, Coverlids, Panns, Pewter, and other Household
goods; the Informers threatening they would not leave taking from them while
they were worth a Groat, saying, they would turn Drovers, and drive them every
week. The Informers being highly encouraged by a Justice of Chester; they used
violence to many, in breaking up the meeting, pulling the hair off their heads,
striking them, and drawing their Swords, swore they would take off a hand or
arm from some of them, and threatened to run through and kill some of them, and
to stand to it when they had done. The aforesaid Justice bid the Officers be
sure to take enough, and then they might have some for themselves: setting the
Soldiers to buy the Cattle, when none else would buy them.

Amongst these sufferers, 10 or 12 are poor Widows, some of them having a
great charge of Fatherless children, they have not left some of them a Skillet
to boil their childrens meat in, and most of them have no Estates, but are
Rackers, which they pay Yearly for; and diverse lately fined and liable to be
distreyned.

Oxfordshire, 1670. 1674.
TAken the vallue of 176 l. 2 s. 7 d. In Cowes, Corn, Piggs, Bacon, Malt,
Bedds, Bolsters, Sheets, and other household goods, to the very Pot-hookes, and
the poor man's Breeches and Doublet; not leaving one man a Bed to lie on, nor
any thing to boil food in for his Wife and five small children, and took 15 s.
out of a poor Woman's Purse. A Priest being Informer haled the women out of the
meeting, and tore their clothes, and another Priests wife swore she would be an
Informer.

Besides, the rude, uncivil, obscene and shameful behavior and carriages of
the Scholars at our meeting in Oxford.

Many more Warrants out to distrein, which are not yet executed.

One man fined 5 s. for which the Officers took a child's coat, which the child
seeing, cried out with a loud voice.

Essex, 1670, 1674, 1675.
TAken the vallue of 467 l. 19 s. 7 d. In Linen Cloth, women's clothes,
Horses, Carts, Brass, Pewter, Bedding, Wool, Sheep, Leather, Bread-Corn and
Bread, Shop-goods and household goods, the Justice using rugged speeches,
striking some, and thrusting others in the Dirt, that were brought before him,
for being at a meeting, and caused two to be set in the Stocks.

Cumberland, 1670, 1672, 1673.
TAken in Cattle, viz. Cowes, Heifers, Sheep, Horses, Swine, Corn, etc. Butter,
Cheese, wearing clothes, working tools, and Household goods, to the vallue of
226 l. 13 s. 1 d. most of the sufferers being poor laboring people: some
whereof had all to their very bedding taken from them: as for instance, Matthew
Kirkbride a poor man had his Bed-cloaths taken from off his poor children, and
they left naked. James Barn an old poor dimsighted lame man (maimed in the
Kings service) his very bedding, and Eight bushels of Malt taken from him.

Westmerland, 1675.
FOurscore persons presented, indicted and ^onvicted upon the Statute of the
23th of Elizabeth to be returned into the Exchequer since the Kings late
Declaration against Popish-Recusants though well known to be no Papists.

Gloucester-shire, 1675.
MUch goods distreined, and sold, to a considerable vallue; and from laboring
men their working-tools taken from them, that some were constrained to give
over their Trades. They took from a Smith, his Bellows, Anvil and Vices,
scarce leaving any a Bed to lie on; and some were so cruelly beaten, that their
flesh was of many colors. Much Cattle also being distreined and brought to
Market in Droves, to the grief and trouble of many people to see such
oppression and spoil upon their peaceable Neighbors.

Surrey, from 1670. to 1675.
FIfty Three persons had distreined from them, for meetings, Goods and Cattle
of the vallue of 351 l. 3 s. 4 d.

Durham.
SEventeen persons for meetings, had distreined from them Pewter, Horse, Corn,
and other goods, to the vallue of 28 l. 13 s. 6 d. besides had great abuses
done to their persons. Taken goods to the vallue of 18 l. for a fine of 2 l. 10
s. and 3 remain Prisoners at this time in this County, for Conscience sake.

Warwickshire.
THirteen persons for meeting, had Cattle, Corn, and other goods taken from
them, to the vallue of 69 l. 6 s. 10 d. John Clark of ^atington, A Priest,
being Informer in this County, the Officers with him went into a backside to
distrein, and running after the Piggs, they saw a blind Horse, the Priest said
they must take him, the Officers said he was worth little, he said they must
take him, though they knock him on the head for his skin to sell.

Sussex.
TWenty four persons for meeting, had Cattle, Horses, Corn, and other-goods
distreined from them, to the vallue of 66 l. 1 s.

Suffolk, from 1670, to 1675.
ONe hundred and thirty persons for meetings, had their Cattle Horses, Corn,
Bedding, and other goods distreined, to the vallue of 1294 l. 1 s. 7 d. amongst
others, some poor people, having some Nine, others 3 children, had taken from
them the very Pott that should boil their meat in, and other small necessaries
for their subsistence; and one poor Infant bereaved of its Blanckets wherewith
it was swadled, with the Pillow and Bolster whereon it lay in the Cradle;
others their bed taken from under them, and they left to lie on Straw.

Somersetshire, from the year, 1670, to 1674.
TAken, viz. Horses, Cowes, Sheep, Wool, Cloth, Bedds, bedding, Pewter, Brass,
Shoes, Stockings, Wheat, Meal, Bacon, and such like, to the vallue of 906 l. 3
s. 9 d. besides several other persons in this County have had their goods
seized on, that as yet we know not the value of; amongst whom, is one, that had
all his Brass and Pewter taken away, and not so much as a Pot lest to dress
Victuals in: There has also been much havoc made on the Goods of Widows,
Poor, Aged, and Indigent people and Fatherless Children.

Sallop
TAken in Cloth, Stuffs, Pewter, Copper, Brass, and other Houshold-goods, to
the value of 51 l. 4 s. A poor old Widow woman, she then having in her Custody
a Motherless Child, which was her Sons, the Man being then very Sick, and in
danger of death; and the Priest, the Informer, having caused her Goods to be
taken from her, she brought him the Child, and told him he must take care for
it; but the same Evening he returned the Child to her, which she received: When
her Son was recovered, he took the Child into another County, yet this
Informer, the Priest, detayneth this Old-Woman in Prison, and says he will
keep her there, unless she will find Sureties that the Child shall not be
troublesome to the Parish, although it was Born there, and its Father, and
Grandfather continued there many years.

Pembroke-shire.
NIneteen Persons for Meetings had taken from them, Cows, Oxen, Sheep, Horses,
Piggs, Corn, Hay, Beast, Pewter, Sheets, Blankets, Coverlids, Plow, with
furniture and other Goods, to the value of 172 l. 5 s. 4 d. An Informer knocked
one Person off his Horse with his stick, and drew his Sword and beat him, and
so commanded the Constable to Distrain his Goods; taking from one poor Man his
Coverlid, Sheets, and Blanket; Another poor man had only one Pigg; which they
took.

Dorset-shire.
TAken from Twenty Eight Persons (whereof some poor, and maimed in the Kings
service) in money, Cows, Heifers, Calves Pewter, Brass, and other Household
Goods, and the Woman's Peticoate, and men's Shoes, to the value of 1000 l. 11 s.
11 d. One Robert Culliford, called a Justice, at a Meeting, kicked Deborah
Coleman on the Belly, and several other places, and also struck her violently
with his dog Whip, and pincht one man by the Ear, calling him Rogue and thief;
and pincht several others till they were Black and Blew.

A Sadle was taken worth 9 s. for 1 d. leavyed short before.

A fine charged for a Speaker, he being known not to be at the Meeting that
time, but elsewhere: another sworn against, yet not at the Meeting: A poor man
to whom yarn was delivered to work on, had his door broke up, and it taken from
him, for another supposed offense. Tho. Dyker the Informer, going to Seize
Henry Hodges Cowes, Henry's Wife, and Son, and Daughter, stood before the
Cattle in the ground, being not willing to part with them; but the Informer in
a rage drew his Sword, and threatened to run the Woman big with Child, through;
and Henry Hodges standing by with a Child in his Arms, though he spoke not a
word, he cut him on the Arm with his sword to the Bone, and struck him many
other Blows; so that he broke his Sword in two pieces.

In the same County Ten Persons Indicted as Popish Recusants, though known to
be of the People called Quakers; and a writ of enquiry sent down to
Commissioners, to enquire into their real and personal Estates: And others
whose names we yet know not, are like to suffer upon the same Account.

Lancashire.
FOrty one Persons for Meeting, had goods taken away, to the value of 71 l.
besides several fined not yet distreyned: Eight persons remaining in prison in
this County, for non-payment of Tithes; some of the aforementioned sufferers
for Meetings, being poor, had all their Cattle, and Shop-Goods taken away.

Leicester shire.
SIxty Persons have had goods taken away; and fines imposed to the value of 333
l. 18 s. 8 d. One had all his goods in his House and Shop taken away; two other
poor Men having each but one Cow, to give their young Children Milk, were both
taken away, with their Beds and Blankets; all being not enough, George Villers
called a Justice, required an Oath of the Officers, that they had not left one
of them worth any thing. Nineteen persons fined, and have had goods taken away
(for refusing to Swear) to the Value of 80 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Staffordshire, from 1670, to 1674.
GOods and Cattle taken for Meetings, to the vallue of 75 l. 4 s. 10 d. Alice
Bowman, for speaking a few sober words to a Priest and the people in their
Meeting House was committed to the House of Correction, with her sucking child:
under which hard usage the Child died.

Hereford-shire. 1670, 1674.
THirty two Persons for Meeting, had Goods and Cattle, taken from them; to the
value of 330 l. 12 s. 4 d. Charles Bernard of Lemster, fined at two times 60 l.
for which all his Goods, Chattels, and movables were seized, and sold by the
Officers and Informers, by a warrant from one Tomkins and John Barnaby, Knights.

Berk-shire. 1670.
GOods and Hay, taken from several persons in this County for Meeting; to the
value of 40 l. 2 s. 6 d.

Hamp-shire. 1670.
TWo Persons fined for Meetings, had taken from them, Goods to the value of 36
l. 10 s.

Wilt-shire.
FIve persons for Meeting, had taken from them, Oxen, Cowes, Sheep, Malt, Wool
and Household Goods, to the value of 81 l. 9 s. 6 d. The seizers of these goods,
came in at a Window at one house, and broke open a door at another; one of the
five sufferers is a poor Woman having Children.

Northumberland, 1675.
SEven Persons committed to Prison for Meeting; one of them having been sick of
the Flux this half year, was taken out of his Chamber very rudely, and without
Mercy haled out of the Town, being scarce able to go on his legs.

Devon-shire, from 1670; to 1674.
SIxty one Persons for Meeting, had Pewter, Brass potts, Sheep, Warming Pan,
Brass Kettle, Linnen-Cloath, Jack, Dishes, Candlestick, Fire-Pan,
Weaving-Tooles, Wool-combing-Tooles, Household Stuff and necessarys for rigging
a Ship, for 154 l. 13 s. fines: Taken to the value of 222 l. 10 s. 6 d. Two
Laborers, for refuseing to carry away goods distrained, were committed to
Prison: Four Constables sent to Jayle, for not distreining Peoples Goods.

Hartfordshire, from 1670. to 1675.
TAken for Meeting, in Heifers, Horses, Sheep, Household Goods and Malt, to the
value of 582 l. 10 s. Two Prisoners in this County, upon a writ of Excomunicato
Capiendo, and another for non payment of Tithes.

York shire.
TAken for Meeting, in Horses, Cows, Sheep, Shop ware, and Houshold-goods, to
the value of 2381 l. 00 s. 3 d. Taken from one Person in this County
Twenty-eight Head of Cattle, Nine Horses, and 130 Sheep, in all worth 130 l.
And when the Constable affirmed at the Sessions, that he could not get the
Goods sold; one of the Justices told him, you must sell them, though you sell
Ten pounds worth for 10 s.

And though the Losses have been so very great in this County, yet they are not
to be compared to the Loss of their Trades, many of them being Trades men, and
Laboring Poor men, who have had their Looms, Leads, and Tenters taken away,
which was the Upholders of their Families. And some poor Women had their Goods
taken, who were hardly able to get Food and Necessaries. Mary Toad, a poor
Widow, for having a Meeting at her House, one Francis Driffeild, called a
Justice, sent a Warrant to bring her before him; but she was so Aged, she was
not able to go on Foot nor Ride so far: Then he gave Order to Distrain 20 l. 5
s. on her Goods: The Informers told him her Goods was not, worth so much, well
said he, take all she has, which they performed as near as they could, not
leaving her a Bed to lie on, taking her very Clothes, though she was but a poor
Widow, Aged and in Debt.

William Thornaby the younger, and John Allison, both of Richmond, grand
Informers, searching for a Meeting at a Widows House, where they found three
persons visiting the Widows Daughter, who lay very weak, not likely to live;
and whilst they were Searching, there came in two other persons accidentally,
one of which was a Kinswoman, and no Quaker, as was afterward proved;
nevertheless Thornaby set down their Names, and went to James Metcalf, called a
Justice, who Fined the Persons, and granted a Warrant to Distrain; but the
Sufferers appealing, the most moderate Justices, judged this hard measure and
illegal, and ordered the money to be returned. This is only noted to show the
wickedness of these Informers, and some Justices.

Note, That among the Sufferers, the Burden has fallen exceeding heavy upon
some Particulars, as Farmers, Trades men, Shopkeepers, Handicraft men, being
Fined and Unreasonably Distrained, because of the Poverty of many others,
whereof particular Instances may be given, if occasion require: This foregoing
account being but an abstract of the many and great sufferings which we have
received an account of already, and for expedition sake thus abreviated, there
being also much more suffering, as we understand, in diverse Countys, which we
have not yet a full Account of, as in Norfolk, Cheshire, Cambridge, Suffolk,
and some other places; the spoil being greatest where the Magistrates are ready
to answer the Mercinary Informers; the Cry of whose destructive proceedings is
very loud in this Nation, and the Land mourns because of this Oppression:
Therefore, we request your speedy redress of this Grievance, that the Poor, the
Oppressed and Industrious Families may be Relieved, Eased, and Encouraged; and
do likewise pray, that God would graciously be pleased to enlighten and open
your understandings, and make your hearts tender and sensible that he may turn
away his Wrath, and divert those heavy Judg-Judgments and Calamities which this
Nation is liable to.

We were always willing to give Caesar his due and we desire we may have
liberty to give God his due in all respects, and to Serve, Obey, and Worship
him in Spirit and Truth, and to meet together in the peaceable exercise
thereof, as we are commanded. If we be Ruined in our Persons and Estates, or
Masters of Families destroyed in Prisons, how can we pay the Kings Taxes, or
Landlords their Rents, or Contribute to the Service of King or Country? You may
understand what lamentable havoc is made of us, and only for good Conscience
in obeying God and Christ; for nothing contrary has been, sound against us, for
which we suffer. It is the Liberty of the Gospel of Christ Jesus that we
desire, knowing that neither He nor his Ministers did ever force any man to
their Religion by Imprisonment or spoiling Goods; so as we are enjoined to
stand fast in that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free from the Thraldom
of Satan, we desire this our liberty may not be infringed upon. We greatly
suffered for our tender Consciences toward God in the other Powers days; and
we think it very hard that we, who own the Lord Jesus Christ, should suffer in
a Nation professing Christianity.

You cannot be unsensible how many of us have also been Imprisoned and
Premunired, because they durst not break the command of Christ and the Apostle,
who commands not to Swear, but keep to Yea and Nay, Math. 5. Jam. 5. Wherefore
we request that our Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, may be taken instead of an Oath;
and when we are called to testify the Truth in any case, or bear any Office,
if we break (or be found false in) our Yea, or our Nay, then let us suffer the
same Punishment as they do that break their Oaths; and not for our
Conscientiously refusing to Swear, while we speak the Truth, as we are still
liable to suffer, unless you are pleased to grant a redress.

Be it Remembered

That there have suffered Imprisonment for Conscience Sake, since the King came
into England, above 8000 of the People called Quakers; and since, near two
hundred have dyed Prisoners by reason of their close Confinement. Of which
number Seventy-nine Dyed in Newgate, and on Board the Ships, appointed for
their Transportation in the time of the Contagion in London, being Prisoners;
and many under the Sentence of Transportation, upon the Act against
Conventicles: and 138 Persons Sentenced for Banishment.

He that justifies the Wicked, and the that Condemns the Just, even they
both are an abomination unto the Lord,

Prove. 17.15. THE END
Carefully Examined and Compared with the Original Accounts sent out of the
Countries, on the behalf of the aforesaid Sufferers, By Ellis Hooks.

