The Fatal DOOM; OR, The Charms OF DIVINE LOVE.

By R. H.

Totus figatur in Cord
Qui pro te fixus in Cruce.
LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

TO THE RIGHT virtuous and honorable, GEORGE BERKLEY, Esquire.
SIR,
IF there be any thing new under the Sun, it is that Bird of Paradise, that is
styled the New Creature. This is such a Noveltie of such an heterogeneous
nature from the old world, that it gazeth on him as a piteous Changeling, and
explodes him as an ill-favored Monster. Alas (says Marcus Antoninus) those
Graces which the Deity sent down as so many Pillars to stay up Humane
Societies, (...)
Faith and Modesty, Justice and Verity, they found such cold entertainment
here below, that they are fled back to Heaven. And for all that I perceive, it
is as great a Raritie to meet with one that ownes them, as it is with a white
Moore or black Swan: that if any were of the humor of that old Philosopher,
(Pittacus)
(...), to let fly an arrow at every vicious man he sees, a thousand to one
that he misses, shoot where he will. They are all gone out of the way, (Psalm)
14.4.
there is none that does good, (...), (...).
no not one (says the Prophet.) No (says Plutarch) there is not one that is
sober to Virtue, but they are all run not only shamefully out of the way,
but unhappily out of their wits; such a Vertigo there is in their brain, and
turning round, by the spirit of Giddiness. Nay, and (says Julian) they are all
inflamed to an height of Frenzy, (...). (Julian. Imp.)
by the Furies of Hell; nay, and many (says Isidor) by the fury of their own
Lusts: so that they dare do that which the Devils themselves dare not, (...),
(Isid. Pelus.)
such acts that the very transcendencies of their horriblenesse makes them
incredible to Posterity. And yet (...) peradventure (says Julian) it may be
no Paradox, (...), (Julian.)
that amongst myriads of bad ones there may be found one good; and he gives
two eminent instances; Deioces among the Medes, and Anacharsis amongst the
Scythians.

Sir, I am overjoyed that I can see one Star shining amidst this our so crooked
and umbratile Generation, Quidam adeo umbratiles sunt, ut quicquid in turbido
est, in luce esse putent. (Seneca.)
that knows not how to distinguish betwixt oblique and straight, betwixt
Light and Darkness, nay, that extinguisheth the one by the other, that
breaths forth nothing but Spears and Swords, (...) (Sapient. 2.11.) Ius est
in armis (Sen.)
and measures all rights by the length of their Weapons. I am glad I have met
with one of an heroic spirit, that dares love Christ, when nothing sooner
exposes to hatred; nay, when Christ himself, (...), very God, (1 John 5.20.
(blessed God for ever (Romans 9.5.) is exposed, (and that not by jews, but by
Christians, nay, (...).
by multitudes of them, as blasphemous Arrius boasted) to that cursed croaking
of that Atheistical Toad, which Hell it self durst not belch forth, (...);
(Theodo retus.)
and which I cannot express without horror, (...), that grand Impostor hung
upon a Gibbet. For do not they all in effect speak the same, who deny his
Godhead? Nay, yet, which is worse, (...), (Epiphan.)
if Epiphanius be not mistaken, scarce one of the many thousands who with their
mouths deifie him, (Tit. 1.16.)
but by their abominable actions defy and deny him. (Romans 1.21.)


Sir, I am glad I have met with one, in whose heart the love of him is fixed,
who was crucified for us; one noble Eagle that can (...), gaze upon that
glorious Sun with an irretort eye, when others are either like Moales
starkeblinde, (...), (Clem. Alex.)
or like Owls pur-blinde, (...), (2 Per. 1.9.)
and cannot see at any distance; one that looks upon all other things as Dung
in comparison of the superexcellent Excellency of Jesus Christ; one of whom I
could say more, but that I should expose, what? your Honor to the tongue of
Envy? or my Reputation to a jealousy of Adulation? nay, but rather your
Modesty to violence, which uses to blush at its own Perfections; otherwise I
should not much fear the imputation of Flattery, where all Hyperboler are but
Diminutions.

When once a soul is pregnant by the Deity (says Plotinus) oh what lovely
offsprings will it produce? (...), (Plotin.)
it brings forth Beauty, it brings forth Righteousness; that is, (if I may
interpret as a Divine) Love to God, and Charity to all that bear his Impress:
for so I find in the sacred Dialect, Love to God, (2 Cor. 3.18.)
such a Beauty as transformes into the Image of him who is the Brightness of
Glory; (1 John 4.16.)
which therefore must needs ennoble the Soul, because it is of such a near
cognation with God; and Charity to Man is in express terms styled (...)
Righteousness, (Psalm 112.9.) He that gives to the poor his righteousness
remains for ever. And that this is the very resemblance of that Heavenly
Father, not only Christ has said it, (Matthew. 5.44.)
but an Heathen Emperor. (...) (Marcus ^^tonin.)


Which are the reasons that heightened me to this boldness, to present this
charm of Divine Love to your Honor. First, because there is no such lovely
Music in your ears: which I do more then conjecture, by your candid
acceptance of a very incompo sed susurration thereof, in the presence of that
good Knight, Sir Robert Cook
for whom I could have died: and Secondly, because I could do nothing less by
way of gratitude for my many Engagements to that noble Hand of Charity, (...),
(S. Chrysostom.)
so often reached out to me ready to sink: which, as it is (...), (Philip.
4.18)
a sacrifice that ascends in such odoriferous flames, that God is delighted
therewith; so (I doubt not) will descend in abundance of blessings upon you,
and your virtuous Lady, and noble Relations here, and shall be crowned with a
Diadem of Glory hereafter: which shall be the hearty Prayer of,

Sir, Your Honors most humble Chaplain R. H.

1 CORINTHIANS. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord JESUS CHRIST, let him be
Anathema, Maran-atha.


IF any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ: A strange and dreadful Si-quis
this; but I hope, non est inventus, there is no such Monster amongst he sons of
men. Any man not love that blessed God who made him man; nay, who himself
condescended to be made Man, (...) (Joan. Metropol.)
that man might ascend into the participation of his divine nature? Blessed
Apostle, can any man be so wretchedly cursed, as not to love him who was made a
curse that man might be crowned with blessings? So it seems by the manner of
his expression; nay and so its too too evident by the general demeanor of
thousands that glory in the title of Christians. St. Martin walking in the
fields by himself, of a sudden fell into loud cries and weeping, and being
asked (by one that passed by and overheard him) the cause of that his
lamentation, I weep (says he) to think that the Lord Jesus should do so much
for us men, and yet not one man of a thousand so much as minds him, or thinks
of him. Thinks of him? nay indeed, where is there amongst us one of a thousand,
that does not either by base apostasy and schismatic dissension, or by fraud
and rapine, or per jury and other scandalous actions dishonor him, and (...),
expose him to the obloquies of Jews and Heathens? Ecce quinam sunt qui se
Christianos vocant: See what manner of people they are who term themselves
Christians, (as Lactantius brings in the Heathens upbraiding them in his time.
Si Sancta Christus docuisset, Sancta a Christianis fierent. Qualis Secta, tales
Sectatores. Quomodo bonus Magister, cujus tam pravos videmus Discipulos?
) Sure, had their Christ taught them better, they would be better then they
are: how can we think the Master to be good, whose Disciples we see to be so
bad? He that looks upon the lives of Christians amongst us at this day, must
conclude as Doctor Whitaker, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus
Evangelici; Either there is no such Christ as the Scriptures speak of, or else
those that profess Christ are not so good Christians as becomes them. Never
Age pretended more to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and never Age expressed
less love to him, if Obedience be the argument of it, as himself implies.
Never more light, and never less heat. It Is the epidemicall malady of this our
Enthusiasticall Age, that the Spirits are dispenst not into the hand and feet,
but they fly up into the tongue and brain; and people conceit, as the old
Gnostics, that there is no other ingredient to salvation, then refined
speculations of Evangelicall mysteries: which is a damnable Cheat that the
Devil has put upon them, and which (if I were at leisure) might be easily
convinced of most gross absurdities from the very heathen Philosophers.

1. Gratius est Deoamari quam prospici, the Deity takes a greater complacency
to be loved by us, then to be known, why so for in knowing God we give nothing
to him; but in loving him we give him quicquid and sumus and possidemus, all
that we are, and all that we have.

2. It is possible that we may know God, and yet be never the better, nay the
worse; (...) (1 Corinthians. 8; 1.)
for many times knowledge puffs up with pride. There is none more knowing
then the Spirit of pride, who is therefore called (...), quasi (...). But love
him we cannot, but must be the better. why so? because (says Plato) the soul
by the force of love, not of knowledge, is made divine; as wood by the heat,
not the light of fire, is transformed into fire. And then,

3. There is none but will grant that pejus est Deum odisse quam ignorare,
it is infinitely worse to hate God then to be ignorant of God: then it must
follow by undeniable consequence, that it is by many degrees better to love God
then to know him. And if you scruple at these blind men's reasons, I will tell
you what my divine Apostle says in this case (1 Cor. 13, 1, 2, 3.) Though I
speak with the tongues of men and of Angels, and have not charity, I am become
as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymball: And though I have the gift of
prophesy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge; and though I have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.
And then what think you of that saying of St. James, (...), ^am 2.19.
Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well; and so do the devils
themselves: nay, they go a degree further; the devils believe and tremble. It Is
a plain case (says Cusanus) diabolica est fides, credere and non amare; that
is no better then a devilish faith, that believes only, and does not also love.
Lucere novit Lucifer iste, ardere non novit: that Lucifer knows excellently
what the light of knowledge is, but not what the flame of Love, and therefore
is said to have his chair in the North. ideoque cathedram ponit in Aquilone
(Petrus Blesensis,)
And for all that I perceive, it is generally our case in these Northern parts;
if not, I could wish some would do me the favor to show me such an one: as
Arrianus said to the Stoics of his time; You talk much, and glory in the
profession of Stoicism, but I beseech you do me the courtesy to show me one
that is a true Stoic indeed; show me one that smiles upon the rack, that can
look upon the grim visage of death without the least perturbation of spirit;
(...), Gratify my old eyes with such a lovely spectacle as I never yet could
behold. So shall I say to you (Christians) You talk much of Christ, and pretend
much to the love of Christ, and it were pity of your life, if you should not
love Christ; but I pray you bless my eyes with the sight of any one that loves
Christ indeed; show me one that is one spirit with Christ, (...) (Epictetus.)
that loves those things that Christ loves, and hates those things that Christ
hates; show me one that dresseth himself at that spotless Glass of beauty,
that purifieth himself even as he is pure, that draws all the lines of his
life according to that glorious Sampler of virtue and holiness. Show me but
one such Christian as Clemens Alexandrinus describes his Gnostick, (...), who
lives a pure holy life merely out of pure love to God, who will not violate the
least divine law (...), though he might have the privilege of impunity, nay
(...), though he might upon that condition enjoy the joys of the blessed above.
Alas! where shall we meet with such a lovely object? But, if it be not so with
you, if you do not imitate Christ; for shame pretend not to the love of Christ:
if you love him not, pretend not to the life, no, nor name of Christians.
(...), For shame (says Epictetus to his Stoics) either live as Stoics, or
leave off the name of Stoics. So shall I say to you (Christians) either love
Christ as becomes Christians, or else take not upon you the glorious title of
Christians. Christians, and yet not love Christ; what a prodigy were that!
(...).
Who can with patience see Apes in the habit of Nobles? (says Lucianus.) Who
can brook with the impudency of such Hypocrisy? To see (says Julianus the
Emperor) people pretend to be adorers of Jupiter, (...).
Hospital Jupiter, and yet themselves in their actions more inhumane and
barbarous then the Scythians: to see them flock into Jupiter's Temple, (...).
and to sacrifice to him, and think (...), they have done him such honor and
service as passes; when in the interim they grumble to part with one Farthing
to relieve their poor neighbors want: what inconsistencies and incongruities
are these? (...), when I look upon them, (...), I cannot but be extremely
amazed. And the truth is (says Plato) there cannot be any more extreme
Injustice, then that any man should seem to be Just, and Pious, (...) (Plato.)
when he is not so indeed.

Reader, I know not how the case stands with thee: but if thou do not love
Christ sincerely, I shall wish thee to forbear the name of a Christian, either
to lay claim to it, or any privileges belonging to it. (...) (says Greg.
Nazianzen;) None that loves not Light, but must be heir of Darkness. And so
you see here my Apostle wishes such a black fate to all such, If any man love
not, etc.

For the more clear illustration of which words, I shall discuss these two
Quaeres. 1. What he means by these aenigmaticall terms, Anathema, Maran-atha.
2. Why he lets fly such Thunderbolts against that man that does not love the
Lord Jesus Christ.


1. Let him be Anathema, what is that? It is a word that is clothed with
Death, or rather it is lethalis arundo, an arrow that is steept in the gall of
Dragons, that strikes with death wheresoever it lights. It is of the same
deadly rankling nature that (...) of old in the Synagogue, which (say the
Jewish Doctors) was the second species of Excommunication, and much more
dreadful then the first, the (...) (nidui) separation or remotion adquatuor
passus, not suffering any man to come within four paces of him that was under
that censure; which my Apostle expresses by (...), 1 Cor. 5.11.
not to entertain such persons with any civil familiar discourse, that they
might be ashamed: but this of Anathema is a degree higher, and a more direful
kind of Excommunication amongst them, and in which, for the greater Solemnity
of it, there were Curses out of the Law of Moses, and direful Execrations
added to it. It is a word that exposes to all kinds of dreads and deaths: as
Josephus observes of those whom the Esseni (a pure Sect amongst the Jews) cast
out of their Congregation, (...), being taken in some notorious sin; whosoever
was thus cast out, (...)
commonly he came to some fearful death. And therefore the Primitive Church
used to put on mourning habits, and to wall over them that were to be
excommunicated, (...), as over them that were dead (says Origin:) for so was
the Apostolical constitution (says Clemens;) Every one that is irreclamable,
(...) (Apost. Constit. 2.)
(...) turn out of the Church, (...) with grief and mourning. And so my Apostle
calls it in express terms (...) (1 Cor. 5.2.) to lament and mourn: and (2 Cor.
12.21.) I am afraid least when I come, I shall bewail many amongst you that
have sinned and have not repented, Doctor Hammond.
that is (as that (...) does interpret it) I shall be forced to exercise
severity among you, to inflict Censures on them. So that you see its no
laughing matter, as this profane Age of ours makes it, that stands no (...)
(Lucian)
more in awe of this Apostolical Thunder, then of the snuff of a Candle. No?
is it no more formidable then so? is not Death terrible? (...)
Why, this Anathema, whenever it strikes, if it be not reverst by thy
repentance, it cuts thee off as a sacrifice to Vengeance. Exodus 22.20.
He that sacrifices unto any god, save unto any god, save unto the Lord, ut
Anathema perditor, or (as the Septuagint) (...), let him die the death. Nay, it
exposes thee not only to the Jaws of Death, but also of Hell, and that spirit
of hell that rangeth up and down like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour. Let him be Anathema, let him be stripped of all protections and blessings
of all good Angels; (...) (S. Basil.)
nay, (...), let him be exposed not only to all the fiery darts and plagues of
the Divine Fury, but to the black paws and fangs of that Infernal Spirit,
whose sole employment it is (says Macarius) nay delight and pleasure (says
Clemens Alexandrinus) to imbrew his hands in blood, (...) (Macarius Homil.)
and to plunge all souls into the same gulf of damnation with himself. Let such
an one be delivered up to Satan (says my Apostle. (1 Cor. 5.5.)
) If that be not a dreadful sentence, that may shake every corner of thy
heart, what is? An Excommunicat person? what object more ruthful and
calamitous? The very Heathens pointed at such an one that was excluded their
Temples, as Caput diis inferis sacrum, a Wretch given up into the proper
possession of the infernal Fiends; and looked upon him as such a malignant,
that if any should kill him, he was not obnoxious to judgment, because his
soul belonged to those spirits below. And such (it seems by the manner of
expression) did cursed Cain take himself to be: Now am I cast out from the
presence of the Lord, and every one that meets me, will murder me. And such a
Wretch is every one that does not love the Lord Jesus Christ, in my Apostles
account, Let him be Anathema. Nec amet, nec ametur ab ullo; let all mouths be
opened against him: the mouth of Heaven and Saints to curse him; the mouth of
Hell and Devils to devour him. So that (you see) that word is black and
dreadful enough: and able (I should think) to fright the stoutest heart of
them all.

2. But what is that other, Maran-atha? You would little think by the
interpretation thereof there should be so much Horror in it, as there is. It
is a word compounded of the Syriack and Hebrew; Maran signifies the Lord, and
Atha signifies venit, is come, or, is coming: put them both together, The Lord
is come, or The Lord is coming. Instruct me Oracles, what is the meaning of
this? Some will have it to be a tacit rouzing of his Corinthians out of their
supine lethargy and prodigious forgetfulness of their duty to their Lord and
Master: An allusion to Scholars in the absence of their Master playing the
wantons; of a sudden one of them spying the master coming, gives the rest
warning of it, To your books, Scholars, the Master is coming: so the Apostle
here, To your lesson of Love, Corinthians, Maran-atha, The Lord is coming.
Others will have it to be a patheticall adjuring of them by the loving coming
of the Lord, to reciprocate love to him again, Others will have it to be an
Apostolical exprobration: How? not love the Lord Jesus Christ? (...) (S.
Chrysostom.) Dominus venit salutis; iste Dominum vementem non amat, adeo perfidus
and ingratus? (Pet. Mar.)
Why, this Lord came down from heaven out of mere love to save him, and yet is
he such a monster of ingratitude as not to love him? Fie upon him; let a curse?
yea and let shame light upon him. Which (I confess) I do rather embrace then
any of the former interpretations: yet there is another, which I shall rather
commend unto you then this also; which says that the Apostle alludes to the
original form of Excommunication used in the Church of the Jews, which they
called Sham-Atha, and was the highest degree, and with which (says our learned
Doctor) this Maran-atha is coincidental: Dr. Hammond.
For Sham, that is no other then Shem, our blessed Lord, whose name is
Wonderful, Esaias 9.6.
The Angel of the Covenant, in the midst of whom is my name ( Exodus, 23.21.) and
Atha, as here, is coming. And so St. Jude expressly tells, that it was the very
Thunderbolt that old Enoch shot at such like prodigious Monsters in his time,
Jude v. 14.
(...), The Lord is coming with his holy myriads to execute judgment upon all
that are ungodly, and to convince them of all their ungodly deeds and words.
Nay, the word runs' in the praeteritum tempus, as this of my Apostle does;
(...) (says holy Enoch) Mara^-atha (says S. Paul) the Lord is come: whereby
is employed the Certainty of his glorious coming to the confusion of all such
graceless wretches, so sure as if he were come already.

So you see the interpretations of these Riddles clear, as if they were wrote
with the Sunne-beams.

And now let the Atheistical scoffer at the power of the Church take them home
with him, and tell me, nay rather himself, whether this (...) two-edged Sword,
may not make deep wounds and gashes in that carnal soul of his: If any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, cursed from the presence
of the Lord, let him not be thought worthy to come where the Lord has to do;
Maran-atha, a cursed wretch of that deplored hope, that the Church knows not
what to do farther with him, but is enforced to bind him over to answer that
high indignity at that great general day of Assizes, and to expose him to the
dreadful sentence of that Lord himself whom he has so contemned, and
incensed, who shall be Judge, and who, he may be sure, will pay him home; nay
and that suddenly too, Maran-atha, the Lord is coming to render vengeance and
execute Judgment upon all such ungodly wretches as do not love him. Which is
the first Quaere, what is the meaning of those abstruse, obscure words,
Anathema, Maran-atha.

Yet, before I can dismiss them, I shall be seech the to fix thy eye upon
this glass, and therein take an exact view of the ill-favourednesse and
ugliness of that man that does not love the Lord Jesus Christ Thou see the
Apostle uses two words of diverse languages to express his horrid and woeful
condition, Let him be Anathema, Maran-atha; as if he would have it engraven on
his forehead in such characters, that all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles,
might read it running. The Observation is obvious, and evident, yet such, that
(I should think) it should make the man to tremble.

There is no such cursed creature under the Sun, as that man that does not love
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Rather then he shall escape, my Apostle here disciplines both Jew and Gentile
to thunder out curses against him in their own dialect. This is such a Truth,
that the Devil himself, whose very propriety is lying, (...) (Psellus.)
confessed it, when by an holy man exorcized and conjured out of a poor man whom
he had possessed; for being demanded his name, he answered, I am that cursed
creature who am deprived of Love. I hope then no Christian will deny it; and if
there be any such, I doubt not but to convince them ere I have done.

If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, he must needs be accursed; First,
because he cuts himself off from him that is the Fountain of all blessings here
for the present; and secondly, because Christ will cut him off from all
enjoyments of himself hereafter in the life of Glory.

1. Accursed he must be, because he flies off from him that is blessed God for
ever; (...), (Plotinus.)
a quo procul abesse est esse minus, from whom the more that any man is at a
distance, the less he is (a blind man could say.) And he that does not love
Christ, must needs be at a great, nay an infinite distance from him, because he
hates him. Hate him? Horresco referens, I cannot but tremble at the very
expression: it is a very sad, yet infallible Truth, for so himself has said it;
(...), two Lords you cannot serve, Matthew. 6.24.
for you must hate the one and love the other. It is a plain case (says
Cusanus) two loves cannot be equal, especially where there is no
subordination, but contrariety of Objects (as in the present case, Christ and
Mammon) and therefore he that loves the one must of necessity hate the other,
as being divided from that one which he loves. Does he so? does he hate Christ?
then separated from Christ he must needs be: for as Love is of an uniting
nature, so Hatred is of a dividing. Your sins have divided betwixt me and you
(says God, Esaias 52.2.) Alas, alas, (says Gregory Nazianzen) (...), there is
not the least sin that I hugg in my bosom, but it estrangeth and divorceth me
from my God: especially that damnable (...) hatred of God, this must needs
estrange the soul from God, because it is of an heterogeneous nature from him;
it is the very assimilation of the Devil, who is therefore called Satan,
because he is an hater of God. Hatred is no other then the participation of the
satanicall nature, and transforms the soul into Satan himself, if you will believe
the Wise man; Ecclus 21.27.
When the ungodly man curses Satan, (...) he curses his own soul: as if they
were (...) but one soul; as if there were not only an identity of nature, but
of persons; for it is the Soul of the man, Animus cususque is est quisque
(Cicero.)
that is the Person of the man. And if Satan therefore acknowledge himself an
accursed creature, because deprived of this divine love; what think you, must
not that man be also accursed, who is of so near cognation to him, that if he
curse him, he curses his own soul? (...); (says Gregory Nazianzen.) What a
cursed wretch must that man be that is separated from the pure fountain of all
blessings; who is hated by that God who is Love it self; (...) (Ajax.)
nay, whose very Blessings are cursed by the God of Blessings! ( Malachy 2.2.)
What a cursed wretch, that neither can nor dares pray to heaven for a blessing;
nay, whose very prayers are such an Abomination to the Lord, that they pull
down Curses in stead of Blessings! As the Philosopher said to the debauched
Mariners, praying in a great storm; Oh Wretches, (...).
hold your peace, lest we all be cast away, if the Gods perceive you to be
sailing here. What a cursed wretch, whom all the Creatures pursue, and rise up
in arms to his ruin and confusion! (...), he arms the whole creation, (Wisd.
5.17.)
(...), for the revenge of his enemies; as Jonah will tell you to his cost. God
is pleased to send him to Nineve, and he forsooth, in a pettish humor, is
hoysing up his sails for Tarsus; and see what comes of it: The Winds and
storms rise up in a fury, and the Seas swell with rage against him; the ship,
though of that bulk that it could carry any thing else, Omnem rem vehere potest
navis praeter fugitivum.
yet cannot the fugitive Prophet, but overboard he must; and there is a Whale
ready to receive him into her wide jaws, and there he is intombed, (...), as
it were in a living Sepulcher, to let him and all the world see, that he that
flies from the ever living God, flies to his own death. And howso ever that
juggling spirit casts mists before their eyes, and fools them with a conceit of
pleasantness and deligh in the ways that are farthest off from the strictness
and severity of holiness; yet (says Greg. Nazianzen) (...), it is a most
divine truth, that the ways of wicked men are full of hells: (...).
and I (says Plato) if I were a Lawmakers, I would impose a severe penalty
upon that man that should say, that there are ^ome men that are not so pious
indeed as they should be, but they live merrily. Soul, eat, drink and be merry
(says the rich Farmer, Luke 12.19.) But it was as great a mistake of the fool
to think that such a soul could be merry, as it was that it could eat or drink.
Soul, be merry? Foolish man, how can such a soul be merry, that is so taken up
with the love and thoughts of earth, that is therefore so fain to wander abroad
and busy it self about other objects, (...) (Plutarch)
because its afraid to look homeward, and to behold its own ugly self, (...);
how can such a soul be merry, or take joy in it self or any thing else, that is
divided from him who is the pure fountain of joy? Yet that is not the worst of
it neither, but,

2. That man that does not love the Lord Jesus Christ, must needs be in a
cursed woeful condition, because he shall be eternally separated from his
blessed and blissful presence. And so my Apostle does assure us, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7, 8 9.
The Lord shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, and shall in
flaming fire take vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord. No wonder he says, they shall be eternally destroyed, who shall be
eternally separated from him who is salvation it self. And that it shall be so,
himself has told it beforehand, his very sentence shall run, Depart from me,
Matthew. 25.41.
(...) ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
Into fire, eternal fire? an heavy sentence this (says St. Chrysostom.) yet
nothing so heavy as the former part: Depart from me? this is dreadful indeed;
(...), there is more horror contained in that word, then in all the fire and
brimstone, and tortures of Hell; (...)
and its that Poena damni, that eternal loss of his blessed face, that makes
Hell so terrible to the Saints. Depart from me? Lord (says Saint Peter)
whither shall we go but unto thee? Thou have the words of eternal life, (John
6.68.) Nay, Thou art (...), that Word that is eternal life. And what death
must surprise us, if we depart from Thee, who art Life it self! What darkness,
if we depart from Thee, who art Light it self! Into what a cursed Hell must we
be plunged, if we depart from Thee, who art Blessedness it self? Depart from
me: no wonder he adds, ye cursed. If such a departure from such a blessed
presence be not a curse, I pray tell me, what is? And see how this blessed Lord
pays them home with their coin: For did not those Wretches that did not love
him, first bid him depart from them, and cry out, we will not that he should
reign over us? would they part with one lust for his sake, that parted with
heaven for theirs? nay, did they not so hate him, that they advanced their base
lusts into his glorious Throne, and made them their Christ? (...)
For without doubt (says Macarius) whatsoever it is that carries away the
principal love of any man's heart, (...), that is that man's God. And if that be
not a prodigious departure from him, what is? And if so, I must appeal to
themselves, whether that his dismissive sentence, Depart from me, be not very
proportionable and just. Oh what curse, what hell can be bad enough for that
man that dethrones the Lord of Glory: nay, enthrones in his stead Avarice,
Ebriety, Envy, Pride, Luxury, nay the very spirit of Darkness? And yet to see
(...), how prodigiously mad impiety makes its Idolaters: there is not one of a
thousand of these cursed Wretches, but flatters himself with an hope that he
shall hereafter be eternally blessed with the enjoyment of Christ in Glory.
How? enjoy Christ in Glory, and yet so shamefully to renounce him, as not to
love him? its impossible: as impossible as that himself should be forsworn.
Do thou not hear God himself swear the contrary, Heb. 3.11.
I swear in my wrath, (...) if ever they enter into my rest. What then? Nay
there is all: but its such a dreadful Aposiopesis, as (I should think) should
shake every vein of thy heart. As it he had said, if ever they come where I
have to do, then say I am no God, I am perjured.

But suppose there had bin no such oath, I shall ask thee, First, with what
modesty; Secondly, with what reason could thou expect to come into the
presence of that Majesty? What impudence were it for such a soul, as black as
hell, to dare to approach near such a resplendent brightness? As Mercurius told
Charon (in Lucian) requesting him to show him Jupiters Palace above, How (says
he) (...), (...)
that such a Caitiffe as thou, whose conversation has been altogether with
black shades and impure ghosts, should set thy foot in that pure Palace of
Light? (...), what a dishonor and derogation were that to the place? (...),
what harmony is there (says my Apostle) betwixt Light and Darkness? There is
such an absolute contrariety and heterogeneousness betwixt their natures, that
they are incompatible and inconsistent (says Proclus.) (...), whatsoever is of
another and discrepant nature from light, must needs stand off at a great
distance from it. John 1.5.
And that light shined in darkness (says St. John of Christ) and the darkness
comprehended it not. Indeed it were strange if it had (says Cusanus,) ubi
nulla basis lucis, where there was not the least base or foundation for that
light to fasten upon. And sure, as light cannot comprehend darkness, so neither
can darkness comprehend light. (...), 1 Cor. 6.9.
Be not deceived, (says my Apostle) neither fornicatours, nor idolaters, etc.
shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God. No (says an Heathen) but those that
would be immortally happy, (...) (Antisthenes.)
they must live holily and justly.

There is no happiness of the Soul, but only in its immediate union with God,
(...) (Proclus.)
as of the eye with light, (says Plato;) no, nor can the soul ever be in a
capacity of that happy union (...), except it be first transformed into the
same nature with the Deity, (says Proclus.) What think thou? do not these
Heathens speak reason? may they not put thee to the blush, thou wretch, who art
so unlike to God, that thou hate him who is Love it self, and all that is
lovely; and yet with a shameless confidence look to enjoy the beatificall
vision of him in Glory? How? and yet not love him? with what congruitie of
reason can thou think so? But, suppose thou should come to that glorious
sight (which yet that it is impossible, those blind men have told thee) it
would be so far from being any advantage of happiness unto thee, that it
would be as Quid pravis mentibus imprecer^ Opes, honores ambiant: Etcum falsa
bona gravi mole paraverint, tunc vera cognoscant bona. (Boethius.) (...),
(Julianus Imperator.)
hideous and horrible as hell it self; thou would so burst with very envy to
see his infinite Glory, whom thou did so hate: thy case would just be the same
with (...) the soar eye gazing upon the Sun (as Hierocles instanceth) which is
so far from being a comfort, that it proves a torment to it.

And now, if thou have any further maw to it, go and spit out all the
virulencie thou can, against the Lord Jesus, and let thy rapine and malice
against his poor Members, (...).
and impious confounding of Heaven with Earth, things sacred with profane,
proclaim to the world that thou hate him: Yet, says Diphilus, (...).
(...), I must tell thee, thou foolest thy self, if ever thou think to sneak
away without vengeance and confusion. How is it possible? when the very
presence of him, who to, the Saints that look upon him with pure eyes is an
infinite delectable light, will be to thee, as the light of the Sun is to those
that see it (...), through a cloud, that is, (...), neither purely nor clearly;
it does not seem (...), a pure light, Julianus Imperat.
but fire (its an observation of one of thy fellow-haters of Christ.) and if
thou would know what fire, my Apostle tells thee to thy confusion, Heb. 12.29.
(...), a consuming fire. What think thou now? can thou conceit any
comfort in the approach to such a presence? do thou not clearly see an
inevitable necessity of thy forlorn cursed condition? Oh (says our blessed
Savior) if the eye, Matthew. 6.24.
which is the sole light of the body, if that be darkness, (...); how great is
that darkness! The application is easy, but withal very dreadful: If the
presence of Christ, who is Life it self, prove Death to thee, oh how great will
thy death be! If the presence of him, who is Happiness it self and Salvation it
self, prove a Torment to thee and Damnation, oh how great will thy torment and
damnation be! If the presence of him, who is the very Joy and Bliss of Saints
and Angels, prove a Curse to thee, oh how great and inconceivable will thy
curse be! And so you have the first quaere, what is the meaning of those
abstruse terms, Anathema, Maran-atha.

2. Why this Apostle comes with these (...), direful Thunderbolts, and lets
them fly abroad against such wretches that anathematize themselves by that
their not loving our blessed Jesus? What? (says he to these very Corinthians)
shall I come unto you with a rod, 1 Cor. 4.21.
or rather in love, and in the spirit of meekness? How sweetly he recollects
himself? and the truth is, there is no such loadstone to attract love as love,
Generosa est men's hominis, and facilius ducitur quam trahitur. (Seneca.)
and no such ready way to win upon the noble mind of man, as the spirit of
meekness: and without doubt there is nothing more symbolicall and suitable to
the Evangelicall spirit of this Apostle. And it may seem strange at the first
view, that such a Barnabas (Son of Consolation) whose sacred lines use to flow
with grace and peace, should become such a Boanerges, and come upon them with
such terrible Thunders, Anathema, Maran-atha. Yet if thou please (whosoever
thou art, that art so unhappy as not to love the Lord Jesus Christ) with a
little patience to hear what may be said, to shame thee out of that hellish
fury, and to draw thee, nay, and enforce thee to return to the love of him, I
shall appeal to thy self as a rational creature, whether S. Paul could do less
then power out these Execrations upon thee.

1. Do but seriously consider the condescensions of Christ's wonderful love to
thee, and see if they will not put thee to the blush, if thou answer not his
love with love. Secondly, Take but an exact view of the stupendous
excellencies that shine in him, and tell me if they may not draw (...) the most
iron heart: And then, Thirdly, Do but chew a while upon a few principles of
reason, which I shall tell thee, and which thou shall not deny, and then tell
thy self whether thou art not enforced to love Christ, if thou mean to love any
thing.

1. The condescensions of Christ's love to thee are three.

1. Its a great condescension in him, that he will vouchsafe to give thee leave
to love him. That such a Majesty that loves himself infinitely, because he is
an infinite Lovelyness, nay (with reverence let me speak it) that cannot do
more to himself, then love himself; that he should vouchsafe the same
privilege and honor to Man; well may thou cry out with the Prophet, Lord,
what is man, that thou should so honor him? An high condescension this, if
thou bethink thy self what man is: the best of them all no such lovely piece,
as to invite such a Majesty to bespeak their love. Look upon man with a
spiritual eye, and there is no such leprous creature; (...), from the soal of
the foot to the crown of the head, there is nothing but Boyles and Botches, and
putrefying Soars. (...): no Toad so odious and ugly as man, if he be looked
upon out of Christ: look upon him with a natural eye, and there is no such
despicable and forlorn creature. What is Man? I Will tell you what (says Gregory
Nazians.) he is (...), a pile of Dust and puff of Wind. Nay, (...), (says
Pindarus;) Man is a dream of a shadow. Nay, (...) (says Aeschylus) a shadow of
smoke. What is Man? Why (says the Prophet) every man is altogether vanity.
Nay, it runs in the original, every man is every vanity: imagine what vanity
you will, Man is that; Man is a mere comprehensive vanity. Is he so? Pellis
morticina, vas putredinis, fomestineae, cibus vermis. (Petr. Blesensis.)
then what a condescent is this, that such a glorious Majesty should stoop to
be loved by such a poor Frog crawling out of the pool (as S. Bernard terms
him?) And what a shame is it if thou do not love him, when it is thy greatest
honor that thou may love him.

The condescension will appear greater yet, if thou consider who is the
greatest gainer of the two, if thou should love him. What (I hope) thou will
not imagine that Christ wishes thee to love him, as if he were at any great
loss or distress if thou love him not, or that he gets any thing by it if
thou love him: No, but all the gain and advantage will redound to thy self. To
be sure, its impossible that any thing should be added to him, (...), (Aristot.)
for he is Perfection it self, and nothing can be added to Perfection (says
the Philosopher.) He is such a super-in-undant Fountain (says Philo) that he
breaks out with the streams of his goodness upon all things, (...) (Philo Iud.)
but receives nothing back again from any, (...) to better himself therewith.
Nay, it were no less then Blasphemy to have any such conceit of the Deity
(says Hierocles: (...).
) (...) whosoever thinks by honoring or loving God, that God is any way the
better for it, he does prodigiously forget himself, as if he were better then
God himself. Alas (says the Prophet) My goodness reaches not unto Thee; and,
My Prayer shall return into my own bosom. Yea, and so shall all our other
services whatsoever: If we love him, all the Advantage shall redound to our
selves; if we do not love him, all the Loss will be our own, all the
mischievous and fatal consequents will light upon our own pate. And so, if
thou be not wilfully blind to thy own Ruin, thou may perceive by that
complaint of his ( Ierem. 2.13.) They have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, and dug unto themselves broken cisterns that will hold no water. As
if he had said, I do not complain as if this their revolt were any damage to my
self; for what is a living Spring the worse, if people will not draw water out
of it? but that which troubles me, is their own miscarriage and prodigious
Folly; that they should forsake me, that so they may perish with thirst; that
they should fly from me, that so they may fall headlong into the Devils mouth.
It is a plain case, there is no such policy for a man, if he wish well to
himself, and love himself, as to love God. Amare Deum est amare seipsum, (says
S. Augustine) to love God, is to love himself: as to hate God, is to hate
himself. Oh, what a sweet, and lovely, and loving precept is that, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God? Illud jubet quod e re nostra maxim est, he commands us
to do that which makes most to our own advantage. It is out of pure love to us,
that he would have us to love him: he does it upon no other design, but that
upon our loving of him, he might crown us with blessings. So that (I should
think) it were strange, if any man should now hum and haw, and be at a Quandary
with himself, whether he should love Christ or no, if he does any thing wish
well to himself. Were not that man a Monster, who being thirsty, should not
only expect that drink should be put into his mouth, but be threatened, nay
hired to let it down his throat? And yet such is the love of this our blessed
Jesus. He is pleased to present the cup of Love to thee; and, rather then fail
of thy admittance thereof, he entreats thee to pledge him, nay, will hire thee
to it: Si amabis, dabo coelum; none shall outvie me, or bid more for it then
my self; I will give thee heaven, where are all (...), Psalm. 16.
deliciousnesses and delectabilities; and if that be not enough, I my self (who
am the comprehension of all things desire able) will be thy Reward. Nay, rather
then fail, if fair words and glorious promises will not prevail, he comes with
an holy violence, ( Psalm 9. 12.) If a man will not turn, (no ho with him, but
will still go on in that his froward humor;) he has drawn his sword (says
the Prophet) as if like a passionate lover, he set the point at his breast, and
will enforce him to love him. Nirembergius breaks out, Quid mibi and tibi, O
bone Jesus, ut me ames? Blessed Jesus, what is my love worth, that thou should
use such violence for the procuring of it? For the most part, if we desire that
any should love us, we make choice of such as are most lovely. Alas, Ego horror
and odium totius mundi; I am such an horrid, odious and deformed monster, that
all thy creatures rise up against me, and threaten my confusion. What a
condescension is this, that thou selectest me for one of thy lovers, who
deserve thy love less then the very Devils themselves! And yet what says my
Apostle? If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. How? If any man not love
him, when its man's greatest honor that Christ vouchsafes to give him leave to
love him; nay, when, if he do love him, Christ gains nothing by it, but all the
advantage accrues to the man himself? I will appeal now, if thy be not a foul
shame, and if thou do not deserve this Anathema, Maran-atha. Yet,

2. There is a greater condescension then this. He has not only condescended
to give us leave to love him, but, rather then fail of our love, he has made
us capable of loving him. The Philosopher gave God thanks, that he made him a
Man and not a Beast: and so must thou, or else thou art worse then a beast; and
so well may thou, if thou will but take a reflext view of the super-eminent
dignity of thy Nature above the rest. Why Man (says Epictetus) (...); (...).
(...). if thou be think thy self of thy natural dignity, its a great blemish
and derogation to thy honor, if thou stoop to the love of any thing below the
Deity, whose very Image is stamped upon thee. (...).
What a lovely character does Philo give of Man? He is (says he) the most
lively and lovely Idea of the Archetypall Life and Beauty, the most amiable
picture of the most amiable Deity. And indeed (says Socrates) he is (...), the
only Creature under the Sun that is capable of religion, of knowing and of
loving God; none other but Angels are so. Which made the Prophet break out into
admiration, Lord, what is man, that thou should so honor him? Thou have
made him little lower (not many degrees lower) then the very Angels. Cast thy
eye upon thy self: do thou not see a most vivacious will and sagacious
understanding shining within thee, as in those Angelical Spirits? And why
(think thou) did he so condescend to bespangle thy soul wi^h those glorious
powers, why with that vigorous understanding; but that, as an Eagle, thou
might soar up, and gaze upon that most bright and dazzeling Sun of Glory?
and why with that will, but, that upon that clear view of his resplendent
Brightness, it might, as those Angels, be inflamed with love? Nay, not only
has he impressed in thee a vertuall capabilitie of love; but see with what art
he contrives to imprint an actual capacity of love: else why (I pray) does he
present thee with so many tokens of his love, but to win and gain thy love? The
heavens declare the Glory of God, (says the Kingly Prophet:) not only the
Glory of his Power, but also of his Love. What a glorious Love was that, to
enlighten thee here below with Stars, as it were with so many radiant,
glittering Diamonds! The heavens? I, and so does every creature under the
Heavens, proclaim the wonderful love of God to man. Look where thou will, thou
art surrounded with flames of his Love: mirabile est si non ardeas (says
Cusanus) it were strange if thou should not be set on fire; if not, sure thou
must needs be a diabolical Salamander. Diabolicae sunt Salamandrae, qui tantis
ignibus non calesiunt (Cusanus.)
Nay, why else; but that he might enamour thee on him, does he send thee so
many Love Letters transcribed by the Prophets and Apostles, and those special
pledges of his Love, the Sacraments sealed with his own blood? Nay, why else
does he send down his glorious Spirit, that Architectonicall Chemist of Love;
but, that he might by his sacred breath blow up those dead cinders of thy
affections into sparks, and those sparks into flames, and those flames into
perpetual burnings? Nay, why else did this Jesus himself, the bright Sun of
Love, come down from his sphere of Glory, and condescend to be shut up in the
dark lantern of our flesh, but that he might even burn and overcome thee with
love of him, as he was with love of thee? Here is an enforcement upon thee;
Love him now thou must, otherwise thou art prodigiously un-naturall. Every
creature loves that which is like it self: Ecclus 13.15.
(the Wise man observes that to be the very Law of Nature, which the very
Brutes keep inviolable) and so will man, (...), he will cleave to his like: and
yet what says my Apostle? If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. How? not
love him that is so like him, that he is clothed with the same nature with
man? No man hates his own flesh; and yet If any man not love the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone? I Will appeal, whether
such a man be not opprobrium naturae, a shame and disgrace to nature. Anacreon
the Poet tells, how there had been an hot duel betwixt Love and himself a long
time: (...), Love (says he) grapled with me with all the skill and strength
that he had; but all that would not do, he had too rough a piece to encounter
with: what does he then, (...).
but in a fury shoot his arrows thick and threefold at my breast? but all
they were disappointed by my prudent retreat and flight: At last having thus
emptied his Quiver of all his store, very slyly (...), he darted himself into
my heart, and then alas, what could I do else but yield? (...) oh Love, thou
have got the victory, I may not, I will not resist thee any more. And (I pray
thee) is it not thy case, and every man's? How many vollies of his Arrows did
the Lord Jesus, that God who is Love it self, send after thee? how many tokens
of his Love? and that in such a prodigal manner, that, as if he had emptied
his Quiver, he cries our, What could I have done more for my people then I have
done? and at last, when all would not make any impression, see if he does not
shoot himself into our very humane nature; see if by the force of love he be
not transformed into a man. (...) (Lucian.)
(...), (as Venus said to Cupid) Love, see what Miracles thou do, who have
power over God himself, and can turn him into what shape thou please. And
yet If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ? What, not him that was so
overcome with love to man, that he condescended to become Man, and that to
enforce man to the love of him? If he will not love him as God, he must love
him now, because he is become Man like himself: and yet if any man not love
him? Say now, whether that man be not filius mortis qui hoc fecerit, an heir of
this Apostolical curse, and death, which does such an unnatural thing. Not
love him, who made him capable of love; who, if he had pleased, might have made
him a stock, or stone, or brute, neither capable nor sensible of love? nay, not
him, who himself was therefore pleased to be made Man, that man might be
constrained to love him, as being of one and the self-same nature with himself?
Not love him, who is not only God, but Man? nay, not him, who so loved man,
that he has wedded man's nature to his own divine, glorious Person? nay, not
him, who is the very Principle of all Love, and Love it self? If this does not
speak the man a Monster, and set up an high aggravation against him, what will?
How, if any man not love him, without whom he cannot love himself, or any thing
else? For that (I hope) thou will not deny, because himself has asserted it;
John 15.5.
(...), without me ye can do nothing. He does not say (says St. Augustine,)
Sine me parum potestis, without me ye can do but little; or, but difficulter,
very hardly: no, but nothing at all, (...).
not so much as speak a good word, or think a good thought, (2 Cor. 3.5.) No,
but whatsoever virtue or grace shines in us, they are streams flowing only
from that fountain: (...), of his fullness we all receive, (John 1.16.) If thou
invoke him its but an echo of that voice of his first calling thee: If thou see
him, it is not so much an aspection, as a respection. Just as an Image in the
Glass, (says Ficinus) that is imprinted there by the face looking into it;
that Image does not look back upon the Face, except the Face first look forward
upon the Image: and in that the Image does seem to see the Face, its nothing
else, but that the Face does see the Image. And so, if thou love Christ, it is
nothing else but the reflection or resultance of that beam of love, that was
first trajected or darted from that pure fountain of Love. Its most certain,
Love him thou can not, no, nor any thing else, nisi amore ipso prius
inflammatus, except that supreme wheel set that inferior wheel of thine upon
that motion. How is it possible that any man should affectare extra charitatem,
love without love? love without him, that is the very principle of all Love? If
thou can not, I must now appeal, if thou be not a prodigy in nature, if thou
return hatred to him, who therefore made thee capable of love, that whatsoever
thou love, might be in order to him. Were not that a monstrous Glass, that
should return a Frown for a Smile, and Ugliness for Beauty? And is not the
same thy case, if thou return to the Lord Jesus Christ hatred for love? What,
love any thing rather then him, without whose influxe, neither could that thing
be, nor could thy self love it? Nay, hate him, by whose virtue thou love
that, whatsoever it be, which ingendreth that hatred? How shamefully unnatural
is this? How does every thing in nature cry out upon thee? For there is nothing
but naturally returns to its original Cause; (...) (Procl.) Aquae in tanium
ascondum, in quantum descendunt.
and always (says Proclus) the revolution comes home to the devolution, the
ascension to the first descension. The rivers run to the Sea (says Solomon,
Eccles 1.7.) why? because they first flowed from the Sea. The face in the glass
looks back to the face looking on the glass, why? because it borrows all its
being, and grace and features from it. The sparks of fire ascend or fly
upwards, why? because they first came from above. The beams of the Sun rebound
back to the Sun, why? because they were streamed thence. Always in nature
there is a return of all things to their original Cause. Vnaquaeque res
repetit suam originem (Mars. Ficinus)
Why now, Love is a flame of Christ's own kindling; and whither should it ascend
but to its own proper Sphere? Love is a beam that was first shot from Christ
the Sun of righteousness, and a stream that originally flowed out from that
immense vast Ocean of all Graces; and whither should it retire or return but to
him? And yet, If any man not love the Lord Jesus Christ? How? not love Him, who
is the very pure fountain of Love? What a prodigious unnatural wretch is that
man? Let him say himself, whether my Apostle could do less then let fly his
thundering Canons at him. Yet that is not all; But

3. There is a greater condescension of his Love to man yet. He has not only
vouchsafed to give thee leave to love him, and to make thee capable of that
love; but himself is the first that, what? ah, what am I about to say?
Loquimur, and stupemus, inde non tacemus unde, tamen cloqui non v^lemus, (St.
Leo.)
that which though I cannot express, yet can I not be silent: himself is the
first that condescends, what? to love us first. Nay, higher yet, (though that
in the judgment of Saint John be an high condescension) he condescends to sue
to us for our love; 1 John 4.10.
nay, and sends Ambassadors to agitate, nay, to entreat our love. 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are Christ's Ambassadors (says my Apostle) as if God besought you by us; we
beseech you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God. Can thou hear this,
and ^hy heart not be moulten into Love, at least not stricken with Admiration?
Be ye reconciled unto God? and, we beseech you? nay, God by us beseeches? what
condescensions are these? One would think, considering who began the Quarrel,
thou should rather beseech him to be reconciled to thee, then that he should
beseech thee to be reconciled unto him. Compare the Persons: He; who? God, an
infinite Majesty, at whole presence the mountains tremble; Beseeches, who^?
Thee, a poor silly Flea, a Worm, Marcus Imperat
(...), a little Soul carrying about thee a dead piece of flesh. Weigh the
circumstance of Time: He beseeches thee, when? when there is any thing of such
Loveliness in thee that is worth the Beseeching? no, but when thou art
wallowing in the goare, when (God knows) there is no such un-lovely and
unsighty piece. A strange condescension this; as if a King should fall in love
with a poor leprous Damsel, and send Ambassadors to woe and beseech her to
entertain his Majesty's love. But now consider the manner of his beseeching
thee, and that must needs swallow thee up into astonishment. He beseeches,
how? by writing thee Love Letters in his own Blood. He so passionately loves
thee, that rather then fail, he will die to win thy love. No fond wanton
lover of them all (says Saint Chrysostom) though his brain be by the heat of
love enfeavered to an high degree of frenzy, that is so all on fire with the
love of his Mistress, as the Lord Jesus is with the love of thy Soul. He so
loved thee, as that he exposed himself to thousands of Wounds, not only made
by Men, or Devils, but by the heavy hand of Divine Justice; and interposed his
own sacred breast to receive, so to stave them off from thee. Homines, Quid
miramini, nisi stupes citis, quod Deus tam affectuose amet creaturas? (Eusebius.
Niremberg.) St. Bern.
quid miramini? Ah (Men) what is it that ye can stand amazed at, if you do not
at this, that God should so affectionately love his creature? that, Deus tantus
tantillos, tantum, tam gratis; so great a God should so much love such little
inconsiderable worms? Show me such another wonder of love, if you can. That
condescension of Jesus, (says Nirembergius) that stupendous humbling of
himself to Death, Philip. 2.7.
and emptying himself of Glory, was such a transcendent masterpiece of Love,
that, should any man have either imagined any such thing, or wished that so it
might be, before himself was pleased to reveal that great secret, The seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head; preces blasphemiae crederentur, votum
sacrilega voluntas, that thought of his had been blasphemy, and that wish
horrible sacrilege. What an impudence were it, if a Rebel justly sentenced by
the Judge to tortures and death, should put up a Petition to the King, to lay
down his life, and to suffer the penalty of the Law for him? what rude and
prodigious Impudence were this? And yet, such was the Love of our Redeemer,
Jesus Christ, the King of Kings; he humbles himself to Death, nay, the death of
the Cross, the most ignominious and cursed kind of death, and that for us Men,
who for our Rebellion were damned to eternal death; nay, and that before we
ever, what? did make it our suit to his Majesty; nay, and before we ever durst
have thought of any such horrid request. It was a love unto death it self, and
that is the strongest of all Loves. Greater love then this (says my Apostle)
can no man have, then to lay down his life for another: That is the Grand Love,
without all doubt, and all compare; that is the charitas superlativa, the
greatest of all. And yet here is one circumstance that makes this superlative
love of Christ to us Men, more then superlative: it was a love of anticipation;
such a love, that not only exceeds all imaginations and desires, but prevents
all, which is the most kindly of all loves, the best kind of love. And sure it
must speak us the worst of all creatures, Nimis durus est animus, qui si non
impendere, nec rependere vult (S. Aug.)
if we should not answer such a love as this, with love. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ? How? not love him, who so loved Man as to die for him,
rather then Man should die the death? That were brutish. Brutish? nay, worse;
for the most savage of Brutes love those that love them; the very Lions and
Tigres do so. Amant a mantes Leones amant Tigres. (S. Aug.)
and yet, If any man not love the Lord Jesus Christ, who so loved man as to die
for him? that were devilish. Devilish? nay, worse then devilish, (says
Nirembergius) for there is not so great a tie or engagement of love upon the
Devils, as there is upon us Men; the Lord Jesus did not die for them, but for
us Men, and for our salvation, eripere de faucibus, to rescue us out of their
furious jaws. If they hate him, they hate only their Creator; but if any of
us men be so wretched, we do not only hate our Creator, but our Redeemer, we
hate him that poured out his own blood to redeem us.

Say now, thou Monster, whether thou be not confounded with shame, and
whether my Apostle could do less then to thunder out his confounding Anathema
against thee. Which is my first kind of Arguments, for the shaming of thee out
of that thy peevish and more then devilish humor; viz. the condescensions of
Christ's Love to us.

2. If thou be not shamed, if thou please to take a view of those
supereminent Glories and Superexcellencies that shine in him, I shall challenge
thee, if thou can choose, do not love him.

But now (my sweet Jesu) how shall I be able to display the radiant beams of
thy Glories, whose Intellect is clothed, or rather clouded with Reason, and
Reason with Fancy, and Fancy with Sense, (...).
which sees nothing but shadows and delusive dreams? Alas, the brightness of
thy Glory dazels me; and the more bright that shines, the more it leaves me in
darkness: nay, (...), (Dionys. Areop.)
and the more that my eye is thus dazeled and darkened, so much the more clearly
does it see thee: I can never more fully see thee, then when I see thus much,
that I cannot see thee; never till then do I comprehend thee indeed, (...),
(Damascen.)
but when I comprehend that thou art altogether incomprehensible.

Reader, I beseech thee help me out in admiration. The Prophet says, He shall
be called wonderful; Esaias 9.6.
and so well he may, (says Hierotheus:) For howsoever that glorious Majesty
condescended to be clad with the base rags of our flesh; (...).
yet, which is the wonder of wonders, in the very naturals, which he borrowed
from us, he was super-naturall, in our very estentialls, he was
super-essentiall; as his walking upon the Sea testifies, to the astonishment of
all. No wonder he is styled Wonderful, for indeed there is nothing spoken of
him but speaks a Wonder.

That he should be born, (...). (S. Chrysostom.
who is Eternity it self; be made Flesh, by whom not only all Flesh, but all
Principalities and Powers were made: nay, made of a woman; nay, and that a
Virgin: this is such a Wonder, that the very Angels descend from Heaven to see
a greater wonder below; nay, such, that God himself seems to wonder at it;
Ier. 31.22.
The Lord has created a new thing upon earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. A
new thing? why? is that such a wonder? Yes, and thy self shall say, there was
never any such, if once thou see what woman that is, and what that man. That
woman is such a woman as is a Virgin (says the Prophet Esaias) such a woman as
never knew man. Esaias 7.14
You may think this strange, for so did that Blessed Virgin her self, when an
Angel told her she should bring forth a Son; (...), how can this be, seeing I
know not a man? (...), (Joan, Metrop.)
Very strange, a Mother, and yet never knew man; a Virgin, and yet compass a
man. Nec alia matter decebat Deum nisi virgo, nec alius filius decebat virginem
nisi Deus, (Petr. Blesens.) Esaias 40.12.
And yet look upon that man that is compassed by her, it is infinitely more
strange. It is no other then he that measures the waters with his span, and
comprehends the heavens with his fist; it is he whom the heavens of heavens
cannot comprehend (says Solomon:) and that he who is incomprehensible, should
be comprehended within the narrow womb of a Virgin, if this be not (...) (says
Damascen) the only new thing either under or above the Sun, what is? Never was
there such a demonstration of the power of the Deity as this (says Saint
Basil) that the lesser should comprehend the greater, (...) (Bas.)
that the Daughter should conceive and bring forth her Father, the Sheep her
Shepherd, the Creature her Creator: was there ever such a wonder as this?

And so not only his Birth, but his Death, how wonderful was it? which gave
such a deadly wound, not only to Death, in token whereof many of the dead
arose out of their Sepulchers; but also to him that had the power of death,
divested him of his power, threw him out of his Temples, silenced his Oracles.
What a triumphant expression is that of my Apostle, ( Coloss. 2.15.) Having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly, (as his
captives) (...) triumphing over them (...) by the Cross. It was such a rout,
that Ignatius says, the Devil never since either hears or sees the Cross,
(...).
but he is all in a shaking and trembling.

And then his whole Life, what was it else but miraculis fulgens, a very
Theater of miracles? What think you of giving eyes to the blind, (...)
(Sibylla.)
life to the dead, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb? He did such
wonders, that Amelius Platonicus cries out, Sure God has put on our humane
nature, and therein does show the world the Majesty of the Divine nature. And
Agbarus King of Edessa (says Eusebius) wrote a letter to him, wherein he
concludes, (...), one of these two, Either Thou art God, (...).
or the Son of God, that do those things that I hear of thee.

And yet, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ? How? not Him, whose Birth,
and Life, and Death, and all Actions speak nothing but Wonders? Not love Him
that is so full of such Excellencies, that the very blind can descrie the
glories of the Deity shining through the cloud of our flesh which he assumed?
Its impossible: thou must either deny that, Matthew. 8.29. (...) (S. Chrysostom.)
which the Devils durst, not, his Divinity; or else thou must be ravished with
love of him.

Or if that variety of his Excellencies allure not, cast thy eye upon the
variation of the glorious Resemblances which my Apostle here runs upon. The
Lord Jesus Christ. What a divine philtrum and charm of love is wrapped up in
every of these Titles, (...).
able to melt hearts of iron into love? The Lord, that speaks a sovereign
Power. He is Lord of all (says Saint Peter:) yea, and so says every creature;
(...)
all stoop to the Scepter of his Imperial command; (...), etc. (Archylus).
Fire and hail, snow and vapors, depths and all dragons, wind and storm, all
fulfilling his word, (Psalm. 148.8.) nay, so the Angels above; Could I not now,
if I would, command a legion of Angels? (says he) nay, and the very Devils
below; Lord, in thy Name the Devils are subject to us. He is a Lord of that
Power, that he bears up all things: Heb. 1.3.
who if he should withdraw the influxe of his Power but one moment, we should
all instantly sink into our old Chaos again. It is good for me to cleave to the
Lord (says David:) and he said well in it (says S. August.) for if he cleave
not to him, to himself he cannot, Domine, si vis ut recedam a te, da mibi alium
Te, alias non recedam.
Lord, if thou will that I depart from thee, I must beseech thee to give me
another Thee, otherwise I shall be very loath to depart from thee. And yet, If
any man love him not? fly off in his love from him, who is a Lord of that
power, that he can so easily, if his wrath be kindled, dismiss him into the
lake of fire and brimstone? what desperate folly is that?

But if his Power make no impression in thee, see what that other name (Christ)
will do. He is not only Lord, but Christ. Which is a name (says the Spouse)
that breaths forth nothing but Aromatic odours and rich perfumes; Thy Name is
as an ointment poured out, Cant. 1.2.
and therefore the Virgins love thee: and, All thy garments smell of Myrrh,
Aloes and Cassia (says King David:) and, Thou art anointed with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows; Prae consortibus, and pro consortibus, for thy
fellows too, that it might drop upon all that breathe after the fragrant Sents
thereof. Its this Christ, this Anointed, that perfumes all, not only our
Persons, but our Prayers, and all other actions, and makes them odoriferous and
acceptable to his Father. Its he only that is the sole delight of all the
Divine Senses: nothing delicious to his palate, but what is seasoned with the
gall of his Son; nothing melodious to his ear, but what sounds with the name of
this his eternal Word; nothing lovely in his eye, but what is seen through
this spotless glass of Beauty; nothing pleasing to his smell, but what is
sented with the rich odours of this his Christ or Anointed. This is my beloved
Son, (...), in whom I am well pleased, (Matthew. 3.17.) And yet, If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ? How? not love him, without whom he cannot be lovely?
not love him, without whom he may not draw near to the presence of God, but
must be struck with a javeline of death? If any man not love Christ, without
whose sweet unctions, Hell it self exhales not a more odious, noisome stench,
then every man must? What Vultures are such Wretches, quibus etiam Alabastrum
unguenti plenum putere videtur; that are rather drawn with stinking carrions,
then such precious sovereign Perfume?

Yet, if this will not allure thee, what think thou of him as Jesus? which
very word speaks and breaths, forth nothing but love (says Saint Bernard)
Mel in ore, melos in aure. Spell the letters, and there will resound in thine
ears a Savior. O quam dulce nomen! what music so ravishing? And yet, If any
man not love the Lord Jesus? How? not love him that is his Savior, that has
not only redeemed him from Hell, but purchased Heaven for him? It is
impossible. What, I hope, thou art not so abhorrent from nature, that thou will
court thy own Death or Ruin, nay, or wish it; (...) (Aristot.)
but rather wishest and love thy salvation. Do thou so? and yet not love
him who is the Author and finisher of all salvation? How can this be? Every
man loves light; and yet, if any man not love the Sun, the fountain of light?
no man but loves salvation; and yet, if any man love not Jesus, the fountain of
salvation? What incongruities, nay, what impossibilities are these? Thou must
either deny Jesus to be a Savior, which would be little comfort to thee; or
renounce all pretenses to any love, or wishing well to thy self, which were
very unnatural; or else thou must love him. The love of thy Jesus will
constrain thee to it, nay, the very love of thy self must. Et ipsam animam
(says Saint Bernard) I would hate my very soul, Et ipsam animam odio haberom,
si non diligeret meum Iesum.
if it should not love my Jesus. Nay, Aristodemus an Heathen, hearing
Philosophers arguing the provident care of the gods, and love to man, cries
out, (...) (apud Xenoph.)
Oh if I were assured of that, sure I would not so slight and vilipend them as
I do. And yet, If my man, any Christian man, love not the Lord Jesus, such a
loving God to man, that, rather then man should perish, came down from Heaven
to save him? it cannot be. Oh man, how can thou mind or think of any other
love, when such a Jesus is to be loved? or if thou do such a moral
impossibility, how can thou deny, (I appeal to thy self) my Apostles
censures of Anathema, Maran-atha, to be very justly inflicted on thee? And yet,
that is not all I have to say to thee; But,

3. Take along with thee but three Principles which I shall tell thee, and sure
they must convince thee, and evince thy love, and enforce thee to love the Lord
Jesus Christ, if thou resolve to love any thing.

1. None can choose, but every man must love that which is beautiful: this no
Devil can deny. (...) (Plato)
For indeed (says Plato) Love is not love, if it be not of that which is
lovely. Love is nothing else nisi pulchritudinis desiderium (says Cusanus) but
breathing after the enjoyment of Beauty: and (says Ficinus) Amor tanquam ejus
finem, fruitionem respicit pulchritudinis, (Mars. Ficinus.)
it acquiesceth in the enjoyment thereof as in its end. No man can properly
love any thing but what is beautiful; and what is so, none can choose but must
love it: and therefore it is called (...), (...) (Proclus.)
because (says Proclus) it is so lovely, that it draws all eyes to stupour
and admiration of it; as Lucian brings in young Paris so ravished at the sight
of fair Helena, that he thought he could not enjoy himself, though a Prince and
Heir of famous Troy, (...) (Lucianus.)
nor could live, unless he enjoyed that Beauty. And Pindarus says of the
lovely Theoxenus, that he that gazing upon that august and comely face of his,
(...).
is not surprised with amazements, and inflamed with loves and desires, he must
have an heart of Adamant or Brass.

Beauty is of that force, that (...), that it transports all that look on it,
out of themselves, and rapts them with a divine fury (says Proclus.) And
there may be some reason for it (says another Philosopher) Marsilius Ficiuus.
for indeed it is no other then divini luminis imago, a very image of the
divine light, imo vultus, of the divine countenance; and who can choose but
must be ravished at any the least glimpse of the Deity?

Why now, Christ is ipsa essentialis pulchritudo, Beauty it self, the very
essential Idea and pure sampler of all beauties: he is that Beauty, that
beautifies and bespangles all the several spheres of the whole Universe, with
all whatsoever gracefulnesses or comelinesses glitter in them; that adorneth
the Angelical mind with its beautiful order of Ideas; the rational soul with
its golden chain of Reasons; active Nature with its variety of seeds; and the
lowermost Orb of all, passive Matter, with all its several forms, that you
see the Lilie so clothed, Matthew. 6.29.
that Solomon in all his royalty was nothing comparable to it. (...), it is
this absolute Beauty that so clothes that and and all other things with their
amiable complexions and comely shapes, (says Cusanus;) and they all are
nothing else then so many several adumbrations of this one absolute Beauty,
who is the comprehension of them all; as Unity is the complication of all
Numbers, and Number is nothing else then the explication of Unity. In Number
is all Proportion, in Proportion is all harmonicall Order; and therefore all
the Beauty that results from that order and proportion, must needs be wrapped up
in Unity in a more eminent manner. He is such a Beauty, that the very Angels
(says S. Peter) (...), 1 Pet. 1.12.
are greedy to peep into; nay, such a Beauty, that God himself proclaims from
his most excellent Glory, that he is ravished at the sight of him; This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And yet what says the Apostle here? If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. How? any man not love him that is such
a Beauty, that God himself takes a wonderful complacencie in him? No man, but
loves what is Beautiful: and yet, If any man not love him who is so Beautiful
that he is Beauty it self? Thou must either deny him to be such a Beauty,
which Hell it self dares not; or point out some other that may be compared, and
stand in competition with him; or else thou must be enforced to love him.

But is there any other indeed? No, thou art grossly deluded, if thou fancy any
thing to be a real Beauty here below: it is merely (says Boethius)
imbecillitas oculorum, the weakness of thy eyes that fools thee into that
conceit: had thou but one pierceing eye, thou would see that that, which
thou take to be such a peerless beauty, there were not vilius sterquiliniu^,
a more loathsome dung-hil then it. Nay, Diana her self (says Lucian) (...),
that famous Lady of Beauty, being suddenly by Actaeon spied naked, as she was
washing her self in a bath, for fear lest he should tell tales abroad of her
cleanliness, (...).
she opens the mouths of his own hounds upon him to stop his. Alas, whatsoever
Beauty thou meetest with here, it is no other then an exile shadow of Beauty.
The Sun that is so resplendent, and (...), so excessively beautiful, (...).
(apud Xenoph.)
that if any man dare impudently gaze upon it, he indangereth his eyes; yet is
it but (...) (says Plato) an image, nay, a shadow of the Deity. And that
intelligible, (...).
that Divine Light which is the Arche-type and Fountain of all, (says Philo)
does as far exceed in luster and brightness that visible Light, that so dazles
our eyes, as that Light does Darkness it self. Nirembergius thinks the Spouse
alludes to or implies some such thing, by that her expression, I sought him
whom my soul loves, by night. Nox est respectu Domini splendour rerum
venustarum; all the beauties of Sun, and Heavens, and Stars, and Angels, are
but Night in respect of Christ; and were they all contracted into one Beauty,
yet what were it compared with him? turpis and obscura esset, how obscure and
unlovely would it appear? But, si tantum umbra lucet, quantum lux ipsa, if his
very shadows seem so bright and glorious in thy eye, oh how bright and
glorious must the Fountain it self shine? And yet what says the Apostle? If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. Very strange: But without doubt, the
reason is, because he is so immerst and sunk into sense, and, (...).
like the Hedgehog, (says Clemens Alexandrinus) rolling altogether in flesh,
that he is enclosed with, that he cannot rise up into the sublime speculation
of spiritual Beauties, but entertains the same (if not lower) imaginations of
them, as he does of sensual and carnal. Why do we dote so fondly upon this
world? (...).
(it was the saying of an heathen woman.) Why? (...), because it glitters with
many gaudie gaities: but it would not so, had we but the least insight into
that other above. Oh if once our eyes were blessed (says Plato) with the sight
of Beauty it self; (...).
and we did behold it in its own purity and complexion, * as it is in it self;
not (as here) mixed and stained with flesh and blood, and over-laid with
cerussaes and paintings, and daubed with Apothecaries drugs, but in its own
genuine hue and bright flame what then? (...).
we would not then think that glistering Gold, and sparkling Diamonds, or
beauteous Ladies were it; and oh, how would the sight thereof inflame all with
love that behold it? (...).
(says he most divinely.) And you may well think so (says Hermes) when as the
very glimpse thereof has so rapt some out of themselves, (...).
that they never were themselves again, till they came to the full enjoyment
thereof. Come (says holy Monicha) Volemus in Coelos, fideles volemus in
Coelos; come Christians, let us get us to our wings, and fly up to our blessed
Jesus; ut quid hic agimus, what make we here below, when he is above? what joy
can we take in his absence? And so holy Ignatius, (...), (...).
my Love is crucified; and there is not in me any such fire as can take any
pleasure in preying upon these carrions and sordid pleasures below, but there
is a pure water leaping up and down in me, and whispering unto me, Up
(Ignatius) get thee up to thy Jesus. (...).
And oh now (says he) how I long to be thrown into the jaws of those Lions
which I hear roaring for me! and if they will not dispatch me the sooner,
(...), I will enforce them to it by violence, that so I may enjoy the sight of
my blessed Jesus. And yet, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ? what? not
love him that is such a Beauty, that the Saints with chearfullness run through
any kinds of deaths, so to have the sight of him? No man but loves that which
is lovely: and yet, if any man not love him, who is so lovely, that he is
loveliness it self? Thou must either deny him to be the Brightness of Glory,
Heb. 1.3.
and so give my Apostle the Lie; or thou must be enforced to love him. O cor
meum, quomodo non te evellis post tantum deco rem: (Nuremberg.)
O my heart (says Nirembergius) why do thou not pluck thy self up by the
very root, after so great a Beauty? which is the first eviction.

2. No man can choose, but he must love that which is good. This cannot be
denied: for there is that natural cognation betwixt man and goodness (says
Plato) that there is not any thing else which man loves, (...).
but what is good; insomuch that, if their hands or feet be so gangrened that
they seem naught, they are willing to have them cut off. That which is good, is
not only diffusive of it self, (...).
but attractive of all others, it draws all by its genuine splendor, nay,
(...), it draws by a kindly violence, as the Sun does all eyes, to love and
admiration (says Proclus). For is Truth is the adequate object of the
Intellect, so is Goodness of the Will; and as the Intellect cannot properly
understand any thing but what is true, so neither can the Will love any thing
but what is good, and what is good, it cannot but love: if at any time it does
unhappily embrace that which is evil, (...) (Arist.)
it does not therefore embrace it because it is evil, but because the
Understanding being deluded does represent it under the notion of good;
otherwise it is impossible that Vice should impose upon us, Non nisi virtutis
sub umbra decipiunt vitia. (Seneca)
if it did not come in the habit of Virtue: if the Will decline good, it is
because that good seems evil, and the very declining, good. Goodness has
such a sweet force upon the Will, that the very shadow of it enforces the Will
to court it, and to make love to it. And this (says the Platonist) is the very
reason, why both Beauty so allures the Eye, and Harmony so ravisheth the
Ear: Beauty, because it is nothing else but a visible Goodness, for there is
all the difference between them; (...) (Procl.)
Goodness is an inward Beauty, and Beauty is an outward Goodness, displaying
to all eyes the loveliness that is shining within: and so, as Beauty is a
visible Goodness, so is Harmony bonitas audibilis, an audible Goodness; which
therefore is so highly delightful, because of the huge complacencie and
pleasure that the soul takes in Goodness, wheresoever it meets with it, through
what organs soever it is conveyed, then which (says Marcus Antoninus) (...),
there is nothing does more harmonize with its nature, or is more suitable and
agreeable. Why now, Christ, as he is essential Beauty, so he is essential
Goodness: as the spotless glass of Beauty, so (says the Wise man) he is
(...), Wisd 7.26.
the Image of the Divine Goodness; or (as Saint John characterizeth him) (...),
the very Idea and Reason, or pure Sampler of all things, which are no other
then contracted Images of that most absolute one. And if so, then you may
irrefragably conclude (says Philo) that that (...), that original Sampler,
whence all created beauties and goodnesses were so drawn out to the life, must
needs be in himself infinitely more lovely and good. For no effect can possibly
rise up to the dignity of its primordiall cause: (...)
whatsoever virtue or excellency is shining in any subordinate cause, (...),
(Proclus.)
must needs be in the highest in a more eminent and exuberant manner
preexistent; nay, and that so supereminently (says Ficinus) that what
belongs to those Effects, cannot properly be attributed to their higher
cause: as to say Heat is hot, Wisdom is wise, Light is lightsome, Goodness is
good; what defective, nay, and derogative predications are these? Joy (says
the Areopagite) wheresoever it glanceth, it affects with mavelous
cheerfulness; yet we cannot properly say that Joy it self is affected with
cheerfulness, or is joyful, but is so Joy as passes all imagination. If there
be any goodness in the Creature, how infinitely more must there be in the
Creator, so as exceeds all apprehensions? Why call thou me good? (says
Christ to him, that had a conceit that he was but a mere man.) Why call thou
me good (who look not upon me as God, as well as Man?) There is none good
but God, Good? nay, God is so good, that he is Goodness it self (says Hermes.)
there is such a reciprocal identitie of God and good, (...).
that if thou say that any other thing is good but God, (...), thou art
impious, or that God is any other thing then good, thou art impious again. And
yet what says the Apostle, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. How? not
love him that is the eternal Son of God, that is, 1 John 5.20.
(...) very God (says Saint John) blessed God for ever (says my Apostle?) No
man but loves whatsoever has but the appearance or shadow of Goodness, nay,
and cannot but love it; and yet, if any man not love him, who is the very
essence and substance of Goodness, Goodness it self? it cannot be. Thou must
either turn an Arrian, and blasphemously deny his Divinity, which not only
Angels have proclaimed, but the very Star at his birth, and the very stones,
rocks and monuments at his death, and the very winds roared out upon the Sea,
and Devils upon on the Land; or else thou must be enforced to love him. And
were it not that sad experience speaks the same that my Apostle here, I
should think it an uncharitable censure and supposition, that there should be
any such monstrous man, that loves not such a lovely God. Man? Very strange,
that man, a rational creature, whose very Reason will dispense with the love
of nothing but what is good, Nemo adeo alienus a lege naturae est, ut malum qua
malum eligat. ( Senec.)
and will tell him, he offers violence to his nature, if he do; should yet
forsake the very Principle and End of all good, and fall in love with mere
superficies and shadows thereof, and with foolish Ixion embrace an empty
Cloud in stead of bright Juno. For so the very Pagans shall tell thee; (...)
(says Plotinus) all these things that thou so dotest upon here, and
all-to-begoddest, what are they but mortal, nay, (...) (Plot.)
and mortiferous, and senseless loves of Idols, or livelesse Images? Nay,
(says Plato) whatsoever thou look upon here, (...) (Plato.)
is a mere Dream, (...) that man is only awake that sees that he sees
nothing else but Dreams. (...) (says Plutarch:) alas we are here only,
(...), as those that are surprised with dead sleeps; (...), (Plutarch)
and our soul does grasp and groap at that which is divine and good indeed,
merely as in a dream. And yet if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ? not
love him that is the very Ideall Fountain and real Verity of all that is
worth the loving, and if his love pre^ before him on^^ verisimilitudes and
shadows, fleeting shadows, nay, which therefore (says Gregory Nazianzen)
that divine Wisdom out of an holy Policy made so fleeting and unstable,
(...) (Greg. Naz.)
that we might not so foolishly fix our love upon them? how irrational is
this? Cast a piece of bread to a dog (says Nirembergius) will he be so foolish
as to leave the substance and fall upon the shadow? For shame (says Saint
Chrysostom) let not us rational creatures be so mad as to run after that
which flies away from us, (...), (Chrysostom.) (...); (Greg. Naz.)
and to fly away from him, who remains one and the same blessed God for
ever. For shame, shall we never learn to distinguish betwixt Light and
Darkness, Shadows and Substance, Moments and Eternity, Apparences and
Realitie? Why, man, (says Menander) (...), if thou be only a mortal
creature, and that soul of thine shall expire as that of the beasts, then go
and mind, and love only such as are like thy self: But, if thou be a divine
creature, and have such a soul as is immortal, then why do thou not mind
and love such things as are suitable to thy noble nature? If Goodness be the
natural object of thy Will, Cum aliqua non amentur nisi quia bona sunt, pudeat
iis in harendo non amare bonum Ipsam unde bona sunt.
and the Will cannot love any thing else but what is good; for shame man,
(says Saint Augustine,) let not thy affection so adhere to created Goodnesses,
that thou neglect the Fountain, whence they were all derived. If these blurred
lines so delight, why then should not He that is the pure Copy of all? If such
streams, nay, dropps please thee, (...) (Epicter.)
why should not He infinitely more, who is the infinite Fountain of all? Thou
must give a reason why not; or else reason it self tells thee, thou must love
him. No man but naturally loves what is good, either real or apparent: Jesus
is Goodness it self. That is the second Eviction: one more, and I have done.

3. None can choose, but must love his own perfection and happiness. This (I
presume) thou will not deny; for it is an inviolable Law of Nature (says
Aristotle:) (...), Happiness carries the votes of all, even of the Wizzard
Balaam himself. As that which we naturally breath after is good and beautiful,
so it is perfect and happy. As good, so it is the original Being of all
things: as beautiful, so it is the Grace and Comeliness of all: as perfect, so
it is the ultimate Center and Acquiescence of all. As it is good and
beautiful, so it moves and draws all to the love of it: as it is perfect,
so all things move and draw themselves toward it. As good and beautiful, so
it is of an admirable attractive virtue: as perfect, so it is of a wondrous
conversive and circulative Force; (...), (Procl.)
it wheels about the several Spheres of the Creatures, and reduces them back
to it self.

No created substance but has its revolution; (...).
and always you shall see, whither their return tends, there is their
Perfection, because their center where they can only rest and terminate their
motion. which is the reason, why heavy Elements descend, and light ascend,
nay, and that in a direct Geometrical line, which yet is not their proper
motion; for in their Spheres their motion is circular, the Fire above moves
circularly, and the Water below, and the Air betwixt both, moves circularly,
and so would the Earth, if it moved, as Copernicus conceited; and yet all these
in their motions and tendencies toward their centers move in a strait line,
without the least circulation or fetching any compass about; and why so, but
that they may be the sooner at their homes, where only they can rest, and
their nature is perfected?

Why now Christ, as he is the essential Pulchritude, and essential Goodness
of all; so he is the essential Perfection. (Coloss. 2.9.)
In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, (says my Apostle;) and
that Divinity of that God-Man (says Dorotheus divinely) which the Jews
looked upon with such disdain, is such a fullness of Perfection, that it
essentiateth all essences, it naturalizeth all natures, it perfectionates all
perfections: (...) (Coloss. 1.15.)
it is perfect in things that are imperfect, it is full in things that are
empty, in things that are full, it is over-full. The (...), first-begotten of
every Creature (says my Apostle again.) Yet, least that ye should damnably
mistake him (as some Heretics have done) you must understand, that he was not
only the first-begotten, but the (...) onely-begotten (says Saint John) and
so by consequence the first and last; John 1.14.
and therefore something more and above a Creature. What is the meaning then of
that Riddle, The first-begotten of every Creature? That is, as I conceive, It
was he that was the original Beauty and Perfection, whence all the Creatures
got and derived whatsoever excellencies and perfections shine in them; he the
fair Coppie, whence all these lines were transcribed. So Clemens Alexandrinus
seems to allude. God the Father (when he was upon the glorious design of
framing the several orders of the Creatures) was pleased to cast his eye upon
his glorious Son, (...)
that eternal (...), or Idea, and infinite sampler of Perfections; and
according to that sampler before his eye did he draw them all out in their
several lineaments and features and complexions. If you take this for a
fancy, read that Text of the Prophet, and then tell me if a man would not
think as if the Apostle did only paraphrase upon him: (Psalm. 104.24.)
Oh how great are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: (for so
Christ is styled, the wisdom of the Father) And the earth is full, (...) of
thy Creatures.

What can be more clear? Nay, you shall hear himself, ( Colossians 1.16.) with
what elegancies does he express how Christ was that absolute lovely conception
of the Father, and the complication of all created Perfections; and all had the
reason and cause of their Being in that complacencie of the Father? (...), In
him were all things created, things in Heaven, and things in Earth, things
visible, and things invisible, etc. and all things were created by him, and for
him, and he is before all: nay, and the Areopagite adds, (...), He himself is
All: All Perfections absolutely, (...).
and All comprehensively, and All singularly; what they are all severally and
distinctly, he is singularly and (...) alonely: (...), All are summed up in
him, (...), All in him are perfected: he is the Essence of things essential,
the sense of things sentient, the life of things living, (...) etc. (Dionys.
Ar.)
the intellect of things intellectual, the perfection of things perfect, and
then are all things the more perfect, the nearer they come to him who is the
Perfection of All; Prove. 8.22. (...), possessed me, wisdom, (not (...) as the
Sept.) the beginning of his proceedings to his works.
as the Elements reach to the higher degree of Life, being assumed into the
vegetative nature of Plants, those Plants reach to the higher degree of Sense
and Imagination, being assumed into the nature of Brutes, and those Brutes
reach to Reason in Man, and Man to the highest degree of Grace and Glory in
Christ, God-Man. And sure there is something more then is ordinarily imagined,
in that expression of my Apostle, (Romans 8.21.)
the very creation groans, longing to be delivered from their bondage of
corruption, (from such slavish subjection to such a corrupt creature) (...),
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Never do they take themselves to
be at liberty indeed, till man (who is their glory, and in whom is terminated
their perfection) be advanced to that immensitie and amplitude of liberty, that
he is become one with Christ the perfection of All. And yet what says my
Apostle here? If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. How? not love him who
is the perfection of man and all things? No creatures, but to the utmost of
their power, reach out themselves toward the participation of him, as far as
their capacities will extend; and yet, if any man, who is the perfection of
them all, and who can only reach to him, not love him, not breathe after him?
No creature but spirat aliquid Dei, aspirat Bonum, Omnis creatura colit and
amat quandam beatitudinis and Dei statuam, (Marsil. Ficinus.)
breathes forth something of God, and does somewhat breath after God; it
strives by its restless motions and agitations, that what it is, it may be well
at least, if not better; which, what is it else then affectare Bonum,
splendorem Dei (says Ficinus) to affect good, the brightness of the Deity, by
which the Universe is beautified? And yet, If any man not love the Lord Jesus
Christ? Man, the Lord of all, only of all creatures degenerate? No man but
wishes to be happy and perfect: and yet, If any man not love him who is
happiness it self, and perfection it self? What sad contradictions are these,
and how irrational? What think thou now of it? Is it not reason that thou
should love the Lord Jesus Christ? Art thou not enforced to it, when every
thing in nature cries out upon thee if thou do not? Thou must either show some
other object, that can perfectionate thy love, and ennoble it, or thou must
renounce thy natural reason, or else love him thou must: for that is (...)
(says Epictetus) an inviolable law of reason, (...).
that whatsoever appears the best, that be loved best: and then (says
another Heathen) thou must know that that only may be esteemed best, (...)
(Marcus Imperat.)
which makes thy self best, that is, just, wise, free, holy: and without all
doubt (says a third,) that is a truth that is evident to every man; (...)
(Proclus.)
what? that whatsoever it is that makes man happy, it must be something that
will assimilate him unto the Deity, rather then what will make him un godlike;
and that must needs make the man therefore happy, because by that assimilation
he rises up into the highest perfection (says another Heathen;) as if a
liveless picture should be assumed and advanced into the same vigorous degree
of liveliness and loveliness, (...) (Plotinus)
with that majesty which it resembles.

All this is reason, is it not? Now point me out, or single out any one object
here below, if thou can, that will raise thee to that divine perfection I
will tell thee what one of these Heathens says in this case; If the rational
soul stoop to the love of these material treasures, or brutish pleasures,
(...), (Plotin.)
it descends, and debaseth it self infinitely, and its an unhappie fracture
of her noble wings, (...).
and precipitation of the soul. If thou doubtest the man's judgment, yet what
can be more infallible, when it is the very nature of love, Transformat in
imagines istarum rerum quas amamus, (Raym. de Sab.)
to transform the soul into the image of those things which it loves? and there
is a Text that implies so much, They are become (...), Hos. 9.10.
abominable like those things which they have loved. Si terram amas, terra es;
If (says Saint Augustine) thou love Earth, thou art Earth; and so whatsoever
else. And if that be not an embasing of the soul, to degrade it, and transform
it into such low elements of such inferior natures to it, what is? What is it
then that will beatifie and elevate the soul into its primordial state of
perfection? Why (says he) its a wise recess and retreat of the soul from all
loves of, (...) (Plotin.)
and affectionate converse with these things below, and an holy flight and
retiring unto him only, who is only.

Christian, do thou hear this without a blush? Lets see now, what can thou
pretend to love that is worth the while, besides Jesus Christ? Whatsoever it is
that is less then a God, Quicquid minus Deo mente^ Dei capacem non implet.
(Bern.) Si aliud praeter Deum habeo, nec aliud plene possideo, nec Deum. Deus
qui non deficit, solus mihi sufficil, (Eusebius. Niremb.) Et hoc adepto beata, quo
amisso misera fit anima, (S. Aug.)
that cannot possibly fill up the vast chasms and immense capacities of the
soul; that is sure: and if so, then take joy in it it cannot, that is as certain;
no, nor can it be said properly to enjoy it (says S. August.) for that only
can it enjoy, which can terminate the restless motions of its desires, and
which being once attained, the soul is happy, and which being lost, it is
miserable and wretched. And if there be any thing else then the Lord Jesus, the
loss whereof will undo you, then go and love it with all thy heart, and soul,
and strength, and spare not. But say in sober sadness, is there any such
indeed? There is little sign (says Longinus) when it is the greatest argument
of a great mind, (...) (Longinus.)
to look upon them with the eye of disdain and contempt, as poor, small
nothings. and he instanceth in those things, which the world adores as the
great gods; Riches, Honors, Principalities. If there be any thing that will
satisfy the soul, it is more then Solomon could see, who had his eyes in his
head, and could tell better then another, as having a full experiment of all.
He cries out, Vanity of vanities, (emptiness of emptinesses) and all things
are vanity and vexation of spirit.

Vexation of spirit, that they must needs be, because First, they are
emptinesses ^ they can no more fill up the spirit or soul, then a drop of water
can fill up the huge Ocean; no more quench the natural desires of the soul,
then a little water can the thirst of a man inflamed with a fever: nay, they
are so far from that, (...) (Isid. P^lus.)
as that they inflame the more: they vex them, as the Tick vexes the Ox, or
the Indian Gnats do the Lions, which sitting on their eyebrowes, cause them to
scratch themselves blind.

Secondly, A vexation of spirit they are, because they delude the man, (...),
(Arrianus.)
which no man can endure, and put a cheat upon him, promising huge contentments
and pleasures, and when he has run through them all, he finds no more
satisfaction in them, then (...), an hungry stomach does in the reaking fume
of a ladle, or dreaming of a banquet. The spirit must needs be vexed, to be
thus deluded and gulled in its expectation.

And thirdly, A vexation of the soul they must needs be, because they are of an
heterogeneous and extrinsecall nature to this our spiritual. (...).
It is a gross mistake (says Plotinus) if thou take any of these material
things to be the good which thou naturally seek, or to be thy good indeed,
or to be loved by any but fools: and if (says Marcus Antoninus) thou be drawn
to any of their loves, thy motion is violent, (...), as those Puppets that are
set on motion by gins of iron or wire, that are of another and extrinsecall
nature. That soul that is moved by any other principle then God, (who only can
move it naturally, because he only i^ that sovereign Good and Truth wherein
the Will and Understanding can acquiesce) is dragged by unnatural principles,
and therefore by violent. No wonder then he calls it a vexation of spirit, that
puts the soul to a most torturing violence, and turns it out of its natural
biass. Nay, Epictetus will tell thee, (...).
that, as none but base and servile spirits will desire things impossible; so,
none but such as dare proudly to fight with God, will love any thing that is of
a distant and strange nature from him. And yet, what says the Apostle? If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ. How? not him, such an incomparable and
comprehensive perfection, that all things else are but mere empty Vanities and
Nothingnesses? Not love him, that is that absolute necessary One; that is both
the Principle, and Middle, and End of all Pluralities, all the myriads of all
created Beings and entities both in Heaven and Earth; that absolute One, or
Unity, Qui habet hoc unum, habet unum universale.
that is so one, that he is all; so that if any man seek rest in any thing
else, he cannot possibly find it, because he seeks it not where it only is, he
seeks it not in one, but in another, and therefore otherwise then he should,
and otherwhere then it is? What folly? what madness is this? For so the Prophet
puts them both together, (Psalm. 75.5.)
I said unto the fools, deal not so madly. Here is the folly and madness of
men: they run after Riches, and Pleasures, and Honors, and run themselves
out of breath in their hot pursuit after them; and the more they run after
them, (...), (Plot.)
the more they run from him who is the verity and realitie of them all.
Which is that frenzy, that himself inviteth the Angels to stand aghast at,
(Jer. 2.13.) Be astonished ye Heavens; They have forsaken me the Fountain of
living Waters, and have dug unto themselves Cisterns that will hold no
waters. As if he had said, If there were any other Fountain besides my self,
that could stay or satisfy their thirst, I could dispense with that their
revolt from me; but now that there is no other such but my self, that they
should forsake me, and run to the Creatures, that are mere emptinesses, this is
that offends and astonisheth me. Ah wreched and mad man (says Cusanus) no
man that seeks any thing, but pretends to seek something that is good; and
he that seeks good, and forsakes God, what does he but run away from that
which he seeks? And if this be thy case, I cannot but wonder at thee, nay, I
hope thou will now begin to wonder at thy self: to be sure, thou may not,
can not any more wonder at my Apostle, for his Anathema, Maran-atha; nor at
me, if I dismiss thee with the saying of an honest Philosopher, (...);
(Diogenes.)
Why pretendest thou to live, if thou think much to love him by whom thou
live?

FINIS.

