THE Spirit of the Martyrs REVIVED In a Brief COMPENDIOUS COLLECTION Of the
Most Remarkable PASSAGES and Living Testimonies OF THE True Church, Seed of
God, AND FAITHFUL MARTYRS In All AGES:

Contained in several Ecclesiastical Histories and Chronological Accounts of
the Succession of the TRUE CHURCH from the Creation, the Times of the Fathers,
Patriarchs, Prophets, CHRIST and the Apostles.

Call to Remembrance what Acts our Fathers did in their time, so shall ye
receive great Honor, and an everlasting Name,

1 Mac. 2.51. Their Seed shall remain forever, and their Glory shall not be
blotted out, but their Name lives forevermore; the People will tell of their
Wisdom,

Eccles. 44.13, 14, 15. Thy Testimonies are my Delight and Councellor,

Psalm. 1, 19. Go, write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that
it may be for the time to come. TO THE READER.
Reader
I Have hear Collected and brought together that which has been scattered in
diverse great Vollums, writ by several Authors, judging these my Labors may
prove more profitable to such who have a desire to be informed in these things;
those great Books being too Voluminous, and costly for the generality to read
or buy; I have therefore for the sake of such who have but little leisure, and
cannot read much, brought the History of these things into a nearer compass,
that so the meanest capacity may easily comprehend the Lords dealings with the
Sons of men in all Generations; and my chief aim in this work, is, for the good
and information of all People, that they may see how the Lord preserved his
Church in all times, and what great things he has done for them, who led the
Ancient Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles by his mighty Power, in
which they served and worshipped him, whereby they left a sweet Savor behind
them, as the Reader may see at large in the ensuing Treatise, which contains
a Cloud of Witnesses to the Lords Work, and Power. And though these Testimonies
may be slighted and dis-esteemed by the sensual wisdom which is from below; yet
I know it will be acceptable, and a confirming and strengthening to the Faith
of some who are Innocent and Upright to the Lord, and have a delight in reading
and meditating upon his Ways, and of his tender dealings with his Church and
People, who in all Ages preserved his little Remnant whom he raised up as
righteous Branches to bring forth Fruits of Holiness in the midst of a
perverse Generation: And on the other hand the Reader many see, in this ensuing
Tract, Satan's cruelty, the great Enemy to man's good, who has in all Ages used
all his Power to stop the increase and growth of this holy Seed, by
Persecuting, Murdering and Destroying their Bodies, and using his utmost
endeavors by Cruelties to stop the least good Inclination that might at any
time stir in any; and this has been the work of the Evil one ever since he got
footing in men's hearts, he has always sought to extinguish the Work of God,
and has deceived Nations, and all the World wondered after the Beast; and John
in his time saw a Terrible Day was to come on the Inhabitants of the Earth, for
the Devil was come down having, great Wrath; and when the Dragon saw that he
was cast into the Earth he Persecuted the Woman, which brought forth the Man
Child and the Woman fled into the Wilderness for a time and times and half a
time, and the Earth helped the Woman, and the Earth opened her Mouth and
swollowed up the Flood, which the Dragon cast out of his Mouth; and the Dragon
was Wrath with the Woman, and went to make War with the Remnant of her Seed,
which kept the Commandments of God, and have the Testimonies of Jesus Christ,
but they overcame by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony;
and the Lord still preserved a Remnant that bowed not their knees to Baal: And
the Lord said, David shall never want'a man to sit upon the Thrown of the House
of Israel; and this has been fulfilled in that the Lord has from time to time
raised up his Living Witnesses, both to testify to, and suffer for his Name
and Truth, as will appear in this Book, to which I refer the Reader for
satisfaction, and remain a Lover of all the Upright in Heart,

Ellis Hooks.

The Author to the Book it self.
GO forth, O Book, and let the World reveiw
The Bloodshed by a Persecuting Crew;
Let Popish Bishops and the Prelates see,
The dying Martyrs Words revived be,
Who though their Bodies for the Truth were slain
Their Living Testimonies still remain;
Their Souls under the Altar still do Cry,
How long, O Lord, most just that rules on High,
Ere thou avenge our Cause, who for thy sake
Foyfully embrace the Fire and the Stake.
Fear not, O Book, the Frowns of Mortal Foes,
Who always did the blessed Truth oppose,
Though Foes enough thou shall be sure to find
Among Priests, that have the Souls of many pined,
And scornful Prelates too, who will not preach,
Nor suffer those that carefully would teach
Gods Truth, and give Christ's Sheep their wholesome Food;
All such Restrainers make the sinful Brood;
And of that Rank not one of them is found,
That feeds the Flock in wholesome Pasture Ground;
The Food they give, they Poison give withal,
Which proves worse then Wormwood mixed with Gall;
They suffer not the Milk of Gods Word pure,
To work upon the Souls of men a Cure;
Though sincere Milk the same is it
Which wakes for God the Soul of each man sit;
It made the Martyrs witnessing the same,
Rejoice when that they suffered in the Flame.
Part I.
The year of the World.
Shows, how God under the several Dispensations of himself to Mankind always
led and guided his Church and Seed by his Spirit and Power to Worship and Serve
him, and to bring forth the Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness which was
acceptable to him; And how the Serpent and Evil-One has from the beginning
made it his work to deceive, and lead man from God to Sin, and work wickedness,
which always brought the Wrath and Judgments of God upon Man.

AFter that God had Created Heaven and Earth, Man at first created in Innocence.
and all things in them, at last he created Man in his own Image, that is to
say, pure, holy and innocent, giving him Power to Govern and Rule the Creation
to God's Glory; and God said, It is not good for man to be alone, I will make
him an Help Meet for him; and he caused a deep Sleep to fall upon Adam, and he
took one of his Ribs, Woman made to be a help meet for man.
and closed up the Flesh thereof, and of the Rib he made Woman, and brought her
unto the man; and Adam said, This is now Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my
Flesh, she shall be called Woman: And the Lord placed them in the Garden of
Eden, there to live in a blessed Estate, giving unto them a Commandment of
Obedience, which was, The Commandment given man in his first Creation.
that they were not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, for in
the day they did eat thereof they should dye; but of all the rest of the Trees
of the Garden they might eat, and receiving Comfort therefrom might give the
Praise and Glory thereof to their Maker, to whom it did belong: And whilst Man
and Woman stood in this Condition they were happy and blessed. And now God
beheld all that he had made, and behold all was Good; for Sin had not as yet
entered upon man.

But the Devil envying Gods Honor and Man's Felicity tempted the Woman to Sin
by the Serpent; The Serpent beguiled Man and Woman by his Subtilty,
the Woman being beguiled by the Serpent, the man was also beguiled by her, and
brake the Ordinance of God by eating the Forbidden Fruit: And thus Man and
Woman lost the Dignity and Excellency of their first Creation, and were
enslaved by the Serpent, who by his Wiles and Subtilty had entangled and
ensnared them, and persuaded them to believe him more then God; for God said,
That in the day they did eat thereof they should die; but the Serpent said,
They should not surely die; for God does know (said he) that you shall be as
Gods, knowing Good and Evil: and thus was man by a lie drawn from the pure
Command of his Maker.

Now after they had sinned, in the cool of the day, the Lord called unto Adam,
saying, Where art thou? and Adam, who did hide himself, said, I heard thy Voice
in the Garden, and was afraid, because I was Naked: And God said, Who told thee
that thou wast Naked? have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee that
thou should not Eat? And now having brought Guilt and shame upon themselves
by Transgression, After man had transgressed, he first began to make a Covering.
they began to make them Coverings, by sewing fig leaves to make them Aprons,
of which it seems they had no need before they had transgressed.

And now by this all men may see, that it was the Serpents work from the
beginning (and indeed it has been in all Ages his work) to beguile Men and
Women with his Lies and Subtilties, and to darken their Eyes and polute their
Understandings, that he may keep them in subjection to himself; and from hence
does spring the wicked Thoughts and Actions, which all mankind are apt to lean
and incline to, and have been and are readier to give ear to the Voice of the
Serpent and wicked One, The Serpent has ever been the moving cause of all the
W^ that has come upon Man.
then to the Voice of God their Maker: And this has been the Fountain and
Springhead, from whence has come all the Disorders, Miseries and Woes, that
have happened unto all Manking throughout the World, in all Ages; they have
been feeding and delighting themselves in eating the Forbidden Fruit which
their Forefathers also delighted in, and all Nations upon the Earth are in this
State and Condition at this day, led away by the Voice of the Serpent from the
Purity and Righteousness in which man was first created, except a Little
Remnant, which God has at this day gathered by his Light and Power, to be
witnesses to his name.

And now the Lord having convicted Adam of his evil, The Promise of God for the
restoring lost man
and pronounced several punishments upon him, and on Eve his Wife; yet with
this Promise added, That the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head;
and now man being put out of the Garden of Eden, and a Fiery Flaming Sword
being set to keep the Way, leading to the Tree of Life; man was in an undone
condition, had not the Lord condescended in his tender Love and Mercy to
restore him, and make that Promise to him; and this was the Lords great Love,
to open a Door of hope to lost man, that he might not be destroyed by Satan's
Power; and now the Power of God, by which man was first created, appeared again
to restore him.

After the fall of Adam, Cain was the first man that was born of a woman, and
after Cain his Brother Abel was born; and now in process of time, these two
offered Offerings unto the Lord (being without question instructed in
Righteousness by their Father Adam after h^s restoration) but Cains Sacrifice,
What Sacrafice God accepted, and what he rejected.
being only outward in show, and nothing inward in the Spirit, wherein does
consist the true Worship of God, the Lord accepted not his Offering; but unto
Abel and his Offering, which was from the Uprightness and Sincerity of his
heart, the Lord had respect. At this Cain was Wrath, and being inflamed with
Anger, rose up against his Brother Abel, and in his envy slew him; here was the
beginning of Persecution, and that upon a righteous person for serving God in a
pure mind; and here the envy of the Wicked one appeared again, to extinguish,
if he could, the righteous Seed: But now the Lord showed regard again to
mankind, and in his tender love repaired this loss; for now Abel being slain,
Adams Wife bare another Son, whose name was Seth; for God, says she; Seth born
in the room of Abel.
bath appointed me another Seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew; and this Seth
proved a godly man, and had a Son called Enos, who kept up the holy Seed and
true Religion, as it is recorded of him; that in his days men did begin to
call on the Name of the Lord; now Enos signifies, the lamentable condition of
all mankind, for even then (as some men write) was the worship of God
wretchedly corrupted, by the race of Cain, whence it came, that men were even
so distinguished, that they who persisted in the true worship of God, were
known by the name of, the Children of God, and they which forsook him were
termed, the Children of men.

Enochs blameless life.
The next of the Righteous Stock was Jared, to whom was born Enoch, another of
the Righteous Seed, whose life and conversation was so Innocent, that it is
recorded of him, that he walked with God.

And thus the Reader may see how the Righteous Plants were such, who took the
Lord to be their Guide in their Actions and Undertakings, who were as Patterns
of Righteousness in the midst of a perverse Generation, and it is the same with
all the faithful and upright at this day: And now Enoch having this Testimony,
that he pleased God, the Lord, as a requital of his faithfulness, translated
him, so that he saw no death, and took him to himself.

The evil the Sons of God were prone to run into
And it came to pass when men began to multiply on the Face of the Earth, and
Daughters were born unto them, these Sons of God saw the Daughters of men, that
they were fair, and they took them Wives of all that they chose; this
displeased the Lord, so that he said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, for that he also is Flesh; and his days were shortened to one Hundred and
Twenty Years, who before lived many Hundred Years.

The Spirit of he Lord grieved with the corrupt among men.
And God saw that the Wickedness of man was great in the Earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his Heart was only evil continually; and it
repented the Lord that he had made man, and it grieved him at his Heart; and
the Earth was corrupt, and filled with violence, and God looked upon the Earth,
and behold it was corrupt, for all Flesh had corrupted his Way upon the Earth.

He raised up Noah to testify against them, and commanded him to build an Ark.
And God said unto Noah, The end of all Flesh is come up before me, for the
Earth is filled with violence through them, and behold I will Destroy them with
the Earth; and he commanded Noah to make an Ark, and behold, I bring a Flood
upon the Earth to Destroy all Flesh, wherein is the Breath of Life, and every
thing that is in the Earth shall die; but with thee will I establish my
Covenant, and thou shall come into the Ark thou and thy Sons, and thy Wife, and
thy Sons Wives, for thee have I seen righteous before me in this Generation.

But before the Lord brought the deluge of Waters upon the World of the Wicked,
Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness unto. them, giving them one Hundred and
Twenty Years space to repent them of their evil ways; The long suffering of
God before he brought the deluge upon man.
and Noah having provided an Ark at the Commandment of God, he was appointed
when he should enter into the Ark, whilst the World (in the mean time) void of
all fear, sat eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in marriage; in
the six hundredth Year of the life of Noah, upon the seventh day of the second
Month, when he with his Children were entered into the Ark, God sent a Rain
upon the Earth forty days and forty nights, and the Waters continued upon the
Earth a hundred and fifty days; the Waters abating upon the seventeenth day of
the seventh Month, the Ark rested upon one of the Mountains of Ararat; the
Waters still falling, upon the first day of the tenth Month, the top of the
Mountains appeared above the waters, and after forty days Noah opened the
Window of the Ark, and sent forth a Raven, and seven days after sent forth a
Dove, and she returning, after seven days more he sent her forth again, and
about the Evening she returned bringing the Leaf of an Olive Tree in her Mouth;
and then staying yet seven days more, sent the same Dove out again, which
returned no more unto him.

In the six hundred and first Year of the life of Noah, when the surface of the
Earth was now all dry, Noah took off the Covering of the Ark, Noah goes forth
of the Ark and offers unto the Lord for his Preservation.
and went forth with all that were with him in the Ark, being gone forth, he
offered unto God for his Preservation an Offering, and the Lord smelled a
sweet-Savour; and the Lord said in his Heart, I will not again Curse the Ground
any more for man's sake, for the imagination of his Heart is evil from his
Youth: And God spoke unto Noah and to his Sons, saying, I will establish my
Covenant with you, and with your Seed after you, neither shall all Flesh be cut
off any more by the Waters of a Flood to destroy the Earth; and gave the
Rain-bow-for a sign of the Covenant which he then made with man.

And now Noah made a division of Land among his Grandchildren, and that done,
Ararat) unto the Valley of Shinar, where the People impiously laid their heads
together to hinder the dispersion of them, ( commanded by God, and begun by
Noah) they went in hand to build the City and Tower of Babylon, The beginning
of the confusion of Babel,
whose top might reach to Heaven; least they should be scattered abroad upon
the Face of the Earth; which purpose of theirs being frustrated by the
confusion of Languages sent among them, from whence they took the name of
Babel, the dispersion of Nations followed, and now one Language was lost, which
the whole Earth was of until this Attempt.

And now the next of the righteous Stock that succeeded was Abram the second
Son of Terah, Sarai born, daughter of Haran, Abrams Brother, who was afterward
Abrams Wife; some Writers say that Abram was educated in the Idolatry of his
Fathers House, who they say was a maker of Statues and Images, and the Jews
relate of Abram's going into the Shop in the absence of his Father, his
breaking the Images, and jeering those that came to buy, or worship them,
Schalch Hakk. p. 8. Citante. Hotnig Smeg. Orient C. 8. p. 291. Confer. Maimon.
Mar. Neroch Part 3. C 29. p. 4 1.
of his Fathers carrying him to Nimrod to be punished; his witty answers, and
miraculous escapes; thus the Jews write of him, but however these things may be
credited, we have a sure record in the Scriptures, that the Lord had a great
regard to the sincerity of Abram, and had a purpose to make use of him to be an
Instrument in his work and service; and that appears by his calling him from
his Kindred, Abram, Abram called from his Fathers House.
who had chosen the Lord for his delight above all earthly things, consulted
not, but departed as the Lord had commanded him; and he took Sarai his Wife,
and Lot his Brothers son, and traveled to the Land of Canaan, where God
promised to Abram, that to his Seed he would give that Land; but afterward,
Abram compelled by a Famine, went from thence down into Egypt, where Sarai his
Wife (who to eschew a danger) went for his Sister, was taken into Pharaoh's
House, being fair and beautiful, but was not long after sent back unto him
untouched: Then Abram, Abram goes into Egypt because of the Famine, being
accompanied with Lot.
accompanied with just Lot, returned into Canaan, where, when the Country which
they pitched upon was not sufficient to feed both their Herds of Cattle, Strife
arose between the Herd-men; and Abram loving Peace, said to Lot, Let there be
no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my Herdsmen and thine,
for we be Brethren; They parted to avoid strife.
and they parted; and Lot went into the Country of Sodom; and after they were
parted, the promise both of the Possession of that Land of Canaan, and also of
his Numberless Posterity was again renewed unto him.

Abram being now ninety nine years old, Isaac, who was to be born of Sarai that
time twelve month, Abrams name changed.
gave him the Seal of Circumcision (changing both their names Abram into
Abraham, and Sarai into Sarah) for a sure pledge and testimony of his Promise.

When Abraham was now a hundred, Sarah ninety years of Age Isaac was born unto
them, and Abraham instructed his Family in Righteousness; for God said, I know
Abraham, that he will command his Children, and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment.

By Faith Abraham offered up his son Isaac; Josephius reports, that at this
time Isaac was twenty five years old, By Faith Abraham offers up his Son Isaac
Lib. 1. Antiq. 14. (Al 22.)
and that he was at that time of good years may be gathered from this, that he
was able to carry so much Wood as was to go to the burning and consuming of
such a whole burnt-Offering as himself was, then intended by Abraham to have
been made; Sarah being now one hundred twenty seven years of Age dyed in
Hebron; and as Abraham for his integrity and uprightness to the Lord is
recorded to Posterity for the Father of the Faithful; so is Sarah for the
Mother of the Faithful, and she is the only Woman whose full and entire Age is
mentioned in Scripture.

Abraham being also well stricken in Age, was careful to get a wife for his son
Isaac, and careful he was that he might not Marry with any of the idolatrous
and corrupt Nations, it being looked upon as a great evil by this righteous
Stock, Abraham's care in getting a good Wife for his Son Isaac.
that their Sons should marry with the Daughters of men that were corrupted,
and despisers of the true Religion, as it appears by Abraham's care for his son
that he should not take a wife of the Daughters of the Canaanites among whom he
dwelt; and also by the strict charge he gave to his Servant to look out a Wife
for him, who going by the guidance of God into Mesopotamia, where praying to
the Lord to show kindness unto his master Abraham, he there obtained for him
Rebeka, the Daughter of Bethuel, Sister to Laban the Syrian, whom Isaac
receiving for his Wife, brought her into the tent of his Mother Sarah; and he
loved her, and had comfort in her after his Mothers death; and he was forty
years old when he married with Rebeka.

Abraham, when he was a hundred seventy five years old, and a hundred years
after his coming into Canaan departed this life, ^183.
and was buried by his two Sons in his Cave at Macpelah with Sarah his Wife; he
lived fifteen years after the birth of Jacob, with whom he is said also to have
lived in Tents.

And now Abraham being dead, Isaac was raised up, as the next of the righteous
Line and Seed of God, to whom the Lord often appeared in his divine Power,
Abraham being dead, Isaac walks in the steps of his Father.
confirming the Covenant that he had made with Abraham his Father; for he
walked in the steps of his Father in faithfulness to the Lord, and when his
Fathers Servant brought Rebeka to him, they found him meditating in the Field
at evening-tide, by which it appears, his mind was delighted in that which was
good; when his Wife had continued barren ninteen years after her Marriage,
Isaac entreated the Lord in the behalf of his Wifes barreness.
Isaac entreated the Lord for her, because she was barren, and the Lord was
entreated of him, and his Wife conceived, and when the twins strove in the
Womb, Rebeka asked counsel of God; and the Lord said unto her, Two Nations are
in thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels; and
the one People shall be stronger then the other, Esau and Jacob are born
and the Elder shall serve the Younger: Being born, the Children grew, and one
of them, named Esau, was a counning Hunter, a man of the Field; and Jacob was a
plain man dwelling in Tents, and Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his
Venison, but Rebeka loved Jacob.

Isaac now grown old, Esau his eldest Son to take some Venison for him,
purposing to Bless him at his return; but Jacob the younger Son, by the counsel
of his Mother coming disguised in his Clothes, and with savory meat in his
hand, Jacob got the Blessing from Esau.
stole away the blessing unwiting to his Father, and the Blessing, though so
got, God confirmed ever after; but Jacob seeing that for so doing, his Brother
followed him with a deadly hatred, and being desirous to avoid his traps,
willing also to take a Wife of his own Kindred, his Father Blessing him, he
took his Journey to Mesopotamia, to his uncle Laban, for his Father had charged
him not to take a Wife of the Daughters of Canaan; and in his Journey the Lord
appeared unto him by his presence, Isaac's care that Jacob should not take a
Wife of the Canaantes.
and renewed the Covenant to him which he had made before to his Father and
Grandfather, and now the Lord manifesting his presence unto him, he covenanted
with the Lord, saying, If God will be with me, and keep me in this way that I
go, and will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, so that I come again
to my Fathers House in peace, then shall the Lord be my God; and coming at
length to Carron, He fell in love with Rachel.
and continuing a time with Laban, fell in love with Rachel his Daughter, for
whom he served seven years, and they seemed to him but a few days, for the
love he had to her.

Esau had now been married thirty seven Years, and was seventy seven Years Old,
whereas Jacob, who was as Old as he, had all this while lived unmarried, but
being now mindful of his Fathers Command, he demanded Rachel his Wife to be
given to him, He is deceived of Rachel after he had served Seven Years for her.
using this for a reason, that his days were now full; but by the fraud of
Laban, instead of Rachel, Leah the elder Daughter was put in Bed unto him;
nevertheless Rachel also afterward was espoused to him upon Covenant of
serving seven Years more for her.

At first Rachel was barren, Joseph unto Jacob; at the end of the fourteen
years service, Jacob asking leave of Laban to return into his own Country, he
was held there six years more upon another bargain made between him and his
Father-in-law Laban, for a certain part of his Flock.

Jacob perceiving the heart burning of Laban, and his Sons malice toward him,
was warned of God to return into his own Country, Laban was sheering his Sheep
at the latter end of the Spring, after his twenty years service, getting away
unknown to Laban, with all his Substance, Jacob gets away from Laban unknown to
him.
Wives and Family, passed over the River Euphrates, Laban three days after,
hearing that his Son-in-law was gone, took some of his Friends and Kindred
along with him, and persued after him seven days Journey, and at last overtook
him at mount Gilead, which took its name from this their Meeting there; for
after many and diverse Expostulations which passed there between them, making
all fair at last, Laban following after him, and overtaking him, came to
agreement with him.
for a Testimony and Monument of their Covenant there made, Jacob erected a
Pillar with an heap of Stones, which Laban the Syrian called, Jegar-Sahadutha,
but Jacob the Hebrew called, Gilead (that is) the heap of a Testimony or
Witness between them two. Jacob being sent away in peace by Laban, He is
affrighted with the news of Esau; approach.
but affrighted with the news of his Brother Esau's approach with four hundred
men, divided his Company into two, saying, If he smite one, then the other
Company which is left shall escape; and calls upon God, saying, O God of my
Father Abraham, Isaac, etc. which saidest unto me, return into thy Country, and
to thy Kindred, and I will deal well with thee, deliver me I pray thee from the
hand of my Brother Esau. Esau having entertained his Brother courteously, after
much entreaty, accepts of his Presents, Jacob then went on to Su^^oth, and
there he built him an House, and afterward passing over Jordan, he came into
Canaan, and pitched his Tent in Salem, and there he built an Altar, He presents
Esau with Presents.
which he called by the name of El-Elohe-Israel, or of, the mighty God, the God
of Israel, to wit, in the self same place where Abraham had heretofore built
his first Altar, and where Jacob's Well was.

I am now come to write of Joseph, who being Seventeen Years of Age, The cause
why Ioseph's Brethren hated him.
and Joseph declaring his Dream to them, the Lord having showed him that he
should be set above his Brethren, and be the chief of his Fathers Family, they
hated him yet the more; and first, they conspired his death, They conspired his
Death, at last sold him.
and at length agreed to sell him away for a Bond slave unto a far Country; so
drawing him out of the Pit, whereinto they had cast him, they sold him to the
Merchants for twenty pieces of Silver, and was by them carried into Egypt, and
there sold for a Slave to Potipher Captain of the Guard to Pharaoh, He is sold
to Captain of the Pharaoh's Guard.
where he was tempted by Potiphers Wife to Uncleanness; and because he refused
to do such Evil, she by her Lies instigated Potipher her Husband against him,
who put him in Prison; but the Lord was with Joseph, and showed him mercy, and
gave him favor in the sight of the Keeper of the Prison, and that which he did
the Lord made it to prosper.

Two of the Officers of Pharaoh's Court, Joseph, having both of them Dreamed,
Joseph interpreted their Dreams unto them, which came to pass according to his
interpretation; and says Joseph to one of them, When thou art restored into
thy place, after thy former manner, think on me when it shall be well with
thee, and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto
Pharaoh, and bring me out of this House; for indeed I was stolen away out of
the Land of the Hebrews, and here also have I done nothing, that they should
put me into the Dungeon; But when this Officer was restored again into Pharaohs
Court, he remembered not Joseph.

Joseph expert in interpreting the Dreams.
Two Years after Pharaoh Dreamed two Dreams, which seeing he could not get
expounded by his own Wise men, but hearing of Joseph's expertness to enterpret
Dreams, sent for him, being then thirty Years Old, who having opened to the
King his Dreams; first, that of the Seven Years of Plenty; He interpreeted the
Kings Dream.
then the Seven Years of Famine: He added moreover, as his council and advice,
how to provide out of the store of the first Years of Plenty, against the
Famine of the other Seven Years of Scarcity, Pharaoh advanced Joseph.
which were to follow; whereupon by the general consent of his Nobles, he made
him Governor of the Kingdom.

Seven Year Plenty.
From the Harvest of this Year, being to be counted Seven Years of Plenty,
wherein Joseph laid up an infinite Treasure of Corn.

The Seven Years of the Famine began from the Harvest of this Year, Joseph did
not only sustain Egypt, Seven years of Famine.
but was a help and relief to other Countries.

Jacob dispatched away ten of his Sons into Egypt to buy Corn, Joseph seeming
not to know, caused to be taken for Spies, and being laid hold on, he spoke
roughly unto them, and said, Jacob sends his Sons into Egypt to buy Corn and
they are taken for Spies.
Whence came ye? and they said, From the Land of Canaan, to buy Food: And
Joseph knew his Brethren, but they knew not him; and he said, They were come as
Spies to see the Nakedness of the Land; they said, They were true men, and thy
Servants are twelve Brethren the Sons of one man in the Land of Canaan, and
behold, the Youngest is this day with our Father, and one is not; and Joseph
said, Ye are Spies, Joseph sends all of them away with Corn, but one whom he
kept Prisoner till they brought their Youngest Brother.
hereby shall it be proved, if ye be true men, let one of your Brethren be
bound in Prison; go ye carry Corn for the Famine of your Houses, but bring your
Youngest Brother unto me, so shall your words be verified, and you shall not
die; and they did so: And they said one to the other, We are verily guilty
concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear, therefore is this Distress come upon us;
and Ruben answered them, saying, speak not I unto you, saying, Do not sin
against the Child, and ye would not hear, They confess the evil they had done
against Joseph.
therefore behold his blood is required; and they knew not that Joseph
understood them, for he speak unto them by an Interpreter; and he turned
himself about from them, and wept, and returned to them again, and communed
with them, and took from them Simeon the chiefest of them, who consented to
sell him, and cast him into Prison, and now being dismissed, they carried away
their Corn, and with it the Money that they had paid for it, being conveyed
into their Sacks by the secret appointment of Joseph; they tell their Father
Jacob all that happened unto them, They tell their Father what happened.
and withal declared unto him the necessity that laid upon them of carrying
there Younger Brother Benjamin into Egypt, persuading him by all means to let
him go; but Jacob their Father said, unto them, He was loath to part with
Benjamin but being press with Famine, let him go.
Me have ye bereaved of my Children, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and you
will take away Benjamin; all these things are against me: but Jacob pressed
with Famine, sent again his Sons, and with them his Son, Benjamin, furnished
with double Money, and other Presents to Joseph, to buy more Corn, and they at
their return were courteously entertained; Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he
said to the Ruler of his House, Bring these men home, and slay and make ready
for these men shall dine with me at Noon: And the man did as Joseph bad, Joseph
Entertains them.
and the man brought the men into Joseph's House, and the men were afraid
because they were brought into Joseph's House, and they said, Because of the
Money that was returned in our Sacks the first time, are we brought in, that he
may seek Occasion against us: but the Steward comforted them, saying, Peace be
unto you, fear not; your God, and the God of your Fathers has given you
Treasure in your Sacks, I had your Money; and he brought Simeon out unto them.
And Joseph asked them of their welfare, saying, Is your Father well, the old
man of whom you spoke, is he yet alive? and they answered, Thy Servant our
Father is in good health; he is yet alive: When he saw his Benjamin, his
Mothers Son, he made haste, for his Bowels did yern upon his Brother, and he
sought where to weep, and he entered into his Chamber, and wept there; and
after they had eaten, he commanded the Steward of his House to fill their Sacks
with Food, and to put a silver Cup in the Sacks mouth of the youngest; His
Contrivance to stay his Brethren.
and when they were gone, Joseph sent after them, and caused them to be stopped
for taking away his Cup, which Crime they endeavored to put of, by showing how
truly they meant, by bringing again the Money which they found in their Sacks
when they came home; offering themselves to die, or to be his Bondslaves if any
such thing could be proved against them; but in the end the Cup being found
with Benjamin, and they brought back to Joseph, they all yielded themselves to
him for his bondslaves, which when he refused, Jud^h humbly supplicates Joseph.
saying, He would have none but him with whom the Cup was found; Judah then
humbly offered himself to serve him in Benjamins stead, saying, When I come to
thy Servant my Father, and the Lad be not with us, (seeing that his life is
bound up in the Lads life) it shall come to pass that when he sees that the
Lad is not with us that he will die, and thy Servants shall bring down the gray
Hairs of thy Servant our Father with Sorrow to the Grave: Then Joseph could not
refrain himself before all them that stood by him: and he cried, Cause every
man to go out from me, Joseph maker himself known (...) his Brethren.
and there stood no man with them while Joseph made himself known unto his
Brethren, and he wept aloud, and the Egyptians, and the House of Pharaoh heard;
and Joseph said unto his Brethren, I am Joseph; does my Father yet live* And
his Brethren could not answer him, for they were troubled at his Presence, and
Joseph said unto his Brethren, Come near to me, I pray you, and they came near,
and he said, I am Joseph your Brother, whom ye sold into Egypt; and seeing them
troubled, he comforted them, by showing how that act of theirs was by the
Providence of God.

And he said unto them, ^^er he and comm^^ed cha^^, he sends for his Father.
Haste ye and go up to my Father, and say unto him, Thus says thy son Joseph,
God has made me Lord of all Eygpt; Come down unto me, tarry not, and thou
shall dwell in the Land of Goshen, and thou shall be near unto me, thou and thy
Children, and thy Childrens Children, and thy Flocks and thy Herds, and all
that thou have, and there will I nourish thee; for there are yet five years of
Famine: and he fell upon his Brother Benjamin's Neck, and Benjamin wept upon
his Neck, moreover he kissed all his Brethren, and wept upon them; so he sent
his Brethren away, and they told Jacob all the words of Joseph, and when he saw
the Wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the Spirit of Jacob their
Father revived; When the news was bought to Jacob be revived.
and Israel said, it is enough, Joseph my Son is yet alive, I will go and see
him before I die; and God spoke unto Israel, saying, I am God, the God of thy
Father, fear not to down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great
Nation;I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will surely bring thee up
again: and Jacob was one hundred and thirty years old when he went down into
Egypt.

Joseph letting Pharaoh know of the arrival of his Kindred in Egypt, Joseph
brings five of his Brethren and Father before Pharaoh
brought his Father, and five of his Brethren into his presence, and having
communed with him, assigned them a fitting place in the Land of Goshen, where
they were provided of all necessaries by Joseph.

The Book of Genesis end with the death of Joseph containing the the Story of
Two thousand three hundred sixty nine years space, which Book, that it was
written by Moses himself is the opinion of the Talmudists in their Baba-bathra,
Lib. I.

At this time lived Job, The time when Job lived.
and all righteousness; rich in Substance, and the more noted, for that neither
the enjoyment of those riches corrupted, nor the loss of them depraved him in
his way; for, whenas first being spoiled of his Goods by Satan, he was also
bereft of his Children; and at last tormented with grievous Botches and Sores
in his Body, he could yet never be drawn through impatience to sin in any sort,
whereof, having first received a Testimony from Gods own mouth, he was
afterward restored to his former health, and had cast into his Bossom double
of whatever he possessed before.

Joseph being dead and Pharaoh.
And now when Joseph was dead, and all his Brethren, and that Generation, and
the Children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and
muliplied, and waxed exceeding mighty, and the Land was filled with them; A new
King rose up that afflicted the Israelites.
Now there arose up a new King over Egypt, which knew not Joseph, and he began
to afflict them, but the more they were afflicted, the more they multiplied and
grew; and the Egyptians made the Children of Israel to serve with Rigor, and
they made their lives bitter with hard Bondage, and kept them under with great
severity.

Aaron was born three years before his Brother Moses, Israel out of Egypt

The Ungodly King of Egypt, Hebrew Women privily to make away the Male-Children
of them, set forth a barbarous Edict to destroy them all, The King made an
Edict to destroy the Male-Children.
by drowning them in the River.

About this time Moses the Son of Amram, of the House of Levi, was born, and
when his Mother saw he was a goodly Child, being willing to preserve him, Moses
born.
she took for him an Ark of Bulrushes, and daubed it with slime, and with
pitch, and put the Child therein, and she laid it in the Flags by the Rivers
brink, his Sister standing aloof off from the place, to see what would become
of him; and Pharaohs daughter finding him there, caused her maids to fetch it,
His wonderful fetchfetch.
and when she had opened it, she saw the Child, and behold it wept, and she had
compassion on him, and said, this is one of the Hebrews Children; then said his
Sister to Pharaohs Daughter, Shall I go and call a Nurse to thee of the Hebrew
Women, that she may nurse the Child for thee; and Pharaohs Daughter said, go,
and the maid went and called the Child's Mother; and she nursed him, and
Pharaohs Daughter called his Name Moses, because she drew him out of the Water,
and she caused him to be brought up as her Son, and caused him to be instructed
in the Science and Learning of the Egyptians: And thus did the Lord wonderfully
preserve him, which notes no less then that he intended to make him an
Instrument in some great Work, as indeed it so came to pass; for as he grew in
years, the Lord put it in his heart to slight the honors of Pharaohs Court;
for he refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, Egypt, for he had
respect to the Recompense of Reward: And now the Lord having chosen him into
his work and service, he endued him with such a Spirit of Meekness that none
was like him upon the Earth; and being thus fitted he had often trials and
exercises of his patience by the People he was to govern, who were often
murmuring and repining against him. And the Lord appeared unto him whilst he
was keeping his Father-in-law Jethros Sheep in the Mountain of Horeb, and the
Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of Fire, out of the midest of a
Bush, and behold the Bush burned with Fire, and the Bush was not Consumed; and
the Lord said unto him, I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and Moses hid his Face, for he was afraid to
look upon God; and the Lord said, I have surely seen the Affliction of my
People which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, by reason of their
Tusk-masters, for I know their sorrow, and am come down to deliver them out of
the hands of the Egyptians: And he chose Moses as an Instrument to go unto
Pharaoh, and to bring the Children of Israel out of Egypt, to whom, as an
Assistant in this work, Aaron was added.

Moses and Aron declare their Message to Pharaoh.
Moses and Aaron having declared unto Pharaoh the Message in which they were
sent unto him from God, were sent away with many bad words, and many more
grievous labors were inflicted upon the Israelites then were before.

They go again to Pharaoh.
Moses being now eighty, and Aaron eighty, three Years of Age, being moved by
the Lord, returned again to Pharaoh, where the Magitians immitating the
Miracles of Aarons Rod, God plagued Pharaoh.
made Pharaoh harden his heart, so that he would not let the Children of Israel
go; wherefore the Lord sent diverse Plagues upon Pharaoh before they would let
the Children of Israel go; and when the last Plague was brought upon them, When
they were departed Pharaoh and his Host followed them
then Pharaoh and his Servants made haste to send away the Israelites, with all
their Substance, being six hundred thousand men, besides Children; and now
being departed, Pharaoh with his Host over-took them; here Moses divided the
Waters with his Rod, whom Pharaoh and his Army would needs follow, The Children
of Israel sung a Song, a Song to the Lord for their deliverance.
they were all overwhelmed of the Waters coming together again; when the
Israelites were thus freed from the Bondage of the Egyptians, they forthwith
song a Song of Praise and Thanksgiving unto God for their deliverance, which
is called the Song of Moses.

After their encamping in the desert of Sinai, Moses went up into the Mount,
and the Lord said unto him, Thus shall thou say to the House of Jacob- and tell
the Children of Israel, Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I
bear you on Eagles Wings, and brought you unto my self; now therefore if you
will obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a Peculiar
Treasure unto me above all People, for all the Earth is mine, and ye shall be
unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation; and Moses told the People
what the Lord had Commanded him; all the People answered together, and said,
All that the Lord has spoken we will do. But the Reader may see how ready and
apt these People were to forget the tender dealings of the Lord toward them;
for Moses and Aaron, and several of the Elders of Israel went up into the Mount
and there beheld the Glory of God; and the reft returning, Moses with his
Servant Joshua abode there still, and waited there six days, and upon the
seventh day God speak unto him, Moses received the Law upon the Mount.
and there he continued forty days and forty nights, eating no meat all that
while, nor drinking water, where he received Gods Command, and the Law written
in Tables of Stone, with Gods own Finger; God biding him withal to get him
down, for that the People had already made themselves a Molten-Calf, to worship
it: Whilst he was in the Mount the People were run into Idolarty.


Moses seeing this, brake the Tables at the Foot of the Mount, and having burnt
and defaced the Idol, many of the people were put to death by the hands of the
Levites.

The next day Moses returned again into the Mount, and there again entreated
the Lord for the People, and having drawn the People out of a deep Sense of the
Wrath of God, to repent them of their sin, by his prayer he obtained that God
himself should be their Leader in their way. He prays for the People.


God Commanded Moses to frame New Tables of Stone, and the next day to bring
them with him into the Mount; Moses staying again forty days and forty nights
in the Mount, without Meat or Drink, prayed there for the People, God was then
pleased to renew his Covenant with the People, and gave his Laws a new, and
bids Moses commit them to writing; Moses after forty days returns from the
Mount with the Tables in his Hand and covering his Face with a Vail, because it
shone; he published the Laws of God to the People enjoining the observation of
them, and commanded a Freewill-offering to be made, Nadab and Abibue struck
dead, and why.
toward the building of the Tabernacle according to Gods Order; Nadab and
Abibue, the two Eldest Sons of Aaron (which going with their Father up into the
Mount Sinai had there seen the Glory of God) going into the Sanctuary with
strange or common Fire, were struck dead in the place by Fire sent from Heaven,
The Priests for bidden Wine.
and for them the Priests were forbid to make Lamentation; moreover, for some
particular men's neglect of duty, all the Priests were charged to forbear Wine
and strong Drink, before they were to go into the Tabernacle.

Moses finding the Government of the Israelites to be weighty, complained to the
Lord of the burden thereof; saying, I am not able to bear all this People
alone, because it is too heavy for me; and to ease him, the Lord said, Gather
seventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou know to be the Elders of the
People, To ease Moses in the Government seventy Elders were chosen.
and Officers over them, and bring them to the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
that they may stand there with thee; and Moses gathered the seventy Elders, and
the Lord gave of the same Spirit that was on Moses unto them, and it rested
upon them, and they Prophesied; and Eldad and Medad remained in the Camp, and
Prophesied, and when it was told Moses that they prophesied, Moses being
pleased therewith, said, Would God that all the Lords People were Prophets, and
that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them.

The Israelites lusting after Flesh, and loathing the Food that God gave them,
Israel murmer again, the Lord was Wrath with them.
the Lord was Wrath with them, and brought Quales from the Sea, and let them
fall by the Camp, and the People gathered them; but whilst the Flesh was yet
between their Teeth, ere it was chewed, the Wrath of the Lord was kindled
against the People, and the Lord smote the people with a very great Plague; and
thus God punished them again for their murmering.

And now twelve Spies were sent, one for every Tribe to discover and spy out
the Land of Canaan: Spies sent out ^o veiw the Land of Canaan.
After forty days spent in searching out the Land, the Spies returned to
Kadesh in the Wilderness of Pearan, bringing with them one Branch of a Vine,
with a Cluster of Grapes upon it, gathered in the Valley of Eshcol; ten of the
twelve Spies, by speaking ill of the Country, and the barrenness thereof, and
withal magnifying the Cities for their strength and the Giantly stature of the
men therein, Some of the Spies bring an ill report of the Land, so that the
People were disheartened.
disheartened the People from marching any further toward it, whilst Caleb did
all he could to persuade the people to go on; and now the People began to
murmer again against Moses and Aaron, and would needs go back again into
Egypt, and were ready to Stone Caleb and Joshua, for saying, the Land was an
exceeding good Land, and that it flowed with Milk and Honey; and because of the
Peoples complaining the Lord threatens them with sudden Destruction, but
through Moses's intercession and Prayer the Lord spared them yet so, For the
Peoples complaining, the Lord was again Angry.
that withal he denounced to them, that all of them which were then twenty
years old and upwards should dye in the Wilderness, and never see the Land
which was promised unto them; and that they should wander in that Wilderness
forty years; but my Servant Caleb, because he has another Spirit, and has
followed me fully, him will I bring into the Land, and his Seed shall Possess
it.

Upon this Calamity, and the continual dropping away of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, Moses prayed unto the Lord, and thereupon it is supposed he writ
the ninetieth Psalm, Man's Age again shortened.
in which he shows, that the ordinary Age of Men was reduced to seventy or
eighty years at the utmost, so that now the age of man was again contracted,
and cut shorter.

And now again the People for lack of Water murmer against Moses and Aaron, The
People murmer again
only by speaking to it; Moses being moved in his mind, said, Hear now ye
Rebels, must we fetch you Water out of the Rock? and with the Rod he smote the
Rock twice, and the Water came forth abundantly; Moses and Aaron for their
unbelieve here showed in executing the Command of God, were debarred from
entering into the Land of Canaan; and the Waters were called Meribah, or Waters
of Strife.

Aaron di^^
And now in the fortieth year after the coming of the Children of Isarel out of
Egypt, Aaron died; and shortly after God signified to Moses that he should die;
and Moses desired the Lord to set a man over the People, which might go in and
out before them, and that might not be as Sheep without a Shepherd; Joshua
succeed ed Moses.
and the Lord chose Joshua, a man in whom was the Spirit of God, and Moses
laid his hands on him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord had commanded him;
and here ends the matter of the five Books of Moses containing the History of
the two thousand five hundred fifty two years and a half; and the Children of
Israel mourned for Moses as they had done for Aaron thirty days in the Land of
Moab.

The Lord was with Joshua.
And now Joshua succeeding Moses, the Lord Promised Joshua to be with him, and
to Assist him, and the Lord was with him until he had Conquered all the Enemies
of the Israelites; and now, when God was about to give the Israelites rest
round about them, so that they might dwell there securely, it was requisite
also that a place should be appointed which himself should choose, to place his
Name there; wherefore coming together at Shilo, they there fixed the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, after the whole Land was subdued unto them. Now Shilo,
both by the signification of the Name, and also by the situation of the place,
seems to be the same with Salem, both which words signifies Peace or Rest.

Joshua built the City of Timnah-Sera in Mount Ephraim, Israel, and having
lived a hundred and ten Years, he there died and was buried.

After the decease of Joshua and the Elders, who out lived him, Israel, Joshua
being dead the Israelites began to backslide.
from the time of their first bringing out of Egypt, began to be forgotten by
the Young men, every man now doing what seemed good in his own Eyes; all those
disorders were committed, which are reported in the five last Chapters of the
Book of Judges, to wit, the Idolatry of Micah, and the Children of Dan, and the
War of the Benjaminites, and the cause thereof, and there succeeded a
Generation of men which forgot God, And Idolarty crept in.
and mingled themselves with the Canaanites by marriage, and worshipped their
Idols, and God hereby was provoked to Wrath, and gave them up to Cushan, King
of Mesapotania, They were brought into Bondage.
which first calamity of theirs held them eighty years, until Othoniel,
Son-in-law to Joshua, being stirred up by God as a Judge and Avenger of his
People, defeated Cushan, Delivered by Othoniel.
and delivered the Israelites out of their Bondage and the Land had rest forty
years after the rest which Joshua procured them.

After the decease of Othoniel, Israelites falling again to sin against God,
Brought into Bondage again
were again given over into the hands of Eglon King of Moab, who joining with
the Ammonites and Amalekites, overthrew the Israelites, and took Jerico; and
this second Oppression of theirs continued for the space of eighteen years.

Instrumentally delivered by Ehud.
Then the Lord raised up Ehud to be an Avenger of his People, who slew Eglon
and ten thousand of the Valiant men of Moah, and then the Land of Israel had
rest forty years. But when Ehud was dead, they returned to their old Sin, They
return again to sin, and are brought into Bondage.
wherefore they were brought again into Thraldom for twenty years, until Jabins
Army was routed, and Sisera Captain of his Army was killed by Jael, the Wife of
Heber, in her own Tent with a Nail struck into the Temples of his Head;
whereupon Debora, Are delivered again
a Prophetess, who at that time judged Israel, made a Song thereof for a
memorial of that Victory, and the Land rested forty years.

The Israelites sinning again and doing evil in the sight of the Lord, Midian
seven years; They sin again
the Israelites falling into this fourth Thraldom, cried unto the Lord for
help, A Prophet sent of God to reprove them.
and the Lord sent a Prophet unto them, who reproved them, and showed them what
great things the Lord had done for them, and encouraged them that they should
not fear the Gods of the Amorites; and the Lord raised up Gideon, Gideon raised
up to deliver them again.
being stirred up by an Angel sent from God to deliver them; and first by
Command from God he overturned the Altar of Baal, and burnt his Grove; and now
the Midianites and Amorites pitching their Camp against him, the Spirit of the
Lord came upon Gideon, and out of thirty two thousand men, he chose only three
hundred according to Gods Commandment to fight against them, By a small number
which he chose, and why.
That so the Victory of Salvation might appear to be of the Arm of the Lord,
that Israel might not Vaunt themselves against him. After he had obtained the
Victory, when the Israelites offered to settle the Kingdom on his Posterity, he
refused it, saying, The Lord shall rule over you; but receiving their Golden
Earings, he made, thereof an Ephad, whereof they afterward took an occasion to
fall into Idolatry; but the Midianites being vanquished, the Land had rest
forty years. They fall into Idolatry again.
So soon as Gideon was dead, the Israelites falling back to Idolatry,
worshipped Baal-Berith for their God; and Abimelech the Son of Gideon (begotten
upon a Concubine) purpossing to get unto himself the Kingdom which his Father
had refused, slew seventy of his Brethren, all upon one Stone; when Abimelech
had gotten the Kingdom, and had reigned three years, Gaal, a man of Sichem,
conspired against him, which being discovered to Abimelech, the City of Sichem
was utterly Destroyed, and the Inhabitants put to the Sword, and from thence
Abimelech going to besiege Thebez was knocked on the head with a piece of a
Millstone cast upon him by a Woman, and then killed outright by his own
Armor-bearer.

Now the Israelites forsaking again the true God and falling to Worship the
Gods of several Nations, Philistines. Were delivered into Bondage.


Sampson the Nazarite was born at Zora, who avenged the Israelites twenty years
in the time of the Philistines, who slew a thousand of of them at one time with
the Jawbone of an Ass, in which place, called Lehi, from that Jawbone, God at
the prayer of Sampson clave an hollow place that was in the Jaw, and there came
water there-out, Sampson avenged their cause.
and when he had drunk, he was revived, wherefore he called the name thereof
En^hackore, that is, The Fountain of him which called upon God.

Sampson betrayed by Dalila, with what followed.
Sampson being betrayed by Dalila, and spoiled of the Hair of his Nazariteship,
is delivered to the Philistines, who plucking out his Eyes, carried him away
Prisoner to Gaza, and put him there in Prison, fast bound in Chains, where his
strength renewing again, he pulled down the Temple of the great Dagon, killing
the Princes of the Philistines, with a very great multitude of People which
were therein; more men being killed at the fall thereof, (with himself for
Company) then he had slain in all his life before, and he was buried with his
Fathers, after he had been the avenger of the Israelites twenty years.

The Israelites being grievously oppressed by the Philistines, Sampson being
dead, Samuel was raised up of the Lord to be a Prophet unto them, who by his
faithfulness was found a true Prophet, Samuel the Prophet is raised up.
and by his word he was known to be faithful in Vision, he exhorted them to
turn unto the Lord with all their hearts, and to put away their strange Gods,
and to prepare their hearts unto the Lord, and to serve him only, and then he
would deliver them out of the hands of the Philistines; Then the Children of
Israel did put away their Gods, His care to turn the People from Idolatty.
and served the Lord only, and the Philistines came no more to envade the
borders of the Israelites, because they saw the Hand of the Lord was against
them all the days of Samuel, till Saul came to be King, under whom they
returned again, and grievously oppressed Israel; Samuel taking his Sons to help
to Judge the People, they walked not in the way of their Father.
and Samnel being now grown old, took to him his two Sons to be his Assistants
to Judge the People, and his Sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside
after lucre, and took Bribes, and perverted Judgment; wherefore the Israelites
were offended, and desired Samuel that they might have a King to Rule them, as
other Nations had; this displeased Samuel, and he prayed unto the Lord, At
which the people being offended desire they might have a King.
and the Lord said, Hearken unto the People, for they have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them: Whereupon God
gave them a King in his Wrath, to wit, Saul; and now began the Israelites
trouble again, for the Amorites besiege them; Saul being given for a King, he
reigned but a short time.
and Saul reigned but a short time until he was put from the Kingdom by the
Philistines, and the Israelites were again grievously enthroaled by them.

Jesse the Ephrathite in his old age had his youngest Son David born at
Bethlehem, David, thirty years before he succeeded Saul in the Kingdom.

God having now rejected Saul, Samuel, after his long mourning for Saul, to
Bethlehem, there to anoint David to be King (forty years before the Rebellion
of Absalom) who being a lovely keeper of a lovely Flock, was called from
keeping his Fathers Sheep, and prefered before his Elder Brethren, and being
anointed in their presence he incurred their envy no lest then Joseph did of
his Brethren; David is anointed King.
and at last was set over the Tribe of Juda at the same age that Joseph was
made Ruler over all Egypt; mean while, from the very day of his anointing the
Spirit of God came upon him, to wit, the Spirit of Courage and Wisdom, in both
which respects, even whilst Saul lived he was made Captain over Israel, and
withal grew a great Warrior to Fight the Lords Battle, and besides was a
Prophet, and made the sweet Singer of Israel, as one who by his divine Psalms
should teach and instruct the People of God.

David's Combat with the Phili^^ine.
The Armies of the Israelites and Philistines being ready to Battle, Caliah of
Gath the Philistine, their great Champion, defied the Armies of Israel;
wherefore David being stirred in his Zeal, said, who is this uncircumcised
Philistine that he should defy the Armies of the living God; but Eliab, David's
eldest Bother, hearing him, was offended, and asked him, with whom he had left
the Sheep in the Wilderness, and told him, he knew his Pride and naughtiness of
his heart; and says he, thou art come down that thou may see the Battle;
David said, what I have now down, is there not a Cause? Saul being acquainted
with David's words, sent for him; and David told Saul, he would fight the
Philistine; Saul replied, Thou art not able to fight him, he is a man of War,
and thou art but a Youth; David tells him, whilst he was keeping his Fathers
Sheep he had killed a Lion and a Bear, and that this uncircumcised Philistine,
who had defied the Armies of the living God should be as one of them; then Saul
bid him go, and said, the Lord be with thee, and armed him with his Armor,
which David put off again, and took only his Staff, and five smooth Stones out
of the Brook, and put them in his Shepherds bag, and with his Sling in his hand
he drew near to the Philistine. The Philistine defied his coming so meanly
armed, David, said, Thou come with Sword Spear and Shield, I come in the Name
of the Lord of Host; and all thy Assembly shall know that the Lord saves not
with Sword and Spear, for the Battle is the Lords. And David slew the
Philistine with a Stone and a Sling; and Saul taking notice of David's Valor,
enquired whose Son the Stripling David was, and David brought the Philistines
Head to Saul, which he had cut off with the Philistines own Sword, having first
slain him with a Stone he Sling at him; and David told Saul whose Son he was,
and after this David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself
wisely.

The cause of Saul's anger against David.
And David returning from the Slaughter of the Philistine, because it was said,
Saul has Slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands, Saul was very wroth
with David from that day forwards, and an evil Spirit entered Saul, and the
Lord departed from him, and he was afraid of David, David well beloved of the
People.
because he saw the Lord was with him; and David behaved himself wisely, and
all Israel and Juda loved him, but especially Jonathan the Son of Saul, who
made a Covenant with David, because he loved him as his own Soul; and David
fearing he might at last fall into Saul's hands, fled; for Saul became David's
Enemy continually.

And now David being fled, and the Armies of the Philistines invading the Land,
Saul fell into a fear, sought counsel from the Lord, Saul's Evil course in going
to the Witch of Endor, and what the effects thereof proved to him.
but receiving no answer from him, neither by Dream, nor by Urim, nor by
Prophets, he went to Endor by night to consult with a Witch: where by Vision he
saw Samuel, who told Saul God shall deliver Israel, together with thy self,
into the hands of the Philistines; for the Lord has rent the Kingdom out of
thine hand, and given it to thy Neighbor, even to David, because thou obeyed
not the Voice of the Lord, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalcek.

The Host of Israel being routed the Sons of Saul were all slain, and Saul
killed himself; when David heard it, David Lamenteth the death-of Saul and
Jonathan.
he much lamented the Death of Saul and Jonathan, saying, Tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, lest the Daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, left the Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph; and further he said,
I am distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto
me, thy Love to me was wonderful, passing the love of Women.

David having now built him an House of Cedar and living in a full and perfect
peace, imparted unto Nathan the Prophet, David's purpose to build a House for
God, but put by it, and why,
the purpose he had of building an House for God; but was answered from God,
that this was a work which should be done not by him, because he was a man of
Blood; but by his Son Solomon, a man of Peace, which should be born unto him.

Now David subdued the Philistines, the Edomites, the Amalekites, the Moabites,
the Ammonites and the Syrians, and the Bounds of Israel were stretched out to
the outmost part of all that Land, which had been formerly promised to the Seed
of Abraham, but never before possessed so fully by any of them, as by David and
Solomon his Son.

David's great sin.
At the end of this year, whilst David took his ease at Jerusalem, he there
defiled by Adultery Bathsheba the Wife of Uriah the Hittite, who was then in
the Army, and in consequence thereof procured the Husband to be slain by the
hands of the Ammonites; ^eing convinced of his evil by the Prophet, repented.
when the Child so gotten in Adultery was born, David being convinced by Nathan
the Prophet of his evil, acknowledged his Transgression, saying, My sin is ever
before me; and repented of his sin, as may be seen at large in Psalm 51. yet
the new born Babe was taken away by death: Bathsheba being now his Wfe, bare
David a Son, unto whom, Solomon born.
as to one who should prove a man of Peace, God gave the name of Solomon, as to
one beloved of God the Name of Jedidia.

The Lord was angery with David, and why.
David for numbering the People kindled the Wrath of God against the Israelites;
wherefore Gad the Prophet told David, thus says the Lord, Choose one of them,
that I may do unto thee, viz. whether Famine, Sword or Pestilence; and David
said, I am in great straight, and his Heart smote him, David chose to fall into
the hands of God.
for he saw the evil he had done in Numbering the People; and said, Let us now
fall into the Hands of the Lord, for his Mercies are great; and let me not fall
into the hands of men. So the Lord sent the Pestilence upon Israel, and there
died seventy thousand men in one day.

David being now seventy years of age, David grown old.
grew weak and feeble, and Adonias his Son seeing his Father thus declining, by
the counsel and advice of Joah and Abiathar the high Priest, Adonias his Son
strives for the Kingdom. David causes Solomon to be anointed King.
made himself King, whereof when David was advertized by Bathsheba and Nathan,
he presently caused his Son Solomon to be anointed King by Zadock the Priest,
and Nathan the Prophet, and Benajah the Son of Jehojada in Gihon, which so soon
as Adonias heard, he presently fled, and afterward laying hold on the Horns of
the Altar was pardoned by the favor of Solomon, and set at liberty; Whereupon
Adonias flies
and now David assembling all the Governors and chief of Israel, together with
his Sons and Servants, exhorted them all to fear and worship God.

David departed this life, Hebron seven years and and six Months, David dies.
and thirty three years in Jerusalem over all Israel.

Solomon loved the Lord, David his Father, Solomon's Uprightness to walk before
the Lord.
and in Gibeon the Lord appeared to him in a Dream, and bid him ask and choose
what he would, and it should be given him; and Solomon said, Thou have showed
unto thy Servant David my Father great mercy, according as he walked before
thee in Truth and Righteousness; and now, O Lord my God, thou have made thy
Servant King instead of David my Father, and I am but a little Child, I know
not how to go out or come in; He asks Wisdom.
and he asked Wisdom, and an Understanding Heart to be given him of God; and
the Speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing; God therefore
gave him Wisdom from above, Wherefore God gave him Wisdom beyond any before or
after The first experience of Solomon's Wisdom.
exceeding any that was before him, or should come after him, and of his Wisdom
the first Experiment was made in deciding the Controversy between the two
Women about the Child, which first gave him an esteem among the People, when
they saw the Wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment.

Solomon having according to his Fathers direction (in whose heart it was to
build an House for the Name of the Lord God of Israel) built the Temple, How
long the Temple was building.
in the building of which there was neither Hammer nor Ax, nor any Tool of Iron
heard in the House whilst it was in building; and now Solomon having built the
Temple, he placed there the Ark, wherein was the Covenant of the Lord, which he
made with the Children of Israel, when he brought them out of the Land of
Egypt; and Solomon stood before the Altar of the Lord, and in the Presence of
the People said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in Heaven above,
or in Earth beneath, who keep Covenant and Mercy with thy Servants, that
walk before thee with all their heart; and he made a long prayer for the
Preservation of the People, and desired the Lord would be with them, Solomon's
Prayer for he People.
as he was with their Fathers, and not leave them nor forsake them, and that he
would incline their Hearts unto him to walk in all his Ways, and to keep his
Statutes and Judgments which he commanded their Fathers: Thus was Solomon's
beginning, Solomon's heart drawn away from the Lord.
but it was not long after, until he was drawn away by many strange Women, who
toward his latter days drew away his Heart into Idolatry, and his heart was
not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the Heart of David his Father, for he
went after the Abominations of the Amonites, and he did evil in the sight of
the Lord, The Lord angry with Solomon.
and went not fully after the Lord as did David his Father, and he built an
high place for Chemosh, the Abomination of Moab; and for these things the Lord
was angry with Solomon, and said, Because thou have not kept my Covenant, I
will surely rend the Kingdom from thee, yet in thy days I will not do it for
David thy Fathers sake; but after this Solomon repented deeply, and made his
peace with the Lord, Solomon repents.
as may be seen at large in the Book called the Preacher, and at last he died
when he had reigned forty years.

Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, Israel met at Sechem to make him King, Rehoboam
through his unadvisedness turns away the Peoples heart from him.
by a harsh answer made unto them alienated the hearts of the ten Tribes from
him, who presently sending into Egypt for Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, made him
King over them; and fell off both from the House of David, and also from the
true Worship of God, in memorial of which sad disaster the Jews afterward kept
a Solemn fast yearly upon the twenty third of the third Month, called Sivan,
from this dismal rent made in that Kingdom. Rehoboam reigned over Judea and
Benjamin seventeen years, and Jeroboam over Israel, that is, over the ten
Tribes by the space of twenty years.

And now Jeroboam fearing lest his new-gotten Subjects should revolt from him
again, Ier^^^ms Idolatry.
to divert their thoughts from looking any more after Jerusalem, set up a new
deviced Form of Religion, setting up two Golden Calves, the one at Bethell, the
other at Dan; and there he offered Sacrifices to his Calves, and the People run
a Whoring after his Idolatry.

At which time a Prophet, and Man of God out of Judea, went to Bethell, and
cried out against the Altar, in the Word of the Lord, The Prophet is sent of
God to reprove him.
and bore his Testimony against the Kings Idolatry; and when the King stretched
forth his hand to lay hold on him, his hand was dried up, and the Prophet
foretold, That the Altar should be Rent: After this Prophet had done his
Message, he was charged by the Lord, not to eat Bread, nor to drink Water, nor
return by the way that he came; but being deceived by another, who said, he was
a Prophet, and abused the Word of God unto him, was unfaithful to Gods Command;
wherefore, The Prophet slain for his disobedience.
as he was returning homeward he was slain by a Lion, whereof when tidings came
to the Prophet which had deceived him, he took up his Body and buried it,
mourning over him, Alas my Brother, and assured his Sons, that what had been
foretold by the man of God should come to pass.

The Israelites who feared God falling off from Jeroboam to Rehoboam,
maintained the Kingdom of Juda three years, for so long walked they in the
ways of David and Solomon.

Rehoboam being once settled in his Kingdom, Israel and Juda with him; Rehoboam
forsook the Lord.
for the Jews who by their good Example should have stirred up their Brethren
the Israelites to repentance, provoked the Lord with their own Sins, wherein
they offended more then any of their Forefathers had done, for they made also
to themselves High Places, Images and Groves upon every high Hill, and under
every green Tree, doing according to all the Abominations of the Gentiles,
which the Lord had therefore cast out before them.

After Rehoboam succeeded Abijah, Jeroboam, and slew five hundred thousand men,
and took Bethel, where one of the Idolatrous Calves was set up.

After the death of Abijah, Asa his Son succeeded, and God gave ten years
peace, without interuption in the Land, and this godly King Asa put away all
Idolatry, Asa throw down Idolatry.
and reformed the Kingdom; but when Asa dyed, though he was good, yet a better
succeeded in his stand, his Son called Jehosaphat, who being settled in his
Kingdom began with taking away the High Places, Iehosaphats good reign.
and the Groves; but when Jehosaphat dyed, Jehoram his wicked Son slew all his
Brethren, and many of the Princes of Israel, and following the counsel of his
wicked Wife Athaliah, set up in Juda, Iehorams Idolatry.
and even in Jerusalem it self, the Idolatrous worship of Baal, after the
manner of his Father-in-law Ahab and his house; He is reproved by the Prophet.
for which he was reproved in a letter by the Prophet Elias, who foretold him
what Calamities should fall upon him, because he had not walked in the ways of
his Father, but had made Juda, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a
Whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also had slain his
Brethren of his Fathers house, The Judgment that God inflicted on him.
which were better then himself; and according to what the Prophet had
foretold, the Lord struck Jehoram with an incurable dissease in the Bowels, and
he died a miserable death; and his Son Achazia succeeded him, who also walked
in the ways of the wicked house of Ahab, for his Mother was his Counselor to
do wickedly, and the evil that he did in the sight of the Lord was his
destruction, being sick he asked counsel of Baal-zebub the God of the Ekronites
concerning his recovery; the Prophet Elias told the King plainly that he should
dye, and accordingly he dyed.

Athaliab through cruelty possesses her self of the Kingdom. The secret
Athalia the Daughter of Ahab seeing her own Son Achazia dead, destroyed all
the Race of the house of Juda, and possessed her self of the Kingdom; but
Jehosheba the Daughter of King Joram, and Wife to Jehoida the high Priest took
Joash, being then an Infant, and Son to her Brother Ahazia, and him with his
Nurse hid six months in the Temple, preservatien of Joash.
whilst Athalia ruled, and at seven years end brought him forth, and anointed
him King, and caused Athalia to be slain, and restored the worship of the True
God, Athalia slain.
destroying the worship of Baal.

Whilst this King had good Counsel he did right.
This Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the days of
Jehojada the Priest; now after the death of Jehojada, the King harkening to the
Princes of Juda, they left the house of the Lord God of their Fathers and
served Groves and Idols, for which Sin the Lord sent his wrath upon them; He
turns into Idolatry.
yet he sent his Prophets to testify against them, and to bring them back
again, but they would not hear, and Zechariah the Son of Jehoiada was moved by
the Spirit of God to tell them that they had forsaken God, The Prophets
reproves him.
and that he had forsaken them; for which Message they stoned him to death at
the Commandment of the King; The Prophets is stoned to Death.
thus Joash the King remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada Zachariahs
Father had done to him; and when the Prophet dyed, he said, This Kings
miserable end.
the Lord look upon it and require it; and now, mark what was the end of this
King, his own Servants conspired against him, and slew him in his bed, as may
be seen more at large in the account given of Gods Judgments against
Persecutors.

Amazia succeeded Joash, Amaziahs Evil.
for at last he set up the God of the Children of Seir, and bowed himself
before them, and burnt Incense unto them; wherefore the anger of the Lord was
Kindled against him, and he sent a Prophet unto him to reprove him, The
Prophets reproves him.
to whom the King said, Art thou made of the Kings Council, forbear, wherefore
should thou be smitten; Nevertheless, the Prophet said, I know God has
determined to destroy thee; The King is slain.
and after the time that this King turned away his heart from the Lord he was
slain.

After him succeeded Uzzia, under him did the Kingdom of Juda flourish, no less
then that other of Israel did under Jeroboam the second, and he did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, The reason of Vzziah his prosperity.
and he sought God in the days of Zachariah, and as long as he sought the
Lord, and applied his mind to matters of piety, God made him to prosper, and he
subdued the Philistines, and other bordering Enemies; and thus whilst he was
weak and low, he was marvellously helped against his Enemies; but when he was
strong, How he came to loss.
and looked at his own strength, his heart was lifted up to his destruction; for
he transgressed against the Lord, and burnt Incense, wherefore the Lord smote
him with Leprosy, and he remained a Leper to the day of his death, and dwelt
in a house several, God Judgment on him.
for he was cut off from the house of the Lord; and he being dead, Jotham his
son reigned, and he did that which was right in the fight of the Lord, how be
it the People did yet do corruptly, but he be came mighty, because he prepared
his ways before the Lord his God. After him reigned Ahaz his Son, Israel, Ahaz
his Evil.
who made also Moulten Images for Baalim, and burnt Incense on the High Places,
and under every green Tree, wherefore the Lord delivered him into the hands of
his Enemies; and thus the Reader may see, He is delivered into the hands of his
Enemies.
how these people and Children of Juda and Israel, to whom God had given a
commandment that they should fear him, and not forget him, and that then he
would deliver them from their Enemies, howbeit they did not hearken, but were
ready often to back-slide, and to serve their graven Images, both their
Children and their Childrens Children unto this day.

Ahaz being dead Hezekiah his Son began to reign, David did; Hezckiahs good
reign, his breaking down Idolatry.
and brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent that Moses had made, for unto those
days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he called it Nehushtan
that is to say, a little piece of Brass; and thus this good Reformer he trusted
in the Lord God of Israel, and he left not off throwing down the Altars and
High Places, until he had Destroyed them all, causing a through Reformation: And
his zeal was so great for the Lord, that after him, as it is recorded, was none
like him, among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that was before him; for he
clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him, and the Lord was with
him, and he prospered him whithersoever he went forth.

Hezekiah falling sick unto death, the Prophet Esaiah being commanded of the
Lord, Set thine House in order, for thou shall die, He tell sick, the Prophet
foretold his death.
and not live; this moved Hezekiah's heart, that he wept sore, and turning to
the Wall, prayed unto the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now
how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart, He ekiah is
broken in Tenderness The Lord had compassion on him.
and have done that which is good in thy sight, wherefore the Lord had
compassion on him, and added fifteen years more to his days; and Hezekiah
dying Manasseh his Son reigned, and did that which was evil in the sight of the
Lord, after the Abomination of the Heathen, building the High Places which his
Father had destroyed, and again reared up Alters for Baal, His Son is turned to
Idolatry.
and worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and served them, and used Enchantments,
and dealing with Familiar-Spirits, and Wizards, he wrought much Wickedness in
the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger; for which Abomination the Lord
sent his Servants and Prophets to foretell, that for those Abominations he would
bring such evil upon Jerusalem and Juda that whosoever should hear it their
Ears should tingle; The Prophets Message against the evil of those times. The
Kings Bondage he is brought into. He is humbled under the hand of God, and
reforms in part.
and the Lord brought upon Manasseh the Host of the Assyrians, which took
Manasseh, and bound him with Fetters, and carried him Captive to Babylon; and
now being in Affliction, he besought the Lord and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, wherefore the Lord restored him again to his
Kingdom, and then he knew that the Lord was God, and he cast out the Altars
that he had built, and took away the strange Gods and Idols, and commanded the
People to serve the Lord God of Israel; but still the People retained the
High Places to Worship in: And after his death, his Son Amon was punished by
the Lord, being slain by his Servants in his own House; and now these two bad
Kings being taken away, the Lord raised up another good King, The good King
Josiah raised up.
which was Josiah the Son of Amon, who reigned thirty four years in Jerusalem,
and eaused again a Blessed and through Reformation amongst the People of Judah
and Jerusalem, making a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the Lord and to
keep his Testimonies with all his Heart, His Covenant with the Lord.
and with all his Soul, and he likewise cleansed away the Abominations from the
People, and again stirred them up to serve the Lord their God, and all his
days they departed not from following the Lord God of their Fathers.

Nero King of Egypt, Assyria, who at that time made War upon him, He
unadvisedly assisted the King of Egypt, and was slain
2 Kings 23.29. 2 Chro. 35.20, 21. Josiah unadvisedly engaging in this War was
slain, and now this good King being taken out of the World, a World of Miseries
grew on upon it, and such Lamentations there was, that it grew almost a common
proverb, the Lamentation of Hadadrimon in the Valley of Megiddo; His loss
g^^^^ly ^amen^d by all.
for not only the whole People living wonderfully bewailing the death of
Josiah, but the Ages following were sencible of the loss of him; and the
Prophet Jeremiah in rememberance thereof wrote his mournful Book of
Lamentations, Especia^^y by the Prophet Jeriemiah.
wherein bewailing the Calamities which were shortly to befall the People, as if
he had then presently beheld them, using these words, The Breath of our
Nostrils, the ancinted of the Lord is taken in their pits, of whom we said,
under the shadow of his Wings we shall live among the Heathen.

After the death of Josiah his Youngest Son was anointed King, who presently
fell to doing that which was evil in the sight of God, His Son walked not in
the steps of his Pather, but did e^il.
but Nero King of Egypt removed him after he had reigned three Months, and
made Eliakim his Elder Brother King in his room, changing his name into
Jehojakim, that thereby he might testify to the World, that he ascribed the
Victory by him gotten against the Assyrians to the Lord only, by whom he
professed he was formerly sent against them.

In the Beginning of this Kings reign Jeremiah commanded by God, Jeremiah
exhortes the people.
he denounced the Judgment of God against them, saying, that that House should
become as Shilo, and that City should be cursed among all the Nations of the
Earth; whereupon he was presently apprehended by the Priests and Prophets, and
all the people then in the Court, and accused as a man worthy of death, but was
acquitted and set at Liberty by the public Judgment of the Princes and Elders.

Vriahs Prophecy. He is put to death.
At this time also Uriah prophesied against Jerusalem, and the Land of Juda,
agreeable to the sayings of the Prophet Jeremiah, for which the King put him to
death by the Sword, and threw his Carcass among the vilest Sepulchers of the
common people; yet Ahikam, who had formerly been a man of great Authority with
King Josiah, appeared so much in the behalf of the Prophet Jeremiah, that he
was not delivered over into the hands of the people to be put to death at that
time.

To these might be added the Prophet Habbakuk, to whom, when he complained of
the stubornness of the Jews, God made this answer, Habbahkuks prophecy.
That he would shortly send the Chaldeans into Juda; and further declared his
purpose concerning this matter, in these words, I will do a work in your days
which you will not believe when it shall be told unto you; for behold, I will
stir up the Chaldeans, a fierce Nation, and a swift, which shall walk through
the breadth of the Land which is none of theirs, as their own Inheritance.

Jeremiah reproves the Jews.
In the fourth year of this King Jehojakim, the Prophet Jeremiah reproved the
Jews, for not harkening to the Word of the Lord which he had spoken unto them
from time to time, and for not regarding the Exhortations of the Prophets which
the Lord had sent unto them, and then again told them of the coming of
Nebuchadnezar upon them, He prophesies of their Captivity.
and of their being carried away Captives to Babylon, and that Captivity to
last seventy years long, and during the seventy years time of Captivity, Daniel
prophesied of the coming of the Messiah, who should bring in the Law of
Everlasting Righteousness, and put an end to the Levitical Sacrifices.

Jehojakim being taken Prisoner by the Chaldeans, Jerusalem, according as was
foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah; though in referance to the common course in
nature he also may be said, to have slept with his Fathers, as he is 2 Kings
24.6.

After him came his Son Jehoiachin, who was also called Jeconias, and reigned
three Months and ten days in Jerusalem, who also did evil in the sight of the
Lord as his Father had done before him, against whom the Lord by his Prophet
Jeremiah declared a most dreadful Decree, Ieremiahs decree against. Ichoiachin.
He pronounced a Woe against the wicked Pastors.
saying, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord, thus says the Lord,
write ye this man Childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days, for no
man of his Seed shall prosper, sitting upon the Throne of David, and ruling any
more in Juda; and pronounced a woe to the Pastors that scattered the Sheep, and
that had not fed nor visited, the People; and therefore the Lord would Visit
them for the evil of their doing, and that he would gather the Remnant of his
Flock, and would set up Shepherds over them that should feed them, and that he
would raise unto David a righteous Branch, that should execute Judgment and
Justice in the Earth; and that in his day Juda should be saved, and Israel
dwell safely; and this is his Name wherewith he shall be called, the Lord our
Righteousness; and in the fence of this the Prophet cried out. Mine heart
within me is broken, because of the Prophets, all my Bones shake, I am like a
drunken man, and like a man whom Wine has overcome, Isaiahs Prophets of Christ.
because of the Lord, and because of the Word of his Holiness.

And Esaiah the Prophet had a true sight of the coming of the Blessed Messiah;
for he said, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me to Preach good tidings unto the Meek, he has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening the
Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and
the day of Vengence of our God; to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them
that mourn in Sion, to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the oil of Joy for
mourning, the garment of Praise for the Spirit of heaviness, that they might be
called Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that be might be
glorified; and they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former
Desolations, and they shall repair the Waste Cities, the Desolations of many
Generations.

And thus the Reader may see the many glorious Dispensations, and
manifestations of Gods Love unto mankind, to the holy Patriarchs and Prophets
in all Generations, and now we are come according to what the Prophets
foretold, to the day of the Appearance of that great Savior of the World,
whose Dispensation far exceeded all others in Glory, being that eternal
Substance, which ended all Types Shaddows and Figures.

And thus these Jews who had been the true Worshippers, being apostatized and
degenerated from their primitive glory, and institutions, and their Worship
becoming merely outside, for its said, they drew near to God with their
Mouths, and honored him with their Lips but their Hearts were far from him;
the Prophets were raised up and sent from the Lord to Cry against them, and to
foretell the Desolation and destruction that was to come upon them, which
accordingly came to pass, as will be seen anon; and in this condition did
Christ at his coming find these Ancient people the Jews, to whom God had
formerly committed his Laws and Commands, and given his Oracles, but they were
wholly apostatized from them, as will appear by their fruits in the following
Discourse.

The Continuation of the Discourse from the Birth of Christ. The year of Christ.

AFter the Jews had Apostatized, according as the Prophets had foretold, and
that the Messiah and Deliverer should come; so in the fullness of time Christ
Jesus the Son of God was born of the Virgin Mary, whom she roled in
Swadling-Cloaths, and laid in a Manger because there was no room for him in
the Inn; Christ is born
the Birth of Christ was revealed by an Angel of the Lord to Shepherds keeping
their Flock by night in the Fields, and suddenly there was with the Angel a
Multitude of the heavenly Host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
Highest, and on Earth Peace and Good Will to men: The great rejoicing at his
Birth.
The Shepherds making haste to Bethlehem, found Mary and Joseph and the Child
lying in the Manger, and they published that which was told them concerning the
Child, and they returned Praising and Glorifying God; but Mary kept all these
things, and pondered them in her Heart.

The Child was called Jesus (which signifies a Savior) which was so declared
by the Angel before he was conceived in the Womb. He is called Jesus.
The Wise men from the East, the Star being their Guide, coming to Herod to
Jerusalem, and there being taught that the Birthplace of Christ was at
Bethlehem of Judea, they went thither, and entering into the House which was
showed them by the Star, which stood over it; they found the little Child and
Mary his Mother, and falling down worshipped him, and having opened their
Treasures, they offered unto him Gold, Frankinseence and Myrhe. Then being
warned of God in a Dream that they should not return unto Herod, they departed
into their own Country another way.

And when the Child was brought by his Parents to Jerusalem to be presented to
the Lord, there came into the Temple one Simeon a just and devout man, who had
waited for the Consolation of Israel; and the holy Ghost was upon him, and it
was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, That he should not see Death before he
had seen the Lords Christ; and he came by the Spirit into the Temple, and when
the Parents brought the Child to do for him after the custom of the Law, then
took he him up in his Arms, Simeons Testimony concerning that.
and blessed God, and said, Lord, now let thou they Servant depart in
Peace, according to thy Word; for mine Eyes has seen thy Salvation, which thou
have ppreared before the Face of all People; a Light to Lighten the Gentiles,
and the Glory of thy People Israel: and Joseph, and his Mother marvelled at
those things which were spoken of him; and Simeon blessed them, and said unto
Mary his Mother, Behold, this Child is set for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.

In the same moment came Anna, a Prophetess, the Daughter of Phanuel, she also
openly acknowledged the Lord, and speak of him to all that looked for
Redemption in Jerusalem.

When Joseph and Mary had performed all things according to the Law of the
Lord, they returned into Galilee, unto their own City Nazareth.

The Angel of the Lord appearing unto Joseph in a Dream, shows him, that he
should flee into Egypt, that he might provide for the life of the Child, and
escape the Devices of Herod, Herod's Cruelty and Subtle endeavors to kill the
Child Jesus.
who being awakened took the Young Child, and his Mother by night, and departed
into Egypt, where he remained until the death of Herod: Herod thinking the
Young Child had been still at Bethlehem, that he might Destroy him among the
rest, killed all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the Coast
thereof from two years old and under, according to the time (of the Star first
seen in the East) that he had enquired of the Wisemen.

Herod shortly after dyed Miserably, being dead, the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto Joseph in a Dream in Egypt, and commanded, that he should return with the
young Child and his Mother into the Land of Israel; but when he heard that
Archelaus did reign in Juda in the room of his Father Herod, he feared to go
thither, and being warned of God in a dream, he departed into the parts of
Galilee, and there dwelt in the City Nazareth, from whence Jesus took the Name
of Nazarene, and the Christians of Nazarenes.

In the year of the World 4010. it being the Passover, Joseph and Mary to
Jerusalem; his Parents returning home, he stayed behind, His Mouth was first
ope^ed to oppose the Doctors, at twelve, years old.
they not knowing where he was, sought him three days, and found him in the
Temple sitting in the midest of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them
Questions; and all that heard him were astonished at his Understanding and
Answers, and he went down with his Parents to Nazareth, and was obedient unto
them, and followed his Fathers Trade of a Carpenter.

In the year of the World 4030. and in the thirtieth year of Christ, John --
came forth in his Ministry, Crying with a loud Voice in the Wilderness, Prepare
ye the way of the Lord, make his Paths straight, John Ministry what it was.
and opening the acceptable year of the Lord, or the time of his divine
pleasure, preaching Repentance and Remission of Sins, being clothed with a
Garment of Camels Hair, and a girdle of Skins about his Loins, and his food was
Locus and wild Honey.

And now Jesus being filled with the Holy Ghost he was led by the Spirit into
the desert, where he fasted forty days and forty night, where he was tempted,
Jesus fasie^^ forty days
but the Tempter could find no place in him* when John was asked by the Sect of
the Pharisees, who he was, he told them he was not the Christ, and denying that
he was Elias or that Prophet; but said, he was the Voice of one Crying in the
Wilderness, Make strait the Way of the Lord; and told them, I Baptize with
Water, but there stands ono amongst you, whom ye know not, he it is who
comes after me, who is preferred before me, whose Shoe Latchet I am not worthy
to unloose: The next day John seeing Jesus coming to him, says, Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the world; This is he of whom I spoke,
there comes one after me that is preferred before me, John's Testimony
concerning Christ.
and I saw him, and testify that this is the Son of God.

And now Jesus going into Galilee, commanded Philip to follow him, he finding
Nathaniel under a Fig Tree, and brings him to Jesus, who pronounces him to be
truly an Israelite in whom was no guile.

And now we are come to the Public Ministry of Christ, whose Acts I shall
briefly mention before I proceed to give an account of his Suffering and Death.
JEsus working Miracles many believed on him, but he did not commit himself
unto them, The works he did in Jud^^.
because he knew what is in man, leaving Jerusalem where he had been at the
Passover, he went into the Land of Judea, with his Disciples, where after he
had stayed eight months, he went into Galilee again, but he must needs go
through Samaria, where he brings the Samaritan Woman off from the Jerusalem
worship, His works and Acts in Syria.
to the worship of the Father in the Spirit and Truth; and in Galilee he worked
many Miracles, healing the sick, and casting out Devils, going through all
Galilee, and preaching in their Synagogues, and healing every disease, and his
fame went into all Syria; and a great Multitude followed him, and in a certain
City he heals a Leper, who though he was forbid, yet he publishes it, and they
came to him from every place to hear him, and to be healed, insomuch, that he
could no more enter openly into the City, but was in desert places and prayed.

After these things was the Feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,
The Jews offended because he had healed on the Sabbath day. They seek to ^lay
him.
where, for healing a man on the Sabbath day, that had had an Infirmity thirty
eight years, lying at the Pool of Bethesda: The Jews persecuted Jesus, and
sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath day; Jesus
told them, My Father works hitherto, and I work; wherefore the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he said, that God was his Father; Jesus said, The
Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for whatsoever
he does, these also does the Son; for the Father loves the Son, and shows
him all things that himself does, and he will show him greater things then
these, that ye may marvel, for the Father judges no man but has committed all
Judgment unto the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father, he that honors not the Son honors not the Father that has
sent him.

And it came to pass in those days, that he went into a Mountain to pray, He
chose^h the twelve Apostles.
and continued in prayer all night, and when it was day he chose twelve, whom
he called Apostles, and he came down with them, and stood in the Plain, and a
great multitude coming unto him, he went up into a Mountain again, and there
spoke first to his Apostles, and afterward to the People, exhorting his
Disciples to lowliness, pronouncing a Blessing to the Poor, and to them that
weep now, His Exhortation to them
but a Woe unto them that were Rich, and Full, and unto them that laughed now,
for they should mourn and weep; and that they should love their Enemies, and do
good to them which hate them: And when he had ended all his Sayings in the
Audience of the People, he entered into Capern^um, and heals the Centurions
Servant that lay sick ready to dye; and afterward he went from City to City
Preaching, and his Disciples were with him, and certain Women Ministered unto
him: And whilst he spoke to the People, it was told him, Word of God and do it.

And as Jesus was going to the House of Jairus (who fell down at Jesus his
Feet, and besought him that he would come to his House, for he had one only
Daughter of about twelve years of Age, He cures the Woman that had long ^ad the
Issue of blood.
and she lay a dying) the People thronged him as he went, and a Woman having an
Issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her Living upon Physicians,
neither could be healed of any, came behind him, and touched the Border of his
Garment, and she was healed, and the Daughter of Jairus now already dead, is
restored to life by his Word only, and likewise he straightly charge that no
man should know it.

When he departed thence, two blind men followed him, He opens the Eyes of two
Blind men.
whose Eyes he opened, straightly charging, that no man should know it; as they
went out, behold, they brought unto him a Dumb man Possessed with a Devil, and
when the Devil was cast out, the Dumb speak, and a Multitude marvelled, but the
Pharisees Blasphemed; and he went round about all their Cities and Villages,
teaching and healing all their Diseases; He again exhorts his Disciples, and
sends them forth to Preach.
and he was moved with compassion toward the great multitude, when he saw the
great Harvest and the few Laborers, and says to his Disciples, that they
should pray the Lord that he would send forth Laborers; and he sends forth the
twelve Apostles to Preach the Gospel.

He says to his Disciples, Woe unto them by whom Offenses come; and he teaches
them, that if thy Brother sin against thee, he is to be forgiven.

Lazarus of Bethany was sick, his Sisters therefore sends to Jesus to tell him
of his sickness, as soon as he heard that he was sick, he tarries to days in
the place where he was, but afterward he says to his Disciples, let us go
again into Judea, who say to him, the Jews of late sought to Stone thee, and
go thou thither again? Jesus answering, says unto them, Lazarus sleeps
(speaking of his Death, not of his Sleep) let us go to him, says Thomas, that
we may dye with him; Jesus comes nigh unto Bethany, and finds that Lazarus had
been buried four days in the Grave; Martha comes to meet him, they discourse
concerning the Resurrection; Mary hearing of it comes quickly to him without
the Town, where Martha met him, who seeing her weep, Jesus wept, and comes to
the Grave, bidding them remove the Stone, and giving thanks to his Father,
calls Lazarus out of his Grave; He rais^th up Lazarus.
whereupon many believed on him, and some going to the Pharisees telling what
things Jesus had done, they called therefore a Council, where Caiaphas
Prophesied concerning Jesus, and from that day consulted together, that they
might put him to death, commanding, that if any knew where he was, they should
give notice, that they might take him; and at another time the Pharisees said,
Behold, the whole World is gone after him.

And Jesus traveling toward Jerusalem, He weeps over Jerusalem.
when he came nigh, seeing the City, he wept over it, foretelling the utter
Destruction thereof; and being come to Jerusalem, having spoken of the
desolation and ruin of it, as he sat on the Mount of Olive, over against the
Temple, his Disciples asked him, when these thing shall be, and what shall be
the signs of thy coming? He warns his Disciples to watch
to whom he answers at large, and warns them to Watch, and to be ready, for
they know not the hour when the Lord will come, and teaches the same thing by
the Parable of the ten Virgins, as also by the Parable of the Tallents
delivered to the Servants to Trade withal.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these sayings, he says to his
Disciples, Ye know that after two days is the Passover, and the Son of Man
shall be betrayed to be crucified. Then they consulted together in the Palace
of the High Priest, that they might kill Jesus, but they said, Juda^ Covenants
to betray him.
not on the Feast Day, least there be an uproar among the People; then entered
Satan into Judas, who offers himself, and Covenants to betray him.

In the first day of the Unleavened Bread, when the Passover was slain, and in
the Evening he comes with the twelve, and when they had sat down and eaten,
Jesus said, I have greatly desired to eat this Passover before I suffer; and he
further said; One of you shall betray me; He tells who should betray him.
and they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him, one by one, Is it I? He
answered, It is he that dippeth his hand with me in the d^sh; and to Judas,
asking, Is it I? He says, Thou have said.

When Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this World
unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the World, he loved them
unto the end; Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his
hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God, there being a strife
among his Disciples who should be greatest, he rises after Supper, and lays
aside his Garments, He washes his Disciples Feet.
and took a Towel, and girded himself; after that, he poured Water into a
Basin, and began to wash the Disciples Feet; Peter says, Thou shall never wash
my Feet; Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me;
Peter says, Not my Feet only, but also my Hands, and my Head: After he had
washed their Feet, and had taken his Garments, and was set down again, he said
unto them, Know ye what I have done to you, you call me Master and Lord, and ye
say well; for so I am; if then your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, you
ought also to wash one another Feet; for I have given you an Example, that you
should do as I have done to you; and speaking further to his Disciples, he was
troubled in Spirit, and said, One of you shall betray me, they looked one upon
another, doubting of whom he speak; one of the Disciples whom Jesus loved,
lying on Jesus his Breast, said, Lord, who is it? Jesus said, He it is to whom
I shall give a stop, after I have dipped it, and he gave it to Judas, and said
to him, What thou do do quickly. Now when Judas had received the stop, he
went immediately out; when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of Man
Glorified, and God is Glorified in him; little Children, yet a little while I
am with you, ye shall seek me, and as I said to the Jews, Whither I go you
cannot come, so now I say unto you, He exhorts them to love one another.
a New Commandment I give unto you, That you love one another, as I have loved
you, by this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if you have love one
to another: Peter said, Lord, whither go thou? Jesus answered, Whither I go
thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me afterward; Peter said,
Why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my Life for thy sake; Jesus
answered, The Cock shall not crow till thou have denied me thrice.

Against their sorrow conceived by them for his death he comforts them, saying,
Let not your hearts be troubled; He comforts them.
and that in his Fathers House were many Mansions; and that the Comforter, the
holy Ghost should come, and be their Teacher; and he exhorts them to to abide
patiently the hatred of the World, which hated him, and that they should not be
offended though Persecutions attended them.

Again, entering into a Garden with his Disciples, unto whom he said, Pray ye
that ye enter not into Temptation; He again exhorts them to pray against
entering into Temptation.
sit here till I go and pray yonder, and he took Peter, and the two Sons of
Zebedee, with him, and said unto them, Tarry here and watch; and being
withdrawn from them about a Stones cast, he kneeled down and prayed, saying,
Father, if thou be willing remove this Cup from me, nevertheless not my Will,
but thine be done; and there appeared an Angel from Heaven strengthening him,
then he returns and finds his Disciples sleeping, he reprehends and admonishes
them, Christ was in an Agony.
and being in an Agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were
great drops of blood; and while he was yet speaking to his Disciples, Judas
came and betrayed him to the chief Priests, and they took him; and he said unto
them, This is your hour and Power of Darkness; and the Disciples left him, and
fled; and they bound Jesus, Judas betrayed him.
and brought him first to Annas, who sent him to Caiphas the High Priest, where
were all the chief Priests, Elders and Scribes of the People gathered together;
then Caiphas asked him concerning his Disciples, and his Doctrine; Jesus
answered him, I spoke openly to the World, ask them that heard me; therefore
one of the Officers struck him with a Staff, to whom he answered. If I have
well spoken, why smitest thou me? Then all the Council sought false Witness
against him, and found none; at last two Witnesses came, but their Testimony
agreed not; Caiphas then said, answerest thou not to what they witness against
thee, but Jesus held his peace; then he adjured him that he should tell,
whether he were the Christ, and he answered, I am; wherefore they judged him
guilty of death, for this Blasphemy (as they accounted it. Their cruelty to him.
) Then they Mocked him, and Spit on him, and cruelly beat him with Buffits, and
Staves, and covering his Face, they said, Prophecy who smote thee; and many
other things they reproachfully spoke against him.

And they led him bound unto Pontius Pilate the Governor, from Caiphas, to the
Hall of Judgment, and they began to accuse him saying, We found this Man
perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar, The chief
Priests accuse him falsely.
saying, that himself is Christ, a King, and when he was accused of the chief
Priest and Elders, he answered nothing; then said Pilate unto him, Hear thou
not how many things they Witness against thee, but he answered him not a word,
so that Pilate marvell'd; then said Pilate, take ye him and judge him according
to your Law, but they urged, it is not lawful for us to put any man to death;
Pilate then entered into the Judgment Hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him, He is called before Pilate again.
Art thou the King of the Jews, Jesus answered, Say thou this of thy self,
or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? thine own
Nation, and the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me, what have thou done?
Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of this World; Pilate therefore said unto
him, Art thou a King then? His answer to Pilate.
Jesus answered, For this cause came I into the World, that I might bear
Witness unto the Truth; Pilate said unto him, What is Truth? And when he had
said this, he went out again unto the Jews and said unto them, Pilate finds no
fault in him.
I find in him no fault at all; and they were the more fierce, saying, He
stirs up the People, teaching throughout all Galilee to this place; Pilate
therefore hearing of Galilee, asked, if he were a Galilean? and when he knew,
that he belonged to Herod's Juridictions, he sent him to Herod, who was at
Jerusalem in those days, Being in Herod's Jurisdiction, he is sent by Pilate to
him.
and when he saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad, but being deceived in his hopes
of seeing a Miracle, and not vouchsafed any answer either to him or the chief
Priests and Scribes, vehemently accusing him; after Herod had set Jesus at
naught and mocked him, Sends him back to Pilate arrayed in a gorgeous Robe;
Her^d sends. him back.
and both the Governors were made Friends that same day; and Pilate when he had
called the chief Priests, and the Rulers, and the People, said unto them,
Neither I nor Herod find any fault in him, Pilate would have released him.
nor any thing worthy of Death, I will therefore Chastize him and release him,
for the Governor was of necessity every Feast (as the custom was) to deliver to
the People one Prisoner whom they would, and the Multitude crying out aloud,
began to desire that he would do unto them as he had ever done; Pilate
therefore calling them, said unto them, Ye have a custom, that I should release
unto you one at the Passover; will ye therefore that I release unto you the
King of the Jews? The Jews still prosecute their envy against him.
Which will ye, either this man or Barrabas? For he knew that the chief Priests
had delivered him for envy, but they stirred up the People that he should
rather deliver Barrabas unto them: Now he was a notable Thief, who lay bound
with them that made Insurrection, and for Insurrection and Murder in the City
was Cast into Prison, and when Pilate was sat down in the Judgment Seat, his
Wife sent unto him, saying, Have nothing to do with the just man; Pilate fits
again. His Wife Warns him.
for I have suffered many things in my Dream by reason of him this day; Pilate
therefore spoke unto them again, being willing to release Jesus; which of the
twain will you that I release unto you? but they all cried out, saying, not
him, but Barrabas; Pilate, therefore answering, said unto them, what will you
that I shall do unto him that ye call King of the Jews, and they all cried out
again, Crucify him; Pilate said, but what evil has he done, I find no Cause
of death in him? I will therefore Cha^tize him and let him go, but they cried
more earnestly, Crucify him, and were very instant with loud Voices, desiring
the same; The Jews Cruelty.
then Pilate took Jesus and Scourged him, and the Soldiers plated a Crown of
Thorns, and put it on his Head, and clothed him with Purple, saying, Hail
King of the Jews; and beat him with staves, Pilate therefore went forth again,
and said unto them; behold, I bring him forth unto you, that you may know I
find no fault in him; then Jesus came forth, wearing the Crown of Thorns, and
the Robe, and Pilate said unto them, behold the man. When the Chief Priests and
Officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, Crucify him; Pilate
said, take ye him and Crucify him, for I find no fault in him; the Jews said
he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God; when Pilate therefore
heard that saying, he was the more afraid, Pilate went again into the Judgment
Hall.
and went again into the Judgment Hall, and said to Jesus, Whence art thou, but
Jesus gave him no answer; then said Pilate speak thou not unto me, know
thou not that I have Power to Crucify thee? Jesus answered, thou could have
no power unless it were given thee from above, and from thence forth Pilate
sought to release him, but the Jews cried out, then thou art not Caesar's
Friend; when Pilate heard this, he brought forth Jesus, and sat in the
Judgment Seat, in the Place, called the Pavement, and it was the Preparation of
the Passover, and about the sixth hour; then said he unto the Jews, The chief
Priests wickedness.
behold your King, but they cried out, Away with him, Away with him, Crucify
him, Pilate said unto them, shall I Crucify your King? Then answered the Chief
Priests, we have no King but Caesar; Pilate washes his hands, and why.
when Pilate therefore saw that he prevailed nothing, but that rather a Tumult
was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the Multitude, saying, I
am innocent of the Blood of this just Person, see you to it, and all the People
answered and said, his Blood be upon us and our Children; then willing to
content the Multitude, he released unto them Barrabas; and when he had scourged
Jesus, he delivered him ^ver to their will, that he might be Crucified.

And the Soldiers of the Governor, when they had led Jesus into the Hall,
called Praetoriam, they called together the whole Band, and when they had
stripped him, they put upon him a scarlet Robe, and plated a Crown of thorns,
and put it on his head, The Jews mocked Christ.
and a Reed in his right Hand, and bowing the Knee, mocked him, saying, hail
King of the Jews; and when they had spit on him, they took that Reed, and smote
him on the Head; and when they had mocked him they took off the Purple from
him, and put his own Clothes on him, and led him out to Crucify him.

Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself, and brought the thirty Pieces of Silver to the Chief Priests, Judas
his wicked end.
confesting his Sin unto them, and casting the Silver Pieces into the Temple,
went and hanged himself; and they bought with them the Potters-field, that the
Prophecy might be fulfilled.

And Jesus came forth carrying his Cross, but as they were leading him, they
found one Simon of Cyreen, who came out of the Country, whom they took and
compelled to carry the Cross after Jesus; and there were two Thieves that were
led with him, that they might be Crucified, and there followed a great
Multitude of People, and of Women that Lamented him, to whom he turned and
foretold the Lamentable destruction of Jerusalem; and when they were come into
the Place called Calvary, but in the Hebrew Golgotha, they gave unto him wine
mingled with Mirrhe, and Vinegar mingled with Gall, and when he had tasted it,
he would not drink it, and they Cr^cified him there, (and it was the third
hour) and the two Thieves with him, one on the right hand, and the other on the
left; and Jesus said, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; and
Pilate wrote a Superscription in Hebrew Greek, and Latin, and put it on the
Cross, which at the request of the high Priest, Pilate would not alter; and
after they Crucified him, they parted his Garments into four parts to every
Soldier that was employed in the Execution a part, casting lots, and likewise
upon his Seamless Coat, whose it should be, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, and they sitting down, watched him there; and the People stood
beholding him, but they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and
saying, Oh, thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days,
save thy self, if thou be the Son of God come down from the Cross; likewise
also the chief Priest and Rulers, The chief Priests mock Christ.
with the People mocking and scoffing, with the Scribes and Elders, said among
themselves, he saved others, himself he cannot save; if he be the King of
Israel, if that Christ, the chosen of God, let him come down from the Cross,
and we will believe him; he trusted in God, let him deliver him; for he said,
The Soldiers also mock him.
I am the Son of God: The Soldiers also mocked him, and coming unto him
offered him Vinegar, saying, if thou be the King of the Jews save thy self; one
of the Thieves also which were crucified with him, continued railing against
him, the other being converted, rebuked him that rayled, and said unto Jesus,
Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; to whom Christ answered, To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise; and there stood by his Cross the Mother
of Jesus, and his Mothers Sister Mary, the Wife of Cleoph^^, and Mary
Magdalene; when therefore Jesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved,
standing; he said unto his Mother, behold thy Son, and to the Disciple, behold
thy Mother: And when the sixth hour was come there was darkness over all the
Land or Country until the nineth hour, and about the ninth hour Jesus cried
with aloud Voice Eli, Eli, or Eloi, Eloi lamma Sabacthani; and some that stood
by said, that he called Elias; after this when Jesus knew that all things were
accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, I thirst, now there
was set there a Vessel full of Vinegar, and they filled a Spung with Vinegar,
and put it upon Isop or a Reed, and put it to his Mouth, saying, also with
rest, let it be, let us see if Elias will come to save him, and take him down:
But Jesus when he had received the Vinegar, said, It is finished; and again he
cried with a loud voice, Father into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, The
Ce^turions Tes^imony conerning Christ.
and bowing his head he gave up the Ghost. And when the Centurion saw that he
so cried out, and gave up the Ghost, he Glorified God, saying, truly this is a
just man, truly this is the Son of God.

And behold the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the Graves were
opened, and many Bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and came out of the
Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto
many, and the Centurion, and they that stood over against, and those that
watched Jesus, when they saw the Earth quake, and the things that were done,
feared greatly, saying, Truly, this was the Son of God; and all the people that
came together to that sight, beholding the things that were done, smote their
Breasts and returned, and his Aquaintance, and the Women which follwed him from
Galilee stood afar off, beholding these things, among whom were Mary Magdalene,
and Mary the Mother of James the less, and Mother of Joses and Salome, who also
when he was in Galilee followed him, and Ministered unto him, there were also
many other Women that came up to Jerusalem with him.

The Jews therefore, that the Bodies should not remain on the Cross on the
Sabbath, because it was the preparation (for that Sabbath was an High day)
besought Pilate, that their Legs might be broken, and that they might be taken
away; the Soldiers therefore came and brake the Legs of the two Thieves, but
not of Jesus, because he was already dead, but one of the Soldiers with a
Spear pierced his side, and there came out strait-way Blood and Water; and
these things were suffered to be done that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

And when Evening was now come, because it was the Preparation, that is, the
day before the Sabb^th, comes Joseph of Arimathea, a Rich man, and an
honorable Councellor, who also looked for the Kingdom of God, a good man, and
a just, and had not consented to the Council and deed of them, being a
Disciple, but secretly, for fear of the Jews, Joseph beggeth the Body of Jesus
of Pilate.
came boldly unto Pilate, and begged the Body of Jesus, Pilate marvelled if he
were already dead, and called a Centurion, asked him, and when he knew it, he
gave the Body to Joseph; there comes also Nichodemus (which at the first came
to Jesus by night) and brought a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes, about an hundred
pound weight; they took therefore the Body of Jesus, ad wound it in a Linen
Cloth, with the Spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury; and Joseph, when
he had wrapped him in a clean Linen Cloth, laid it in his own Sepulcher, which
he had hewn out of a Rock, wherein never man was laid, Joseph buries Jesus his
Body.
and which was in a Garden in a place where Jesus was Crucified? and Joseph
roled a great Stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and Mary Magdelene and Mary
the Mother of Joses, which came with him from Galilee, beheld where they had
laid him, and sat over against the Sepulcher, and they returned, and prepared
Spices and Ointments, and rested the Sabbath day, The Sepulcher is watched by
Pilate Command.
according to the commandments, the next day the Pharisees besought Pilate that
he would command the Sepulcher to be made sure until the third day, showing him
a reason, which when he had yielded unto, they went and made the Sepulcher
sure, sealing the Stone and setting a Watch.

In the end of the Sabbath, or when the Sabbath was now past, when it dawned
toward the first day of the week, in the Morning very early, whiles it w^^ yet
dark came Mary Magdelene, and Mary the Mother of James and Salome, bringing
Spices, which they had bought, that they might see the Sepulcher, and anoint
Jesus; and they said among themselves, who shall role away the Stone from the
door for us; and when the Sun was risen, coming to the Sepulcher, they saw the
stone was roled away; for behold there was a great Earth quake, for the Angel
of the Lord came down from Heaven, and roled away the Stone, and sat upon it,
and they went in and found not the Body of the Lord Jesus, and it came to pass
as they were much perplexed thereat, that behold two men came to them in
shining Raiment, their Countinances was as Lightening, and their Garments white
as Snow, ( Matthew and Mark speak but of one Angel) and the Keepers for fear
did shake, and became as dead men, and when the Woman were afraid, and bowed
their faces to the Earth, the Angel said unto them, fear not ye, I know ye seek
Jesus which was Crucified; why seek ye the living among the dead? he is not
here, he is risen, as he said; come and see the place where the Lord was laid,
and remember what he said while he was yet in Galilee with you, saying, the Son
of man, must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be Crucified, and
the third day rise again, but go ye quickly, and tell his Disciples, and Peter,
that he is risen again from the dead, and behold he goes before you into
Galilee, there shall ye see him; behold I have told you; then the Woman
remembered the Words of Jesus, and they departed quickly out of the Sepulcher
with fear, and wonder, and great joy, and ran that they might tell his
Disciples, but they said nothing to any man (as they went) for they were
afraid, and when the Women told these things to the Eleven, and to all the
rest, their words seemed unto them as idle Tales, but Mary Magdelene telling
Peter, and the other Disciple whom Jesus loved, they have taken away the Lord,
and we know not where they have laid him; Peter therefore, and that other
Disciple went out and came to the Sepulcher, but that other Disciple out-ran
Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher, and when he stooped down he saw the
Linen Clothes lying, but went not in; then came Peter following him, and went
into the Sepulcher, and sees the Linen Clothes lie, and the Napkin that was
about his head, not lying with the Linen Clothes, but wrapped together in a
place by it self; then went in that other Disciple, and saw, and believed; and
Peter went unto his own home wondering at what was done, for as yet they knew
not the Scriptures that he must rise again from the dead, and the Disciples
went unto their own home: But Mary Magdelene stood without at the Sepulcher
weeping, and whilst she yet wept, she stooped down into the Sepulcher, and
sees two Angels in white, sitting the one at the head, and the other at the
feet, where the body of Jesus had lain, who said unto her, Woman why weepest
thou? she said unto them, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him; Jesus first appeared to Mary Magdalene
and when she had said thus, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus standing,
but knew not that it was him; and Jesus said unto her, Why weepest thou? Whom
seek thou? she supposing him to be the Gardner, answered and said, If thou
have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him
away, Jesus says unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father, but go and tell my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, unto my God and your God; and she came and told his Disciples,
and those that had been with him, She goes and tells the Disciples of it. The
Disciples believed her not
as they were weeping and mourning, that she had seen the Lord, and that he had
said these things unto her; but they, when they heard that he was alive, and
had been seen of her, believed not: And as the Women went from the Sepulcher,
that they might tell his Disciples, behold Jesus meets them, and spoke unto
them, saying, Be not afraid, go ye and tell my Brethren, that I go into
Galilee, there shall they see me.

Now when they were going, behold some of the Watch came into the City, and
showed unto the Highpriests all things that were done; and when they were
assembled with the Elders, they took Counsel that they should give large Money
to the Soldiers, that they should say, that his Disciples came by night, and
stole him away whilst they slept, and if this comes to the Governors Ears, we
(say they) will persuade him, and secure you; so they took their Money, and did
as they were taught; and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews to
this day.

And behold two of them went into the Country that same day to a Village sixty
Furlongs from Jerusalem, called Emmaus, Christ appeared to two of the Disciples
as they were going to Emmaus.
and as they journyed Jesus went along with them, and they telling what things
were done in those days concerning Jesus of Nazareth, how he was Crucified,
and that he rose again; Jesus shows them out of the Sciptures, that it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to enter into his Glory. And in the Village when he had
taken Bread, and given thanks and brake it, and given it unto them, he was
known unto them, their Eyes being opened; although he appeared in another Form,
but he vanished out of their sight; and they rose up that same hour, and
returned to Jerusalem to the Eleven, and those that were with them, who told
them, The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared unto Simon; then they told
them what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking
of Bread; but neither believed they them. But whilst they yet spoke, whilst
it was Evening, in the first day of the week, the Door being shut, where the
Disciples were gathered together, for fear of the Jews, He appears again to his
Disciples.
comes Jesus himself, and stood in the midest of them, and says unto them,
Peace be unto you; but they were terrified, and affrighted, supposing they had
seen a Spirit; but he upbreaded them with their unbelief and heardness of
heart, He reproves their unbelief.
because they believed not them that had seen him since he was risen; and he
said unto them, Why are ye troubled? See my Hands and my Feet, a Spirit has
not Flesh and Bones, and he showed them his Hands, and his Feet, and his Side;
and when they believed not for joy and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye
here any meat? and he eat a piece of boiled Fish, and an Honeycomb; and the
Disciples rejoiced that they had seen the Lord; and he said unto them, These
are the words that I spoke unto you, that all things must be fullfilled that
was written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms of me;
then opened he their understandings, He opens their understandings.
that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is
written, and thus it behooveth Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
Name among all Nations, and ye are witnesses of these things, and behold I send
the Promise of my Father among you, He send^ them forth.
but tarry ye at Jerusalem till ye be endued with Power from on High. He says
unto them again, Peace be unto you, as my Father sent me, so send I you; go ye
into the World and preach the Gospel to every Creature; he that believes, and
is Baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, and
these signs shall follow them that believe; in my Name they shall cast out
Devils, and they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and
if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover: And when he had said these things,
he breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive the holy Ghost, whose Sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose Sins ye retain they are retained,
(and thus Jesus appeared five times in the very first day of his Resurrection)
but Thomas, who is called Dydimus one of the twelve was not with them when
Jesus came, and the rest of the Disciples telling him, we have seen the Lord,
he very confidently professed he would not believe it, about eight days after,
Thomas being then together with the rest, Jesus comes; the doors being shut,
and stands in the midest, and says unto them, Peace be unto you, and
abundantly satisfies Thomas his unbelief.

Then the Eleven Disciples went into Galilee unto the Mountain that he had
appointed them; and when they saw him they worshipped him, but some doubted;
and when Jesus came unto them, he said; All Power is given unto me, both in
Heaven and in Earth, go therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
and I am with you to the end of the World; After that, Jesus was seen of above
five hundred Brethren at once, after that by James, 1 Cor. 15.6, 7.

Afterward Jesus showed himself to his Disciples again at the Sea at Tiberias,
or at the least to seven of them, as they were Fishing, after they had fished
all night, and caught nothing, in the morning J^^^^ unknown to them, stands
upon the Shore, and bids them cast their Net on the right side of the Ship,
where they took a great Number of Fish.

Last of all he appeared to his Disciples in Jerusalem, and led them out as far
as Bethany, and he lift up his Hands, and blessed them, and it came to pass, as
he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven.

Hitherto reaches the History of the four Evangelists declaring the Sufferings
of Christ; and now I shall give the Reader a short account what Josephus the
Jewish Historian in his eighteenth Book of Antiquity writes of John the
Baptist and Christ; concerning the Baptist Cap. 7. he says thus, Herod the
Tetrarch killed John, Sur-named the Baptist, Josephus his Testimony Concerning
John.
a most excellent man, who stirred up the Jews to the study of Virtues,
especially of Piety and Justice, and also to the washing of Baptism, which he
said then would be acceptable to God, if not abstaining from some one or two
Sins but having their minds first purged through righteousness, they also added
cleanness of body: And whereas there was great resort unto him, the Common
people being greedy of such Doctrine, Herod fearing least the great Authority
of the man should raise some Rebellion, because they seemed as though they
would decline nothing to which he advised them, thought it safer to take him
out of the way, before there was any alteration in the State, then to repent
too late, when the State was once imbroyled; wherefore he commanded him to be
sent Prisoner to Macharas, and then to be put to death.

Concerning Christ he says thus, Chap. 45. In the same time there was a wise
man (named Jesus) if we may call him a man; Josephus his Testimony concerning
Christ.
he was a worker of miracles, and a Teacher of them that willingly receive the
Truth, he had many both Jews and Gentiles that were his Followers, and was
believed to be the Christ; and when Pilate had crucified him, through the envy
of our Rulers, nevertheless those that loved him continued constant in their
affections, for he appeared to them alive the third day; the Prophets in their
Prophesies foretelling both these, and many other wonderful things concerning
him, and the Christians (from him so called) continue to this very day.

After the Apostles had seen Christ, and had worshipped him, after his
Resurrection, they returned to Jerusalem with great joy, from the mount of
Olives, which is from thence a Sabbath days journey, and in Jerusalem they
abode in an uper Room, The holy Ghost fell upon the Apostles.
and continued with one accord in Prayer, with the Women, and Mary his Mother,
and his Brethren; and they were filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak
with Tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance; and many received the Truth,
and continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking
bread from House to House, did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of
Heart, praising God, and having favor with all the people, Them that belived
were of one heart.
and the Lord daily added to the Church such as should be saved, and the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and one Soul, and there was
none among them that lacked; for as many as had Possessions of Lands or Houses
sold them, and brought the prices, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, to
be distributed to the use of the Poor, in which business Barnabas, that is, the
Son of Consolation, showed the first Example.

By the hands of the Apostles were many Miracles done among the People, and
many believed, and were added to the Lord.

But the high Priests and Sadduces that were with him, moved with Envy cast the
Apostles into Prison, from whence the night following being freed by an Angel,
were commanded to Teach the people boldly, and without fear, from whence being
brought to the Council by the advice of Gamaliel a Pharisee, a Doctor of Law,
in much esteem among the People, were delivered from death (after they had been
scourged) and let go; and they went from the Council rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Jesus, and they taught daily in the
Temple, and the Word of the Lord increased, and the number of the Disciples
multiplied.

Stephen did many wonders and Miracles among the People, and stoutly defended
the Cause of Christ against the Jews of the Synagogue of the Libertines,
Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and of Asia, disputing
with them; but when they could not resist the wisdom and spirit by which he
spoke, they turn to false accusing him, and caught him, and brought him before
the Council, and set up false Witnesses, who should avouch, that they heard him
speak Blasphemous words against the Temple and the Law.

Stephen before Annas the High Priest and Council shows, that the true worship
of God was observed by Abraham and his Posterity, before the Temple was built
by Solomon; Stephens Testimony of Christ.
yea, before Moses was born, and that Moses gives Testimony of Christ, and that
the outward Ceremonies that were given to their Fathers were to endure but for
a time: Then he sharply reprehends the Jews, because they always resisted the
holy Ghost, and had wickedly put Christ to death, whom the Prophets had
foretold should come into the World; now concerning the death of Stephen, see
it at large in the Testimony of the Martyrs.

Persecution arose.
After the death of Stephen there arose a great Persecution against the whole
Church that was at Jerusalem, in which Saul exceedingly raging, made havoc of
the Church, for having received Authority from the chief Priests, he not only,
when the Saints were put to death, gave his voice against them, but also he
himself, entering into every House, and taking from thence both men and Women,
bound them, and put them in Prison, and some were compelled by denying Christ
to Blaspheme.

This Persecution dispersed the Church into diverse Countries, but with great
advantage to the Church; It proves to the advantage of the Church.
for some that were dispersed into the Regions of Judea and Samaria, preached
the Gospel wheresoever they came; others went to Damascus, amongst whom was
Ananias, a devout man according to the Law, and one who had a good report among
all the Jews who dwelt there; others traveled as far as Phenice, Cypris and
Antioch, Preaching the Word of God to those that were dispersed among the
Gentiles; amongst them that went to Samaria was Philip, who Preached Christ
there; when the Apostles at Jerusalem had heard that Samaria had received the
Word of the Lord, they sent unto them Peter and John, upon whose praying for
them, and laying their hands on them, they received the holy Ghost, which Simon
Magus (who had a long time, Simon Magus his wickedness.
bewitched the People of Samaria with his Sorceries, that giving heed to him,
from the least to the greatest, they said, he was the great Power of God)
seeing the great signs and wonders that were done by the Apostles offered them
Money, that he also might receive the Gift of conferring the holy Ghost, Peter
reprove^ him.
whose mad impiety Peter sharply rebuking, warns him to repent of this his
Wickedness, and to ask pardon of God; who desires the Apostles that they would
pray for him to the Lord: The Apostles having cleared themselves in these
parts, they returned to Jerusalem Preaching the Gospel in the Villages of
Samaria as they went.

Saul yet brea^hing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, obtains of the High Priest Annas and the Council, Saul breathes out
threatenings against the Christians.
Letters to the Synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any that were
Christians, he should bring them bound to Jerusalem, that they might be
punished, and as he came nigh to Damascus at midnight a Light from Heaven
above the brightness of the Sun, shined round about him, and them that journyed
with him, and when they were fallen to the Earth, he heard a voice speaking to
him in the Hebrew Tongue, Saul, Saul, Why Persecutest thou me, it is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks? and when he had said, Who art thou Lord? it
was answered him, I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou Persecutest; The Lord
appears to him.
but rise, and stand upon thy feet, I have appeared unto thee for this purpose,
to make thee a Minister and a Witness both of those things that thou have seen,
and those things in which I will appear unto thee, delivering thee from the
People, and from the Gentiles unto whom now I send thee, that thou may open
their Eyes and turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan
unto God, that they may receive remission of sins, and Inheritance among them
that are Sanctified by Faith that is in me; and when as Saul, full of fear and
trembling, asked further, Lord, what will thou have me to do? The Lord said
unto him, Rise, go unto Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things
that thou must do; The Lord sends him to Damascus.
but the men that journyed with Saul were so amazed that they were speechless,
seeing indeed a Light, and hearing the sound of words, but neither seeing
Christ which spoke, nor understanding any thing which he spoke; Saul arose from
the Earth, and being blinded with the Glory of the Light, being led by the
hand, His sight was taken away.
he comes to Damascus, and he was three days without sight, and did neither
eat or drink: Now there was a certain Disciple, named Ananias, to whom the Lord
spoke in a Vision, Arise and go into the Street that is called Straight, and
inquire in the House of Judas, for Saul of Tarsus, Ananias is sent by a Vision
to him.
for behold he prays; (and Saul then saw in a Vision Ananias entering, and
laying his hand on him that he might receive his sight) but Ananias answered,
Year since Christ.
Lord I have heard by many how much evil he has done unto thy Saints at
Jerusalem; yea, in this place he has Authority from the chief Priests to bind
all that call upon thy Name; and the Lord said unto him, Go thy way, for he is
a chosen Vessel unto me, to carry my Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and
the Children of Israel; for I will show unto him how great things he must
suffer for my Name.

He lays his hand on him.
And Ananias went and entered into the House, and laying his hands on him,
said, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who appeared unto thee in the Way as thou
came, has sent me that thou may receive thy sight, and be filled with the
holy Ghost; His sight is restored.
and strait-way their fell from his Eyes as it were scales, and he received his
sight forthwith. And Ananias said, The God of our Fathers has chosen thee
that thou should know his Will, and see that Just One, and should hear
the Voice from his Mouth, for thou shall be a Witness before all men, of those
things that thou have heard and seen; and now, why tarriest thou? Arise and be
Baptized, and Washed from thy Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord; and Saul
arose and was Baptized; and when he had received meat he was strengthened.

But what was revealed to Saul at Damascus that he should do, Luke shows not in
the Acts, but out of those things which in the Epistle to the Galatians, he
says happened unto him immediately after his Conversion, it appears that among
other things, it was commanded him, that he should not confer with flesh and
blood, nor return to Jerusalem to them that were Apostles before him, but that
he should go for some time into Arabia, or places near Damascus, where he
should Receive the Knowledge of the Gospel, not being taught of men, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ.

Saul then returns to Damascus, and tarries with the Disciples there a few
days, and strait-way in the Synagogue he Preaches that Christ is the Son of
God, and they were all amazed who heard these things, and said, Is not this he
that destroyed at Jerusalem those that called on this Name, and came hither for
that intent that he might bring them bound unto the chief Priest; and Saul
increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews that dwelt at Damascus,
teaching that Jesus is the Christ; for to the Jews that dwelt at Damascus was
the Gospel first preached by him.

Tiberius being certified by Pilate out of Palestine concerning the Affairs of
Christ, he proposes to the Senate that Christ might be reckoned among the
Gods, which the Senate opposing, he remaining in his Opinion, threatens that it
should be dangerous for any to accuse a Christian, as Tertullian relates, [in
Apologetic. ( Chap. 5, and 21.) and others that follow him, as Eusebius in
Chronic. and Hestor. Eccles. lib. 2.2.] and our Gildas in an Epistle of the
destruction of Britain, which being granted; we may lawfully say, that the
first Persecution, after the Murder of Stephen, that arose in Judea, ceased
partly by the Conversion of Saul, who greatly promoted it, and partty through
the fear of Tiberius.

When Saul had preached the Gospel a long time at Damascus, the Jews took
counsel to kill him, and watching the Gates of the City day and night that they
might take him and kill him, but being let down by a rope by night in a Baskit
escaped from them.

The first three years after his conversion being finished Saul returned to
Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days, and he then assaying
to join himself to the Disciples, they all were afraid of him, not believing
him to be a Disciple; but Barnabas took him, and brought him to the Apostles,
viz. Peter, and James the Brother of the Lord, he declared unto them, how he
had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had
preached boldly at Damascus in the Name of Jesus.

Saul also speaks boldly in the Name of Jesus at Jerusalem, but the Jews went
about to kill him, Saul being in the Temple praying, was in a Trance, and saw
the Lord speaking unto him, saying, Make haste, and get thee quickly out of
Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy Testimony of me; to whom he answered,
Lord, they know that I imprisoned, and beat in every Synagogue those that
believed on thee, and when the Blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was
standing by* and kept the Garments of them that killed him; and the Lord said
unto him, Go, and I will send thee to the Gentiles.

The Brethren at Jerusalem brought him to Cesarea, Tarsus, and he came into the
Countries of Syria, and Cilicia, hitherto he was unknown by face to the
Churches of Judea; but they heard only that he preaches the Faith which once
he destroyed, and they glorified God in him, and the Churches had rest through
all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear
of the Lord, and comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied.

About this time King Herod troubled the Church, Josephius Lib. 19. Cap. ult.
relates.

He slew James the Brother of John with the Sword, and seeing the death of
James Peter imprisoned.
pleased the people he cast Peter into prison in the days of Azincus,
delivering him to four Quaturnions, that is, sixteen Soldiers to gua^d him,
intending after the Passover to bring him out to the People, He is wounderfully
delivered.
but there were Prayers made daily in the Church for him, and an Angel of the
Lord delivered him miraculously in the night, and he went to the house of Mary
the Mother of John Marcus, where many were Congregated, and at Prayer, and
telling them that they might certify James the Son of Alph^as, and Brother of
our Lord, and the rest, of the manner of his deliverance, he went into another
Place,

Herod, rage against the Prison Kepers.
Herod being frustrate of his hope, in his rage commands the Innocent Keepers
to be dragged to Execution, and he going down to Caesarea stayed there; he was
prejudiced in his mind against the Syrians and Sidonians, whose Land being not
sufficient to maintain them, (Especially in that year of scarcity) they were
forced to seek for themselves sustentation from Galilee, and other places under
Herod's Jurisdiction; they came therefore Unanimously to him, by the mediation
of Blastus the Kings Chamberlain, whom they had made their Friend, desiring
Peace of him; a day being appointed, Herod in his royal attire, and sitting
before the Tribunal, made a Speech to them; the People with Acclamations
shouting out, It Is the Voice of a God, and not a Man; Herod is smote and d^ed.
but presently the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he did not give the
Glory to God, and being eaten up of Worms, he gave up the Ghost.

The very same History Josephius Examplifies, saying, he had now finished the
third year of his reign [the fourth now beginning] when he came to Caesaria,
which was formerly called Stratons- Tower, where he Solemnized some yearly
Plays for Caesar's health, to which Festivity a great multitude of Noble Men
and Youngsters came together, out of the Province; on the second day of this
Celebrity he goes all attired with his Princely Robe; richly and curiously
wrought with Silver, which by the reflection of the rising Sun yiedling an
Angelical or extraordinary lusture struck reverence into the Spectators; and
presently some wicked Parasites with acclamations from a far off, saluted him
God, desiring him to be propitious to them, for that hitherto they had only
honored him as a man, but now they saw there was something more in him than
humane: This Impious Adulation he neither refused nor repelled, he was suddenly
struck to the very heart; afterward his Belly began to torment him more and
more grievously, wherefore turning to his Friends, he said, Behold, I who by
your appellation am a God, am commanded out of this Life, my certain fate
giving the Lie to your flattery; and I, who you saluted Immortal, am forced to
death; but I must endure the pleasure of the Heavens: Having spoken these
things, his pain grew worse and worse, and presently these things being
divulged about the Country, the rumor went, that he was a dying, and in the
end his pain lasted in great extremity, and without intermition for five days
space, and he then ended his life, Joseph. Lib. 19. Chap. ult.

Saul^ name is changed to Paul.
About this time Saul is always found named by his new name Paul, Paul and
Barnabas coming to Antioch, and entering into the Synagogues, almost the whole
City came to hear the Word of God; but the Jews seeing the multitude, were
filled with envy, and contradicted what Paul spoke, with whose Blasphemies Paul
and Barnabas being grievously offended, they left the Jews and preached only to
the Gentiles who with joy embraced the Gospel, and the Word of God was divulged
over that whole Nation; they stayed an Antioch a great while, and suffered
those things which in his latter Epistle to the Corinthians he writes of, to
wit, that as at Phillippy afterward, so twice elsewhere by the Gentiles he had
been whipped with rods, and received five times four hundred stripes from the
Jews.

Certain Professors of the Name of Christ of the Sect of the Pharisees came
down from Judea to Antioch, Christians of the Gentiles ought to be Circumcised,
and keep the law of Moses, if they would be saved, disturbing the Souls of many
of the Brethren in Syria and Cili^i^ with their perverse Doctrine, against whom
Paul and Barnabas stiffly oppose themselves, Paul calls them Brethren brought in
un^wards, Philastrius de Here Is. Cap. 87. and Epiphanius Here Is. 28* say, that
Cerinthus that arch Heretic was the first Broacher of this Opinion.

Paul fourteen years after his going to Jerusalem, undertaken three years after
his Conversation, goes again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, Paul goes to Jerusalem,
being both sent from the Church at Antioch with some others, that they might
ask the Judgment of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem (whose names those
Disturbers had abused to bolster out their Opinion) concerning the Controversy
newly risen, but Paul would not compel Titus to be Circumcised least he should
seem to give place to the false Brethren for a moment.

Peter and Paul had foretold at Rome, that it should come to pass, Jews, and
that should lay their City equal with the Ground, and should Beseige them,
being pined with hunger and thirst, and then it should come to pass, that they
should eat each other, and consume one the other, and at last that they should
come into their Enemies hands, and should see their Wives most grievously
Tormented in their sight, and their Virgins to be Violated and Prostituted,
their Sons to be torn asunder, and their little Ones to be dashed in pieces;
and to be short, all things to be wasted by Fire and Sword, and themselves
forever banished out of their own Land; and all this because they exalted
themselves against the Son of God; Lactan. lib. 4. Chap. 21.

On the 29th day of the Month called June, (which last day of that Month
falls to be within the reign of Nero.) Paul was beheaded at Rome, as the
Records both of the Eastern and Western Churches confirm; whereupon Chrysostom
undoubtedly affirms, that the day of his death was more certainly known then
that of Alexander himself [in 2 Cor. Homil. 26.] Dionysius the Bishop of the
Corinthians affirms in an Epistle to the Romans, that Peter also suffered
Martyrdom at the same time with him [in Eusebius l^b. 2. Histor. Ecclesiast.
Chap. 24.] whom also Origin relates in the third Tome of his Comentaries upon
Genesis, that at Rome he was Crucified with his head downwards (as he had
desired, [Ibid. lib. 3. Hist. Chap. 1.]

Four Years before the Jewish War (that was managed by Vespasian) when the City
of Jerusalem enjoyed both Peace and Plenty one Jesus, the Son of Ananus, a
Countryman, and one of the common People, coming to the Feast of Tabernacles,
began suddenly to cry out, A Voice from the East, a Voice from the West, A
prophesy against the ^ews.
a Voice from the four Winds, a Voice against Jerusalem and the Temple, a Voice
against New Married Men and Women, a Voice against all this People; and crying
thus night and day through all the Streets of the City, some of the Nobility
disdaining any token of adversity, took the Fellow and scourged him with many
stripes; but he spoke nothing secretly for himself, nor unto them that scourged
him, but continued still in the same Cry; but the Magistrates thinking it
rather to be some Motion in him from God, brought him to the Roman Captain,
where being beaten till his Bones appeared, he made no entreaty, but with a
weeping Voice, at every stroke he said, Woe, Woe, to Jerusalem: Albinus then
asked them, who he was, and where he was born, and why he still cried after
this manner? but he answered nothing; yet he ceased not to bewail the City,
till Albinus thinking he was mad suffered him to depart; he crying thus most on
the Feast days, and that for seven years space (or rather six as it is in
Phot. Biblioth. Cod. 47.) and five Months, and yet was neither hoarse nor
weary; at last he was killed by a stone shot out of an Engine in the time of
the seige [ Jeseph. lib. 7. bell. Chap. 12.]

And according to these, and many other Prophecies concerning the destruction
that was to come upon the Jews for the hardness of their hearts, it accordingly
came to pass; for Cornelius and Suetonius relate, that there were six hundred
thousand of the Jews killed in this war between Vespasian the Emperor and the
Jews, but Josephius, a Jew, and a Commander in that war writes, that ten
hundred thousand perished by Sword and Famine; and of the rest of the Jews that
were dispersed all the World over, and put to death diverse ways, the number is
said to be ninty thousands [so Orolius lib. 7. Chap. 9.] but I find not the
number of six hundred thousand of them that were killed in Suetonius; in
Josephius [ lib. 6. belli. Chap. 17.] the number of Captives is ninty seven
thousand, but the other number, eleven hundred thousand, is only the number
that perished in the six months seige in Jerusalem; and thus did the Lord
afflict with Wars and Destruction these Apostatized and stiff-necked people the
Jews, until they were a scattered and dispersed people, as at this day they are
throughout the World.

Part II.
Shows, the corrupt Fruits of the false Church, and Seed of the Serpent in
the time of Apostasy, Darkness, Contention and Persecution, got up amongst them
called Christians.

ALthough the Sufferings of the Christians were very great after the death of
the Apostles, for some time, and it cannot be denied but there was a sincerity
in some of the Christian Churches; yet as John testified in his day, he saw the
true Church flee into the Wilderness, and the Apostle foretold, 2. Tim. 3.
that there would be a departing from the Faith, and Paul saw the Apostasy
coming in, in his day, The Apostles prophecy of the Apostasy.
and said, perilous Times should come, and that men should be lovers of
themselves, Covetous, etc, and reprobate concerning the Truth. So it was not
long after the Apostles time before these Prophesies were fulfiled; for if the
Reader peruseth this following Discourse, he will find a great Decay, and
Apostasy from that Life and Power that the Apostles were in, and the corrupt
Fruits of many of these called Christians brought forth, manifested the great
Degeneration that was come upon the Christian Church; for as Eusebius writes,
Lib. 4. Chap 6.
when Persecution at any time ceased then began Heresy to spring apace among
the Christians, until at last there was continual Discord and Contention, and
they broke out into Sects and Opinions, and persecuted one another about their
several Forms of Faith, and became so far degenerated from the Doctrine of
Christ which taught to Love Enemies, that they became haters of one another,
and manifested to the World, that they had lost the blessed Love and unity that
was amongst the Apostles and Brethren of the Christian Church in the beginning;
but before a particular Account be given of that, its necessary that the Reader
understand that the Estate of the Christians in the first Times after the
Apostles, was their most suffering Times, when as yet the Christian Religion
was accounted by the Heathen but an upstart thing, and therefore they
presecuted them greatly, as may be seen at large in the Testimony of the
Martyrs hereunto annexed.

But through the tenderness of Adrian the Emperor, Cap. 13. Adrians tenderness
to the Christians.
the Christians had some intermission from their Sufferings, and they began to
be in some request; for after Adrians death, Antonius Pius succeeding, he
continued that peace with the Christians he found begun in Adrians last days,
for which he had the name of Pius; yet by the peoples tumult, without the
Emperors consent, some were martyred: To this Emperor, Justin made an Apology
on the behalf of the Christians, diverse other Supplications were also made unto
him, on their behalf which Supplications produced an Edict from the Emperor
remitting the Persecutions against the Christians.

The Copy of the Edict is as follows.
The Emperor Caesar Marcus Aurelius Antonius Augustus Amenicus Pontifex
Maximus, The Edict of Aurelius Antonius on the behalf of the Christians.
fifteen times Trybune, thrice Consul, unto the Commonalty of Asia sends
greeting; I know the Gods are careful to disclose hurtful persons, for they
punish such as will not worship them more grievously then you do them you bring
in trouble concerning that Opinion which they conceive of you, to be wicked and
ungodly men, it is their desire in Gods quarrel to dye rather then to live, so
that they became Conquerors yiedling their lives unto the death, rather then to
obey your Edicts; it shall seem very necessary to admonish you of the
Earthquakes which have and do happen among us, that being therewith moved you
may compare our Estate with theirs; They have, more confidence toward God then
you have, you during the time of your ignorance despise other Gods, condemn the
Religion of the Immortal God, banish the Christians which worship him, and
persecute them unto death, in the behalf of these men many of the Provintials
Presidents have written heretofore unto our Father of famous memory, whom he
answered in writing again, that they were no longer to be molested, unless they
had practiced Treason against the Roman Empire, and many have given notice unto
us of the same matter, whom we answered as our Father did before, If any
therefore hereafter be found thus busied in other men's affairs, we command,
that the Accused be absolute and free, though he be found such a one, I mean
faulty, and that the Accuser be grievously punished.

In the hearing of the great Assembly of Asia, this Edict was Porclaimed at
Ephesus: The Edict proclaimed.
Thus far of Antonius Pius, who was so called for his gentile and good
disposition, of whom it is recorded, that this quiet Emperor in Life, of all
other Emperors of those times, dyed the most quietest death.

But Verus, one of his Successors, was a wicked and cruel man, under whom
multitudes of Christians suffered, The Christians suffer again.
as may be seen in my Testimony of the Martyrs, which may give the Reader a
taste of what they endured who were faithful to give a Testimony concerning
their Faith.

About this time the Christians began to have a little respite and peace again
from the Heathens Persecution of them, They have respite again.
peace they now began to jangle about the Celebration of Easter, but though
they differed in this Ceremony, they were not yet grown so bad as to be out of
Charity one with another, but left it as an indifferent thing in the Church
until the time of Victor.

Now this Victor was so violent set upon, upholding the Roman Determination of
his former Predecessor as unnecessary, that he would Excommunicate all the
Bishops and Churche^ of Asia, unless they would be of his Opinion, had not
Ireneus restrained him, who though he was of Victors Opinion concerning the
Celebration of Easter, yet seeing Policratus Bishop of Ephesus, and diverse
other Bishops of Asia, of another Opinion, allegding for their Practice
Scripture, and Example of other Fathers; therefore Ireneus still took off the
Edg of sharp Contentions, and so the Controversy remained free till the time of
the Niceen Council; Victor the first imposet.
and other Doctrines of Christian Religion were free till Victors time, which
was about two hundred years after Christ.

About this time was one Phillipius made President of Alexandria, who had a
Daughter Eugenia, of rare Beauty, The good Pattern of Eugenia.
going in man's Apparel calling her self Eugenius, and for her parts was made
head of a Society of Christians, where a lustful Matron being enamoured with
her Beauty, supposing her to be a man, labored to draw her unto Uncleanness
with her, but Eugenia not consenting, this Matron accuses Eugenia to have
labored to deflower her; whereupon the matter was brought before Phillipus the
President, who according to Allegations, being about to condemn her to death;
Eugenia seeing no other evidence would serve, discovered her self to Phillipus
to be an Innocent Woman, and his Daughter, and so was restored and received of
Phillipus, who not long after converted her Father to Christianity, who after
died also a Martyr, and after his death Eugenia returning to Rome was also
Martyred.

Maximinus Persecuted the Christians sorely, though at times he would seem to
be otherwise minded; the hand of God persued him, Eusebius. lib. 3. Cap. 14.
whilst the hand of God was on him, he pondered with himself the rash
Interprizes he had practiced against the Worshippers of God; wherefore
returning unto himself he confessed his sins to God, and gave forth command,
that with all speed they should cease from Persecuting the Christians.

And now the Christians having a little Ease and Liberty, they began to grow in
favor in the Emperors Courts, The Christians came in favor at Court.
and to be employed in the Emperors Palaces, and to be eminent in the managment
of Public Affairs, whereby they degenerated from the Natural rule of Piety,
and after that, one persued another with open contumely and hatred, Bishops
against Bishops, and People against People, raised Seditions, which raised
Persecution against them again, for the Shepherds (says the Historian)
practiced Contention and Schism among themselves; but these Persecutions ended
when Constantine came to be Emperor, who being a Christian, and a wise and
mighty Prince, struck all these Cruelties and Death under foot, and gave Peace
unto all, but as Peace and Rest came, still Divisions arose up amongst them,
and when they had Power, they began to impose their Faiths and Forms of worship
one upon another, as the Heathen did to them.

No sooner were the Heathen Persecutions laid aside, They fell at Variance.
but these that had jointly with-stood the force of Heathenish Persecution came
now to be at Variance, and at length to do the same things one to another as
the Heathen had done unto them together.

And now being at rest, and differing among themselves in some things, they
knew not how to bear one another, but being unsensible of the hand that had
wrought their deliverance, they began to impose one upon another, and to
enforce their several Faiths with Torments and the Sword, which wrote sore
Destruction and trouble among them, and shamed the Christian Religion.

Free liberty in Religion allowed by Constantine.
In the days of Constantine free Liberty was given to all men to use what
Religion they pleased, as by the particular Constitutions and Edicts may be
seen at large: So that there was Liberty now of Complaints, and Synods called
to refuit, at least take off the Opposition of the contrary; but when that the
Emperors succeeded, which leaned to this or that Party, or Confession of Faith,
or Opinion, then force of Arms, or carnal Extremities were exercised toward
these who were of the contrary dispositions, Banishment, Torments, Death. And
thus as Religion became National, and was required by Laws of men, and imposed,
such were the consequences of it; for a difference fell out between Cicilianus
Bishop of Carthage, and the Bishops with him, the one siding against the other
in Africa, which occasioned Constantine to summon a Synod of Bishops to meet
at Rome, Eus. lib. 20 Cap. 1.5.
for the hearing and reconciling thereof, at which something being attempted,
and the Judgment given, by the other Party not being acquiessed in, but after
the rising of the Synod, the difference increasing instead of being ended
amongst them, a second Synod he called at Orleans in France to the end it might
be determined: The Christians are Persecuted again
As a Scourge and Rebuke unto which Dissentions, or the Differences that then
arose among the Christians, Lucinius (who being Emperor, and together with
Constantine had wrote, enjoining the Liberty of the Christians) comes forth and
fell upon the Christians under his Dominion, who never did him evil, practicing
the same things upon them as those had done, whom for so doing he had cut off;
first he Banished them from his Court, and such as would not Sacrifice, he
spoiled of their Honor and Dignities, commanded no Charity to be given to them
that were in Prison and in Fetters, no not by their Kindred, overthro wing the
Meetings. Places of the Christians to the Ground; some of the Bishops, his
Presidents, caused to be Tormented cutting their Bodies into small pieces as
Butchers do their Meat, casting pieces into the Sea for food for Fishes; he
revoked sundry good Laws, of the Romans, brought in barbarous and cruel Laws,
Unjust and Unlawful, making away Noble and Honest Personages, whose Youthful
and Tender Wives he delivered to his Servants to be shamefully abused; for
these things Constantine made War against him, by which means the the
Persecutions against the Christians again ceased, and they had rest.

Now the Christians came to have Rest and Peace again, see what Socrates in the
Continuation of the History says, They have rest and peace again.
concerning the Differences that were among the Christians, and the
Consequences thereof.

Arius was the first he takes notice of, who hearing Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, entreating somewhat more curiously of what is called the Trinity in
Unity, among the Priests that were under him said.

If the Father begot the Son, then had the Son which was begotten a beginning
of Essence; hereby it is manifest that there was a time when the Son was not,
and the consequence to follow necessarily that he had his Essence of nothing.
This began a great deal of reasoning amongst them. Arius had his Favorers,
both of Bishops and others, of this his Blasphemous Opinion which beginning at
Alexandria spread it self throughout all Egypt, Libia, and the upper Thebais,
and at length passed through the rest of the Cities and Provinces; the speading
of this moved Alexander, who calling of a Council of many Bishops deprived
Arius, and such as favored his Opinion, of the Priestly order, and afterward
writing to the Bishops throughout the Cities against him, spread the thing
further then it was before, because those unto whom the Letters were directed,
began to burn among themselves with the sparks of Contention and Discord.

So the nicety of the Bishop on the one hand, and his sharp proceeding, and
writing on the other, gave Occasion for this little spark to burn out into a
great flame, which made sore distraction and divisions, They fall into
Divisions again.
and which is no wise could come to be quenched, but ran over all as a
loathsome Leprosy, Bishop against Bishop, People against People, and Synod
against Synods, doing the things which the Heathen had done to them, which
rended them asunder, and caused the Religion which the Christians professed to
be openly derided by the Heathens in the Public Theaters.

Constantine was sorely troubled at these things, Cap. 4. Constantine writes to
them that occationed the difference.
and by a principal person whom he entirely loved, he wrote both to Alexander
and Arius, blaming Alexander for demanding a question of the Elders touching a
certain place of Scripture; yea, rather (says his Letter) touching a certain
vain piece of a question what every ones Opinion was; And Arius for unadvisedly
blazing abroad, and setting a broach, that which thou should (says the
Emperor) not at the first have conceived, He seeks an accommodation. They
refused to hear him.
and having conceived it, thou should have passed it over with Silence: He
wrote smartly to them both, and very reasonably concerning an Accommodation, and
that union might be again; exhorting them to Pardon each other, but neither of
them would hear; he summoned a Council at Nice about that, and about the time
of Celebrating the feast of Easter, about which there was no small controversy
at this time also, at which Council three hundred and eighteen Bishops met, and
the Emperor was present, endeavoring to persuade them to unity, where making a
Creed, they generally subscribed it, except five Bishops, who admitted not of
the Clause of one Substance with the Father, who thus affirmed, that to be of
one Substance, which had its original of something, either by division, or
derivation, or production; by production, as a bud out of a root; by
derivation, as Children of the Parents; by division, as two or three pieces out
of one piece of Gold. The Son of God by relation was after none of these
manners, and therefore they said, they would not agree to the form of Faith
confirmed in the Council of Nice; hereupon Arius was not only accursed, but all
his Adherents, and forbad Alexandria, and by the Emperors Edict some of the
dissenting Bishops were exiled. Arius accused. The Emperor banisheth some of
the dissenting Bishops. The Censure of the Council of Nice owned by ^he Emperor.


The Decree of this Synod by a solemn Epistle is sent unto the Churches
throughout Egpypt, Libia, etc. and Constantine writes to the Church at
Alexandria, and other places, concerning the matter, wherein he calls the
Censure of this Assembly, or the Decree of this Synod, the Sentence of God
himself; neither doubted he, that so great a company of Bishops was so united
and linked together in one Opinion and mind, but by the motion and instinct of
the holy Ghost; notwithstanding Sabinus (who was termed the Ringleader of the
Macedonian Heresy) impugned those things, tearming those that met at Nice
unlearned, and doltish Idiots.

So things grow on to a height, for the Emperor favoring the strongest side
made Decrees and Laws, so that there came to be an injunction; and the Emperor
commanded, Injunctions for burning Arius his Books.
that if any book or work of Arius could be found, it should be burnt to Ashes,
and that it should be death to keep them, and that as soon as he was taken his
head should be stricken off from his Shoulders; and thus the contest grew high,
and woeful wreck came upon Christian Assemblies, although the Emperor in his
Letters to Arius and Alexander, he reasoned contrary to his Actions, for
writing concerning the unity, he said to them; wherefore let every of you, The
Emperors Judgment concerning the difference.
pardoning each other, like of that which your fellow Minister, not without
cause exhorts you unto (as foresaid) and what is that? That you neither
object at all, neither answer any Objection that concerns such matters; for
such Questions as no Law or Ecclesiastical Canon necessarily defines, but the
fruitless contention of Idle brains sets abroad, though the exercise
thereof avail for the sharping of the wit, yet ought we to retain them in the
inward Closet of our mind, and not rashly to broach them in the public
Assembly of the vulgar people; neither unadvisedly to grant the common sort the
hearing thereof; for how many be there that can worthily explicate and
sufficiently ponder the weight of so grave, so intricate, so obscure a matter,
but if there be any such that persuades himself easily to compass and attain
unto it; how many parts are there, I beseech you, of the multitude whom he can
sufficiently instruct therein, and who is there who in sifting out so curious a
Question that can well pass the peril of plunging into Error; wherefore in such
Cases, we must refrain from verbal Disputations, lest that either we by reason
of the imbecility of our wit cannot explicate our mind, either our Auditors
when we teach by reason of their dull capacity cannot comprehend the curous
drift of our Doctrine, whereby the people of necessity either incurreth the
danger, either of blasphemy, or the poisoning infection of discord, wherefore
both the rash Objection, and the unadvised answer being the cause of the
Heretical Sect of the Arians, Eunomians, and as many as favor the like folly,
ought each one of each other crave pardon.

The difference between the Heathen and the Christians was, whether Christ, was
the Son of God? The difference betwixt the Christians was, whether the Son of
God was Eternal? and in at this Door entered the Enemy to make shipwreck of the
Flock. The Emperor sends for Arius.


Arius being sent for to Constantinople, and coming there, he framed a
Recantation at the Emperors demand, He frams a Recantation.
whereupon the Emperor sends him to Alexandria again; Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria (for Alexander was dead) refuses to receive him, Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia writes to Athanasius, Being sent to Alexandria, Athanasius refuses
to receive him, and why.
and also procures the Emperors Letters to command Athanasius to admit Arius;
Athanasius wrote back again to the Emperor, That it was not lawful for such as
had made Shiprack of their Faith, and had been held accursed, after this their
turn and Conversion to receive their former Dignities; this vexed the Emperor,
so that he was much displeased with Athanasius, The Emperor is troubled at it.
and wrote sharply to him, but he refused notwithstanding to receive him;
whereupon six Bishops take their oppertunity to left him out of his Bishopric;
Athanasius is exiled.
afterward by the consent of all the Bishops assembled at Jerusalem to
consecrate the Temple, built by the Emperor, Athanasius is Exiled.

The thirtieth Year of Constantine was expired while these thing were doing,
yet he saw no peace among the Christians; Arius with his Company returning to
Alexandria, they set the whole City in an uproar, for they were not only
disturbed with the return of Arius, but the Banishment of Athanasius: The
Emperor sends for Arius again.
The Emperor understanding the perverse mind and corrupt purpose of Arius,
sends for him again to Constantinople, to render an account of the Tumult and
Sedition he had raised afresh; the City being divided into two parts, one for
the Niceen Creed, the other for Arius. Arius being come to Constantinople, the
Emperor demands of him to sign the Niceen Creed, His juggle with the Emperor.
he subscribes it cheerfully, he puts him to his Oath, he swares it also; his
juggle (is said to be this) he wrote his own Opinion in a piece of Paper, the
same he carries under his Arm in his Bosom, coming to the Book he takes his
Oath that he verily believed as he had written; the Emperor believing he had
dealt plainly, commanded the Bishop of Constantinople to receive him to
communion, this was on Saturday (says the History) the day after he looked to
be received by the Church, but see what happened upon his lewd and bold
enterprise (says the History) being departed out of the Emperors Hall passing
through the City in great pomp coming nigh Constantine's Market, he was
suddenly taken with a great lask and faintness, and inquiring for a Draught or
Jakes, being got thither, he avoided his Guts and Excrements, and immediately
dies like a Dog (says the History) and the Jakes was then to be seen (when
the History was wrote) and the Passengers were wont as they went by to point
their Fingers thereat in rememberance of the miserable end of Arius: Anno.
Shortly after the Emperor died; but neither with the death of Arius:
Constantine was there an end of the troublesome discord that was among the
Christians, for a Council being called by both the Emperors at Sardis, Socrat
Lib. 2. Cap. 16.
the Bishops of the East would not come to the Bishops of the west, unless they
would bare Paulus and Athanasius of their company, which the Bishops of the
west not brooking the Eastern Bishops, departed, and at Phillipy a City in
Thracia there assembled a private Council, and thence-forth openly began to
curse the Creed, condemning the Clause of one Substance, and in writing to s^w
abroad there Opinion, that the Son of God was not of one Substance with the
Father.

The Western Bishops that continued at Sardis, first condemned them which fled
from the hearing of their Cause, next, deposed from their Dignities the
Accusers of Athanasius, afterward ratified the Creed of the Niceen Council,
and abrogated the Heretical Opinion, which said, that the Son was of a
different Substance from the Father; lastly, they set forth more plainly the
Clause of one Subance, and wrote Letters thereof, and sent them throughout the
whole World.

And thus things often changed and altered, men having lost that which should
give a weighty understanding in these matters, and going about to make Faiths,
and force and compel one another thereto, and also to determine and give
Judgment in things beyond their reach, being in their fallen Wisdom, they
turned the World upside down in reference to confirmity to their Faith, and
brake asunder the Bond of Unity and Concord which once flourished among the
true Christians.

But these cruel Divisions, Socrat Li. 3. Cap.
because of Faith and Doctrines in Relation unto God, was not let pass without
rebukes from the Lord; for the Persians Proclaimed Wars against the Romans, and
now Constantine the Emperor dies, Constantine dies.
Julianus Succeeds him, who though he was brought up a Christian, Julianus Suc
ceeds and turn to Paganism
yet had a secret inclination unto Paganism; who set open the Idols, Temples,
and Idols Groves, and Sacrificed to Pictures, and entitled himself a High
Priest.

The Christian suffer again.
In the reign of this Julian, called the Apostate, by reason of his inclining
to Heathenism the Christians suffered very deeply and (says the History) some
were run through with Swords, some brained with Clubs; some Stoned to death;
some Strangled with Halters; some Nailed to Trees, casting in their Teeth the
Death of the Cross; one Friend fell upon another; one Brother sought another
life; Parents put their Children to death; and to be short, one cut the others
Throat. This blood and murder the Emperor Julian seemed to be troubled at,
thinking it might give a sudden start to his settlement in the Empire;
therefore he writes a cruel angry Letter to those of Alexandria, showing his
dislike of their enterprise.

Shortly after Julian puts forth a Proclamation, Cap. 11.
that such as would not renounce the Christian Faith should Warfare no longer
in the Emperoos Palace, The Christians no fighters.
but all should prepare to do Sacrifice; that no Christian should bear Office
in the Commonwealth; for their Law says he, forbids the use of the Sword
unto such as deserve death, and therefore they were not fit to be Magistrates.

As a Scourge for Julian, who undertook these Enterprises against the
Christians, Wars broke out against Julian.
Wars brake out against him, and considering that many inconveniences and evils
attended War, and great sums of Money were requisite, he set a great Fine on
the Heads of those that would not Sacrifice; so that the Christians were
assessed and he wonderfully enriched himself with wondrous heaps of Money
unjustly exacted; then did the Gentiles insult over the Christians, the
Philosophers solemnizing their detestable rights and Ceremonies, He oppresses
the Christiant by Assesments.
making slaughter of Infants, sparing neither Sex, using their intrales for
South-saying, they tasted of their tender Flesh; these detestable practices
were both at Athens and Alexandria, and elsewhere.

At Marais in Phrygia, Amachius the Governor commanded the Temple to be set
wide open, and to be cleansed, Chap. 13.
and set himself to the worshipping the Idols, which pricked not a little in
Conscience (says the History) the zealous Christians, wherefore Masidonius,
Theodulus and Tattanus brake in the night-Season into the Temple, The Zeal of
three Christians against Idols.
threw down their Idols, and stamped them to powder, at which, when the Governor
was exceeding wrath, and threatened to execute diverse of the Citizens; the men
aforesaid presented themselves, who were the Authors thereof, that the
guiltless of that act might not suffer, and chose to dye themselves for the
Truth, the Governor commanded them to clear themselves by Sacrifice, threatening
severely to punish them, They are put to cruel Torments.
if they did it not; they set naught by his threats, and made themselves ready
to suffer; The Governor when he had assayed them with all kind of Torments,
last of all, set them on the Gridiron, and caused fire to be made under, and
broiled them to death; who nobly said, If thou long, O Amachius, after broiled
meat, Their Zeal at their death.
turn up the other side of us, least in the eating we seem raw unto thee, and
the blood run about thy Teeth.

Julian dies Jovianus succeeds.
Julian being dead, Jovianus succeeds, who being proclaimed Emperor refused the
Crown, and being compelled thereto by loud Speeches, expressed himself in that
he was a Christian he would not be Emperor where Ethnicks should be his
Subjects; but when they cried with one Voice, and confessed themselves
Christians, he yielded, and was crowned Emperor; and now peace came again to
the Church, but it was no sooner come, The Christians have peace again.
but the Sedition began again among the Christians; and now the Emperor
sticking fast to the Faith of one Substance, the Bishops who had been exiled
for the same Faith he also restored; the Pagans Temple he shut up, Jovianus
puts a stop to Idollatry.
and ceased their worshipping Devils, which Julian gave way to, and which they
had their fill in, in his reign.

Now went on the old work of tearing and rending one another among the
Christians; Chap. 21. The Christians fall into Contention again.
the Macedonians make a supplication unto the Emperor, that such as avouch the
unlikeness and dissimilitude between the Son and the Father should be banished
the Church, and themselves substituted in their Rooms; the Emperor gave them no
answer at all, but with these words sent them away; I tell you truly, The
Emperor is troubled at it.
I cannot away with Contention, but such as embrace Unity and Concord I do both
honor and reverence them, which cooled the fiery Contention of others.

The Acacians also signed a Supplication to the Emperor, acknowlidging the
Faith of one Substance, the Emperor told them, he would not molest any what
Faith and Religion soever they professed; but above all others, that he would
honor and reverence such as showed themselves Peacemakers, and went about to
maintain the bond of unity and concord.

And Athanasius being dead, Anno. 375.
after he had been Bishop forty and six years, Peter was left behind to succeed
him; the Emperor Jovianus being also dead, Cha. 16.
and the Arians coming in favor, Lucius the Arian was settled in Alexandria,
whereupon great Persecution followed in Egypt, He dies, and Lucius succeeds.
Persecution began again,
wherein some were Imprisoned, some Tormented, others Exiled; Peter the Bishop
of Alexandria was Imprisoned, and not long after an Edict was proclaimed, by
virtue of which the Religious Houses in the Desert were spoiled, thrown down,
and cruelly beaten to the Ground; for the armed Soldiers setting upon those
accounted silly and unarmed Souls, who would not streach out the hand in their
own defense, were miserably slain; the manner of which Slaughter was so
lamentable (says the Record) that it cannot sufficiently be Manifest to the
World, and throughout Alexandria and Egypt there was great Persecutions to them
that maintained the Faith of one Substance; they were brought before the Bar;
they were put in Prison; they were diversely Tormented and vexed with sundry
Punishments, set at naught, Cap. 19.
Scourged, spoiled of their Raiment, fettered in Prison, crushed with Stones,
beheaded with bloody Swords, shut up in the Desert, covered with Sheep and Goat
Skins, destitute of aid and succor, greivously afflicted, whom the World was
not worthy to enjoy, nor the Earth to bear so holy a burden (says the
Historian Rufinus) who is said to be an eye witness, and pertaker with them in
the same Calamity; many wandered (says he) in many and dangerous ways, The
Extremities they were put to.
they hid themselves in Mountains, and Caves, and Dens, and hollow Rocks, all
which when Lucius had accomplished, he persuaded the Captain to banish the
Fathers and Ringleaders of them.

In those days these sufferings brought the Christians into a lowly frame and
State leading a self denying life in Deserts and other retired places; Cap. 29.
the Historian mentions one of them, They were humbled by it.
by which may be seen what Principles was amongst the rest.

There was, says he, one Moses, who led in the Desert a Solitary, or retired
kind of life, and is said, for his Zeal to Religion, and constant Faith, to be
famous among them; this Moses was taken from the Wilderness and sent to
Alexandria, with intent to be made Bishop; and being come to be made Bishop, he
refused to receive orders from Lucius; and after this sort reasons with him, I
think my self unworthy of the Priestly order; yet if it be for the profit of
the Common wealth that I be called unto the Function; truly thou Lucius shall
never lay hand upon my head, for thy right hand is imbrewed in slaughter and
bloodshed; when Lucius said again, that it became not him so contumeliously to
revile him, but rather to learn of him the precepts of Christian Religion;
Moses answered, I am not come to reason of matters of Religion; but sure I am
of this, that thy horrible practice against the Brethren prove thee to be
utterly void of the true Principles of Christian Religion; for the true
Christians strikes no man, revileth no man, fights with no man; for the
Servant of God should be no Fighter; but thy deeds in Exiling of some, throwing
others to wild Beasts, burning of some others, do cry out against thee; yet are
we surer of the things we see with our eyes, then of those we hear with our
ears; So Moses was brought to a Mountain and made Priest by such (...) were
exiled; for now the Wars ceased, and the Persecuted found some comfort.

But now the Affairs of the Church being quiet from Persecution, Anno. 383.
Socrat lib. 4. Cap. 29.
they began to jangle about their Creeds, and to difference they go again, and
falling together by the ears, when a little outward peace from the Emperor
sprang in among them, which was occasioned by forcing their Faith one upon
another, this was the division among themselves, when there was no division
made of them by the Roman Governments, and this was the trade among the
Christians, striving and contending for each others Bishoprics, worse then
some of the Emperors, Lib 5. Cap. 19.
who were willing many times to leave things free as to matters of Religion,
the manner of the Bishops at the general Councils and Synods being to cleave
hairs (as they use to say) at Arguments, and they that were most curious and
subtle therein were accounted the best Masters of Faith, and so carried the
matter, not according to the Revelation of Truth, but the subtilty of man,
through which came all this ado and trouble in the World; and that side that
the Emperor took part with, prevailed, and kept the other under; and thus
matters of Religion began to be guided by policy, and to be enforced to be
believed by the Emperors Sword, Having a little peace, they fall into heaps
again.
or else great Persecution followed; and now the Christians were divided into
diversity of Opinions viz. Arians, Novations, Macedonians and Eunomians, one
severing himself from another, Cap. 20.
and these Schisms and Rents were many (and too long here to repeat) as it
usual where the Unity of the Spirit is not known, in the bond of Peace, where
Logic, and Wit, and the Wisdom which is from beneath takes upon it the
Determination of Truth.

The other chief matters in which they differed, was, concerning the time of
Observing of Easter, their Lent, Communion, Days of Fasting, setting of their
Altar, Priests Marrying, The matters in which they differed.
and such like Trumpery. Concerning Easter, the greater part throughout the
lesser Asia, held no discord with them that held the contrary Opinion, until
Victor, Cap. 21.
Bishop of Rome, through broiling heat and chollor had excomunicated all Asia
for not believing his Opinion in the same; for which Irenius envyed bitterly by
Letter against him, and rebuked him for his furnish dealing, and furious rage.

Though many Councils were called, thinking thereby to make reconcilement in
the matter of difference, yet the breach rather grew wider, Deposing and
Banishing one another for refusing to subject to the Decrees and Canons of
Councils; for they were so strict that they would not admit of the change of
one Syllable, avoiding the Company, and refusing to communicate with them that
were otherwise minded; on the other hand, others condemned the Council, and
their Decrees, and accursed them, contending among themselves, whether Christ
had one or two Natures; insomuch, that all the Churches were divided into
sundry Factions, and the Bishops refusing to communicate one with another. They
refuse to Communicate one with another.


And thus the Reader may see how far the Christians were degenerated from the
Life that the Apostles and first Chrisrians were in, contending with and
destroying one another, about their Forms and outward Observations, as if they
had wholly forgotten the Doctrine of the Apostles, who wrote after this manner;
how turn you again to these weak and beggarly Elements, whereinto ye desire
again to be in bondage; ye observe Days, Months, Times and Years, I am afraid
of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in vain.

Yet at this time there were some sincere Persons raised up to testify against
the looseness and evils the pretended Christians were run into: Hi^tor. tripor.
Lib 10. Cha. 6.
For Chrysostom (says the History) was bold and free in rebuking sin,
especially, in his public preaching, and for that cause was he hated of the
Clergy; he withstood Gainas, who requested of the Emperor that he might obtain
a Temple at Constantinople for his People.

About this time was John Patriark of Alexandria,

About this time died Gregory, Bishop of Rome, in whose time it is recorded
that the purity of the Ecclesiastical Doctrine was almost lost; for it was
imbrued and darkened with humane Traditions, for Monkery began to take root and
flourish, and many and sundry sort of Supersitions were daily brought in, and
there grew horrible and bitter darkness; yet, says my Author, the Lord raised
up some good men, by ^imes; in this Bishops time there happened a great
Controversy about the Primacy of the Church for John Bishop of Constantionple,
was declared in the whole Synod of the Greeks Universal Patriark, and Mauritius
the Emperor commanded Gregory to obey the said Patriark of Constantinople;
Grego Epist to M^u 32, and 38.
but Gregory would not abide that any Bishop should be Universal above all the
rest: It is further said of this Gregory, that he was the basest of all his
Predecessors, and the best of all his Successors.

Boniface the third being Bishop of Rome, Palatin^ Chris. Misseas Epist. lib. 4
Epist. 32. cap. 76.
then Gregory could do good in many; he obtained of Phocas (the wicked Emperor,
who had murdered Mauritius his Master) that he and his Successors in that See
should have an Universal Headship over all the Churches in Christendom.

And it is observable, that as in the time of Constantine the Christians had
more liberty, so they grew more Ambitious, for then the Bishops began first to
think on Miters, that before time thought nothing else but to be Martyrs, and
now no less will satisfy the ambition of the Bishop of Rome, but to be Head of
all other Bishops.

The years of Christ amounting to a thousand, Religion was wholly decayed, to
what it was in former times; and from the year three hundred to that time, many
dark Institutions and Ceremonies were set up in the Church of the pretended
Christians; insomuch, that it became midnight for darkness, and the Popes
began to draw their Swords to War in defense of Peter's Keys.

And now Henry the fourth, Emperor, attends upon Pope Hidlebrand with his Wife
and Children bare foot at his Palace-Gate, and then he is made to swear
unreasonable subjection to the Pope in all things, and when all is done, the
Pope gives away his Crown to Redulph Duke of Swevia with these words; The Rock
to Peter gave the Diadem,
And Peter gives it unto Redulphs Reame.


The Emperor this while sitting quietly at home, and considering how the Pope
had wrested his power, in Elections of Popes, inevsting of Prelates, etc. how
he peeled and had poled all Nations by his Legates, and sown discord in his
Empire; hereupon he requires homage and oath of Allegiance of all his Bishops,
and forbids the Popes Legates to enter into his Empire, without his sending
for, and all appeals to Rome; finally, in his Letters he prefixed his Name
before the Popes; hereupon the Pope writes a rebuking Letter to the Emperor;
the Emperor writes back in defense of his doings, an Appologetical Epistle;
the Pope replies with a Bull of Excommunication; the Emperor makes answer to
that, with accusatory Letters, against the Viloness, Pride, etc. of the Sea of
Rome; then the Pope writes to the Germain Bishops to work against the Empeorur,
the Bishops they write their Excusing of the Emperor.

This Pope toward the end of his Life (who dyed amidest these broyls being
choked with a fly as he was walking abroad) was wont to say that there was no
more Miserable kind of Life, than to be a Pope.

About this time William the first, King of England, England, for he ordained
that they should exercise no Temporal Authority at all, but in spirituallities,
he rather raised them, as may be seen by a passage between Aldred Archbishop
of York and the King, for at a time upon the repulse of a certain suit the Arch
bishop in great coffeehouse offered to depart, when the King in awe of his
displeasure fell down at his Feet, desired pardon, and promised to grant his
Suit: The King all this while being down at the Archbishops feet, the noble
men that were present, put him in mind, that he should cause the King to rise;
nay, said the Archbishop, let him alone, let him find what it is to anger
Saint Peter; and as by this Story we see the insulting pride of a Prelate in
those days, so by another we may see the equivocating falsehood of a Prelate at
that time; for Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury would often swear he had not
one Penny upon the Earth, when under the Earth it was afterward found he had
hidden great Treasures.

About this time William the second King of England claimed the making of
Bishops to be his right, Rome; For Appeals had been seldom used, tell Anselm in
this Kings reign Appealed to the Pope, upon whose complaint, the Pope was about
to Excommunicate the King, but having a little before Excommunicated the
Emperor Henry the fourth, he forbore at that time to do it, least by making
Excommunication common, he should make it be slighted; at this time great
Contention arose between the King, and Archbishop Anselm, and Anselm not
yiedling to the King in any Point Perjudicial to the Popes Authority, nor the
King yiedling to Anselm in any point prejudicial to his own Prerogative, the
Contention continued long and hot, Anselm often threatening his going to Rome,
the King told him plainly, he would not thrust him out of the Realm, but if he
would go without his leave, he would then keep him out during his pleasure; and
besides he should carry nothing out of the Realm with him; yet Anselm ventured
it, and the King performed it; for William Warlswast, was sent to riffle him in
his passage at Sea of all he had; neither was he suffered to return as long as
the King lived, during all which time the King took all the profits of his
Archbishopric to his own use.

At this time Henry the first, being King of England, at his first coming to
the Crown he forbore his claim to the investitures of Bishops, Rome belonged to
him. In these Anselm Arch Bishop of Canterbury, who was now returned into
England, opposed him, affirming, that both of them belonged to the Pope; the
contention at last was brought to the Pope, to whom King Henry sent William
Warlestwast, Elect Bishop of Exeter; who, saying to the Pope, that his Master
would not for the Crown of his Realm loose the Authority of investing his
Prelates; The Pope started up, and answered, neither will I loose the disposing
of spritual Promotions in England for the Kings head that wears the Crown,
before God, I avow it; so the Contention grew long, and hot, and many
Messengers were sent to and fro about it; the Conclusion was, that the King
should receive homage of the Bishop Elect, but should not invest them by Staff
and Ring, to which the King said nothing for the present; but forbore not to do
it nevertheless; for five years after the death of Anselm, Ralph Bishop of
Rochester, was by the King made Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding all
the Popes threa^nings.

At this time there being two Popes chosen at one time made a great Schism and
Tumult, Alexander being one that was chosen, scorns the motion Victor does
appear; him therefore the Emperor aids to the City? and settles him to be Pope:
Alexander flies to France and Venice, and requires aid against the Emperor, at
last the Emperor was fain to submit to the Pope, who putting his foot upon the
Emperors Neck, spoke these words, Thou shall walk upon the Adders and
Basilicks, and shall tread down the Lion and Dragon; mean while, the Emperor
speaking to the Pope from under his foot, not to thee, but to Peter; the Pope
answers, both to me, and to Peter: Thus the Emperor having subjected himself,
promising to take Alexander for the true Pope, and to restore all that he had
taken from Rome, departed.

Henry, Emperor is crowned (on condition of restoring many things to St Peter,
pretended by the Pope to have been taken away) the Pope holding the Crown
between his feet, and so the Emperor stoops with his head to take it on, the
Pope immediately with his foot strikes it off again, intimating his power to
depose him, as well as Crown him) the Cardinals taking up the Crown, thus
kicked of, puts it on again.

About the year 1216. after the death of Habert Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Mo^ks of that Covent, secretly in the night, elected one Reginald their
Sub-prior to succeed him, and caused him to go to Rome for confirmation; but
afterward doubting how the King would take it, being done without his
Knowledge, they crave leave of King John to chose a fit man; the King is
content to allow them the Election, but requires himself to have the
nomination, and thereupon commends unto them John Gray, Bishop of Norwich, whom
he specially favored, and accordingly the Monks Elect him; but the matter
being afterward referred to the Pope which of these Elections should stand
good, after many Allegations on both sides, the Pope to show himself
indifferent to both, disallows them both, and nominates a third man, one
Stephen Langton, an Englishman, a Cardinal, the Monks admit him, but the King
opposes it; the Contest grew hot, but at first the King gave the Pope as good
as he brought, for as the Pope threatened the King to Excommunicate him, and to
interdict the Kingdom; so the King threatened the Pope to nullify his
Authority, and to banish the Clergy men out of the Realm, as the Pope acted as
much as he threatened (for he interdicted the Kingdom, So the King performed as
much as he had spoken; for he drove the Monks out of the Cloisters, yet at last
when the Popes Legate, came into England, he told the King in what great danger
he stood, first, of the King of France by invasion, and then of his own
Subjects by Rebellion, forboth which there was no other help, but reconcilement
with the Pope; this so touched him to the quick, that he made him leave his
great words and fall to ask him forgiveness; so as taking off his Crown from
his head, he laid it down at the Legates feet, to be disposed of as the Pope
should please, and the Legate stuck not to take up his Crown, and to keep it
three or four days in his hands before he restored it; and did not then
neither, but upon Condition that he and his Successors should hold the Kingdom
of the Sea of Rome, at the Annual Tribute of a Thousand Marks.

This King John was shortly after (as it is Recorded) poisoned by one Simon a
Monk, who being absolved of his Abbot before hand, for doing this fact; to
accomptish his Design, he finds a Toad in the Garden, and pricks him with a
Penknife until he had made him vomit up all his Poison, which he having
conveyed into a Cup of Wine, began to the King with a smiling countinance,
speaking these words, If it shall please your Princely Majesty, here is such a
Cup of Wine, as you never drank a better; I turst this Wassel shall make all
England glad: The King having drunk, and anon being ill, enquired for Simon the
Monk, to whom some answered, that he was departed this life (for his Guts
gushed out of his Belly) the King replied, then God have mercy on my Soul, and
so he dyed, much repenting of his former life.

About this time several persons were stirred up by the Lord to declare against
the Pope, as an Heretic, and were by him condemned for their pains, viz.
Arnoldus, Johannes, Semeca, Gulielmus de Santo amorie, Gallus, and Grosthead,
great Writers against the Popes Decrees, giving many signs of false Teachers;
of whom see more in my Testimonies of the Martyrs.

The Pope being at odds with the Emperor Fredrick the second, France strongly
interceed, and the Emperor himself cleared himself of all imputation, and
offered full saitsfaction for all pretended wrongs, and to go out of his Empire
(if the Pope would not endure him there) to the holy Land, never to return into
Europe again, so as his Son Henry, Nephew to King Henry of England might
succeed him, with offer of other most reasonable conditions: These Oppositions
of the Pope against Christian Emperors and Kings, gave the Turks great
advantage of prevailing against those called Christians, and the grand Cause
that God did not prosper the Christians in their wars in the Holy Land was
imputed to the Christians adhering to their Masses and other Superstitions.

And thus having given a brief Relation of the most material Passages in the
Affairs of the pretended Christian Church, till this time; I shall now Proceed
to give a Discovery of the beginning and proceedings of the Monks, Friars and
Jesuits, who now began to swarm in the Apostized Church of the Papists.

We read that many Religious men heretofore contemning the World, and all the
Pomp, Pride and Vanity thereof, withdrew themselves into the Wilderness, and
Desert places, in Syria, Egypt, and other Countries, it being in the time of
great Persecution, to the end they might the better (being not troubled in the
worldly cares and encumbrance) bestow their time in reading the Scriptures,
Fasting, Praying, Meditating and such divine Exercises, whereof Paul, surnamed
the first Hermit, Anthony, Hilarion, Basil and Jerome were the first and
chiefest among the Christians, who for their Sanctity of Life were in those
days had in great Honor; for then this kind of life was simple and free, and
not Bound or Tied to Unlawful Vows and Ridiculous Ceremonies, as afterward
came to be observed by such as were called Monks and Friars; their Habit was
then homely, and yet decent, as every man best pleased to wear, neither were
they bound to abide or remain in any one particular place, nor tied to one kind
of life by Vow, but free to stay there where they liked best, or to go into any
City or Country where they would, at their own pleasure; they sought out the
most Desert place as they could find, that is in the Wilderness, working with
their hands, and getting their living with the sweat of their Brows, gave a
singular good Example to all men to live Virtuously and Godly, instructing
their Families, and others that resorted unto them, to lead a godly and
Christian Life; and were admired and honored of all good men for their
Doctrine, Integrity of Life, and godly zeal; for as yet (says the History) the
Christians had but one Law, and one Religion, which afterward fell out
otherwise, to the Grief and Sorrow of the Upright among them, to see what Rents
and Divisions, Sects and Factions, Superstitions and Ceremonies were brought in
amongst them, although good stirrings there might be amongst these that lived
this private life.

Their Successors and Imitators were far unlike them, for the words of Philo,
cited by Eusebius are these, Now let our Monks, says he, who live like Kings,
who swim in all manner of delights and pleasures, who affect nothing more then
Promotion and Honor, and whose chiefest care and studdy is to gather Wealth
and to hoord up Gold, Silver, etc.

About this time several Sects of Monks began to spread forth out of the Order
of Benedictus; Corona; they are bound to abstain from Flesh, unless it be when
they are sick: These Benedictine Monks would have the World believe, that they
are godly and religious men, and would not be ranked with the Jesuits, who
were States men, for they (poor Monks) meddle not with matters of State, or
with Kings Affairs; but for all their counterfeit holiness, an English
Benedictine Monk of Swinsted Abbey, Poisoned King John, as is before related,
for the which fact he was and still is highly honored by all Papist in
general; and one says on him thus, Regem perimere Meritorium ratus est, he
thought it a meritorious deed for to kill the King.

About this time began to peep out another Sect of Monks, Montelinetences, at
the time when there were three several Popes living, who troubled all
Christendom for their Papacy, the Institutor of this Family of Monks, was one
Bernardus Ptolomeus; they lived at the first at Sienna in Italy, but afterward
(having gathered their Crumbs together) they built an Abbey on the top of a hill
not far from thence, they wear a white Habit, this Family was approved by Pope
Gregory the twelfth.

The Bethlemite Friars began 1257. their first dwelling was at Cambridge,
Dominican Friars, saving that these did wear a Star in their Breast, wrought
upon their Habit in memorial of the Star that did appear at the time that
Christ was born at Bethlchem; There was, says the History, so many Sects of
Monks, Friars and Nuns, Balaus in appendice.
at this time upon a sudden started up in England, that the Commonwealth was
so oppressed and exhausted by them, that it was not able to satisfy their
exorbitant and greedy desires.

The Monks, Praemonstratenses, descended down from Heaven (as they themselves
brag) in the Bishopwrick of Lodan at a place which they call Praemonstratum,
Bruscius and. Polidor.
the Author of this order was Northbertus, a Priest born in Lorrain, who patcht
up an order, or rule, for his New-begotten Monks out of Augustines rule which
was afterward approved and confirmed by Pope Calixtus the second, they wear a
long white Cloth Coat, open before, and a Lynnen Surplice over, and over that
along white Cloak, a Corner Cap or Hat (when they go abroad) of the same
color, and underneath all Dublets, Breeches, Linnen-Shirts, Shoes and white
Stokins; these Monks have Lands and Revenues to maintain themselves, and are
Rich wheresoever they live; this Sect began about the year 1170. and had Abbyes
in England, but at this time I hope there is not one English man of that Sect.

About this time appeared first in England, the Order of Crutched-Fryars,
Clitus, Peter's Disciple, and the third Bishop of Rome after him, was warned by
an Angel to build for him an House to entertain all those that fled thither for
the Christian Religion sake, which he with all speed performed, so that in a
short time many godly men repaired thither, and were entertained, who for many
years after bare a Cross in their hands, in memorial of the Death of Christ. A
thing unlike to be true, that Clitus should be warned by a Angel to build an
House for a company of lazy Friars to entertain all those that fled to Rome for
the Christian Religion sake, whereas the very names of Monks or Friars was not
then, or many hundred years after, either known or heard of in the Church of
God, and withal the Persecution was then so great in Rome that the Saints
themselves were constrained to forsake the City, Matthew. West: Monast, and
Balaus.
and therefore it is not creditable that Christians should fly thither for
relief. Pope Pius commanded these Friars to wear a Sky-colored Habit, but now
this Order wears a Cross of red Cloth or Scarlet fixed to their Habit on their
Breast, and wear black; these Friars do likewise live by their Lands and
Revenues, they had a Monastery heretofore at Tower Hill, which is now put to a
better use, being built up into Tenements.

In the time of Pope Innocent the third, the Trinitarian Friars began to show
themselves to the World, one Johannes Matta, and one Felix Anchorita, who lived
a Solitary life in France, were warned in their sleep (as they report) to
repair to Rome to the Pope, and to seek for a place of him to build a Cloister;
and this Pope (as they say) was warned in a Vision to entertain them, which he
did, and ordained that they should wear a white Habit, with a red, and
Sky-colored Cross, wrought on their Breast in the same, their charge was to go
and gather Money to redeem Christians, that were Captives under the Turks, and
were called Monks of the Redemption of Captives, but instead of Redeeming
Captives, they purchased Lands with the Money they gathered; so that the
Captives, if they had no reward from Christ, for suffering for his sake, they
were like to have no Redemption from these Friars.

Bridget of Sweethland being a Widow did institute an Order of Friars and
Nuns, and coming her self to Rome, Sebellicus Enne 9. l. 4. Polydor l, 7. c. 4.
obtained of Pope Urban the fifth, a Confirmation of the same Order or
Institution, that both Sex should live together in one Cloister having a Wall
between them, and that the Nuns should lie in the uppermost Chambers, and the
Friars underneath them.

The next is the Minorite Friars, they wear a morish-coloured Habit, and never
eat Flesh, Butter or Cheese, but feed on the best Fish and Oil, the finest
Bread, and purest Wine, the best Spices, Fruit, Herbs and Roots that they can
buy for their Money; they had a Cloister built for them at Barkhamsted in
England in the Year 1257.

The Mendicant or Begging Friars do wear a long white Coat of Cloth down to
their heels, all loose, with a Cowle or Hood, of the same, when they are in
their Cloisters, but when they go abroad, they wear another black Coat over the
other, with another Cowle; both their Coats are then bound close to their
Bodies, with a broad leather Girdle or Belt, which Girdle is a very holy thing
(if they may be believed) for they call it Saint Austins Girdle, and many Lame
people do wear it for pure devotion sake, looking upon it to have some singular
Virtue in it; this leather Belt is given to none but those that are special
good Benefactors, and such as pay dearly for it, which brings them in no small
benefit.

The next is the Carmelite Friars, their first appearance in the word was in
the year 1270. that is, Friars of the Order of the blessed Virgin Mary, of
Mount Carmel; at first they were ordained to wear a party-colored Habit, white
and red, made in the form of a man, the which they then dreamed to be like unto
that which Elias did use to wear; but afterward Pope Honorius forbid them to
wear that Habit, as being not well befitting their Profession, and therefore a
black long habit and a Cowle was given them, and over that a long white Robe or
Cloak, as best agreeing with Virginity.

Another sort is the Franciscan, or Gray Friars, of whom it is said, They would
not touch any Money, and made a show, as if they abstained from all Flesh, and
did eat nothing but raw Herbs and Roots, and did wear Wooden Clogs instead of
Shoes, railing against other Friars, who Possessed Money, and eat Meat, wore
Shoes and Stokings, etc. But these did not long persevere in this Austere life,
but their delight was to fare delitiously, and to cram their Guts with the best
Dainties.

There is a sort of these Franciscans, called Penitentiarian, these wear no
Linen, as they say, neither Doublet, Breeches nor Hose, but only a little pair
of Linen Drawers to save their skin from their course habit; instead of Shoes,
they wear wooden Clogs, which are under their Feet, bound over with Leather
Straps, their habit is made of a very course Cloth, and close before, reaching
down to their heels, with a Cowle close to their head made of the same, and
also a gray Rope made of hair, full of knots, instead of a Girdle about their
Loins; they never ride, but go a foot; when they travel they have a great pair
of wooden Beads, with a wooden Cross tied to their Girdles before them: If
these Franciscan Friars may be believed, they say, All that they wear about
them is holy; yea, all that they eat, drink or touch, is Sanctified; their
grecy Cowle, Habit, Sandals, and especially their knotty Girdles, they say,
has many Virtues, and therefore they have no small profit from the Lay People
that they may wear them; concerning these Friars Habits one wrote these Verses
as follows; The knotty Rope, Feet bare, deceitful Cowle,
Bring bare Foot Friars into Hell to howl.
The knotty Rope that binds that Slovens Coat,
Were better used being tied about his Throat.


The Original or beginning of the Society of the Jesuits is but of a new
Institution, whereof the Founder was one Ignatius Loyola, born in Spain, who
had been a Soldier, and was hurt on both his knees, and halted ever after; his
Order was confirmed by Paul the third, in the year 1504 and himself Sanctified
by Pope Paul the fifth in the year 1622. not for his Holiness and Sanctity of
life, but for an Infinite sum of Money given unto the Pope by the Jesuits;
Maphaus invith ignat. ^^lle^ in (...) Chronolog.
and with all, because the Duke of Bavaria (by the Wicked Practice, and
Devilish policy of his Children the Jesuits, and the help of the King of
Spain) had taken the Palatinate from the Prince Elector, the true and Lawful
Owner thereof: This Ignatius, ordained that all those of this upstart Society,
^^m Valder^me page 10.
should call themselves Jesuits, or Patres Societatis Jesu, Fathers of the
Society of Jesus.

Valderama preached, Years since Christ.
That when this St. Ignatius resolved to quit the Soldiers life, the very
House wherein he then was, the Walls shaked, the Beams and Posts trembled, and
all that were in it betook themselves to flight, and ran out of Doors as fast
as their legs could carry them, even as when some strange eruption of Fire does
suddenly break out in some high Mountain; so when interior Fire began to be
discovered in him, who before was cold and frozen, as to Religion, it lightened
forth in such sort, that it caused a thousand amazments, a thousand firing of
Houses, etc. there was never any Aetna or flaming Mountain that did the like;
thus far are thewords of Valderama.

And truly many people are of Opinion at this day, that this Fire was
transferred after his death unto his Society, seeing they do perticipate so
much of it, for out of the fervor of their Mercenary Religion they have ever
since exercised the Trade of Incendiaries in all places, and they have set all
Christendom on Fire; neither is there any Kingdom, Commonwealth, City or
Province, which they have not inflamed with Wars, Seditions and Persecutions.

And now further the Reader may see what ignorance was among the Papists at
this time, for the Heathen People heretofore had many Gods, and every one of
them their distinct Office, as Apollo was the God of Wisdom; Mars of Wars;
Aeolus of the winds; Neptune of the Seas, etc. The Papist has as many Saints
which they honor, and every one has their several Charge assigned unto them;
As Saint Anthony for Swine and for Fire; Saint Roch to Cure the Plague, and
Sheep; Saint Lusey for the Toothache; Saint Petronel for the Fevour; Saint
Marti^^ for the Itch; Saint Valentine for Lovers; Saint Crispine for
Shoe-makers; and Saint Clement for Bakers, Brewers, and Victuallers; Saint
Sebastine for Archers; Saint Nicholas for Butchers; and many more: and the
Office assigned Ignatius, as Valderama says, page 51. This blessed Father
Ignatius, does most assuredly and readily (says he) assiist all Women that are
in Labor; for this vigilent Pastor does always accompany the sheep that are
great with young; and thus, this Ignatius does shoulder the Virgin out of
Doors; for the Papist Women were wont heretofore to call upon her in that
Extremity.

But how the Monks, Friars and Priest, did take this, I cannot till, for that
it clipped away some of their profit; for they had often money and gifts to say
Masses for Women's safe delivery, especially, the Augustine Friars of Burgos in
Spain, who sold the measure of their Crucifix at a dear rate, because they
counted it a precious Relic for many Diseases.

These Jesuits are great Intelligencers and Statesmen in most parts of the
World, and wheresoever they remain they take upon them to teach and instruct
Children, as well of Noblemen, as also of inferior persons, professing to do
the same freely, and without reward, wherein they deal so carefully, that the
Parents do not account their Childrens time Misspent, but also do reward them
highly, and the Jesuits make thereof a double benefit; for, first, they bind
the Parents of the Children thereby to be their Favorites; secondly, as for
the Scholars, they strick into their tender Capacity, such a reverence of
themselves, and do withal distill into their minds (Especially into such as are
witty) such Points of Doctrine, and such an Opinion of their Holiness and
integrity, that the same very seldom, and sometimes never wears away, but
rather increases with their years, according to that saying. Quo semet est
imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. That is, The Vessel will long retain
the taste of the first Liquor it first held or contained, which is undoubtedly
of no small moment to the strengthening and upholding of their Faction and
Society; moreover, they have so cunningly wrought, that wheresoever they are,
they only are the general hearers of all Confessions, diving thereby into the
secrets and drifts of all men, acquainting themselves with their humors and
Imperfections, and making, as time and occasion serves, use and benefit thereof
to themselves.

Thus much as to Jesuits Monks, and Friars which may fitly be annexed to the
Arraignment of Popery, a Book published, by G. F. and E. H. to which I refer
the Reader, if he desire to be further informed of the Corruption of this
Apostatized, Popish Church, and so conclude this part.

A Brief View OF THE Great Sufferings AND LIVING TESTIMONIES Of the TRUE and
Constant Martyrs, Contained in the Acts and Monuments of the Church, writ by
the industrous Labors of John Fox, and now Epitomized, and a further Account
annexed of some that suffered DEATH for RELIGION since.

By E. H.

The CONTENTS. Part I. Containing an Account of the Persecutions and Sufferings
inflicted on the Faithful Servants of the Lord, both before and after the Jews
Apostasy, and before the Coming of Christ, page 1. Part II. Containing an
Account of the Great Persecutions and Martyrdoms of the Christians after the
Coming of Christ, and before the Apostasy and Darkness wholely spread over the
Church, page 7. Part III. An Account of the Grievous Sufferings, Persecutions
and Martyrdoms of the Servants of the Lord under the Popish Church, after the
Apostasy from the Ancient Primitive Truth, preached by Christ and his Apostles,
page, 20. Part IV. Containing an Account of such as suffered Persecution and
Martyrdom under Episcopacy, etc. page 235. An Account of the Just Judgments of
God inflicted upon Persecutors; wherein is showed, the Wicked Lives and most
Horrible Untimely Deaths of many of the Persecutors of Old, page 248. A
Christian-Plea against Persecutors for the Cause of Conscience, grounded upon
Scripture, Reason, Experience, and Testimonies of Princes and Learned Authors.


Published for general Service.

Part I.
Containing the History of the Persecutions, and great Sufferings sustained by
the faithful Servants of the Lord, hoth before and after the Jews Apostasy,
and before the Coming of Christ.

THe great Enemy to all mankind is that wicked Spirit of Persecution, Abel
persecuted by Cain
it moved Cain against his righteous Brother Abel; The Lord had respect unto
Abel, and to his Offering, but unto Cain and his Offering he had not respect;
and Cain rose up against his Brother Abel, and slew him; and the Lord said unto
Cain, where is Abel thy Brother? and he said, I know not: And the Lord said, A
Fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou be in the Earth; and Cain said unto the
Lord, My punishment is greater then I can bear.

And Pharach afflicted the People of God a long time, The Children of Israel
persecuted in Egypt.
which grieved the good Spirit of God in his People; but they Cried out to the
Lord in their Oppressions, for the Egyptians made the Children of Israel to
serve with rigor; and they made their Lives bitter with hard Bondage, the King
commanding the Midwives to slay all the male Children, yet the Lord delivered
his people out of all these afflictions with a mighty hand, and he poured out
his Judgments upon Pharach, and upon the Egyptians that oppressed his people,
and he set his people free; for while the People of God had a sense of their
Bondage and Sufferings, and Cried unto the Lord through the multitude of their
Oppressions, the Lord heard and answered them, and delivered them by the hand
of his servant Moses, by whom he gave them Laws, which they were to obey, and
which they submitted to; then God was with them as a mighty Defense, and in
this time of sufferings they kept nigh to the Lord, and he was with them, and
was as a Rock of Defense unto them.

And because Mordecai the servant of the Lord could not bow, Mordecai and the
Jew; persecuted by Haman.
nor do reverence to proud Haman, Haman was full of wrath, and he thought scorn
to lay hands on Mordecai alone; wherefore he sought to destroy all the Jews
that were throughout the whole Kingdom of Abasuerus, even the People of
Mordecai: And Haman said unto King Abasuerus, There is a certain People
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the People in all the Provinces of thy
Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all People, neither keep they the
Kings Laws; therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them: If it
please the King let it be written that they may be destroyed, and I will pay
ten thousand Talents of Silver. And the King said, the Silver is given to thee,
the People also, to do with them as seems good to thee: and Letters were sent
to the Rulers of all the Provinces to destroy all, both young and old, little
children, and Women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey. Thus this Proud
Persecutor endeavored to have destroyed this People, A just judgment against a
persecutor.
had not Queen Esther made supplication the King on their behalf, and by that
means a stop was put to the wicked design; and he was hanged on the Gallows
that he prepared for Mordecai.

And Jezebel cut off the Prophets of the Lord; but Obadiah (who was Governor
of Ahab's house) being one that feared the Lord greatly, he took an hundred of
the Prophets, 1 Kings 18.4.
and hid them by fifty in a Cave and fed them with Bread and Water.

And Ahab persecuted Elijah, and said to him, Art thou he that troubles
Israel; Elijah persecuted
he answered, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers House, in
that you have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed
Baalim

And Jezebel persecuted Elijah, so that he fled into the Wilderness.

And Manasses persecuted the Prophet Isaiah for reproving him, Jeremiah
persecuted Jer. 29.
and caused him to be sawn a sunder with a wooden Saw.

And Jeremiah, for declaring the word of the Lord to all the Cities of Judah,
and saying, Thus says the Lord, If you will not hearken to, me, to walk in my
Law, which I have set before you, etc. Then will I make this House like Shiloh,
and will make this City a Curse to all the Nations of the Earth; for this
Testimony he was persecuted, and all the people were gathered against him in
the House of the Lord, and the Priests and Prophets said unto the Princes and
People, This man is Worthy, to dye, for he has prophesied against this City:
Jeremiah said, The Lord sent me to Prophecy against this House, and against
this City.

As for me (said he) behold I am in your hands, do with me as seems good and
meet unto you; Chap. 23.2.
But know for a certain, that if ye put me to death, you shall surely bring
Innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City.

And Jeremiah was shut up in the Court of the Prison, which was in the King of
Judahs house.

And in the 37 Chap. verse 15. the Princes were wrath with Jeremiah, and smote
him, and put him in Prison into a Dungeon.

Nebuchadnezzar persecuted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, because they would
not bow to the Golden Image he had set up; The three Children persecuted Dan.
3.23.
the King told them, that if they would not worship the Image which he had
made, they should be cast into the burning fiery Furnace, they answered, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter; if it be so,
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the fiery Furnace, and he will
deliver us out of thy hand, O King; but if not, be it known unto thee, O King,
we will not serve thy Gods, etc. then was he full of fury, and commanded the
Furnace to be heat seven times more then it was wont to be, and commanded that
they should be bound with their Hats and Coats on, and cast into it; but the
Lord preserved them in the Flames, so that the Fire had no power over them.

The Princes under Darius also persecuted the Prophet Daniel, against whom they
confessed they could find no occasion, except it were concerning the Law of his
God; Daniel persecuted.
wherefore they persuaded the King to make a Decree, That whosoever should ask
a Petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of the King, should be cast
into the Den of Lions: But Daniel, as he did afore-time, opened his windows
toward Jerusalem, and kneeled down, and prayed, and gave thanks before his
God, of which these Persecutors acquainted the King; then the King commanded,
and they cast Daniel into the Den of Lions, but the Lord preserved him that the
Lions hurt him not, because he believed in his God; which the King hearing of,
caused Daniel to be taken up out of the Den, A judgment of God upon Persecutors.
and commanded them that were his Persecutors to be cast into it, which was
done, and they were soon destroyed.

The Constancy and faithful Suffering of some of the ancient people of the
Jews, rather then they would be forced to depart from the Laws of their
Fathers, and not to live after the Laws of God.
Eleazer one of the principal Scribes, an aged man, and of a well-favoured
countenance, was constrained to open his Mouth, Eleazer persecuted
and to eat Swines Flesh: But he choosing rather to dye gloriously, then to
live stained with such an Abomination, spit it forth, and came of his own
accord to the torment; as it behoved them to come, that are resolved to stand
out against such things as are not lawful for love of life to be tasted: But
they that had the charge of that wicked Feast, for the old acquaintance they
had with the man, taking him aside, besought him to bring flesh of his own
provision, such as was lawful for him to use, and make as if he did eat of the
flesh taken from the Sacrifice commanded by the King; That in so doing he might
be delivered from death, and for the old friendship with them, find favor. But
he began to consider discreetly, and as became his Age, and the excellency of
his ancient years, and the honor of his gray Head, whereunto he was come, and
his most honest Education from a Child, or rather the holy Law made and given
by God; therefore he answered accordingly, and willed them strait-wayes to send
him to the Grave: For it becomes not our Age, (said he) in any wise to
dissemble, whereby many young persons might think that Eleazer being fourscore
years old and ten, were now gone to a strange Religion, and so they through
mine hypocrisy, and desire to live a little time, and a moment longer, should
be deceived by me, and I get a stain to mine old Age, and make it Abominable;
For though for the present time I should be delivered from the punishment of
men, yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive, nor dead;
wherefore now manfully changing this life, I will show my self such an one, as
mine Age requires, and leave a notable example to such as be young, to die
willingly and courageously, for the honorable and holy Laws; and when he had
said these words, immediately he went to the Torment; they that led him,
changing the good will they bare him a little before, into hatred, because the
foresaid speeches proceeded, as they thought, from a desperate mind. But when
he was ready to dye with stripes, he groaned, and said, It is manifest unto the
Lord, that has the holy knowledge, that whereas I might have been delivered
from death, I now endure sore pains in body, by being beaten, but in soul am
well content to suffer these things, because I fear him. And thus this man
dyed, leaving his death for an example of a noble Courage, and a memorial of
virtue, not only unto young men, but unto all his Nation.

The Constancy and Cruel Death of seven Brethren and their Mother in one day,
because they would not eat Swines Flesh at the Kings Commandment.
Seven Brethren with their Mother were taken, and compelled by the King against
the Law, The Mother and her seven Children persecuted.
to taste Swines Flesh, and were tormented with Scourges and Whips; but one of
them that spoke first, said thus, What would thou ask or learn of us? we are
ready to dye 'rather then to transgress the Laws of our Fathers: Then the King,
being in a rage, commanded Pans and Caldrons to be made hot, which forthwith
being heated, he commanded to cut out the Tongue of him that spoke first, and
to cut off the utmost parts of his Body, the rest of his Brethren, and his
Mother looking on. Now when he was thus maimed in all his Members, he commanded
him, being yet alive, to be brought to the Fire, and to be fried in the Pan;
and as the vapor of the Pan was for a good space disperced, they exhorted one
another with the Mother, to dye manfully, saying thus, The Lord God looks
upon us, and in Truth has comfort in us, as Moses in his Song, which witnessed
to their Faces, declared, saying, and he shall be comforted in his Servants: so
when the first was dead, after this manner, they brought the second to make a
mocking stock; and when they had pulled off the skin of his Head with the hair,
they asked him, 'Wilt thou eat before thou be punished 'throughout every member
of thy Body; but he answered in his own Language, and said, No; wherefore he
also received the next Torment in order as the former did; and when he was at
the last gasp, he said; Thou like a fury take us out of this present life,
but the King of the world shall raise us up, who have dyed for his Laws, unto
everlasting life: After him was the third made a mocking stock, and when he was
required, he put out his tongue, and that right soon, holding forth his hands
manfully, and said couragously, 'These I had from Heaven, and for his Laws I
d^spise them, and 'from him I hope to receive them again; insomuch, that the
King, and they that were with him marvailed at the young man's courage, for that
he nothing regarded the pains. Now when this man was dead also, they tormented
and mingled the fourth in like manner; so when he was ready to dye, he said
thus, It is good being put to death by men, to look for hope from God to be
raised up again by him; as for thee, thou shall have no resurrection to life.
Afterward they brought the fifth also, and mangled him; then looked he unto the
King, and said Thou have power over men, thou art corruptible, thou do what
thou will, yet think not that our Nation is forsaken of God; but abide a while,
and behold his great power, how he will torment thee and thy seed. After him
also they brought the sixth, who being ready to dye, said, Be not deceived
without cause, for we Suffer these things for our selves, having sinned against
our God, therefore marvelous things are done unto us; but think not thou, that
take in hand to strive against God, that thou shall escape unpunished. But
the mother was marvelous above all, and worthy of honorable memory, for when
she saw her seven sons slain within the space of one day, she bare it with a
good courage, because of the hope that she had in the Lord; yea she exhorted
every one of them in her own Language, filled with courageous spirit, and
stirred up her womanish thoughts with a manly stomach, she said unto them; I
cannot tell how you came into my womb, for I neither gave you breath nor life,
neither was it I that formed the members of every one of you; but doubtless the
Creator of the world, who formed the Generation of man, and found out the
beginning of all things, will also of his own mercy give you breath and life
again, as you now regard not your own selves for his Laws sake. Now Antiochus
thinking himself despised, and suspecting it to be a reproachful speech, whilst
the youngest was yet alive, did not only exhort him by words, but also assured
him with Oaths, that he would make him both a rich and a happy man, if he
would turn from the Laws of his Fathers; and that also he would take him for
his Friend, and trust him with affairs; but when the young man would in no case
hearken unto him, the King called his Mother, and exhorted her, that she would
counsel the young man to save his life; and when he had exhorted her with many
words, she promised him, that she would counsel her Son; but she bowing her
self toward him, laughing the cruel Tyrant to scorn, spoke in her Country
language on this manner, O my Son have pity upon me that bare thee nine Months
in my Womb, and gave thee suck three Years, and nourished thee, and brought
thee up unto this age, and endured the troubles of Education; I beseech thee my
Son look upon the Heaven and the Earth, and all that is therein, and consider
that God made them of things that were not, and so was mankind made likewise;
fear not this Tormentor, but being worthy of thy Brethren take thy death, that
I may receive thee again in mercy with thy Brethren: While she was yet speaking
these words, the young man said, Whom wait ye for? I will not obey the Kings
commandment, but I will obey the Commandment of the Law that was given unto our
Fathers by Moses; and thou that have been the author of all mischief against
the Hebrews, shall not escape the hands of God, for we suffer because of our
Sins; and though the living Lord be angry with us a little while, for our
chastning and correction, yet shall he be at one again with his Servants. But
thou, O Godless man, and of all other most wicked, be not lifted up without a
cause, nor puffed up with uncertain hopes, lifting up thy hands against the
Servants of God, for thou have not yet escaped the Judgment of Almighty God who
sees all things; for our Brethren who now have suffered a snort pain, are dead
under Gods Covenant of everlasting Life; but thou, through the Judgment of God,
shall receive just punishment for thy Pride; but I, as my Brethren, offer up my
Body and Life for the Laws of our Fathers, beseeching God that he would
speedily be merciful unto our Nation, and that thou by Torments and Plagues
may confess that he alone is God, and that in me and my Brethren the wrath
of the Almighty, which is justly brought upon all our Nation, may cease. Then
the King, being in a rage, handled him worse then all the rest, and took it
grievously that he was mocked; so this man dyed undefiled, and put his whole
trust in the Lord: last of all, after the Sons, the Mother dyed. When her Sons
were apprehended she exhorted them in the Hebrew Tongue, saying, O my most dear
and loving Children, let us hasten to that Agony which may credit our
profession, and be rewarded by God with Eternal Life; let us fearlessly present
our Bodies to those Torments which aged Eleazar endured; let us call to mind
our Father Abraham, who having but one only Son, willingly sacrificed him at
Gods command, and feared not to bring him to the Alter, whom with many prayers
he had obtained in his old age: Remember Daniel, the three Children, etc.
Antioch being enraged against her, caused her to be stripped naked, hanged up by
the Hands, and cruelly whipped; then were her Dugs and Paps pulled off, and her
self put into the Red-hot Drying Pan, where lifting up her Hands and Eyes to
Heaven, in the midest of her Prayers, she yielded up her chaste Soul unto God.
But God suffered not the cruel Tyrant to escape unpunished; for in his Wars
against the Persians the Lord struck him with Madness, his Intrals were
devoured with Worms, and stinking like a Carrion, in the Extremity of his
Torments he gave up the Ghost.

Part II
Containing an Account of the great Persecutions and Martyrdoms of the
Christians, after the coming of Christ, and before the Apostasy and Darkness
wholly spread over the Church.

AFter the Jews, who were once the People of God, and had the Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances and Commands of God made known to them, as is before related, had
apostatized from the holy Spirit or Life, they provoked God, and soon forgot
him, and shamefully entreated and killed the Servants and Messengers of God,
yet the Lord had Compassion to mankind, and remembered his Promise, and in love
to the World sent forth his Son, who said when he was come, he was the true
Light that enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, yet the world
knew him not, but God sent his Messenger to prepare his Way, and the Voice of
one cried in the Wilderness, prepare ye the Way of the Lord, and make strait
Paths for our God; and when this Messenger, whose name was John, was come, the
hand of the Lord was with him, and he preached repentance for the remission of
sins; and for reproving Herod of his Evils, he was shut up in Prison; and
though Christ testified of him, that among those that were born of women, there
was not a greater Prophet then John: Yet this Herod, who had married Herodias,
his brothers wife, to whom John said, it is not lawful for thee to have thy
brothers wife; John Baptist beheaded.
therefore the persecuting spirit arose in Herodias, and she would have killed
him, but could not; yet afterward she was the cause of John Baptists being
beheaded in Prison.

And when Christ Jesus appeared, who is the Light of the world, whom John
called the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus Persecuted and put to death.
who testified against the apostatized Jews, and their false worship in their
dead Forms, saying, God a is Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit, and and truth; yet him these Jews rejected, and would not receive
him, that they might have Life; and when he said, I am the bread of life, and I
am the living bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this bread
he shall live forever, and the bread that I shall give is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world; the Jews in their ignorance reasoned,
saying, How can this be? can this man give us his flesh to eat? and could not
believe in him, though he did such great works and miracles amongst them, that
never man did the like, yet they sought to kill him; nevertheless they would be
accounted of Abraham's seed, and called him their Father; but says Christ, if
ye were Abraham's Children ye would do Abraham's works, but now ye seek to kill
me, a man that has told you the Truth; ye are, said he, or your father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do; he was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is no truth in him: And
this blessed Lamb of God Christ Jesus did these persecuting Jews put to death,
crucifying of him, as may be read at large in the Scriptures. After they had
Crucified the Lord of life, then they persecuted his Disciples and Apostles, as
follows.

When the Jews heard what Stephen had declared, Acts. 7.54^
they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their Teeth; but he
being full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into Heaven and saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said, behold, I
see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right Hand of God;
then they cried out with aloud voice, and stopped their Ears, and run upon him
with one accord, and cast him out of the City, and stoned him; and they stoned
Stephen calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and he
kneeled down, and crying with a loud voice, Lord lay not this Sin to their
charge; and when he had said this, he fell asleep.

James the Brother of John Martyred.
After the Martyrdom of this blessed Stephen, the Apostle James suffered next,
mention of which is in the Acts of the Apostles, how, that not long after the
stoning of Stephen, King Herod stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the
Church, who slew James the Brother of John with the Sword; of this James
Eusebius also makes mention, alleging Clement thus writing a memorable story
of him; this James (says Clement) when he was brought to the Tribunal Seat,
Eusebius. Lib. 2. Chap. 9.
he that brought him, (and was the cause of his trouble) seeing him to
condemned, and that he should suffer death; as he went to the Execution, he
being moved therewith in Heart and Conscience, confessed himself also, of his
own accord, to be a Christian: And so were they led forth together, where in
the way he desired of James to forgive him that he had done; after that James
had a little paused upon the matter, turning to him, said, Peace be unto thee,
Brother, and kissed him, and both were beheaded together in the Year 36.

James the Brother of Christ Martyred.
James the Brother of Christ, was termed a just and perfect man; it is said,
that he took in hand the Government of the Church after the Apostles; and when
many of the Princes were persuaded, there arose a Tumult of the Jews, Scribes
and Pharisees, saying, It is very dangerous lest the whole People look after
this Jesus, as though he were Christ; and being gathered together they said to
James, we pray thee stay this people, for they err in Jesus, as though he were
the true Christ: We pray thee persuade this people concerning Jesus, Eusebius.
Lib. 2. Chap. 23.
for we all obey thee; yea, we and all the people testify of thee, that thou
art just, and respectest not the person of any man; stand therefore upon the
Pinnacle of the Temple that thou may be seen aloft, and that thy word may be
heard plainly of all the people. The aforesaid Scribes and Pharisees placed
James upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, and shouted to him, and said, Thou just
man, at whose commandment we are all here, insomuch as this people are seduced
after Jesus who was crucified, declare unto us which is the Door or way of
Jesus crucified; and he answered with a loud Voice, why ask ye me of Jesus the
Son of man, when as he fitteth at the right Hand in the great Power in Heaven:
When as he had persuaded many, so that they glorified God at the Testimony of
James, and said, Hosanna in the highest to the Son of David: Then the Scribes
and Pharisees said among themselves, We have done very ill in causing such a
Testimony of Jesus to be brought forth; but let us climb up and take him, to
the end that the people may be stricken with fear, and so may be brought to
renounce his Faith; and they shouted, saying, O, O, and the just also is
seduced; so they climbed up, and threw Justus down dead long, saying, let us
stone James Justus; and they began to throw stones at him, for after his fall
he was not fully dead; and he fell upon his Knees, saying, I beseech thee Lord
God and Father forgive them, for they wot not what they do: And as they were
stoning of him one of the Priests, the Son of Rachab, the Son of Cherabim,
spoke to them the Testimony which is in Jeremiah the Prophet, and cried out,
Cease, what do you? this just man prays for you: And one of them that were
present, taking a fullers Club, struck Justus on the head, and brained him.
This James was so notable a man, that for his justness he was had in honor of
all men, insomuch, that the wise man of the Jews shortly after his Martyrdom,
did impute the cause of the besieging Jerusalem, and other Calamities which
happened unto them, to no other cause, but unto the violence and injury done to
this man: also Josephus has not left this out of his History, where he
speaks of him after this manner; Jos. Lib. 10.
these things so chanced unto the Jews for a vengeance, because of that Just
man James, which was the Brother of Jesus; for shortly after his suffering
Vespatianus the Emperor destroyed the Land of Jury, and brought them into
Captivity.

A Relation of the Persecutions raised by the Romans against the Christians in
the Primitive Age of the Church dureing the space of three hundred Years.
Eusebius, and the most part of Writers do number the first Persecutions to be
Ten, wherein great Numbers of the Christians were slain and tormented; some
slain with the Sword, some burnt with Fire, some with whips scourged, some
stabed with Forks of Iron, some fastened to the Cross, or Gibbet, some drowned
in the Sea, some their Skins pluck off, some their Tongues cut out, some stoned
to death, some killed with cold, some starved with hunger, some their Hands cut
off, or otherwise dis-membred, have been so left naked to the open shame of the
World, whose kinds of punishment, although they were diverse, yet the manner of
constancy in all these Martyrs was one.

The first of the Ten Persecutions
The first of these Ten Persecutions was stired up by Nero Domitias, about the
year 67. after the Birth of Christ. Orosius writes of Nero, that he was the
first within Rome did raise up Persecution against the Christians, Orosius lib.
5.
and not only in Rome, but in all the Provinces thereof, thinking thereby to
abolish the Name of Christians in all places.

In this Persecution the Apostle Peter suffered death, Hien. lib. de viris just.
with many more Christians, as Hierome said Simon Peter, the Son of Jona, of
the province of Galilee, and of the Town of Bethsaida, the Brother of Andrew,
about the year 44. after Christ's birth came to Rome to withstand Simon Magus,
in the time of Nero, and was crucified with his Head downwards, and his Feet
upwards, himself so requiring; because, said he, I am unworthy to be crucified
after the same manner as the Lord was.

Paul the Apostle, after his great travail and labors in preaching the Gospel
in diverse Countries, at last suffered Martyrdom in this first Persecution under
Nero, and was beheaded; some writers say on the same day on which Peter was
Crucified, although not in the same year, but in the next year following, which
was the thirty seventh year after the Passion of Christ; that which he spoke at
his death is written as follows.

Paul being delivered by Nero bound unto Longimus and Magistus, the chief
Officers, and Acestus the Centurion, that they should lead him without the
City, and cause him to be beheaded; and Paul being full of the holy Ghost;
spoke the words of Eternal life, that both Nero, and all should believe in
Jesus Christ, who was King of Heaven and Earth, who would destroy the glory of
the world with fire; when they had led him away, Longimus, Magistus, and
Acestus began to say unto him, Tell us, O Paul, where is that King? and where
will he appear unto you? and how will you know him? and what will he give unto
you, or what good will he bestow upon you, that you Christians so mightily love
him, that by no means you will consent unto our Religion, that you may live and
enjoy the good of this life; but rather, then all the pleasures of delight, to
be led to die for him with diverse Torments? for this seems to us to be a great
error, to hate this joyful life, and to embrace with all your desire
punishment and death: Paul therefore said, O ye wise men, and flourishing in
knowledge, depart out of the darkness and error, wherein the nobility of your
understanding is clouded with darkness lest you should see the Truth, which
lies hid in you, return the eyes of your minds to the Eternal true Light, that
ye may be able first to know your selves; and so come to the knowledge of that
King with gladness, and to be saved from the fire which is to came upon the
world, and to remain unhurt; for we do not War as you think, for some earthly
King, but the living God, the Kingdom without end, who by reason of the
Iniquities that is done in this World, he will come a Judge, and will judge it
by fire; happy will that man be who will believe in him, he shall have Eternal
life, and shall live World without end; and most unhappy is he who dispising
the Riches of his Bounties and long Suffering, will not return unto him, for he
shall Perish Eternally.

The first Persecution beginning under Nero, as aforesaid ceased under
Vespatian, who gave some rest to the poor Christians, after whose reign was
moved not long after the second Persecution by the Emperor Domitian, Brother of
Titus, his Tyrany was unmeasurable, he put to death all the Nephews of Jude,
called the Lords Brother, and caused to be sought out, and to be slain all that
could be found of the Stock of David. In the time of this Persecution Simon
Bishop of Jerusalem, after other Torments, was Crucified to death In this
Persecution John the Evangelist was Banished into Pathmos for the Testimony of
the Word, and after the death of Domitian, in the Reign of Pertinax the Emperor
he came to Ephesus, being released in the year 100. He lived to a great age;
some write, till he was 120. And this was his constant practice to his dying
day, when age and weakness grew upon him at Ephesus, Hierom Comi^ in C. 6. ad
Galat. Tom. 9. p. 200.
that he was no longer able to Preach to them, he used at every Public Meeting
to be led to the Meeting, and say no more to them, then, Little Children love
one another.

He expressed great care for the good of souls, unweariedly spending himself in
the service of the Gospel, and to beget People to the Truth, Eusebius. lib. 3.
Chap. 10. p. 92.
witness one instance in his visitation of the Churches near Ephesus, he made
choice of a young man, of goodly body, gracious face, and fervent mind, whom
with a special Charge for his Instruction and Education he committed to the
Bishop of that place; so John returned to Ephesus. But in process of time the
young man became very dissolute, and perniciously accompanied himself with idle
dissolute persons of ill behavior, who put him in a way to steal and rob; so
after he forsook the right way, he brought himself unto a bottomless Pit of
all misorder and outrage, and a rout of Thieves being gathered together, he
became their Captain, which John at his return understanding, was sorely
troubled, and said, I have left a wise keeper of our Brothers soul; prepare me
a Horse, and let me have a Guide, he hastened and rode in post, being come to
the place appointed, he is straitwayes taken of the Theevish watch, he neither
fled nor resisted, but said bring me to your Captain, who in the mean time, as
he was armed, beheld him coming; but as soon as he saw his face, and knew it
was John he was stricken with shame, and fled away, the Old man persued, and
cried, my Son, why fleest thou? O Son, tender my case, be not afraid, as yet
there remains hope of Salvation; I will undertake for thee with Christ, I
will die for thee, if need be, as Christ did for us; which words seized so on
the young man, that his Countenance changed, and he shook off his Armor, and
trembled, and wept bitterly, and embraced the Old man, and answered as well as
he could for weeping; so afterward the Apostle brought him into the Church
again. Ex Niceph^ro Lib. 3. Chap. 32.
Yet notwithstanding all these continual Persecutions, and horible Punishments,
the Christians daily increased, deeply rooted in the Doctrine of the Apostles,
and watered plentiously with the Blood of Saints, as says Neceph^rus.

Everastu^ pers^^^ed
Everastus Bishop of Rome was Martyred under Trajanus in the year 102. after
Christ, and Ignatius Bishop of Anti^ch was Martyred in his Regin; with many
more Christians: This Trajanus was very impious toward the Christian Religion,
and cruel toward the Christians, and caused the Third Persecution; in which
Persecution Pliny the second, a Heathen Philosopher, a man learned and famous,
seeing the lamentable Slaughter of Christians, and moved therewith to pity,
wrote to Trajanus of the pitiful Persecution, certifying him, that there were
very many thousands of them daily put to death, of which none did any thing
contrary to the Roman Laws worthy persecution, saving that they used to gather
together in the Morning before day and sing Hymns to a certain God whom they
worshipped, called Christ, in all other their Ordinances they were godly and
honest, and for proof hereof, says he, I caused two Maidens to be laid on the
Rack, and with Torments to be Examined about the same, but finding nothing in
them, but only lewd and immoderate superstition. I resolved to surcease farther
enquiry, till I receive further Instructions from you in this matter: Trajan
having read this Epistle, returned answer, that it was his mind that the
Christians should not be sought after; but if they were brought and convicted,
that then they should suffer Execution. Whereof Tertullian speaking, said, Oh
confussed Sentance, he would not have them sought for, as men Innocent, and yet
would have them punished as men guilty. This Trajan sent a Command to
Jerusalem, that whosoever could be found out of the Stock of David should be
inquired for, and put to death. In this Persecution suffered Phocas Bishop of
Pontus, whom Trajan, because he would not worship Neptune, caused to be cast
into a hot Lime-Kill, and afterward to be put into a scaulding Bath, where he
ended his life in the cause of Christ; Then also Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch,
was apprehended, and sent to Rome, where he was devoured of wild Beafts; and
beside these, many thousands more were martyred.

In the Reign of Antolius Verus a great Number of the Christians suffered most
cruel punishments and torments, Policarpus suffered.
especially in Asia and France, among whom was Policarp, Bishop of Smyrna, who
was burnt at a Stake at Smyrna. About this time also suffered Blandina, and
Ponticus a youth of fifteen years old, who defying their Idols, and constantly
cleaving to Christ, were put to all the Torments their enraged Enemies could
devise, till at last the youth gave up the Ghost; Blandina was first pitifully
whiped, and then thrown to the wild Beasts, then tormented on the Gridiron, and
at last slain. Comolus the Emperor upon his Birth day calling the People of
Rome together in a great Royalty, clothed in his Lions skin, sacrificed to
Hercules, causing it to be proclaimed, that Hercules was the Patron of the
City; whereupon Vinsencicus E^sebius, Perigrenous and Potentionous, learned
men, being stirred up with Zeal, went about from place to place converting the
Heathen to the Faith of Christ; and hearing of the Madness of the Emperor and
People, they reproved that Idolatrous blindness, exhorting them to believe in
the true and living God, and that forsaking the worship ping of Devils, they
should honor God alone. The Emperor hearing thereof caused them to be
Apprehended, and required them to Sacrifice Hercules which they refusing to do,
he caused them to be grievously tormented, and pressed to death with weights of
Lead.

Severus, another Emperor, put forth Proclamations, that no Christians should
be suffered to live; hereby a great Persecution was stirred up on every side,
and an infinite number of Martyrs were slain: Potamtena was tormented with
boiling Pitch poured upon her, Potamtena persecuted.
and afterward, with her Mother Mersila, and Rhais was burnt in the Fire; and
when Basilides Captain, having the Maid to execution, as he led her to the
place, he repressed the raging of the Multitude, who followed with raging and
reviling, which she seeing, prayed to the Lord for his Conversion to the true
Faith, and so with admirable patience suffered Martyrdom.

Shortly after Basilides being required to give an Oath in the behalf of his
fellow Soldiers he denied the same plainly, Basilides suffered.
affirming, that he was a Christian, and therefore he could not Swear; they
which heard him thought he jested at first, but when he had constantly affirmed
it, they had him before the Judge, who committed him to Ward; the Christians
wondering at it, went to him and inquiring the cause of his Conversion, he told
them, that Potamiena prayed for him, and so he saw a Crown put upon his head,
adding that it should not be long before he received it; and accordingly the
next day he was beheaded.

A certain Christian being examined before the Judge, and through fear being
ready to shrink back, there were certain persons standing by, who were ready to
burst for grief, making signs to him, by their hands and jestures, to be
constant; which being observed they were ready to be laid hold on; but they of
their own accord pressed up to the Judge, professed themselves to be
Christians, which much emboldened the weak Christian, and terrified the Judge;
this being done, they departed away, rejoicing for the Testimony they had given
of their Faith.

The crimes and charges laid to the Christians.
The Crimes and Accusations that was laid to the charge of the Christians by
the Persecutors, were, That they refused to worship Idols, and the Emperors,
and that they professed the Name of Christ; yet besides, all the Calamities and
evils that happenedin the World, as Wars, Famine, Pestilence, etc. were imputed
only to the Christians. But Cyprian and Tertullian, confuting these Slanders,
proved, That the special cause of all those Miseries which befell the Empire,
proceeded from the sheding of the Innocent Blood of the Christians; Cyprian was
at last condemned to have his Head cut off, who patiently and willingly
submitted his Neck to the stroke of the Sword.

Sixtus, Bishop of Rome, with his six Deacons, for the Christian Faith were all
beheaded.

Laurence also, another of hi^ Deacons, following Sixtus, Laurence Martyred.
as he went to his Execution, complained that he might not suffer with him, but
that he was seeluded, as the Son from the Father; to whom the Bishop answered,
That within three days he should follow him, bidding him in the mean time to go
Home, and if he had any Treasures, to distribute them amongst the Poor; the
Judge hearing mention of Treasures, supposing that Laurence had great store in
his custody, commanded him to bring the same to him; Laurence craved three days
respit, promising then to declare where the Treasure might be had; in the mean
time he caused a good number of Christians to be gathered together, and when
the day of his answer was come, the persecutors strictly charged him to make
good his promise; but Valiant Laurence streaching his Arms over the Poor, said,
These are the precious Treasures of the Church; these are the Treasures indeed,
in whom Christ has his Mansion, etc. But the Tyrant, in a great fury and
madness, cried, kindle the Fire, make no spare of Wood; has this Villain
deluded the Emperor? Away with him, whip him with Sourges, jerk him with Rods,
buffet him with Fists, brain him with Clubs, jesteth the Traitor with the
Emperor? Pinch him with fiery Tongs, gird him with burning Plates, bring out
the strongest Chains and Fire-forks, and the Grate of Iron, set in on the Fire;
bind the Rebel hand and foot, and when the Grate is red hot, on with him, roast
him, broyl him, toss him turn him; upon pain of our high displeasure, do every
man his office, Oh ye Tormentors; Immediately his command was obeyed, and after
many cruel handlings, this meek Lamb was laid on the Gridiron; but what he
endured was with such patience, that the Emperor seemed to be tormented more
then him, though his Flesn broyled, the other's Heart burned; and when he had
been pressed down with Forks for a great space, in the mighty Spirit of God he
spoke to the Tyrant, thus.

This side is now roasted enough, turn up, Oh Tyrant great;
(Assay) whether roasted or Raw thou think the better Meat.
Dioniceous writes, that the number of those that suffered Martyrdom about
that time was great, Men, Women, young Men, Maidens, old Wives, and Men of all
sorts and ages, of whom some with Scourgings and Fire, and some with the Sword
abtained the V^ctory, and got the Crown; neither, says he, to this day does
the President cease cruelly Murdering such as be brought before him, tearing
some with Torments, Imprisoning others, and commanding that no man should come
to them; yet God with the daily resort of the Brethren does comfort the
afflicted.

Not long after this time the Church had Peace for about the space of forty
four years, during which time it did mightily increase and flourish, and diverse
of the Christians were preferred both to Court, and elsewhere; but through this
great prosperity the Christians began to degenerate, and to grow Idle, striving
and contending among themselves upon every occasion, with railing words
bespattering one another in a despiteful manner, Bishops against Bishops, and
People against People, moving hatred and sedition each against other, besides
cursed Hyposrisie and Dissimulation more and more, by reason whereof Gods
Judgments brake forth against them, the Pastors being inflamed in mutual
comtempt against each other; then did the Lord raise up Adversaries against his
People; then did Dioclecian the Emperor raise a great and grievous Persecution
against the Church; commanding all the Meeting places of the Christians to be
spoiled and cast down, and the Book of the Scripture to be burnt, which was
executed with all rigor and contempt that might be, giving out Edicts for the
displacing of all Christian Magistrates; and for Imprisoning of the Elders and
Bishops, and a great Persecution ensued: But the Christians manfully passed
through exceeding bitter Torments, by Scouging, Whipping, and Racking, and
being put to death; so that it cannot be expressed what number of Martyrs
suffered, what Blood was shed through all Cities and Regions for the Name of
Christ in this Emperors time, by diverse Torments; some being hanged up by the
Feet, and by the smoke of a small Fire strangled.

One Peter was hoysted up naked, and so beaten and torn with Whips, that his
Bones might be seen; then they poured on Salt and Vinegar, and after Roasted
him with a soft Fire.

Also many Christians being met together, Maximinian the Emperor sent some to
burn the Meeting place, and burn them all; but first they commanded a Crier to
Proclaim, that whosoever would have life should come out, and sacrifice to
Jupiter, otherwise they should be all burnt; then one steping up boldly in the
name of all the rest, said, We are all Christians, and believe that Christ is
our only God and King, and we will sacrifice to none but him: hereupon the Fire
was kindled and many Men Women and Children were burnt in that place.

And the punishments these Christians endured were so great, and horrible, as
no Tongue is able to express; as Whippings, Scourgings, Rackings, horrible
Scrapings, Sword, Fireship-boats, whereinto many were put, and sunk into the
Sea, as also hanging upon Crosses, binding some to the bodies of Trees, with
their Head hanging downwards, hanging others by the middles upon Gallowses,
till they dyed of hunger, throwing diverse alive to Bears, Leopards, wild
Bulls, pricking others with bodkins, and tallens of Beasts, till they were
almost dead.

The Christians being assembled at Antioch, where one Romanus ran to them,
declaring to them that the Wolves were at hand, which would devour them; yet he
exhorted them not to fear: A Band of armed men were sent against them, but they
kept their Faith; whereupon the Soldiers sent word to their Captain, that they
could not force the Christians to deny their Faith, by reason of Romanus, who
did so mightily encourage them; The Captain commanded that he should be brought
before him, which was done accordingly; What, says the Captain, Art thou the
Author of this Sedition? Art thou the cause that so many lose their lives,
Roman^^ Persecuted.
by the Gods I Swear, thou shall answer for them all, and shall suffer those
Torments that thou encouragest them to undergo: Romanus answered, Thy Sentance,
O Emperor, I willingly embrace, I refuse not to be sacrificed for my Brethren,
and that by as cruel Torments as thou can invent: The Captain being much
enraged with this his stout answer, commanded him to be trust up, and his
bowels drawn out; whereupon the Executionor said, not to Sir; this man is of
noble p^rantage, and therefore be may not be put to so ignoble a death; scourge
him then, quoth the Captain, with whips having knobs of lead at the end; but
Romamus song all the time of his whipping, requiring not to favor him for
nobilities sake; not the blood of Progenitors, says he, but the Christian
Profession makes me Noble. Then did he deride their Idol Gods, which enraged
the Tyrant, so that he commanded his sides to be lanced with Knives, till the
Bones were laid open; yet still did the holy Martyr preach the living God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ to him, for which the Tyrant commanded them to strike out
his teeth; also his face was buffetted; his Eyelids torn; his Cheeks gashed
with Knives; the skin of his Beard pulled off, yet the meek Martyr said, I
thank thee, O Captain, that thou have opened to me so many Mouths, as Wounds,
whereby I may Preach my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Look how many Wounds I
have, so many mouths I have landing and praising God. The Captain astonished at
his constancy, bad them give over tormenting him, yet he threatened to burn him,
reviled him, and blasphemod God saying, Thy crucified Christ is but a
yesterdayes God, the Gods of the Gentiles are of greatest Antiquity, But
Romanus taking occasion from hence, declared to him the Eternity of Christ,
withal, saying, give me a Christian Child of seven years old, and thou shall
hear what he will say; hereupon a Boy was called out of the Multitude, to whom
Romanus said, Tell me my pretty Babe, whether thou think it reason that we
worship Christ, and in Christ one Father, or else that we worship infinite
Gods; the Child answered, that certainly what we affirm to be God must needs be
one, which with one is one and the same, and inasmuch as this one is Christ, of
necessity Christ must be the true God; for that there be many Gods we Children
cannot believe. The Captain amazed at this, said, Thou young Villain and
Traitor, where, and of whom learnest thou this Lesson? of my mother, said he,
with whose milk I sucked, in this Lesson, that I must believe in Christ; The
mother was called, and she gladly appeared; the Tyrant commanded the Child to
be horsed up, and scourged; the Standers by beholding this merciless act, could
not refrain from tears; the joyful and glad mother alone stood by, with dry
cheeks, yea, she rebuked her sweet Babe for desiring a cup of cold water,
charging him to thirst after the cup that the Babes of Bethlem once drunk of;
she willing him to remember little Isaac, who willingly offered his neck to the
dint of his fathers Sword, etc. Then did the cruel Tormentor pull of the skin,
hair and all from the crown of the Child's head; the mother, Crying, Suffer my
Child, anon thou shall pass to him that will adorn thy head with a Crown of
Eternal glory. Thus the mother counsels and encourages, the Child is
encouraged and receives the strips with a smilling countenance. The Captain
seeing the Child invincible, and himself vanquished, commanded him to be cast
into the stinking Prison, whilst the Torments of Romanus were renewed and
increased; then was Romanus brought forth again to receive new strips upon his
old sorts, the flesh being torn, and the bare bones appearing, yet the cruel
Tyrant raging like a mad man, quarrelled with the tormentors for dealing so
mildly with him, commanding them to cut, prick and punch him; and then he
passed sentence upon him, together with the Child to be burned to death; to
whom Romanus, said, I appeal from this unjust sentence of thine to the
righteous Throne of Christ, that upright Judge; not because I fear thy cruel
Torments, and merciless handling, but that thy Judgments may be known to be
cruel and bloody. When they came to the place of Execution, the Tormentors
required the Child of his mother, for she had carried it in her Arms from the
Prison, she kissed it, delivered it to them, and as the Execution or was
striking off his head, she said, farewell my sweet Child.

All Laud and praise with heart and Voice,
O Lord, we yield to thee;
To whom the death of all thy Saints
We know most dear to be.
The Child's head being cut off the mother wrapped it in her garment, laid it to
her breast, and so departed. Then was Romanus cast into a mighty Fire which
being quenched with a great storm of Rain; the Tyrant commanded his Tongue to
be cut out, and afterward caused him to be strangled in the Prison.

Gordius a Centurion in Cesarea, in the heat of this Persecution left his
charge, living a sollitary Life in a Wilderness for a long time, at last when a
solemn Feast was celebrated to Mars in that City, and multitudes of People were
assembled in the Theater to see the Games, he came and got up into a
conspicuous place, and with a loud Voice said; behold I am found of those that
sought me not. The Multitude hereupon looked about to see who it was that spoke
this, and Gordius being known, he was immediately brought before the Sheriff,
and being asked, who, and what he was, and why he came thither? he told him the
whole Truth, professing, that he believed in Christ, valued not their
threatings, and chose this as a fit time to manifest his Profession in: Then
did the Sheriff call for Scourges, Gibbets and all manner of Torments; to whom
Gordius answered, That it would be a loss and damage to him if he did not
suffer diverse Torments and Punishments for Christ and his Cause. The Sheriff
more incensed hereby, commanded all those Torments to be inflicted on him, with
which Gordius could not be overcome, but sang, The Lord is my helper, I will
not fear what man can do unto me, and I will fear no evil, because thou Lord
art with me, etc. Then did he blame the Tormentors for favoring him, provoking
them to do their uttermost; the Sheriff not prevailing that way, sought by
flattery to seduce him, promising him Preferment, Riches, Treasures, Honor,
etc. if he would deny Christ; but Gordius deriding his foolish Madness, saying,
That he looked for greater preferment in Heaven then he could give him here upon
Earth. Then was he condemned, and had out of the City and burnt, Multitudes
followed him, and some kissing him with Tears, entreated him to pity himself,
to whom he answered, Weep not, I pray you, for me, but for the Enemies of God,
which fight against the Christians, weep, I say, for them which prepare a Fire
for us, purchasing Hellfire thereby for themselves in the day of Vengeance;
and cease, I pray you, thus to molest my quiet and settled mind; for truly, For
the Name of Christ, I am ready to suffer a Thousands deaths, etc. Others
persuaded him to deny Christ with his mouth, and to keep his Conscience to
himself: my Tongue (says he) which by Gods goodness I have, cannot be brought
to deny the author and giver of the same; for with the Heart we believe unto
righteousness, and with the Tongue we confessed unto Salvation; and thus
persuading and encouraging the People to be willing to dye in the like cause,
with an unappalled countenance he willingly gave himself to be burnt.

Basil in one of his Orations relates a Story of one Julitta, from whom one of
the Emperors Officers took all her Goods, Lands and Servants, contrary to all
Equity; whereupon she complained to the Judges, and a day of hearing was
appointed, where the spoiled Woman lamentably declared her Case; but the wicked
Villain that had robbed her, said, that her Action was of no force, for she was
an Outlaw, for not observing the Emperors Gods, and that she was a Christian:
His Allegation was allowed, Incense was prepared for her to offer to the Gods,
which if she refused, she should neither have protection nor benefit of the
Emperors Laws, nor continue her life; she hearing this, in the mighty Strength
of God, said, Farwell Riches, welcome Poverty; Farwell Life, welcome Death, all
that I have, were it a Thousand times more, would I lose, rather then speak one
wicked word against God my Creator; I yield thee most hearty thanks, O my God,
for this gift of Grace, that I can condemn and despise this frail and
transitory World, esteeming the Profession of Christ above all Treasures. And
thence forth, when any Question was proposed to her, her answer was, I am the
Servant of Jesus Christ; her Kindred and Friends earnestly soliciting her to
change her mind, but she constantly refused, with detestation of their
Idolatry: Then did the cruel Judge condemn her to be burnt, which Sentence she
embraced joyfully, as a thing most sweet and delectable; and so she addressed
her self to the Flames, in countenance, jesture and words declaring the Joy of
her Heart, coupled with singular constancy, and so embracing the Fire she
sweetly slept in the Lord.

Thus near the space of three hundred years was the Church of Christ assaulted
on every side, had small rest, no joy nor outward safety in this present World,
but in much bitterness of Heart, in continual tears and mourning under the
Cross passed over their days, being spoiled, imprisoned, contemned, reviled,
famished, tormented and martyred every where, by night assembling to sing
Praises to God; in all which their dreadful dangers, and sorrowful afflictions,
notwithstanding the goodness of the Lord left them not desolate, but the more
their outward Tribulations did increase, the more their inward Consolations did
abound; and the farther off they seemed from the joys of this Life, the more
present was the Lord with them with Grace and fortitude to confirm and rejoice
their Souls; and though their possessions and riches in this World were lost
and spoiled, yet were they enriched with heavenly Gifts and Treasures from
above an hundredfold; then was true Religion truly felt in the Heart; then was
Christianity not in outward appearance showed only, but in inward affection
received; then was the Name and Fear of God true in Heart, not in Lips alone
dwelling; Faith then was fervent, Zeal ardent, Prayer not swiming in the Lips,
but groaned out to God from the bottom of the Spirit; then was no Pride in the
Church, nor leisure to seek riches, nor time to keep them; contention for
Trifles was then so far from Christians, that well were they when they could
meet to pray together against the Devil the author of all dissension.

But after this the Christians coming to be in favor with the Emperors, and
riches and worldly wealth crept into the Clergy, and the Devil poured his venom
into the Church, so that true humility began to decay, and Pride to set in his
Foot; and after the Church through favor of the Emperors, was endued with
Lands, Donations, Possessions and Patrimonies, and the Bishops feeling the
smack of Wealth, ease and prosperity, began to swell in pomp and pride, and the
more they flourished in this World, the more Gods holy Spirit forsook them;
till at last the Bishops, who were for a long time kept low, and persecuted, as
before is related, now of persecuted People, began to be Persecutors of others,
and through their pride and riches were wholly degenerated from the true
Religion, and became Adversaties to God, and persecuted and destroyed his
living Witnesses and Members, as any were raised up from time to time to bear a
Testimony against their Apostasy, as in this following History will appear.

Part III
Containing an Account of the grievous Sufferings, Persecutions and Martyrdom
of the Servants of the Lord, inflicted on them by the Papists, after the
Apostasy from the ancient Primitive Gospel of Truth preached by Christ and his
Apostles.

John saw there would be an Apostasy from the blessed Faith in his days; Rev.
13.
for he saw a Beast rise out of the Sea, and the Dragon gave him his Power, and
his Seat, and great Authority, and all the World wondered after the Beast, and
they worshipped the Dragon which gave Power unto the Beast, and they worshipped
the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is a^le to make War with
him? And he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God, to Blaspheme his Name
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, and it was given unto him to
make War with the Saints, and to overcome them; and power was given him over
all Kindreds Tongues and Nations, and all that dwell upon the Earth shall
worship him, whose Names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain
from the Foundation of the World.

After this great Darkness had spread over Nations and People for some years,
the Lord raised up some from time to time to bare Testimony, according to their
measures of light and knowledge they had received, against the blindness and
ignorance that the World was under, as in the following instances the Reader
may observe.

Robert Grosthead living in the year 1240 wrote sharply to the Pope, (especially
for the evils he committed in England) that he was opposite to Christ, a
Murderer of Souls and an Heretic, and complained on his deathbed of the
corruptions which were sprung up in the Church, and inveighed bitterly against
the manifold abominations of the Church and Court of Rome, saying, well may
these verses be applied to them.

The whole World cannot suffice their greedy covetous mind,
Nor all their drabs and naughty pack, their filthy lusting kind.
For his thundering against the Romish Church, and for his public reproving of
the covetousness, pride and manifold Tyrannies of the Pope he was
excommunicated to the pit of Hell by Innocent the fourth, and cited to come to
his bloody Court; but he appealed from the Popes Tyranny to the Eternal
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, and shortly after died: Yea, before this there were
some found in England who testified against the corruptions of the Church of
Rome, and suffered for the same, for in the year 884. John Patrick Erigena wrote
a Book about the Lords Supper, which was afterward condemned by the Pope, and
he martyred for it.

In the year 960. some were braned in the Face at Oxford, and banished for
saying, That the Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon; Monkery a stinking
Carrion; their Vows nurses of sodomy; Purgatory and Masses, etc. inventions of
the Devil.

In the year 1126. there was one Arnold an English Preacher was cruelly
butchered for preaching against Prelates pride, and Priest wicked lives.

About the year 1160. about thirty Waldenses came into England, one Gerrard
being their Minister, these People laboring to win Disciples to Christ, were
quickly smelt out by the Popish Clergy, and great complaints were made against
them to the King, being Henry the Second, who caused them to be brought before
an Assembly of Bishops at Oxford, where Gerrard speaking for them, said, to
this effect; we are Christians, holding the Doctrine, of the Apostles; in their
Examinations they would not admit of Salt, Spittle, and Exorcisms in Baptism
and the Eucharist, nor of binding with the stool in Marriage; and being
admonished to repent and return to the unity of the Church, they despised that
counsel, and scorned threats, saying, Blessed are they which Suffer Persecution
for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Then did the
Bishops excomunicate them, and so delivered them over to be corporally Punished
by the King, who caused them to be burnt as Heretics in the forehead, and to
be whipped through Oxford, they singing all the while, Blessed are ye when men
hate you, and dispitefully use you; and the King further commanded that none
should persume to receive them to house, nor to cherish them with any comfort,
whereby they miserably perished with hunger and cold, none affording any
comfort to them.

These W^ldenses are rep^ted the first Reformers after the darkness of Popery
had overspread the Christian World, as before is related: And Pope Alexander
the third being informed, that diverse persons in Lions questioned his Sovereign
Authority over the whole Church, cursed Valdo and his Adherents, commanding the
Archbishop to proceed against them by Ecclesiastical censures to their utter
extirpation; whereupon they were wholly chased out of Lions; Valdo and his
followers were called Waldenses, who afterward spread themselves into diverse
Countries, and Companies, and for their Religion many of them were Burnt to
death, and fleeing into Germany and other Countries, many of them were put to
death; Pope Alexander (...) de a Decree that these Gospellers, and all their
Favorers should (...) comunicated, and that none should sell them any thing,
or buy (...) thing of them.

(...) the Waldenses, notwithstanding all the Popes Curses continued
publishing, that the Pope was Antichrist, the Mass an Abomination, the Host an
Idol, and Purgatory a Fable; whereupon Pope Innocent the third Anno 1198.
seeing that the other remedies were not sufficient to suppress these Heretics,
as he called them, authorized certain Monks Inquisitors who by process should
apprehend and deliver them to the secular power, by a far shorter, but much
more cruel way then was used formerly, for by this means they were by thousands
delivered into the Magistrates hands, and by them to the Executioners, whereby
in a few years all Christendom was moved with compassion to see so many burnt
and hanged that did trust only in Christ for Salvation.

And from the year 1170. to the year 1470. many noble Witnesses were raised up
in England, and elsewhere, to write against the Popes pride, calling him
Antichrist, etc. and to bear a public Testimony in these dark times against
the corruption and abominable Idolatry (which was crept into the Church) with
the hazard of their Lives and Liberties, amongst which were the Lollards, of
the increase of whom the Pope had often complained in Richard the second's
time, but could not prevail; and King Henry the fourth coming to the Crown by
Usurpation, to ingratiate himself with the Clergy, made a Law, that Lollards
should be burnt at the discretion of the Bishops; whereupon diverse suffered
Martyrdom, as follows.

William Sawtery of London in the year 1400. William Sawtery Suffered.
was imprisoned by Thomas Arondell Archbishop of Canterbury, William Sawtry
desired his cause might be heard by the Parliament then sitting for the
commodity of the whole Realm, but the Bishops would not allow it, but caused
him to be brought before them, who examined him upon eight Articles, the last
whereof was about Transubstantiation, to which he answered, that after the
words of Consecration there remained very bread, the same bread, which it was
before the words were spoken; whereupon he was condemned by Robert Hall, the
Bishops Chancellor, after which they got a warrant from the King, directed to
the Mayor and Sheriff of London for his burning.

William Thorp for the same cause was examined and imprisoned; and after a long
examination, before the Archbishop, was committed to another foul bad Prison,
where he never was before, of which place he writes as follows: After I was
brought to Prison, when all men were gone forth from me, the Prison doors fast,
being by my self, I began to Think on God, and to thank him for his goodness,
and I was then greatly comforted, not only for that I was then delivered for a
time from the presence of the Scorning, and from the Menacing of my Enemies,
but much more I rejoiced in the Lord, because that through his Grace he kept me
so, both among the flattering especially, and among the menacing of mine
Adversaries, that without heaviness and anguish of my Conscience I passed away
from them.

In his examination the Bishop told him, that it was certified against him,
that he preached openly and boldly in Shrewsoury that Priests have no title to
Tithes, the substance of his Answer was.

There was one came to Prison to me, and asked, what I said of Tithes, to whom
I said, ask the Priests and Clerks of the Town, the man replied, our Prelates
say, they are cursed that withdraw their Tithes; I said, I wonder any Priest
say men are cursed without the ground of Gods Word, and put the man to enquire
of the Priest of that Town, where the sentence of cursing them that Tythed not
was written in Gods Law; and I said further in the old Law, which ending not
fully till Christ rose up from death to life, God commanded Tithes to be given
to the Levites, but the Priests were to have but the tenth part of those Tithes
given to the Levites; now, said I, in the new Law neither Christ, nor any of
his Apostles took Tithes of the People, nor commanded the People to pay Tithes;
but Christ taught the People to show works of mercy, and I said not of Tithes,
but of pure Alms of the People Christ and the Apostles lived, when they were
so busy in preaching the word to the People, that they could not otherwise
work to get their livelihood.

Then the Bishop said, thou preachedst openly at Shrowsbury, that it is not
lawful to swear in any case.

Thorp said, by the Authority of the Epistle of James, and by witness of diverse
others, The Martyr against swearing o^ a Book.
I have preached openly in one place or other, that it is not lawful for any to
swear in any case by any Creature.

Then the Clerk asked, him whether it were not lawful for a Subject, at the
command of his Prelate, to kneel down and touch the holy Gospel book, and kiss
it, saying so help me God, and this holy Dome?

Thorp said, Ye speak full largly, what if a Prelate command his Subject to do
an unlawful thing, should he obey?

Archbishop; a Subject ought not to suppose that his Prelate will bid him do
an unlawful thing.

Thorp, But to our purpose related the Opinion of a master in Divinity in the
matter of Swearing, who said, it was not lawful either to give or take any such
charge upon a Book, for every Book is nothing else but diverse Creatures, of
which it is made of: Therefore to swear upon a Book is to swear by Creatures,
and this swearing is ever unlawful; this Sentence (says Thorp) witnesses
Chrysostom plainly, blaming them greatly that bring forth a book to swear upon,
charging Clerks, that in no wise they constrain any Body to swear, whether they
think a man to swear true or false. Then the Archbishop scorned me, and
threatened me with sharp and great Punishment, except I left this Opinion of
swearing.

Thorp said, It is not only my opinion, but the opinion of Christ, James and
Chrysostom, and diverse others.

The Clerk said, Will thou tarry my Lord longer? submit thee here meekly to the
Ordinance of holy Church, and lay thy hand upon a Book, touching the holy
Gospel of God, promising, not only with thy Mouth, but also with thine Heart to
stand to my Lords ordinance.

Thorp said, have I not told you here, how that I heard a Master of Divinity
say; That in such case it is all one to touch a Book, as to swear by a Book.

Bishop, There is no Master of Divinity in England, but if he hold this opinion
before me, I shall punish him, as I shall do thee, except thou swear as I shall
charge thee.

Thorp, Is not Chrysostom and ententive Doctor,

Bishop, Yea.

Thorp, If Chrysostom proves him worthy of great blame that brings forth a
Book to swear upon, it must needs follow that he is more to blame that swears
on that Book.

The Clark said, lay thine Hand upon the Book touching the holy Gospel of God,
and take thy charge.

Thorp, I understand that the holy Gospel of God may not be touched with man's
Hand.

It was mentioned before that he was imprisoned by Thomas Arondell Archbishop
of Canterbury; and it is recorded that he was by the said Bishop at last
secretly put to death in the year 1407.

John Purvey was imprisoned by Henry Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury in the
year 1421. John Purvey M^rty
he writ a Book against the Pope, wherein he calls him Antichrist, and that his
censures was like the blast of Lucifer. He, the said Purvey complained, that
many before him, who had impugned the Romish errorrs, had been imprisoned,
killed, and their Books burnt, and that none were suffered to preach but such
as would swear obedience to the Pope: For which he was imprisoned, and secretly
made away by the aforesaid Bishop.

In the year 1413. Roger Acton and other Persecuted.
Roger Acton, John Brown, John Beverly were persecuted, and put to death for
their Testimony to the Truth, in Giles's in the field, together with diverse
others, to the number of thirty six, all which were hanged with Fire made under
them. These godly persons in these dangerous times used to meet in the night in
Giles's in the Fields to pray and preach, which the Bishops having notice of,
they informed the King as if they intended to rebel; whereupon the King going
with many armed men at Midnight took these thirty six, and caused them to be
executed; the number that were assembled was greater, but they fled, amongst
whom was Will. Murle of Dunstable, Maultster, who being afterward apprehended
was drawn hanged and burnt, within few days after their Execution: Thomas
Arundel Archbishop was so stricken by God in his tongue, that he could neither
swallow any food, nor speak for diverse days before his death, A Judgment on a
Persecutor.
whereby he died in much misery. And this was thought to come upon him, for
that he so bound the Word of the Lord, that it should not be preached in his
days.

About this time there began to spring forth some light in Bohemia, the
Bohemians having received some of Wickliffs Books, began first to taste and
savor Christ's Gospel, till at length by the preaching of John Hus they
increased more and more in knowledge, insomuch that Pope Alexander the fifth
hearing thereof, began to stir Coals, and directed his Bull to the Archbishop
of Swinco, requiring him to look to the matter, that no persons should maintain
that Doctrine; and not long after this John Hus and Jerome of Prague were both
condemned, and burnt at Constance, by the Council held there; and yet their
blood did not satisfy their Adversaries, but they took further counsel for the
destruction of these People in the whole Nation; for when fifty eight of the
chief Nobles of Bohemia, in the Name of all the Commons Anno 1416. had sent
letters from Prague to the Council, complaining, that John Hus their Paster, an
innocent and holy man, and faithful Teacher of the Truth was unjustly
condemned, the Council instead of answering them, wrote Letters to some violent
Papists who were in Authority, to assist their Legate i^ oppressing the
Heretics; and thereupo^ ^^ey persecuted them all manner of ways, useing great
violence toward them; insomuch that they raised Tumults, and one Zisca, a
noble man of that Country, being sore grieved for the death of John Hus and
Jerome of Prague, minding to revenge the Injuries which the Council had done,
greatly to the dishonor of the Kingdom of Behemia, upon their Accomplices and
Adherents he gathered together a number of men of War, subverted the
Monasteries, and Idolatrous Temples, pulling down and breaking in pieces the
Images and Idols, driving away the Monks and Priests, which he said were kept
up in their Cloisters like Swine in their Styes to be fatted: when this Zisca
died, in remembrance of him the Bohemians ingraved over his Tomb, in the Greek
Language this Epitaph; John Zisca, a Bohemian, Enemy to all wicked and
Covetuout Priests, but with a godly Zeal.

Yet still as the Popish party prevailed they exercised all manner of Cruelty
upon the poor Servants of Christ, till they were utterly suppressed by force,
many of whom fled into the hilly Country, near to Silesia, to inhabit; where
throwing off all superstitious practices they applied themselves to the best
form that they according to the best of their understandings judged to be
nearest to the primitive Christians, calling themselves Brethren and Sisters:
They were branded with the Name of Piccards, a Name by which the Waldenses in
Piccardy were called: The purity that was amongst them much displeased the
Devil; for he raised a sudden and violent Tempest against them, and an Edict
was proclaimed, threatening death to all that should administer to the Piccards;
whereupon they were brought into great extremity: A second Edict came forth
that none of them should be suffered either to live in Bohemia, or Moravia;
hereupon they were dispersed amongst the Woods and Mountains, dwelling in
Caves, where yet they were scarce safe, so that they were forced to make no
Fire, nor dress any meat, but in the night time least the smoke should betray
them. In the cold Winter nights sitting by the Fire they applied themselves to
the reading of the Bible, and holy discourses, when in the Snow they went
abroad to provide them necessaries they went close together, and lest their
footsteps should betray them, the hindermost of them did draw after him a
great bough to cover the prints which their feet had made.

But to return again to give a futher account of Sufferers in England; John
Claydon of London Curryer in the year 1415. being examined before Henry Chichly
Archbishop of Canturbury, upon suspicion of Heresy, he confessed, that for
the same cause he had been formerly imp^^soned by Robert Braybrock, Bishop of
London, in Conway Prison two years, and at another time three years in the
Fleet, and also that he had several English books that he took delight to hear
read to him, one of the books was entitled, The Lanthorn of Light, in which
books were contained; 1 Speaking or Treating of the Text, how the Enemy did sow
the Tears, there is thus said, That wicked Antichrist, the Pope, has sowed his
Popish and corrupt Decrees, which are of no authority, strength, nor value; and
that the Bishops License for a man to Preach is the true Character of the Beast
and Antichrist: And that the Court of Rome is the Chief Head of Antichrist: And
that no Reprobate is a Member of the Church: His books being examined, were
condemned as heretical, to be burnt in the Fire, and Sentence of Condemnation
was past upon him by the Archbishop, and he was delivered to the secular
Power, by whom he was carried into Smithfield, and there burnt with one Richard
Turning a Baker

The next year after the burning of these men, the Prelates of England, seeing
the daily increase of the Gospel, and fearing the ruin of their papal Kingdom,
took counsel together, with what deligence they could to maintain the same:
Wherefore, to make their State and Kingdom sure, by Statutes, Laws,
Constitutions and Terror of Punishment, Henry Chichly Archbishop in his
Convocation holden at London makes another Constitution against the poor
Lollards, which was sent abroad Anno 1416. to be straightly executed; in which
their Officials (or Commissaries) were required twice every year at least, to
make diligent enquiry after such persons as were suspected of Heresy; and
Parishoners were to be sworn upon the Evangelifts to discover whether they knew
any frequenting privy Conventicles, or differing in their life and manners from
other Common Catholic men, or that should have any Books in the English Tongue.

After the setting out of this Constitution aforesaid, great inquisition
hereupon followed in England, and many good men, who began to have a love to
the Gospel, were much troubled, and great Sufferers.

John Gale of London was summoned before the Archbishop, for having a Book in
English, entitled, A Book of the new Law.

Ralph Mungin for the same Doctrine was condemned to perpetual imprisonment.

William White a follower of John Wickliff, he was of a devout holy life, is
recorded as a Morning Star in the midst of a Cloud, a man well learned, an
upright man, and well spoken, for the love of the Truth he gave over his
Preisthood, but not his preaching, for he continually labored to advance the
glory of God, by reading, writing and preaching: The chief matters charged
against him were, that he held; That men should seek for the forgiveness of
their sins only at the band of God.

That the Pope was an Enemy unto Christ's Truth.

That men ought not to Worship Images.

That the Romish Church was the Fig Tree which Christ Cursea, because it
brought forth no Fruit of the true Belief.

That such as wear C^ules, or be Anointed, or Shorn, are the Soldiers of
Lucifer. And that all such, because their Lamps are not burning, shall be shut
out when as the Lord shall come.



He was apprehended (for preaching and teaching such like Doctrine) in Norfolk,
and being had before the Bishop of Norwich; he was convicted, condemned and
burnt in Norwich in the 7th Month 1424.

When he was at the Stake beginning to open his mouth to speak to the People,
to exhort them and confirm them in the Truth, one of the Bishops Servants
struck him in the mouth, thereby to force him to keep silence: And thus this
good man received the Crown of Martyrdom, and ended this Mortal life, to the
great grief of all good men in Norfolk; his wife Joane following her Husbands
steps, A Woman Preacher.
according to her power teaching and sowing abroad the same Doctrine, confirmed
many in Gods Truth, wherefore she suffered much trouble and punishment the same
year at the hands of the said Bishop.

John Goose 1473. being called before the Bishops, and accused for Heresy,
being condemned and delivered to Robert Be^^isdon one of the Sheriffs of
London, to see him burnt in the afternoon, the Sheriff, like a charitable man,
had him home to his house, and there exhorted him to deny his Errors, he
desired the Sheriff to be content, for he was satisfied in his Conscience. The
Sheriff giving him some meat, he being very hungry did eat so freely as if the
hour of his death had not been known to be so nigh, saying to the Standers by,
leat now a good and competent Dinner, for I shall pass a little sharp Shower
ere I go to Supper; and having dined, he required that he might be led to the
place where he should yield up his spirit unto God.

About this time there being a war begun by the Turks against the Christians,
so called, there was great invasions and victories obtained by the Turks
against them, insomuch that the Turks in the space of Thirty years subdued.
Arabia, got Palestina, Phenetia, Siria, Egypt and Persia, raging with their
Armies throughout all Asia and Europe, Conquering as they passed: The causes of
which Invasions and Victories as is recorded, were the dissension, discord,
falsehood, idleness, unconstancy, greedy avarice, lack of Truth and fidelity
amongst Christian men, of all states and degrees both high and low; for by the
wilful defection and backsliding of the Christians, the Turkish power did
exceedingly increase, and them called Christians were by multitudes destroyed,
and as it is written there was hardly a Town, City or Village in all Asia and
Grecia, also in a great part of Europe and Africa, whose streets did not flow
with the Blood of the Christians, whom these cruel Turks Murdered after an
inhuman manner, Men and Women being by them cut in Pieces, Children stuck upon
Poles and Stakes till they gored them to death in the sight of their Parents,
draging some at their Horse tails till they famished them to death, tearing
some in Pieces tying their Arms and Legs to four Horses, treading the aged and
feeble under their Horses feet: The Princes of Rasia had both their Eyes put
out, with Basins red hot set before them, cuting some asunder in the midst, and
with other Torments putting many to death, insomuch that the streets and ways
of Chalrides did flow with Blood of them that were slain. The Pretors Daughter
of which City, being the only Daughter of her Father, and noted to be of
singular beauty, A remarkable story and worthy no^ing.
was saved out of the slaughter, and brought to Mahumet the Turk, to be his
Concubine, but she denying to consent to his Turkish filthiness, was commanded
therefore to be slain; it would be long to recite, and incredible to b^lieve
the cruel and horrible slaughters, and miserable tortures inflicted upon the
Christians by these Turks in most parts of Asia and Africa, but especially in
Europe.

And during all these Wars and Slaughters the Pope ceased not, continually
calling upon Christian Kings and Princes and Subjects to take the Cross, and to
War against the Turks, lest he should lose all; whereupon in that time of
Darkness and Popery, many took Voyages to the holy Land, and many Ba^tails were
fought for the winning the holy Cross; and yet no success, neither ever came it
prosperoufly forward, whatsoever the Pope attempted against him, what the cause
was may be easily judged, if the Reader considers the gross Idolatry,
profaneness and degeneration those called Christians were fallen into, having
wholly lost the true Faith once delivered to the Saints, and instead of being
Sufferers, which was once the portion of the true Christians, were now became
Persecutors and Destroyers of such as would not stoop to their Idolatry, and to
every foolish invention that the Popes from time to time did set up, and
commanded to be observed. It is recorded, that in the time of Pope Julius,
partly with his Wars, and partly with his Cursings in the space of seven years,
about 200000. Christians were destroyed, so addicted to Bloodshed was this
Pope; and as is written, surpassed many other Popes in Iniquity, that Wicelius
wrote thus of him, Marti illum quam Christo deditiorem fuisse, that is, that he
was more given to War, and Batail, then to Christ; which made Philip Melancton
write an Epigram in Latin upon him, the sense of which in English is as
follows: When Julius Pope against the French determined to make War,
As fame reports he gathered up great Troops of men from far,
And to the Bridge of Tyber then, marching as he were Wood,
His holy Keys he took and cast them down into the Flood,
And afterward into his hand he took a naked Sword;
And shaking it, braks forth into this fierce and warlike word;
This Sword of Paul (quoth he) shall now defend us from our Foe,
Since that this Key of Peter does nothing avail thereto.


In the year 1512. there was a fight between Lewis the French King and this
Pope Julius at Ravenna upon Easter day, where the Pope was vanquished, and had
of his Army slain to the number of Sixteen thousand; and the next year, this
Apostolical Warrior, which had resigned his Keys to the River of Tybris
before, made an end both of his fighting and living.

About this time began the reign of Henry the eighth King of England, in whose
reign great alterations and turns of Religion were wrought by the mighty
operation of Gods Hand, not only in England, but in Germany, and other parts of
Europe, such as had not been seen (although much groaned for) many hundred
years before; nevertheless, many suffered great Persecutions and Martyrdom in
this Kings reign, both in England, and elsewhere, and many good men were raised
up to bear witness to the Truth, yet some were of opinion, that it was not
wholly the Kings fault that so much Blood was spilt in his time, for the Bishops
were the Draco to make the bloody Laws, and it was the Bishops that were
earnest to see the Laws put in Execution, the King oftentimes scarce knowing
what was done; and but hearing of a Woman that was the second time put upon the
Rack, exceedingly condemned the party that was the cause of it, for using such
extreme Cruelty.

John Brown passing from London in a Gravesend-Barge, in which Barge there was
a Priest, and Brown sat hard by him; whereupon the Priest said, do thou know
who I am? Thou sit too near me: Brown said, no sir, I know not who you are;
I tell thee, said he, I am a Priest: What sir, said Brown, are you a Parson, or
a Viccar, or a Ladies Chaplain? I am, said he, a Soul Priest, and sing for a
Soul: I pray you sir, said Brown, where find you the Soul when you go to Mass?
I know not, said the Priest; and where do you leave it when you have done Mass?
I cannot tell, said the Priest. Brown replied, if you neither know where the
Soul is when you begin, nor where you leave it when you have done; how then do
you save a soul? Go thy ways, said the Priest, thou art an Heretic, and I will
be even with thee. And accordingly when they came to Land, the Priest taking
two others with him that were present in the Boat, went and complained to
Archbishop Warham, who sent a Warrant presently to apprehend Brown; and being
apprehended the Messenger bound his feet under his horse belly, and carried him
away to the Archbishop, neither his wife nor friends knowing whether he went,
nor what they would do with him. The Bishop cast him into Prison, where he lay
about six weeks, then was carried to Ashford where he dwelt, and there set in
the flocks all night, his wife hearing of it, came and set by him all night, to
whom he showed how cruelly he had been handled by the Archbishop, telling her
he could not set his feet to the ground, for they had burnt them to the bones
to make him deny Christ, which, said he, I durst not do, lest my Lord Christ
should deny me hereafter; Therefore, good wife, continue as thou have begun,
and bring up my Children Virtuously, and in the Fear of God: And so the next
day this Godly Martyr was burnt calling upon God and saying, into thy hands I
commend my Spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. At the fire the
n="" Chilton by name
Bailiff, bid cast in his Children also; for, said he, they will spring out of
his Ashes. And in Queen Mary's time his son Richard Brown was sentenced to be
burnt being a Prisoner at Canterbury, but that the Queen dying he escaped
suffering.

About this time many suffered very greatly for spaking against Worshipping of
Saints, against Pilgrimage, for having Scripture books in English, and a book
called Wickliss wicket.

One of which Sufferers by name Elizabeth Stamford, who being brought and
examined before Fitz James Bishop of London Anno 1517. confessed, that she was
taught by one Thomas Beale of Henly these words, Eleaven years before, viz.
That Christ fa^deth and nourishes his Church with his own precious Body, that
is, the Bread of Life, coming down from Heaven: This is, said she, the Worthy
Word that is Worthily received, and joined unto man, to be in one body with
him; so it is that they be both one, they may not be parted; This is not
received by chewing of Teeth, but by hearing with Ears, and understanding with
the Soul, and wisely working thereafter, and as Paul says, I fear me amongst
us, Brethren, that many of us be feeble, and sick, therefore my Counsel is,
Brethren, to rise and watch that the great day of Doom come not suddenly upon
us, as the Thief does upon the Merchant: And she said further, that the said
Thomas Beale taught her, that she should confess her sins to God, and that the
Popes Pardons and Indulgences were nothing worth.

John Stillman in the year 1518. was apprehended and brought before the Bishop
of London, and examined for speaking against Worshipping, Praying and Offering
unto Images, and for saying Wicklifs Wicket was a good book; and that when he
was apprehended he hid the same in an old oak, and did not bring it out to the
Bishop; he was sent to the Lollards Tower, and being afterward brought openly
to the Consistory at Paul's, it was further objected against him, that he should
say the Pope was Antichrist, and not the true Successor of Peter, or Christ's
Viccar on Earth; and that his Pardons and Indulgences which he granted in the
Sacrament of Penance were nongth, and that he would have none of them; and
likewise, that the College of Carpinals were Limbs of Antichrist, and the
Priests the Synogogue of Satan; and that the Doctors of the Church had
Subverted the truth of Holy Scripture, expounding it after their own minds; and
that he should say, he would abide by these Doctrines, and dye for it; and
wished there were twenty thousand of his Opinion to witness against them Scribes
and Pharisees: For his constant persevereing in these Principles, Doctors Head,
Vicar General past sentence against him as an Heritick, and so delivered him to
the Sheriffs of London to be openly burnt in Smithfield.

Thomas man martyr.
The next that suffered was Tho. Man, who for saying, the Popish Church was not
the Church, of God, but a Synagogue, and for holding several other Articles
contrary to the Popish Church, he was a long time imprisoned; but through
frailty and fear, having an oppertunity, he fled the Diocese of Lincoln; but
not long after was again apprehended, and brought before the Bishop of London,
and was shorty after delivered by Dr. Head to the Sheriff of London, to be
presently burnt, with this protestation, that he might not consent to the death
of any.

This Popish Chancellor would not seem to consent to his death, [Note]
but yet sent him to the Shambles to be Killed, for these were the words he
sent to the Sheriff: Receive this Person, and we desire in the bowels of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that the punishment and execution of due severity of him,
and against him in this part, may be so moderate, that there be no rigorous
Rigor, nor yet no dissolute mansuetude, but to the health and wealth of his
Soul, etc.

Thomas Man, was burnt by the Sheriff without any warrant, for Head delivered
him to the Sheriff in Paternoster-Row, protesting he had no power to put him to
death, and therefore desired the Sheriff to see him punished, et tamen citra
mortem, that is, without death, but the Sheriff had him to Smithfield, and
there caused him to be burnt

This Tho. Man, after he had escaped out of the Diocese of Lincoln, traveled
about in diverse places and Counties in England, and instructed many into the
Truth, as at Amersham, London, Bi^^erycay, Chelmsford, Stratford, Uxbridge,
Henly, Newberry, Suffolk and Norfolk, and diverse other places, and he teftified
himself, that as he went westward he found a great Company of well disposed
persons of the same Judgment with him, especially at Newberry, where, he said,
were a glorious and sweet Society of faithful favorers, three or four of which
were burnt for Religion.

And he travailed diverse other places, where he found many faithful Brethren,
who at that time were called by the name of Known Men, or Just Fast Men.

This Thomas Man confessed, as it is Registered in the Bishops Book, that he had
turned seven hundred People to his Religion, for which he thanked God; which
People were afterward called by the name of Protestants.

William Sweeting and James Brewster had the like Catholic Charity showed to
them by the Bishop, who being imprisoned for their Zeal to the Truth and
Religion, being surprised with fear, said, they submitted themselves to the
mercy of Almighty God, and to the favorable goodness of the Judge, upon which
submission the Popish Fathers were contented to give out a Sollemn Commission
to re^^ase and pardon them from the Sentence of Excommunication; but immediately
the Bishop pronounced upon them the Sentance of death and condemnation;
whereupon they were both delivered to the Secular power, and both burnt
together as one Fire in Smithfield.

I find further upon Record, that as the Light of the Gospel began more and
more to appear, and the number of the Professers thereof to grow, so
Persecution increased, and the Bishops bestired themselves to keep the Truth
from increasing and growing: whereupon ensued great Persecutions, and grievous
Affliction upon diverse in several Counties, especially about Buckinghamshire,
Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex; but although they were thus afflicted outwardly,
yet their inward fervency and zeal for the Truth was very great, as appeared by
their sitting up all Night in Reading and Hearing, and by their Expenses in
giving great prizes for a few Chapters of James and Paul in English: And
further, their great Travails, earness Seeking, their burning Zeal, their
Reading, their Watchings, their sweet Assemblies, their Love and Concord, their
Godly Living, their faithful Marrying only with the faithful; all which it is
written, that they were faithfully practicing and observing, being noted or
known among themselves by the name of Known Men, or Just fast Men; the Bishop
of Lincoln in his Inquisitions and Examinations of those Known Men was so
strict and cruel, that he caused the Wife to detect the Husband, and the
Husband the Wife, the Father the Daughter, and the Daughter the Father; Brother
against Brother, and Neighbor against Neighbor to witness one against
another, and that to death; causing them to Swear upon the Evangelists, whether
they knew the persons to be Known Men.

Agnis Ashford, being one of the said People, for preaching these words
following was Articled against, viz. We be the Salt of the Earth, if it be
putrified and vanished away, it is nothing worth; a City set upon a Hill may not
be hid; ye light not a Candle and put it under a Bushel, but set it on a Candle
stick, that it may give a Light to all in the House, so shine your Light before
men, that they may see your works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
And further, she did teach, saying, Jesus feeing his People, as he went up a
Hill, was set, and his Disciples came to him, he opened his Mouth and taught
them, saying, Blessed be the poor men in Spirit for the Kingdom of Heaven is
theirs; blessed be mild men, for they shall weld the Earth: For teaching this
Doctrine the Bishop strictly enjoined and commanded her to teach no more such
Lessons to any man, especially to her Children.

There were three persons accused for sitting up all night, reading in a Book
of Scriptures, in the House of one Durdant in Iven Court near Stanes; either
were accused for having of certain English Books, as Wickliffs Wicket, in which
was contained, how that man could not make the Body of Christ, which made us;
another Crime was, for having foam part of the New Testament, and a Book called
The Prick of Conscience; for these, and such like Allegations, did these men
greatly suffer, but the Lords Hand did work marvelously amongst them, so that
in a short space they did exceedingly increase, in such sort that the Bishop
was driven to make his Complaint to the King, to require his aid to suppress
them; the King being then young, and easily incensed with the Bishops
Suggestions and cruel Complaints, sent Letters to the Sheriffs to aid the
Bishop against these Known Men, whom he termed Heretics; upon the Kings Letter
he renewed his former sierceness, and began to show further violence upon the
poor flock of Christ, calling them before his Tribunal Seat, passing Judgment
upon some, and committing them to the Secular Arm to be burnt, namely Thomas
Bernard, James Morden, Robert Rave, John Scrivener, and others; compelling
Children to set Fire to their own Fathers, and Example of such Cruelty as is
contrary both to God and Nature.

The judicious Reader, whose eyes are enlightened may see what darkness the
World was drowned in at this time, the purity of the Christian Religion being
wholly lost, and turned into outward Observations, Ceremonies and Idolatry,
worshipping of Saints, going Pilgrimages to see the Relics which were as so
many lying Miracles; instead of worshipping the Living God, worshipped dead
Stocks and Stones; how the People were led, so the Priests were fed, no care
was taken; the Popes Laws and Canons being more set by then Christ's Testament
or the Scriptures; laying another Foundation then Christ and the Apostles laid,
upon which the Papists planted their infinite number of Masses, Derriges,
Obsequies, Mattens, hours of singing Service, Midnight-rising, Bare-foot-going,
Fish-tasting Lent fast, Ember-fast, Stations, Rogations, Jubilees, Advocation
of Saints, praying to Images, Pilgrimage, Walking, Vows of Chastity, wilful
Poverty, Pardons, Indulgen^^s, Penance, Auriculer Confession, Shaving, Powling,
Anointing, saying Prayers by their Beads, making Laws that none should wear
Sumptions Garments, or Rings or Ouches on their Fingers, but Bishops only when
they were saying Mass; these with other such like filthy Stuff has been set up
by the Popes Power in the night of Apostasy, and People have been forced to
Swollow it down, though some did it against their Stomachs and Consciences, and
if the least Light appeared in any to testify against their Trumpery, the
Beast and false Prophet made War with them, and rather then they would fail in
the extinguishing the Truth, they would destroy the persons in whom the least
appearance thereof manifested it self, as in the Relation before, and hereafter
will appear; about this time there were many eminent men raised up who were
accounted Fathers of the Protestant Church, as, Zuinglius, Occolempadius,
Melancton, and Martin Lather; this Martin Luther was a German born, and being
oppressed with the Popish Idolatry, began to preach against the Authority of
the Pope, and to bring in a reformation of Religion; for repressing of whom the
Council of Trent was called by Pope Paul the third in the year 1542. which
Council continued about forty years to no purpose, for they made so many
Decrees, which caused a great confusion amongst the Papists themselves. It is
Recorded of Luther, that he shined in the Church as a bright Star after a long
Cloudy and Obscure Sky; he preached expressly, that Sins are freely remitted
for the love of the Son of God, and that we ought faith fully to embrace this
bountiful gift; these good beginnings got him great authority, especially,
seeing his life also was correspondent to his profession, the consideration
whereof took place in the hearts of his Hearers, some of which were persons of
note; these things, and his preaching against Indulgences and Pardons sticking
in the Pope Stomach, he put forth a new Edict wherein he declared this to be
the Catholic Doctrine of the holy Mother Church of Rome, Prince of all other
Churches; That Bishops of Rome, which are Successors of Peter, and Viccars of
Christ, have this Power and authority given to release and dispense, also to
grant Indulgences available both for the Living, and for the Dead lying in the
pains of Purgatory; and this Doctrine he charged to be received of all faithful
Christian men under pairs of the great Curse and utter Separation from all holy
Church: Whereupon Luther's Books were condemned as Heretical and the Popes
Legate caused them to be burnt, which Martin Luther hearing of got a Company
together at Wittenberge, and making a Fire, burnt the Popes Decrees and Bull
then lately sent out against him; for which the Pope accursed him at Rome;
afterward he was sent for by the Emperor to Worms, who though he was much
persuaded not to go, said, As touching me, since I am sent for, I am resolved
and certainly intend to enter Worms in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
did appear; who according to a promise made by the Emperor, was safe conducted
thither, and home again; before the Emperor he said, I can affirm no other
thing but only this, that I have taught hitherto in simplicity of mind that
which I have though to tend to Gods Glory; being asked, whether he owned these
Books published in his name, he said, they were his Books; but he could not
submit his Books to the Judgments of men, which he had fortified by the
Authority of Scripture, unless they could prove by the Scripture the contrary;
professing, that except they could convince him by Testimonies of the
Scriptures, (for he did not believe the Pope, nor their general Councils, which
have erred many times, and have contradicted them selves.)

This opposition made by Luther much troubled the Pope, especially seeing the
Followers of Luther to increase, and therefore he earnestly desired some speedy
Remedy against the same, and to that end sent to the German Princes to move
them thereunto; but the German Princes, instead of putting the Apostolic
sentence in execution against Luther and his Followers, exhibited at the
Council of Norenberge 100 Grievances and Oppressions against the Court of Rome,
as forbidding Marriage to some, forbidding Meats, times of Marriages
restrained, and after released again for money, selling remission of sins for
money, the licentious Life of the Priests, and their great number of Holy
days, and such like other things, which would be too much to Mention.

This Martin Luther continued notwithstanding all the opposition against him
twenty nine year a Preacher, and at last dyed in peace in his own Country.

But there continued great Disputations and Reformations in diverse parts of
Europe, abolishing the Mass, and all Images and foolish Ceremonies, making
Decrees against them, that they should be utterly abandoned. After the
preaching of Luther great Troubles and Persecutions followed in many parts of
the World, and many Laws and Decrees were made against sech as bore Testimony
against the Ignorance and Error of those times, whereby many good Christian men
were cruelly handled; and lamentable it is to read how many poor men were
troubled both in Germany, France and England; some being Racked, some Exiled,
some driven to Caves in Woods, and some burnt to death; with many other cruel
Torments. It will be too large to mention every particular that suffered in
those days for Religion; but some of the chief are as follows.

In the year 1523. John Esch and Henry Voes, two young men, for owning the
Doctrine of Luther, were proceeded against as Heretics, being Examined by the
Popes Inquisitors at Lovaine; John Esch and Henry Voes Mar^yred.
the greatest thing that they were accused of as error was, That men ought to
trust only in God, inasmuch as men are Liars and deceitful in all their words
and deeds: Being condemned, they were led to the place of Execution in
Bruxells, they went joyfully, saying, They dyed for the Glory of God, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel, as true Christians, believing and following the Holy
Church of the Son of God, saying also, That it was the day which they had long
desired: Being come to the place of execution and stripped to their Shirts,
they stood so a great space, patiently and joyfully enduring whatsoever was
done unto them; praising God and singing for joy; a Doctor standing by,
exhorted Henry to take heed so foolishly to Glory himself; to whom he answered,
God forbid that I should Glory in any thing but only in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ: Another counseled him to have God before his eyes; to whom he
said I trust I carry him truly in my heart.

The next that suffered was Henry Stutven, burned in the borders of Germany;
when he was apprehended they fell upon him in a great rage and fury, drawing
him naked out of his bed, Henry Stutven Martyred in ^^rmany.
and bound his hands behind him; when he was brought to Hemming stead they
asked of him, what his intent was in coming to Diethmar, unto whom he gently
declared the cause of his coming, which was to preach the Gospel, they all in a
rage cried out, away with him, away with him, for we will hear him talk no
longer; then he being mavelous weary and faint required to be set on
horseback, for his feet were all cut and hurt with the Ice, because he was led
all night barefoot, but they mocked him and said he was an Heretic, and he
should go on foot; that night they had him to a man's House called Calden, and
there bound him in Chains in the Stocks, but the Master of the House being
compassionate would not suffer the cruel deed long, wherefore he was carried
away to a Priests House, and there shut up in a Cubbard, and by the rude people
mocked and scorned all night; in the morning about Eight of the Clock they
gathered together in the Marketplace to consult what they should do, where the
Rustical people, boiling in drink, cried out burn him, burn him to the fire
with the Heretic; then they bound him hands, feet and neck, and being brought
to the Fire, one of the Presidents appeared to pass a sentence upon him to be
burnt and consumed with fire; Henry lifting up his hands, said, Lord forgive
them, for they know not what they do; thy Name, oh Almighty God, is Holy; the
Fire as often as it was kindled would not burn; notwithstanding they satisfied
their minds upon him, striking and pricking him with their several kinds of
Weapons; the said Henry standing in his shirt, and when he began to pray, one
struck him on the face saying, thou shall first be burnt, and afterward pray
and prate as much as thou will; and thus this godly preacher finished his
Martyrdom which was in the year 1529.

John Clark Perscuted in France.
John Clark of Melden in France, for setting up a paper upon the Steeple-House
door against the Popes Pardons, calling the Pope Antichrist, for which he was
whipped three several days, and marked in the forehead, his mother seeing their
cruelty toward her son, constantly and boldly encouraged her son, blessing the
Lord with aloud voice that he was worthy to suffer; after the execution of the
foresaid punishment, the said John Clark removed to Mentz, and there followed
his trade, being a Wooll-Comber, where understanding that the people of the
City after an old accustomed manner Worshipped certain blind Idols, the said John
being inflamed with the zeal of God against them, went to the place where the
Images were, and broke them all down in pieces; the next morning the Cannons,
Priests, Monks, accompained with the People according to their accustomed
manner, went to their Idolatrous place of Worship, where they sound all their
blocks and stocks broken to pieces upon the ground, which fight sore offended
them, and searching out for the author of the fact, and John Clark being
suspected was apprehended, and upon examination confessed he did it, and showed
them the cause wherefore, and being brought to trial, he defended the pure
Doctrine of the Son of God against their Images and their false Worships, for
which he was condemned; being led to the place of Execution he there sustained
extreme Torments, for first his right hand was cut off, then his nose with
sharp pinchers was violently plucked from his face; all which, and much more he
quietly and constantly endured, testifying at the Fire against his Persecutors,
saying, their Imageswere Silver and Gold the work only of man's hand.

George Carpenter of Emering in Bavaria was burnt to death; when he was led out
of the Tower where he was Prisoner before the Council, George Carpender
Martyred.
diverse Friars and Monks followed him to instruct and teach him, whom he willed
to tarry at home, and not to follow him; when he came before the Council they
read his Offenses, viz. That he did not believe that a Priest could forgive a
man his Sins, and that he did not believe that God was in the Bread which the
Priests hang over the Alter, and that the Element of Water in Baptism does not
give grace; being urged to revoke these his Opinions, and that then he should
be set at Liberty, and go home to his Wife and Children, to which he answered,
any wife and Children are so dearly beloved unto me, that they cannot be bought
from me for all the riches and possessions of the Duke of Bavaria, but for the
Love of my Lord God I can willingly forsake them; at his Execution a
Schoolmaster repeating the Lords Prayer, George Carpenter said as follows,
Truly, thou art our Father, and no other, this day I trust to be with thee; Oh,
my God, how little is thy Name hallowed in this World; for this Cause, Oh
Father, am I now hear that thy will might be fulfilled, and not mine; the only
Living Bread Jesus Christ shall be my food; with a willing mind do I forgive
all men, both my Friends and Adversaries; Oh, my Lord, without doubt shall thou
deliver me, for upon thee only have I laid all my hope, in thee alone do I
trust, in thee only is all my confidence; I knew that I must suffer Persecution
if I did cleave unto Christ, who said, where the Heart is there is the Treasure
also; and whatsoever thing a man does fix in his Heart to love above God, that
he makes his Idol; and then being cast into the Fire by the Hangman he
joyfully yielded up his Spirit unto God.

The suffering of Weendal Muta.
Weendel Muta, a widow of Holland, receiving the Truth of the Gospel into her
Heart, was apprehended and committed into the Castle of Werden, and from thence
shorly after was brought to the Hague to trial, where certain Monks were
appointed to talk with her, to win her to recant, but she constantly persisted
in the Truth in which she was planted; a Woman of her acquaintance coming to
Prison to visit her, said to her, why do not thou keep silence, and think
secretly in thine Heart these things which thou believe, that thou may
prolong thy life here? Oh, (said the Widow) you know not what you say, it is
written. With the Heart we believe to Righteousness, with the Tongue we confess
to Salvation; at her Execution she commended her self into the Hands of God,
and after a fervent prayer was burnt to death.

John Pistorius Martyr.
About this time there suffered many more in Germany, for the witness of the
Gospel, viz. John Pistorius coming from Wittenberge, for speaking against the
Mass, and Pardons, and against the subtle abuses of the Priests, he was
committed to Prison with ten Malefactors, whom he did comfort, one of whom
being half naked, and in danger of cold, he gave his gown; his Father visiting
him in Prison, did not dissuade him, but bad him be constant; being condemned,
and coming to the Stake, he gave his neck willingly to the band wherewith he
was first strangled, and then burned, saying at his death, O death where is thy
victory.

There using to be a great Meeting near Antwerp, where one used to preach to a
great number of People, which Charles the Emperor hearing of, gave leave to any
that would, to take the uppermost Garment of all them that came to hear, and
offered thirty Guilders to him that would take the Preacher; afterward, when
the People were gathered, and their usual Minister being not there, One
Nicholas of Antwerp Martyr.
one Nicholas of Antwerp stood up and preached to the People, wherefore being
apprehended by a Butchers Servant, was put in a Sack and drowned at the Crane
at Antwerp 1524.

And certain of the City of Lovane were suspected of L^^^^ranism, the Emperors
Procurator came from Brussels thither to make Inquisition, after which
Inquisition made, certain Bands of armed men came and beset their Houses in the
night, where many were taken in their beds, plucked from their Wives and
Children, and sent to diverse Prisons, through the terror whereof many Citizens
revolted from the Gospel, The terror of Persecution caused some to revolt from
the Truth.
and returned again to Idolatry; but twenty eight there were which remained
constant in that Persecution, unto whom the Doctors and Inquisitor of Lovane
resorted, disputing with them, thinking either to confound them or convert
them; but so strongly the Spirit of the Lord wrought with the Saints, that the
Doctors went rather confounded away themselves; when they saw disputing would
not do, they used cruel Torments to enforce them; one of them was condemned to
perpetual Prison, which was a dark and stinking Dungeon, where he was suffered
neither to write nor read, nor any man to come at him, commanded only to be fed
with bread and Water; two of the said Prisoners were also burns, constantly
taking their Martyrdom.

One man beheaded, and two women buried afive
There was there an old man and two aged Women brought forth, of whom the one
was called Antonia, born of an ancient Stock in that City; these were
condemned, the man to beheaded, the two Women to be buried Quick, which death
they received very cheerfully; and the rest of the Prisoners that would not
abjure the Doctrine of Lather were put to the Fire.

One Percival of Lovane for owning the Truth was adjudged to perpetual
imprisonment, there to be fed only with Bread and Water, which punishment he
took patiently for Christ's sake, he was secretly made away, either famished or
drowned no man could learn how.

Justus Jusberge, a Skinner in Lovane, in the year 1544. for having a New
Testament in his House, Justus Jusberge Martyr.
was persecuted by one Darsardus, and committed to Prison, and the Jailer
commanded that none should speak with him; shortly after, the Doctors examining
of him touching the Popes Supremacy, Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, and such
Trumpery, whereunto he answered plainly and boldly, confirming his Answers by
the Scriptures; when they saw he would not be moved from his Faith, then they
condemned him to be burnt, but as a pretended favor to him, he was only
beheaded.

Giles Tilman of Brussels Cutler, born of honest Parents about the age of
thirty years, Giles Tilman Martyr.
he began to receive the Light of the Gospel, for which he was very Zealous and
fervent, he was in his nature very mild and pitiful, passing all other in
those parts, giving whatsoever he had to spare to the poor, living only upon
his Trade, he was persecuted by the Priest of Brussels, being taken at Lovane
spreading that Religion which the Pope called Heresy, his Adversaries used
great care to make him objure, but being a man of a singular wit, and constant
in his Religion, they went away many times with shame; after he had been kept
eight Months in Prison he was sent to Brussels to be judged, where finding
Franciscus Ensenes, and oaths of the same Religion in Prison, he exhorted them
to be constant to the Truth, that they might receive the Crown that was
prepared for them.

When the Gray-Friars, being sent unto him, would mis call and abuse him, he
ever held his peace at such private lajuries, wheresore they reported that he
had a dumb Devil in him, he might several times have escaped out of Prison, the
doors being set open, but he would not, being removed to another Prison, and on
the twenty second of the Month called January 1544. he was condemned to be
burnt privately, for openly they durst not do it, for fear of the People, he
being so well beloved; when tiding was brought him of his Sentence, he thanked
God that the hour was some wherein he might glorify the Lord; and being had to
the Fire, he willingly refined up his life into the Hands of the Lord.

Great Persecution in Gaunt, and other parts of Flanders Anno, 1543, 1544.
The Edict against the Lutherans to be read twice a year.
Charles the Emperor lying in Gaunt, the Friars and Docters obtained, that the
Edict made against the Lutherans might be read openly twice a year, which
caused a great Persecution to follow; so that there was no City nor Town in all
Flanders wherein some were not either Expulsed, Beheaded, Condemned to
perpetual Imprisonment, or their Goods Confiscate, without respect either to
Age or Sex, especially at Gaunt where some of the chief men in the Town were
burnt for their Religion.

Afterward the Emperor coming to Brussels, there also was terrible Slaughter
and Persecution of Gods People, namely in Brabant, Honegow and Artois, the
horror and cruelty whereof is almost incredible; insomuch that two hundred Men
and Women were brought out of the Country into the City, some of whom were
drowned, others buried Quick, others privately made away, others sent to
perpetual Imprisonment, whereby the Prisons were filled to the great sorrow of
them which knew the Gospel, the Professors whereof being now compelled either
to deny the same, or confirm it with their blood; the Story whereof was at
large set forth by Francis Ensenes in Latin, who himself was a Prisoner at the
same time in Brussels for the Truth Sake.

Martin Hoeurblock Martyr.
Martin Hoeurblock Fishmonger in Gaint 1545. being converted to the Truth from
the Superstitious Idolatry of the Papists, and a great change wrought in him,
having all his time till then lived a wicked and a fleshly life, was a wonder
to his Neighbors to see such a sudden change; the Franciscan Friars, who
before knew him, and remembering how beneficial he had been to them, now seeing
him so altered, and taking notice of his visiting the Prisoners, and comforting
them in Persecution, and confirming them that went to the Fire, they soon
caused him to be detected and imprisoned, and with grievous and sharp Torments
would have constrained him to utter more of the same Religion, to whom he
answered, That if they could prove by the Scripture, that his detecting and
accusing of his Brethren, whom they would afflict with the like Torments, were
not against the Law of God, then he would not refuse to prefer the honor of
God before the safeguard of his Brethren; he was soon after had to the Council
in Flanders, where the Causes laid against him were, the Sacrament, Purgatory,
etc. for which he was condemned and burn at Gaunt, all his goods being
Confiscate.

Nicholas and Francis Thiesten Martyrs.
Nicholas and Francis Thiesten Anno 1545. for standing firm in the Truth, and
bearing witness against the Church of Rome, and their Auriculer Confession,
Purgatory, etc. were condemned to be burnt, and coming to the place of
Execution, for exhorting the People, they put Wooden-gags in their Mouths; when
they were fastened to the Stake they patiently endured the Fire; the Mother of
these two men was for her stedfastness to the Truth condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment.

Adrian Tailor and Marion his wife Martyr.
Adrian Tailor and Marion his wife of Dornick Anno 1545. by reason of the
Emperors decree at Worms against the Lutherans, were apprehended and
persecuted; Adrian not so strange as a man, for fear gave back, and was but only
beheated; the wife stronger then a Woman, withstood their threats, and abode
the uttermost, and being enclosed in an Iron grate, formed in shape of a Pasty,
was laid in the Earth, and buried quick; when the Adversaries first told her
that her Husband had relented she believed them not, but as she was going to
the place where she was to die, passing by the Tower where he was, she called
to him to take her leave, but he was gone before.

Peter Bruly Martyrs.
Peter Bruly, of Stratsburge, at the earnest request of faithful Brethren, went
down to visit the Lower Counties, about Artois, which the Magistrates of
Dornick hearing, shot the gates of the Town, and made search for him three
days, he was privately let down the Wall in the night by a basket, and as he
was let down into the Ditch, ready to take his way, one of them which let him
down leaning over the wall, to bid him farewell, caused unawares a stone to slip
out of the wall, which falling upon him brake his Leg, by reason whereof he was
heard of the watchmen, complaining of his wound, and so was taken: So long as
he remained in Prison he ceased not to preach the Truth to all that came unto
him, he wrote his own Confession, and Examination, and sent it to the Brethren,
he wrote also another Epistle to them that were in Persecution, another he
wrote to all the faithful, another Letter he wrote to his wife the same day he
was burned; he remained four Months in Prison before he was sentenceed to be
burnt; Letters were sent from Duke Frederick, of the Lant-grave to entreat for
him, but he was burnt before the Letters came.

Peter Moice Martyr.
Peter Moice being converted to the Truth by Peter Bruly, was apprehended and
let down into a deep Dungeon under the Castle-Dirch, which was full of filthy
Vermin, the Friars coming to examine him, he told them, whilst he lived an
ungodly life they never concerned themselves with him, but now for favoring
the Word of God they sought his blood; being brought before the Senate, he
would have boldly answered to what they objected against him, but they
interrupted him, to whom he said, if you will not suffer me to answer for my
self, send me back to Prison among the Toads and Frogs, which will not
interrupt me, while I talk with my God, and continuing constant in the Truth
was at last burnt to death.

Nicholas Frenchman Martyr.
Nicholas Frenchman having been at Geneva, intending to go into England, but in
his way was apprehended by the Lieutenant of Dornick and being bound hands and
feet was brought to Burgis, and there laid in a Dungeon, the Friars when they
came to examine him, went away in a shameful rage, saying, he had a Devil; and
crying, to the fire with him. Soon after the Judges condemned him to be burnt
to Ashes, at which sentence giving, he blessed the Lord which had counted him
worthy to be a witness in the cause of his beloved Son; going to the place of
Execution he was threatened, that if he spoke they would put a wooden ball in
his mouth, nevertheless, being at the Stake, he minded not their threats but
cried out with a loud voice, saying, Oh Charles, Charles, how long shall thy
heart be heardned; with that one of the Soldiers gave him a blow; then he
said, O miserable People, who are not worthy, to whom the Word of God should be
Preached; then the Friars cried out, he has a Devil, to whom he said, depart
from me all you Wicked, for the Lord has heard the voice of my Weeping: So in
the midst of the fire commended his Spirit unto God, and ended this life.

Bertrand Le Blais Martyr.
Bertrand Le Blais at Dornick in the year 1555. Suffered lamentably, his
Torments being almost incredible that the Tyrants showed unto him, his
constancy was admirable. This Bertrand being a Silk-Weaver, having something
upon his Spirit, set his House in order, and desired his Wife and Brother to
pray that God would establish him in his enterprise, that he was going about,
which was, upon Christ-mass (day so called) he went to the high place at
Dornick, where he took the Cake out of the Priests hands, as he would have
lifted it over his head, at Mass, and stamped it under his feet, saying, that he
did it to show the Glory of that God, and what little power he has; at the
sight hereof the People were amazed, and he hardly escaped with his life; it
was not long before the Governor of the Castle heard of this passage, who like
a mad man threatened he should be an example to all posterity; Bertrand being
brought before him, he asked him if he repented of his fact, who answered no,
and if he had a hundred lives he could give them in that Quarrel; then was he
thrice put to the Pin-bank and Tormented most miserably, to utter his Setters
on, then they past sentence against him, and this was executed; First he was
drawn from the Castle of Dornick to the Market place having a ball of Iron put
in his mouth, then he was set upon a Stage where his Right hand was Crushed and
pressed between two hot Irons, with sharp Iron edges fiery red, in the like
manner they served his right foot, which Torments he endured with marvelous
constancy, that done, they took the ball of Iron out of his mouth, and cut out
his Tongue; notwithstanding his Tongue was cut out, he still called upon God as
well as he could, whereby the hearts of the people were greatly moved,
whereupon the Tormentors thrust the Iron ball into his mouth again, from thence
they brought him down to a lower Stage, where his legs and hands were bound
behind him, with an Iron Chain going about his body, and so he was let down
flat upon the Fire, the Governer standing by, caused him to be plucked up
again, and so down and up again, till at last the whole body was consumed to
Ashes.

James Faber and three others Martyrs.
James Faber and three others suffered at Valens, James Faber being an old man,
said, that though he could not answer nor saisfie them in Reasoning, yet he
would constantly abide in the Truth of the Gospel.

Godfry Hamell Martyr.
Godfry Hamell a Tailor taken and condemned at Dornick, when they had condemned
him by the Name of an Heretic, nay, said he, not an Heretic, but a Servant of
Jesus Christ; when the Hangman went about to Strangle him, to diminish his
punishment, he refused, saying, that he would abide the Sentence that the
Judges had given.

Besides these that suffered in Germany before mentioned, a great number there
was, both in the Higher and Lower Countries of Germany, which were put to death
for Religion, many of them were burnt, some buried alive, some secretly
drowned, many of their Names are mentioned in the Acts and Monuments, but
little of the circumstances of their Trial and Execution being mentioned I have
omitted them for brevities sake.

Sufferers in France for bearing the like Witness to the Gospel.
Dennis Renix Martyr.
Denis Renix at Melde in the year 1558. Was burnt for testifying against the
Mass, he was always wont to have in his mouth the Words of Christ, He that
denies me before men, him wi^^ I also deny before my Father; he was burnt in a
slow Fire, and did abide much Torments.

Note, upon a complaint made to the Council, called Le Chamber Ardante, that
the Judges suffered Heretics to have their Tongues; Immediately thereupon a
Decree was made, that all which were to be burned unless they recanted at the
fire, should have their Tongues cut off, which Law afterward was diligently
observed.

Stephen Polliard Martyr.
Stephen Polliard coming out of Normandy in the year 1546. (where he was born)
unto Meux, tarried there not long, but he was compelled to flee, and went to a
Town called Fera, where he was apprehended and brought to Paris, and there cast
into a foul and dark Prison, in which Prison he was kept in Bonds and Fetters a
long time, where he saw almost no Light; at length being called for before the
Senate, and his sentence given to have his Tongue cut out, and to be burnt
alive, his Satchell of Books hanging about his neck; O Lord, said he, is the
World in blindness and darkness still; for he thought, being in Prison so long
that the World had been altered from its old darkness to better knowledge, at
last with his Books about his neck he was burnt to death.

Florent Venote Martyr.
Florent Venote remained a Prisoner in Paris four years, during which time he
was put to diverse Torments, one kind of Torment was, he was put in a narrow
place, so straight that he could neither stand nor lie, which they called the
Hose, or Boots, because it was strait below, and wide above; in this he
remained seven weeks, where the Tormentors affirm, that no Thief or Murderer
could ever endure 15 days, but were in danger of Life or Madness; and at last
on the 9th of the Month, called July, he was burnt to death, with diverse other
Martyrs who were burnt as a Spectacle at the Kings coming into Paris.

The next that suffered was a poor Tailor in Paris, who for working upon
Holy Days (so called) and denying to observe them, A poor Tailor in Paris
Martyred.
was clapped in Prison, the King hearing of it sent for him before him, and some
of his Peers; being before the King, he answered with great boldness, wit and
memory, defending the cause of Christ, neither flattering their Persons nor
fearing their threats, which struck the King in a great damp, in museing in his
mind; which the Bishops seeing, committed the poor Tailor again to the hands of
the Officer, saying, he was a stubborn Fellow, and fitter to be punished, then
to be marvelled at; within few days after he was condemned to be burnt alive.

The next year two men for friendly admonishing a certain Priest which in his
Sermon had abused the Name of God, were both burned; another young man of the
Age of eighteen years, for rebuking a man in Paris for Swearing, being
suspected to be a Lutheran, was apprehended, and brought before the Council at
Paris, who committed him to Prison, where he was so cruelly Racked and
Tormented, that one of the Persecutors seeing it, could not but turn his back
and weep; when he was brought and put in the Fire, he was plucked up again upon
the Gibbet, and asked, whether he would turn, to whom he said, that he was in
his way toward God, and therefore desired them to let him go.

John Joyer, and his Servant being a young man, in the year 1552. coming from
Geneva to their Country with certain Books, John Joyer and his Servant and his
Servant Martyrs.
were apprehended by the way, and had to Toulouse; where the Master was first
condemned, the Servant being young, was not so prompt to answer, but directed
them to his Master, to answer them; when they were brought to the Stake, the
young man first going up, began to weep, the Master fearing lest he should
recant ran to him, and he was comforted; as they were in the Fire, the Master
standing upright to the Stake shifted the Fire from him to his Servant, being
more carfull for him, then for himself; and when he saw him dead, he bowed down
himself in the flame and so expired.

Mathias Dimonetus Merchant at Lions, in the year 1553. having been a man of a
Vicious and detestable life, Mathias Dimonetus Martyr.
was notwithstanding through the Grace of God brought to the knowledge and
Savor of his Truth, for a Testimony to which he was soon after Imprisoned;
being in Prison he had great conflicts with the infirmity of his own Flesh, but
especially with the temptation of his Parents, Brethren and Kinsfolks, and the
great sorrow of his Mother; nevertheless the Lord so assisted him that he
endured to the end; and was burnt to death.

In the year 1558. the fourth day of the Month called September, there being a
Company of the Faithful, to the number of three or four hundred met together at
Paris in a certain House, in the beginning of the night, they were discovered
by some Priests, the House was soon beset, and the City in an uproar, many
being in an extreme rage, furiously seeking to have their blood; at the
suddenness of this thing, the poor people were stricken in great fear; and fell
to prayer, about six or sevenscore of them having Weapons, escaped through the
Multitude, save only one, who was knocked down with Scones, and destroyed; the
Women remaining in the House were taken by the Magistrates and had to Prison;
in their passing to the Prison they were plucked and haled by the rude
Multitude, who tore their Garments, and pulled of their Hoods, and disfigured
their Faces with dirt; they were accused to the King by a Priest, that they put
out the Candles in their Meetings, and went together Jack and Gill; and that
they maintained there was no God, and denied the Divinity and Humanity of
Christ, the Immortallity of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the Body, etc.
these things a lying Doctor charged on them, without any proof, moving the King
and People to destroy them; and shortly after a Commission was directed out by
the King to certain Counselors to try and give Judgment upon the aforesaid
Sufferers, a particular Relation of whose Execution is at large inserted by my
Author, but there being little material circumstances either in their Trial or
Execution, wherefore I thought not meet here to insert them.

A Relation of the manner of the Spanish Inquisition.
About this time many suffered Martyrdom under the cruel and bloody Inquisition
in Spain, first began by King Fardinandus and Elizabeth his wife; the Spainsh
Priests do hold the holy and sacred Inquisition, as they call it, cannot err,
and that the holy Fathers the Inquisitors cannot be deceived; if any be
apprehended as favorers of Heretics, he is carried and put into a horrible
Prison, and none permitted to come to him, but there he is kept alone in a
place where he cannot see so much as the ground, and often Whipped, Scourged,
Irons put upon him, Tortured and Racked, sometimes brought out and showed in
some higher place to the People, as a Spectacle of rebuking Infamy; and thus
some are detained there many years, and murdered by long Torments in which is
more cruelty executed then if they were at once slain by the Hangman; during
all their time of imprisonment, whatsoever process is done against them, no
person knows it, but only the holy Fathers and Tormentors, which are sworn to
execute the Torments; all the proceedings of the Cour of that Execrable
Inquisition are done in hugger mugger, the Accuset is secret, the Crime secret,
and the witness secret, by the rigor of which Inquisition many good men have
been destroyed, both in Spain and Italy.

In the Kingdom of Naples in the year 1560. in the time of Pope Pius the fouth,
was begun a hot Persecution against the Protestants, many men and their wives
being slain.

Likewise the same year in Calabria, the number of Eighty eight Persons both
old and young suffered for the Protestant Religion by the Papists, Eighty eight
person, Butchered for Religion in Calabria
all which were put together in one House, and taken out one after another, and
laid upon the Butchers Stall like the Sheep in the Shambles, with one bloody
Knife they were all killed one after another, a Spectacle most tragical for all
Posterity to remember, and almost incredible to believe, but that it is
confirmed by two Epistles of sufficient credit, which are at large incerted in
the Book of Martyrs.

The next matter to be treated on is the great Persecution and Destruction of
the People of Merindol and Cabries in the Country of Province, where not a few
persons, but whole Villages, and Townships, with the most part of all the
Country both Men, Women, and Childen, were put to all kind of cruelly, and
suffered Martyrdom for the profession of the Gospel.

From the year 1200. they had refused the Bishop of Rome's Authority,
Persecuted in Merindol and Cabries.
for this cause they were often accused and complained of to the King, as
Contemners and Dispisers of the Magistrates, and Rebels; wherefore they were
called by diverse names according to the Countries and places where they dwelt;
for in the Country about Lions, they were called the poor People of Lions; in
the borders of Sarmatia, and Liv^nia, and other Countries toward the North,
they were called Lollards; in Flanders and Artois, Turrelupines, of a Desert
where Wolves did haunt in Dolphine; with great dispite they were called
Chagnars, because they lived in places open to the Sun without House or
harbor, but most commonly they were called Waldoys of Waldo, who first
instructed them in the Word of God, as before is related, which name continued
till the name of Lutherans come up, which above all others was most hated and
abhorred.

Notwithstanding in these most spiteful Contumelies and Slanders, the People
dwelling at the foot of the Alps, and also in Merindol, and Cabries always
lived so Godly, so uprightly and justly, that in all their life and
conversation there appeared to be in them a great fear of God; and that little
Light of true Knowledge which God had given them, they labored by all means to
kindle and increase daily more and more, sparing no charges, whether it were to
purchase the Scriptures in their own Language, or to encourage one another in
Godliness, traveling into other Countries, even to the furthest parts of the
Earth, where they had heard, that any Light of the Gospel began to shine.

But the more zealous these people were for a Reformation in their Religion,
the more did the fury and rage of Persecution stir in the Bishops, Priests and
Monks in all Province against them; amongst the rest, one Jo. de Roma, a Monk
obtaining a commission to examine those that were suspected to be of the
Waldoys or Lutherans profession, forthwith ceased not to afflict the faithful
with all kinds of Cruelty that he could devise or imagine; The Cruelty of the
Papists.
amongst other most horrible Torments, this was one, which he most delighted
in, and most commonly practiced, he filled Boots with boiling Grease, and put
them upon their Legs, tying them backward, to a Form with their Legs hanging
down over a small Fire, and so he examined them; thus he tormented very many,
and in the end most cruelly put them to death: this cruelty coming to the
French Kings ear, he was much disgusted, wherefore he wrote to the Parliament
at Province, that the Monk might be apprehended and punished, but he conveyed
himself away; but the Lord not long after smote him with sickness, indeed a
most horrible and strange Disease, his Body being greatly tormented with Pain,
and could get no Help; being had to an Hospital, his Flesh rotted away, and
stunk so that none cared to come near him; and in this Rage and Torment he was
under, he often cried out, Who will deliver me? The Just Judgment of God
against a cruel Persecutor.
Who will Kill me, and deliver me out of these Torments and Pains, which I know
I suffer for the evils and oppressions that I have done to the poor men? and in
this anguish he most miserably ended his unhappy days.

After the death of this persecuting Monk, the Bishop of Aix by his Official
continued the Persecution, and put a great Multitude of them in Prison, of whom
some by force of Torments revolted, from the Truth, the others, which proved
constant, after he had condemned them of Heresy, were put into the hands of
the ordinary Judge, which at that time was one Meiranus, a cruel Persecutor,
who without any form of Process or order of Law, such as the Official had
pronounced to be Heretics, he put to death with most Cruel Torments.

After this Persecutor was dead one Bartholomew Casenes, President of the
Parliment of Province, a Pestilent Persecutor, whom God at length struck with a
fearful and sudden Death: in the time of this Tyrant those of Merindol were
cited personally to appear before the Kings Attorney; but they hearing that the
Court had determined to burn them without any Process or Order of Law, durst
not appear at the day appointed, for which cause the Court awarded a cruel
Sentence against Merindol, and condemned all the Inhabitants to be burned, both
Men, Women and Children, and their Town and Houses to be rased to the Ground,
and their Country to be made a Desert and Wilderness never more to be
inhabited. This bloody Arrest or Decree seemed strange and wonderful, same
openly saying, They marvelled the Parliment should be so mad to give out such
an Arrest so manifestly injurious and unjust, and contrary to all Reason and
Humanity; others said, The Judges are not bound to observe either Right or
Reason in exterpating such as are suspected to be Lutherans; but what ever was
said in opposition to this Decree the Bishops from time to time used all the
opportunities to endeavor to put the same in execution as appears in the
following Relation.

Amongst these poor men that suffered in Merindol there was a Bookseller, who
for ^etting publicly to sale certain Bibles in French and Latin, in the sight
of the Bishop of Aix and other Prelates, they were thereat greatly moved, and
caused him to be apprehended, and committed to Prison, and afterward he was
sentenced and burnt: the Prelates seeing great dissension among the people of
Avinion, and that many murmured at the death of this Bookseller for selling
the Bible, to fear the people the next day they put out a Proclamation against
all, French Bibles, That none should keep them in their Hands upon pain of
Death.

After this Proclamation the Bishop of Aix endeavored his utmost to prosecute
the people of Merindol, being very earness with the President to that effect,
and to put the Parliaments Arrest and Decree in execution, the President
showing himself unwilling to the Bishop to shed Innocent Blood pleaded, The
King would be displeased to have such destruction made of his Subjects: then
said the Bishop, Though the King at the first do think it ill done, we will so
bring it to past, that in a short space he shall think it well done; for we
have the Cardinals on our side, especially Cardinal Tournon.

By these Arguments of the Bishop, the President and Council of Parliament were
persuaded to raise a Force, and destroy the people of Merindol, according to
the Decree: The Inhabitants of Merindol hearing thereof, and seeing nothing but
present death to be at hand, with great Lamentation commended themselves and
their Cause unto God by Prayer, and made themselves ready to be murdered, as
Sheep for the Slaughter; whilst they were in this grievous distress, there was
one raised up called the Lord of Alner, to plead with the President on their
behalf, giving the President several Reasons, why he ought not to destroy these
poor Christian man of Merindol; by which Reasons the President was persuaded,
and immediately called back his Commission, which he had given out, and caused
the Army to Retire, who were within a mile and a half of Merindol; which the
people of Merindol understanding, that the Army was retired, gave thanks unto
God, comforting one another with Admonition and Exhortation, Always to have
the fear of God before their Eyes, and to seek after the everlasting Riches.

The noise of these Proceedings, and of this Arrest and Decree, coming to the
King of France his ear, he appointed persons to make Inquiry into the whole
matter, and to make a Report to him thereof, and what manner of People these
Merindolians were.

These Deputies brought a Copy of the Arrest Decree and Proceedings unto the
Kings Lieutenant, declaring unto him the great Injuries, Polling, Extortions,
Exactions, Tyrannies and Cruelties which the Judges, as well Secular as
Ecclesiastical, had used against them of Merindol and others, as touching the
behavior and disposition of those which were persecuted, they reported, that
the most part of the men of Province, affirmed them to be men given to great
Labor and Travel, and that about two hundred years past (as it is reported)
they came out of the Country of Piedmont to dwell in Province, and took to
tillage and to inhabit many Villages destroyed by the Wars, which they had so
well husbandred, that there was now great store of Wine, Oil, Honey and
Cattle, so that Strangers were greatly relieved; and that they were a Peaceable
Quiet People, beloved of all their Neighbors, man of good Behavior, constant
in keeping of their Promise, and paying of their Debts, without suing men at
Law; that they were also Charitable men, giving Alms, relieving of the Poor,
and suffered none amongst them to lack, or be in necessity, harboring and
Nourishing poor Strangers and Passengers in their necessities: moreover that
they were known by this throughout all the Country, that they would not Swear,
and that if they heard any Swear, blaspheme, or dishonor God, they strait-way
departed out of their Company; this was the tenor of the report made to the
Kings Lieutenant touching the Life and Behavior of these Inhabitants of
Merindol who were persecuted by the Popish Bishops and Cardinals, which the
Lieutenant advertised the King, who was a good Prince, moved with mercy and
pity, sent Letters to the Parliament, Expressly charging and commanding them
that they should not hereafter proceed to prosecute the said Arrest and Decree
so Rigorously as they had done before against this People, and not to molest or
trouble them in person or goods, and to command them to set at Liberty all
Prisoners, which either were accused or suspected of Lutheranism; and withal
included in his Letter, That if any of them should be convict of Heresy by the
Scriptures of the old and New Testament, they should be caused to abjure.

Notwithstanding this Letter was writ in favor unto the people of Merindol,
yet the Bishop of Cavaillon took advantage at one part of the Letter to
prosecute his Malice against the people of Merindol for upon the Kings Letter
the Parliament ordained, that John Durand Counceller of the Parliament, with
the Secretary, and the Bishop of Cavaillon, with a Doctor of Divinity should go
to Merindol, and there declare to the Inhabitants the Errors and Heresies which
they knew to be contained in their confession of their Faith, and make them
apparent by good and sufficient Information, and having so convicted them by
the Word of God, they should make them to renounce and abjure the said
Heresies, and if they did refuse to abjure, then to make report thereof, that
the Court might appoint how to proceed against them; the Bishop of Cavaillon
would not tarry till the time appointed by the Court for the Execution of this
Matter, but he himself with a Doctor went to Merindol to make them abjure, but
they refusing he grew very angry with them.

Shortly after John Durandus Councellor of the Parliament, went to execute the
Commission, according to order, to whom the Bailiff of Merindal said, it
seems unto me that there is no due form of Process in this Judgment, for
there is no party here, that does accuse us; if we had any Accuser present,
which according to the rule of the Scripture, either should prove by good
demonstration out of the New and Old Testament, that whereof we are accused, or
if he were not able, should suffer punishment, due unto such as are Heretics;
I think he will be as greatly troubled to maintain his Accusations, as we to
answer unto the same.

Thus things debated for some time, but the Bishop and Doctor were much
confounded, and the Inhabitance of Merindol were in rest and quietness, for a
space, until John Miniers an exceeding bloody Tyrant began a new Persecution;
he put five or six of his own Tennants into a Cistern under the ground, and
closing it up there he kept them till they died for Hunger, pretending that
they were Lutherans; but it was to get their goods and possessions by these
practices this Wretch grew great, and wealthy, and became President of the
Parliament, and Lieutenant General in the Country of Province, he employed all
his power to obtain Letters Pattens from the King to prosecute the Decree
against the people of Merindol, which by the help of the Cardinal of Tournon,
he did obtain. After this he gathered all the Kings Army, and employed them to
the destruction of Merindol, Cabries and other Towns, to the number of twenty
two, giving Commission, To spoil, ransack, burn and destroy all together, and
to kill Man, Woman and Child without mercy. The people of Merindol seeing all
in a flame round about them, left their Houses, and fled into the Woods,
carrying their Children upon their shoulders a days Journey, but the way that
they were to pass through being rough and cumbersome they thought it expedient
to leave the Woman and Children behind, hoping that the Enemy would show mercy
to the Woman and Children, being destitute of all Succor; no Tongue can
express, what Sorrow, what Tears, what Sighings, what Lamentation there was at
that Woeful departing, when they were compelled to be thus separated asunder,
the Husband from his Wife, the Father from his tender Children, and never like
to see each other again: They were not gone far, but the Enemy suddenly came
upon them, finding them assembling together at prayers, and spoiled them of all
that they had, some they Ravished, and some they Scourged, practicing what
Cruelty and Villainy they could divise against them; the woman were in number
about five hundred. This Miniers caused thirty men to be carried into a Meadow,
and there to be miserably cut and hewed to pieces by Soldiers, and he caused
forty woman to be put into a Barn full of Straw, and the Barn to be set on fire
to destroy them: the number of those that were so unmercifully murdered by this
bloody Tyrant were about one Thousand persons, Men, Women and Children. It is
unexpressible how Lamentably and Cruelly these poor People were Persecuted,
insomuch that no kind of Cruelty and Tyranny was left unpractised; for them
that escaped into the Woods and Mountains, being taken, were either slain
outright, or put in the Gally and made Slaves; some were famished in Rocks and
Caves with Hunger; and thus it continued till God by his just Judgments cut off
the bloody Tyrant Miniers by death.

Now follows the Persecution of the Waldenses in Angrogne, Lucerne, Perouse and
Piedmont, and other places, from the year 1555, to 1561.
Though these people by long persecution were driven from place to place, and
in all places afflicted, yet they were not utterly destroyed, nor would never
yield to the superstitions of the Popish Religion but abstained from their
Idolatry; they had many Books of the New Testament translated into their own
Language; they lived in great simplicity, and with the sweat of their brows,
they were quiet and peaceable among their Neighbors abstaining from Oaths,
Games, Dancing and filthy Songs. The said People at Angrogne having drawn up a
confession of their faith, it was by learned men at the Kings Court condemned
as Heretical; wherefore the King required them to give Obedience to the Church
of Rome on pain of loss of goods and life; and to give their Answer in three
days; but upon some of the German Princes interceeding with the French King on
their behalf, desiring him to show some pity to these Churches, they were not
molested for three years; only one of their Ministers that traveled from place
to place was apprehended, and suffered Martyrdom, to wit, Jeffery Varnigle: but
the Pope envying this Liberty obtained through the Moderation of the German
Princes, who entreated on their behalf. The Pope stirs up the Duke of Savay
against them (who in his own nature was rather inclined to let them live in
quietness) telling him, that he ought to banish the Waldenses, for that they
were a rebellious People against the holy Mother the Church; these Instigations
caused great Persecutions on these poor People; for soon after several of them
were burnt, many fled and their Houses were ransakt, some were taken and sent
to the Galleys; and Proclamation was put out, That none should go to their
Assemblies on pain of death. In the midst of this Suffering they thought the
best way to put a stop, was to send to the Duke a Declaration of their
Religion, and wherefore they suffered, which they did, withal declaring, that
if by the Word of God it could be proved, that they were in Error, they should
not be obstinate, but be reformed, etc. after this the Persecution seemed
somewhat to abate for a time; but in the month called June following, it was
first proposed to them. To put away their Ministers that were Strangers; which
they refusing to do, it was then commanded of them, in the Dukes name, That
they should banish from them all their Ministers that were Strangers: and a New
Proclamation was put out, and Persecution began afresh, and many of the said
People were slain, and many imprisoned and cruelly handled the Monks being very
active in this Persecution; in one place causing two Women to carry Faggots to
the Fire where their Minister was burnt, and to speak these words to him, viz.
Take this thou wicked Heretic in recompense of the Naughty Doctrine thou have
taught us; to whom he said, Ah! Good Women, I have taught you well, but you
have learned ill. Great was the Havoc and Ruin they made upon these poor
Peoples Estates and Bodies in this Persecution; and not long after an Army was
raised to destroy the Waldoys, which they hearing, their Ministers met with the
chief Rulers, to advise what in such an Extremity they were best to do, upon
due consideration they concluded not to defend themselves by force of Arms,
but to flee to the Mountains, and carry their goods with them; others of their
Ministers hearing of the resolution that they at Angrogne and Lucern had made,
thought it strange that they might not defend themselves against their Enemies
violence in so just a cause, knowing that it was the Pope and his Ministers who
were the cause of their Troubles; and some stood in their own defense, and made
great Slaughters upon their Enemies at times; and when they persued their
enemies, they often retired to avoid shedding Blood, meaning only to defend
themselves, and held their Adversaries so titely to it that they were at last
brought to make a Peace upon Articles and conditions so that the Persecution
was stopped and the Pride, Malice and Rage of their Adversaries was abated.

Thus having given an Account in brief of the troubles and Persecutions
sustained by the faithful Martyrs in Forrei^ parts, it remains to give a
further Relation of such as suffered in this Nation of England in this Kings
Reign.

After that the light of the Gospel began to Shine and increase beyond Sea, the
Beams of it began to spread and grow more here in England, and a great stir and
alteration followed in the hearts of many, so that colored Hypocrisy and
painted Holiness began to be spied more and more, by such as in any measure
tasted of the Truth, and some there were that could distinguish Christ from
Antichrist; amongst whom was one Simon Fish of Grayes-Inn, who wrote a sharp
Book against the Corruption of the Clergy, Entitled, The Supplication of
Beggars, which Book was wrote beyond Sea, Anno 1525.
he being fled thither for fear of Cardinal Woolsey, who had taken distaste
against him; in this Book was showed what a great Oppression the Priests and
Clergy were to the Nation, for that they had got into their hands more then a
third part of the Realm, besides their Tithes of all the enerease of Corn, Hay,
etc. The Book being read to the King, after a pause, he said, If a man should
pull down an old stone wall, and begin at the lower part, the upper part
thereof might chance to fall on his head, and took the Book and put it in his
Desk, and seemed to be pleased at it, for he encouraged Simon Fish his Wife to
send for her Husband to come before him; but how much so ever he liked it, he
would make no show of it openly; for that Book and others being thrown about
London, the Cardinal acquainted the King therewith and bid him beware of them;
and the Cardinal and Bishop of London consulted how they might stop the
mischief that might acrew by that and other Books being so spread about;
whereupon they agreed that, the Bishop of London should send forth a
Proclamation to call in the New Testament, Translated into English; The
Supplication of Beggars; The Revelation of Antichrist by Martin Luther; and
other Books in English. This was one way they took, by which they thought-to
have suppressed the growth of those they accounted Heretics; but not thinking
that sufficient, obtained a Proclamation from the King to suppress the
Sectaries, Heretics and Lollards, and for abolishing diverse of their Books in
English; the Bishops having that now they would have, there was no diligence
wanting on their parts for the putting the same in execution; whereupon ensued
a grievous Persecution and Slaughter of the Faithful.

Thomas Bil^ey Martyr.
The first that went to wrack was Thomas Bilney, who after his Examination and
Condemnation by Doctor Pells Chan^llor, he was committed to the Lay Power, viz.
to the Sheriffs of the City of Norwich; a day before his Execution some Friends
being with him and comforting him, that though he was to go through the Fire,
the Lord would refresh him in it: At this he put his finger in the Candle (as
he used to do diverse times) saying, I know the fire is hot, and my body shall
be wasted by it, and it is a pain for the time, but he would often rehearse this
Scripture for his comfort, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, and called thee
by my name, thou art mine own; When thou go through the water, I will be
with thee; when th^s walk in the Fire, it shall not burn thee, and the Flame
shall not kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel:
Going to Execution, he said, The Mariner for a while meets with a troubled
Sea, and is tossed with the Waves, but he is in hopes when he comes to the
Haven he shall be at quiet; I doubt not (though I feel storms) but by Gods
Grace I shall attain to the Haven; and being brought to the Stake, he very
Patiently endured the Fire till doath.

Richard Bayfield Martyr.
The next that suffered was Richard Bayfield, who receiving the truth in a
measure, and reading the Testament in English, and a book called, The wicked
Mamman, etc. He was cast into Prison, and there sore whipped with a Gag in his
mouth, and then stocked, and there continued in Prison three quarters of a
year, and then was set at Liberty, but soon after was taken again, and put in
the C^le-house, where he was tied by the neck, middle and legs, standing
upright by the walls; this punishment was inflicted on him to make him confess
who bought his books, but he accused none, but stood to his Religion, and told
them he would Dispute for his Faith; at his Trial he was accused of diverse
things, but the chief were, for bringing Books over from beyond Sea, and
spreading them here in England; on the twentieth day of November. 1532. being
had into the Quire of Paul's Cathedral, the Bishop of London, with other
Prelates being there ready to pass sentence on him, and being delivered to the
Sheriffs of London, to carry him to Newgate, and from thence to the place of
Execution, but first the Sheriffs were commanded to have him into the Vestry,
and to bring him forth again in Antichrists apparel, to be degraded, having
been a Monk; where the Bishop took his Crosier Staff, and smote him on the
Breast that he threw him down backwards, and brake his head, and he swounded,
but coming to himself again, he thanked God that he was delivered from this
Malignant Church of Antichrist; and being led to Newgate, after one hours
respite, he was had to the Fire and burnt.

John Tewkesberry Martyr.
John Tewksberry Leather-seller of London, he was converted by the reading of
the Testament in English, and the Book called, The wicked Mammon, in the month
called April, in the year 1529. he was brought before the Bishop of London in
the open Consistory, where he disputed with the Bishops and the Prelates
concerning his Faith, and was very expect and prompt in his answers to them;
being endued with heavenly Wisdom, that they were not able to resist him;
insomuch that the Bishops were ashamed, that a Leather-seller should so
confound them; he affirmed in his Doctrine, that there was no Purgatory after
this life, but that the Souls of the faithful departing this life rest with
Christ, that prayers ought not to be made to Saints, there being no other
Advocate but Christ alone; for which and other Principles he was condemned to
die by the Bishop of London, and by him dilivered to the Sheriffs of London,
and by them burnt in Smithfield.

Edward Freese Martyr.
Edward Freese Painter, for painting upon clothes in an Inn certain Sentences
of Scripture, was noted to be a Heretic, and was apprehended, and brought to
London and from thence had to the Bishops House at Fulham, where he was
imprisoned with several other, men and their wives, and there fed with
Manchets, part of which was made with Sawdust, and there kept so strait in
Prison, that their Relations were not Suffered to come at them; the Painters
Wife being very desireous to see her Husband, and pressing to go into the
Prison, notwithstanding she was big with Child, the Bishops Porter kicked her on
the Belly so that her Child died immediately, and she died soon after.

After that the Prisoners were all put in the Stocks for a long time, and after
they were let loose, some had Horse-locks put on their Legs, and some other
Irons, the Painter would ever and anon be writing on the Walls with Chalk or
Coal, which so provoked his Adversaries, that they Manackled his wrists so
long, till the Flesh of his Arms was grown higher then the Irons, from that
Prison he was brought to the Lollards Tower, where they kept him there days
without Meat, and used him so heard, that he lost his understanding and sense;
so that when he was brought before the Consistory at Paul's he could say
nothing, but look upon the People like a wild man; and if they asked him a
Question he could say nothing, but my Lord is a good man, my Lord is a good
man; and in this unsensible condition he continued to his dying day.

Valentine Freese, Brother of the said Edward Freese, and the said Valentine's
wife were both burned at one Stake in York, for the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

James Bainham Martyr.
James Bainham, Son to a Knight, in Glo^cestershire, the said James was a man
of a virtuous disposition, and a Godly Conversation, much addicted to Prayer
and Reading of the Scriptures, a great maintainer of the Godly, a visiter of
the Prisoners, liberal and merciful, delighting in doing equity and Justice to
the Poor, very dilligent in giving counsel to all Widows, Fatherless and
A^^ucted, without Money or Reward, being a man bred in Knowledge in the Law;
this Bainham for his Religion was apprehended by the instigation of Thomas Moor
Chancellor of England, who kept him Prisoner in his own house, and there whipped
him at a Tree in his Garden, which he called, The Tree of Troth, from thence he
sent him to the Tower to be Racked, being himself present to see it effectually
done, till in a manner he had lamed him, to make him confess where his Books
lay, and because his wife denied them to be at his House, she was sent to the
Fleet, and their goods were Confiscated; these Tortures making him confess
nothing, the Chanceller sent him to the Bishop of London in the year 1531 who
examined him upon certain Interrogatories concerning his Religion; asked,
Whether he believed there was any Purgatory of Souls hence departed; to which
he answered, If we walk in the Light even as he is in the Light, we have
Society together with him, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son has cleansed
us from all Sin; if we say we have no Sin we deceive our selves, and the Truth
in not is us; if we confess our Sins he is faithful and just, and will forgive
us our Sins, and will purge us from all our Imqui^^es. Several other things
they objected against him, and often had him to and again before them,
threatening him with the danger that would ensue if he did not abjure his
Religion; whereupon, he being overtaken with fear, he consented unto them;
after he had abjured, the Chancellor fined him twenty pound to the King, and
enj^yned him Penance, which was to go before the Cross in profession at Paul's,
and to stand before the Preacher during the Sermon at Paul's Cross, with a
Fagger upon his Shoulder, and then to return with the Sumner to Prison again;
but, soon after he was discharged of his Imprisonment, and before he had been
at Liberty a month, he bewailed his Fact and Abjuration, and was never quie^ in
his Mind and Conscience until before a Congregation of the People of God, who
in those days met in a Warehouse in ^ow-Lan^, he uttered his Condemnation of
the Fact, asking God and that Assembly forgiveness, and the next Sunday (so
called) afterward went to a place, called St. Austins, and stood up in a Pew
with a Testament in English in his Hand, and with Tears declared to the People
that he had denied God, and desired the People to forgive him, and to beware of
his weakness, and rather to choose to die then to do as he did, for he would
not for all the World to feel again such a Hell as he had done, to this purpose
he also wrote to the Bishop, whereupon he was shortly after apprehended, and
committed to the Tower of London, from thence he was removed to the Bishops
Coale-house, where he lay two weeks in the Stocks with Irons upon his Legs,
then he was carried to the Chancellors, and there Chained to a post two nights,
from thence he was had to Fullham, where he was cruely handled, for the space
of a week; from thence he was committed to the Tower, where he lay a fortnight,
and there scourged with Whips to make him revoke his Opinions; from thence he
was carried to Barkin, and from thence to Che^sey, and there was condemned, and
from thence was conveyed to Newgate, and by the Sheriffs of London had into
Smithfield, and there burnt to death, the last day of April about three of the
Clock in the afternoon.

Three men executed for pulling down an Idol and burnin it.
In the year 1532. Robert King, Nicholas March, Rober^ Gardner, all of Dedham,
and Robert Debnam of Esthergholt, being burdened in their Consciences to see
the honor and power of the Almighty Living God to be blasphemed by Peoples
adoring an Idol, called, The Roode of Dover Court, to which many People did
greatly resort, ignorantly believing a common rumor blown abroad, that no man
had power to shut the Steeple house door where that Idol stood; whereupon, the
aforesaid four men were moved by the Spirit of God to travel out of Dedham, in
a frosty Moonshiney Night ten Miles, to the place where this Idol stood, and
took the filthy Idol from his Shrine, and carried it a quarter of a Mile, and
there struck Fire, and set it on Fire, for which fact three of them were
indicted as Fellons, and were hanged in Chains about half a year after, and it
is recorded, that at their death, through the working of the Spirit of God,
they bore such a living Testimony, that the People were more edified in the
Truth, then they had been by all the Sermons they had heard preached before.

The fourth man, viz. Robert Gardener, had suffered the same death, but that he
fled away, and that way escaped their Hands.

The same year there was many more Images cast down and destroyed, in many
places,

John Frith Martyr.
John Frith a godly young man, and one of great parts and wit, and of a ready
capacity, and a great Scholar in the outward Littera^ure, coming acquainted
with William Tindal, through his Instructions he first received into his heart
the Seed of the Gospel and sincere Godlin^ss.

The said John Frith accompanying himself with diverse young men of grave
Judgment and sharp wits, who conferring together upon the abuses of Religion,
which at that time were crept into the Church, were therefore accused of
Heresy to Cardinal Woolsey, and cast into a Prison within a deep Cave, under a
College in Oxford, where they used to lay their Salt-fish, the stink of which
so infected their bodies, that three of them died in a little space, the fourth
was John Frith, who was shortly after discharged out of Prison, and traveled
Beyond Sea, and after two years returning into England, and being at Reading,
it happened that he was taken as a Vagabond, and was put in the Stocks, and
there kept so long till he was almost pined with hunger, and would not discover
who he was, but desiring to speak with the Schoolmaster of the Town, to whom
he spoke Latin, the Schoolmaster perceiving that he was a Scholar, and a
young man of excellent parts, obtained of the Magistrates that he might be set
at Liberty, which he enjoyed not long, being so persued by Sr. Thomas Moor
Chancellor, who persecuted him both by Sea and Land, promising great reward to
any that could bring news or tidings of him; soon after he was apprehended and
committed to the Tower of London, where he had many conflicts with the Bishops,
but especially in writing with the Chancellor, and afterward was carried to
Lambeth, before the Bishop of Canterbury, and from thence to Croyden, before
the Bishop of Winchester, and last of all he was brought before the Bishops in
a common Assembly at London, the whole matter of his Examination before them
was comprehended in two special Articles (that is to say) of Purgatory, and of
the substance of the Sacrament, to which he answered very fully and wisely, and
in great moderation and uprightness, but no Reason would prevail against the
force and cruelty of his Adversaries: The twentieth day of the month called
June 1533. he was brought before several Bishops at Paul's, who seeing that by
no means, they could persuade him to Recant, the Bishop of London condemned him
to be burnt, and past Sentence against him to that effect.

John Chapman A. Hewit J. Tibauld Martyrs.
About this time one John Chapman, Andrew Hewet and John Tibauld, being men
Zealous for Religion and Piety, were informed against, and by the Bishop of
London's Chancellor and others were apprehended and carried to the Bishops
House; Andrew Hewet was sent to the Lollard Tower, and Chapman and Tibauld kept
asunder in the Bishops House till the next day that he came from Fulham, who
then examined them not liking their Confession, Chapman he committed to the
Stocks, with this threat, that he should tell another Tale, or else he should
sit there till his Heels did drop from his Arse; Tibauld he shut up in a close
Chamber, but afterward delivered him out of Prison upon this Injunction, that
he should not come within seven Miles of his own House; Chapman after five
weeks imprisonment, three weeks whereof he set in the Stocks, by Suit made to
the Chancellor on his behalf, after many threatenings was discharged out of
Prison; Andrew Hewet being brought before the Bishops, and asked, what he
thought concerning the Sacrament, answered, even as Frith does, at which the
Bishops smiled, and one of them said, why Frith is an Heretic, and is
condemned to be burnt, and except thou revoke thy Opinion, thou shall be burnt
with him; truly, said he, I am contented therewith; whereupon he was sent to
the Prison to Frith, and on the fourth day of the month called July he was
carried to Smithfield with Frith, and there burned.

Thomas Bennet Martyr.
Thomas Bennet Schoolmaster in Exeter, a man of a godly conversation, and a
favourer of such as suffered for their zeal to the true Religion, after he had
lived in a retired condition six years, could no longer contain but he must
bear a Testimony against the Idolatry of those times, though his blood were
shed for the same, the beginning of his troubles was, he wrote a Paper, and set
it upon one of the Steeple-House-doors of the City, in which was written, The
Pope is Antichrist, and we ought to Worship God only, and no Saints; which
Paper being seen, great search and inquiry was made what Heretic should set it
up, but seeing they could not find the Authorout at that present, they agreed,
that the sentence of a Curse should be pronounced against him that did it; the
manner of which Curse was as follows.

The Priest being in the Pulpit clothed in white, and the Monks and Friars
standing about him, the Cross was held up with Candles fixed to the same, then
said the Priest; By the Authority of God the Father Almighty, and of the
blessed Virgin Mary of Saint Peter and Paul, and of the holy Saints, we
Excommunicate, we utterly Curse and Bann, commit and deliver to the Devil of
Hell him or her, whatsoever he or she be, that have in spite of God, The Popes
Curse by Bell Book and Candle.
and of Saint Peter whose Church this is, in Spite of all holy Saints, and in
Spite of our most holy Father the Pope, Gods Viccar here in Earth, and in Spite
of the reverend Father in God John our Diocesian, and the Worshipful Cannons,
Masters Priests and Clarks which serve God daily in this Cathedral Church,
fixed up with wax such Cursed and Heretical Bills, full of Blasphemy, upon the
Doors of th^s, and other holy Churches within this City, Excommunicate be h^
she or they plaenally, and delivered over to the Devil as perpetual Malefactors
and Schismatics, accursed they be, and given Body and Soul to the Devil,
Cursed be they he or she, in Cities and Towns, in Fields and Ways, in Houses
and out of Houses, and all other places, standing, lying, or rising, walking,
running, waking, sleeping, eating, drinking, and whatsoever thing they do
besides; we separate them him or her from the Threshold, and from all the good
Prayers of the Church from the participation of the holy Mass, from all
Sacraments, Chapels and Altars, from Holy Bread, and Holy water, from all the
Merrits of Gods Priests and religious men, and from all their Cloisters, from
all their Pardons, Privileges Grants and Immunities which all the holy Fathers
Popes of Rome have granted to them; and we give them over utterly to the power
of the Devil, and let us quench their Souls if they be dead this night in the
pains of Hellfire, as this Candle is now quenched, and put out: (and with that
he put out one of the Candles) and let us pray to God, if they be alive, that
their ey's may be put out, as this Candle light is; (so he put out another
Candle) let us pray to God, and to our Lady, and to Saint Peter and Paul and
all holy Saints, that all the Senses of their bodies may fail them, and that
they may have no feeling, as now the Light of this Candle is gone, (and so he
put out the third Candle) except they he or she come openly now, and confess
their Blasphemy and by repentance (as in them shall lie) make satisfaction unto
God, our Lady, Saint Peter, and the Worshipful Company of this Cathedral
Church.

Thomas Bennet being not able to digest these Fopperies, writ other Bills, and
caused them to be set up upon the Gates of the Grave yard, but the person that
set them up being taken in the action, Thomas Bennet was thereby discovered,
and being apprehended, confessed they were his Bills, and that he could do it
again to discover the Abominable Blasphemy of their Antichrist the Pope, and
to let people see that he is the B^ar come out of the Wood, which destroys
and throws down the Hedges of Gods Church. Whereupon he was committed to
Prison, and the next day was had to the Bishop, who committed him to Prison
again, where he was kept in the Stocks with strong Irons, with as much favor
as a Dog should find, then his Hou^e was Searched for Books, and his wife
shamefully abused, which she bore with patience, being contented to bare the
Cross with her Husband, and to fare hardly with him, and eat Course meat and
drink: A gray Friar possessing Thomas Bennet with the many dangers that he was
liable to fall into in that condition, Thomas replied, my life is not dear to
me, I had rather by death (which I know is not far off) depart this Life then
to partake of your detestable Idolatries and Superstitions, or be subject to
Antichrist your Pope.

During the time of his imprisonment the hate of the people through ignorance
was great against him, notwithstanding they could never move his patience;
during his imprisonment, his wife provided Sustenance for him, when she
Lamented he Comforted her, and gave her many good and godly Exhortations, and
desired her not to move him to comply with his Adversaries. After the Clergy
saw they could by no means cause him to recant, they Condemned him to be burnt,
and delivered him to the Sheriff of Devonshire to see him Executed; the mild
man rejoicing to see his end approach so near, as the Sheep before the Shearer
yielded himself with all humbleness to abide and suffer the Cross of
Persecution; being brought to his Execution in a place called Livery Dole,
without Exeter, he gravely and soberly spoke to the people to seek the honor
of God, and the knowledge of him, and to leave the devices and immaginations of
men's inventions, and saying, Oh Lord receive my spirit, patiently endured the
Cruelty of the Fire until his life was ended.

Thus the Reader has an Account of such as sustained death for Christ's Cause
through the rigorous Proclamation aforesaid, set out in the name of the King,
but indeed procured by the Bishops, and by them so strictly Executed, that no
good man could peep out with his head never so little, but he was caught by the
back, and either brought to the fire or else forced to abjure their Religion, a
great number of which are particularly mentioned in Foxe's Acts and Monuments,
which for Brevity sake are here omitted.

Thomas Phillip being one of them that was prosecuted, and being asked by the
Bishop, whether he would abjure or not, he said, except ye show me cause
wherefore I should abjure, I will not say, yea or nay to it, but will stand to
my appeal, then the Bishop read openly the Bill of Excommunication against him,
charging all men to have no company, or any thing to do with him; after this
Excommunication what became of him, whether he was burnt, or died in the Tower,
no mention is made in the Register, I mention him because a Letter that was
found in his Pocket, and the substance of one Tracy's Will, are worth the
taking notice of, which are as follows.

A Letter directed to Thomas Phillip in the name of the Brethren, and given him
by the way going to the Tower, is as follows,
The favor of him that is able to keep you, that you fall not, and to confess
your name in the Kingdom of Glory, and to give you strength by his Spirit to
confess him, before all his Adversaries, be with you ever Amen.

The Brethren think that there be diverse false Brethren craftily crept in among
them to seek out their freedom in the Lord, that they may accuse them to the
Lords Adversaries, as they suppose they have done you; wherefore, if it be so
that the Spirit of God move you thereunto, they as Councellers desire you above
all things, to be steadfast in the Lords Truth, without fear, for he shall and
will be your help, according to his promise, so that they shall not diminish
the least hair of your head without his will, unto the which will submit your
self, and rejoice; for the Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of
Temptation, and how to reserve the Unjust, unto the day of Judgment to be
punished; and therefore cast all your care on him, for he cares for you; and in
that you suffer as a Christian man, be not ashamed, but rather glorify God on
that behalf, looking upon Christ the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for
the joy that was set before him, abode the Cross and despised the shame;
nevertheless, though we suffer the wrong after the example of our Master
Christ, yet we are not bound to suffer the wrong cause, for Christ himself
suffered it not, but reproved him that smote him wrongfully, likewise Paul,
Acts 23. says, we must not suffer the wrong, but boldly reprove them that sit
as Righteous Judges, and act contrary to Righteousness; therefore according
both to God and man's Law, you are not bound to make answer to any cause till
your Accusers came before you, which if you require, and thereon do stick, the
false Brethren shall be known to the great comfort of those who now stand in
doubt who they may trust, and also it shall be a means that they shall not
craftily by Questions take you in Snares, and Acts 20. its written, It is not
the manner of the Romans to deliver any man that he should perish, before he
that is accused have his Accuser before him, and have License to answer for
himself, as pertaining to the Crime whereof he is accused; and also Christ
said, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses all things shall stand;
wherefore seeing that in Accusations such Witnesses should be, you may with a
good Conscience require it; and thus the God of Grace settle, strengthen and
establish you, that to him may be the glory and praise for ever.


This is the Substance of the Letter; now follows the Substance of Tracy's Will.

William Tracy of Taddington in the County of Gloucester in his Will declared
amongst other things, that touching the burying of his body it availed him not
whatsoever was done thereto when he was dead, for, said he, Funeral pomps are
rather for the Solace of them that live, then the wealth and comfort of them
that are dead: Which Will being brought by his Son, his Executor, to the Bishop
of Canterbury to be proved, the Bishop showed it to the Convocation, who past a
Sentence that a Commission should be sent to Doctor Parker, Chancellor of the
Diocese of worcester, to take up Tracy's dead body, and to burn him as an
Heretic for making such a Will, which accordingly was Executed,
notwithstanding he had been buried almost two years before.

About this time the House of Commons assembled in Parliament put up a
Supplication by way of Complaint to the King against the Clergy, this Complaint
the King seemed at first not to take much notice of, yet afterward coming to
have a clear understanding of the abuses and enormities of the Clergy,
especially of the corrupt Authority of the Sea of Rome, provided certain Acts
against the same, and wholly excluded the Popes Authority out of his Realm; but
thinking the work not sufficiently done, as long as Abbeys and Priories kept
their Station, which were as it were his Fortresses and Pillars, there was not
long after means found to have them suppressed; for aspersions being laid upon
them, of Adulteries and Murders, they by Act of Parliament at least near four
hundred of them were suppressed, and all their Lands and Goods conferred upon
the King, and afterward all the rest, and all Colleges, Chanteries, and
Hospitals; also the same Parliament enacted, that Bishops should pay no more
Annals or Money for their Bulls to the Pope, and that no Person should appeal
for any Cause out of this Realm to the Court of Rome, and an Act was made, that
the King should be the Supreme head of the Church of England, etc.

But although the Popes Wings were thus cut, and his Power and Authority in
England abrogated by Act of Parliament, as before is mentioned, yet the Bishops
here went on persecuting such as they accounted Sectaries and Heretics; but
before I give an account of such as further suffered here in England for
Religion, it falls in order to give an Account of the Sufferings of William
Tindal beyond Sea.

This William Tindal was burnt near Wales, William Tindal Marryr.
and being a man Zealous for Reformation and Religion, and considering, that if
the Scripture were turned into the vulgar Speech it might much conduce to ^he
propagating thereof; and finding his purpose could not be well effected here in
England by reason of the strictness of the Bishops and Chancellor, he traveled
into Germany, and there he first translated the New Testament, and then the
Old, and writ several other Books against the irreligious Practice of the
Prelates, which Books being published and sent over into England, it cannot be
spoken what a door of Light they opened to the whole English Nation, who before
were many years shut up in darkness.

But though the spreading of these Books wrought much good to the upright, and
such as had in any measure a desire to advance the Truth, yet the envious and
persecuting Spirit of the Bishops was also much more stirred up thereby,
seeking by all means how to stop them from being spread, lest their Hypocrisy
and works of Darkness should he discerned, wherefore they made great stir and
search, as Herod did at the birth of Christ, and sought out by what means they
might hinder the travels of this Tindal, and of his Printing and Publishing the
said Books, and set persons to search and examine at Antwerp how things stook
with Tindal, which when the Bishops and Chancellors in England understood how
things were, they sent over one Henry Phillips to betray him into the hands of
the Emperors Procurator General at Brussells, the said Procurator, through the
treachery of Phillips, seized upon all Tindalls Books, and apprehended him and
sent him Prisoner to Filford Castle, eighteen English Miles from Antwerp, being
brought to his Trial, they offered him to have Council to plead for him, he
refused, saying, he would answer for himself; after much reasoning and Dispute,
he was Condemned by virtue of the Emperors Decree made in the Assembly at
Ausbrough, and upon the same was brought to the place of Execution at Filford,
Anna 1536. being ryed to the Stake, he cried with a fervent zeal, and a loud
voice, Lord open the King of Englands eyes, and so was burnt to death.

When the King had taken the title of Supremacy from the Bishop of Rome, and
Stated the same to himself, he perceived by the Wisdom and advice of Thomas
Cromwell, one of his Privy Council, that the corrupt State of the Church had
need of Reformation in many things.

This Cromwell was through the goodness of God raised up to be a friend and a
favourer of those that professed the Gospel, who though but a Smiths Son, born at
Putney, for the pregnancy of his wit, he was first entertained by Cardinal
Woolsey, and by him employed in many great Affairs; the Cardinal falling, the
King took him unto his Service, and finding his great Abillities, advanced him
for his worth to great places of Honor and Trust, through whose persuasions
several Injunctions were put out by the King for Reformation in Religion; and
he was the great Instrument in overthrowing Abbeys, Monasteries and Friaries,
which were a little before by Act of Parliament given into the Kings hands:
Whereupon, not only their Houses were rased, but their Possessions were divided
amongst the Nobility, insomuch that all Friars, Monks, Cannons, Nuns, and other
such Sects, were so rooted out of this Land from the Foundation, that there
seemed to be no room left for such Weeds to grow here any more.

But as this Thomas Cromwell was raised up for good, and being so greatly in
favor with the King, used all means he could to persuade him to reform the
enormities in the Church; on the other hand, Satan raised up his Instrument,
which was Stephen Gardner, Bishop of Winchester, who used all wilds and subtle
means he could to persuade the King against the same, casting upon the
Professors of Truth the name of Heretics, Sectaries, Anabaptists, and
Sacramentaries, and so far prevailed with the King, that by the Kings Authority
certain Injunctions were published prohibiting the publishing any Books in
English, written by the Sectaries and Sacramentaries, under the pain of the
forfeiture of all their goods and Chattels, and their Bodies to be Imprisoned
during the Kings pleasure: And further, this Stephen Gardner instigated the
King, not only against the Queen (who was a favourer of Religion and
Reformation) but also against this Thomas Lord Cromwell, who no doubt had
brought the increase of true Religion, according to his understanding, to more
prefection, had not this Gardner, and other Malignant Opposers thereof set
themselves against it, to hinder the prosperity thereof: but now through the
said Gardners evil advise, the King, who before had raised the said Thomas
Cromwell for his worth and integrity, now for his pleasure took him off, and
suffered him to be Beheaded: After his death Religion, and the Reformation more
and more decayed, whereby the Reader may see how variable the State of things
stood in reference to Religion at this time, and with what difficulty any thing
of Light and Truth came forth, how often things changed, even as the King was
ruled and gave ear; sometimes it went a little forward, and then backward
again, according as the persons prevailed that were about the King.

And now the King being led through Gardners suggestions, began to withdraw
showing any favor to the Reformation in Religion, concluding so to do was most
for his safety both at home and abroad, having so much displeased the Pope, and
other Popish Princes, in what he had already done; and though he had rejected
the Popes Authority, he would declare himself nevertheless to be a good
Catholic Son of the Mother Church, and a withstander of new Heresies; and then
calling a new Parliament, and Convocation of Prelates, there was six Articles
decreed concerning Religion, which was afterward commonly called a whip with
six Srings, it was pretended for the Unity of the Church, but what Unity
followed, the groaning hearts of many that suffered death by the same, both in
this Kings time, and in Queen Mary's time, may declare.

The Six Articles of the Bishops Condemning all to be burnt as Heretics that
should hold, First, That the Body of Christ was not really present in the
Sacrament after Consecration. Secondly, That the Sacrament might not truly be
administered under one Kind. Thirdly, That Priests entered into holy Orders might
Marry. Fourthly, That Vows of Chastity entered into, upon mature deliberation,
were not to be kept. Fifthly, That private Masses were not to be used. Sixthly,
That Auricular Confession was not to be used in the Church.


Before these Articles were published, Bishop Gardener having obtained his
desire with the King, he and the rest of the Prelates began again fresh to
persecute the Protestants, and the first they stretched forth their Hands
against was John Lambert a Norfolk man, and one zealous for the Spreading of
the Truth, according to the Manifestation of it then broke forth; and to that
end was conversant with Tindal and Frith at Antweep, until by the Instigation
of Sr. Thomas Moor he was apprehended and brought to London, where he was first
brought to Examination at Lambeth, and then at the Bishops House at Oxford,
before Worham Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, where forty five Articles
were objected against him, to all which he answered in writing very fully, and
wisely, both according to the Scriptures and Reason; the Articles, and his
Answers may be read at large in Foxe's Acts and Monuments.

The Bishop of Canterbury shortly after dying, whereby Lambort for that time
was delivered out of Prison; and coming to London it was not long before he
fell into trouble again; for having a private Conference with one Doctor
Tailor, what past between them in their dispute in private grew at last a
public and common talk, which coming to the Archbishops Ear, he sent for
Lambort, and forced him to defend his Cause openly; in that Disputation Lambort
appealed to the King from the Bishops.

Upon this appeal Bishop Gardener goes to the King, and privately possesses
him, that now he had an opportunity to quiet the minds of the people who were
offended with him for abolishing the Bishop of Rome's Authority, and subverting
of Monasteries and Abbeys, etc. he might now remedy these troubles, if he would
manifestly appear in this matter against Lambort, and show himself stoutly to
resist the Heretics; the King immediately received this wicked Counsel of the
Bishop, and forth with sent out a general Commission, commanding all the
Bishops and Nobles of the Land, to come with all speed to London to assist the
King against Heretics; these preparations being made, a day was set, upon
which Lambort should appear before the King, and the rest assembled with him,
to be Tried and Judged.

The day being come, the King ascended his Throne, clothed all in white, he
looked upon the Prisoner with a stern Countenance, as if his mind was full of
Indignation, and then called forth the Bishop of Chichester, and commanded him
to declare to the People the Causes of that Assembly, the Substance of the
Bishops Speech tended to this, That the King would have none to conceive, that
whereas the Authority and Name of the Bishop of Rome being utterly abolished,
he would also extinguish all Religion, or give Liberty to Heretics to trouble
the Churches of England without punishment; the Bishop having ended his Speech,
the chief thing that the King pressed Lambort to declare, was, what Opinion he
held touching the Sacrament of the Altar; to which he answered fully, and the
Dispute held chiefly concerning that point for some hours until the King and
Bishops, enraged against him, forced him to silence at last.

The King being minded to end the Dispute, said to Lambort, What say thou
after all these Labors and Reasons of these learned Men? Art thou yet
satisfied? Will thou live or die; thou have yet free choice?

Lambort answered, I yield and submit my self wholly unto the will of your
Majesty.

Then said the King, commit thy self unto the hands of God, and not unto mine.

Lambort, I commend my Soul unto the hands of God, but my Body I wholly yield
and Submit unto your clemency.

Then said the King, if you do commit your self unto my Judgment, you must die,
for I will not be a patron to Heretics, and so caused the Sentence of Death to
be read against him: Shortly a^^er he was had to Smithfield, and there burnt;
in the midst of the Flames he cried unto the people in these words, None but
Christ, none bu^ Christ; and so ended his life.

The aforesaid six Articles being consented unto, and concluded by the King and
Parliament, the Bishops caused further to be enacted, that whosoever denied
Transubstantiation; or whosoever should be Alders, Comforters, Counselors,
Consentors, and A bettors therein, should be adjudged Heretics; That every
such Offender should have and suffer Judgment, Execution and pain of death by
way of burning, without any Abjuration, benefit of the Clergy, or Sanctuary,
and should forfeit to the King all their Land, and Tenements, Goods and
Chattels, as in Cases of high Treason: And for all such as did preach, teach,
uphold, maintain or defend any thing contrary to the five last Articles should
be adjudged as Fellons, and lose both life and goods, as in the Case of Felony.

When these Articles were in debate in the Parliament house, Doctor Cranmer, in
favor to the Professors of the Truth, earnestly disputed in defense of the
Truth against them; but notwithstanding all his opposition, the Act was past.

By reason of these fix Articles a great Number were apprehended in London and
other Places, so that all the prisons in London were too little to hold them,
and many were imprisoned in Halls.

Amongst whem was one John Porter of London, John Porter died in Prison.
who for reading to people in a Bible, was sent for by Bonner, and sharply
reproved, Porter answered, he trusted he had no way offended contrary to the
Law thereby; Bonner charged him for making expositions upon the Text, and for
gathering Multitudes about him, this Porter denied; yet did Bonner send him to
Newgate, where he was miserably Laden with Irons, both hands and legs, with a
great Collor of Iron about his neck, whereby he was fastened to the Wall in the
Dungeon; after a while he sent for a Kinsman of his, who by bribing the Keeper,
obtained, that he was put amongst Thieves and Murderers; but Porter hearing
and seeing their Wickedness, exhorted them to amendment of life, giving them
good instructions; for this he was complained of, and carried down into the
lowest Dungeon; where he was so cruelly oppressed with Bolts and Irons, that
within few days after he was found dead.

In the year 1544. One Robert Testwood living at Windsor, being a favourer of
the Lutherans, Robert Testwood Martyr.
and seeing People licking and kissing a white Alablaster Image that stood
behind the high Altar, at which his Zeal was so stirred, that with a Key that
he had in his hand he struck off the Images nose; saying, see good People what
it is, it cannot help it self; how then would you have it help you: The noise
hereof being spread abroad, one Simonds a Lawyer took up the Nose, and said, one
day it should be a dear Nose to Testwood.

And further, upon a day whereon every one was to carry a Relick in procession,
Testwood, amongst others, had Beckets Rochet proferred him, but he pusht it
from him, saying if they gave it him he would wipe his Tail with it.

These doings so offended the Clergy, that they said he was a Heretic, and
would roast a Faggot one day for this geer, but notwithstanding their Threats he
lived in quiet till the death of the Lord Cromwell, and till Winchester had
insinuated into the affections of the King, and wholly ruled; at which time
Testwood being sick in bed, was fetched out and cast into Prison, together with
one Anthony Person, John Marbeck and Henry Filmer, and after a while they were
all brought forth to Judgment be fore Doctor Capon ^i^^op of Salsbury and
others: Testwoods Indictment was, for that when the Priest lifted up the
Sacrament, he said, what will thou lift it up so high? what yet higher? take
heed that thou let him not fall: As also, that at such times, when the
Sacrament was lifted up, he used to look down on his Book, or another way, that
he might not see the Sacrament; whereupon, he said, Whereon did he look that
marked me so well: Marry, quoth the Kings Attorney, he could not be better
Occupied, then to mark such Heretics. The Prisoners being Condemned, they
spent the greatest part of the night (before their Execution) in prayer, that
the Lord would strengthen them and enable them with steadfast Faith, and power,
to go through their Exercise.

About this time there rose a great Persecution in Callice in France, which was
then under Englands power, Persecution in Callice.
there was at one time twelve persons Imprisoned for their Religion, but the
Lord Cromwell (so called hearing of it, wrote immediately to the Commissioners
in Callice, in the Kings Name, requiring, that the Heretics, with their
Accusers, should be sent over into England; forthwith, the Commissioners
loading them with Chains, sent them over; as soon as Cromwell heard they were
arrived, he sent for them to his House, and smiling upon them, said, Go your
ways to the Fleet, and Submit your selves Prisoners there, and be of good
cheer; for if God give me life, you shall shortly go home with as much honesty,
as ye came with shame. But it pleased God that shortly after this Cromwell was
beheaded; so that the poor men then had no hope but in the Providence of their
Heavenly Father, who comforted them in their deep Troubles, that as their
Afflictions abounded, their joys and consolations abounded much more; for when
all hope was past, the Lord Audley Chancellor of England, sent for them; and
without any further examination discharged them of their Imprisonment.

In the year 1541. The King sent out a Commission for apprehending of such as
offended against the six Articles, and when the Commissioners sat^ at
Mercers-Chapple, being such as were chosen on purpose, they enquired not only
for such as offended against the six Articles, but of such as came seldom to
Church (as its called) and received not the holy Bread and Water; so that they
indicted above five hundred persons, most of which had either died in Prison,
or been burnt in Smithfield, but that the King (being informed by the Lord
Audley, that they were indicted of malice) granted them his Pardon.

Richard Meekins Martyr, being a Boy of fifteen years old.
About the same time one Richard Meekins, a boy of fifteen years old, was
accused for spaking some words against the Sacrament of the Altar, and when the
first Jury would not find the indictment against him, they were soundly ratled
by the Bishop of London, and another Jury impannelled that found it, and so the
poor Boy was burnt in Smithfield.

Persecuted at Callice.
By reason of the diligent preaching of Adam Damplip and one William Smith at
Callice, the Devil raised up his Instruments to Persecute them, and others
their Hearers, and Letters were wrote over to the Council in England,
suggesting, that by the means of Damplip, they were infected with horrible
Heresies and Errors, Persons accused were Thomas Brook, Ralph Hare, James
Cock, and James Barber, who were sent for over and committed to Prison at
Westminster, afterward they were brought before the Bishops; grievous Letters
were written against them from Callice by their Adversaries, so that if God had
not preserved them, they had all certainly Perished.

One of these, viz. Ralph Hare, though so unlearned, that he could scarce read,
yet was very zealous, and so holy and inofensive in his life, that none of his
Adversaries could accuse him of evil; he was charged for speaking against
Auricular Confession, holy Bread, holy Water, as also for that he would not
Swear, nor use any Pastime, but used to be in a Corner by himself, looking on
his Book, when others were at Liberty. Thus being charged, he said to the
Commissioners, I take God to Witness, I would not willingly maintain any Error
or Heresy; wherefore I beseech you, let my Accusers come before me face to
face; for if they charge me with that I have spoken, I will not deny it; and if
it be Truth I will stand to it, if an Error, I will with all my heart forsake
it; I mean, if it be against Gods holy Word; for, the Lord is my Witness, I
daily pray to God that I may know the Truth, and shun Errors, and I hope God
will preserve me from them. The Bishop of Winchester said, I perceive now thou
art a naughty Fellow: Alas, said Hare what evil have I spoken? Bishop replied,
Marry Sir, you said, the Lord, the Lord, and that is Symbolum Hereticorum; what
is that said Hare? Thou art naught, thou art naught, said the Bishop, and
further said, I pity thee, for I think thou art a good simple man and meanst
well enough if thou had not bad bad Schoolmasters, and then Thomas Brook was
called for; who was charged with sedition, and that he had contributed toward
maintaining Adam Damplip, and that he should say, that what the Priest held up
at Mass was not the Body of Christ; Brook denied the charge, and after some
debate was for that present dismissed,

The Suffering and Martyrdom of Anne Askew.
Anne Askew being apprehended for her Religion, and examined before one
Christopher Dare an Inquisitor, who asked her, if she did not believe the
Sacrament of the Altar to be the real Body of Christ: To this question she
refused to answer: Then he told her that she was accu^ed for reading, that God
dwelt not in Temples made with hands, thereupon she showed him the 7 and 17.
Chapters of the Acts for it: Then he asked her, how she understood those texts,
she answered, that she would not cast Pearls before Swine; Then he charged her
for saying that she had rather read five lines in her ^ible, then hear a Mass;
she said, the reason was, because one did greatly edify her, and the other did
not; and after other questions asked her, he had her before the Mayor of London;
The Mayor, after some discourse with her, ordered her to be had to Prison; she
asked, if Sureties would not serve turn; he said, he would take none, but after
some time she was released from that imprisonment; but not long after was
apprehended again and carried before the Kings Council, where the Chancellor
asked her, her Opinion about the Sacrament, she said, that she believed that so
often as she received the Bread in remembrance of Christ's death, she received
therewith the fr^^^s of his most glorious Passion; the Bishop of Winchester bid
her answer directly; she answered, she would not sing the Lords Song in a
strange Land; The Bishop told her, she was a Pariat: To which she replied, that
she was willing not only to rec^^ve rebukes from him, but whatsoever should
follow besides, and that gladly; after much other debate, she was imprisoned
until the next day; at which time, they asked her again, what she said to the
Sacrament, she answered, that she had said what she could say.

Then the Bishop of Winchester said, he would speak with her familiarly, she
said, so did Judas when he unfriendly betrayed Christ; Then desired the Bishop
to speak with her alone, but she refused; he asked her Why? she said, that in
the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every matter should stand, after Christ and
Paul's Doctrine.

Then the Chancellor began to examine her again of the Sacrament; Math. 18.2
Cor. 13.
; she asked him, how long he would halt on both sides; then would be needs know
where she found that, she said, in the Scripture? then he went his way: Then
the Bishop told her she would be burnt, she answered, 3 Kings 18.
that she had searched all the Scriptures, and could never find that either
Christ or his Apostles put any Creature to death, and told them God would laugh
their threatings to scorn.

After much other arguing, wherein she answered them wifely and holily, they
dismissed her; a few days after she was taken very sick like to die, in which
extremity of her sickness they sent her ^o Newgate.

After a time she was brought to her Trial at Guild Hall, where she was
required to recant, or else she was condemned by the Law for an Heretic; she
answered, she was no Heretic, neither deserved death by the Law of God; Then
they asked, if she would deny the Sacrament to be Christ's Body and Blood; she
said, yea; They wished her to shrive her self to a Priest, at which she smiled
and said, she would confess her faults to God, for she was sure he would bear
her with favor.

Then they would know of her whether the Bread in the Box were God or no; she
said, God is a Spirit and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth; After she was
Condemned she wrote a few li^es to the King, to this effect.

I Anne Askew of good memory, although God has given me the Bread of Adversity
and the Water of Trouble, yet be it known that for as much as I am by the Law
condemned as an Evil Doer; here I take Heaven and Earth to record, that I shall
die in my innocence, and as I said at first, I say at last, I utterly abhor and
detest all Heresies, and concerning the Supper of the Lord, I believe so much
as Christ has said therein, which he confirmed with his most blessed Blood, I
believe so much as he willed me to follow, for I will not forsake the
Commandment of his holy Lips, but look what God has charged me with his Mouth,
that have I shut up in my Heart; and thus briefly I end,

Anne Askew.


Shortly after she was sent from Newgate to the sign of the Crown, where, she
said, one Rich and the Bishop of London, used all their power by flattering
words, to persuade her from God, but they prevailed not with her; one Nicholas
Shaxton counseled her to recant, as he had done; she told him, it had been
good for him he had never been born; then Rich sent her to the Tower to be
racked, where first he and one of the Council examined her, telling of her,
that the King was informed, that if she would, she could name a great number of
her Sect; she answered, that the King was as well deceived in that, as he was
in other Matters.

The manner of her Racking was thus, she was first lead down into a Dungeon,
where the Lieutenant of the Tower commanded the Jailer to pinch her with the
Rack, which being done, so much as he thought sufficient, he went about to take
her, down but Wristley, the Chancellor, not contented that she was loosed so
soon, confessing nothing, but lay still, and did not cry, commanded the
Lieutenant to strain her on the Rack again, which because he denied to do,
tendering the weakness of the Woman, the Chancellor threatened him he would
signify his disobedience to the King; Then Rich and the Chanceller took pains
to Rack her themselves, till she was near dead; first asking her whether she
was with Child; to whom she answered, you shall not need to spare for that, but
do your wills upon me, and so quietly and patiently praying unto the Lord, she
abode their Tyranny, till her Bones and Joints were almost plucked assunder;
after she was loosed from the Rack, she swooned, but they recovered her again,
and she was carried away in a Chair to a house, and laid in a bed, with weary
and painful Bones; the Chancellor sent her word, that if she would leave her
Opinion she should want for nothing, if she would not, she should be forthwith
sent to Newgate, and so be burned; she sent him word again, that she would
rather die then break her Faith.

The Prayer of Anne Askew before her Death.

O Lord, I have more Enemies now, then there be Hairs on my Head, yet, Lord,
let them never overcome me with vain words; but fight thou, Lord, in my stead,
for on thee cast I my Care; with all the spite they can imagine they fall upon
me, which am thy poor Creature; yet, Lord, let me not set by them which are
against me, for in thee is my whole delight; and Lord, I heartily desire of
thee, that thou will of thy most merciful Goodness forgive them that Violence
which they do, and have done unto me; open also thou their blind Hearts, that
they may hereafter do that thing in thy Sight which is only acceptable before
thee, and to set forth thy Truth aright, without all vain Fantasy of sinful
men: So be it, O Lord, so be it. The day of her Execution being appointed, she
was brought into Smithfield in a Chair, because she could not go on her feet by
means of her great Torments; when she was brought to the stake, she was tied by
the middle with a Chain that held up her Body; and so encompassed with the
Flames of Fire, as a blessed Sacrifice unto God, she resigned up her life, in
the Year 1546. leaving behind her a singular example of Christian-Constancy,
for all men to follow; there was at the same time three others burnt with her
in Smithfield.

After the death of this Woman, the Ponish Clergy consulted together, how they
might further proceed to keep the Truth under and down, and to that end
obtained another Proclamation, in the Kings name, for the abolishing the
Scriptures in English, and all other English Books, which might give any light
to the People, which made sore work and caused Persecution for a time, but it
was not long that it continued by reason of the Kings death, which was shortly
after.

But before there be a full Conclusion of the Transactions in this Kings reign,
its necessary a short Account be given of the rise and fall of Thom is Cromwell;
of whom mention is made before; especially, seeing he was a man so Zealous for
Reformation of both Church and Commonwealth.

He was born at Putney, his Father being a Smith, as is before related, in his
youthful days, it is said, he had little regard to God and Religion, but
traveled beyond Seas, and for a time was there a Soldier; at length getting
the New Testament in English, by often reading in it he began to be touched,
and something opened in his understanding, and coming into England again,
Cardinal Woolsey entertained him in his service, where, after some yoars
remaining, he was preferred to be Solicitor to the Cardinal. After the fall of
Cardinal Woolsey, he was by the Master of the Roles preferred to the King (who
had then to do against the Pope) as a fit person to be employed by him, and
being brought to the King at his Garden in Westminster, where he possessed the
King that his Authority was abused by the Clergy, and by being sworn to the
Pope they had run themselves into a Praemunire, and that now the King had an
Opertunity to enrich himself: To this the King gave ear, and liked well his
advice, and admited him into his service, and sent him to the Convocation-house
amongst the Bishops, where he made a Speech to this effect, that in as much as
they had sworn to the Pope, contrary to their Fealty due to the King, they had
forfeited all their Goods, Chattels, Lands, Possessions to the King, etc. This
amazed the Bishops at first, but after a little pause, they began to shrink,
and before they could be quit of the Praemunire, by Act of Parliament it cost
them to the King no less then One hundred eighteen thousand eight hundred and
forty pounds.

After this Cromwell grew greatly in favor with the King, and was made one of
his Privy Council, and Master of the Rolls, and afterward Knight of the
Garter, and Earl of Essex; and now being come into such Authority, and seeing
the Superstition, Blindness Hypocrisy and Idolatry of the Monks, and Friars,
and Papists, whose filthy stink did breath up a most pestiferous fume, as
Matthew Paris said in the like case of Rome: Wherefore Cromwell, like a
Champion, was raised up to root them up, which while the King favored him, he
prosecuted with effect, as before is related; but when the Popish Bishops saw
the Popes power abolished out of England, they never gave over using all their
uttmost Endeavors, and Politic Contrivances, till they had laid a Plaster to
his Wounded Head.

It would be too long to recite what benefit this Cromwell by his Prudence and
Zeal wrought in a little time for the public good, what good Orders he
established, what Wickedness and Vices he suppressed, what Corruptions he
reformed, what Abuses he brought to light, and Popish Idolatry and Images he
suppressed, (One called, The Rood of Grace) wherein a man stood enclosed with a
hundred Wyres within the Rood, to make the Image goggle its Eyes, nod its Head,
hang the Lip, and move and shake his Jaws, according to the value of the Gift
offered; if it were a small piece of Silver, then would he hang a frowning Lip,
if it were a piece of Gold, then should his Jaws go Merrily: Thus were poor
peoples Souls seduced, and their pockets picked by these Idolatrous Forgers,
until Cromwell caused the said Image to be carried publicly to Paul's, where the
People tore it in pieces.

He was a man not only Zealous for the public Reformation, but also always
ready to help private persons that were in distress; and though its common
amongst men that are raised from low estate to great place and outward
preferment; to forget themselves what they formerly were, and the persons from
whom they received benefits; It was not so with him, for in his Travels beyond
Sea, being brought to a low condition, and being relieved by a Rich Merchant in
Florence, and entertained in his House, when he was in great distress, and when
he was minded to return to England, the Merchant gave him a Horse, Money and
Apparel, which Cromwell received with great thankfulness.

This Merchant not long after (through great losses fell to decay; and having
money owing him in England, came over to see if he could get it, and arriving
at London, not thinking of the kindness he had showed to Cromwell; but as he was
traveling the Streets, Cromwell, as he was riding along espied him, and knew
him, and alighted, and took notice of him, and of his former kindness, and
invited him to Court, who coming there, after he had dined with him, he had the
Merchant into a private Room, and paid him fully for all he had of him at
Florence, and gave him sufficiently over, as a Recompense for his kindness, and
kept him in his House all the time of his remaining in England. This is but one
example of many that might be mentioned to show this Cromwells Gratitude and
Courtesy.

His care and Zeal for the settling the Protestant Religion was that which
brought him to his end, for that, for the better estalishing thereof he devised
to effect a Marriage between the King and the Lady Anne of Cleeve, whose Sister
was Married to the Duke of Saxony, a Protestant Prince, by which Marriage, it
was supposed, there would be established a perpetual Peace and Amity between
this Kingdom and the Protestant Princes of Germany, which would much strengthen
the Protestant Party against the Tyranny and Oppression of the Pope and his
Adherents: But presently after the Marriage, Stephen Gardner, who had soon
after crept into favor with the King (as is before related) suggested to him
some occasions of distaste against the Duke of Saxony, and some apprehensions,
of fear by reason of that Odium which he had pulled upon himself, by rejecting
the Pope, and demolishing Abbeys and Monasteries, whereby (as he told him) he
had made the Pope the Emperor, the King of France, and the King of Scotland
his Enemies; but especially his own Subjects, who were much distasted with the
Innovations in Religion, and that the only way to heal all, was to show himself
Sharp and severe against the new Sectaries: This occasioned the King to
withdraw his favor from Cromwell; for being one day in the Council Chamber, he
was suddenly apprehended and committed to the Tower of London; at the hearing
whereof many good men were much troubled, the charge laid against him was, that
he was a supporter of Heretics, and a Spreader of their Books, and that he had
caused to be translated into English Books wrote against the Sacrament of the
Alter, and that he had spoke words against the King; but whatever he was
accused of, he was soon after condemned in the Tower, without coming to his
Answer, and was beheaded; his death the King shortly after bewailed, wishing he
had his Cromwell alive again; so that it appears it was more the malice of his
Adversary, that stirred up the King against him, then any real cause by him
given or acted that might justly occasion his death.

In this year viz. 1545. one John Athee was indicted by the Kings writ for
speaking certain words against the Sacrament; That he would not believe in the
thing that the Knave Priest made, neither in that which Longs wife sells, but
only in God which is in Heaven; and when it was told him, that God through his
Word could make it Flesh and Blood, he answered, so he might if he would turn
it into a Chickens leg.

Here follows a Narative of a sudden Fear and Surprizal that fell upon the
Doctors and others at Mary's Steeple-house in Oxford, by reason of a man's
Crying Fire in the Street, and what happened thereupon.
There being a Sermon to be preached in the aforesaid Steeple-house at the
Recantation of one Malory; the Priest had no sooner got into the Pulpit, and
Malory come forth with his Faggot on his Shoulder, accompanied with a great
Congregation of people, but one in the Street seeing a Chimney on Fire, cried
out Fire, Fire, which so alarumed the People in the Steeple-house that the
Doctor and Congregation were amazed, expecting the Steeple-house had been on
Fire, and at last they all generally concluded it was on Fire and that the
Heretics had set it on Fire, and with eagerness running on heaps to get forth,
they raised such a dust, that it seemed like Smoke of Fire, and thrusting many
together to get out, they stopped up the Doors, that few could pass; and thus
being afrighted, as if great Danger or present Death were at hand, did they
crowd one upon another; the Heretic throwing down his Faggot, and shifting as
well as he could among the rest, the Doctor that was preaching his Recantation,
cried out, Lord have Mercy upon me, this is the Heretics doings: amongst the
rest a Monk, one of the Auditors, fearing the Danger, and seeing the way to
escape stopped; he got up to a Window and breaking the glass thrust himself part
through, but there stuck, and could get no further, neither in nor out; a Boy
also endeavoring to escape got upon the Door, and jumping down, jumpt into a
Monks Cowle, as it hung at his Back, the Monk hearing one in his Cowle, cried
out, who is that at my Back? The Boy cried, I am Bertrams Boy: Who art thou,
said the Monk? I am Bertrams Boy; good Master let me go? and with that the
Cowle began to crak, the Monk took him out, and the Boy ran away: Some lost
their Clothes in the throng, and some their Money in this Surprizal and Fright
at the noise of a Fire that did them no hurt.

About this time one Sr. George Blague of the Kings Privy-Chamber was falsely
accused for speaking against the Mass; whereupon Wrisly the Lord Chancellor
sent him to Newgate, and the next day he was arraigned and Condemned at
Guild Hall, and within a day or two after should have been burnt in Smithfield;
but some of the privy-Chamber making suit to the King on his behalf, the King
was much offended that they should come so near him as his Privy-Chamber
without his knowledge and Consent, sent for the Chancellor, and commanded him
presently to draw up his Pardon himself, whereby he was set at liberty: George
Blague afterward coming into the Kings Presence, the King said to him, Oh, my
Pig! (for so he used to call him) Yea, said he, if your Majesty had not been
better to me then your Bishops were, your Pig had been roasted before this time.

The Troubles of the Queen Katherine Parr, for showing favor to the Professors
of the Truth, and how the Lord made way for her Deliverance,
About this time the King coming from Bullein, information was given him, that
the Queen, Katherine Parr, was much given to reading the Scriptures, and
entertained diverse godly persons in conference about spiritual Matters: At
first the King seemed to like well of it, Her Council to the King.
which made her the more bold sometimes freely to debate with the King about
Religion, often beseeching him, That as he had to the glory of God and his own
Eternal Fame began a good work in banishing the Popes supremacy, that he would
perfect what he had begun, and thoroughly to cleanse away the dregs of Popery,
whereof much remained yet behind. The King though he was grown very teasty and
froward, yet out of his singular Affection to her, was content to bear with
her; for never did Maid more seek to please her Mistress then she did withal
painful endeavor apply her self by all virtuous means in all things, to please
his Humor. She was a Woman very beautiful, virtuous and of a comely personage,
which greatly delighted the King: But some subtle and malicious Instruments of
Satan, Popish Subtilty.
fearing what might be the Issue of it, sought by all means to set the King
against her; these were the Bishop of Winchester, Wrisly the Chancellor, and
others of the Council and Privy-Chamber, hoping that if they could but take
away her, that was such an Encourager of the Professors of the Truth, they
might soon destroy the rest.

The King growing sickly and froward left off his accustomed manner of visiting
the Queen, and therefore she took all opportunities to visit him, and did
earnestly solicit him to be Zealous in the Reformation of the Church;
Winchester being present at one time, and perceiving the King not to be very
well pleased with her; when she was gone he maliciously endeavored to stir up
the Kings Indignation against her, possessing the King, That under his Favor,
he with others of the Council, could in a short time disclose such Treason
cloaked with the vail of Heresy, that his Majesty should easily perceive how
dangerous it was to nourish such a Serpent in his Bossom; this so stirred up
the King that he gave them leave to draw up Articles against her, and thus far
they got their end; the next thing was, to suborn Witnesses to betray and
accuse her, and to find out what Books she had in her Closets that were
forbidden by Law, and to search her Closets, and to apprehend the Queen, and
send her by Barge to the Tower. The King being made privy to this devise by
Winchester and Wrisly, he politickly seemed to approve it, that he might see
how far the malice of the Bishop would carry him; and thus the Day, Time and
place for the Apprehending the Queen, and some about her was concluded of.

The King at this time lay at White Hall, and by reason of his distemper seldom
stirred abroad, and the time approaching for the apprehension of the Queen; she
suspected nothing of it, and therefore used after her accustomed manner, when
she came to the King, still to deal with him about Religion, as formerly she
had done; but one night after she had taken her Leave of him, the King imparted
the whole design to Doctor VVendy, enjoining him not to spoke of it to any
Creature; but by Providence these Articles drawn up against her, and signed by
the King fell from of the Bosom one of these Counselors, and was immediately
carried to the Queen, who reading the Articles, knowing the Kings hand was
supprised with such a sudden fear, that she made pitious Mean and Lamentation;
The King hearing that she was in peril of her Life, sent his Physicians to her,
and Doctor VVendy knowing the cause better then the other, began secretly to
break with her about the Articles, tilling her, that he knew well of them,
though he stood in danger of his Life by revealing of them, yet to quiet his
Conscience he could not but give her Warning of them, entreating her somewhat
to conform her self to the Kings mind, not doubting but that by her humble
submission, she should find him favorable to her; shortly after the King
hearing of her dangerous Condition went to her, to him therefore she uttered
her Grief, fearing, as she said, lest he had taken displeasure against her.
Whereupon he like a loving Husband with sweet and comfortable Words somewhat
eased her perplexed Mind, so that she began to recover; the King being departed
she caused all her Books which the Law was against to be conveyed away, and
taking a fit season in an Evening, she went to visit the King, who was
confering with some of his Bedchamber. When he saw her, he entertained her
Courteously, and began to Commnue with her about Religion, seeming desirous to
be resolved by the Queen of certain doubts which he proposed to her; she
perceiving his drift, with mild and reverend Conutenance answered him thus.
Your Majesty knows right well, neither am I ignorant what weakness attends our
Sex, and therefore we are inferior and Subject to man, our Head, whence all
our directions must pro^eed; God has made man in his own Likeness, endued him
with more exellent Gifts, etc. But he has made Woman of Man, by whom she is to
be governed and directed: seeing therefore that God has appointed such a
Natural Difference, and you being of so excellent. Wisdom; and I a poor sily
Woman, so much in feriour to you, why should your Majesty propose such
difficult Cases to me? yea, when I have said what I can, I must and will refer
my self unto your Wisdom, as my Supreme H^ad under God, by whom I must be
d^rected. This that she declared, and other discourse that passed between them
at that time, so pleased the King, that he showed great favor unto her, as
heretofore he had done. Her Adversaries knew nothing of this, and therefore
were providing for her Apprehension, which was to be next day, at which time
they intended to carry her to the Tower; the Day, and almost the Hour being
come, the King intending to take the Air, went into the Garden, whither the
Queen also went to him, being sent for by him, where the King being merrily
disposed with her, on a sudden, in the middst of the mirth in came VVrisly the
Chancellor, with forty of the Kings Guard at his heels, whom the King sternly
beholding, went to him, and upon private conference together, the King called
him Knave, Arrent Beast, and Fool, withal commanding him out of his Presence.
The King after his departure returned to the Queen, who perceiving him to be
much chafed, with Sweet words endeavored to qualify his displeasure, saying,
that though she knew not what might be the cause, he was Offended, but desired
him, if it were not heinous; that for her sake he would pass it by, Ah poor
Soul, said the King, little do thou know how ill he deserves this Grace at
thy hands, on my word, Sweet Heart, he has been toward thee an Arrant Knave,
and so let him go.

And thus the Queen through Gods Providence, and the Kings Favor escaped the
Hands of her bloody Persecutors, who sought to have destroyed her.

Persecuted in Scotland.
In the year 1534. the Archbishop of Andrews convented before him David
Stratton and one Norman Gourlay, the first of these having a Fisher-boat that
went to Sea, the Bishop of Murray demanded Tythe-Fish of him; to whom he
answered, That if they would have Tithe of that which his Servants caught in
the Sea, they should take it in the Place, where it was caught, and so caused
his Servants to throw the tenth Fish into the Sea again. All this while he had
nothing in him for Religion; But when hereupon he was summoned to answer for
Heresy, it troubled him exceedingly, and then he began to frequent the company
of such as were godly, and here appeared a Wonderful change in him; so that,
whereas before he despised the Scriptures, now all his delight was in hearing
them read to him; and he became a vehement Exhorter of all men to peace and
concord, and contempt of the World; he much frequented the company of the Lord
of Dun Ariskin, whom God in these days had marvelously illuminated, and
hearing that Text read (for he could not read himself) He that denies me
before men, or is ashamed of me in the midst of this wicked Generation, I will
deny him before my Father and holy Angels; at those words, being suddenly as
one revived, he fell upon his Knees, and steadfastly lifting up his Eyes and
Hands, at length he burst out into these words, O Lord I have been wicked, and
justly may thou withdraw thy Grace from me; But, Lord, for thy Mercies sake,
let me never deny thee nor thy Truth, for fear of Death or any Corporal Pain.
soon after Norman and he were brought to Judgment to Holy Rood house, the King
himself being present, much means was used to draw this David Stratton to make
a Recantation; but he persevered in his constancy, still denying that he had
offended, and so they were both condemned to the Fire, and after dinner they
were both first hanged and then burnt.

Not long after the burning of these two, there was one Thomas Forret a Dean,
who used to preach every first day to his Parishoners the Epistles and Gospels,
this was counted a great Novelty in those time; for none used to preach but the
Friars, and therefore they envying him, accused him to the Bishop of Dunkelden
for an Heretic, and one that re rad the Mysteries of Scriptures to the vulgar
People, the Bishop instigated by the complaint of the Friars called the said
Thomas Forret before him, to whom he said, My joy, Dean Thomas, I love you
well, and therefore I must give you Council how to govern your self; The Dean
thanked him, and then he proceeded, My joy, Dean Thomas, I am informed that you
preach the Epistles and Gospels every Sunday to your People, and that you take
not your Dues from them, which is very prejudicial to the Churchmen, and that
therefore my joy, Dean Thomas, I would have you to take your Dues, or else its
too much to preach every Sunday; for by so doing you make the People think,
that we should do so also.

Thomas answered, My Lord, I presume none of my Parishoners complain for my not
taking my Dues, and whereas you say, its too much to preach every Sunday; I
think it is too little; and wish that your Lordship would do the like.

Nay, nay, Dean Thomas, said the Bishop, let that be, for we are not ordained
to preach; and Dean Thomas, go your ways, and let all these Fancies be; for if
you persist herein, you will repent you, when it is too late.

I trust, said the Dean, my cause is good and just in the presence of God, and
therefore I care not what follows thereupon; and so went away, but shortly
after he was summoned to appear before the Cardinal, by whom he was condemned
and burned for a chief Heretic, and Teacher of Heresy.

But, notwithstanding their bloody Tyranny, the Knowledge of God did
Wonderfully increase in this Country, partly by reading, and partly by
brotherly Conference, which in those dangerous days were much used, to the
Comfort of many, which so enraged the Popish Party, that in the year 1538.
there were burned in one Fire four Persons.

The year after Jeremy Russel and Alexander Kenedy were apprehended and brought
before the Bishop, the said Jeremy being a man of a meek and quiet Nature;
Alexander was a young man about eightteen years old, Alexander at first was
faint, and would fain have recanted, but when all place of Repentance was
denied him, the Spirit of God began to refresh him, yea, the inward Comfort
began to burst forth as well in his Vissage as in his words, and he cried in
prayer to God, Oh Eternal God, how Wounderful is thy Love and Mercy, who have
made me to feel Heavenly Comfort, which take, from me that ungodly fear,
which before I was oppressed with; now I defy death; do with me what you
please; I praise God I am ready. Then did they rail upon him and Jeremy, who
also said unto them, This is your hour and power of darkness: Now sit ye as
Judges, and we stand wrongfully Accused, and more wrongfully to be Condemned;
but the day will come when our Innocence will appear, and ye shall see your own
blindness to your Everlasting Confusion: Go forward, and fulfill the measure of
your Iniquity. Shortly aft'r th'y were Condemned to die, and as they went to
Execution Jeremy comforted Alexander, saying to him, Brother, fear not, greater
is he that that is in us, then he that is in the World; the pain that we are to
suffer is short, and shall be light, but our Joy and Consolation shall never
have end: Let us therefore strive to enter into our Master and Saviors Joy by
the same Strait Way which he has taken before us; Death cannot hurt us, for it
is already destroyed by him, for whose Sake we now Suffer. And thus they
constantly continued steadfast in the Flaming Fire till they finished their
Course by Death.

In the year 1543. George Wiseheart a man of a Courteous, Modest and Temperate
Behavior, fearing God and hating Covetousness, very charitable and moderate in
his Apparel and Diet, and for his Innocence was a man well beloved; he was
accused on several Articles by the Bishops, and afterward Condemned by them as
an Heretic to be burnt; when he came to the fire he said, Father of Heaven, I
commend my Spirit into thy holy Hands; and then turned him to the People, and
said these Words, I beseech you Christian Brethren and Sisters, that you be not
offended in the Word of God for the affliction and Torments which you see
already prepared for me; but I Exhort you, that you Love the Word of God, and
suffer patiently, and with a comfortable heart for the Words sake, which is
your undoubted Salvation and Everlasting Comfort.

Moreover I pray you, show my Brethren and Sisters, which have heard me often
before, that they cease not, nor l^^ve off the Word of God which I taught unto
them, after the Grace given to me, for any Persecutions or Troubles in this
World, which lasts not; and show unto them, that my Doctrine was no Old Wives
Fable, after the Constitution made by men; and if I had taught men's Doctrine, I
had gotten great thanks of men, but for the Word and true Gospels sake I suffer
this day by men, not sorowfully, but with a glad Heart and Mind; for this cause
I was sent, that I should Suffer this Fire for Christ's Sake, this grim Fire I
fear not, and so I pray you to do, if that any Persecution come unto you for
the Word's sake; and fear not them that Kill the Body, and afterward have no
power to Kill the Soul.

Then he prayed for them which accused him, saying, I beseech thee, Father of
Heaven, to forgive them that have through Ignorance, or an evil Mind, forged
Lies against me; I forgive them with all my heart, and I beseech Christ to
forgive them who have Condemned me to death this day ignorantly. So being first
Hanged, he was then burnt, many People bewailing his death.

VVabter Mill, amongst the rest of the Martyrs of Scotland, his Constancy is
not to be past over with silence, out of whose Ashes Sprung thousands of his
Religion in Scotland; many Articles were drawn up against him, for which he had
sentance pronounced against him, that he should be delivered to the Temporal
Judge, and punished as an Heretic, which was to be burnt.

Now when all things were ready for his death, and he conveyed with Armed men
to the Fire, Andrew Olifant Judge, that past sentence upon him, bad him Go to
the Stake; he said, Nay, except thou pull me up with thy hand, for I am
forbidden by the Law of God, to lay hands of my self: then Olifant put him up
with his hand, thereupon he went gladly, saying, I will go to the Altar of God,
and desired that he might have time to speak to the People, which his
Executioner denied, saying, That he had spoken overmuch, and that the Bishops
were o^fended that the matter was so long continued, but some young men that
stood by desired him to speak what he please; so, after he had prayed, he rose
up, and standing upon the Coals, said on this wise.

Dear Friends, the Cause why I suffer this day, is not for any Crime laid to my
Charge, but only for the defense of the Faith of Christ Jesus, for which, as
the faithful Martyrs have heretofore gladly offered themselves, being assured,
after the Death of their Bodies, of Eternal Felicity; so this day I praise God,
that he has called me of his Mercy, among the rest of his Servants, to seal
his Truth with my Life; which as I received it of him, so willingly I offer it
to his Glory: Therefore as you will escape the eternal death, be no more
seduced by the Lies of Priests, Monks and Bishops, and the rest of the Sect of
Antichrist, but depend only upon Jesus Christ, and his Mercy, that you may be
delivered from Condemnation.

All that while there was great Mourning and Lamentation of the multitude, for
they perceiving his Patience, Stoutness, Boldness, and Constancy, were not only
moved and stirred up, but their hearts also were so inflamed, that he was the
last Martyr that died in Scotland for Religion; after his prayer he was hoised
up on the Stake, and being in the Fire, he said, Lord have Mercy on me; pray
People while there is time, and so be constantly departed.

The Persecutions in the Reign of Edward the sixth.
Henry the Eighth being dead, Edward the sixth succeeded him at the Age of nine
years; he was a Youth of a meek nature and disposition, much inclined to
Clemency and Mercy, yea, so much, that when one Joan Butcher being condemned to
be burnt for Heresy, all the Council could not move him to set his hand,
saying to Cranmer, what, will you send her quick to the Devil in her Error?
Doctor Cranmer persuaded him, with much ado at last to put his hand, to whom he
said, He would lay all the charge thereof upon Cranmer as before the Lord.

But though this King was of so mild a Nature, and a Person inclining to love
Religion from a Child, being very Zealous for a further Reformation in the
Church, abolishing the Mass, etc. and a Protector being appointed during his
Nonage, which was his uncle the Duke of Somerset, a man also very Zealous for
Reformation, and an Encourager of such as professed the Gospel; but in the midst
of these meek and gentle times, on the other hand, the P^pish party having a
great power in the Kingdom used all the Means and Endeavors to stir up
Persecution, and to hinder that good they found the King and his Uncle
inclinable to, yet the most of this Kings Reign, which was but short, the Sword
was taken out of their hands, so that they had not power to shed much Blood all
his Reign; yet some there were that suffered for Religion, viz. Joan of Kent,
an English woman, and one George a Dutchman, and one Thom^s Dobb, who was
apprehended for speaking against the Idolatry of the Mass, and committed to
Prison, where he died.

The cause of the Imprisonment of Thomas Dobb was as follows.
The said Thomas Dobb being a Man fervent and zealous for Religion, and as it
is recorded of him, a man so Innocent, that he was like a Dove, without any
Gall or Bitterness, and more apt to receive Injury then do wrong to any one: It
happened, that as he was passing by Paul's in London, seeing the Priest at Mass,
being at the Elevation as he passed by, the young man filled with godly Zeal,
pitying the Ignorance and Idolatry of the People in honoring that so devoutly
which the Priest lifted up, was not able to forbear, but opened his Mouth, and
turning to the People, exhorted them, testifying against their Idolatry, for
which cause he was presently apprehended by the Mayor, and being accused by the
Bishop of Canterbury, was Committed to the Counter in Bredstreet, where falling
sick he soon after died.

In this Kings time there was also one John Hume, a servant to one Lewnax,
accused by his Master, of denying the Sacrament of the Altar to be the real
Flesh and Blood of Christ: And for saying, That he would never vail his Bonnet
to it, if he burnt therefore: And for saying, That if he heard Mass he should
be damned. For these things he was accused of his Master and Mistress, and sent
up by them to the Bishop of Canterbury, with Letters, desiring that he might be
severely punished for the same, but no mention is made of his Execution, and so
that may be past by, and return may be to give a short account of the
Reformation in this Kings time, and how far it extended.

Injunctions were set out in his time, viz, that Bibles in English should be
placed in some convenient place in the Church (so called) that the People might
read in them when they pleased, and rather be furthered to read them, then
hindered by the Priests or Curates.

And the Priests or Curates should not at any time haunt Taverns or Alehouses,
neither spend their time Idly in unlawful Games, but should give themselves to
read and hear the Scriptures read, and every Benificed-Preacher to preach twice
a year, and that all Monuments of Idolatry in Churches (so called) and Houses,
and Windows should be taken away, and that Homilies should be read every Sunday.

He took away and abrogated all Acts made by former Kings for reformation of
Heretics and Lollords, and the Act of the six Articles, and all Acts published
prohibiting the speading the Scriptures in English.

He also sent out a Letter to the Archbishop, signed by the Council, to
abolish Images, and that the Altars should be taken down, and a Table set up
instead thereof.

Though this may be acounted but a little Reformation to what is since, yet it
so troubled the Popish Adversaries, that they sought all the ways and means
they could to hinder its further proceeding and growth, and would not be
satisfied until they had found out a way to answer their Wicked purposes. And
now the old Adversary of all good put it in the Heads of the Popish Party, to
charge the Duke of Somerset, the Kings Uncle and Protector of his Person, and
the Realm, as that he was the occasion of all the Sedition that had happened in
the Realm, etc.

And though he was in a high state, yet that could not, nor did not preserve
him; and indeed it is a vain thing for man to put Trust or Confidence upon the
brickle Pillars of Worldly Prosperity, how high soever it seems, considering
that where virtue is most prefect, it is there most envied by Wicked men, as in
the Example of this Duke appears.

This Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset being Protector, had a Brother who was
high Admiral of England; these two Brethren, so long as they were knit and
joined together in Love and Concord, preserved themselves, the King and whole
Commonwealth, from the Violen^e and Fear of Danger of all their Adversaries:
But the old Subtle Serpent always envying man's felicity, through Slanderous
Tongues sought to sow matter, first of discord between them, then of Suspicion,
and last of all of Extreme Hatred, insomuch that the Protector suffered his
Brother, being accused (whether true or false, the Lord knows) to be
Condemned, and to lose his Head whereby it came to pass that not long after he
himself was over-matched by his Adversaries, and overthrown by them, and being
cast into the Tower, at last lost his Head also, to the great Lamentation of
many good men, and so the fall of one Brother was the Ruin of the other; for it
was not long after the Admiral was beheaded but that Insurrections began in
several parts of the Kingdom; but after they were subdued, several of the Lords
assembled at Baynard; Castle, and at the Mayor of Londons House, and had great
Consultations against the Protector, who was then with the King at Hampton
Court, which the King hearing of, sent the Secretary to them with a Message, to
which they made no answer, and not long after published a Proclamation in the
City against the Protector, charging him with diverse Crimes, as that he should
be the chief Occasion of all the Sedition that had of late happened in the
Kingdom and that he did what in him lay to cause Variance between the King and
the Nobles, and desired the City to aid them; the King also sent the Mayor and
City a Letter, requiring aid likewise. This made the Mayor and Citizens in a
strait, some being for helping the King, and some on the other side, for
helping the Lords, and against the Protector; the Recorder pressed the Citizens
to assist the Lords against the Protector, who, he said, had abused the King
and the whole Realm, and pressed the Common Council for an Answer, and that they
would declare what they would do; but they were silent in the matter until one
Ge^rge Stadlow stood up and told them, It is good to consider of things p^st,
to avoid dangers in things to come, and then related to them, what
inconveniences and damage befell the Citizens in assisting the Barons in their
Wars against King Henry the third: In conclusion the Lords hearing what past in
the City, assembled in the Star Chamber next day, and sent a Messenger to the
King to Windsor, who so ordered his matter with the King, that the Protector
was apprehended, and shortly after was had to the Tower in London, and there
was charged with several Articles, and a terrible Proclamation put out against
him, but through the Kings Love and laboring in his behalf, he was shortly
after let out of the Tower, and the Proclamation called in again; after which
trouble he continued two years at Liberty, though not restored to his former
Office.

But after this respite, he was again apprehended and committed to the Tower,
from whence he was in a short time after conveyed through the City, (with the
Tower-Ax carried before him,) to Westminster, and there tried by the Peers,
where in a quiet, patient and Suffering Spirit, he Modestly Behaved himself,
showing himself an Example of Meekness, yea, wisely replying to the Articles,
objected against him, and was at last cleared of the Treason laid to his
charge, which the People understanding, were greatly rejoiced at; but his
Adversaries quickly found out another Snare; for they charged him with Felony,
for intending and purposing the death of the Earl of Northumberland, which was
by them adjudged Felony according to a Law, wherein it was enacted, That it
should be Felony for any Subject to seek or procure the death of any P^^^y
Councillor; and being condemned he was again conveyed to the Tower, and shortly
after from thence was had to the place of Execution, where neither his Voice
nor countenance changed, but after his usual manner he spoke to the people to
this effect. Dearly beloved Friends, I am brought hither to suffer death,
though I never offended the King neither in Word nor Deed, and have been always
as faithful and true to this Realm as any man has been: And after other words,
he said, morecover, Dearly beloved Friends, there is yet somewhat that I must
put you in mind of, as touching Christian Religion, which so long as I was in
Auth^rity I always dilligently furthered to my power, neither do I repent me
of my doings, but rejoice therein, seeing the state of Christian Religi^n
comes nearer to the order of the Princitive Church, which thing I esteem as a
great benefit given of God both unto you and me, most heartily exhorting you
all, that this which is most purely set forth unto you, you will with the like
thankfulness unbrace and accept of, and show forth the same in your living,
which thing if you do not, without doubt greater mischief and Calamity will
follow. And after other Good exhortations to the people he kneeled down,
without showing any token of Trouble or Fear, but like a meek Lamb received the
Stroke of Death.

As touching his disposition and Conversation whilst alive, (as it is written
of him) it could not be sufficienly commended according to his worth, being a
man of so meek and gentle a nature, as is rare to be found in so high an
estate; he was always ready to give ear to the complaints of the Poor, and
very attentive unto the Affairs of the Common Wealth; he was a man ignorant of
all Craft and Deceit, and as void of Pride and Ambition, as he was from doing
injury, being indeed void of both; he was of a gentle Disposition, m^re apt and
ready to be deceived, then to deceive; and last of all, he was a man Zealous
for the Religion and Truth, so far as it appeared, and was broken forth in that
day; and in all likelihood he had been a good Instrument in the work of
Reformation, had not this difference between the Lords and him happened, which
put a period to his days, for so long as they agreed, and that there was
Concord among them, the two great persecuting Bishops Winchester and Bonner
were kept under, and their power was but little, which afterward upon seeing
the great division amongst the Nobles they then again began to have hopes they
should have another Day and Time, further to execute their presecuting power,
which soon after then had, for the next year after the death of the Duke of
Somerset the King died, and Queen Mary reigned next, and of the bloody work
that was made in her Reign a Relation will herein be given in its place.

A Relation of the Lamentable Suffering of William Gardner an English Merchant
in Portugal, for his Testimony to the Truth against Popish Idolatry.
William Gardner was born at Bristol of honest Parents, he was naturally given
to gravity, of a mean stature of Body, but of a comely and pleasant
Countenance, but in no part so excellent as in the inward qualities of the mind
which from a Child he had kept without spot of reprehension; being a Prentise
with a Merchant in Bristo^, his Master sent him a Voyage into Spain, but by
accident the Ship arrived at Lisbon in Portugal; where after he came ashore, he
was very strict in keeping himself, lest he should be defiled with the
Portugals Superstition, whilst he remained there a great Marriage was to be
solemnized between the King of Portugals Son and the King of Spains Daughter,
the which amongst other People he going to the Public place to see, and there
beholding the Peoples great Idolatry, the young man was sore pricked and moved
in his Conscience against it, but had not an opportunity to bear his Testimony
against it at that time, but left the place and went away with a great Burden
upon him, and so it continued upon him insomuch that he sought out secret and
solitary Places where he might call upon God with Tears, and ease his mind,
bewaling himself for neglecting his duty in testifying against the Impiety and
Superstition of that People; concluding in his mind to take another opportunity
to clear himself, and to that end he made up his accounts with all men, and
then gave himself continually to Prayer and Meditation on the Lord, taking
little Meat by Day, or Sleep by Night.

And shortly after he went on a Sunday (so called) to the Public Place of
Worship again where the King was present, and a great Assembly of people,
getting as near to the high Altar as he could, having a Testament in English in
his hand, in which he read while the Mass was celebrated by the Cardinal, until
the Cardinal took the Host in his hand, and then William being moved with Zeal,
and not longer able to forbear, he stepped speedily and snarched the Cake out of
the Priests hand and trod it under his Feet, and overthrew the Challice: This
made the People all amazed, and to rise in a great Tumult, and one run him into
the Shoulder with his Dagger, and immediately they would have killed him, but
that the King commanded he should be saved.

After the Tumult Ceased, he was brought before the King, who asked him, What
Country man he was, and how he durst be so bold to do such an Action in
Contempt to him and the Sacrament of the Church?

William Gardner, told him, He was an English man, and came thither a Merchant,
and seeing so great Idolatry in so famous an Assembly, he was not satisfied in
his Conscience until he had acted what he had done, further telling the King;
there was not any thought in him of acting any ^^^ing in Contempt to his
Presence.

Then he was urged, to discover the persons that instigated him to the Action;
He desired there might be no such suspicion conceived of him, saying, He was
not moved thereunto by any man, but by his own Conscience, and that he did it
as required of God, and for the People Salvation.

While he was thus examined, he was ready to faint with the wound he received,
whereupon Chirurgions were sent for to cure him, if possible, to the end he
might be further examined, and receive greater punishment; for they were fully
persuaded some others had stirred him to do the Action, and thereupon the
English Merchants were apprehended, and his bedfellow was examined, and
cruo^ly tormented, and kept in Prison two years after, and having ^^^ched
William Gardner's Chamber, thinking there to find out ^^me of the Authors of
the interprize, but finding none they repa^^ed to him again, urging him to
discover who was the Author or Instigator of him to do the fact, using an
unheard of piece of Cruelty (...) ^^^ke him ^^^fess, which was thus, they made
fast a thread to a Cl^th B^ll^ (...) ^^^st it down his Throat, and then plucked
it up again, and so plucked (...) and fro for some time, till they were wearyed
and seeing they could work nothing that way, they asked him, whether he did
repeat of his wicked Deed? he answered, That he thought, that if is were to do
again he should do it.

After they had used diverse Torments to make him confess, and saw it was to no
purpose, they had him to Execution; but first they carried him into the Vestry,
and cut off his Right Hand; then he was had into the Marketplace, and there
they cut off his Left Hand; then his Arms were bound behind him, and his Feet
under the Horses Belley, and so was carried to the place of Execution, where he
was let down by a pulley into the Fire, and then plucked up, and let down again,
all which cruelty he endured with a constant Spirit, saying, O Eternal God,
Father of all Mercies, look down upon thy Servant, and with patience he
suffered, till at last the Rope burning he fell down into the Fre, and was
consumed. This was in the year 1552.

Persecutions in the Reign of Queen Mary, beginning Anno 1553.
After the Death of Edward the fixth, Queen Mary succeeded; and after the was
settled in her Throne, a Sinod was assembled for consulting about matters of
Religion, and the point, especially of the real Presence in the Sacrament,
after a long Disputation, where Reason and Scriptures were not so much weighed
as Voices numbered, the Papal side, as having most voices, carried it, and
thereupon was that Religion again restored, and the Mass commanded again in all
Churches (so called) to be celebrated after the ant^^^ m^^^.

And shortly after, Cardinal Poole, and English man, that (...) fed to Rome for
Succor in the former time, Q. Mary.
was sent for over again to England by the Queen, who was no sooner come, but
the Attaindor upon Record against him, was by Act of Parliament taken off, and
he restored; and a few days after, coming to the Parliament, before the Queen,
and both Houses assembled; after the Bishop of Winchester, who was Chancellor,
had made a short speech to them, signifying the presence of the Cardinal, and
that he was sent from the Pope, as his Legate, for their good and benefit: Then
the Cardinal stood up, and made a long Oration to them, thanking them for
restoring him, whereby he was made a Member of their Society: Then Exhorting
them to return into the Bossom of the Church, for which end he was come, not to
Condemn, but to Reconcile; not to compel, but to call and require; and for
their first work of Reconcilement, requiring them to repeal and abrogate all
such Laws as had formerly been made in derogation of the Catholic Religion.

After which Speech, the Parliament going together, drew up a Supplication,
which within two days after, they presented to the King and Queen, wherein
they showed themselves to be very penitent for their former Errors, and humbly
desired them to interceed for them to the Cardinal and the Sea Apostolic, that
they might be pardoned of all they had done amiss, and be received into the
Bossom of the Church, being themselves most ready to abrogate all Laws
prejudicial to the Sea of Rome.

This Supplication being delivered to the Cardinal, he then gave them
Absolution in these words, We, (by the Apostolic Authority, given unto us by
the most holy Lord Pope Julius the third, Christ's Vicegerent on Earth) do
absolve, and deliver you, and every of you, with the whole Realm and Dominions
thereof from all Heresy and Schism, and from all Judgments, Censures and
Pains, for that cause incurred; and also we do restore you again to the unity
of our Mother the holy Church. The report hereof coming to Rome, was cause that
a solemn Procession was made for Joy of the Conversion of England to the Church
of Rome.

And now all Bishops which had been deprived in the time of Edward the sixth,
were restored to their Bishoprics, and the new removed, and all that would not
turn and forsake their Religion were turned out of their Livings; and Stephen
Gardner and Bonner became again to be had in favor, and were restored to their
former places, and several old Laws were again revived by Act of Parliament for
the trial of Heresy and Commissions, and Inquisitors were sent abroad into all
parts of the Realm; whereupon many were apprehended and brought to London, and
there Imprisoned, and afterward most of them burnt to death, or else through
cruel usage died in Prison, and were buried in Dunghils in the Fields, to the
Number of near three Hundred Persons, Men and Women, in the short Reign of this
Queen.

And now Bonner being re-invested into his Bishopric, he sends forth
Injunctions, that six in every Parish (upon their Oaths) should present before
him such as would not conform; and soon after, about threescore Inhabitants of
the City of London were apprehended and imprisoned, for dispersing and selling
certain Books, sent over into England out of Germany, and other Countries.

About this time, the people going a Procession in Smithfield, and the Priest
being under the Canopy with the Box, John Street persecuted.
according to the usual Custom, one John Street, a Joyner in Coleman-Street,
going by in haste about his business, by chance went under the Canopy by the
Priest, at which the Priest was so surprised, and overcome with fear, that he
let the Pix fall down; the people being amazed, presently apprehended the poor
man, and committed he was to the Compter; and the Priest accused him to the
Council, as if he came to slay him; from the Compter, he was removed to
Newgate, where he was cast into the Dungeon, and there chained to a Post, and
so miserably used till he lost his Senses, and then they sent him to Bedlam.

Roods Commaded to be again set up in the places called Churches.
These were but in the beginnings of Bonners Cruelty in this Queens time; the
next thing he did was, he put out a Mandate to the Curates within his Diocese,
requiring them to abrogate and blot out all Scripture Texts wrote upon the Walls
in Churches (so called) in Edward the sixths time; which he said was opening a
Window to all Vice; and further, commanded that comely Roods should be again
set up in all Churches.

The same Injunction for setting up Roods was published in other Diocesses at
this time; for at Cockram in Lancashire, the Parishoners and Wardens had agreed
with a Carver to make them a Rood, and to set it up in that they called their
Church, at a certain prise, which the Carver did; but the Rood being made of an
ugly grim Countenance, they disliked it, and refused to pay the Workman that
made it; whereupon by Warrant he brought them before the Mayor of Lancaster,
who was a favourer of the Protestants, and a man against Images; when they came
before the Mayor, he asked them, Why they did not pay the man according to their
Agreement? they replied, they did not like the grimness of its Vissage; saying,
they had a man formerly with a hansome Face, and they would have had such
another now; well, said the Mayor, though you like not the Rood, the Poor-mans
Labor has been never the less, and its pity he should loose; but I tell you
what you shall do, pay him the Money you promised him; and if it will not serve
you for a God, you may make a Devil of it, at which they laughed, and so
departed.

About this time, about thirty Men and Women were taken at a Religious
Assembly, in Bow-yard in Cheapside, and were Committed to Prison; their
Preacher, one Rose, was had before the Bishop of Winchester, S. Gardner, and
by him Committed to the Tower.

Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer apprehended.
Shortly after, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, three Bishops, were sent to the
Tower, and from thence Conveyed to Oxford; there to Dispute with Oxford and
Cambridge men in points of Religion, but especially of the Eucharist; the
Oxford men were Cole, Chadsey, Pie, Harpsfield, Smith, and Weston Prolocutor;
the Cambridge men were, Young, Seaton, Watson, Fecknam, Atkinson, and Sedgwick;
the matter was so carried by these twelve men, that it went against the
Prisoners; and after the Disputation was ended, the Prisoners were brought
again upon the Stage, and demanded, whether they would persist in their Opinion
or recant? They affirming they would persist, they were all three adjudged
Heretics, and Condemned to the Fire, but their Execution was not till a year
or two after.

John Rogers Martyr.
In the mean time we have an account of John Rogers, who was the first Martyr
in this Queens time, who was burnt in London, after a long and fore suffering
by Imprisonment. Soon after him was burnt Lawrence Saunders, Lawrence Saunders
Martyr
who was by order kept straightly in Prison, and none suffered to speak with him,
not so much as his Wife suffered to visit him; in his Examination the
Chancellor threatening him that he should not live many days. Saunders said,
Welcome shall the Will of God be, either Life or Death, for I have learned to
die; but I Exhort you to beware of shedding Innocent blood, Truly it will Cry.
As the Officers were leading him away from his Examination, he exhorted the
People to Repentance, warning them to defy Antichrist, Sin, Death, and the
Devil, that they might receive blessing and favor from the Lord; being
Condemned, he was carried down to Coventry to be burnt, where he was put into
the common Goal, where he slept little, but spent the Night in Prayer, and
instructing others, and the next day was burnt; during the time of his
Imprisonment, he wrote several good Epistles, to comfort and strengthen such as
were under the like Suffering with him: I shall only insert the Substance of
one to his Wife, by which may be perceived the seriousness and Zeal that was
stirred up in him against his Adversaries, forbidding his Wife to seek any way
for his delivery.

Lawrence Saunders his Letter to his Wife.
Grace, Mercy and Peace in Christ our Lord, entirely beloved Wife, even as unto
mine own Soul and Body, so do I daily in my Prayer wish unto you, daily
remembering you: And I do not doubt, dear Wife, but that both I and you, as we
be written in the Book of Life, so we shall together enjoy the same
Everlastingly, through the Grace and Mercy of God, our dear Father, in his Son
Christ; and for this present life, let^ us wholly appoint our selves to the Will
of our God, to glorify him either by Life or by Death; the Lord make us worthy
to Honor him either way, as pleases him. I am cheerful, I thank God in
Christ, in whom, and through whom I know I shall be able to fight a good fight,
and finish a good Course, and then receive the Crown which is laid up in Store
for me, and all the true Soldiers of Christ; wherefore, Wife, let us in the
Name of our God, fight to overcome the Flesh, the Devil, and the World; what
Weapons are used in this fight, look in the sixth Chap. of the Ephesians; and
pray etc. I would that you make no suit for me in any wise; thank you know
whom, for her most sweet and comfortable putting me in remembrance of my
Journey, whither I am passing, I have too few such Friends to further me in
that Journey, which is indeed the greatest friendship; the blessing of God be
with you all, Amen.

A Prisoner in the Lord Lawrence Saunders.


John Hooper and Rowland Tailor Martyr.
Shortly after were burnt for Religion, John Hooper, and one Rowland Tailor,
the one at Gloucester, and the other at Hadley: The time of Rowland Taylor's
Execution drawing nigh, his Wife and Son coming to see him, and one John H^^^,
that had been his Servant; after he had supt, he turned to his Son, saying,
Thomas, my dear Son, God Almighty bless thee, see that thou fear God always,
and flee from Sin, and wicked living; be virtuous, and apply thy self to thy
Book; and in any wise see thou be obedient to thy Mother, love her, serve her,
and be ruled by her in thy Youth, and follow her good Counsel in all things:
Beware of Lewd Company of Young men that fear not God but follow their lewd
lusts; flee from Whoredom, and hate all filthy living; and when thy Mother is
old, forsake her not, but provide for her to thy power, and see that she lack
nothing; then will God bless thee, and give thee long Life upon Earth, and
Prosperity. To his Wife, he said, my dear Wife, continue steadfast in the fear
and Love of God; keep your self undefiled from Poposh Idolatries and
Superstitions; I have been unto you a faithful Yoke Fellow, and so have you
been to me, for which I doubt not, dear Wife, but God will reward you: Now the
time is come that I shall be taken from you; The Lord gave you unto me, and the
Lord will take me from you, Blessed be the Name of the Lord; I believe they are
blessed which die in the Lord; The Lord is my Light, and my Salvation, whom
then shall I fear; God is he that justifies, who is he that can condemn: In
thee O Lord I have trusted, let we never be confounded: On the next day by two
of the Clock in the Morning, he was taken out of the Compter by Officers, and
had to Chelmsford, and there was he delivered to the Sheriff of Suffolk, who
was commanded to see him burnt.

The suffering of Hailes.
About this time One St. James Hailes, on of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
at an Assizes in Kent, giving charge upon the Statutes of Henry the Eighth, and
Edward the Sixth, in derogation of the primacy of Rome; when he was before the
Chancellor in Westminster Hall, being there among other Judges to take his
Oath, the Chancellor said:

Chancellor, I am informed you have Indicted certain Priests in Kent for saying
Mass.


Hailes, I Indicted none, but certain Indictments of that Nature were brought
before me at the Assizes in Kent, and I did according to Law therein, and
according to Conscience; and if it were to do again I could do no less then I
did.


Chancellor, Your Conscience is known well enough.


Hailes, You may do well to search your own Conscience; for mine is better
known to my self then to you.


This and other talk at that time so displeased the Bishop, that not many days
after this discourse in Westminster Hall, Judge Hailes, was by the Commandment
of the Bishop, committed to the Kings Bench, where he remained some time, and
then was committed to the Compter in Bred-Street, and from thence carried to
the Fleet; being in the Fleet, some endeavored to persuade him to Compliance;
how far he yielded to those Persuasions and Assaults of the Enemy, it was not
known; but shortly after he fell into a great horror and terror in his
Conscience, and in the anguish of his Spirit stabbed himself with his
Penknife, and so thought to end his misery, but through providence he was
disappointed of destroying himself at that time: But this Action being noised
abroad, as it was occasion of great sorrow and trouble to many that had a great
Esteem of him, being reputed so worthy a Judge, and so just a man, so it also
opened the Mouth of his Adversary, the Bishop, who openly in the Star Chamber
blasphemed against such as professed the Truth, calling the Doctrine of the
Gospel, the Doctrine of Desperation. But it was not long before the Judge was
set at Liberty, but he had not been long at home, (but his trouble increasing
upon him) he watch an apportunity, and drowned himself in a shallow Water near
his House.

Now, Stephen Gardner, Bishop of Winchester, having got the Law and outward
Sword on his Side, he thought to Rule as he pleased; and having taken off
(either by Imprisonment or Death) most of the principal Preachers, of those he
counted Sectaries, he concluded the rest would be thereby terrified, and kept
under; but his Expectations herein were frustrated.

For within a few Weeks after the Apprehension and Execution of the aforesaid
persons, The apprehending of Thomas Tomkins and five others.
there were six more raised up to testify against the Popish Idolatry then
established by a Law; their names were William Piggot, a Butcher, Stephen
Knight, a Barber, Thomas Tomkins, a Weaver, Thomas Hawks, John Lawrence, and
William Hunter; these Persons being brought before B. Gardner, he was so
concerned to see his former devices so little effect the end he intended, that
he refused to Act any more against them; but being wholly discouraged, turned
them over to Bonner Bishop of London, who Prosecuted all that were brought
before him to the utmost of his power, not sparing to act his cruelty, as from
time to time he had an opportunity, to the uttermost.

They were all condemned by B^nnor.
Upon the 8th day of the Month called February 1555. The aforesaid six persons
were brought before B^nner, at the Consistory at Paul's, where nhe next day he
past Sentence of Death upon them, showing himself a rash and cruel Judge, to
pass Sentence so suddenly upon so many Innocent men's Lives; but he gave them a
little time before they were put to death, which was till the Month following.

The most remarkable Passages that I find at their Trials and Examinations, are
briefly related as follows.
Thomas Tomkins a Weaver, dwelling in Shoreditch, a man accounted by such as
were acquainted with him Zealous and Godly, The Examination of Thomas Tomkins.
much given to Prayer; during the time of his Imprisonment, which was half a
year, the Bishop Bonner beat him sorely about the Face, and plucked him by the
Beard (being long) and caused his Beard to be Shaved off; but though the rage
of the Bishop was great, the constancy and patience of the poor man was as
great; for he was not moved at the Bishops cruelty; the Bishop seeing the
course he had taken would no ways prevail, he fell from Beating to Burning;
for having a great Candle burning in his Hall at Fulham, he took Tomkins by the
Fingers ends holding his hand over the flame of the Candle, trying him whether
he would Recant, but with patience he bore this cruelty also, until Doctor
Harpsfield standing by, moved with pity, told Bonner he had tried him enough,
and then Bonner let his Fingers go.

The last time Thomas Tomkins appeared before Bonner, there were several other
Bishops present, one of which earnestly exhorted him to leave off his Opinions;
to whom he answered, I was Born and brought up in Ignorance until of late
years, and now I know the Truth, I shall continue in the same until Death;
which Bonner hearing, thought it time to pass Sentence upon him; and as he had
begun to burn his Hand, so sentenced his Body to be burnt, delivering him to
the Sheriff of London, who carried him to Newgate, where he remained until the
16th day of the Month called March, and then sealed his Faith in the Flames.

The 26th day of the aforesaid Month, followed the Martyrdom of another of
these six persons, viz. William Hunter, a Zeal. ous Young man for Religion;
William Hunter Martys
who was about the Age of ninteen years when he suffered; he was born of godly
Parents, by whom he was not only Instructed in godliness, but also confirmed by
them until Death.

William Hunter, being an Apprentize in Coleman-Street in London, with one
Thomas Tailor a Silk-weaver; the beginning of his trouble was, for refusing to
hear Mass, and to receive their Eucharist, for which the Priest of the Parish
threatened to have him before the Bishop; his Master fearing lest he should come
to suffer, by reason of Williams not conforming, desired him to depart from
him, whereupon William went home to his Fathers, to Burntwood in Essex, where
after he had remained a little time, happening to go into the Chapel of
Burntwood, and finding a Bible lying upon a Desk he read therein; while he was
reading, one Atwell, a Sumner, coming in, reproved him, saying, Wherefore
meddlest thou with the Bible? William answered, I read in it for my comfort;
Atwell replied, It was never a good World since the Bible came abroad in
England; William answered, say not so, it likes me well, and I pray God we may
have the Bible amongst us continually.

Atwell, I perceive you are one of them that mislikes the Queens Laws, and
therefore you came from London; but you must turn another Leaf, or else you
will Broyl for it, and in a fury went away, saying, he would fetch one that
should talk with him, and went to an Alehouse hard by, and fetch out the
Viccar of Soutweld, who coming into the Chapel, and hearing William read,
said, Sirrah who gave thee leave to read in the Bible? William answered, I read
for my Comfort, and shall read while I Live; and told the Viccar, He ought
rather to encourage, then discourage people in reading the Scriptures.


Viccar, Does This become thee to tell me what I have to do, thou Heretic?


William Hunter said, I am no Heretic.


V^ccar, What say thou to the blessed Sacrament of the Altar? believe thou
in it? and that the bread and wine is transubstantiated into the very Body and
Blood of Christ?


William Hunter, I learn no such thing in the Scriptures, as you speak of; you
understand Christ's Words much like the Carnal Cappern^tes, who thought that
Christ would have given them his Flesh to feed upon, which opinion Christ
corrected, when he said, The Words which I speak unto you are Spirit and Life.


Viccar, I have found you out now; I see thou art an Heretic indeed, and that
thou do not believe in the Sacerament of the Altar.


William Hunter, whereas you doubt my belief, I would it were tried, whether
you or I would stand fastest in our Faith.


Viccar, Thou Heretic, would thou have it so tried?


William Hunter, In that way which you call Heresy, do I serve the Lord my
God; I would you and I were even now tied fast to a Stake, to prove which of us
would stand firmest in our Faith.


Viccar, It shall not be so tried.


No, quoth William, I think so, for if it might, I know who would soonest
Recant; I durst set my Foot against yours, even to the death.

That we shall see, quoth the Viccar, and so departed, threatening William to
complain of him; Shortly after, according to his words, he instigated one
Justice Brown against William, who shortly after sent for a Constable, and for
William's Father to come before him; William being gone from home, the Justice
threatened his Father, He would make him tell where he was, or else he would
send him to Prison; the Old man said, Would you have me seek my Son to be
burned? If thou bring him to me, says the Justice, I will deal well enough for
that matter, and with flatterings and threatenings persuaded him to seek his Son
out.

When the old man had found his Son he told him what the Justice said; William
told his Father, I will go home with you, and save you harmless, what ever
comes on it; as soon as he came home, he was apprehended by the Constable, and
put in the Stocks, and the next day was had before the Justice.

Justice Brown, Ah Sirrah, are you come; I hear say you are a Scripture-man?
What say you to these words, where Christ says the Bread is his Body?


William Hunter, the Scripture says, that Christ took Bread; but not that he
changed it into another Substance, but gave that which he took, and brake that
which he gave, which was Bread, as is evident by the Text, else he should have
had two Bodeis.


At which the Justice began to be angry, and called him Naughty Boy, saying,
Does not Christ call the Bread his Body plainly, and thou will not believe that
the Bread is his Body after Consecration, thou go about to make Christ a
Liar.

William Hunter, We ought earnestly to search what the mind of Christ is in
that holy Institution, wherein he commends unto us the remembrance of his
Death, Passion, Resurrection and coming again, saying, This do in remembrance
of me; And though Christ calls the Bread his Body, so he did also say, that he
is a Vine, a Door, etc. Yet is not his Body turned into Bread, no more then he
is turned into a Door or Vine; wherefore Christ called the Bread his Body by a
figure.


William Hunter ^ent up to Bonner.
At these words, the Justice was enraged, calling him Villain, and the next day
sent him and a Letter by an Officer to Bonner, Bishop of London; When he came
before the Bishop, at first the Bishop began to flatter him, telling him, he
should have no harm for any thing he had done or said, if he would be ruled by
him; saying further, It may be thou may be ashamed to bear a Faggot, a Recant
openly of what thou have said; but if thou will Recant thy sayings, I promise
thee, what thou speakst between me and thee shall go no further, and thou shall
go home again without any hurt, so that thou will go to Church and continue a
good Catholic.

W. Hunter, I will not do so for all the World.


Then said the Bishop, If you will not do so, I will make you sure enough, I
warrant you.

William, You can do no more then God will permit you.


Bishop, Will thou not Recant indeed, by no means?


William, No, never while I live.


Then the Bishop commanded his Men to put him in the Stocks, in his Gate House,
where he sat two days and two nights, only with a Crust of brown Bread, and a
Cup of Water; at the two days end, the Bishop came to him, and finding the Cup
of Water, and crust of Bread still by him upon the Stocks, he said to his men,
take him out of the Stocks, and let him Breakfast with you; whereupon they took
him forth of the Stocks, but would not suffer him to eat with them, but called
him Heretic.

He told them, He was as unwilling to be in their company as they were to be in
his.

After Breakfast, the Bishop sent for him, and asked, whether he would Recant?

He answered, No, he would never Recant that which he had confessed before men,
concerning his Faith in Christ.

Then the Bishop sent him to Prison, and commanded the Keeper to lay Irons upon
him, as many as he could bear, and asked William how old he was?

He told him, he was nineteen years Old.

Well, said the Bishop, you will be burnt ere you are twenty year old, if you
do not Recant.

William answered, God strengthen me in his Truth, and so he parted from the
Bishop. He continued in Prison three quarters of a year, in which time, he had
been before the Bishop five times, besides the time when he and five more were
Condemned in the Consistory in Pau^s, which was on the ninth day of the Month,
called February, before the Se^^ence was past; the Bishop asked him, if he would
Recant; but finding ^un to stand firm in his Faith, said, I have always found
thee at this Point; I see no hope of reclaiming thee to the Catholic Faith,
but thou will continue a corrupt Member: And then pronounced Sentence upon him,
how that he should go from that place to Newgate, for a time, and from thence
to Burntwood, Where, said he, Thou shall be Burnt.


After he had Condemned the rest, he called for William again, and would have
persuaded him to Recant; saying, if thou will Recant, I will make thee a
Freeman of the City; and I will give thee forty Pounds to set up thy Trade
with, or I will make thee Steward of my House.

William Replied, I thank you for your great Offers, if you cannot perfwade my
Conscience with Scriptures, I cannot find in my Heart to turn from God for the
love of the World; for I count all things worldly but loss and Dung in respect
of the Love of Christ.


Then said the Bishop, If thou die in this mind, thou art damned forever.

William answered. God Judges righteously, and justifies them whom man
condemns unjustly.


Then the Bishop departed, and William and the rest were sent to Newgate, where
they remained about a Month, and then William was carried down to Burntwood,
where his Father and Mother coming to him, heartily desired of the Lord, that he
might continue to the end in that good way in which he had begun, counting
themselves happy, that they had a Child that could lose his Life for Christ's
sake.

Many people resorted to the Inn to see him, whom he exhorted to leave the
Abomination of Popisn Superstition and Idolatry. At his Execution he desired
the people to pray for him.

Justice Brown, that first apprehended him, standing by, said I will pray no
more for thee, then I would for a Dog.


William answered, Now you have what you sought for, I pray God it be not laid
to your charge at the last day, I forgive you.


Brown said, I ask no forgiveness of thee.


William, If God forgive you not, I shall require my Blood at your Hands.


The Fire being kindled, William said, I am not afraid; and lifting up his
Hands, said, Lord receive my Spirit, and so sealed his Testimony with his Blood
to the praise of God.

Justice Brown, commanded an Officer to take Robert Hunter, William's Brother,
and put him in the Stocks, until he came back from the burning of Higbed, at
Hornden on the Hill; on the same day, after he was taken out of the Stocks, and
brought before the Justice, he asked him, If he would do as his Brother had
done? Robert Hunter, answered, If I do as my Brother has done, I shall have as
he has had; Thou may be sure of that, said the Justice. But after some
further Examination, he bid him go home.


Higbed and Canston Martyr.
The next that suffured, were Higbed and Canston, both of Essex, two men so
fervent for Religion, that in these blind and Idolatries times, could not lie
long hid in obscurity, but were constrained to bear their Testimony, though it
were by Death.

Bonnet perceiving these men were men of repute in their Country and such as
were called Gentlemen, was so much the more concerned to bring them off their
Profession, that he went down to Colchester himself, to seek to reclaim them;
sometimes using fair Promises and flattering Enticements; other times
threatening them, with high words to terrify them; in fine, seeing them both
constant and unmovable in their Zeal for their Religion, he caused them, and
some others at the same time and for the same cause apprehended in that
Country, to be brought up to London Prisoners, where they were committed close
Prisoners, where they were first privately examined, and urged by all means to
forsake their Opinions by the Bishop and his Chaplain: But when the Bishop saw
that way would work no alteration, he caused them to be brought to open
Examination at the Consistory at Paul's, the seventeenth day of the Mouth called
February, 1555. where being further pressed to Recant of the Errors they said
they held, and to return to the unity of the Church, which they still refused;
whereupon, a great List of Articles were delivered them, and their Answers
thereunto the next day required of them.

At the second time of their public appearance and trial their Answers were
read, and Canston being first called, was exhorted again to be conformable to
the unity of the Church, into which (they said) they were ready to receive him;
He replied, you lay Snares and Gins to catch us, but mark, what measure you
meet shall be measured to you again.

Then Higbed was called, to whom the like persuasions were used; but to as
little purpose as the other; for he told them, he had been sixteen years in
that mind he was then in, and should not alter now.

At their last appearance before them, the Prisoners declared (calling God to
record) that their persisting in that stedfastness, was not in wilfulness, as
some might judge, but for Conscience sake; for, said they, we sought the Lord,
that we might do nothing contrary to his blessed Word, and in that he has
showed his Power in our weakness, we cannot but praise him, unto whom we give
thanks through Christ Jesus our Lord.

When they had thus spoken, the Bishop began to pronounce the Sentence against
Canston; to whom Canston said, it was a rash Judgment without Love and Mercy;
Then was sentence also pronounced against Higbed, and both delivered to the
Sheriffs, who sent them to Newgate, where they remained fourteen days
contiunally praising God, not so much concerned at their Afflictions as
rejoiced in their Consolations, praying, and earnestly desiring they might
persevere to the end, to the praise of the Eternal God, and Comfort of the
Brethren.

The fourteen days being expired, they were by four a Clock in the Morning led
from Newgate to Algate, and there delivered to the Sheriff of Essex, who
conveyed them to the places where they were Executed, viz. Higbed to Hornden on
the hill, and Thomas Canston to Rayly, where they both with great constancy
finished their Testimonies in the Fire, greatly rejoicing and giving the glory
to God.

The next that suffered were William Pyget, Stephen Knight and John Lawrence,
Pyget, Knight, Lawren^ Martyr.
at their Examinations it was demanded of them, to declare their Opinion
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar; to which they answered, to this effect;
That in the Sacrament of the Altar, under the forms of Bread and Wine, there is
not the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ: This Answer being given, the
Bishop caused Articles to be read against them, to which they answered. The
second time they were brought before him; he pressed them to recant, which they
refusing, saying, They should stick to their Faith. Wherefore, the third time
being brought before him, he past Sentence upon them, and committed them to the
Custody of the Sheriffs of London, who sent them to Newgate; where they
remained in much Joy and comfort, and at last were had down to Essex, and there
burnt. When Stephen Knight came to the Stake, which was at Maulden, he kneeled
down and prayed; some Sentances of which Prayer are as follows.

O Lord Jesus Christ, for whose Love I leave willingly this Life, and desire
rather the bitter Death of the Cross, with the loss of all Earthly things, then
to abide the Blasphemy of thy most holy Name, or to obey men in breaking thy
holy Commandment; Thou see, O Lord, that where I might live in Wordly Wealth,
to Worship a false God, and honor thine Enemy, I choose rather the Torment of
the Body, and the loss of this Life, and have counted all things but Vile, Dust
and Dung that I might Win thee; which Death is Dearer unto me then thousand of
Gold and Silver; such Love, O Lord, have thou laid up in my Breast, that I
Hunger for thee, as the Deer that is Wounded desires the Soil; send thy holy
Comforter, O Lord, to Aid, Comfort, and Strengthen this Weak piece of Earth,
which is empty of all strength of it self; Thou rememberst, O Lord, that I am
^ut (...), therefore as thou of thy Love have bidden me to this Banquet, and
accounted me worthy to drink of thine own Cup amongst thine Elect, even so give
me strength, O Lord, that so through me strength of thy holy Spirit, I may pass
through the rage of this fire, into thy Bossom, according to thy Promise, and
for this Mortal receive an Immortal, and for this Corruptible put on
Incorruption; accept this burnt Sacrifice and Offering, O Lord, not for the
Sacrifice, but for thy Sons sake, for whose Testimony I offer this
Free-will-Offering with my Soul; into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit,
Amen.

The next day John Lawrence was brought to Colchester, and being not able to
go, his Legs being so worn in Prison with heavy Irons, and his Body weak, he
was carried in a Chair to the Fire and burnt sitting.

After these, suffered two persons in Wales, viz. Robert Farrar, in Carmarthen,
Robert Farrar and Rawlins White Maryrs in Wales.
who was a Bishop of a place called St. David's, and one Rawlins white, a
Fisherman, burnt at Cardiff: This Rawlins, for the love that was in him to the
Truth, and delight he took in hearing the Scriptures read, trained up his Son
at School on purpose to read to him, because he could not read himself; and by
often hearing the Scriptures read, having a good Memory, he so retained them,
that he at last became an Instructor and Teacher to People, and traveled from
place to place, with his little Boy with him, visiting such where he saw any
hopes of receiving the Truth; having thus continued for five years, in Edward
the sixths time he became a noted Preacher, until by the Bishop of Landaff he
was committed Prisoner to Chepstow, and from thence was removed to Cardiff
Castle, where he continued a Prisoner a whole year, which tended to the ruin of
his poor Wife and Children in this World; yet he, as a man unconcerned at the
loss of the World, continued exhorting and speaking to such as came to visit
him, declaring the Way of Salvation to them, according to the best of his
understanding, admonishing them to beware of false Prophets, that come to them
in Sheeps Clothing. At his Examination, the Bishop speak to him to this
effect, that they had taken pains to reduce him from his Opinions, but seeing
he continued still obstinate and willful, he must condemn him as an Heretic;
but, said the Bishop to the People, before we proceed any further, let us pray
that God may turn his heart; after Prayer, the Bishop asked him, how it was with
him? and whether he would recant? He answered, Rawlins you left me, and Ralwins
you shall find me: Thereupon he was carried again to Cardiff, and ordered to be
put in the Town Prison, a very dark loathsome bad Prison, where he continued
about three week, before he suffered, in which time the Enmity of his
Persecutors was such, that they would have burnt him before the Writ de
hareticis Comburendis came from London, had not the Recorder of the Town stopped
them, teling them if they should so do they were liable to be called in
question; when the Writ came, as they had him to Execution, his Wife and
Children met him by the way, Q. Mary. An. 1555.
with great Weeping and Lamentation, at the Sudden sight whereof, his heart
was so pierced, that the tears trickled down his Face; yet on he went
cheerfully to the Stake, and being fastened thereto with a Chain, and the Fire
kindled, he give up his life, crying, O Lord, receive my Soul; O Lord, receive
my Spirit.

About this time the Pope knowing how things stood in England in reference to
Religion, and how the Power of the Sword was turned against such as had been
the chief Instruments in reforming Religion, he thought it was now a good time
to stir, to redeem and cause to be restored to the Church such Rites as not
long before had been taken from her; for Queen Mary signifying to the Council,
that in her Conscience she was not satisfied until she had restored Abbey Lands
to the former Proprietors: The Council objected against it upon this account,
for that it brought in such an incom to the Crown, without which possessions,
they said, it could not well be furnished, nor maintained; she answered, the
Salvation of her Soul was more to her then ten Kingdoms (a zealous Expression,
and could not have been discommended, had it been spoken in a good cause) The
Pope hearing this, sends over a Bull, with all speed, with full Authority to
Command the Restitution of Abbey Lands, thundering out Excommunication against
all such as should detain them; but many of the chief, both of the Clergy, and
others being against the alteration of those Laws that had given them to the
Crown, considering the profit they brought in, over-ballanced that good will
and affection they had to observe the Popes Directions and Command, which no
doubt they were ready enough to incline to, had it not been in a matter wherein
the Revenues of the Crown would have been so lessned, if the Bull had been
prosecured; and therefore it was let fall without taking so much notice of it
as to see it performed: but to return to show the next that suffered.

The Sufferings and Examination of George Marsh Martyr, at Westchester the 24th
day of the Month called April 1555.
The said George Marsh was born in the Parish of Deane, George Marsh Martyr.
in the County of Lancaster, about the Age of twenty five years, he Married,
and took a Farm toward the Maintenance of himself and Family; for favoring
the Protestant Religion, and Preaching against the Antichristian Doctrine of
the Papists; he was at length apprehended and committed to Prison: The
beginning of his trouble was thus; there was strict search made for him in
Boulton, with intentions, if he had been apprehended to have him before the
Earl of Derly, there to be examined concerning his Religion; diverse of his
Friends and Relations hearing of it, advised him to escape their hands, laying
before him the danger that might ensue if he did not, which caused him to
consult with himself, and to be full of trouble, not knowing what course he had
best to take; but soon after a Friend writ to him, counselling him, that he
should not flee, but abide, and boldly confess the Faith of Jesus Christ, at
which words he was so confirmed and established in his Conscience, that from
thenceforth he consulted no more, but was resolved to appear before those that
sought after him, and patiently to bear such Cross as it should please God to
lay upon him; upon which Conclusion be found great peace and quietness in his
Conscience. And appearing before one Barton that had sought for him, Barton
showed him a Letter from the Earl of Darby, wherein he was Commanded to send
the said George Marsh and others to Latham; when he came to Latham he was
brought before the Earl of Darby, who after he had ask his name, enquired
further of him, whether he was not one that sowed evil seed and diffention
among the People, which thing he denied, desiring to know who were his
Accusers; and after many more Questions asked him, in Conclusion they committed
him to Ward, in a cold windy Stone House, where was little room, where he lay
two nights without any bed, saving a few great Canvas Tent Cloths; and after
two nights he had a pair of Sheets allowed him, but no Woolen clothes, and
there was kept without any being suffered to come at him, only twice a day the
Keeper when he brought him Victuals; shortly after he was brought before the
Earl again, who examined him of the Sacrament, at his Answers the Earl seemed
to be somewhat pleased, and hoped he would be conformable, and commanded that
he should have a bed, and fire, and liberty to go amongst his Servants; when he
departed he was much troubled in his Spirit, for fear lest he had given
advantage to his Adversaries, in not confessing Christ so boldly as he ought to
have done, and was much grieved, but considering his condition, he cried
earnestly unto the Lord, saying, Strengthen me with thy holy Spirit, with
boldness to confess thee, and deliver me from their enticing words, that I may
not be spoiled through their Phylosoply and vain deceit: A day or two after, he
was sent for before two Priests, who began to discourse with him concerning the
Mass, asking him, what part of the Mass offended him? he answered, the whole
Mass did offend him; upon which discourse, and other matters that past between
them, Articles were drawn up against him, and they exhorted him to recant his
Opinions; he told them he could not change nor alter, and desired them to speak
to the Earl, that during his Imprisonment, his Friends might be suffered to
relieve him with necessaries, they still presisted to advise him to forsake his
Opinions, not regarding any Worldly shame; he answered, what he did was not for
avoiding Worldly shame, nor yet for any vain praise of the World, but in the
reverent fear of God; they told him, it was pity such a well-favoured Young man
should so foolishly cast away himself; he answered them to this effect; My
Wife, Children and other delights of this World, are as Sweet to me, as another
man's may be to him, and I am as unwilling to lose them, as another would, if I
might enjoy them with a good Conscience, but my trust is, said he, that God
will strengthen me to lose them all for his sake; for I do not say or do any
thing either out of Stubbornness, willfullness, vain Glory, or any other
Worldly purpose, but with a good Conscience in the fear of God; and farther
said, I commit my cause unto God, who has numbered the hairs of my head, and
appointed the days of my life, who is a Righteous Judge, and will make
inquisition for my blood.

From Latham he was carried to Lancaster Castle, where he was threatened for
preaching to the people out of the Prison; shortly after he was carried to
Lancaster, the Bishop of Chester came thither, and sent for the Jailer, and
rebuked him for suffering George Marsh to fare so well, and from thence he was
removed to Chester, and being brought before the Bishop, he was further
examined concerning the Sacrament, and other matters, and Articles drawn up
against him; and the last time he was brought before the Bishop, the Bishops
Chanceller made a Speech to the people, to this effect; The Bishop, said he, as
a good Shepherd, does see to his Flock, that no Scabby diseased Sheep infect
the other, wherefore his Lordship has sent for this George Marsh, as a Scabby
Sheep, to weed him out, lest he corrupt others; and then read the Articles
against him, and asked him, if he would have mercy; Marsh said, he durst not
deny Christ; then the Bishop read the Sentence against him; and committed him
to the Northgate Prison, and there was he kept in a dark Dungeon, where none
dared to come to him, that had any Friendship toward him for fear of the
Bishops threats, so that he was kept very strictly in Prison, until the time
that he suffered death, having little comfort or relief from any worldly
Creature; sometimes in an Evening, some Citizens (at a hole upon the Wall of
the City that looked into the dark Prison) would call to him, and ask him how
he did, he would answer them cheerfully, that he did well, and thanked God that
he of his Mercy had appointed him to be a Witness of his Truth, and to suffer
for the same, wherein he did rejoice, desiring that he might not faint under
the Cross, but patiently bare the same to Gods Glory, and the Comfort of his
Church; once he had ten pence cast him in at the said hole, and another time
two shillings, which did help to supply his necessity; shortly after, he was
led to the place of Execution, with a Lock upon his Foot; he began to exhort
the people, but one of the Sheriffs would not suffer him to speak, saying, We
must have no Sermon now; so with patience he ended his days in the Fire.

Whilst he was a Prisoner he wrote several Epistles to his Friends and
Relations, and such as had been assistant to him in the time of his Sufferings;
the Epistles being large, I shall only insert some of the Principle heads of
some of them; which if the Reader pernseth, he will find them to be worth
^oting, considering the time they were wrote in; and first, I shall begin with a
letter he wrote to the Faithful Professors at Langton.

An Epistle by George Marsh to his Friends at Langton.
Grace be unto you and Peace be multiplied in the knowledge of Jesus Christ our
Lord Amen. I thought it meet to write unto my beloved in the Lord at Langton,
to stir up your minds, and to call to your remembrance the Words, which have
been told you before, and to exhort you (as that Good Man, and full of the holy
Ghost, Barnabas did the Antiochians) That with purpose of heart you continually
cleave unto the Lord, and that ye stand fast, and be not moved away from the
hope of the Gospel when Persecution arises because of the word; do not fall
away like shrinking Children, and forsake the Truth, for after this life the
Godly being delivered from their Tribulations and Pains, shall have a most
quiet and joyful rest; whereas the Wicked and Ungodly contrary wise shall be
tormented for evermore, as Christ by the Parable of the rich Glutton and
wretched Lazarus does plainly declare; these ought we to have before our Eyes
always, that in the time of Adversity and Persecution we may stand steadfast in
the Lord, and endure even unto the end, that we may be saved; for unless we
like good Warriors of Christ Jesus, endeavor our selves to please him, who
has chosen us to be his Soldiers, and fight the good sight of Faith even unto
the end, we shall not obtain the Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, that
is a righteous Judge, shall give to all them that love his Coming.

Let us therefore receive with meekness the word that is grafted in us, which
is able to save our Souls, and ground our selves on the sure Rock Christ; for
as the Apostle says, Other Foundation can no man lay then that which is
already laid, which is Jesus Christ, if any man build on this Foundation Gold,
Silver, Pretious-Sones, Timber, Nay, Stubble, every man's work shall appear, for
the day shall declare it, and it shall be showed in Fire; and the Fire shall
try every man's work what it is; if any man's work which he has builded upon
abide, he shall receive a Reward; if any man's work burn he shall suffer Loss;
but he shall be saved himself yet as it were through Fire.

By Fire here the Apostle understands Persecution and Trouble, for they which
do truly preach and profess the Word of God, which is called the Word of the
Cross, shall be railed upon, and abhorred, hated, thrust out of the Company,
persecuted, and tried in the Furnace of Adversity, as Gold and Silver are tried
in the Fire.

By Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, he understands them that in the midst
of Persecution abode steadfast in the Word: By Timber, Hay, and Stubble are
meant such as in the time of Persecution do fall away from the Truth; and when
Christ does purge his Floor, with the Wind of Adversity, these scatter away
like Chaff, which shall be burnt with unquenchable Fire.

Wherefore, my beloved, give diligent heed, that ye as living Stones be built
upon this sure Rock, and be made a spiritual House, and holy Preistood, to
offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God by Jesus Christ; for we are
the true Temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in us, if so be that we
continue in the Doctrine of the Gospel; we are also a holy and Royal
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices and Oblations.

And thus I commend you, Brethren, unto God, and to the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you further, and to give you an Inheritance amongst all
them that are sanctified, beseeching you to help me, and all them that be in
bonds for the Gospel sake, with your Prayers to God for us, that we may be
delivered from all them that believe not, and from unreasonable and froward
Men; and that this our Imprisonment and Affliction may be to the glory and
profit of our Christian Brethren in the World, and that Christ may be magnified
in our Bodies, whether it be by death or by life, Amen. Salute me to all the
faithful Brethren, let them hear my Letters; the Grace of our Lord be with you
all, Amen.

George Marsh.


In another Letter dated from Lancaster the thirtieth of August 1555. directed
to his Friends at Manchester, he writes thus.
Confider what I say, the Lord give us understanding in all things; Brethren,
the time is short, it remains that ye use this World as though you used it
not, for the fashions of this World vanishes away; see that ye Love not the
World, neither the things that are in the World, but set your affections upon
heavenly things, be meek, and long suffering, serve and edify one another with
the gift that God has given you; beware of strange Doctrine, lay aside the old
conversation of greedy Lusts, and walk in a New Life, beware of uncleanness,
covetousness and foollish talking; rejoice and be thankful toward God, and
submit your selves one to another; cease from sin, be sober and apt to pray, be
patient in trouble, love each other, and let the Glory of God and profit of
your Neighbor be the only mark you shoot at in all your doings; repent ye of
the life that is past, and take better heed to your doings hereafter.


Another Letter to a Friend.
Grace be with you, and Peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God, and Jesus
the Lord. After hearty Commendations and Thanks to you for your large token,
but much more for your loving Letters full of Consolation to me, as touching my
person unknown to you, these shall be to certify you, that I rejoice greatly
in the Lord when I perceive to see the minds of my Friends stirred up to bear
part with me in this my costly imprisonment, sending me things not only
necessary for this persent life, but also comfortable Letters, encouraging and
exhorting me to continue grounded and established in the Faith, and not to be
moved away from the hope of the Gospel, whereof according to my small Tallent I
have been a Minister; and daily I call and cry unto the Lord, in whom is all my
trust, and without whom I can do nothing, that he which has begun a good work
in me, would go on with it until the day of Jesus Christ, being surely
certified in my Conscience of this, that he will so do, for as much as he has
given me, that not only I should believe on him, but also suffer for his sake.
The Lord strengthen me with his holy Spirit, that I may be one of the number of
those Blessed, which enduring to the end shall be saved.

And whereas you say that my suffering of Persecution with Christ is a thing to
you most comfortable: I answer, that in all my Adversities and Necessities,
nothing on your behalf is greater Consolation unto me, then to hear of the
Faith and Love of others, and how they have good remembrance of us always,
even as the Apostle said by the Thessalonians: Now are we alive, if ye stand
steadfast in the Lord; be strong, let your hearts be of good comfort, and wait
ye still for the Lord, he tarrieth not that will come; look for him therefore,
and faint not, and he will never fail you. Yours.

George Marsh.


The next that suffered were John Cordmaker, John Cordmaker, and three other
Martyrs.
John warn Upholster of London, John Ardly and John Simson of Wigborrough in
Essex husbandmen; against these four persons many Articles were drawn up, for
not conforming to the Doctrine of the Popish Church; according to common course
of the Consistory Court they were several times called, and the Articles
against them read, which Articles were much alike against them all; and for
refusing to recant they were all condemned and burat about the Month of May.

The Examinations, Sufferings and Martyrdom of Thomas Hawks (called a
Gentleman) written by himself.
The said Thomas Hawks, Thomas Hawks Martyr.
was condemned when Thomkins and the rest with him were condemned, which was in
the Month called February, but his Execution was not till the Month called June
following, and now coming in order to that Month it falls in course to relate
his Trials and Sufferings as follows.

As touching his Education he was born in Essex of an honest stock, and bred up
a Courtier, his Person and Stature very comely, and his mind endued with
excellent qualities, a man of a gentle behavior, and of a fervent love to true
Religion and godliness; he was also singularly adorned with valor and courage,
whose Example therein was a good president to the rest of his Brethren; and as
it is recorded of him, few men stood more notably, or triumphed more gloriously
then this young man; for he was so wise in the Cause of God, and so godly in
his life, and so constant to the death, that he shined as a Star most clear in
the Church by his Example. But to the Relation of his Sufferings, his Trouble
first began for refusing to sprinkle his Child after the Papistical manner, for
which the Earl of Oxford (to whose family the said Thomas Hawks had not long
before been a retainder) being apprehended and brought before the said Earl, he
forthwith sent him to Bonner to London, with a Letter, signifying his Crime;
his Examinations and Answers before the Bishop are very long, and therefore I
have thought meet to insert only some of the chief or most principal matters
contained therein.

Being brought before the Bishop, the first question he asked him, was; Why he
left his Child unchristned so long?

Hawks, Because I am bound to do nothing contrary to the Word of God.


Bonner, Why Baptism is commanded by the word of God.


Hawks, His Institution therein I do not deny.


Bonner, What deny you then?


Hawks, I deny things invented and devised by men.


Bonner, What things are those that so offend you?


Hawks, Your Oil, Spittle, Cream, Candle, and Conjuring Water.


Bonner, Will you deny that the whole World and your Forefathers were
contented withal?


Hawks, What my Father and all the World have done, I have nothing to do with,
but what God has commanded me to do, to that I stand.


Bonner, The Catholic Church has taught it.


Hawks, What is the Catholic Church?


Bonner, It is the Faithful Congregation wheresoever it be dispersed throughout
the World.


Hawks, Who is the head thereof?


Bonner, Christ is the head thereof.


Hawks, Are we taught in Christ, or in the Church now?


Bonner, In John, Its said, he would send the Comforter which should teach you
all things.


Hawks, I grant the Comforter was to lead into all Truth; but that was not to
teach a New Doctrine.


Bonner, Ah, Sir, you are a right Scripture man, you will have nothing but the
Scripture; there are a great number of your Country men of your Opinion; and
asked him, if he knew one Bagget?


He said, Yea.

Whereupon Bagget; by the Bishops order was called; the Bishop telling Hawks,
(in mean time) that he was a proud stubborn man.

It seems so to you, said Hawks, because I do not bow to you.

Then Bagget appearing, the Bishop said, Do you know this man?

Bagget, Yes.


Bishop, He refuses to have his Child Baptized after the custom now used in
the Church, what say you to it?


Bagget, I say nothing thereto; said the Bishop, I Will make you tell me whether
it be laudable, and ought not to be used in the Church.


Bagget, I beseech you parden me, he is old enough, let him answer for himself.


Bonner, Ah, Sir Knave, are you at that point; go call me the Porter, said the
Bishop, Thou shall sit in the Stocks, and have nothing but bread and water; I
perceive I have kept you to well; have I made thus much of you, and have I you
at this point? The Porter being not in the way, the Bishop took him aside, and
bid one of his men talk with Thomas Hawks the while; who enquired of Hawks,
whom he knew in Essex, and who were his Teachers?


Hawks, replied, when I see your Commission I Will make you answer; and then
returned the Bishop again, and sitting under a Vine in his Orchard, called for
Bagget and Hawks to him; and to Bagget he said, How say you now to Baptism;
Ought it to be used as now it is in the Church?


To which Bagget said, yes, it is good.

Bonner, I befool your heart could you not have said so before? you have
wounded this man's Conscience. Then the Bishop turned to Hawks, and said, How
say you now, Sir, this man is turned, and Converted.


Hawks, I build my Faith neither upon this man, nor upon you, but upon Christ
only.


Bonner I perceive you are a stubborn Fellow, I must work another way with you
to win you.


Hawks, Whatsoever you do, I am ready to suffer it; for I am in your hands,
and must abide it.


Bonner, Well; you are so, come on your ways, you shall go in, and I will use
you Christian-like; you shall have meat and drink; but in any wise talk not.


Hawks, I purpose to talk nothing but the Truth.


Bonner, I will have no Hercsie talked on in my House.


Hawks, Why, Is the Truth become Heresy?


Bonner, If you will have my favor take my counsel.


Hawks, then let your Doctors and Servants give me no occasion; for if they
do, I will surely utter my Conscience.


After Dinner, some of the Chaplains fell in discourse with Thomas Hawks, and
whilst they were reasoning, in came the Bishop, who said, Did not I give you a
charge not to talk?

Hawks, answered, Did not I desire your Servants should give me no occasion?


Then went he into his Orchard, After he had been a while in the Orchard, they
went to the Chapple, and had Hawks with them.
and took his Doctors and Hawks with him: to whom he spoke to this effect.

Bonner. Will you be content to tarry here, and your Child shall be baptized,
and you shall not see it, so that you will agree is it?


Hawks, If I would have done so, I need^d not to have come to you, for I had
the same counsel given me before.


Bonner, Do you not think that the Queen and I cannot command it to be done in
spite of your Teeth?


Hawks, I shall not question what the Queen can do; but my consent you get
never the sooner for that.


Bonner, Well, you are a stubborn young man; I perceive I must work another way
with you.


Hawks, You are in the hands of God, and so am I.


Bonner, Whatsoever you think, I would not have you speak such words to me;
thou art a proper young man, God has done his part unto thee, I would be glad
to do thee good; thou know that I am thy Pastor, and one that shall answer
for thee, if I do not Teach thee well.


Hawks, That I have said I will stand to it, God willing, there is no way to
remove it.


Bonner, Nay, nay, Hawks, Thou shall not be so wilful; remember Christ bid two
go into his Vineyard, the one said he would, and went not, the other said he
would not, and went.


Hawks, The last went.


Bonner, Do thou likewise, and I will talk Friendly with thee; How say thou;
It is in the sixth of John, I am the Bread of Life, and the Bread that I will
give is my Flesh, etc. Do you believe this?


Hawks, I must needs believe the Scripture.


Bonner, Then I hope you are sound concerning the Sacrament.


Hawks, I beseech you put no more to my Conscience then what I am accused of
to you.


Bonner, Well, well, let us go to Evensong, with that Hawks turned his back to
go out of the Chapel.


Bonner, Why, will you not tarry?


Hawks, No, I will not; It will not edify me.


Then said the Bishop, I pray you tarry, you may pray by your self.

He replied, I will not Pray in this Place, nor in no such.

Then said one of the Chaplains, let him go, my Lord, and he shall not partake
with us in our prayers.

Hawks, I think my self best at ease when I am furtherst from you.


So to prayer they went, and Tho. Hawks walked in a Court, between the Hall and
the Chapel, till they had done, and then he was called up into the Bishops
Bedchamber, where he examined him concerning the Sacrament; saying, you could
not have your Conscience examined any further, then in that you were accused of.

Hawks, I thought you would not be both my Accuser and Judge.


And the Bishop speaking further of the Sacrament of the Altar.

Hawks said, I do not know it.


Bonner, Well, we will make you know it, and believe in it too before we have
done with you.


Hawks, No, you shall never do that.


Bonner; Yes, a Faggot will make you do it.


Hawks, No, no, a point for your Faggot, what God thinks meet to be done that
shall ye do, and more shall ye not do.


Bonner, How say you to the Mass, Sirrah?


Hawks, I say it is Destable, Abominable, and Profitable for nothing.


Bonner, What nothing Profitable in it; what say you to the Epistle and Gospel?


Hawks, Its good, if it be used as Christ left it to be used.


Bonner, Well, I am glad that you somewhat Recant.


Hawks, I have not, nor will not Recant.


Bonner, How say you to Confiteor?


Hawks, I say, it is Abominable, Detestable, and Blasphemy against God and his
Son Christ, to call upon any, to turst to any, or to pray to any but to Christ
Jesus.


The next day he was brought before Bonner, and another old Bishop; to whom
Bonner said, This young man has a Child, and will not have it Christened, and
was very angry with Tho. Hawks, calling him Fool.

Hawks meekly replied, A Bishop ought to be blameless, sober, discreet, no
Chider, nor given to Anger.


Then said the old Bishop that stood by, Alas, young man! you must be taught by
the Church, and by your Ancients, and do as your forefathers have done before
you.

Then said Bonner, No, no, he will have nothing but the Scriptures, and them he
understands not; he will have no Ceremonies in the Church; what say you to holy
Water?

Hawks, I say to it as to the rest, and to all that be of his making that made
them.


Bonner, Why? the Scriptures allow it; and we read that Elisha threw Salt into
the Water.


Hawks, It Is ture, Elisha threw Salt into the water, and the water became
sweet and good, which before was Corrupted; when our waters are corrupted, if
by throwing in your Salt you can make them sweet and wholesome, we will believe
better of your Ceremonies.


Bonner, You believe no Doctrine but that which is wrought by Miracles.


Hawks, No, these tokens said Christ shall follow them that believe in me,
they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall cast out Devils, and if they
drink any deadly Poison it shall not hurt them.


Bonner, With what new Tongues do you speak?


Hawks, Whereas heretofore I was with my Tongue a foul Blasphemer, a filthy
Talker; since I came to the Knowledge of the Truth, I have praised God, and
given thanks to him: Is not this a new Tongue?


Bonner, Did you ever drink any deadly Poison?


Yes, that I have, for I have drunk of the Pestilent Traditions and Ceremonies
of the Bishop of Rome.

Bonner, Now you show your self to be a right Heretic; you shall be burnt if
you continue in this Opinion.


Hawks, Where prove you that Christ or his Apostles did kill any man for his
Faith.


Bonner, Did not Paul Excommunicate?


Hawks, Yes; but there is a great difference between Excommunicating and
Burning.


Bonner, Have you not read of the Man and the Woman in the Acts of the A^ostles
whom Peter destroyed?


Hawks, Yes, I have read of one Annanias and Saphira his wife, who were
destroyed for Lying against ^he holy Ghost, which serves nothing to your
purpose.


After some other words the Bishop went to Dinner, and Hawks to the Porters
Lodge.

After Dinner the old Bishop by Bonners advice took Hawks into his Chamber,
and sitting him down in his chair, said to him, I would to God I could do you
some good; you are a young man, and I would not wish you to go too far.

Hawks, I will bear with nothing that is contrary to the Word of God.


And he looked that the old Bishop should have made him an answer, but he was
fallen fast asleep; then Hawks departed our of the Chamber, and went to the
Porter's Lodge again. The next day Fecknam camo and discoursed with him.

Fecknam, How say you, Christ took bread and brake it, and said, take, cat,
this is my body.


Hawks. Is every word to be understood as Christ spoke it? Christ said, I am a
door, a Vine. I am a King away, etc.


Fecknam Christ spoke these words in para^les.


Hawks, And why spoke he these in P^rables more then when he said, take, eat,
this is my Body; for after the same phrase of speech that he said the one, he
said the other?


Then Fecknam stood up, and said; Alas, these places serve nothing for your
purpose; I perceive you build upon them at Oxford.

Hawks. I build my Faith upon no man, for if those men, and as many more
should recant, and deny that they have said or done, yet will I stand to it,
and by this shall you know that I build my Faith upon no man.


Bonner, If any of those recant, what will you say to it?


Hawks, When they recant I will make you an answer.


Then Fecknam departed, and Hawks went to the Porters Lodge again.

The next day Doctor Chadsey, and the Bishop entered discourse with him; he
told Chadsey this man is Stubborn and will not Christen his Child, but is
against the Ceremonies of the Church.

Bonner, He thin^eth there is no Church but in England and Germany.


Hawks, And you think there is no Church but the Church of Rome.


Chadsey, What say you to the Church of Rome?


Hawks, I say, it is a Church of a Sort of vicious Cardinals, Priests, Monks
and Friars which I will never credit nor believe; after much more discourse,
Chadsey at his parting said, it is pity thou should live, or any such as thou
art.


Hawks answered, In this Case I desire not to live, but rather to die.


The next day Chadsey was to preach in the Bishops Chapel, where Bonner would
have had Thomas Hawks to have gone in to hear him, but he would not go into
the Chapel, but stood at the Door. After Dinner, the Bishop asked him, How he
liked the Sermon.

To whom he replied, as I like all the rest; then said the Bishop, it was made
on purpose for you.

Said Howkes, I am sorry he should bestow so much labor upon one that so
little regarded it.

The next day, the Bishop called him into his Chamber, and said, you have been
with me a great while, and you are never the better, but worse and worse, and
therefore I will delay the time no longer, but send you to Newgate.

Hawks, You can do me no better pleasure.


Bonner, Why would you so fain go to Prison?


Hawks, Truly I did look for none other when I came to your hands.


Bonner, Come on your ways, you shall see what I have written; And then showed
him several Articles he had drawn up against him; whereupon he thought he
should have been carried to Prison the next day, and so he had, but that he was
kept till Doctor Harpsfield had some discourse with him; who began to persuade
him concerning the Sacrament, and the Ceremonies; and after much talk, he said,
That the Sacrament of the Altar was the same Body that was born of the Virgin
Mary, which did hang upon the Cross.


Hawks, He was upon the Cross both alive and dead; which of them was the
Sacrament?


Harpsfield, Alive.

Hawks, How prove you that.


Harpsfield, You must believe, he that believes not is condemned already.


Hawks, John, says, he that believes not in the Son of God is condemned
already, he does not say, he that believes not in the Sacrament is condemned
already.


Harpsfield, There is no talking with you.


Then said Hawks, Why is the Roodloff set between the Body of the Church and
the Chancel?

Harpsfield, You have asked a question you cannot answer your self.


Hawks, Yes, that I can, for this, says one of your own Doctors, that the
Body of the Church does present the Church Millitant, and the Chancel the
Church Triumphant; and so because we cannot go from the Church Millitant to the
Church Triumphant, but that me must bare the Cross of Christ, this is the cause
of the Roodlof^ being between the Body of the Church and the Chancel.


Harpsfield, This is well and Clarklike concluded.


Hawks, As all the rest of your Doctrines, and so the discourse ended, and
Thomas Hawks returned again to the Porters Lodge.


The next day being the first day of the Mon^th, called July, the Bishop went
to the Porters Lodge himself, and called Thomas Hawks to him; and commanded
him to make ready to go to Prison, and writ a Warrant, and sent two men with
him to the Gate House at Westmenster; in the Warrant he writ to this effect to
the Keeper, to keep him safe Prisoner, and let none speak with him; for that
(said he) he is a Sacramentary, and one that speaks against Baptism, a
seditious and perilous man; some days after his commitment, the Bishop sent
two of his men, to see how he did, and whither he was the same man still; to
whom he answered, I do like a Prisoner, and am not changed; They said, my Lord
would be glad that you should do well: If he will do me any good, said Hawks,
let him suffer my Friends to come to me, so they departed, but Hawks heard no
more of the Bishop till the third day of the Mon^th, called September,
following: And then Bonner brought a charge against him, and required him to
set his hand to it, but he refused, saying, I shall set my hand to nothing of
your making or devising: then the Bishop in great anger thrust him on the
breast, and said, he would be even with him, and with all such proud Knaves in
Essex.

Hawks, You shall do no more there God shall give you leave: And as for your
Cursings, and Railings, I care not for them, for I know the Moths an^ Worms
shall eat you.


Bishop, I w^^^ be even with you, when time shall come.


Hawks, You have been even with some of us already; you may in your Malice
destroy a man, but when you have done, you cannot do so much as make a finger.


Bonner, If I do thee any wrong, take the Law of me.


Hawks, Soloman says, Go not to Law with a Judge, for he will judge according
to his own honor.


Bonner, Soloman says, Give not a Fool an answer; and I count thee a Fool, and
so do thou me, but God forgive thee.


Hawks, Thought is free.


Then took Bonner the Bill of Articles, and read it again; when he saw he could
not have Hawks hand to it, he bi^ him take it into his hand, and give it him
again.

Hawks, What needs that Ceremony? It shall neither come into my hand nor
heart.


After these private Conferences between the Bishop and Thomas Hawks, the
Bishop seeing no hopes to win him to his Wicked Ways, he was fully bent to
proceed openly against him; and to that end caused him to be brought to the
public Consistory; where Bonner brought the Articles (he refused to sign)
against him, the Bishop adding four more to them; to the which Hawks answered
publicly; then the Bishop exhorted him to return to the Mother Church; but in
a constant resolution he satisfied them he should never recant, so long as he
lived; whereupon Bonner past the Sentence of Death upon him and shortly after
he was delivered to the Sheriff of Essex, and burnt at a Town called Coxhall.

This following Epistle he wrote to the Congregation.
An Epistle written by Thomas Hawks.
Grace Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ be
always with you all (My Dear Brethren and Sisters in the Lord Jesus Christ)
for ever; and his holy Spirit conduct and lead you in all your doings, that you
may always direct your deeds according to his holy Word, that when he shall
appear to reward every man according to their works, you may as Obedient
Children, be found Watching, ready to enter into his Everlasting Kingdom, with
your Lamps Burning; and when the Bridegroom shall show himself, ye need not to
be ashamed of this life that God has lent you, which is but transitory, vain,
and like unto a vapor, that for a season appears, and vani^heth away; so
soop passes away all our terrestial honor, glory and felicity; For all Flesh
says the Prophet, is grass, and all his glory as the Flower of the Field,
which for a season shows her beauty, and as soon as the Lord blows upon it,
it withers away, and departs. For in this transitory and dangerous
Wilderness we are as Pilgrims and Strangers, following the footsteps of Moses,
among many unspeakeable dangers, beholding nothing with our outward man, but
all vanities and vexation of mind; subject to hunger, cold, nakedness, bonds,
sickness, loss, labor, banishment, in danger of that dreadful Dragon and his
sinful seed, to be devoured, tempted and tormented, who cease not behind
every Bush to lay a bait, when we walk awry, to have his pleasure upon us;
casting abroad his Apples in all places, times and seasons, to see if Adam will
be allured, and enticed to leave the Living God, and his most holy
Commandments, whereby he is assured of everlasting life, promising the World at
will, to all that will fall down in all Ages, and for a mess of pottage sell
and set at naught the Everlasting Kingdom of Heaven; so ^rail is Flesh and
Blood; and especially Israel is most ready to walk awry, when he is filled with
all manner of Riches, as says the Prophet.

Therefore I am bold in bonds (as entirely desiring your everlasting health and
felicity) to warn you, and most heartily desire you to watch and pray, for our
estate is dangerous, and requires continual prayer, for on the high Mountains
does not grow most plenty of grass; neither are the highest Trees furthest from
danger, but seldom sure, and always shaken of every wind that blows; such a
deceitful thing, says our Savior, is honor and riches, that without Grace
it choketh up the good Seed sown on his Crentures, and blinds so their
seeing, that they go groping at noonday in darkness; it makes a man think
himself somewhat, that is nothing at all; for though for our honor we esteem
our selves, and stand in our own light, yet when we shall stand before the
Living God, there shall be no respect of persons, for Riches helps not in the
day of Vengeance, neither can we make the Lord partial for Money, but as ye
have ministered unto the Saints, so shall you receive the reward, which I am
fully persuaded and assured shall be plentiously poured forth upon you all; for
the great goodness showed to the Servants of the Living God; and I most
heartily beseech almighty God to pour forth a plentious reward upon you, for
the same, and that he will assist you with his holy Spirit in all your doings,
that ye may grow, as ye have begun, unto such a perfection as may to be Gods
honor, your own Salvation, and the strengthening of the weak Members of Christ;
for though the World rage and blaspeme the Elect of God, you know that it did
so unto Christ, his Apostles, and to all that were in the Primitive Church, and
so it shall be unto the Worlds end.

Wherefore believe in the Light, while you have it, lest it be taken away from
you; if you shall seem to neglect the great Mercy of God that has been opened
unto you, and your hearts consented unto it that it is the very and only Truth
pronounced by Gods only Son Jesus Christ, by the good will of our heavenly
Father; therefore, I say, in the bowels of my Lord Jesus Christ, stick fast
unto it; let it never depart out of your Hearts and Conversations, that you
with us, and we with you, at the great day, being one Flock, as we have one
Shepherd, may arise to the Life Immortal through Jesus Christ our only Savior,
Amen.

Yours, in him that lives forever, Thomas Hawks.


The Sufferings, Examinations and Martyrdom of Thomas Watts.
The said Thomas Watts, of Billery Key, in the County of Essex, Thomas Watts
Martyr.
Linen Draper, expecting for his non Conformity to be shortly apprehended, he
disposed of his Estate for the benefit of his Wife and Children; and according
to his expectation, not long after he was had before the Judges at Chelmsford,
where one called the Lord R^ch, spoke to him to this effect; Watts, You are
brought hither, because you will not obey the Queens Laws, and will not go to
Church, nor hear Mass, but have your Conventicles in Corners.

Watts, replied, If I have offended a Law, I am here subject to the Law.


Then Justice Brown said to him; Watts, who first taught thee this Religion?

Watts, You taught it me, and none more then you; for in King Edwards Days, in
open Sessions you spoke against this Religion now used, calling the Mass
abominable, exhorting people not to believe in it, but to believe in Christ
only.


Then said Justice Brown, what a Knave is this, to b^ly me to my face: Hereupon
a letter was writ and signed by the Justices, and Watts sent up to Bonner, as a
Nonconformist; what entertainment he received from the Bishop at their private
conference no mention is made of it; but about the beginning of the Month
called May, he was brought to the public Consistory, where Articles were
objected against him for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, and saying the
Mass was abominable; being brought the second time into the Consistory; the
Bishop counseled him to Recant; to which he answered, I am weary to live in
such Idolatry as you would have me to live in: He was several times afterward
brought before them, and continuing steadfast in his Religion, which the Bishop
perceiving, fell to his last and strongest Argument, which was to pass Sentence
of Death upon him, and delivered him to the Sheriff of London; where he
continued till the ninth day of the Month called June, and then was carried to
Chelmsford, where his wife and his six Children met him; to whom he said, My
Wife and Children, I must now depart from you, therefore henceforth know I you
no more, but as the Lord has given you unto me, so I again give you unto the
Lord; charging them to fear and obey him and to beware of the abominations of
Popery, and so sealed his Testimony in the Fire.

After this Watts there were three others suffered in this County of Essex,
viz. Thomas Osmond Fuller, William Bamford Weaver, Nicholas Chamberla Weaver,
all of Coxhall; one and the same Articles were objected against them all, viz.
for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, Auricular Confession, etc. according to
the accustomed manner, they were several times brought to the Consistory, where
they were sometimes flattered, and sometimes threatened, to see if they would
recant, after the common usage of the Ecclesiastical Court, and at last were
condemued as Heretics, and delivered to the Sheriffs, and shortly after were
all three burned in Essex.

John Bradford and John Lease Martyrs.
The next that suffered were John Bradford, and one John Lease, an Apprentize
to a Tallow-Chandler; the chief matter for which they suffered was, for denying
the real presence in the Sacrament, Auricular Confession, etc.

The said John Lease, after he had been examined by the Bishop, had the
Articles of his Confession sent to him to the Courter Prison to sign, after he
hard them read, because he could not write, in stead of a Pen he took a pin,
and pricking his hand sprinkled the blood upon the paper, and bid the Messenger
tell the Bishop, he had sealed them with his blood already.

The Words that John Bradford spoke at the Stake, were to this effect; O
England, England, repent thee of thy Sins, repeat thee of thy Sins, beware of
Idolatry, beware of false Antichrists, take heed they do not deceive you,
Strait is the Way, and Narrow is the Gate that leads to Eternal Salvation,
and few there be that find it.

This John Bradford, during the time of his imprisonment, exercised himself in
writing several consolating Letters, not only to particular persons, but to
several Towns and Counties where he had labored, showing his great Zeal for
the increasing and spreading the most reformed Religion, earnestly exhorting
all men, and tenderly comforting the heavy hearted, confirming and encouraging
all to continue steadfast in the Way he had taught them.

Bland, Frankish, Shetterden and Middleton Marytr.
Shortly after were four others burnt at Canterbury, viz. John Bland, John
Frankish, Nicholas Shetterden, and Humfrey Middleton, all condemned for their
denying the real Presence in the Sacrament.

Shetterden, being at first illegally committed, when he was brought before the
Chief Pri^sts, and examined upon certain Articles, he required (...) see their
Commission, which they showed, and read to him, whereby he perceived that upon
suspicion they might examine upon two A^^ieles, viz. ^hather Christ's real
Presence were in the Sacrament (so called) and whether the Church of England
were Christ's Catholic Church.

Whereupon Sh^^terden said, I have been a Prisoner three quarters of ^^^ar, and
as I think wrongfully, reas^n would therefore that I should answer to those
things wherefore I was first ^ed.

The Sus^^agan said, his Commission was, You m^st ans^er directly, yea, or ^^y.

Sh^tterden, This Commission was not general to examine whom you woodd b^t upon
just s^sp^^ion.


Sus^ragan said, You are suspected, and presented to me.


Shetterden, I require the Accusation may be showed.


Suffr. I am not bound to show it.


Shetterden, For what I have done I ask no favor; but as I am a Subject, I
require Justice.


Suffr. You are suspected.


Shetterden, Prove vour suspicion, or show the cause of it.


Suffr. Thou wast cast into Prison for that cause.


Shetterden, Because I was cast into Prison contrary to the Law of God; must I
now to make me amends be examined upon suspicion, with u^a cause, to hide all
the wrong done to me before?


Then said the Bishop, I my self do suspect thee.

Whereby, said Shetterden?

Suffr. It is^n^ matter whereby you are suspected.


Shetterden, It is not meet for you to be my Accuser and my Judge: If I have
offended the Law, let me be punished, I ask no favor.


Then said they, You are obstinate, and will not answer.

Shetterden, Because you greedily seek Blood, I will answer only to what you
have against me.


Suffr. No, we seek not thy Blood, but thy Conversion.


Shetterden, That we shall s^e, if you first prove that you have against me
before you condemn me upon suspicion.


Sh^r^ly after he was had before the Bishop of Winchester.

Bishop, I have sent for you, because I hear you are indictedof Heres^^^ and
being called before the Commissioners, you will not answer, nor submit your
self.


Shetterden, I did not refuse to answer, but did plainly answer, that I had
been in Prison a long time, and I thought it was but reason that I should b^
charged or discharged for that, and not to be examiced upon Articles, to hide
my wrong imprisonment; neither did I know any Indictment against me; if there
were any, it could not be just; for I was not abroad since this Law was made.


Bishop, Yet if you be suspected you ought to clear your self.


Shetterden, I thought it sufficient to answer to my Offenses, etc.


Bishop, If thou will declare thy self, thou shall go, and then thou wayst have
a Writ of wrong Imprisonment.


Shetterden, I am not minded to sue, but require Justice to be done me; and if
I have offended the Law, let me be punished; and after some other discourse the
Bishop departed.


Middleton being examined (who was one of the four burnt at this time)
concerning his belief in the Sacrament, he said, he believed in his own God, my
living God, and no dead God.


After their Examinations they were condemned by the Bishop of Dover the five
and twentieth day of the Month called June 1555. and were delivered to the
secular power, and all burnt in one Fire at Can^erbury.

Nicholas Shetterden, before his death, prayed to this Effect.

O Lord my God and Savior, which art Lord in Heaven and Earth, Maker of all
things visible and invisible, I am thy Creature, and Work of thy Hands, Lord
God look upon me, and other thy People which at this time are oppressed of the
Worldly minded for thy Laws sake; Yea, Lord, thy Law it self is now trodden
under foot, and men's Inventions exalted above it, and for that cause do I, and
many thy Creatures refuse the Glory Praise and Commodity of this Life, and do
choose to suffer adversity, and to be banished, yea, to be burnt with the Books
of thy Word, for the hopes sake that is laid up in store; for, Lord, thou
know, if we would but seem to please men in things contrary to thy Word, we
might by their permission enjoy these Commodities that others do, as Wife,
Children, Goods, and Friends, all which I acknowledge to be thy Gifts, given to
the end I should serve thee; and now, Lord, that the World will ^ot suffer me
to enjoy them, except I offend thy Laws, behold, I give unto thee my whole
Spirit, Soul and Body, I leave all the pleasures of this life, in hopes of
Eternal life, purchased by Christ's Blood for all them that are content to
suffer with him for the Truth.


In the conclusion of his Prayer he cried, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit into
thy Hands, Amen.

In the same Month, next after the suffering of the aforesaid Kentish men,
Nicholas Hall and Christopher Waid Martyrs.
followed the death and Martyrdom of Nichola^ Hall Bricklayer, and Christopher
Waid of Dartford, both condemned by the Biship of Rochester, about the last day
of the Mouth called June, upon Articles much to the same effect as the Kentish
men's were; As that they should hold and maintain, that in the Sacrament of the
Altar, under the forms of Bread and Wine, is not the very Body and Blood of
Christ; and that the Mass was naught and Abominable. Three others burnt in Kent.


In the Month called July, three others were condemned by the same Bishop,
whose names were Joan Beech widow, John Harpolt of Rochester, and Margery
Polly. Derick Carver, John Launder Martyrs.


The twenty second day of the same Month Derick Carver was burnt at Lewis in
the County of Sussex, and the next day John Launder was burnt at Stenning, in
the same County; they were first apprehended by one Edward Gage, as they were
at prayer within the dwelling house of the said Derick Carver, and by him sent
up to the Council, who after examination, sent them to Newgate, and shortly
after were examined privately by Bonner, who used many fair words to persuade
them to recant of their Religion, who when he saw that way would not do, he
caused them to be brought to the public Consistory at Paul's, where the Bishop
first beginning with Derick Carver, causing his Articles and Answers to be
openly read, asking him, whether he would stand to the same, to whom Derick
replied, he would; for, said he your Doctrine is Poison and Sorcery, and if
Christ were here, you would put him to a worse death then he was put to before:
your Ceremonies are beggarly, and your Auriculer Confession is very Poison.

The Bishop seeing his constancy, and that neither his accustomed flatteries,
nor yet his cruel threatenings could once move him to incline to their Idolatry,
he pronounced his usual Sentence against him, and also against John Launder,
and delivered them both to the Sheriffs, who conveyed them to the aforesaid
places in Sussex, wh^re they were both burnt.

When Derick Carver came to the Stake he bore Testimony to the people to this
effect, as follows, Dear Brethren and S^sters, Witness to you all, that I am
come to Seal with my Blood Chr^sts Gospe^, because I know that it is true, and
because I will not deny here Gods Gospel, and be obedient to man's Laws, I am
condemned to die; and he said further, O Lord my God, thou have written, he
that will not fors^ke wife. Children, House, and all that ever he has, and
take up the Cross and follow thee, is not worthy of thee; but thou, Lord,
know that I have forsaken all to come unto thee; Lord have Mercy upon me,
for unto thee I command my Spirit, and my Soul does rejoice in thee.

At Chichester about the same Month was burnt one Thomas Jveson of Godsto^e in
the County of Surrey Carpenter; Tho. Jveson Martyr.
his Examination and Articles were much like Derick Carver and John Launder's;
when the Bishop pressed him to recant, he said, he would not recant for all the
goods in London; I do apeal, said he, to Gods mercy, and will be none of your
Church, nor submit my self to the same, and what I have said I will say again,
and if there came an Angel from Heaven to teach me any other Doctrine then that
which I am now in, I would not believe him, for which answer he was condemned
as an Heretic, and shortly after was burnt at Chichester as before is
mentioned.

James Abbeys, a Young man, James Abbeys Martyr.
which through compassion (of the Tyranny then used) traveled from place to
place to avoid the peril of the times, but at last happened to be apprehended,
and to be brought before the Bishop of Norwich, who examining of him concerning
his Religion, and very strictly charging him, sometimes with threats, and other
whiles with flatteries, persuading him at last, the Young man did yield to
their persuasions, although against his Conscience; then the Bishop dismissed
him, giving him a small piece of Money; he was no sooner gone from the Bishop,
but his Conscience began to work, and inwardly to be Accused, how that he had
displeased the Lord, by consenting to their delusions; whereupon he immediately
went back to the Bishop, and threw him his Money again, saying, I repent that
ever I consented to your wicked persuasions, and received your Money: Upon this
the Bishop, with his Chaplins, fell a laboring to reduce him again, but all
was in vain, for he would not yield to them at all, but with constancy suffered
death for his Religion, being burnt in Bury the second day of the Month called
August 1555.

The next that suffered were John Denly, John Newman and Patrick Packington,
John Deuly John Newman, and Patrick Packington Martyrs.
the manner of their apprehending was as follows.

One Edmund Terril a Justice in Essex having been at the Execution of certain
Martyrs, met with John Denly and John Newman (both of Maidstone in Kent,
traveling upon the way, and going to ^isit their Friends; upon sight of them,
the said Terrill suspected them to be religious persons, and caused them to be
apprehended, and searched, and at last sent them up to London to the Queens
Commissioners, who shortly after sent them to Bishop Ben^er, who, according to
his accustomed manner, would have persuaded them to recant; to whom, Denly
said, God keep me in the mind that I am in, and from your Counsel; for that you
count Heresy I take to be the Truth: Shortly after they were brought to the
open Consistory, where Articles were drawn up against them, but their
unmovable constancy appearing, they were soon condemned for Heretics, and
delivered to the Sheriffs of London, to see them Executed.

The Chief heads of the Examination of John Newman, before Doctor Tornton and
others, are as follows.
How say you to this, This is my Body which is given for you.

Newman, It is a figurative speech, one thing spoken, and another meant, as
Christ says, I am a Vine, I am a Door, I am a Stone; Is he therefore a
material Stone, a Vine, and a Door?


Docter, This is no figurative speech, for he says, This is my Body which is
given for you, and so says, he not of the Stone, Vine, or Door; but that is a
figurative speech.


Newman, Christ says, this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, if ye will
have it so meant, then let them take and eat the Cup.


Doctor, Nay, that is not so meant; for it is a common Phrase of speech among
our selves, we say to our Friend, drink a Cup of drink, and yet we account he
should drink the drink in the Cup.


Newman, Why, if you will have the one sound erstood, you must so understand
the other.


Thornton, Well, how say you, is the Body of Christ really in the Sacrament or
no?


Newman, No, I believe it not.


Thornton, Well, will you stand to it?


Newman, I must needs stand to it, till I be persuaded by a further truth.


Many other Questions Thornton asked, which for brevity sake are omitted, being
not very material to be inserted.

Six persons burned at Canterbury, and one at Chichester.
About this time there suffered death for the same Cause seven persons, viz.
one Richard Hook, burnt at Chichester in Sussex, and the other six were all
burnt at Canterbury, viz. William Coker, William Hopper, Henry Lawrence,
Richard Colliar, Richard Wright, and William Steer; the last six were
persecuted by the aforesaid Thornton Bishop of Dover, for denying the real
presence in the Sacrament, and Auricular confession, etc. Henry Lawrence being
charged, for not putting off his Cap, when Mention was made of the Sacrament by
the Suffergan; the said Lawrance told them, It was not so holy that they need
put of their Caps to it, calling it an Idol, etc. Richard Wright, another of
the Prisoners, being asked what he believed concerning the Sacrament of the
Altar, he said, he allowed not of it, nor of the Mass, but was ashamed to speak
of them.

At this time the Prisons at London began to be filled with the Servants of
God, many being daily committed, being sent up to the Commissioners from one
part of the Nation or another, and now here is an account of Ten persons sent
by the Commissioners, to Bonner, at one time, as appears by the following
Letter.

A Letter sent by the Commissioners to the Bishop of London.
After our hearty commendations to your good Lordship, we send you here John
Wade, William Hale, George King, Thomas Leyes of Thorpe in Essex, Thomas Fust
Hosier, Robert Smith Painter, Stephen Harwood Brewer, George Tankerfield Cook,
Elizabeth Warn and Joane Layshford of London Sacramentaries, all which we
desire your Lordship to examine, and to order according to the Ecclesiastical
Laws, praying your Lordship to appoint some of your Officers to receive them at
this Bearers hands, and thus most heartily fare your Lordship well; from London
this second of July.

Your Lordships loving Friends, Nicholas Hare, Richard Read, William Roper,
William Cook.


An Account of the most remarkable Passages at their Examination and
Executions, are as follows.
Elizabeth Warn Martyr.
Elizabeth Warn of London Widow, her Husband being not long before her death,
burnt for the same cause she was first apprehended at a Meeting in Bow-Lane,
where she, with others, were at prayer, and was first carried to the Counter,
and from thence to Newgate; being brought before Bonner, the common Articles
usally administered to the Martyrs, and such as had before suffered were
objected against her: In the end, being brought diverse times before him, and
urged to recant, she said, do what you will; for if I am in an Error, Christ
was in an Error, upon which answer he condemned her as an Heretic, and she was
burnt at Stratford-Bow near London, about the latter end of the Month called
May, 1555.

George Tankerfield of London, Cook, born in the City of York, Aged about
twenty seven years, G. Tankerfield Martyr.
at his first conversion, being something touched in his understanding; he
desired the Lord would open his Truth to him; according to his Request there
was wrought in him daily a further detestation of the Mass, and such Idolatrous
stuff, so that he did abhor the same, and his mind came more and more to be
enlightened, that at length such a Flame was kindled in him, that he began not
only to reprove, and declare against his own former ignorant actions, but
exhorted others to repent, and to return to the Truth; but no sooner did this
good thing stir in him, but the bad stirred in his Adversaries against him, who
sent one to his House to apprehend him; when the Messenger came for him, he was
from home, but the Messenger declaring to his Wife a Lie, saying that he was
come for her Husband to dress a Banquet for the Lord Paget; the Woman
mistrusting no evil in the matter, sought out her Husband, and acquainted him
of the business; the poor man, when he heard the Message, said, A Banquet
Woman, indeed its such a Banquet as will not be very pleasent to the Flesh, but
Gods will be done; and went home with her, where he was soon apprehended, and
had to Newgate: shortly after he was brought to Examination before Bonner,
where the common Articles concerning the Sacrament, and Auricular Confession,
etc. were objected against him, and for refusing to recant, Sentence was past
against him, and he was delivered to the Sheriff of Hartford-Shire, and burnt
at Albions upon the 26th of the Month called August 1555.

The Sufferings and Examination of Robert Smith who Suffered for the Truth in
the Month called August 1555.
Robert Smith, was brought to Newgate the fif^h of the Month called November,
by John Matthew, yeoman of the G^ard, by order of the Council; this Smith first
served in the house of Sir Thomas Smith Knight, being then Provest of Eaton,
from thence he was preferred to Windsor, having there in the College a Clerk
n^p of ten pounds a year, of stature he was tall and slender, a^^^e ^^bout many
things: In Religion he was fervent; after he had ^^ce ^^^^d the Truth, at the
coming of Queen Mary to the Crown he was ^eprived of his Clerkship by her
Visitors, and not long after was appreheaded and brought to Examination before
Bonner, as here follows, written and testified with his own hand.

The principal heads of the first Examination of Robert Smith before Bishop
Bonner, written by himself.
About nine of the Clock in the Morning I was among the rest of my Brethren,
brought to the Bishops house, and I first of all was brought before him into
his Chamber, to whom the Bishop said as follows, after he had asked my Name.

Bonner, How long is it ago since the time that you were confessed to any
Priest?


Smith, Never since I had years of discretion for I never saw it needful,
neither commanded of God to come to show my faults to any of that sinful
number, whom ye call Priests.


Bonner, Thou show thy self even at the first chop to be a rank Heretic,
which being weary of painting art entered into Divinity, and so fallen through
thy departing from thy vocations into Heresy.


Smith, Although I have understanding in the said Occupation, yet (I praise
God) I have had little need all my life hitherto to live by the same, but have
lived without the same, in mine own house, as honestly in my vocation as ye
have lived in yours, and yet used the same better then ever you used the Pulpit.


Bonner How long is it ago since you received the Sacrament of the Altar? and
what is your opinion in the same?


Smith, I never received the same since I had years of discretion, nor never
will by Gods Grace, neither do esteem the same in any point, because it has
not Gods Ordinance, neither in Name, nor in other usage, but rather is set up
and erected to mock God withal.


Bonner, Do you not believe that it is the very Body of Christ, that was born
of the Virgin Mary, naturally, substantially, and really after the words of
Consecration?


Sm^th, I showed you before, it was none of Gods Ordinances, as you use it,
then much less to be God, or any part of his Substance, but only bread and wine
erected to the use aforesaid; yet nevertheless, if ye can prove it to be the
Body that ye speak of, by the Word, I ^ill believe it, if not I will, as I do,
account it a detestable Idol, not God, but contrary to God and his Truth.


Then after many raging words, and vain Objections, he said, There was no
remedy but I must be burned.

Smith, Ye shall do no more unto me then ye have done to better men then either
of us both: but think not thereby to quench the Spirit of God neither thereby
to make your matter good; for your sore is too well seen to be healed so
privily with Blood, for even the very Children have all your deeds in derision,
so that although ye parch up one place with Authority, yet shall it break forth
in forty to your shame.


Then after much ado; and many railing sentences, the Bishop said, throwing
away the Paper of mine Examination; Well, even now, by my Troth, even in good
earnest, if thou will go and be shriven, I will tear this Paper in pieces.

Smith, To which I answered, it would be too much to his shame to show it to
men of discretion.


After which Answer, I was carried down to the Garden with my Jailer, and there
remained until my Brother Harwood was examined, and then being again brought up
before the said Bonner, he demanded, if I agreed with Harwood in his
Confession, upon this Articles following.

Bonner, What say you to the Catholic Church; do ye not confess there is one
in Earth?


Smith, Yesverily, I believe that there is one Catholic Church or faithful
Congregation, which, as the Apostle says, is builded upon the Prophets and
Apostles, Christ Jesus being the head Cornerstone, which Church in all her
words and works maintains the Word, and brings the same for her Authority,
and without it does nothing, nor ough^^^ do, of which I am assured, I am by
Grace made a Member.


Bonner, You shall understand, that I am bound, when my Brother offends, and
will not be reconciled, to bring him before the Congregation; now if your
Church be the same, where may a man find it, to bring his Brother before the
same.


Smith, It is written in the Acts of the Apostles that when the Tyranny of the
Bishops was so great against the Church in Jury, they were fain to Congregate
in Houses, and private places, as they now do, and yet were they nevertheless
the Church of God; and seeing they had their matters redressed, being shut up
in a Corner, may not we do the like now adays?


Bonner, Yea, their Church was known full well, for St. Paul writ to the
Corinthians to have the man punished and Excomunicated, that had committed evil
with his Fathers Wife, whereby we may well perceive it was a known Church, but
yours is not known.


Smith, Then could you not Persecute it as ye do, but as ye say the Church of
God at Corinth was manifest both to God and Paul, even so is this Church of God
in England, whom ye Persecute both known to God, and also even to the very
Wicked, although they know not, nor will not know their Truth nor Conversation;
yea, and your sinful number have professed their Truth, and maintained the same
a long season.


Bonner, Well, Thou say that the Church of God was only at Corinth when Paul
writ unto them, and so will I put in Writing, shall I?


Smith, I do marvel greatly that you are not ashamed to lay Snares for your
Brethren on this manner; this is now the third Snare you have laid for me;
first to make me confess that the Church of England is not the Church of
Christ: Secondly, to say it is not known: Thirdly, to say the Church of God is
not Universal, but Particular, and this is not the office of a Bishop; for if
an Innocent had come in your way you would have done your best I see to have
entangled him.


Harpsfield, Well, Friend, quoth one of the Chaplains, you are no Innocent, as
appears.


Smith, By the Grace of God I am that I am, and this Grace in me I hope is not
vain.


Bonner, Laughing, said, tell me, how say thou of the Church?


Smith, I told you whereupon the true Church is builded, and I affirm in
England to be the Congregation of God, and also in Omnem Terram, as it is
written, their sound is gone forth into all Lands, and that is the afflicted
and persecuted Church, which ye cease not to Imprison, Slay and Kill: And in
Corinth, was not all the Congregation of God, but a number of those holy and
elect People of God? for neither Paul nor Peter were present at Corinth, when
they wrote, and yet were they of the Church of God, as many thousands more,
which also Communicate in that holy Spirit.


Bonner, What call you Catholic, and what call you Church?


Smith, Catholic, is universal; and Church, is a Congregation knit together in
unity.


Then after much like vain talk, it was laid to his charge, that his fellow and
he spoke one thing; whereof he praised God; and was sent again to the Garden;
where after a while, as his Brother Harwood and he had been together, came one
of the Chaplains that much desired to commune with him, demanding first, if he
were a Prisoner.

Smith, I am in this flesh a Prisoner, and subject to my Master and yours; but
I hope yet the Lords Freeman through Christ Jesus.


Doctor, I do much desire to talk with you lovingly, because you are a man that
I much lament, with many other sweet words.


To which I answered, sub melle lates venenum; and after much ado about his
God, I compelled him to say, that it must needs enter into the Belly, and so
fall into the draught, to which he answered.

Doctor, What deragation was it to Christ when the Jews spit in his Face?


Smith, If the Jews being his Enemies, did but spit in his Face, and we being
his Friends, throw him into the draught; which of us have deserved the greatest
Damnation? Then by your Arguments he that does injury to Christ shall have a
most Plenteous Salvation.


Then start he away, and would have his humanity in comprehensible, making a
comparison between our Soul, and the Body of Christ, bringing in to serve his
turn, which way Christ came in among his disciples the Doors being shut?

Smith, Although it be said that when he came the doors were shut, yet have I
as much to prove that the doors opened at his coming, as ye have to prove he
came through the door; for that mighty God that brought the Disciples out of
prison, which yet when search came were found shut, was able to let Christ in
at the door although it were shut; and yet it makes not for your purpose, for
they saw him, heard him, and felt him, and so cannot we say ye do; at which
answer he made many scoffs, and departed, and we were carried into my Lords
Hall, where we were baited of my Lords Band almost all the day, until our
Keeper seeing their misorder shut us up in a fair Chamber, while my Lord went
into his Sinagogue to condemn M. Dealy and John Newman.


Rob. Smith brought again before the Bishop and the L. Mayor.
Then brought they up the Lord Mayor to hear our matter above in the Chamber,
and I first of all was called into the Chamber, where the Bishop intended to
Sup, where the Lord Mayor being set, with the Bishop, and one of the Sheriffs,
Wine was walking on every side, I standing before them, as an outcast, which
made me remember how Pilate and Herod were made Friends; but no man was sorry
for Joseph's hurt; but after the Bishop had well drunk, my Articles were sent
for, and read, and he demanded whether I said not as was written?

Smith, That I have said, I have said, and what I have said, I do mean utterly.


Bonner, Well, my Lord Mayor, your Lordship has hard somewhat what a stout
Heretic this is, and that his Articles have deserved death; yet nevertheless,
for as much as they do report me for to seek Blood, and cast me Bloody Bonner;
whereas, God knows, I never sought any man's blood in all my life, I have
stayed him from the Consistory this day, whether I might have brought him
justly, and yet here before your Lordship I desire him to turn, and I will with
all speed dispatch him out of trouble, and this I profess before your Lordship
and all this Audience.


Smith, Why do you put on this fair visor before the Lord Mayor, to make him
believe that ye seek not my Blood to C^o^k your Murders through my stoutness,
as you call it? Have ye n^^ had my Brother Tomkins before you, whose hand, when
you had burned most cruelly, ye burn also his body, and not only him, but a
great many of the numbers of Christ, men that feared God, and lived Virtuously,
and also the Queens true Subjects; and seeing to these Saints you have showed
so little mercy, shall it seem to my Lord, and this Audience, that ye show me
more favor; no no, my Lord, but if you mean as you say, why then examine you
me of that I am not bound to answer you unto?


Bonner, Well, what say thou by the Sacrament of the Altar, is it not the
very body of Christ, Flesh, Blood and Bone, as it was born of the Virgin?


Smith, I have answered that it is none of Gods order, neither any Sacrament,
but man's own vain invention, and showed him the Lords institution: But when he
was so earnestly before the Audience, declaring that we knew nothing, bringing
out his hoc est Corpus meum to lay in my dish; I proved before the Audience,
that it was a dead God; declaring the distinction appointed between the two
Creatures of Bread and Wine, and that a body without Blood has no life, at
which Harpsfield found himself much offended, and took the Tale out of my Lords
mouth, saying,


Harpsfield, I will prove by the Scriptures that you blaspheme God in so
saying, for it is given in two parts, because there is two thing showed that is
to say, his Body, and his Passion, as says St. Paul, and therefore is the
Bread his Body, and the Wine the representation of his death and blood shedding.


Smith, You falsify the Word, and rack it to serve your purpose; for the Wine
was not only the showing of his passion, but the Bread also; for our Savior
says, so often as you do this, do it in remembrance of me; and St. Paul says,
so often as you eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, you shall show the
Lords death till he comes; and here is as much reverence given to the one, as
the other.


Then rose up the Lord Bishop; and the Lord Mayor desired me to save my Soul.

To whom I answered, I hope it was saved through Christ Jesus, desiring him to
have pity on his own soul, and remember whose Sword he carried.

At which I was carried into the Garden, and there abode until the rest of my
Friends were Examined, and so were we sent away with many foul farewels to
Newgate again; the Lord Bishop giving the Keeper a charge to lay me in Limbo.

The Substance of another Examination of Robert Smith, before the said Bishop.
Upon Saturday, at Eight of the Clock, I was brought to his Chamber again, and
there by him examined, as follows.

Bonner, Thou Robert Smith say, that there is no Catholic Church here on
Earth.


Smith, You have heard me both speak the contrary, and you have written it as a
Witness of the same.


Bonner, Yea, but I must ask thee this question how say thou?


Smith, Must you of necessity begin with a Lie; it makes manifest that you
determine to end with the same; but there shall no Liars enter the Kingdom of
God; nevertheless, if you will be answemed, ask mine Articles that were written
yesterday, and they shall tell you, that I have confessed a Church of God, as
well in Earth, as in Heaven, and yet all one Church, and one man's Members, even
Christ Jesus.


Bonner, Well, what say thou to Auricular confession, is it not necessary to
be used in Christ's Church; and will thou not be shriven of the Priest?


Smith, It is not needful to be used in Christ's Church, as I answered
yesterday; but if it be needful for your Church, it is to pick men's purses, and
such pick-purse matters is all the whole rabble of your Ceremonies; for all is
but money matters that ye maintain.


Bonner, How art thou able to prove that Confession is a Pickpurse matter, Art
thou not ashamed so to say?


Smith, I speak by experience, for I have both heard and seen the fruits of the
same; for first we see it has been a bewrayer of Kings secrets, and the
secrets of other men's Consciences, who being delivered, and glad to be
discharged of their sins have given to Priest great sums of money to absolve
them, and sing Masses for their Souls health; and began to tell him an Example
of a Gentleman in Norfolk, who being bound in Conscience, through the
persuasion of the Priest gave away a great part of what he had; the which thing
when his Brother heard, he went to London, and declaring it to the Council, how
that by subtilty the Priest had robbed his Wife and Children, he recovered a
great part again, to the value of two or three hundred pounds; as I was
relating this, the Bishop saw it savoured not to his purpose, but began to
revile me, and said; By the Mass, if the Queens Majesty were of his mind, I
should not come to talk before any man, but should be put into a Sack, and a
Dog tied unto the same, and so should be thrown into the Water.


Smith, To which I answered again, saying, I know you speak by practice, as
much as by speculation; for both you, and your predecessors have sought all
means possible to Kill Christ secretly, Witness M. Hunn, whom your predecessors
caused to be thrust in at the Nose with hot burning needles, and then to be
hanged, and said he hanged himself; and also a good Brother of yours, a Bishop
of your profession, having in his Prison an Innocent man, whom because he saw
he was not able by the Scriptures to be overcome, he made him privily to be
Snarled, and his Flesh to be torn, and p^^kt away with a pair of Pinsors, and
bringing him before the People said the rats had eaten him: Thus according to
your Oath is all your dealing, and has been, and as you taking upon you the
Office do not wit^out Oaths open your Mouths, no more do you without Murder
maintain your Traditions


Bonner, Ah you are a Generation of Liars there is not one true Word that
comes out of your Mouths.


Smith, Yes, my Lord, have said that Jesus Christ is dead for my sins, and
risen for my Justification, and this is no Lie.


Bonner, How say thou Smith, to the seven Sacraments, believe thou not that
they be Gods order, that is to say the Sacrament of etc.


Smith, As for the Sacrament of the Altar, and all your Sacraments, they may
well serve your Church, but Gods Church has nothing to do with them; neither
have I any thing to do with them, nor you to examine me of them.


Bonner, Why is Gods order changed in Baptism, in what point do we differ from
the Word of God?


Smith, First in Hallowing your Water, in Conjuring the same, in Baptizing
Children, with Anointing, and Spitting in their Mouths, mingled with Salt, and
with many other lewd Ceremonies of which not one point is able to be proved in
Gods order.


Bonner, By the Mass, this is the most unshamfaced Heretic that ever I heard
speak.


Smith, Well sworn, my Lord, you keep a good Watch.


Bonner, Well, Mr. Controler, you catch me at my Words, but I well Watch thee
as well, I warrent thee.


John Mordant being by, said, By my Troth my Lord, I never heard the like in
all my life; but I pray you, my Lord, mark well his answer for Baptism, he
disalloweth therein holy Ointment, Salt, and such other laudable Ceremonies,
which no Christian man will deny.

Smith, That is a shameful Blasphemy against Christ, so to use any
mingle-mangle in your Baptism.


Bonner, I believe, I tell thee, that if they die before they are Baptized they
are damned.


Smith, You shall never be saved by that belief; but I pray you, my Lord, show
me, are we saved by Water or by Christ?


Bonner, By both.


Smith, Then the Water died for our Sins, and so must you say, that the Water
has life, and it being our Servant, and created for us is our Savior?


Bonner, Why, how understandest thou these Scriptures, except a man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God? And again,
suffer, says our Savior, these Children to come unto me, if thou will not
suffer them to be Baptized, after the laudable order, thou let them to come
unto Christ.


Smith, Where you allege, except a man be born, etc. And will thereby prove
the Water to save. The Apostle asked the Calathians, whether they received the
Spirit by the deeds of the Law or by the Preaching of faith? And where you say,
I let the Children from coming unto Christ, it is manifest by our Saviors
Words, that you let them to come, that will not suffer them to come, without
the necessity of Water, for he says suffer them to come unto me, and not unto
Water; and it is not, says St. Peter, the washing away of the filth of the
Flesh, but in a good Conscience converteth unto God; and to prove that the
Water only brings not the holy Ghost, it is written that Simon received
Water, and would have received the holy Ghost for Money; and many received the
holy Ghost before Baptism, and to Judge Children damned that be not Baptized,
it is Wicked.


Mordant By our Lady, Sir, but I believe that if my Child dye without Water he
is damned.


Bonner, Yea, and so do I, and all Catholic men, good Master Mordant.


Smith, Well, my Lord, such Catholic, such Salvation.


Bonner, Well, Sir, what say you to the Sacrament of Orders.


Smith, You may call it the Sacrament of Misorders, for all orders are
appointed of God, but as for your Shaving, Anointing, Creasing, Poling and
Rounding, there are no such things appointed in Gods Book, and therefore I have
nothing to do to believe your orders; and as for you, my Lord, if you had
grace, or intelligence, you would not so dis-figure your self as you do.


Bonner, Say thou so now, by my Troth, and I will go shave my self to anger
thee; withal, desiring me before he went to answer to these Articles.


Bonner, What say you to the holy Bread and holy Water, to the Sacrament of
Anointing, and to all the rest of such Ceremonies of the Church?


Smith, I say they be Baubles for Fools to play withal, and not for the
Children of God to exercise themselves in, and therefore they may go among the
refuse.


Then went away M. Mordent, and my Lord went to shaving, leaving there certain
Doctors, as he called them, to assay what they could do, of whom I was baited
half an hour; of whom I asked this question, where were all you in the days of
King Edward, that you spoke not that which you speak now?

Doctor, We were in England.


Smith, Yes, but then you had the Faces of men, but now you have put on Lions
Faces again; you show your selves as full of malice as may be, for you have for
every time a visor; yea, and if another King Edward should arise, ye would then
say down with the Pope, for he is Antichrist, and so are his Angels.


Then they reviled me, and had me away, but brought me before them again, and
one of them asked me, if I disallowed confession.

Smith, To whom I answered, look in my Articles and they will show you what I
allow.


Doctor, In your Articles you confess that you allow not auricular Confession.


Smith, I allow it not, because the Word allows it not, nor commands it not.


Doctor, Why, it is written, thou shall not hide thy Sins and Offenses.


Smith, No, I do not, when I confess them to Almighty God.


Doctor, Why you cannot say that you can hide them from God, and therefore your
must understand the words are spoken to be uttered to them that do not know
them.


Smith, You have made a good answer, then must the Priest confess himself to
me, as I to him, for I know his faults and secrcets no more then he knows mine;
and David said, I will confess my Sins unto thee, Lord: And after some more
words passed between me and the Doctors, came in the Bishop from shaving, and
asked me, How I liked him?


Smith, Forsooth, you are even as wise as you were before you were shaven.


Bonner, Well, How stands it, Master Doctors, have you done any good?


Doctor, No, by my Troth, my Lord, we can do no good.


Smith, Then it is fulfilled which is written, How can an evil Tr^^ bring forth
good Fruit?


Bonner, Nay, naughty fellow, I set these Gentlemen to bring thee home to
Christ.


Smith, Such Gentlemen, such Christ's, and as truly as they have that Name from
Christ, so truly do they teach Christ.


Bonner, Well, will thou neither hear them nor me.


Smith, Yes I am compelled to hear you, but you cannot compel me to follow you.


Bonner. Well, thou shall be burnt at a Stake in Smithfield, if thou will not
turn.


Smith, And you shall burn in Hell, if you repent not. But, my Lord, to put you
out of doubt, because I am weary, I will strain Courtesy with you; I perceive
you will not with your Doctors come unto me, and I am not determined to come
unto you, by Gods Grace, for I have hardened my Face against you, as hard as
Brass. Then after many railing sentences, I was sent away: And thus have I left
the Truth of my Answers in writing, being thereunto desired by my Friends, that
you may see how the Lord has, according to his promise, given me a Mouth and
Wisdom to answer in his Cause, for which I am condemned and my Cause not heard.


The Substance of the last Examination of Robert Smith before Bishop Bonner,
with his Condemnation in the Consistory.
The second day of July I was with my Brethren brought into the Consistory, and
mine Articles read before the Mayor and the Sheriffs, with all the Assistants,
unto which I answered as follows.

Bonner, By my faith, my Lord Mayor, I have showed him as much favor as any
man living might do, but I perceive all is lost, both in him and all his
Company.


Smith, At this word, which he coupled with an Oath, came I in, and said, my
Lord, it is written you must not Swear.


Bonner, Ah, Master Controler, are you come, Lo, my Lord Mayor, this is Master
Speaker, pointing, to my Brother Tankerfield; and this is Master Controler,
pointing to me, and then began to read my Articles.


Smith, I require you, my Lord, in Gods behalf unto whom pretaineth your Sword
and Justice, that I may here before your presence answer to these Objections
that are laid against me, and if any thing can be proved Heresy that I have
said, I will recant before this Auditory.


Mayor, Why Smith thou can not deny but this thou saydest.


Smith, Yes, I deny that which he has written, because he has both added to,
and diminished from the same; but what I have spoken I will never deny.


Mayor, Why, thou speak against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.


Smith, I denied it to be any Sacrament, and I do stand here to make proof
thereof, and if my Lord here, or any of his Doctors, be able to prove either
the name or usage of the same, I will recant mine error.


Then spoke my Brother Tankerfield, and defended the probation of things which
they called Heresy, unto which the Bishop answered.

Bonner, By my troth, Master Speaker, you shall Preach at a Stake.


Smith, Well sworn, my Lord, you keep a good Watch.


Bonner, Well, Master Controler, I am no Saint.


Smith, No, nor yet good Bishop; for a Bishop, says St. Paul, should be
faultless, and a dedicate Vessel unto God; and are you not ashamed to sit in
Judgment, and be a Blasphemer, condemning Innocents?


Bonner, Well, Master Controler, you are faultless.


Note the said Robert Smith being charged ^alsly in the said Articles turning
to the Mayor, said.
Smith speaking to the Mayor, said, I require you in Gods name, that I may have
Justice; we are here this day a great many Innocents, that are wrongfully
Accused of Heresy, and I require you, if you will not seem to be partial, let
me have no more favor at your hands, then the Apostle had at the hands of
Fest^ and Agrippa, who being Heathens, and Infidells, gave him leave not only
to speak for himself, but also heard the probation of his Cause; this require I
at your hands, who being a Christian Judge, I hope will not deny me that right
which the Heathen have suffered; if ye do, then shall all this Audience, and
the Heathen speak shame of your fact; for a City, says our Savior, that is
builded on a hill cannot be hid; if they therefore have the Truth, let it come
to light; for all that well do come to the Light, and they that do evil hate
the Light.

Then the Mayor hanging down his head said nothing; but the Bishop told him he
should preach at a Stake, and so the Sheriff cried with the Bishop, Away with
him.

Thus came he before them four times, desiring Justice, but could have none,
and at length his Friends requiring, with ou^ voice, the same, but could not
have it, they had Sentence; and then being carried out, were brought in again,
and had it every men severally given.

But before the Bishop gave Sentence on Richard Smith, he told him in derision
of his Brother Tankerfield, a Tale between a Gentleman and his Cook.

To which he answered, you fill the Peoples Ears with Fantasies, and foolish
Tales, and make a laughing matter at Blood; but if you were a true Bishop, you
should leave these railing Sentences, and speak the Words of God.

Bonner, Well, I have offered to that naughty fellow, Master Speaker, your
Companion the Cook, that my Chancellor should here instruct him, but he has
here with great disdain forsaken it. How say thou, will thou have him
instruct thee, and lead thee in the right way?


Smith, If your Chancellor shall do me any good, and take any pains, as you
say, let him take mine Articles in his hands that you have objected against me,
and either prove one of them Heresy, or any thing that you do to be good, and
if he be able so to do, I stand here with all my heart to hear him; if not, I
have no need, I praise God, of his Sermon; for I come to answer for my life,
and not to hear a Sermon.


Then began the Sentence in Dei Nomine.

To which Smith answered, that he began in a wrong name, requiring of him,
where he learned in Scriptures to give sentence of death against any man for
his Conscience sake.

To the which he made no answer, but went forward to the end; and immediately
cried, Away with him.

Then Smith turned to the Mayor and Sheriffs, and said, Is it not enough for
you, that ye have left the strait way of the Lord, but that, you must condemn
Christ causless.

Bonner, Well, Master Controller, now you cannot say but I have offered you
fair to have Instruction; and now I prithee call me bloody Bishop, and say I
seek thy Blood.


Smith, Well, although neither I, nor any of this Congregation, do report the
truth of your fact, yet shall these Stones cry it out, rather then it shall be
hidden.


Bonner, Away with him, away with him. Woodrofe, Away with him, take him away.


Smith, Well, good Friends, ye have seen and heard the great wrong that we have
received this day, and ye are all Records, that we have desired the probation
of our cause by Gods Book, and it has not been granted, but we are condemned,
and our cause not heard; nevertheless, my Lord Mayor, forasmuch as here you
have exercised Gods Sword c^^sless, and will not hear the right of the poor, I
commit my cause to Almighty God, that shall judge all men according unto right,
before whom we shall both stand without Authority, and there will I stand in
the right to your great confusion except your repent, which the Lord grant you
to do, if it be his will; and then was I, with the rest of my Brethren, carried
away to Newgate.


Thus, gentle Reader, as near as I can, I have set out the Truth of my
Examination, and the verity of mine unjust condemnation for the Truth, desiring
God that it may not be laid to the ch^rge of thee, O England, requiring your
hearty prayers unto God for his Grace and Spirit of boldness, with hope even
shortly to set to my Seal at Uxbridge, the eighth of August, by Gods Grace,
pray that it may be to his honor, my Salvation, and your Consolation, I pray
you Dagloriam Deo, Robert Smith.

Thus, Reader, thou have a full Relation of the Christian fortitude and valor
of this faithful Martyr, who so valiantly and manfully stood in the defense of
his Masters cause; and as thou see him here boldly stand in Examination
before the Bishop, and Doctors; so was he no less comfortable also in the
Prison among his Fellows, who being tog^^^^r Prisoners in Newgate, did daily
pray and exhort one another, and his care was not only for those in the ^ame
Prison with him, but for other Prisoners, to whom he sent several good Epistles
of love and Exhortation; and many were converted by him from the Iniquity of
the times, some of which Epistles are as follows.

O Ye that Love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing that is Evil. A Letter of
Robert Smith's to his Wife in Meetre.
Verses containing good Exhortations, written by R. Smith.
THe God that gives Life and Light, and leads into rest,
That breaks bonds, and brings out the Poor that are oppressed,
And keeps mercy for the Meek, his treasure and his store
Increase thy Life in perfect Love, both now and evermore;
That as thou have begun to ground in Faith and fervent Love,
Thou may be made a mighty Mount that never may remove,
That thine ensample may be showed among all thine increase,
That they may live and learn the like, and pass their time in peace,
Thy Salutations that were sent, I heartily retain,
And send thee seventy times as much to thee and thine again;
And for because I know the Gold that thou do most desire,
I send thee here a paper full, is fined in the Fire,
In hope thou will accept it well, although it be but small,
Because I have none other good to make amends withal;
For all thy free and friendly facts which thy good will has wrought,
I send thee surely for a shift the thing that cost me naught;
Abstain from all ungodliness, in dread direct your days,
Possess not sin in any wise, beware of wicked ways
Hold fast your Faith unfeignedly, build as you have begun,
And arm your self in perfect Faith to do as you have done,
Lest that the wicked make a mock that you have took in hand,
In leaving of the perfect Rock to build upon the Sand;
Beware these filthy Pharisees, their building is in Blood,
Eat not with them in any wise, their Leaven is not good,
Their Salt is all unsavory, and under good intents
They maintain all their knavery, and murder Innocents;
They seek to set in Christ's seat, and put him out of place,
And make all means that may be made, his doings to deface;
They keep him down with Bills and Bats that made the blind to see;
They make a God for Mice and Rat^^^ and say the same is he;
They show like Sheep, and sweat like wolves, their baits be all for Blood,
They kill and slay the simple Souls, and rob them of their good;
The dark illusions of the Devil has dimmed so their Eyes,
That they cannot abide the Truth to stir in any wise;
And if you keep the perfect path, (as I have hope you do)
You shall be sure to have such shame, as they can put you to,
For all that lead a goodly life shall surely suffer loss,
And eke the World will seek their shame, and make them kiss (...) Cross;
Ye shall be killed says Christ your sorrows shall not cease,
And yet in your afflictions, I am your perfect peace;
For in the World you shall have w^, because you are unknown,
And for because you hate the World, the World will love his own.
Be fervent therefore to the death against all their Decrees,
And God shall surely fight for thee against thine Enemies:
Commit thy cause unto the Lord, revenge not any evil
And thou shall see the wicked want, when thou shall have thy will,
For all afflictions that may fall, that they can say or do,
They are not sure of the Wealth we shall attain unto;
For I have seen the sinners spread their branches like a bay,
And yet ere one could turn his head were withered clean away;
Beware that money make you not in riches to arise
Against the goodness of the Lord, among the worldly wise;
For many mischiefs it has made, that may not be expressed,
And many evils it has begun, which may not be redrest;
For money makes many one, in riches to rebel;
And he that makes Gold a God, he has a Soul to sell;
It makes Kings to kill and slay, and waste their wits in War,
In leaving of the Wolf at home, to hunt the Fox afar:
And where they should see Justice done, and set their Realm in rest,
By money they be made a mean, to see the poor oppressed;
It makes Lords obey the Laws that they d^ ill and naught;
It makes Bishops suck the Bl^ol, that God has dearly bought;
And where they should be faithful Friends, and Fathers to the Flock,
By money they do turn about even like a Weathercock:
The Priest does make a money mean, to have again his whores,
To p^t away h^^ wedd^d Wife and Children out of doors:
It h^ldeth back the Husband man, which may not be forborne,
And will not suffer him to sow and cast abroad his Corn;
In like case* it does let again, when that the Seed they sow,
It choake^h up the Corn again, so that it cannot grow;
The H^sband he would have a Wife, with Nobles new and old,
The wife would have the Husband hanged, that she might have his Gold.
It ^a^eth M^rthers many a one, and bears much with Blood;
The Child would see the Parents slain to seize upon their good:
And though it be a blessed thing, created in the kind,
It is a ^^^^ss^ry evil annexed to the mind;
For who (...) plays with the pitch, his fingers are defild,
And he that waketh Gold a God, shall surely be beguild:
Be friendly to the Fatherless, and all that are oppressed,
Assist them always out of hand, and see them set at rest;
In all your doings, and your deeds, let mercy still remain;
For with the measure that you meet, shall ye be met again;
Be always lowly in your life, let love enjoy her own,
The highest Trees are seldom sure, and soonest overthrown.
The Lions lack and suffer sore in Hunger and in Thurst,
And they that do oppress the poor continue still accursed;
The Be is but a little Beast in body and in sight,
And yet she brings more increase then either Crow or Kite;
Therefore beware in any wise keep well your watch always,
Be sure of Oil within your Lamp, let not your light decay;
For death dispiseth them that lack, and hates them that have,
And treads down the rich and poor, together in the grave.
Exhort your Children to be chaste, rebuke them for their ill,
And let not them in any wise be wedded to their will;
Laughed not with them, but keep them low, show them no merry cheer;
Least thou do weep with them also, but bring them up in fear,
And let your light and living shine, that ye be not suspect
To have the same within your self, for which they are correct;
Be meek and modest in a mean, let all your deeds be done,
That they which are without the Law may see how right you run;
Keep well the member in your Mouth, your Tongue see that you tame,
For out of little sparks of Fire proceeds out a flame;
And as the poison does express the nature of the Toad,
Even so the Tongue does manifest the Heart that fears God,
For therewith bless we God above, and therewith Curse we men,
And thereby Murders do arise through Women now and then;
And seeing God has given a Tongue, and put it under power,
The surest way is for to set a hatch before the door;
For God has set you in a seat of double low degree,
First unto God, and then to man a subject for to be;
I write not that I see in you those things to be suspect,
But only set before your Face how sin should be correct;
For flesh and Blood I know you are, as other Women be,
And if ye dwell in Flesh and Blood, there is infirmity;
Receive a Warning willingly, that to thy teeth is told,
Account the gift of greater price then if he gave thee Gold;
A wise man, says Solomon, a warning will embrace,
A Fool will sooner (as he says) be smitten on the Face;
And as your members must be dead from all things that are vain,
Even so by Baptism you are born to live with Christ again;
Thus farewell free and faithful Friend, the Lord that is above
Increase in thee a perfect faith, and lead thee in his Love;
And as I pray with perfect Love, and pour out bitter tears
For you and all that are at large abroad among the briars,
Even so I pray thee to prefer my person and my bonds
Unto the Everlasting God, that has me in his Hands,
That I may pass out of this Pound wherein I am oppressed,
Enclosed in a clod of Clay that here can have no rest;
That as he has begun in me his mercies many one,
I may attain to overtake my Brethren that be gone,
That when that death shall do his worst, where he shall point a place,
I may be able like a man, to look him in the Face,
For though he catch away my Clo^k, my body into dust,
Yet am I sure to save a Soul when death has done his worst;
And though I leave a little dust dissolved, without blood
I shall receive it safe again when God shall see it good;
For my Redeemer I am sure does live for evermore,
And sits high upon the Heavens for whom I hunger sore,
Even as the Deer, with deadly wounds, escaped from the spoil,
Does haste by all the means he may to seek unto the soil,
Of whom I hope to have a Crown that always shall ^emain,
And eke enjoy a perfect peace for all my woe and pain;
The God that gives all increase, and seeks still to save,
Abound in thee that perfect peace which I do hope to have;
And I beseech the living God to hold thee in his Hands,
And wish thee even withal my heart the blessing of my bands,
Which I esteem of higher price then Pearl or precious Stone,
And shall endure for evermore when earthly things are gone;
For though the Fire do consume our Treasure and our Store,
Yet shall the goodness of the Lord endure for evermore;
And where thou art a Friend to him that is to me full dear,
The God of might make thee amends when all men shall appear
That has showed Mercy to the meek, and rid them out of pain.
And thus the Lord possess thy Spirit till we do meet again.
If thou will have a Recompense
Abide still in obedience.
The Exhortation of Robert Smith, unto his Children.
GIve ear my Children to my words, whom God has dearly bought;
Lay up my Law within your heart, and print it in your thought;
For I your Father have foreseen the frail and filthy way,
Which flesh and blood would follow fain, even to their own decay.
For all and every living beast their Crib do know full well,
But Adams heirs above the rest are ready to rebel;
And all the Creatures on the Earth full well can keep their way,
But man above all other Beasts is apt to go astray;
For Earth and Ashes is his strengh, his glory, and his reign,
And unto Ashes at the length shall he return again;
For flesh does flourish like a flower, and grow up like a Grass,
And is consumed in an hour, as it is brought to pass:
In me the Image of your years, your treasure, and your trust,
Whom you do see before your face dissolved into dust;
For as you see your Fathers flesh converted into Clay,
Even so shall ye my Children dear consume and wear away;
The Sun and Moon, and e^e the Stars that serve the day and night,
The Earth and every earthly thing shall be consumed quite,
And all the Worship that is wrought, that have been heard or seen,
Shall clean consume and come to naught, as ift had never been
Therefore that ye may follow me your Father and your Friend,
And enter into that same life which never shall have end;
I leave you here a little Book for you to look upon,
That you may see your Fathers Face when I am dead and gone,
Who for the hope of heavenly things, while he did here remain,
Gave over all his golden years in Prison and in Pain;
Where I among mine Iron bands enclosed in the dark,
A few days before my death did dedicate this work
To you mine heirs of earthly things which I have left behind,
That ye may read and understand and keep it in your mind;
That as you have been heirs of that which once shall wear away,
Even so you may possess the part which never shall decay;
In following of your Fathers foot in Truth, and eke in Love,
That ye may also be h^^ heirs for evermore above;
And in example to your youth, to whom I wish all good,
I preach you here a perfect faith, and seal it with my Blood:
Have God always before your Eyes in all your wh^le intents,
Commit not sin in any ^ise keep his Commandments,
Abhor that arrant Whore of Rome, and all her blasphemies,
And drink not of her decretals, nor yet of her decrees;
Give honor to your Mother dear, remember well her pain,
And recompense her in her age in like with love again;
Be always ai^ing at her hand, and let her not decay,
Remember well your Fathers fall, that should have been her stay;
Give of your Portion to the poor, as Riches does arise,
And from the needy naked soul turn not away your eyes;
For be that will not hear the Cry of such as are in need,
Shall cry himself and not be heard when he would hope to speed;
If God has given you great increase, and blessed well your store,
Remember you are put in trust to minister the more;
Beware of foul and filthy last, let whoredom have no place,
Keep clean your Vessels in the Lord, that he may you embrace,
Ye are the Temples of the Lord, for ye are dearly bought,
And they that do defile the same shall surely come to naught:
Possess not pride in any case, build not your nests too high,
But have always before your face that ye be born to die;
Defraud not him that hired is your labors to Sustain,
But give him always out of hand his penny for his pain;
And as ye would that other men against you should proceed,
Do you the same again to them when they do stand in need;
And part your portion with the poor, in money and in meat,
And feed the fainted feeble soul with that which ye should eat,
That when your members lacks meat, and clothing to your back,
You may the better think on them that now do live and lack;
Ask counsel at the wise, give ear unto the end,
Refuse not you the sweet rebuke of him that is your Friend;
Be thankful always to the Lord with prayer and with praise;
Desire you him in all your deeds for to direct your ways,
And sin not like that swearing sort whose bellys being fed,
Consume their years upon the Earth from belly unto bed;
Seek first I say the living God, set him always before,
And then be sure that he will bless your hasket and your store;
And thus if you direct your days according to this book,
Then shall they say who see your ways how like me you do look;
And when you have so perfectly upon your fingers ends
Possessed all within your book, then give it to your Friends;
And I beseech the living God replenish you with grace
That I may have you in the Heavens, and see you face to fact,
And though the sword have cut me off, contrary to my kind,
That I could not enjoy your love according to my mind;
Yet do I hope when that the Heavens shall vanish like a scrole,
I shall receive your perfect shape in body and in soul;
And that I may enjoy your love, and ye enjoy the the Land,
I do beseech the living God to hold you in his hand:
Farewell my Children from the World where ye must yet remain,
The Lord of Hosts be your defense till we do meet again;
Farewell my Love, and loving Wife, my Children and my Friends,
I hope to God to have you all when all things have their ends;
And if you do abide in God, as you have now began,
Your course I Will warrant will be short, ye have not far to run;
God grant you so to end your years, as he shall think it best,
That ye may enter into Heaven where I do hope to rest.
Robert Smith to his Brother.
AS Nature does me bind, because thou art my blood,
According to my kind to give thee of my good,
That thou may have in mind how I have run my race,
Although thou bide behind but for a little space,
I give thee here a Pearl, the price of all my good,
For which I leave my life, to buy it with my blood;
More worth then all the World, or ought that I can note,
Although it be clad, in such a simple Coat;
For when I had obtained this pearl of such a price,
Then was I sure I gained the way for to be wise,
It taught me for to fight, for to despise my flesh,
To stick unto the Light, and for to leave the Lies,
In sending out my Seed with bonds and bitter tears,
That I might reap with joy in Everlasting years,
And have for all my loss, my travail and my pain,
A thousand times and more of better goods again;
And for because the good that has been got and gained,
And that the Lords Elect has evermore obtained,
Is closed in this book, which I do give to thee,
Wherein I have my part, as thou thy self may see;
In which I hope thou have a stock also in s^ore,
And wilt not cease to sail till God has made it more;
I will thee to beware, be sure thou keep it well,
For if thou do it loose, thy part shall be in Hell;
And here I testify before the living God,
That I detest to do the things that are forbad;
And as my Judgment is, my body to be brent,
My heart is surely set therewith to be content,
And since it is his will to put me in his Power,
Upon his holy Hill to fight against this Whore
Full well I am content, if he allow it so,
To stand with all my might, the Whore to overthrow:
Even with a willing mind, the death I will outface,
And as I am assured, the Battle to embrace,
That they which hear the Truth, how I have past the pike,
May set aside their youth, and learn to do the like;
And though it be my lot, to let her suck my blood,
Yet am I well assured, it shall do her no good;
For she is set to kill the thing she thinks accursed,
And shall not have her fill of blood until she burst:
And when as thou shall see or hear of my decease,
Pray to the living God, that I may pass in peace;
And when I am at rest, and rid out of my pain,
Then will I do the like for thee to God again;
And to my woeful wife and widow desolate,
Whom I do leave behind in such a simple state,
And compassed with tears, and mournings many one,
Be thou her staying staff when I am dead and gone;
My mouth may not express the dolours of my mind,
Nor yet my heaviness to leave her here behind;
But as thou art my Bone, my Brother, and my Blood,
So let her have thy heart, if it may do her good;
I took her from the World, and made her like the Cross,
But if she hold her own, she shall not suffer loss;
For where she had before a man, unto her make,
That by the force of fire was strangled at a Stake;
Now shall she have a King, to be her helping hand,
To whom pertains all things, that are within the Land;
And eke my Daughter dear, whom I bequeath to thee,
To be brought up in fear, and Learn the A B C;
That she may grow in Grace, and Ruled by the Rod,
To learn to lead her Life, within the fear of God,
And always have in mind, thy Brother being dead,
That thou art left behind, a Father in my stead;
And thou my Brother Dear, and eke my Mothers Son,
Come forth out of all fear, and do us I have done;
And God shall be thy Guide, and give thee such increase,
That in the Flames of Fire, thou shall have perfect Peace;
Into Eternal Joy, and pass out of all pain,
Where we shall meet with mirth, and never part again:
If thou will do my Daughter good,
Be mindful of they Brothers Blood.
Teach me O Lord, to walk thy Ways, my living to amend,
And I shall keep it all my days, even to my lives end;
Give me a mind to understand, so shall I never start,
But I shall keep all thy precepts, even wholly with my heart;
Make me to go a perfect pace in that I have begun,
For all my love and my delight is in thy Ways to run;
Incline my heart unto thy Ways, set thou thereon my thought,
And let me not consume my days to covet that is naught:
O quicken me in all thy Ways the World for to despise,
And from all fond and foolish toys, turn thou away mine Eyes:
O plant in me thy perfect Word, which is to me so dear,
Lay up thy Laws within my heart, to keep me still in fear;
Aed rob me of that great rebuke, which I do fear full sore,
For all thy Judgments and thy Law endure for evermore:
Behold, O Lord, in thy precepts is all my whole delight,
O quicken me in all thy Ways, that I may walk aright.
The Substance of an Epistle written by Robert Smith to the Persecuted Flock of
Christ.
To all which Love God unfainedly, and intend to lead a godly life, according
to his Gospel, and to persevere in his Truth unto the end, Grace and Peace from
God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. Be not afraid, most
dearly beloved in our Savior Jesus Christ, at these most perilous days,
wherein by the suffering of God, the Prince of Darkness is broken loose, and
rages in his members against the Elect of God withal cruelty, to set up again
the Kingdom of Antichrist, against whom see that ye be strong in faith to
resist his most devilish Doctrines with the pure Gospel of God, arming your
selves with patience, to abide whatsoever shall be laid to your charge for the
Truths sake, knowing that thereunto you are called, not only to believe in him,
but also to suffer for him: Oh, how happy are ye that in the sight of God are
counted worthy to suffer for the Testimony of Christ, quit therefore your
selves (O my loving Brethren) and rejoice in him for whom ye suffer, for unto
you do remain the unspeakable Joys, which neither the Eye has seen, nor the
Ear has heard, nei^^^r the heart of man is able to comprehend in any wise: Be
not ^^^raid of the bodily Death, for your names are written in the Book of
Life; and the Prophets do record, that in the sight of the ^^^d precious is the
Death of his Saints; Watch therefore and pray that ye be not prevented in the
day of Temptation; now comes the day of your Trial, wherein the Waters rage,
and the Stormy Winds blow; now shall it appear whether you have builded upon
the fleeting Sand, or upon the unmovable Rock Christ, which is the Foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, whereon every House that is builded grows into
an holy Temple of the Lord, by the mighty working of the holy Ghost, now
approaches the day of your Battle, wherein it is required that you show
yourselves the valiant Soldiers of Christ Jesus, with the Armor of God, that
ye may be able to stand fast against all the crafty assaults of the Devil;
Christ is your Captain, an^ you are his Soldiers, whose Cognizance is the
Cross to the which he willingly humbled himself, even unto the Death, and
thereby spoiled his Enemies, and now triumphs he over them in the glory of
his Father, making intercession for them that do here remain to suffer the
A^^lictions that are to be fulfilled in his mysti^al Body; it behooves
therefore every one that will be accounted his Schollor, to take up his o^n
Cross, and follow him, as y^u have him for Example; and ^ssure you that he
being on your side, nothing shall be able to prevail against you, and that he
will be with you even to the Worlds and; you have his promise in the 28th of
Matthew; he will go forth with his Host as a Conqueror to make a Conquest; he
is the man that si^^eth on the white Horse crowned with Immortality, and ye
Brethren are his Fellowship, whereof he is the Head; he has your hearts in his
hand, as a bow bent after his godly will, he shall direct the same according to
the riches of his glory, into all spiritual and heavenly Cogitation; he is
faithful and will not suffer you to be further ass^^^ced then he will give you
strength to overcome, and in the most danger he will make a way that you may be
able to bear it. Shrink not therefore, dear ^earts, when ye shall be called to
answer for the hope that is in you, for ^eb^^e the Comforter, even the Spirit
of Truth which was sent from the Heavens to teach us; he shall speak in us, he
shall strengthen us; what is he then that shall be able to confound us? Nay,
what Tyrant is he that now boasts himself of his strength to do mischief,
whom the Lord shall not with his Spirit, by the Mo^th of his Servants strike
down to Hellfire; yea suddenly will the Lord bring down the glory of the
Proud Philistians by the hands of his Servant David; their strength is in
Shield and Spear, but our help is in the Name of the Lord, which made both
Heaven and Earth; he is our Buckler, and our Wall, a strong Tower of defense;
he is our God, and we are his People; he shall bring the counsels of the
ungodly to naught, he shall take them in their own Net, he shall destroy them
in their own Inventions, the Right Hand of the Lord shall work this Wonder; his
Power is known amongst the Children of men; their Fathers have felt it, and are
confounde^ in like manner shall they know that there is no counsel against the
Lord, when their secrets are opened to the whole World, and are found to be
against the Living God, work they never so craftily, buil^ ^hey never so
strongly, yet down shall their Babel fall, and the Builders themselves shall
then be scattred upon the face of the Earth as Accursed of God; the Just shall
see this, and be glad, and praise the Name of the Lord, that so Marvelously
has dealt with his Servants, as to bring their Enemies under their feet; then
shall the fearful Seed of Cain Tremble and Quake; then shall the mocking
Ishm^elites be cast out of the Door; then shall the Proud Nemborth see his
labor lost; then shall the Beast of Babylon be trodden under foot; then shall
the Scribes and Pharisees for madness fret and rage; then shall their painted
Wisdom be known for extreme folly; then shall the bloody Dragon be void of his
prey; then shall the Whore of Babylon receive double Vengence; then shall they
scratch their Crowns, for the fall of their Mistress Harlot, whom they now
serve for filthy lucre, when no man shall buy their Wares any more; then shall
the Popish Priesthood cry, Weal away, with care, even when the Lord shall help
his Servants, which day is not far off, the day wherein the Kingdom of
Antichrist shall have an end, and never raise any more; in the mean time,
abide in certain and sure hope cleaving unto the promises of God, which in
their own time shall be fulfilled. What better Quarrel can you have to give
your lives for, then the Truth it self? That man that gives his life for the
Truth, takes the readiest way to life; he that has the Popes curse for the
Truth, is sure of Christ's Blessing. Well then, my Brethren, what shall now let
but that you go forwards as ye have begun? Nay, rather run with the Runners,
that ye may obtain the appointed glory; hold on the right way, look not back,
have the Eye of your heart fixed upon God, and so run that you may get hold of
it; cast away all your Worldly Pelf, and Worldly respects, as the favor of
Friends, the fear of men sensual Affection, respect of Person, Honor, Praise,
Shame, Rebuke, Wealth, Poverty, Riches, Lands, Possessions, carnal Fathers and
Mothers, Wife and Children, with the love of your own selves and in respect of
that Heavenly treasure you look for, let all these be denied and utterly
refused of you, so that in no condition they do abate your zeal, or quench your
Love toward God; in this case make no account of them, but rather repute them
as vile in comparison of Everlasting life; away with them as Thorns that cheak
the Heavenly Seed of the Gospel, where they be suffered to grow; they are
burdens of the Flesh, which encumber the Soul, exch^^ge th^^ therefore, I
beseech you, for advantage; does not he gain that finds Heavenly and immortal
treasure, for Earthly and corruptible Riches; loses that man any thing which
of his carnal Father and Mother is forsaken, when therefore he is received of
God the Father to be his Child and Heir in Christ Heavenly for Earthly, for
Mortal Immortal, for transistory things permanant is great gains to a Christian
Conscience.

Therefore as I began, I exhort you in the Lord not to be afraid; shrink not my
Brethren, mistrust not God, be of good comfort, rejoice in the Lord, hold fast
your Faith, and continue to the end; deny the World, and take up the Cross, and
follow him which is your Lead man, and is gone before; if you suffer with him
you shall reign with him? What way can you glorify the Name of your Heavenly
Father better, then by suffering death for his Sons sake? What a Spectacle
shall it be to the World to behold so godly a fellowship as you Servants of
God, in so just a Quarrel as the Gospel of Christ is, with so pure a
Conscience, so strong a Faith, and so lively a hope, to offer your selves to
suffer most cruel Torments at the hands of Gods Enenies, and so to end your
days in Peace to receive in the resurrection of the Righteous life Everlasting.

Be strong therefore in your Battle, the Lord God is on your side, and his
Truth is your cause, and against you be none but the Enemies of the Cross of
Christ, as the Serpent and his Seed, the Dragon with his Tail, the marked man
of the Beast, the Off-pring of the Pharisees, the Congregation Malignant, the
Generation of Vipers and Murderers, as their Father the Devil has been from
the beginning. To conclude such are they as the Lord God has always abhorred,
and in all Ages resisted and overthrown, God from whom nothing is hid, knows
what they are, he that searches the hearts of men, he has found out them to
be crafty, subtle, full of Poison, Proud, Disdainful, Stiff-necked, Devourers,
Ravenours, and Barkers against the Truth, filthy and shameless; and therefore
does the Spirit of God by the Mouths of his holy Prophets and Apostles call
them by the names of Foxes, Serpents, Cockatrices, Lions, Leopards, Bulls,
Bears, Wolves, Dogs, Swine, Beasts, teaching us thereby to understand that
their natural inclination is to deceive, poison and destroy as much as in them
lies, the faithful and Elect of God; but the Lord with his right Arm shall
defend his little Flock against the whole rabblerment of these Worldlings,
which have conspired against him; he has numbered all the hairs of his
Childens Heads, so that not one of them shall perish without his Fatherly will;
he keeps the Sparrows, much more will he preserve them whom he has purchased
with the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb; he will keep them until the hour
appointed wherein the Name of God shall be glorified in his Saints; in the mean
time, let them work their wills, let them Envy, let them Malign, let them
Blasphem, let them Curse, Ban, Betray, Whip, Scourge, Hang and Burn; for by
this means God will try his Elect, as Gold in the Furnance, and by these Fruits
shall they also bring themselves to be known what they be, for all their Sheep
skins; for as he that in suffering patiently for the Gospel of God, is thereby
known to be of Christ, even so also is the Persecutor of him known to be a
member of Antichrist: Besides this, their extreme cruelty shall be a means the
sooner to provoke God to take pity upon his Servants, and to destroy them that
so Tyranniously entreat his People, as we may learn by the Histories as well in
the Bondage of Israel under Pharaoh in Eygpt, as also in the miserable
Captivity of Judas in Babylon, where when the People of God were in most
extreme thraldom, then did the Lord streath forth his mighty Power to deliver
his Servants, though God for a time suffered them to be exalted in their own
pride, yet shall they not escape his Vengeance.

To conclude, my Brethren, I commit you to God and the Power of his Word, which
is able to establish you in all Truth, his Spirit be with you, and work always,
that ye may be mindful of your duties toward him, whose ye are both Body and
Soul, whom see that ye Love, Serve, Dread, and Obey, above all worldly Powers,
and for nothing under the Heavens defile your Conscience before God; dissemble
not with his Word, God will not be mocked? Nay, they that dissemble with him
deceive themselves, such shall the Lord deny, and cast out at the last day;
such I say as bear two faces in one hood; such as play on both hands; such as
deny the known Truth; such as obstinately rebel against him; all such with
their partakers shall the Lord destroy; God defend you from all such, and make
you perfect unto the end, your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy.

This aforesaid Robert Smith, the valiant and constant Martyr of Christ, thus
replenished, as you have read, with the fortitude of Gods Spirit, was condemned
at London by Bishop Bonner the 12th day of the Month called July, and suffered
Death at Uxbridge the Eighth day of the Month called August, Anno 1555.

A Letter sent to his Wife Anne Smith.
The God and Father eternal which brought again from death our Lord Jesus
Christ keep thee, dear Wife, now and ever Amen, and all thy Parents and
Friends; I praise God for his Mercy, I am in the same state that ye left me in,
rather better then worse, looking daily for the living God, before whom I
hunger full sore to appear and receive the Glory of which I trust thou art
willing to be a partaker; I give God most hearty thanks therefore, desiring
thee of all loves to stand in that Faith which thou have received, and let no
man take away the Seed that Almighty God has sown in thee; but lay hands of
Everlasting Life, which shall ever abide when both the Earth and all earthly
Friends shall perish, desiring them also to receive thankfully our trouble
which is momentary and little, and as St. Paul says, not Worthy of the things
which shall be showed on us, that we patiently carrying our Cross, may attain
to the place where our Savior Christ is gone before, to the which I beseech
God of his Mercy bring us speedily; I have been much troubled about your
deliverance, fearing much the persuasions of Worldlings, and have found a
Friend, which will I trust, find a mean for you, if you be not already
provided; desiring you, in any case, to abide such order as those my Friends
shall appoint in God, and bear well in mind the words which I spoke at our
departing, that as God has found us, and also elected us worthy to suffer with
him, we may endeavor our selves to follow uprightly in this our Vocation;
desiring you to present my hearty commendations to all our Friends, and
especially to your Parents, keeping your matter close in any wise; give most
hearty thanks to my Friends which only for our Cause are come to Windsor:
continue in prayer, do well, be faultless, in all things beware of
Abominations, keep clean from sin, pray for me as I do for you; and most
entirely desire you to send me word if you lack any thing: The Lord Jesus
preserve you and yours, Amen. From Newgate the fifteenth of April.

By your Husband Robert Smith.

A Sententious Letter of Robert Smith's to his Wife.
Seek first to Love God, dear Wife, with your whole heart, and then shall it be
eafie to love your Neighbor.

Be friendly to all Creatures, and especially to your own Soul.

Be always an Enemy to the Devil and the World, but especially to your own
Flesh.

In hearing good things, join the ears of your head and heart together.

Seek unity and quietness with all men, but especially with your Conscience;
for he will not easily be entreated.

Love all men, but especially your Enemies.

Hate the sin^ that are past, but especially those to come.

Be as ready to further your Enemy, as he is to hinder you, that you may be the
Child of God.

Remember that God has hedged in your Tongue with the Teeth and Lips, that it
might speak under correction.

Be ready at all times to lock to your Brothers Eye; but especially to your own
Eye; for he that warns others of that he himself is faulty, does give his
Neighbor the clear Wine, and keeps the Dregs for himself.

Show mercy unto the Saints for Christ's sake, and Christ shall reward you for
the Saints sake.

Amongst all other Prisoners visit your own Soul, for it is enclosed in a
perilous Prison.

If you will love God, hate Evil, and you shall obtain the reward of well doing.

Thus fare you well, good Anne; have me heartily commended to all that love the
Lord unfainedly; I beseech you have me in your prayer while I am living, and I
am assured the Lord will accept it; bring up my Children and yours in the Fear
of God, and then shall I not fail but receive you together in the everlasting
Kingdom of God which I go unto,

Your Husband Robert Smith.

Robert Smith to all faithful Servants of Christ, exhorting them to be strong
under Persecution.
Content thy self with patience with Christ to bear the Cross of pain,
Which can and will thee recompense a thousand fold with Joys again:
Let nothing cause thy heart to quail;
Launch forth thy Boat, hail up thy Sail,
Put from the Shore,
And be thou sure thou shall attain
Unto the Port that shall remain
For evermore.
About this time died Steven Harwood at Stratford, and Thomas Fust at Ware.

About the same time William Hail of Th^rp in the County of Essex, was
condemned and burnt; Will. Hail Martyr.
when he received the Sentence of condemnation, he gave this exhortation to the
lookers on; Ah, good People, said he, beware of this Idolatry, and this
Antichrist, pointing to the Bishop of London; he was burnt at Barnet.

George King, Thomas Leys, and John VVade, being Prisoners in Lollards Tower,
fell sick and died, and were buried by some of the faithful Brethren.

William Andrew being twice brought before Bonner upon Examination, manfully
stood in the defense of his Religion, at length through strait handling in the
Prison of Newgate, there he lost his life.

Robert Samuel, committed to Ipswich Goal, Rob. Samuel Martyr.
, and from thence removed to Norwich, where Bishop Hopton or his Chancellor
were the cause of his being kept very close Prisoner at his first coming, where
he was Chained bolt upright to a Post, keeping him for some time without meat
and drink, except it were a small morsel of Bread, and a little Water; he
Suffered Death the 31th of August, 1555.

Next after Robert Samuel was burnt, William Allen of Walsingham, Will. Allen
Martyr
Labourer; upon Examination, the Bishop asked him, why he was imprisoned, he
said it was because he would not follow the Cross; and said, if he saw the King
and Queen follow the Cross or bow down to it, he would not; for which Sentence
of Death was given against him; he was burned about the beginning of September
at Walsingham, who declared such Constancy at his Martyrdom, and had such
Credit with the Justices, by reason of his upright and well tried Conversation
among them, that he was suffered to go untyed to his suffering, and there being
fastened with a Chain, stood quietly without shrinking until he died.

The Martyrdom of Roger Coo of Melford in Suffolk Sheer-man, first Examined
before the Bishop of Norwich, and by him Condemned 12th. of August, 1555.
Bishop, Why was you Imprisoned?


Robert Coo Examined.
Coo, At the Justices Commandment.

Bishop, There was some cause why?


Coo, Here is my Accuser, let him declare.


Accuser, He will not receive the Sacrament?


Bishop said, he thought he had transgress^d the Law?


Coo, There is no Law to transgress, that I know?


Accuser, Nor will not know, my Lord, ask him when be received the Sacrament?


Coo seeing the Accuser so bold, said to the Bishop let him sit down and
examine me himself; but the Bishop would not hear that; but after some other
discourse, the Bishop asked him, whether he would not obey the Kings Laws?


Coo, As far as they agree with the Word of God, I will obey them.


Bishop, Whether they agree with the Word of God or not, we are bound to obey
them, if the King were an Infidel.


Coo, If Sydrach Mesack and Abed^eg^ had so done, Nebucad^nezzer had not
confessed the Living God.


In the same Month was Thom^^ Cobb of Haveril Butcher, Tho. Cobb Martyr.
burned in the Town of Thatford.

Upon the third day of the sixth Month called August, were brought before
Thornton, Bishop of Dover, George Catmer of Hithe, Robert Streater of Hithe,
Anthony Burward of Calet, George Brodbridge of Bromfield, James Tutty of
Brenchly, and were examined particularly touching the Sacrament of the Altar,
Aurticular Confession, and other such like Ceremonies.

To which Catmer answered on this wise, Christ, said he, sits in Heaven on
the Right hand of God the Father, and therefore I do not believe him to be in
the Sacrament of the Altar, but he is in the worthy Receiver, and your
Sacrament, as you use it, is an abominable Idol.

George Br^dbridge said, as for your holy Bread and holy Water, and your Mass,
I utterly defy them.


They were all five condemned and burnt at Canterbury the sixth day of the 7th
Month 1555.

Two burnt at Lichfield.
About the middle of the same Month Thomas Hayward and John ^oreway, were both
burnt at Lichfield.

The Persecutions and Sufferings of Robert Glover
About the Month called September 1555. there was a privy Commission sent down
to the Mayor of Coventry to apprehend John Glover Brother of the said Robert;
Rob. Clover Martyr.
but John having some notice of the Officers coming, escaped; but they
searching in an upper Room, found Robert Glover lying sick in Bed, and had him
away before the Sheriff, who being detained till the Bishop came, and was then
examined, a Relation of his Troubles and Conflicts he had with the Bishop: He
sent his Wife in a Letter some Passages, most material of which are as
follows.

To my entirely beloved Wife Mary Glover.
The peace of Conscience which passes all understanding, the Sweet
Consolation, Comfort, Strength and Boldness of the holy Ghost, be continually
increased in our hearts, through a servant earnest and steadfast faith in our
most dear and only Savior Jesus Christ Amen.

I thank you heartily most loving Wife for your Letters sent unto me in my
imprisonment, I read them with tears more then once or twice, for Joy and
Gladness, that God had wrote in you so merciful a work: These your Letters, and
the hearing of your most godly proceedings, and constant doing from time to
time, have much relieved and comforted me at all times, and shall be a goodly
Testimony with you at the great Day.

If I would have given place to worldly reasons, these might have moved me,
first the foregoing of you, and my Children, the consideration of the state of
my Children, being yet tender of Age, and young, apt and inclineable to virtue
and learning, and so having the more need of my Assistance, being not
altogether destitute of gifts to help them withal, possessions above the common
sort of men; because I was never called to be a preacher or minister (because
of my sickness) fear of death in imprisonment before I should come to my
answer, and so my death to be unprofitable.

But these and such like, I thank my heavenly Father, who of his infinite mercy
inspired me with his holy Ghost for his Sons sake, prevailed not in me, but
when I had by the wonderful permission of God fallen into their hands, at the
first sight of the Sheriff, Nature a little abashed yet ere ever I came to the
Prison, by the working of God, and through his goodness, fear departed; I said
to the Sheriff at his coming, unto me what matter have you to charge me withal:
He answered, you shall know when you come before the Masters; I looked to have
been brought before the Masters, and to have heard what they could have
burdened me withal, but contrary to my expectation I was committed forthwith
to the Goal, not being called to my answer; little Justice being showed
therein, but the less Justice a man finds at their hands, the more
Consolation in Conscience shall he find from God, for whosoever is of the
World, the World will love him.

After I came into Prison, and had reposed my self there a while, I wept for
Joy and Gladness my belly full, musing much of the great mercies of God, and as
it were saying to my self after this sort: Oh, Lord, who am I, on whom thou
should bestow this great mercy, to be numbered among the Saints that suffer
for the Gospel sake. And so beholding, and considering on the one side, my
imperfection unableness, sinful misery and unworthiness, and on the other
side, the greatness of Gods mercy, to be called to so high promotion; I was as
it were amazed, and overcome for a while with joy and gladness, concluding thus
with my self in my heart: Oh, Lord, thou show Power in Weakness, Wisdom in
Foolishness, Mercy in Sinfulness, who shall let thee to choose where and whom
thou will? as I have zealously loved the confession of thy Word, so ever
thought I my self to be most unworthy, to be a partaker of the affliction for
the same.

Not long after came unto me M. Brasbridge M. Phinees, and M. Hopkins
traveling with me to be dismissed upon bonds; to whom my answer was (to my
rememberance, after this sort) for as much as the Masters have imprisoned me,
having nothing to burden me withal; If I should enter into bouds, I should in
so doing Accuse my self, and seeing they have no matter to lay to my charge,
they may as well let me pass without bo^nds as with bonds.

And when they were somewhat importune, I said to one of them, that liberty of
Conscience was a precious thing, and took as it were a pause, lifting up my
heart to God, earnestly for his aid and help, that I might do the thing that
might please him; and so when they had let their sure fall, my heart me thought
was wonderfully comforted.

Afterward, debating the matter with my self, these considerations came into my
head; I have from time to time with good Conscience (God I take to record)
moved all such I had Conference withal, to be no dalliers in Gods matters, but
to show themselves after so great a light and knowledge, hearty, earnest,
constant, and stable, in so manifest a Truth, and not to give place one jot
contrary to the same; now thought I, if I shall withdraw my self, and make any
shifts to pull my own neck our of the Collar, I shall give great offense to my
weak Brethren in Christ, and advantage to the Enemy, to slander Gods Word; it
will be said, he has been a great boldner of others to be earnest and fervent
to fear no worldly perrils, or dangers, but he himself will give no such
example.

Wherefore I thought it my bounden duty, both to God and man, being (as it
were) by the great goodness of God marvelously called and appointed hereunto,
to set aside all fear, perril and dangers, all worldly respects, and
considerations, and like as I had hereto according to the measure of my small
gift, from the bottom of my heart unfeignedly moved, exhorted and persuaded,
all that profess Gods Word, manfully to persist in the defense of the same, not
with Sword and Voilence, but with suffering, and loss of life, rather then to
defile themselves again with the Whorish abominations of the Romish
Antichrist; so the hour being come with my fact and Example to ratific and
confirm the same to the hearts of all true Believers, and to this end (by the
assistance of Gods holy Spirit) I resolved my self with much peace of
Conscience, willingly to sustain whatsoever the Romish Antichrist should do
against me: So I remained a Prisoner about ten days in Coventry, being never
called to my Answer, contrary to Law, they having no Warrant to apprehend me,
but my elder Brother; God lay not their extreme doing against me to their
charge at the great Day.

The second day after the Bishops coming to Coventry, the Jailer was ordered to
carry me before him, when I came before the Bishop he said, he was my Bishop
for lack of a better, and willed me to submit my self.

I said, I am not come to Accuse my self, what have you to lay to my charge?

He asked me whether I was learned?

I answered, smally learned.

The Chancellor standing by, said, I was a Master of Art.

Then the Bishop laid to my charge, my not coming to Church.

Here I might have dallied with him, and put him to his proofs, knowing that
none of the Citizens were able to prove any such matter against me; but I
answered, I neither had, nor would come at their Church, as long as their Mass
was used there, to save, if I had them, five hundred lives; I willed him to
show me one jot or tittle in the Scripture for the proof and defense of the
Mass.

He answered, he came to teach, and not to be taught.

I was content, I said, to learn of him so far as he was able to teach me by
the Word of God.

Bishop, Who shall judge the Word?


Glover, Christ was contend the People should judge of his Doctrine by
searching the Scriptures, and so was Paul; I am content the Primitive Church
next the Apostles time shall judge betwixt you and me. But he refused to be
judged by these.


Then he said, I am your Bishop, and therefore you must believe me.

Glover, If you say black is white, must I say as you say?


Here the Chancellor noted me to be arrogant, because I would not give place to
my Bishop.

Glover, If you must be believed because you are a Bishop, why find you fault
with the People that believed L^timer, Ridly, and Hooper, who were Bishops?


Bishop, Because they were Heretics.


Glover, And may not you err.


To which the Bishop, instead of making answer, asserted his Authority, etc.

The next day after I was had to Liechfield, which at first discouraged me,
considering my weakness of body, until I considered the same God that had
preserved me was able to preserve me there, so long as I put my trust in him.
When I came to Liechfield, the same night I was put in a Prison, where I
continued until I was condemned, in a place next to the Dungeon, a narrow Room,
strong of building, and very cold, with small light, and there I was allowed a
bundle of Straw, instead of my Bed, without any thing to sit down upon; but God
of his great Mercy (through prayer) gave me great patience that night, so that
if it had been his pleasure I could have been contented to have ended my life;
the Bishops man came to me in the morning, who was my Keeper, to whom I said,
this is a great exteamity, God send us patience, and no more.

Then they were content that I should have a Bed of my own procuring, but I was
allowed no help night nor day, nor company of any man, notwithstanding my great
sickness, nor yet Paper, Pen or Ink, or Books, save my new Testament in Latin,
and another little Book which I got in privately.

About two days after, the Chancellor and one Temsey a Prebendary came to me
to the Prison, and exhorted me to conform to the Bishop, and to the Church.

I said, I refused not to be ordered by that Church that was ordered by the
Word of God.

Chancellor, How know you the Word of God but by the Church.

Glover said to the Chancellor, The Church shows which is the Word of God,
therefore the Church is above the Word of God: This is no good reason in
Learning, for its like unto this, John showed the People who was Christ, ^ergo
John was above Christ.

The Chancellor said, he came not to reason with me; so I remained without any
further Conference with any man by the space of eight days, till the Bishop
came, in which ti^^ I gave my self continually to prayer and meditation; I
found in my self daily an amendment of health in my body, and increase of peace
in Conscience, and many consolations from God by the help of his holy Spirit,
and sometimes a taste and glimmering of the Life to come, though the Enemy
ceased not many times sundry ways to assault me.

When the Bishop came to Liechfield, I was had before him in a by Chamber, next
my Prison, when I came and saw none but his Officers, Chaplains, and Servants,
except and Old Priest, I was partly amazed, and lifted up my heart to God for
his merciful help and assistance.


Some discourse at that time the Bishop had with this faithful Martyr
concerning the Sacrament and Confession, the usual Snares; but his last
Examination, when he was condemned, I do not find upon Record; but this I find
noted, that after Condemnation, this Servant of the Lord was under some
exercise of heaviness, and dullness of Spirit, and desolate of all Spiritual
Consolation, and full of much discomfort and unaptness to bear the bitter Cross
of Martyrdom, ready to be laid upon him.

Whereupon, he fearing in himself lest the Lord had utterly withdrawn his
wonted favor from him, made his condition known to one Austen Bernher, his
faithful Friend, how that he had earnestly prayed day and night to the Lord,
and yet could receive no motion nor sense of any comfort from him.

Austen exhorted him patiently to wait the Lords pleasure, and howsoever his
present feeling was, yet seeing his Cause was just and true, to stick
constantly to the same, and not to doubt but the Lord in his good time would
visit him, and satisfy his desire with plenty of Consolation; the next day, as
he was going to the place of Execution he was so mightily replenished with holy
Comfort, and Heavenly Joys, that he cried out to Austen Bernher, and said,
Austen, He is come, he is come.

In the same Fire, with him was burned Cornelius Bongey of Coventry, Cornelius
Bongey burned.
and condemned by the said Radulph Bishop of Coventry and Liechfield.

The 9th day of the Month called October, were condemned to be burnt William
Woolsey, Will. Woolsey and Rob. Pygot Martyrs.
and Robert Pygot of Wisbidge in the Isle of Ely, by John Fuller, the
Chancellor to the Bishop of Ely, and others.

Doctor Fuller and some others, coming to visit William Woolsey in Prison,
William heard all they had to say to him, and then spoke these words, W^ be
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven before men, ye your selves go not in, neither suffer ye them that come
to enter in.

Not long after the Doctor came to William again, and said to him, thou
troublest my Conscience, wherefore I pray thee depart, and rule thy Tongue, so
that I hear no more complaint of thee, and come to the Church when thou will,
and if thou be complained upon, so far as I may, I promise thee I will not hear
of it.

William said in reply, I was brought hither by a Law, and by a Law I will be
delivered; at the Sessions the said William was committed to the Castle at
VVisbidge.


Robert Pygot* a Painter by Trade, was at the same Sessions presentde for not
going to Church, and being called before Sr. Clement Higham Judge of the
Sessions, who said to Pygot; Ah, are you the holy Father, the Painter? How
chance you come not to Church?

Robert Pygot, I am not out of the Church, I trust in God.


No Sr. said the Judge, this is no Church, this is a Hall.

Rob. Pygot, I know very well it is a Hall, but he that is in the true faith of
Jesus Christ, is never absent, but present in the Church of God.


Ah Sirrah, said the Judge, you are too high learned for me to talk withal,
wherefore I will send you to them that be better learned; and committed him to
the Goal where VVoolsey lay, and from thence they were both carried to Ely
where they remained Prisoners till the day of their death.

About the nineteenth day of the same Month they were had to Judgment, before
Doctor Fullor then Chancellor and others, who laid several Articles to their
charge, viz. that they denied the Sacrament of the Altar, whereunto their
answer was, that the Sacrament of the Altar was an Idol: One of the
Commissioners drew up a Paper that he would have Robert Pygot sign.

No, said Pygot, that is your Faith, and not mine.

When these two men were burnt, there was a great Sheet knit full of Books,
burnt with them.

It is further testified concerning those two Martyrs, by one William Fulk of
Cambridge, that they were burnt at Ely; Pygot, he said, was mild, humble and
modest, promising that he would be conformable to his Persecutors if they could
persuade him by the Scriptures; Wolsey, he said, was stout, strong and
vehement, and detested all their doings, as of whom he was sure to receive
nothing but Cruelty and Tyranny; he was wondrous jealous over his Companion,
fearing least his gentle Nature would have been overcome by the flatering
inticements of the World, and therefore the same day that they were burned,
when they would have talked with him alone, he pulled him away from them almost
by force.

Ridley and Latimer burnt at Oxford.
About the same time were burned at Oxford, Nicholas Ridley and Hugh Latimer,
both Bishops; when the Faggot was brought, kindled, and laid at Nicholas
Ridley's feet* Latimer spoke to him in this manner, Be of good comfort, we
shall this day light such a Candle, by Gods Grace, in England, as I trust shall
never be put out.

Three burnt at Canterbury.
About the thirtieth of the Month called November 1555. John Web, George Roper
and Gregory Porke were all burnt together in one Fire at Canterbury, abiding
most patiently the torment, counting themselves happy and blessed of the Lord,
that they were made worthy to suffer for Christ's Gospel sake.

William Wiseman a Clothworker of London, the thirtieth of December following
died a Prisoner for the Gospel in Lollards Tower; after he was departed, the
Papists commanded that no man should bury him, but he was cast out into the
fields, accounting him as a profane person, and worthy of no burial, yet some
faithful Brethren buried him in the evening, as they did the rest thrown out in
like sort, whom they were wont privily by night to bury.

In the same Month James Gore died Prisoner in Colchester for the Truth of Gods
Word.

John Philpot Martyr.
The next follows the Martyrdom of John Philpot, who suffered for the sake of
the Gospel of Christ, and a Witness against the Antichristian Sea of Rome: He
was a Knights son, and was born in Hampshire, and was brought up in learning;
he was of a pregnant wit, of singular courage, and zealous in Religion. When
Queen Mary came to the Crown, she caused a Convocation to be held, where this
John Philpot was present, where he vindicated the cause of the Gospel, manfully
against the adverse party, for the which cause he was called to account by
Bishop Gardner the Chancellor, notwithstanding the Liberty of the House
promised before; after Gardner had examined him, he sent him to Bonner and his
Commissinors, Q. Mary. An. 5515
with whom he had sundry conflicts, the most material passages in which
examinations I have here inserted.

Doctor Story looking on him, said, He was well fed.

Philpot, If I be fat, it is no marvel, since I have been staled up in Prison a
year and a half in a close corner.


Roper, We here say you are out of the Catholic Church, and have been a
disturber of the same; wherefore, if you will come into the same you shall be
received, and find favor.


Philpot, I am come before you, and I would know my Offense, and if I have done
nothing contrary to the Laws, I desire I may have the benefit of a Subject, and
be delivered out of my wrong imprisonment.


Story, Thou art an Heretic, and hold against the blessed Mass.


Philpot, What I spoke in the Convocation House, the Queen and Council gave
Liberty to every man of the House to utter his Conscience, and to speak his
mind freely of such matters in Religion as were propounded by the Prolocutor,
for which I ought not to be molested, nor compelled by you to answer for the
same.


Story, Thou shall go to the Lollards Tower, and there shall thou be handled
like a Heretic as thou art, and be Judged by the Bishop of London.


Philpot, I have been Examined and imprisoned by the Chancellor, mine Ordinary,
and by the Law I may have exceptionem fori, and its against all equity that I
should be twice vexed for one cause; and that by such as by the Law have
nothing to do with me.


Story, Thou shall be had to the Lollards Tower.


Philpot, Since you will needs show me this Extremity, I desire to see your
Commission that gives you Authority so to do.


Roper, Let him see the Commission.


Story, Shall we lit every vile person see our Commission?


Cholmly, Let him go from whence he came, and on Thursday he shall see our
Commission.


Story, No, let him lie in the mean while in the Lollards Tower; I will sweep
the Kings-Beach, and all the other Prisons of these Heretics; so that they
shall not have that resort as they have had to scatter their Heresies.


Philpot, You have power to transfer my Body from place to place at your
pleasure, but you have no power over my Soul, and I pass not whither you commit
me, for I cannot be worse entreated, then I am kept all day in a close Chamber.


Story, Marshall, Take him home with you again, and bring him on Thursday, and
then we shall rid your fingers of him, and afterward of your other Heretics.


Philpot, God has appointed a day shortly to come, in the which he will surely
Judge us with righteousness; howsoever you judge of us now.


After some further discourse with him, he was, with four others, had to the
Keepers House in Paster-noster-row, where the Arch Deacon of Londons Servant,
Q. Mary. An. 1555
in his Masters name, offered John Philpot a Bed for that night. To whom he
gave thanks, but said, it would be a grief to him to lie well one night, and
the next night worse; wherefore, said he, I will begin as I am like to
continue, and take such as my Fellows do; whereupon they were brought to the
Bishops Cole-house, unto which is joined a little blind house, with a pair of
Stocks, where they found one person sitting, with his hand and foot in.

At his fifth Examination, as he was going to the Cole-house, he met with
Bonner, who said to him, Philpot, If there be any pleasure I can show you in my
house, I pray you require it, and you shall have it.

Philpot, The pleasure that I require of you is to hasten my Judgment, which is
committed unto you, and to dispatch me forth of this miserable World, unto my
Eternal rest.


Note, for all this fair Speech, I could never attain hitherto this fortnight
space, neither Fire, nor Candle, nor good Lodging.

Another time, being sent for before Bonner, Bonner said, I charge, you to
answer to such Articles as my Chaplain and my Register have from me to object
against you.

Philpot, Omnia Judicia debet esse publica, All Judgment ought to be public;
therefore if you have any thing to charge me lawfully withal, let me be in
Judgment lawful and openly called, and I will answer, otherwise in Corners I
will not.


At which the Bishop was angry, and called him foolish Knave, and bid them, put
him in the Stocks.

Philpot, Indeed you handle me with others, like Fools, and we must be content
to be made Fools at your hands; Stocks and Violence is your Bishop like Alms:
so he was put in the Stocks alone, in the house separate from his Fellows, for
which he praised God that he thought him worthy to suffer any thing for his
Names sake.

Not long after, the Bishop coming to view the Cole-house, saying, he was never
there before, (and his coming then was for no good) for he thought the place
too good for John Philpot; and called for the Keeper, and caused him to put the
said John Philpot in another place, by himself, where the Keeper plucked off his
Gown, and searched him, and took away his Pen, and Ink, and Papers.

At another Examination the fourth of December, Chadsey said, You shall be
constrained to come to us at length whether you will or no.

Philpot said, Hold that Argument fast, for it is the best you have; for you
have nothing but violence.

Soon after Bonner pronounced the Sentence against him, and then delivered him
to the Sheriffs whose Officers had him to Newgate (in his way he said, Ah good
People, Blessed be God for this day.)

At Newgate he was cruelly handled by the Keeper, having Irons put on, because
he had not wherewithal to satisfy the unreasonable Goalers demand for Fees.

Upon the 17th day of December the Sheriff sent a Messenger to him, to bid him
make ready, for the next day he should suffer, and be burnt at a Stake.

He answered, I am ready, God grant me strength; so he went into his Chamber,
and poured out his Spirit unto the Lord God, giving him thanks that he of his
mercy had made him worthy to suffer for his Truth; and when he came into
Smithfield, he kneeled down, saying these words, I will pay my Vows in thee O
Smithfield; and so died a constant Martyr,

The death of the Persecuting Bishop of Winchester.
About this time died one of the great Persecutors, viz. Stephen Gardner,
Bishop of Winchester, at his House in Southwark, of whose death its memorable,
that the same day in which Ridley and Latimer suffered at Oxford, he would not
go to Dinner till four a Clock in the afternoon, though the old Duke of
Norfolk was come to Dine with him, the reason was, because he would first hear
of their being burnt; and as soon as word of that was brought him, he presently
said, now let us go to Dinner; where sitting down, and eating merrily, upon a
sudden he fell into such an Extremity, that he was fain to be taken from the
Table, and carried to his Bed, where he continued fifteen days without voiding
any thing, either by urine, or otherwise, which caused his Tongue to swell in
his Mouth, and so he died.

^556 Seven Martyrs burnt in Smithfield.
About the 27th of January were burned in Smithlfield, London, these seven
persons hereafter following, viz.

Thomas VVhittle. Bartelet Green. John Tudson. John Went. Thomas Brown.
Isabel Foster. Joane Warren, alias Lashford.
At which seven as they were burned together in one Fire, so were they likewise
upon one sort and form of Articles condemned in one day.

This Thomas VVhittle, one of these Sufferers, was the person that Jo. Philpot
found in the Stocks, when he was put into the Bishops Colehouse, Thomas Whittle
was sorely beaten, and heardly used by the Bishop, for two nights he lay on a
Table without Bed or Straw; the Bishop telling him, he should be fed with Bread
and Water; the Bishop sometimes giving him fair words, and sometimes threatening
him, and Doctor Harpsfield persuaded him very much to forsake his Opinions;
Thomas answered, he held nothing but the Truth; but he had made a Bill for
Thomas to subscribe, to this effect, that he should detest all Errors and
Heresy against the Sacrament of the Altar, and other Sacraments, and to
believe the Faith of the Catholic Church, and live accordingly.

Now after he had signed it, he was under great condemnation, as appears by
this Testimony under his hand, the Substance of which is as follows.

To the Bill I did indeed set my hand, being much desired, and counseled so to
do, and the Flesh being always desirous to have liberty, I considered not
thoroughly the inconveniences that might come thereupon; and respite I desired
to have had, but earnestly they desired me to subcribe: Now when I had so done
I had little joy thereof, for by and by my Mind and Conscience told me I had
done evil, by such a slighty means to shake of the sweet Cross of Christ; and
yet it was not my seeking, as God he knows, but altogether came of them, O
the crafty Subtilty of Satan in his Members, let every man that God shall
deliver into their hands, take good heed, and cleave fast to Christ, for they
will leave no corner of his Conscience unsought, but will attempt and guilefull
and subtle means to corrupt him, to fall both from God and his Truth.

The night after I had subscribed, I was sore grieved, and for sorrow of
Conscience could not sleep; for in the deliverance of my Body out of Bonds,
which I might have had, I could find no joy nor confort, but still was in my
Conscience tomented more and more, being assured by Gods Spirit, and his Word,
that I through evil counsel and advisement had done amiss, and with the
disquietness of my Mind, and other cruel handling, I was sick lying upon the
ground, when the Keeper came, and so I desired him to pray Doctor Harpsfield to
come to me, and so he did.

And when he came, and the Register with him; I told him, that I was not well
at ease, but especially, I told him, I was grieved very much in my Conscience
and Mind, because I had subscribed; and I said, that my Conscience had so
Accused me, through the just Judgment of God and his Word, that I had felt Hell
in my Conscience, and Satan ready to devour me, and therefore I pray you, said
I, let me have the Bill again, for I will not stand to it, so he gently
commanded it to be fetched, and gave it me, and suffered me to put out my name,
whereof I was right gl^d, when I had so done, although death should follow; and
hereby I had experience of Gods Providence and Mercy toward me, who tries his
People, and suffers them to fall, but not to be lost; for in the midst of
this Temptation and Trouble he gave me warning of my deed, and also delivered
me, his name be praised for evermore, Amen.

By me Thomas VVhittle.


Bartlet Green, born in the City of London, in the Parish of Ba^inghal, of the
age of twenty five years, Bartlet Green Martyr.
being examined by Bishop Bonner, with whom he had sundry Conferences, and
public Examinations, but in the end, Bonner seeing his stedfastness to the
faith of Christ to be such, as against the which neither their threatenings, nor
yet their flattering promises could prevail: After he he had condemned the
other six, he called for Bartlet Green, and pronounced the definitive sentence
against him, and so committed him to the Sheriffs of London, who sent him to
Newgate; and when he came to Prison, he was often exercised in prayer and godly
meditations and exercises, until the twenty eighth day of the month called
January, when he with his other above mentioned Brethren, went most che^rfully
unto the place of their Torments, at the stake repeating these Latin verses
following, Christ de us sine te spes est mihi nulla salutis
Te duce vera sequor, Q. Mary. An. 5515
te duce falsa nege,


In English, thus;

O Christ my God, sure hope of health besides thee have I none,
The Truth I love, and falsehood hate, by thee my Guide alone.
After these seven above rehearsed martyred together in Smithfield, shortly
after, in the same Month, being the one and thirtieth day of the Month called
January, Four Women, and one Man burnt at Canterbury.
four Women, and one Man were burnt for the Faith of the Gospel at Canterbury,
their names are as follows, viz.

John Lomas, a young man of the Parish of Tenterden. Anne Albright. Joan Catmer
of the Parish of Hyth. Agnes Snoth Widow, of Smarden Joan Sole Wife, of the
Parish of Horton.
The aforesaid five persons were burnt at two Stakes, and one Fire, ratifying
and confessing the true faith of Christ Jesus, and when the flame was about
their ears they sung for joy, whereat John Norton, called Knight, standing by,
wept bitterly to hear and see what was done. The Persecutors names.


The Judges and others Assistants which face upon these Martyrs, were, Richard
Faucet, John Warren, John Mills, Robert Collins, and John Baker the Notary.

Now we come to the time of Cranmers Execution, who the year before (as I have
mentioned) was condemned and degraded by Commission from the Pope, Cranmers
Martyrdom.
after which being by the subtylty of some, put in hope of life, out of
frailty, he subscribed to a Recantation which yet did him no good; for whether
it were that Cardinal Pool would no longer be kept from being Aron-Bishop
(which he would not be, as long as he lived) or that the Queen could not be
gotten to forget his being the chief Instrument of her Mothers divorce, his
Execution was resolved to be in the same place at Oxford, where Ridley, and
Latimer five Months before had suffered; before the Execution Doctor Cole
preached; who to make use of Cranmers recantation, told the People they should
do well to hearken to this learned man's Confession, who now at his death, and
with his death, would testify which was the true Religion, never thinking
Cranmer would have denied his former Recantation; but Cranmer being brought to
the Stake(contrary to expectation) acknowledged that throught frailty, he had
subscribed it, praying God heartily to forgive it, for that he had set his hand
contrary to the Truth that was in his heart; and now for a punishment that hand
which had done ^^should first suffer; and therewithal thrusting his Right hand
into the Fire, he there held it, till i^ first, then his whole Body was
consumed.

The next that suffered, were Agnes Potter, and Jone Trunchfield, in the County
of Suffolk, both Married Women, dwelling both in one Town, they were burnt in
Ipswich; when they had prepared themselves ready for the Fire, they exhorted
the people very earnestly to lay hold on the Word of God, and not upon man's
devices and inventions, despising the Ordinances and Inventions of the Romish
Antichrist, with all his Superstitions and rotten Religion.

After these two Women were burnt, three Men at one Fire in Salsbury, their
names,

John Spicer, Free-Mason. William Coberly, Tailor. John Maundrel, Husbandman.
The beginning of their Imprisonment was after this manner, going into a
Steeple-house, and seeing the Idolatry by the people performed, in following
the Idol in procession, exhorted the people to return to the living God,
speaking more particularly to one Robert Berksdale, head man of the Parish, but
he took no regard to their words; soon after the Priest came into his Pulpit,
who being about to read his Bedral, and prayer for the Souls in Purgatory, Jo.
Maundrel speaking with an Audible voice, said, that that was the Popes Pinfold,
after which words, by commandment of the Priest, they were had to the Stocks,
where they remained till their Worship was done, and then were had before a
Justice of Peace, and the next day were all three had to Salsbury, and
presented before Bishop Capon, and William Geoffry, the Chancellor of the
Diocese, by whom they were imprisoned, and often Examined of their Faith in
private, but seldom openly: in their Answer to the Articles charged against
them, they said, that the Popish Mass was abominable Idolatry, and injurious to
the Blood of Christ; and being asked, whether the Pope was supreme head of the
Church, they said, he usurped Authority; and said, Christ was the head of the
Church; and said, Christ's Blood purged away their Sins, and not the Popes
Purgatory; and being asked, whether Images were necessary in the Church, John
Mundrell said, Wooden Images were good to roast a shoulder of Mutten, but evil
in the Church, whereby Idolatry was committed; when the Articles were answered,
the Chancellor read their Condemnation, and so delivered them to the Sheriff,
to whom John Spicer said, now you must be their Butcher, that you may be guilty
also with them of Innocent Blood before the Lord. The 24th day of the Month
called March they were had to the place of Execution, where they kneeled down
and prayed secretly, and then being disclothed to their Shirts, John Mundrell
spoke with a Loud voice, Not for all Salsbury, which words men judged to be an
answer to the Sheriff, who offered him the Queens Pardon, if he would recant;
and after this, in like manner spoke John Spicer, This is the joyfullest day
that ever I saw. Thus did they most constantly give their Bodies to the Fire,
and their Souls to the Lord for a Testimony to his Truth.

Six persons burnt in Smithfield.
About the 23th day of the Month called April 1556 were burned in Smithfield
at one Fire these six persons, viz. Robert Drakes, William Tymis, Richard
Spurge, Thomas Spurge, John Cavel, Q. Mary, An. 1556
and George Ambross, they were all of Essex, and so of the Diocese of London,
they were sent up at sundry times by Lord Rich, and others, and by Gardner
Bishop of Winchester, then Lord Chancellor of England, committed some to the
Marshal-sea, and some to the King's Bench, where they remained almost the whole
year before they were brought to Examination: Some Passages in their
Examination, are as follows.

After six or seven hours discourse between the Bishop of London and Bath with
William Tymis, they were weary, and began to pity Tymis's case, and to slater
him, saying, Ah, good Fellow, thou art bold, and thou have a good fresh Spirit,
we would thou hadest learning to thy Spirit.

I thank you, said he, and both you be learned, and I would you had a good
Spirit to your learning.

The Bishop seeing Tymis his hoase part white, and part of a sheeps russet, in
a mocking manner said, Ah, Sirrah, are you a Deacon?

Yea, that I am, said he.

So me thinks, said the Bishop, you are decked like a Deacon.

Said Tymis, Methinks my Vesture does not so much vary from a Deacon, but your
Apparel does as much vary from an Apostle.

And one of the Bishops men said, Scoffingly, my Lord give him a Chair, a Tossed
and Drink, and he will be Lusty.

But the Bishop said, Have him away till another time.

The 28th day of March, the aforesaid six Martyrs were brought to the open
Consistory in Paul's, before Bishop Bonner, to be condemned for Heresy.

Bishop said, Tymis, I Will begin with thee, for thou art, and have been the
Ringleader of these thy Companions, thou have taught them Heresies, and
Confirmed them in their Err^ous Opinions, endeavoring to make them like thy
self.

Tymis said, I Marvel, you will begin with a Lie, you call me the Ringleader
and Teacher of this Company. There is none of all these my Brethren, which are
brought hither as Prisoners, but when they were at liberty, and out of Prison,
dissented from you and your doings as much as they do now, and for that cause
they are now Prisoners, so that they learned not their Religion in Prison; and
as for me, I never knew them till I was committed Prisoner with them; and as
for my fault which you make so grievous, whatsoever you judge of me, I am well
assured that I hold no other Religion then Christ Preached, the Apostles
Witnessed, the Primitive Church received, and now of late has been faithfully
taught by Evangelical Preachers, for which you have cruelly burned them, and
now you seek our Blood also, proceed on hardly by what rule you will, I fear
not.

Then the Bishop proceeded to pass the Sentence upon him, and then upon the
rest, and after he had condemned them he ridded his bloody hands of them,
delivering them to the Sheriffs of London, who sent them to Newgate, where they
remained till the 14th day of the Month called April, and then sealed their
Faith with their Blood.

The Substance of a Letter of William Tymis to his Friends in Hookly.
The Grace of God the Father through the Merrits of his dear Son Jesus our Lord
and only Savior, with the continual aid of his holy and mighty Spirit to the
performance of his will, to our Everlasting comfort be with you, my dear
Brethren, both now and evermore, Amen.

My dearly beloved, I beseech God to reward the great goodness that you have
showed unto me, seven fold into your Bosoms; and as you have always had a most
godly love unto his Word, even so I beseech him to give you grace to love your
own Souls, and then I trust that you will flee from all those things that
should displease our good and merciful God, and hate and abhor all the Company
of these that would have you to Worship God any otherwise then is contained in
his holy Word; and beware of those Masters of Idolatry, that is, these
Papistical Priests. My dear Brethren, for the tender mercy of God, remember
well what I have said unto you, and also written, the which I am now ready to
seal with my Blood; I praise God that ever I lived to see the day; and blessed
be my good and merciful God that ever he gave me a body to glorify his Name.
And dear hearts, I do now write unto you for none other cause, but to put you
in rememberance that I have not forgot you, to the end, that I would not have
you forget me, but to remember well what I have simply by word of Mouth, and
Writing taught you, the which, although it were most simply done; yet truly,
as your own Conscience bears me record; and therefore, in any case, take good
heed, that you do not that thing which your own Conscience does condemn;
therefore come out of Sodom, and go to Heavenward with the Servants and
Martyrs of God, least you be partakers of the Vengeance of God, that is coming
upon this Wicked Nation, from the which the Lord God defend you, etc. Thus now,
I take my leave of you forever in this World, except I be burned amongst you,
which thing is uncertain unto me as yet.

By me your poorest, and most unworthy Brother in Christ William Tymis;
in Newgate; the 12th day of April, condemned to die for Christ's Truth.

Joan Beech of Tumbridge, and John Harpool of Rochester, were both condemned
for the Truth of the Gospel by Morris, Bishop of Rochester, and were Sufferers
together at one Fire in Rochester the first day of the Month called April 1556.

The next day after suffered in the like Cause at Cambridge one John Hullier.

Some Sentences taken out of a Letter, written by the said John Hullier, are as
follows
John Hullier being of long time Prisoner, and now openly judged for the
Testimony of the Lord Jesus, wishes heartily to the whole Congregation of God
the strength of his holy Spirit to their Everlasting health both for Body and
Soul.

I now (most dear Christians) having the Sweet Comfort of Gods saving health,
and being confirmed with his free Spirit (be he only praised therefore) am
constrained in my Conscience, thinking it my very Duty to admonish you, as ye
tender the Salvation of your Souls, by all manner of means, to separate your
selves from the Company of the Popes Hirelings, considering what is said in the
Revelation of St. John by the Angel of God touching all men, the words be
these; If any man Worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his Mark in his
forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink the Wine of the Wrath of God,
which is poured into the Cup of his wrath, and he shall be punished with Fire
and Brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb; and the Smoke of
their Torment ascends up evermore.

Come out from among them and join not your selves to their unlawful
Assemblies; yea, do not once show your selves with the least part of your Body
to favor their Wicked doings, but glorify God (as most right is) so well in
your whole Body outwardly, as inwardly in your Spirit, or else you can do
neither of both well; for your Body does belong to God as well asyour Spirit;
at the Dreadful Day of judgment we shall all receive the Works of our Bodies
according to that we have done, whether it be good or bad.

Therefore whatsoever we do we may not bring the Spirit in bondage to the Body,
but contrary wise we may subdue the Body, and the will of the Flesh to the
Spirit, that the Spirit may freely accomplish the will of God in all things;
for otherwise we shall never be Partakers of his Promise, with the true
Children of Abraham, for, as Paul says, they which are the Children of the
Flesh, are not the Children of God; if we live according to the Flesh, we shall
die; for to be carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually minded is Life
and Peace, because that the fleshly mind is Emnity to God, for it is not
obedient to the Law of God, neither can be so, then they that are in the Flesh
cannot please God.

Now choose you which way you will, take either the narrow Way that leads to
Life, which Christ himself, and his faithful Followers, have gone through
before; or else the broad Pathway which leads to Destruction, which the
Wicked Worldlings take their pleasure in, for a while; I for my part have now
written this short Admonition unto you of good will (as God be my Witness) to
exhort you to that Way which at length you your selvos shall prove and find to
be best, yea, and rejoice thereof: And I do not only write this, but I will
also (with the assistance of Gods Grace) ratify, confirm and s^al the same
with the effusion of my Blood, when the full time shall be expired that he has
appointed, which (so far forth as I may judge) must needs be within these few
days: Therefore, I now bid you all most heartily farewell in the Lord, whose
Grace be with your Spirit; Amen; Watch and Pray, Watch and Pray, Pray Pray, so
be it.

John Hullier.


On the 24th day of April (so called) there were six men burnt at one fire in
Colchester, Six men burnt at Colchester.
where the most part of them did inhabit, there names were,

Christopher Laster, of Dingham, Husbandman. John Mace, of Colchester,
Apothecary. John Spencer, Weaver, of Colchester. Simon Join, Sawyer. Richard
Nicholes, of Colchester, Weaver. John Hammond, of Colchester, Tanner.
Being had to the Bishops House at Fulham, several Articles were objected
against them concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, and other things the same
in effect that were propounded to others that suffered before them; to the
which they made there several Answers, agreeing altogether there in one Truth,
and standing most firmly unto their Christian-profession, though they were by
diverse ways and means tried and proved, whether they would revoke their Faith,
and return to Anti-christs-Church; which thing, when they refused, the Bishop
stoutly pronounced the Sentence of condemnation against them, committing them
unto the temperal power, who receiving the writ De Hereticis Comburandis, the
28th day of the Mon. called April, as aforesaid, they cheefully ended their
lives to the glory of God, and the great encouragment of others.

The next that suffered were Hugh Laverock of Barking, Hugh Laverock and Jo.
Apprice Martyrs.
a Lame man, and John Apprice a Blind man. They were Accused of some of their
Neighbors to the Bishop, and others; and being sent for by an Officer were
brought to the Bishops House, where he Examined them upon his nine
Common-Articles, to the which they having answered, were sent to Prison till
further Examined, which was about nine days after in the Consistory at Paul's,
where he urged them to recant their Opinions against the Sacrament of the
Altar; Hugh Laverock said, I will stand to mine answers, and I cannot find in
the Scriptures, that the Priests should lift up over their heads a Cake of
Bread. John Apprice said, your Doctrine you teach is so agreeable with the
World, and embraced by them, that it cannot be agreeable with the Scriptures of
God.

The Bishop soon after pronounced the Sentence against them, and delivered them
to the Temperal Officer, and on the 15th day of the aforesaid Month, they were
carried in a Cart from Newgate to Stratford, where most quietly in the Fire,
they praised God, yielding up their Souls into his hands.

The next day after they were burnt, there suffered Death at the Fire in
Smithfield three Women, viz.

Katherine Hut, of Bocking, Widow. Joan Horns, of Billerica, Maid. Elizabeth
Thackvell, of Great-Bursted, Maid. Three Women burnt in Smithfield.

Bonner brought his usal form of Articles against them, to which when they had
answered, he past his Sentence upon them.

Katherine Hut, Widow, at her last Examination told the Bishop, she denied
their Sacrament to be God, because, said she, it is a dumb God; and made with
men's hands.

Joan Horns said, That Way you call Heresy, I trust to serve the Lord my God
in.

At the same time there was one Margaret Ellis, who for the same Truth was
brought in Question, and was by Bonner adjudged and condemned, but before the
time of her burning came, she died in Newgate, whose Innocent suffering was
also thought meet to be recorded with the rest of her Faithful Friends.

A Relation of the burning of Thomas Drowry, a Blind Boy, and Thomas Croker
Bricklayer.
In Examination before Doctor Williams, Chancellor of the Consistory Court at
Gloucester, amongst other Articles, Thomas Drowry and Tho. Croker Martyrs.
he chiefly urged the Articles of Transubstantiation saying,

Chancellor, Do not thou believe, that after the Words of Consecreation
spoken by the Priest, there remains the very real Body of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar?


To whom the Blind Boy answered, No, that I do not.

Chancellor, Then thou art an Heretic, and shall be burnt, but who has taught
thee this Heresy?


Boy, You.


Chancellor, Where I pray thee?


Boy, Even in yonder place, pointing toward the Pulpit,(the Court being held
near it.)


Chancellor, When did I teach thee so?


Boy, When you Preached there upon the Sacrament, you said, the Sacrament was
to be received Spiritually, by Faith, and not carnally, as the Papists have
heretofore taught.

Chancellor, Then do as I have done, and thou shall live as I do, and escape
burning.


Boy, Though you can so easily dispense with your self, and Mock with God, the
World and your Conscience, yet, I will not so do.


Chancellor, Then God have Mercy upon thee, for I will read the Sentance
against thee.


Boy, Gods will be fulfilled: And soon after he and Thomas Croker were both
burnt in Gloucester. Tho. Spicer, John Dunny, and Edmund Fools Martyrs.



About the Month call May Thomas Spicer of Winston, John Duny and Edmund
Poole, being brought to Examination before Duming Chancellor of Norwich, who
objected against them the common Articles, and after they had answered, because
they would not recant, he read the condemnation, and delivered them to the
Secular power, and about the 21th of the aforesaid Month they were all burnt
for their Testimony in one Fire in Beckless in the County of Suffolk.

In this Month William Slech Prisoner in the King's Bench, for the Confession
of the Truth there died.

On the sixth day of the Month called June there were four persons burnt at
Lewis, Sufferers in Sussex.
in Sussex, for the Profession of the Truth, viz. Thomas Harland of Woodmancet,
Carpenter, John Oswald of the same, Husbandman, Thomas Auington of Ardingly,
Turner, and Thomas Read. These four, after a long Imprisonment in the
King's Bench, Suffered at the aforesaid place; John Oswald denied to answer any
thing until his Accusers were brought face to face before him, and said, Fire
and Faggots could not make him afraid; but as many good men were gone before
him, he was ready to Suffer, and follow after.

In the same Month, and in the same Town of Lewis were burnt Thomas Wood and
Thomas Mills.

William Adheral, and John Clement, being Prisoners, died in the King's Bench
about the 24th day of the same Month.

The 26th day of the same Month a Young manservant to a Merchant was burnt by
the Papists at Liecester.

The 27th day of the same Month there suffered thirteen Persons at one Fire at
Stratford near Bow by London, cleaven Men, and two Women; the cleaven Men were
tied to three Stakes, and the two Women were loose in the midst without any
Stake. In the company of these thirteen were three more condemned to die, viz.
Thomas Freeman, William Stamard, William Adany.

The Names of the thirteen that were burnt, were as follows, Ralph Jackson,
Henry Adlington, Lion Cawch, Will. Halnoell, George Searles, John Ronth, John
Darisall, Henry Wye, Edmund Hurst, Lawrence Parnham, Thomas Bowyer, Ellis
Pepper, Agnes George.

After they were condemned the Dean of Paul's declared in his Sermon that they
held as many Opinions as there were persons, wherefore, they drew up a
Declaration of their Faith, to which they all signed; some particulars of which
were.

That the Sea of Rome was the Sea of Antichrist, the Congregation of the
Wicked, etc. Whereof the Pope is head, under the Devil.

Also, that the Mass was not only a profanation of the Lords Supper, but a
Blasphemous Idol:

That God was neither Spiritually nor Corporally in the Sacrament of the Altar,
and there remains no Substance in the same, but only the substance of Bread
and Water; for these Articles of our Belief (said they) we being condemned to
die, do willingly offer our corruptible Bodies to be dissolved in the Fire, all
with one Voice assenting and consenting thereunto.

When they were fixamined before the Bloody Bishop, and said, they would
believe all he or they could prove by Scripture, he said, he would not stand to
prove it with Heretics; but said, they were the holy Church, and you ought
(said he) to believe us, or else be cut off like withered Branches.

About this time Thomas Parres, Martin Hunt, and John Norrice died Prisoners in
the King's Bench, who were all buried in the backside of the Prison.

Three burnt at Edmundsbury.
The 30th of the Month called June there were three persons burnt in one Fire
at Edmundsbury in Suffolk, whose names were, Roger Bernard, Adam Foster, and
Robert Lawson.

When Roger Bernard came before Doctor Hopton, Bishop of Norwick upon
Examination, the Bishop asked him, Whether he had been with the Priest at Easter
to be shriven; and whether he had received the Sacrament of the Altar or no?

Bernard said, No, I have not been to confess to the Priest, but I have
confessed mysinsto Almighty God, and I trust he has forgiven me; wherefore, I
shall not need to go to the Priest, for such matters, who cannot help himself.


Bishop, Surely Bernard, thou must needs go and confess thy self unto him.


Bernard, That shall I not do, by the Grace of God, while I live.


Bishop, What a stout Boyly Heretic is this? How malipertly he answers.


Bernard, It does not grieve me (I thank God) to be called Heretic at your
hands, for so your Forefathers called the Prophets and Confessors of Christ,
long before this time.


After some other words past between them, the Bishop rose up sore displeased,
and Commanded the Jailer to take him away, and lay Irons enough on him, for,
said he, I will tame him ere he go from me.

The next day being brought before him again, Bishop asked him, if he remembered
himself, since the day before.

Bernard said, Yes, I remember my self very well, for I am the same man I was
yesterday, and I hope shall be all the days of my life concerning the matter
you talked with me of.


Then one of the Guard being by, undertook to Examine him, who had him to an
Inn, where many Priests were assembled together, who first began to flatter
Roger Bernard, and then seeing that would not do, they threatened him with
Whipping, Stocking, Burning, and such like.

Bernard tenderly replying, said, Friends, I am no better then my Master Christ
and the Prophets, which your Forefathers served after such sort, and I for his
Names sake am content to suffer the like at your hands, if God shall so permit,
trusting that he will strengthen me in the same according to his promise.

When they saw he would not relent, or yield, they said, behold, a right
Scholar of John Fortune, whom they had then in Prison; so they carried him
again to the Bishop, who immediately condemned him as an Heretic, and
delivered him to the secular power; he was a single man, a Labourer, dwelling
in Fransden in Suffolk, and was first apprehended for refusing to go the Church
(so called.)

A Relation of the Examination of John Fortune of Hintlesham Suffolk
Blacksmith, about in the 20th day of the Month called April, before' Doctor
Parker and the Bishop, written with his own hand.
This John Fortune was a man of a Zealous Spirit, and ready in the Scriptures,
in Christ's Cause Stout and Valiant, and no less patience in his wrongful
Suffering, then constant in his Doctrine.

The Examination is as follows.

First, Doctor Parker asked, How I believed in the Catholic Faith?

Fortune, I asked him which Faith he meant, whether the Faith that Stephen had,
or the Faith of them that put Stephen to death?


Parker being moved, said, What a naughty Fellow is this, you shall see anon he
will deny the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and said, How say thou by the
blessed Mass?

Fortune, And I stood still, and made no answer.


Then said one Foster, Why speak thou not, and make the Gentleman an answer?

Fortune, I said, Silence is a good answer to a foolish Question.


Parker, I am sure be will deny the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.


Fortune, I said, I knew none such.


Parker, You deny the order of the seven Sacraments; and why do thou not
believe in the Sacrament of the Altar?


Fortune, Because it is not written in Gods Book.


Foster, You shall be Whipped and Burnt for this.


Fortune, If you knew how these words do rejoice my heart, you would not have
spoken them.


Away with him, said he, for he is ten times worse then Samuel, and so he was
carried away to Prison again.

At the second Examination.

Bishop asked me, If I did not believe in the Catholic Church?

Fortune, I believe that Church whereof Christ is the head.


Bishop, Do thou not believe that the Pope is Supreme head of the Church?


Fortune, No, Christ is Head of the true Church.


Fortune, Then I asked him, whether the Pope were a Spirtual Man?


To which he said, Yea.

Fortune, I said, They are spightfull men, for in seventeen Months there were
three Popes one Poisoned another, for that presumptous seat of Anti-chhist.


Bishop, It is Malishiously spoken, for thou must obey the power, and not the
man; well, said he, What say you to the Ceremonies of the Church?


Fortune, All things that are not planted by my heavenly Father shall be
blucked up by the roots, says Christ.


Bishop, They are good and godly, and necessary to be used.


Fortune, Paul called them weak and beggarly.


At the third Examination.

Bishop, How believe thou in the Sacrament of the Altar? Do thou not
believe that after the Consecration there is the real substance of the Body of
Christ?


Fortune, That is the greatest Plague that ever came into England.


Bishop, Why so?


Fortune, If I were a Bishop, and you a poor man as I am, I would be ashamed to
ask such a Question; for a Bishop should be apt to teach and not to learn.


Bishop, Is it Idolatry to Worship the blessed Sacrament or no?


Fortune, God is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth.


At another Examination.

Bishop asked me, If I would stand to my Answers that I had made him before?


Fortune, Yea, for I have spoken nothing but the Truth: And after that he made
a great Circumstance upon the Sacrament.


Then I desired him to keep to the Text, and he read the Scripture which said,
I am the Bread which came down from Heaven; believe thou not this?

Fortune, Yea, truly.


Bishop, Why do thou deny the Sacrament?


Fortune, Because your Doctrine is false.


Bishop, How can that be false which is spoken in the Scripture?


Fortune, Christ said, I am the Bread, and you say, the Bread is he; therefore
your Doctrine is false.


Bishop, Do not thou believe the Bread is he?


Fortune, No.


Bishop, I will bring thee to it by the Scriptures.


Fortune, Hold that fast, for that is the best Argument you have yet.


Bishop, Thou shall be burnt like an Heretic.


Fortune, Who shall give Judgment upon me?


Bishop, I will judge a hundred such as thou art, and never be shreven for it.


Fortune, Is not there a Law for the Spirituality as well as for the
Temporality?


Clement Higham said, Yes, what meanest thou by that?


Fortune, When a man is perjured, by the Law he is cast over the Bar, and
sits no more in judgment; and the Bishop is a perjured man, and ought to sit
in Judgment of no man.


Bishop, How provest thou that?


Fortune, Because you took an Oath in King Henry's days to resist the Pope; so
both Spiritual and Temperal are perjured, that here can be no true Judgment.


Bishop, Think thou to escape Judgment by that, no, for my Chancellor shall
judge thee, he took no Oath, for he was then out of the Realm.


Clement Higham, It is time to Weed out such Fellows as you be indeed.


The Bishop commanded the Bailiff to take him away; thus much touching the
Examination of this man, but whether he died by Fire, or were otherwise
prevented by Death is not recorded, only his Sentence of Condemnation was drawn
up, and registered by the Register of Norwich; but most certain it is, he never
recanted.

John Careless Examined before Doctor Martin.
Martin asked him, Where he was born?

Careless said, John Careleses Examination.
At Coventry.

Martin said, How came thou hither?


Careless, By a Writ.


Martin, Thou art a hansom man, and its pity but thou should do well, and
play the Wise man's part.


Careless, I put you out of doubt, that I am most sure and certain of my
Salvation by Christ Jesus, so that my Soul is safe already, whatsoever pains my
Body suffer here for a little time.


After much more discourse between them about predestination.

Martin said, The Lord knows that I would gladly make some means to preserve
thy life, but thou speak so much of the Lord, the Lord; How say thou,
will thou be content to go into Ireland, and serve the Queen there?


Careless, I am ready to do service to the Queen, or her Officers, but if they
require me to do any thing contrary to Christ's Religion I am ready also to do
my service in Smithfield for not observing it, as other my Brethren have done.


He endured Imprisonment two whole years in Coventry, and the King's Bench,
where at last he died, and was buried in a Dunghill in the Fields.

Sentences taken out of a Letter written by John Careless, in the time of his
Suffering, and Imprisonment
To my most dear and faithful Brethren in Newgate condemned to die for the
Testimony of Gods Everlasting Truth.

The Everlasting Peace of God in Christ Jesus, the continual Joy, Strength and
Comfort of his most pure, Holy and Mighty Spirit, with the increase of Faith,
and lively feeling of his Eternal Mercy be with you my most dear and faithful
loving Brother Tyms, with all the rest of my dear hearts in the Lord you
faithful fellow Soldiers, and most constant Companions in bonds, yea of men
Condemned most cruelly for the sincere Testimony of Gods Everlasting Truth, to
the full finishing of that good work which he has so graciously begun in you
all that the same may be to his glory the commodity of his poor afflicted
Church, and to your Everlasting comfort in him, Amen.

Ah, my most sweet and loving Brethren, and dearest hearts in the Lord, what
shall I say, or how shall I write unto you in the lest point or part to utter
the great joy that my poor heart has conceived in God, through the most godly
Example of your Christian-constancy, and sincere Confession of Christ's Truth;
truly my Tongue cannot declare nor my Pen express the abundance of Spiritual
mirth and gladness that my mind and inward man has felt, ever since I heard of
your hearty ^oldness and modest behavior before the Bloody Butcher, in the
time of all your crafty Examinations, especially at your cruel Condemnation in
their cursed Consistory place; blessed be God the Father of all Mercy, and
Praised be his Name, who has not only given you continual Aid, Strength and
Comfort of his holy and mighty Spirit to the faithful Confession of Christ, for
whose Cause (Oh, most happy man) ye are condemned to die, but has also given
you such a Mouth and Wisdom, as all your Wicked Enemies were not able to
resist; my dear Brethren, this is an evident proof that God is on our side.

Therefore, my dearly Beloved, Cease not so long as ye be in this life to
praise the Lord, for that of his great mercy and infinite goodness he has
counted you Worthy of this great dignity, to suffer for his sake, not only the
loss of Goods, Wife and Children, long Imprisonment, Cruel Oppression etc. But
also the deprivation of this mortal life, with the dissoluation of your Bodies
in the fire.

Ah, my most dear Brother Tyms, whose time rests altogether in the hands of
the Lord, in a full happy time came thou into this Troublesome World; but in
a much more blessed hour shall thou depart out of the same, so that the sweet
saying of Soloman, or rather of the holy Ghost, shall be full well verified
upon thee, yea, and on all thy faithful Fellows, better is the day of Death,
says he, then the day of Birth: This saying cannot be verified upon every man,
but upon thee, my dear Brother, and such as thou art, whose Death is most
precious before God, and full dear shall your Blood be in his sight; blessed be
God for thee, my dear Brother, that ever I knew thee; for in a most happy time
came I first into thy Company; pray for me, dear Brother, pray for me, that God
will once vouch me Worthy of that great dignity whereunto he has now brought
you.

Ah, all my faithful Brethren, what shall I say, or what shall I write unto
you, but the same that Elizabeth said to Mary, Happy art thou which have
believed, Luke 2.
for all things which the Lord has spoken to thee shall be fulfilled; so I say
to you, my dear hearts in the Lord, happy are ye all, yea, twice happy shall
you be for evermore, because you have steadfastly believed the most sweet
Promises which God the Father has made unto you, with his own Mouth, in that
he has Promised you (which are the faithful Seed of the believing Abraham)
that ye shall be blessed ever World without end; and as you do believe, so do
you bear record that God is true, the Testimony whereof you have full worthily
born to the World, and shortly will full surely seal the same with your Blood,
yea, even to Morrow, I do understand.

Oh Constant-Christians! Oh Valliant Soldiers of the high Captain Jesus
Christ, who for your sake has conquered the Devil Death, Sin and Hell, and
has given you full Victory over them for evermore. Oh Worthy Witnesses, and
most glorious Martyrs, whose invincible Faith has overcome that Proud,
Sturdy-Bragging Prince of the World, and all his Wicked Army, over whom you
shall shortly triumph for evermore.

Thus committing you all to Gods most merciful Defense, whose Quarrel you have
defended, whose Cause you have promoted, whose glory you have set forth, and
whose Name you have constantly confessed; farewell my dear Hearts in the Lord, I
will make as much haste after you as I may. Rev. 11.
All our dear Brethren Salute you, they pray for you, and praise God for you
continually; Blessed be the Dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their
Labors and their Works follow them.

John Careless.


About the same time that John Careless died, Julius Palmer, John Gwin and
Thomas Askin were burnt together in Newberry, in the County of Berks.

Julius Palmer, Julius Palmer Martyr.
was born in Coventry, his Father had been Mayor of Coventry, who bred Julius a
Scholar. This Julius was a man of a prompt and ready memory, a wit sharp and
pregnant, he was of behavior courteous, without curiosity, of countenance
cheerful, without high looks, of Speech pleasant, he was affable and lo^ as a
Child, and yet quick Spirited, and vehement in reasoning, he practi^ed no
deceit toward any man, for he was of such simplicity, that he was apter to be
deceived then to deceive: In King Edward's time, he was a Papist, and an utter
Enemy to the Protestant Religion then appearing, for which he was expelled the
House or College he belonged to; but in Queen Maryes reign was again restored
to the said House, but seeing the Constancy of the Martyrs that Suffered in
Queen Maryes reign, and hearing a Relation of the cruelty inflicted on some of
them, he cried out, O raging Cruelty, O Tyranny, and more then Barbarous, and
set himself to search into the Religion of the Protestants that suffered, and
soon after was so far converted from Popery, that he could not bow to several
Popish Ceremonies, so that he was constrained in a short space to yield up his
Fellowship in Oxford, and betook himself to teach School at Reading, where he
had not continued long, but some envious p^^^^us against the Tr^th sought
Occasion aganst him, and finding an opper^^^^ty, searched his Closet, where
they found some Books and Writings, written by him against the Popish
Proceedings, and espec^lly against their brutish Tyranny executed against the
Martyrs; whereupon they threatened him, that except he did without delay depart
their Coasts, they would produce the Books before the Council; whereupon he was
forced to depart from the Town of Reading, leaving in the hands of his Enemies
what he had there, and took his Journey to Evisham, where his Mother dwelt,
hoping to get what his Father left him when he died; his Mother understanding
his Condition, as soon as she saw him, and had a short discourse with him, said
to him, I require thee to depart from my House, and out of my sight; as for
Money and Goods I have none of thine, thy Father bequeathed naught for
Heretics, Faggots I have to burn thee, more thou gets not at my hand; so with
a soft answer and a few sweet words to her, the tears running down his cheeks,
he departed from her, which so mollified her hard heart, that she threw an old
Angel after him, and said, take that to keep thee a true man. This poor man
being destitute of worldly Friendship, and cast off by her whom he took to be
his surest Friend, knew not which way to go, at last he concluded to go to
Oxford to some Friends there, where a School was proposed to him in
Gloucestershire, which he accepted, and as he was traveling it came into his
mind that there was a quarters stipend due to him at Reading for teaching
School, and to look after his other things he had there, he resolved to go to
Reading; where though he used what endeavors he could to be retired and
private, he was by the treachery of some Hypocrites discovered and apprehended,
being taken out of his Bed by Officers, to whom he opened not his Lips, but was
led away as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and was committed to Prison, where the
Keeper like a Ravening Woolfe greedy of his prey, put him into a blind stinking
and dark Dungeon, and there left him for a time hanging by the hands and feet
in a pair of Stocks; in this Dungeon he remained about ten days, under the
Tyranny of this unmercifull Keeper.

After this he was brought before the Mayor, where he was Accused (by those
that had Pilledged his Study, of diverse grieous Crimes) but when he came to his
Answer he did so deface their Evidence, and defend his own Innocence, that the
Mayor was ashamed that he had given so much credit to them, and sought how they
might convey him privily out of the Country; when these Bloody Adversaries saw
this Stratagem would not serve their turns, they found another Snare, which was
to Accuse Palmer of Heresy, and he was again called out of Prison before the
Mayor and Justices, to render an Account of his Faith before them, and when
they had intrapt'd him, they caused him, and a Bill of Instruction with him to
be sent to Newberry to be Examined by Doctor Jeffery at the Visitation at
Newberry, the 16th of the Month called July 1556. In the mean time he Suffered
some hardships in Reading Goal, for want of Money to supply his Occasion.

The public Examination of Julius Palmer at Newbery before Doctor Jefferies,
Bishop of Sarum, and others.
Bishop called Palmer, and said, Art thou the jolly Writer of three half penny
books we hear of?

Palmer, I know not what you mean.


Bishop, Have you taught Latin so long, that now you understand not English.


To this he answered Nothing.

Bishop, We understand by your Articles that you are convict of certain
Heresies; that you deny the Popes Holiness Supremacy; that the Priest shows
up an Idol at Mass, and that there is no Purgatory, etc.


Bishop asked him, Whether he wrote some Books, and he showed him the Books.

Palmer answered, yea, he did.

Bishop threatened him, that he would make him recant, and would wring peccavi
out of his lying Lips ere he had done with him.


Palmer, I know, that though of my self I am able to do nothing, yet if you and
all mine Enemies should do your worst, you shall not be able to bring that to
pass, neither shall you prevail against Gods mighty Spirit, by which we
understand the Truth, and speak it so boldly.


Bishop, Ah, are you full of the Spirit, are you inspired with the holy Ghost?


Palmer, No man can believe but by the inspiration of the holy Ghost; therefore
if I were not a spiritual man, and inspired with Gods holy Spirit, I were not a
true Christian; he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his.


Bishop, I perceive you lack no words.


Palmer, Christ has promised not only to give us store of words necessary, but
with them such force of matter as the Gates of Hell shall not be able to
confound or prevail against it.


Bishop, Christ made such a promise to his Apostles; you will not compare with
them?


Palmer, With the Apostles I may not compare, yet this promise I am certain
pertains to all such as are appointed to defend Gods Truth against his
Enemies in the time of their Persecution for the same.


Bishop, Then it pertains not unto thee.


Palmer, Yes, I am right well assured that it pertains unto me, as it shall
appear if you give me leave to dispute with you before this Audience, in the
defense of all that I have there Written.


Bishop, Thou art but a beardless Boy, start up yesterday out of the Schools,
and dare thou presume to offer Disputation, or to encounter with a Doctor?


Palmer, Remember M. Doctor, the Spirit breaths where it pleases, etc. and
out of the Mouths of Babes, etc. And thou have hidden these things from the
wise, etc. God is not tied to time, wit, learning, place nor person.


The Register said if you suffer him thus impudently to trifle with you he will
never have done.

Then the Bishop said, It was not in his Commission to dispute with him, but
had a great deal more discourse with him, and after he had done examining of
him, the high Sheriff after Dinner sent for Julius Palmer to speak with him,
and exhorted him to revoak his Opinion, to spare his young years wit and
learning, and told him that if he would be conformable he would give him his
meat and ten pound a year, etc.

Palmer thankt him, and said, that as he had already in two places renounced
his living for Christ's sake, so he would, with Gods Grace, be ready to
surrender and yield up his life also for the same, when God should send time.

Then one Winchcom upon the Bench said, Take pity on thy golden Years and
pleasant Flowers of lusty Youth, before it be too late.

Palmer, I long for those springing Flowers that shall never fade away.

Winchcom, If thou be at that point. I have done with thee.

Then was Palmer had to the Blind-house, and in the afternoon John Gwin and
Thomas Askin had the sentence of Condemnation, and were delivered to the
Sheriff, and the next morning Palmer was condemned, and the same afternoon they
were all three burnt; About an hour before they were executed Palmer comforted
his Fellow Sufferers with these words, Happy are you when me^ revile you and
persecute you for righteousness sake, rejoice and be glad for great is your
reward in Heaven; fear not them, that kill the Body, and be not able to touch
the Soul, God (...) Faithful and will not suffer us to be tempted further then
we shall be able to bear it; and being brought to the Stake, and the Fire
kindled, they cried, Lord Jesus strengthen us, Lord Jesus assist us, Lord Jesus
recei^e our Souls, until they ended their lives.

A Remarkable Providence, whereby Agnes Wardall was preserved from her Violent
Persecutors, in the Town of Ipwich.
This Agnes Wardal was a Woman that lived in Gods fear, and was at defiance
with their Romish Trash, Agnes Wardals Sufferings.
desiring rather with hard Fair and ill Lodging to be abroad, then to be at
home in her House among the Tents of the ungodly, her Husband also being a man
living in the fear of God, and for the Testimony of his Conscience being also
hunted by force of the Law, was constrained to leave his House and to go to Sea
for a livelihood, an employment he was unaccustomed to; Agnes Wardal coming
home one day to see her Children (which she had left wholely to the care of the
Maidservant to look after) one Doctor Argentine, a great Persecutor having
notice of her coming home, stirred up the Constable and Watch to apprehend her,
who in the night beset the House, and knocking at the door the the Maid heard
them, and aw^ked her Mistress, who immediately got up, and creeping through a
ditch full of Nettles she got into a Parlour wherein stood a Cupbord with a
fair Press, Q. Mary. An. 1556.
into the which the Maid locked her, and then going into a Chamber next the
Street, spoke to the Watch, who threatened to break the door down, if she did
not open it, with that she opened the door, and the Watch searched the House
very narrowly and came into the Room where Agnes was in the Press, and one of
them said, here is a fair Cupbord, and laid his hand on it; she may be here for
any thing that is done, that is true, said another; yet they looked no further,
but went into another Room, and when they had searched the House, they went into
the Fields, at the backside of the House, and in the mean time the poor Woman
was almost smothered in the Press, but at last by a Neighbor (with much ado)
for being a stranger she could not in a long time unlock the Press, was let
out, and being let out she got through the Garden Pales into the Fields, and
there hid her self in the Ditch, whereby she escaped these envious Persecutors
who sought in their cruelty to have Ruined her.

Thomas Moore, The Examination and Martyrdom of Tho. More.
a Husbandman, and a Servant in the Town of Leicester for saying that his Maker
was in Heaven, and (...) in the Pix, was apprehended; the person that examined
him, po^ting to the high Altar, asked him, whether he did not believe his Maker
to be there?

Thomas Moor said, No.

Bishop, What is that thou see above the Altar?


Thomas Moor, I cannot tell what you would have me to see, I see there fine
Clothes with golden Tassels, and other gay gere hanging about the Pix, what is
within I cannot see.


Bishop, Do not thou believe Christ to be there, Flesh, Blood and Bone?


Thomas Moor, No, that I do not.


Whereupon he was immediately condemned to die, and was the twenty sixth day of
the Month called June burnt in the Town of Leicester.

The Examination of John Jackson before Doctor Cook.
When first I came before him, The Examination of Jo. Jakson.
he railed, and called me Heretic.

Jackson, I said, I am no Heretic.

Cook, M. Read told me, that thou wast the rankest Heretic of all them in the
King's Bench.


Jackson, I said I knew him not.


Cook, No, quoth he, yes, he examined thee at the King's Bench.


Jackson, He examined five other, but not me.


Cook, what say thou to the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.


Jackson, It is a diffuse question to ask me at the first Dash, you promising
to deliver me.


Cook, What a Heretic is this?


Jackson, It is easier to call a man a Heretic then to prove him one.


Cook, What Church art thou of?


Jackson, What Church, quoth I, I am of the same Church that is builded on the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the head
Cornerstone.


Cook, Thou art an Heretic.


Jackson, How can that be, seeing that I am of that Church? I am sure you will
not say that the Prophets and Apostles were Heretics.


Cook, No, but what say thou to the blessed Sacrament of the Altar?


Jackson, I find it not written.


Cook, No: Keeper, away with him.


But I had some further discourse with him, and then he called again to the
Keeper to have me to Prison.

Jackson, I am contented with that and so we parted, and I answered no further,
in this matter, because I thought he should not have my blood, in a Corner; but
I hope in the living God, that when the time shall come before the
Congregation, I shall shake their building in another manner of fashion; for
they build but upon Sand, and their Walls be daubed with untempered Mortar, and
therefore they cannot stand long: Therefore, good Brothers and Sisters, be of
good cheer, for I trust in my God, I and my other Prison-fellows shall go
joyfully before you, Praising God most heartily, that we are counted worthy to
be Witnesses of his Truth.


John Jackson.

The next that suffered was one Joan Wast a poor Blind Maid about twenty two
years of Age. Joan Wast Martyr.


This poor Woman had such an esteem of the Scriptures, that though she was
blind, and had little Money, she saved so much Money together as would buy her
a New Testament (which in those days was but scarce) and she would give Money
to some at their spare time to read to her, whereby she became perfect in the
Scripture, so that she retained several Chapters in her memory, and in King
Edwards time she was zealous for the Religion then established, and when he
died, she could not but continue constant in her Conscience, and refused to
back-slide with the Multitude to Popery, but retained her Zeal until she was
apprehended, and being Examined was Condemned, and was led from the place where
she was condemned to a place called the Windmill-pit, near to the Town of
Derby, and holding her Brother Roger Wast by the hand; she desired the People
to pray for her, and called upon Christ to have mercy upon her, and so with
patience suffered Martyrdom.

The Sufferings of William Dangerfield.
William Dangerfield of Wooton near Bristol, for fear of Persecution kept
abroad from his House and Family, and coming home to visit Wife and Children
his House was soon beset, and he apprehended and imprisoned, where under Bishop
Brook's his cruelty, he was so handled for some time, yea, so long till the
flesh was fretted off his Legs with Irons; and after he was apprehended, his
Wife likewise was taken with a young Child but fourteen days old, and was put
into the Common Goal amongst Thieves and Murderers, where she was kept without
any fire, but was forced to warm her Child's clothes in her own Bossom, in the
mean season while the Husband and Wife lay in two Prisons, the Bishop began to
practice, not with the Woman first, as the Serpent did with Eve, but with the
Man, craftily deceiving his simplicity with fair words, falsely persuading him
that his Wife had recanted, and when he perceived he was inclinable and
consented, he suffered him to go to his Wife in the Common Goal, where they
with melting hearts opened their minds one to another, and he told his Wife how
the Bishop with his subtle flatteries had circumvented him, at the hearing of
which the Woman's heart clave assunder; and she said, Alack, thus long have we
continued one, and has Satan so prevailed; but the sense of the Action
reflicted so much upon his Conscience that it brake the man's heart, so that in
a short time after he died, after he had endured twelve weeks imprisonment.

Sometime after his Wife was had in Examination before the Bishop, what her
Answers were at her Examination are not recorded, but she was kept in Prison
with her tender Infant till they both died; the Child was sent out of the
Prison, but it was past remedy, first being almost starved with cold and want
of things necessary, and the Man's Mother, a woman of eighty years of Age, being
left in the House after their apprehension, for lack of comfort, there perished
also.

About this time there were five persons famished in Canterbury Castle, by the
unmerciful Tyranny of the Papists, as by the Copy of this following Letter
which the Prisoners threw out of the Castle Window my appear.

The Letter.
Be it known to all men that shall read or hear read these our Letters that we
the poor Prisoners of the Castle of Canterbury, for Gods Truth are kept and lie
in cold Irons, and our Keepers will not suffer any meat to be brought to us to
comfort us; and if any do bring any Bread, Butter, Cheese, or other Food, the
Keeper will charge them to carry it back, or else keep it for himself, so that
we have nothing thereof; insomuch that there are four of us Prisoners for Gods
truth famished already, and thus is it his mind to famish us all, and we think
he is appointed thereunto of the Bishops and Priests, and Justices so to famish
us, and not only us of the said Castle, but also all other Prisoners in other
Prisons, for the like Cause, to be also famished; notwithstanding, we write not
these our Letters to that intent we might not aford to be famished for the Lord
Jesus sake, but for this cause and intent, that they having no Law so to famish
us in Prison, should not do it privily, but that the Murderers hearts should be
openly known to all the World, that all men may know of what Church they are,
and who is their Father.

Out of the Castle of Canterbury.

About this time there was a consultation held at Cambridge by the Clergy,
concerning Martin Bucer and Paulus Phagius, The digging up and burning Martin
Bucer, and Paulus Phagius's Bones.
two persons dead three or four year before; and after much debating they
agreed altogether in this determination, that they were Sectaries and famous
Heretics, and a supplication should be made to the Lords Commissioners in the
Name of the whole University, that their dead Carcases might forthwith be
dug up, for that it was against the rule of of holy Canons that their Bodies
should be buried in Christian burial.

And Cardinal Poole sent a Commission to make inquest upon Heresy; now after
the aforesaid Condemnation was past, and the said Commission was read from the
Cardinal, Doctor Pern desired process might be sent out for Bucer and Phagius
to appear, or any other that would take upon them to plead their Cause, to
which the Commissioners condecended, and the next day process went out to cite
the Offenders, which Citation was fixed up in several public places in
Cambridge, and soon after Witnesses were sworn and examined against Martin
Bucer and Phagius, and a time was set for a Jury to bring in their Verdict, and
in the mean time a Commandment was given forth by the Commissioners, for
bringing in all Heretical Books; and a day there was appointed, for Judgment to
be given against these Heretics; but when the day came, and that neither Bucer
nor Phagius would appear at their call in the Court, nor that any put forth
himself to defend them, yet the courteous Commissioners would not proceed to
Judgment (which for their contumacy in absenting themselves they might have
done) considering how that day was peremtory, but to show their mercy and
equity, had rather show some favor then to take the extent of the Law.

Whereupon, Vincent published the second Process; and stuck it up in public
places as before, putting off the day of Judgment from the eighteenth to the
twenty sixth day of the same Month, which day being come, the Mayor and
Burgesses were warned to be present when the Sentence was published, which was
done by Doctor Scot Bishop of Chester, in which Sentence he condemned Bucer and
Phagius of Heresy; after the Sentence, the Bishop commanded their Bodies to be
dug out of their Graves, and being degraded from holy Orders, delivered them
into the hands of the secular Power; then the Cardinal was advertised how far
they had proceeded, and he was desired that the Writ De Heretico Comburendo
might be sent to Smith Mayor of Cambridge, else the business could not be
finished; in the mean time while the Writ was coming, and order was made that
the Books before commanded to be searched for, should be thrown into the Fire
with them; the Writ being come, and the dead Bodies being taken up, they were
Guarded to the Market place, a great train of People following them, and there
Chained to a Post, Fire was set to them the Books were thrown in and burnt with
them; and thus ends this piece of Popish folly.

And because one University should not mock the other, the like piece of folly
was acted upon the dead Body of Peter Martyrs Wife at Oxford, and honest grave
and sober Woman while she lived, and of poor People always a great helper; she
died in the year 1552. The Cardinals Visitors coming to Oxford, among other
things had in Commission to take up this good Woman out of her Grave, and to
consume her Carcass with Fire.

Stephen Kemp, William Hay, William Walterer, William Prowting, William Lowick
and Thomas Hudson, were all burnt in Kent in the Month called January 1557.

Five Persons burnt in Smithfield.
The next that suffered were these five persons following, viz. Thomas Loseby,
Henry Ramsey, Thomas Thirtet, Margaret Hide and Agnes Stanley, who were
Examined upon the general Articles before Bonner's Chancellor, to which they
particularly answered, being thereunto required before Sentence, and to declare
whether they would recant, and what they had to say, why he should not
pronounce the Sentence of Condemnation.

Thomas Loseby, first answered, saying, God give me strength to stand against
you and your Sentence, and your Law, which is a devouring Law, for it devoureth
the Flock of Christ, and I perceive there is no way with me but Death, except I
would consent to your devouring Law, and believe in that Idol the Mass.

Thomas Thirtel said, If you make me an Heretic, then you make Christ and his
Apostles Heretics; for I am in the true Faith, and I will stand in it; for I
know full well I shall have Eternal life therefore.

Henry Ramsey said, Will you have me to go from the Truth that I am in?

Margaret Hide said, You have no cause to give Sentence against me, for I am in
the true Faith, and will never forsake it, and I do wish I were more stronger
in it; and the second time being called before the Bishop, she said, I will not
depart from my sayings till I be burned.

Agnes Stanley said, I had rather every hair of my head were burned, if it were
never so much worth, then that I should forsake my faith, which is the true
Faith.

After they had been twice called and Examined, they were condemned, and about
the 12th day of the Month called April were all burnt in one Fire in
Smithfield.

After these, in the Month called May, three others suffered in Georges-fields
in Southwark, viz. William Morrant, Stephen Gratwick, and one King.

This St. Gratwick in his Examination was very hardly and illegally deal with;
for first, he was condemned by the Bishops of Winchester and Rocester, to whose
Diocese he did not belong. Secondly, when he made his appeal from these
incompetent Judges to the Bishop of the Diocese he lived in, his appeal would
not be allowed; when they had no other shift to color their inordinate
proceedings withal; they procured a Priest to counterfeit himself to be Bishop
of Chester, and brought him to sit as Judge over him.

When he was before the Bishop of Winchester in Mary-Overs Steeple-house,
because the People cried out, God strengthen thee; the Bishop threatened,
saying, Now let me see him here, that dare open his Mouth to bid God strengthen
thee; he shall die the death that thou shall die.

Gratwick answered, I know your cruelty does extend more largly then your pity.
They further showed their injustice against him, in that they brought in
Articles against him, which were not grounded upon his own Examinations and
Confessions; and because he refused to answer to them, though they had no other
just matters against him, but only for saying these words, viz. That which I
have said, I have said; they proceeded to read the Sentence of Death against
him.

When he was asked whether he would recant, he said, My Faith is grounded more
steadfastly then to change in a moment, its no process of time can alter me,
unless my faith were as the Waves of the Sea: When the Sentence was read, the
Bishop delivered him into the hands of the Sheriff to be carried Prisoner to
the Marshalsea, whereupon the Prisoner with a loud voice, desired God, that he
would not lay his blood to their charge, if it were his will, and as he was
passing away, because he spoke to the People, his Persecutors cried out, Cut
his Tongue out, Stop his Mouth; and so he was had to to the Marshalsea, and put
in Irons, and shortly after was burnt in Georges-Fields, with one Morrant, and
one King, about the later end of the Month called May.

Seven persons burnt at Maidstone in Kent
By reason of a Proclamation published in the Month called February, the Storm
of Persecution grew rather greater in many places then before, but especally in
the Diocese of Canterbury whereupon the 18th day of the Month called June,
seven Persons were burnt at Maidstone, the Relation of whose Apprehension
Examination and Execution is not registed, excepting something concerning
Edmund Allen of Frytenden in Kent, Miller, who for reading the Scriptures, and
expounding upon them, was complained of by John Tailor, Parson of the Parish,
to the Justice, who sending for him, committed both him and his Wife to Prison,
but not long after they were set at liberty, and went over to Callice, where
his Conscience being troubled; after some time the Lord discovered to him that
he had work for him to do in England, and thereupon he and his Wife shortly
after returned home to Kent; Parson Tailor hearing of their return, although he
was in the midst of his Mass, when the News was brought him, he turned to the
people and commanded some with all speed to go and apprehend them, when his
Mass was over, he went and apprehended the said Allen, and had him before (one
called) Sr. John Baker a Justice, who sent him to Prison, and caused an
Inventory to be made of his Goods, and they took thirteen pounds in Money away
from him; when he was brought before Baker the Justice;

The Justice said, Who gave thee Authority to Preach?

Allen, Give me leave to answer, I am persuaded that God has given me this
Authority, as he has given to all other Christians? Why are we called
Christians, if we do not follow Christ, nor read his Laws? Is not Christ our
Father, shall not the Son follow the Fathers steps? Is not Christ our Master,
and shall the Scholar be hindered from Learning and Preaching his Precepts? Is
not Christ our Redeemer, and shall we not praise his Name, and serve him that
has Redeemed us from Sin and Damnation? did not Christ being but of twelve
years of Age dispute with the Doctors, and interpret the Prophet Isaiah,
although he was not of the Tribe of Levi, which were Priests, but of the Royal
Tribe of Judah, neither had taken any outward Priesthood? wherefore, if we be
Christians we must do the same.


One Collins standing by, said to the Justice, What a Knave is this that
compares himself with Christ?

Justice Baker, Let him alone, he will pump out an infinite heap of Heresies;
have thee any more to say for thy self?


Allen, Yea, that I have, Adam was Licensed of God, and Abraham was commanded
to teach his Children and Posterity, and David teaches in diverse Psalms, and
Soloman also preached to the People as the Book of the Preacher proves, where
he teaches, that there is no immortal felicity in this Life; and Noah taught
them that were disobedient in his days, and therefore is called the eighth
Preacher of Righteousness: Moses chose seventy Elders to help him to teach, and
Rule the People. Eldad and Medad preached in their Tents, wherefore, Josuah
being Offended, complained to Moses that Eldad and Medad did preach without
License, to whom Moses answered, I would all the People could do the like.


Justice Baker, Thou said thou did feed the People both Bodily and
Spiritually?


Allen, We are all Kings to rule our Affections; Priests to Preach out the
virtues of God; and lively Stones, to give light to others, for as out of
Flint-Stones comes forth that, that is able to set all the World on fire, so
out of Christians should spring the Beams of the Gospel, which should inflame
all the World; what avails it a man that has Meat, and will eat none, and
Apparel, and will ware none? Is not every Christian a Follower of Christ? And
does not Paul forbid quenching the Spirit? Does he prohibit any man that has
gifts, that they shall not exercise the same?


The Justice asked him, Why he refused to Worship the Sacrament of the Altar?

Allen, Because it is an Idol.


Baker, Away with him, and then was he carried to Prison, and shortly after
burnt at Maidstone.


The 30th day of the Month called June, there were four men and three Women
more burnt at Canterbury.

Alice Benden, one of the seven, being brought before one Roberts of Crambrook,
who asked her, Why she would not go to Church, because, Seven more burnt at
Canterbury,
said she, I cannot with a clear Conscience, there is so much Idolatry
committed there against the glory of God; for the which she was committed to
Prison, but her Husband being troubled at it, got a Certificate from some of
the chief men of Staplehurst to the Bishop of Dover desiring her liberty. When
she came before the Bishop, he asked her, If she would go home and go to Church?
she said, If I would have so done, I need not to come hither. Well, said the
Bishop, Go thy ways home, and go to Church when thou will; thereupon she was
set at Liberty; but shortly after she was again committed for the same cause,
and her Husband went again to desire her liberty, but the Bishop told him, She
was an obstinate Heretic, and therefore he could not deliver her; then her
Husband desired the Bishop, that he would keep her Brother from coming to her,
for, said he, he relieves her, and comforts her, and persuades her not to
recant; this request was no sooner made, but it was granted by the Bishop, who
commanded that she should be put into a place called Mundayes-Hole, being a
Vault under ground, and gave a strict charge that if her Brother came at her,
he should be apprehended, however he used what means he could to find where she
was, and to get at her; and one morning hearing her voice, as she was pouring
out her sorrowful complaints unto the Lord, he invented a way how he might
relieve her, which was by putting Money in a loaf of bread, and sticking the
same upon a pole, and so reaching it to her, and this was five weeks after her
coming thither, all which time no Creature was known to come at her, except her
Keeper; her Lodging in this Vault was only upon a little Straw, between a pair
of Stocks and a Stone-wall, being allowed three farthings a day, that is half
Penny Bread, and a Farthing Drink, neither could she get any more for her Money,
wherefore she desired to have her whole allowance in Bread, and used Water for
her drink, and thus she lay nine weeks without shifting her apparel all the
time; at her first committing to this place she much lamented her condition,
dolefully mourning that the Lord should so sequester her from her Friends; but
in the midst of her Supplications, she considered the Right hand of the most
high could change all, and received comfort therein; shortly after she was
called before the Bishop again, who asked her, Whether she would go home, and go
to Church, she replied, your extremity toward me has thoroughly satisfied me,
that you are not of God, who seeks my utter Destruction, showing him, how lame
she was with lying in the cold, and for lack of Food; then the Bishop sent her
from that filthy hole to Westgate Prison, and shortly after she was called
before the Bishop, and others, who condemned her, and committed her to the
Castle Prison, where she continued till the 19th day of the Month called June,
and then with six others aforementioned was burnt in Canterbury.

The Substance of the Examinations and Answers of Matthew Plaise Weaver of the
Parish of Stone, Examination of Matthew Plaise.
in the County of Kent, before Thomas Thornton Bishop of Dover, and others.

When he came before the Bishop, he asked him, where he dwelt, he answered, at
Stone in Kent.

Then said the Bishop, You are indicted by twelve men at Ashford at the
Sessions for Heresy.

Matthew, That Is sooner said then proved, and said, let me hear it, and I will
answer to it:


Then the Bishop said, He would not do so, but you shall answer to the Article
against you, yea or nay,

Matthew answered, he could not, for I was not at Ashford, said he, but I
perceive you go about to lay a Net for my Blood.


Archdeacon said, Peace, Peace, we do not desire thy Blood, and said, you are
suspected of Heresy, and therefore, we would have you confess what you believe
concerning these Articles; and the Bishop charged him again, in the King and
Queens Name, to answer yea, or nay, to the Articles.

Matthew, Then I commanded him in his Name that should come in Flaming Fire with
his mighty Angels to render Vengance to the Disobedient, and to all those that
believed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which should be punished with
Everlasting Damnation, that he should speak nothing but the Truth, Grounded
upon Christ and his Apostles, and then I would answer him, or else not.


Then the Bishop was angry, and said, If you will not answer, I will condemn
you.

Matthew, Well, said I, if you do, you shall be guilty of my blood, and prove
your self a Murderer.


The Bishop further Examined him concerning the Catholic Church, and said,
Tell me whether is the King and Queen of that Church or not?

Matthew, Well said I, now I perceive you go about to be both mine Accuser and
Judge, contrary to all right, I confess Christ has a Church upon Earth, which
is built upon the Apostles and Prophets, Christ being the Head thereof; and as
touching the King and Queen, I answer, I have nothing to do with any man's Faith
but mine own.


Then said the Bishop, Is there no part of that Church here in England?

Matthew, Well, I perceive you would fain have something to lay to my charge, I
will tell you what Christ says, where two or three is gathered together in his
Name, there is he in the midst of them.


Then the Archdeacon stood up, and in a mocking manner said, You have no wit
to think that we have been deceived so long time, Q. Mary. An. 1557.
and that the Truth is only made known to half a dozen of you in a Corner, and
read the Article of the Sacrament, and said, you deny the real Presence to be
in the Sacrament after Consecration; much talk they had about this point, but
at last the Bishop was so angry, that he said, If you will not answer yea or
nay, I will condemn you.

Matthew said, I have answered, and if you condemn me, my life is not dear unto
me, and I am sure you shall not escape unpunished, for God will be revenged
upon such Murderers.


Then the Deacon entreated him to be ruled by him, and take Mercy while it was
Offered; for if you are condemned, you must be burnt: And whether he died in
Prison, or was burnt, no mention is made in the Register.

Ten persons burnt in Sussex.
On the 22th day of the Month called June, in the year 1557. Ten persons were
burnt for Religion in Lewis in Sussex, viz. Richard Woodman, George Stevens,
William Mainard, Alex. Hoseman's Servant, Tomazin Wood, Margery Morris, James
Morris her Son, Dennis Burgis, Ashdon's Wife, and Grove's Wife.

The Sufferings, and Principal Heads and Matter of the Examination of Richard
Woodman, being written by his own hand, which being large I could not avoid
abreviating them for the benefit of the Reader, as follows.
Woodman, Rich. Woodman apprehended the 15th day of the Month called March
1556.
Reader, hereby you shall see how the Scriptures are partly fulfilled on me,
being one of the least of his poor Lambs; first, you may understand, that since
I was delivered out of the Bishop of London's hands, which was the 18th day of
December 1555. which was the same day Philpot was burnt, I lay in his
Cole-house eight weeks lacking one day, and before that, I was almost a year
and a half in the King's Bench after my first apprehending for reproving a
Preacher in the Pulpit, in the Parish of Warbleton, where I dwelt for which I
was had to two Sessions before I was sent to Prison, and carried to two more
Sessions while I was in Prison; twice before the Bishop of Chichester, and five
times before the Commissioners, and then sent to the Bishop of Londons
Cole-house, and many times called before him, as it appears by my
Examinations, which the Bishop of Chichester now has, for they were found in
my House when I was taken, also several had Copies of the same of me, when I
was in the Cole-house.

And it pleased God to deliver me, with four more out of the Butchers hands,
requiring nothing else of us, but that we should be honest men, and Members of
the true Catholic Church, which we affirmed we were Members of, and purposed
by Gods help therein to die; hereupon we were delivered, and he wished us
several times to speak well of him, and no doubt he was worthy to be praised,
because he had been so faithful a helper in his Master the Devils business,
for he had burnt John Philpot the same morning, in whose blood his heart was so
drunk, that he could not tell what he did, as it appeared to us, Q. Mary. An.
1556.
both before and after; for but two days before he promised us, that we should
be condemned that same day we were delivered; and the next day after he had
delivered us, he sought earnestly to take some of us again, he waxed dry after
his great drunkenness; wherefore, he is like to have Blood to drink in Hell, as
he is worthy, if he repent not with speed; the Lord turn all their hearts if it
be his Will.

After I was delivered, the Papists said, I had consented unto them, rejoicing
thereat; the which I praised God, was not the least in my thoughts, but they
perceived the contrary in a little time; for I went from Parish to Parish, and
talked with them, to thirteen at least, and that of the chiefest in the County,
which so angered them, that the Commissioners complained against me to Sr. John
Gaye, Lord Chamberlain, who sent out four or five Warrant to apprehend me, but
having warning of their laying in wait for me, I kept out of their way, so that
the Bailiffs mist of their prey, and were much displeased; but three days
after the Lord Chamberlain sent three of his men to apprehend me, I being at
Plough with my Folks in the way coming to my House, not mistrusting them, came
to them, and spoke to them; they said, that they Arrested me in the King and
Queens Name, and that I must go with them, which sudden words made my Flesh to
Tremble and Quake; yet I answered them, that I would go with them, and desired
them to go to my House first, they said I should. Then I remembered my self,
saying in my heart, why am I thus afraid, they can lay no evil to my charge, if
they Kill me for well doing, I may think my self happy; I remembered how I was
formerly contented, and glad to die in that Quarrel, and so had continued ever
since; and should I now fear to die, God forbid that I should, for then were
all my Labor in vain; then I praised God, I was satisfied, having considered
it was but the frailty of my Flesh, which was loath to leave Wife, Children and
Goods; I saw nothing but present Death before mine Eyes, and as soon as I was
persuaded in my mind to die, I had regard of nothing in this World, but was as
joyful as ever I was: This Battle lasted not a quarter of an hour, but I dare
say, it was sharper then Death it self for the time.

When I had got my Breakfast, I desired them to show me their Warrant, thinking
thereby I might see wherefore I was Arrested, that I might be the better able
to make my defense; but one of them answered, they had not their Warrant there;
at which words, God put it into my mind, that I need not to go with them
unless they had their Warrant; and I said, it is much you will come to take a man
without a Warrant, and therefore set your hearts at rest, I will not go with
you, unless you carry me by force, and so I rose up from the Board, and stepped
into my Chamber, thinking to go from them, if I could possible, seeing God had
made the way so open for me; I meant to play Peter's part with them, but God
would not have it so, but sent a fear amongst them, that before I came out of
my Chamber again they were gone out of my House.

When I saw that, I knew it was Gods doing to set me at liberty once again; yet
I was compelled to spoke to them, saying, if you have a Warrant I desire you to
show it me, and I will go with you, if not, I defire you to depart in peace,
for surely I will not go without the order of the Law; I have been too simple
in such things already, for when I was sent first to Prison the Justices sent
for me by one of their men, without any Warrant, and I went gently to them to
two Sessions, and they sent me to Prison, and kept me there almost a year and
three quarters, contrary to right and equity, and it seems strange to me that
I should be thus evilly handled; therefore, I will go to none of them hence
forward without legal order. Then one of them said, we have not the Warrant
here, but it is at my House, the worst is, you can but make us fetch it: Then
said I, fetch it if you will, and so I shut my door, and before they came back
with a Constable, as God would have it, I was gone forth, but they searched
every corner of my House, and at night there came seven men and a Constable to
search again, but I kept abroad; and because I supposed they would lay wait for
me, and thinking they would not mistrust that I dare be nigh home, I told my
Wife I would make my Lodging in a Wood near my House, as I did, under a Tree,
and there had my Bible, Pen and Ink, and other necessaries, and there I
continued six or seven weeks; then there came word into the Country, that I was
seen and spoken with in Flanders, whereupon they left laying wait for me, for
God put in my mind that they would lay wait for me at all Seacoast Towns, as
they did.

So when all was hushed, I went abroad among our Friends and Brethren, and at
length I went beyond the Seas, both into Flanders and France, but I thought the
time long till I came home again; I was there but three weeks, but it was known
among Baals Priests, who could not abide it, but got Warrants and searched my
House for me, sometimes twice in a week, sometimes I went privily, sometimes
openly from home, staying abroad two or three weeks together, otherwhile living
a Month together at home, doing openly such work as I had to do, and yet mine
Enemies laid no hands on me, till the hour was fully come, and then mine own
Brother, according to the flesh, delivered me into their hands.


The Examination of Richard Woodman before the Bishop of Chichester, Doctor
Story, Doctor Cook, and others.
Bishop, What is your name? My name is Richard Woodman. Then said the Bishop, I
am sorry for you, you have been a man of good report and esteem in your Country
till now of late; therefore, look to your self, your Wife and Children, and
Friends, and be ruled, and think not your self wiser then all the Realm, but be
informed, and you shall have their favor as much as ever you had.


Woodman, My Life, my Wife and my Children, I love them, but they are all in
Gods hands, and I have them as if I had them not.


Bishop, Q. Mary, An. 1557.
The Sheriff told me, that you were desirous to spoke with me.


Woodman, I thought meet to appeal to you, because you have taken upon you to
be the Physician of our Country, for many unjust things are laid to my charge;
and they seek my Blood, and I have appealed unto you, that if my blood be shed
unrighteously it might be required at your hands.


Doctor Story, Is not this a perverse Fellow, do thou think thou shall be put
to death unjustly, and that thy Blood shall be required, no said he, and
further added, that he could condemn a hundred such Heretics, and threatened
that he would help to rid him.


Then Woodman would have answered, but the Bishop desired them both to give him
place.

Bishop, Well, Neighbor Woodman, I call you Neighbor, because you are one of
my Diocese, and you are sent to me, that I should give you spiritual counsel,
for I am your Spiritual Pastor, therefore hear what I say unto you.


Woodman, First, I desire you to hear me a few words; you have said, you will
give me Spiritual counsel, are you sure you have the Spirit of God?


Bishop, No, I am not sure of that, I dare not be so bold to say so.


Woodman, Then you are like the Waves of the Sea, Tossed about with every wind,
and unstable in all your ways, and can look for no good thing at the Lords
hand, yea, you are neither hot nor cold, and therefore, God will spue you out
of his Mouth.


Then in a fury Story said, What a perverse Fellow is this, he has a Devil in
him, and is mad; and the Bishop said, He is sent to me to learn, and takes
upon him to teach me.

Then Richard Woodman seeing their Blindness, and Blasphemy, it made such an
impression upon him, that his heart was melted, and and his eyes gusht out with
tears, and he spoke to them after this manner: The Jew's said to Christ, he had
a Devil, and was mad, as you have here said to me, but I know the Servant is
not above his Master, and God forbid that I should learn of him that confesses
he has not the Spirit of God.

Bishop, Why do you think that you have the Spirit of God, you boast more then
ever Paul did, or any of the Apostles, the which is great presumption.


Woodman, I boast not in my self, but in the Gift of God, as Paul did, who
said, He verily believed that he had the Spirit of God, making thereof no
question, 1 Cor. 7.


Chichester, It is not so, you belly the Text.


Woodman, If it be not so, let me be burnt to morrow.


Story, Thou shall not be burnt too morrow, but I will promise thee thou shall
be burnt within six days.


Bishop, If it be so, it is wrong Translated, as it is in a thousand places more


Woodman, Take heed that you belly not the Translators; I believe they had the
fear of God more before their Eyes, then you report of them, but if that place
be wrong translated, I can prove by places enough that Paul had the Spirit of
God.


Bishop, How prove you that?


Woodman, No man can believe that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost, for
he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his; and again, we have not
received the Spirit of Bondage to fear any more, but we have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, the same Spirit certifieth us,
that we are the Sons of God; also, John says, he that believes not that
Christ is come in the Flesh, is an Antichrist, and denies both the Father and
the Son; and he that believes in God, dwells in God, and God in him.


Story, What an Heretic is this, why do you here him, send him to Prison to
his Fellows in the Marshalsea, and they shall be dspatcht within these twelve
days.


Woodman, When I heard him say so, I rejoiced greatly in my heart, desiring
God, if it were his will to keep them in that mind; for I expected to have been
sent to the Bishop of Londons Cole-house, or Lollards Tower, but they sent me
to the Marshalsea to my Brethren and old Prison-Fellows, whereby it pleased God
that the burden I looked for, was something eased; when they saw I rather
rejoiced, then feared imprisonment, the Bishop said, My thinks he is not afraid
of the Prison.


Woodman, No, I praise the Living God.


Story, He has the right terms of an Heretic, the living God, etc. I pray you
be there deads Gods, that you say the Living God?


Woodman, Are you angry with me for speaking the words written in the Bible?


Story, Bibble Babble, what speak thou of the Bible? there is no such word
written in all the Bible.


Then said Woodman, I am much to blame, and brought several Scriptures to prove
that there was a Living God, and dead Gods; for David said, My Soul has a
desire, and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh
rejoice in the living God.

Story, My Lord I will tell you how you shall know a Heretic by his words,
that is, they will say (the Lord) and we praise God) and the (Living God) etc.


Woodman, The Lords Name be praised from the rising of the Sun, until the going
down of the same, also as many as fear the Lord, say always, the Lord be
praised.


Story, My Lord this is an Old Heretic, send him to Prison, you will do no
good on him, I will leave you and go to Church.


The second Examination of Richard Woodman.
The Bishop began with the common Snare, asking him, What he said to the seven
Sacraments, for there we left off, and there we will begin, said he: Woodman
replied, If he could prove them, he should believe them; hereat the Bishop was
moved, and swore by his troth, whereupon Woodman reproved him, saying, a Bishop
should be blameless, and you use much swaring, which is a great fault in a
Bishop above all other, which should be an Example to the Flock: Then said the
Bishop, in a rage. I perceive this man is worse then he was, for he takes upon
him to teach me to speak. Woodman replied; I am commanded to do that I do, I
dare not for my life hold my peace, for if I should, I should bare your sin.

Bishop, Where do you find that you are commanded to reprove me?


Woodman, If thou see thy Brother Sin, reprove him. A Priest standing by, said,
My Lord this man is past cure.


Bishop, So my thinks, I will talk no more with him, since he has been with his
Fellows in the Marshalsea, he is worse then he was; call M. Story, and let him
do with him what he will.


Woodman said, My Faith hangs upon no man, but upon God: The Priest standing
by, said, My Lord, I think he is not the worse for them, but I fear they are
the worse for him. Then Woodman speaking to the Bishop said, Look well to it,
you will deliver me to other men to shed my Blood, and so think to wash your
hands of me, as Pilate did by Christ, but you cannot be so discharged: Then the
Bishop replied to this effect; I have nothing to do with you, I am not yet
Consecrated, the Cardinal may Examine you, and condemn you, or the Bishop of
London, in whose Diocese you now are; and after other discourse, he asked him,
What he said to the Sacrament of the Altar?


Woodman, Do you mean Christ to be the Altar?


Bishop, I mean the Sacrament of the Altar, in the Church.


VVoodman, What the Altar of Stone?


Bishop, Yes, it is that Altar I mean, how d^ you understand the Altar
otherwise?


VVoodman, It is written that wheresoever two or three are gathered together in
Christ's Name there is he in the midst of them, and whatsoever they ask in his
Name it shall be given unto them; when thou come to Offer thy Gift at the
Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy Offering, and go first, and be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift.


A Priest standing by, would have interrupted him, but the Bishop said, Let him
alone.

Then VVoodman said, By these two places of Scripture I prove that Christ is
the true Altar whereon every Christian, that is in the Love and Charity, ought
to offer their Gifts

Bishop, I never heard any man understand the Altar so, no, not Luther the
great Heretic, that was condemned by a general Council, and his Picture burnt.


VVoodman, If he were an Heretic I think he understood it not so indeed, but I
am sure all Christians ought so to understand it; and after further discourse
they laughed at him, and said, This is a Heretic indeed, it is time he were
burnt.


Then VVoodman replied, judge not least you be judged, for in that way you call
Heresy I serve my God with.

Then Story said, What you are a Preaching. You shall Preach at a Stake
shortly with your Fellows, carry him to the Marsh^^^ ^^^^n, and let him be kept
close, and let none come to speak with him.

At another time being brought before the Bishop of Winchester, and others, the
Bishop spoke to him to this effect; Woodman, When you were l^st before us, you
would not confess that you were sent to P^i^on for Heresy, but called for your
Accusers, and stood stoutly in defend of your self.

Woodman replied, saying, You said, I was sent to Prison for Heresy, I told
you wherefore I was sent to Prison, which was upon the breach of a Statute, for
speaking to a Priest in the Pulpit, Woodman ^^us^^ to be B^^^^^ to the good be,
haviour.
and for that cause, the Justices of that Country thought I had offended the
Statute, and sent for me before them, and would have bound me to the good
behavior, and because I refused they sent me to Prison.

He was at his Examination before the Bishop of Winchester pressed to answer to
several things objected against him, but he refused, saying, he was not of his
Diocese.

The Bishop being displeased at his answers, called him, Perverse Villian, and
Obstinate Fool, and Heretic, and cried, Hold him a Book I Will make him swear,
and answer, or else I will condemn him; hold thy hand on the Book said the
Bishop; I will lay no hand on the Book for none of you all, said Woodman; and
looking on the People, the Bishop cried, See how he looks about for help. I
look for no help (said he) from men, for God is on my side, and therefore I do
not care who is against me.

Then they cried, Away with him, and bring us another.

At another time being brought before the Bishop of Winchester, the Bishop asked
him, His belief concerning the Sacrament of the Altar. To which Richard Woodman
replied, to this effect. I pray you, said he, be content, I will answer no more
Questions, for that I perceive you go about to shed my blood.

Then said the Bishop, No, hold him a Book, if he refuse to swear, he is an
Anabaptist, and shall be Excommunicated.

Woodman made answer, I will not swear, Excommunicate me if you will.

After some more words past between them, the Bishop past the Sentence against
the said VVoodman, and then they cried, Away with him, away with him, not
suffering him to speak any more for himself, and so was had away to the
Marshalsea again: And thus the Reader has the chiefest and most weighty
matters that past at his Examinations, from time to time. After the Sentence
was past, he was burnt at Lewis with nine more, viz. five Men, and four Women,
as before some mention was made of them.

Several Sentences taken out of a Letter of Richard Woodman's, to one Roberts
of Hawkhurst.
Grace Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from his Son our only Savior
Jesus Christ, by the operation and Working of the holy Ghost, be multiplied
plentifully upon you, dear Sister, that you may the more joyfully bear the
Cross of Christ that you are under, to the end, to your only Comfort, and
Consolation, and to all our Brethren and Sisters in those parts that love our
Lord unfainedly, certifying you, that I and all my Brethren with me are joyful,
praised be God, looking daily to be dissolved from these our mortal Bodies,
according to the good pleasure of our heavenly Father, praising God also for
your constancy, and kindness showed unto Gods People in this troublesome time
of Persecution; Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy: The
Fruits always declare what the Tree is, for a good Man or Woman out of the
good Treasure of their hearts brings forth good Fruits.

Wherefore, dear Sister, let our Faith be made manifest to the World by our
deeds, and in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, as St. Paul says,
Let your Light shine as in a dark place.

O dear hearts, now is the Gospel of God overwhelmed with many black and
troublesome Clouds of Persecution, for the which cause very few go about to
have their Eyes made clear by the true light of the Gospel, for fear of loosing
their Treasures of this World, which are but vain, and shall Perish.

Let us not therefore, be like unto them which light their Candle, and put it
under a Bushel, but let us set our Candle upon a Candlestick, that it may give
light unto all them that are in the House; that is to say, let all the People
of the Household of God see our good works, in suffering all things patiently
that shall be laid upon us for the Gospel sake, if it be Death it self; for
Christ died for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps; and
as he has given his Life for us, so ought we to give our Lives for the Defense
of the Gospel to the comfort of our Brethren.

How is it then that some will say, that their Faith is good, and yet they do
all the deeds of Antichrist the Devil; St. Paul says, To believe with the
heart justifies, and to confess with the Mouth makes a man safe: Here may all
see, that no man or woman can have a true Faith unless they have deeds also,
and he that doubts, is like the Waves of the Sea, Tossed about of the Wind,
and can look for no good thing at the Lords hands: Now is the acceptable time
that Christ spoke of, yea, even now is the Ax put to the Root of the Tree, that
so every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, must be hewn down and cast
into the Fire.

Now is the Lord come with his Fan in his hand to try the Wheat from the Chaff,
the Wheat he will gather into his Barn, and the Chaff he will burn: Now is the
time come that we must go meet the Bridegroom with Oil in our Lamps; we are
also bidden to the Feast, let us make no excuses, our Master has delivered
Talents unto us: Now is the Lord come to see if there be any Fruit upon his
Trees, if he find none, he will serve us as he did the wild Fig Tree, that is,
Never Fruit shall grow on him more: If we go to meet the Bridegroom without
Oil in our Lamps, and should go to buy, the doubt is, we should be served as
the Foolish Virgins were, to whom God said, Depart I know you not: If we use
not our Talents well, they shall be taken from us, and given to others, and all
such unprofitable Servants shall be cast into Hell, where shall be Weeping and
Gnashing of teeth.

May not all People now perceive that this is the time that our Master Christ
speaks of, that the Father should be against the Son, and the Son against the
Father, and one Brother against an other, that the Brother shall deliver the
Brother to death; yea, and that the Wicked shall say all manner of Wicked
sayings against us for his Name sake, the which I have found by experience, I
praise God that gave me strength to bear it.

I have no mistrust but that the World shall see and know my Blood shall not be
dear in my own sight, whenever it please God to give my Adversaries leave to
shed it; I do earnestly believe, that God which has begun this good work in
me, will perform it to the end; for when I have been in Prison, sometimes
wearing Blots and Shackles, lying on the bear ground, and sometimes sitting in
the Stocks, and bound with Cords, that my Body was swelled, and I like to be
overcome with pain, sometimes lying in the Woods and Fields, wandering to and
fro, brought before Justices, Sheriffs, Lords, Doctors, and Bishops; called
Dog, Devil, Heretic, Whoremonger, Traitor, Thief, Deceiver, and such like:
Yea, even they that did eat of my Bread, that should have been most my Friends
by Nature have betrayed me; yet for all this I praise God, that has separated
me from my Mothers Womb, all this that has happened unto me has been easy,
for I praise God, they are not able to prove one tittle of their sayings to be
true, but that way which they call Heresy I serve my Lord God; and at all
times, before whomsoever I have been brought, God has given me Mouth and
Wisdom, against which my Adversaries have not been able to resist; wherefore,
dear Sister, be of good comfort, with all your Brethren and Sisters, and take
no thought what you shall say, for it shall be given you the same hour
according to the promises, as I have always found, and as you and all others
of Gods Elect shall well find, when the time is full come; and whereas I and
many others have hoped that this Persecution would have been at an end ere this
time; now I perceive God will have a further Trial, to Root out all
Dissemblers, that no man should rejoice in himself, but he that rejoices
should rejoice in God; wherefore if Prophecy should fail, and Tongues should
cease, yet Love must endure, for fear has painfulness, but a perfect Love
casts out all fear, which Love I have no mistrust, but God has poured it
upon you so abundantly, that nothing in the World shall be able to separate you
from God, neither High nor Low, Rich nor Poor, Life nor Death, shall be able to
put you from Christ, but by him I trust you shall enter into New Jerusalem
there to live forever.

After his Examination, Sentence was past upon him, and upon the 22th day of
the Month called June, he and nine more were burnt at Lewis, as mention is
made before.

The next Month following Simon Miller, and Elizabeth Cooper were burnt at
Norwich: S. Miller Elizabeth Cooper Martyrs.
This Simon Miller dwelt in Lyn, he was a zealous man for the Lord and his
Truth in those days, detesting and abhoring the forced. Religion of the
Papists, going from Lyn to Norwich, and standing in the press of People, as
they were coming from their Popish service, he spoke some words to them, at
which some marvelled to hear and see his boldness, but shortly after he was
brought before Dunning Chancellor of Norwich, when he was before him, having
his Confession of his Faith written, and put in his Shoe, part of which
appearing was taken out, which the Chancellor perusing, asked him, If he would
stand to that Faith, to which he said he should; whereupon, he was committed to
Ward, and shortly after was by the Bishop of Norwich and his Chancellor
condemned, and burnt with the ^^^esaid Elizabeth Cooper: When Elizabeth first
felt the Fire, the shrunk, and cried out; Simon Miller put his hand behind him
toward her, and wished her to be strong, so they both ended their lives joyfully.

About this time several persons Persecuted in Colchester suffered in Essex,
being Prosecuted by one Thomas Tie Priest, who wrote a Letter to Bonner against
them to this effect.

They assemble, said he, together upon the Sabbath day, during the time of
Divine Service, sometimes in one House, and sometimes in another, and there
keep their private Conventicles, this Letter of the Priests caused a Storm to
arise against such as profess the Truth in Essex, and the House of William Mant
was beset by one Terril, and the Officers with him, The Priests Letter to stir
up Persecution.
who told William Munt and his Wife, they must go with them to Colchester
Castle: The woman being sick in Bed, desired her Daughter might first fetch her
some Drink, for she was ill at ease, Terrill giving her Daughter leave, as she
was coming back with the Drink, and a Candle in her hand, He wished her, to give
her Father and Mother good counsel; the Maid replied, they have a better
Instructor then me, for I hope the holy Ghost does teach them, which will not
suffer them to err; then said Terril, Art thou in that mind, thou naughty
Houswiff, marry, it is time to look upon such Heretics indeed; the Maid
replied, with that you call Heresy, do I worship my Lord God: Terril said,
Then I perceive Gossip, you will burn with the rest for Company sake; no, said
she, not for Company sake, but for Christ's sake; if I am compelled; and I
hope, if he call me to it, he will enable me to bear it: Then the said Terril
took the Candle out of her hand, and held her wrest and the burning Candle
under her hand, saying, Thou young Whore, will thou not cry? She replied, she
had no cause to cry, but rather to rejoice, and quietly suffered his rage for
the time; at the last she said, have you done what you will do? he said, Yea
and if thou think it not well, then mend it: Mend it said she nay, the Lord
mend you, and give you repentance; and now, if you think it good, begin at the
Feet, and burnt the Head also; for he that set you on work, shall pay you your
wages, so the said Terril searched the House, and took one John Thurston, and
Margeret his Wife, and william Munt and his Wife, and Rose his Daughter, whose
hand he had burnt, and carried them to Colchester Castle immediately; there was
in all ten persons Prisoners in Colchester for not conforming, and for denying
the real presence in the Sacrament, who were all severally Sentenced to be
burnt. When Rose Alen, whose hand was burnt by Terril, Examined concerning her
belief, concerning Auricular Confession, and the Mass, etc. She said, they
stunk in the Face of God; and being asked, What she said concerning the Sea of
Rome, and whether she would obey the Bishop of Romes Authority; she answered
boldl^^ she was none of his, and as for his Sea, it is for such Ravens and
Crows as you be, to swim in, for I shall not swim in that Sea while I live,
neither will I have any thing to do therewith; whereupon she was condemned as
the rest were. After these poor Lambs were condemned, they were delivered into
the hands of the Secular Power, and were by them committed every one unto the
Prison from whence they came, where they remained with much joy and great
comfort, in continual reading and calling upon God, ever looking for, Nine
Martyr burntin Essex, and one died in Pison.
and expecting the day of their dissolution, which was upon the second day of
the Month called August following; and because some were in the Castle Prison,
and some in the Town Prison, called the Mote-hall, therefore it was agreed by
the Officers, that they in the Mote-hall, viz. William Bongeer, William Purcas,
Thomas Benold, Agnes Silverside, alias Smith, Ellen Ewring, and Elizabeth
Fowlks should be burnt in the forenoon, and William Munt, and his Wife and
Daughter, and John Johnson, Prisoners in the Castle, should be burnt in the
afternoon, who when they were tied to the Stakes, they called upon God, and
earnestly exhorted the People to flee from Idolatry, and so ended their
Testimonies joyfully, and as for John Thurston, before mentioned, he died in
Prison.

The next that suffered, was George Eagles, a man of a good Utterance, G.
Eagles Maryr.
and Eloquent in speech, though but a Tailor by Trade, in this time of great
Persecution, he left his Trade, and traveled about from place to place to
comfort and strengthen such as had received the Truth in any measure, sometimes
Lodging in the Fields and Woods, and because he traveled much abroad, he was
called Trudgever; in his Diet he was sparing, and for his Drink it was mostly
Water for three years, to which necessities of denying himself he was drove to;
through the ^ear of this time of Persecution, for he was fain to keep pretty
much in Woods and Holes, for the Queen had put out a Proclamation in four
Counties for apprehending of him, and twenty pounds was to be given to the
party that took him, and shortly after he was taken in a Corn-Field in Essex,
and being apprehended, was had Prisoner to Colchester, and from thence within
four days was had to Chilmsford, where he abode one night, and did neither
sleep nor eat nor drink, and the next day he was carried to London, and there
Examined by the Bishop or Council, and from thence sent back to Chilmsford
again, and at the Sessions there, he was indicted for Treason, for having
Meetings contrary to the Law, and for praying that God would turn Queen Maryes
heart, or else take her away; the which words, that God would take her away, he
denied that he spoke, nevertheless, he was condemned, and executed for the same.

The Sufferings of Richard Crashfield of Wymondham, Examined before Dunning
Chancellor of Norwich.
The Chancellor said, Rich Crashfield Martyr.
How say you, Sirrah, to the Ceremony of the Church? What Ceremonies, said
Crashfield?


Chancellor, Do you believe in the Sacrament of the Altar?


Crashfield said, He knew not what it was.


Chancellor, Do you not believe that Christ took Bread, gave thanks, break it,
and said, Take eat, this is my Body?


Crashfield, Even as Christ spoke, so did he perform the work.


Chancellor, How say you to the Confession to the Priest, when were you
Confessed?


Answ. I confess my self daily unto the Eternal God.


Chancellor, Do you not then take the confession to the Priste to be good?


Answ. No, but rather Wicked.


Chancellor, What say you to Singing, and the Organs, is that godly?


Answ. I perceive said he, no godliness in it, and yet he said, he approved of
Spiritual Songs, but yours is of the Flesh, and of the Spirit of Error, and
though to you it be pleasant, and glorious, yet to the Lord it is bitter and
odious.


Then said the Chancellor, Stand nearer Countryman, why stand you so far off?

Answ. I am near enough, and a little too near; and further said, I have done
with you.


Chancellor, What shall I tell my Lord of you?


Answ. If you have nothing to tell him, your Arrant will be the sooner done.


Chancellor, Will you turn from this wicked Error? (you have been an evil
example, by your wicked reading; you have persuaded simple women to this Error)
and you shall have mercy.


Answ. I ask mercy of God, whom I have offended, and not of you.


Chancellor, When were you at your Parish Church, you have been Excommunicated
this two years and therefore you are condemned; and so past Sentence upon him;
and he was shortly after burnt at Norwich.


The next that suffered, was one Joyce Lewis, Wife to Thomas Lewis of
Manchester; this Joyce Lewis, was a woman finely brought up in the pleasures of
the World, Joyce Lewis Martyr.
she was turned from the Popish Religion, by seeing the great Sufferings and
Death of Lawrance Saunders at Coventry; and being afterward inflamed with the
love of God, she purposed to abstain from those things that displeased him; but
her Husband being furious against her, compelled her to go to Mass; but being
there, in Testimony against their Idolatry, when they sprinkled the holy Water,
she turned her back toward it, for which she was shortly after accused before
the Bishop; the told the Bishop, by refusing their holy Water, she neither
offended God nor his Laws, the Bishop thereat was offended, and Bound her
Husband in a hundred pound Bond for her appearance a Month after, the Month
being ended, her unnatural Husband carried her himself to the Bishop, who asked
her, Why she would not go to Mass, and receive the Sacraments? She answered,
because she found them not in the Word needful, for men's Salvation, wherefore
she was condemned; after her condemnation she continued a year in Prison, where
her behavior both in word and deed was such, that her death was greatly
lamented; when the Sheriff brought her news of the hour of her death, she said
to him, your Message is welcome to me; when the Fire was set to her, she never
struggled, nor strived, but ended her life patiently.

Four persons burnt at Islington.
About the seventeenth day of September were burnt at Islington Ralph Allerton,
James Austoo, Margery Austoo his Wife, and Richard Roth.

Ralph Alerton, after his apprehending, was kept a whole year in Prison before
he was condemned, he was first accused before the Lord Darsey of Chichester,
for not conforming to the Idolatry and Superstition of the times, and for
praying and exhorting the People of the Parish where he lived, not being a
Priest; before he was apprehended he kept himself in Woods and Barnes, and
other solitary places; and at last being apprehended, was sent up to the
Council, and from them to Bonner Bishop of London; in his Examination he told
the Bishop, there were three Religions in England; then said Bonner, Which be
these? Allerton replied, The first is that which you hold; the second is clean
contrary to the same; and the third is a Neuter: Then said Bonner, Of which of
these three art thou of? Allerton said, I am of that which is contrary to that
which you teach to be believed on the pain of death; after some other discourse
between them, the Bishop in a rage called him Knave, and Whoreson Prick-louse,
and demanded what he had to say, why he should not pronounce the Sentence of
condemnation against him? to which he answered. You ought not to condemn me,
for I am a Christian, but do as you have determined, for I see right and truth
are suppressed, and cannot appear upon the Earth; these words ended, the Bishop
pronounced the Sentence of death against him, and delivered him to the temperal
Officers, who on the day aforesaid, caused him and the other three to be burnt.

There is not much Recorded what past in the Trial of the other three, only
James Austoo, when he was brought upon Examination before the Bishop in his
Chapel at Fulham, the Bishop said to him, Do thou know where thou art, and
before whom; to which he replied, I know where I am, for I am in an
Idol-temple, whereupon the Bishop past Sentence against him and his Wife, who
suffered deeply, a Prisoner in the Bishops House, being kept in his Dog-kennel,
under a pair of Stairs. One Article against Richard Roth, one of the four that
was burned, was, that he was a Comforter to Heretics, and to that end had
Writ a Letter, to certain Persons that were burnt at Colchester.

The Substance of which Letter written by him, and directed to his Brethren and
Sisters in Christ, condemned at Colehester, and ready to be burned for the
Testimony of the Truth, is as follows.
Oh, dear Brethren and Sisters, how much have you to rejoice in God, that he
has given you such Faith, to overcome this blood thirsty Tyrant thus far, and
no doubt he that has begun that good work in you, will fulfill it unto the
end: Oh, dear hearts in Christ, what a Crown of Glory shall ye receive with
Christ, in the Kingdom of God: Oh, that it had been the good will of God, that
I had been ready to have gone with you, for I lie in my Lords little ease in
the day, and in the night, I lie in the Cole-house, from Ralph Allerton, or any
other, and we look every day when we shall be condemned, for he said, that I
should be burnt within ten days, before Easter; but I lie still at the
Pools-brink, and every man goes in before me; but we abide patiently the Lords
leisure with many Bonds in Fetters, and Stocks; by the which we have received
great joy in God: And now fare you well, dear Brethren and Sisters, in this
World.

Oh Brother Munt, with your Wife, and my dear Sister Rose, how blessed are you
in the Lord, that God has found you worthy to suffer for his sake; with all
the rest of my dear Brethren and Sisters, known and unknown. Oh, be joyful
even unto death, fear it not, says Christ, For I have overcome death, says
he: Oh, dear hearts, seeing that Jesus Christ will be our help, Oh tarry you
the Lords leisure, be strong, let your hearts be of good comfort, and wait you
still for the Lord, he is at hand, yea, the Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tent
round about them that fear him, and delivers them which way he sees best,
for our lives are in the Lords hand, and they can do nothing unto us, before
God suffer them; therefore give all thanks to God; Oh, dear hearts, you shall
be clothed with long white Garments upon Mount Zion, with the multitude of
Saints, and with Christ Jesus our Savior, which will never forsake us; Oh,
blessed Virgins, you have played the wise Virgins part, in that you have taken
Oil in your Lamps, that you may go in with the Bridegroom when he comes, into
the everlasting joy with him; but as for the Foolish they shall be shut out,
because they made not themselves ready to suffer with Christ, neither go about
to take up his Cross; Oh, dear hearts, how precious shall your death be in the
sight of the Lord, for dear is the death of his Saints; Oh, fare you well, and
pray; the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen, Amen, pray,
pray, pray.

By me R^chard Roth, written with my own Blood.


I mentioned before, how that ten persons suffered at Colchester, amongst whom
was one Agnes Bengeer, who should have suffered with them six that went out of
Mote-hall, but her Execution was suspended for a time, her name being mistaken
in the Writ, and instead of Agnes Bengeer, called Agnes Boyer; this poor woman,
when she saw she was separated from her Prison-fellows, and sent back to
Prison, and might not suffer with them, for she had given up her self to
suffer, having provided a Nurse for her sucking Child, and provided all things
necessary for her suffering; but when she saw she was put back, she wept
bitterly, and made pitious m^an to her self, esteeming her self as naked and
desolate, and bemoaning her condition when she was separated from her
Companions; and this is written that the Reader may see how zealous these
persons were in those days, who esteemed death rather then life for their
Testimonies sake; but shortly after a Writ came down from London, wherein her
name was rightly incerted, and she was burnt at Colchester.

Shortly after, one John Noyes of Lacksfield, in the County of Suffolk
Shoemaker; John Noyes Martyr.
he was apprehended for not going to their public Service and Mass, by one
Thomas Level and others, who beset his House on both sides, where they found
John Noyes in his backside going forth; one of the Persecutors seeing of him,
called to him, and said, Whether go thou? John replied, to my Neighbors;
the Persecutor said, Your Master has deceived you, you must go with us now:
John replied, Take heed your Master deceive not you, so they apprehended him,
and had him before the Justices next day, who committed him to the Dungeon,
where he lay for some time, and then he was had to Norwich before the Bishop;
and soon after Sentence of death was pronounced against him; when he was bound
to the Stake, he speak these words, Fear not them that can kill the Body, but
fear him that can kill both Body and Soul, and cast them into Everlasting Fire:
And seeing his Sister weep, and make moan for him, he bid her that she should
not weep for him, but weep for her sins, and so he yielded up his life.

Whilst he was burning one John Jarvis standing by, said, How the Sinews of his
Arms shrink up; two of the Sheriffs men hearing of him speak, apprehended him
and having him before the Justices, they affirmed he should say, what
Villianous Wretches are these? Whereupon the Justices commanded, that he should
be set in the Stocks next Market day, and whipped about the Market naked; but the
Constable, in friendship to him, did not set him in the Stocks, till that
called Sunday morning, and in the afternoon they whipped him about the Market
with a Dog-whip, having three Cords, and so they let him go.

Whilst John Noyes was Prisoner, his Wife desiring him to send her some tokens
of Rememberance of him, thereupon he sent her several Sentences of Scripture
for a Rememberance, as follows.
Dearly beloved, be not troubled with this heat that is now come among you, to
try you, as though some strange thing had happened unto you, but rejoice,
insomuch as you are partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when his glory
appears, you may be glad; if ye be railed on for the Name of Christ, happy
are you, for the Spirit of Glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you.

It is better, if the will of God be so, that you suffer for well-doing, then
for evil-doing, 1 Pet. 3.

So 1 Pet. 4. See that none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or an
Evil-door, or as a Busie-body, in other men's matters; but if any man suffer as
a Christian-man, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this
behalf; for the time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God: If
it first begin at us, what shall the end of them be that believe not the Gospel
of God? Wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of God, commit
their Souls to him in well-doing.

St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 3. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
Persecution.

St. John says, 1 John 2. See that ye love not the World, neither the things
that are in the World; if any man love the World, the love of the Father is not
in him: For all that is in the World, as the lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World, which
vanishes away and the Lust thereof; but he that fulfileth the Will of God
abides forever

St. Paul says, Collos. 3. If ye be risen again with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God: Set your
affection on things that are above, and not on things which are on Earth.

Our Savior Christ says, Math. 18. Whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones, that believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were cast into the Sea.

The Prophet David says, Psalm. 84. Great are the troubles of the Righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of all; fear the Lord ye his Saints; for they
that fear him lack nothing.

When the Righteous cry, the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles; but misfortune shall slay the ungodly, and they that hate the
Righteous shall perish.

Hear, Oh my People, I assure thee, Oh Israel, if thou will hearken unto me,
there shall so strange God be in thee, neither shall thou Worship any other
God: Oh that my People would obey me; for if Israel would walk in my ways, I
would soon put down their Enemies, and turn my hand against their Adversaries.

Our Savior Christ says, The Disciple is not above his Master, nor yet the
Servant above his Lord; it is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master is,
and that the Servant be as his Lord is, if they have called the Master of the
House Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household so; fear not
them therefore.

St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 4. Set your selves therefore at large, and bear not a
strangers Yoke with the Unbelievers, for what fellowship has Righteousness
with Unrighteousness? What Company has Light and Darkness? Either what part
has the Believer with the Infidel, etc? Wherefore come out from among them,
and separate your selves now, (says the Lord) and touch no unclean thing; so
will I receive you, and I will be a Father unto you; and you shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

For neither Eye has seen, nor the Ear has heard, neither can it enter into
the heart of man, what good things the Lord has prepared for them that love
him, 1 Cor. 2.

Ye are brought neither with Silver nor Gold, but with the precious Blood of
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.

There is none other Name given to men wherein we must be saved, Acts 4.

So fare ye well Wife and Children, and leave worldly care, and see that ye be
dilligent to pray.

Take no thought ( says Christ, Mat. 6.) saying, what shall we eat, or what
shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed (for after all these things
seek the Gentiles) for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these
things; but seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof,
and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

The Sufferings of Cicely Ormes, Wife of Edmund Ormes of Norwich,
Worsted-Weaver, burnt about the twenty third day of September.
The occasion of her first apprehending was for that she being persent at the
death of two Martyrs burnt in the Lollards-pit, Ci^ely Ormes Martyr.
without Bishops-gate in Norwich, for that she said, she would pledge them of
the same Cup that they drunk of; she was apprehended and had before the
Chancellor, who Examining her concerning the Sacrament of the Altar: He asked
her, What it was the Priest held over his head, she replied, It was Bread, and
if said she, you make it any better it is worse: Whereupon the Chancellor, with
threatening words, sent her to the Bishops Prison; shortly after she was brought
before him again, who offered her, If she would go to Church, and keep her
Tongue, she should be at liberty, but she refusing his offer, he past Sentence
of Death upon her, and delivered her to the Sheriff, to see her burnt; when she
came to the Stake, she said, Welcome the sweet Cross of Christ; and when the
Fire was kindled about her, she said, My Soul does Magnify the Lord, and my
Spirit rejoices in God my Savior, and so finished her Testimony in patience.

At this time, the rage of Persecution was very hot in many Counties, and many
were Persecuted at Litchfield, and about seventeen were put to death in Sussex
in the Diocese of Chichester, a particular Relation whereof there is little
left upon record to make manifest, but the Popes Tyranny was great in many
Counties in England in this Queens time.

The Examination of Thomas Sprudence before the Chancellor of Norwich
Chancellor asked him, Whether he had been with a Priest and confessed his sins?
Tho. Spancer Martyr.
He replied, I have confessed my sins to God, and that is sufficient for me.

Then said the Bishop, Will thou be sworn to the Pope, as supreme head of the
Church? No, said he, not as long as I live, for you cannot prove by the
Scripture, that the Pope is head of the Church: Yes, said the Bishop, As the
Bell-weather, which wears the Bell, is head of the Flock of Sheep; even so is
the Pope the head of the Church of Christ; and now, good fellow, thou have
wandered long out of thy way like a scattred Sheep, therefore hear this
Bell-weather, and come home with us to thy Mother the true Church again.

Thomas answered, All this is but Natural reason, and no Scripture.

Oh, said the Bishop, I see you are stout, and will not be answered, therefore
you shall be compelled by Law.

Thomas replied, So did your Forefathers entreat Christ and his Apostles, they
had a Law, and by their Law they put him to death; and likewise you have a Law,
which is Tyranny, and by that you would force me to believe as you do; but I
trust the Lord will assist me against all your beggarly Ceremonies, and make
your Foolishness known to all the World.

Then said the Bishop, When were you at Church?

Thomas said, Never since I was born.

How old are you then, said the Bishop?

I think said he, about forty: Then the Bishop not well understanding him, he
explained himself, saying, never since I was born anew; for Christ said unto
Nicodemus, Except you be born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Then the Bishop told him, He was a stubborn Fellow, and an Heretic, and
speaking to him of Obedience to the Laws of the Realm.

Thomas relied, You must consider that I have a Soul and a Body, and my Soul is
none of the Queens, but my Body and Goods is the Queens; and I must give God my
Soul, and all that belongs unto it; that is, I must obey the Laws and
Commandments of God, and whosoever commands obedience to Laws contrary to
Gods Laws, I may not obey them, lest I loose my Soul, but must rather obey God
then man; and further told the Bishop, that their graven Images and Ceremonies,
were but the Inventions and Imaginations of their own brain.

Then one standing by, said to the Prisoners, Are you wiser then all men? Will
you willingly cast away your selves? My Lord would fain save you, therefore
choose some man where you will, and take a day, my Lord will give it you.

Then Thomas replied, If I save life, I shall lose it, and if I lose my life
for Christ's sake, I shall find life Everlasting; and if I take a day, when the
day comes, I must say then even as I say now, except I will lie, and therefore
that needs not.

Well then, said the Bishop, Have him away, and after he had been kept some
time a Prisoner in Bury in Saffolk, he was burnt in November.

In the same Month were three persons put to death in Smithfield, viz. John
Hallingdal, William Sparrow, and Richard Gibson, Three persons burnt in
Smithfield.
they were several times brought before Bonner, who produced several Articles
against them, and used Arguments to persuade them to recant, before he past
Sentence upon them, to which John Hallingdal replied, Because I will not come
to your Babylonical Church, therefore you go about to condemn me, then the
Bishop asked him, Whether he would persevere in his Opinions? He replied, He
should persist in them until the death; whereupon Bonner read the bloody
Sentence against him; William Sparrow being asked the same Question by the
Bishop, he made answer to this effect, That way which you call Heresy, is good
and godly, and if every hair of my head were a man, I would burn them all
rather then go from the Truth; and said, their Laws and Mass was naught and
abominable; whereupon the Bishop Immediately read the Sentence of death against
him, and delivered him to the Secular Power, who sent him again to Prison.

After the Bishop had ministered several Articles against Rich. Gibson; the said
Richard proposed several Articles to him to answer, yea or nay, or else to say,
he could not tell, viz. Whether any man by the holy Ordinance of God ever was,
is, or shall be Lord over men's faith? And by what Lawful Authority any man of
what dignity Estate or calling by Office soever he or they be, may use
Lordship, or Power over any man for Faith or Conscience Sake?

By what lawful authority or power any man of what dignity, estate, or calling
soever he or they be, may be so held as to alter or change the holy Ordinances
of God, or any of them, or any part of them?

By what evident tokens Antichrist and his Ministers may be known, seeing it
is written that Satan can change himself into the simillitudo of an Angel of
Light?

What is the Beast which makes War with the Saints of God, and does not only
kill them, but also will suffer none to buy nor sell, but such as worship his
Image, or receive his mark in their right-hands, or in their foreheads, his
Name or the number of his Name, or do worship his Image which by the just and
terrible Sentence of God already decreed, shall perish in Fire and Brimstone,
before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and they shall have no rest day
nor night, but the smoke of their torment shall ascend up for evermore?

Also what is the Gordious Glittring Wh^re that sits upon the Beast, with a
Golden Gup in her hand, full of Abominations, with whom the Kings of the Earth
have committed Fornication, and the Inhabitants of the Earth, and she her self
also is drunken with the blood of the Saints, which is the Wine of her
Fornication, whose flesh the ^orns of the Beast shall tare in pieces, and burn
her with Fire?

At the last time of his appearing at the Consistory before the Bishop the
Bishop asking him, If be knew any cause, why Sentence should not be past
against him? He answered, That they had nothing against him, justly to condomn
him for; the Bishop replied, saying, He was an evil man; Richard Gibson
answered, I may say so of you also: Then the Bishop hastening on to his
Sentence, Admonisht him to remember himself, and save his Soul; Gibson told the
Bishop, He would not hear his babbling; and said further, blessed am I, that am
cursed at yours hands; and so the Sentence was read against him, and he was
committed to Prison; and shortly after was burnt with the two before mentioned.

At the bottom of his Articles he incerted these two Scripture following.

Ascribe unto the Lord, Oh ye mighty, ascribe unto the Lord worship and
strength; give unto the Lord the Honor of his Name, and bow your selves to the
Majesty of the Lord. I will hearken what the Lord God will say, for he shall
spoke peace unto his people, that they turn not themselves unto foolishness.
April the 6th 1557. By me Richard Gibson.

John Rough and Margaret Mearing Martryrs
In this furious time of Persecution J. Rough and Margaret Mearing, were also
burnt at London on the 22th day of the Month called December; this John Rough
was born in- Scotland, and in his zeal for the Truth, he abhorred the Idolatry
and Superstition in Religion practiced in that Country; and therefore traveled
into England, where after the death of King Edward the sixth, perceiving the
alteration that was like to be in Religion, and the Persecution that would
thereupon arise, and looking at his own weakness fled with his Wife into
Freezland, where they labored with their hands for their maintenance; but
shortly after he returned again into England, and arriving at London, he heard
of a Society of godly People that assembled privately in Religious Exercise, to
whom he joined himself, and continued Exercising his gift in preaching unto
them, until he was through the treachery of a false Brother betrayed and
apprehended by the Vice-Chamberlain of the Queens House, being taken at a
religious Meeting at the Sarrisons head in Islington; after Examination before
the Council, he was sent to Newgate, and his Examination in a Letter to Bonner,
to proceed against him as an Heretic.

Bonner being minded to make quick dispatch with him, within three days after
the receipt of the Letter sent for him from Newgate, to his Palace at London,
where he had several Articles ready drawn up against him, for denying the seven
Sacraments, the Latin Service, and the Popes Supremacy, etc. After he had
answered to these Articles, he was dismissed till next day, and then he was
brought again before the Bishop and others, who perceiving his constancy to his
profession, they ordered him to be brought the next day to the open Consistory,
and there condemned him as an Heretic, and delivered him to the Secular Power,
who sent him to Newgate, and shortly after he was burnt in Smithfield, Q. Mary,
An. 1558.
at half an hour past five a clock in the morning.

A Letter written by John Rough, unto certain of his Friends, confirming, and
strengthening them in the Truth.
The comfort of the holy Ghost make you able to give consolation unto others,
in these dangerous days when Satan is let loose, but to the trial only of the
chosen, when it plea^eth our God to sift his Wheat from the Chaff; I have not
leisure and time to writ, the great Temptations, I have been under, I speak to
Gods Glory, my care was to have the senses of my Soul opened, to perceive the
voice of God, saying, Whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny before
my Father, and his Angels, and to save the life Corporal, is to lose the life
Eternal; and he that will not suffer with Christ, shall not reign with him;
therefore most tender Ones, I have by Gods Spirit given over the Flesh, with
the fight of my Soul, and the Spirit has the victory, the Flesh shall now ere
it be long leave off to sin, the Spirit shall reign Eternally; I have chosen
the death, to confirm the Truth by me taught; what can I do more? Consider with
your selves, that I have done it for the confirmation of Gods Truth; pray that
I may continue unto the end, the greatest part of my assault is past I praise
my God: I have in all my assaults felt the present aid of my God, I give him
most hearty thanks for it; look not back, nor be ashamed of Christ's Gospel, nor
of the Bonds I have suffered for the same, thereby you may be assured it is the
true Word of God, the holy Ones have been sealed with the same, (Mark.) Its no
time for the loss of one man in the Battle, for the Camp to turn back, up with
men's hearts, blow down the daubed Walls of Heresy, let one take the Banner,
and another the Trumpet, I mean not to make corporal resistance, but pray, and
ye shall have Elias's defense, and Elizeas Company to right for you; the cause
is the Lords: Now my Brethren, I can write no more, time will not suffer, and
my heart with Pangs of Death is assaulted, but I am at home with my God; yet
alive, pray for me, and satute one another with a holy Kiss; the Peace of God
rest with you all, Amen.

From Newgate Prison, in haste, the day of my Condemnation. John Rough.

Another Letter of John Rough's, written to the Congregation two days before
he suffered.
The Spirit of all Consolation be with you, aid you, and make you strong to run
to the fight, that is laid before you, wherewithal God in all Ages has tried
his Elect, and has found them worthy of himself, by coupling to their Head
Christ Jesus, in whom, who so desires to live godly, the same must needs
suffer Persecution, for it is given unto them not only to believe, but also to
suffer; and the Servant, or Scholar cannot be greater then his Lord or Master:
But by the same way the Head is entered, the Members must follow; no life is in
the Members which are cut from the Body; likewise we have no life but in
Christ; for in him we live, move, and have our being; dear Hearts, now
departing this life to my great advantage; I make change of Mortallity with
Immortallity, of Corruption to put on Incorruption, to make my Body like to the
Corn cast into the ground, which except it die first, can bring forth no good
Fruit, wherefore Death is to me great advantage; for thereby the Body cease
from sin, and afterward turns into the first Original, but after it shall be
changed, and made brighter then the Sun or Moon; what shall I writ of this
corporal death, seeing it is decreed of God that all men shall once dye, happy
are they that dye in the Lord, which is to dye in the Faith of Christ,
professing and confessing the same, before many Witnesses; I praise my God, I
have past the same Journey, by many Temptations; the Devil is very busy to
persuade, the World to entice with promises and fair words, which I omit to
write, least some might think I do hunt after vain glory, which is farthest
from my heart: Lastly the danger of some false Brethren, who before the Bishop
of London purposed to confess an Untruth to my face; yet the God that ruled
Balaam moved their hearts, where they thought to speak to my Accusation, he
made them speak to my purgation, what a Journey (by Gods power) I have made,
these eight days before this day, it is above Flesh and Blood to bear; but as
Paul says, I may do all things in him which works in me, Jesus Christ. My
course, Brethren, have I run, I have fought a good fight, the Crown of
Righteousness is laid up for me, my day to receive it is not long to; pray
Brethren, for the Enemy does yet assault; stand constant unto the end, then
shall you possessed your Souls; walk worthily in that vocation wherewith you are
called, comfort the Brethren; salute one another in my name; be not ashamed of
the Gospel of the Cross by me preached, nor yet of my suffering; for with my
Blood I affirm the same; I go before, I suffer first the baiting of the
Butchers dogs; yet I have not done what I should have done, but my weakness, I
doubt not is supplied in the strength of Jesus Christ, and your Wisdoms and
Learning will accept that small Talent, which I have distributed unto you (as I
trust) as a faithful Steward; and what was undone, impute that to frailty and
ignorance, and with your love cover that which is and was naked in me; God
knows ye are all tender unto me, my heart bursteth for the love of you, ye
are not without your great Pastor of your Souls, who so loves you that if men
were not to be sought out (as God be praised, there is no want of men) he would
cause stones to Minister unto you; cast your care upon that Rock, the Wind of
Temptation shall not prevail; fast and pray, for the days are evil; look up
with your Eyes of hope, for the Redemption is not far off: And also that which
is behind of the blood of our Brethren, which shall also be laid under the
Altar, shall cry for your relief; time will not now suffer me to write longer
Letters; the Spirit of God guide you in and our, rising and sitting, cover you
with the Shadow of his Wings, defend you against the Tyranny of the Wicked,
and bring you happily unto the Part of eternal felicity, where all tears shall
be wiped from your eyes, and you shall always abide with the Lamb.

John Rough.

The Sufferings, and cruel Torments sustained by Cutbert Simson, of London, at
the hands of the cruel Papists.
This Cuthbert Simsion was a man of a zealous and faithful Spirit for Christ,
and the true Flock in London, Cuthbert Simson Martyr.
in that day wherein they greatly suffered, he ceased not daily to labor and
earnestly to endeavor their preservation from the corruption of the Popish
Religion, his pains, zeal, travil, patience and sidelity was not easily to be
expressed, as says the Record. A Relation of his cruel Usage in the Tower, is
as follows.

On the 13th day of the Month called December he was sent to the Tower by the
Council, and on the Thursday following, he was called into the Warehouse
before the Constable of the Tower, and the Recorder of London, who pressed him to
discover the persons he had willed to come to the Meeting he belonged to; but
he answered, he would declare nothing, whereupon he was set in the Rack of Iron
the space of three hours, then they asked him, If he would tell them, he
answered as before, then was he loosed and carried to his Lodging, and on the
day called Sunday following was brought to the same place again, before the
Lieutenant and Chelmly Recorder of London, who again Examined him, he answered
as before: Then the Lieutenant swore by God, he should tell, and caused his two
fore-fingers to be bound together, and put a small Arrow betwixt them, and drew
it threw so fast that the blood followed, and the Arrow broke; then they Rackt
him twice, and then carried him to his Lodging again; and ten days after the
Lieutenant asked him, If he would confess, to whom he answered, He had said as
much as he would; then about five weeks after, he sent him to a high Priest,
who past the Popes curse upon him forbearing Witness to the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. When he was brought before Bonner, several Articles were objected
against him, as denying the Sacraments and Ceremonies of the Church, and for
being at several great Meetings, Assemblies and Conventicles. At the same time
there were two other persons Examined before Bonner, viz. Hugh Fox, Hugh Fox
and Jo. Devenish Martyrs.
and John Devenish, against whom the general common Articles were produced, and
they were condemned and burnt with Cuthbert, Simson in Smithfield, upon the
28th day of the Month called March, for whose constancy to the Lord in his
Quarrel, his Name be exalted for evermore.

Some Passages wrote in a Letter from Cuthbert Simson to his Wife, out of the
Cole-house, are as follows.

Dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, I cannot writ as I do wish unto you;
I beseech you with my Soul commit your self under the mighty hand of our God,
trusting in his Mercy, and he will surely help us, as shall be most unto his
Glory, and our everlasting comfort, being sure of this, that he will suffer
nothing to come unto us, but that which shall be most profitable for us; for it
is either a Correction for our Sins, or a Trial of our Faith, or to set forth
his glory, or for all together, and therefore must needs be well done, for
there is nothing that comes unto us but by our heavenly Fathers providence;
and therefore pray unto our heavenly Father, that he will ever give us his
Grace to consider it; let us give most hearty thanks for these his fatherly
corrections, for as many as he loves he corrects: And I beseech you now, be
of good cheer, and count the Cross of Christ greater Riches then all the
vain-pleasures of England: I doubt not but you have Supped with Christ at his
Table, I mean believed in him, for that is the effect, and then must you drink
of his Cup, I mean his Cross (for that does the Cup signify unto us) take the
Cup, and then shall you be sure to have the good Wine Christ's Blood to thy
poor thirsty Soul; pray continually, in all things give thanks. In the Name of
Jesus shall every knee bow.

Cuthbert Simson.


One thing more I thought meet to mention, which I find upon record concerning
this Cuthbert Simson, which some may hardly believe who are apt to think all
things incredible, which vary from the common course and order of Nature, and
may look upon this to be more a Fantasy, then a real Vision, but I shall
relate the matter in short, as I find it, and so leave it to the tender Reader
to judge of it.

The day before this Cuthbert Simson was condemned, he being in the Stocks in
the Bishops Cole-house, Cluny the Keeper, about nine at night (according to his
usual manner) came to see whether his Prisoner was safe, and locked the Doors,
about two hours after Cuthbert heard one coming in to him, first opened the
Outward-door, then the Innerdoor, and though there was no Candle, yet he saw a
great brightness and light, most comfortable and joyful to his heart, and this
he declared to one Austen and others, and expressed much joy and solace in
declaring of it; and the Vision that he saw was comfortable unto him.

Soon after suffered William Nichol, who was burnt for the same cause at
Haverfordwest in Wales, and William Seaman, Thomas Carman, and Thomas Hudson
suffered in Norfolk.

William Seaman, was an Husbandman, of the age of twenty six years, dwelling in
Mendlesham in the County of Suffolk; William Seaman Martyr.
he was persecuted by one Sr. John Terril, who searched his house for him by
night, but missing of him, he set his servants to search for him, and when they
had apprehended him, brought him before their Master, who asked him, why he
would not go to Mass, and receive the Sacrament, Seaman replied, because it was
an Idol he would not receive it; wherefore Terril sent him to Hopton Bishop of
Norwich, to deal with him, who after he had examined him, soon passed his
bloody sentence of death against him; This Seaman, when he died, left behind
him a Wife, and three young Children, which her Husband being taken away, one
would have thought should have moved those pretended Christians to some pity
toward her, but instead of showing pity, they persecuted her out of the Town
of Mendlesham, because she refused to hear Mass; and one Coals, Lord of the
said Town, caused all her Goods, and Corn, to be seized and taken away.

Another of these Sufferers, was Thomas Hudson, of Ailesham in Norfolk, he was
thirty years of age, by trade a Glover, and a very honest poor man, having a
Wife and three Children, and laboring always dilligently in his employment,
being zealous for that Truth which bore testimony against the Papists
blasphemous preaching, who put the Draugh and Darnel for the Wheat, and that he
might avoid their Idolatries, and Superstition he absented from his house, and
went into Suffolk a long time, and there remained, traveling from one place to
another, at last he returned home again to comfort his Wife and Children, being
troubled at his absence, when he was come home, he conceiving his continuing
there would be dangerous, he and his Wife devised to make him a place among his
Fagots, to hide himself in, where he remained all day exercising himself in
reading and prayer, and thus he continued for about the space of half a year;
but at last his Zeal and Courage arose, and he walked abroad several days
openly in the Town, crying out continually, against the Mass, and such like
trumpery, and for three days and three nights together refused meat, or to
talk with any; one Berry Vicar of the Town, and one of the Bishops
Commissaries, caused the Officers to watch for him, who upon the twenty second
day of the Month called April, apprehended him by the break of the day, and led
him to Berry the Commissary, who examined him after this manner.

Do thou not believe, said Berry, in the Sacrament of the Altar, what is it?

Hudson replied, it is worms meat, my belief is in Christ.

Berry, Do thou not believe the Mass to put away Sins?

Hudson, No, God forbid, it is a patcht Monster, and a disguised Puppet, more
longer a piecing, then ever was Solomon's Temple.

At which words Berry stamped and fumed, and said, Well, thou Villain, I will
write to my Good Lord the Bishop.

Hudson said, There is no Lord but God.

Then he asked Hudson, whether he would Recant? to which he replied, the Lord
forbid; I had rather die many deaths then do so.

This Thomas Hudson, and the other two being brought to the Lollards-pit, and
there standing with Chains about them, on a sudden Thomas Hudson came forth
from under the Chain, which made some to doubt that he would have recanted, but
his two Companions at the Stake exhorted him, and comforted him, in the Bowels
of Christ; but Hudson felt more in his Heart and Conscience then they did
conceive was in him, for he was compassed with great grief of mind, not for his
death, but for lack of the feeling of Christ, for which he kneeled down, and
prayed earnestly unto the Lord, who at last according to his mercies gave him
comfort, and then he said, now I thank God I am strong, and so went to the
Stake to his Fellows again, and they all suffered constantly, and joyfully to
the Magnifying of the Lords Name.

Before I proceed to give a further Account of such as suffered Martyrdom, its
necessary to give a short Account of the said end of this Persecuting
Commissary Berry, who Persecuted Thomas Hudson, and others to death, as I find
it recorded.

This Berry in his rage was very fierce against many godly People in the Town
of Ailesham, he burnt all good Books he could get, and persecuted men for their
Consciences, and compelled many to Idolatry, and being Rich, and in great
Authority, he had the more power to Persecute; he divorced many men and women
for Religion, he was a great Swearer, and given to Women, (to write says the
History) how many Concubines and Whores he had, would be incredible; but mark
what Judgments the Lord brought upon him for his wickedness.

On a time, a poor man speaking a word to him, he struck him such a blow, with
the swingle of a staile, that he presently died thereon, for which (as is said)
Berry held up his hand at the Bar.

And shortly after one Alice Oxes, of the Parish of Ailesham, coming into his
House, and going into the Hall, he met her (and being before moved) smote her
with his fist, whereby she was fain to be carried home, and the next day was
found dead in her Chamber.

When this Priest heard that Queen Mary was dead, and that the glory of their
triumph quailed, the day called Sunday following, he made a great Feast, A
Judgment of God upon a Persecutor.
and had one of his Concubines there present, with whom he was in his Chamber
after Dinner, until he went to that he called his Evening-song, where he
Ministered Baptism, and as he was going home, between the Grave-Yard and his
House, he fell down suddenly to the ground with a heavy graon, and never
stirred after, and thus the Judgments of God was evidently seen to be Executed
upon him, by all that beheld him.

In the same Month that the aforesaid three suffered at Norwich, there was two
men and one woman burnt at Colchester, viz. William Harris, Richard Day, and
Christian George.

In the next Month, being the Month called June, a short, but sharp
Proclamation came forth to prohibit the spreading several good Books, therein
condemned under the title of Heresy and Sedition, laying the injunction so
strickt, that whosoever should be found to have any such Books in their custody
after the Proclamation came forth, should be reputed as Rebels, and to be
Executed forthwith according to the order of Martial Law.

Shortly after several persons were apprehended, being assembled in a religious
exercise in a back Close near Islington, two and twenty of whom were committed
to Newgate, and there remained seven weeks before they were Examined, seven of
these two and twenty were afterward burnt in Smithfield and six at Brainford.

One of them, viz. Reginald Eastland being required by the Bishop to answer
upon Oath to the Articles charged against him, refused, saying an Oath was to
end strife, but to begin strife (said he) and Oath is not lawful; and therefore
choosed rather to suffer what punishment they would inflict upon him, then to
swear the matter against himself.

After Bonner had past Sentence upon Roger Holland, one of them that was burnt
in Smithfield, Roger spoke to this effect; I am said he Moved by the Spirit of
God to say, that God will shorten your hand of cruelty, and after this day in
this place shall there not be any put to the Trial of Fire and Faggot, and as
he was speaking and exhorting the People, the Bishop turned back and charged
the Keeper, that none should speak with him without leave; being brought to the
Stake, he spoke after this manner; Lord I most humbly thank thy Majesty that
thou have called me from the state of Death, unto the Light of thy heavenly
Word, and now unto the fellowship of thy Saint^, that I may sing and say, holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hosts; and Lord into thy hands I commit my Spirit; Lord
bless these thy People, and save them from Idolatry.

Amongst these persons apprehended at Islington, some of them were Scourged or
Whipped by Bonner with his own hands; upon his deformed Effigies in Whipping
them, one made some Latin Verses, the which in English are as follows.

Muse not so much, that Natures work, is thus deformed now:
With belly blown, and head so swollen, for I shall tell you how;
This Canibal in three years space two hundred Martyrs slew,
They were his food, he loved so blood, he spared none he knew.
It should appear that blood feeds fat, if men lie well and soft:
For Bonners belly waxt with blood, though he seemed to fast often.
Oh, bloody Beast, bewail the death of those that thou have slain;
In time repent, since thou can not their lives restore again.
Thomas Hinshaw, and John Wills were taken and sent to the Cole-house, and from
thence Wills was had to Fulham, and there was kept eight days in the Stocks;
in which time Bonner much abused him, oftentimes raping him on the head with a
Stick, and flirting him under the Chin, saying, He looked down like a Thief,
and then had him into his Orchard, and in an Arbor, where he Whipped Tho.
Henshaw, he Whipped him; first, with a Willow-rod, and then with a Birchenrod,
laboring and dealing his blows so long as his fat panch could endure with
breath, oftentimes the Bishop speak to Wills to this effect, They call me (said
he) bloody Bonner, I would fain be rid of you, a vengeance on you, you have a
delight in burning: If I might have my will, said he, I would sow up your
Mouths, and put you into a Sack and drown you; and thus much concerning the
two and twenty taken at Islington.

Rich Yeoman Martyr.
The next that suffered was Richard Yeoman; after the Persecution arose, at
which time he was put out of his Living, he was put to great straits, so that
he was forced to travel from place to place, selling Pins and Laces to get a
livelihood to maintain his Wife and Children, at last was apprehended by order
from one called Justice Moyle, who set him in the Stocks a day and a night, but
having no evident matter to charge him with, let him go again, and returning
home to Hadley, Persecution against him was so hot, that his Wife kept him
privately a whole year in a Room locked up all day, where he carded Wool to get
Bread for his Family, although he was Seventy Years Old; at last the Priest of
the Town, one Newall, having intelligence of it, searched his House one night,
and took him out of his Bed, and put him in the Cage and in the Stocks until
day.

At the same time the said Newall had caused to be put into the Stocks one John
Dale, and there had kept him two or three days, for speaking to him in the
time of his Executing the Romish Service, and saying, O Miserable Blind Guides,
will ye ever be Blind Leaders of the Blind? Will ye never amend? Will ye never
see the Truth? Will neither Gods Threats, nor Promises enter into your Hearts?
Will the Blood of Martyrs nothing mollify you? O Crooked and Perverse
Generation. Out of the Stocks they were both taken, and bound like Thieves, and
set on Horseback, and their Legs bound under the Horses belly, and so carried
to the Goal at Bury, where they were put in Irons, and thrown into the lowest
Dungeon, where John Dale fell sick and died; after he was dead Richard Yeoman
was removed to Norwich Prison, where after close Imprisonment for some time,
being Examined and Required to submit himself to the Pope, he said, I defy
him, and all his detasteble Abominations; whereupon he was condemned and burnt.

There was also a Young man, one Joh. Alcock, a Sheer-man by Trade, who being
in the Market at Hadley, and Newall the Priest coming by with procession,
because he would not move his Cap, nor show any sign of reverence, he caught
hold on him, and called for a Constable, and said, Here Is an Heretic, and a
Traitor, have him to the Stocks, and afterward he was committed to Prison, and
shortly after carried him up to London, where he was long time kept Prisoner in
Newgate; where after many Examinations, and Troubles, for refusing to submit to
the Romish Religion, he was thrown into the lower Dungeon, where falling sick
he died in Prison.

Thomas Benbridge Martyr.
Thomas Benbridge of the Diocese of Winchester, a Single man, and one called a
Gentleman, who thought he might have enjoyed the pleasures of the World, if he
would have conformed, yet he rather chused quietness and peace of Conscience,
and therefore manfully withstood the Popish Doctrines, and was therefore
condemned by Doctor White Bishop of Winchester, but being brought to the
Stake, they used many insinuations, to cause him to recant, to whom at first he
said, Away Babyloaon, away; the Fire being kindled, he was suprised with fear,
so that he cried out, I recant, but before they would take him from the Stake,
his Adversary caused him to subscribe Articles upon a man's Back, and then he
was taken from the Stake, and committed to Prison, where being troubled in
Conscience that he had subscribed the Articles, he signified so much unto his
Enemies, who about a week after brought him again to the Stake and there burnt
him.

In this same Year, which was the last Year of Queen Mary, Jo. Cook a Sawyer,
Robert Miles a Sheer-Man, Alexander Lane a Wheelright, and James Ashly a
Batchellor, they were all four Examined before Hopton Bishop of Norwich, Edward
VValgrave Knight, and others; the chief thing they demanded in there
Examination, was, to know why they refused to go to Church (so called) to which
they answered, to this effect, that it was against their Consciences, and that
they could not follow false Gods; after their Examination they were all four
condemned, and burnt at Edmundsbury about the beginning of the Month called
August, which was not long before Queen Mary fell sick.

Alexander Gouch and Alice Driver Martyrs.
In the Month called November following Alexander Gouch and Alice Driver
suffered at Ipswich: The Woman in her Examination Smiling upon Doctor Spencer
that examined her, he said, Woman, why do thou laugh us to scorn?

She replied, whether I do or no, I may well enough, to see what Fools you be.

Then the Chancellor asked her, Wherefore she was brought before im.

Alice Driver, Wherefore, said she, I think I need not tell you that, for you
know it better then me, and if you know not, you have done me much wrong to
keep me in Prison, and know not the cause why.

Chancellor, Woman, Woman, What say thou to the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar? To which she made no answer, till he asked her the second time, and then
she told him, she knew not what he meant thereby, having not read in all the
Scriptures of such a Sacrament; and asked him, what a Sacrament was?


The Chancellor replied, It is a Sign, and another Doctor standing by, said, It
was a Sign of an holy thing.

Alice answered, Its true, it is a Sign indeed, and therefore cannot be the
thing signified; thus far we do agree.

The Doctor standing by, said, Christ said to his Disciples, Take eat this is
my Body; Ergo.

Alice Driver, Whether was it Bread he gave unto them?


Doctor, No, It was his Body.


Alice, Then, was it his Body they did eat over night?


Doctor, Yes, it was his Body.


Alice, What Body was it then was crucified next day?


Doctor, It was Christ's Body.


Alice, How could that be, when his Disciples had eaten him over night, except
he had two Bodies; then the Chancellor commanded the Jailer to take her away.


Alice, Now you are not able to resist the Truth, you command me to Prison
again; well the Lord in the end shall judge our cause, and to him I leave it.


The next day she was brought before them again, The Chancellor asked her, What
she said to the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar?

Alice, I will say nothing to it, for you will neither believe me, no^ your
selves; for yesterday I asked you what a Sacrament was, and you said it was a
sign, and I agreed thereto; and now you ask me again of such a Sacrament, which
I never read of in the Scriptures.


Chancellor, Thou naughty Woman, thou lie, we did not say it was a Sign.


Alice, Why, are not you the men that you were yesterday; will you eat your own
words; are not you ashamed to lie before all this Multitude here present, who
heard you speak the same. The Doctor that sat by, told her she was deceived,
there was three Churches.


Alice said, Is there mention of so many in the Scripture; show me the place
where it is written?

The Doctor feeling for a Bible, but had none.

Alice said, you are a good Doctor, to sit here a Judge, and have not the Book
of the Law by which you should Judge.

Doctor, Have you one? No, said she, Then said he, I am as good a Doctor as you.


Alice, I had one, but you took it from me (as you would take me from Christ if
you could) Then the Chancellor having no more to say, rose up, and read the
Sentance in Latin against her, and committed her to the secular Power, and
shortly after A. Gouch and she were burnt together at Ipswich.


Shortly after Philip Humfrey, John David, and Henry David his Brother were all
three burnt in Bury in Suffolk, for the cause of Religion, being prosecuted by
Clement Higham Knight, the same Month that Queen Mary died.

About this time also suffered at Exeter a poor Woman whose name was Pressed,
this Woman going into Peter's Steeplehouse in Exeter, and seeing one making new
Noses to certain Images which were disfigured in King Edwards time, she
reproved him, saying, what a mad man art thou to make them new Noses which
within a few days shall all lofe their heads; for these words she was clapped
fast and close in Prison; this poor Woman was by many ways tried both by hard
imprisonment, throatnings, taunts and scorns, but neither frowns nor flatteries
would prevail to move her from her profession, but she continued an Example of
Constancy to all that professed the Truth, which her Enemies perceiving, they
removed her from the Bishops Prison to Guild Hall, where she was exhorted to
leave her fond Opinions, telling her, she was not fit to meddle with such high
matters.

Though I am not, said she, yet with my death I am content to be a Witness of
Christ's death: And I pray you, make no longer delay with me, for my heart is
fixed, and I will never turn to your superstitious doings.

Then the Bishop said, The Devil did lead her.

No said she, it is the Spirit of God which leads me, and which called me in
my Bed at Midnight, and opened his Truth to me. Then the Priests and others,
Shouted and laughed at her: When the Sentence was read against her, and she was
condemned to be burnt to death; she lifted up her Voice, and said, I thank thee
my Lord, my God, this day have I found that which I have long sought for: At
which words, They mocked her, and so being brought to the Stake, she was as
lively and cheerful in her Countenance, as if she had been prepared for that
day of her Marriage, to meet the Lamb; and so she ended this Mortal Life. She
was a Woman very patient in her Words and Answers, in her Apparel, Meat and
Drink, moderate and sober, and would never be Idle, and was a great comfort to
such as talked with her; and in her trouble she refused to take Money, saying,
whilst I am here God has Promised to feed me, and I am going to a City where
there is no need of Money: And in the time of her suffering she forsook Husband
Children, who Persecuted her because she would not stoop to Idolatry, and when
after Sentence and Judgment was given against her, they offered her that if she
would recant and turn, her life should be spared: Nay, said she, God forbid
that I should lose life Eternal for this life; I will never turn from my
heavenly Husband to my earthly Husband, from the fellowship of Angels to Mortal
Children. If my Husband and Children were faithful, then am I theirs; God is my
Father, my Sister, my Brother, and my Friend most faithful.

Five persons burnt at Canterbury.
We are now come to a stop of the Issue of Blood, and the rage of Persecution;
for the Testimony of Truth in Queen Maryes time, and the last that suffered in
her time, were five that were burnt at Canterbury, about six days before her
Death, viz. John Cornford of wortham, Christopher Brown of Maidstone, Jo.
Hurst of Ashford, Alice Sloth, Katherine Tynley, which five persons being in
the custody of the Archdeacon of Canterbury, who being at London, and
understanding the danger of the Queens dying, Posted home to dispatch them out
of the way; in the which fact, the Tyranny of this Archdeacon, seems to
exceed Bonner's cruelty; for several that were under his custody, were
delivered by the Death of the Queen; after they had suffered many great
Exercises and Trials.

Here follows an Account of such who suffered Trials and Imprisonments for
their Profession of the Truth, and who in all likelihood had also been burnt
for the same, had not God, through his Mercy and Providence preserved them by
the Death of the Queen.
At this time diverse there were in many places of the Realm Imprisoned, whereof
some were but newly taken, and not Examined, some begun to be Examined, but
were not condemned, several were Examined and condemned, but no Writ being sent
down escaped; others were condemned, and the Writ sent down for there burning,
but the Bishop, Chancellor, and Queen happning to die together, about one time,
they were Marvelously preserved, amongst whom was one John Hunt, and Richard
white, both Imprisoned at Salisbury, and other places, This Examnation was on
the 26th of April, 1557.
where they lay above two years, and were often troubled by Priests and
Bishops; Richard White being brought before Capon Bishop of Salisbury, and
Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, and a great number of other Priests; Bishop
Brooks said, Is this the Prisoner? and said, Friend, wherefore come thou
hither?

White, I trust to know the cause, for the Law says, in the Mouth of two or
three Witnesses, things must stand.


Dr. Capon. Did not I Examine thee of thy faith?


White, No, you did not Examine me, but commanded me to the Lollards Tower,
and that no man shoeld speak with me, and now I do require mine Accuser; say
what I have said, and I will answer you.


Then the Chancellor said, Thou shall corfess thy Faith ere then depart, and my
Lord of Gloucester shall Examine thee.

White, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, because it is the power of
God to Salvation to all that believe; and St. Peter says, If any man do ask
thee a reason of the hope that is in thee, make him a direct answer, and that
with meekness: And being referred to the Bishop to Examine him, he said, Will
you take the pains to wet your Coat in my blood? Be not Guilty thereof, I warn
you, and that before hand.


Brooks, I will do nothing contrary to our Law, declare thy faith (said he)
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar.


White, What is a Sacrament? I find not that word Sacrament in the Scriptures.


Much discourse they had concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, which for
brevities sake is omitted; and at last the Bishop cried, Away with him to the
Lollards Tower, and dispatch him as soon as you can; this was the Substance of
his Examination.

The occasion of his and his Companions long detainment in Prison, and not
Executed, was the moderation of the Undersheriff, who when he had received the
Writ to burn them, said, I will not be guilty of these men's blood, and
immediately burnt the Writing; within few days after, the said John Hunt and
Richard White, being in a low and dark Dungeon, in an Evening fell upon their
knees to prayer, but could not utter words for weeping and tenderness of Heart,
and so continued a great while in tears, the next morning news was brought them
that the Chancellor their great Enemy was dead, who died about the same time
that they were in such a weeping frame; however, they there continued in Prison
till the coming in of Queen Elizabeth, and then were set at Liberty.

At this time also was delivered by the Providence of God, one John Fetty, a
poor Tailor of Clarkenwel, whom his Wife complained of to the Priest of the
Parish, for that he would not go to Mass, and be partaker of their Idolatry,
notwithstanding this unkind fact of his Wife, yet did he cherish her and
provide well for her, but notwithstanding his gentle dealing with her, and that
she had recovered her health, having been ill, did again accuse him, whereupon
he was apprehended, and by one of the Queens Commissioners sent to the Lollards
Tower, where he was put into the painful Stocks, and had a dish of Water set by
him with a Stone put in it, after he had layn there about two weeks hanging in
the Stocks, sometimes by one Leg and one Arm, and sometimes by the other, and
sometimes by both; it happened that one of his Children, a Boy of the Age of
about eight or nine Years came to the Bishops House, to see if he could see his
Father, at his coming thither, one of the Bishops Chaplains asked him, What he
lackt? The Child answered, that he came to see his Father; the Chaplain said,
Who is your Father? The Boy pointing toward Lollards Tower, told him, that
his Father was in Prison there. Why, said the Priest, thy Father is an
Heretic: No, said the Boy, my Father is no Heretic; but you are an Heretic,
for you have Balaams mark.

With that the Priest took him by the hand and led him into the Bishops House,
and there stripped him naked amongst them, and in a most shameful manner, without
all pity, Whipped and Scourged this poor Child, till he was all in a gore blood,
and then caused Cluney the Keeper to carry him in his Shirt to his Father in
Prison, the blood running down by his heels.

The poor man seeing his Child, cried out for sorrow, Alas, Will, who has done
this to thee, the Boy answered, As I was seeking to come to see you, a Priest
with Balaams mark, took me into the Bishops House, and there I was so used.
Cluney the Keeper heering this, pulled the Boy out of his Fathers hands, and
carried him back again to the Bishops House, where they kept him three days,
at the three days end, the Child's Father was brought before Bonner, and coming
into the Bishops Chamber, he said, God be here, and Peace.

Then said Bonner, That is neither God speed, nor Good morrow.

Then said Fetty, if you kick against this peace, this is not the place that I
seek for, and espying a Crucifix lying in the Window, he asked the Bishop,
whether Christ was handled so cruely as he was there pictured?

Yea, That he was said the Bishop.

Fetty, Even so cruelly do you handle such as come before you; for you are unto
Gods people as Caiphas was unto Christ.

Then said the Bishop thou art a vile Herotick, and I will burn thee, or else I
will spend all that I have to my Gown.

Nay, said Fetty, you were better give your Gown to some poor body, that he may
pray for you. But notwithstanding this talk the Bishop considering what danger
the Child was in, by reason of their cruel whipping, and cruelty used toward
him, let the father and him both go at Liberty, but within fourteen days after
the Child dyed.

The Martyrdom of Nicholas Burton Englishman, and Merchant in Spain.
Nicholas Burton Martyr in Spain.
The fifth day of November in the year 1560. Nicholas Burton, Merchant of
London, being in the City of Cadiz, was apprehended by the Officers of the
Inquisition, who knowing himself clear, asked them that did Arrest him, what
they laid to his Charge, they answered nothing, but commanded him with cruel
threatenings to hold his peace, and so carried him to the common Prison of the
Town, where he remained in Irons fourteen days amongst Thieves; and because he
declared the Truth amongst the Prisoners, according to the Tallent that God had
given him, exhorting them to reject the Popes Traditions, which being known to
the Officers of the Inquisition, they conveyed him, laden with Irons, from
thence to the City of Civil, into a more cruel and strait Prison, called
Triana, where the persecuting Fathers of the Inquisition proceeded against him
according to their accustomed tyranny, that never after he could be ever
suffered to write or speak to the English Nation.

In December following they brought him, with a great number of other Prisoners
for professing the true Christian Religion, into a place in the City, called
the Awto, where the Inquisitors sat in Judgment; Nicholas Burton they had
clothed with a Canvas Coat, whereupon in diverse parts was painted a huge
Devil, tormenting a Soul in a flame of Fire, and on his head a Coppintanke of
the same work.

His Tongue was forced out of his Mouth with a Cloven-stick fastened upon it,
that he should not utter his Conscience and Faith unto the people, and so he
was set with another English man of South ^^pton, and diverse other condemned
men for Religion, as well French men as Spaniard upon, Scaffold over against
the said Inquisition, where Sentence and Judgment was pronounced against them,
and immediately after the Sentence was given, they were all carried to the
place of Execution without the City, and after he was burnt, they immediately
seized all the Goods and Merchand^^^, both of his own and other men's that he
was entrusted with as Factor.

A Merchant of Bristol who had sent Goods to him, hearing of this, sent over an
Agent to Civel, to recover his Goods out of the Inquisition so wrongfully
seized.

At length, after he had spent four Months time, and great charges he was at,
was by the Inquisitors still, shifted off from time to time, Posting him from
one to another, till he had spent his Money and could get no relief; but being
earnest to be dispatched, he was at last himself also shut up in a close
Prison, where being two or three days, after brought before the Court, where
because he demanded his Goods, they bid him say his Avemary, and sent him to
Prison again as an Heretic, and afterward brought him forth upon the Stage in
a disguised manner, where Sentence was given against him that he should lose
all the Goods he sued for, thought they were none of his own, and suffer a
Years Imprisonment besides.

The Scourging of Thomas Green.
Thomas Green Servant to one VVayland a Printer, for dispersing a Book called
Antichrist, was bought before Docter Story, who asked him, Where he had that
Book, and called for Cluney the Keeper of the Lollards Tower, and bid him set
him in the Stocks; he had not been two hours in the Lollards Tower, but Cluney
took him out and carried him to the Cole-house, where he took a Frenchman out
of the Stocks, and putting a Bolt and Fetter upon Thomas Greens right Leg, and
left Hand, he set him cross Fettered in the Stocks, and took the Frenchman
away with him, and there he lay a day and a night; the next day the Keeper
came, and said, Let us shift your Hand and your Leg as you may not be lame, and
there he remained six days, and then was sent for by Doctor Story, who asked
him, Where he had the Book, he told him, He had it of a Frenchman; How came
you acquainted with him, said the Doctor?

Thomas Green replied, Coming to Newgate to my Friends who were put in for
Truth's sake, where the Frenchman also came, and there we were acquainted.

Then Story required him to bring two Sureties; Thomas Green told him, He could
find no Sureties.

Then said Story to the Keeper, Lay him safe in the Cole-house, I Will make him
tell another tale at his next coming, so he lay in the Stocks day and night for
ten days before he was called again; and then the Doctor asked him, Whether he
would tell the Truth?

Thomas Green replied, I can tell no other Truth then I have told already, and
thereupon was committed to Prison for fourteen days more.

Then Story sent for him again, and calling him into the Garden before a
Chaplain and two others, who said, The Book had both Treason and Heresy in it,
and asked Thomas Green, What he said of it? he said, He knew no evil by it: The
Doctor in a chafe, said, He would hang him up by the hands with a Rope and cut
out his Tongue, and out off his Ears, and called him Heretic, and bid Cluney
lay him fast in the Cole-House, where he was kept alone without Company, in a
place caled the Salt-house, having upon his Leg a Bolt and a Fetter, and his
hands manackled together with Irons, Q. Mray, An. 1558.
and there continued ten days; having nothing to lie on but bare Stones, or a
board.

Whilst he lay there in Prison two women being brought in, he was carried to
the Lollards Tower and put in the Stocks, and there kept night and day more
then a Month, and none suffered to come to him or speak with him, but the
Keeper who brought him meat; shortly after he was sent for before one Hussy,
who threatened him he should be whipped: So Thomas thanked him, and went away
with his Keeper to the Lollards Tower again, where he remained two or three
days, and then was brought to the Gray-Friers, now called Christs-Hospital,
where he was whipped, and delivered him to the Portor, who put him into a
stinking Dungeon, after he had remained a Prisoner a Month, Dr. Story came to
him, and calling for two Beadles, and Whips to Whipped him, and caused him to be
stripped, and to be Whipped with Rods; the Doctor standing by, commanded to give
him one hundred stripes, crying, If I might have my will, I would cut out his
Tongue: But upon the entreaty of some that stood by, who had more pity then the
Doctor, he received not so many stripes, and then after they had Whipped him,
they bid him go his ways.

About his time, one William Living, and John Lithal suffered deeply in the
Cause of the Gospel.

William Living being brought before Bonner's Chancellor, where after short
Examination, he commanded Cluny to take him to the Colehouse, and took from him
his Purse, Girdle, and New Testament, and put him in the Stocks, saying, Put in
both your Legs and your Hands also, and except you pay your Fine, I will put a
Collar about your Neck; What is the Fine, said William? Forty Shillings, said
the Keeper, I am never able to pay it, said William.

A Kinswoman seeing him in this condition, gave the Keeper forty pence to take
him out of the Stocks, he took her Money, and let him out to eat his Supper,
and at seven of the clock he put him in the Stocksagain, and so he remained
till two of the clock the next day.

The Thursday following, in the afternoon, he was had to the Lollards Tower,
and there put in the Stocks having the favor to put his Legs in the same holes
that John Philpots leg had been in, and so lay all night, no body coming to him
either with meat or drink; and shortly after two men were surety for him, and
paid his Fees and he was discharged.

When John Lithal was Examined before the Chancellor, who asked him, What
Church he was of, and why he came not to his Parish Church?

Lithal answered, I am of the Church of Christ, the Fountain of all goodness.

He was used with great extremity and cruelly by Cluny the Keeper at Lollards
Tower, who hanged him in a great pair of Stocks, where he lay three days and
nights, till he was so lame that he could not stir nor move: In the time of his
great suffering several of his Neighbors Importuned the Chancellor for his
deliverance, whereupon the Chancellor sent for him, and spoke to him to this
effect, will you that your Neighbors enter into Bonds for you or not.

Lithel, By my mind they shall not; wherefore I defire you that you would not
bind me, Q. Mary, An. 1558
but let me serve God with my Conscience freely; for it is written, they that
lead into Captivity shall go into Captivity, and they that strike with a Sword
shall perish with the Sword; I desire you, said he, that be my Neighbors, that
you would not enter into bond for me, it goes against my Conscience that you
should.

Chancellor, I will not bind you to do any thing against your Conscience.

Then the Bond was made, but he would not seal it; wherefore the Chancellor
said, its pity thou have so much favor showed thee, for these honest men's sake
I will discharge thee.

The Examination of Elizabeth Young before M. Hussy.
He Examined her of many things; First, Where she was born; and who was her
Father and Mother?

Elizabeth Young, Sir, all this is but vain talk, and very superfluous, I
think you have not put me in Prison to know who was my Father and Mother; but I
pray you go to the matter that I came hither for.


Hussy, Wherefore wentest thou out of the Realm?


Elizabeth, To keep my Conscience clear.


After some other discourse, he asked her, What age she was of, she replied,
forty and upwards.

Hussy, Twenty of those years thou wentest to Mass.


Elizabeth, Yea, and Twenty more I may, and yet come home as wise as I was at
first; for I understand it not.


Hussy, Why wilt not thou go to Mass?


Elizabeth, My Conscience will nor suffer me, for I had rather all the World
should accuse me then my own Conscience.


Hussy, But why wilt not thou swear upon the Evangelist before a Judge?


Elizabeth, Because I know not what a book Oath is.


Hussy, Woman thou art come from beyond Sea, and have brought books with thee
of Heresy and Treason, and thou must confess to us who translated them, and
printed them, and who sent them over, else thou shall be racked Inch-meal, thou
traiterous Whore and Heretic, but thou shall swear before a Judge before thou
go; yea, and thou shall be made to confess how many Books thou haft sold, and
to whom.


Elizabeth, I understand not what an Oath is, and therefore will take no such
thing upon me.


Then said Docter Martin to her (who had formerly delivered her, being brought
before him at Westminster; I delivered thee (said he) and thy Husband, and I
thought thou would have done otherwise then now thou do; for if thou
hadest been before any Bishop in England, and said the words thou did before
me, thou had fried a faggot; and though thou did not burn then, thou art
like to burn or hang now.

Elizabeth, Q. Mary, An. 1558.
Sir, I promised you then that I would never be fed with an unknown Tongue, and
no more will I yet.


Dr. Martin, Thou shall be fed with that which shall be smally to thine ease.


Elizabeth, Do what God shall suffer you to do, for you shall do no more


Martin charged the Goalers Wife to give her one day bread, and another day
water.

Elizabeth, If you take away my meat I hope God will take away my hunger, and
then she was shut up under two Locks in the Clink as she was before.


At another Examination, Doctor Martin said, Wilt not thou confess, and keep
thee from the Rack?

Elizabeth, Sir, I can confess no more, do with my Carcass what you will.


At another time Doctor Cook said, let her head be trussed in a small Line, and
make her to confess.

Then said the Bishop, Why wilt not thou swear before a Judge, that was the
right trade of the Anabaptists?

Then said she, I will not swear that this hand is mine; my Lord Christ says,
that whatsoever is more then Yea Yea, and Nay Nay, it comes of Evil.

Roger Cholmly being by, said, It was a man in Woman's Clothes: Think you so,
said Bonner? Swear her upon a Book, seeing it is but a Question.

Then Doctor Cook brought her a Book, and commanded her to lay her hand thereon.

Elizabeth, (but she refused) saying, I will not swear.


Docter Cook said, swear before us, whether thou be a man or a Woman.


Elizabeth, If you will not believe me, send for Women into a secret place, and
I will be tried.


Cholmly, Thou art an Ill-favored whore.


Then said Bonner, How believe thou in the Sacrament of the Altar? and after
some other Questions they cried, Away with her.

And speaking of Spirit and Faith, Cholmly said, What nothing but Spirit and
Faith Where?

Then was she carried into the Cole-house, and searched for Books, and put into
the Stock-house, and a Knife, girdle and Apron taken from her, and there both
her hands were Manacled in one Iron, for several days, and afterward she was
removed into the Lollards Tower, and there she remained with both her feet in
the Stocks and Irons, till the next time of her Examination.

But shortly upon the request of two Women, who sought for her Liberty, and
became surety for her appearance before the Bishop of London, she was set at
Liberty.

In the Town of Bodfeild, in the County of Suffolk, was an ancient Woman, one
Elizabeth Lawson, apprehended by the Constable of the Town as an Heretic,
because she would not go to hear Mass, for which they laid her in a Dungeon, Q.
Mary An. 1558.
and after that she was carried to Norwich, and from thence to Bury-Goal, where
at last she was condemned to be burnt. After Sentence was past Sir John
Sylliard the high Sheriff took her home to his house, where she was hardly
kept, and wrapped in Irons, till at length, when by no means they could move her
to Recant, she was sent to Prison again with shameful revilings.

Thus she continued in Prison the space of two years and three quarters; in the
mean time there was burnt her Son and many others, where by she would often
say, Lord what is the cause that I may not come to thee with thy Children?
well, thy blessed will be done, and not mine.

Through the death of Queen Mary she was preserved, although she had been
before condemned to die.

It is also very remarkable to read and consider the many preservations from
time to time (that these People persecuted so hotly) received through the Lords
goodness in their Meetings in the City of London; for they met is private
places, sometimes one hundred, sometimes two hundred, about the latter end of
Queen Mary they greatly increased, and one remarkable Passage of their
preservation was as follows; one Cuthbert Simpson, one of their Church,
usually carrying a little Book in his Pocket of the Names of such as were
Members of the Congregation the which had been found about him when he was
apprehended, had not Rough their Minister been warned in a Dream of the danger
thereof, and thereupon sent to Cuthbert Simpson to leave the Book out of his
Pocket, which he did, otherwise all their Names had been discovered.

At this time the Popish Party so much abhorred these despised Peoples
Preaching, or strengthening one another at the time of their Suffering and
Martyrdom, that the Queen put forth a Proclamation, which was Proclaimed at
Newgate, and at the Stake where seven were condemned to suffer, strictly for
bidding any to pray or speak to them, or any ways to comfort them; but not
withstanding this Proclamation one Bentham one of their Ministers, in his
Christian Zeal and Charity opened his Mouth, and aloud said, I know they are
the People of God, and therefore cannot chose but wish well to them, and say,
God strengthen them, which words many People standing by, confirmed, saying,
Amen, Amen; so that then so many appeared to speak well of them, that the
Officers knew not what to say nor who to Accuse.

The said Bentham was another time marvelously preserved, for as, he was
passing the Streets, he was taken hold on to be a Quest man, upon the death of
a man found drowned, being loath to meddle, he was very earnest with the man to
be excused, alleging he had little experience in such a matter, and desired
them to take another that might have more Skill, but finding what he had said
would not satisfy them to excuse him, he further alleged, that he was a
Scholar of Oxford, and thereby privileged from being of any Inquest; the
Coroner demanded the sight of his privilege, he said, if he would give him
leave. he would fetch it; then said the Coroner, the Queen must be served
withour delay, Q. Mray, An. 1558
and constrained him to stay and hear the matter; when the Book was offered him
to swear upon, Bentham opening the Book, and seeing it a Popish Primmer,
refused to swear thereupon, speaking against the superstition therein
contained; what, said the Coroner, I think we shall have an Heretic among us,
and after further reasoning committed him to an Officer till further
examination; but mark, what happened, for while these matters about Heresy were
in debate, suddenly came the Coroner of the Admiralty and discharged the first
Inquest, saying, it belonged to his Officer to choose a Jury and Sit there, by
reason of which Bantham escaped their hands, and had no more said to him.

The Suffering and Preservation of Richard Bartie of Lincolnshire and
Katherine, Duchess of Suffolk, his Wife.
In the Reign of Queen Mary, Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester surmising the
Duchess of Suffolk to be one of his Ancient Enemies, because he knew he had
deserved no better of her, began to practice some revenge upon her for former
grudges, and thereupon subpaened her Husband Richard Bartie to appear before
him at his House at Mary-Overs, when he came before him, after much discourse,
at last he said, If I may ask the question of my Lady your Wife, is she as
ready now to set up the Mass as she was lately to pull it down? Does she think
her Lambs now safe enough, who said to me, when I veiled my Bonnet to her out
of my Chamber Window in the Tower, that it was merry with the Lambs now the
Wolf were shut up.

Richard Bartie, after he had heard him, endeavored to moderate things,
saying, that though them words seemed at that season bitter, yet if the cause
were considered one would purge the other, and for setting up of Mass, she had
learned by the persuasions of excellent men for Six Years past, inwardly to
abhor, and if she should then outwardly allow it, she should show her self a
false Christian, and to her Prince a Masking Subject; you know my Lord one by
Judgment reformed is more worth then a thousand transformed Temporizers, to
force a Confession of Religion by Mouth, contrary to that in the Heart, works
Damnation, where Salvation is pretended.

Then said the Bishop, That deliberation would do well, if she were required to
come from an Old Religion to a New, but now she is to returned from a New to an
Ancient Religion.

My Lord, said Bartie, in answer to that, not long since she answered a Friend
of hers, using your Lordships speech, that Religion went not by Age, but by
Truth, and therefore she was to be turned by persuasion, and not by Commandment.

The Duchess and her Husband daily understanding by their Friends, that the
Bishop intended to call her to Account for her Faith, and considering the
Sufferings and Extremity that might follow, endeavored to get the Queens
License to travel beyond Sea, which in a few days he obtained, and then first
went over by himself, leaving the Duchess behind, who had agreed to follow him,
Q. Mary, An. 1558
which with much difficulty she did, and in their travels beyond Sea they
suffered very much, for having taken a House in a Town called Santon, a Haunce
Town, under the Duke of Cleves Dominion, to which Town diverse Wallons were fled
for Religion, it was muttered about the Town, that the Duchess and her Husband
weregreater persons of note then they discovered themselves to be, and the
Magistrates being not very well inclined to Religion, a sudden order was given
out that the Duchess and her Husband should be Examined of their Condition and
Religion; Bartie hearing this, took his Wife and Child, and two other with him,
and on Foot traveled forthwith toward VVeesell, which proved a wet and
wearisome Journey, being not used to Foot it, and Passage otherwise they could
not hire; he being fain for some part of the way to carry the Child himself,
and she to earry his Cloak, and that which was worse, when night approached
coming to Weesel they could get no entertainment at Inns; the Innholders
suspecting him to be a Lance Knight, and the Duchess his Woman; so that they
were brought to a great straight, for it rained hard, the Child with cold
cried, and the Mother wept; the Husband seeing themselves destitute of Succor,
resolved to get some Straw and Coals, and lay them in a Porch that night, if he
could get no better Lodging; but in the midst of this hardship he met with two
Boys that spoke Latin, through their directions he found out a Wallons House,
where he met with one of his acquaintance, and one that had been a Friend to
him, who meeting together, and seeing the Duchess and her Husband in such a
dirty wet condition could not speak for some time to each other for tears; but
at last the comfort they received from their Friend revived them, and in a few
days he hired a fair House for them, and it was soon noised about the Town
what they were, and the uncivility of the Inn-holders toward them was openly
and sharply rebuked by the Preachers in their Pulpits, for being so unkind to
Strangers; but they were not long settled here, but they were unsettled again,
for a Snare was laid to apprehend them there, which through the kindness of the
English Ambassador they had intimation of whereupon they traveled to the
Palsgraves Country, and after some time of abode there, the King of Poland
hearing of their troubles, invited them into his Country, where they were
quietly and honorably entertained till the Death of Queen Mary.

The Sufferings and Preservation of Thomas Rose, Aged Seventy six Years, in the
Town of Luton, and Country of Bedford.
This Thomas Rose for his zeal for the Gospel was informed against to the
Council, who sent a Messenger down to Hadley in Suffolk to apprehend him, being
before the Council, the charge against him was, that he was privy to the
burning of the Rood of Dover-Court, for this he was committed to Prison to the
Bishop of Lincolns House in Holburn, and there remained from the time called
Shrovetide till Midsummer, very sore Stocked, the Stocks being very high and
great, so that day and night he did lie with his back on the ground upon a
little Straw, with his heels so high, that the blood fell from his feet, so
that his feet were almost without sense for a long time, and he fell sick,
insomuch that the Keeper pitying him, acquainted the Bishop therewith, and
told him, He would not keep him to die under his hands; whereupon the Bishop
extended some charity, and gave him some more ease and liberty; but would not
suffer Thomas Rose his own Mother to visit him, but bid her go home, for she
might not see him; but she giving the Keeper four Shillings, he let her speak
to him through a Grate; from thence he was removed Prisoner to Lambeth, but was
shortly after delivered, and after he was at liberty, for preaching against
Auricular Confession, Transubstantiation, and such other Points contained in
the six Articles (which then so to do was Death by the Law) wherefore he was
narrowly sought after by the Duke of Norfolk, who being Lieutenant, commanded
that whosoever should take him, should hang him on the next Tree; Thomas having
notice of what was intended against him, was conveyed into Flanders, where he
remained some Years, and afterward coming over into England again, was
received by the Meeting at London to be their Preacher, who at their Assembles
would often at a night gather ten pounds for the Assistance and help of such as
suffered in Prisons for the Truths sake.

He was secretly preserved often times in this Assembly at London, yet at
length through treachery was taken with thirty five at a Meeting in Bow-Yard in
Cheapside, at a Sheer-mans House on the day called New-years-day, and was had
before Stephen Gardner to be Examined, who committed him to the Clink till a
seasonable time to do it: He was several times brought before the Bishop upon
Examination, where the chief discourse was upon the common Snares of
Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession, etc. And after long Disputations
privately to and fro betwixt them; the Bishop took him by the hand, and said,
Father Rose, you may be a worthy Instrument in the Church, and so committed him
only to his own Lodging that night, and afterward being set at liberty by the
hand of Providence, he traveled beyond Sea, and there remained till the Death
of Queen Mary.

A true Relation of the Martyrdom of Richard Atkins, an English man, by the
bloody Papists at Rome, Anno 1581.
Richard Atkins born in Hartfordshire, Rich. Atkins Martyr at Rome.
about the Month called July, in the Year aforesaid, came to Rome, and having
found the English College, Knocked at the Door, to whom diverse of the Students
there came forth to welcome him, hearing he was an English man; amongst other
talk had with him, they wished him to go to the Hospital, and there to receive
his Meat and Lodging according as the order was appointed; whereunto he
answered, I came not (my Countrymen) to any such intent as you judge, but I
came lovingly to rebuke the great disorder of your lives, which I grieve to
hear, and pity to behold; I come likewise to let your proud Antichrist
understand, that he does Offend the heavenly Majesty, Rob God of his Honor,
and Poison the whole World with his Abominable Blasphemies, making them do
Homage to Stocks and Stones, and that filthy Sacrament, which is nothing else
but a foolish Idol; when they heard these words, one Hugh Griffen a Welch-man,
and Student of the College, caused him to be put in the Inquisition; what he
answered there to their Examinations is not recorded, but after some days he
was set at Liberty again.

And one day going in the Street he met a Priest carrying the Sacrament, which
so offended his Conscience to see the People crouch and bow d^wn to it, that he
catched at it to have thrown it down, but missing of his purpose, and it being
judged by the People that he did catch at the holiness (that (they say) comes
from the Sacrament) upon mere devotion he was let pass and nothing said to him;
a few days after he came to the place called Saint Peter's Church, where diverse
being hearing Mass, and the Priest at the Elevation, without showing any
reverence he stepped amongst the People to the Altar, and threw down the Chalice
with the Wine, striving likewise to pull the Cake out of the Priests hands, for
which diverse rose up and beat him with their fists, and one drew his Rapyer,
and would have slain him; and away he was carried to Prison, where he was
Examined, wherefore he had committed so heinous an offense; he answered, that
he came purposely for that intent to rebuke the Popes Wickedness, and their
Idolary; upon this he was condemned to be burnt, which Sentence (he said) he
was right willing to suffer, and the rather, because the sum of his offense
pertained to the Glory of God; during the time he remained in Prison, sundry
Englishmen came to him, wishing him to be sorry for what he had done, and to
recant of his Damnable Opinion; but all the means they used were in vain; he
confuted their dealings by diverse places of Scripture, and willed them to be
sorry for their Wickedness, while God did permit them time, else they were in
danger of Everlasting Damnation; these words made the Englishmen depart, for
they could not abide to hear them: Within a while after he was set upon an Ass,
without any Sadle, being from the middle upward naked, having some
English-Priests with him to talk with him; but he regarded them not, but spoke
to the people in as good Language as he could, and told them, they were in a
wrong way, and therefore wished them to have regard to the saving of their
Souls. All the way as he went, there were four that did nothing else but thrust
at his body with burning torches, whereat he never moved nor shrunk one jot,
but with a cheerful Countenance labored to persuade the People to good; at
which the People not a little wondered; thus he continued almost the space of
half a mile until he came to the Place of Execution, which was before the
Mass-house, called Saint Peter's; where they had made a device, not to make a
Fire about him, but to burn his legs first, which they did, at which he was no
whit dismayed, but suffered all cheerfully, at which the People much admired.
Then they offered him a Cross to embrace, in token that he died a Christian,
but he put it away with his hand, calling them evil men to trouble him with
such poltery stuff when he was preparing himself to God, whom he beheld in
majesty and mercy, ready to receive him into the Eternal rest: they seeing him
in this mind, departed, saying, Come, let us go and leave him to the Devil whom
he serves. Thus ended this faithful Soldier, and Martyr of Christ his life, a
Witness against the Pope and his Followers wickedness.

Persecuted by the Papists in Foreign Parts, etc.
A brief Relation concerning the Horrible Massacree in France, Ann. 1571.
When the Admiral was wounded in both his Arms he Immediately thereupon said to
Maure, O my Brother, I do now perceive that I am beloved of my God, seeing that
for his Name sake I do Suffer these Wounds; at this time were many great
persons cruelly murdered; two thousand were murdered in one day.

At Meldis Two hundred were cast into Prison, and being brought out as sheep to
the slaughter were cruelly murdered.

At Orleans a Thousand Men Women and Children were Murdered.

The Citizens of Augustobona, when they heard of the Massacree at Paris, shut
the Gates of their Town, that no Protestant might escape, and cast all that
they suspected into Prison, which afterward were brought forth and Murdered.

At Avericome in like manner the suspected for religion were cast into Prison.

At Roan five hundred were put to death; Thuanus who writes the History of
these things, writes thus; this Example, says he, passed into other Cities,
and from Cities to Towns and Villages, so that it is by many Published, that in
all the Kingdom above thirty thousand were in these tumults diverse ways
destroyed by the Papists.

There was wonderful joy in Rome for this Massacree, and the Pope with his
Cardinals went a Procession, to give thanks unto God for this great benefit
bestowed upon the Sea of Rome, and the Christian World; a Jubily also was
published; and in the Evening the great Ordinance was shot off at the Castle:
Thus did this unholy Father delight to hear of the destruction of so many
Innocent People; well might Christ say, You are of your Father the Devil, and
the Lusts of your Father you will do; he has been a Murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is no Truth in him.

An Account of four Martyrs burnt at Lile in Flanders, Q. Mary, An. 1559.
in the year 1556. whose names were Robert Ogvier, and Jane his wife, Baudicon
and Martin his two Sons.
Few places can be named where the Truth was more freely, and with greater zeal
received then in this City of Lile, where Antichrists Tyranny was great; For
three years together it was secretly preached amongst them sometimes in Houses,
in Woods, in Feilds, and in Caves of the Earth, not without hazarding of their
Lives, if they had been discovered; yet could not these apparent dangers under
such Tyranny cool or abate the burning Zeal, which almost consumed the hearts
of his People, hungering and thursting after the spiritual food of their Souls.

What was amongst them preached, was accordingly practiced; works of Mercy and
Charity were there exercised, not only toward those of the Household of Faith,
but even toward them which were without, so as many by means hereof were drawn
and brought on to the knowledge of Christ: They ordained certain Persons, who
were men fearing God, and approved of, who went weekly from house to house to
collect the Alms of such as they knew to be faithful, admonishing every one how
to carry themselves in their Vocations, and of their duty in contributing
toward the relief of the poor Saints.

And thus each one according to his place endeavoring to express and manifest
his Faith by the Fruits thereof, namely, good works, in a short time the Lord
raised up a flourishing Meeting in this place, so that they consisted of a
competent number of Men, Women and Children, not only of the City, but of the
Villages nigh.

In the mean while Satan and his Adherance ceased not to storm and rage hereat,
not being able long to endure these their holy Meetings.

Upon the sixth of the Month called March, about ten at night, the Provest of
the City, with his Sergeants, armed themselves to make search if they could
find any met together in houses, but as then there was no Assembly; therefore
they went to the house of Robert Ogvier, and there violently entered, seeking
here and there for their prey; they found certain Books, which they carried
away, but he whom they principally aimed at was not then in the House, viz.
Baudicon the Son of the said Robert, who, according to his usual manner, was
gone abroad to visit some Brethren, but returning home, knocking at the Door,
his brother Martin watching his coming, bid him be gone, wishing him not to
come in, he thinking his Brother took him for some other, said, it is I, open
the Door, with that the Sergeants drew nigh, and opened it, and he came in.

Then said the Provest, I arrest you all in the Emperors name and commanded
each of them to be Bound, to wit, the Husband and his Wife with their two Sons,
leaving their two Daughters to look to the House; now as they conveyed them
along through the Streets, Baudicon, with a voice somewhat extended, which
might easily be heard at that time of the night, said Assist us, O Lord by thy
Grace, not only to be Prisoners for thy Name sake, but to confess thy holy
Truth in all purity before men, so far as to seal the same with our Bloods, for
the edification of thy poor Church.

Thus were they brought into several Prisons, where they were severally
handled, yet ceased they not to bless and praise the Lord with one consent;
within a few days after, they were brought before the Magistrates of the City,
and Examined, who first spoke to the Father in these words, It is told us, that
you never come to Mass, and also diswade others from coming thereto, and that
you maintain Conventicles in your House, whereby you have Transgressed the Laws
of the Emperial Majesty.

Robert answered to this effect, We read not in all the Scriptures that either
Christ or any of his Apostles ever said Mass; for they knew not what it meant:
As for the second Accusation, I cannot, nor will deny, but there have met
together in my House Honest People fearing God, I assure you not with intention
to wrong or harm any, but rather for the advancement of Gods Glory, and the
good of many; I knew indeed that the Emperor had forbiden it, but what then, I
know also that Christ had commanded it, who said, Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. Thus you see I
could not well obey the Emperor, but I must disobey Christ; in this case then,
I chose rather to obey my God then man.

When they were brought to the Fire, the last words they were heard to
pronounce were, Jesus Christ, thou Son of God, into thy hands we commend our
Spirits; and so they ended their Testimony. Within eight days after Jane the
Mother, and Martin her Son were both Executed in the same City.

The manner of the Merciless Inquisitors Tormenting such as are brought into
the Popish Inquisition in Spain.
When they purpose to torture any one, the Jailer is commanded to bring forth
his Prisoner into the accustomed place where it is to be given, which place is
under the Earth, and very obscure, then going through many turnings, and through
sundry Doors, so as the horrible cries of those who are there tortured can in
no wise be heard, there is a Seat prepared for the Inquisitors on high, with a
Rigister also, to behold their Tragical Act; the Torches being lighted, those
who are to Act their parts in this woeful Tragedy are brought in, the Tormentor
who attends their coming is covered all over with a black Garment, close to his
Body, and on his Head a black Hood, which hides his Face from being seen,
having only two or three holes made therein for himself to see and to breath
at; and all this is to terrify the more the poor patient, who beholds as it
were a grim Devil ready to Torment him; these Fathers being set upon their
Seat, begin again to charge the Prisoner voluntary to confess the Truth, which
if he refuse to do, and if it then happen, that Arm, or any other Member of his
Body be broken, or that they die on the Torture (for that is all the favor he
has showed him) they made it his own fault, and none of theirs; after they
have used all the terrible threats that can be, they cause him or her to be
stripped stark naked, whether Man, Woman or Maid, though they be never so
modest and bashful, many having fallen into their bloody fingers thus to to
have their nakedness discovered in the sight of others, was more grievous then
all their Torments besides which they endured, laying aside then all Humanity
in unclothing them, they put upon them linen Bretches, as if their secret
parts were better and more honestly covered with Bretches then with Shirt or
Smock, or as if the Torments they meant to put them to would not pierce deep
enough as well in the one as in the other; with such shameless Spectacles the
chaste Inquisitors fed their Ages, and with such cruel Lust, satisfied their
infamous and detestable virginity.

The Man or Woman standing naked, then only covered with little Bretches, they
beckon to the Tormenter, (who is well aquainted with their secret sign and
watch word, and can readily discern what Torments the holy Fathers would have
them put to, to teach them the Faith of the Roman Church.

Then standing thus naked, they exhort them once again to tell the truth. If
the Patient be to endure the Cord, they tie his hands behind his back pulling
him up eight or ten times, according to the number of twitches limited by the
Inquisitors to the Tormentor, that so nothing may be done there without order;
at the first encounter are reckoned up to him all his Articles, and then,
besides binding his hands, they tie his Thumbs together with a small Cord, then
they tie his Hands and Tumbs unto a greater Cord, hoisting him up by a Pulley
very high, which done, they put upon his Legs heavy Bolts, if he have not them
on before, to which are yet added for the first pull, an Iron weight of twenty
five pounds, which is hanged to those Bolts between his Feet; being thus
arrayed the Tormenter draws him up on high, the Register and Inquisitor mixing
therewith their former Exhortations, confess; when he comes to touch the Pulley
with his Head, they urge him yet then to confess; if he obey, they presently
let him down, if not, then they let him hang in this condition until he have
answered their demands; now after he has hung thus without making any
Confession, they let him down to redouble on his feet the former weight, and
then pulling him up again, threatening him, to hang there till he die, if he
declare not to them, what they ask of him, commanding thet Tormenter to let him
hang a long while, that through the heaviness of the weight, which hangs at his
Feet, all his Members and Joints are stretched out beyond measure; when the
Patient through the extremity of Torment which he endures cries out, they in
like sort cry as loud as they can, that he should now confess what he knows, if
not, then they let him fall; for when they perceive he continues constant, then
they commanded the Officer to let go the Cord, which is as soon done as spoken,
yet not wholly and altogether to the mid way, but a certain stop which hinders
his falling to the ground, by reason whereof he receives such a sudden check,
his Body is pitifully and miserably stretched.

But yet this suffices not, for then if through their importunity he will
confess nothing, they augment the weight the third time, and if the poor
creature, in regard of his intolerable pain, call upon the Lord to help him,
and desire to be let down, then they Scoff and Mock at him, pressing him to
confess, telling him, that is not all, threatening him by the Strappado, as
before. This Hellish Torture begins at nine, and lasts till one a clock;
and when they please to make an end, they ask the Tormenter, if he have the
other Engines ready, and at their going, all the comfort they give their
dissolate Patient, is thus; this shall suffice, say they, for this time, but
look between this and to morrow, thou advisest thy self well, what thou
ought to confess, other ways, thou art like to die under Torture; nor think
to escape by what thou have endured, for that is but a Bed of Roses in regard
of the Torment which is to come; they being gone, his clothes is put on, and if
he be not able to go, he is carried again unto Prison; a few days after they
send for him again, renewing their threats, that if he will not reveal those
that are of his Opinion, he must prepare himself for the Torture, wherein if he
any way miscarry, or Death follows, the fault shall be his, and not theirs; if
he continue unmovable in his mind, they cause the Jailer to bring him to the
place of Torture, and there they sitting in their Tribunal command him to be
stripped naked, and then tormented after the same manner as is before related;
besides, as an addition thereunto, they tie his thighs and hamstrings together
with a small Cord, forcing the same with pieces of Wood, so that the Cords do
eat into his very Flesh, in which extremity they leave him for three or four
hours plying him the whilst with infinite threats and derisions, which is all
the comfort that they minister unto him in this his most miserable condition.

Thus in short the Reader has an Account of the cruel Inquisition of these
pretended Christians in Spain. Now I shall proceed to give a further Account of
some that suffered under these Papists cruelty in diverse parts of France and
Flanders.

A Woman of Tours (whose Husband the Papists had not long before drowned)
having an Infant sucking at her Breast, about seven weeks old, and a Daughter
about sixteen Years Old, who was very beautiful; this Woman accompained with
her Children, they hailed to the River side, where kneeling down, she prayed to
the Lord, the Child sucking at her Breast, then she shifted her Child in the
Sun, and laid it upon the Grass, commending it to God, in the mean while this
Hellish Crew used many words to turn the Young Maid from her Religion; the
Mother being ready to be plunged into the Water, exhorted her Daughter to
persist in the Truth; the Daughter beholding their outrage, cried out in these
words, I will, said she, live and die with my Mother, whom I know to be a
virtuous woman; as for your threats and promises, I regard them not, do with me
what you please: The Mother was not yet dead when these merciless wretches
threw in the Daughter also, An. 1562.
and so they yielded up their Souls together as Witnesses against the Papists
cruelty; the Infant was taken up by a Soldier, who having kept it a day and a
night, laid it in a Steeple-House-Porch, whence being taken and given to a
Nurse to keep, it would never take the Breast after, but within two days it
died.

In the same City suffered one Glee an honorable woman, and constant to her
Profession, and when news was brought her, that she was condemned to be hanged,
she received it with joy, being conducted with the rest of the Prisoners about
the second hour in the afternoon toward the place of Execution, they would
have put a lighted Torch into her hand, and have had her to acknowledge she had
offended God and the King. Away, away with it, said she, I have neither
offended God nor the King, I need no such light to help me ask forgiveness of
my sins, use such things your selves, who sit and walk in the Darkness of
Ignorance and Error.

The one of her Kindred meeting her in the way presented to her veiw her little
Children, praying her to have compassion on them, seeing that by renouncing
your Religion, you may preserve your life. This caused the tears to flow down,
and this answer she made, I must needs say, I love my Children dearly, but yet
neither for love I bear to them, or any thing else in this World, will I
renounce the Truth, or my God, who is and will be a Father unto them; and
therefore to his Providence and Protection I commend and leave them; and so
passed on, and with cheerfulness finished her Testimony with the loss of her
life.

The Body of Coqueville being stripped naked, was dragged by the Murderers
from Valongues (being low Normandy) up and down his House with derision into a
Chamber, where they used to meet, and there spurning the dead body with their
feet, they bid him, Now pray to his God, and preach if he could; the Priests
stuffing the dead Mouth with the leaves of Bibles, and said to the dead Corpse,
Preach the Truth of your God, and call upon him now to help you.

A Letter written by Wouter Oom, Prisoner and Martyr in the City of Antwerp,
full of Consolation, against the fear of Persecution, directed to a Brother and
Sister of his.
Grace and Peace from God the Father, and from his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen:

Well beloved Brother and Sister, whom I love dearly for the Truths sake, and
for your Faith in Christ Jesus; these are to certify you, that I am in bodily
health, and enjoy the comfort of a good Conscience, I praise my Lord God
therefore, who is able to increase the same more and more by the powerful
Operation of his holy Spirit; whosoever they be that will forsake this present
evil World, and become Followers of their Captain Christ, must make account to
meet with many Persecutions, and Afflictions; for Christ has told us
aforehand, That we should be Hated, Persecuted, and Banished out of the for
his Names sake; An. 1562.
and this they will do, says he, Because they have neither known the Father
nor me; but be not afraid, says he, for I have overcome the World; St. Paul
also Witnesses the same thing, saying, All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer Persecution. And again, To you it is given for Jesus Christ,
not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake: And does not our
Lord Jesus Christ say, Blessed are you, when men persecute you, and speak all
manner of evil falsely against you for my Names sake: Rejoice therefore and be
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven: Now whereto serves all this, my
beloved, but to bring us into a conformity with our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ? For Christ has suffered for us, says the Apostle Saint Peter, leaving
us an Example, that we should walk in his steps; who also endured the Cross,
and despised the shame, for the obtaining of that joy which was set before him,
and became Poor to make us Rich, 2 Cor. 8, 9.

By him also are we brought by faith into that state of Grace wherein we stand
rejoicing in the hope of the Glory of God, knowing that Tribulation works
Patience, etc.

Wherefore, dear Brother and Sister, be not afraid of the fiery Trial which is
now sent among us to prove us, for what Father loving his Child, does not
correct it? Even so does the Lord chastise those whom he loves; for if we
should be without correction, whereof all true Christians are partakers; then
were we Bastards, and not Sons. And therefore Solomon faith, My Son, despise
not the Chastning of the Lord, neither faint when thou art corrected of him,
for whom the Lord loves, the same he corrects, even as a Father the Son in
whom he delights; fear not then to follow the footsteps of Christ, for he is
the Head, and we are his Members, even as Christ then has obtained full Joy
and Glory by suffering of Anguishes and Sorrows; so we also according to his
Example, must through many Tribulations enter into the heavenly places, even
into the New Jerusalem. Let us then say with Saint Paul, Christ unto me is in
life, and in death advantage: Let us cry out with him, O wretched Creatures
that we are! who shall deliver us from this Body of Death? See here how the
Faithful have desired to be with Christ; for with Abraham they had an Eye to
that holy City, which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. Let us
then, my beloved, cheerfully and willingly follow the Lord, possessing our
Souls by Patience; For it is a good thing, as says the Prophet Jeremiah, both
to hope and quietly to wait for the Salvation of the Lord; and good also it is
for a man to bear the Yoke, in his Youth; for such the Lord will comfort in the
end, and restore unto them the joy of his Salvation.

Lo here, dear Brother and Sister, what Consolations our God has treasured up
for us in his holy Word; for us, I say, whose desire it is to fear the Lord,
and to trust in his Grace and Mercy, for the Salvation of the Righteous is of
the Lord, he is their strength in the time of Trouble; wherefore giving all
diligence, let us add to Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to
Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness,
and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness. and to Brotherly Kindness Love; for if
these thing be in us, and abound, An. 1567.
they will cause us neither to be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ: The which, God our Father grant us for his Sons sake our
Lord, Amen.

Out of my Hole December the 11th 1562. Wouter Oom, Prisoner for the Truth.

A Relation of such things as fell out under the Government of Alva; And of many
men put to death, Anno 1567.
The Afflictions of the Protestants in the Low Countries were multiplied this
year under the Dominion of Ferdinando of Toledo Duke of Alva.

It is well known that the Spaniards using all their endeavorus to rule over
this Country at their pleasures had no better opertunity, to accomplish their
designs then to establish among them their Inquisition, thereby todomineer over
the goods, honors and lives of every one; the noble Citizens and Commons did
what they could to oppose the same, to which purpose they had instantly
besought the King to afford them his Royal presence, that hearing once their
Complaints, his Majesty might take some order for matters of so great
Importance, alleging to this end the Example of the Emperor Charles his
Father, who upon a business far inferior to this, adventured himself with much
diligence to pass through the Enemies Country, who were but a while before
reconciled, only to stay some Mutinies begun in the City of Cand. These things
had so moved the King that he made them a promise by Letters of his coming; but
his intentions were broken of by such as were the upholders of the Inquisition,
that so they might with the more facility attain the end of their desires,
instead of their King then, they had sent unto them the Duke of Alva, who at
his Entrance found the Prisons replenished with Gentlemen, and other Personages
of note, whom the Duchess of Parma had left in bonds after her death.

Long did they languish in this Captivity, whilst the Duke of Alva by fair
promises dissembled a kind of meek and gentle carriage of mind toward them
giving them some hope of a General pardon, proceeding from the Kings Clemency,
that thus he might catch the Lords, and Governors the more cunningly into his
Nets, whereof the Lord Lemoral Earl of Egmond, Prince of Gaud Governor of
Planders and Artois, and others of quality gave but too Lamentable experience,
who being led with vain hopes were at length inhumanly put to death.

The sixteen Provinces also subjecting themselves under this new Government,
lost their ancient Liberties and Privileges, which evidently appeared by the
exploits done from the year 1567. hitherto by a new Council of twelve, elected
and settled there by the Duke, the principal of which were Vergas and Elrio
Fathers of the Inquisition, which Council was commonly called, the Council of
BLOOD.

In the year 1568. the Duke of Alva began to declare to the World his feigned
meekness, An. 1568.
putting to death two Brethren, Barons of Battembourg, The names of three
Martyrs, Imprisoned at Antwerp, were Schoblant, Son of Barthel, Jo. de Hues and
Joris Comans.
and several others he Executed at the same time at Brussel. These two Brethren
from the flower of their youth had constantly professed the pure Doctrine of
the Gospel, and in the end were put to death for their Testimony to the same.

Shortly after there were taken and imprisoned at Antwerp several persons whose
constancy to Death will appear by what they writ to certain of their Brethren,
Dated the 17th of March, as follows.

Seeing it is the will of God, that we should suffer for his holy Name and in
the Quarrel of his Gospel; we certify you, Brethren, that we are hitherto of
good courage, howsoever the flesh continually rebels against the Spirit,
counselling it ever and anon according to the advice of the Old Serpent; but we
are well assured that Christ who has bruised, will also still bruise the
Serpents Head, and not leave us comfortless; true it is, we are now and then
pricked in the heel, but that is all the Serpent can do, nor are we
discouraged, but keep our faith close to the Promises of God, who is the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, having created all things of nothing: He forsook not
Joseph in Eygpt, nor left the three Young Men in the fiery Furnace; no nor
Daniel in the Lions Den; this is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of
their Righteous Posterity, so that we can without fear say with the Prophet
David, The Lord is my Help, Tower, Strength and Refuge: By such, and the like
Scriptures, dear Brethren, we comfort our selves in our Bonds, rejecting all
confidence in man whatsoever; be not dismayed then, good Brethren and Sisters,
for our Bonds and Imprisonment, for so is the good will of God now toward us;
and therefore pray rather, that he would give us grace to persevere constantly
unto the End, so be it.

One of these three imprisoned in Antwerp wrote a few Lines to the Church of God
in Antwerp, as follows; Brethren, I write unto you, being left alone; whereas
we were three in number, John Hues is now dead in the Lord, I did my best to
comfort him whilst he breathed so as now I am alone, and yet not altogether
alone, seeing the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is with me, he is my
exceeding great Reward, and will not fail to reward me as soon as I have laid
down this earthly Tabernable: Pray unto God that he would strengthen me to the
end, for from hour to hour I expect the dissolution of this house of Clay.

When Joris one of the three was examined before the Magistrates, the Marquess
said unto him, I have hitherto spared you, hoping to see you recant, but you
grow worse and worse.

Joris replied, during the time of my Imprisonment I have shed many tears; and
further said, he was now become resolute, and could not fashon himself
according to their desire, although they burnt him as they had done his Brother
Schoblant.

Marquess, I can tell you, it will cost you but little better cheap.

Joris, I am ready if it be to morrow.

Then said one of the Standers by, he has neither Wife, Child nor Goods to
lose, and that makes him so willing to dye.

Joris, You shall answer these your doings at the last day, where you must all
appear, and then there will be no respect of persons.

Marquess, We have heard you preach too long; take him Jailer, and cast him
into the Hole; then was he put among Thieves as a Lamb among so many Wolves:
Thus this constant Witness remained firm till death.

The Spectacles of dead Bodies slain by the Bloody Inquisition was a Dreadful
sight, being gazed on in a manner, in every place, especially in the City of
Tournay, and of the Valentians; in regard of the multitudes of Believers, both
of men and women; who had long Languished in sundry Prisons, in great miseries
and necessities. Now that we may not forget what fell out in the beginning of
this Year 1569. Thus it happened in the City of Valence, seven and fifty
persons were executed for no other cause but for cleaving to the true Faith of
Christ Jesus, not without much astonishment of the poor people of that City.

Among these sad Relations, a little to quicken and refresh the Spirit of the
Reader, I will here insert a Letter, full of Consolations, written out of
Prison, to the Faithful, by one William Tovart, Merchant, who had his dwelling
in the City of Lile in Flanders.

This honorable person being come to the Age of Eighty Years, or thereabouts,
used his House for the space of Fourteen or Fifteen Years for the Assembly in
the City of Lile to meet in: Being chased and Banished thence in the Year 1561.
he withdrew himself for a while to Tournay, whence he was constrained to fly,
and to go to Amiens and Moundediea, Cities of Prickardy; afterward returning
into his own Country, he came to reside in the City of Antwerp, where after he
had continued many Years, he was at length condemned to be burnt with two
others, who suffered for the same cause, but they put him to another kind of
Death, for they drowned him by plunging him in a Cistern of Water in Prison.
Amongst many Letters which he wrote, during the time of his Imprisonment, my
Author has selected out this one, which here follows.

Dear Brethren and Sisters in Jesus Christ,
I most humbly thank my God, that he has so fortified and comforted me by his
Grace, that I feel my self more cheered by lying in this dark Prison, then if I
were walking in the open Streets or Fields; I say, this I feel according to the
Spirit, for as touching the Flesh, what does it apprehend here, but stinking
Vapors and Smoke. Wherefore, my beloved, if it so fall out, that you be
apprehended for the Name of Jesus Christ; fear not the prison, nor those that
have power to Kill the Body, for having done that, they can go no further; be
not afraid then, seeing it is the reward which our good Captain Jesus Christ
has Promised to all his Faithful Soldiers and Servants; he who turns his back
in this conflict goes by the loss; but whosoever fights manfully, obtains in
the end the Crown; not a Crown of Gold, but of Glory Immortal; we here lay down
a fading life, filled with griefs and troubles, to change the same for a Life
Everlasting; we put off the Rags of this Mortal Flesh, to be clothed with Robes
Immortal; we forsake a loathsome Life, for joy and felicity eternal; ought any
gain or exchange to be compared with this? O sweet and happy Martyrdom! how
do thou dignifie and enrich us in despite of the World, Devil, and our own
Flesh? and which of us now can complain, seeing our Sovereign Lord and Master
has so expressly foretold it to all his Followers? will any man come after me,
says he, Let him then take up his Cross, and follow me; Let us bear, Oh, let
us then bear the Cross cheerfully, and with joyfulness, that we may be received
in the presence of his heavenly Father; for it is not only given us for to
believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake; and if we suffer with him,
then we shall also Reign with him.

Oh, that we could admire his bounty, who no sooner imployes us in his Work,
but has the Wages ready in his Hand wherewith to recompense us; your sorrow,
says he, Shall be turned into joy; let us then cast off every weight that
presses down, and whatsoever else that stands in our way to Heavenward, be it
Father, Mother, Brother, Sisters, Husband, Child, yea, and our own life also;
let us with the wise Merchant-man sell all, that with him we may purchase that
precious Pearl; how happy do I esteem them that are called to suffer, and leave
their Life for confessing the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Eternal Son of God
will confess their Names before his heavenly Father and his holy Angels; they
shall be clad with white Robes, and shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of Heaven
filled with gladness in the Presence of the Lamb; they shall eat of the Fruit
of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: Let us fix
the Eye of our Minds upon these so great and precious Promises of Jesus Christ,
which he has made to all those who persevere in well-doing unto the end. Oh!
how happy shall we be when we are delivered from these Bodies of Death to live
forever with our God? Let us then continually pray with the Disciples, Lord
increase our Faith. Oh, dear Brethren, remember me always in your prayers, who
am bound here in the Bonds of Antichrist; remember those also who are in
Bonds, as if you were bound with them: Pray, I say, without ceasing, for our
Adversary the Devil is always compassing us about to cause our Hearts to
faint, and you are not ignorant what a potent Enemy our own Flesh is unto us;
but I confidently believe that our God, who has begun this good Work in me,
will perfect the same, even unto the Day of Christ.

Farewell.

When the Massacrees began to play their parts in Rovan, they counseled those
of the Religion, Persecution and Massacree at Rovan.
to get themselves into the Prisons as into places of greatest security, from
the fury and rage of the people, but such as followed this advice were there
even ready to be devoured, as poor Sheep, by these greedy Wolves at their
pleasure.

Those who were murdered in the City in a few days, some in their Houses, and
others in the Prisons amounted to six thousand, besides more then fifty Women,
unto whom they exercised no less Cruelty then upon men.

Their names for brevity sake are here omitted, their dead bodies being piled
together were conveyed out of the City in Tumbrils, and thrown by heaps one
upon another into great pits, dug for that purpose: Their garments being
washed in the River, from their Blood, by certain poor Women, were afterward
distributed here and there to the Poor by the Papists, that they might seem
with their merciless and unjust Cruelty to mingle some Works of Justice and
Charity.

A Massacree at Toulouse.
Upon the eight day after the Massacree at Paris, about eight of the Clock in
the Morning, the chief of the Papists at Toulouse, received Advertisement of
that which had passed, with Letters directing them what they were to do, then a
Council was called; at the breaking up whereof, the great Gates of the City
were shut, only the little Wickets left open, and shortly after, they entered
into the houses of those of the Religion, whom they imprisoned in sundry
Prisons of the City, about three weeks after they put all these Prisoners
together into the Consciergery, which is a special Prison, deferring the
Slaughter of them until they received Warrant and Authority from Paris, which
having received, the Prisoners were called down to the Stairs foot, one after
another, and there Massacred, not permitting them so much leisure as to speak;
the Counselors who were of the Religion, after they had Massacred them, they
hanged them up in their Gowns upon a great Elm which was in the Court of the
Palace, and in the mean time sacked and pillaged their houses.

An English Man burnt at Rome.
In the year 1595 a young man, about the age of twenty five years being at
Rome, was much stirred in a Religious Zeal, against their hornble Idolatry, as
the Bishop was going a Procession the young man plucked the Pix out of his hand,
and threw it to the ground, calling, Wretched Idolater, for which he was
apprehended and sent to prison, and shortly after Pope Clement the eighth
hearing of it, ordained, that he should be immediately burnt, but some of the
Cardinals advised, that he might rather be kept till a further examination; and
accordingly they kept him eight days in prison, but when they see nothing
could be drawn from him, but these words, viz. such was the will of God: Then
they stripped him naked to the middle, and put on the form of a Devil or Dragon
upon his head, and then bound him in a Cart, and carried him to the place of
Execution, where he was burnt alive.

Three English men put to death at Rome.
I find also a Relation of three other Englishmen, put to death at Rome, the
manner of their sufferings are as follows: They meeting together entered into
a Conference, concerning the state of the Church at that time, complaining that
the Zeal of Gods Glory was wonderfully cooled amongst men; yea, and that even
those of the Religion, were grown but too worldly wise; that Satan by little
and little was sowing the seed of Atheism every where, by rocking men asleep in
the Cradle of Security; whereupon, commending themselves into the hands of God,
they determined to take their Vogage to Rome, and there to encounter, with the
Adversary of Christ; thither they came, and after two or three days, two of
them behaving themselves modestly, did in secret manifest to some the Truth of
the Gospel, who being betrayed, were imprisoned and put to death, without any
further ado; the third resolved to bear his Testimony more public, and
therefore taking an opportunity, when the Pope was in the midst of his Massing
devotion, stepped quickly to him, and plucked the host out of his hands, and trod
it under his feet, testifying against the Mass and Antichrist; the people in a
rage fell upon him, beating and bruising of him, and he was forthwith bound and
set upon an Ass, and the Executioners with lighted Torches burnt his Face,
Mouth and Tongue first, when the flames came overthwart his Cheeks, he was
heard to cry, Lord forgive them, they know not what they do; and then they
consumed his body with Fire to Ashes.

And herein the Reader has seen the invinceable Constancy, of these Martyrs,
who in their burning Zeal for Religion, dried up the Rivers of Persecution; and
were never tired in Suffering, until the Persecutors swords were blunt with the
slaughter.

Blessed are they that are Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for their is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Part IV.
Q. Eliz. An. 1558.
Containing an Account of such as suffered Persecution and Martyrdom under
Episcopacy, etc.

I Am now come to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth in whose first year the
Parliament restored the first fruits and tenths to the Crown, and the
Protestant Religion was again established, the Bishops that refused the Oath of
Supremacy were removed, and others put in their rooms; in this Queens time,
about the Eleaventh year of her reign arose a People making a Profession of the
Pure Religion, and would allow of nothing but what was directly taken out of
the Scriptures, openly condemning the received Discipline of the Church of
England, together with the Liturgy, and the very calling of the Bishops, as
savouring too much of the Romish Religion, declaring it to be an impious thing
to hold any thing common with the Church of Rome, and used all diligence to
have the Church of England reformed in every point according to the rule of the
Church of Geneva; amongst these Dissenters were Coleman, Burton, Hallingham and
Benson, whom the Queen commanded to be committed to Prison, yet it is a thing
almost incredible how on a sudden their Followers increased, known by the
envious name of Puritans, who preached nothing more then Evangelical Purity,
crying down the Ecclesiastical Form of Government, as a thing poluted with
Roman Dregs, setting out Books in Print to the same effect, refusing to go to
the public Worship, as it was then used; whereupon many endeavors were used
to suppress them, and the Law was commanded to be put in Execution which
required Uniformity, and the Books wrote by the Puritans to be delivered into
the Bishops hands on pain of Imprisonment; by these courses of persecution and
force they were kept down for a time, the Archbishop of Canterbury using his
utmost endeavors to settle an uniformity in Ecclesiastical Discipline
according to the Laws, which he saw lay gasping, if the Puritans increased, and
thereupon provided Articles for all Ministers to subscribe, but he found great
opposition or disturbance in this his Design, both at home and abroad, for one
Robert Brown a young man of Cambridge, from whom a People called Brownists took
their name, and one Rich. Harrison a School master, these set forth Books in
Zealand, and dispersed them over England, condemning the Church of England for
no Church; these Books were by Authority prohibited, and several of the chief
of these Brownists were executed at Bury in Suffolk, as the Reader shall
understand more particularly in this following Discourse, Q. Eliz. An. 1558.
as far as I can give a discovery by the Authors I could procure.

As I have said, though by the forciable course the Bishops took, these People
were kept under at times, yet in the one and thirtieth year of the Queen, the
Pur^ita^n^s Flames brake forth again, and Books were written by the names of
Martin-Marprelate, and another Book by Penry and Udal against the Government of
Bishops, and Barrow and Greenwood wrote a short Treatise, called, a Platform,
in which was contained sharp reproofs to the Clergy, saying, That all false and
Antichristian Ministers, ought by the Princes Authority to be rooted out, and
that their Antichristian and Idolatrous Livings ought to be converted to
chartiable Civil-uses, and are not to be appropriated or given to Gods true
Ministry, for the maintenance thereof, neither ought it to receive the same;
for it stands not with the honor of God, that Bethel, Gods House, should be
garnished and supported with the things belonging to, or taken from Bethaven,
the House of Idols, as if the Almighty wanted other means for support of his
own House, and must needs be beholden to the House of Idols to help him and his.

For these, and such matters by them openly divulged, they were imprisoned, and
all that would not bow, the Bishops resolved to break them to pieces; on the
other hand, the more hotly they were persecuted by the Bishops, the more the
Zeal stirred in them to oppose, strengthening themselves daily through their
diligence in Reading the Scriptures, that they might be enabled to oppose the
Clergy, whose Reformation they said was no more then casting out the name and
Persons of the Pope and Papists, and yet reserved all their Livings and
Privileges, even all the fat and gainful Ware of Amaleck unto themselves.

But in the end of these things, as it seldom has been known, so far as I have
observed, that whenever the Truth appeared, though in the least Measure, but
it cost some Blood, which should make men love it the better: So in these
times, this Barrow, Greenwood and Penry, and several others, sealed their
Testimony, first by hard Imprisonment, and at last by death it self, as in the
sequel will appear; and if what I find upon record be true (as I have no cause
to believe otherwise) the chief Instruments of their deaths were the Clergy,
and not the Queen: For when the Queen asked Doctor Raynolds what he thought of
those two men (meaning Barrow and Greenwood) he answered, It would not avail
any thing to show his Judgment concerning them, seeing they were put to death,
and being loath to speak his mind further, the Queen pressed him, and charged
him to speak, whereupon he answered, that he was persuaded if they had lived,
they would have been two as worthy Instruments for the Church of God, as has
been raised up in this Age: The Queen sighed, and said no more: But after that
riding to a Park, by a place where they were executed, called to mind their
suffering of death, (and being willing to have further information concerning
them) demanded of the Earl of Cumberland (that was present when they suffered)
what end they made; he answered, a very godly end, and prayed for your Majesty
and the State; moreover one Philips, a famous Preacher, having both heard and
seen Barrows Speeches and Preparation for death, said, Barrow, Barrow, my Soul
be with thine: And now before I give Account of the places where these persons
were executed, it will be necessary to insert their Complaint to the
Parliament, relating their hard usage in Prisons, a Copy of which is as
follows.

The Humble, most earnest, and lamentable Complaint and Supplication of the
Persecuted and Prescribed Church, and Servants of Christ, falsely called
Brownists, unto the High-Court of Parliament.
The most high God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, brings at this present
before your Lordships and Wisdoms (right honorable) his own Cause, his own
People (his own Sworn, and most treacherous Enemies) together with the most
shameful Usage of his Truth and Servants, that ever has been heard of in the
days of Sions professed Peace and Tranquillity.

His Cause and People he offers unto your Consideration and Defense in our
Profession and Persons: His Enemies and their Outrage against his Truth and
Servants in the Persons and Bloody Proceedings of the Prelates of this Land,
and their Accomplices.

We profess the same Faith, and Truth of the Gospel with her Majesty, which
your honors, this whole Land, and all the reformed Churches under Heaven this
day do hold and Maintain. We go beyond them (being our only fault, even in the
Judgment of our tyrannical and most savage Enemies) in the detestation of all
Popery, that most fearful Antichristian Religion, and draw nearer in some
Points by our practice unto Christ's holy Order and Institution; this is our
Faith, this is our cause (Right Honorable) yea, the Lords Cause in our sinful
hands.

For the Profession and Maintenance of which Faith, the forenamed Enemies of
God detain in their hands within the Prisons about London (not to speak of
other Goals throughout the Land) about threescore and twelve persons, Men,
Women, Young and Old, lying in Cold, in Hunger, in Dungeons, and in Irons; of
which Number they have taken the Lords day last, being the third day of the
fourth Month, 1592. about some sixteen persons, hearing the Word of God truly
taught, praying and praising God for his favors showed unto us, unto her
Majesty, your Honors, and this whole Land, and desiring our God to be Merciful
to us, unto our Gracious Prince and Country; being employed in these holy
Actions, and no other (as the Parties who disturbed them can testify) they
were taken in the very place where the Persecuted Church and Martyrs were
enforced to use the like Exercise in Queen Maryes days.

The former Number are now unbailable, committed by the Prelatel or Bishop of
London, unto whose close (for the most part) several Prisons, as Bridewel, the
Limboe or Dungeon in Newgate, the Fleet, the Marshalsea, the Counters, the
Clynk, the Gatehouse, the Whitelyon, etc. wherein we willingly acknowledge the
Lot and Inheritance, in this Life of our Forefathers and Brethren the holy
Martyrs of the former Age, and the entailed Aceldama, or Bloody Succession of
the Sea of London, and that whole Lineage; Well, here our Brethren lie (How long
Lord holy and true thou know) in Dungeons, in Hunger, in Cold, in Nakedness,
and all outward distress, for these Bloody men will allow them neither Meat,
Drink, Fire, Lodging, nor suffer any whose Hearts the Lord would stir up for
their relief to have any access unto them, purposing belike to imprison them
unto death, as they have done Seventeen or Eighteen others in the same noisome
Goals within these Six Years. The Husband and Wife being now taken by them,
they permit not to be in the same, but have sent them to be close kept in other
Prisons. What the poor Family does at home in the mean time, your Lordships
may consider, and justly pity. Some of this Company had not one Penny about them
when they were sent into close Prison, nor any thing, being abroad (which is
the case of most of them, if not all) to procure themselves and their poor
Families any Maintenance, save only their handy Labors and Trades, whereby it
is come to pass that these Enemies of God, do not only starve and undo a number
of men in the Prisons, but even a lamentable Company of poor Orphans and
Servants abroad; their unbrid led slanders, their Lawless privy searches, their
Violent breaking open and rifling of our Houses, their lamentable and barbarous
Usage of Women and Young Children in these hostile assaults, their
Uncontrouled Thievery, Robbing and taking away of whatsoever they think meet
from us in this case, their unappeased and merciless pursuit of us from our
Houses, Trades, Wives, Children, especially from the holy Society of the Saints
and Church of God, We are enforced to omit, lest we should be over tedious to
your Lordships; but their dealing this way toward us is so woeful (right
honorable) as we may truly demand with grief of heart, whether the foreign
Enemy, or our native Country men do possess and bear rule over us in our dear
and native Country.

Their whole dealing herein is most Barbarous, most Inhumane, but especially
most Unchristian and such as exceeds the cruelty of the Heathen and Popish
Professed Tyrants and Persecutors; the Records of the Heathen Persecution under
Nero, Trajan, Decius, Galienus, Maximinian, etc. can scant afford us any
Examples of the like cruelty and havoc; for the Heathen Romans would Murder
Openly and Professedly: These godless men have put the Blood of War about them,
in the day of the Peace and Truth, which this whole Land professes to hold
with Jesus Christ, and his Servants. Bishop Bonner, Story, Wes^^n. dealt not
after this sort; for those whom they committed close, they would also either
feed, or permit to be fed by others, and they brought them in short space
openly into Smithfield to end their misery, and to begin their never ending
joy. Whereas Bishop Elinar, Q. Eliz. An. 1592.
Dr. Stanhope, and Mr. Justice Young, with the rest of that Persecuting and
Blood thirsty faculty will do neither of these: No Fellows, no Murderers, no
Traitors in this Land are so dealt with.

There are many of us, by the Mercies of God still out of their hands: The
former holy Exercise and Profession, we purpose not to leave by the Assistance
of God: We have as good Warrant to reject the Ordinances of Antichrist, and
labor for the recovery of Christ's holy Institutions, as our Fathers and
Brethren in Queen Maryes days had to do the like: and we doubt not, if our
cause were truly known unto her Majesty and your Wisdoms, but we should find
greater favor then they did, whereas our Estate now is far more lamentable.

And therefore we humbly and earnestly crave of her Majesty and your Lordships,
both for our selves abroad, and for our Brethren now in miserable Captivity;
but just and equal Trial, according unto her Majesty's Laws, if we prove not
our Adversaries to be in a most Pestilent and godless course, both in regard of
their Offices, and their Proceedings in them, and our selves to be in the right
Way, we desire not to have the benefit of her Majestyes true and faithful
Subjects, which of all earthly favors we account to be one of the greatest.
Are we Malefactors? Are we any wise undutiful unto our Prince? Maintain we any
Errors? Let us then be judicially convicted thereof, and delivered to the
Civil Authority; but let not these bloody men both Accuse, Condemn, and closly
Murder after this sort, contrary to all Law, Equity and Conscience, where they
alone are the Plantiffs, the Accusers, the Judges, and the Executioners of
their most fearful and barbarous Tyranny.

They should not by the Laws of this Land go any further in Cases of Religion,
then their own Ecclesiastical Censure, and then refer us to the Civil power;
their Forefathers Gardner, Bonner and Story dealt thus equally, and we crave
but this Equity: Oh let her Excellent Majesty our Sovereign, and your Wisdoms
consider and accord unto this our just Petition; for Streams of Innocent Blood
are like to be spilt in secret by these Blood-thirsty-men, except her Majesty
and your Lordships, do take order with their most cruel and inhuman proceedings.

We crave for all of us but the Liberty, either to die openly, or to live
openly in the Land of our Nativity. If we deserve death, it beseems the
Majesty of Justice not to see us closely murdered, yea, starved to death with
hunger and cold, and stifled in loathsome Dungeons: If we be guiltless, we
crave but the benefit of onr Innocence, viz. That we may have peace to serve
our God and our Prince in the place of the Sepulcher of our Fathers.

Thus protesting our Innocence, complaining of Violence and Wrong, and crying
for Justice on the behalf, and on the name of that righteous Judge the God of
Equity and Justice, we continue our Prayers unto him for her Majesty and your
Honors, whose hearts we beseech him to incline toward this our most equal and
just Suit, This complaint was Penned by H. Barrow, and is by me truly Copied
Verbatim out of my Author.
through CHRIST JESUS our Lord.

And now I find that besides many that ended their days in loathsome Prisons,
there were six executed, who sealed up their Testimonies with their blood, the
six that were executed are these, viz. Henry Barrow and John Greenwood at
Tyburn, John Penry at Thomas a Waterings near London, William Dennis at
Thetford in Norfolk, and C^ppin and Elias at Edmunds-Bury in Suffolk.

I have here inserted (as follows) two Letters of John Penry, which was all I
could meet with, by which Letters the Reader may see what a Zeal and religious
Courage was stirring in these people at this day.

To the distressed faithful Congregation of Christ in London, and all the
Members thereof whether in bonds or at liberty these be delivered; my beloved
Brethren, M. F. Johnson, M. D. M. S. M. S. M. G. I. M. I. M. H. M. B. M. S. R.
B. M. R. M. K. N. B. M. B. I. M. N. P. W. C. P. A. my Brethren M. I. C. W. B.
A. P. M. M. M. E. C. C. D. G. M. A. B. with the rest of you both men and women
(as if particularly I named you all) which stand members of this poor afflicted
Congregation, whether at liberty or in bonds, Jes^^ Christ that great King and
Prince of the Kings of the Earth bless you, co^f^^t you with his invinceable
Spirit, that you may be able to bear and over come these great Trials which you
are yet, and I with you, if I ^^^e to undergo for his Names sake in this
Testimony.
Beloved, let us think our Lot and Portion more then blessed, that now are
vouchsafed the favor not only to know, and to profess, but also to suffer for
the sincerity of the Gospel; and let us remember, that great is our reward in
Heaven, if we endure unto the end, I testify unto you for mine own part, as I
shall answer before Jesus Christ and his Elect Angels, that I never saw any
Truth more clear and undoubted, then this witness wherein we stand; First,
Against false Offices. Secondly, The callings. Thirdly, The works. Fourthly,
The maintenance left and retained in this Land by and from Popery. Fifthly,
Against the obedience which spiritually either in Soul or in Body is yielded,
and the communion that is had with these inventions of darkness. Sixthly, The
mingling of all sorts in these Assemblies. Seventhly, The worship done but
scant in one of the three parts of the Commission given by our Savior, scant
done, I say, in one of the three parts of the Commission by the best Teachers
of this Land; and I thank my God, I am not only ready to be bound and banished,
but even to die in his Cause by his strength; yea, my Brethren, I greatly long
in regard of my self to be dissolved, and ^o live i^ the blessed Kingdom of
Heaven with Jesus Christ and his Angels, with Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Job, David, Jeremiah, Daniel, Paul the great Apostle of the Gentiles,
and with the rest of the holy Saints, both men and women, with the glorious
Kings, Prophets and Martyrs, and Witnesses of Jesus Christ, that have been from
the beginning of the World; particularly with my two dear Brethren Master Henry
Barrow, and Master John Greenwood, which have last of all yielded their Blood
for this precious Testimony; confessing unto you, my Brethren and Sisters,
that if I might live upon the Earth the days of Methusala twice told, and that
in no less Comfort then Peter, James and John were in the Mount, and after this
life might be fure of the Kingdom of Heaven, that yet to gain all this I durst
not go from the former Testimony; wherefore, my Brethren, I beseech you, be of
like mind herein with me; I doubt not but you have the same precious faith with
me, and are Partakers also of far more glorious Comfort then my barren and
sinful Soul can be; strive for me, and with me, that the Lord our God may make
me, and all us, able to end our Cause with joy and patience; strive also, that
he may stay his blessed hand (if it be his good pleasure) and not make any
further breach in his Church, by the taking away of any more of us as yet, to
the discouraging of the weak, and the lifting up of the horn of our
Adversaries. I would indeed, if it be his good pleasure, live yet with you, to
help you to bear that grievous and hard Yoke, which yet ye are like to sustain
either here, or in a strange Land: and my good Brethren, seeing Banishment,
with loss of goods is likely to betide you all, prepare your selves for this
hard entreaty, and rejoice that you are made worthy for CHRIST's Cause to
suffer and bear all these things: And I beseech you in the Bowels of Jesus
Christ, that none of you in this case look upon this particular Estate, but
regard the general state of the Church of God, that the same may go and be kept
together whithersoever it shall please God to send you. Oh, the Blessing will
be great that shall ensue this care; whereas, if you go every man to provide
for his own House, and to look for his own Family, first neglecting poor Sion,
the Lord will set his Face against you, and scatter you from the one end of
Heaven to the other, neither shall you find a resting place for the Soles of
your Feet, or a blessing upon any thing you take in hand.

The Lord, my Brethren and Sisters, has not forgotten to be gracious unto
Sion, you shall yet find days of peace and rest if you continue faithful: This
standing and treading of us under his feet, this subverting of our cause, and
right in Judgment is done by him to the end that we should search and try our
ways, and repent us of our Carelessness, Profaneness and Rebellion in his
sight; but he will yet maintain the Cause of our Souls, and redeem our lives,
if we return to him; yea, he will be with us in Fire and Water, and will not
forsake us, if our Hearts be only and especially of the Building of Zion,
whithersoever we go. Let not those of you then that either have Stocks in your
hands, or some likely Trades to live by, dispose of your selves where it may be
most commodious for your outward Estate, and in the mean time suffer the poor
ones that have no such means, either to bear the whole Work upon their weak
Shoulders, or to end their days in sorrow and mourning for want of outward and
inward comforts in the Land of Strangers; for the Lord will be an Avenger of
all such dealings; but consult with the whole Church, yea, with the Brethren in
other places, how the Church may be kept together, and built whithersoever they
go; let not the Poor and the Friendless be forced to stay behind here, and to
break a good Conscience for want of your support and kindness unto them, that
they may go with you: And here I humbly beseech you, not in any outward regard,
as I shall answer before my God, that you would take my poor and desolate
Widow and my mess of Fatherless and Friendless Orphans with you into exile
whithersoever you go, and you shall find, I doubt not, that the blessed
Promises of my God made unto me and mine will accompany them, and even the
whole Church for their sakes; for this also is the Lords Promise unto the holy
Seed, as you shall not need much to demand what they shall eat, or wherewith
they shall be clothed, and in short time I doubt not, but they will be found
helpful, and not burdensome to the Church; only I beseech you, let them not
continue after you in this Land, where they must be enforced to go again unto
Egypt, and my God will bless you even with a joyful return unto your own
Country for it. There are you who I doubt not will be careful of the
performance of the will of your dead Brother in this point; who may yet live to
show this kindness unto yours; I will say no more. Be kind, loving and
tenderhearted the one of you toward the other, labor every way to increase
love, and to show the duties of love one of you toward another, by visiting,
comforting and relieving one the other even for the reproach of the Heathen
that are round about us (as the Lord says) Be watching in prayer; especially
remember those of our Brethren, that are especially endangered, particularly
those our two Brethren M. Studley and Robert Boule, whom our God has
strengthened now to stand in the forefront of the Battle; I fear me that our
carelessness was over great to sue unto our God for the lives of these two so
notable Lights of his Church, who now rest with him, and that he took them away
for many respects, seeming good to his Wisdom, so also that we might learn to
become careful in prayer in all such causes; pray for them then, my Brethren,
and for our Brother M. Fran. Johnson, and for me, who am likely to end my days
either with them or before them, that our God may spare us unto his Church, if
it be his good pleasure, or give us exceeding faithfulness, and be every way
comfortable unto the Sister and Wife of the dead.

I mean unto my beloved M. Barrow and M. Greenwood, whom I most heartily
salute, and desire much to be comforted in their God, who by his Blessings from
above will countervail unto them the want of so notable a Brother and Husband.
I would with you earnestly to write, yea, to send if you may to comfort the
Brethren in the West and North Countries, that they faint not in these
Troubles, and that also you may have of their advice, and they of yours what to
do in these desolate times; and if you think it any thing for their further
comfort and direction, send them conveniently a Copy of this my Letter, and of
the declaration of my Faith, and Allegiance, wishing them before whomsoever
they be called, that their own Mouths be not had a Witness against them in any
thing; yea, I would wish you and them to be together, if you may, whithersoever
you shall be banished, and to this purpose to bethink you before hand where to
be, yea, to send some who may be meet to prepare you some resting place, and be
all of you assured, that he who is your God in England will be your God in any
Land under the whole Heaven, for the Earth and the fullness thereof are his, and
blessed are they that for his Cause are bereaved of any part of the same.
Finally, my Brethren, the eternal God bless you, and yours, that I may meet
with you all unto my comfort in the blessed Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus having from my Heart, and with tears performed (it may be) my last duty
toward you in this Life, I salute you all in the Lord, both men and women,
even those who I have not named as heartily as those whose names I have
mentioned, (for all your names I know not) And remember to stand steadfast and
faithful in Jesus Christ, as you have received him unto your Immortallity: And
he Confirm and Establish you to the end for the praise of his Glory, Amen.

The 24th of the 4th Month, (April) 1593. Your Loving Brother in the Patience
and Sufferings of the Gospel John Penry, a Witness of Christ in this Life, and
a Partaker of the Glory that shall be revealed.


I found also a Letter of the said Penry to his Wife, which being large, I have
only inserted some particular sentences thereof, as follows.

To my beloved Wife Ellinor Penry, Partaker with me in this life of the
sufferings of the Gospel in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, and
resting with me in undoubted hope of the glory that shall be revealed, all
strength and comfort with all other spiritual graces be multiplied through
Christ Jesus our Lord.
I see my blood laid for (my Beloved) and so my days and Testimony drawing to
an end, for ought I know; and therefore I think it my duty to leave behind me
this Testimony of my love, toward so dear a Sister and loving a Wife in the
Lord, as you have been unto me. First then, I beseech you, stand fast in that
Truth which you and I profess at this present in much outward discomfort and
danger, let nothing draw you to be subject to Antichrist, let your Soul and
your Body be far from those Assemblies which yield either known or secret
submission unto the Ordinances of the Beast. Oh! our Souls are to rejoice in
these ways more then in all Substance and Treasure, and the loving kindness of
the Eternal is forever and ever toward them and their Seed that remember his
ordinances to do them. My dear Wife and Sister, look not at any earthly thing,
consecrate your self wholely both Soul, Body, Husband, Children, and whatsoever
you have unto the Lord your God; let them not be dearer unto you then his
Worship and Service; fear not the want of outward things, for the Lord cares
for you and yours; the Lord is my God and yours, and the God of our Seed; I
know if you and our poor Children continue, that they shall see a blessed
Reward even in this life; be much and often in prayer day and night, and much
in reading and meditating; above all things, pray that the Lord would restore
beauty unto his Church, and so would overthrow the cursed Religion of the Roman
Anti christ in every part thereof; remember me also and my Brethren now in
Bonds, that the Lord would assist us with the strength and comfort of his
Spirit, to keep a good Conscience, and to bear a glorious Testimony to the end;
be not out of hope but I may be restored again unto you, therefore be earnest
in prayer for my deliverance; yet if the Lord shall end my days in this
Testimony, blessed be his Name; howsoever it goes, I am ready and content with
his good pleasure, and whatsoever shift you make, keep our poor Children with
you, that you may bring them up your self in the Instruction and Information of
the Lord; I leave you and them indeed nothing in this Life, but the blessing of
my God; and this my Sister, I doubt not, shall be found an ample Portion both
for you and them, though you know that in hunger often, and cold often, in
poverty and nakedness we must make an account to profess the Gospel in this
Life; and teach them, I beseech you, even now in their youth that Lesson, If
they will reign with Christ, they must suffer with him; teach them the meanness
of the Gospel, and that they are not to look for greatness in this Life, but
every day to make account that they are to yield their lives, and whatsoever
they have for the Truth; break their affections betimes, while they are yet
green, by Instructions and Corrections meet for them; when they are capable of
handy labor I know you will not let them be Idle: Thus having disburdened my
self of my duty toward you, and of my care to you and your poor Children in
some part, I am, I thank God, in great comfort, though under great Trials of my
weakness and consideration of my own wants, not in regard of men, I fear not
any power or strength of man whatsoever, and I am this hour willing to lay down
my Life for my Testimony, and I trust shall be unto the end; you know I was
taken at a Meeting at Ratliff the two and twentieth day of the third Month
1592. and committed close by M. Young to the Powltry Counter; some days
after, some were sent privately to confer with me, I answered, for private
Conference, inasmuch as my Cause was made public, I saw no Cause why I should
yield unto any, I desired public upon equal conditions, they said no, and
after much needless speech departed.

Upon the fifth day of the fifth Month, I was sent for to the Sessions House,
where after some discourse I was sent back again; I cannot see but they thirst
after my Blood, therefore pray for me, and desire all they Church to do the
same.

To draw to an End, salute the whole Church from me, especially those in Bonds,
and be you all much and heartily saluted in the Lord, let none of you be
dismayed, the Lord will send a glorious issue to Sions troubles; yet you must
all be prepared for sufferings, I see no other likelihood.

Let not those which are abroad miss to frequent the holy Meetings; salute my
Mother and yours in Wales, my Brethren, Sisters and Kindred there, and my God
knows, yea, your self knows, how earnestly and often I have desired that he
would vouchsafe my service in his Gospel among them, to the winning of their
souls forever more unto him; salute your Parents and mine in Northampton, with
my poor kinsman Jenkin Jones, and M. David also, though I had not thought that
any outward respects would have made him withdraw his Shoulders from the Lords
ways, but the Lord will draw him forward in his good time; salute all ours in
Scotland upon the Borders and every way Northward, especially M. Juell, always
dear unto me; I got means this day to write thus much, whereof no Creature
living knows.

The sixth of the fourth Month 1593. in great haste, with many Tears, and yet
in the great Spiritual comfort of my Soul, your Husband. John Penry, a Witness
of Christ against the Abominations of the Roman Antichrist and his Soldiers;
sure of the Victory by Blood of the Lamb.


These Puritans suffered greatly also in King James his Reign, although the
original Cause thereof, so far as I can perceive, did not appear to proceed
from the King, for in his Speech to the Parliament in the eighteenth year of
his Reign, in the year 1620. He said, As touching Religion, Laws enough are
made already: It stands in two points, Persuasion, and Compulsion: Men may
persuade, but God must give the blessing: Jesuits, Priests, Puritants and
Sectaries, erring both on the right hand, and left hand, are forward to
persuade unto their own ends, and so ought you the Bishops in your Example and
Preaching; but Compulsion to obey is to bind the Conscience.

How much soever the King inclined to favor, the Reader may understand by this
following Relation, being the Copy of an Address these people made to the King
and Parliament, relating the great Oppressions they were under.

To our Sovereign Lord the Kings most Exellent Majesty, together with the honor
able Nobility, Knights and Burgesses now Assembled at the High-Court of
Parliament.
May it please your Majesty, Honors, Worships graciously to respect the humble
Suit of Gods poor afflicted Servants, and well-affected loyal Subjects to your
Highness and Honors. We are many of us constrained to live in Exile out of our
native Country, others detained in Prisons, all of us in some Affliction, which
the Prelates and Clergy of this Land have inflicted upon us for our Faith in
God, and Obedience to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: We have never to
this day been convinced of Heresy, Error or Crime, for which we should
sustain the great Calamities we have endured. The grounds of Christian Religion
professed and maintained, in this Land, and other Churches round about; we also
with one heart and Spirit assent unto and profess: Enemies we are to all
Popery, Anabaptistry or other Heresy, Schism, Rebellion, Treason, or Faction,
and whatsoever else is contrary to the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, or the
Prosperity and good estate of this Realm; our only desire is so to serve God as
that we may please him with reverence and fear, abstaining and keeping our
Souls and Bodies from all remnants of the Roman Religion, Idolatry, Imposition,
and vain will worship, of what sort soever: We witness against the unlawful
pompous Hierarchy and Priesthood of this Nation, as utterly disagreeing from
the Testament of Christ, and Ministry there appointed, in their Offices,
Callings, Administrations, and Lord like Livings and Maintenance; against the
confuse profane and irreligious multitude of all sorts of vicious Livers,
baptized into, and retained in the Body of the Church of England, without
voluntary profession of, and holy walking in the Faith of the Gospel; against
their manner of Worship and Service, by reading Prayers out of a Book, instead
of true Spiritual invocation on the Name of the Lord; and briesly, against all
their Popish Abuses and Relics of the man of sin whatsoever: And because this
our Testimony makes against the irregular Authority of the Prelates, reproves
their evil Actions, and disproveth their Pomp, Stateliness, Rich Revenues,
Stipends, etc. therefore have they in all hostile manner set themselves against
us, Persecuting us unto Bands, Exile, and Death it self, reproaching us as
Schismatics, Donatists, Prownists, Seditions persons, etc. though they could
never convince us of these, or any the like crimes; and though we have not
ceased, neither by Gods Grace will cease to wish and procure good to their
Souls and Bodies in the Lord; now therefore our humble Request is unto your
Majesty, Honors, and Worships, that notwithstanding these differences we may
be suffered to return into our native Country, there to live in Peace
practizing the Faith of Christ, which we profess, and have long since set forth
to the view of the World in our public Confession, wherein none hitherto have
showed us any Error; and seeing the People of other Nations are by your Majesty
and Honors suffered in this Realm, though differing from the Ecclesiastical
state of the same, we hope that your Highness Natural and Loyal Subjects, may
find like favor at your hands; for although we cannot but hold and Witness the
Truth of God against the corruptions remaining, yet hold we in no wise lawful
for our selves or any Subjects to attempt the reforming or abolishing of these,
or any the like abuses; for God has committed the Sword into your Majesty's
hand alone, who in his time will persuade (we trust) your Royal heart to fulfill
his will, and execute his Judgments upon the Remainders of the Spiritual
Babylon, which will turn to as great Honor to God, Honor to your Majesty, and
good of this Realm, as the abolishing of Abbats, Munks, Fryart, Mass, Images,
etc. has turned heretofore. So the Lord of Lords and Ruler of Rulers of the
Earth will establish your Crown and Kingdom unto Length of days; and howsoever
this our Suit shall be regarded, we will not cease in all places of our
Pilgrimage to pray for and procure the good of your Majesty, your Honors,
Worships, and all our Country, whom God Almighty bless with Long Life and happy
days on Earth, and Crown with Everlasting Glory in the highest Heavens, Amen.


I find that in the year 1604. in this Kings Reign, four Persons were banished
the Land of England, after they had suffered three Months Imprisonment, for no
other cause but seperating themselves from the Church of England, refusing to
Communicate join or partake with the same in their public Ministry and
Worship, reputing many corruptions to be still remaining amongst them, which
were derived from Popery.

And thus, I have given an Account of such as suffered, for Religion in those
times; and now to conclude, I have this further to write, by what I have
observed upon Histories in several Ages, viz. That while any People were under
Suffering and Oppression for their Consciences, endeavoring to serve and
worship God in that Way they believed to be most agreeable to the Scriptures of
Truth then the public Way established in the Kingdom: whilst they traveled
under this Bondage and Suffering they were low in their minds, and the Lord had
regard unto them, for their hearts were tender, and the Lord appeared for them;
and now, when the Lord had tried this People, and at last put Power into their
hands, and raised them as it were from a low estate, they soon forgot his kind
dealings with them; as for Example, the Independants and Presbyterians, some of
whom I have seen, near forty years since, dregged out of their Meetings in
private Houses, and their Clothes tore, and their Faces covered (as it were)
with dirt, and their blood spilt; and in this suffering condition they made
many Covenants and Vows to the Lord; but this very People afterward coming
into Places of Authority, and killing, and taking Possession, got themselves
into the High Places of the Earth, and soon forgot their time of deep
Sufferings; and being exalted into Government, they tread in the same steps
those had trodden that were their great Persecutors, and then they turned as
riggid Persecutors, if not worse, then those they had turned out, as witness
the Innocent Blood they shed both in Old-England and New, whose Cruelty (under
the Visor of a more righteous Cloak) is too large here to insert, but will be
matter sufficient for another Volum and therefore I here conclude this.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Just Judgments of God INFLICTED UPON PERSECUTORS Wherein is
showed The Wicked Lives and most horrible Untimely Deaths of many of the
Persecutors of Old; Collected out of Ancient Histories, and out of the
Scriptures.
CHAP. I
The remarkable and righteous Judgments, of God which have befaln several
Persecutors for Conscience sake, mentioned in the Old Testament.

THe Old Serpent the Devil, The Old Serpent.
who was the first Persecutor for Righteousness sake that ever was in the
World, who for that very cause has hunted after the blood of the Saints, even
from the beginning unto this day, was for his Persecution cursed of God above
all Creatures, Genesis 3.14.

Cain persecuted his godly Brother Abel until Death, Cain.
and that for no other cause, but for Righteousness sake, even because his own
works were Evil, and his Brothers Good and Righteous, 1 John 3. 12. was
therefore cursed of God with a bitter curse, even from the Presence of God, and
from the Earth, and made a Fugative and Vagabond in the Earth, yea, so great
was his punishment, that he said, It was greater then he could bear, Genesis 4.11,
12, 13.

Ishmael was another Persecutor, for he was a Mocker of his Brother Isaac,
Ishmael.
the true Seed of God; and therefore was cast out with his Mother out of the
Family of the Faithful, that he might have no part in the Inheritance in the
true Seed, unto whom the Promise was made, Genesis 12.9, 10, 11.

Joseph's Brethren were punished by Famine and Distress, Joseph's Brethren.
who persecuted their righteous Brother Joseph, in that they hated him, and
sold him for twenty pieces of Silver to the Ishmaelites, as is confessed and
acknowledged by themselves to be justly come upon them for that thing; We are
very guilty say they one to another, concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is
this Distress come upon us, and Ruben answered them, saying, Spoke I not unto
you, saying, Do not sin against the Child, and ye would not hear; therefore,
behold also his blood is required, Genesis 37.4.28.

King Pharaoh and the Egyptians, the great Persecutors of the Children of
Israel, Pharaoh and the Egyptians.
who kept them long in Captivity in Egypt the House of Boundage, who by all
the Wisdom they had studdied how to Vex and Torment them by Taskmasters, to
Afflict them by Burdens, and make them serve with Rigor, and thereby made
their Lives most bitter unto them with heard Bondage in Mortar and Brick, to be
made without Straw, and yet exacting upon them the full tail of Bricks, as when
they had Straw; and beating of them, if they did not fulfill the number of their
wonted daily Task; and lastly by commanding all their Male-Children to be slain
and killed, and would not let them go to do Sacrifice unto the Lord their God;
but for all this they did not go unpunished, but the Lord most justly, and most
severelly punisned them for all their Cruelty and Wicked Persecution: For
First, their Water was all turned into Blood, insomuch that their Fish died,
and they themselves could not drink of it: Secondly, They were plagued with
Frogs in their Houses and in their Chambers, in their Beds, in their Ovens, and
in their kneeding-troughs, and upon himself and his People. Thirdly, Their Dust
was turned into Lice, and they were upon Man and Beast, and in their Houses,
and they covered the Ground. Fourthly, They were plagued with swarms of Flies
in like manner. Fifthly, With the Murrain among their Beasts. Sixthly, With
Blaines and Boyles upon man and Beast, Seventhly, With grievous Hail mingled
with Fire, killing men and Beast, that it fell upon, and every Herb of the
Field throughout the Land and every Tree. Eighthly, With grievous Locusts,
which went over all the Land, covering the Face of the whole Earth, so that the
Land was Darkened, and they did eat every Herb of the Land, and all the Fruit
of the Trees which the Hail had left. Ninthly, With thick Darkness over all the
Land even darkness that may be felt, for three days together, so that they saw
not one the other, neither rose any from his place for three days; but the
Children of Israel had light in their dwellings all the while. Tenthly, The
Lord did out off all the Firstborn in the Land, from the Firstborn of
Pharaoh, that sits upon the Throne, to the Firstborn of the Maidservant that
was behind the Mill, and all the Firstborn of Beasts. Then, Lastly, the Lord
drowned them all in the midst of the Red Sea, even Pharaoh, and all the
Egyptians, with all their Chariots and Horsemen, and all his Host; so as
there remained not one of them. Thus was the Judgment of God executed upon
cruel Persecuting Pharaoh, and all the Egyptians.

The Wicked King Ahab, who sold himself to work Wickedness, a great Persecutor
and Hater of good Micah, a true Prophet of the Lord, King Ahab.
who for speaking the truth in the Name of the Lord, when commanded by the King
so to do, though it were against the King himself, was for that by him
commanded to be put in Prison, and fed with Bread and Water of Affliction, and
suffered him to be smitten on the Face by Zedekiah in his presence without
reproof, was at last met with by the hand of Justice and true Judgment,
according to the Word of the Lord, spoken by the said Prophet; for he was slain
in Battle by a Dart snot out of a Bow at venture, which smote him, the King of
Israel, between the joints of the harness, whilst he was in his Chariot, and
was fain to be carried out of the Battle, and at Evening about Sunset he died,
2 Chronicles. 18.7, 26, 33, 34.

Jezabel that cursed Woman, and great Persecutor of the Saints, who slew and
cut off many of the Prophets of the Lord, Jezabel Queen.
who caused Naboth to be accused falsely of Blasphemy, that so he might be
Stoned to Death as he was; so that King Ahab her Husband, who thristed for poor
Naboths Vineyard might take possession thereof, as he did. She threatened the
man of God and Prophet of the Lord Elijah, in Swearing by her Gods, She would
cause him to be slain by to morrow this time, and make his life as the life of
one of the Prophets of Baal which he had slain; was most justly rewarded at the
Hand of the Lord, according as the Prophet of the Lord Elijah had aforetold;
who said, the Dogs should eat Jezabel by the Wall of Jezreel, which was the
very Wall of Naboth's Vineyard, which she caused to be taken most wickedly from
him, as aforesaid; for when she reckoned with her self to set out her self in
the most sumptions manner she could, to the liking of the King, by triming and
decking her self, by painting her Face, and tiring her Head, to look out of the
Window upon the King; then did King Jehu command her to be thrown down out of
the Window; and so they threw her down out of the Window, and shed her blood,
and trampled her under their Feet; and when he would have buried this cursed
Woman, as he called her (because she was a Kings Daughter) they found that the
Dogs had lickt up her Blood, and had eaten her Flesh, so that there remained
only her Skull, her Feet, and the Palms of her Hands: Then said the King, when
he heard of it, This makes good the Word of the Lord which he spoke by his
Servant Elijah^ the Tishbite, saying, In the Portion of Jezreel, shall Dogs eat
the Flesh of Jezabel, and the Carcass of Jezabel shall be as Dung upon the Face
of the Fields in the Portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, this is
Jezabel, 1 King. 18.4, 13. 1 Kings 21.8, 16, 21, 23. 2 Kings 9.33, 36, 37.

King Joash when he began to Reign Ruled well, King Joash.
and so continued while he had good Counselors about him; but when he began to
hearken unto evil Counselors, viz. The Princes of Judah, (his chief good
Councellor Jehoida the Priest being dead) and took their evil Council, they
drew away his Heart and inclined it to Idolatry, and to Persecution; so that
when Zachariah (the Son of Jehoida) came to him from the Lord, being filled
with the Spirit, to bear Testimony against him and their Idolatry, and against
his and their Transgressions, and to reprove him and them for it; they
conspired against him, and Stoned him with Stones at the Commandment of the
King, in the Court of the House of the Lord, and slew him; but the Lord soon,
according unto this good man's Prayer at his Death, looked upon this evil, and
required it at his and their hands by executing Judgment upon the King and his
evil Counselors; for at the end of that Year the Lord sent the Host of Assyria
against him, even but a small Company, and destroyed all the Princes of the
People (the Kings evil Counselors first) from among the People, and sent the
spoil of them to the King of Damascus, and delivered a very great Army into
their hands, Because they had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers; and so
they executed Judgment against Joash the King; and when they had departed from
him, having left him in great Di^tress, by reason of great Diseases, his own
Servant conspired against him, for the blood of the Sons of Jehoida, and slew
him on his Bed that he died, 2 Chronicles. 24.

Proud Haman Persecutor.
Haman the Persecutor, who persecuted Mordecai, because he would not bow unto
him, and do him reverence according to the Kings Command, who therefore sought
to destroy all the Jews that were in the Kingdom, promising to pay into the
Kings Treasure ten thousand Talents of Silver, if he would grant his Writing
for their Destruction, unto which the King consented to; and in the mean time
Haman builds a Gallows fifty Cubits high to hang Mordecai upon, for not moving
nor rising up, nor doing reverence unto him; but the Righteous God the Judge of
Heaven and Earth, who sees all things, soon overtook this Persecutor, in his
furious Pride and Blood-thirstiness, and put a stop to his intended Persecution
by turning the Kings Heart against him, by the intercession of Esther the
Queen, whereby he came to be hanged himself upon the same Gallows he had set up
for Mordecai the Jew, Esther 3.

Nebuchadnezar humbled.
Nebuchadnezzar that Proud Persecuting King of Babylon and Caldea, how did the
Lord humble him for his pride and cruelty exercised toward the three Children,
in casting then into the Fiery-Furnace, which he caused to be heat seven times
hotter then ordinary for them, because they would not Worship the Golden Image
which he had set up, by renting his Kingdom from him, and driving him from Men,
and making his dwelling with the Beasts of the Field. and to eat grass as an
Ox, till seven times past over him, and that his hands grew like Eagles
Feathers. and his nails like Birds Claws, that he and all might know that the
Lord only changes times and seasons, and Rules the Kingdoms of men, and gives
to whomsoever he will, and that his Ways, Works and Judgments are Truth (as he
afterward confessed) and that those that walk in pride, he is able to abase,
Dan. 3.14. to the 18th verse.

The Executioners execut^ed.
Those chosen men, that were the most mighty men of all that King Nebuchadnezar
had in his whole Army, that were the appointed Executioners of the Kings
cruelty, in fulfilling his Commands, in binding the three Children, and casting
them into the burning Fiery Furnace, soon tasted the just Judgment of God for
their frowardness to obey such commands of cruelty, for the flames of the Fire
slew those men that took the three Children up, while the Saints of the most
high, themselves, though bound in their Coats, Hosen, Hats and other Garments,
being cast into the midst of the burning Fiery Furnace, where they fell down
bound into the midst of it; yet upon their Bodies the Fire had no power, nor
was one hair of their head singed, neither were their Coats changed, nor the
smell of Fire past on them, Dan. 3.20.

Those Presidents and Princes of Media and Persia, that were the Persecutors of
Daniel (in King Darius his time) that sought the occasions to find something
against Daniel, The Presidents and Princes of M^dia and Pers^a.
that they might accuse him to the King concerning the Kingdom, but could find
no occasion nor fault, forasmuch as he was Faithful, neither was there any
error or fault found in him, save only in that matter, concerning the Law of
his God, against whom, that they might have something against him in that
matter also, they are constrained to procure a Degree, that whosoever shall ask
a Petition of any God or Man for three days, save only the King, he should be
cast into the Den of Lions, which he the said Daniel (even as they thought)
would not obey; but immediately as soon as he be understood it was signed, he
went into his House, his Windows being opened in his Chamber toward Jerusalem,
he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before
God, as he did before time; for which those men aforesaid, accused him before
the King, by whose means, according to the said Decree, he was cast into the
Lions Den, but God sent his Angels, and shut the Lions Mouths, that they could
not hurt him, for no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he was
Innocent, and believed in God; but his Persecutors soon felt the just and
righteous hand of God upon them, for their so wicked persecuting the Innocent
for Conscience sake, for the King commanded those men to be brought, that had
accused Daniel, and they cast them, their Wives and their Children into the
Lions Den, and the Lions had the Mastery of them, and break all their bones in
pieces ere they came to the bottom of the Den, Dan. 6.

King Antiochus, King Antiocu^.
surnamed Epiphanes, a great Persecutor of the Jews, who committed great Evils
at Jerusalem, and took all the Vessels of Gold and Silver that were therein,
and sent to destroy the Inhabitants of Judea, without a cause, and as himself
confessed, who in a Proud and insolent manner protested he would make Jerusalem
a common burying place, and the Streets thereof run with the blood of Gods
People, was by Gods just Judgment plagued with a grievous sickness, having a
remediless pain in his Bowels, and an intolerable Torment in his inward parts,
his Body bred abundance of Worms, which continually crawled out of the same;
yea, he so rotted above ground, that by reason of an intolerable stink, no man
could endure to come near him, neither could he himself endure the same; but in
a flood of extreme Misery ended his days, which, as he confessed, came upon
him, for the evil aforesaid; see the Life of Judas Maccabees in Clerks
Martrol. page 13. as also the first Book of Maccabees, Chap. 1, 10. and Chap.
6, 8, etc.

Sennacrib King of Assyria murdered by his own Sons.
Sennacrib King of Assyria, the great Oppressor and Persecutor of Israel and
Judah, and horrible blasphemer and reproacher of the Living God (the God of
Israel and Judah, though they were left of him for a time for their forsaking
him, and falling to Idolatry) and a great Defyer of him by the Mouth of wicked
Rebshaketh, boasting and threatening what he would do unto Jerusalem, and unto
the men in it, viz. he would make them eat their own Dung, and drink their own
Piss, was by the just Judgment of God, in the midst of his Pride, disappointed
of his wicked purpose; for the Lord sent his Angel into the Camp of Assyria,
and slew in one night of his men one hundred fourscore and five thousand, so
that when they arose early in the Morning, behold, they were all dead Corpses;
and the King himself, though returning to Nineveh, not long after, as he was
worshipping of his God in the house of Nisroch, two of his Sons, named
Adramelech and Sharezer, smote him with the Sword that he died, 2 Kings 18, etc.

The Assyrian punished.
The Assyrian, who was the great and stout hearted Persecutor and Oppressor of
the Saints, who removed the Bounds of the People, and robbed them of their
Treasures, and destroyed and cut off many Nations, and took them for a prey,
and divided the spoil thereof, and trod them down like mire in the Streets, and
then boasted of it when he had done, saying, all this have I done by the
strength of mine own hand, and by mine own wisdom I have put down the
Inhabitants like a valiant man, and I have found out the riches of the People
as a Nest, and gathered it as men gather Eggs that are left, boasting, how
there was none that moved the Wing, or opened the Mouth, or peeped, when as
indeed in all this he was but the Rod of Gods anger and the Lords Indignation
was the staff in his hand, he being sent of him to an hypocritical Nation (as
the People of Israel then was) to the end that they might repent and be
amended, and had it therefore given him in charge so to do; howbeit, in all
this, in regard he did what he did upon no such account as the Rod of Gods
anger, nor unto no such end as their purging and purifying, neither did he mean
so, nor yet was it in his heart to think so, but he did what he did out of a
murderous and persecuting nature, it being in his heart to destroy and cut off
Nations, not a few; therefore see how the just Vengeance of God is threatened
against him for it) wherefore it shall come to pass (says the Lord) that when
the Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion, and on Jerusalem, that
I will, says the Lord, punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks, and mine anger shall cease in his
destruction, and the Pride of Assyria shall be brought down; the Lord of Hosts
has sworn, saying, surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass, and as
I have purposed, so shall it stand; that I will break the Assyrian in my Land,
and upon my Mountains tread him under foot, Isa. 14.24, 25. who had before trod
down his People under his feet, and this is the purpose which the Lord of Hosts
has purposed concerning the Assyrian, and who shall dissanul it; and his hand
is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

It is very remarkable also to see and consider all along the Scriptures, how
exceeding jealous the Lord has ever been over his People and Children for
good, and how very wathful, and tender he has been over them, lest any should
wrong them, or any way hurt them; and how ready he has always been to revenge
the least injury done unto them, either by word or dead; yea, the Lord has
kept them as M^ses confessed, as the Apple of his own Eye, and has at certain
times rebuked all their Enemies for them before their faces, so says the
Psalmist, he suffered no man, says he, to do them wrong; yea, he reproved
Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no harm,
for he that touches them touches the very Apple of his Eye, Zeph. 3.8. The
Truth of which this tract has plentifully proved, and now there remains to
show from Scripture, as well as from History, how ready the Lord has ever
been, and still is, to revenge upon whole Kingdoms and Nations, as well as upon
particular Persons, all Injuries done unto his Servants and Children; as for
Example

The Amonites, The Amonites for saying, Aha.
because they did but say Aha, against the Sanctuary of the Lord, when it was
profaned, and against the People of Israel, and their Land, when it was
dessolate, and against the House of Judah when they went into Captivity; see in
what manner the Judgments of the Lord were threatened against them; behold
therefore, says the Lord, I will deliver thee to the men of the East, for a
Possession, and they shall set their places in thee, and make their dwellings
in thee; they shall eat thy Fruit, they shall drink thy Milk; and I will make
Rabbah, which was the Royal City, and Seat of the King (where his great Iron
Bed-stead stood, Deuteronomy. 3.11. 2 Samuel 12.26, 30. called the City of Waters for
pleasantness) a Stable for Camels, and the Amonites a couching place for
Flocks, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 25.3, 4, 5.

Again, the Amonites, because they clapped their Hands, and stamped with their
Feet, and rejoiced in their Heart, with all their despite against the Land and
People of Israel; therefore, thus says the Lord, Because thou have done so,
behold therefore, I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and will deliver thee
for a spoil to the Heathen, and I will cut thee off from the People, and will
cause thee to perish out of the Countries, I will destroy thee, and thou shall
know that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 25. 6, 7.

Moab and Seir, because they did but say, Behold the House, the House of Judah
is like unto all the Heathen; therefore behold, says the Lord, I will open the
side of Moab from the Cities, from his Cities which are in his Frontiers, the
Glory of the Country Bethjeshimoth, Baalmeon and Kiriathain unto the men of the
East, with the Amonites, and will give them in Possession, that the Amonites
may not be remembered among the Nations; and I will execute Judgment upon Moab,
and they shall know that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 25.8, 9.

Edom for revenging themselves against Judah, therefore, thus says the Lord,
Because that Edom has dealt against the House of Judah, by taking Vengeance,
and has greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them; therefore, thus
says the Lord God, I will also stretch out mine hands upon Edom, and will cut
off Man and Beast from it, and will make it desolate from Teman, and they of
Dedan shall fall by the Sword, I will lay my Vengeance upon Edom by the hand of
my People Israel, and they shall do in Edom according to mine Anger, and
according to my Fury, and they shall know my Vengeance, says the Lord God.

Tyrus, for saying but Aha against Jerusalem, I shall be replenished, now she
is laid waste and is broken to pieces, that was the Gates of the People;
therefore, thus says the Lord God, Behold I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will
cause many Nations to come up against thee, as the Sea causes his Waves to
come up, and they shall destroy the Walls of Tyrus, and break down her Towers,
I will also scrape her Dust from her, and make her like the top of a Rock, it
shall be a place for the spreading of Nets in the midst of the Sea; for I have
spoken it, says the Lord God; and it shall become a spoil to the Nations; and
her Daughters which are in the Field shall be slain by the Sword, and they
shall know that I am the Lord; for thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will
bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, a King of Kings from the North,
with Horses, and with Chariots, and with Horsemen, and Companies, and much
People: In a Word, the Lord threatens her to be Destroyed with a sore
Destruction by War, from a potent and mighty Army, who shall besiege her, and
raise Forts and Mounts against her, and lift up Axes, and Bucklers, and Engines
of War against her, and break down her Walls and her Towers, and tread down her
Streets, and slay her People by the Sword, and raze her Garrisons to the
ground, and make spoil of her Riches, and a prey of her Merchandise, and
destroy her pleasant Houses, and lay her Stones, Timber and Dust in the midst
of the Waters, and cause the noise of her Songs, and her Harps to cease, and be
utterly Destroyed, never to be built more; for I the Lord have spoken it, says
the Lord God; insomuch that the Isles shall shake at the sound of her fall,
when the wounded cry, when the Slaughter is made in the midst of her, and the
Princes of the Sea shall come down from their Thrones, and lay away their
Robes, and put off their Imbroidered-Garments, and cloth themselves with
Trembling, and sit upon the ground Trembling at every Moment, and be astonished
at her; and they shall take up a Lamentation for her, and say unto her, How art
thou destroyed that wast inhabited of Sea-fearing men, the renowned City which
was strong in the Sea, and the Isles shall tremble at her fall, and the Isles
of the Sea be troubled at her departure, when she shall be made a desolate
City, and be brought down into the Pit, and be a terror unto them, when she
shall be no more, though she be sought for, yet shall she never be found again,
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 2, 6, 27, and 28, Chapters.

Eypypt and Pharaoh the King thereof, because they have been a Staff of Reed to
the House of Israel, when they took hold of thee by the hand, thou did break,
and rent all their Shoulder, and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and
made all their loins to be at a stand: Therefore, thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I am against thee Pharaoh King of Egypt, the great Dragon that lies
in the midst of his Rivers, which has said, my Rivers are my own, and I have
made it for my self: but I will put hooks to thy Jaws, and I will cause the
Fish of thy Rivers to stick unto thy Scales, and I will leave thee thrown into
the wilderness, thee, and all the Fish of thy Rivers; thou shall fall upon the
open Feilds, thou shall not be brought together nor gathered; I have given thee
for meat to the Beasts of the Field, and to the Fowls of the Heaven; and all
the Inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the Lord: and because thou have
been a Staff of Reed to the house of Israel, etc. therefore thus faith the Lord
God, behold, I will bring a Sword upon thee, and cut off Man and Beast out of
thee; and the Land, of Egypt shall be desolate, and they shall know that I am
the Lord, Ezekiel. 29.2. etc.

Mount Seir, because thou have had a perpetual hatred, and have shed the Blood
of the Children of Israel by the force of the Sword, in the time of their
Calamity, in the time that their Iniquity had an end; therefore, thus says the
Lord God, behold, O Mount Seir, I am against thee, and I will stretch out mine
hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate; I will lay thy Cities
waste, thou shall be desolate, and thou shall know that I am the Lord; as I
live, says the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto Blood, and Blood shall
pursue thee; thus will I make Mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him
that passes out, and him that returns; and I will fill his Mountains with
his slain Men in thy Hills, and in thy Valleys, and in all thy Rivers shall
they fall that are slain with the Sword; and I will make thee a perpetual
desolation, and thy Cities shall not return, and ye shall know that I am the
Lord, Ezekiel. 35.3, 4. etc.

CHAP. II.
Several Remarkable Judgments of God, which have befallen several Persecutors
for Conscience sake from Christ's time until the end of the Ten first
Persecutions, under the persecuting Roman Emperors.

King Herod
HErod the great (so called) the great Persecutor of Christ, who that he might
kill Christ in the Cradle, sent and slew all the Children in Bethlem from two
years old and under, who afterward, as History relates, being given up of God
to wickedness, slew his own Wife, and Children, and nearest Kindfolks, and
familiar Friends; but it was not long but the remarkabl^ Judgment of God met
with him, for he was smitten of God with a grievous sickness, viz. a Fire was
kindled in his inward parts, a rotting in his Bowels, a grievous flux in his
Fundament, a moist running humor in his Feet, and the like about his Bladder,
and his privy Members ingendring abundance of Worms, which continually swarmed
out; he had also throughout all the parts of his Body, such a violent Cramp as
humane strength was not able to endure, who seeking to end his days by laying
violent hands upon himself, was prevented by his Friends, and so at length in
extreme misery, he ended his wretched life; see Clerks Genesis Martyrol. page 26.

Herod the Tetrarch.
That wicked Herod the less, Murderer of John the Baptist and condemner of.
Jesus Christ himself, who putting away his own wife, took her Brother Philips
wife, was himself and this incestuous Herodias condemned to perpetual
Banishment to Vienna in France by Caesar Caligula then Emperor, where they both
died miserably, see Acts and Mon. page 50.

Judas Jscoriot.
Judas Iscariot that grand Traitor, and false Disciple of Christ, who after he
had most wickedly betrayed his Lord and Master, and sold him for thirty pieces
of Silver to the Jews, to be Crucified; he afterward, when he saw that Christ
was condemned, brought again the thirty pecies of Silver to the Priests and
Elders, and cast them into the Temple, and crying out through horror of
Conscience, said, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed Innocent Blood, and
then went forth and hanged himself, and falling headlong he brust asunder in
the midst, so that all his Bowels gushed out, Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5.

Pilate the Governor.
Pilate, that wicked Governor, under whom Christ was Crucified, in the days of
Tiberius Nero, then Emperor, through the just punishment of Gods was first
apprehended, and accused at Rome. and deposed, and then banished to the Town of
Lions, at length killed himself, Acts and Mon. page 50.

Caiphas the high Priest.
Caiphas, that wicked high Priest, that sat upon the Judgment Seat, and
condemned Christ, was in the reign of the Emperor Caesar Caligula removed from
his Highpriests Office and did not long after escape with his life. Acts and
Mon. page 50.

Tiberius Caesar.
Tiberius Caesar, who was also called, Tiberius Nero, under whose Reign and
Government Christ himself suffered, was poisoned to death, Acts and Mon. page 50.

Caesar Caligula.
Caesar Caligula, that wicked Emperor, and bloody minded man, that wished that
all the People of Rome had but one Neck, that he might at his pleasure destroy
them at once, was cut off by the hands of a Tribune and others, being slain
when he had reigned but four years. ibid.

Claudius Nero.
Claudius Nero, of whom it is said, that he Ruled thirteen years with no little
Cruelty to the Christians, was in the end slain, ibid.

Domitius Nero, which succeeded next in the Empire, but exceeded all the rest
of the Neros, for Fury, Wickedness and Tyranny; insomuch, as he was counted a
prodigious Monster of Nature, more like a Beast, yea, rather a Devil then a
Man, in that he was so monsterously given to uncleanness, Domitius Nero the
first beginner and stirer up of the ten Persecutions, about the Year 67 Acts
and Mon. page 54.
that he abstained not from his own Mother, and his Natural Sister, and in that
he was so wretchedly cruel as that he caused to be put to death his own Mother,
his Brother-in-law, his own Sister, his own Wife great with Child, and his
Tutor Seneca and Lucane, with diverse more of his own Kindred; besides the
Apostles Peter and Paul, who are said to be put to Death at the latter end of
his reign, for the Testimony of Christ; and not only so, his Wickedness ended
not here, but also he set on Fire the City of Rome in twelve places, and so
continued it six days and seven nights burning, and to avoid the Infamy
thereby, laid the fault upon the Christians, and then caused them to be
persecuted: He reigned fourteen Years, even so long in cruelty, till at last
the Senate Proclaiming him a public Enemy of Mankind, condemned him to be
drawn through the City, and to be whipped to Death; for the fear whereof, he
flying the Hands of his Enemies in the night fled to a Manor of his Servants
in the Country, where he was forced to slay himself, complaining that he had
neither Friend nor Enemy that would do so much for him, Ibid.

In a word, if Histories speak true, few or none of the Persecuting Roman
Emperors died in their Beds.

Decius the Persecutor, being overcome in War, to avoid his Enemies hands, he
leaped with his Horse into a Whirl-pool, and was drowned, Cla. Genesis Martyr. 54.

Valerianus his reward.
Valerianus the Emperor, and Persecutor of the Christians, was taken Prisoner
of the Persians when he was Seventy Years of Age, and Sapores the King of the
Persians used him for his Riding-block; for whenever the King was minded to
mount his Horse openly in the sight of the People, Valerian the Quondam Emperor
was brought forth instead of a Block, for the King to tread upon his Back in
going to his Horseback; and in the end he was condemned to be slain, and
powdered with Salt, for a perpetual Monument of his own wretchedness, Acts and
Mon. 105. Ex. Eusebius.

Gallienus, Killed by Aureolus, Acts and Mon. 51.

Aurelianus his Persecution wonderfuly prevented.
Aurelianus the Emperor began his reign with moderation and discretion, giving
Toleration to the Christians; but at length giving ear to evil counsel, his
nature inclinable to Severity, was altered to plain Tyranny, which he showed in
Murdering, First, his own Sisters Son, then purposing in himself to persecute
the Christians, he framed a Proclamation against them for their Persec^^^n ^^d
being ready, and about to sign it with his own hand, was by the ^^ghty stroke
of the hand of the Lord suddenly from above stopped in his purpose, binding as a
man might say, the Emperors hands behind him, for Utropius and V^piscus
affirms, that as the said Aurelianus was purposing to raise Persecution against
the Christians, he was suddenly Terrified with Lightning, and so stopped from
his wicked Tyranny.

Dioclesian the Wicked Persecutor Poisoned himself.
Dioclesian, that Wicked and Impious Persecuting Emperor, ring whose life a
great and most grievous Persecution was moved against the Christians ten Years
together, and then he deposed himself and as some say at Solona, Anno. 319.
Poisoned himself, Acts and Mon. Fol. 51. and 121.

Maximinus was hanged, as it is said, by Constantine at Massilia, about the
Year 310. Acts and Mon. 123.

Galerius confesses to the Judgment of God.
Galerius the chief Minister of the Persecution, after his terrible
Persecutions, fell into a wonderful sickness, having such a sore risen in the
nether parts of his Belly, which consumed his Privey Members, and so did swarm
with Worms, that being not curable, neither by Chyrurgery nor Physic, he
confessed it happened for his cruelty against the Christians, and so calling in
his Proclamations against them; notwithstanding he not able to sustain, as some
say, the stanch of his sore, slew himself, Acts and Mon. page 51.

Maximinus the cruel Persecutor confesses to the just Judgment of God
Maximinus (the Son as it is thought) that Arch-Enemy to the Christians, and
great Persecutor of tender Conscience, and stirrer up of others thereunto; as
witness his advising his Idol-Priests to execute their Office with great
Authority and Dignity, and with World like Pomp, being to Christian pity and
Religion most incensed, exerci^ing cruel Persecution toward the East Churches
(so called) was by the just Judgment of God suddenly and sorely vexed with a
fatal disease, most filthy and desperate, and very strange, taking its first
beginning in his Flesh outwardly, and from thence proceeding into the inward
parts of his Body; for in his Members there happened to him a sudden
Putrefaction, and botchey corrupt Boyles, with a Fistual, consuming and eating
up his Intrales, out of the which came swarming forth an innumerable multitude
of Lice, with such a pestifferous stench, that no man could abide him, or to be
near him, by reason whereof, the Physicians that had him in cure, some of them
not able to abide the intolerable stench, were commanded to be slain, others
because they could not heal him, being so swollen and past hope of cure were all
cruelly put to Death; at length being put in mind and in rememberance, that his
disease was sent of God; he began to bethink himself of the wickedness that he
had done against the Saints of God, and coming unto himself, confesses his
sins to God, and sets forth his Edicts to command all men to cease from
Persecuting the Christians, desiring the Christians to pray to their God for
him, and this occasioned the very Infidels themselves to extol the only true
God of the Christians; and not long after, by the very Violence of his Disease
he ended his life, Acts and Mon. 115.116.122.

Maxentius was vanquished by Constantine, and drowned in Tyber Acts and Mon.
page 51.

Lycinius, being overcome by Constantine the great, was deposed from his
Empire, and afterward slain of his Soldiers, Ibid.

CHAP. III.
The Just Judgments of God that befell some under Officers, and Ministers of
state, and others that did execute the several Tyrannical Persecutions of the
before said Emperors upon the Christians, for Conscience sake, during the time
of the aforesaid Ten Persecutions.

Informers justly rewarded.
CErtain men of the Jewish Nation Informers, had accused the Martyr Simon (Son
of Cleophas, and reputed nephew to Christ) for being a Christian, and one of
the Stock of David, against whom Trajanus the Emperor had given forth a
Commandment, that whosoever could be found of the Stock of David, This Trajanus
Emperor, was the beginner of the Third persecution, Anno. 100. or 108. see Acts
and Mon. 57. Clae. Genesis Martyr 35.
he should be inquired out, and put to death; of which Stock, upon inquiry
these his Accusers were found to be, and so right justly were put to Execution
themselves, which sought the destruction of another; though it was not long
after, but the good man Simon, after he had been scourged many days, bearing
it with singular constancy, when he was a hundred and twenty years old, was
Crucified and put to death, finishing his course in the Lord, Acts and Mon. 65,
66.

Three other wicked evil-disposed persons (Informers) seeing the soundness,
grave, constancy and virtuous life of Narcissus, then Bishop of Jerusalem, aged
an hundred and sixty three years, accused him as being guilty of a heinous
crime, Perjured Informers.
that he was clear of, and having laid it to his charge, they the better to
make their Accusation seem more probable before the People, they bind it with a
great Oath, one wishing to be destroyed by Fire, if he said not true; the other
to be consumed with a grievous sickness; the third, to loose both his Eyes, if
they did Lie: Narcissus, although having his Conscience clear, yet not able,
being but one man, to withsland their Accusation, bound with such Oaths, gave
place, and removed himself from the Multitude into a solitary Desert by
himself, where he continued many years; in the mean time to them which so
willingly and wickedly forswore themselves, this happened: The first, by
casualty of one little small sparkle of Fire was burnt, with his goods, and all
his Family. The Second was taken with a great sickness, from the top to the
toe, and devoured with the same. The Third hearing and seeing the punishment of
the other, confessed his fault, but through great Repentance poured out such
tears that he lost both his Eyes, and thus was their false perjury punished,
and Narcissus, after long absence returned home again, was by this means both
cleared of the Fact, and received into his Bishopric again, Acts and Mon. 80.

An Executioner.
Antiochus, Tormentor and Executioner of extreme torments (under Alexander
Severus the Emperor, and Persecutor of the Christians) upon a young youth,
called Agapitus, of the Age of fifteen years, who suffered Martyrdom for not
Sacrificing to Idols, after he had, been assailed with sundry Torments, viz.
First, with whips scourged, This Alexander Severus was the beginner of the
Fifth Persecution. Anno. 195.
then hanged by the feet, after having hot, water poured upon him, at last cast
to the wild Beasts; with all which Torments, when he could not be hurt;
finally, with the Sword was beheaded: This said Antioclius, in the Executing
the aforesaid Torments suddenly fell down from his Judicial Seat, crying out,
that all his inward Bowels burned within him, and so gave up the Ghost Hen. de
Erfordia lib. 6. chapter 29. Acts and Mon. 85.

The like severity of Gods terrible Judgments is also to be noted in Claudius
his President; Perfident to Claudius.
this President and Minister of his Persecutions, who was possessed and vexed
with a Devil in such sort, that he biting off his own Tongue in many small
pieces, so ended his life, Hen. de Erfordia Acts and Mon. 105.

CHAP. IV.
The Just Judgments of God upon Persecutors in Queen Maryes Reign.

AFter the death of Queen Mary, the bloody work ceased, although a stop there
was before her Death in London, in some measure; for as Roger Holland had
declared to Bonner, that the Lord would shorten their hands of cruelty; and as
he foretold, there was not one burnt in Smithfield for Religion after him; for
though the vehement zeal of this Queen was such, for the setting up of Popery
in England, as if she intended to establish it forever; yet the secret hand of
Providence had a regard to his suffering Seed, and put a period to her cruelty,
and it is an evident token that the Religion she endeavored to settle did not
please God, although it pleased her, since we see the bad effects it brought
forth; for had it been as godly as it was bloody, no doubt the success would
have been better, and the strict Hand of Gods Judgments would not have been
executed upon the bloody Persecutors of such as dissented, as evidently appears
they were by the many Examples of divine Justice, showed from time to time, and
the unprosperous success of this Queen in all her affairs, are a full assurance
the Lord disliked her effusion of so much blood in the matter of Religion;
neither in all her undertaking had she any good success; for though she
endeavored to restore again the Monks, and Nuns, Abbyes, Friars, etc. which
were partly dissolved in her Fathers time, yet she was frustrated in her
designs, and how unprosperous she was in her State affairs may be read at large
in the Chronicle; for she lost Callice which had been won by the valor of
Edward the Third, and marrying with Philip of Spain a Papist, by him she had no
Issue, and though she promised to her self great felicity in him, but it proved
otherwise; for he withdrew first his affection from her, and at last his
company also; and thus the Almighty ordered things, but no Admonitions would
take place with her, to cause her to revoke her bloody Laws, nor to stop the
Tyranny of these bloody Priests and Bishops, but the Servants of God were drawn
by heaps as Sheep to the Slaughter, and so it continued till by death she was
taken away, after she had reigned Five Years and Five Months.

And now I shall give a short Account of the severe punishment that God
inflicted upon several Persecutors (of his People) from time to time in this
Queens reign, which are not already inserted in this Book.

Doctor Dunning, Chancellor of Norwich, a bloody man, who condemned several
Innocent persons, Chancellor of Norwich
in the midst of his rage died suddenly (as it is said) siting in his Chair.

Bishop Thornton
The like Judgment fell upon Bishop Thornton, Suffragan of Dover, who after he
had exercised great cruelty in Persecuting, at length upon a Sunday (so called)
looking upon his men, playing at Bowls, fell suddenly in a Palsy, and being
had to Bed, was put in mind to remember God; Yea, said he, so I do, and my Lord
Cardinal too, and so died.

After he was dead, the Cardinal ordained another Bishop in his room, who being
at Greenwich, after he had received the Cardinals blessing, going down a pair
of Stairs from the Chamber, he fell down and broak his Neck: to these Examples
also may be added, the terrible Judgment of God upon the Parson at Crundall in
Kent, who having received the Popes Pardon from Cardinal Poole, coming home to
his Parish, exhorted the People to receive the same, saying, That he now stood
as clear in his Conscience as when he was first born, and mattered not if he
died the same hour he spoke it; whereupon, being suddenly stricken by the Hand
of God, and leaning a little on the one side, immediately shrunk down in the
Pulpit, and so was found dead, not speaking one word more.

Not long before the death of Queen Mary, died Doctor Capon Bishop of
Salisbury, Persecutor, about the which time also followed the unprepared death
of Doctor Jeffery, Chancellor of Salisbury, who not long before his death had
caused above ninety persons to be summoned to appear before him, to the end he
might Examine them by Inquisition concerning their Religion, but by the
Providence of God he was prevented from executing the evil, he intended against
them, for in the midst of his buildings, he was suddenly taking away by the
mighty Hand of God.

And now to come from Priests to Laymen where first an Account is given of one
Woodrove, Woodrove Sheriff of London
who was Sheriff of London, who rejoiced much at the death of the Innocent, and
was very cruel in his Office, for when one Rogers was going in a Cart toward
Smithfield to be burnt, and in the way his Children being brought to him,
because the Car-man stopped his Cart, that he might speak to them, he caused
the Car-mans head to be broke; but what happened? within a week after this
Sheriff came out of his Office, he was suddenly smote by the hand of God, the
one half of his Body being benumed, and lay Bedrid, and in this infirmity he
continued seven or eight years till his dying day.

The Keeper of Newgate.
Alexander the keeper of Newgate, a cruel Enemy to those that lay there for
Religion, died very miserably, being so swelled that he was more like a Monster
then a man, and so rotten within, that no man could abide the smell of him;
this cruel Wretch to hasten the poor Lambs to the Slaughter, would go to
Bonner, Story, Cholmley, and others, Crying out, Rid my Prison, Rid my Prison,
I am too much pestered with these Heretics.

The Keeper of Newgate Son.
James, the Son of the said Alexander, having left unto him by his Father great
Substance, within three years wasted all to naught, and when some marvelled how
he spent those goods so fast; Oh, said he, Evil gotten, Evil spent; and shortly
after, as he went to Newgate-market, he fell down suddenly and there wretchedly
died.

His Son in Law.
John Peter, Son in law to this Alexander, an horrible Blasphemer of God, and
no less cruel to the said Prisoners, he commonly when he would affim any thing,
were it true or false, used to say, If it be not true, I pray God I rot ere I
dye; accordingly he did rot away, and so died most miserably.

Cardinal Pool.
The next day after the death of Queen Mary died Cardinal Pool, of what
disease, although it be uncertain to many, it was suspected that he took some
Italian Physic^k that did him no good.

The sudden death of many more Persecutors might be mentioned who were cut off
in this Queens time, and before; but by what is incerted may be seen that the
Lord was against those persecuting Priests and Bishops.

A Relation of the end of Docter Story, a bloody Persecutor of Christ's Members.
Doctor Story.
This Doctor Story was an Arch-Enemy to, and a bloody Persecutor of Gods
people, when Queen Mary dyed Queen Elizabeth staying the Sword of Persecution
from raging any further, caused this Docter Story to be apprehended, and
committed to Prison, where after a little while being detained, he broke out of
Prison, and fled beyond Sea where getting into favor, and growing familiar
with the Duke de Alva in Antwerp, of whom he received a special Commission to
search for English Books, and in this Authority he continued for a time, by
which means he did much hurt, and brought many into trouble and perril of their
lives, Raging in his persecuting blood-thirsty cruelty (but when the measure of
Iniquity was full, the Lord proceeded against him in Judgment, and cut him off,
which was after this manner.

Some in England being concerned to hear of his wicked behavior toward
Innocent people, sent over one Parker a Merchant to Antwerp, who had undertaken
some means to convey Story into England; Parker arriving at Antwerp, got some
privately to inform Doctor Story that in such an English Ship he might find
store of English Books; Story hearing this, suspecting nothing, made haste
toward the Ship as to a prey, and coming on board, said, he came to search for
Heretical Books, and being between Decks they claped down the Hatches upon him,
and hoysted up their Sails, and brought him away into England; where, for
saying, that he was a sworn Subject to the King of Spain, and no Subject to the
Queen of England, he was condemned to be hanged, and accordingly was Executed.

CHAP. V.
The just Judgments of God upon several Persecutors in Foreign Parts.

IN the English Translation of the History of John Carrion Fol. 250. he writes
concerning the Death of John Eckins as follows; Anno. 1553. John Eckins.
this Year, says he, died at Ingeldstate, Doctor Eckins, a faithful Servant
and Champion of the Pope, and a Defender of the abominable Papacy: But as his
Life was full of all Ungodliness, Uncleanness and Blasphemy, so was his end
Miserable, Hard and Pitiful, for his last words were these, In case, said he,
the four thousand Gilders were ready, the matter were dispatched, dreaming
belike of some Cardinal Ship that he should have bought, now what an end this
was, I leave it to the Readers judgment.

John wanderwarfe a Bastard, son of a Stock or Kindred called Warfe, John
Wanderwarfe.
a man of a cruel nature, and of a perverse and corrupt judgment, a sore
Persecutor of Christ's Flock, with greediness, seeking and shedding Innocent
Blood, having drowned diverse good men and women, for which, of some he was
called, A blood-Hound, of others Sheltade, that being of a short, grundy and
little stature, he did commonly ride with a broad Hat, as a Churl of the
Country: On a time, having been at Antwerp, at a Feast, and being laden with
Wine, riding home over a Bridge, the Wagon was blown over the Bar into the
Town-Ditch, where his neck was broken, and his Wife being with him, was taken
up alive, but died within three days after; the truth of this was Witnessed,
by several Merchants of Antwerp.

Erasmus in his Apology makes mention of a Noble man, who having purposed
before his Death, to go see Jerusalem, and setting things in order for his
Journey, An. 1558.
leaving the care of his Wife, who was great with Child, and of his Lordships
and Castles to an Archbishop, as to a must sure and trusty Father; to make
short, it happened this Noble man died in his Journey; as soon as the
Archbishop hard of it, instead of a Father he became an Enemy and Destroyer,
seizing into his hands all his Lordships and Possessions, neither was he
therewith contented, but he laid seige against a strong Fort, into which the
Wife of the Noble man was fled for safeguard, where, in the conclusion, she
with the Child she went withal, was miserably slain: By this Example, the
Reader may see what the effects of this man's blind Superstition was, and what
ill Fruits his rash vows to defend Idolatrous Pilgrimage did produce;
therefore, says my Author, it is rightly said of Hierome, To have been at
Jerusalem, is no great matter; but to live a Godly and Virtuous life that is a
great matter indeed.

In the Town of Gaunt in Flander;, An. 1565 The Provost of Gaunt*
one william D'waver was accused and Imprisoned, by the Provost in Gaunt, who
had in his Cloister a Prison and place of Execution, being with several others,
set in Judgment Seat in Examination and Trial of the said D'weav^^ where he
charged him with denying to pray to Saints, and denying Purgatory; on a sudden
the said Provost, was smitten with a Palsy, that his Mouth was drawn almost to
his Ear, and so he fell down and never speak word more, and the next day about
ten a clock he died, nevertheless they burned the said William D'weaver within
three hours after the same.

The like Example of the Lords Judgment was showed upon another great
Persecutor, called, Sir Garret Triest, A^ ^56^ (...)
who had long promised to the Regent to bring down the Preachers, for which the
^^gent promised to make him an Earl, the said Gerret being at Ga^^^, ^e with
other of the Lords received a Commission from the Regent (...) swear the Lords
and Commons unto the Romish Religion; Garret being at Supper, speak to his Wife
to call him an hour sooner then he use to rise, for that he should have much
business to swear the People in the Townhouse the next day; but see what
happened, the said Garret going to Bed in good health, and his Wife calling him
in the morning, according to his appointment, found him dead by her, and so not
able to prosecute his wicked purpose.

However the Lords of Gaunt, coming to the Townhouse, proceeded to give the
Oath, according to their Commission, ^
but Martin de P^^^^^ the Secratary, being appointed to tender the Oath, at the
first ^an he offered it to, the said Secratary was stricken with present Death,
and fell down and was carried away in a Chair, and never speak more; and to
witness the Truth hereof, my Author produces ten persons Names.

A Letter translated out of French into English, written to Henry the Second
French King, declaring and proving out of diverse Histories, what Afflictions
and Calamities from time to time, by Gods Righteous Judgments, have fallen upon
such, as have been E^^mic^ to his People, and have resisted the free passage of
his Truth.
Consider I pray you, Sir, and you shall find, that all your (...) ^^ous have
come upon yon, ^
since you have set your self against (...) which are called Lutherans, when
you made the Edict of (...) ^^ant, God sent you wars; but when you ceased the
(...) said Edict, and as long as you were Enemies to the Pope, (...) ^^ing into
Armain for the defense of the liberty of the Germans, ^^^^ed for Religion, your
Affairs prospered, as you could wish or desire.

On the contrary, what has come upon you since you joined with the Pope again,
having received a Sword from him, for his own safeguard, and who was it that
caused you, to break the Truce? God has turned in a moment your Prosperity
into such Afflictions, that they touch not only the state of your own person
but of your Kingdom also.

To what end came the enterprise, of the Duke of Guise in Haly, going about the
service of the Enemy of God, and purposing after his return to destroy the
Valleys of Piedmont, to offer or sacrifice them to God, for his Victories; the
event has well declared, that God can turn upside down our Counsels and
Enterprises, as he overturned of la^e the Enterprise of the Constable of France
at S. Quintinis, having Vowed to God, that at his return, he would go and
destroy Geneva, when he had gotten the Victory?

Have you not heard of L' Pouchet Arch Bishop of Towers, who made suit for the
erection of a Court called Chamber Ardent, wherein to condemn the Protestants
to the Fire? who afterward was stricken with a disease, called, The Fire of
God, which began at his feet, and ascended upwards, that he caused one Member
after another to be cut off, and so died miserably without any Remedy.

Also one Castillanus, who having enriched himself by the Gospel, and forsaking
the pure Doctrine thereof, and returning to his vomit again, went about to
persecute the Christians at Orleans, and by the Hand of God was stricken in his
Body with a sickness unknown to the Physicians, the one half of his Body
burning as hot as Fire, and the other as cold as Ice, and so most miserably
crying and lamenting, ended his life.

There be other infinite Examples of Gods Judgments worthy to be remembered, as
the death of the Chancellor, and Legate Duprat, which was the first that opened
to the Parliament the knowledge of Heresies, and gave out the first Commissions
to put the faithful to death, who afterward died in his House at Natcilet,
Swearing and horribly Blaspheming God; and his stomach was found pierced and
knawn assunder with Worms; also John Ruse Councellor in the Parliament, coming
from the Court after he had made report of the process against the poor
Innocents, was taken in a burning in the lower part of his Belly, and before he
could be brought home to his House the fire invaded all his secret parts, and
so he died miserably.

Also one named, Claude De Astes, a Councellor in the said Court, the same day
he gave his Opinion and Consent to burn a faithful Christian (albeit it was not
done indeed as he would have it) after he had dined, committed Whoredom with a
Servant in the House, and even in doing the Act was stricken with a disease
called an Apoplexia, whereof he died out of hand.

Peter Lyset, chief President of the said Court, and one of the Authors of the
aforesaid burning Chamber, was deposed from his Office, for being known to be
out of his right wit, and bereaved of his understanding.

Also John Moren Lieutenant Crimnel of the Provost of Paris, after he had been
the cause of the Death of many Christians, was finally stricken with a disease
in the Legs, called the Wolves, whereby he lost the use of them, and died also
out of his wits, many days before denying and blaspheming God.

Likewise John Andrew, Book-Binder of the Palace, a spy for the President
Liset, and of Bruseard the Kings Soliciter died in a Fury of Madness.

The Inquisitor John De Roma, in Province, his flesh fell from him by
piecemeal, and so stinking, that no man might come near him for the smell
thereof.

Also John Minerius of Province, who was the cause of the death of a great
Number of Men, Women and Children at Cabriers, and at Merindol, died with
bleeding in the lower parts, the Fire having taken his Belly, blaspheming and
despising God, besides many other whereof we might make recital, which were
punished with the like kind of death.

It may please your Majesty to remember your self that ye had no sooner
determined to set upon us, but new troubles were by and by moved by your
Enemies, with whom ye could make no Agreement, which God would not suffer,
forasmuch as your Peace was grounded upon the Persecution which ye pretended
against Gods Servants; as also your Cardinals cannot let through their cruelty
the course of the Gospel, which has taken such root in your Realm, that if God
should give you leave to destroy the Professers thereof, you should be almost a
King without Subjects.

Tertullian has well said, that the blood of Martyrs is the Seed of the
Gospel, wherefore to take away all these evils coming of the riches of the
Papists, which cause so much Whoredom, Sodomitry and Incest, wherein they
wallow like Hogs, feeding their idle Bellies; the best way were, to put them
from their Lands, and Possessions, as the Old Sacrificing Levites were,
according to the express Commandment given to Joshua; for as long as the
Commandment of God took place, and that they were void of Ambition, the purity
of Religion remained whole and perfect, but when they began to aspire to
Principallity, Riches and worldly Honors, then began the Abomination of
Desolation that Christ foretold.

It was even so in the Primitive Church, for it flourished and continued in all
pureness, as long as the Ministers were of small wealth, and sought not their
particular profit, but the Glory of God only; but since the Pope began to be
Prince like, and to usurp the Dominion of the Empire, under the color of a
false Donation of Constantine, they have turned the Scriptures from their true
sense, and have attributed the service to themselves, which we owe to God,
wherefore your Majesty may seize with good right, upon all the Temperallities,
of the Benefices, and that with a safe Conscience, to Employ them to their true
and right use.

First, For the finding and maintaining of the faithful Ministers of the Word
of God, for such Livings shall be requisite for them, according as the case
shall require. Secondly, For the entertainment of your Justices that give
Judgment. Thirdly, For the relieving of the poor and Maintenance of the
Colleges, to instruct the poor Youths in that which they shall be most apt
unto; and the rest, which is infinite may remain for entertainment of your own
Estate and Affairs, to the great easment of your poor People, which alone bear
the Burden, and possess in manner nothing.

In this doing, an infinite Number of men, and even of your Nobility, which
live of the Crucifex should employ themselves to your Service and the Common
Wealths, so much the more diligently, as they see that ye recompense none, but
those that have deserved; whereas now there is an infinite Number of men in
your Kingdom which occupy the chiefest and greatest Benifices, which never
deserved any part of them, etc. And thus much touching the Superfluous
Possessions of the Popish Lordly Clergy: Now, proceeding further in this
Exhortation to the King, thus the Letter imports.

But when the Papists see they have not to alledg for themselves any reason,
they say, to make odious to your Majesty the Lutherans (as they call us) and
say, if their sayings take place, ye shall be fain to remain a private person,
and that there is never change of Religion, but there is also change of
Princedom; a thing as false as when they accuse us to be Sacramentaries, and
that we deny the Authority of Magistrates under the shadow of a certain
furious Anabaptist which Satan has raised in our time, to Darken the Light of
the Gospel, for the Histories of the Emporors, which have begun to receive the
Christian Religion, and that which is come to pass in our time show the
contrary.

Was there ever Prince more feared and obeyed then Constantine in receiving the
Christian Religion? Was he therefore put from the Empire? No, he was thereby
the more confirmed and established in the same, and also his Posterity which
ruled themselves by his Providence; but such as are fallen away, and followed
men's Traditions, God has destroyed, and their Race is no more known in the
Earth, so much does God detest them that forsake him; and in our time the late
Kings of England and Germany, were they constrained, in reproving
Superstitions, which the wickedness of the time has brought in, to forsake
their Kingdoms and Princedoms? All men see the contrary; and what honor,
fidelity and obedience of the people in our time, that have received the
Reformation of the Gospel do under their Princes and Superiors; yae, I may
say, that the Princes knew not before, what it was to be obeyed at that time
when the rude and ignorant people received so readily, the dispensations of the
Pope, to drive out their own Kings and Natural Lords.

The true and only remedy, Sir, is, that ye cause to be holden a holy and free
Council, where ye should be chief, and not the Pope and his, who ought but only
to defend their causes by the holy Scriptures, that in the mean while ye may
seek out men, not corrupted, suspected nor partial, whom ye may charge to give
report faithfully unto you of the true sense of the holy Scriptures; and this
done after the Example of the good King Jehosaphat, Hezekias and Josi^^, ye
shall take out of the Church all Idolatry, Superstitions and Abuse, which is
found directly contrary to the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testimament,
and by that means ye shall guide your People in the true and pure Service of
God, not regarding in the mean time the cavelling pretenses of the Papists,
which say, that such Questions have been already answered at General Councils,
for it is known well enough that no Council has been lawful since the Popes
have usurped the Principallity and Tyranny upon men's Souls, but they have made
them serve to their Covetousness, Ambition, and Cruelty, and the contrariety
which is among those Councils, makes enough for their disproof, beside a
hundred thousand other absurdities, against the Word of God, which be in them
the true proof, for such matters is in the true and holy Scriptures, to the
which no times nor Age has any prescription to be alleged against them; for
by them we receive the Councils founded upon the Word of God, and also by the
same we reject that Doctrine which is repugnant.

And if ye do thus, Sir, God will bless your enterprise, he will increase and
confirm your Reign and Empire, and your Posterity; if otherwise Destruction is
at your Gate, and unhappy are the People which shall dwell under your
Obedience; there is no doubt, but God will harden your heart as he did
Pharaohs, and take of the Crown from your head, as he did to Jeroboam, Nadah,
Baza, Ahab, and to many other Kings, and give it your Enemies to triumph over
you and your Children.

And if the Emperor Antonyne the meek, although he was a Pagan, and Idolator,
seeing himself bewrapt with so many wars ceased the Persecutions which were in
his time against the Christians, and determined in the end to hear their Cause
and Reasons, how much more ought you that bear the name of most Christian King
to be careful and diligent to cease the Persecutions against the poor
Christians, seeing they have not troubled, nor do trouble in any wise the Sat
of your Kingdom, and your Affairs? Considering also, that the Jews are suffered
throughout all Christendom, although they be mortal Enemies of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which we hold by common accord and consent for our God, Redeemer and
Savior, and that until you have heard, lawfully debated, and understand our
Reasons taken out of the Holy Scriptures, and that your Majesty have judged, if
we be worthy of such punishments; for if we be not overcome by the Word of God,
the Fire, the Sword, nor the cruel Torments shall not make us afraid; these are
Exercises that God has promised his, the which he fortold should come in the
last times, that they should not be troubled when such things came upon them.


Translated out of the French Book, entitled, Commentaries of the State of the
Church and Public Weal, page 7.

Notwithstanding the Letter and warning, the King no whit abated his cruel
Persecution against the Lords People, but rather was the more hardened in
heart, and inflamed against them, pouring out great Threatening against them.

But the Lord in whose hand the hearts of Kings are, caused him to stoop; for
shortly after in a public Triumph or Jusling, Mountgomery and the King met
together so stoutly, that in breaking their Spears, the King was stricken with
a counter blow right in one of his Eyes, and the shivers entered into his Head,
so that his Brains festered and perished and no remedy could be found, but he
dyed having reigned twelve years three months and ten days.

Amongst others, it is not to be forgoten the Example of Gods just Scourge upon
Sigismundus the Emperor, A just Judgment upon Sigismundus the Emperor.
who after his wrongful condemnation of John Husse and Hierome of Prage,
nothing afterward went prosperous with him, but all contrary, so that he died
without issue, and in his wars he ever had the worst, and not long after Ladis
Laus his Daughters son, King of Hungary, fighting against the Turk, was slain
in the Field, so that in the time of one Generation all the Posterity and
Offspring of this Emperor perished; besides this, Barbara his Wife, came to
such ruin by her wicked Lewdness, that she became a shame and slander to the
name and state of all Queens, whereby all Christian Princes may be warned how
they defile themselves with the blood of Saints an Martyrs.

And thus the Reader may see all along throughout the Scriptures, and by the
record of Ancient Histories, The Conclusion.
how God has avenged the the Cause of his People against all Persecutors for
Conscience sake, of every Age almost from the beginning unto these Times, and
now these Examples may be a Warning to the Persecutors of this Age, who have
made Spoil of the People of God, and have the Spoil in their Houses; and though
such Oppressors may be lifted up, because Judgment is not speedily executed;
yet let such consider their ways and repent before it be too late, for the
Lord is at the Door, and beholds the Actions of such as grind the face of his
People, and though he has long forbearance, yet his Judgments will come, if
there be not repentance in time. Return therefore whilst ye have time. (O ye
Persecutors, and wicked Men) for the day of the Lord is at hand, It shall come
as a Destruction from the Almighty; therefore shall all hands be faint, and
every man's heart shall melt, and they shall be afraid; Pangs and Sorrows shall
take hold upon them; they shall be in Pain as a Woman that travelleth; they
shall be amazed one at an other; their faces shall be as Flames: Behold, the
day of the Lord comes, cruel both with Wrath and fierce Anger to lay the Land
desolate, and he shall destroy the Sinners thereof out of it, and will punish
the World for their Evil, and the wicked for their Iniquity, and will cause the
arrogance of the Proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
Terrible.

A Christian Plea AGAINST PERSECUTION For the Cause of CONSCIENCE, Grounded
Upon Scripture, Reason, Experience and Testimonies OF Princes and learned
Authors.

Acts 5.38, 39. Now, I say unto you, Refrain from these Men, and let them
alone; for if this Counsel, or this Work, be of Men, it will come to naught;
but if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily you be found
Fighters against God.

Printed and Published for the Service of Truth.

The Contents.
I. REason against Persecution is, because it is Contrary to the Scriptures.
II. Reason against Persecution for the cause of Conscience, is, because it is
against the Profession and Practice of Famous Princes. III. Reason against
Persecution, is, because it is condemned by the ancient and the later Writers.
IV. Reason, Its no prejudice to a Kingdom or Commonwealth, if Liberty of
Conscience be suffered to such as fear God, as is or will be manifested i^ such
men's Lives and Conversations, as Scripture-Examples Testify. V. Several
Testimonies showing that Conscience ought to be free, and not to be imposed
upon, and no person ought to be Compelled to accuse himself, or purge himself
by Oath. VI. Some remarkable Collections out of Doctor Tailors Book, entitled,
OEOAOTIA EKAEKTIKH, A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying; showing the
unreasonableness of prescribing to other men's Faith, and the Iniquity of
persecuting different Opinions. VII. Instances out of diverse Authors treating
on the same subject, by W. C. deceased. VIII. Several Reasons rendered (why no
outward force nor imposition ought to be used in matters of Faith and Religion)
by R. H. S. F. and F. H. deceased. IX. Several Sayings Collected from the
Speeches and writings of King Charles the first. X. Several Promises and
Declarations for the Liberty of tender Consciences taken out of the Speeches of
King Charles the second.
SECT. I.
Persecution for the cause of Conscience is against the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, the King of Kings, as these Scriptures and Reasons following do
demonstrate.

The first Reason against Persecution is, because it is contrary to Scripture.
FOr Christ commanded, that the Tares and Wheat should be let alone in the
World, Matthew. 13.30.38. etc
and not plucked up until the Harvest, which is the End of the World.

Christ also commands, Matthew. 15.14.
that they that are blind should be let alone referring their punishment unto
the falling into the Ditch.

Again, he reproved his Disciples, who would have had Fire come down from
Heaven, Luke 9.54, 59.
and devour those Samaritans, who would not receive him, in these Words, Ye
know not of what Spirit ye are; the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
Lives, but to save them.

Paul the Apostle taught, 2 Timothy 24.2.
that the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all
men, suffering the evil men, instructing them with meekness that are
contrary-minded, proving if God at any time will give them Repentance, that
they may acknowledge the Truth, and come to amendment out of that Snare of the
Devil.

According to these blessed Commandments the Prophets foretold, Esa. 2.4. Mica.
4.3.4.
that when the Law of Moses (concerning Worship) should cease, and Christ's
Kingdom be established, they should break their Swords into Plough-shares and
their Spears into Pruning Hooks. Then shall none hurt or destroy in all the
Mountains of my holiness: And when he came, the same he taught and practiced as
before, Esa. 11.9.
so did his Disciples after^him, for the Weapons of his Warfare are nor carnal,
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4.

But he charge straightly (that his Disciples should be so far from persecuting
those that would not be of their Religion) that when they were persecuted, they
should pray; when they were Cursed, Matthew. 5.
they should Bless, etc. And the reason seems to be, because they who now are
Tares, may hereafter become Wheat; they who are now Blind, may hereafter see;
they that now resist, him, may hereafter receive him; they that are now in the
Devils snare, in adversness to the Truth, may hereafter come to Repentance;
they that are now Blasphemers and Persecutors (as Paul was) may in time become
faithful as he; they that are now Idolatrous, as the Corinthians once were, 1
Cor. 6.9.
may hereafter become true Worshippers as they; they that are now no people of
God, nor under Mercy (as the Saints sometimes were, 1 Pet. 2, 20.) may
hereafter become the People of God, and obtain Mercy as they.

Some come not till the eleventh hour: Matt. 20. (...).
If those that come not till the last hour should be destroyed, because they
come not at the first, then should they never come but be prevented.

SECT. II.
The second Reason against Persecution for cause of Conscience is, because it
is against the Profession and Practice of famous Princes.

FIrst, Consider the speech of King James to the Parliament 1609. he says, It
is a sure Rule in Divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church by
Violence and Bloodshed; and that it was usually the Condition of Christians to
be persecuted, but not to persecute.

Again, he says, page four, speaking of the Papists; I gave good proof, that I
intended no Persecution against them for Conscience Cause.

And in the same Kings Exposition of the Revelation the twentieth, printed 1588.
he writes thus; Compassing of the Saints, and beseiging of the beloved City,
declares unto us a certain Note of a false Church to be Persecution; for they
come to seek the faithful; the Faithful are them, that are sought; the Wicked
are the Besiegers, the Faithful are the Besieged.

And the King of Bohemia has thus written, And notwithstanding the success of
the latter Times (wherein Sundry Opinions have been hatched about the subject
of Religion) may make one clearly discern with his Eye, and as it were to touch
with his Finger, that according to the Truth of the Scripture, and a Maxim
heretofore maintained by the ancient Doctors of the Church, that men's
Consciences ought in no fort to be violated, urged, or constrained; and
whenever men have attempted any thing, by this violent course, whether
openly, or by secret means, the issue has been Pernicious, and the cause of
great and wonderful Innovations in the Principalest and Mightiest Kingdoms and
Countries of all Christendom.

And further he says: So that once more we do profess, before God and the
whole World, that from this time forward we are firmly resolved, not to
persecute or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or molested, any person
whosoever, for matter of Religion, no not those who profess themselves to be of
the Romish Church, neither to trouble nor disturb them in the Exercise of their
Religion, so they live conformable to the Laws of the States, etc.

SECT. III.
The Third Reason, because Persecution for Cause of Conscience, is condemned by
the ancient and later Writers.

HIlary against Auxentius, says thus, The Christian Church does not persecute,
but is persecuted. And Lamentable it is to see the folly of these Times, and
the foolish Opinion of this World, in that men think by humane Aid to help God,
and with Wordly Pomp and Power to undertake to defend the Christian Church: I
ask the Bishops, what help used the Apostles, in the publishing the Gospel?
with the Aid of what power did they Preach Christ, and converted the Heathen
from their Idolatry to God? When they were in Prisons, and lay in Chains, did
they praise and give thanks to God for any dignities or favors received from
the Court, or do you think that Paul went about with regal Mandates, or kingly
Authority, to gather and establish the Church of Christ? Sought he Protection
from Nero Vespatian?

The Apostles wrought with their hands for their own Maintenance, traveling by
Land and Water, from Town to City; to preach Christ; yea, the more they were
forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ; but now, alas, humane help
must assist and protect the Faith, and give the same Countenance too, and by
vain and worldly Honors do men seek to defend the Church of Christ, as if he
by his Power were unable to perform it,

The Church formerly by enduring Misery and Imprisonment was known to be a true
Church: The pretended Church now do terrify others by Imprisonment, Banishment
and Misery, and boasts that she is highly esteemed of the World, when as the
true Church cannot but be hated of the same.

Tertul. ad scapulam, It agrees both with human Reason and natural Equity,
that every man worship God uncompelled; neither beseems it any Religion, to
compel another to be of their Religion, which willingly and freely should be
embraced, and not by constraint; forasmuch as the Offerings were required of
those that freely and of good will offered, and not from, the contrary.

Jerome in Proaem lib. 4. in Jeremiam, Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of
the Spirit, let us strike through with the Arrows of the Spirit all Sons and
Disciples of misled Heretics, that is, with Testimonies of Scriptures; the
slaughter of Heretics is by the Word of God.

Brentius upon the first of the Corinthians, chap. 3. No man has power to
make, or give Laws to Christians, whereby to bind their Consciences; for
willingly, freely and uncompelled, with a ready desire, and cheerful mind, must
those that come, run unto Christ.

Luther in his Books of the Civil Magistrate, says, The Laws of the Civil
Magistrates Government extends no further then over the Body or Goods, and to
that which is external, for over the Soul God will not suffer any man to rule,
only he himself will Rule there; wherefore whosoever does under take to give
Laws unto the Souls and Consciences of men, he usurpeth that Government
himself, which appertains unto God, etc.

Therefore upon 1 Kings 5. In the building of the Temple, there was no sound of
Iron heard, to signify, that Christ will have in his Church a free and a
willing People, not compelled and constrained by Laws and Statutes.

Again, he faith upon Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church, which is
defended by the secular Arm, or humane Power, but the false and feigned Church,
which although it carries the name of a Church, yet it denies the power thereof.

And upon Psalm. 17. he says, For the true Church of Christ, knows not
Brachium seculare, which the Bishops now adays chiefly use.

Again, in Postil Dom. 1 post Epipham, he says, Let not Christians be
commanded, but exhorted; for he that willingly will not do that whereunto he is
friendly exhorted, he is no Christian; wherefore they that do compel those that
are not willing, show thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but
worldly Beadles.

Again upon 1 Peter 3. He, says If the Civil Magistrate shall command me to
believe thus and thus, I should answer him after this manner; look you to your
civil or worldly Government, your Power extends not so far as to command any
thing in Gods Kingdom; therefore herein I may not hear you; for if you cannot
bear it, that any should usurp Authority, where you have to command, how do you
think that God should suffer you to thrust him from his Seat, and to seat your
self therein?

SECT. IV.
The Fourth Reason, Its no prejudice to a Kingdom or Commonwealth, if Liberty
of Conscience be suffered to such as fear God; as is or will be manifested in
such men's lives and conversations, as Scripture Examples testify.

AEraham abode among the Cananites a long time, yet contrary to them in
Religion, Genesis 13.7. and 16.13.

Again; he sojourned in Gerar and King Abimelech gave him leave to abide is his
Land, Genesis 20.21, 23, 24.

Isaac also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Genesis 26.

Jacoh lived Twenty years in one house with his Uncle Laban, yet differed in
Religion, Genesis 31.

The People of Israel were about Four hundred and thirty years in that infamous
Land of Egypt, and afterward seventy years in Babylon, all which time they
differed in Religion from the State, Exodus 12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.

Come to the time of Christ, when Israel was under the Romans, where lived
diverse Sects of Religion, as Herodians, Scribes and Pharisees, Saduces and
Libertines, Thudeans and Samaritans, besides the common Religion of the Jews,
Christ, and his Apostles, all which differed from the common Religion of the
State, which was like the worship of Diana, which almost the whole World then
worshipped Acts 19.20.

All these lived under the Government of Caesur, being no thing hurtful to the
Commonwealth,) giving unto Caesar that which was his, and for their Religion
and Consciences toward God, he left them to themselves, as having no dominion
over their Souls and Consciences; and when the Enemies of Truth raised up any
Tumults, the wisdom of the Magistrate most wisely appeased them, Acts 18.14.
and 19.35.

SECT. V.
Several Testimonies showing that Conscience ought to be free, and not to be
imposed upon, and no person be compelled to accuse himself, or purge himself by
Oath, etc.

ACcusare se nemo tenetur, says Vasquius, nisi coram de^: secundum illud
Chrysostomi non tibi dico ut teprodas: Valque Co^irs illustraes p. 124. number. 27.
No man is bound to accuse himself but before God, according to that of
Chrysostom, I do not say that thou should betray thy self.

Quis sibi utrumque audeat assumere ut unquam sit ipse and accusator and Judex?
Aug. hom. 50.
Who dares assume to himself to be both an Accuser and a Judge, says Austin?

That famous Lawyer Cook says, Juramentum in propria est inventio Diaboli ad
detrudendum anim as miserorum in infernum. The Oath Ex officio; says he, is an
invention of the Devil, to cast the Souls of miserable people into Hell.

Let the Judges, says Tindall, judge and condemn the Trespasses under lawful
Witnesses, Tindals Obed. of Christ p. 22. Col. 2.
and not break up into the Consciences of men after the Example of Antichrists
Disciples, and compel them either to forswear themselves, or to testify
against themselves, which abomination, says he, our Prelates learned of
Caiphas, Matthew. 26. saying to Christ, I adjure, or charge thee in the name of
the Living God, that thou tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of the Living
God.

SECT. VI.
Some remarkable Observation, collected out of a Book, entitled, THEOLOGIA
EKLEKTIK, A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying; showing the
unreasonableness of prescribing to othermens Faith, and the Iniquity of
persecuting different Opinions; by Jer. Tailor D. D. (so styled) Chaplin in
Ordinary to his late Majesty.

IN his Epistle Dedicatory are these words: viz. As contrary as Cruelty is to
Mercy, as Tyranny to Charity; so is War and Bloodshed to the Meekness and
Gentleness of Christian Religion.

And further speaks, to dispute men into Mercies, Compliances and Tolerations
mutual; and further adds.

I designed a Discourse to this purpose, with as much greediness, as if I had
thought it possible with my Arguments to have persuaded the rough and hard
handed Soldiers to have disbanded presently; for I had often thought of the
Prophecy, that in the Gospel, our Swords should be turned into Plow-shares,
and our Spears into Pruning Hooks.

I thought it my duty to plead for Peace and Charity, and Forgiveness, and
Permissions mutual.

Although we must contend earnestly for the Faith, yet this contention must be
with Arms sit for the Christian Warfare, the Sword of the Spirit, the Shield of
Faith, etc. but not with other Arms; for a Churchman must not be a Striker,
for the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual.

I being most of all troubled, that men should be persecuted, and afflicted,
for disagreeing in such opinions, which they cannot with sufficient grounds
obtrude upon others necessarily, because they cannot propound them infallibly.

Considerations (are to be had) to the Persons of men, and to the Laws of
Charity more then to the triumphing in any Opinion, etc.

If the Persons be Christians in their life, and Christians in their
profession; if they acknowledge the Eternal Son of God for their Master, and
the Lord, and live in all relations as becomes Persons making such professions,
why then should I hate such Persons whom God loves, and who love God, who are
pertakers of Christ, and Christ has a Title to them, who dwell in Christ, and
Christ in them, because their understandings have not been brought up like
mine, have not had the same Masters, they have not met with the same Books --
have not the same Opinions that I have, and do not determine their School
Questions to the same sense of my Sect or Interest?

And whatsoever is against the Foundation of Faith or contrary to good Life --
or destructive to humane society -- is out of the limits of my Question, and
does not pretend to compliance or toleration.

The fault I find and seek to remedy is, That men are so dogmatical and
resolute in their Opinions, and impatient of others disagreeing in those things
wherein is no sufficient means of Union and Determination, but that men should
let Opinions and Problems not be obtruded as Axioms, nor Questions in the vast
collection of the Systeme of divinity be adopted into the Family of Faith.

Its hard to say, that he who would not have men put to death or punished
corporally for such things, for which no human Authority is sufficient for
Cognizance, or Determination, or competent for infliction; that he perfwades to
an indifferency when he refers to another Judicatory, which is competent,
sufficient, infallible, just, and highly severe -- for God alone must be Judge
of these matters, who alone is Master of our Souls, and has the Dominion over
humane understanding -- God alone is Judge of erring Persons.

I earnestly contend, that another man's Opinion shall be no Rule to mine, and
that my Opinion shall be no Snare and Prejudice to my self; that men use one
another so charitably, that no error or violence tempt men to Hypocrisy; this
very thing being one of the Arguments I used to persuade Permissions, lest
Compulsion introduce Hypocrisy, and make Sincerity troublesome, etc.

From the Dictates of holy Scriptures; it is observable, that this, with its
appendant degrees, I mean, restraint of Prophesying, imposing upon other men's
understandings, being Masters of their Consciences, and lording it over their
Faith, came in with the retinue and train of Antichrist, as other abuses and
corruptions of the Church did, by reason of the iniquity of the times, and the
cooling of the first heats of Christianity, and the increase of interest, and
the abatements of Christian simplicity, when the Churches fortune grew better,
and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst of all: For in the first
three hundred Years there was no sign of persecuting any man for his Opinion,
though at that time there were very horrid Opinions commenced -- and they who
used all means -- Christian and Spiritual, for their disimprovement and
conviction, thought not of using corporal force -- and therefore I do not only
urge their not doing it, as an Argument of the unlawfulness of such proceeding,
but their defying it, and speaking against such practices as unreasonable, and
destructive to Christianity, for so Tertullina is express, Humani juris and
naturalis potestatis uni cuique quod putaverit colere, sed nec religionis est
cogere religionem quae suscipi debet sponte non vi: its of humane right and
natural power for every one to worship what he thinks; but neither is it the
part of Religion to compel Religion, which ought to be undertaken of its own
accord.

The same is the Doctrine of Cyprian, Lactantius, Hillary, Minutius, Faelix,
Sulpitius, Severus, Chrisostom, Hierom, Austin, Damaseen, Theophilact, Socrates
Scholasticus, and Bernard.

All wise Princes till they were overborn with Faction, and solicited by
peevish persons, gave Toleration to differing Sects -- But at first there were
some heretical persons, that were so impatient, they were the men that first
entreated the Emperor to persecute the Catholics: but till four hundred years
after Christ, no Catholic persons, or very few, did provoke the secular Arm,
or implore its aid against the Heretics; save only that Arrius behaved himself
so seditiously and tumultuarily that the Nicene Fathers procured a temporary
Decree for his relegation; but it was soon taken off, and God left to be his
Judge.

But as the Ages grew worse, so men grew more cruel and unchristian; and in the
Greek Church Atticus and Nestorius of Constantinople, Theodocius of Synoda, and
some few others, who had forgotten the mercies of their great master, and their
own duty, grew implacable, and furious, and impatient of contradiction.

It was a bold and arrogant Speech which Nestorius made in his Sermon before
Theodotius the younger; Damihi, O Emperator, terram ab Haereticis repurgatam
and ego tibi vicissim coelum dabo; disperde mecum Haereticos, and ego tecum
disperdam Persas; which is in English, O Emperor, give to me the Land purged
from Heretics; and I, instead thereof, will give thee heaven: destroy me the
Heretics, and I will destroy with thee the Persians: It was as groundless, as
unwarrantable, as it was bloody and inhumane. And we see the contrary events
prove truer; for Theodosius and Valentinian were prosperous Princes, and have
the reputation of great piety; but they were so far from doing what Nestorius
had suggested, that they restrained him from his violence and immanity; and
Theodosius did highly commend B. Proclus, for his sweetness of deportment
toward erring persons, far above the cruelty of his Predecessor Atticus.

And the experience which Christendom has had in this last Age, is Argument
enough, That Tole ration of differing Opinions is so far from disturbing the
public peace, or destroying the Interest of Princes, and Commonwealths, that
it does advantage the Public, it secures the Peace, because there is not so
much as the Pretense of Religion left to such persons to contend for, it being
already indulged to them.

When France fought against the Hugonots, the spilling of their own Blood was
Arguments enough of the imprudence of that way of promoting Religion; but since
she has given permission to them, etc.

The great instance is in the differing Temper, Government, and Success which
Margaret of Parma, and the Duke of Alva had; the clemency of the first had
almost extinguished the Flame; but when she was removed, D. Alva succeeded, and
managed the matter of Religion with Fire and Sword, he made the Flame so
great, that his Religion, and his Prince too, had both been almost turned out
of the Country; Pellie mediosapientiam quoties vi res agitur, said, Ennius, [
Wisdom is driven out, when the matter is acted by force.]

[And therefore the best of men, and most glorious of Princes, were always
ready to give Toleration.]

Eusebeus in his second Book of the life of Constantine, reports these words of
the Emperor, Parem cum fidelibus ij qui errant pacis, and quietis fruitionem
gaudentes accipiant: ipsa si quidem communicationis and societatis restitutio
ad rectam etiam veritat is viam perducere potest; nemo cuiquam molestis sit,
quisque quod animo destinat hoc etiam faciat; Let them which err with joy
receive the like fruition of Peace and quietness with the Faithful, since the
restoring of communication, and society may bring them into the right Way of
Truth: Let none give molestation to any; let every one do as he determines in
his mind.

And indeed there is great reason for Princes to give Toleration to disagreeing
persons, whose Opinions cannot by fair means be altered; for if the persons be
confident, they will serve God according to their persuasions; and if they be
publicly prohibited, they will privately convene, and then all those
inconveniences, and mischiefs, which are Arguments against the permission of
Conventicles, are Arguments for the public permissions of differing Religions,
etc. -- they being restrained, and made miserable, indears the discontented
persons mutual, and makes more hearty and dangerous confederations.

King James in his Letters to the States of the United-Provinces, dated March
6.1613. thus wrote -- Ita ut prohibeatis Ministros vestros ne eas disputationes
in suggestum aut ad plebem ferant, ac districte impertis ut pacem colant se in
vicem tolerando in ista opinionum ac sententiarum discrepantia -- So that you
may forbid your Ministers, that they bring not those Disputations into the
Pulpit, or to the People, and strictly command, that they embrace peace among
themselves, by Tolerating in that difference of Opinions and Judgments.

The like Counsel in the divisions of Germany, at the first Reformation, was
thought reasonable by the Emperor Ferdinand, and his excellent Son Maximilian;
for they had observed, That Violence did exasperate was unblest, unsuccesful,
and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Toleration.

And the Duke of Savoy repenting of his War, undertaken for Religion against
the Piedmontans, promised them Toleration; and was as good as his word -- As
much is done by the Nobility of Polenia: so that the best Princes and the best
Bishops gave Toleration and Impunities (but it is known, that the first
Persecution of disagreeing Persons was by the Arrians, by Circumcellians, and
Donatists, and from them they of the Church took Example, etc.) And among the
Greeks it became a public and authorized practice, till the question of Images
grew hot and high; for then the Worshippers of Images, having taken their
example from the Empreis Irene, who put her son's eyes out for making an Edict
against Images, began to be as cruel, as they were deceived, especially, being
encouraged by the Pope of Rome, who then blew the Coals to some purpose.

I may upon this occasion give account of this affair in the Church of Rome, it
is remarkable that till the time of Justinian the Emperor, A. D. 525. the
Catholics and Novatians had Churches indifferently permitted even in Rome it
self, but the Bishops of Rome, whose interest was much concerned in it, spoke
much against it, and labored the eradication of the Novatians; and at last
when they got power into their hands they served them accordingly; but it is
observed by S^crates that when the first persecution was made against them at
Rome by Pope Innocent the first, at the same instant the Goths invaded Itally,
and became Lords of all, it being just in God, etc.

And I have heard it observed as a blessing upon S. Austin (who was so merciful
to erring Persons) as the greatest part of his life -- to tolerate them, and
never to endure that they should be given over to the seculer power to be
killed) that the very night the Vandals set down before his City of Hippo, to
besiege it, he died, and went to God; being taken from the miseries to come.

But in the Church of Rome, the Popes were the first Preachers of Force and
Violence in matters of Opinion, and that so zealously that Pope Vigilius
suffered himself to be imprisoned, and handled roughly by the Emperor
Justinian, rather then he would consent to the restitution and peace of certain
disagreeing persons, etc.

The first that preached that Doctrine was dominick, the Founder of the Begging
Order of Friars: The Friars Preachers, in memory of which the Inquitision is
entrusted only to the Friars of his order; and if there be any force in Dreams,
or truth in Legends, etc. -- This very thing might be signified by his mothers
Dream, who the night before Dominick was born, dreamed she was brought to bed
of a huge Dog, with a Firebrand in his mouth; sure enough, however his
Disciples expound the Dream, it was a better sign that he should prove a Rabid
furious incendiary then any thing else, what ever he might be in the other
parts of this life; in this Doctrine he was not much better, as appears in his
deportment toward the Abligences, against whom he so preached -- Adeo quidem
ut centum hereticorum millia ab octo millibus catholicorum fuse and interfecta
fuisse probiantur, says one of him, and of those who were taken, one hundred
and eighty were burned to death, because they would not abjure their Doctrine;
this was the first Example of putting erring Persons to death, that I find in
the Romish Church.

By this time I hope it will not be thought unreasonable to say, He that
teaches mercy to erring Persons teaches indifferency in Religion, unless so
many Fathers, and so many Churches, and the best of Emperors, and all the World
(till they were abused by Tyranny, Popery and Faction) did teach indifferency:
For;

I have shown that Christianity does not punish corporally, persons erring
Spiritually, but indeed Popery does.

The Donatists, and Circumcelians, and Arrians, and Itaciani, they of old did
in the middle Ages: the Patrons of Images did, and the Papists at this day do,
and have done ever since they were taught it by their St Dominick.

Let all Errors be as much, and as zealously suppressed as may be, but let it be
done by such means as are proper instruments of their suppression, by Preaching
and Disputation, by Charity and Sweetness, by Holiness of Life, Assiduity of
Exhortation, by the Word of God, and Prayer.

For these ways are most natural, most prudent, most peaceable and effectual,
only let not men be hasty, in calling every disliked Opinion by the name of
Heresy; and when they have resolved that they will call it so, let them use
the erring person like a Brother, not beat him like a Dog, or convince him with
a Gibbit, or vex him out of his understanding or persuasion.

Thus far Jer. Tailor; these Passages being truly collected out of his Epistle
where are many more to the same purpose; to which the Reader is referred for
further satisfaction, if he desire it: And further in his Sixteenth Section,
for the lawlulness of Princes giving Toleration to several Religions, he has
these Passages.

For it may be safe in diversity of persuasions, and it is also a part of
Christian Religion, that the Liberty of men's Consciences should be preserved in
all things, where God has not set a limit --

That the Soul of man should be free and acknowledge no Master but Jesus Christ.

That matters Spiritual should not be restrained by punishments corporal.

That the same mockness and Charity should be preserved in the promotion of
Christianity, that gave it foundation, and increment, and firmness in its first
publication.

And that Persons should not more certainly be condemned then their Opinions
confuted.

And lastly, That the Infirmities of men, and difficulties of things, should be
both put in balance, to make abatement in the diffinitive sentence against
men's persons.

As Christian Princes must look to the interest of their Government; so
especially must they consider the interests of Christianity, and not call every
redargution, or modesty, discovery of an established Error, by the name of the
disturbance of the Peace; For,

It is very likely that the peevishness, and impatience of contradiction in the
Governors may break the peace.

Let them but remember the Gentleness of Christianity; the Liberty of
Consciences which ought to be preserved; and let them do justice to the
persons, whoever they are that are peevish; provided no man's personbe overborn
with prejudice: For,

If it be necessary for all men to subscribe to the present established
Religion; by the same reason, at another time a man may be bound to subscribe
to the contradictory, and so to all Religions in the World. Uncharitableness is
much prevented when no person is on either side engaged upon revenge, or
troubled with disgrace, or vexed with punishments, by any decretory sentence
against him: It was the saying of a wise Statesman, (I mean Thuanus) Haretici
qui pace data factiouibus sciuduntur, persecutione uniuntur contra. Remp. -- If
you persecute Heretics, or Discrepants, they unite themselves as to a common
defense; if you permit them, they divide themselves upon private interest, and
the rather if this interest was an ingredient of the Opinion.

SECT. VII.
Instances out of diverse Authors treating on the same Subject, Collected by W.
C. deceased.

CHrisostomus said, 'It is not the manner of the Children of God to Persecute
others to death about their Religion; but it has been, and is their condition
to be put to death themselves for the Testimony of the Truth. Moreover, (said
he) the shedding of Blood about Religion, is an evident token of Antichrist,
Relig. Uris. page 192.

Haywardus said, That the best Writers of that time did agree in one opinion,
and with Tertulliano, Lacta^ti^, Cassidoro, and Josephus, etc. That People must
inform men to embrace Religion with Reason, and not compel them by violence.

I have for long season determined, said one of the Kings of France, to reform
the Church, which without Peace (said he) I cannot do, and it is impossible to
reform, or convert people by violence.

I am King as a Shepherd, (said he) and will not shed the Blood of my Sheep;
but will gather them through the mildness and goodness of a King, and not
through the power of Tyranny: And I will give them that are of the reformed
Religion right Liberty to live and dwell free, without being examined,
perplexed, molested, or compelled to any thing contrary to their Consciences;
for they shall have the free exercise of their Religion, etc. vide Chron. Vande
Underg. 2. deel. page 1514.

Luther said, That the Hypocrites Church was to be known by its Manners, whose
Image and Sign was Esau, yet she boasted of God, and would be accounted his
Church, but lived wholly according to the World. Further (said he) the true
Church is not defended by a Fleshly Arm, which wicked Bishops especially use,
and cry unto, Thesau. page 622.

Calvin said, That the Apostle gave to understand, that to exercise authority
over ones Faith, was in no wise just, nor tolerable: (yea, said he) It is
Tyranny in the Church; for FAITH ought to be free from all Subjection of men.

When several of the Priests in the low Countries requested of the Prince and
States, that they would introduce Ordinances and Discipline, according to their
Opinions; but the Prince, and the States, rejected their requests, esteeming
them prejudicial both to Religion and Policy; when they observed the diverse
Opinions that were among the People, concluding, It was the best way to
perserve unity among the People, to give Liberty to all, and to Compel none,
Anno 1608. Edict. Fol. 27.

Areneus affirmed, That all forcing of Conscience, though it was but a
forbiding of the Exercise, which is esteemed by one or another, to be necessary
to Salvation, is in no wise right nor fitting, He also affir med, That through
diversities of Religions the Kingdom should not be brought into any disturbance.

The Anrient Reformed Protestants termed that forcing of Conscience, when they
were constrained to leave off the exercise of their Religion, saying, Car nous
privant de nostre Religion on nous tiendroit en une continuele mors corporelle
and spirituelle that is) For to deprive us of our Religion, is to keep us in a
perpetual corporal and spiritual death; adding thereunto, How that they would
rather be put to death then be bereaved of the exercise of their Religion, etc.
And also they testified, how that the Religion which was defended with Cruelty,
was not grounded upon the Word of God.

Lactantius said, If you will with blood, with evil, and with torments, defend
the Worship, it shall not thereby be defended but polluted, Lib. 5. Chap. 20.

Constantius the Emperor said, That it was enough that he perserved the unity
of the FAITH, that he might be excusable before the Judgment Seat of God; and
that he would leave every one to his own understanding, according to the
account he will give before the Judgment Seat of Christ: Hereto may we stir up
People ( said he) not compel them, beseech them to come into the unity of the
Christians; but to do VIOLENCE to them, we will not in no wise. Sabast. Frank.
Cron. Fol. 127.

Augastinus said, Some disturbed the Peace of the Church, while they went about
to root out the TARES before the time; and through this Error of Blindness (
said he) are they themselves separated, so much the more from being united unto
Christ.

Retnaldus testified, That he who with Imprisoning and Persecuting seeks to
spread the Gospel, and greaseth his Hands with Blood, shall much rather be
looked upon for a wild Hunter, then a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.

The State of Holland testified, Dat waer vervolginghen Zijndatter daer al in
roere is, maer waer geen en sijdor verscheijden Religion dat dare all saclren
stilder sijn so o^lr in onse ijden is levon den: that is, Where there was
Persecution, there was all in distraction, but where there was none (though
there were several Religions) there all things were the quieter, as has been
evident in our days, said they, Vide Urede Handel Van. Col. Fol. 53.

Calvin said, That those that are set over us must be obeyed, if that the
Command of God be not thereby disobeyed; but if they lead us from obedience to
God, and presumptionsly strive against the Lord, then must they not be
regarded, said he, to the end that God with his Authority may retain the
pre-eminence.

A Book written in French, by N. M. Anno 1576. has this Sentence in it.
Those Princes that have ruled by Gentleness and Clemency, added to justice;
and have exercised Moderation and Meekness toward their Subjects, always
greatly Prospered, and Reigned long.

But on the contrary, those Princes that have been Cruel, Unjust, Perfidious,
and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon fallen, they and their Estate into
danger, or total ruin.

Veritus said, Seeing Christ is a LAMB, whom you profess to be your Head and
Captain, then it behooves you to be Sheep, and to use the same WEAPONS, which
he made use of; for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves, and wild Beasts, but
only of SHEEP; wherefore if you lose the Nature of Sheep (said he) and be
changed into Wolves, and wild Beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you
exclude your selves out of his Calling; and forsake his Banner, and then will
he not be your Captain.

Stephanus King of Poland said, It belongs not to me to reform the
Conscience, I have always gladly given that over to God, which belongs to
him, and so shall I do now; and also for the future, I will suffer the WEEDS to
grew until the time of Harvest; for I know that the number of Believers are
but small, therefore, said he, when some were proceeding in persecution, 'Ego
sum Rex Populorum non Conscientiarum, that is, I am the King of the People, not
of their Consciences: he also affirmed, That Religion was not to be planted
with FIRE and SWORD, Chron. Van. de Rel. Urijh. 2. deel.

Tindal said, The New Testament of Christ suffered no Law of Compelling, but
alone of Persuading and Exhorting, Fox. Acts and Mon. page 1338.

The Prince of Orange testified, Anno 1579. That it was impossible that the
Land should be kept in Peace except there was a free Toleration in the Exercise
of Religion.

Where have thou ever read in thy days (said Menno) in the Writings of the
Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrates, for
their Power, against them that would not hear their Doctrine, not obey their
Words? I know certainly, said he, that where the Magistrate shall Banish with
the SWORD, there is not the right Knowledge, spiritual Word, nor Church of
Christ, it is Invocare Brachium Seculare.

It is not Christian like, but Tyrannical, said D. Philipson, to Banish and
Persecute People about FAITH and Religion, and they that so do are certainly of
the Pharisaical Generation, who resisted the Holy Ghost.

Erasmus said, That though they take our Moneys and Goods, they cannot
therefore hurt our Salvation; they afflict us much with Prisons, but they do
not thereby separate us from God, In de Krijdges wrede, Fol. 63.

Lucernus said, He that commands any thing, wherewith he binds the
Conscience, this is an Antichrist, Inde Benuse disp. Fol. 71.

It was Lather's Opinion, That those that stirred up the Princes to persecure
about Religion, they raised the Uproar, Thesaur. page 679.

SECT. VIII.
Several Reasons rendered, why no outward Force, nor Imposition, ought to he
used in Matters of Faith and Religion, by R. H. S. F. and F. H.

LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE ought to be allowed in the days of the Gospel, in the
free Exercise of it to Godward (without Compulsion) in all things relating to
His Worship, for these REASONS following.

1. Because the General and Universal Royal-Law of Christ commands it, Matthew
7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them: for this is the Law and Prophets -- That which every man would have,
and receive from another, he ought by Christ RULE to give and allow it to
another. But every man is willing to have the LIBERTY of his OWN CONSCIENCE,
therefore ought to ALLOW it to another. 2. Because no man can persuade the
Conscience of another, either what God is, or how he should be worshipped, but
by the Spirit, which God has given to instruct man in the Ways of Truth. 3.
Because, all Obedience or Service that is obtained by force, is for fear of
Wrath, and not from Love, nor for Conscience sake; and therefore will but
continue so long as that fear or force abides upon them. 4. Because, that by
forcing, no man can make a Hypocrite to be a true Believer; but on the
contrary, many may be made Hypocrites. 5. Because, that in all forced
Impositions upon men's Consciences, there is something of the wrath of man
exercised, which works not the Righteousness of God, but rather begets enmity
in the heart one toward another. 6. Because, that by forcing any thing upon
men's Consciences, as to matters of Faith and Worship, many are hardened in
their hearts against the things imposed; when as otherwise, through Love and
gentle Instructions their hearts might be persuaded to willing obedience. 7.
Because, that Persecution for Conscience contradicts Christ's Charge, Matthew
13. who bids that the Tares (or false Worshippers) be suffered to grow together
in the Field (or World) till the Harvest (or End of the World.) 8. Because,
Force is contrary to the end for which it is pretended to be used (viz.) The
preservation and safety of the Wheat, which End is not answered by Persecution,
because the Wheat is in danger to be plucked up thereby, as Christ says. 9.
Because to Force is inconsistant with the belief of the Jews Conversion (and
other false Worshippers) which is prayed for by the public Teachers, and
cannot be attained, if Persecution for Conscience be prosecuted. 10. Because
they that impose upon men's Consciences, exercise Dominion over men's Faith,
which the Apostles denied, saying, They had not Dominion over any man's Faith.
11. Because, Imposition upon men's Consciences necessitates them to sin, in
yielding a Conformity contrary to their own Faith; for whatsoever is not of a
man's own Faith, is sin. 12. Because, that Imposition and Force wrestles with
flesh and blood, and carnal Weapons, which are contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, who said, Our Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and Mighty
through God; and we wrestle not with Flesh, and Blood. 13. Because, there is
but One Judge, Law giver and King in and over the Conscience, as the Saints
have testified in the Scriptures of Truth; and whosoever would intrude, so as
to be Judge and Lawgiver over the Conscience, intrencheth upon the Perogative
of Christ, Isa. 33. 22. James 4.12. 14. Because, it is prophesied in Isa. 11.
The Wo^lf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, and there shall be no Destroyer in all the Holy Mountain: And therefore no
Imposition upon men's Consciences. 15. Because, to impose upon men's Consciences
for differences in Faith, is contrary to the Advice of the Apostle, who directs
People to wait upon God to be satisfied, and not to the Magistrates, or others
to be forced; who says, Whereunto we have attained, let us walk; and wherein
any man is otherwise minded God shall reveal, even that unto him. 16. Because,
to force men's Consciences, and to lay Yoaks upon them, is to make void the
Bloodshed and Sufferings of Christ, who fits upon the Throne of the Conscience,
and gives liberty there; and commands us to stand fast in that liberty, and not
to be entangled through the Impositions of men, or Yoke of bondage, ^alat. 5.6.
17. Because, in all Nations the different Professions and Persuasions of
Religion, are either Friends or Enemies to the Governors; if Friends then
obliged by that bond; if Enemies then Christ's Command is to take place, who
says, Love your Enemies, which if observed, Persecution for Conscience will be
avoided. 18. Because Toleration of different Persuasions in Religion was
allowed in the Jewish State, as not inconsistant with their Safety, and that in
things contrary each to other, as the Sadduces, Pharisees, Esaeans, Herodians,
with others. 19. Because, the true Religion cannot be preached up by force of
ARMS, and the primitive Christians detested that Form of Proceedings. 20.
Because, no man has such power (by outward compulsion) over the Souls and
Consciences of other men, as to lay a necessity on them to believe that which
they do not believe, or not to believe what they do believe; true Faith being
the Gift of God. 21. Because, If the Magistrate imposes upon the Conscience,
he must either do it as a Magistrate, or as a Christian. Not as a Magistrate,
for then Heathens (being Magistrates) have the same power to impose; and so, by
Revolutions and Conquests, may come to give Laws to Christians, and compel them
to Idolatry. 2. Not as Christians, for that contradicts Christ's saying, The
Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, but it shall not be so among
you, for all ye are Erethren. 22. Because by the same Rule and Reason that the
Magistrates of one Nation ought to impose upon, and persecute for Conscience,
the Magistrates in all other Nations ought to do the same, and so the greatest
part of Mankind may come to be destroyed, there being more that Dissent, then
are at Unity in Metters of Faith and Religion. 23. Because the strength of
Truth, and its Conquest over Falsity and Deceit is best discovered by letting
both have their Liberty, from outward Compulsion; For no doubt, had outward
Force been less used, the prevalency of Truth had been more manifest, and that
wise Saying, truly experienced in the World, viz. That which is of God will
stand, and that which is not will come to nothing. 24. Because. the Disciples
of Christ are rebuked by him for desiring the Destruction of those that were
contrary to him, and would not receive Him; which zeal is sharply reproved in
his Saying, They knew not what Spirit they were of. 25. Because, to impose upon
men's Consciences, and to destroy their Persons for difference in Religion, is
contrary to the end of Christ's coming, who, says, He came not to Destroy men's
Lives but to save them. 26. Because, People of diverse Religions in one Nation,
if not tolerated, must some of them be destroyed or removed, by banishment? If
destroyed, the Constancy and Patience of the Sufferers for their Faith, moving
Pity and Commiseration, makes men more ready to own, then to reject their
Faith; and so rather multiplies, then lessens the number of its Professors; if
banished, this renders the Banished as so many Enemies abroad, ready upon all
occasions to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of their own native Country.
There is therefore in order to the outward welfare of all Nations, a kind of
necessity for a Toleration in them of all Religions. 27. Because, to impose
upon men's Consciences begets a hatred against the Imposers in those who are
imposed upon, and forced thereby to violate their Consciences toward God, in
matters of Worship. 28. Because, men are commanded to be subject to the Powers
that are, for Conscience sake, and therefore such Powers ought not to persecute
men for Conscience sake, being that is prescribed for the Rule of Obedience,
the Scriptures saying, Be ye subject not only for Wrath, but for Conscience
sake.
SECT. IX.
Several Sayings collected from the Speeches, and Writings of King Charles the
First.

ANd we find asserted by King Charles the ^^rst, in his Book known by the Name
of EIKON ASILIK, as follows.

Page 67. In his Prayer to God, he said, Thou seeft how much Cruelty among
Christians is acted, under the color of Religion; as if we could not be
Christians, unless we crucific one another.

Page 28. Make them at length seriously to consider, that nothing violent and
injurious can be religious.

Page 70. Nor is it so proper to hew out religious Reformations by the Sword,
as to pollish them by fair and equal Disputations, among those that are most
concerned in the Differences, whom, not Force, but Reason ought to convince.

Sure in Matters of Religion, those Truths gain most upon men's Judgments and
Consciences, which are least urged with Secular Violence, which weakens Truth
with Perjudices.

Page 115. It being an Office, not only of Humanity, rather to use Reason then
Force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace, and ensue it.

Page 91, 92, In point of true conscientious tenderness, I have often declared,
how little I desire my Laws and Scepter should entrench on God's Sovereignty,
which is the only King of men's Consciences.

Page 123. Nor do I desire any man should be further subject unto me, then all
of us may be subject unto God.

Concerning Oaths.

P. 76. The injoyning of Oaths, upon People, must needs in things doubtful be
Dangerous, as in things unlawful Damnable.

Some words of Advice from CHARLES the First, to the then Prince of Wales, now
King of England, etc.

Page 165. My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you seriously consider the
former real or objected Miscariages, which might occasion my Troubles, that you
may avoid them, etc.

Beware of Exasperating any Factions, by the Crosness and Asperity of some men's
Passions, Humors, and private Opinions, employed by you, grounded only upon
differences in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and Subburbs of
Religion, wherein a Charitable Connivance, and Christian Toleration often
Dissipates their strength, when rougher Opposition Fortifies, and puts the
despised and oppressed party into such Combinations, as may most enable them to
get a full revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly
assisted by that vulgar commisseration, which attends all that are said to
suffer under the notion of Religion.

Page 166. Take heed that outward Circumstances and Formalities of Religion
devour not all.

Page 164. Your Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather
then exacting the rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse then Legal
Tyranny.

To these Sayings we add more, as Collected out of the same Book in Duodecimo.

IN his Prayer, Page 1. O never suffer me for any reason of State to go against
the Reason of Conscience, which is highly to sight against thee* the God of
Reason, and Judge of our Consciences.

Page 121. Break in sunder, Oh Lord, all violent Confederations to do wickedly
and injuriously.

Page 136. Thou, Oh Lord, shall destroy them that speak Lies; the Lord will
abhor both the Blood thirsty and Deceitful men.

P. 164. Church Affairs should be managed neither with Tyranny, Parity, nor
Popularity -- neither people oppressed.

P. 168. He declares his willingness for fair satisfaction unto all, and
against Covetousness, and Superstition.

Page 171. Oh thou that art the God of Reason and Peace, soften our hearts --
and persuade us to accept of Peace with thy self, and both to secure and
preserve Peace among our selves as men and Christians -- Condemn us not to our
passions, which are destructive both of our selves and others; Clear up our
Understandings to see thy Truth, both in Reason as men, and in Religion as
Christians.

Page 180. Stir up all parties Pious Ambitions to overcome each other with
Reason, Moderation, and such Self-denial as becomes, etc.

P. 200. O thou Sovereign of our Souls, the only Commander of our Consciences.

And further, in his Advice to the Prince of Wales now KING, etc.

Page 234. The best Government and highest Soveraignity you can attain unto,
is, To be subject to God, that the Scepter of his Word, and Spirit may rule in
your heart.

P. 239. He pleads for better Arguments for Convincement, then Tumults, Armies,
and Prisons.

Page 241. Always keep up sollid Piety, and those Fundamental Truths, which
mend both hearts and lives of men with impartial Favor and Justice.

Page 242. My Charge and Counsel to you is, that as you need no palliations for
any design, so that you studdy really to exceed in true and constant
Demonstrations of Goodness, Piety and Virtue (toward the people) even all
these men that make the greatest noise and ostentations of Religion, so you
shall neither fear any detection, (as they do who have but the Mask of
Goodness) nor shall you frustrate the just Expectations of your people.

Page 243. Use all Princely Arts and Clemency to heal the Wounds, that the
Smart of the Cure may not equal the Anguish of the hurt.

Page 244. As your quality sets you beyond any Duel with any Subject, so the
nobleness of your mind must raise you above the meditating any revenge, or
executing your Anger upon the many.

Page 248. Keep you to true Principles of Piety, Virtue, and Honor; you shall
never want a Kingdom.

In his Meditations on his Death; p. 346. It is indeed a sad fate for any man
to have his Enemies to be Accuser, Parties and Judge.

SECT. X.
Several Promises and Declarations for the Liberty of tender Consciences, taken
out of the Speeches of King Charles the Second.

IN the Kings Letter from Bredah, that was sent to the House of Peers, and read
in the House, May the first. 1660. and which Letter was ordered by the Lords in
Parliament assembled, that it should be forthwith printed and published for the
service of the House, and satisfaction of the Kingdoms; it is said in the Book
of Collections of the Kings Speeches, Page 8, and 9. And because the passion
and uncharitableness of the times have produced several Opinions in Religion,
by which men are engaged in Parties and Animosities against each other; which
when they shall hereafter unite in a freedom of Conversation, will be composed,
or better understood. We do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and that
no man shall be disquieted or called in question for differences in Opinion in
matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and that we
shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon Mature
deliveration, shall be offered to us for the full granting that Indulgence.

And in the Kings Declaration, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, which was
dated October the 25th, 1660. it is said, In a word we do again renew what we
have formerly said in our Declaration from Bredah, for the liberty of tender
Consciences, That no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom; and if any have been disturbed in that kind, since our arival
here, it has not proceeded from any direction of ours. And it is said, We do
in the first place declare, Our Purpose and Resolution is, and shall be, to
promote the Power of Godliness, and to encourage the Exercise of Religion, both
in public and private. And in the same Declaration it is said, Our present
Consideration and work is, To gratify the private Consciences of those who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dispensing with
the omitting these Ceremonies.

In the Kings Speech to both houses of Parliament, the 8th of July, 1661. It is
to put my self in mind, as well as you, That I so often (I think so often as I
come to you) mention to you my Declaration from Bredah; And let me put you in
mind of another Declaration, published by your selves about the same time, and
which I am persuaded made mine the more effectual; An Honest, Generous, and
Christian Declaration, signed by the most eminent Persons, who had been the
most eminent Sufferers; in which you remounced all former Animosities, and
memory of former Unkindnesses. And my Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no man's
power to charge me, or you, with the breach of our Words or Promises, which can
never be a good Ingredient to our future security.

And in the Chancellors Speech to both Houses, May 8. 1661. It is said, He told
you, but now (meaning the King) that he valued himself much, upon keeping his
word, upon performing all that he promises to his People.

And also in the Kings discourse with Richard Hubberthorn, soon after he
arrived in England, he said, Well, of this you may be assured, That you shall
none of you suffer for your Opinions or Religion, so long as you live
peaceably, and you have the Word of a King for it; and I also have given forth
a Declaration to the same purpose, That none shall Wrong you, or Abuse you.

And further in the Kings Declaration, dated December 26. 1662. wherein he
declares, first, his wonderful Restoration without the least blood shed by the
Military Sword.

And he expresses his Clemency, or the Clemency of his Nature.

And he vindicates himself from diverse suggestions, of disaffccted Persons,
particularly from that, of intending to subject Persons and Estates to revenge
or spoil, etc. and from intending to introduce a Military or Arbitrary way of
Government.

Also he expresses these words, as a malicius Scandal, viz. That having made
use of such solemn Promises from Bredah, and in several Declarations since, of
ease and liberty to tender Consciences, instead of performing any part of them,
we have added streighter Fetters then ever.

And further adds, viz. We find it as artificially, as maliciously divulged
throughout the whole Kingdom, that at the same time we deny a fitting Liberty
to those other Sects of our Subjects, whose Consciences will not allow them to
conform to the Religion established, we are highly indulgent to Papists, even
to such a degree of countenance as may even endanger the Protestants Religion.

These, and such like, in the said Declaration are related as venomous
Insinuations, most false and malicious Scandals, wicked and malicious
Suggestions, and the Fomenters of them, as the most dangerous Enemies of his
Crown and of the Peace and Happ^ness of the Nation.

And these words are further added, (viz.) It having been always a constant
profession of ours, That we do, and shall ever think our royal dignity and
greatness much more happily and securely founded on our own Clemency, and our
Subjects Loves, then in their Fears and our Power.

To give our People a Testimony of our founding all our security, rather in
their affections, then in any Military Power; the sole strength and security,
we shall ever confide in, shall be the hearts and affections of our Subjects,
indeared and confirmed to us by our Gracious and Steady manner of Government,
according to the ancient known Laws of the Land, there being not any one of our
Subjects, who does more from his heart abhor (then we our selves) all sorts of
Military and Arbitrary Rule.

As concerning the nonperformance of our Promises; we remember well the very
words of those from Bredah, (viz.) We do declare a liberty to tender
Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon Mature deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full
granting that Indulgence. We remember well the Confirmations, we have made of
them since upon several occasions in Parliament; and as all there things are
still fresh in our memory, so are we still firm in the Resolution of performing
them to the full.

We do conceive our selves so far engaged, both in honor, and in what we owe
to the Peace of our Dominions, which we profess we can never think secure,
whilst there shall be a color left to the disaffected, to inflame the minds of
so many Multitudes, upon the scores of Consciences with despair of ever
obtaining any effect of our Promises for their ease.

Such an Act, as in pursuance of our promises the wisdom of our Parliament
shall think fit to offer unto us for the ease of tender Consciences.

We profess it would be grievous unto us to consent, to the putting any of our
Subjects to death for their Opinions in matter of Religion only.

Our expressing according to Christian Charity Our dislike of Bloodshed for
Religion only.

Our Parliament is an Assembly so eminent in their Loyalty and their Zeal, for
the Peace and Prosperity of our Kingdoms -- can no ways be doubted in the
performance of all our Promises, and to the effecting all those gracious
intentions, which God knows our heart is full of, for the PLENTY, PROSPERITY,
and UNIVERSAL SATISFACTION of the NATION.

We think to give them the most important Marks of our care First, In punishing
by severe Laws that Licentiousness and Impiety, which we find to our great
grief, has overspread the Nation.

And lastly so to improve the good consequence -- to the advancement of trade,
that all our Subjects finding the advantage -- in that Prime foundation of
plenty, they may all, with minds happily composed by our clemency and
indulgence (instead of taking up thoughts of deserting their professions) apply
themselves comfortably, and with redoubled industry to their several vocations,
etc.

Also in the Votes and Advice of the House of Commons, Febr. 5. 1662. Upon
reading the Kings, Declaration and Speech, are these words, (viz.) And our
hearts are further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgiving when we consider
your Majesty's most Princely; and Heroic professions of relying upon the
affections of your People, AND ABHORING ALL SORTS OF MILITARY AND ARBITRARY
RULE, etc.

And in the Kings Declaration, March 15th 1671. Page 4. But it being Evident by
the sad Experience of twelve years, that there is very little fruit of all
those forceable courses.

And in Page 8. Its said, we do in the next place declare our will and pleasure
to be, that the Execution of all, and all manner of penal Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical, against whatsoever sort of Non-conformists or Recusants, be
immediately suspended, and they are hereby suspended, etc.

THE END.

