SOME Necessary and Important CONSIDERATIONS, (TO BE Considered of by all sorts
of People) Taken out of (That late Worthy and Renowned Judge) Sir. MATTHEW
HALE's WRITINGS: And therein His own Experience of the Inward, and Invisible
Guidance of the Spirit of GOD.

The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance. Psalm. CXII. 6. Blessed
are the Dead that Die in the LORD, They Rest from their Labors; and their
Works follow them. The Tenth Edition.

LONDON Printed, 1697. And are freely given away by me (who am given up to
Spend, and be Spent, for the Everlasting Well-being of all Mankind) John
Pennyman.

Mr. Baxter's Character of Judge Hale.
SIR Matthew Hale, That Unwearied Student; That Prudent Man; That Solid
Philosopher; That Famous Lawyer; That PILLAR and BASIS of JUSTICE; (who would
not have done an Unjust Act, if or any Worldly Price, or Motive) That Godly,
Serious, Practical Christian, The Lover of Goodness and all Good Men. -- That
great Contemner of the Riches, Pomp, and Vanity of the World; Who, while He
fled from the Honor that persu'd Him, was yet made Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, after His being long Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; Living and
Dying -- with the most Universal Love, and Honor, and Praise, that ever did
any English Subject in this Age, or any that just History does acquaint us
with, etc.

JUdge Hale was a Person well Known, yet Unknown; a Public, yet Hidden Man;
which State, was, and is, as yet, known but to few.

He that Reads this Little Book, in a Serious, and Weighty Mind, may, as in a
Glass, plainly see how it is betwixt GOD and his own Soul.

What Man is he that Fears the LORD? Him shall HE Teach in the way that HE
shall choose. Psalm. 25.12. SOME Necessary and Important CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
The following is taken out of The Great Audit: With the Account of The Good
Steward.
As Touching my Conscience.
I Have been very diligent to keep my Conscience Clean, to Encourage It in the
Vicegerency that THOU, [the great LORD of the World] have given It over my Soul
and Actions. I have kept It in the Throne and greatest Reverence and Authority
in my Heart.

In Actions to be Done or Omitted, I have always Advised with It, and taken Its
Advise; I have neither Stifled, nor Forced, nor Bribed It; but gave It a free
Liberty to Advise and Speak out, and a free Subjection of my Will, Purposes,
and Actions to It.

If, through Importunity of Temptations, etc. I have at any time done Amiss, I
have not taken Her up short, or stopped Her Mouth, or my own Attention to Her
Chiding and Reproof; but I have, with much Submission of Mind, born Her
Chastisement, and improved it to an Humbling of my self before THEE for my
Failings; for I looked upon Her as Acting by THY Authority, for THY Service,
and to THY Glory; and I durst not Discourage, Discountenance, or Disobey Her.

When She was Pleased, and gave me Good Words, I was Glad; for I esteemed Her
as a Glass that represented to my Soul the Favor or Displeasure of GOD
Himself, and how HE stood affected toward me.

I have more Trembled under the Fear of a Seared or Discouraged Conscience,
than under the Fear of a Sharp or Scrupulous Conscience? because I always
accounted the Latter, though more Troublesome, yet more Safe.

I have been very jealous, either of Wounding, A Wounded Spirit who can bear?
or Grieving, or Discouraging, or Deadning my Conscience. I have therefore
chosen rather to forbear that which seemed but Indifferent, lest there should
be somewhat in it that might be Unlawful; and would rather Gratify my
Conscience, with being too Scrupulous, than Displease, Disquiet, or Flat It, by
being too Venturous: I have still chosen rather to Forbear what might be
Probably Lawful, than to Do that which might be Possibly Unlawful; because I
could not Err in the Former, I might in the Latter.

I have been careful to advise Impartially with my Conscience before my
Actions; But lest I had committed any thing Amiss, either in the Nature or
Manner of the Action, I commonly, every Night, brought my Actions of the Day
past, before the Judicatory of my Conscience, and left Her to a Free and
Impartial Censure of them; and what She Sentenced Well Done, I with Humility
returned the Praise thereof to THY Name; what She Sentenced Done Amiss, I did
humbly sue unto THEE for Pardon, and for Grace to prevent me from the like
Miscarriages. By this means I kept my Conscience Active, Renewed, and preserved
my Peace with THEE, and learned Vigilance and Caution for the Time to come.

Touching THY Creatures.
I have not only looked upon THY Blessings and Bounty, in Lending me THY own
Creatures for my Use; but I have sought unto THEE for a Blessing upon them, in
my Use of them. I did very well observe, That there is by my Sin a Curse in the
very Creatures that I receive, unless THY Blessing fetch it out; an Emptiness
in them, unless THY Goodness fill them: Though THOU should give me Quails and
Manna from Heaven, yet without THY Blessing upon them, they would become
Rottenness and Putrefaction to me; and therefore I ever begged THY Blessing
upon THY Blessings, as well as the Blessings themselves; and attributed the
Good I Found, or was to Expect in them, to the Same HAND that Gave them.

I received and used THY Creatures, as committed to me under a Trust, and as a
Steward and Accomptant for them; and therefore I was always careful to use them
according to those Limits, and in order for those Ends, for which THOU did
commit them to me: 1st. With Temperance and Moderation; I did not use THY
Creatures to Luxury and Excess, to make Provision for my Lusts, with vain Glory
or Ostentation, but for the convenient Support of the Exigencies of my Nature
and Condition; and if at any time THY Goodness did indulge me an Use of them
for Delight, as well as Necessity, I did it but Rarely and Watchfully; I looked
not upon the Wine, when it gave its color in the Cup; nor gave my self over
either to Excess or Curiosity in Meats or Drinks; I checked my Self therein, as
being in THY Presence, and still remembered I had THY Creatures under an
Account; and was ever careful to avoid Excess or Intemperance, because every
Excessive Cup and Meal was in danger to leave me somewhat in Super, and Arear
to my LORD. 2dly. With Mercy and Compassion to the Creatures themselves, which
THOU have put under my Power and Disposal. When I considered the Admirable
Powers of Life and Sense which I saw in the Birds and Beasts, and that all the
Men in the World could not give the like Being to any thing, nor restore that
Life and Sense which is once Taken from them; When I considered how Innocently
and Harmlesly the Fowls, and Fish, and Sheep, and Oxen take their Food, that
THOU, the LORD of All, have given them, I have been apt to think that surely
THOU did intend a more Innocent kind of Food to Man, than such as must be
taken with such Detriment to those Living parts of THY Creation; and although
THY wonderful Goodness has so much Indulged to Mankind, as to give up the
Lives of these Creatures for the Food of Man by THY express Commission, yet I
still do, and ever did think, that there was a Justice due from Man, even to
these Sensible Creatures, that he should take them Sparingly, for Necessity,
and not for Delight; or if for Delight, yet not for Luxury: I have been apt to
think, That if there were any more Liberal use of Creatures for Delight or
Variety, it should be of Fruits, or such other Delicacies as might be had
without the loss of Life; But however it be, this very Consideration has made
me very Sparing and Careful, not Vainly, or Superfluously, or Unnecessarily, or
Prodigally, to take away the Life of THY Creatures for Feasting and Excess. And
the very same Consideration has always gone a long with me, in reference to
the Labor of THY Creatures. I have ever thought that there was a certain
degree of Justice due from Man to the Creatures, as from Man to Man; and that
an excessive, immoderate, unseasonable Use of the Creatures Labor, is an
Injustice for which he must Account.

To deny Domestical Creatures their convenient Food; to exact that Labor from
them that they are not able to perform; to use Extremity or Cruelty toward
them, is a breach of that Trust, under which the Dominion of the Creatures was
committed to us, and a breach of that Justice that is due from Men to them; and
therefore I have always esteemed it as part of my Duty, and it has been always
my Practice, to be Merciful to my Beasts; and upon the same Account I have ever
esteemed it a breach of Trust, and have accordingly declined any Cruelty to any
of THY Creatures; and as much as I might, prevented it in others, as a Tyranny,
inconsistent with the Trust and Stewardship that THOU have committed to me. I
have abhorred those Sports that consist in the Torturing of the Creatures; and
if either Noxious Creatures must be Destroyed, or Creatures for Food must be
Taken, it has been my Practice to do it in that manner, that may be with the
least Torture or Cruelty to the Creature; and I have still thought it an
Unlawful thing to Destroy those Creatures for Recreation-sake, that either were
not Hurtful when they Lived, or are not Profitable when they are Killed; ever
remembering that tho THOU have given us a Dominion over THY Creatures; yet it
is under a Law of Justice, Prudence, and Moderation; otherwise we should become
Tyrants, not Lords, over THY Creatures; and therefore those things of this
nature, that others have practiced as Recreations, I have avoided as Sins.

Touching my Body.
My Body, which was given to Serve, and Obey, became the Empress, and
Commanded, and Corrupted my Soul; Embased and Enslaved It to Lust and Disorder;
and my Soul, which was given to Rule, became but the Slave of my Body: I
Considered, That if the business was thus carried, my Happiness must be only in
this Life; and that when Death seized upon me, I had an Immortal Soul that had
lost Her time wholly in this World; and therefore could expect nothing but
Vexation and Everlasting Confusion to all Eternity, etc. Upon these, and the
like Considerations, I Resolved, and Practiced Severity over my Body; and
refused to Gratify her Intemperate Desires: Denied them, kept them in Awe, and
under Dissipline; and because I found that my Lusts grew Unruly, by Variety and
Curiossity of Meats and Drinks; I Subdued them by Moderate Diet, and Temperance.

My Table was Sparing to my Self, my Clothes Plain, my Retinue, and Attendance,
but Necessary: I chased away my Lusts, with the Contemplations of the Presence
of GOD, the End of CHRIST's Sufferings, the Certainty, yet Uncertainty of
Death, the State after Death; and mingled all my Enjoyments, and Desires, with
these serious and cleansing Considerations; and I Peremptorily refused to
gratify the cravings of an Inordinate, Sensual Appetite; and did resolutely let
them know, they should not, might not expect any better dealing from me; and my
Practice was accordingly.

Concerning my Wealth.
The more I had, the more was my Care, and the greater the Charge that I had
under my Hands, and the more was my Solicitude to be a Faithful Steward of it,
to the Honor and Use of my MASTER; but my part was the least that was in it:
Indeed I rejoiced in this, that my MASTER esteemed me Faithful, committing the
Dispensation thereof to my Trust; but I thought it no more mine, than the Lords
Baily, or the Merchants Cash-keeper, thinks his Masters Rents or Money his.

And therefore thought it would be a breach of my Trust to Consume or Embezil
that Wealth in Excessive Superfluities of Meat, Drink or Apparel, or in
advancing my Self, or my Posterity, to a massy or huge Acquest.

Touching my Reputation.
Though I have loved my Reputation, and have been vigilant not to lose or impair
it by my own Default, or Neglect, yet, I have looked upon it as a brittle
thing, a thing that the Devil aims to hit in a special manner, a thing that is
much in the Power of a False Report, a Mistake, a Mis-apprehension, to wound
and hurt; Notwithstanding all my Care, I am at the Mercy of Others, without
GOD's wonderful overruling Providence. And as my Reputation is the esteem that
Others have of me, so that Esteem may be Blemished without my Default. I have
therefore always taken this care, not to set my Heart upon my Reputation. I
will use all Fidelity and Honesty, and take care it shall not be lost by any
Default of mine; and if notwithstanding all this, my Reputation be soiled by
Evil or Envious Men or Angels, I will patiently bear it, and content my Self
with the Serenity of my own Conscience: Hic murus ahenius esto.

The aforesaid Author in His Book, Of the Nature of True Religion, etc. p. 17.
etc.
TRue Religion Teaches and Tutors the Soul to a high Reverence and Veneration
of Almighty GOD, a Sincere and Upright Walking, as in the Presence of the
Invisible, All-Seeing GOD: It makes a Man truly to Love, to Honor, to Obey
HIM, and therefore careful to know what HIS Will is; It renders the Heart
highly Thankful to HIM, both as his Creator, Redeemer, and Benefactor: It makes
a Man entirely to depend upon HIM, to seek to HIM for Guidance, and Direction,
and Protection; to Submit to HIS Will with all Patience, and Resignation of
Soul: It gives the Law not only to his Words and Actions, but to his very
Thoughts and Purposes, that he dares not entertain Thoughts unbecoming the
Sight and Presence of that GOD, to Whom all our Thoughts are Legible: It
teaches and brings a Man to such a deportment both of External and Internal
Sobriety, as may be Decent in the Presence of GOD and all HIS Holy Angels: It
crusheth, and casts down all Pride and Haughtiness, both in a Man's Heart and
Carriage, and gives him an Humble Frame of Soul, and Life, both in the sight of
GOD and Men: It Regulates and Governs the Passions of the Mind, and brings them
into due Moderation and Frame: It gives a Man a right estimate of this present
World, and sets the Heart, and Hopes above it, so that he never Loves it more
than it deserves: It makes the Wealth, and the Glory of this World, high
Places, and great Preferments, but of a low and little value to Him; so that He
is neither Covetous, nor Ambitious, nor over Solicitous concerning the
Advantages of it: It brings a Man to that Frame, that Righteousness, Justice,
Honesty, and Fidelity is, as it were, part of His Nature; He can sooner Dye,
than Commit, or Purpose that which is Unjust, Dishonest, or Unworthy a Good
Man. It makes Him value the Love of GOD, and Peace of Conscience, above all the
Wealth, and Honor in the World, and to be very vigilant to keep it inviolably:
-- He performs all his Duties to GOD in Sincerity and Integrity; and whilst he
Lives on Earth, yet his Conversation, his Hopes, his Treasure, is in Heaven;
and he entirely endeavors to Walk sutably to such a Hope: This Man has the
Life of Religion in him, and that Life Acts in him, and will conform his Soul
to the Image of his SAVIOR, and to Walk along with HIM to all Eternity.

GOD has given to the Sons of Men, Knowledge of GOD, p. 286, 287.
in respect of Sensual Things, Objects, not only for Necessity, but Delight;
But here is their Misery, as well as their Sin, That they rest not in what GOD
Lawfully allows. -- And hence it is, that the GOD of Mercy Curses, and that
most Justly, HIS own Blessings, unto that Man that thus Perverts the Use of
them. Wine Rejoices the Heart of Man, as it was given for that end, but when a
Man in the Use of it looks no higher, but to Satiate himself, there is a Sting
put into it, and t proves a Serpent. Pro. 23.32.

Touching the Conscience.
COnscience is GOD's Vicegerent in Man, Knowledge of GOD. p. 269.
and when Her LORD is Angry, the Conscience will Chide: It is a Glass, wherein
a Man may, by Reflection, see the Face of Heaven, and of his own Soul.

If thy Conscience blame thee, though never so little, Despise It not, nor
Neglect this Secret Check, it is a Message from Heaven, that Summons thee to
thy Duty. p. 372.

Certainly the sense of the Love of GOD, is either Not at all, or not Awake,
when any Man, Consideratly, commits the least Sin against his Conscience. p.
297.

The Direction of Conscience, when It is well used, is seldom without the
Immediate Direction of the very Spirit of GOD, but if the Guidance of that
Spirit be Neglected, it will not Return to thy Assistance when thou Please.
p. 369.

There is nothing in the World conduces more to the Composure and Tranquillity
of the Mind, Contemp. p. 373.
than the Serenity and Clearness of the Conscience; keep but That Safe and
Untainted, the Mind will enjoy a Calm and Tranquillity in the midst of all the
Storms of the World. And although the Waves beat, and the Sea works, and the
Winds blow; the Mind that has a Quiet and Clear Conscience within, will be as
Stable and as Safe from Perturbation as a Rock in the midst of a Tempestuous
Sea, and will be a Goshen to, and within, it self, when the rest of the World
without, is like an Egypt for Plagues and Darkness.

Whatever thou do Hazard, or Lose, keep the Integrity of thy Conscience, both
before Troubles come, and under them; it is a Jewel will make thee Rich in the
midst of Poverty, a Sun that will give thee Light in the midst of Darkness, a
Fortress that will keep thee Safe in the greatest Danger, and that is never to
be taken from thee, unless thou thy self Betray it, and Deliver it up.

Judge Hale's Experience of the Inward and Invisible Guidance of the Spirit of
GOD.
THOSE that truly fear GOD, have a Secret Guidance from a higher Wisdom than
what is barely Humane; namely, The Spirit of Truth and Wisdom, that does Really
and Truly, but Secretly, Prevent and Direct them. Any Man that Sincerely and
Truly Fears Almighty GOD, relies upon HIM, and calls upon HIM for HIS Guidance
and Direction, has it as Really as a Son has the Counsel and Direction of his
Father. And though the Voice be not Audible, nor the Direction always
Perceptible, (or Discernable) to Sense; yet it is equally as Real as if a Man
heard the Voice saying, This is the Way, walk in it.

And this secret Direction of Almighty GOD, is Principally seen in matters
relating to the Good of the Soul; yet it may also be found in the Concerns of
this Life, which a good Man, that fears GOD, and begs HIS Direction, shall very
often, if not at all times find. Contemp. p. 45.

I can call my own Experience to witness, That even in the External Actions of
my whole Life, I was never disappointed of the best Guidance and Direction,
when I have, in Humility and Sincerity, implored the Secret Direction, and
Guidance, of the Divine Wisdom. p. 323.

The Observation of the Secret Admonition of the Spirit of GOD in the Heart, as
It is an Effectual Means, Knowledge of GOD, etc. page 331. 378. 391.
so It is a Calm and Comfortable Means to Cleanse and Sanctify thy Heart; and
the more It is attended unto, the more It will be Conversant with thy Soul, for
thy Instruction. -- In the midst of thy Difficulties, It will be thy
Counselor: In the midst of thy Temptations, It will be thy Strength; and a
Grace Sufficient for thee: In the midst of thy Troubles, It will be thy Light,
and thy Comforter: Only beware thou neglect not the Voice of This Spirit, it
maybe thy Neglect may Quench It, and thou may never hear that Voice more.

It is impossible for thee to Enjoy That which must make thee Happy, till thou
art deeply sensible of thy own Emptiness, and Nothingness; and thy Spirit
thereby brought down, and laid in the Dust. -- The Spirit of CHRIST is an
Humbling Spirit, the more thou have of It, the more It will Humble thee; and it
is a Sign, that either thou have It not, or that It is yet over-master'd by thy
Corruptions, if thy Heart be still Haughty.

Watch, therefore, the Secret Persuasions and Diswasions of the Spirit of GOD;
and beware thou Quench It not, nor Grieve It; be sure thou Observe This Voice.
-- This Wind that blows where It lists, if Shut out, Resisted, or Grieved, may
happily never Breath upon thee again, but leave thee to be Hardened in thy Sins:
But if Observed, and Obeyed, thou shall be sure to have It thy Monitor, and
Director upon all Occasions. When thou Go, It will Lead thee, when thou
Sleep, It will Keep thee, and when thou Awakest, It will Talk with thee.

[These are Faithful, Weighty, and True Sayings; Happy are those that Witness
them so to be.]

This Little Tract, is a Treasure worth keeping, and to be often Perused by
People of all Persuasions: For We must all come to Judgment, To give an Account
of our Talents and Stewardship.

Blessed, and Happy, yea, for ever Happy will that Person be, unto whom it
shall be said, viz.

Well done, Good and Faithful Servant, enter Thou into the Joy of thy LORD.
Mat. 25.23.
