A Christian Plea Against PERSECUTION For the Cause of CONSCIENCE; Grounded
upon Scripture, Reason, Experience and Testimonies Of Princes and learned
Authors.

Impartially Collected by Ellis Hooks.

Now, I say unto you, Refrain from these Men, a let them alone; for if this
Counsel, or this Wond he of Men, it will come to naught; but if it brk, God,
you cannot overthrow it, lest happily yo e of found Fighters against God.

Acts 5.38, 39. u be Published for the Service of Truth.

The Contents.
I. REason against Persecution is, because it is Contrary to the Scriptures.
II. Reason against Persecution for the cause of Conscience, is, because it is
against the Profession and Practice of Famous Princes. III. Reason against
Persecution, is, because it is condemned by the ancient and the later Writers.
IV. Reason, Its no prejudice to a Kingdom or Commonwealth, if Libery, of
Conscience be suffered to such as fear God, as is or will be manifested in such
men's Lives and Conversations, as Scripture-Examples Testify. V. Several
Testimonies, showing, that Conscience ought to be free, and not to be imposed
upon, and no person ought to be Compelled to accuse himself, or purge himself
by Oath. VI. Some remarkable Collections out of Doctor Tailors Book, entitled,
OEOAOTIA EKAEKTIKH, A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying; showing the
unreasonableness of prescribing to other men's Faith, and the Iniquity of
persecuting different Opinions. VII. Instances out of diverse Authors treating
on the same subject, by W. C. deceased. VIII. Several Reasons rendered (why no
outward force nor imposition ought to be used in matters of Faith and Religion)
by R. H. S. F. and F. H. deceased. IX. Several Sayings Collected from the
Speeches and writings of King Charles the first. X. Several Promises and
Declarations for the Liberty of tender Consciences taken out of the Speeches of
King Charles the second.
SECT. I. Persecution for the cause of Conscience is against the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, as these Scriptures and Reasons following do
demonstrate.
The first Reason against Persecution is, because it is contrary to Scripture.
FOr Christ commanded, that the Tares and Wheat should be let alone in the
World, and not plucked up until the Harvest, which is the End of the World.
Matthew. 13.30, 38, etc.

Christ also commands, that they that are blind should be let alone referring
their punishment unto the falling into the Ditch, Matthew. 15.14.

Again, he reproved his Disciples, who would have had Fire come down from
Heaven, and devour those Samaritans, who would not receive him, in these Words,
Ye know not of what Spirit ye are; the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
Lives, but to save them, Luke 9.54, 55.

Paul the Apostle taught, that the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but
must be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil men, instructing them with
meekness that are contrary-minded, proving if God at any time will give them
Repentance, that they may acknowledge the Truth, and come to amendment out of
the Snare of the Devil. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.

According to these blessed Commandments the Prophets foretold, that when the
Law of Moses (concerning Worship) should cease, and Christ's Kingdom be
established, Esa. 2.4. Mica. 4.3, 4. Esa. 11.9.
they should break their Swords into Ploughshares and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks. Then shall none hurt or destroy in all the Mountains of my
holiness: And when he came, the same he taught and practiced as before, so did
his Disciples after him, for the Weapons of his Warfare are nor carnal, says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4.

But he charge straightly (that his Disciples should be so far from persecuting
those that would not be of their Religion) that when they were persecuted, they
should pray; when they were Cursed, they should Bless, etc. ( Matthew. 5. And the
reason seems to be, because they who now are Tares, may hereafter become Wheat;
they who are now Blind, may hereafter see; they that now resist, him, may
hereafter receive him; they that are now in the Devils snare, in adversness to
the Truth, may hereafter come to Repentance; they that are now Blasphemers and
Persecutors, (as Paul was) may in time become faithful as he; they that are now
Idolatrous, as the Corinthians once were, 1 Cor. 6.9. may hereafter become true
Worshippers as they; they that are now no people of God, nor under Mercy (as
the Saints sometimes were, 1 Pet. 2.20.) may hereafter become the People of
God, and obtain Mercy as they.

Some come not till the eleventh hour: ( Matthew 20.6.) If those that come not
till the last hour should be destroyed, because they come not at the first,
then should they never come but be prevented.

SECT. II. The second Reason against Persecution for cause of Conscience, is,
because it is against the Profession and Practice of famous Princes.
FIrst, Consider the speech of King James to the Parliament 1609. he says, It
is (...) R^le in Divinity, that God never serves to plant his Church by
Violence and Bloodshed; and that it was usually the Condition of Christians to
be persecuted, but not to persecute.

Again, he says page four, speaking of the Papists; I gave good proof, that I
intended no Persecution against them for Conscience Cause.

And in the same Kings Exposition of the Revelation the twentieth, printed
1588, he writes thus; Compassing of the Saints, and beseiging of the beloved
City, declares unto us a certain Note of a false Church to be Persecution; for
they come to seek the Faithful; the Faithful are them, that are sought; the
Wicked are the Besiegers, the Faithful are the Besieged.

And the King of Bohemia has thus written, And notwithstanding the success of
the later Times (wherein Sundry Opinions have been hatched about the subject of
Religion) may make one clearly discern with his Eye, and as it were to touch
with his Finger, that according to the Truth of the Scripture, and a Maxim
heretofore maintained by the ancient Doctors of the Church, that men's
Consciences ought in no sort to be violated, urged, or constrained; and
whenever men have attempted any thing, by this violent course, whether
openly, or by secret means, the issue has been Pernicious, and the cause of
great and wonderful Innovations in the Principalest and Mightiest Kingdoms and
Countries of all Christendom.

And further he says: So that once more we do profess, before God, and the
whole World, that from this time forward we are firmly resolved, not to
persecute or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or molested, any person
whosoever, for matter of Religion, no not those who profess themselves to be of
the Romish Church, neither to trouble nor disturb them in the Exercise of their
Religion, so they live conformable to the Laws of the States, etc.

SECT. III. The Third Reason, because Persecution for Cause of Conscience, is
condemned by the ancient and later Writers.
HIlary against Auxentius, says thus, The Christian Church does not persecute,
but is persecuted. And Lamentable it is to see the folly of these Times, and
the foolish Opinion of this World, in that men think by humane Aid to help God,
and with Worldly Pomp and Power to undertake to defend the Christian Church: I
ask the Bishops, what help used the Apostles, in the publishing the Gospel?
with the Aid of what power did they Preach Christ, and converted the Heathen
from their Idolatry to God? When they were in Prisons, and lay in Chains, did
they praise and give thanks to God for any dignities or favors received from
the Court, or do you think that Paul went about with regal Mandates, or kingly
Authority, to gather and establish the Church of Christ? Sought he Protection
from Nero Vespatian?

The Apostles wrought with their hands for their own Maintenance, traveling by
Land and Water, from Town to City; to preach Christ; yea, the more they were
forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ; but now, alas, humane help
must assist and protect the Faith, and give the same Countenance too, and by
vain and worldly Honors do men seek to defend the Church of Christ, as if he
by his Power were unable to perform it,

The Church formerly by enduring Misery and Imprisonment was known to be a true
Church: The pretended Church now do terrify others by Imprisonment, Banishment
and Misery, and boasts that she is highly esteemed of the World, when as the
true Church cannot but be hated of the same.

Tertul ad scapulam It agrees both with human Reason and natural Equity, that
every man worship God uncompelled; neither beseems it any Religion, to compel
another to be of their Religion, which willingly and freely should be embraced,
and not by constraint; forasmuch as the Offerings were required of those that
freely and of good will offered, and not from the contrary.

Jerome in Proaem lib. 4. in Jeremiam, Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of
the Spirit, let us strike through with the Arrows of the Spirit all Sons and
Disciples of misled Heretics, that is, with Testimonies of Scriptures; the
slaughter of Heretics is by the Word of God.

Brentius upon the first of the Corinthians, chap. 3. No man has power to
make, or give Laws to Christians, whereby to bind their Consciences; for
willingly, freely and uncompelled, with a ready desire, and cheerful mind, must
those that come, run unto Christ.

Luther in his Books of the Civil Magistrate, says, The Laws of the Civil
Magistrates Government extends no further then over the Body or Goods, and to
that which is external, for over the Soul God will not suffer any man to rule,
only he himself will Rule there, wherefore whosoever does undertake to give
Laws unto the Souls and Consciences of men; he usurpeth that Government
himself, which appertains unto God, etc.

Therefore upon 1 Kings 5. In the building of the Temple, there was no sound of
Iron heard, to signify, that Christ will have in his Church a free and a
willing People, (...) compelled and constrained by Laws and Statutes.

Again his ^h upon Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church, which is
defended by the secular Arm, or humane Power, but the false and feigned Church,
which although it carries the name of a Church, yet it denies the power thereof.

And upon Psalm. 17. he says, For the true Church of Christ, knows not
Brachium saeculare, which the Bishops now adays chiefly use.

Again, in Postil Dom. 1 post Epipham, he says, Let not Christians be
commanded, but exhorted; for he that willingly will not do that whereunto he is
friendly exhorted, he is no Christian; wherefore they that do compel those that
are not willing, show thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but
worldly Beadles.

Again upon 1 Peter 3. He says If the Civil Magistrate shall command me to
believe thus and thus, I should answer him after this manner; look you to your
civil or worldly Government, your Power extends not so far as to command any
thing in Gods Kingdom; therefore herein I may not hear you; for if you cannot
bear it, that any should usurp Authority, where you have to command; how do you
think that God should suffer you to thrust him from his Seat, and to seat your
self therein.

SECT. IV. The Fourth Reason, Its no prejudice to a Kingdom or Commonwealth,
if Liberty of Conscience be suffered to such as fear God; as is or will be
manifested in such men's lives and conversations, as Scripture Examples testify.
ABraham abode among the Cananites a long time, yet contrary to them in
Religion, Genesis 13.7. and 16.13.

Again, he Sojourned in Gerar and King Abimelech give him leave to abide in his
Land, Genesis 20.21, 23, 24.

Isaac, also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Genesis 26.

Jacob lived Twenty years in one house with his uncle Laban, yet differed in
Religion, Genesis 31.

The People of Israel were about Three hundred and thirty years in that
infamous Land of Egypt, and afterward seventy years in Babylon, all which time
they differed in Religion from the State, Exodus 12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.

Come to (...) time of Christ, when Israel was under the Romans, where lived
diverse Sects of Religion, as Herodians, Scribes and Pharisees, Saduces and
Libertines, Thudeans and Samaritans, besides the common Religion of the Jews,
Christ and his Apostles, all which differed from the common Religion of the
State, which was like the worship of Diana, which almost the whole World then
worshipped Acts 19.20.

All these lived under the Government of Caesar, being no thing hurtful to the
Commonwealth,) giving unto Caesar that which was his, and for their Religion
and Consciences toward God, he left them to themselves, as having no dominion
over their Souls and Consciences; and when the Enemies of Truth raised up any
Tumults, the wisdom of the Magistrate most wisely appeased them, Acts 18.14.
and 19.35.

SECT. V. Several Testimonies showing that Conscience ought to he free, and not
to be imposed upon, and no person be compelled to accuse himself, or purge
himself by Oath, etc.
ACcusare se nemo tenetur, says Vasquius, nisi coram deo: secundum illud
Chrisostom non tibi dico ut te prodasNo man is bound to accuse himself but
before God, according to that of Chrysostom, I do not say that thou should
betray thy self. Valque Coniro illustres P. 124. number. 27.

Quis sibi utrumque audeat assumere ut unquam sit ipse and accusator and Judex?
Who dares assume to himself to be both an Accuser and a Judge, says Austin?

That famous Lawyer Cook says, Juramentum in propria est inventio Diaboli ad
detrudendum animas miserorum in infernum. The Oath Ex officio, says he, is an
invention of the Devil, to cast the Souls of miserable people into Hell. Aug.
hom. 50.

Let the Judges, says Tindall, judge and condemn the Trespasses under lawful
Witnesses, and not break up into the Consciences of men after the Example of
Antichrists Disciples, and compel them either to forswear themselves, or to
testify against themselves, which abomination says he, our Prelates learned
of Caiphas, Matthew. 26. saying to Christ, I adjure, or charge thee in the name
of the Living God that thou tell us whether thou be Christ the Son of the
Living God. see, Tindals Obed. of Christ page 22. Collos. 2.

SECT. VI. Some remarkable Observation, collected out of a Book, entitled,
THEOLOGIA EKLEKTIK, A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying; showing the
unreasonableness of prescribing to other men's Faith, and the Iniquity of
persecuting different Opinions; by Jer. Tailor D. D. (so styled) Chaplin in
Ordinary to his late Majesty.
IN his Epistle Dedicatory are these words: viz. As contrary as Cruelty is to
Mercy, as Tyranny to Charity; so is War and Bloodshed to the Meekness and
Gentleness of Christian Religion.

And further speaks, to dispute men into Mercies, Compliances and Tolerations
mutual; and further adds.

I designed a Discourse to this purpose, with as much greediness, as if I had
thought it possible with my Arguments to have persuaded the rough and hard
handed Soldiers to have disbanded presently; for I had often thought of the
Prophecy, that in the Gospel, our Swords should be turned into Plow-shares,
and our Spears into Pruning Hooks.

I thought it my duty to plead for Peace and Charity, and Forgiveness, and
Permissions mutual.

Although we must contend earnestly for the Faith, yet this contention must be
with Arms sit for the Christian Warfare, the Sword of the Spirit, the Shield of
Faith, etc. but not with other Arms; for a Churchman must not be a Striker,
for the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual.

I being most of all troubled, that men should be persecuted, and afflicted,
for disagreeing in such opinions, which they cannot with sufficient grounds
obtrude upon others necessarily, because they cannot propound them infalibly.

Considerations (are to be had) to the Persons of men, and to the Laws of
Charity more then to the triumphing in any Opinion, etc.

If the Persons be Christians in their life, and Christians in their
profession; if they acknowledge the Eternal Son of God for their Master, and
the Lord, and live in all relations as becomes Persons making such professions,
why then should I hate such Persons whom God loves, and who love God, who are
pertakers of Christ, and Christ has a Title to them, who dwell in Christ, and
Christ in them, because their understandings have not been brought up like
mine, have not had the same Masters, they have not met with the same Books --
have not the same Opinions that I have, and do not determine their School
Questions to the same sense of my Sect or Interest?

And whatsoever is against the Foundation of Faith or contrary to good Life --
or destructive to humane society -- is out of the limits of my Question, and
does not pretend to compliance or toleration.

The fault I find and seek to remedy is, That men are so dogmatical and
resolute in their Opinions, and impatient of others disagreeing in those things
wherein is no sufficient means of Union and D^, but that men ^uld let Op^ (...)
Problems not be (...) nor Questions (...) vas^ ^^^ction of the Systems of (...)
adopted into the Family ^h.

Its hard to say, th^e who would not have (...) p^^ (...) death or punished
(...) for such things, for which (...) (...) Authority is sufficient (...)
Cognizance, or Det^ ^tion, (...) competent for ^liction; that he persuades to
an (...) differency when he refers to another Judicatory, which is competent,
sufficient, infallible, just, and highly severe -- for God alone must (...)
Judge of these matters, who alone is Master of our Souls, and has the Dominion
over humane understanding -- God alone is Judge of erring Persons.

I earnestly contend, that another man's Opinion shall be no Rule to mine, and
that my Opinion shall be no Snare and Prejudice to my self; that men use one
another so charitably, that no error or violence tempt men to Hypocrisy; this
very thing being one of the Arguments I used to persuade Permissions, lest
Compulsion introduce Hypocrisy, and make Sincerity troublesome, etc.

From the Dictates of holy Scriptures; it is observable, that this, with its
appendant degrees, I mean, restraint of Prophesying, imposing upon other men's
understandings, being Masters of their Consciences, and lording it over their
Faith, came in with the retinue and train of Antichrift, as other abuses and
corruptions of the Church did, by reason of the iniquity of the times, and the
cooling of the first heats of Christianity, and the increase of interest, and
the abatements of Christian simplicity, when the Churches fortune grew better,
and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers three hundred Years there was
no sign of persecuting any man for his Opinion, though at that time there were
very horrid Opinions commenced -- and they who used all means -- Christian and
Spiritual, for their disimprovement and conviction, thought not of using
corporal force -- and therefore I do not only urge their not doing it, as an
Argument of the unlawfulness of such proceeding, but their defying it, and
speaking against such practices as unreasonable, and destructive to
Christianity, for so Tertullian is express, Humani juris and naturalis
potestatis uni cuique quod putaverit colere, sed nec religionis est cogere
religionem quae suscipi debet sponte non vi: its of humane right and natural
power for every one to worship what he thinks; but neither is it the part of
Religion to compel Religion, which ought to be under^ of its own accord.

The same (...) Doctrine of Cyprian, Lactentius, Hillary, Minutius Faelix,
Sulpitius, Severus, Chrisostom. H^erova Austin, Damascen, Theophilact, S^cra^^,
Scholasticus, and Bernard.

All wise Princes till they were overborn with Faction, and solicited by
peevish persons, gave Toleration to differing Sects -- But at first there were
some heretical persons, that were so impatient, they were the men that first
entreated the Emperor to persecute the Catholics: but till four hundred years
after Christ, no Catholic persons, or very few, did provoke the secular Arm,
or implore its aid against the Heretics; save only that Arrius behaved himself
so seditiously and tumultuarily that the Nicene Fathers procured a temporary
Decree for his relegation; but it was soon taken off, and God lest to be his
Judge.

But as the Ages grew worse, so men grew more cruel and unchristian; and in the
Greek Church Atticus and Nestorius of Constantinople, Theodocius of Synoda, and
some few others, who had forgotten the mercies of their great Master, and their
own duty, grew implacable, and surious, and impatient of contradiction.

It was a bold and arrogant Speech which Nestorius made in his Sermon before
Theedotius the younger; Da mihi, O Emperator, terram ab Haereticis repurgatam
and ege tibi vicissim coelum dabo; disperde mecum Haereticos, and ego tecum
disperdam Persas; which is in English, O Emperor, give to me the Land purged
from Heretics; and I, instead thereof, will give thee Heaven: destroy me the
Heretics, and I will destroy with thee the Persians: It was as groundless, as
unwarrantable, as it was bloody and inhumane. And we see the contrary events
prove truer; for Theodosius and Valentinian were prosperous Princes, and have
the reputation of great piety; but they were so far from doing what Nestorius
had suggested, that they restrained him from his violence and immanity; and
Theodosius did highly commend B. Proclus, for his sweetness of deportment
toward erring persons, far above the cruelty of his Predecessor Atticus.

And the experience which Christendom has had in this last age, is Argument
enough, That Toleration of differing opinions is so far from disturbing the
public peace, or destroying the Interest of Princes, and Commonwealths, that
it does advantage the Public, it secures the Peace, because there is not so
much as the Pretense of Religion left to such persons to contend for, it being
already indulged to them.

When France fought against the Hugonots, the spilling of their own Blood was
Arguments enough of the imprudence of that way of promoting Religion; but since
she has given permission to them, etc.

The great instance is in the differing Temper, Government, and Success which
Margaret of Parma, and the Duke of Alva had; the clemency of the first had
almost extinguished the Flame; but when she was removed, D. Alva succeeded, and
managed the matter of Religion with Fire and Sword, he made the Flame so
great, that his Religion, and his Prince too, had both been almost turned out
of the Country; Pellie medio sapientiam quoties vires agitur, said, Ennius,
[Wisdom is driven out, when the matter is acted by force.]

[And therefore the best of men, and most glorious of Princes, were always
ready to give Toleration.]

Esebeus in his second Book of the life of Constantine, reports these words of
the Emperor, Parem cum fidelibus ij qui errant pacis, and quietis fruitionem
gaudentes accipiant: ipsa si quidem communicationis and societatis restitutio
ad rectam etiam veritatis viam perducere potest; nemo cuiquam molestis sit,
quisque quod animo destinat hoc etiam faciat; Let them which err with joy
receive the like fruition of Peace and quietness with the Faithful, since the
restoring of communication, and society may bring them into the right Way of
Truth: Let none give molestation to any; let every one do as he determines in
his mind.

And indeed there is great reason for Princes to give Toleration to disagreeing
persons, whose Opinions cannot by fair means be altered; for if the persons be
confident, they will serve God according to their persuasions; and if they be
publicly prohibited, they will privately convene, and then all those
inconveniences and mischiefs, which are Arguments against the permission of
Conventicles, are Arguments for the public permissions of differing Religions,
etc. -- they being restrained, and made miserable, indears the discontented
persons mutual, and makes more hearty and dangerous confederations.

King James in his Letters to the States of the United-Provinces, dated March
6. 1613. thus wrote -- Ita ut prohibeatis Ministros vestr^s ne eas disputationes
in suggestum aut ad plebem ferant, ac districte imperetis ut pacem colant se in
vicem tolerando in ista opinionum ac sententia-rum discrepantia -- So that you
may forbid your Ministers, that they bring not those Disputations into the
Pulpit, or to the People, and strictly command, that they embrace peace among
themselves, by Tolerating in that difference of Opinions, and Judgments.

The like Counsel in the divisions of Germany, at the first Reformation, was
thought reasonable by the Emperor Ferdinand, and his excellent Son Maximilian;
for they had observed, That Violence did exasperate was unblest, unsuccesful,
and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Toleration.

And the Duke of Savoy repenting of his War, undertaken for Religion against
the Piedm^ntans, promised them Toleration; and was as good as his word -- As
much is done by the nobility of Polonia: so that the best Princes and the best
Bishops gave Toleration and Impunities (but it is known, that the first
Persecution of disagreeing Persons was by the Arrians, by Circumcellians, and
Donatists, and from them they of the Church took Example, etc.) And among the
Greeks it became a public and authorized practice, till the question of Images
grew hot and high; for then the Worshippers of Images, having taken their
example from the Empress Irene, who put her son's eyes out for making an Edict
against Images, began to be as cruel, as they were deceived, especially, being
encouraged by the Pope of Rome, who then blew the Coals to some purpose.

I may upon this occasion give account of this affair in the Church of Rome, it
is remarkable that till the time of Justinian the Emperor, A. D. 525. the
Catholics and Novatians had Churches indifferently permitted even in Rome it
self, but the Bishops of Rome, whose interest was much concerned in it, spoke
much against it, and labored the eradication of the Novatians; and at last
when they got power into their hands they served them accordingly; but it is
observed by Socrates that when the first persecution was made against them at
Rome by Pope Innocent the first, at the same instant the Goths invaded Itally,
and became Lords of all, it being just in God, etc.

And I have heard it observed as a blessing upon S. Austin (who was so merciful
to erring Persons) as the greatest part of his life -- to tolerate them, and
never to endure that they should be given over to the seculer power to be
killed) that the very night the Vandals set down before his City of Hippo, to
besiege it, he died, and went to God; being taken from the miseries to come.

But in the Church of Rome, the Popes were the first Preachers of Force and
Violence in matters of Opinion, and that so zealously that Pope Vigilius
suffered himself to be imprisoned, and handled roughly by the Emperor
Justinian, rather then he would consent to the restitution and peace of certain
disagreeing persons, etc.

The first that preached that Doctrine was Dominick, the Founder of the Begging
Order of Friars: The Friars Preachers, in memory of which the Inquision is
entrusted only to the Friars of his order; and if there be any force in Dreams,
or truth in Legends, etc. -- This very thing might be signified by his mothers
Dream, who the night before Dominick was born, dreamed she was brought to bed
of a huge Dog, with a Firebrand in his mouth; sure enough however his
Disciples expound the Dream, it was a better sign that he should prove a Rabid
furious incendiary then any thing else, what ever he might be in the other
parts of this life; in this Doctrine he was not much better, as appears in his
deportment toward the Abligences, against whom he so preached -- Adeo quidem
ut centum hereticorum millia ab octo millibus catholicorum fuse and interfecta
fuisse probiantur, says one of him, and of those who were taken, one hundred
and eighty were burned to death, because they w^ (...) abjure their Doctrine;
this was the first Example of putting erring Persons to death, that I sind in
the Romish Church.

By this time I hope it will not be thought unreasonable to say, He that
teaches mercy to erring Persons teaches indifferency in Religion, unless so
many Fathers, and so many Churches, and the best of Emperors, and all the World
(till they were abused by Tyranny, Popery and faction) did teach indifferency:
For;

I have shown that Christianity does not punish corporally, persons erring
Spiritually, but indeed Popery does.

The Donatists, and Circumcelians, and Arrians, and Itaciani, they of old did
in the middle Ages: the Patrons of Images did, and the Papists at this day do,
and have done ever since they were taught it by their St Dominick.

Let all Errors be as much, and as zealously suppressed as may be, but let it be
done by such means as are proper instruments of their suppression, by Preaching
and Disputation, by Charity and Sweetness, by Holiness of Life, Assiduity of
Exhortation, by the Word of God, and Prayer.

For these ways are most natural, most prudent, most peaceable and effectual,
only let not men be hasty, in calling every disliked Opinion by the name of
Heresy; and when they have resolved that they will call it so, let them use
the erring person like a Brother, not beat him like a Dog, or convince him with
a Gibbit, or vex him out of his understanding or persuasion.

Thus far Jer. Talyer; these Passages being truly collected out of his Epistle,
where are many more to the same purpose; to which the Reader is referred for
further satisfaction, if he desire it: And further in his Sixteenth Section,
for the lawlulness of Princes giving Toleration to several Religions, he has
these Passages.

For it may be safe in diversity of persuasions, and it is also a part of
Christian Religion, that the Liberty of men's Consciences should be preserved in
all things, where God has not set a limit --

That the Soul of man should be free and acknowledge no Master but Jesus Christ.

That matters Spiritual should not be restrained by punishments corporal.

That the same meekness and Charity should be preserved in the promotion of
Christianity, that gave it foundation, and increment, and firmness in its first
publication.

And that Persons should not more certainly be condemned then their Opinions
confuted.

And lastly, That the Infirmities of men, and difficulties of things, should be
both put in balance, to make abatement in the diffinitive sentence against
men's persons.

As Christian Princes must look to the interest of their Government; so
especially must they consider the interests of Christianity, and not call every
redargution, or modesty, discovery of an established Error, by the name of the
disturbance of the Peace; For,

It is very likely that the peevishness, and impatience of contradiction in the
Governors may break the peace.

Let them but remember the Gentleness of Christianity; the Liberty of
Consciences which ought to be preserved; and let them do justice to the
persons, whoever they are that are peevish; provided no man's person be
overborn with prejudice: For,

If it be necessary for all men to subscribe to the present established
Religion; by the same reason, at another time, a man may be bound to subscribe
the contradictory, and to all Religions in the World. Uncharitableness is much
prevented when no person is on either side engaged upon revenge, or troubled
with disgrace, or vexed with punishments, by any decretory sentence against
him: It was the saying of a wise Statesman, (I mean Thuanus) Haeretici qui
pace data factionibus scinduntur, persecutione uniuntur contra. Remp. -- If you
persecute Heretics, or Discrepants, they unite themselves as to a common
defense; if you permit them, they divide themselves upon private interest, and
the rather if this interest was an ingredient of the Opinion.

SECT. VII. Instances out of diverse Authors treating on the same Subject,
Collected by W. C. deceased.
CHrisostomus said, It is not the manner, of the Children of God to Persecute
others to death about their Religion; but it has been, and is their condition
to be put to death themselves for the Testimony of the Truth. Moreover, (said
he) the shedding of Blood about Religion, is an evident token of Antichrist,
Relig. Uris. page 192.

Haywardus said,

That the best Writers of that time did agree in one opinion, and with
Tertulliano, Lactantio, Cassidoro, and Josephus, etc. That People must inform
men to embrace Religion with Reason, and not compel them by violence.

I have for long season determined, said one of the Kings of France, ^o reform
the Church, which with out Peace (said he) I cannot do, and it is unpossible to
reform, or convert people by violence.

I am King as a Shepherd, (said he) and will not shed the Blood of my Sheep;
but will gather them through the mildness and goodness of a King, and not
through the power of Tyranny: And I will give them that are of the reformed
Religion right Liberty to live and dwell free, without being examined,
perplexed, molested, or compelled to any thing contrary to their Consciences;
for they shall have the free exercise of their Religion, etc. vide Chron. Vande
Underg 2. deel. page. 1514.

Luther said, That the Hypocrites Church was to be known by its Manners, whose
Image and Sign was Esau, yet she boasted of God, and would be accounted his
Church, but lived wholly according to the World. Further (said he) the true
Church is not defended by a ^ly Arm^ which wicked Bishops especially use, and
cry unto. Thesau. page 622.

Colvin said, That the Apostle gave to understand, that to exercise authority
over ones Faith, was in no wise just, nor tolerable: (yea, said he) It is
Tyranny in the Church; for FAITH ought to be free from all Subjection of men.

When several of the Priests in the low Countries requested of the Prince and
States, that they would introduce Ordinances and Discipline, according to their
Opinions; but the Prince, and the States, rejected their requests, esteeming
them prejudicial both to Religion and Policy; when they observed the diverse
Opinions that were among the People, concluding, It was the best way to
perserve unity among the People, to give Liberty to all, and to Compel none,
Anno 1608. Edict. Fol. 27.

Areneus affirmed, That all forcing of Conscience, though it was but a
forbiding of the Exercise, which is esteemed by one or another, to be necessary
to Salvation, is in no wise right nor fitting: He also affirmed, That through
diversities of Religions the Kingdom should not be brought into any disturbance.

The Ancient Reformed Protestants termed that forcing of Conscience, when they
were constrained to leave off the exercise of their Religion, saying, Car nous
privant de nostre Religion on nous tiendroit en une continuele mors corporelle
and spirituelle that is) For to deprive us of our Religion, is to keep us in a
perpetual corporal and spiritual death; adding thereunto, How that they would
rather be put to death then be bereaved of the exercise of their Religion, etc.
And also they testified, how that the Religion which was defended with Cruelty,
was not grounded upon the Word of God.

Lactantius said, If you will with blood, with evil, and with torments, defend
the Worship, it shall not thereby be defended but polluted, Lib. 5. Chap. 20.

Constantius the Emperor said, That it was enough that he perserved the unity
of the FAITH, that he might be excusable before the Judgment Seat of God; and
that he would leave every one to his own understanding, according to the
account he will give before the Judgment Seat of Christ: Hereto may we stir up
People (said he) not compel them, beseech them to come into the unity of the
Christians; but to do VIOLENCE to them, we will not in no wise. Sabast. Frank.
Cron. Fol. 127.

Augustinus said, Some disturbed the Peace of the Church, while they went about
to root out the TARES before the time; and through this Error of Blindness
(said he) are they themselves separated, so much the more from being united
unto Christ.

Retnaldu^ testified, That he who with Imprisoning and Persecuting seeks to
spread the Gospel, and greaseth his Hands with Blood, shall much rather be
looked upon for a wild Hunter, then a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.

The State of Holland testified, Dat waer vervolginghen Zijndatter daer al in
rocre is, maer waer geen en sijdor verscheijden Religion dat dare all saelren
stilder sijn so o^lr in onse i den is ^evon den: that is. Where there was
Persecution, there was all in distraction, but where there was none (though
there were several Religions there all things were the quieter, as has been
evident in our days, said they, Vide Urede Handel Van. Col. Fol. 53.

Calvin said, That those that are set over us must be obeyed, if that the
Command of God be not thereby disobeyed; but if they lead us from obedience to
God, and presumptiously, strive against the Lord, then must they not be
regarded, said he, to the end that God with his Authority may retain the
pre-eminence.

A Book written in French, by N. M. Anno 1576. has this Sentence in it. Those
Princes that have ruled by Gentleness and Clemency, added to justice; and have
exercised Moderation and Meekness toward their Subjects, always greatly
Prospered, and Reigned long.

But on the contrary, those Princes that have been Cruel, Unjust, Perfidious,
and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon fallen, they and their Estate into
danger, or total ruin.



Veritus said, Seeing Christ is a LAMB, whom you profess to be your Head and
Captain, then it behooves you to be Sheep, and to use the same WEAPONS, which
he made use of; for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves, and wild Beasts, but
only of SHEEP; wherefore if you lose the Nature of Sheep (said he) and be
changed into Wolves, and wild Beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you
exclude your selves out of his Calling; and forsake his Banner, and then will
he not be your Captain.

Stephanus King of Poland said, It belongs not to me to reform the
Conscience, I have always gladly given that over to God, which belongs to
him, and so shall I do now; and also for the future, I will suffer the WEEDS to
grew until the time of Harvest; for I know that the number of Believers are
but small, therefore, said he, when some were proceeding in persecution, Ego
sum Rex Populorum non Conscientiarum, that is, I am the King of the People, not
of their Consciences: he also affirmed, That Religion was not to be planted
with FIRE and SWORD, Chron. Van. de Rel. Urijh. 2. deel.

Tindal said, The New Testament of Christ suffered no Law of Compelling, but
alone of Persuading and Exhorting, Fox, Acts and Mon. page 1338.

The Prince of Orange testified, Anno 1579.

That it was impossible that the Land should be kept in Peace except there was
a free Toleration in the Exercise of Religion.

Where have thou ever read in thy days (said Menno) in the Writings of the
Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrates, for
their Power, against them that would not hear their Doctrine, not obey their
Words? I know certainly, said he, that where the Magistrate shall Banish with
the SWORD, there is not the right Knowledge, spiritual Word, nor Church of
Christ, it is Invocare Brachium Seculare.

It is not Christian, like but Tyrannical, said D. Philipson, to Banish and
Persecute People about FAITH and Religion, and they that so do are certainly of
the Pharisaical Generation, who resisted the Holy Ghost.

Erasmus said, That though they take our Moneys and Goods, they cannot
therefore hurt our Salvation; they afflict us much with Prisons, but they do
not thereby separate us from God, In de Krijdges wrede, Fol. 63.

Lucernus said, He that Commands any thing, wherewith he binds the
Conscience, this is an Antichrist, Inde Benuse disp. Fol. 71.

It was Luther's Opinion, That those that stirred up the Princes to persecute
about Religion, they raised the Uproar, Thesaur. page 679.

SECT. VIII. Several Reasons rendered, why no outward Force, nor Imposition,
ought to be used in Matters of Faith and Religion, by R. H. S. F. and F. H.
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE ought to be allowed in the days of the Gospel, in the
free Exercise of it to Godward (without Compulsion) in all things relating to
His Worship, for these REASONS following.

1. Because the General and Universal Royal-Law of Christ commands it, Matthew
7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do yeven so to
them: for this is the Law and Prophets -- That which every man would have, and
receive from another, he ought by Christ RULE to give and allow it to another.
But every man is willing to have the LIBERTY of his OWN CONSCIENCE, therefore
ought to ALLOW it to another. 2. Because no man can persuade the Conscience of
another, either what God is, or how he should be worshipped, but by the Spirit,
which God has given to instruct man in the Ways of Truth. 3. Because, all
Obedience or Service that is obtained by force, is for fear of Wrath, and not
from Love, nor for Conscience sake; and therefore will but continue so long as
that fear or force abides upon them. 4. Because, that by forcing, no man can
make a Hypocrite to be a true Believer; but on the contrary, many may be made
Hypocrites. 5. Because, that in all forced Impositions upon men's Consciences,
there is something of the wrath of man exercised, which works not the
Righteousness of God, but rather begets enmity in the heart one toward
another. 6. Because, that by forcing any thing upon men's Consciences, as to
matters of Faith and Worship, many are hardened in their hearts against the
things imposed; when as otherwise, through Love and gentle Instructions their
hearts might be persuaded to willing obedience. 7. Because, that Persecution
for Conscience contradicts Christ's Charge, Matthew 13. who bids that the
Tares (or false Worshippers) be suffered to grow together in the Field (or
World) till the Harvest (or End of the World.) 8. Because, Force is contrary to
the end for which it is pretended to be used (viz.) The preservation and safety
of the Wheat, which End is not answered by Persecution, because the Wheat is in
danger to be plucked up thereby, as Christ says. 9. Because to Force is
inconsistant with the belief of the Jews Conversion (and other false
Worshippers) which is prayed for by the public Teachers, and cannot be
attained, if Persecution for Conscience be prosecuted. 10. Because they that
impose upon men's Consciences, exercise Dominion over men's Faith, which the
Apostles denied, saying, They had not Dominion over any man's Faith. 11.
Because, Imposition upon men's Consciences necessitates them to sin, in yielding
a Conformity contrary to their own Faith; for whatsoever is not of a man's own
Faith, is sin. 12. Because that Imposition and Force wrestles with flesh and
blood, and carnal Weapons, which are contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who
said, Our Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and Mighty through God; and we
wrestle not with Flesh, and Blood. 13. Because, there is but One Judge, Law
giver, and King in and over the Conscience, as the Saints have testified in the
Scriptures of Truth; and whosoever would intrude, so as to be Judge and
Lawgiver over the Conscience, intrencheth upon the Perogative of Christ, Isa.
33.22. James 4.12. 14. Because, it is prophesied in Isa. 11. The woolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shlilllie down with the Kid, and there
shall be no Destroyer in all the Holy Meunltain: And therefore no Imposition
upon men's Consciences. 15. Because, to impose upon men's Consciences for
differences in Faith, is contrary to the Advice of the Apostle, who directs
People to wait upon Got to be satisfied, and not to the Magistrates, or others
to be forced; who says, where unto we have attained, let us walk; and wherein
any man is otherwise minded, God shall reveal, even that unto him. 16. Because,
to force men's Consciences, and to lay Yoaks upon them, is to make void the
Bloodshed and Sufferings of Christ, who sits upon the Throne of the Conscience,
and gives liberty there; and commands us to stand fast in that liberty, and not
to be entangled though the Impositions of men, or Yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.6.
17. Because, in all Nations the different Professions and Persuasions of
Religion, are either Friends or Enemies to the Governors; if Friends then
obliged by that bond; if Enemies then Christ's Command is to take place, who
says, Love your Enemies, which if observed, Persecution for Conscience will be
avoided. 18. Because Toleration of different Persuasions in Religion was
allowed in the Jewish State, as not inconsistant with their Safety, and that in
things contrary each to other, as the Sadduces, Pharisees, Esaeans, Herodians,
with others. 19. Because, the true Religion cannot be preached up by force of
ARMS, and the primitive Christians detested that Form of Proceedings. 20.
Because, no man has such power (by outward compulsion) over the Souls and
Consciences of other men, as to lay a necessity on them to believe that which
they do not believe, or not to believe what they do believe; true Faith being
the Gift of God. 21. Because, If the Magistrate imposes upon the Conscience,
he must either do it as a Magistrate, or as a Christian. Not as a Magistrate,
for then Heathens (being Magistrates) have the same power to impose; and so, by
Revolutions, and Conquests, may come to give Laws to Christians, and compel
them to Idolatry. 2. Not as Christians, for that contradicts Christ's saying,
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them but it shall not be so
among you for all ye are Brethren. 22. Because by the same Rule and Reason that
the Magistrates of one Nation ought to impose upon, and persecute for
Conscience, the Magistrates in all other Nations ought to do the same, and so
the greatest part of Mankind may come to be destroyed, there being more that
Dissent, than are at Unity in Matters of Faith and Religion. 23. Because the
strength of Truth, and its Conquest over Falsity and Deceit is best discovered
by letting both have their Liberty, from outward Compulsion; For no doubt, had
outward Force been less used, the prevalency of Truth had been more manifest,
and that wise Saying, truly experienced in the World, viz. That which is of God
will stand, and that which is not will come to nothing. 24. Because, the
Disciples of Christ are rebuked by him for desiring the Destruction of those
that were contrary to him, and would not receive Him; which zeal is sharply
reproved in his Saying, They knew not what Spirit they were of. 25. Because, to
impose upon men's Comciences, and to destroy their Persons for difference in
Religion. is contrary to the end of Christ's coming, who, says. He came not to
Destroy men's Lives but to save them. 26. Because, People of diverse Religions in
one Nation, it not tolerated, must some of them be destroyed or removed, by
banishment? If destroyed, the Constancy and Patience of the Sufferers for their
Faith, moving Pity and Commiseration, makes men more ready to own, then to
reject their Faith; and so rather mult plies, than lessens the number of its
Professors; if banished, this renders the Banished us so many Enemies abroad,
ready upon all occasions to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of their own
native Country. There is therefore in order to the outward welfare of all
Nations, a kind of necessity for a Toleration in them of all Religions. 27.
Because, to impose upon men's Consciences begets a hatred against the Imposers
in those who are imposed upon, and forced thereby to violate their Consciences
toward God, in matters of Worship. 28. Because, men are commanded to be
subject to the Powers that are, for Conscience sake, and therefore such Powers
ought not to persecute men for Conscience sake, being that is prescribed for
the Rule of Obedience, the Scriptures saying, Be ye subject not only for Wrath,
but for Conscience sake.
SECT. IX. Several Sayings collected from the Speeches, and Writings of King
Charles the First.
ANd we find asserted by King Charles the First, in his Book known by the Name
of EIKON ASILIK, as follows.

Page 67. In his Prayer to God, he said, Thou feast how much Cruelty among
Christians is acted, under the color of Religion; as if we could not be
Christians, unless we crucific one another. Page 28. Make them at length
seriously to consider, that nothing violent and injurious can be religious.
Page 70. Nor is it so proper to hew out religious Reformations by the Sword, as
to pollith them by fair and equal Disputations, among those that are most co
corned in the Differences, whom, not Force, but Reason ought to convince. Sure
in Matters of Religion, those Truths gain most upon men's Judgments and
Consciences which are least urged with Secular Violence, which weakens Truth
with Perjudices. Page 115. It being an Office, not only of Humanity, rather to
use Reason then Force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace, and ensue it.
Page 91, 92, In point of true conscientious tenderness, I have often declared,
how little I desire my Laws and Scepter should entrench on God's Sovereignty,
which is the only King of men's Consciences. Page 123. Nor do I desire any man
should be further subject unto me, then all of us may be subject unto God.
Concerning Oaths.
Page 76. The injoyning of Oaths, upon People, must needs in things doubtful be
Dangerous, as in things unlawful Damnable. Some words of Advice from CHARLES
the First, to the then Prince of Wales, now King of England, etc.

Page 165. My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you seriously consider the
former real or objected Miseariages, which might occasion my Troubles, that you
may avoid them, etc. Beware of Exasperating any Factions, by the Crosness and
Asperity, of some men's Passions, Humors, and private Opinions employed by you,
grounded only upon differences in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and
Subburbs of Religion, wherein a Charitable Connivance, and Christian Toleration
often Disipates their strength, when rougher Opposition Fortifies, and puts the
despised and oppressed party into such Combinations, as may most enable them to
get a full revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly
assisted by that vulgar commisseration, which attends all that are said to
suffer under the notion of Religion. Page 166. Take heed that outward
Circumstances and Formalities of Religion devour not all. Page 164. Your
Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather then exacting the
rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse then Legal Tyranny. To these
Sayings we add more, as Collected out of the same Book in Duodecimo.
IN his Prayer, Page 1. O never suffer me for any reason of State to go against
the Reason of Conscience, which is highly to fight against thee, the God of
Reason, and Judge of our Consciences. Page 121. Break in sunder, Oh Lord, all
violent Confederations to do wickedly and injuriously. Page 136. Thou, Oh Lord,
shall destroy them that speak Lies; the Lord will abhor both the Bloodthirsty
and Deceitful men. Page 164. Church Affairs should be managed neither with
Tyranny, Parity, nor Popularity -- neither people oppressed. P. 168. He
declares his willingness for fair satisfaction unto all, and against
Coverousness, and Superstition. Page 171. Oh thou that art the God of Reason
and Peace, soften our hearts -- and persuade us to accept of Pe^ce with thy
self, and both to secure and preserve Peace among our selves as men and
Christians -- Condemn us not to our passions, which are destructive both of our
selves and others; Clear up our Understandings to see thy Truth, both in Reason
as men, and in Religion as Christians. P. 180. Stir up all parties Pious
Ambitions to overcome each other with Reason, Moderation, and such Self-denial
as becomes, etc. Page 200. O thou Sovereign of our Souls, the only Commander of
our Consciences. And further, in his Advice to the Prince of Wales now KING,
etc.
Page 234. The best Government and highest Soveraignity you can attain unto,
is, To be subject to God, that the Scepter of his Word, and Spirit may rule in
your heart. Page 239. He pleads for better Arguments for Convincement, then
Tumults, Armies, and Prisons. Page 241. Always keep up sollid Piety, and those
Fundamental Truths, which mend both hearts and lives of men with impartial
Favor and Justice. Page 242. My Charge and Counsel to you is, that as you need
^o palliations for any design, so that you studdy really to exceed in true and
constant Demonstrations of Goodness, Piety and Virtue (toward the people) even
all these men that make the greatest noise and ostentations of Religion, so you
shall neither fear any detection, (as they do who have but the Mask of
Goodness) nor shall you frustrate the just Expectations of your people. Page
243. Use all Princely Arts and Clemency to heal the Wounds, that the Smart of
the Cure may not equal the Anguish of the hurt. Page 244. As your quality sets
you beyond any Duel with any Subject, so the nobleness of your mind must raise
you above the meditating any revenge, or executing your Anger upon the many.
Page 248. Keep you to true Principles of Piety, Virtue, and Honor; you shall
never want a Kingdom. In his Meditations on his Death; page 346. It is indeed a
sad fate for any man to have his Enemies to be Accuser, Parties and Judge.
SECT. X. Several Promises and Declarations for the Liberty of tender
Consciences, taken out of the Speeches of King Charles the Second.
IN the Kings Letter from Bredah, that was sent to the House of Peers, and read
in the House, May the first. 1660, and which Letter was ordered by the Lords in
Parliament assembled, that it should be forthwith printed and published for the
service of the House, and satisfaction of the Kingdoms; it is said in the Book
of Collections of the Kings Speeches Page 8, and 9. And because p^ssion an^
uncharitableness of the times have produced several Opinions in Religion, by
which men are engaged in Parties and Animosities against each other; which when
they shall hereafter unite in a freedom of Conversation, will be composed, or
better understood. We do declare a liberty to tender Consciences, and that no
man shall be disquieted or called in question for differences in Opinion in
matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Feace of the Kingdom, and that we
shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament, as upon Mature
deliberation, shall be offered to us for the fud granting that Indulgence.

And in the Kings Declaration, concerning Ecelesiastical Affairs, which was
dated October the 25th, 1660. it is said, In a word we do again renew what we
have formerly said in our Declaration from Bredah, for the liberty of tender
Consciences. That no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom; and if any have been disturbed in that kind, since our arival
here, it has not proceeded from any direction of ours. And it is said, we do
in the first place declare, Our Purpose and Resolution is, and shall be, to
promote the Power of Godliness, and to encourage the Exercise of Religion, both
in public and private. And in the same Declaration it is said, Our present
Consideration and work is. To gratify the private Consciences of those who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dispensing with
the omitting these Ceremonies.

In the Kings Speech to both houses of Parliament, the 8th of July, 1661. It is
to put my self in mind, as well as you, That I so often (I think so often as I
come to you) mention to you my Declaration from Bredah; And let me put you in
mind of another Declaration, published by your selves about the same time, and
which I am persuaded made mine the more effectual; An Honest, Generous, and
Christian Declaration, signed by the most eminent Persons, who had been the
most eminent Sufferers; in which you renounced all former Animosities, and
memory of former Unkindnesses. And my Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no man's
power to charge me, or you, with the breach of our words or Promises, which can
never be a good Ingredient to our future security.

And in the Chancellors Speech to both Houses, May the 8th, 1661. It is said,
He told you, but now (meaning the King) that he vallued himself much, upon
keeping his word, upon performing all that he promises to his People.

And also in the Kings discourse with Richard Hubberthorn, soon after he
arrived in England, he said, Well, of this you may be assured, That you shall
none of you suffer for your Opinions or Religion, so long as you live
peaceably, and you have the Word of a King for it; and I also have given forth
a Declaration to the same purpose. That none shall Wrong you, or Abuse you.

And further in the Kings Doclaration, dated December 26. 1662, wherein he
declares, first, his wonderful Restoration without the least bloodshed by the
Military Sword.

And he expresses his Clemency, or the Clemency of his Nature.

And he vindicates himself from diverse suggestions, of disaffected Persons,
particularly from that, of intending to subject Persons and Estates to revenge
or spoil, etc. and from intending to introduce a Military or Arbitrary way of
Government.

Also he expresses these words, as a malicius Scandal, viz.) That having made
use of such solemn Promises from Bredah, and in several Declarations since, of
ease and liberty to tender Consciences, instead of performing any part of them,
we have added streighter Fetters then ever.

And further adds, viz. We find it as artificially, as maliciously divulged
throughout the whole Kingdom, that at the same time we deny a sitting Liberty
to those other Sects of our Subjects, whose Consciences will not allow them to
conform to the Religion established, we are highly indulgent to Papists, even
to such a degree of countenance as may even endanger the Protestants Religion.

These, and such like, in the said Declaration are related as venomous
Insinuations, most false and malicious Scandals, wicked and malicious
Suggestions, and the Fomenters of them, as the most dangerous Enemies of his
Crown and of the Peace and Happiness of the Nation.

And these words are further added, (viz.)

It having been always a constant profession of ours, That we do, and shall
ever think our royal dignity and greatness much more happily and securely
founded on our own Clemency, and our Subjects Loves, then in their Fears and
our Power.

To give our People a Testimony of our founding all our security, rather in
their affections, then in any Military Power; the sole strength and security,
we shall ever confide in, shall be the hearts and affections of our Subjects
indeared and confirmed to us by our Gra^ious and Steady manner of Government,
according to the ancient known Laws of the Land, there being not any one of our
Subjects, who does more from his heart abhor (then we our selves) all sorts of
Military and Arbitrary Rule.

As concerning the nonperformance of our Promises; we remember well the very
words of those from Bredah, (viz.) We do declare a liberty to tender
Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon Mature deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full
granting that Indulgence. We remember well the Confirmations, we have made of
them since upon several occasions in Parliament; and as all these things are
still fresh in our memory, so are we still firm in the Resolution of performing
them to the full.

We do conceive our selves so far engaged, both in honor, and in what we owe
to the Peace of our Dominions, which we profess we can never think secure,
whilst there shall be a color left to the disaffected, to inflame the minds of
so many Multitudes, upon the scores of Consciences, with despair of ever
obtaining any effect of our Promises for their ease.

Such an Act, as in pursuance of our Promises the wisdom of our Parliament
shall think fit to offer unto us for the ease of tender Consciences.

We profess it would be grievous unto us to consent to the putting any of our
Subjects to death for their Opinions in matter of Religion only.

Our expressing according to Christian Charity, Our dislike of Bloodshed for
Religion only.

Our Parliament is an Assembly so eminent in their Loyalty and their Zeal, for
the Peace and Prosperity of our Kingdoms -- can no ways be doubted in the
performance of all our Promises, and to the affecting all those gracious
intentions, which God knows our heart is full of, for the PLENTY, PROSPERITY,
and UNIVERSAL SATISFACTION of the NATION.

We think to give them the most important Marks of our care: First, In
punishing by severe Laws that Licentiousness and Impiety, which we find to our
great grief, has overspread the Nation.

And lastly so to improve the good consequence -- to the advancement of trade,
that all our Subjects finding the advantage -- in that Prime foundation of
plenty, they may all, with minds happily composed by our clemency and
indulgence (instead of taking up thoughts of deserting their professions) apply
themselves comfortably, and with redoubled industry to their several vocations,
etc.

Also in the Votes and Advice of the House of Commons, Febr. 5. 1662. Upon
reading the Kings, Declaration and Speech, are these words, (viz.) And our
hearts are further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgiving when we consider
your Majesty's most Princely; and Heroic professions of relying upon the
affections of your People, AND ABHORING ALL SORTS OF MILITARY AND ARBITRARY
RULE, etc.

And in the Kings Declaration, March 15th 1671. Page 4. But it being Evident by
the sad Experience of twelve years, that there is very little fruit of all
those forceable courses.

And in Page 8. Its said, we do in the next place declare our will and pleasure
to be, that the Execution of all, and all manner of penal Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical, against whatsoever sort of Non-conformists or Recusants, be
immediately suspended, and they are hereby suspended, etc.

THE END

