New-Englands Sense, OF OLD-ENGLAND AND JRELANDS SORROWS.

A Sermon Preached upon a day of general Humiliation in the Churches of
NEW ENGLAND. In the behalf of Old-England and Jrelands Sad condition. By
WILLIAM HOOK, Minister of GODS Word at Taunton in NEW ENGLAND.

Entrusted in the hands of a worthy Member of the Honorable House of Commons,
who desired it might be Printed.

Imprimatur JOSEPH CARYL.

LONDON, Printed for John Ro^^^ell, at the Sign of the Sun in
Pauls-Church-yard, 1645.

NEW ENGLANDS SENSE, OF OLD ENGLAND, AND IRELANDS SORROWS.
2 SAMUEL: 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 6 And when the children of Ammon saw that
they stank before David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of
Beth-Rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of King
Maacha a thousand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand footmen.

7 And when David heard of it, he sent Ioab, and all the host of the mighty m^n.

8 And the Children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the
entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ishtob, and
Maacah, were by themselves in the field.

9 When Ioab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and
behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against
the Syrians.

10 And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his
brother, that he might put them in array against the children of Ammon.

11 And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me:
but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help
th^e.

12 Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and the
Cities of our God; and the Lord do that which seems him good.


THe occasion of this wars was this. Nahash the King of Ammon (he who once
demanded the right eyes of the Gileadites, and to lay it as a reproach upon all
Israel, upon condition of covenanting with them) is now dead. He had been, it
seems, a friend to David, in opposition, probably, to Saul who was an enemy to
them both. David looked at the expressions of his love, and left his heart to
him that searched it, accounting it an office of humanity to comfort him
concerning the death of his Father. His kindness is misconstrued by the
Princes of the children of Ammon, who detracting from the sincere intentions of
upright David, hasten to their King and fill him full of jealousy and
prejudice against David, as if he had not sent Ambassadors, but Spies; not
Conforters, but Traitors. The young King is overthrown in the entrance of his
government by evil Counselors, whose suggestions he receives in stead of the
comfort of David's Ambassadors, which cost him dear. His Counselors were
indeed his Traitors, not the Messengers. Alas, how fearfully is the King
misguided in the threshold of his reign, by such who should have better
advised him? It is well said of a Bishop upon these words; Happy is that
State, where both the Counselors are faithful to give only good advice, and
the King wise to discern good advice from evil.

But what does Hanun do? He takes the servants of David and shaves off the one
half of their beards, and cuts off their garments in the middle, and sends them
away. The news of it is brought to David, who sends to meet them; because they
were greatly ashamed, and he said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be
grown, and then return.

And when the children of Ammon saw that they stanke before David, they sent
and hired the Syrians, etc.

In the words, there is, first, A preparation for war by the Ammonites against
David. Secondly, David's addressing himself for an encounter.

In Ammons preparations, there is, First, The ground of it, which was; because
they saw that they stanke before David. Secondly, The hyring of Auxiliaries out
of Syria, and that at a dear rate, viz. For a thousand talents of silver, 1 Chronicles. 19.6.

In David's address for encounter, we have, first, his sending of Ioab, with
all the host of the mighty men. Secondly, The subtlety of the Ammonites, who
were so wise as to devide their forces, and to leave the Syrians to fight in
the open fields, whom they durst not trust at the entrance in of their Cities,
while themselves put the battle in array before the gates, that so also they
might (if need were) have opportunity to retire. Thirdly, The wisdom of Ioab
in ordering the battle the best way, in the strait he was in. Fourthly, a
covenant of mutual assistance between Ioab and Abishai, as need should
require. Fifthly, Ioabs words of encouragement to Abishai, yea and to himself.
Be of good courage, and let us play the men, etc. Which are the words that I
have especially looked at for the occasion of this day. But some things I shall
briefly observe in the way to them.

First, for the ground of Ammons preparations; They saw that they did stink
before David, by reason of the abuse they had done to his Ambassadors. Whence
we may observe.

Observation.

That Indignities and inhumane carriages to Ambassadors of Peace, is that which
will make the Enemies of GOD to stink in the nostrils of his People.

Do not expect a parallel text for proof, for such practices have bin very
rare till of later years. There is no sin but it stinkes in the nostrils of
God, but as for men, it must be very gross before it has so ill a savor; and
such are especially grosie sins against the second Table, as being committed
against the greater light. Of this kind I remember for the present but one more
in Scripture, and that was the bloody treachery of Simeon and Levi against the
Sechemites, to whom therefore their Father Jacob said, Ye have made me to
stink among the inhabitants of the land, Genesis 34.30. For such dealings are
against the light of blindest nature, especially such usage of Ambassadors,
whose name has ever bin honorable by the law of Nations.

Use.

First, This gives us to see one special cause why the Prelates in England do
this day stink in the rostrils of Gods people, yea of many such as have but
little Religion in them, there indignities and abuses offered to the Lords
Ambassadors have bin infinite and intolerable. Alas! what are the insolences
of Hanun here, to theirs? For first, He and his Ammonites never saw the tithe
of that light that these have done. Ammon saw not the light of Israel; nor
Israel the light of England. Secondly, those indignities done by Hanun, were
far inferior unto these. For first, He only cut the beards and garments of
these Messengers, whose beards grew out again at Jericho, and whose garments
might be changed for longer; whereas these have pared the Ears of the servants
of God, which can never grow again; and stigmatized the Faces with indelible
characters. And therefore, secondly, Hanun came not so near to the persons of
those Messengers, for he meddled only with beards and garments, the cutting
off of which shed no blood; whereas these have offered bloody indignities to
the Lords Ambassadors. Thirdly, those Ammonitish insolences brought upon
Messengers only a civil inconformity in hair and vestments to the manners of
Gods Israel: whereas the practices of these men have forced a Spiritual
conformity on Gods Ministers, to the manners of that great Strumpet and Mother
of whoredoms. Fourthly, David's messengers were abused only in Beards and
Garments; but these have been Convented, Suspended, Deprived, Degraded,
Excommunicated, Imprisoned, Impillored, Fined, stripped of all, Exiled, and
exposed to great extremities. Thus the indignities considered in themselves
were far inferior unto these. Thirdly, Hanun never sinned herein against
Conscience, as these have done; for he was misguided by his Princes, and so he
knew not that the Messengers were Spies: whereas the Prelates have offered
horrible indignities to many such of whose integrity they have themselves
first given ample testimony. Fourthly, Hanum did nothing obstinatly, for his
Nobles persuaded him; but with these, all the Noble men in the land could not
prevail with that Arch-Ammonite and his followers, to deal favorably with
the Lords Ambassadors. Fifthly, If we look upon the Messengers, Hanuns
inhumanitie was offered to the messengers of a mortal Prince, but these men
have most dreadfully abused the Ambassadors of the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth. For the Lord has sent his Messengers to England, and one they have
beaten, another they have killed, a third they have stoned; or that which is as
bad. Again, the Lord has sent more Servants, and they have done to them
likewise. Lastly, those were sent only to minister a little comfort to a man
who (it seems) had no great need of it; but these have been sent to publish
the Gospel of everlasting Peace to the wearied.

O monsters among men that these Prelates are, trained up by Tigers, whom no
incestuous offspring of Lot can parallel by a thousand degrees! that if such
Prodigies among men do this day stink in the nostrils, not of Israelites
only, but even Ammonites also, we have great cause of thankfulness, none of
wonder.

these noisome enemies of CHRIST and his Messengers; for seeing they are thus
unsavory, what are they good for? What use can there be made of unsavory Salt?
It is neither fit, says Christ, for the Land, nor for the Dunghill. It is
good, says he, for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under foot of men,
Math. 5.13. An unsavory Ammonite may be good either for the land or for the
dung hill. Moah was trodden down as straw for the dunghill, Isa. 25.10. But an
unsavory Prelate is good for neither, as being unsavorie Salt. The most noisome
Dung that is, is good enough for the dunghill; but unsavory Salt is not,
because it is so far from making barren land fruit-full, that it makes fruit
full land barren. And such salt are the enemies of CHRIST'S Ambassadors, that
wherever a Prelate has been cast, the place (though fruit full before) has
soon proved barren in Religion round about him. For as they have no favor of
life in themselves, they cannot endure either that Minister or People that
have: Oh what will become of them now, whom the very dunghill does reject? Who
shall lament for them now, saying, Ah my brother; or, ah Lord; or, ah his
glory, when they shall be cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem? As for
other men, though never so vile, or degenerous, that are still good enough for
the dunghill; men will find some mean employment or other to put them to. If
there be refuse people in a land, thou shall have a drum beaten up to call
them together, that they may be sent forth in some service against the enemies
of the land: whereas these want both ability and fidelity for such a service.
Yea, should they come and crouch for a piece of silver, or a morsel of bread,
saying, put us into the Priests Office, or as it is rendered after the Original,
put us into somewhat about the Priesthood, as much as to say, make Parish
Clarks of us, that we may eat a piece of bread; they are not fit for it, for
they cannot say, Amen, to the prayers of Gods people this day. They are not fit
to occupy any room in Church or Common wealth; they are not fit for Pulpit, or
Press, for Church Government, Counsell-Table, Parliament, Iusticeship,
Traffic, who have thus long traded only for the mother of Whoredom, and who
begin now to weep and mourn, because no man buyeth their Merchandise any
more, Revel. 18. 11. They are not then good for war, nor peace; for Prince,
not people; for Church nor State: only being wiser in their Generation, then
the Children of light, like that wicked Steward they have robbed and spoiled,
and feathered their nests, before they were turned out of their Stewardships,
as being conscious to themselves, that dig I cannot, and to beg they are
ashamed.

England, that he would purge the Land of this filth; for otherwise how noisome
will that Country be wherein there are so many unsavory creatures. Not that we
desire any other purging of them, then their deposing and repentance for their
horrible indig^aties, and inhuma^ities to the Ambassadors of the King of
Kings. And thus much for the grounds of Ammons Preparations to muster up Forces
against David, because they saw, that they stanke before him.

Secondly, we have their hiring of Auxiliaries to defend them in their
wickeduesse: They sent and hired the Syrians of Beth Rehob, and the Syrians of
Zoba, etc.

Observation.

When wicked men are come to that height of sin, that they stinck in the
nostrils of Gods people, they will rather dye, then confess and repent of
their wickedness.

We have the like example in the Benjamites against the eleven Tribes. And it
is made good this day in the Prelates against England. For whereas they should
have put on sackcloth on their loins, and ropes upon their necks, and gone to
the King and Parliament, saying; Your servants say (...) pray you let us live;
they have stood out rebelliously, and protested against Parliamentary
proceedings. Nay, their moneys have gone most profusely for the hiring of
Syrians, and the maintenance of wars against the Scots, calling it, Bellum
Episcopale; The Bishops War. It was 1000. talents of silver that the
Ammonites expended to hire help against the Israel of God, when first they had
offered them such a moustrous indignity: But how many thousand talents these
have disbursed and collected among themselves, and their Clergy, and Popishly
affected party, it is not easy for to say. For, The Angel of the Lord has
powered out his vi-all upon their Sun, and they have been scorched with great
heat, and have blasphemed the name of the Lord which has power over these
Plagues; and they have not repented to give him glory. REV. 16. 8. 9.

But whom now do the Ammonites hire? but a sort of flagitious Pagans, that
neither looked into the price of other men's blood, their own souls, or the
justness of the cause? A thousand talents have soon bought them to fight the
battles of the Devil against the Lord of Hosts.

Observation.

There is no cause so wicked or deplored, but money will hire some mercinarily
minded to abet, who will damn their souls for a little silver. And how many
such there have been even in the Christian world, the Prelates better know then
we. What forlorn creatures, Papists, Atheists, Neuters, and mongrell
Protestants, had they procured to fight against the Scottish Nation? When
wicked men are conscious to the insufficiency of their cause, they muster up
the greater forces, and place their affiance in the arm of flesh; that what
innocence here could not do, three and thirty thousand Pagans joined to the
forces of Ammon shall. But thus much shall suffice to be spoken of Ammons
Preparations, both their ground and helps.

David's providing to encounter them, we have, First, his sending of Ioab, with
all the Host of the mighty men. David, you see, is sencible of the horrible
abuses done to his Ambassadors.

Observation.

Indignities offered to Ambassadors, redound to their King, who cannot be
insensible thereof, especially, they being Ambassadors of Peace.

And thus it is with God; as it is written, The Lord God of their Fathers sent
to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending, because he had
compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: but they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose, and there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon
them the King of the Caldees, who slew the young men with the sword in the
house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or may den, old
man, or him that stooped for age; he gave them all unto his hand. 2 Chro. 36.
15, 16, 17. And now under the Gospel; when the Lord of the Vineyard sends his
servants to the Husbandmen, and the Husbandmen beat one, and kill another, and
stone a third; and when he sends yet more servants, and they do unto them
likewise; surely he will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out
his Vineyard to other Husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their
season. Matthew. 21. 33.

Belo^ed! CHRIST is this day sensible of all the abuses that have been offered
by the Prelates to his Messengers. How often has he cried from heaven if that
poor soul had not been utterly deaf, Laud, Laud, Why persecutest thou me? It
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Oh! CHRIST in his Messengers has
given his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that have plucked off the
hair; his beard has been cut, and his garments curtold by these Prelatique
Ammonites. The Messengers of Jesus have bin made a spectacle to the world,
Angels, and men; they have been made partakers of Christ's sufferings, and have
filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in their flesh, for
his bodies sake which is the Church. And is Christ sensible, and shall not
these Ammonites hear of it? Yes; for he is now awaking as out of sleep, and
like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of Wine; Ah! says he, I will ease
me of mine adversaries, and avenge me^ of mine enemies, and put them to
perpetual shame. But so much be said of this.

Ioab now approaching with his Forces; when lo, the Adversaries have cunningly
divided themselves, some standing at the entrance of the gates of the City,
the residue in the open field. Ioab a wise General, and prepared for
difficulties, forecasteth the best way of encounter, and fitting himself to
assault the Syrians, leaves the Ammonities to his brother Abishai, but with
this covenant of mutual assistance (for I must now put sundry things together)
If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me, but if the
Children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then will I come and help thee.

Observation.

When Gods Israel has to do with many potent, subtle, most wicked and
desperate enemies, they had need to enter into a covenant of mutual help and
assistance.

Abraham was confederate with Mamre, Eschol, and Aner, when he was to
encounter with the four Kings that had carried away his cosen Lot, prisoner,
Genesis 14. 13. 24. Yea, it is lawful for us herein to learn wit of an enemy;
For thus the enemies of Israel confederate themselves. Come, say they, let us
cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance. Yea, they have consulted together with one consent, and are
confederate against Israel; the Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of
Moah, and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalech, the Philistims, with the
inhabitants of Tire; Assure also is joined with them, they have helped the
children of Lot, Psalm. 83. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And in the days of Ahaz it was
told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim, Isa. 7. 2.

And this covenanting in case of opposing many, powerful, cunning, wicked,
desperate Enemies, is very requisite; Seeing a Kingdom divided cannot stand,
which firmly united by confederacy is not easily vanquished, when every man's
interesses are another, and the same engagements common unto all. And this
Antichrist knows well enough; for he being set forth most lively under the
Type of Antiochus Epiphanes in the 11.th of Daniel, his heart is said to be
against the holy Covenant, verse. 28. by and by he is said to have intelligence
with them that forsake the holy Covenant; yea, and to have indignation against
the holy Covenant, verse. 30. And such as do wickedly, against the Covenant, He
is said, to corrupt by flatteries, verse. 32. Mark these expressions. His heart
is against the holy Covenant. His very heart rises at the name of Covenant,
and Covenanting, and Covenanters, and those are the most odious people with him
in all the world. Yea, he has indignation against the holy Covenant. He could
tear it in his teeth; the very gall of bitterness rises in him at it. And
with whom has he intelligence, but with them that forsake it? They are his
Counselors, that either fall off from the Covenant, or are learned to
declaime and rail against it. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant,
he corrupts by flatteries. If there be any who are more malicious then others
against the Covenant, and the Covenanters, who will go about to break the
League, to raise Arms, to hatch Treasons, to confound Kingdoms, Commonwealths
and Parliaments, and to bring all things into combustion, that he may fish in
troubled waters, O these are his white boys, these he smooths and strokes,
and flatters, these shall have Prebendaries, Bishopticks, Cardinals Caps, and
great preferments, etc. And no marvel, for these Covenanters is the ruin of
Antichrist; for he could never have been, if the Covenant had been kept, his
Babel can never be built where men keep close to God and one another.

Use.

First, this shows us the wonderful goodness

First, in uniting the Honorable Nation of the Scots by Covenant against the
Prelates, in their late defense against their Tyranny. Which how powerful and
successful it was, we may easily see, not only by the carriage and issue of
things on their parts, but also by the continual attempts of the Prelates to
have divided them.

Secondly, In the firm brotherly Union of England and Scotland, as it were of
Joab and Abishai; and that too, by such an occasion, as the Prelates hoped
should have engaged them in blood, the one against the other, like Manasseh
against Ephraim, or as if Ioab and Abishai should cut one another throats.

Thirdly, In uniting both houses of Parliament, they having to do with such
Ammonites and Syrians. It is such a knot, that the very Sword of Alexander, we
hope, shall not easily cut asunder.

A Kingdom united into one body, will endure a mighty shock. Men standing
single are soon jusled down, most difficult, when they are all imbodied into
one.

Fourthly, In uniting the hearts of all the Churches in this Land to one
another, and all of them this day to our dear Country, in opposing the common
Advers^ry. F^r what has England said to us of late? If the Papi^s, Prelates,
and Atheis^s be too strong for us, th^n you shall help us; and if at any time
the enemy be too strong for you, we will help you. O let us all enter into
Covenant with England, to live and dye against these Ammonites and Syrians.

Israel of God, need to enter into Covenant with the Lord of Hosts, in opposing
such an Adversary. What is a Politic to a Religious Covenant? When the
Israelites fled, and fell before the men of Ai; the Lord gives the reason of it
unto Joshua, Josh. 7.11. Israel has finned, and they have transgressed my
Covenant which I commanded them; for they have taken of the accursed thing,
etc. Where by the way, you may see how nearly this Covenant uniteth, that what
one does, (which the rest might with circumspection have prevented) is imputed
to them all. The Lord will never have need to say to England, or to us, If the
Malignant party with their Cavaliers be too strong for me, then shall you help
me; but we shall have need so to say to him; and therefore we had need see
that we be in covenant with him.

And where a people are in Covenant with God, and cleave only to him, having
cast away whatsoever is displeasing to him, he enters himself presently the
General of all their forces, leads their Armies, and fights their Battails.
And then who can be against us? For one shall chase a thousand, and ten, ten
thousand; because their Rock will not fell them, nor the Lord shut them up. And
so much for the Covenant of mutual assistance.

We are now come to Ioabs words of Encouragement: wherein we have; First, an
Exhortation. Secondly, a Resignation. An exhortation to be Valiant in fighting
the Lords Battles; and a Resignation of their wills into the Lords hands.

First, of the Exhortation. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our
people, and for the Cities of our God. And here we may observe the grounds of
their encouragement, viz. They were to fight for all that they had, or were;
God, and their Country; Church, and State; souls and bodies; their own, and
others.

Observations.

When Religion and Policy, Church and Commonwealth lie at stake, Gods people
had need to encourage themselves, and one another.

Therefore we shall find, that when the people of God were to go to battle
against his enemies, both the Lords, the Priests, and the Officers, did ( All)
give them encouragement, Deuteronomy. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The place is
pregnant to this purpose, and worthy our reading. Excellent are the words of
Nehemiah to this point, Neh. 4.14. He said to the Nobles and Rulers, and the
rest of the people, Be not afraid of your Enemies; remember the Lord which is
great and terrible, and fight for your Brethren, your Sons, and your
Daughters, your Wives and your Houses. They were to fight for the Lord, whose
cause was then in hand; and for the Commonwealth, and each man's private
interesses: therefore says he, Be not afraid of your Enemies.

Use.

viz. A way of undaunted courage and resolution, as if they should say to one
another, as once those Trojans, The only way to safety to the Conquered, is to
turn desperate. Some may think they transgress their limits; No, for how can
they take less courage to themselves, who being beset behind and before with
Syrians and Ammonites, are to bestirre themselves for their people, and the
Cities of their God. God and England, and every Shire and City in England, do
this day cry out unto them, saying; Be strong and of a good courage, be not
afraid, neither be dismayed; for the Lord your God is with you whithersoever
you go. Therefore let us not only have high thoughts of them, and such as are
always Honorable, but magnify the Lord who has put such resolutions into
them.

Joab sound in our ears this day. Be of good courage, and let us play the men
for our people, and for the Cities of our God. Beloved! I cannot but look upon
the Churches in this Land this day, as upon so many several Regiments, or
bands of Soldiers lying in ambush here under the fearn and brushet of the
Wilderness, like the liars in wait beside Gibeah, against the wretched
rebellious Benjamites. I know we are little dreamt of at this time in any part
of Christendom, our weapons being as invisible to the eye of flesh, as our
persons are to all the world. So much the better; we shall fight this day with
the greater safety to our selves, and danger to our enemies; among whom, I am
confident in the Lord, thousands shall fall, and never know who hurt them. We
arrogate nothing to our selves; for if the weapons of our warfare are mighty,
it is not through us, but through God. But if the Israel of God would have
thought of a way of quickest discomfiture to the adversary, what course could
they have taken better, then to have divided their Forces, and to have sent
some to lie in wait in the wilderness, to come upon the backs of Gods Enemies
with deadly Fastings and Prayer, murderers that will kill point blanke from
one end of the world to the other. Here then is our station, therefore be we of
good courage, and let us play the men at this time; and first, For our God. For
he is ours, Beloved, and we trust he is Englands: and shall we see our selves
bereft of him? Can the Israel of God endure to see Idols and Idolothites to
stand in his place, and Dagon to be exalted above the Arc? If Israel be
robbed of their God, what have they more? What are the people, or Cities, if
they be not the people and Cities of our God? They are even like the world
without the Sun. God therefore and Religion lie at stake; and therefore let us
play the men.

Pharisees? How have the Scriptures been wrested? The Word profaned in
Pulpits? Christ fought against, with the word of his own mouth? Doctrines of
Devils maintained with pretense of Scripture? The Messengers of Christ
persecuted and hunted like Partriges upon the Mountains; for holding sorth the
Word in his native luster? O deliver the Word of God out of this Captivity! The
Seals of righteousness cry alowd to us this day; They crave reduction to the
rules of the Gospel. Every Ordinance pleads for vindication, traveling in
pain under the captivity of beggarly Rudiments. O, say they, we have been
dealt forth these many scores of years under Gospell-light, in such fulsome
forms, that men abhor the offerings of the Lord. Oh! The Whore has
quaffed, and made herself drunk with her Pandors, and Paramours, and with her
cunning and unclean Merchants, in the vessel of the Lords Sanctuary.

Beloved! Let us hold; and hear no more of these sad complaints; for who can
have pitic, and patience too? Have we the blood of Protestants in us? Does the
spirit of JESUS run in our veins? It is enough: We cannot want courage, nor
but play the men for God and pure Religion. And if any people under the Sun,
who more then we, whom the gracious hand of heaven has asserted from that
spiritual bondage, under which we once did groan? It is a truth, we saw but
little in comparison of what now we do, when we left our Native homes; as much
it is not that yet we see, tho, blessed be the Lord for what we do. But is
there any people in the world who have tasted more of the sweet of God, and
Christ, and Ordinances, then we in this Land have done? Do any know the price
of God and Christ, more then we here? I beseech you in the Lord, Consider, and
let the spirit of Christ rise in you at this instant, and wrestle and strive
this day in Prayer; let us loose a joint with Jacob, but we will be Israelites
this day. Let us play the men according to the knowledge, fence and experience
that we have of God and Christ. Let us halt to our dying day, but we will
return laden with the spoil of Rebels.

Secondly, as Gods worship lies engaged, so Joshua to God upon the day of
afflicting his soul? What shall be done to thy great Name? When the Ministers
of the Lord were to weep between the Porch and the Altar upon the day of their
fasting, they were to say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them; wherefore should
they say among the people, Where is their God? Then will the Lord be jealous
for his Land, and pity his people, as it follows. And shall not this
argument then move us, which ever prevailed with the Lord? Moses, Joshua, the
Priests, no sooner urge Gods glory, but the Lord answers them.

Oh! how then has Gods honor been laid in the dust by those Prelates, who now
with their honors begin to lie there themselves? What insultings have they
used? What triumphs have they often led? And as if they had bound our Christ
like Sampson, and put him to grind in the Prison house (as in some sense they
have.) Oh! how have these Lords of the Philistims gathered themselves together
to offer sacrifice to their Dagon, to burn Incense to their Drag, to their
power, their Policies, Prelacies, Confederacies, Conjurations, Superstitions,
and so rejoice? Saying, Our God has delivered Christ our enemy into our hand,
the destroyer of our Prelacies, who slew many of us.

And thus, could they but get the day again, they would say, and Dagon should
up as high, and CHRIST be thrown down as low, as ever. And can we endure so
much as the thought of it? The Lord forbid. O let us play the men for our God,
and our Christ, whose glory is more worth then ten thousand worlds of souls. O
let us set to it this day with all our courage; let every vein, and joint, and
limb, and affection in us, pray this day; O Lord God, remember thine honor,
we pray thee, and strengthen us, we pray thee, that we may once be avenged on
these Philistims against their Lords; for our two eyes. Yea, as Sampson said,
Let me dye with the Philistims: So, let us dye with these Philistims, if need
were. Let us kill our selves with fasting and prayer, to destroy them, and to
pull down the Temple of their Dagon, all the fabric of the Hyrarchie, upon
the heads of these superstious Prelates.

Thirdly, Let us consider how inglorious a Nation when the Arc was captivated,
the glory was departed from Israel. The Ark was the testimony of Gods presence;
so that when God does not testify his presence with a People, they are without
glory. If the World be beautified by the presence of the Sun, so great glory
attend the Court where the King is resident: How does the special presence of
the Prince of the Kings of the earth, beautify that Land where it is? Yea,
there is not only a spiritual glory, visible only to a spiritual eye,
resulting from the special presence of the Lord among a people; but also an
external, and visible glory. When Iehoshaphat walked in the first ways of his
Father David, and lift up his heart in the ways of the Lord; and that a great
Reformation was wrought in the Land, and that he had spread the Word all over
his kingdom; it is said, That he had riches and honor in abundance; and The
fear of the Lord fell upon all Kingdoms of the Lands that were round about
Judah, so that they made no war against Iehoshaphat. Yea, the Philistims and
Arabians brought him great presents, insomuch that Iehoshaphat waxed great
exceedingly, and he built in Judah, Castles, and Cities of store; and he had
much business in the Cities of Judah; and the men of War, mighty men of
valor, were in Jerusalem. So that Judah had abundance of external glory,
even the glory of riches, and honor, and power, and greatness, and peace, and
homage from foreign States, and of great emploiments, and of mighty men of
valor. Wherefore, seeing God is come nearer to England, then formerly, and
has of late made such gracious tenders of himself, and has found better
acceptance then formerly; O let us conclude in daily prayer, and this day
especially, for his presence to be continued, and more clearly manifested then
ever. For if he should now withdraw again, we are to expect no glory to rest
among them. You know how little honor has been visible in that Land of late
years; It has for a long time been a Land of sorrow, of mourning, and not of
joy and rejoyceing. It has not been called Naomi, but Marah; it has not been
a Crown of Glory, nor a Royal Diadem in the hand of the Lord; but been termed
for saken and desolate. But now the day has begun to dawne, yea, the Sun
seems to be ris^n on it, if it strike nor in again, and a Tempest ensue upon
it; which the Lord forbid. O why should we give the Lord any rest, till it be
called Hephzibah, and Beulah, My delight is in her, because she is married to
the Lord. For when once a Land is joined to the Lord, he is married to it, and
then his delight is in it, and he will cloth it with honor and glory. And
thus much for the first ground of the Exhortation.

Secondly, the other is the State and Commonwealth, All the Foundations of the
Land are out of course, Psalm. 82.5. The Heavens, Sea, and dry Land have been
shaken, and there has been both a Church-quake, and a Statequake in that Land,
which has removed Foundations, and swallowed up both people and Cities. For
when Foundations are not only shaken, but out of course, and removed, what
have people, and Cities to stand upon? There is no man in such a case, who can
say, I stand upon sure ground, I fear no colors, I am able to bear out my
just actions. For if they should say, we will have recourse to our Foundations;
alas, they are out of Course, they are removed, and none knows where to find
them.

Beloved! It is a fearful thing to have but the foundation of an house
undermined, the corner stones removed, and the pillars pulled down; but when
whole Cities, and Towns, and Shires of people, shall be undermined, and near
blown up, oh how dreadful is it? When a People who can say, We are Romans,
neither did we buy our freedom, but are the lawful and legitimate heirs of
Liberty, shall be scourged uncondemned; and when Cities that were formerly
Cities of Refuge, where the afflicted might find succor under municipall Laws,
shall be invaded by destroyers; what cause have men to do as David and his
followers, when they had recourse to Ziklag, thinking to have found shelter
there; but lo, the City was burnt, and their wives, and sons, and daughters
taken Captives? Even lift up their voices and weep, until they have no more
power to weep. When a man may say as David; In the way wherein I walked, they
privily laid a snare for me: I looked on my right hand, and behold, there was
no man would know me, refuge failed me: this is miserable. For a man thinks
himself safe in his way, and if he be in the Kings high way, he thinks much to
have a snare laid for him; and none but Cutters will way lay a man there. For
Edom to assault Israel, when they promised to walk on, only in the Kings high
way; O barbarous and inhumane! Numb. 20, 17, 20. But when a man shall be
assaulted in such a case, and he looks on his right hand, and on his left for
help, and can see none, then his purse, if not his throat is endangered. Surely
it is uncomfortable traveling in such Countries.

Brethren! Liberty is more precious then life, inasmuch as death is the common
lot of all men, but servitude the portion only of men destined to misery. And
if a people be sold for bondmen, and bondwomen, what can countervaile the Kings
damage? And seldom is it, that cruelty rests satisfied with bondage, but makes
his progressions to further degrees of blood. When people and Cities cannot say
Municipia, but Man^ipia, what remains but death; as when the Ephramites could
not pronounce Shibboleth, but only Sibboleth, presently they dyed for it. If
goods and liberty be in the power of men's wills, why not also life? There is
much comprised in people and Cities, even all that is Politic, Oeconomick, or
Private; but I instance only in the greatest mischief. Let us therefore use
the words of Queen Hester unto Ahasuerus, and direct them unto God. If we have
found favor in thy sight, O Lord, and if it please the King, let our lives be
given us at our petition, and our people at our request; for our people are
sold to be destroyed, and slain, and perish.

If any say, How are we concerned in the miseries of other men, so long as we
are free. I say, It touches us, as Lots captivity touched Abraham, who mustred
up his men, and took his confederats along with him, Mamre, Eshcol, and Aner,
and delivered him out of bondage. And if we forbear to deliver them that are
drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if we say, we knew
it not or what did it concern us? He that pondereth the heart confidereth it,
and he will render unto us according to our works. Prove. 24.11.12. Wherefore
Let us play the men for our people and Cities. What though it be well with us?
Let us yet remember the afflictions of Joseph; yea, and the words of Joseph to
Pharaoh's Butler; Think upon me when it shall be well with thee; and show
kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and
bring me out of this house. For thus in effect speaks England and Ireland to us
this day, and all the Cities in them; now that it is well with you, think upon
us, and show kindness unto us, and make mention of us unto the God of heaven,
that we may fully once be delivered out of the house of bondage. Oh, says such
and such a City, there are so many thousand souls in me, who cannot discern
between the right hand and the left.

But if it be not well with them, how can it be well with us? If the Arc, and
Israel, and Judah, abide in tents, and the people of God are encamped in the
open fields, what comfort can we have in our houses, food, or wives? What
though we are so far from them in place? The needle in the Compass is never
quiet till it points to the North, at a thousand times greater distance.
Affections touched with grace, stand firm from one end of the World to the
other. Nehemiah's heart stood right toward Jerusalem, when he was in Persia;
and though he was not in an humbling Wilderness, but an alluring Palace,
even in Shushan, yet Jerusalem came into his mind. For when Hanani, and
certain men of Judah came thither to him, he asked them concerning his
brethren that were left of the Captivity, and concerning Jerusalem. And when
they told him of the great affliction and reproach, he sat down and wept, and
mourned many days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, Neh. 1.1,
2, 3, etc. Wherefore let that Word of the Lord sound often in our ears; Ye
that have escaped the Sword, go away, stand not still; remember the Lord a
far off, and let Jerusalem come into your minds. Ier. 50.51. And though we
have but a day, or two, wherein to join all our Forces in the Land together,
and to give the Adversaries a broad side; Yet let us now and then make
excursions by our selves in private, now that the Lord calls for help against
the Mighty. Are we not all the Voluntary of JESUS, whose People shall be
willing in the day of his power? neither is there any restraint unto the Lord,
to save by many, or by few; by whole Churches, or by single persons. Let us
therefore be often adventuring by our selves, like Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer against the Philistims. If ever we afflicted our souls, let it
be in these days; for we may partly understand by Books the number of the
years which God will accomplish in the desolations of Jerusalem. So that, we
set our faces unto the Lord God, to seek by Prayer and Supplications, with
Fasting, Sack cloth, and Ashes. There is at this time a great battle between
Michael and the Dragon, and the Angels. The Beast and the Kings of the earth,
and their Armies have gathered themselves together to make war with the
Lamb. All the Principalities, and Powers, and Rulers of the Darkness of the
World, and Spiritual wickednesses in High places, are up in Arms this day,
and there is scarce a Devil left behind in Hell. If ever therefore, now Let us
quit our selves like men; the weapons of our Warre-fare are not Carnal, but
mighty through God. Let us pray against them, as Moses against Amalek; and
Preach against them, as the Priests under the Law, when the Host went out
against the Enemy; and sing against them, as Iehosophat and the men of Judah
did against Moah, Ammon, and Edom; and live against them, as it is written,
When the Host goes forth against the Enemy, then keep thee from every wicked
thing. Deuteronomy. 23.9. Every Ordinance of God is a deadly murderer. O let us walk
and sleep in our Armor and never be unfurnished of promises touching the
confusion of Babel, and her builders. Let the cause of God affect us deeply,
and the people and Cities of our God be always in our eyes. And let the
desolations of Christendom awaken us to frequent Prayers, and constant
sympathy; and the blood of Gods people (particularly) in Ireland, be to us as
the blood of Grapes and Mulberies are to Elephants, to provoke them to fight.
Oh those incarnate Irish Devils! let them be often in our sight. Their
blasphemies, their burnings, their robberies, their rapes, their rostings,
their strippings, rippings, hangings, drownings, dis-membrings, butcheries, the
very shambles of the Devil erected in Ireland, would be always in our eyes and
ears. And yet when we have done all, let us refer the issue to the Almighty,
saying; Let the Lord do what seems him good. The last thing, is their
resigning up their wills into the hands of GOD; whereof a few words, and I end.

Ioab is not wanting in the use of all means to obtain victory, yet looks
above them, and refers the issue to the Lord of Hosts; teaching us, Doctrine.

To neglect no means of Victory, yet to depend upon the Lord only for a
gracious issue.

For there is no trusting in our bows or swords, it is the Lord that saves us
from our enemies. It is not the race to the swift, for then Ioab knew that his
brother Asael had not dyed by the hand of Abner. Neither is it the battle to
the strong, for then he knew, that Goliath should never have fallen by the hand
of David. The Horse is prepared against the day of Battle, but victory is of
the Lord.

Vsc.

David did. He had a Catalogue of all the mighty men, 2 Samuel 23. and now too,
he will have a list of all the Soldiers in his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 24. He
Idolized the carnal strength of Israel, and remembered not the Word of the
Lord, which said, When thou take the sum of the children of Israel, after
their number, then they shall give every man a ransom for his soul unto the
Lord, that there be no plague among them, when thou numbrest them. Exodus
30.12. Let us remember England in this particular; It lies under great
temptations to this kind of Idolatry. The Union of the two Nations, two Houses,
all (or most) of the Shires by Petitioning for Reformation, the settling of the
Warrefare of the Kingdom at Sea and Land, the mervellous wisdom, and
undaunted resolution of Parliament, their success in many matters, the eyes of
many on them, and the applause that is given them, besides whatsoever other
temptations, and arms of flesh; may soon solicit the hearts, even of the
godly, much more of others, to carnal confidence, that they may never lift up
their eyes unto the hills from whence comes their help.

Sisera, Midian, Goliath, Senacherib, Zerah, fall by their carnal props; when
Barak, Gedeon, David, Jonathan, and Asa, resting upon the Lord in the use of
small means, return victorious. Two days weeping and fasting was little
enough for the eleven Tribes to gain the day of Benjamin. O let not Gods
people rest in Council, Number, Courage, Ammunition, but in the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, Let not us then place any affiance in

Lastly, Let us lay our hearts this day in the Lords hand, as once Eli and
Hezekiah being threatened, as here Ioab ready for the onset, did. The People of
God, both in old England and new, have waited on his providence both by earthly
and heavenly means. Now let the Lord do what seems him good. If it shall
seem good to him, that England, Ireland, or Scotland, shall suffer yet further,
the will of the Lord be done. What remains, but for us to magnify Gods
justice, and to put our mouths into the dust? Especially, (as for England)
considering how long the Prelacie has fought against Christ, and kept him out
of his Kingdom: What bloody brazen-faced Idolatries have bin committed there?
What Atheismes, Blasphemies, Adultery, Prodigies of pride, grinding of faces,
selling of the Poor, countenanced Sabbath breakers, derision of holiness,
shedding the blood of the Saints, have been common in that Land; and in a
special manner, considering the sins of Gods dear people there,
particularly of his Messengers in their lon^ continued subjection unto the
power of Antichrist, in the Prelacy, the warpings and shrinkings of some, the
fearefulnes and cowardice of many (for which, for mine own particular, I desire
to be humbled while I live) the reading of that abominable Book of cursed
liberty, contributing to the Superstitious Pompousnesse of Paul's, and to the
raising of Forces against the Scots, (a dreadful bloody sin) reading, or
permitting to be read, Proclamations, and Prayers in the Churches against them.
I say, considering all this (to mention no more) though we have used what
means we can, and though they should do the like, yet let our expectations of
success be low, let us humbly submit our selves to the will of the Lord,
saying; Let him do what seems him good. If it seem good to him to pardon the
Land, O blessed be such gentleness; If otherwise it seem good to him to
correct it, blessed be his justice. What soever he does, is good; therefore
let him do it. And any mercy at any time, is enough for great transgressors.

FINIS.

