A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Witnesses, Relating to the TIME, PLACE, and MANNER
of their being Slain.

BY WILLIAM HOOK, late Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood, for Thomas Cockeril at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market, 1681.

Quest. I. Whether the Witnesses are Slain?
I Dare not be definitive and peremptory in making answer hereunto, being
conscious to much darkness in my self about the understanding and unfolding
matters Apocalyptical, and knowing also that there are many difficulties
attending the Answer of this Question; I shall therefore humbly lay before you
what the Scripture speaks, and leave it to you to consider and conclude as
the Lord shall help you. And in order to what I shall say, there is something
that I would premise, and it is this: That in the slaughter of the Witnesses
there is that which carries a great analogy and proportion to the death of
Christ, the consideration whereof will much help us in the Answer of the
Question; but I mean not a complete and adequate proportion, but as to many
remarkable Particulars.

The sufferings of the Church are a great part of the subject matter of this
Book of the Revelations, especially under the Seals and Trumpers, till you come
to the last Woe, which is objectated chiefly on Antichrist: And these Sufferings
were partly under the Pagan Roman Empire, partly under Rome Antichristian; and
the sufferings of the Saints under both are the sufferings of Christ mystical,
and are so expressed as bearing a great proportion and likeness with the
sufferings of Christ personal.

The first of these sufferings of Christ mystical we find, Rev. 12.1, 2, 3.
etc. where it is said, The Woman being with Child, cried, traveling in Birth,
and pained to be delivered. The Woman here is the Church, and the Child that
she travelleth with is her Seed, which is Christ mystical, whose Sufferings by
the great Red Dragon ( i. e. the Devil in the Roman Pagan Empire) do, in many
things, Mr. D^^^ on Rev. 1^
as a Learned Interpreter has observed, allude to the sufferings of Christ
personal when he was born. 1. In that Christ was a Child born of a Woman under
many outward wants, so as the condition of the Church is commonly. 2. In that
Herod did watch to destroy Christ so loon as he was born, and as Paraoh
(several times called a Dragon) sought to destroy the Jews Male-Children as
soon as they came into the world. 3. As Christ when he was born, was soon put
to flee into Egypt with his Mother; so it is here with the Church and her
seed, they flee into the Wilderness. 4. The foresaid Author affirms, that the
time of Christ's being in Egypt was three years and an half, which (in the
mystery) is the time of the Church her Wilderness condition: For Christ (as my
Author affirms) was born in the thirtieth year of Herod's Reign, but he fled
not presently, but was first circumcised and his Mother purified, after which
also Herod sought to destroy the young Children in and about Bethlehem: This
took up some part of Herod's thirty first year, and Christ returned out of
Aegpyt immediately after Herod's death, who reigned thirty four years. 5. As
Herod vented his malice upon the Bethlehemitish Infants after the flight of
Christ; so does the Devil here vent his malice upon the Church her seed after
her deliverance and flight. 6. As Christ was still preserved till he had
finished the work committed to him, notwithstanding all the opposition he met
with, but after that he suffered and was slain; even so it happens to the
seed of the Church. Thus you see how the sufferings of Christ mystical under
Rome Pagan, do in many things answer to the sufferings of Christ personal.


Secondly, Let us consider the other part of the sufferings of Christ Mystical
under Rome Antichristian, and we shall see their conformity to the sufferings
of Christ Personal, especially in and about his death.

It is said (you know) Rev. 11.8.
that the doad Bodies of the Witnesses shall lie in the Street of the great
City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified. Which last words are added, not only to discover under what power
the Witnesses should be slain, viz. that of Rome, spiritually called Sodom and
Egypt; but also to show us the conformity that should be between the slaughter
of Christ and his Witnesses. And yet we must not expect a complete analogy and
proportion between them, for in some Circumstances they differ, but in several
material ones they do agree.

1. Christ preaches forty two Months, literally taken; the witnesses prophecy
as long, taking forty two months Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6.
prophetically and mystically. 2. Christ is slain when he had finished his
Testimony, and could not by any means be slain before; so it is with the
Witnesses, Rev. 11.7. 3. Christ is slain by the Rev. 11.8. with Luke 18.32 33.
Gentiles, grammatically and properly so taken; and the Witnesses are slain by
the Rev. 11.2, 7.
Gentiles, metaphorically so taken. 4. Christ arose after three days,
figuratively taken, i. e. part being put for the whole: His Witnesses arise
after three days and an half, prophetically taken, i. e. three years and an
half. 5. Christ's Sepulcher was guarded to keep him down in his Grave, and
hinder his Resurrection, Mat. 27.64.
which his enemies could not bear the thoughts of: In like manner the enemies
of the Witnesses endeavor to keep them down by power, and so to bury them (but
that they are hindered) that they might never rise again. 6. When Christ was
crucified, presently begins the Jews Passover, where his Enemies rejoiced
together and made merry, because Christ, who had tormented them was crucified:
Rev. 11.10.
Even thus deal the Enemies of the Witnesses when they are slain. 7. Christ
arose notwithstanding the Soldiers who guarded his Sepulcher, and when he arose
they were woefully skared at the sight of him: Rev. 11.11.
Even so it is at the Resurrection of his Witnesses. 8. When Christ arose there
was a great Earthquake, properly so called: So, not long after the Resurrection
of the Witnesses, there is Rev. 11.13.
a great Earthquake, mystically and metaphorically so called.
This Analogy thus premised, I shall express to you what the Scripture says
concerning the slaughter of the Witnesses, that you may make your Collections
from it as the Lord shall help you.

1. The Rev. 2^.8, 9.
Text seems to hold forth such a slaughter of the Witnesses, as is partly
civil and partly spiritual: For were the slaughter literal and proper, the
enemies of the Witnesses would not have endured their dead Bodies to have lain
so long unburied in the Street, because of the noisomness thereof; nor would
Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations have hindered their burial, from the
Principle of mere Humanity. And therefore this their death must be of another
kind, and that is partly civil, the Witnesses being deprived of their liberty
and free exercise of their Religion by humane Laws and Constitutions; whereupon
their death becomes also partly spiritual, in that their Spirits faint and fail
so far, that they are bereft of spiritual Life and Courage; the spirit of Life
is greatly withdrawn from them, and they are possessed with great fear and
faintness. And that this is the manner of their death, appears, in that upon
their Resurrection it is said, that the spirit of life from God entered into
them, which clearly signifies, that during their slaughter, they were deprived
of spiritual life and activity. You see then what kind of death this of the
Witnesses is, partly civil and partly spiritual, civil as to the outward means,
slaying, spiritual as to the inward man, slain.

And if it be thus, then we are not to account the great slaughter of the
Saints in other Countries, viz. Germany, Holland, France, Piedmont, England in
those Marian days, to be this slaughter of the Witnesses, because those
slaughters were properly such in a literal sense, and the Saints so slain were
buried in a proper sense.

2. The Text tells us, Rev. 11.7.
that the Witnesses must finish (or be in finishing) their Testimony, before
they can be slain; that is, they must be finishing it, 1. As to the time or
period of their prophesying, viz. at the end of 1260 years, a day being put for
a year. 2. As to the matter of their Testimony, or the thing to be witnessed by
them.
And therefore begin the Epoch and rise of their Prophesying where you will,
you fail in the commencement thereof, if the 1260 years do not determine and
conclude in the finishing of the matter of the Testimony, which is to be
insisted upon as much as the period and conclusion of it. And from hence again
I gather, that all your former slaughters in other Countries, cannot be that
mentioned here, Rev. 11.7. because the Testimony of Jesus was not materially
finished in any of them, no nor in finishing.

When therefore is this Testimony finished, (...). A^^.
as to the matter of it?

When the whole Office of Christ's Mediatorship is testified unto; that is, not
only his Prophetical and Priestly, but also his Kingly Office, When Antichrist
wrought, as it were under ground, during the sounding of the four first
Trumpets, he opposed the Person of Christ by those ancient blasphemous heresies
of the Arrians, Nestorians, Eutichyans, Macedonians, etc. But since the
sounding of the first Wo-Trumpet, he has more especially opposed his
Mediatorship, which the Witnesses have still asserted to this day. And this
Testimony of theirs must be complete, and conformable also to that of Christ
himself, who finished his Testimony 1 Timothy 6.13.
when he witnessed a good Confession before Pontius Pilate: And what was that
Confession? You may see in Joh. 18.33-38. where he asserteth and avoucheth his
Spiritual Kingdom before the Roman Governor, and therein he finished his
Testimony; for he was put to death upon that very account, as appears hereby;
in that when Pilate said unto the Jews, Joh. 19.6, 7, 12.
Take ye him and crucify him, for I find no fault in him: Say the Jews, We
have a law, and by our Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God. I say, this did not move Pilate at all, but rather affright him from
meddling with Christ, and cause him to attempt his release; for Christ must not
die upon the confession only of his Person, that he was the Son of God.

When the Jews therefore perceived that this would not prevail with Pilate,
they cried out, saying: If thou let this man go, thou art nor Caesar's Friend;
whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar. Ay, now Pilate is put
hard to it, and sits down again upon his Judgment Seat, and says to the Jews,
Behold your King: But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, Crucify
him: Pilate says unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The Chief Priests
answered, We have no King but Caesar. Then Pilate delivered him to be
Crucified. The Jews were weary enough, as we know, of the Roman Yoke, and had
no cordial zeal for Caesar, save only when he comes into competition with
Christ, who must dye upon the point of his Kingly Power and Government, where
his Testimony was finished. And upon the same Confession, must the Testimony of
his Witnesses be completed. And hence, again, I conclude, that all the former
slaughters in other Countries, cannot be (upon this very account) the slaughter
of the Witnesses spoken of, Rev. 11.7 -- because those that suffered, dyed not
upon this Confession.

3. When the Witnesses are slain, it is the act of the Beast, as the same Text
tells us: which word Beast, as applied to Antichrist, you shall sometimes find
mentioned in the Revelations, Rev. 1^.1, 4, with 11.
as distinct from the two horned Lamb that speaks like a Dragon; Rev. 17.7.
sometimes you will find the Beast distinguished from the Woman that sits upon
him; Rev. 16.13. and 1^.2^.
another time you will find him distinguished from the false Prophet. And when
you find it thus, then by the Beast we are to understand the secular power of
Antichrist; and by the two horned Lamb, the Woman, and the false Prophet, we
are to understand his Ecclesiastical. But when we find the word Beast mentioned
alone, as it is in the slaughter of the Witnesses, then it holds forth his
complex Power, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. This being so, you here find this
complicated Power of the Beast in the slaughter of the Witnesses, who must be
slain by both these Powers. And though the Ecclesiastical is included in the
word Beast, when it stands alone; yet the Secular Power has the pre-eminence
therein: For it may so fall out, that when the Witnesses are to be slain, there
may not be so much power in the High Priest and his Followers, as to do it of
themselves; their former Power, perhaps, may be diminished, insomuch that they
must crave the help of the secular Officers to perform this work for them, like
as the chief Priest and Elders did of Pilate; and this civil power must exert
it self, and make Laws and Decrees for the slaughter of the Witnesses. It is
therefore the Civil or Secular Power (employed here more immediately in the
Beast) that must commit this slaughter. True, the earnest Votes, fervent
Affections, and utmost Endeavors of the two horned Lamb, the scarlet Whore,
and false Prophet, will be found in this Slaughter, as the Ecclesiastical Power
was accessory to the killing of Christ Personal; but as it was Pilate's Secular
Power that struck the great stroke; so must the Secular Power be especially the
Instrument in the death of the Witnesses.

4. There must be a Rev. 11.7.
particular, eminent and signal War waged with the Witnesses by the Beast, when
they are to be slain.

For there is a clear distinction between the Beasts war with the Saints, and
his war with the Witnesses when they are to be overcome and killed by him. As
for his war with the Saints, it commenced with the beginning of his Reign, as
is apparent, Rev. 13.4-8. And this war runs through the whole Reign of the
Beast unto the very time that the Witnesses have finished their Testimony;
after which there Rev. 11.7.
begins a distinct particular war with them; otherwise why is it said, That
when they have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends out of the
bottomless pit, shall make war with them, overcome them, and kill them? For it
may be said, the Beast has been at war with the Saints ever since he first
arose. True; but this last war of his with the Witnesses, is more particular,
eminent and signal, as directed especially against them, and not generally
against all the Saints, as his former wars were, by which he rose still higher
and higher, whereas after this particular and last war of his with the
Witnesses, he descends, and falls still lower and lower, whereof I shall
speak more hereafter. By his first wars Rev. 13.7.
he got power over Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations; whereas when he has slain
the Witnesses, the Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations shall dislike his doings,
and hinder his attempts to bury them.

It being thus, hence it will follow, that in this last war, the Ministers of
the Gospel, and the Churches ( Rev. 11.3, 4.
who are properly the Witnesses) must be the special object of the Beasts
opposition. As for the rest of the Saints, they shall escape this civil
slaughter, that is, they shall fare better, the enemy shall not fight with
small nor great, save only with the Witnesses; I mean, the heat of the Battle
shall fall especially upon them, they shall be sadly handled, others shall not
be so strictly looked after, the weapons of the Adversary, viz. his Edicts,
Mulcts, Fines, Counsels, Menaces, Searchings, Apprehensions, Restraints,
Confinements, Impoverishments, Banishments, etc. are principally directed
against them; they shall be sought after and carried away, when others shall
better escape. So that this war (you see) is distinct from that general long
lasting war against the Saints spoken of in the thirteenth Chapter.

But are not all the people of God Witnesses, Quest.
especially when they profess and practice against the Beast?

Yes, Answ.
in a large sense, but not in the strict meaning of the word in this eleventh
Chapter. And among all the Saints, the Martyrs of Jesus may best be called
Witnesses, for so the word signifies; but the Witnesses that we have here to
do with, are (as I humbly conceive from the Text) Ministers and Churches of
Christ.

5. The Witnesses must be slain, Rev. 11.2.
not in the streets, but street of that great City; that is, not in all places
under the power and dominion of the Beast, but in some one particular Province
or Nation, which has not (at least fully) cast off and renounced his Interest.

It must be such a Nation in which Jesus Christ does not Reign visibly, but the
Government thereof is subservient to the Beast, at least as to the end and
issue of the work, if not also as to the intention and scope of the workers.
And yet it is not totally immersed in Popery, because there is a plentiful
Testimony therein given against it, else how should the Witnesses be slain
therein?

But what Street may this be? Quest.


I will not define particularly; only it is some remarkable Street, Answ.
because there is (...)etc.
an Article, in the Original, prefixed to it, as much as to say, that Street.
And when this Street is afterward mentioned under the notion of the tenth part
of the City, both the tenth part and the City have this Article of Eminency set
before them: (...); Ver. 13. Now it is eminent either in relation to the
Witnesses that have formerly lived in it, and especially that live in it
immediately before the Slaughter; i. e. It must be a Nation eminent for its
Testimony against the Beast, and for its Testimony for Jesus Christ and his
Kingly Power in and over the Churches, which is the special matter of their
Testimony for which they are slain; or else it is eminent, as belonging to the
Beast in a special manner. And in both these respects (as says a worthy and
learned Writer) this Street is no other but Germany: But I do rather fix upon
the first of these respects, because that Testimony is the point upon which the
Witnesses are slain, and no other eminency can be found in the Text; though
peradventure, there may be some other Country besides Germany, which has been
very eminent for its relation to the Beast, and which has afforded him no
small revenue and support.

It therefore concerns us to consider, what Country and Nation has been
most eminent for its Testimony for Jesus Christ and his complete Mediatorship:
For though Germany has been famous for its Witnesses, in their generations,
yet the eminency of the Witnesses must lie, not in the number of them that give
the Testimony, but especially in the clearness and completeness of the
Testimony given; I say, The Street must excel in that respect, which will not
be found in Germany, but rather in some other Country, in which the Kingly
Power of Christ in and over his Churches, has been testified both by Doctrine
and Practice; and if you can find out that, you have found the Street. And,
peradventure, when you have found it, you may find also that such a Street may
better brook the Prophetical and Priestly Offices of Christ, than his Kingly
Power and Government: I say, better, though you may not find a full and cordial
approbation of either; but as touching the Kingly Office of Christ, that will
in no wise be admitted, but pertinaciously rejected, upon this apprehension,
that Christ and Caesar cannot consist, Joh. 18.36.
though Christ has said the contrary; but the pride of man will not endure it.

You see, partly, what a Street it must be in which the Witnesses must be
slain. And by this you may further see (by the way) what it is in Reformations,
not to make through work: For such a Street (I conceive) it will be, that is
not discharged from subjection to the Beast, but is subservient to his
Interest, though it may not be professedly cordial to him. But what then is it,
you will say, not to go through stitch with Reformation? It greatly gratifieth
the Devil^ who, when he sees that there is still a remnant of Idolatry and
Superstition unpurged, presently he marks use of that for the continuance of
that persecution which before was grounded upon other Cau^es, which are now
removed by a partial Reformation. For such a persecution must necessarily be in
such a Nation, or else how could the Witnesses be slain there? So dangerous and
dreadful a thing it is, not to do as J^holad^ did after the death of that
wicked woman Athaliah; (...) Kings 11.18.
for he caused the people to break the Altars and Images of Baal in picces
thoroughly.

But (to return) the Witnesses you see must be slain, not in the Streets, but
Street, i. e. in some one remarkable Country under the power of the Beast, and
which has not cast off his Government, though yet there must be so much of
Protestancy, and Testimony against Papal Usurpations and Impositions, and for
the Kingly Power of Christ in and over his Churches, as will be a fit object
for Persecution even unto the slaughter of the Witnesses.

I know there are such as like not to have this slaughter so narrowly confined,
whereas the Text is express for some particular Street; And there seems to me
to be reason for it, why it should be thus limited. 1. Because if the slaughter
should be in all the Streets of the great City, i. e. in all the Countries
under the power of the Beast, there would be a very large Testimony, and the
Witnesses would be numerous, who (in respect of their paucity) Rev. 11.3.
are here said to be two. For the Testimony must be but little and narrow when
the Witnesses are slain, as it was never very large before. 2. If they were to
be slain in all Countries where the Beast has to do, where should we find
those Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, that must hinder their Burial? For as
concerning these hinderers, they seem to be a middle sort of people, such as
neither like the slaughter of the Witnesses, nor yet are full for the Testimony
of the slain; but are of a mungrel kind, and stirred up by a worldly interest
to hinder the Burial of the Witnesses.


They aim not herein at Reformation, nor at the exalting of the Kingly
Government of Christ in the Churches, according to the rule of the everlasting
Gospel, but are wholly swayed herein by Principles of State. Now I say, if the
Witnesses were to be slain in all places under the Beasts Dominion, where
should we find out so many Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, so and so qualified,
as might suffice to hinder the Buryal of the Witnesses?

Again; That it is not to be a general slaughter in all Countries, but only in
some one particular, here called the Street, I shall demonstrate by a further
Argument.

In order hereunto, we must know, that this Street is that which in Rev. 11.13.
is called the tenth part of the City; for that Verse is coupled with the
precedent, as belonging to the same Story of the Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of the Witnesses, and as Vindicta divina d^testium inimi^is. Pisc. in
Rev. 11.13.
Piscator observes, there is expressed in it, the revenge of God upon the
enemies of the Witnesses, and I cannot ^ee how it should be otherwise
understood. Hence then I thusargue:

Where the revenge of God is inflicted for the slaying of the Witnesses, there
(and there only) are the Witnesses slain.

But the revenge of God is inflicted only upon the tenth part of the City for
the staying of the Witnesses; therefore in that tenth part only are they slain.

For the God of Revenges, in the execution of Judgment for such and such sins,
does not exceed the limits of the Place and Persons offending; he will not
punish the Innocent for the sins of the Delinquent, nor one Place for the
iniquity of another. And yet I cannot but say, that the whole City is vertually
guilty of this slaughter, as being not only guilty of the like, but also as
approving of this. But God has Rev. 16.18.
another guess Earthquake in store for the whole City, ( i. e. the whole Papal
Dominion) which shall destroy it all totally and for ever. This Earthquake (
Rev. 11.13.) reaches only the tenth part.

I might further enlarge upon this point (which is of great moment as to the
purpose in hand) by pasing through the several Streets of the great City, and
rationally considering which of them is most likely to commit this Martyricide,
as I may call it; especially weighing withal what the Testimony must be upon
which the Witnesses must be slain, viz. Such as asserteth and exalts the
Kingly Power of Christ in his Churches, as you heard but now in the second
particular.

Now this being granted, that the Witnesses must be slain in some one
particular and eminent Street, and not in all the whole Dition and Dominion of
the Beast; it will follow, that the former slaughters which have been committed
in many Countries, and near about the same time, are not the slaughters that we
are here enqui^ing into. For I have read of many hundred of thousands slain in
several Countries for the Testimony of Je^us, about the year 1540. and
afterward for some years; but 1. They were slain in a proper sense. 2. Not upon
the point of the Kingly Power of Christ; and therefore the Testimony was not
finished when they were slain. 3. Their dead Bodies were buried, nor did any
hinder it. 4. They have lain dead above an hundred years, and are not like to
rise again till the Resurrection at Christ's coming; whereas, if the death of
the Witnesses is proper, so must also their Resurrection be.


6. When the Witnesses are slain, they must be looked upon by their enemies, as
it were naturally dead, so dead in law, as if they were also dead in body. This
may be gathered from Rev. 11.8, 9, 10. For the Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations,
could not so look upon them, if their enemies did not so behold them; nor could
their dead Bodies lie dead in the Street, and their enemies there living not
look upon them; nor would the dwellers upon earth rejoice and make merry at
their death, did they not account them so dead, as that they would never rise
again; for did they but fear their Resurrection, it would mar their mirth, as
the Hand Writing on the Wall did Belshazzar's; because if the Witnesses did
torment them before they were slain, O how would they excruciate them to the
very death, should they but rise again! And hence it is, that their enemies
will not be contented with the death of the Witnesses, except also they be
buried, and therefore they attempt their interment, but that they are therein
hindered: so that this attempt to bury them is not out of any love to them, but
merely out of hatred, fearing lest they should rise from the dead; for they
will never think them dead enough. To this end, they will make one Law after
another, and throw upon the slain Witnesses one Edict after another, as they do
upon dead Bodies when they throw one shovel-full of earth after another,
saying, Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, etc. only not in sure and certain hope
of the Resurrection of the Witnesses to life again. And this multiplying of
Laws upon them, is (interpretatively) their attempt to bury them.

7. There shall be no humane help, nor Arm of Flesh employed in their
Resurrection, this shall be wrought only by the Spirit of Life from God entering
into them: Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord. If any
liberty should be procured by force (which ought not to be) it will not
prosper, nor will any attempts that way. The Resurrection of the Witnesses
shall be like a Resurrection, wrought only by the omnipotent hand of Heaven,
even by him in whose power alone it is to raise the dead, and to call things
that are not as though they were. It is true indeed, when the Earthquake
comes, which follows soon after the Ascension of the Witnesses, there will
be great Concussions in that Country, whatever it is, where the Witnesses must
be slain; but who shall be the Authors of them and Actors in them, I do not
know; but as for the Resurrection it self, it shall be effected immediately by
the Spirit of Life from God, who will certainly blast all humane attempts by
Conspiracies and Insurrections in order (or rather disorder) to the
Resurrection of the Witnesses.

Men were as good go about the raising of the dead out of their Graves, as to
raise the slain Witnesses by humane endeavors. When the Israelites were even
upon the point of their Resurrection out of Egypt (which was not complete till
they arose out of the Red Sea; Ex. 15. compared with Rev. 15.2, 3.) what says
Moses to them? Exodus 14.13, 14.
Fear not, stand still and see the salvation of God -- The Lord shall fight for
you, and ye shall hold your peace. And yet the Israelites at that time were
Exodus 13.18.
harnessed, marshalled, and prepared with Arms; and they used them not long
after this their Resurrection Exodus 17.9.13.
against the Amalekites at Rephidim; but at their Resurrection there must not
be a Sword drawn, nor a stroke struck; but as Jahaziel said to Jehosaphat and
the men of Judah, 2 Chr. 20.17.
Ye shall not need to fight in this Battle, set your selves, stand ye still and
see the salvation of the Lord with you. Thus (should I live to the Time, and in
the Street of the Resurrection of the Witnesses) would I say, and as Moses also
said to the Israelites (who would needs go up uncalled, and fight against the
Canaanites,) Numb. 14.41.
Wherefore now do ye transgress the Commandment of the Lord? But it shall not
prosper; Go not up, for the Lord is not among you, that ye be not smitten
before your enemies: Yet they would presume and go up, but the Amalekites and
Canaanites smote them and discomfited them even unto Hormah. Ex. 17.
When they had a call to fight against the Amalekites, they conquered them; but
when they will fight with them uncalled, they are smitten by them.

Quest. II. What if we should see such a Slaughter, as symbolizeth much with
that here, ver. 7, 8, etc. And yet when the three years and half are ended,
there appears little or nothing in view, agreeable to such a Resurrection as
the Text here holds forth, ver. 11, 12?
Answ.

HEre lies the difficulty, that (as I said in answer to the former Question
the last time) I dare not be positive in determining whether the Witnesses are
slain or not; only I laid before you what the Scripture says concerning their
slaughter, and left it to you to consider: And the same course I shall take at
present in answer to this Question.

But before I come to the Answer, I shall premise a Position or two.

1. That there must not only be a Resurrection of the slain Witnesses, but such
a Resurrection al^o as is here described, for the Scripture cannot be broken.
It is not enough that there is an answerableness of things in the death of the
Witnesses, to prove their Slaughter; but there must be the like in their
Resurrection also, or we can conclude nothing. Every Slaughter has not been
the S^^nght^r, and so every Resurrection is not that Resurrection; And to hold
forth that which is like the death of the Witnesses, but to fall in the
Resurrection, will not amount to satisfaction.

2. This Resurrection of the Withesses must be homogeneal, and of the same kind
with the Slaughter, (...) If the slaughter be partly civil and partly
spiritual. so must also the Resurrection be, and not proper and literal; for
those Bodies can never rise from a natural death, which were never deprived of
their natural lives. These Positions premised, I proceed to the Answer.

1. Negatively, I shall not answer as some have done, who say, that after three
days and (...) the witnesses shall arise, but how soon after it is not said.
(...) not answer thus, for this were ponere Resurrectionem (...) smite
Resurrection, without an, determination of time; and ^o to what purpose would
the Text in hand ^^rve? Or what comfort thould we have from it more than this,
that there shall come a time when the witnesses shall arise? For as Martha said
to Christ, of her dead Brother (...), I know that he shall arise again i^ the
Resurrection at the last day; all her doubt was, whether Christ would raise him
then, John 11.24. Even ^o might we say of the slain Witnesses, if their
Resurrection here had (...) been mentioned at all, We know that they shall rise
again^: yea, but when shall they arise? After three days and a^ half, says the
Text; therefore the time is determined. For in these words there is the Ep^^^^,
(...) O^^^inal or beginning of time from whence the Re^urrection does commerce
and proceed, i. (...). presently after the expiration of the said (...) of
their death. For the time of their Witnessing had, 1. Its Epo^^^^, though (...)
dark and difficult to discover it. 2. Its Continuance, (...)
like manner the time of their slaughter has. 1. (...) and ^egi^ning, and term
from whence to reckon; and 2. Its (...) c^^^^ance, v^z. three years and an
half: And shall not (...) ^^ction also have a certain fixed beginning?
God is very pun^^^^ (...) as to his times and seasons, though our darkness
knows not how to discern it, as you may see, Exodus 12.40, 41, 42. It came to
pass at the end of the 430 years, even the self same day it came to pass, that
all the hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt: It is a night to be
much observed, etc. it is doubled and trebled to show us Gods exactness in
keeping time.

2. I shall not answer according to that Notion of some others concerning three
years and half, i. e. three years (say they) and half three years for the words
in the Original are these, (...) i. e. say they, after three days and half,
leaving out the word an; so that they reckon the time to be three years and
half three years, i. e. four years and an half. But this answer will not hold:
For, 1. There are three notable Numbers in the Revelations, relating to the
sufferings of the Church, viz. 1260 days, and 42 months; and time, times, and
half a time, i. e. three years and an half: For so many days are so many
months, and so many months are so many years, a day being put for a year; so
that there is a singular answerableness in these numbers, and therefore if we
extend the three days and an half ( i. e. three years and an half) to four
years and an half, we break the proportion and correspondence that is between
these three numbers. 2. How will this notion hold, if at the end of four years
and an half, there should be no more show of a Resurrection, than there was at
the end of three years and an half? I come therefore to an Affirmative Answer.


First. There are several Resurrections mentioned in the Scriptures.

1. The Resurrection of the Soul from the death of Sin to the life of Grace,
(...) 5.25. Ephesians. 2.1. 2. The Resurrection of the Body at the coming of Christ,
1 Thessalonians. 4.16. And the^e two Resurrections are in instanti, or in a very short
and quick time, as it is said of that great change, 1 Cor. 15.52. In
th^^twinkling of (...). 3. There is the Resurrection of the Jews at their
Conversion, ^for so it is calied, Ez^k. 37.12, 13, 14. Romans 11.15. 4. The
Resurrection of the Witnesses in my Text. And these two last are not so peedy
as the two former, but have their gradual Process and ^e^^ral ^ucceeding steps.
For, as touching that of the Calling or Resurrection of the J^ws. 1. There is a
noise. 2. A shaking. Ezekiel. 37.7.-11.
3. A coming together of Bone to Bone. 4. Sinews and Flesh coming upon them,
and skin ^^ve^ing them. 5. The breath of Life coming into them. 6. Their (...)
upon their feet as an exceeding great Army.
So for the raiting of the (...): 1. The Spirit of Life from God enters into
them. 2. They fraud upon their feet. 3. They hear a great voice from Heave,
saying, Come up hither.

Secondly, I answer, that the Resurrection of the Witnesses seems to answer to
the coming of the Children of Israel our of Egypt, for spiritual Babylon is
called spiritual Egypt, ver. 8. Which Deliverance was a kind of Resurrection,
as appears from the resemblance there made to Abraham in a vision, Genesis 15.9,
10, 11. Now the Children of Israel arose our of their bondage by degrees, for
their Resurrection was not complete till they rose out of the Red Sea, and sang
the song of Moses, Ex. 15. For till then they were not quite free from the
^^yptians. They made several steps out of Egypt to the other side of the Red
Sea, viz. from Rameses to Succoth, from Succoth to Etham, from Etham to
Pihahireth, from P^hahiroth to the red Sea, Numb. 33.5-9. And therefore that
remarkable day spoken of, Exodus 12.40, 41, 42. is not to be understood of
Isreal's complete Resurrection, but that day was remarkable for the beginning of
it.

3ly. There is a great Analogy between literal and spiritual Babylon, and the
coming of Gods people out of that, and of the rising of the Witnesses and their
deliverance from this. Now the people of God arose gradually out of literal
Babylon. For 1. When the seventy years of their captivity were fulfilled, Jer.
29.10.-15.
the Text tells us, that they must call upon the Lord, and go and pray to him
and seek him; and search for him with all their hearts, and then he would be
found of them; then they should do it, i. e. at the end of the 70 years. This
then was their first motion in their Resurrection; they must first of all rise
upon their knees.

And Daniel did his part in this Calling, Praying, Seeking, Searching. And when
did he do it? In the second year of Darius the Son of Ahasuerus of the seed of
the Medes, in which he was made King over the Realm of the Chaldeans, Dan. 9.1.

This then was after the accomplishment of the 70 years, because the Kingdom of
the Chaldeans was now at an end. For note what Jeremy says, It shall come to
pass when 70 years are accomplished, that I will punish the King of Babylon;
and that Nation, says the Lord, for their iniquity, etc. Jer. 25.12. It is
apparent therefore that the 70 years were now ended, and that the time of the
Jews deliverance was come; and yet (you see) after that very time did Daniel
thus call, pray, seek, and search. This (I say) is remarkable, as also, that
after this time it was, that our Lord Jesus Christ (the Angel of the Covenant)
made intercession for the deliverance of his people, Zach. 1.12. Says he, O
Lord of hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these threescore and
ten years? God therefore seemed to delay a while, some may say, after the 70
years were ended, that our Lord Jesus says, How long, when the years were
expired. Yea, but God did not delay one moment, Hab. 2.3. for the Jews
Resurrection was now begun, for they were upon their knees, and Christ was
interceding for them and in them. The Spirit of Life from God acted this way in
them in their first motion; their rising was somewhat like as when a man rises
out of his bed, and falls down upon his knees by his Bedside and prays. If
any man now should enquire and say, is such a man risen? it might truly be
affirmed that he is so, though he be down upon his knees at present. Isa.
26.1^9.
It was prophesyed of the coming of the Jews out of Babylon, that their dew
should be as the dew of the herbs, and that the earth should cast forth her
dead: Their Resurrection out of Babylon should be like the Resurrection of
Herbs in Spring, which arise out of the earth by degrees.

And also when they did come out of Babylon, they came not out all at once, but
at several times; some of them in the first year of King Cyrus, upon the
Proclamation which he made, Ezr. 1. Others in the Reign of Artaxerxes, came out
with Ezra the Scribe, Neh. 2. and 7.7. -- which was 13 years after Ezra's
coming forth. Neh. 2.1. with Ezr. 7.7, 8.
Ezr. 7.1. -- Others with Nehemiah, in whose days also the bondage was not
quite ended, Neh. 9.36, 37. So that it was upon that account also a kind of
gradual Resurrection or coming forth.

It is true, there was liberty of returning granted by Proclamation in the
first year of King Cyrus, but there fell in certain impediments that hindered
both the speedy progress of their coming forth, and also of their carrying on
of Religion when they were come unto Jerusalem, for fear was upon them, Ezr.
3.3. and much opposition they met with for some years; for the people of the
Land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building,
and hired Counselors against them, to frustrate their purpose all the days of
Cyrus King of Persia, Ezr. 4th 5th, and 6th Chapters.
unto the days of Darius the King thereof. They had still very many Adversaries.

For Military Occasions withdrew Cyrus, who left the Government to his Son
Cambyses, who proved an Enemy to the Jews, and to the building of the Temple:
He did not second his Farthers Proclamation of Liberty, but rather hid it in
the House of the Rolls, insomuch, that it was at last quite forgotten, as you
may see Ezr. 5.13. with 17. and chap. 6.1, 2. Note therefore what is said, Dan.
10.1 -- In the third year of Cyrus King of Persia, a thing was revealed unto
Daniel, and the thing was true, but the time appointed was long -- In those
days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks, I ate no pleasant bread, neither
came Flesh or Wine into my mouth, etc. It seems he understood of the
oppositions which were made by Cambyses and his Emissaries against the work of
God at Jerusalem, even in the third year of King Cyrus, who gave the Jews their
liberty in his first year. Ezr. 4.
And upon this occasion Daniel humbles himself greatly, and waits to know
the mind of God, and what he purposed to do with his people: And our Lord Jesus
Christ appeared to him, and showed him a great Vision, which astonished him
very much, and made him to fall down upon his face, and he was cast into a deep
sleep, his face being toward the ground.

And now behold, an Hand touched him which set him upon his knees, and upon the
palms of his hands; afterward Christ said unto him, Stand upright, for unt^
thee am I sent; and when he had spoken this word, Daniel stood trembling.
Christ could have set him upright upon his feet at once, but I have sometimes
thought whether our Lord Jesus did not hereby show unto Daniel, the gradual
manner of the Je^s Re^urrection out of B^bylon; for 1. They did lie in B^bylon
as it were in a deep sleep on their faces, as Isalah prophesying of their
coming out of Captivity, says, Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust. Isa.
26.19.
2. They arise but in a gradual manner, viz. upon their knees (as it were) and
the palms of their hands. 3. They stand upright, but trembling; and therefore
as if the Lord Jesus should bid Daniel not to be so much dejected, the people
of God, for whom he was thus solicitous, should stand upright in good time.
This (I have thought) is the intendment of Christ in this Vision, and of what
befell the Prophet under it; s^eing it is likely that Jesus Christ would
instruct him by the Vision and the Effects of it, concerning that business
which lay most upon his Heart. Now to come to our purpose.

Even thus the Witnesses are dead asleep in the dust. 2. The Spirit of Life
from God enters into them, and they rise first on their knees and palms of
their Hands, and there they stick a while, a^ l^^^ they stand upright but
trembling, and then they begin to gather strength by little and little, till at
last their en^mies begin to stand trembling, and are afraid to look upon him,
as we shall bear, ver. 12.

Thus the Resurrection here will be gradual, and (which is more) not be the
business of a few days, though in my Text it is comprehended in a very few
words.

You know what vast Histories are contained in the second and seventh Chapters
of Daniel, and in other also of his Visions, which are but short and brief in
the Reading. And thus it is with very many Histories in the Scriptures which
are expressed with very great brevity. That which the Apostle speaks of
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and of what did then hinder his visible appearance, and what he speaks of his
Wickedness, Revelation, Consumption, Destruction, contains many Centuries of
years above a thousand, and is the sum of most that is contained in the Book of
the Revelations, from the sixth Chapter to the End; In which Book how are large
Stories contained in a very small compass? The large History of the ten
Persecutions lies in a narrow Room in the sixth Chapter; the Tyranny and power
of the Turk, and how he has been a Scourge to the Antichristian World, lies
within the one half of the ninth Chapter, etc.

For it is in this Book, as in a small Map of the vast World, wherein very
great Countries are described in as narrow a compass as the breadth of your
hand: And in the S^ale of miles which you see in the bottom of the Map, the
miles seem to be very short, but he that travelleth them shall find them very
long. And therefore I conceive we are much mistaken, when we think that the
entering of the Spirit of life into the Witnesses, and their standing upon their
feet, and their ascending in a Cloud, are matters that fall out suddenly, and
that follow close one upon the heels of another. The slaying and rising of the
Witnesses is a great part of that Story which is contained under the sixth
Trumpet, which sounds several hundreds of years, and yet you see not many
things expressed during the time of its sounding.

Lastly, That the rising of the Witnesses will be gradual, is apparent by the
gradual fall of the Beast; for they cannot rise faster than he falls, like as
in two Well-buckets, one cannot ascend faster than the other does descend.

Autichrist, you know, has been long ascending to his height, and his Vertical
point is at the time of the slaying of the Witnesses, after which he will rise
no higher, but begin to descend, yet so as that it will not be presently
discerned, no more than the declining of the Sun is forthwith observable after
his height in Summer; there is a Solstice, or a stay or stand (as it were) of
the Sun for a time after the longest day, before the declension thereof is
visible: For even thus it is with the Kingdom of the Beast after the rising of
the Witnesses: And when that Kingdom of his does decline visibly, it will not
fall suddenly, but God will first begin with a tenth part thereof, verse. 13. as
a pledge of the ruin of the whole City under the seventh Trumpet, which will
sound presently upon the back of the fall of the said tenth part. But the
descending of the Beast to his Center, i. e. till he be cast into the Lake that
burns with fire and Brimstone, will take up many years, during which time the
Church will still be ascending. And therefore we must not think that when the
Witnesses begin to arise, they will presently (no nor in a few years neither)
rise up to their height; for they must ascend as Antichrist descends, and
that is, gradually.

And by this we may collect, that it is a mistake in such as think, that when
the Witnesses begin to arise we shall have Halcyon days, in which the Saints
shall begin to ride as it were in Triumph, and see sorrow no more. For surely
their life from the dead will not presently become the death of the Beast;
only, after a while, when he perceives that the Cause of Christ is in a rising
way, he will be sorely affrighted, as here verse. 12. But great troubles will
follow this Resurrection after a short time; for the tenth part of the City (
i. e. of the Beasts Dominion) will not fall easily, as the walls of Jericho
did, without striking of a stroke; there will be somewhat to do in the
execution of the Vengeance of Gods Witnesses, which will shake the power of the
Beast so far, that he shall lose the tithe of his Dominion. There will be
nothing but woeful stirs and shakings, till it be come to Armageddon. For when
the Beast perceives himself falling, who has stood, and that strongly, these
many hundreds of years, he will rage like the Angel of the bottomless Pit,
Quoniam ad septimum clangorem principatus Christi maxim eminet, ad ho^ tempus
praecipuus furor totius Pontifici^e nationis reservatus est. Joh. Bright. in
locum.
so that Hell it self will be moved, and break loose to help him.

You know what is said here after the sounding of the Seventh Trumpet, The
Nations were angry, etc.

Christ's Kingdom will begin to shine forth at the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, and therefore the special rage of the Pontifician Nation is reserved
unto that time. And if it be thus under the Seventh Trumpet which allarums the
Beast more especially, how will it be under the sixth Trumpet, which is the
saddest of all the Trumpets to the Church and People of God? And what a
fearful Farewell will it have? For it will not cease sounding presently after
the rising of the Witnesses, seeing there is an ascending time to follow, and a
great Earthquake at the heels thereof, which will make sad work, and after
that, The third Woe comes quickly. These things then will not be done upon a
sudden, nor without further trials to the Church of God. For the Worships and
Superstitions of Antichrist are woven (almost) into every thing throughout
Christendom, the unravelling whereof will shake that part of the World where
these things are so twisted and interwoven, and so have been these hundreds of
years. And therefore we must take heed that we do not judge of the rising of
the Witnesses by the times that succeed it, but by that Resurrection Spirit
which (after a while) will appear in the Witnesses of Christ.

I shall conclude with a Consectary flowing from what has been spoken of the
gradual rising, and it will serve also in way of answer to the question in
hand; and it is this, viz. That seeing there is such a gradual motion, the
first beginnings of the Resurrection will not (in probability) be so
perceivable. How imperceptible were the first motions of Antichrist? 2 These. 2.
The Mystery of Iniquity (says Paul) does work already; and yet how few
discerned him in the days of Constantine, which was some hundreds of years
after the Apostle thus wrote, and when also that which did let his more public
appearing and acting, was quite taken out of the way?

I suppose, they have been very few who at the opening of the Seals, and at the
beginning of the sounding of every Trumpet hitherto, could say, Now such a Seal
is opened; and hark, how such or such a Trumpet does now begin to sound.

Beginnings are many times very small and obscure, as it is with Rivers which
arise from little Fountains, and yet at last grow to be very deep. Perhaps also
there may be in some an aptness to expect the accomplishment of such or such a
passage in the Revelati^ns, in such a way as they have fore-fancyed, and then
when the fulfilling of them is very different from their pre-conceptions, they
may be ready to question it. In our eager pursuits after accomplishments, it
may happen sometimes that we may leave them behind us, and yet think that they
are before us. A little waiting therefore will set our Judgments right as to
the question in hand, and give you a surer Answer than I shall undertake to do.

One thing more; you have heard how the Death and Resurrection of the Witnesses
do in many things answer to the Death and Resurrection of Christ, though in
some things again they differ: But if their Resurrections correspond in any
thing, I am prone to think it is in their first beginnings: Let us consider
this a little, and finish the present discourse.

1. When Christ arose it was dark, and for ought I know to the contrary, it
might be near Midnight. Joh. 20.1.
When Mary Magdalene came to the Sepulcher, it was yet dark, and Christ was
then risen I know not how long before. And when she saw Christ afterward at
the Sepulcher, she neither knew him, nor that he was risen, but mistook him,
thinking he had been the Gardener; And when she knew him, she went and told
them that had been with him, and found them mourning and weeping, who therefore
little imagined that Christ was risen. Mark 16.10, 11.
And when these heard what she said, they believed it not; and when the two
Disciples told them the same, they did not believe them; Mark 16.13.
for as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.
And when he appeared afterward to the Eleven as they sat at meat, Joh. 20.9.
he upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16.14.
because they believed not them that had been with him after he was risen. And
so too he upbraided the two Disciples that went with him to Emmaus. And when he
appeared to the Ten, Thomas (who was then absent from them) would not believe
that Christ was risen; yea, Luke 24.37
and at his first appearing to them, they thought they had seen a Spirit,
(which is more;) when the Disciples went into Galilee into a Mountain where
Christ appeared (which I conceive to be the time spoken of by the Apostle,
Matthew. 28.17.
1 Cor. 15.6.) it is said, They worshipped him, but some doubted.

By all this you see, how difficultly the Resurrection of Christ was believed.
Even thus it may be when He rises in his Witnesses, whose resurrection does
(in many things as well as his death) allude to that of Christ's.

The Witnesses then (like Christ) may be up, and few know it, or believe it;
that, as it is said of the report of them who brought the first tidings of
Christ's resurrection to his Disciples, Their words s^emed to them as idle
^ales, Luke 24.11
and they believed them not: Even so it may happen at the resurrection of the
Witnesses, who do not only ascend, but perhaps also rise in a cloud, as many
times the Sun does, insomuch that some lie a bed till seven or eight of the
Clock in the Spring in a cloudy Morning, and think not that the Sun is risen.

Now then, lay all the precedent passages together, and pray for light and help
from the Spirit, and see what it does amount unto. However wait for a while
longer, and time will prove a sure Interpreter.

REV. XI. 12. And they heard a great Voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come
up hither; And they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their Enemies beheld
them.
IN the former Verse we find the Witnesses upon their feet, in this we find
them upon the wing. In the words you may observe, 1. A Call given them, and it
is by a Voice. 2. It is a great Call, for it is a great Voice. 3. From whence
it comes, from Heaven. 4. The Witnesses hearing it, They heard a great voice.
5. What it says, viz. Come up hither.
I shall only paraphrase upon the verse, and conclude with application.

And they heard a great Voice from Heaven.] Heaven is put for the Church here
upon Earth. For as the Church is distinguished from her seed; Chap. 12.17. So
here, from her Witnesses. The meaning therefore is, There comes a voice out of
the Church to the Churches and Ministers, to rise up yet higher and nearer
Heaven. For the Spirit speaks in the Churches to the Churches, as you may see
in the second and third Chapters of this Book of the Revelations. This I take
to be the meaning of the words. 1. It seems to be set here in opposition to the
Beast, who is said to ascend out of the bottomless pit, ver. 7. The Beast lives
in Hell upon Earth, the Saints in Heaven. 2. It stands also in opposition to
the former condition that the Witnesses were in, who but now lay dead (as it
were) upon the earth, and now, behold, they are called up to Heaven. 3. This
Heaven is the same that is mentioned ver. 19. but that is the Church of God,
and therefore so is this.


Now the voice that calls to them from this Heaven, is a great Voice, declaring
a loud call. Here then is a Commission and Warrant given them to prophecy
again, and to follow their former employment, and not in the least to be
discouraged, for their Call is very clear, distinct, and audible, it being a
great voice. And some do conceive, that this Call comes from men in public
place; and I should be glad it might prove so; but I much doubt of it, upon
these grounds.

1. Because it is said, That when they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud, their
Enemies beheld them. Now these enemies are those who lately slew them, and
therefore were men of Place and Power. And still they are the men they were, as
very Enemies at the Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, as when they
slew them; Therefore surely these could not call them; They who beheld them as
Enemies when they ascended up to Heaven, would never call them up to Heaven.

2. It is said in the following words, That in the same hour there was a great
Earthquake, and the tenth part of the City fell, and in the Earthquake were
slain of men seven thousand. These are the enemies spoken of in my Text, as I
shall further show you when I come to ver. 13. So that this call here comes not
from men in public place, they are enemies (you see) after the Resurrection,
and at the Ascension of the Witnesses; And the Voice here comes from Heaven,
which is no place for the enemies of the Witnesses.

This Voice then comes from the Spirit of God in the Churches, working an
inward powerful instinct and impression in these Witnesses, etc.

They heard a great Voice.] It is not said, that others heard it. It is
somewhat like the voice which Pau^ heard from Heaven, Act. 22.5.
when he was near unto Damas^^; They that were with him saw the light that
shined about him, but they heard not the voice of ^im that spoke to him: That
is, They did not hear it disti^^tly; for the men that journeyed with him st^od
speechless, hearing a Voice, Act. 9.7.
but seeing no man. It was a Voice, and a great, clear, distinct voice, but in
Paul's ears only, not in theirs. So here, etc. But what is the subject matter
of this call? Come up hither;] Not l^^g ago, there was a great voice, or vote,
from He^^ against these Witnesses; and now there is a voice from Heaven to
them, and for ^^em; The first was from the Beast ascending out of the
Bottomless p^^, this is from the Spirit speaking from Heaven to them; The first
cried, D^^^ with them: This from Heaven cries, Up with them; Come up hither;
The first laid them as it were upon the Earth in the streets; This calls them
up to Heaven.

Quest. But what shall they do there? Answ. Wherefore, as if the voice should
say, Here is more work for you, the Church is rising higher than it was; It is
nearer Heaven, more pure and refined, more set upon Separation, more elevated
above the world, and preparing for more glorious times approaching under the
seventh Trumpet; and therefore, Come up hither; which intimates, that formerly
they preached, lived, and conversed at a lower rate than now they must, and are
here called to do; For the Churches are risen, and all things in the Churches
are higher, and got up nearer unto Heaven, and the Saints must now live far
above their former selves; Wherefore, abide no longer where you are, but Come
up hither.

And in this Call, there is a motion employed, Come, which has a term from
which. 1. The Earth, or a lower condition of living before, when the Witnesses
savoured too much of the Earth, and when their Spirits lay prostrate during the
time of their slaughter; For as the death of the Witnesses was in a special
manner Spiritual, their spirits being low and dead, so now their Spirits are
raised up higher. 2. They move and rise up from Antichrist and his Pollutions,
and all his earthly and hellish ways of Worship, Mixtures, and base
conversations. 3. From that Bondage and servitude which the Witnesses were
lately in unto the Wills of men, before their Resurrection; so that sometime
after their Resurrection there will be a very great change in the Churches of
Christ, as to purity of Doctrine and Worship, and Holiness of walking, and
Gospel-liberty, far beyond what was before. Thus you see their Call cleared.


2. I come now to their Obedience to this Call, or great Voice from Heaven.

And they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud, and their Enemies beheld them.] In
which words, there are three things considerable. 1. Their Ascent to Heaven. 2.
In what manner, in a Cloud. 3. Who saw them thus ascending; their Enemies
beheld them.


1. They ascended up to Heaven. The great Voice is accompanied with great
Power, that the thing commanded is soon accomplished. They willingly and
readily attend the Call, declaring that their hearts were wholly in it. Come up
hither; Lo, we come; and must we yet be more separate from sin and sinners, as
to communion with them, and from Antichristian pollutions, and from the world?
We desire nothing more. And must we be more conform to Rule, in Church, in
Family, and in all our Relations, Conditions, and Conversations in this world?
We cheerfully attend this call from Heaven. They are not therefore passive in
ascending, as men that are haled up from the Earth so as if their feet stuck in
the mire, and as Jeremy's body was drawn up by cords out of the Dungeon; but
they seem to leap up Heavenward. Only this is not done presently after their
Resurrection, but like unto Christ's Ascension to Heaven in a cloud, some good
space of time after his Resurrection.

2. For the Manner; They ascended in a cloud; Act. 1.9.
wherein there is an allusion unto the manner of Christ's Ascension into
Heaven. But what does this Cloud here signify?

1. It notes their ascending in a Degree of glory. Matthew. 24.30. There is now
a Spirit of glory resting upon them. As it was with Christ when he rose from
the dead, he laid aside for ever his state of Humiliation: So do these
Witnesses; they shall now prophecy in sackcloath no more, they shall
henceforth be clothed with a cloud of glory. And as Christ's Resurrection was
the first degree of his Exaltation, and his Ascension the second; even so it is
here with his Witnesses; For this is the second degree of their Exaltation, the
third will be when they shall dye and enter into glory; and the last, when they
shall come with Christ to judge the world.

2. Here is also Power denoted in this cloud, as you may see from the former
Text, Matthew. 24.30. For the Witnesses were slain in dishonor, but they shall
be raised (especially ascend) in glory; slain in weakness, but raised and
ascend in power, as it is also said of Christ, 2 Cor. 13.4.
that he was crucified through weakness, but he lives by the power of God.

3. Hereby is signified their Protection and safe passage and proceedings in
the way of further Reformation, like as the Cloud in the Wilderness was a
defense upon Israel when they were come up out of Egypt; for thus now, upon all
the glory there shall be a Defense. The case also is somewhat like as when the
Egyptians pursued the Israelites into the Red Sea, at what time the pillar of
cloud removed from before the Israelites, and stood between them and the
Egyptians; For thus, here is a cloud of Protection between the ascending
Witnesses and their Enemies.

4. This cloud signifies the Obscurity of this ascension, as to their enemies
who stand here looking on them. For clouds are sometimes put for darkness. Ps.
97.2. And as it is said of the Pillar of cloud that stood between the
Israelites and the Egyptians, Exodus 14.20.
It was a cloud and darkness to the Egyptians, but it gave light by night unto
the Israelites: Even so, etc. And therefore though there are many lookers on
here to see the ascending Witnesses, yet they do not understand what God is
about to do in this so glorious a dispensation, but are ready to say as
Samballat, Neh. 4.2.
What do these feeble Jews? Will they fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice?
Will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of
the rubbish which are burnt? Why? What is that which blinds their eyes? It is
their malice, envy and hatred; for you see they are still called Enemies, even
when the Witnesses ascend. God has hardened their hearts, and blinded their
eyes, and given them up to a reprobate sense, and to the power of prevailing
enmity. Besides which, They look upon there Ascenders as clouded with
reproaches and calumnies, which has still been the Lot of the Saints in all
times of Reformation. So that, neither the Resarrection, nor Ascension have
altered them, nor opened their eyes in the least. Thus much for the Manner of
the Witnesses Ascension.

3. Here follows the Spectators of this Ascension.

And their Enemies beheld them.] There is a fo^r-fold Beholding of them by
their Enemies. 1. They beheld them prophesying, and that was with Torment, ver.
10. 2. They beheld them s^ain, and this was with joy, for they rejoiced over
them, and made merry, and sent gifts one to another. 3. They beheld them risen,
and that was with fear, ver. 11. 4. They here behold them ascending, and that
is with grief and Indignation.


But that which is here remarkable is, 1. The Progress which the Witnesses make
in their Reformation after their slaughter is finished; for, 1. The Spirit of
Life from God enter^th into them. 2. They stand upon their feet. 3. They ascend
up to Heaven. For surely such a progression there will be.


2. It is observable, that as the Witnesses are called to this Reformation by a
great Voice from Heaven, so a great power attends the work, insomuch that their
Enemies cannot hinder it by any means, though the persons and their work are
very visible to their eyes; for they see both them and it with fear, grief, and
Indignation, like as Tobiah, Sanballat, Goshem, and the rest of their
companions, beheld the repairing the Wall of Jerusalem, but could not put a
stop to it: For just so it is here with these Enemies. The case is somewhat
like that which the Psalmist mentions concerning the Kings of the Nations,
who came up against Zion; Ps. 48.4, 5, ^.
says he, Lo, the Kings were assembled, they passed by together; they saw it,
and so they marvelled, they were troubled and hasted away; fear took hold upon
them there, and pain as of a Woman in Travel. They saw Zion, and were troubled,
affrighted, and pained greatly, and that was all that they could do. And like
as the Soldiers, who guarded the Sepulcher of Christ, saw him as he arose, and
feared, Marth. 23.4.
and shook, and became like dead men, but were not able to lift up a weapon
against him: Even so it (...) here, etc. Whereas in the time of the slaughter,
a Child of God could scarce stir, but these Enemies presently beheld it, and
not only so, but also opposed and hindered it; but after their Resurrection,
especially their Ascension, they shall behold the Witnesses, and do little or
nothing more to speak of.

3. It is remarkable, that the Enemies of the Witnesses do still retain their
Enmity unto the last, even though they do most evidently behold that their
slaying of the Witnesses is come to nothing, but (notwithstanding all
endeavors to the contrary) they are up and upon their feet again, yea, and
ascending also, as resolved upon a further Reformation; For yet still you see
that here they are called Enemies, even when the Witnesses are upon the wing
for Heaven. They are a Generation of Vipers, the seed of the Serpent, whose
malice is implacable. And why are they such Enemies? Not for any hurt that the
Witnesses and people of God have done them, for these would fain be quiet and
live peaceably, for they oppose not Government here, but endeavor further to
reform among themselves. Their condition is much like that of David; says he,
They that render evil for good are mine Adversaries, because I follow the thing
that good is. Oh what a dreadful account will these Enemies have, when neither
the wonderful Providence of God, nor notable Disappointments, nor Reformation,
nor Holiness in Churches and Saints, can by any means turn them from their
Enmity and opposition even against God himself! And thus much for the
explication of this 12th. verse; Let me add a few Uses, and conclude.

USES.
1. We are showed, that when the Witnesses are risen, God calls them after a
while to an higher pitch of Reformation: I say, After a while; For their
Resurrection (as you have heard) is gradual, and when they are arrived so far
that they stand upon their feet, and have attained to some strength and
stability, then God calls them by a great Voice from Heaven to Come up higher,
and to approach nearer unto Heaven. God does not raise up his Witnesses, that
now they should sit down, and content themselves to live as they did before;
the Resurrection is the first degree of Glory, and God does now expect that
they should live above the world.

What the Apostle says, Col. 3.1. may well be applied to the purpose in hand;
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above. Churches must
now reform, and be rising up nearer and nearer toward Heaven; and so it must
be also with Families and Persons. Especially Ministers, Churches and
Church Members must be advancing forward, and pressing after an higher point of
holiness and conformity to the Gospel; for the Witness and testimony lies
especially among these; And God calls from Heaven to them with a loud voice to
ascend; Surely, if the Churches and Saints were at their set pirch, God would
not say to them, as here he does, Come up hither. It is not therefore ^^ough
that they are ri^on from the dead, and have the spirit of life in them, but
they must also ^and upon their feet; stand fast, grow strong, and (...) last
ascend (...) ward. They must now grow and encrea^^, 1 King. 22.35.
as the ^ame word in the Original is rendered both to ascend and increase; they
must be going and growing 2 ^^am. ^.1^.
as it is said of David when he came to the Kingdom. And does God call from
Heaven? take heed then that (...) refu^e not him that speaks for how shall
they escape who tu^h awa; from him that speaks from Heaven?

As for public and general Reformation, God calls aloud this day for it; but
it is our duty to leave that unto our Superiors; As for our selves, we shall
be left wholly without excuse, if we take up our stand and ^ndeavour not to
ascend yet higher. As touching others, (...) not this Voice, nor will they hear
it when it shall hereafter come to (...) great Voice; for they are like the
People who stood close by Christ when there came a voice from Heaven, Joh.
12.28.
saying unto him, I have both glo^^^ed my Name, and will glorify it again;
which when the standers by heard, they said, that it Thundered. It seems
therefore that it was a very great voice, and yet the matter spoken was hidden
from them. Others said, An Angel spoke unto him; how beit Christ tells them,
That voice came for their sakes, but (you see) they understood it not.

But let us hear what the Lord speaks; for we have this day a voice from
Heaven, though the great Voice is not as yet come. Let us hear what is come,
and though it be but a still small voice, yet God is in it, and therefore let
us wrap our faces in our mantles, fear God, and obey his voice.

For surely God calls now for a more full Reformation in the Churches, and more
exact walking according to Gospel-pattern; and why should we stay till the
great voice comes? When that comes, the Witnesses will hear, as the Text
declares, as much as to say, Till then they will not hear, at least be so
attentive. For thus God calls, and calls, and few will hear, that at last he is
fain to call with a loud voice; In the mean while it is the sin of such who are
thus dull of hearing. Do not therefore say as sometimes the Jews did concerning
the building of the Temple, The time is not yet come; so, the great voice has
not, as yet, spoken; but if there be any thing of a Resurrection-spirit in us,
let us live at an higher rate, and far above our slain selves. Surely, when the
Witnesses are risen from the dead (whether it be done, or as yet to come) they
will preach, and speak, and pray, and partake of Ordinances, and buy, and sell,
and converse, at a Resurrection-rate, especially when once they begin to stand
upon their feet, and to be warmed with the Spirit of life from God in them. And
God will go on with a further Reformation before the 7th Trumpet sounds; yea,
you see that he calls for ascending higher immediately before the coming of the
Earthquake, saying, as sometimes ^^shua to the Israelites, Josh. 3.5.
Sanctify your selves, for to morrow God will do wonders among you. Make have,
get ye up with all speed, and stand clear of the Earthquake.

2. We are further informed, That when the Witnesses are risen, they shall not
dye again, they are now beyond any more slaughters; And as it is said of Christ
in another kind, so it may be said of his Witnesses, Christ being raised from
the dead, Romans 6.5.
dies no more.

And as there was Counsel in the former point of Information, so there is
Comfort in this. The Testiomony of Jesus after its Resurrection shall live for
ever, that as Christ says of his own death and Resurrection, his Testimony may
speak likewise, I am be that live^h and was dead, Rev. 1.18.
and behold, I am alive for evermore. The joy and mirth of the Beast at the
slaughter of the Witnesses could not keep them down from rising again; nor
shall their fears, and griefs, and wrath, and indignation at their Resurrection
prevail to slay them a second time. This is great mercy, and not a little
comfort.

When the Isra^lites rose up out of their boudage in Egypt, they rose (as you
have heard) by degrees, and were not completely risen till they came up out of
the Red Sea; and though all the power of Egypt pursued them to reduce them to
their former servitude, and to slay them once again, they could not prevail,
God would not suffer Pharaoh and his host to come near them, but he interposeth
by the Pillar of cloud between them, as if he should say, You shall as soon
slay me as them; not an hair of their heads shall perish. Yea, but shall not
the Witnesses meet with oppositions and exercises from the men of the world
after their Resurrection? Yes, they may have many attempts made against them to
destroy them, for even to their very Ascension (as you see here in the Text)
they have their Enemies, for their Enemies behold them; They behold them both
rising and ascending, they have still an eye upon them.

The Enmity therefore does not cease at the Resurrection or Ascension, but
rather increase upon that very account; for the Witnesses rise, and (at last)
ascend, and their ^^emies cannot help it, they can behold them, as the Text she
weth us, and that is all that is here spoken of them. The Witnesses shall meet
with enm^^y enough, but with no more slaughters, attempts perhaps that way,
(...) still f^ustraueous. We must not therefore judge of the Resurrection (...)
Ascension of the Witnesses by the enmity and affronts which they ^ay meet with,
for what (...) can be expected from Enemies? The privilege of the ri^en
Witnesses is, not that they shall suffer no more, but that they shall be slain
no more. Joh. 12.10.
When Lazarus was risen from the dead, the chief Priests consulted to take away
his life, but they could not do it; will any therefore say, that Lazarus was
not risen from the dead, because the Hierarchy consulted to kill him? No; Do
not therefore misgive as to the Resurrection of the Witnesses, upon every petty
or particular indignity that some one or more of them may meet with from their
enemies. When the children of Israel were risen up out of the Red Sea, they
were gone no further than to Rephidim, Exodus 19 1, 2.
which was within three months, e're they met with an host of Amalekites, who
gave them a sore assault, and when Moses let down his hands, prevailed against
them; but Israel had the day, and discomsited them, who were afterward devoted
to utter destruction for this their cruel and wicked attempt. Exodus 19 4.
Israel was now born up on Eagles Wings, out of the reach of destroying
dangers, and of fear of Reduction into Egyptian bondage; and now they pass on
still from Journey to Journey in the Wilderness, and though at last they meet
with Og and Sihon in the way, yet they subdue them, and never stop till they
arrive in Canaan. Thus it will be with the Witnesses after their Resurrection.

The Churches and Saints will meet with some shakings after the Resurrection
and Ascension, because there is a great Earthquake presently to follow; ver.
13. After Christ's Ascension, the Gospel, its Preachers and Professors had many
encounters with their enemies; for presently Act. 4.26
The Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together against
the Lord, and against his Christ; but in all the story of the Acts of the
Apostles, you find the Gospel growing and getting ground by opposition, and
they were but two, Stephen and James, who lost their lives. And though we have
an expectation of a great Earthquake, yet it is comfortable to consider, that
immediately before it comes, a great Voice says unto the Witnesses, Come up
hither, and that the ascend up to Heaven in a cloud. It is a mercy, and will
prove a means of the greater security, that they are got up nearer unto Heaven,
and unto an higher degree of Holiness, Purity of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and manner of living, before the storm comes. The safest living is above the
Earth, in the Heaven of holiness, when the Earth shall shake and reel to and
fro like a drunken man; And this shall be the case of the Witnesses ascended.

You never find a Reformation in the Scriptures, but if there followed a
shaking time, the People of God sped well, or much the better for it.

When the Israelites put away their strange Gods and Ashteroth from among them,
1 Samuel 7.4 --
and prepared their hearts unto the Lord, and served him only, and poured out
water before him, and fasted, and confessed their sins, presently the
Philistines are gathered together against them, and draw near to battle; but
the Lord thundered upon them and discomfiteth them, and they are smitten before
Israel.

When Jchosaphat had reformed his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 19. it came to pass
afterward that the Inhabitants of Moah, Ammon and Mount Seir, came up to war
against Judah, but God turned their swords against one another, and destroyed
them without a stroke struck by the men of Judah, 2 Chro. 20.

2 Chro. 29.30, 31. 2 Chro. 30.
When Hezekiah had finished an eminent Reformation in Judah, Sennacherib comes
up against the land with a very formidable Army; but the Angel of the Lord slew
therein an hundred fourscore and five thousand in one night.

And in all these confusions of the enemies of God and his People, after a
Reformation wrought, it is observable, that God does work wonders from Heaven,
his People do little or nothing but pray and stand still; And I am thinking
whether God will not work wonderfully from Heaven by his own immediate hand
when the great Earthquake comes, soon after the Ascension of the Witnesses.

The Enemy comes upon a very great disadvantage to himself against the People
of God, when once they are in an ascending way of Reformation. It is great
presumption in these enemies here to slay the Witnesses; to oppose them and
oppress them in their sackcloath is a cruel and accur^ed thing; what then will
God account it, if they shall dare to design against them when clothed with a
Cloud? This is a very high degree of Th^omachy. For, as for the Dragon and the
Beast, they will not be quiet till the seventh Vyal is poured out, and both are
shut up in the bottomless Pit; yea, when the Devil is loosed out of prison at
the end of the thousand years, the first thing he does, is, he gathers Gog
and Magog together against the Camp of the Saints. He and his Instruments will
never cease their opposition, till they are thrown together into Hell, there to
remain for ever. Wherefore, after the Resurrection of the Witnesses, the Saints
may meet, and are like so to do, with many troubles to the pouring out of the
last Vial, but yet they shall meet with no more slaughters. For what do we meet
with as to these Enemies, after the rising of the Witnesses? 1. It is said of
them, that great fear fell upon them. 2. That, when the Witnesses ascended,
they beheld them. 3. When the Earthquake comes, many fall, and the remnant is
affrighted. 4. When the seventh Trumpet sounds, they are angry. 5. When the
fourth Vial is poured out, they blaspheme. 6. When the fifth, they gnaw their
tongues and blaspheme. 7. When the sixth, they gather themselves together to
the battle of the great day of God Almighty.
So that here is fear, anger, showing of teeth, blaspheming and gnawing of
tongues, and great preparations to sight, kill and conquer; and this is all
that I find after the Resurrection of the Witnesses unto the last Vial, which
will end in their everlasting confusion. Make therefore the Resurrection sure,
and though there will be stirrs and struglings, attempts and oppositions, and
some particular sufferings now and then, yet no great or considerable hurt will
be done unto the very last.

3. If the Witnesses shall thus rise and afterward ascend, then it will follow,
that from thence forwards the Beast will not rise higher, but be continually in
the declining hand unto the very last; During which time will be made good in a
pecial manner what is prophesied of him by the Apostle, 2 These. 2.8.
The Lord shall consume that wicke ^on^ with the breath of his mouth. And this
consi^^^ption shall more eminently begin with the fall of the tenth part of the
City, and when the seventh Vial is poured out, he shall be destroyed with the
brightness of Christ's coming.

He shall never thrive more after the slaughter of the Witnesses, he shall
never digest the shedding of their blood, which shall cry night and day to
Heaven against him for vengeance. Let us but rise and ascend, let once a
Resurrection Spirit appear amongst us, a Spirit of Faith, Love, Power and Zeal,
a Spirit of Prayer, Praise, Reformation, holy walking, and it will prove a
Blessed Omen to us of the coming of Christ's Kingdom, and of the declension of
the Beast's dominion. If we ascend, he will of course desced; for we and he
cannot ascend, nor descend together, we are so diametrically opposire, that
contrary fates do of necessity attend us.

Now then, out of all that has been said, you may gather up these Consequents
of the Witnesses Resurrection. 1. That as the Spirit of Life from God enters
into them, so now they will be more bold, active and zealous for God; only as
the Resurrection is gradual, so this Spirit of Life comes on by degrees. 2.
They attain, at last, to some stability, and begin to stand upon their feet, as
being more fixed, strengthened and resolved. 3. When it is come thus far, grear
fear falls upon them that see them, and their enemies begin now to be
affrighted; As the Witnesses grow stronger in faith, their enemies grow weaker
with fear. 4. When thus they begin to gather strength, and their enemies to
grow more and more feeble, the Spirit of God gives the Witnesses a loud call to
embrace the opportunity, and to ascend to an higher pitch of Reformation,
raising them up above the earth and earthly things, and separating them more
from the world and the things of Antichrist. 5. And now, instead of sackcloath,
they are clothed with a cloud, and a Spirit of power and glory rests on
them. 6. They shall still have enemies notwithstanding all this, and their
enemies eyes shall be much upon them with vexation and anguish, but yet they
shall not know how to help themselves, nor how to hinder this work of God, the
external face whereof they shall see, but not the meaning of the dispensation,
the Cloud interposing between them and that, so that they shall be blinded and
hardened like Pharaon and the Egyptian, they shall be under the power of a
dedolent Spirit, and still ^^^ain their enmity. 7. This Ascension of the
Witnesses immediately foreruns the Earthquake, giving hopes of greater security
to the Witnesses in such a day of dreadful concussion, when God will make some
notable distinction between them and their enemies.
If therefore you should live to see the Witnesses upon their feet, expect
after a while to see them upon the wing; and if you see them ascending, expect
ere long that Earthquake, whereof I shall speak in the next discourse, which
will cause great ruins, and effect strange alterations. When the Witnesses
begin to ascend, the great City will begin to descend, and pay the rithe of it
self to divine Vengeance for its late blood-guiltiness, of which more upon the
next Verse. So much for this.

VERSE 13. And the same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the tenth part
of the City fell, and in the Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; and
the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven.
WE are now come to the Conclusion of the sixth Trumpet, which ends with an
Earthquake; and (...) Earthquake is described, 1. By its Greatness, for it is
said to be a great Earthquake. 2. By the time when it happened, (...). 3. By
the effects or consequents of it;
1. That the^ ^^th, (...) of the City fell. 2. That therein were slain of men
seven thousand. 3. That the remnant were affrighted. 4. That they gave glory to
(...) God of He^^^^.


I shall handle the words as I did the former verse, by way of Paraphrase, or
E^^^^ion.

And the same hour.] Not th^^hour of their Resurrection: the Earthquake here is
reserved for the W^^^sses. Asce^^on, after which it hastes, coming in the sam^
(...), not ^^tera^ly taken, but Metaphorically, i. e. Sp^^^^ (...) For it (...)
s^^den and anexpected succession of the (...) (...) of the Witnesses. Let but
these once (...), and ^re^e^^^y (...) falls a shaking; for ( Vindicta divina de
testi^m inimicis. Joh. Pisc. in h^^^versum.
as Piscat. well (...)) this in the ^e^^^^ce of God upon the enemies of the
Witnesses; they were now gazing up to Heaven to see the Witnesses ascending,
and, before they are aware, they are surprised with a grea Earthquake from
under them. For this verse is connected with the Ascension of the Witnesses by
the Copulative And, showing us, that it belongs to the same story, and
follows close upon the Ascension. The Enemies were staring upon the
Ascenders, and upon a sudden the Earth shakes under them, and turns their eyes
upon another object. God threatens to throw them down to Hell, whilst his
Witnesses are ascending up to Heaven.

And the same hour there was an Earthquake.] There are two sorts of Earthquakes
in the Scriptures. 1. Such as are Natural, as when the earth shakes through
collection of Wind and Vapors in the bowels thereof, and which want vent. Such
an Earthquake there was in the days of King Vzziah, Zach. 14.5.
and such before the destruction of Jerusalem, Luke 21.11. 2. There are
figurative and metaphorical Earthquakes in the Scripture, as when some notable
dispensation of God resembles an Earthquake; and such is this here in the Text.
And this, in Scripture, signifies some notable change, Hebr. 12.26, 27.
as when God says, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven;
This (says the Apostle) signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken. And when God says, He will shake the Heavens and the Earth, mark what
a change follows: And I will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, and I will
destroy the strength of the Kingdoms of the Heathen, and I will overthrow the
Chariots and those that ride in them, and the horses and their riders shall
come down, every one by the sword of his brother. Hag. 2.21, 22. See also Isa.
13.13. And these Metaphorical and figurative Eathquakes are sometimes
accompanied with or presaged by literal ones, as in that place of Luke
forementioned. And that formidable Earthquake in the days of Vzziah happened
about the time that Jehu's fourth Generation was expiring, after which followed
frequent and fearful changes unto the very Captivity of the ten Tribes. Again;
When God brought his people of Israel out of Egypt, this was a periodical time,
and there was now a very great change coming upon the World, and the Church
therein, not the like thereunto (excepting in the time of the Deluge) from the
foundation of the World. Pharaoh and the Egyptians were now to be destroyed in
the Red Sea, and the Church to pass into Canaan, and there to settle; And God
signified this great change by an Earthquake properly and literally so called.
O God (says the Psalmist) when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou
did march through the wilderness, the earth shook, the Heavens also dropped at
the presince of God, even Sinai it self was moved at the presence of God, the
God of Israel. Ps. 68.7, 8. See also, Ps. 77.15, 16. to the end. The Earthquake
therefore in my text signifies some great and eminent change brought in with
shaking and affrighting Judgments, commonly for the destruction of Gods
enemies, and sometimes for the deliverance of his People. Thus you see what
kind of Earthquake is here meant, and what it signifies.

But let us look a little further into it, and compare it with other
Earthquakes in this book of the Revelations, which we may call Apocalyptical
Earthquakes, of which we find five.

1. The first at the opening of the sixth Seal, Rev. 6.12. 2. The second at the
opening of the seventh Seal, Rev. 8.5. 3. The third in my Text, near the
conclusion of the sixth Trumpet. 4. The fourth at the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, Rev. 11. last. 5. The fifth at the pouring out of the seventh Vial,
Rev. 16.18.
Among these, this in my Text is the middlemost; the two first (like the two
last) fall in quickly, the one after the other, the first under the sixth, the
second under the seventh Seal, a little before the sounding of the first
Trumpet; after which we meet with no more Earthquakes till the close of the
sixth Trumpet in my Text, which long interval takes up above a thousand years,
during all which time the Earth seems to stand still, not simply, but in
comparison with what is now like to be at the close of the sixth Trumpet, and
the beginning of the seventh. The world is now drawing toward its end, that
its shaking fits do come so fast upon it; and some more than ordinary Change is
hasting upon the World; for there have been great Changes in it during the long
Interval aforesaid, and yet none of them have been called Earthquakes, as this
here in my Text, which though it falls only upon the tenth part of the City,
yet it is a fair warning to all the other parts, and a sure Pledge of their
approaching ruin.

The far greater part of this Interval between the second and third Earthquake,
has been taken up with the Reign of the Beast and of the Turk, who in all this
time have met with no such considerable Change, as now they are warned to look
out for, and which shall shortly befall them under the seventh Trumpet; but as
for the change signified by the Earthquake in my Text, it appertains especially
to the Beast who slew the Witnesses.

The same hour there was a great Earthquake.] Great; Let us consider that a
little, and compare it with the other four Earthquakes; For they are all great,
and as it seems, greater than this here in hand.

The first, mentioned, Rev. 6.12. is expressly called a great Earthquake, and
surely greater than this in my Text; For that was so great, that it shook the
whole Pagan Empire, and overthrew it funditus, with an utter destruction, as in
the Verses there following. It overthrew the Pagan Emperial world, the Heavens
thereof, the Sun, Moon, and Stars thereof, and every Mountain and Island
belonging thereunto, Rev. 6.12. -- to the end.
and all the persons therein, from the King to the Bond-slave. This then was a
dreadful Earthquake, which shook and overthrew the whole fabric of the
Heathenish Empire, and introduced a blessed Change as to the Christian world,
Rev. 8.2.
at least for a season. But now, as for the Earthquake in my Text, though it is
great, yet nothing near so great, as shaking only and overthrowing a tenth part
of the great City. Only know thus much, that it will destroy the Heavens, the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars of this tenth part, and overturn the little world
therein. For all the Apocalyptick Earthquakes overthrow Worlds; the first the
Roman Pagan world, the second the Roman Christian World, the third, fourth and
fifth the Romish Antichristian World; after which succeeds the Millenary
World, which the Apostle calls, The World to come, H. br. 2.5.

2. As for the second Earthquake at the opening of the seventh Seal, and
immediately foregoing the sounding of the first Trumpet, Rev. 8.5.
this also was a great Earthquake, though it is not expressly so called. For, 1.
A great Change follows it, as appears in the eighth and ninth Chapters. 2.
Whereas there are several expressions of Terror when it comes, as, Voices, and
Thunderings, and Lightnings, and an Earthquake, there seems to be a gradation
in the words, and the sorest dispensation brings up the rear, and that is an
Earthquake. So that this also looks greater than that in the Text in hand.


3. Compare the Earthquake in my Text with the next to it, under the seventh
Trumpet, and though this here is great, yet that is greater, so as it is not in
my Text. 1. Because accompanied with Lightnings, and Voices, and Thunderings,
and great Hail. 2. Because it is the immediate forerunner of those Vials which
shall utterly destroy the Beast. Whereas the Earthquake in my Text shakes only
a tenth part of the City, and makes way for the seventh Trumpet.


4. Compare it next with the Earthquake at the pouring out of the seventh Vial,
Rev. 16.18. And though this in my Text is called great, yet that is greater,
and indeed the greatest that ever was. For mark what the Text says of it:
There were Voices, and Thunderings, and Lightnings, and there was a great
Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake, and so great; and the great City was divided into three parts. This
Commotion and concussion made the great City to fall asunder; And great Babylon
came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath; and every Island sted away, and the mountains were not
found, and there fell upon men a great hail out of Heaven, every stone about
the weight of Talent, etc. Well therefore may it be said, There was not so
great an Earthquake since men were upon the earth. For now also the Romish
Antichristian world is wholly destroyed, and the Millenary introduced. For in
these three last Earthquakes, it is observable, that there is a gradation, that
in my Text is exceeded by that, verse last, and this exceeded abundantly by
that under the seventh Vial, which is the sweeping and concluding Earthquake.

And in these two last, it is observable again, that they are accompanied with
Hail, the first of them with great hail, but the last with so great, that every
Stone is about the weight of a Talent, big enough to brain an Ox or an
Elephant; for God now knocks down not only the great Beast, but the Turk and
Devil also. And now, not only the Earth shakes under the Beast, but the Heavens
also from above discharge (as I may say) their Cannon-shot, such massy
Hailstones as God has reserved against this day of battle and war, and now is
fulfilled what is written, The windows from on high are open, and the
foundations of the earth do shake, Isa. 24.18. It will be now in the end of
this Antichristian World, a^ in the end of the Old World, when the deep from
beneath, and the Windows of Heaven from above, met together and conspired to
destroy that world of the ungodly. Thus I have opened to you these five
Revelation Earthquakes, comparing that in my Text with the other four, as the
least of them all, yet called a great Earthquake, considered simply in it self,
as also effecting a great work, in throwing down the tenth part of the great
City.

Let us come now to the effect of this Earthquake in the following words.

And the tenth part of the City fell.] By City here we understand the great
City spoken of, ver. 8. For this verse referrs to that, though that is called
the great City, this only The City, without the Epithete Great, yet not without
an Article or two, (...), which amounts to as much as Great, for it is, That
tenth part of that City; so that both the City it self and its tenth part, have
a singular remark here upon them. But what is that City, that great City? It is
not a material City properly so called, compassed about with walls, but the
City here being the same with that ver. 8. is the whole Jurisdiction and
Government of Rome. And whereas it is said, The tenth part thereof fell, viz.
with the foresaid Earthquake, this cannot be meant of the City of Rome it self,
which is reserved for the fifth Vial, which I conceive will not be poured out
till after the sounding of the seventh Trumpet. And though a Learned
Interpreter of the Revelations expounds this of the City of Rome, which he
says, is now but the tenth part of what Rome was in former times, I suppose
that will not easily be proved. Nor is this tenth part (as I humbly apprehend)
to be understood Geographically, for a tenth proportion of the Romish Dominion;
but I rather conceive, that it is to be understood Mystically, for one of the
ten Horns; among which Great Brittanny is reckoned one, and by some, the first.

But why does there fall no more of the City than the tenth part? Quest.


1. Not but that it were just with God to destroy the whole City, Answ.
which has fully deserved it long since; but God begins only with a tenth part
to give the remainder of the City fair warning, lest all be ruined (as it will)
after some time longer. You know, this City is spiritually called Sodem, ver.
8. Now God gave Sodom a timely Admonition by the Conquest which the four Kings
had over it, and the spoil which they got therein, and the captivating its
Inhabitants; and when this prevailed not to amend them, after a while it was
utterly destroyed: Even thus it is with this Spiritual Sodom in my Text.

2. I further answer, (...), God has a revenging eye; The eye of divine
Vengeance is not so much at time this of the Earthquake upon the whole City or
Power of Rome, as upon that part thereof where the Witnesses were slain.

But the whole City is guilty of this Internetion and Witness-slaughter: Ob.
For though the hands of multitudes, and of the the far greater part by much of
all the Citizens of the Romish Polity, were not in this slaughter, yet their
hearts do fully consent unto it; like as in the French Massacre, Aug. 24. in
the year 1572. though the blood was shed in France, yet Rome did even triumph
when they heard thereof.

This is granted, Sol.
according to that of Christ, Matthew. 23.35. as also Rev. 18.20. But divine
Vengeance falls here upon the Principals, and Patience forbears the Accessaries
for a season longer, giving them space, as yet, to repent. For in all the
strokes and plagues that God inflicteth upon the Beast, God still expects
Repentance, as we plainly see, Rev. 9. last; and, Rev. 16.9, 11. This fall or
ruin then lights only upon the place or Country where the slaughter of the
Witnesses is committed, to give warning to the remainder of the City, which yet
suffers also in the fall of this tenth part.

But how and in what manner does this tenth part of the City fall, Quest.
it may be said?

1. By dreadful Concussions; Answ.
as if God should say, I will overturn, overturn, overturn it. God will throw
down the Props and Pillars thereof with notable subversions.

2. There will also be (as I am apt to think) a falling, by falling off; in the
end, or falling away of this tenth part from the remaining nine, by them that
shall survive the overthrow; for I do not think that the tenth part shall be
utterly destroyed. The survivers shall desert the Beast and his Worship and
Government. So that the whole City shall be mulcted and fined a tenth part,
paying the tithe of it self to divine Vengeance for the slaughter of the
Witnesses; for the Hierarchical Power shall from thence forward cease in that
Country, which but now was the tenth part of the great City, and the Country
shall be forfeited, for its bloodshed, into the hands of our Lord Jesus. My
apprehensions are, that it will be such a fall as this, i. e. which will end in
a falling off, and that such a Change will be introduced by this Earthquake, as
will prove to be a great Judgment upon the great Whore. The Hierarchy exercised
in that tenth part shall fall and sink, and never rise again, like as what is
sunk by an Earthquake never rises more, but is for ever buried in its own
ruins. A City or Town may be shaken by a little Earthquake, and yet not fall,
though it may stand tottering and hang a-to-side, and be propt up for a time,
but this here is said to be a great Earthquake, which will quite swallow up
that which before was only shaken and shivered, that now it shall never rise
again.

It may be said, perhaps, That what the Sea loses in one place, Ob.
it gains in another:

But it is not so with the Sea of Rome, Sol.
which now falls into that irrecoverable Consumption prophesied of, 2 These.
2.8. The Lord shall consume that wicked one with the breath of his mouth; i. e.
with the Gospel, which shall now begin to flourish, when the tenth part of this
City is fallen. When the City begins to fall, the Gospel shall begin to rise in
equal proportion, and never fall again. There will be no Balm for this bruise,
no Cordial for this Consumption; the great Whore shall now begin to abate of
her flesh, by that time that this Earthquake has done reckoning with her; her
Arm shall be so broken, that there shall be no Roller to bind it that it may be
healed and strengthened. And thus you have heard the first Effect of this
Earthquake opened; the next follows.

2. And in the Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand.] The New
Translation renders it, Capita hominum, heads of men: The Old, Nomina hominum,
Names of men, and so the Original has it; the meaning whereof is, by an
Hypallage, Men of Names, i. e. famous men. The Grecians (I suppose) borrow the
expression from the Hebrews, who call eminent and renowned men, Men of names,
as you may see, 1 Chronicles, 5.24. and 12.30. The Text there compared with the
Margin in your Bibles, where Men of names in the Hebrew are called famous men
in the Text. And hence, men of no name in the Hebrew, are called, base men by
the Translators, Job 30.8. By this then you see the meaning of the expression
in my Text; for these seven thousand men of Names, are Viri nominati, as Junius
and Tremelius render the same word, named, or famous men. They are therefore
men of eminency and fame, as if one should say, Dukes, and Earls, and Lords,
and Knights, and Esquires, and Gentlemen, and Prelates, and Judges, and
Counselors, and Doctors, and Colonels, and Captains, and Magistrates,
Officers, etc.

Now of these men of Names, there are slain in this Earthquake seven thousand,
i. e. very many, Seven being a number of perfection, and often used in this
Book of the Revelations; as seven Spirits, seven golden Candlesticks, seven
Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Angels, seven Vials; so here, seven Thousand, i.
e. a great number. And of these it is said, That they were slain in the
Earthquake, the Spirit of God (perhaps) alluding to such an effect of natural
Earthquakes, as when they throw down Towns or Cities, and bury many of the
Inhabitants in the ruins.

For this here is called a great Earthquake, and therefore whenever and
wherever it comes, there will be a terrible shake both of Persons and Things,
viz, Houses, Inhabitants, Lands, Goods, Moneys, Inheritances, Callings, Trade,
Liberty, Health, Relations, Life, and many other Comforts; Men's hearts will
shake, fear and tremble, and some perhaps will cry to Rocks and Mountains. It
makes me to think of the case of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.15, 16.
when God committed them among themselves, and when they sheathed their Swords
in one another bowels; there was a trembling (says the Text) in the host, in
the field, and among all the People, insomuch that the Garrison and the
spoilers also trembled, and the Earth quaked, so that it was a very great
trembling, (or, a trembling of God) and the multitude melted away, and they
went on beating down one another. Such a kind of Earthquake peradventure it may
be, when the Mighty man, and man of Name, shall stumble against the mighty, and
both fall down together. Briefly; It will be such a shake as will make a man to
eat his bread with quaking, and to drink his water with trembling and with
carefulness, as sometimes the Prophet did, Ez^k. 12.18. At what time, the Sword
shall devour flesh, and be drunk with the blood of the slain from the beginning
of revenges upon the Enemy. And when shall this be? Upon the back of the
Witnesses Ascension, when once a Reformation (on their part) rises upon their
rising; for then, and not till then, will this Earthquake be; which yields
some matter of Comfort to the People of God, that they are so well prepared
against such a shaking time; for now that they are drawing nearer to God, he
will be their strong Tower to which they shall run and be set aloft. Wherefore,
though the Heavens and the Earth shall shake, the Lord will be the hope of his
People, and the strength of the Children of Israel. So much for this Effect of
the Earthquake.

And the remnant were affrighted.] This is the third Effect of it. The Remnant;
Here is Mercy in the midst of Judgment, that all in this tenth part of the City
are not slain, a remnant lives and escapes. God is so far here from
destroying the whole City, that he destroys not all the Street. But yet the
Remnant are affrighted, flying, like as the People fled from the Earthquake in
the days of Vzziah, Zach. 14.5. Or as the Israelites, that were round about
the Tents of Korah and his Company fled when the Earthquake swallowed up the
Rebels, saying, Lest the Earth swallow us up also, Numb. 16.34.

This is the case of this Remnant, who are not simply afraid, but affrighted,
and even at their wits end; they are not slain with the Earthquake, but almost
killed with fear, yet spared and have their lives given them for a prey. God
might justly have destroyed the whole Street where his Witnesses were slain,
and lay dead, but he is satisfied with the Sacrifice of the lives of Seven
thousand men of Names, and it is somewhat what a considerable price; for if so
many men of Names fall, how many thousands of little or no name are slain
together with them? As Ahasuerus said to Ester; The Jews have slain five
hundred men in Shusan the Palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they
done in the rest of the Kings Provinces? But God's Eye is especially upon the
Fatlings and the best of the Flock, that they may be offered up in sacrifice to
him, and it is somewhat like his sacrifice in Bozrah, and his slaughter in the
Land of Idumea, where his sword is filled with blood, and made fat with
fatness, with the blood of Lambs and Goats, and with the fat of the kidneys of
Rams, when the Unicorns come down with them, and the Bullocks with the Bulls,
in the day of the Lord's Vengeance, and the Year of Recompenses for the
controversies of Zion, Isa. 34.6, 7, 8. And it is also considerable, that what
is wanting in the Number of the slain, is made up in the fall of the Tenth of
the City; a part only are slain, but the whole City falls in a degree.

4. And they gave Glory to the God of Heaven.] This is the last Effect of the
Earthquake. But how do they give God glory? 1. By confessing their Sins,
especially in ought that they did relating to the slaying of the Witnesses. My
Son (says Joshua to Achan) give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, Josh. 7.19. 2. They repent also of the sins which they
confess; for therein also is God glorified, Rev. 10.9. 3. They give God the
glory of his Patience and tender mercy in sparing them, and plucking them as a
brand out of the burning, Lam. 3.22. 4. They glorify his Justice and righteous
dealings with the bloody Street, saying, Thou art righteous, O Lord, because
thou have judged thus, for they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and
of thy Witnesses, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy;
Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.
And this glory is given to the God of Heaven, as in my Text, i. e. to the true
God; for as Cyrus says in his Proclamation of liberty to the Jews, The God of
Heaven, he is the God, Ezra 1.2, 3. The Remnant is now convinced of their
former Atheisms, Superstitions and Idolatries, and give glory to the God of
Heaven.

But is this Acknowledgment extorted from them, Quest.
or is it freely given by them, as by such whose hearts are now unfeignedly
turned to the Lord?

It is apprehended by some, Answ.
that it is done by the power only of a strong Conviction in the time of this
great Judgment and Vengeance of God upon his Adversaries, but not done by such
whose hearts are now truly turned to the Lord: For the Judgments of God do
sometimes wring such acknowledgments from wicked men, as when Pharaoh could say
after the plague of the Hail, I have sinned this time, the Lord is righteous,
Exodus 9.27.
and I and my people are wicked. And as Joshua said to Achan, My son, Josh.
7.19, 20.
give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto
him; And Achan said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and
thus and thus have I done. See also Judge. 1.7. and 2 Chronicles. 12.6. and 1 Samuel
6.5. But others do apprehend that this Remnant here were effectually wrought
upon by this terrible hand of God, and gave glory to him in sincerity. But I
find no reasons given for either opinion, yet I incline to this second. If
indeed this Remnant were such as had been totally immerst and drenched in
Popery, I should have been of the first opinion; for the Jurats and sworn
Creatures of the Man of sin, cannot repent to give glory to God whatever
judgments are inflicted on them, as you may clearly see, Rev. 9.20, 21. and
16.9, 10, 11, 21. The Spirit of Popery is a Spirit of dedolence and
impenitency, because the complete Worshippers of the Beast are noted as
obstinate Reprobates, Rev. 13.8. and, 14.9, 10.

This Remnant therefore were only sprinkled and dipped a little into Popery, and
such may and often do repent of their Idolatries and Superstitions. And by this
you see that there is a possibility that this remnant may truly repent and give
Glory to the God of Heaven. Yea, and it is probable that they do effectually
repent in giving Glory unto God.

For it is here said, that a tenth part of the City fell by this Earthquake;
now, How did it fall? Two ways, as has been said; 1. A part therereof fell by
being Slain, as a just recompense for Slaying the Witnesses, upon whose
ascension it immediately follows. 2. The remnant also of the tenth part fell,
but how? By falling away from the Power and Dominion of the Beast.
For if they had still persisted in their former courses and adhered to the
Bestian Interest, the tenth part of the City had not fallen by falling away,
because a remnant had still stood their ground. And this kind of falling, by
falling off, was also a Righteous Judgment of God upon the Beast, whose Power
is hereby diminished; for the Remnant throws off the Papal Hierarchy, never to
be reassumed more by them; and God is pleased to preserve them (as with
submission I conceive) to make use of them for future against the Beast and his
Interest; Perhaps it is the first of the ten horns which shall hate the Whore,
and make her Desolate and Naked, etc. Surely this remnant is reserved for for
some singular purpose, seeing they are snatched thus out of this dreadful
ruin; for they related unto them that were Slain, in that they are called
their Remnant; It seems therefore as if God intended to turn them into an
Horn wherewith to goar and wound the Beast.

This Street then is, from the time of this Earthquake, and so forward, for
ever cut off from the great City, and being now purged, partly by Divine
Vengeance on the bloody men of Names, and partly by the repentance of the
Remnant, it is thenceforth consecrated unto the Government of Jesus Christ.

This Remnant then is reserved, 1. As a Trophy of Victory and Triumph. 2. For
some signal Service to be performed afterward by them under the seventh
Trumpet, which follows quickly upon the back of this Earthquake, as you may
see, v. 14.
And thus I have opened (as God has helped this passage of the Earthquake and
the several effects of it.

But now it may be inquired, Quest.
what may be the cause of this great Earthquake? As the Psalmist says, What
ailed ye, O Mountains, that ye skiped like Rams, and ye little Hills like Lambs?

You know what follows in answer hereunto; Answ.
Tremble thou Earth at the Presence of the Lord, at the Presence of the God of
Jacob. It comes to pass therefore from the Presence of God among his People,
coming down to visit the Street where his Witnesses were Slain. Deuteronomy. 21.15. --
When under the Law a man was found slain in the Field, and it was not known
who slew him, the City that lay next unto the slain Man was to purge it self
from that blood, and the Elders thereof were to come and wash their hands over
a slain Heifer, and to say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have
our eyes seen it, etc. God is tender of the Lives of men, especially of the
lives and blood of his Saints which is precious in his sight, and he will
certainly make inquisition for it in due time, Ps. 9.12. And when he goes about
this act of Justice, what will he do to that City, or to that Street, where his
Witnesses are found slain; not slain (I say) in a Field by unknown hands, but
in the open Street, yea, and by them that dwell therein, and who cannot thus
wash their hands? He will call them to a severe account, For there is a cry in
the Ears of God for Vengeance.

1. In the general, There is a cry of many and great sins in the Streets, for
where such a sin is committed as Witness-slaughter, surely there are many other
crying sins. Now the sins of a land may lie so heavy upon it, that they may
make it to shake and even to reel and rent again, like as a Cart may be so
heavy laden, that it may make the very Axle-tree to crack, and quite overturn
all. Isa. 24.19, 20.
The Earth (says the Prophet) is utterly broken down, the earth is clean
dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly, the earth shall reel to and fro like
a drunken man, and shall be removed like a Cottage. Why, what is that which
presses it down so greatly? It follows; And the transgression thereof shall
be heavy upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again. It must needs be a
mavelous weight that makes the Earth thus to move, yet such is the weight of
sin.

2. More particularly, there is the cry of blood in the Street, as I have said;
and it is the cry of the blood of the Witnesses. For though they are not
literally slain, i. e. not as men, but as Witnesses, yet the Lord calls it, and
accounts it a slaughter, yea, and their very enemies account them as naturally
dead; and they are greatly Oppressed, Vexed, and Silenced, Imprisoned,
Impoverished, and cruelly handled, and so, that it hasteneth also the Death of
some of them, Jer. 2.34.
and reaches also to the blood (as I may say) of many thousands of Souls who
depended upon their Ministry; and such blood has a loud cry in the ears of
God, and such a cry will shake the Earth wherever the sin is committed, and
remains unpurged. You know how the Martyrs under the fifth Seal cried with a
loud voice, Rev. 6.10, 12.
saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not Judge and Avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth? What then follows? And I beheld when
he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo, there was a great Earthquake, etc. You
have heard before of the greatness of that Earthquake, and how it shook and
quite overthrew the whole Roman Pagan Empire. 2 King. 24.4.
You know also that the blood shed by Menasseh could not be expiated by the
greatest reformation that was ever wrought, but the whole Land of Judah was at
last shaken to pieces for it. That land is extremely deplored that lies under
the guilt of blood, especially of slaying Christ's Witnesses. See 2 Chro.
36.15, 16. It laid Jerusalems house, i. e. the Temple, desolate, Matthew. 23.37,
38.

And when the Jews killed the Lord Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16.
and the Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, forbiding them to Preach to the
Gentiles that they might be saved, they filled up their sins, and the Wrath of
God came upon them to the uttermost. This is a filling and a finishing sin;
even Reformation it self (were it equal to Josiah's) cannot save that land from
a great Earthquake, and from such Vengeance as will make the ears of them who
hear it to tingle. What says the Prophet? The City sheddeth blood in the midst
of it, that her time may come; thou art become guilty in thy blood, and have
caused thy days to draw near, and art come even to thine years. Ezekiel. 22.3, 4.

3. There is yet another cry, and that is from the Prayers of God's people,
especially from under their Affliction. No doubt but the cries, and sighs, and
groans of the Children of Israel in Egypt were accompanied with many Prayers,
and it brought such vengeance upon Egypt, as you have scarce read the like. God
never forgets the cry of the humble. Ps. 9.12. Exodus 22.23.
If but a poor Widow or Fatherless child be afflicted, and they cry at all
unto me, I will surely hear their cry, says the Lord. And know thus much, that
the Prayers of one distressed Child of God may be such, that they may shake the
very Earth it self. What says David? In my distress I called upon the Lord,
Psalm. 18.6, 7.
and cried unto my God; He heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came
before him, even into his ears; Then the Earth shook and trembled, the
Foundations also of the Hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth, etc.
The Prayers of David in his distress shook Heaven, Earth, and Sea. And
wherefore is it that God says, I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, and
the Sea, and the dry land, and I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all
Nations shall come? I say, wherefore is this, and whence proceeds this great
concussion? Even from the desire of all the Saints that live among the Nations
in the world. They are oppressed and persecuted in the world, and they cannot
be quiet; upon this they cry out, and utter their desires, O that Jesus Christ
would come and deliver us, and plead our cause, and relieve us in our
distresses, and call the world to a reckoning! Even so come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. I tell you, This will cost the world a sound shaking. Little do people
imagine what the force of God's peoples prayers is, they have an Earth-shaking
power in them. The praying Saints are a thundering Legion. Samuel no sooner
cries to the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.10.
but he hears him and answers him with a dreadful discomfiting thunder upon
the Philistines. And when the Saints fall to prayer at the close of the seventh
Seal, Rev. 8.3.5.
presently follow Voices, and Thunderings, and Lightnings, and an Earthquake.
Act. 4.31.
When Peter and John were returned from their persecutors to their own company,
Act. 15.25.
they betake themselves to prayer, which was no sooner ended but the place was
shaken, where they were assembled together. And when Paul and Silas prayed and
sung praises to God in the prison, and in the stocks, suddenly (says the Text)
there was a great Earthquake, and the foundations of the prison were shaken,
and immediately all the doors were opened, and every ones bonds were loosed,
and the Keeper of the prison drew his Sword and would have killed himself. And
do we think now, that all the prayers that have been made within these few
years by the Saints in the world, will not end in a dreadful Earthquake? God
has already answered his people, and will again answer them, by terrible
things in righteousness. Thus you have seen the procuring causes of this
Earthquake. I shall conclude with some Consectaries, Informations and
Exhortations flowing from what has been opened to us.

1. By what we have heard in the Explication of this thirteenth verse, we have
a further proof of what sometime I said, That the Witnesses are slain not in
all parts of the great City, but in some one eminent Street thereof that has
not quitted and cast off the power of the Beast; wherefore I thus argue:

Where the revenge of God is inflicted for the slaying of the Witnesses, there,
and there only, are the Witnesses slain:

But the revenge of God is not inflicted upon the whole City for the slaying of
the Witnesses, but only on a tenth part thereof:

Therefore in that tenth part thereof, and there only, are the Witnesses slain.

For God proportioneth his Revenge unto the place of the slaughter, making it
commensurate and adequate thereunto, and does not exceed the bounds thereof.

2. In this dispensation we may see the singular patience of God toward the
Enemies of his Witnesses, in that he does not presently bring this great
Earthquake upon them; they may meet with many a sore concussion, during the
time of the slaughter, and presently after it is over; but yet God deferrs the
terrible Earthquake till the ascension of the Witnesses, and till that great
Voice from Heaven has said unto them, Come up hither, and that they have
ascended in a Cloud in the very sight of their Enemies. Which (by the way)
shows us plainly, as I touched it before, that this loud voice and call unto
them to ascend, does not proceed from the Powers and Rulers of this World, as
some have thought, for these are Enemies, and the men of names, who are to be
slain in the Earthquake presently upon the Ascension of the Witnesses. They
continue Enemies unto the very time of their destruction.

But that which I am speaking to, is the Patience of God toward that Street
where the Witnesses are slain; for God does not destroy the men of names so
soon as they have slain the Witnesses, no, nor so soon as the Witnesses are
risen and standing upon their feet; He tarrieth till they are ascended, and
gives his Enemies warning enough; but when once the Ascension time is over, and
Reformation of Churches, Families, and Saints on foot, the Earth will forbear
shaking no longer; there is then but an hour ( i.e. a very short time) between
the Ascension and the Earthquake.

3. We are showed the just Revenge of God upon these Enemies, in that he
slays them, a meet recompense for their slaying of the Witnesses. Thus, Rev.
13.10.
he that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity, and, he that kills
with the Sword, shall be killed with the Sword. So here, They that slay, shall
be slain; as it is written, Gen 9.6.
He that sheddeth blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Jer. 51.56.
The Lord God of Recompenses shall surely requite; he is as punctual in his
Justice, as powerful in his Patience.

4. In that the holy Ghost here seems to allude to the manner of great.
Earthquakes, which is to swallow up houses and their Inhabitants, so as Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up, though that was rather by the Earth
renting, than quaking, yet swallowed up they were, Numb. 16.32.
they and their houses and all the men that appertained to them, and their
goods; I say God seems to deal with these men of names, as with those Rebels
and their companions; As if God should say, they shall perish in the
gainsaying of Kore, and as so many Dathans and Abirams, and Rebels against the
God of Heaven; for such God accounts these, whatsoever these accounted the
Witnesses. Numb. 16.2.
And of these three men it is said, They rose up before Moses, with certain of
the Children of Israel, two hundred and fifty Princes of the assembly, famous
in the Congregation, men of renown. They were, just like these in my Text, viri
nominatissimi, men of great note and name; and so Mr. Aynsworth translateth the
word famous, in that place, Men of names, and he reckons them no less than
Statesmen, as you may see in his Exposition. And the like title also is given
to the oppressing Giants of the old World, whose foundation was overflowed with
a Flood; Genesis 6.4.
They are called Mighty men, and men of Renown.

You see then the account of God concerning these famous ones in my Text; They
slay the Witnesses as Rebels, and ere long themselves are slain of God, as such.

5. Whereas these many thousands were men of Names, it may denote (as Mr.
Brightman observes from the expression) that God does not fall blindfold with
his judgments upon men; he does not strike Andabatarum more, sed certo,
nominatimque, even so certainly and knowingly, as if he named these great men;
There Is for you, such a one, says he, and there is your reward, says he to
another, naming him, etc. God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall
they be wounded, Psalm. 64.7. He does not shoot like that Syrian who hit Ahab at
adventure, but he aims always when he shoots, and never misseth the mark.

6. God then is no respecter of persons; Job 34.19.
He accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards the Rich more than the
Poor.. Nay, he has a special eye upon the men of Names, for you must know that
this Earthquake here does slay many a man, hundreds and thousands no doubt
nullius nominis, of no name or fame at all, but these you see are not here
mentioned, but only the viri Nominum, the men of great renown. And God will do
this dreadful Execution upon them by a remarkable hand from Heaven; for
Earthquakes are in a special manner from God, there is no hand of man in them.
The mighty shall be taken away without hand, Job 34.20. That is, without the
hand of any man; God will do it by an outstretched hand from Heaven.

7. It is very observable, That in Gods execution of Judgment here, he falls
most eminently upon the principal Ringleaders, the men of Names, whose hands
especially were employed in slaying the Witnesses. Many others of little or no
name were engaged also in the slaughter, but the men of Names stirred them up
and set them on work, and led them the way also by their Examples and
Authority. Wherefore God takes notice of them especially, and the stroke falls
most remarkably upon them as the great Oppressors of the Witnesses, and
hinderers of Reformation. He takes off these therefore, and removes them out of
the way, as intending now to bring in Reformation contra gentes virosque
nominum, against all opposition whatsoever. For great men, if not also good,
are great opposers of that which is good; as God sometimes said to Ezekiel,
showing him five and twenty of his great Enemies, and among them Jaazaniah and
Pelatiah Princes of the people; Son of man, says God, These are the men that
devise Mischief and give wicked Counsel in this City; Therefore prophesy
against them, Ye have multiplied your slain in this City, and ye have filled
the Streets thereof with the slain, etc. I will execute judgments upon you, and
ye shall fall by the Sword, etc. And says Ezekiel, It came to pass when I
prophesied, that Pelatiah dyed, Ezekiel. 11.1. -- See also Numb. 25.4.

Thus when the sixth Seal was opened, and that the Judgments of God fell most
formidably upon the Roman Pagan Empire for the most horrid bloody Persecutions
used against the Christians, the most righteous God began with the
ringleaders, the viri nominum are set in the front of the Sufferers, viz. The
Kings of the Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty men; and after them come in the men of small names,
every bondsman, and every freeman, Rev. 6.15. The Earthquake there mentioned
shook all the Empire from the highest to the lowest, but it began with, and
fell heaviest on, the men of Names, Kings, great men, rich men, chief Captains,
and Mighty men. For as for the Bondmen and Freemen, they were set on by their
Kings, and great men, and rich men, and chief Captains, and mighty men; That
is, the Informers, and Catch-poles, and Jaylors, and poor Soldiers, were but
as a company of boudmen to the Kings, great men, and men of Names; and they
must do what the Powers will command them, but (you see) that will not excuse
them when the Earthquake comes; but yet the Grandees are the men in the Van
that are most eminently shaken and thrown down thereby; they shall pay for it
to the purpose.

8. We may here behold the riches of God's grace, that he not only spares a
Remnant of his, and his Witnesses Enemies, that they are not slain with the
rest in the Earthquake, but he gives to them also the grace of repentance.
They might have drunk of the same Cup with those men of renown, as being a
Remnant of them, especially as to their enmity, but God lets them live to
repent and give him glory. I suppose these to be such as were persecutors as
well as those others, but they did it ignorantly in unbelief, and therefore
they obtain this mercy; peradventure the other (at least many of them) are such
as transgress of malicious wickedness, and rebel against the light, which is a
very high provocation. They are nothing like so ignorant as malicious and
despighthful, being desperate sworn enemies to Jesus Christ, his People, Cause
and Interest. Yet even the spared Remnant are bad enough, as known and
professed enemies to the God of Heaven, to whom now they give glory, whose
glory and honor they never cared for before. O the riches of the glorious
grace of God, that he should save such as these, not only from the destruction
of the Earthquake, but of Hell it self! Let us exalt this inestimable grace,
and believe, love, and praise, and give glory to the God of Heaven for their so
doing; and in the mean while, let none despair, when such men as these repent.

9. They that are the People of God and dwell in that bloody Street, may have
hopes, that God will not utterly destroy it, seeing there is a Remnant that
will be spared, which shall be as the shaking of an Olivetree and the gleaning
of Grapes after the vintage; is ended. You know what devastation God makes by
his four sore Judgments, Ezekiel. 14.22. And yet says the Lord, A remnant shall
be left, and they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and
their doings, and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought
upon you. Isa. 6. ult.
God will not u utterly forsake that Street, but yet in it shall be a tenth,
and it shall return, and shall be eaten as a Teyl-tree, and as an Oak, whose
substance is in them when they cast their leaves; for so the holy seed shall be
the substance thereof. God will as it were tithe this tenth part, and
consecrate it and the land unto himself for some signal and singular service to
his Name. And as God will destroy the Microcosm and little world in that land
by this Earthquake, viz. the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Heavens and Earth thereof;
so he will create new Heavens (as I may say) and a new Earth therein, and the
former shall be remembered no more.

Lastly, We see what a shaking world we live in; Let our hearts therefore hang
loose to the things of this world, to which they are so apt to adhere. How soon
God may shake us, we know not, and shaking (especially of the earth) is in
order to the removing of the things that are shaken, Hebr. 12.26, 27. And when
men are sorely shaken, they had not need to take hold on things that shake, and
which are ready to remove away from under them; they have need to lay hold on
stable and abiding things that will stand fast and not forsake them. If any
should say, This shaking may be far enough off from us; Let no man think so;
For admit that this be not the time nor place spoken of, in Rev. 11.7, 8. Yet
where there is any thing like it, there will be that also which is as like unto
this Earthquake. Ezekiel. ^3.10, 13.
What says the Lord to Ezekiel? If a righteous man beget a son that is a
robber, a shedder of blood, and that does the like to any one of these things,
viz. there spoken of, he shall not live, he shall surely dye, his blood shall
be upon him. That does the like, etc. He does not say, That does the very same.
If an Hue and Cry pursue after a shedder of blood, and find a man that is very
like him, and apprehend him upon suspicion, and it falls out upon examination
that the person apprehended has also shed blood in like manner, though he is
not the person that shed the blood inquired after, yet he shall not live, he
shall surely dye, his blood shall be upon him: Even so, etc. God will never put
up the slaying of his Witnesses, though (perhaps) it may not be that slaying
here spoken of, but only the like unto it. There is no satisfaction to be taken
for the life of a murderer, nor is there any City of Refuge appointed in the
law for him, Numb. 35.31. -- Deuteronomy. 21.1.-10.
he must be taken away from God's altar, or slain at it, as Joab was,
otherwise, the whole land lies under the guilt of blood.

You know what Hanun did to David's Ambassadors, who were sent to him in mere
love and good will. He did not slay them, but shamefully abused them. 2 Samuel
12.30, 31.
O how was the land of the children of Ammon shaken for this abuse! The Kings
crown was taken from his head and set on David's, the Ammonites slain, Rabbah
sacked and plundered, and the people of the Land put under sawes, and harrows,
and axes of iron, and made to pass through the brick-kiln. And yet, what is this
abuse of David's Ambassadors, to that of Christ's, which we have lived to see?
And what will the Lord then do, how dreadfully will he avenge the high and
horrible contempt of his Messengers? Prepare therefore for times of great
concussions; perhaps they may prevent some of your deaths, if not prove also
the cause of them. Hang loose (I say) to the world, and be in the number of the
ascenders, get up above the Earth, and approach nearer unto Christ in
Reformation and Holiness, and then, if the worst should come, you may sing
Luther's Psalm, Ps. 46. And be not so sollicitous about the Earthquake, as
about the Ascension that immediately precedeth it; for the Earthquake must
come, but woe be to them when it comes who are not got above the Earth. It is
the great mercy of God to defer the Earthquake till after the Ascension, for
the greater safety to his people; which I conceive to be a special reason why
it is deferred till then; though another may be, That a foundation may be laid
for the carrying on the work of Reformation the better, when the Earthquake is
at an end.

And it promises well to the Street, that God will not utterly destroy it, nor
take away his Gospel from it; 1. In that he still continues his Witnesses in
it. 2. Because Reformation and Holiness are ascending when the Earthquake
comes.
Now therefore let it be the care and endeavor of the People of God, 1. To
rise. 2. To ascend.
1. To rise; what is that? To hold forth the Spirit of Life from God; They must
walk in opposition to their slain condition; now, they were slain by the loss
of spiritual life, courage, and activity; therefore they must rise by a
contrary Spirit. 2. Let it be their endeavor also to ascend, i. e. to reform,
viz, Churches, Families, Hearts and Lives.


And if we must thus ascend, then it will follow, that we must not stay at that
pitch of Reformation to which we have already attained, but must yet get up
higher; there is a great deal more yet to be done. For perhaps some may say,
Are we not ascended already? No; we are not yet come to the utmost of our
Resurrection, which (as we have heard) is gradual. True; there has been a kind
of rising and ascending of late years; for wherefore are the Witnesses slain,
but for their climbing up so high in their Seperations and Professions? And yet
(you see) they must ascend up higher; For we are not risen up so high above
former times, as we must yet rise up higher above our present selves; God will
not be satisfied with our Resurrection when it is come to its utmost degree,
but then he requires also an Ascension, which will be gradual likewise, unto
the time of the pouring out of the seventh Vial.

FINIS.

