A COMMENT UPON Christ's last Prayer In the Seventeenth of JOHN.

Wherein is opened, The Union Believers have with God and Christ, and the
glorious Privileges thereof.

Besides many other Gospel Truths, there is also showed,

1 That the end why the Saints receive all glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire, and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful Servants. 8 That our Union, and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.
By that Faithful, and known Servant of Christ, Mr. THOMAS HOOKER, late Pastor
of the Church at Hartford in New England; sometimes Preacher of the Word at
Chelmsford in Essex, and Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridg.

Printed from the Authors own Papers, written with his own Hand. And attested
to be such, in an Epistle, By Thomas Goodwin, And Philip Nigh.

London: Printed by Peter Cole at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

MR Hooker On the Seventeenth of John Being his Seventeenth Book, made in
New England.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE more eminent Matter of these Sermons, is our mystical Union with God and
Christ; a Subject but rarely handled by Divines, and then but overly in
comparison to what those other Benefits by Christ have been, that yet but flow
from this, or do accompany it: So as any small advance of Light into this
Mystery, is highly to be valued, specially from so good a Hand, or Heart
rather, so deeply experienced, and acutely insighted, as was our Author.

This Head, though it lay in the Road of another Course of Ministry the Author
held, namely, the opening the whole Work of the Application of our Redemption,
in all the parts thereof (shortly to follow this into public view, so far as
he had proceeded in it) whereof this of Union, was designed one (as by his
Draught, or Scheme of that Work to be Prefaced to the whole, appears) and
accordingly should have been largely treated on, Subject wise, apart by it self
in its due place and order. Yet whether it was that himself, fore-apprehending
he might not live so long (as he did not) to arrive thereat in that Method (and
yet withal considering the more special necessity of this Subject to this Age)
he therefore did anticipate this miscellaneous Treatment of it, is not for us
to say* only we may surely affirm, that our all-wise God (who disposes of the
Gifts, Ministrations, and Operations of, and by his faithful Servants) he
foreseeing all, secretly guided him to this Precursory handling of it in this
way of Comment upon the seven last Verses of Christ's last Prayer; which we may
well suppose to have been intended by himself, but as a preliminary Essay of
that more ample, and set Tractate on this Argument, he afterward intended;
because he intermingleth therewith, Observations about other high, and glorious
Gospel Truths (whereof this Soil, of al other Scriptures, must be supposed most
fertile) as the Text did give occasion.

And surely he was by the same Divine hand as specially directed, both, in his
Choice of this Scripture, for his Ground unto this Subject; which being the
Conclusion of Christ's most solemn last Prayer, must be supposed to express the
very bottom of his heart, and what lay deepest therein, and therefore came forth
last: As also in the Occasion on which he chose to preach these Sermons which
was then, when this Union is designed to be sealed up to Believers more
conspicuously than in other Ordinances, namely, at the Administration of the
Lords Supper and toward his latter end: conjunct with the Solemnization
whereof, even among his Apostles, it was that Christ did pour forth this Prayer
unto his Father before his Death. And indeed he that is spiritual, and reads
these Explanations, will readily find, and must acknowledge, that he was
proportionably raised and assisted by a Gospel Spirit, as the Dignity of the
Matter, and Solemnity of the Dignity of the Matter, and Solemnity of the
Occasion, meeting in such a Conjunction, did require; it being found in
experience, that according to the elevation of the Occasion, and Sublimity of
the Matter discoursed of, the Holy Ghost raises, and enlarges the Spirits of
an holy man of God, that is experienced in what he speaks.

The true stating the Bounds, for kind, or degree of that Union with God, which
the Saints are admitted to by God, is of great use and necessity to this Age;
the Fate whereof, is erring either on the right hand, or the left, in the
greatest Points of Religion, and in this Point, more grossly and wretchedly
than in any other, yea, and in the other (as may easily be observed) upon
occasion, first of a misunderstanding of this one, and particularly of some
passages and Clauses in this Prayer of our Lord, which here have passed the
search and discovery of our Author, as [that they may be one as we are one,
etc.] which some have dared to interpret to be Unity, that is, Union, to be
oneness in Nature with God himself; others to be at least a sameness of Union
for kind, with that which the man Jesus holds with the Natural Son of God;
whereof one is a contradiction to the Nature of Creature, and Creator, as Paul
has set it, Romans 1.25. the other to Christ's being Mediator and Head between
God and us, Of whom we ARE in Christ Jesus, who is that one Lord, and we by
him; his Union therefore Primary, and Original; ours Secondary, and Derivative.
Set but then, and keep the true distance between God and his Elect as
Creatures, and between Christ and those Elect, as whose all they are from God,
is in and through Christ; so as that the Creature can never be one in Nature
with God, who alone is blessed for ever, and that the Saints shall never be one
Person with the Son of God, who is God blessed for ever. And whatever Unions or
Communions with God, are, or can be supposed to be next to these two, to be
sure the Saints are, and shall be partakers thereof; for next to himself, and
his Son, they are Gods Beloved, and the only beloved of him.

Besides, what Glory, and spiritual quickening our (Author giving the very
Life-meaning of our Lord concerning this Union) an holy heart will secretly, and
suddenly find breaking in upon it, and it self inspired withal, in the reading:
It will together therewith confound, without speaking a word of set Confutation,
all such lewd mistakes, which it is better to let sleep, and vanish into
eternal darkness, and silence, than to make mention of them.

And upon al these accounts, we have great boldness to commend these Sermons to
the World, withal assuring the Reader, that they are all as they were penned
under his own hand: Praying with all earnestness, that the holy Spirit of
Christ, who dwelt in the Author so richly, and blessed his preaching of them
with so much life and power; yea, that filled our Savior Christ's heart first in
his praying, and uttering these words; and then his beloved Disciples so many
years after in the penning of them, would graciously accompany this quickening
and Heavenly Exposition of them, to the hearts of al spiritual souls that read
this.

June, 14. 1656. Thomas Goodwyn, Philip Nigh.

The Name of several Books printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near
the Exchange.
Mr. Hookers Books that are printed.

Eleven Books made in New England, by Mr. Thomas Hookers and printed from his
own Papers, written with his own hand; are now Published in three Volums, two
in Quarto, and one in Octavo, Viz. The Application of Redemption by the
Effectual work of the word and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost
sinners unto God. The first Book on 1 Pet. 1.18.19. The second on Math. 1.21.
The third on Luke 1.17. The fourth on 2 Cor. 6.2. The fifth on Math. 20.5, 6, 7.
The sixth on Revel. 3.17. The seventh on Romans 87. The eight on John, 6.44. The
Ninth on Isa. 57.15. The Tenth on Act. 2.37. The Last, Viz. Christ's Prayer for
Believers, on John 17.

There are six more Books of Mr. Hookers, now printing in two Volums.

Nineteen several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns. Viz.
1 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt, and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace* or, the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual Life, and Inbeing of
Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger* 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. 13 Scripture Light, the most
sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and Visions. 2. Natural and
Supernatural Dreams. 3. Impressions with, and without Word. 4. Light and Law
within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7 Humane Reason. 8.
Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons on 2 Pet. 1.19.
14 Christ in Travel: Wherein 1 The Travel of his soul. 2 The first and after
effects of his Death. 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4 And His satisfaction
therein. Are opened and cleared in three Sermons, on Esaias, 53.11.
15 A Lifting up for the Cast-down, in case of, 1. Geat sin. 2. Weakness of
Grace. 3. Miscarriage of Duties. 4. Want of Assurance. 5. Affliction. 6.
Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8. Unserviceableness. 9. Discouragements from the
Condition it self. Delivered in thirteen Sermons on Psalm, 42.11.
His Four Sermons concerning 16 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 17 Sins of
Infirmities. 18 The False Apostle tried and Discovered. 19 The Good and means
of Establishment. And the great Things Faith can Do, and Suffer.
Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1
What Contentment is, 2 It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 The Excellencies of it,
4 The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it.
2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is
showed, 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14.
4 A Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly
mindedness is, 2 The great Evil there of, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse.
Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of Heavenly Mindedness and Walking
with God, on Genesis 5.24. and on Phil. 3.20.
5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of
Hosea, being now complete. 8 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding Sinfulness of
Sin, on Job, 36 11. 9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 10 Of Hope, on 1 John.
3.3. 11 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.
Eleven several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and
Astrology.
1 The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and Several Sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man. Being chiefly a
Transl^tion of the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius,
now living; Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above
fifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few Years,
having been eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wan^ed the
Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the
Medicines for the Cure of them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 2
The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several parts
of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than ever
was in English before. 3 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen' s Method
of Physic. 4 The English Physician Enlarged. 5 A Directory for Midwives, or a
Guide for Women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every sheet, and Illustrated
with diverse new Plates. 6 Gal^u's Art of Physic, with a larg^ Comment. 7 A New
Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 8 A Trestise of the Rickets, 9
Medicaments for the Poor, or Physic for the Common People. 10 Health for the
Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic. 11 Riolanus Anatomy, in which (with the
Anatomy) is exactly described 1. The Diseases incident to every Part of the
Body of Man. 2. How the Diseases are Seated in each Part. 3. The Cure of each
Disease as it is seated in that Part.

A Godly and fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Mister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.

The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

Vox Pacifica, or a persuasive to peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament Time.

Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr. Phillips of Christ's Genealogy.

Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Convenant, showing that they oblige not.

A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. (...) Samuel Stone in
New England.

A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are Answered, 1. Whereof
Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors have an
Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be subject to the
Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4 How far the People are to obey
their Governors. 5 Whether all the people have, be their Governors. 6 Whether
it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor. 7 What Confidence is to be given to
Princes.


The Compassionate Samaritan.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcemen.

A Sacred Penegerick. By Stephen Martial.

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortality of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

King Charts his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Trial.

Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises.

A Vindication of Free Grace; Endeavoring to prove, 1 That we are not elected
as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds, but
persons. 2 That Christ did not by his Death intend to save all men, and
touching those whom he intended to save, that he did not die for them only, if
they would believe, but that they might believe. 3 That we are not justified
properly by our believing in Christ but by out Christ, believing in him. 4.
That which differenceth one man from another, is not the improvement of a
common ability restored through Christ to all men in general, but a principle
of Grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson.


Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.
The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the
Scaffold.

The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel.

The Discipline of the Church (...) New England, by the Churches and Synod
there.

A Relation of the Barbados.

A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England; by
Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayh^w.

The Institutes of the Laws of England, by John Cowel. Octavo.

A description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio; or the Turkish Emperors Court.
By John Greaves. Octavo.

The reigning error Arraigned at the Bar of Scripture, and Reason. By Franscis
Fulwood. Octavo.

The state of Future Life. By Thomas white. Twelves.

The Royal and delightful Game of Picquet, written in French, and now rendered
into English. Octavo.

De copore Poli^^^: or, The Elements of Law, moral, and politic. By Thomas
Hobbs of Malmsbury.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Twelves.

The Parliament Fa^t.

These several Books of Physic and Chyrurgerie will shortly be printed in
English.

Reverius Observations, with fifteen hundred and seventie other Histories and
Observations of other men.

Riolanus Anatomy.

Bartholinus Anatomy.

All the Works of Daniel Sennerius.

The Idea of Practical Physic, being a complete Body of Physic.

And all Fernelius his Works.

Francisci Tayleri, Capitula Patrum: Hebraice and Latin edita. Una cum
Annotationibus sensum locorum difficilium Exprimentibus.

Francisci Tayleri, Lamentationes Jeremiae vatis, Denuo e fontibus Hebraicis
translatae, cum Paraphrasi Chaldaica, Masora magna and parva, and Commentariis
Rabbi Shelomoh, Jarchi and Aben Ezrae, e Buxtorfii Bibliis magnis excerptis.

Mr. Buroughs, on 1 Cor. 5 7. and 18, 19.29. And fifty nine Sermons on
Matthew, 11.28, 29, 30. Are Printing.

The Contents of Mr. Hooker's seventeenth Book, made in New England.
JOHN, 17.20.
CHrist's Prayer as a Mediator. Page 1 The excellency of that Prayer Page 2 The
Parts of it 1 For himself, to verse 6. ib. 2 For his Servants ibid.
DOCT. 1.
The first especial scope of prayer, should be for such things as do more
especially concern us. ibid. The Subjects of our Saviors prayer, are set forth
two ways Page 3 1 From their Quality, They shall believe. Page 4 2 From a
comparison of equality, not only for the Apostles, but for all Page 4
For Explication; there is no difficulty in the words, but what is meant by
their Word. ibid. That is the Gospel which they preached ibid.
Their word opposed to two things ibid. 1 To the Law ibid. 2 To the Doctrines
of men Page 5

DOCT. 2.
The word of the Gospel, is the only ordinary me^^^ to work Faith. ibid. Reas.
1. ibid. Reas. 2. Page 7 Reas. 3. ibid. Use 1. Of Terror. Page 8 Use 2. For
Instruction, and Comfort. Page 9 Use 3. Examination Page 10 Use 4. Exhortation
ibid.
DOCT. 3.
Saving Faith has the Lord Jesus for its Object. Page 11 The Second thing is,
The Comparison of equality ibid.
DOCT. 4.
The Interceding prayer, or Intercession of our Savior, does alike respect all.
Page 12 Christ's Intercession was intended for all Believers alike. ib. Three
things opened 1 The Nature, and manner of Christ's Intercession Page 13 2 The
works and virtue of it. 3 The Reasons of the Point. ibid.
Quest. What are those spiritual affairs of ours? Page 14. Answ. They appear in
three Particulars ibid. The Reasons are three. Page 16 1 Because Christ
indifferently undertook to be our Mediator ibid. 2 Because it is common to all
alike 17 3 Because it is necessary to all alike ibid.
Use 1. For Instruction ibid. Use 2. For Direction Page 19 Use 3. Consolation
ibid. Use 4. Terror. Page 20 Use 5. Exhortation to Believers Page 21
DOCT. 5.
Christ has especial care of such as shall be Believers even in the worst
condition of their Unbelief. Page 22 See this made good in some particulars, 1.
In the several degrees of it. 2. The Reason. 3. The Use. Page 23
The virtue of Christ's prayer appears in five particulars. ibid. The Reasons
are three 1 From the sovereignty of Gods will Page 28 2 From the Riches of Gods
mercy in Christ ibid 3 It is the scope also of Christ's coming ibid.
Use 1. Of Instruction Page 29 Use 2. Matter of admiration. Page 31
Christ's Prayer for Believers.
Ver. 21: That they all may be one, etc. page 35 The Exordium ibid. The things
Christ prays for, referred to two Heads page 36 1 Concerning their spiritual
welfare here ibid. 2 For the top of their Glory in another World ibid.
That which Christ begs for, is that they may be all one Page 37 This is, first
propounded Secondly, amplified by four several Circumstances ibid.
DOCT.
The chief privilege of the Saints, is from Christ's prayer, that they may be
all one Page 38 Enquiry 1 Of what kind of Unity our Savior speaks ibid. 2 What
that Unity is ibid. Answ. 1. Negatively 2. Affirmatively Unity of Love is not
the chief aim of the Text, proved negatively by two Reasons. Page 39, 40 2
Affirmatively Here is meant the unity of that spiritual Relation, which they
have to Christ, and in him to God. ibid. Two things to be unfolded to show
wherein this Unity consists Page 41 1 How the Son is one with the Father ibid.
2 How the Saints must be one in them ibid.
Four short Conclusions to express them by Page 41, 42, 43. The Sum of all that
has been said Page 44 The Reasons Reas. 1. Our Union with God the Father, was
the next end intended by Christ in the great work of Redemption. Page 45, 46.
Reas. 2. This work being savingly made good upon the soul, makes way for the
enlarged expression of the fruits of Holiness. Page 49
Use 1. Of Instruction Page 50 Use 2. Of Comfort Page 51 Use 3. Of Exhortation
Page 54
Verse. 21. -- That the world may believe that thou have sent me. Page 56
The words opened ibid. Two particulars in the words Page 57 1 Christ is sent
by God the Father ibid. 2 God will have this believed by the Ungodly ibid.
Three things to open the phrase 58 1 What the weight of the phrase carries
ibid. 2 In what regard our Savior is said to be sent ibid. 3 Wherein this
sending lies ibid.
Use 1. Matter of wonderment Page 64 Use 2. For Comfort Page 65 Use 3. For
Direction ibid. Three things to be done. Page 66 For Explication enquire 1 What
is meant by the world. Page 67 2 How they are said to believe ibid. 3 What they
believe in the sending of Christ ibid.
Wicked men are called the World, from three things 1 Because the god of this
world rules in them ibid. 2 They are acted by the spirit of the world Page 68
3 They take contentment in the things of the world ibid.
Use. To discover our own condition Page 69 Quest. What is this Faith? Page 72
Answ. It includes two things mainly ibid. 1 It is a humane faith that grows
from force of argument ibid. 2 The evidence of this truth carries a control
with it. ib.
Quest. 3. What the World shall thus believe concerning Christ's sending Page 73
Answ. Our Savior looks at three things ibid. Three Reasons of this Page 74 Use,
Of Exhortation. Page 76
Verse 22. And the glory which thou have given me, I have given them, etc. Page
77
Three things to be attended here 1 What it is our Savior has received ibid. 2
What it is he does communicate ibid. 3 The End why ibid.
Two words opened touching the former ibid. 1 What is meant by Glory. 2 How
Christ is said to receive it ibid.
1 Glory signifies Gods incommunicable property Page 78 2 Glory is taken for
Grace ib. Hence we learn 1 How to judge of true Glory Page 79 2 We see the way
to walk, if we desire to be glorious Page 80 Quest. 2. How our Savior receives
this Page 82 Answ. As man, by gift ibid 1 It is given by Grace of personal
Union ibid. 2 It is given by way of Covenant Page 83 1 Our Savior received all
most glorious Grace in a most eminent manner. Page 84 2 He has it out of
measure. ibid. 3 Without alteration Page 85 Use 1. Of Examination Page 86 Use
2. Of Comfort to the Saints Page 87 Use 3. For Direction ibid. II. What Christ
gives to the Saints. ibid. 1 The Saints share in a like glorious Grace. ibid. 2
They have it by gift from our Savior ibid. The first Truth made good by four
Particulars Page 88 1 This Grace is inward and spiritual ibid. 2 This
impression of Grace is universal ibid. 3 They partake of all perfections of
these kinds Page 90 4 They share in the immutability of Grace ibid.
2. They receive this by Gift Page 91 For the Saints in Adam forfeited 1 This
Glory ibid. 2 They have nothing of worth to purchase it. Page 91 3 They cannnot
receive it otherwise than by gift Page 92
Object. Our Savior is bound to do this by Covenant. ibid. Answ. affirmatively:
He is so bound ibid. Quest. Put why did the Lord so engage himself? ibid. Answ.
Of his free Grace ibid. The Reasons of both Particulars together. ibid. 1 Taken
from the proportion between the first and second Adam Page 93 2 Christ's Humane
Nature received this Grace for that end ibid.
Use. This gives heavy evidence against wicked men Page 94 1 Against all
Hypocrites Page 95 2 Against those that please themselves with the apprehension
of some Grace Page 96
Use 2. Of Instruction ibid. Use 3. Matter of Thankfulness Page 97 Use 4.
Exhortation ibid. The way lies to Christ in four things ibid.
DOCT.
The End why the Saints receive all glorious Grace from Christ, is this, That
they may be one, as the Father and Son are one Page 99 Two Questions answered.
Page 99, 100 For the opening, do three things Page 102 1 Recall what this
oneness is. ibid. 2 How this oneness, and glorious Grace differ ibid. 3 The
Reasons of the Point. ibid.
The choicest of all Graces ought in special manner to be improved Page 105,
106 Use 1. Of Reprehension Page 107 Use 2. Matter of great Comfort ibid.
Verse 23. I in them, and thou in me, etc. 109
The words opened ibid.
DOCT.
Christ in special manner by his spiritual Presence, is in the Faithful Page
111 Three things here opened. 1 In what respect Christ is said to be in his
Page 111 2 What kind of presence this is ibid. 3 After what manner communicated
ibid.
Use 1. Caution to all, especially to the wicked Page 117 Use 2. To desire the
fellowship of the Faithful Page 118 Use 3. Trial of our selves. ib. Use 4.
Shows the excellency of the Saints, in their meanest condition Page 122 Use 5.
Matter of Comfort. Page 124 Use 6. Of Humiliation Page 125 Use 7. Of Admiration
Page 126 Use 8. Of Exhortation ibid. 1 To be affected with the presence of such
a Guest ibid. 2 To entertain him suitably Page 127 This is performed in four
things ibid. Thou in me. 1 The Father is in the Son. Page 129 2 The subsistence
of the Father in the Son, is the original whence the Saints come to be one with
the Son, and the Father ibid. The Nature of this, is opened in three things
Page 130 1 The ground whence this Inbeing proceeds ibid. 2 The ready way to
apprehend the Nature of it rightly ib. 3 How it may be attended in our Savior,
as God and Man ibid.
The first expressed in two Conclusions ibid. The second made good in four
Particulars Page 131 Three things for Explication of the third Page 134 This
manner of existing appears in the Humane Nature in a threefold regard, Viz. Of
Union. Mission. Operation. ib. The In-being of the Father in the Son, is the
first rise whence the Unity of the faithful with the Father and the Son, is
perfected. Page 137 The Doctrine opened ibid. 1 Recall what this oneness is.
Page 139 2 How it is perfected ibid.
This Imperfection lies in three things Page 140 1 In the unsoundness of our
spirit ibid. 2 Crossness to the power of the Spirit Page 141 3 When the soul
will join anything with Christ Page 142
Use 1. For Comfort Page 143 Use 2. For Exhortation Page 144
Ver. 23. That the world may know that thou have sent me, and loved them, as
thou love me. Page 145
The words contain a double end of this Dispensation. ib. 1 That the world may
know thou love me ibid. 2 That thou love them as thou love me ibid. Three
Particulars to open. Page 146 The first opened, as chiefly intended Page 147
That passage of John, 3.35. The Father loves the Son, is, 1 Opened. 2 The
Reasons given 3 The Uses propounded ibid.
Christ's Love shows it self in three Particulars ibid. Reasons upon which Love
grows, are three Page 151 1 Neerness. 2 Likenest. 3 Suitableness of worth. ibid.
Use 1. Of Reprehension Page 152 Use 2. Of Trial Page 154 Use 3. Of Exhortation
Page 155
DOCT.
God the Father loves the Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. Page 156 Two
things opened Page 158 1 Wherein the love of the Father to the Saints, shows it
self ibid. 2 That it is like to that wherewith he loved his Son ibid.
The first appears by three things ibid. 1 Love of Union 2 Complacence 3
Benevolence ibid.
Quest. o^ 2 These. 1.12. Is there any Name higher than the Name of Christ Page
163 Answered by expounding the place ibid. Use 1. Comfort to the Saints,
because God loves them. Page 164 Use 2. Terror to those that hate them ibid.
Use 3. They are worthy our Love Page 165 The Father loves the Saints, as he
loves his Son, proved in each particular ibid.
I. Instruction.
The sins of the faithful, are more grievous to God, than the sins of other
persons Page 170 Instance in two Evils, unto which the Saints are usually
subject Page 172 1 To question Gods love ibid. 2 To undervalue it ibid.
Object. Though God loves me, yet my grounds are weak Page 174 Answ. Gods love
is above all Graces thou can desire. ib.
2. Instruction.
Gods love to the Sainrs, is unchangeable Page 176 Use. Study to answer Gods
love in manner and measure Page 178 That the world may know thou have loved
them, as thou lovst me. Page 180 A double end mentioned by our Savior ibid. The
first End ibid. Two things noted from hence Page 181 1 It is lawful to pray
often for the same thing ibid. 2 We ought to pray earnestly that the power of
our Savior might be expressed Page 182
The Second End Page 183 Two Points in the words ib.
Quest. 1.
How wicked men can be truly said to know the love of God to Believers; which
is a thing so secret, that is not oftentimes made known to the Saints
themselves Page 185 Answ. threefold ibid.
Quest. 2.
Why do not the world know this in this life? Page 188 Answ. For a twofold
Reason ibid. Use, 1. Of Patience Page 191 Use, 2. Of Exhortation Page 192
Verse 24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me, etc.
Page 194
Two things especially attended in this Prayer ibid. We may attend four things
in this Prayer Page 195
The General Observation.
It Is the care of our Savior to seek for the welfare of his servants. Page 197
Use, 1. For Consolation Page 201 Use, 2. For Instruction Page 203 Use, 3. For
Direction Page 204 The particular Scope Page 205
DOCT.
All Believers are given to Christ, by God the Father. Page 205 Two Questions
for Explication of this Doctrine, answered Page 206 Reason 1. ibid. Reason 2.
Page 211 Use, 1. For Information Page 213 The second Particular Page 214 Three
Points observed especially in it ibid. Use, 1. Of Instruction Page 221 Use, 2.
Of Assurance Page 222 Use, 3. To make us willing to die Page 323 Use, 4. To see
the hainousness of rebellion against Christ in Glory Page 324 The words opened
in four particulars Page 325 Use, 1. Of Terror Page 332 Use 2. For Direction
Page 333 Use, 3. For Comfort Page 334
The particulars of it.
1 It cures all fears Page 335 2 Supplies al wants 3 Rescues from Enemies 4
Removes guilt of sin 5 Strengthens all Graces 6 Quickens all Duties 7 Gives
Eternal Life All proved severally. Use, 4. For Instruction Page 342 The eternal
Glory of Christ, is a gift of the eternal love of the Father Page 344 Two
things opened 1 What is meant by this love Page 345 2 How this love is the
cause of Glory ibid.
Reason 1 Page 348 Use, 1. For Trial Page 350 Use, 2. For Comfort Page 353 Use,
3. Of Direction ibid.
Doctrine from the Second Particular
Our Savior does desire to have the faithful in Heaven with himself. Page 354
Three Reasons Page 356 Use, 1. Of Instruction Page 358 Use, 2. Of Reprehension
Page 359 Use, 3. Of spiritual Comfort Page 360 Use, 4. Of Exhortation Page 362
1 What hinders Page 363 2 What helps this Union. Hindrances are three ib.
Helps are three Page 364 The third Particular is, That they might see his
Glory. Page 365
DOCT.
The happiness of our being in Heaven to see Christ's Glory Page 366 Three
things to be enquired 1 What this Glory is Page 368 2 What it is to see it
ibid. 3 How the sight of this glory brings happiness ibid.
For the second Enquiry, consider 1 What his beholding implies Page 370 2 The
manner how it is done ibid.
This manner appears in three things Page 371 To the third Particular, a double
Reason propounded Page 376 Use, 1. Of Instruction Page 379 Use, 2. To Examine
Page 380 Use, 3. Of Direction Page 381 Means are three ibid.

Verse 25, 26. The Verse contains the close of our Saviors Prayer Page 383.
1 A description of the Person to whom be prays Page 384 2 The Prayer it self,
wherein are four Particulars ibid. Two Points considerable 1 We must look unto
Gods excellency, whence we may receive what we pray for Page 388 2 God in
faithfulness dispenses his fatherly Love to us Page 390
Two things opened 1 Wherein Gods faithfulness consists ibid. 2 The reason why
be thus dispenses his love ibid.
Use, 1. For Instruction Page 392 Use, 2. Consolation Page 393 Use, 3. Reproof
Page 394 II. The Prayer it self Page 395
DOCT.
The wicked know not the Fatherly love of God Page 396 Obj. Learned men that
have studied this point, may be ignorant of it Page 397 Answ. four ways Page
398 The Sum of all in brief Page 399 Reas. 1. Gods secrets must be discerned by
Gods Spirit Page 402 Use, 1. Of Instruction Page 404 Use, 2. Of Terror Page 405
Object. I hope I have somewhat more than the world Page 407 Answ. By the way to
try it ib.
DOCT.
The disposition of our Savior, and the Saints toward God, is wholly cross to
the world Page 408 Three Reasons Page 409 Use, 1. Of Instruction Page 413 Use,
2. Examination Page 416 O righteous Father, etc. Page 418 The words opened
ibid.
DOCT.
The Lord Christ has the knowledge of the Father in a peculiar manner Page 420
Three things opened 1 How Christ as second Person is said to know the Father
Page 422 2 How man comes to share in this kn^wledg ibid. 3 The Reason of it
ibid.

DOCT.
The Saints have a special knowledge, that the Lord Christ is sent of God the
Father for their salvation Page 431 Three things opened 1 How Christ is said to
be sent of the Father Page 432 2 For what he is sent ibid. 3 How the Saints
know this in special manner ibid.
Propositions to make way for the first thing Page 433 The second thing Page
439 Use, 1. Matter of Admiration Page 440 Use, 2. Comfort Page 441
The third thing to be enquired of two ways Page 442 1 Wherein the specialty
of this knowledge consists ibid. 2 How it comes to be communicated to the
Saints ibid.
1 The specialty of knowledge consists in four things ib. Quest. Is this the
condition of all the Saints? Page 450 Answ. affirmatively: for the matter, but
not for the manner and measure ibid. Object. We see by experience, that may of
Gods own are ignorant here ibid. Answ. They know in part, or know by reflection
ibid. Two Reasons of the Point ib. Use, 1. Of Thankfulness Page 451 Use, 2. Of
Examination Page 452
Ver 26 I have made known thy Name etc. Page 454
Two things to be here attended 1 Our Saviors Work Page 455 2 His Engagement
ibid.
Doct. To make known the name of the Father to an humbled soul, is our Saviors
peculiar work ibid. Three things opened 1 What this Name is Page 456 2 What it
is make it known 3 why this is properly given to our Savior ibid.
Doct. Christ extends the same care at al times to al his servants Page 4^5
Reason Page 466 Use, 1. Of Instruction Page 467 Use, 2. Of Comfort Page 468
Use, 3. Direction Page 470 Use, 4. Exhortation Page 472 Two Points of Doctrine
Doct. 1. There is much wanting in the full knowledge etc. Page 476 Two things to
be enquired 1 In what this want appears 2 The Reasons why Page 478
Use 1 Instruction Page 482 Use 2 Direction Page 485 Doct. 2. The Lord lends
daily Directions, etc. Page 486 Attend two things 1 The Measure ibid. 2 The
Manner. ibid.


Many Collections hence Col. 1 The best Saints here, live on daily dependence
on these things Page 489 Col. 2 Christ can cloud al our knowledge Page 492 Col.
3 The faithful must increase in knowledge Page 494 Col. 4 Christ is the way to
lead us to the Father Page 496 Col. 5 Matter of abasement of heart ibid. Col 6
Ground of thankfulness Page 497 Col. 7 Ground of Comfort Page 498
Use. Exhortation Page 500 The Close of Christ's Prayer, That the Love wherewith
thou have loved me, etc. Page 501 For understanding of which words, observe
four things. 1 How the Father loves Christ ibid. 2 How that love is said to be
in them ibid. 3 The means how ibid. 4 The time when we shall know this ibid.
Three Points of Doctrine, Doct. 1. It is Christ's desire, that the dearest of
Gods love, etc. Page 511 Use, 1 Reprehension Page 517 Use, 2 Instruction Page
518 Doct. 2. Our union and communion with God in Christ, is the top of our
happiness in Heaven Page 521
Two things opened 1 What this haypiness of Heaven is Page 522 2 How this is
the top of it ibid.
Use, 1 Matter of Admiration Page 530 Use, 2 Examination Page 531
MR HOOKER'S Seventeenth Book Made in NEW ENGLAND.
JOHN, 17.20. I Pray not for these alone: but for them also who shall believe
on me through their word.


IN this 17. Chapter: We have a most heavenly prayer of our Savior, expressed
immediately before his departure hence, which I suppose he presents to the
Father, not as a man, or yet Minister of the Circumcision, unto whom he was
sent, but as Mediator, and is part of that Intercession, which he performs in
the behalf of his Church and people. And being now shortly to offer up himself,
and to lay down his life for his Children, and to go out of the World, (as
though his soul had been transported into the Suburbs of Heaven, as though he
would unbowel his dearest and heart-blood desires into the bosom of his Father)
he sends this prayer beforehand in the power of his Intercession, to lie
leidger there in the behalf of his Disciples and faithful ones, that so he
might fully provide for their everlasting life and spiritual welfare, before he
left his own life, and provide comfort in Heaven to be sent down to them,
before he left the Earth, and went to Heaven.

A Prayer of unconceiveable and incomparable worth, above all that ever was
expressed or recorded in the word: Like a confection or compound of those
sovereign excellencies; beyond the highest strayn of the desires or
conceivings of the souls of the Saints.

That which contains the quintessence or the pith of all the cordialls of the
Gospel; the very marrow of all that great redemption, he had wrought and
purchased: the highest pitch of all that happiness, which Heaven can afford, or
the very richest Diamond in the crown of Glory: for that we may see, he here
prays for something beyond glory, that for which glory was made, and therefore
better than glory it self, for so the words: I have given them my Glory, that
they may be one, as we are one. So that that is the end of Glory, and therefore
better than Glory, able to carry the heart beyond all the riches of admiration.

This is expressed in the parts of it according to the parties for whom it is
made, and those are two.

1 For himself to verse. 6. 2 For his servants and those His Apostles. ver. 6.
to ver. 20. The rest of Believers.

Hence generally for our imitation and direction, learn from our Savior.

1. That the first especial scope of Prayer should be for such things that do
more especially concern us.

Whether it be in regard of any thing which respects the Glory of God, the
furtherance of his truth, or the good and benefit of such, whose conditions or
relations do most nearly touch us; for thus Prayer serves the end best, for
which it is appointed by God, and for which it should be used by us, to help
forward the occasions that be under our hands: Prayer is like the passing boat
of the Ferry, it helps al Travelers, but it attends them next, that come
first; So it was with Jacob, it plied God for the particular, and especially
where the pinch lay, Genesis 32.10.11. So Eleazar, good Lord make it hit right to
day. Genesis 24.12. And it seems it was that which God complains of Isa. 64. At
least he condemns in Josuah, that his hand was in the wrong box. Jos. 7.10.
quorsum hoc? not that he fasted, but that he searched nor, examined not the
sin, and sought not the reformation of that which indeed did especially concern
him.

The present work done, want to be supplied, the way of Providence furthered.
Here is our prick and mark at which our prayers should aim, we must not shoot
at rovers, Prayer like a Skilful Physician, studies the cure of al diseases,
but administers a receipt to him, whose necessities present themselves.

2. Prayers must be of a speeding nature so to attend persons or things of
present necessity, as to reach al in a right order. So David Psalm. 50.2. last.
Paul brings in all Churches within the compass of his care and of his prayers. I
make mention always of you; and of you al in my prayers, and this almost in all
his Epistles. Prayer is like the blood and spirits which pass through the whole
body of Christ, and has its conveyance even into the least member and joint.
Like a Pinnace of dispatch, that gives intelligence from each quarter.

The Subjects of our Saviors Prayer are set forth, two ways.

1 From their quality and special effect, they shall believe: and that from the
generality of the Object, in Me. Time, Hereafter. Instrument by which it shall
be wrought, by their word.
2. From a comparison of equality or parity. i. e. Christ prays not alone for
the Apostles, but equally, but indifferently, for all, as well as they.
For Explication, there is nothing difficult but that: what is meant by their
word.

That is the Gospel, which they published by preaching, or left upon record in
writing, as they were inspired by the spirit: The Lord Christ providing therein
for the good of his Church, unto the end of the world, that so they might have
the path of life paved out before them, and a certain rule to guide them, until
the end of the world. Not that none did formerly believe by the word of the
Prophets in the Old Testament, for even then also the Gospel was preached, Gal.
3.8. Preached the Gospel to Abraham, in thy seed shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed. The word was preached to them, as well as to us, and it was a
word of promise Heb. 4.1.2. And therefore the Apostle professed, He preached no
other things, but what were contained and expressed in the law and the
Prophets. Acts, 26.22. the Prophets and Moses did say, should come; the
Prophets foretold, in the Types was prefigured, and in the Covenant expressed,
in Genesis promised. So that this their word is opposed to two things.

1. Unto the Law, which is our Schoolmaster, to whip us unto Christ, but is not
able, either to declare him to us, or to work faith in us. Its that which only
makes way for faith, but is not that seed, whereof faith is made and begotten:
and therefore when it was said, Faith comes by hearing and the word, Romans
10.17. if ye look into verse. 15. foregoing, ye shall see what word is meant: How
beautiful are the feet of those that bring the Gospel of peace? 2. It is
opposed to all the Doctrines of men, al humane devices, al unwritten traditions,
al conceited revelations which are nothing but Satanical delusions; in which
there is no power to beget faith, no ground to support it.
We have here two points.

The word of the Gospel is the only ordinary means to work Faith. Doct.

It was not only then, when the Apostles were preaching and planting, not
only there and in those coasts, where the sound of the Gospel was Glorious and
Famous: But whoever did then, and whoever shall believe, unto the end of the
world^ for Aftertimes, in all ages, and in all places, in an ordinary course of
Gods dispensations, (leaving secret exceptions, or miraculous proceedings in
the privy purpose of his counsel) there never was, nor shall be any under the
power of Christ's prayer, or possessed with the truth of saving Faith, but by
this means, and this only.

He prays for no other than bel^^vers, he will own none, save none, but such.
And therefore none but such have saving Faith. And that is the reason, why the
Gospel is set in opposition to the law: Romans 10.5. compared with verse. 9. The
word of Faith is that which is near unto us. Hence its called the Ministration
of life and power. 2 Cor. 3. When the Law is said to be weak, through the
infirmity of our flesh, Romans 8.3. and not able to give life, Gal. 3.21.

Reason, 1.
Because the Gospel alone reveals that which may satisfy our spiritual
necessities, and answer the expectation of our faith, and the desires of our
Souls: upon the sense and feeling of those evils, which as unsupportable, would
otherwise sink them, This is the Argument the Apostle gives, Romans 1.16. I am
not ashamed of the Gospel of God; For it is the power of God unto Salvation:
and why? Because by it the righteousness of God is revealed, from faith to
faith. i. e. from one degree of faith unto another.

A man is unrighteous, and possessed of the power and presence of it, and under
the hand of revenging justice by reason of the same.

And where may a righteousness be found, which may answer the necessities of
the Soul? the Law never discovered this, the creatures never heard of it, the
wisdom of man could never reach it, nay the excellency of all the knowledge of
all Angels was never able to devise: but Christ who came out of the Bosom of
the Father, has wrought this righteousness and by the Gospel has brought life
and Immortality to light (2 Timothy 1.10.) which otherwise had never seen light,
and therefore it is, that the glad tidings of peace is said to come this way,
and is not to be heard from any other coast. Tidings of evil come, like Jobs
Messengers from every quarter, tidings we hear from the law, are nothing but
threatenings and wrath, ready to condemn us: tidings from our own hearts are
nothing but guilt and fear, to terrify and arrest us: tidings from Hell are
yet worse, there be nothing but accusations subtle and Malicious, and those
present us, at home and abroad, in Earth and in Heaven at Gods Tribunal, and
require present execution to be done upon such undeserving creatures. Only,
the glad tidings come from the Gospel.

Jesus Christ came to save sinners. This is a faithful word and worthy of al
acceptance and therefore the Soul looks out and says, It may be. This keeps
the Head above Water.

Reason. 2.
Here, in the Gospel only is certainty to be had of some interest and special
Title; whereby the Soul may be encouraged, and faith also find some foot-hold,
whereby the heart may bottom and bear up it self in some confidence. For
righteousness there is to be had from God in Christ: but this Issues only (in
the communication of it) from free mercy. The Lord may do with his own what he
will; and therefore he may deny whom he will, and give to whom he please; how
then shall I know, and have any ground or evidence, upon any certainty that he
will do good to me? God is bound to none.

True. God is bound to none further then he will bind himself; and he binds
himself in no wise to the creature, but by his promise, and that he will never
deny, who cannot deny himself. Now in the Gospel only this promise and
engagement of God is revealed, he has promised to work the condition, and then
tied himself in his truth to do good to those, whom he will so fit for his
mercy. And now the Soul upon this notice grows in upon God, here is a handle,
as it were, for faith to lay hold on, therefore said a word of promise, Romans
9.9. and therefore the whole Gospel is called the promise. Gal. 3.29. Believers
are said to be the Children of the promise, that is, of the Gospel.

Reason. 3.
The Gospel is the only means, whereby the Soul is enabled, with power from
above, even with a Spirit of Grace f^^ to go for succor and relief; where it
is thus evidenced, and whence it has now received some intimation of Gods
engagement, intendment and so of certainty, by which it may be encouraged to go
upon such grounds, as will never fail nor break under a man. That he may go
stedily and comfortably 2. Cor. 3.6. Its said to be the administration of the
Spirit. Not of the Letter; that is, there is not Barely a discovery and
manifestation of what Gods mind and counsel is, that should be done; such the
sense and meaning of words and sentences may descry, set out, and hold forth.
But there is a Spirit of power, that is promised, and so dispensed and conveyed
in and by this word, for to enable the Soul to do that, which the Letter shows
it should do; Gods saying is doing, his calling is making: he speaks not only
to the ear, but conveyes a power by speaking. Lazaruscome forth. The dead shall
hear. John. 5.25. Gal. 3.3. Received ye the Spirit (even this Spirit) by the
preaching of the Law, or by the Doctrine of faith?

This is the word by which God begets us. Jam. 1.18. If in the Gospel there be
that freeness of Grace, that is sufficient to answer all the necessities and
desires of the Heart: certainty of promise to encourage it, if it shall come,
and power and Spirit to enable it for to come: Then, The word of the Gospel is
the only means to work faith.

Use. 1. Of Terror.
This discovers the woeful and miserable condition of such, who want this
Gospel: But especially the hainousness of the sin, and the dreadful
condemnation of such, who Oppose the Gospel. God has shut up al under
unbelief, in the Kingdom of darkness under the power of the Prince of darkness:
they look out as prisoners through the Grates of Hell, and Infidelity; there is
no possibility to help to a Key to open this Door, but the Key of the Gospel;
they wilfully keep the Door bolted, and refuse the only help, which the Lord
has provided, Christ has purchased with his Blood, appointed and sanctified
by his spirit, and does promise to accompany for their deliverance, yea this
they oppose. This was the doom and sentence which Paul passed upon them, Act.
13.46. Ye judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, by putting away the
word: Thou stoppest thine ear at the glad tidings of it, shuttest thine eyes at
the righteousness thereof, Put by and castest away, withdrawest thy soul
from under the prevailing power of that word.

Know: Thou need no Devil to accuse, no witness to evidence, no Judge to
condemn, thy practice does judge thy self unworthy, unfit to receive Grace, who
resistest it; to share in mercy, who despisest it; or to enjoy eternal life,
who have rejected the offer of eternal life. So Paul again sent those away with
their load, when they refused to hear. Act. 28.26.

Use, 2. Instruction and Comfort.
Therefore this word of the Gospel shall undoubtedly be preserved and published,
and that until the end of the world; as long as the Lord Christ has any to be
gathered, any of his to be brought home to himself by a saving Faith. They shall
believe by this, therefore they shall have this, maugre all the malice, the power
and policy of Hell, the rage and restless opposition of all the instruments of
Satan. That word cannot be falsefied, This Prayer cannot be frustrated, and
therefore, This work cannot be hind^ed. Seem it never so improbable, never so
impossible in our Eyes, and feeble apprehensions Measure not the power and
Faithfulness and wisdom of the Lord, by the scantling of our shallow
apprehensions: but know, he has said it, and he will do it.

The fan is in his hand, not in any man's hand. Its said of the Apostles their
sound went through the world. They are compared to the course of the Sun, in
his Sphoere and Orb. So it will be with his messenger, when it is his mind to
call any of his. His Doctrine is as the dew, no man can hinder it from falling;
Either the means to the man, or the man to the means he will send: Onesimus his
theft shall bring him to prison, and so to Paul's ministry, and so to Heaven:
Naaman must go to be cured of his Leprosy, and so meets with the Prophet to
cure him of his sin. Philip is sent post to the Eunuchs Coach, though it was
in an extraordinary way.

Use, 3. Examination.
Know whether our Faith be of the right make or no. Ask whence came it? where
had thou thy Faith? by what word? If it came the right way, It came by
preaching the Gospel.

It will show thee, 1. Thou had once none. 2. That thou art not able to
believe.
Jam 1.18. By bis own good will begat be us, by the word of truth.

If thou can say; I heard thus and thus of a Christ, and so I believed: then
it is in thy will to believe, not in Gods will that begets thee. 3. It will show
thee, that Faith is made of the immortal Seed of the word, 1 Pet. 1.23. that is
the Spirit in the promise; That as a man is made up of the Seed which enters
his constitution: so made up of promises. Hither belongs that of Ephesians. 5.30. We
are Flesh, of his Flesh, and Bone, of his Bone. i. e. As the woman was made of
the Rib of Adam: So Faith has its flesh and bones out of the promise: and the
root of it is in Christ, for the first strok of it.

Use, 4. Exhortation.
Therefore In the want of Faith; bring our own Souls, bring our Wives and
little ones, and beseech the Lord, that one word may be spoken to them, to
believe and Live.

The means or instrument whereby Sinners are brought to believe was the word.
That is finished.

2 The Parties Faith was set forth from the object of it. ME. Believe in Christ.

Saving Faith has the Lord Jesus for its object. Doct.

So the text. Though not him alone, to exclude the other Persons, so not them
alone, to exclude himself. Ye believe in God; believe also in me. That ye
believe in the Father is not enough, ye must believe also in the Son, and by
like reason in the Holy Ghost. Joh. 14.1. This is eternal life (faith our
Savior) to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
i. e. To believe in the Father and Son, is that only means appointed to bring
in eternal life.

The Second thing is.

The Parties for whom Christ prayers are here set forth by a Comparison of
equality and parity. I pray not for my Apostles alone, who are the main Pillars
of the Church, and now to be sent upon the most weighty employments, that can
be committed to the hands of f^e^le men, to publish the Gospel to every
creature, to plant Churches, and to gather mine elect from all the corners of
the world; notwithstanding all the opposition they shall find from Hell, and
fierce persecution they shall meet withal, from the hands of unreasonable men.
And therefore since the work lies first upon their hands, and requires present
performance, and so have need presently to be remembered, and to have the first
place in my prayer.

Yet my love and care reaches proportionably, even to all the meanest and
feeblest of my servants, that shall believe in me, unto the end of the world:
though they come in the second rank, yet shall they share alike in my prayers.
For I pray for them, as for these. That they may know, I remembered them before
they were: and will not therefore forget them, when they shall be here in the
conflicting times, upon the face of the Earth.

The Interceding Prayer, or Intercession of our Savior does alike respect al,
that shall believe in his name. Doct.

I call it here an Interceding Prayer, because herein his Intercession is in a
special manner both expressed and accomplished. For it is not to be attended as
a prayer which he put up, as man alone, or as the minister of the Circumcision,
as the Apostle calls him. Romans 15.8. For then it can avail no further, then the
prayer of a man without sin will do: and answerable to that kind of willing.
Math. 23.37. How often would I have gathered them etc.

But its here the special work of Intercession, and proceeds from him, as God
and man, Mediator of his elect and faithful, and so Intercession in their
behalf: That being (as I told you) shortly to offer up himself, he sends his
prayer, as the great high Priest of his Church, in power of his Intercession,
to lie Leidger there in the behalf of his beloved Children, that he might
provide in Heaven for them, before he lest the Earth. And this prayer is part
of that Intercession he now puts sorth, at the right Hand of the Father. So
that the Sum in short is.

Christ's Intercession was intended for all believers alike. Hence are al these
general and indefinite expressions, as carrying an equal Eye unto all, without
any Special restraint to any particular, of what quality or condition soever.
Heb. 7.25. He is able to save them that came unto God by him; (i.e. Who believe
in him) seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them. i. e. For any of
them, for every one of them, that shall believe. And therefore it was, when the
high Priest was to go into the Holy of Holies, he was to bear the names of the
twelve Tribes upon his Breast Plate i.e. The names of all the Saints, which
should profess the Faith, and by Faith believe in him. And it is the condition
of the great work of our Redemption, it carries no respect of persons with it
(provided they be under the condition and terms of the covenant) it lies open
unto all.

That which Jude spoke of Salvation, its true of the whole work of Mediation
and Intercession, Common Salvation: Common Intercesson. In Christ Jesus, nor
Jew, nor Gentile, Grecian, nor Barbarian, Bond nor Free, Male nor Female. So
that of Paul Romans 5. If reconciled by his Death, when sinners; much more shall
we be saved by his life, being reconciled. If the death of our Savior could
purchase our Reconciliation; much more shall his life (now interceding in
Heaven) be able to save us, i.e. All for whom he died.

I shall open here.

1 The Nature and manner of this Intercession. 2 The works and virtue of it. 3
The reasons of the point, why it appertains to all the Saints.
1 This Intercession, or the manner of our Saviors praying must thus be
conceived: that he does present his merits and obedience before the Father as
fully performed in the behalf of his elect, and (according to the righteous
covenant and agreement past between them) does challenge the communication of
all that spiritual good he has purchased, and the Father has promised to
bestow upon them. That is the meaning of that expression in ver. 24. Father I
will, that those whom thou have given me, be where I am, that they may beh^ld
my Glory. It is my good pleasure, that they should enjoy that happiness, that
thou have given me. and given to them, in me, according as thou have promised.

2. The work of this Intercession is.

To act all our affayrs with God the Father, to further our comfort and
spiritual welfare here on Earth, until we come to him in Heaven, and to shall
have an end of al our wants, fears, and desires; that we shall want nothing
that is good, ^o^ sear any thing that is evil, nor desire any further or more
perfect good to be added, which is ab^ent from us: but he takes care, al shall
be fully accomlished. As it is with States, who have Affayre^ or great
consequences, depending in other countries, they have their Ambassadors, which
ly Leidger at Court, to take advantages to continue Love and honorable
Correspondence betwixt the King and States, and to discover all undermining
Plots, which my breed any distaste, and so procure no small damage to those who
do employ them. So it is with our Savior, he is gone to Heaven, and there
remains a Leidger with God the Father, that he may observe, and take al such
Special advantages, for acomplishment of the comforts of his.

Quest. If you ask; What be those Spiritual affairs of ours, there to be
transacted?

Answ. They appear in three Particulars.

1. Our Savior being in highest Honor and favor in the Court of Heaven, and of
most perfect intelligence touching all the counsels, purposes, and proceedings
of the Father: He there speaks good unto God the Father, in our behalf daily:
sets on going all the passages of Providence, in justice, and mercy, grace, and
Truth, Patience and Bounty, as may best answer all the occasions of the
Churches, in all their conditions, as may most concern them: And answerably
sends an express by the powerful operation of his good Spirit, into the Hearts
of his people. So verse. 11. Keep them through thin own name. Joh. 16.15. All
things that the Father has, are mine, therefore said I, that he shall take of
mine. Christ has liberty to take of all the choicest of the Treasures of
Heaven, and those he does, and sends them by the spirit unto the Hearts of his
people. Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. Thus our Savior does us many
secret kindnesses, which we little consider: and sends privy Intimation, how
things go in Heaven in our behalf.

2. He stands betwixt us and our Harms by these his prayers and Intercession,
and if there by any evil plotted, or intended against us, or hurt coming to us,
he foresees it, and way-laies it, that it may not be to our prejudice in any
particular. The guilt of new sins daily committed, fresh accusations of
conscience, new pleas which Satan the accuser of the Brethren would daily
commence and put up unto divine justice against us.

Our Savior, he is our Advocate, undertakes our cause; pleads for us, and
prevails: gives in so full satisfaction unto divine Juctice, that neither sin,
nor world, nor Satan, can be heard against us. These sins have been committed,
these dishonors done, these evils practiced, says Satan, and the world can
witness, and their own consciences. Yea says divine Justice: Their Advocate
has been here, has plainly and truly related all these; they are not new, and
has fully answered and satisfied to the utmost that can be exacted. Romans 8.34.
Here is the ground of the Apostles Triumph: Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, nay makes Intercession for us. So that there is neither
condemnation nor accusation that can get any hearing against them, for they are
al before discovered* and answered: the Lord Christ has intelligence of their
intendments, and disappoints them wholly.

3. He intercepts all our prayers and performances, which we tender up unto
God, and perfumes them with the sweet Odors of the incense of his own
Intercession, and so they find acceptance, and make a pleasant savor in the
Nostrils of the Almighty. As it is with brackish Water, which comes from the
Sea, passing through some precious Gold or Silver Mines, it becomes, not only
sweet and purified, but of Sovereign virtue and taste. So it is with our
services, being brackish with many base distempers, which cleave to them and
us, being intercepted by the Intercession of our Savior, and passing through
the Rich mines of his Merits and obedience, they prove marvailous pleasing and
acceptable to the Lord. Rev. 8.3. The prayers of the Saints are offered up,
upon the Golden Altar of our Saviors precious Merits. As an Advocate in the
Court, if any of his Clients commend their cause to ska^ning, though they be
weak and unskilful, yet he can ripen them, and being Rectified, present them so
ordered, as that they may find acceptance with the Lord, through the influence
of this Application of the virtue of his Merits.

3 The Reasons are three.

1. Because our Savior Christ has indifferently undertaken the Salvation of al
his Children: and therefore out of his faithfulness it cannot be, but he should
indifferently attain the accomplishment of it, in the behalf of them. This was
the Covenant and Agreement between God the Father and Christ. Those that the
Father in his counsel determined, he commended them all unto the care of our
Savior, and gave him the list, as it were of their names, that he should look,
that none of them miscarry: Our Savior did freely undertake that charge, for all those so committed to his care: and therefore for all, must discharge that
trust alike. Joh. 6.37.38, 39, 40. All that the Father gives me, shall come to
me etc. For I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will, of
him that sent me. And this is the will of the Father, that of al which he has
given me, I should lose none. And this is his will, that he that sees and
believes should have everlasting life etc. And he professes he was faithful
herein. Joh. 10.14, 15, 16. I am the good Shepherd: I lay down my life etc. And
I have other Sheep, and they must come. And therefore when he has gathered al
his elect, and brought in his tally, Here am I, and the Children thou have
given me, He shall then resign up the Kingdom to the Father. 2 Because this is
common to all alike. The whole work of redemption is common to all that must be
redeemed. But this is one part: Ex^^tation, answerable to his humiliation, Romans
4. and the last. The whole sum is every man's. Its called the common Salvation.
Joh. 16, 8, 10. This is a convincing of the world of righteousness, because I
go to the Father. Else it had not been complete righteousness. 3 Because its
necessary alike unto al. Romans 5.10. How much more shall we be saved by his
life? Heb. 7.25. He lives that he may save perfectly. The Application is as
necessary, as the Redemption. There is the virtue of his death and merits to
purchase life; And then, the virtue of his Intercession to apply it: to
continue, and perpetuate the vigor and virtue of it.
If Christ has undertaken for all alike. If it be common unto all: If it be
alike needful for all: Then its that which Christ intends to al his.

Use 1 for Instruction.
Its impossible for a believer to perish, to loose his Grace, to fall away,
either totally, or finally from Christ, and so to be deprived in the Issue of
eternal life. I Reason thus;

That which our Savior died for, prayed for, and does now make Intercession in
Heaven for that, he can never fail to attain.

But for the perseverance of the Saints, and for their everlasting Salvation,
he died, and he did Pray, and does pray at this day for.

Therefore he cannot but attain his end, and they also their happiness.

So he professes, and has left it upon record, to establish the Faith of al
His, in their greatest shocks. Joh 11.41, 42. Father, I thank thee, that thou
have heard me; And I knew that thou hear me always etc. Christ has here
proclaimed it, we may conclude, and that undoubtedly, that which he knows, who
could not be deceived: we may know it for a truth, and that it will never
deceive us. Christ is ever heard, and therefore the Saints shall always be
assisted, supported, enabled to be faithful to the end, and in the end. If
Christ may not be heard, then thou may not be helped: and if he will loose
his prayer, then thou may loose thy comfort and grace. But that is
incredible, this is impossible.

Besides how dishonorable is this Doctrine of falling away, unto the Lord
Jesus, and the work of his Mediation, which in the Issue advances the power of
our sin, and the policy of Satan, above the virtue of the death of Christ, and
the power of the prayer of Christ; For it says thus much: That the policy of
Satan is more able to undermine us, than his prayer to preserve us: His
temptation to destroy us, than the Intercession of Christ to save us.

No, Be the assaults never so fierce, the allurements never so subtle,
corruptions never so strong, Nay let all the power of Darkness do the worst.
The prayer of Christ will yet shore up the meanest Saint in the greatest safety:
Luke 22.32. Satan has desired to winnow (he would have winnowed all the Grace
out of his Heart, but our Savior he made provision for him, and concludes) but
I have prayed, that thy Faith fail not, and there leaves it, as though there
was not then the least shadow or fear of any miscarriage. For it might have
been said: may be, Satan will be too hard, not only for my Grace, but for thy
prayer: No, our Savior leaves it beyond al question, for its so far from any
appearance of probability, that the thought of it is no less than blasphemy.

Use 2 for Direction:
To take heed, how we deal injuriously, or carry our selves offensively toward
the meanest believer: Be his place never so low, his condition never so base,
his abilityes never so feeble and despicable in thine Eye: The prayer of Jesus
is to preserve them from evil, and therefore will be against thee, who intendest
to do evil against them. It was the Argument of our Savior; Math. 18.10. Take
heed that ye despise not one of these little ones: for I tell you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.
If this was a reason of force, as no question it is, that they should not
despise those, whose Guardians are the glorious Angels, the Special Attendants
at the Court of Heaven: How much more that the Son of God does pray daily for
them, who is far above al principalities and powers, and advanced at Gods right
Hand.

Use 3.
Consolation unspeakeable and glorious, even to the meanest of the Saints; when
they are beset with greatest enemies, and that in greatest necessities, and
most unable to succor themselves: know there is support that will never fail
thee. Thy sins plead against thee; 1 John 2.1, 2. Here is an Advocate, who
pleads for thee, and will undoubtedly carry the cause. Thy conscience that
accuses, Satan he condemns; But they al come too late: There is one between
them and home, who intercedes and makes perfect satisfaction, and also full
communication thereof: therefore Paul flings the gantlet. May be thy Heart and
prayers and life and al seem to fail thee: Here is one, who lives always and
prays always, and is heard always; and therefore able to save to the
uttermost, them that come.

Object. True, happy they who have a share in that Intercession: but so sinful
a creature, so silly a wretch, so loathsome an one as I? unworthy that Christ
should ever have me in his thoughts, much less should ever pray for me.

Answ. Yes, for thee, if thou have but Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed: not
only for Peter: for his Apostles: but for thee, silly Woman, Ignorant Child etc.

Use 4.
TERROR. This is a thunderbolt to break the heart, and Split the hopes of al
worldlings under Heaven.

Does then thy conversation witness? does thine own heart confess it? That,

The day is yet to dawn, the hour yet to come, that ever God spoke to thy Soul,
or plucked thee out of the world, As thou were it, thou art: of the Earth, and
speak of the Earth, in the old course, and led aside with old lusts;

Know thou must, Christ has shut thee out of his Prayrs, and thy Soul out of
peace, and self out of Heaven, for ought any living can tell: and I do not say,
how sleep thou, but how can thou live, and hear and know this thy
condition. That thou do not sit down in silence, and thy Soul sink and die
away within thee in everlasting discouragement, in the expectation of evil,
that hangs over thy Head? and have thy life hang in doubt, that when thou go
our, thou should never return, and when thou lie down, thou should
never rise up again? Why? there is nothing to hinder, but the hand of Justice
should plague, and nothing to stay it: Thy sins and Devils to make a prey and
spoil of thee, and nothing to hinder it.

Bear not up thy self with the Opinion of others, or their approbation, how
their Hearts are to thee, and how well they speak of thee. But know; The Heart
of Christ he has discovered it, and professed it, He prays not for the world,
nor for thee, if one of them. Do not deceive thy self, nor suffer Satan to
delude thee with vain pretenses, That notwithstanding thy sins and deserts, yet
there is redemption wrought by Christ: virtue and Salvation in the Blood of
Jesus: He died for sinners, and his Death is able to redeem; because Salvation
is laid upon one that is mighty:

True, that is thy misery: There is enough to be had, but he never suffered any
thing, did any thing, intended any thing, nay purposed to speak a good word for
thee: but to leave thee to shift for thy self, to the hand of Justice to
plague, to the hand of Devils to torment, to the hand of thy sins, to rule and
damn thee. And he professes, he would not spend his breath, much less his
Blood: I think thou have thy load, though I could yet lay it heavier. Hy thee
for thy life out of the compass and company of the world, if ever thou would
be within the power of the prayer of Christ to thine own knowledge.

Use 5, Exhortation to believers;
To have our hearts ravished and our thoughts swallowed up with everlasting
admiration of this indeared love of the Lord Jesus to such poor creatures: That
he should provide and reserve the rarities of the Riches of his Grace for such
miserable, worthless Worms. As Philip in the like case.

Why will thou show thy self to us, and not unto the world? why pray for us,
speak, intercede for us in Heaven, and not for the world? when there be so many
wise, Rich, honorable, that thou never intendest any good unto, nor ever put
test them within one sentence of thy prayer? Lord, who am I, silly Woman,
Ignorant Child, disobedient, rebellious servant, that yet thou should call me
out of the world, and make it thy great work in Heaven, to keep me in the
world, and bring me to Heaven?

What will you do, to honor this Christ, who has thus honored you: how should
you endeavor to serve him in Earth, who indeed serves you in Heaven? He
provides for your safety and comfort: provide you for his Glory. He stands
betwixt you and your Harms, against al sins, Devils, Temptations: stand you
between him and his wrongs, that may be done to him.

Before we pass from this verse, one thing more may be shortly handled: and
that taken from the consideration of the Time; When these persons shall
believe, for whom our Savior here prays; and that is clearly discovered, to
continue, until the end of the world, those who yet were not in the world, and
those who should believe, even at the end of the world, for these now our
Savior prays. Hence.

Our Savior has a special care for those that shall believe on him, Doct.
even in the worst condition of their Unbeleef.
So the text gives in, undeniable evidence; even before many had any being in
Nature, and when some were, and others should be brought into the world, and
had neither mind to know God nor Heart to seek after Christ, or to pray for
themselves. Yet here ye see, our Savior takes in all those now within the
compass of his prayer and care, to provide for them, and to contrive all for
their good, when they neither did, nor could care for him, or for themselves:
therefore its plain.

Our Savior cares for such, who shall believe in him, when they are in the depth
of their unbeleef: and his prayer is then working for their good, when they
intend no good unto themselves. Our Savior, when they were in the heat of that
hellish villainy, in blaspheming, and killing the Lord of life, even then he
intends life to them, procures and purchases life for them. Luke 23, 34.
Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. This prayer it was, that
wrought more than Peter's preaching, when his spirit was warmed with the Love of
Jesus, and the Blood of a dying Savior ran fresh now, in all the Veins of his
Heart, and the power and virtue of it was mighty upon the consciences of Peter's
Hearers, such, as had before been Crucifyers of the Lord of life. It then took
place and prevailed mightily. Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, etc, though he
see not himself.

See this made good in some particulars, as 1. In the several degrees of it, 2.
The Reason, and 3. The Use.


This care, and the virtue of this prayer of our Savior will appear thus, in
five Particulars.

Hence 1. It is, that the Lord contrives means in the ways of his. Providence
for the bringing of these men into the world, so that the Parents and
Predecessors of such, though happily desperately wicked and forlorn, shall yet
have their stock and posterity continued in the world; because they shall bring
these into the world, who shall believe. And therefore it is, the patience of
God is extended toward many a wicked parent, nay to the whole stock and Lineage
of vile and loose men; not for their sakes, but the sakes and cause of some
that shall come of them, whom the Lord Christ does purpose to bring to himself.
Math. 24.22. Had not God shortened those days, no flesh had been saved: but for
his Elects sake, the Lord shortened those days. i.e. The generation of the Jews
now rejecting and most Hellishly blaspheming the Lord Jesus Christ, had so
provoked the Eyes of the Lord; That should he in Justice have proceeded against
them, and executed his righteous Judgments, either as the Nature of their sins
deserved, or their Enemies intended, and out of their power and rage could
easily have accomplished it, there had not been one Jew left alive to propagate
their posterity, or name, or Nation.

But the Lord had an Eye to his Elect, that should come of these, in the last
Age of the world, after so many Ages and generations past, when their dead
Bones shall live, and the Redeemer shall come out of Sion, and turn Jacob from
iniquity, then all Israel shall be saved: So the Apostle. Romans 11.28. Hated for
their sins sake: but beloved for their Fathers sake, i.e. For Abraham, with
whom, through Christ, the covenant of the Gospel was made to him, and to his
Seed: i.e. To all the faithful, whether Jew or Gentile: but with the Jew first,
and then with the Grecian. For this calling and covenant, being everlasting,
is without repentance, and will assuredly take place, in the season thereof,
when it shall be most suitable to show forth free grace.

2. The Lord even so provides, that such means in an ordinary way of
Providence, may be sent, continued, and dispensed to such, who never had a
thought of them, enquired after them, or had a Heart to entertain them, when
they are offered. Upon this ground the Lord appoints, and incourageth the
Apostle. Act. 18.9, 10. Speak and hold not thy Tongue: Speak plainly and fully,
fear no man's frowns, regard no man's favors, no man shall do thee harm: for I
have people in this City. Thus the Spirit stopped the passage into Bithynia;
for when they assayed, the Spirit suffered them not. Act. 16.7. But Christ
sends post, by an express in a Vision to Paul; A man of Macedonia appears,
with this Petition in his Hand, subscribed by the Hearts of the messengers,
Come into Macedonia, and help us. And when they came, the Issue shows their
Errand, A poor Woman, a Purple-seller, and a Stubborn and Rebellious spirited
Jailour, was all the Markets he made.

But this is the Lords manner: if there be but one Grain of Corn in many heaps
of Chaff, he will never leave winnowing, rather than lose it: send he will,
Messenger after Messenger, until he has gathered that into his barn. Onesimus,
a Runnagate from his Master, without the reach of government of Gospel: God
coops him up in Prison, and casts Paul thither also, that so he may come to the
speech of him.

3. He keeps them by his restraining Grace, and some strong hand of Providence,
sometimes from grosser sins (I say some of those that shall believe from some
loathsome and heinous evil) but always, from falling into that sin against the
Holy Ghost: because that is a Disease which admits no Remedy, a Dungeon of that
depth from whence there is no deliverance: beyond the reach of the work of
Redemption, as that which comes not within the compass of mercy, and the Riches
of the compassion of the Almighty.

The Lord has passed the sentence, and that most Peremptory, and shows the
deadly Malignity of that evil, by way of difference from all others. Math.
12.31. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and Blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men; but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be
forgiven, in this world, nor in the world to come. i.e. There is no Hope. It
here cannot be pardoned: and at the great day he shall never be acquitted;
neither here done, nor then declared. So that such a person has the Tombstone
of everlasting destruction turned upon him and sealed: past Hope and help. And
therefore the Apostle puts it upon an impossibility. Heb. 6.4. How far that
goes, I will not now dispute, whether in regard of the covenant of the Gospel,
the counsel of the Lord, the Decree of the Almighty, that he shall never have
Grace give him to repent: for then it should not so much aggravate the
hainousness of the sin: because from impenitency and final presev^rance in any
sin, its not possible such should be recovered; and this great evil upon this
ground should have no other impossibility than many other. And withal the
impossibility should then ly in Gods counsel, and definitive purpose, not in
the Nature of the evil, which answers not the terrible expression of the wrath
of God in the Text.

But however it is, it is safe and sure to Join Issue with the word of truth,
and to take that upon trust. Its impossible such a one should be renewed by
repentance. And therefore its impossible, a man, whom Christ has ordained to
believe and repent, should ever fall into that evil.

4. However the Lord many times, for reasons best known to himself, and his
infinite good pleasure, suffers some, and many of those, whom he will
afterward effectually call, to be overtaken with most loathsome abominations,
yet he ever overrules and over-works al those Hellish miscarriages of theirs,
for the furtherance of his own work in them, when he seriously sets upon the
accomplishment of it.

Sometimes there is no ways to cure Poison, but with Poison: no means to crush
the pride and self-confidence and overweening conceit of a man's own worth, but
to leave him to himself, that he may bedaub himself with some dirty and
detestable distemper; that so his own experience may evidence his own baseness,
and force him to put his Mouth in the Dust, and cover himself with confusion:
when, through his own self deceiving apprehension, he could never either see
it, or bring his heart to be humbled for it before the Lord. Thus many, who in
former times have soothed up themselves, with the glorious appearance of a
formal profession, so that they could keep out, or wipe off, all the convictions
that were presented before them: At length the Lord leaves them to some noysom
lusts, one is overtaken with brutish Drunkenness, another with some base
uncleanness: and so the breaking of the impostume, and the venting of those
vile evils, constraines their consciences to condemn themselves, for rotten;
when the evidence of the word could not: and this has been the occasion of the
through conversion of some men.

Sometimes again, the Lord takes some men out of a sink, to make them mirrors of
the power of his saving mercy to al posterity: The greatness of their sin, was
the occasion, why their Hearts, were pierced for all sin. Act. 2.36, 37. 1 Timothy
1.16.

5. When the time appointed and determined before, in the counsel of the Lord
is come, then the prayer of our Savior ever takes place, and makes the means
effectual and prevailingly successeful for the good of such, for whom he has
taken the care. Joh. 10.16. I have other sheep, which are not yet of this fold,
(such as in his counsel, were ordained to life, yet not called to the saving
knowledge of the truth:) them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice.

These wandering sheep, that are gone astray from the walks of the Lord, yet he
must bring: he must pluck the Adulterer from his lusts, and the Drunkard from
his Cups, and worldling, who has been Buried in his earthly occasions, these
shall hear his voice; they are within his Ken, and under his care, and he
provides for their good, though they intend no good unto themselves. So Christ
to Paul; (he is then pitying, while he is persecuting; he comes to save him,
when he purposes to destroy himself:) why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. So,
Again he sends a Physician to him. Ananias, go etc. verse. 11.

Reas. 1. From the Sovereignty of Gods will, who looks at nothing in the
creature, for which he should be moved to do good unto it, but only his good
will and pleasure, according to which ^e curves out his compassion as suits with
his own liking. Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it: its not in the power
of Israel. And therefore hence it is, He shows mercy, because he will show
mercy: and he it is that raises up a mighty Salvation for his people, when
they were in the depths of their sins and confusions also. Luke 1.69. Ezekiel.
16.6. I saw her in her Blood, and then I said, Live.

2 The Riches of Gods mercy in Christ, and the scope of our Saviors coming, it
is to destroy the work of Satan, and to bring life out of death, and light out
of Darkness. Romans 5. and last. That where sin abounded, Grace has abounded
much more. That is the aim of the place; why then was the Law given, since the
Law could not save, but only Christ? Answ. It was, that sin might abound: when
corruption was discovered, opposed, and provoked, then it was made out of
measure sinful. That where sin has abounded, Grace also might much more
abound. q.d. The Lord Christ would redeem his people, let the Devil and sin do
their worst. So the Apostle again disputes, Romans 5.8. God commended his love to
us, that when we were sinners, Christ died for us. (...), The Lord painted and
limned out the surpassing excellency of his love in most lively Colors.

Its the scope also of the coming of our Savior. He came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to Repentance. He was not to find them blessed, but to
make them so. Isa. 49.5. Christ was formed from the Womb, to be his servant,
that he might bring Jacob again. Its he that leaves the ninty nine in the
Wilderness, and goes to seek up that which was lost in the Wilderness.

If the Sovereignty of Gods good pleasure appointed this; The Riches of his
free Grace and the scope of our Saviors coming intended this: then certainly
our Savior would carefully accomplish it: but the antecedent is such: therefore
the consequent.

Use 1 of Instruction.
Here see the different dispensation of the dealing of the Lord in the ways
and works of his providence toward men of the same quality, and that in the
same condition, men as sinful, one as another, and under the power of their
sin, and in an unregenerate state both of them: Yet the counsel of God and the
care of our Savior Christ is far different, even surpassing man's imagination
and thought.

Be they both unbeleevers now for the present, adversaries to his Grace, and
opposers of his word, and the work of his spirit, and it may be with greater
outrage and violence, the one more than the other? And yet the Lord may do
nothing but in love, and out of mercy to the one; intercede now in Heaven,
order al creatures, and overwork al occasions in Earth, for the good of the
one, and do nothing for the other; but there is a hand of Justice, and the
Poison of his displeasure, which first or last, either in the entrance, or in
the Issue, will be an ingredient in every passage of Gods providence toward
them: Let them both have the same outward blessing, its Diet to the one, surfeit
to the other poison to the one, and a preservative to the other: the one will be
quickened and enlarged to God by it with thankfulness, the other becomes proud,
insolent toward men, careless and negligent toward God.

Let them both be under the same Rod and correction, the one will be made more
humble, and the Heart will be wrought to a more watchful care to walk more
awfully before the Lord: the other will be made more frampful and preverse and
hardened in a self willy erring frame of Spirit. Thus some expound that of Paul,
Gal. 1.15. God who had separated him from the Womb, had set him a part in his
counsel and purpose to such a service, and even from the Womb, in his education
and course of life, and studyes, he was severing and suiting of him for his own
turn.

Object. But it will be said; do not we see by proof and experience; that even
the dearest servants of the Lord, before their conversion pervert even the
bounty and blessing of the Lord, to the increase of their sin and hasting of
their ruin? The learning and wisdom of Paul lifts up his Heart in pride, and
sets on his spirit to presecute the Church. He profited more than his equals:
and breathed out threatenings more than they al. How are these then fruits of
mercy, when they are thus accursed to a man? and indeed can be no other, for an
unbeleeving Heart will suck Poison out of the sweetest blessing the Lord bestows.

Answ. They are blessings as they come from God, and as he give them, they
prove Curses; as the Heart that is yet graceless abuses them: they are
preservatives, as they come from the Hand of the almighty, and he administers
them: they are turned to Poison, as a corrupt Heart perverts them to its own
hurt. As the Physician out of love and wisdom administers a wholesome potion, but
a foul stomach turns it al into matter of an ill Humor, and so a Disease.

And yet also I answer in the Second place; That in the Issue, at the last, the
Lord even out-bids all, and over-works all; even the abuse of all blessings,
the the furfeting upon al his kindnesses, to the further abasing of the soul,
fearful and thankful walking before him, when once he is effectually brought
home. There is a special Confection made out of the kindnesses, and our corrupt
distempers, for our deeper Humiliation, in regard of our selves and admiration,
in regard of Gods goodness. As it was said of them in Egypt, so the Psalmist
applies it to al, The Lord does marva^lously separate his mercier.

Hence also we have an answer to the cavil of the Papists, who plead, that
Christ does not bear all the punishment which the Saints deserve: For say they,
before their conversion, when they were not in the state of Grace, nor in
Christ, those afflictions that were laid on them, must needs be true
punishments, and issue from divine Justice revenging, not from the love of a
Father correcting: and therefore Christ may suffer for the pardon of al their
sins, and yet not bear al their punishments.

Answ. They do come from the love of a Father, who in his counsel has
determined it, and in Christ has fully transacted it, though it is not yet
actually either bestowed, or received of them in the work of redemption.

Use 2.
Here is matter of admiration, of the boundless and unconceivable compassion of
the Lord Jesus, toward those that do believe, they should get them into David's
Counting House of serious consideration, and Sum up al those precious
expressions of his faithfulness and goodness in their whole course;

Instead of reckoning up the value of them, melt away, and be wholly swallowed
up in the wonderment and admiration of that, they are not able to recount, much
less to comprehend, according to the worth thereof. Psalm. 40.5. Many, O Lord,
my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou have done and thy thoughts which
are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee.

Look back therefore men, Brethren, and Fathers, beloved and blessed of the
Lord, unto the days forepast, even from that first birth, unto this present
hour: The goodness of the Lord, how has it grown up, and gone along with you
from time to time? view the succession of those sweet and tender compassions,
which have been renewed and multiplied upon you, as your years, and days, and
months, and moments of your life.

Know it was from the care, and through the virtue of the prayers of Christ,
that you came into this world, that he first time of your breathing had not
been the first time of your damning. He has rocked your Cradles, nursed you at
your Mothers Breasts, trained you up in your tender years, taken care of you,
and then prayed for you, when you did not, could not, pray for your selves: Oh
the Riches of that Mercy!

Will not every Man say, cannot each Man confess it, had I continued in such a
place, conversed with such wretched company, with whom I was sometimes linked
and confederate, had not the Lord freed me from those snares, delivered me from
those temptations: had he not born with the baseness of my Heart, but taken the
advantage against me, and snatched me away, when I was posting down to Hell, in
the eager pursuit of such and such base lusts; there had been no possibility,
but I had perished. Oh the Riches of that Mercy!

Nay had he but let Satan loose upon me, or mine own corruptions loose within
me, unto which I was addicted, and which was my delight and life: This wretched
Heart had never come to an end, nor measure in sin. A Cain here, A Judas here,
An Achitophel here, nay a Hell was here in this Heart: yea what the Heart of
Beelzebub harbored, the spawn of it was here, So that might I have had but mine
own will, I had never ceased sinning, until I had come unto that unpardonable
sin against the Holy Ghost, and so had been past Hope of recovery. But it was
the care, the prayer of Jesus that prevented it, and my everlasting ruin. Oh
the Riches of that mercy!

Nay, when I lay secure and senseless in my sin, and never thought of means,
nor ever sought for them, he sent them: though I was careless, he continued
them, when there was no Eye to pity me, nor I had a Heart to pity my self, yet
when he saw me in my Blood, he said, live, Poor creature, live. Oh the Riches
of that mercy of a Christ!

Nay, such was the rebellion and Enmity of this wretched Heart, that I rejected
life it self, took up Arms against the Almighty and the offer of his mercy,
and professed I would none of that Grace of his, that might pardon, that
holiness that might purge and purify this vile Heart, none of that life and
Power of his that might quicken me, nor hear, though he counseled never so
wisely, I would not yield to his convictions, nor come in to those earnest
entreaties.

But Christ would take no nay, I must be humbled, though I resolved to keep my
pride, I must submit, though my heart was bent to oppose. The prayer of Christ
would preserve me from my sins, and bring me to himself, though I would have
perished. Oh the height, the length, the breadth of his mercy.

Christ's Prayer FOR BELIEVERS.
Verse 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent
me.


IN the former verse we had the parties mentioned and described, for whom our
Savior prays: the several particulars therein expressed, we have opened. From
this 21. verse to the end, we have the matter of our Saviors prayer in a most
high, heavenly, and mysterious manner laid forth and presented to our
consideration; wherein the incomprehensible worth of his love and wisdom seems
to contend for precedence; and in truth both incomparable in themselves, and
unconceiveable by the shallow scantling of the weak and feeble capacity of the
Sons of Men.

To pray and purchase that for his faithful ones, that they, who are, by nature
and sin, enemies against him, and opposite unto him, may in a proportionable
manner, as far, as their meanness is capable, be as near to him, as he to his
Father: a Poor creature durst not have begd so Rich a favor, could not expect
it, and is hardly brought to believe it possible. As he: Is it true indeed,
that God will dwell in a Tabernacle made with hands? behold, the Heaven of
Heavens is not able to contain him, how much less, this House, this Heart? or
as he: I am not worthy, thou should come under my roof.

Yet our Savior excludes not the meanest, imbraceth al in the Arms and Bowels
of his compassion. That they all may be one: even such silly, Poor, despicable
ones, may be one in us. Nor yet is the work more glorious, than the discovery
mysterious, deep, and unsearchable, one in us, as I in thee, and thou in me,
which we may rather adore, than imagine we can conceive,

The things he prays for, may be referred to these two Heads: 1. What
concerns their spiritual welfare here, in this life, at least in the taste and
beginnings of it. 2. What may maintain the top and height of their glory in
another world, in the meeting, concurrence, and continuance of all that special
happiness they shall attain unto. Father, I will, that those, which thou have
given me, may be, where I am. q. d.


He would not live in Heaven, unless he might have his members with him; not
content to be in glory, unless they might be the Spectators of it, and sharers;
that he might be in them, and the love of God in them for ever.

The special things which he begs, as that which concerns their, eternal
welfare, is only this, and in truth, almost al, or more than al is contained
in it viz. That they al may be one.

This is Propounded first, Amplified by several circumstances in the 21, 22,
23. verses,

1. By the special nature of this unity, or Oneness; what is meant and
understood, namely, to be one in them, laid out by way of resemblance: As the
Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, so they should be one in them.
2. From the end why, Namely, the lifting up of the honor of Christ in the
Hearts and acknowledgments of the ungodly, even by a constraining evidence,
whether they will or no: their own consciences will yield it, and their mouths
also confess it at the day of Judgment; That Christ was sent from the Bosom of
the Father, to bring his servants unto himself, when he passed by the greatest
part of the world; as he found them, so left them in their sins. 3. The means
by which they come to attain this so great a privilege verse 22. I have given
them the glory, thou gave unto me, that they may be one, as we are one. 4.
The order how this is dispensed, how received: dispensed from God, received by
them. verse 23. To-wit, Christ should be in them, the Father in Christ, and so
they should be made perfect in one. And here the end is repeated and enlarged
also further, That ths world may know, that he has sent his Son for this end,
and that he has loved them, as he loved him.
Ye have the several truths set out in their order before you, and how woven
together: this is the Key of this Scripture, and willet in some light, for the
more clear discovery of so mysterious truth. The main divine truth to be
attended, is this.

The chief Privilege of the Saints, Doct.
for which our Savior especially prays, is; That they all may be one.
This is the Sum and pith of the great request of the Lord Jesus, which he puts
up in the behalf of al believers, as the choicest legacy, he would bequeath
unto them, and leave with them, and lay in for their behalf; when he was to
leave the world: that which he propounds in the first place, before all others,
repeates again, and pursues it, as the grand Suit of al, that did concern their
good: That they may al be one. If once this can be attained, nothing can be
wanting, what ever shall be desired, and is truly good. The unity of Believers
is the great privilege, of which they can partake, and for which our Savior
prays.

We are here to inquire, 1. Of what kind of unity our Savior and the Text here
speaks. 2. What that unity is, wherein it consists, and by what discerned.


Touching the Answer to the, First.

I must crave leave under favor and correction to step aside from the common
Road, the usual apprehension of many Interpreters; whose Judgment and knowledge
I highly prize and reverence, and with whom I could desire to concur, and
easily so should, but that Evidences out of the Text (to my seeming and
shallowness at least) are so clear, that they constrain my Judgment to go a
little aside. I Answer therefore;

1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.
Negatively: The union of love and concord with the faithful, as the members of
the same Body ought to maintain in their hearts and consciences, and in their
converse and societies one with another; keeping that unity of spiritual
agreement in the bond of peace: to think the same thing, and speak the same
thing: to be of the same mind and Heart, as it was said of them in the
Primitive times; Act. 1.14. They continued with one accord, and Chapter 4.32.
The multitude of them which belee^ed, were of one mind, and one Heart.

This unity of amity, of love, and mutual and spiritual a^cord, is not the
chief aim and intendment of the Text, nor yet the purpose of the prayer of our
Savior. Though indeed it may be collected and inferred from this: and to my
apprehension, the very letter does look another way, and speaks aloud touching
another thing. For so,

1. The words immediately following are marvailous plain and express, That they
may be one in us. True it is, they should be, and those that have the same
spirit. of love, as the same soul in many members, they will be of one and the
same affection each to other: but that Christ now prays for, which
presupposes this, and is indeed the foundation thereof, is, Namely, that they
be one in us: and then they will be at unity, one with another. Yea the very
manner of speech, laid down by way of comparison and resemblance, seems to be
added, as a further clearing and interpretation, of that which went before.
That which was propounded there in the general, here comes more fully to be
explicated; As though our Savior had said, when I pray that al believers may be
one, my meaning may thus be conceived, and my intendment rightly understood by
this resemblance. As I am in the Father, and the Father in me: the scope of my
prayer is; that they should be one in us, after their manner.

Again when our Savior sets down the order, how he would have this unity
attained and preserved, the speaks full verse 23. I in them and thou in me, and
so they shall be made perfect into one q. d. If they all be in me, as I am in
thee, then are they in unity: and thou being in me, and I in them, then are
they perfected in this unity: As they are one in me, and so in thee, by
spiritual dependence, to receive al: So I am one in them and thou in me, by
spiritual influence, and we communicate al unto them.

2. The Second reason is out of verse 22. Where the Glory, which Christ has
received and given to his servants, is made a means to obtain this unity. The
glory, which thou have given to me, I gave to them, that they may be one, as
we. Whence it follows by undeniable evidence; This unity is one Stayr and
degree beyond the glory it self, which the Saints receive: For its a rule-case
in reason, the end is more excellent, and of greater worth and goodness, than
the means appointed for the end. Unity of affection among the Saints is part of
that glory, or an ingredient which makes up the glory of the Saints, but this
unity is the end of that glory, and so more excellent; therefore something
beyond that, or any ingredient in it.

2. I answer affirmatively in a word,

The unity here meant is the unity of that spiritual relation which they have
to Christ, and in him to God the Father; not the unity of affection or charity,
which they have one to another, and one between another.

That which is more excellent than this unity of affection, as being the end
unto that, is ordained unto that, as the end, that must be something beyond it:
so this unity is.

That which is properly bounded by the words of the text, and intendment of the
place, upon Christ, and the Father in him; That unity is not the unity of
affection, but of relation.

But this unity, by the express testimony of the truth and Text is bounded upon
the Father in Christ: That they may be one in us. therefore the unity here
intended is that of relation, not of affection.

We have now gained the first: what kind of unity this is. We are now to
inquire, wherein this consists, or how it may be discerned.

The explication of this, will be the interpretation of the words of the Text,
which follow; which are applied (as far as yet I can conceive by the most sad
consideration) unto this very purpose now in hand. For when our Savior had
prayed; That they might be one; That they might aright understand it, and so,
the exceeding love of Christ; who did not seek, nor so obtain (for he is ever
heard in what he asks) any mean or ordinary blessing, or common courtesy for
them, for their present comfort and refreshing. But the choicest mercy, a
blessing of incomparable worth and surpassing excellency; That, I say, they
might understand this and receive suitable comfort for it; He adds, by way of
explication, what he means, with as much plainness, as such a spiritual
mystery, which touched the very inward Heart-Blood of our happiness could be
discovered. q. d. If you ask what I mean by this unity, and whereby it may de
discerned: I answer by this familiar comparison: As I am in the Father, and he
in me, so I wish, they may be one in us. So that here we must unfold, 1. How
the Son is one in the Father, and he one in him. 2. Then conceive after what
manner the Saints and believers must be one in them, for this Christ has
prayed: this he has obtained: this shall undoubtedly be received.


Both which I cannot tell how more nakedly to lay open, than to express in
several short propositions, or conclusions.

1. The ground of this resemblance, taken from the manner of the Sons being in
the Father, is not to be attended, nor ought to be considered in regard of the
God Head or essence of the Deity: but in regard of their subsistence, as they
be distinct persons in this their dispensation. Therefore the word is in the
plural: One in us, as showing the number of the persons: besides, they are put
by way of particular distinction each to other; the Father in the Son, the Son
in the Father, not so much as mentioning, nor yet taking the Godhead into the
comparison, is common to them both indifferently; as I am in thee, not in the
Godhead: thou in me, not as both in the Godhead, for that was to be one in a
third, not in themselves.

2. Their being each in other, issues out of the mutual respect they have each
unto the other. The Father wholly and alone gives his being and sonship unto
Christ: The Son, as he receives, so he returns his being to the Father, as
relates, or things in relation, look each to other alone, receive and give
consistence one to another, and depend each upon other, in that behalf, and so
to be in the other mutually, their very constitution and being, rising from
this concurrence, mutual holding each upon the other; and ^o may be truly said
to be in each other. As buying is in refe^^nce ever to selling. Giving ever in
reference to taking: so that one cannot be without the other, give being each
to other, and so may be said to be in each other.

So the Father, as such, looks only to the Son: the Son looks only to the
Father. He is not a Father, because God, but, because he has a Son. The Son is
not therefore Son, because he is God, but because he has a Father: for they
are both equally one God and have the Deity indifferently agreeing to them
both. As a man is not therefore a Husband, because he is a man, for then every
man should be a husband, but in reference to the Woman he has married.

And hence the Father is said to be in the Son, and the Son in the Father,
namely to be one in this mutual respect. The Father had an Eye only to the Son
in giving his subsistence of a Son: The Son again has an Eye to the Father
alone, returning the being of his sonship to him. And they are prefect in this;
They wholly give, wholly take. Thus they are said to be in each other. Joh.
14.10. Beleevest thou not, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? so
said again, to be one with another, and delighting one in another. Prove. 8.30.
And mutually to glorify one another. Father glorify thy Son, that thy Son may
glorify thee. Joh. 17.1.

3. The second person in the glorious Trinity so takes our Human Nature into
personal Union with him, that he is the same person he was, no other, and it
becomes one person with him, leanes upon him, has his dependence from him, and
looks alone to him for his subsistence.

As a Son, he assumes our Nature, and as a Son with our Nature looks to the
Father. Therefore said, he does nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father
do. Joh. 5.19. As the Father has life in himself, so he has given to he Son,
to have life in himself because the Son of man verse, 26.27.

4. As the Father is said to beget his Son, and give being to him, so the Son,
as thus begotten assumes our Nature, be comes the Head of the covenant and
gives being of Sonship to his Children, and they return all that being to the
Lord Christ, and the Father in him Therefore called the eternal Father. Isa.
9.6. Hebr. 2.1, 3. Here am I, and the Children thou have given me called also
his seed. The manner of which words may thus be conceived.

The Lord has purchased the Spirit, he is said then to beget, when he sends
the spirit of Sons in^o their Hearts, which by the immutable assistance
thereof, sets their hearts for God, holds the bent thereof toward him alone,
as their Father, and principle of life. As they receive this being of Sons they
return it wholly to the Father in Christ: The whole man, in the whole, and that
with his whole strength, fastens upon God in Christ, acted wholly by the
influence of his spirit, and holds the not excellency thereof.

The Sum of all, out of all that hat been said.

1. Unity is the chiefest privilege for which Christ prays, and believers can
partake of, as their peculiar good in themselves.

I add that, In themselves; because there be higher ends than this, in the
Text: To-wit, the setting up of God in Christ in the Consciences of the
ungodly, that they may be forced to confess, that God sent his Son to this end;
That he loved them, as he loved Christ. There is yet another and higher end:
That they may behold and wonder, and be swallowed up in the admiration of the
glory of Christ, which the Father has given him.

Enquire here, how far Christ being in the Saints, and his love in them, may
yet be a higher end, than this.

2. This Unity is not the unity of affection between each other so much, but
the unity of relation to God in Christ: That as the Father is in the Son, and
the Son in the Father, by eternal generation; Believers so ought to be in both,
by spiritual Adoption.

3. In this Spiritual Adoption, as there is an influence from God in Christ, to
bend and settle the frame of the Heart toward him: So there is a re-fluence
and return, by the power and impression left of the same spirit to come again
to him. Conveyance of help on Gods hand should quicken our dependence to look
to him, and stay our selves with him there.

4. Had Adam stood, his posterity, out of principles, in themselves, might have
challenged happiness, though a covenant performed by a man, conveyed by a man,
unto them, by way of natural generation.

But in the covenant of the Gospel, the second Adam, the second person, taking
our Nature, by the power of the Deity, wrought al for us, communicates al to
us: by the same almighty power, inables us to receive what we have from him: To
be acted in all by him; To return all to him. The mutable principle in the
creature never brought a man to God, nor kept him with him: But the mutable
presence and Spirit of Christ.

So that there is a privilege here above that principle of Grace that was in
Adam, for that was but a creature. But here the spirit and so the power of God
through Christ, that takes our Nature into the nearest union with him, even
personal, which in Adam it attained not, in that purchases all for us. Not a
principle in us firstly, but the spirit of God in Christ it is, by which, the
bent of our Hearts are held and carried toward him, acted by him, and so
enabled to hold out the virtue, power, praise, and excellency of the spirit in
Christ from the Father.

So that a poor creature is compassed about with nothing, but whith the power
of God in Christ, and becomes one with Father and Son in their mutual relation
to them, and total dependence upon them. And this is above the innocence and
excellency of Adam in Paradise, and all that he could attain unto; and above
all created Grace in Heaven, being wholly taken up with God in Christ, and
loose our selves in God and Christ. Ephesians. 4.13. The acknowledgment of the Son of
God. It was not the Son of man that did it: The Son of God, that recovered us,
held the bent of our hearts to him, acted us, kept us, perfected us, crowns
us. God shall be all in all. The Father gives being to the Son, returns all to
the Father, and that eternal generation, and so one. The Lord Christ, as a son,
and begotten of the Father, gives us the being of Children by Adoption, sets
us, and holds us. We take al, acted by him, return to him. As the Father in
Christ gives all, we receive, and to the Father through Christ we return al,
and so we are one in the Father and the Son.

I. Reason.
1. Because this is the scope of our Saviors coming into the world, and the
next end, I say, the next end he intended in the great work of Redemption,
which he wrought for lost man; To bring him into this near relation of dearest
Love of the Father, by himself and the work of his spirit: and its that wherein
the life and power and pith of the covenant of Grace, does especially consist
and appear, and the excellency thereof.

That peculiar and spiritual intercourse, not alone of affection, but of divine
operation of God upon the soul, whereby the soul returns all unto God, to do
al, and to receive all, to do all for himself in man, and to receive all to
himself by man.

So that God alone does all in this, firstly upon man, and then by man. If this
work was so much in the Eye of our Savior, and that intended: So chief also in
the performance, and that accomplished with care: no wonder it had the next
Room and remembrance in his prayer. But so it was: this was the main errand of
our Savior, when he was sent into the world, and the very life of the kingdom
of Grace, and the covenant of Grace, as it concerned them. So the Lord
professes by the Prophet, Esa. 49, 5, And now, says the Lord, that formed me
from the Womb, to be his servant: Our Savior, appointed in Gods decree,
sanctified and overshadowed by the Holy Ghost in the womb, and called to this
end, for this work, To bring Jacob back again to him.

It was that which was plotted by the Head and policy of Satan, and brought
about by the fall and through the folly of our first parents; To break off this
unity and Oneness betwixt God and Adam: For Satan had found it by woeful
experience in himself, that by sin God would be estranged from him, and he also
from God: neither to find his favor toward him, nor the presence of his
spirit of Grace to work upon him: nor yet would Adam, thus departed, act for
God, nor return to him that praise he ought: So that God and Adam are not one,
but at odds.

Its the meaning of that place. Gal. 3.19, 20. When the Apostle had showed the
weakness of the Law, in the work of Justification, and the promise only carried
it; He makes thig Objection; wherefore then served the Law, i.e. The giving of
the Law? Answer; It was to discover transgression; and therefore it was given
by the Hand of a Mediator, to-wit Moses, who was between God and the people.

Now, in that Moses was a Mediator, it shows there was diverse parties
differing and disagreeing one from another: for a Mediator is not of one: not
of parties that are at unity and agreement; but God is one, ever like himself
and the same. Therefore the cause of difference was not on Gods part, but by
Reason of trangression; which shows man to be other, than he was by Nature, full
of guilt and sin, and that is the reason God is at odds with him, as he is
departed from God.

Now the scope of our Saviors coming is, to bring the Soul back again unto God,
by himself, and to make it one with the Father and himself. It was beyond the
power of any created Grace to bring back a fallen Soul; but the Godhead of
Christ, in the Nature of man assumed, must bring the Nature of man to God
again. And where as, it was found by proof in our first parents; that the power
of created Grace did not, nay indeed could not, hold the Soul unchangeably to
him, and so to act by, and for him.

Herein lies the life and incomparable excellency of the covenant of Grace, and
the fullness of the sufficiency of the quickening power of the second Adam, the
Lord Jesus, not only to procure unto acceptance and approbation with the
Father, but the lively communication of himself, and the assistance of his
spirit, to keep our hearts, and the gracious work thereof to him for ever.

So that, though our Graces might and would fall us in Adam, yet the spirit of
Jesus upholds and holds us for ever toward him, a fountain of living water.
Though the virtue and work thereof would wanse away, and through
not-attendance, not put forth it self upon the rule, and for the work, as we
see in Adam, He attended not unto, acted not upon a command, but listened to
the delusion and suggestion of the enemy. Yet the spirit of Christ, which
dwells with us, and shall be in us, is there, not only to keep with us and
carry us to Christ, but to quicken us by virtue from Christ, according to the
tenure of the Gospel. Joh. 14.17. And this is indeed to be under the powerful
impression of the covenant of Grace. And this is the meaning of that place. I
live not, but Christ lives in me. Gal. 3.20. Christ by Faith brings me to God.
By his spirit keeps the bent of the heart toward him. carries it to himself,
acts it upon himself: quickens it by influence of virtue, the fountain whereof
is in himself. Adam might have said, I live, by a power and principle of Grace,
in which I was created, and in which I have pleased God thereby, and according
to a covenant of works may challenge life and happiness. But Paul in the person
of al self-denying sinners, professes that, I live not. Christ has called me,
brought me to himself; gives me his spirit, and keeps the Eye of my Soul upon
himself: That he may thereby, Be all in all to me, work all in me and by me.

Its the meaning also of that. Col. 3.3, 4. Our life is bid with Christ in God:
when Christ, who is our life shall appear. God is in Christ, is in us: keeps
us to himself, and communicates al saving Graces of life here, and will quicken
and perfect all in the whole man at his resurrection. Thus then we see, The end
of our Saviors coming, and the life of the covenant of Grace; both these our
Savior would further by his prayer:

But this unity with the Father and the Son; is the end of our Saviors coming,
and the life of the Covenant.

2. Reason.
This work being savingly and effectually made good upon the soul, it maks way
for the enlarged expression of all the fruits and works of holiness, which
might further set forth the honor of God, the kingdom of Christ, our own
comforts here, and happiness in another world. Its the meaning of that, Joh.
15.5. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit.
True, it is done by faith: but it is something other, and something more, than
the bare coming to Christ, or our Union with him. It is the keeping the Eye of
the soul, and carrying the bent of the Heart upon the engagements of Gods
dearest love, and the unchangeable work of the spirit of Adoption to be acted
by the quickening virtue thereof in Gods time, and after Gods manner, and
answerable to our need, and that condition and place we possess in the Body of
Christ; for so that phrase implies. Joh. 6.56. He that eats my Flesh and
drinks my Blood (that is done by believing) He abides in me, and I in him.
That is another and a further work; And it intimates a free and a full
intercourse of spiritual communion between God and the soul: and a
communication of his presence and spiritual influence upon the believer.

As it is in the Body natural, when the constitution is healthful, and the
composition of parts complete and in a sweet order, there is a free intercourse
of blood and spirits between each part, and in each passage, whence the whole
is in perfect strength, and each part active and able to its office. But when
there grow obstructions, the passages between part and part are stopped, the
work is hindered, and the whole prejudiced, both in health and strength. So it
is, when this Oneness and this near relation in the power and expressions of
it, betwixt the Soul and the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, has his full and
free-passage; There is a special intercourse of the presence and spiritual
influence of the spirit of Adoption upon the soul, whence follows a quickening
virtue and enlarged fruitfullness in all the services to God and man. As they
are one with the Father and Christ; so are they wholly acted by them, and
approve both their hearts and carriages unto them in all well pleasing. So the
Apostle, 1. Joh. 3.6. He that abides in Christ, sins not, but he that
sins, has not seen him, nor known him.

Use to Instruct Comfort Exhort
Us.
1. Instruction. The practice of our Savior is a precedent and pattern of
praying to all the faithful, unto the end of the world, teaching us, how we
should order our desires, when we appear before the Lord, and put up our
petitions unto the throne of Grace.

Thou see here, what our Savior seeks for, sues for, and that in thy behalf,
and for thy good: yea when he would lay in for the relief of his servants, and
provide for their comfort in this world, before he was to go into another
world* When he would suit them with blessings, and good things, that might be
serviceable for their everlasting welfare. This is the great and grand
request, and that put up in the first place, That they may be one in us.

Go thy way, do thou likewise: pray thou likewise: Let this petition have the
chief place in thy heart, and the first place in thy prayer. As the Apostle in
another case; I may in this; Let the same mind be in thee that was in Jesus
Christ. He is most wise, and best knows what may procure our good, and is more
merciful and careful for our welfare than we our selves. If wise, and knows
best: merciful and cares more for our eternal good, than we for our selves;
when we have such a Guide that can not err, who shows us the way, we may safely
follow it.

A pattern beyond all exception: we may, nay we ought, if we be wise-hearted,
to imitate it. The prayer of our Savior is the standard: by this we should make
al prayers, judge all. True, in every thing our prayers and supplications ought
to be made known to God: What ever we would have, or have a sanctified use of,
seek it, and seek a blessing upon it; what ever we receive, be thankful for it.
But, that which is of greatest worth, we have most need of, and may receive
most good by, affect that more than all the rest, and seek that before all
other. Of the six Petitions, but one for worldly things. Where the Lord in his
word bestows more lives and labor to direct thee, bestow thou most care to
attend and take it.

Set then this prayer of our Savior a Sampler daily before thine Eyes, when
thou come to petition good things for thy self, say; It is not the profiting
of this world, that may enrich, not comforts, conveniences which might content,
that I seek for. But, Oh that I, and al mine, and al thine, the families of thy
servants and the assembly, may be, not one only in affection, but one in that
nearest relation of dearest love, to thee blessed Father and blessed redeemer,
That we might not live, but thou would live in us, That we may be al one in
thee.

Use 2. Comfort.
We have here matter of unconceiveable comfort to support the feeble spirit,
and fetch up the fainting and drooping hearts of the poor and faithful servants
of the Lord. What ever difficulty ye meet withal, that may dismay you: what
ever opposition from without, which may resist and hinder, or weakness from
within, that may discourage you, either from the seeking or expecting so great
a favor, so high and happy a privilege from the hands of the Lord:

What: that I! Such a sinful and wretched creature? who am sit to be cooped up
with the damned, and chained up with the Devils, who have been one with them in all their wickedness: temptations have not been presented, occasions offered so
soon, but Oh! this vile heart, has been one, and sided with them, and been
carried by them, and transported with distempers, as with a violent stream.

What I can this carnal cursed heart ever be one with so holy and blessed a
God? what! I! that have been a Traitor to the Lord Jesus, and shed his Blood,
and crucified again the Lord of life! I! who have been a Rebel against the Rich
mercy and Grace of the Father, so graciously provided, so freely offered? that
ever I should imagine to be one with these, who have been an enemy to both? its
beyond my thoughts, much more my Hopes, its not possible, therefore not
credible. Why? alas, mine own experience will give in evidence, and that
undeniable, against my Soul. I have had all means, enjoyed all ordinances, God
has tried all conclusions, compassed me about with mercies, hedged me in with
afflictions, to hold my heart to him, and keep me with him: All Hopes and helps
have been plucked away, from whence I expected relief, that I might look to
him, and be quickened and carried by him: Its not possible therefore to be
attained. True, Its not possible for all means to work: Nor possible by any
power or ability of thine own to bring it about: And yet it is not possible, if
the Lord Jesus have prayed for it, but God should give it, and you undoubtedly
receive it from his Majesty's hands. Our Savior professes so much. Father, I
know tho hear me always. Joh. 1.4^. therefore its no more but that which
Christ avoweth, he knows: and therefore thou may build upon it and know: Yea
upon this ground, he supports the heart of Peter, in that heavy Shock, when
almost al was gone. Luke 22.32. Satan has destred to winnow you, but I have
prayed, that thy Faith fail not.

When therefore Satan's Assaults are never so fell and fierce, his temptations
never so fiery, which with their vehemence, multitude and continuance, seem to
shake and sink thy heart; when helps and heart and Hopes and prayers and al
fail, so that thou art at thy wits end, and utmost period of thy thoughts: yet
the prayer of our Savior never fails of acceptance and success. Therefore set
thy heart at rest; Christ shall either miss of his prayer, or I will not miss of
this privilege. Therefore yet this staggering and backsliding heart will be
se^led. Therefore this giddy and unstedy heart will be established. If the
Father will deny Christ's prayer: I am content he should deny my comfort and
support. But the one is impossible, and the other is incredible.

Its seasonable even for unbeleeving creatures (leaving secret things to Gods
counsel) when they have no heart to pray, not Hope to expect any favor; and
where ever they cast their Eye, they find nothing but cause of discouragement
and confusion of face: look into the world, there is nothing but vanity there
to deceive and vex, look they into their own hearts and lives, there is
nothing, but Hells of sin and guilt, which might overwhelm them; Look then to
the Prayer of our Savior, who prayed for His in their worst condition, when
they did not believe, and could not pray for themselves, and were as bad as I
am: even for Paul, when he was persecuting and blaspheming, even for many of
the Jews, when they were killing of him, and why not for me? why may I not Hope
the best, when I cannot conclude the worst? what God will do, he knows not: what
he may do, he has revealed, and I will yet expect.

Use 3. Exhortation.

He prayed for this disposition, labor thou to attain it. He desired it of his
Father in Heaven, endeavor thou to the utmost of that care and skill thou have,
in the use of all means to attain it upon earth. The Sum is: That the whole
strength of the Soul should be wholly carried to God in Christ for all: not to
any thing in our selves we have, or for any thing we can do (as Adam might have
pleaded, I have done, I have deserved it) but wholly to be quickened and acted
by the spirit of God through Christ.

The Soul should be like the Herb Heliotropium, the Nature whereof is such, as
the philosopher observes, It turns the face of it toward the Sun, what way
soever it turns: In the morning looks to the East, the Sun rising: In the
evening to the West, the Sun setting. So it should be with the believing
sinner, the face and Eye of the Soul ever toward God in Christ.

That which our Souls need, and which is able to answer our desires, and
satisfy our necessities; is here alone to be had: hither alone we must come,
from hence, for ever look to receive it. So Peter disputes. Act. 4.12. Job. 6.
When our Savior would settle their staggering disposition, least they should be
taken a^^de; will ye also go away! He answers, and yields the argument; Whither
should we go? thou only have the words of eternal life. Here only is that
wisdom that may guide; here only that mercy that may succor; here only is that
Grace that may refresh and quicken; Its good therefore coming, being here. So
they by experience concluded; Jer. 3.29. Surely in vam is Salvation hoped for
from the Hills: and from the multitude of the Mountains: truly in the Lord our
God is the Salvation of Israel. And upon the like ground they resolves, Hos.
14.3. For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. Its not Els-where to be found.
Therefore learn we to chide our hearts out unto God in Christ. As Jacob his
Sons, Why stand ye here gazing one upon another? go unto Egypt and buy, that we
may live and not die. Gaze not upon the sins, weaknesses, temptations,
miseries, means, ordinances etc. get ye to God in Christ, that ye may for ever
be assured, comforted, and quickened.

As its alone here to be had, So here we shall never fail to receive what we
seek and expect. Ps. 10.20.

Verse 21. -- That the world may believe, that thou have sent me.


THese last words lay out the main scope of the Prayer of our Savior, at which
he aimed, and which he looked at principally, by the grant of that spiritual
unity which he craved in the behalf of his disciples. And the end is, To lift
up the prais and honor of that supreme and absolute sovereignty of God the
Father in sending; his own faithfulness and infinite sufficiency in executing
and accomplishing the great work of Redemption, about which he was sent: so
that there was nothing failed of all that the Father purposed, and he undertook
to perform: and that the world and worst of men, however formerly they rebelled
against his authority, counsel, and command in sending; rejected also the
person and proceeding of our Savior Christ in coming: who was a stumbling to
the Jew, and foolishness to the Grecians; The Head-corner-stone whom the Jews
refused, whom the Gentiles trampled under their feet: against whom both Jews
and Gentiles banded themselves. So the Apostle Peter observes the Prophecy, and
concludes by proof and experience and accomplishment of it. Act. 4.24, 25, 26,
27. Lord thou art God, which have made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is, who by the mouth of thy servant David have said, why did the
Heathen rage and the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth stood
up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ: for of a truth, against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel were
gathered together, etc. Let us break their bonds, and cast their cords away. I
know not the Lord, says Pharaoh. We know that God spoke unto Moses: as for
this fellow, (so contemptuously they spoke of Jesus) we know not whence he is.
Joh. 9.29. The Jews had certain questions against Paul, says Festus, and of
one Jesus. Act. 25.19. And the whole rabble cry out, Away with him, from the
earth: not him, but Barabbas.

And yet when the prayer of our Savior shall attain his end, in the hearts of
the Faithful, so that they shall be wholly carried to God in Christ, by the
immutable assistance of his Spirit, their hearts kept with him, their graces
acted upon him, themselves quickened by him, for ever: then al these, will they,
nil they, shall by a constraint be forced to acknowledge, their own consciences
will yield it, and their mouths confess it, at the day of Judgment; That Christ
was the true Messiah, sent by the Father, and that he has fully accomplished
the great work of salvation, for the good of his. And God only shall be exalted
in that day.

There be two particulars in the words. We shall open all, and handle that
which is the main.

1. Christ is sent by God the Father. 2. God will have this believed by the
ungodly;
Which will be, when the Saints attain this unity here prayed for, then Christ
will attain this glory.

To the First.

That Christ is sent by God the Father for the Redemption of his. It needs no
further witness to settle it, the words are so express. We will a little open
it that as it is true, so it may be plain and evident, and so much the rather,
because our Savior lays so great a weight upon it and bestows the very
strength of his prayer in the first place, for the attainement of the
acknowledgment thereof. And to speak once for all, 1. What the word and the
weight of the phrase carries. 2. In what regard our Savior is said to be sent.
3. Wherein this sending lies.


1. The word sending, or as the Latin phrase has it, Mission, carries ever two
things in it.

1. The Authority of him that sends, in respect of the party that is sent: but
it is not the authority of dominion and rule so much, as that Authority of
order or communication of a work from one unto another. And in this sense, he
only can be said to be sent, who works from another, and works not originally
from himself. 2. It implies a new act or impression upon the creature, whereby
it has it is self in some other frame or disposition than formerly.
Take it in this breadth and extent, you shall find, that in scripture, the Son
and holy Spirit are only said to be sent, and it is never attributed to the
Father. Gal. 4.4. God sent his son. Joh. 15.26. But when the Comforter shall
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father. And this cannot be any created
Grace or work, for the words following determine that full. The Spirit of
truth, which proceeds from the Father. Joh. 14.20. But the Comforter, which
is the holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name.

Whenever then the action with the manner also from such a person, are
comprehended in this sending; It is (...) given to, or affirmed of the Father:
because it sig^^^ie not an act only expressed by a person, but an (...) from a
person in such a manner, as that he has Au^^^^^y in way of order originally to
act before another at the least: And the other to act from him.

But because the Father cannot act from the Son and Holy Ghost: but both Son
and Holy Ghost, they do not act only, but act in their order and manner from
another; the Son from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from both: therefore they
are truly said to be sent.

But if they look at the act only, which is expressed upon the creature, then
this sending is, and ought to be given to all the presons. As the Incarnation
of our Savior is one thing in his sending. Therefore those two are joined. God
sent his Son made of a Woman, as made, so sent: and herein the Holy Ghost had a
hand, whether we look at the sanctification of the seed in the Womb, or the
uniting of it to the second person. There all the persons work. So likewise in
the dispensation of the office of our Savior, in his whole proceeding, the works
of the Holy Ghost went along. Isa. 61. The Spirit of God was upon me, he sent
me to preach, and he preached and performed all those great works by the
strength and operation of his spirit.

2. In what regard our Savior is said to be sent.

Not as the second person in the glorious Trinity, whereby, he is God blessed
for ever, equal with the Father: for so the Apostle professes Phil. 2.6. Being
in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, i.e. Had the
glory of the Deity truly appertaining to him, and the Godhead dwelling in him,
and knew his own worth and right; therefore willingly submitted himself to that
Under-condition, not by constraint, for he well understood what his due was.

But as he was God and man, and assumed our Nature, and became mediator in our
Room and stead. So he professes of himself: That his Father is greater than
he. As he took upon him the form of a servant, became our surety, and came in
the similitude of sinful flesh, yet without sin. Joh. 14.28. In his voluntary
and free dispensation, as he was willing to take our flesh, and dwell thereby
amongst us, so is he inferior to himself, as God, and so to his Father. And
yet take the work it self, and the manner of the work, as it was explicated
before, and the phrase of sending implies; he is only sent of the Father. But
look at the work Early, he may be said to be sent by all: but that is unusual,
nay in open phrase never to be found in Scripture, because the word comes not
in that sense to our view.

As he becomes to take our Nature, so he was sent. But as Son, by eternal
generation, he is made fit to take our Nature. And therefore it is; the
assuming of Human Nature is made a propriety, a thing peculiar to the second
person; Insomuch, that it is heresy to say, the Father was incarnate, or the
Holy Ghost incarnate.

What ever appertains to our Savior, as the second person, and as the Son of
the Father; that he had by eternal generation, and in a peculiar manner from
the Father. But as second person, he assumes, and so is sent, and dispenses
the work of our Redemption. Therefore so far he is in a peculiar manner sent
from the Father: and in this sense, he is never said to be sent, but from the
Father in the Verdict of Scripture.

2. As he assumes and becomes incarnate, so is our Nature taken into personal
union with the second person, so far is it advanced, and has a privilege and
liberty to use any Attribute, so far he sends the spirit, even the Holy Ghost
from the Father, and dispenses al power from the Father, by the spirit for the
Good of his. And therefore so far he does al in all, as he is sent from the
Father in a peculiar manner.

In a word, hence it appears, that the work of incarnation, as he took our
Nature, the work of dispensation in sending the spirit, and appointing al
Officers, and Offices and ordinances, and accompanying and blessing all for
good: Issues in a peculiar manner from this his sending from the Father. Which
the wicked world does not see, will not acknowledge, cannot submit unto, but
they shall one day be forced unto it.

Hence it is, our Savior always professes, he does al, as sent. Joh. 5.36.
Arms himself by his sending against al. Joh. 10.36. Looks wholly and only at
that work, for which he was sent. Joh. 5.30. And generally all runs upon this
string, comforts all from his sending. As my Father sent me. So I send you;
shows the greatness of their sin, that oppose him, He that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

3. Wherein this sending consists: look at the work of it.

Answer in four things.

1. He is appointed and set apart to this great employment and Embassage. Joh.
6.27. For him has God the Father sealed. Jsa. 49.5. I have formed thee from
the Womb, to be my servant, to bring Jacob again. And verse, 6. -- That thou
may be my Salvation to the end of the Earth.

He is now in Gods counsel and everlasting decree designed to this so great a
work, and in his season called out to the execution, sent from his Bosom abroad
into this world, to act the great affairs of Gods everlasting purposes,
touching the recovery of man.

2. The Father committed this so great a work unto his care and trust, and laid
it upon him as his charge, which by mutual consent and convenant he willingly
undertook. Joh. 6.39. This is my Fathers will that has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose none, but should raise it up at the last
day. And therefore adds verse, 40. He that believes in me. Shall have
everlasting life and I will raise him up at the last day. Yea he gives up his
account of his work. John. 17.12. Those that thou have given me, I have kept,
and lost none. And therefore compares himself to the good Shepherd, that lays
down his self for his Sheep. Joh. 10.

3. Gives him full commission for the accomplishment of this work unto the full,
even as he is the Son of man; has given right and liberty to the humane Nature
of ours now received into personal union, to use and improve any of the
Attributes of the Deity, for the further benefit of the Saints, the good of his
Church, and the furtherance of those spiritual ends, which may best ^et
forwards the glory of God, and the everlasting welfare of his people.

This so wonderful a union does advantage the Humane Nature to so high a
privilege, to use all the excellencies of the Deity, at al times, answerable to
al necessities, to fetch supply suitable, to the wants, desires, comforts of
the Saints. This is the meaning of those places. Math. 28.18. All power is
given to me in Heaven and in Earth. To have al power, it to be Omnipotent, for
more than all cannot be conceived no^ possessed: more than that, God has not:
and that because it is an in-communicable Attribute, he cannot communicate: but
the meaning is; though it be not omnipotent, yet it has liberty to set that on
work, for the benefit and best good of Gods servants.

Hence, what the Father does, the son is said to do also. Joh. 5.26. As the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the son to have life in
himself. Verse, 19. What ever things he does, those the son does likewise: for
as the Father raises up the dead, even so he. Joh. 17.2. Thou have given him
power over all Flesh, to give unto them eternal life. He that must rescue them
from Hell, and sin, and death, and from divine Justice, he must have power over
al: That the power in Heaven, may not prejudice and frustrate the work: in Hell
hinder it: on earth oppose it.

4. The Father leaves the immediate dispensation of all the work unto him, to
act it, according to his own pleasure. For so our Savior, As the Father
raises, and quickens, so the son quickens whom he will. Joh. 5.21: And
adds verse, 22. For the Father judges no man: but has committed al judgment
to the son. Not that the Father has not power for the execution of the work.
For he that gives it, has it in a principal and sovereign manner. But he has
committed the immediate execution thereof unto the Lord Jesus, and so of the
whole work of our Redemption. Joh. 5.27. That (as Pharaoh said concerning
Joseph, when he appointed him next unto himself in the kingdom of Egypt Genesis
41.40,44. I am Pharaoh, and without thee, shall no man lift up his hand or
foot) no man shall do any thing, which way so ever he turn himself etc. Only I
am Pharaoh; So the Father to Christ, he delegates the execution of al in Heaven
and Earth unto him, only he is greater. This is the meaning of that place. 1
Cor. 11.3. I would have you know, that the Head of every man is Christ, the
head of the Woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God. Whence know,

1. That the Apostle speaks not only of faithful men and Women, but of al men
and Women according to their sex. For the scope is to show that Women should be
subject, not only gracious, but al. And this he shows from the feebleness and
underness of their Nature and sex.

2. That these different degrees of excellency are only to be attended in
regard of subordination, in order one to another, and immediate dispensation
from one to another; for that Head implies, not only excellency and dignity, in
the general, but power to move al, in subord nation to it; authority to rule
all in subjection (...) So that, it is not excellency, but power and (...): and
that not at large, for so Angels are the (...) of men; but as they be in
subordination, and not (...) ^^ch, as be far removed, but such as have the next
(...) dispensation, in way of providence, ^e^ch ^ver other. For otherwise,
Christ is head, not of^^^, but of Woman and Angels also: so God himself is.

But the Apostles meaning and intent was, to show, the orderly and next
dispensation in the several degrees: the immediate influence and dispensation
of power and authority for the ruling of the femal sex, is in a way of
providence and appointment from man: the immediate dispensation of power to man
is from Christ: to Christ from God the Father, who has sent him. And thus
Christ is, and does to al: only distinguishing the manner and end of his
dispensation, To the wicked in way of Justice, for their ruin and destruction:
To the godly in way of mercy for their spiritual good. That Is the meaning of
that, All is yours etc. And hence the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. Christ is said
(when he has conquered al enemies, the last is death; damned all the wicked
and delivered up is Children into the hands of his Father) he then is said: To
deliver up his Kingdom to the Father, i.e. Only in regard of this outward
dispensation. For then God the Father shall, in and through Christ, communicate
himself to all his Saints.

Use. 1.
We have here matter of wonderment at the Rich and unconceiveable compassion of
the Father to miserable undone man: who should be careful to provide for his
good, who is so negligent to provide for his own? Spares nothing ^o purchase
his Salvation, who has done what he can to destroy himself. Had he sent the
meanest of his creatures to succor us, his servants to visit us, his Angels to
administer to us, it had been more, than we could have expected: But to send
his Son out of his own Bosom, yea out of his own Bowels, to work out our
Redemption, to make known the way of life, and and to make it good unto our
Souls; Nature would not do this, reason cannot reach this mercy, the heart
would not dare to beg this. Sit we down in the everlasting admiration of his
mercy. As Elizabeth and Mary, when he came to visit her, Luke 1.43. Whence
comes it that the mother of my Lord should come to me? So thou. As David, when
he attended the dealing of the Lord toward lost man, who had made himself the
most vile and forlorn of al his creatures; looks upon his own baseness and Gods
kindness. Lord what is man, that thou should be mindful of him, and the Son
of man thou should regard him? So: What is man? so base, so sinful, so vile,
so miserable. As Saul, who ever found his enemy and slew him not? but who ever
found his enemy, and sent his Son to him?

Use 2.
Comfort to bear up the fainting hearts of the Saints amidst all the corruptions
that annoy, temptations that oppose, feebleness and difficulties that
discourage: why, yet Christ is sent for the work, who is furnished with all
sufficiency to do it. He has laid salvation upon one that is mighty. Mighty
pride, mighty distempers to foil thee, mighty temptations to assault thee,
mighty allurements in the world to entangle thee. Why here is Salvation upon
one that is mighty to save free, and deliver thee. Hither Paul retires, and
strengthens himself. 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed; when I am not
able to resist or vanquish, Christ is able, and nothing ever miscarried, that
was committed to his care. All power in Heaven and Earth is committed into his
had.

Use 3. Of Direction, How to expect all from God. How to go to God for all.

1. Expect all from God in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3 etc. blesses us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in him, Adopts us in him, makes us accepted in him
God was in Christ reconciling the world.

2. Go to God for all in Christ. In the performances of al Duties, in the use of
al Ordinances go to Christ first, and then to the Father. As its true, the
Father judges no man, so he comforts, quickens, sanctifies no man: but has
committed al unto his Son. Christ is the Fathers Almner, and to him we must
repair, if we desire to share in the bounty of the Father. He is that Joseph.
Genesis 41.44, 45. If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. Joh. 8.30. If
he comfort, ye shall be comforted indeed.

Therefore do three things.

1. Be Dex^rous in our apprehensions to see the footsteps of our Savior and be
so well acquainted with his passages, that we may perceive his whispers and know
him at a turn, though we ^ee but his back parts. 2. Use no means nor entertain
any, but such as come by his own appointment. Because those that come not from
him, lead not to him. Col. 2.10. We stand complete in him. Math. 17.5. Hear
him, and none but him. As the Prophet to the King of Judah, Go not with the
King of Israel, for God is not with him. So, go not out in the use of such
means, for God is not in them. 3. Look at him, as sent on purpose for this work
Joh. 6.26. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom the Father
has sent. This answers all. If the Father appoint him, who shall gainsay? It
the Son has undertaken it, how can it fail? If al power be in his hand, who
shall hinder? If all the execution be in his hand, there will be no miscarriage.
We have dispach't the first. The second now follows. Viz. That God will have
this believed by the ungodly world. And its possible they may, when the Saint
attain this unity, Christ shall attain this glory even from the wicked, that
they shall acknowledge his call and commission, and so execution of this work of
our Redemption.

For the explication hereof we may inquire; 1. What it meant by world. 2. How
they are said to believe. 3. What do they believe in the sending of Christ, for
which our Savior so praise, and at which he so aims.


1. WORLD here] not to trouble with any thing Impertinent or superfluous, i^ is
put for the WICKED of the world, who have their hearts, inheritance, and
happiness here, therefore go no higher, look of further.

So ye shall find the word used in this Chap. verse 9. I pray for them, I pray
not for the world: where the opposition gives the true sense and explication of
the word: they are here distinguished and differenced from those that were
given to Christ, and to whom he has given his word, and hearts to believe, and
to whom he gave eternal life. The like ye have, 1 John 5.4. We know that we are
of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness. Where those two are put in
opposition, to be of God, begotten of God, called to be Saints, out of the
world. But those that are not begotten of God they are made up, as it were, of
worldly principles, and they keep and take up their abode in wickedness, they
are brought to bed in it.

And thus wicked men are styled from three grounds.

1. Because the God of this world rules in them. 2 Cor. 4.4. i.e. Satan, whose
abode and habitation is in this visible world: for where the Devils are cast,
there is Hell, but hither they are cast, into the Air, the prince of the Air.
Ephesians. 2.2. He compasses the Earth to and fro, Job. 1. And sometimes he hurries
into the great deep. God has given him a commission in his Justice, to
exercise a Soverainty over the wicked, and to use all these earthly and worldly
things, as baits, to take them at his will; and he never fails. With honor, he
catches the ambitious; with wealth the c^ve^cus; And they acknowledge no God
but Sa^an in these, carried and taken aside by his temptations and overpowred
by his allurements when he will.

2. They are acted by the Spirit of the world. And therefore the Apostle puts
these two in opposition. 1 Cor. 2.12. We have not received the Spirit of the
world, but the Spirit of God. As the ^ons of God are led by the Spirit of God,
who works mightily in them that believe: So wicked men are acted by the Spirit
of the world. Now that which gives life and being to the world, as it is in
opposition to God, is vanity and emptiness, vanity and emptiness perverted.
inordinate or Exorbitant; vanity running wry from the command of God, and cross
to the fear of God. Emptiness and weakness of the creature captivating the Soul
under its command, and carrying of it according to its will; Its the Spirit of
the world. 1 John 2.16. The lust of the Eves carry all away. Thus the Prophet;
Wine and Women take away the heart. Hos. 4.11.

3. They take contentment in the things of the world, and there they take up
their stand, set up their rest. They are called, the men of the Earth, and lay
up their treasures here on Earth. Ps. 17.14. Mind earthly things. Philip. 3.19.
Here they are in their Element, like fish in the Water; and some conceive and
not improbably, that the Psalmist aimed at some such thing. The Heavens are the
Lords, but the Earth he has given to the sons of men. Psalm. 115.16. By Earth
is meant all these visible things, which they who live by sense, set up as
their Gods, serve and worship them. The heaven is Gods throne, where no unclean
thing comes, but the Earth, these visible things, where wicked men have sinned,
and by their sins have polluted, they are now contented with them, and they
shall be plagued by them; therefore its said: God fil^s their Bellies with his
hid Treasures, the things of this world, which are in Gods storehouse, and he
has a hidden dispensation of them. These are the diet of wicked men: they have
not the hid manna, spiritual food to refresh them.

If the God of the world rule them: The Spirit of the world act them: The
things of the world content them: Then are they truly said to be World.

USE.
Before we pass, let us make some use of this; That wicked men are worldly men;
and hence we may discover our condition and take a trial of our estate, whether
carnal or spiritual, whether gracious or wicked; look what it is that carries
thee, what it is that contents thee. Are these worldly things great in thine
Eye, and in thy apprehension and approbation: do thou center thy self upon
these, satisfiest thou thy self with these? believe it thou art of the world,
and shall perish with the world. So our Savior. Joh. 3.31. He that is of the
Earth is earthly, and speaks of the Earth. It is his Nature and he does his
Nature: his actions manifest his disposition, we judge ever the Nature and
quality of the thing by its motion and place whither it tends. Light things will
ascend, and never stay, ti^ they come to the place, their Nature desires: heavy
things descend downward, and they will not stay before they come thither. See
thou the po^se of thy spirit, the motion and inclination of the heart, whither
it goes naturally, and where it would be, if it be there where it desires, and
where it rests, if left unto it self. If the weight of thy thoughts and desires
carry thee freely and strongly after the lust of thine Eyes, the lust of thy
flesh, and stop it does not, stay it would not, before it be there. Thy heart
is on the Earth, and thou art a Citizen on Earth, and thou have thy portion on
this Earth: thou have no Heaven in thee to this day, and thou shall never come
to Heaven.

It skills not, that thou mee^est sometimes with the things of Grace and life,
thy speeches, thy conference, thy carriages, and thy actions, meddle now and
then, and converse with the things of Heaven and happiness: because they be
such as come in thy way, and will keep thee company, if not beyond thy
expectation, yet beyond thy desire.

The Traveiler passes by many countries, baits at many places but he takes not
up his abode and rest, before he come to his own Country and own home, and
there he stays: That shows he is that Country man.

Thou may in thy travel meddle with the heavenly ordinances of God, take up
holy duties in thy course, and bait thy self in such performances, as may
maintain either quiet within, or credit without, amongst men. Oh! but which is
thy home, wither thy heart and desires are going, and will not rest, before they
repair thither? thou seek God to serve thine own turn, touchest at holy
courses, to take in fresh comfort, encouragements etc. But thy heart is not at
home, before it can satisfy it self in the pursuit and possession of worldly
things. The God of the world rules thee, the spirit of the world leads thee,
the things of the world content thee, when thou art there, thou art in thy
Element: when drawn from thence, thou art dragd like Fish out of the Water,
much a-do to live: That is thy condition.

Its possible for a heavy thing by a strong hand, to be held from descending
downward: but leave it to it self, thou shall easily see, whether it be its
place, or suitable to its inclination, it moves immediately downwards. Your
Sea-horses and Crocodils go sometimes ashore for their prey: but because they
retire and take up their abode in the Waters, we therefore know, they are Sea,
not Land-creatures. So its possible, to seek a prey, i.e. For thine own ease or
praise, thou may put to the performances of holy duties: or happily, either
company, place, persons, the laws, or ordinances hold thee by strong hand,
and-force thee to a show of zealous profession. But when these poises are
plucked away: mark what thy Soul before desired inwardly, what it now will into
of it self: If to the world, and the vanities thereof, thou art a worldly man
to this day. Hence it is, that many in these places drop away, and fall
hand-pat to the world, after a long profession of a heavenly life. These
earthly, heavy Souls would have been at their center long before, but there
were some impediments in their way, that stopped their proceeding: Whereas, if
the heart be heavenly, it rests not before it come thither. Psalm. 42. Oh when
shall I appear before the living God? many say, who will show us any good? but
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance. And the Apostle concludes it.
Coloss. 3.1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above, ye
ought to do so, and ye will do so. The Apostle Issues both the parts, with the
grounds of them. 1 Cor. 15. 48. The first Adam is from the Earth, earthly: the
second Adam is the Lord from Heaven: As we have born the image of the earthly,
so shall we bear the image of the Heavenly. Yea our Savior concludes it, They
are not of this world, as I am not of the world. As he by the power of his
Godhead, took our Nature to himself, by the power of the fame Godhead, he
takes our Souls to himself, carries them to himself, acts them upon himself,
keeps them with himself.

2. How the world are said to believe Christ's sending.

Answ. It cannot be meant of saving Faith the faith of Gods Elect, or that
Faith, by which we believe unto Salvation: for that Faith which is here meant,
wicked men should, and its certain sooner or later they shall attain, for its
that which the Father intends and aims at, and our Savior Christ looked at, as
his scope in his prayer: and we know that the Father never fails to accomplish
what he intends, nor our Savior to attain what he prays for. But this our
Savior aims at in his prayer, as one principal scope and end of it.

There is therefore in the second place, a Faith which does belong even to the
wicked, which is truly termed or called Faith in the language of the Scripture,
and the common speech of men, I say truly called Faith though i^ be not truly
saving. Joh. 12.42, 43. Many believed on him, but durst not confess him, for
they loved the pra^e ^f men, mo^e than of God. The^e is says then: and men do
also believe, who love the praise of men more, than of God: but this no man can
do and believe savingly. Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe, which rece^ve honor one
of another and seek not the honor that comes from God only? Joh. 2.23, 24.
Many believe in him, But our Savior did not commit himself unto them for he
well knew, what was in man. And its notorious in the parable of the stony
ground, which believed for a time but in the time of temptation went away.

The Question grows, What is this Faith, which is so styled in the phrase of
Scripture.

Answ. I suppose it includes two things mainly.

1. When the understanding meets with and gives entertainment to the evidence
of that truth, that is now presented to its view: but that is not al, that it
comprehends the compass of the truth that comes to considereation, but that it
is so far settled by force of argument that does confirm it, that it fully
assents and subsc^^bes thereunto. For the force of argument begets this human
Faith and a full and unquestionable assurance of the conclusion. This is that
the Apostle means Romans 14. And the last, when the understanding neither doubts
the certainty, nor mistakes the truth, but is carried sul sail in assent. 2.
The evidence or this truth, thus understood, is of that power and prevailing
efficacy, that it carries a kind of command and control with it, it soakes into
the conscience, sets down that, and convinces it, that conscience gives in its
verdict that way. It proceeds yet further, sets upon the will with that forcible
and u^deniable evidence, that it awes it, and brings it to yield thus far, that
its true in the general, but that its either not her pleasure and so not her
good to submit to it, but only for some turn, for her own ends, but not in
uprightness, and for it self. Joh. 3.8. When Jonah had denounced the judgment
of God against Nineveh, Its said, The believed the word of the Lord. Not that
they did do that savingly, for its spoken of the whole Body of the people, who
were yet heathenish: but that they did without question assent to the truth of
the message, their consciences were so far convinced, and their hearts so far
awed, that they did yield it was certain it would come. And both these are here
understood, and intended by our Savior; that they whose judgments, consciences,
hearts were not settled, convinced, nor yet persuaded, that our Savior was sent,
They might be brought to believe. 3. What the world shall thus believe touching
Christ's sending?
Answ. Our Savior looks at three things.

1. That he had the right of Commission delivered by the Father into his hand,
to attend this work, as being in especial manner appointed and designed
thereunto. Joh. 6.27. 2, That he had fullness of Power, of dispensation of this,
not only called, but authori^ed, enabled, and furnished with all power and
Grace, and that beyond measure, for the discharge and performance of this
weighty change; as to be the Salvation of God, unto the ends of the Earth. 3.
That he has not only undertaken it, but fully, in all particulars,
accomplished that, for which he was thus designed and also furnished from God
the Father Joh. 17.4. I have finished the work thou gave me to do. For these
are the three main difficulties, where the corrupt hearts of men come off most
hardly, and about which they make heaviest opposition against the greatest work
of our Redemption.
Thus the Scribes and Pharisees were ready to quarrel his calling: Joh. 7.42.
The Messiah when he comes etc. But this man, whence he is, we know not. Joh.
9.29. God spoke by Moses, but whence this man comes; We know not. And when the
Blind man seemed but to speak favorably in this point; certainly, no man could
do such and such things, unless God had sent him, They could not bear it. Joh.
9.33, 34.

Again that he had no sufficiency in any seeming appearance for such and so
weighty employment: and therefore they vilified his person, and looked at his
speeches as so many vain glorious expressions, which had neither truth not
sufficiency to maintain. And therefore when our Savior told them, he would give
his flesh for the sins of his Elect, They murmur immediately, as though this
were a deceit. How can this man give us his Flesh etc. Joh. 6.41, 52. Is not
this Jesus the Son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know? verse, 42. How
is it that he says, I came down from Heaven?

Lastly, for the full recovery, there the Sons of men are so fickle and
slippery, that they are ready to step aside, and at least full of question and
therefore his own, after he was condemned, Crucified and Buried, Luke 24.21.
They began to stagger in their own thoughts. We had thought in had be^n he,
that should have delivered etc. And no^ behold this is the third day. Now this
our Savior wishes; that they might be brought to the acknowledgment of the
light of his commission, the po^e^ of his dispensation, the certain and through
fulfilling of all that was committed to him, and that he undertook.

The Reasons are,

1. Hereby the honor of the Father and so of the Son, is at once and together
most gloriously advanced. For the Sovereignty of the power of the Father and
incomprehensible and unconceivable love, the infinite depth of his Grace and
mercy, are manifested in sending.

That surpassing glory, unto which the human Nature of our Savior was advanced,
to be invested with his power and authority, to be berr^sted with this work,
and to be taken, as it were, into Par^neship with the Father, for the
accomplishment, of that, which was far greater than the creating of millions of
worlds.

That it should be in the liberty of the human Nature, to use all the Attributes
of God, for the good of his Church, and to dispense all by his own hand, So
that nothing should be done but by Christ: nothing received but through Christ
from the Father; here the crown of al glory is set upon the Father and the Son
at once. This is the scope of that dispute and the ground of this dispensation.
Joh. 5.18, 19. What the Father does; that he does; and that, because he has
showed him all things, and he will show him greater than those, that ye may
wonder etc. For as he shall raise up the dead, So the Son shall quicken whom he
will. The end is, That al men may honor the Son, as they honor the Father: and
he that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the Father. There is no receiving
any thing from God, but by him. No returning any thing to God, but through him.
Thus ye shall find the honor of both stand and fall together. Math. 10.40. He
that receives me, receives him that sent me Luke 10.16. He that despises me,
despises him, that sent me.

2. Hereby the great work of our Redemption comes to be discovered, comes also
to be acknowledged; when once this sending our Savior is rightly understood.
Its the very Hinge upon which the Gospel turns: The very foundation, upon which
the work of our Salvation hangs. before this we are said to be in bondage under
rudiments. In the fullness of time God sent forth his. Son, made of a Woman,
made under the Law, to redeem those that were under the Law. Gal. 4.4. Joh.
1.18. No man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten Son, which came
out of the Bosom of the Father he has revealed him. Ephesians. 3.7, 8, 9. to the 20.
Here is the great mystery of Godliness, Christ manifested in the flesh. 1. Tim.
3.6.

3. That hereby al mouths might be stopped, and the wicked might be made beyond
excuse. Joh. 15.22. If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had
sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin.

Use.
1. Of Exhortation, That our practice should concur with the prayer of our
Savior his desire and our endeavor. That we should put forth the utmost of our
skill and care; that our savior may be acknowledged by all hearts, confessed by all Tongues, as sent of God. We should pomo^e and help forwards this.

This is Gods main work in the ways of his providence and all his
dispensations in the world and in the Church. Psalm. 2.6. Yet I have set my King
upon my holy Hill of Sion; in despite of all the wrath and rage of Heathens,
Pilate, Jews etc.

So let us set him up as King in all the minds of men, that they may know, in
all consciences, that they may confess him. This Paul endeavored, Romans 15.19.
He made the Gospel of Christ to sound out from Jerusalem to Illiricum, and
strove to preach the Gospel, that to whom he was not spoken of, they should
see. So Act. 2.36.

This Paul rejoiced in. Philip. 1.18. If Christ be preached any way, he does
and will rejoice in it.

Verse, 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they
may be one, even as we are one.


THe Nature of this oneness, and the end why it is, and was so earnestly preyed
for by our Savior, we have spoken to both these, in the foregoing verse.

In this we have the means set forth unto us, by which they should be enabled
to attain the end, and our Savior plainly expresses himself, That he has
given them his glory, which he has himself received, that they might attain
this so great a privilege.

Here we have three things to be attended.

1. What it is our Savior has received. 2. What it is he does communicate. 3.
The end why.
1. Touching the former of these; two words are to be opened, that we may
understand the sense of the Spirit, and the several truths therein contained.

1. What is meant by Glory. 2. In what regard our Savior may be said to
receive, it, and how God the Father gave it him.
1. GLORY Sometimes ^^gnifies that unconceiveable excellency of all that
incomprehensible worth and infinite goodness, that is in the Lord, which is
Gods peculiar, and Prerogative Royal, as only appertaining to him, who is the
first cause and the last end: and therefore as he is the author of all, because
they come from him, so he is the good of al, because al ^end to him.

The shine and lus^^e of al those glorious Attributes of the Lord meeting
together in that infinite fullness, as they be in him, like the beauty of so
many thousand Suns in the Firmament, that is called, the GLORY of GOD, with
which the Eyes of blessed Angels are dazelled, as not able to behold it, and
therefore cover their faces. Isa. 6. Instead of comprehending, falling into
admiration of it. Thus it is used in verse, 4. of this Chap. Joh. 17. Father I
have glorified thee on Earth; now glorify me with thy self, with that glory,
which I had with thee before the world was. Therefore it must be, before his
human Nature was, and so it must be that which does in a peculiar manner
appertain unto him, as God. But this cannot be meant in this place.

For that glory is here meant, which is given by our Savior, unto his faithful
ones.

But the glory which is the Prerogative of the Deity, he professes, he will
not give unto another. Isa. 42.8. Therefore this is not intended.

2. GLORY Is put in phrase of Scripture for Grace, whether attended in the
entrance and beginnings of it here on Earth: or in the consummation and
perfection of it in the highest Heaven. Because there is the greatest worth in
it, greatest beauty Issues from it, the greatest esteem and highest account is
acknowledged to be due thereunto by those who can judge.

This glorious Grace is called Glory, as that which is attended and accompanied
with it; as the Body with the shadow, the Sun with the shine and light: yea
that supreme excellency, with which the Saints shall be crowned in Heaven, is
northing Else but Grace attaining its full consummation, So that the odds is not
in the kind, but in the degree only; and therefore we are sa^d to be blessed in
heavenly places, and to si^ together with Christ in heavenly places. Ephesians. 1.3.
and 2.6.

Here is the suburbs of happiness, and of the New Jerusalem. Grace is the
Porch, as it were, Glory the Palace. Thus ye shall find it. Romans 3.23. But it
is most pregnant and very remarkable. 2. Cor. 3.18. We all with open face, as
in a Glass, behold the glory of God, and are translated or changed (we are
transformed, or have a new form or frame set upon us) from glory to glory, as
by the Spirit of the Lord.

The Glass is the Lord Christ, in whom the Glory of the Grace of God is
imprinted, and by whom, and through whom, it is dispensed and communicated to
us, that we not only receive, but increase in this Glorious Grace from one
degree thereof unto another; And that by the Holy Spirit of the Lord.

Both these are here understood: Grace in the beginning of it, and that
especially and Firstly: yet not excluding the perfection of it, For our Savior
speaks of it, as a thing certain to himself, and that which will assuredly also
accrue to his, nay which they have now in the kind of it.

Hence, before we pass; we may learn how to judge of true Glory, and how to
attain it.

1 How to judge of true Glory, that which will go for current in the Court of
Heaven, and in the account of the Almighty; to-wit.

Its not what the folly of men's minds does conceit, or the breath of the world
would advance, or the pride and ignorance of the most do take and admire as
glorious, that will indeed give in evidence sufficient to pass a righteous
Sentence in this behalf.

Its not the wealth and riches of the world, be they never so great, revenues
never so fair and beautiful; though thy friends, alliance and acquaintance be
never so many and high, will ad any glory to thee in truth, or in the account of
Christ.

If thou have a base heart, leadest a graceless life, thou art a base man, and
a base woman. Thy Favorites may flatter thee, and friends applaud thee, and
thy neighbors speak well of thee: but thou art abhorred of the Lord, art loathed
of the Saints, that can tell how to judge. Psalm. 15. In whose eyes a vile person
is despised. If thou be a wicked man, a vicious, proud, stubborn, froward
person, truly thou art a vile person; and it a note of him, that will enter into
God Tabernacle and dwell in his Holy Hill, that he should despise thee as such:
though thou had never so much of all this earthly pomp the world can afford.
Dross is base though it be kept in the best place of the treasury: Copper is
yet vile and worthless, though it be set upon the highest place of the
Cupboard, and not only man should so judge but God will. The froward in spirit is
abomination unto the Lord.

Nay though thy place and privileges be never so high and great, they indeed
may be glorious, as having some impression of Gods power and authority painted
upon them, but yet, if thy heart be void of Grace, and thy life of Holiness;
Thou art wholly destitute of any true glory. Thy place and the impression of
Gods power must be honored in thee, bu^ thy self art despicable and worthless,
as that King Jehoram that died undefired. 2, Chro. 21.20.

2. We here see the ready way, and the Kings road in which we must walk, if we
would be truly glorious in the eyes of wise, and in the account of our Savior,
that we may be sure to get such glory, as will go in Heaven. Be truly, savingly
gracious: then art thou truly glorious in the account of the Almighty, and
shall be received into glory when this life shall not be. But they must be grace
of the right make, and true stamp, issuing from the glorious spirit of the
Lord. Its not any of those counterfeits of morality and civillity which carry a
mere show of Godlyness, without the power of it: nor yet the Gilt, (as I may so
call it) of those higher Strokes of Illuminations, which appertains to
Apostates, of whom the Apostle faith. That they tasted of the Heavenly gift and
the good word of the Lord, and of the powers of the world to come: this is
hansome gilt, and yet the heart base and lewd, therefore miserable; therefore I
ad that which follows of the Apostle and ye should ad it also, We hope better
things of you, and those that accompany Salvation, not gilt in appearance, but
true Gold in the substance of it: not the ^ast of these, but the truth of
these, something better than astonishing terrors, than fleshy and groundless
inlightenings and raptures; better humiliations, better evidences, better and
more real expressions of the power and conquering virtue of the saving work of
God. The Church is said to be al glorious within Psalm. 45. The workmanship of
God, created unto good works Ephesians. 2. would ye then be glorious servants in the
families wherein ye dwell? glorious Inhabitants in the Plantations where ye
live? glorious members of Churches and Congregations? and leave your names for
a glory and blessing behind you? Do not catch at a shadow, but get the body,
and that will not fade away: do not thing to keep the light in the room and shut
out the Sunbeams, or let the candle be carried away.

Be truly virtuous, and it cannot be but glory will be thy companion; and that
in the very consciences of the wicked, though their mouths, it may be, will
be-ly their Consciences for to maintain their own ways. So it was with David.
2 Samuel 6: 21.22. When he danced before the Lord, Michal conceited, he laid open
himself unto contempt; How glorious was the King this day, etc. He answers: I^
was before the Lord that I did it: and if this be to be vile I will be yet more
vile and even of these Handmaids I shall be had in hanor. Lively faith is
called Precious Faith. 2. Pet. 1.6. Hebr. 11.4. By faith Abel offered a more
excellent sacrifice than Cain.

Would ye therefore pray more excellently, hear more excellently, confer more
excellently, than all the carnal men in the world? get this Precious Faith, then
ye will be Precious Christians, and have precious comforts.

2. How our Savior received this.

Answ. He received this Grace as man, not as God, or as the second person
properly, for so he is equal to the Father, and has equal propriety in all the
Attributes of the Godhead. Besides, the Grace here is that which is given to
believers: but so that cannot be.

He receives it therefore as man and that by gift, says the Text, for our
Savior acknowledges it.

1. It is Given by the Grace of personal Union, in that it pleased God the
Father, that the second person, his beloved son, should take our Nature into
personal Union, so that though he was a perfect person before that was assumed,
yet he remained one and the same person after it was assumed; there he two
Natures, but one person still.

Thus the Apostle disputes, and the connection implies so much. Col. 1.15. He
is the image of the Invisible God ( i. e. as second person,) and so in him all
things consist; and by him al created: and he is the Head of the Body, the
Church and the Issue of al is, For it pleased the Father, that in him all
fullness should dwell. i.e. all the fullness of al Grace is in Christ, in that he
is Head, and so head, as that he is also the invisible image of the Father. In
a word,

Look what the Human Nature did receive from the Son, as a Son, and begotten of
the Father, that it receives by gift also and firstly from the Father, because
what the Son does, as Son, he does it from the Father.

But the Human Nature received it, as the highest gift, that ever was given, to
be taken into personal union by the Son, as the second person begotten of the
Father.

What the Son, as the Son, begotten of the Father gives to the human Nature,
that the Father gives firstly.

But this personal union, the Son, as from the Father, gives: Therefore the
Father gives it firstly. Upon this ground is that Inference also or the
Apostle. Col. 2.9, 10. The Apostle would have them walk in Christ, in the power
of his Grace, and in the direction of his rule and government and he joins
these two together, as the reason, For in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead Bodily, Nor by way of type, but truly, nor yet by communication of
virtue, which he does to and in the Saints, nor yet by sacramental relation, as
he does accompany his ordinances, but the very essence of the Godhead in the
second person supports the Human Nature, as one person with it. This is the
Union. verse, 10. Ye are complete in him, who is the Head etc. Complete in
al-Grace, to enable in all the fullness of wisdom, a^^ Prophet, and rule, as a
King, to guide you in the ways of his Grace. He is the Head from, the former of
al life and motion. If the fullness of the Godhead personally, then the
fullness of al Grace dwells in him.

2. Its given by way of Covenant.

Psalm. 45.7. Loving al righteousness as to fulfill it. Hating al iniquity, as to
suffer for it, and to remove it.


Act. 2.34. Being exaked at the right hand of the Father, and having received
the promise of the spirit, he has shed it abroad. It behoved Christ to suffer
al these things, and so to enter into his glory. The Human Nature of our Savior
having now attained all that fullness of glorious Grace, hat is compatible to any
creature. Hence,

1. Our Savior has received Al most glorious Grace in a most Eminent Manner.

Grace is first in his Human Nature: For since the fall, and that Adam, through
his just desert, has deprived him of the Grace, that God had given him in
Innocence: Had not our Savior taken our Nature into union with himself; that in
it he might suffer and satisfy and purchase Gods Favor and spirit to bring us
again: It had not been possible, that ever any grace should have been imparted
to us.

He is the Head of his Church. Ephesians. 1: 22. The Root or Stock unto the Scions
and Branches. Joh. 15.1.

The fountain of living Water, al means, and men, and ordinances, are but
conduits, which give no more than they do receive: As the Moon from the Sun: as
the looking Glass reflects the light, has no light. 2. Cor. 4.6. To give the
light of the glory of God in the face of Christ.

2. He has it OUT OF MEASURE, not only because he has the spirit of Grace
dwelling in him, with the Godhead: and all the fullness of the Godhead: But
also, He has al Graces, in all the Kinds of them, and all the degrees.

As there is no weakness attending any Grace, which ought to be removed: there
is not any Scantness that any more can be added; nothing but wisdom, no folly,
or ignorance to blemish it, and there is so much, that Human Nature is capable
of no more, no further increase can be expected.

In the Body of Christ, and amongst al Christians, each man has his measure
and proportion suitable to his place, and answerable to the condition he does
possess in the Body.

As in the Body natural: The finger is not so big as the hand, nor that, as the
Arm', nor that as the Back or Thighs: but each holds his place and proportion,
and so his perfection in his kind. So in the Body mystical: one excels in
patience and Meekness, though truly Zealous: another excels in Zeal and
courage, though meek and humble in his measure also. Some are hands, and some
are fingers and feet in this mystical Body, and all the while, the proportion
of their Graces answer their places; Its comely.

But its otherwise with our Savior. He is Zealous, and meek, and patient and
nothing can be added to the measure, fullness, and perfection of these. Ephesians.
4.13. Unto the measure of the stature etc.

3. Without ALTERATION, or possibility of loosing, weakening or decaying in the
power of any Grace. This was incident, as we find by woeful experience, to the
state and perfection of Adam in innocence. He came completely furnished with
all abilities, which might answer his condition, and the obtaining of his end.
His understanding and knowledge clear; and yet became first to be darkened, then
deluded, and then lost and taken away from him. His will holy, and fitted to
choose and to enjoy the chiefest good, but immediately unsettled and perverted:
and corruption defaceth the whole man.

But it is beyond al possibility, that the least decaying in any of these
glorious Graces, should betide him: because our Human Nature is not vertually
only, as to Adam, but the Essence by the person comes to be knit in personal
Union with it, and so sustaines it in that unchangeable condition. For if our
savior should be changed, the infinite power of the Spirit of the Godhead
might be overcome, and put to the worse, which is impossible. It was an
argument to them, for their safety, that they should overcome the world:
because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. Therefore
much more in our Savior essentially, when in us vertually. The Prince of this
world comes, says our Savior, and finds nothing in me; Finds no sin that he
can provoke, and so takes an advantage, nor finds he weakness or mutability of
any Grace, that he is beyond all Hope to shake.

4. It is in him by POWERFVL and Efficacious communication. i. e. He has so
Grace in himself, that he can convey Grace to others, and work it also in them.
So it is not with any man. He may exercise and put forth the act of Grace upon
another, but to convey of his own Grace to another, to make him wise by
another wisdom, this cannot be. Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we all receive.
Likewise Ephesians. 1.23. The Church is said, to be the fullness of him, that fills
all in all. Paul studies this, That Christ may be formed in them. Gal. 4.19.

USE, 1. Of Examination.
We may hence discover, whether our Graces be counterfeit or of the right kind,
such as a man may be content to appear before Chirst withal, such as will go in
Heaven with us.

All Graces are firstly in him, as the treasurer of all Graces: therefore ours
must be from him, if they favor any thing of Christ, or we expect any
acceptance for them. So Paul. 2 Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ
speaking: So we should seek a proof of Christ humbling, of Christ making us
patient, and meek, and Zealous. For there be counterfeits of al these, which
carry a great show and appearence to those that have no skill in mettalls, and
carry not the Touchstone of discerning about them. Ask therefore this, whence
come thy Graces; If they be of the right make, they came from the right mint or
quarry.

So Paul issues it. Cor. 13.5. Prove and examine your selves whether ye be in
the Faith or no. And how is that done? know ye not that Christ is in you,
unless ye be reprobates: al is drossy otherwise. Splendida peccata. Prove that,
and the other will be apparent. As we say of China Metal. If it be right, its
only there found, and must from thence be fetched. There is counterfeit and
false, that is merely imitated. So it is, If saving Christian Grace, they must
be from a Savior and a Christ. Thus Paul intimates and points out apparently,
by way of distinction. Phil. 1.2.

Saints in Christ Jesus. Nay of himself professes, that he lived not.

USE 2. Of Comfort to all the Saints.
If they be empty, here is fullness of Grace to satisfy: If scant, here is
grace out of measure to content and supply them: If poor, here is treasury of
wisdom and knowledge, and though they may decay, this will recover and strengthen
and establish to perfection.

USE 3.
For, DIRECTION How to get this glorious grace. Go to him who has it. As Peter
in a like kind. Whither should I go, but unto Christ, the Author of Grace, the
giver of all grace and peace? He is the great Almner, by whom God gives al: As
in another case, its said, The Father judges no man, but has committed al
judgment to his Son; so he comforts, quickens none, but by his Son: therefore
in these, of al ordinances, priviledge^, performances, look at them only,
either as those which lead to Christ, or come from Christ.

What Christ has received as man, we have dispatched.

2. What he gives now comes into consideration where there be two Doctrins.

1. The Saints share in a like glorious grace with Christ. 2. This glorious
grace they receive by way of gift from our Savior.
To the First. 2. Cor. 3.18. The Apostles Testimony is pregnant, even to the
letter of the doctrine. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, etc. i. e.
while by Faith, in the evidence of the gospel, we behold the glorious grace of
God imprinted upon the humane nature of our Savior, we come to receive the like
print and impression of glorious grace upon our own Souls. 2. Tim. 2.1. My Son
be strong in the Grace that is in Christ.

As it is with the beams of the Sun that be in the air, they have heat and
light continued to them, while they are continued to the body of the sun: If
once that be intercepted, the other decays and vanishes away; So it is with
the grace that i^ in us, which has its beauty and glorious strength from the
daily influence and continuance we have and hold in our communion and sweet
intercourse with the Lord Jesus, as the fountain of al grace and glory.

See this truth made good in four particulars.

1. This grace is Inward and spiritual, not that which orders a man's carriage
in regard of himself, nor moralizes his behavior to walk civilly and
inoffensively toward others: but it leaves an impression upon the most inward
motions of the soul, as they meet with God in the most retired and refined
actions thereof. Psalm. 15. The Queen is al glorious within. Truth in the inward
parts in those contrivements which God alone is privy to. Sound ones in Gods
statutes.

2. This impression of glorious Grace in UNIVERSAL. Every faithful has (not
some few, or many, but) all the saving and sanctifi^ng Graces of the Spirit, in all the kinds of them, and is able and does also put forth the operations
thereof, as occasions do invite, and the Law and his own duty does require at
his hands. Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we al receive, and grace for grace. i.e.
for each grace in Christ there is the like, and answerable Grace left in the
heart of every believer. As it is with the seal and the Wax. There is in the
Wax, letter for letter, syllable for syllable, word for word, answerable to
that which was in the Seal. Every letter there instamped; is for the kind and
number imprinted upon the Wax: So it is with the grace of our Savior, that is
like the seal: our hearts like the wax. We receive patience from his patience,
humility in him leaves a like impression of humility in us etc. Holiness from
his holiness, courage, from his courage. Hence is that of the Apostle, Galat.
4. 19. My little Children of whom I travail again, until Christ be formed in
you. As it is with the parts of the Body of a Child naturally, in an ordinary
and common way of Providence; There is not one, or few, or many members of a
man, but all the particulars are fashioned, when the Child is conceived:
otherwise, it is not a human creature, but a monstrous birth. If the hand
should want some fingers, or the Arm a hand, or the Body an Arm: But Nature in
the course of generation intends all the parts and all the proportions of them:
unless her work be hindered and blemished. So it is in our spiritual
Regeneration, when a Christan is born by the immortal Seed of the word, in the
Womb of the Church, Whole Christ, i.e. All the saving and gracious dispositions
of soul, whereby a man comes to be a perfect Christian, and to carry the stamp
of Christ, his everlasting Father, are left upon him: otherwise he is not a new
Creature, but indeed a fal^ birth and Monster in Christianity. And hence the
Apostle wishes, they should comprehend etc. And be filled with all bis Fullness.
Ephesians. 3.19. i.e. They should not be an empty crevis or corner; no part of the
Body, but it should be sanctified to become a weapon of righteousness: no
faculty of the soul, but it should be adorned with some glorious impression of
the power of Grace, wisdom and prudence in the mind, holiness in the will,
harmonious readiness in all the affections, to attend the counsel of the Lord,
to be instruments of holiness.

3. As they share in all the kinds of glorious Grace here, while they are in
their infancy, and in the Bosom of the Church: So also, They do partake of all
the PERFECTIONS of al these kinds: When they shall arrive at the end of their
hopes, the Salvation of their souls. Here the earnest, there the full bargain:
Here the first fruits, there the whole harvest of holiness and happiness. 1. Joh.
3.2. We are now the sons of God, but it does not appear, what we shall be, but
this is known, that when Christ does appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. Then we shall not see him darkly, as he is revealed in his
word, dispensing himself in his Ordinances, But we shall see him, as he it. He
shall dart in those unconceiveable beams of the fullness of all holiness from
himself immediately upon the Soul. Then the Soul shall see nothing but a
Christ, and receive nothing but the impressions of the holiness and happiness
of a Christ. This is called, the Perfect Man: that a perfect Christian, when
this glory is made Perfect: when there shall be no weakness to enfeeble the
strength of Grace, no blemishes to darken the surpassing beauty of holiness.
This is the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.

4. They share in the CONSTANCY and immutability of all this glorious Grace.
When they shall be beyond all fears and changes, above principalities and
powers, beyond the noise of temptations which may assauk and hinder the work of
Grace: without and beyond the sight and presence of sin, which may any ways
enfeeble it. Called An excessive, exceeding, eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor.
4.17. This is called the Crown of righteousness. 2 Timothy 4.8. The Crown of life
and glory. Jam. 1.12. This is the Diamond in the Crown, and glory of our glory:
when Grace is now settled in the Throne, and Crowned with immutability and
Eternity, ( i.e. becomes victorious and enemies vanquished) as admitting no
alteration, nay no opposition of any thing to hinder, nay not the sight of any
enemy more, that may disturb our settled and established state of happiness.

They who share in the Truth of all kinds of Graces, in the Perfections of al
kinds, in the Immutability of al those perfections: They partake of the like
glorious Grace with our Savior. This last indeed is the end and perfection of
Grace; It was given to Adam, and he should have used it, that he might have
been immutable in the use of it: But missing it, he lost his Grace and fell
short of glory. Now that which the first Adam should have done and failed, the
second Adam has done, and so has obtained it.

2. They receive this by Gift.

He it is in whom al Grace, as a fountain is settled. To whom the immediate
dispensation and communication of it, is committed by God, and from his free
gift, they must receive it.

For look we at the Saints, as they ly in the Loins of Adam.

1. They have forfeited this glory, put away this Grace from them, and by
reason of their rebellion have justly deserved, the Lord should depart away,
(...) withdraw the presence of his Grace, which he formerly furnished them
withal. Romans 3.23. We have sinn^^ and are deprived of his Glory. Yea they take
shame and confusion as their due and portion, Dan. 9.7. O Lord, to us belongs
shame and confusion of face, as it appears this day. Yea they ly down in
shame. Jer. 3.25.

2. They have nothing of worth, that may purchase it; they can do nothing that
can deserve it. For when they have done all they can, they are not only
unprofitable servants. Luke 17.10. Psalm. 143.2. But that is not al: should the
Lord reckon with them for what is done, who could abide? they are so far from
having hope to receive glory from God, as that they might justly expect a Curse
at his hand, and he could not, but in Justice send it.

3. And lastly, such is the baseness of the hearts of men, and the crosseness
of their corrupt Natures to his glorious Grace, that as they will hot, so in
truth they cannot receive it. No man can receive any thing, unless it be given
from above. Joh. 3.27. Joh. 14.17 The world cannot receive the spirit, because
they have not seen him, nor known him.

Object. But our Savior has entered into covenant with God the Father to
become the Shepherd of his Sheep, to undertake the charge and care of his
Elect, to bring them to Grace and so to glory. Joh. 17.2. To as many as are
given to Christ, he should give eternal life to them. Joh. 6.37. All that the
Father gives to me shall come, and I will lose none. If therefore a debt and
agreement unto which our Savior is bound, how is it then a gift, which is in
his liberty to deny*

Answ. True, Its that which Justice and righteousness call for, that having
tied hmself by promise, and engaged his faithfulness and truth, To seek and to
save, to ^^ing other of his sheep, and to bless etc. He cannot fail, ^^^^g his
faithfulness, and deny himself; and not (...) and the honor of his own word.

But let it be demanded, why the Lord did Engage himself to undertake the work
of our Salvation:

It will appear, that there is nothing but free Grace breathing in all the work:
he freely undertook it, out of his free good will performed it, and out of his
free Grace applies it. So that there is nothing but free Grace and the free
gift of Grace, in what Christ has wrought for us, or wrought in us.

You have both the particulars opened, we will give you the Reasons of both
together.

REASONS.
1. Taken from the proportion between the first, and second Adam, the Type and
the Truth. As the first Adam conveyed his sin and wrath by a covenant of works:
the second must convey holiness and life by a covenant of Grace, and the free
gift thereof. The first Adam begat a Son in his own image, wholly defiled and
defaced with original corruption, and so made him Heir apparent to the curse
and condemnation thereby. The second Adam must instamp the image of holiness
upon his, without which, none shall see life. Hebr. 12.14. Thus the Apostle
disputes, 1 Cor. 15.49. As we have born the image of the Earthy, the first, so
we shall bear the image of the Heavenly.

2. For this end, the human Nature of our Savior has received, and is become
the first subject of al Grace, that from thence it might be derived unto the
Nature of his Children. For this end, in our Nature he has performed what ever
divine Justice has required, purchased, and provided a way and means for the
communication of al Grace to his: Therefore undoubtedly he will give it, and
they receive it: Otherwise, he should miss his end, and they their good.

1. For this end he has received al Grace. For had not the second person, by
the power of the Deity, brought our Nature to God, and assumed it into personal
union with himself, so that the fullness of the Godhead might dwell Bodily in
it, and so the fullness of al Grace communicated thereunto: It had not been
possible that ever the Sons of Adam, who are become enemies to God and the work
of his Grace, should have been made partakers thereof, being wholly cross
thereunto. Col. 2.10. Ye are complete in Christ, because in him dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead Bodily. Ye need no other King to rule, nor Prophet
to teach, nor Priest to sanctify.

Yea for this end in our Nature he has purchased al, provided a way to convey
al Grace.

For had he not died, and by death satisfied the Law' the strength of sin had
never been subdued, nor could our corruptions be mortified.

Had he not by his resurrection triumphed over the power of Grave and Satan,
and al sinful weaknesses, we had never had our hearts raised and quickened to
Newness of life.

But when he died, we by his death, die to sin: and sin died when he rose: we by
his resurrection must rise to Newness of life. For this end, these were
performed, and this must also be attained. Romans 6.8. Therefore it is, that this
gift of Grace is committed to him, and the dispensation, and immediate
communication belongs to him. Therefore the Spirit is said to take of Christ's.
Joh. 16.14. He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. There is no
killing virtue, quickening virtue, could be applied or received, but only
through his death, first in him, thereby, then in us.

3. He that gives the faithful, the Spirit of Grace and glory, must needs also
give them all glorious Grace.

But our Savior does so. This is the reason the Apostle alleges, 2 Cor. 3.18.
As by the spirit of the Lord. Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life has
freed us from the Law of sin. As it is in the Scion knit unto the stock, It is
partaker of the same sap with the stock: So here. They are said to be implanted
into the similitude, i.e. To grow up together in the similitude of his death.
Romans 6.5. As his spirit by his death killed sin, that was charged upon him: So
we by that Spirit, grow up in the virtue of that death, and die to sin.

USE.
1. This gives in heavy evidence against a world of wicked wretches, and casts
out a crowd of ungodly persons, our of the pale and fold of Christ, as such, as
never yet had the work of faith here, nor have any hope of glory hereafter.

If all believers share in the Grace of Christ: what shall we think of such
ignorant poor creatures. that never knew this? of those profane ones, who
profess themselves to be Scorners and Opposers of grace, and the gospel of
grace and the spirit of grace and Christ himself? what shall we think of them?
think of them, as they are: They are unbeleeving creatures, yet in the gal of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, and must, and will have their portion with
unbeleevers, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. They loath the
glorious grace of God now: they shall be shut out, and banished from his
glorious presence for ever.

But I will not trouble you, nor my self with these, whose conditions are so
loathsome even unto their own consciences. Only I shall settle it as a matter of
sad reproof upon two sorts, whose hopes and professions seem to promise better,
but in the issue cousen themselves, and fall short of their own comforts.

1. It crusheth the confidence, and splits the vain pretenses of all the most
refined Hypocrites upon Earth.

Its not the gilt and enameling of any ordinary duty, nor the paint of any
profession, that will evidence either their Title to Christ, or the Grace of
Christ, which he gives indeed to his. No it is the spiritualness of the work in
their Souls. If the outside be never so clean, If there be rottenness within,
he loathes it. Psalm. 45.13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within etc. The
garments of the spouse, are not gilt; but wrought Gold. Its not the show and
appearance in your lives, if ye deny the power of Godliness in your hearts. 2 Timothy 3.5. That is not Circumcision that is outward in the flesh: that is not
the glorious Grace of Christ, that reformes a man's course before men. But that
is Circumcision, which is of the spirit, that is the Grace of Christ, that
makes a man close with God in Christ. Thou may have strong inlightenings in
thy mind, strange raptures in thy spirit, and rell^shes of joy, taste of the
good word, and the heavenly gift, and the power of the world to come, have a
Peep-hole into Heaven, and see a glimpse of glory passing by, and all this be
nothing, but the Grace of Apostates and Hypocrites, not the Grace of Christ. No
says the Apostle. We hope better things of you. Deeper impressions of the
power of the Lord Christ, and the work of the spirit, must soak through thy
soul, and that not only tasted but digested, and thy heart delivered up into
the authority thereof.

2. Those who please themselves with the apprehension that they have some
Grace, but are content to want some other, and so indeed, want al.

When either education has reformed them, or their conscience awed them, or
their occasions or conditions free them from such assaults, and because they
want the temptation to sin, they suppose they have the grace of Christ. One man
blesses himself, he is not worldly, and sensual, yet contents himself to be
proud: another is not passionate and loose, yet worldly; whereas if Christ be
formed in a man, nothing of the saving work of Christ will be wanting: if a new
creature, al things are new: otherwise, he is a Monster in Christianity, not in
truth a Christian of Christ's make. Either al or none at al.

If ye have heard and learnt as the truth is in Jesus, put off the old man; not
an old Hand, or Eye, but the frame of heart and life put on the ^^w man.

USE, 2. Of Instruction.
Sanctification is a never-failing argument of a believing and happy condition.
If God give glorious Grace here, he will give possession of glory hereafter.
Its Christ's work, he will approve of it, Its the image of himself, he will own
it. Its the tenure of the promise, Jer. 31.33. Its the sentence which is now
passed upon such. Judged they may be, condemned they shall never be. Math. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22.

USE 3 Its Matter of Thankfulness.
If Christ think nothing too good for us, we should be ashamed to stand for a
little cost and labor for him. He parts with the choicest of his favor, his
Glory to us: we should part with the best of our Duties to him: the best of our
hearts, to love him, of our love to honor him, of our endeavors to serve him.
They are not common courtesies which he vouchlafes to us, not creatures to
comfort us, profits to enrich, but the most precious favor that the Father
bestowed: He has no greater, nor better, and that glory he gives to them. Let
us be ashamed to give the Lean, the Lame, the leavings to the Lord. Give him
the glory of all that glory we do receive. As the Elders, Rev. 4.10. Cast down
our Crowns before him. And let him be advanced in all that he advances us.

USE, 4. Of Exhortation.
Whither we must go, if we Hope to speed, and to receive this gift, to what
door to go, to receive this dole, come to Christ the giver, if we Hope to
receive this gift. The Spirit takes of Christ, before he gives it to us:
therefore much more we must go to him, before we can receive it. The way lies
in these four things.

1. See all in him, And Join none with him, as the Author and worker of this.
There be instruments to convey Grace, but there is no Author of this, or giver
of this, but Christ. Of his fullness we receive. All other things are empty
without him, and can work nothing further than he will work by them. Christ is
al in all. Col. 3.11. Not ordinances, not Duties, not Sacraments: Paul is
nothing, Apollo is nothing, but Christ is all, Christ by all, Christ through
all these works.

2. Look at that in Christ, which we need and would have, and keep the heart
under the stroke of the Spirit in Christ, that working Grace in the Nature of
our Savior, from thence he may work Grace in us. If we would have patience, Eye
the patience of Christ, and the Spirit working patience in him, and from his
patience, patience in me. As it is in a Glass that has many colors, Red,
Green, Blew, Yellow; If the Sun shine upon it, it will convey the like colors
upon that which is opposite to it. The Human Nature of our Savior is as the
Glafs, all the Graces in their variety are like so many colors: The Spirit
shining upon the Nature of our Savior by it leaves the like impression of
Graces upon our Souls, while by faith we keep our Hearts under the stroke
thereof.

3. Faith acts each faculty to digest and improve that power from Christ
received, for his particular use, according to its particular end. As the
Veins deliver up the Blood to each part, as that special portion and
provision, which is allowed in the course of Nature, for its relief, and so
each part taking the Blood, it does appropriate it to its own Nature. Bone
makes Bone of it, Sinews make Sinews, etc. So Faith, like those Veins, conveys
the efficacy of the Blood and merits of Christ to all the faculties, to answer
al their necessities.

4. We must wait Gods leisure, and stay his time for the bestowing of his
favors. Beggars must not be Chusers; And nothing more free than gift: And
therefore he that will challenge it, at his time, and according to his will,
makes it a Debt, and not a Gift.

That they may be one, as we are one.

Here is the third thing, that was especially intended in the verse.

1. We heard that Christ had all glorious Grace given him. 2. That he gives all
that glorious Grace unto his Saints.
Here lastly we have the END AND AIM of our Savior, in this his bounty in
giving, and the benefit of the faithful in receiving. Viz. That they may be one
in the Father and the Son. Hence,

The end why the Saints receive all glorious Grace from our Savior Christ, is
this, Doct.
that they may be one, as the Father and Son are one with themselves.
This is a truth not included, or that which may by way of consequence be
collected, or probably inferred out of the text: But that which is clearly
intended, as the chief scope of our Savior, yea fully and plainly expressed in
the words, beyond all exception or disputation, and that which carries such
evidence out of the phrase of speech, that unless a man will cast away the rule
and dictate of right reason, he can in no wise reject or refuse.

Ask but the Question, why did our Savior Christ receive all glorious Grace
into his Human Nature from God the Father?

The Answer is, He received it by way of gift, that he might give it to others
out of his faithfulness. He was their Treasurer.

But ascend one stair higher, if yet further we may stir. What was the end of
our Saviors giving of this Grace?

The Answer is full and fair from the letter of the text, for this is another
reason, that can be fastened upon the manner of the speech, It was for this
end; its that which our Savior aimed at in a peculiar manner, That they may be
one, as the Father and Son are.

This is the Crown of that glory, which the Saints shall attain in the full
perfection thereof in Heaven, yea the diamond of that Crown, the Pinnacle and
highest point of perfection, there to be expected in regard of their own
particulars; as that which each man has in his Eye. The Heaven of Heaven, and
one step higher than the highest Star of glorious Grace.

For we know the end is better than the means, and adds beauty to the means,
Else there would be a flaw and blemish in glory, and some defect. Ephesians. 4.13.
When all the Churches are perfected and the Saints gathered and come to the
fullness of the Stature of Christ, and have attained the unity of the faith. The
highest strain of their happiness is, to acknowledge the Son of God. q. d. There
is nothing to do in Heaven, but only that. That Is the top of glory, and one
step higher than all the happiness of all that glorious Grace, they shall enjoy
there to perfection: To give in witness through al Eternity, that all the good
they have received, it was in Christ as the fountain: all that was done by all
means, it was done by him. So the Apostle gives in the Reason of Gods
dispensation, It pleased the Father that in him, all fullness should dwell; That
in all things he might have the Pre-eminence.

Tha Sacraments were full of comfort and the word and Sermons full of wisdom,
consciences full of peace that passes understanding: but it was because the
fullness of Christ overflowed in these and filled these, otherwise had he
withdrawn himself, the word had been a clasped Book and a killing letter, and
(...) heart an empty Vessel.

So the Soul in glory, acknowledge no means, nor orders, nor offices further
than he appoints them, nor was there any power in them or virtue communicated
thereby, further than the Lord was pleased to work by them. The power was
Christ that strengthened; The life and virtue Christ that quickened. The
success was Christ's only, who was pleated to breath upon and bless.

I take it to be the meaning of that place very difficult, and the expression
very spiritual and of a high strain. 2 Thessalonians. 1.12. That the Name of our Lord
Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the Grace of God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Why, you would say, Is there any Name higher than the Name of Christ, or glory
due to any beyond or after Christ? why is it added, that Christ should be
glorified and you in him?

For Answer, open the words a little, as we pass for the present, we shall
speak more fully and largely, when we shall come to them again, that which may
suffice for the while is this. The Apostle having prayed in the foregoing
verse, That God would count them worthy of their calling, i. e. Worthy of the
glory, Unto which they were called and so fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness i.e. fully bestow all that spiritual good, which in the full purpose of
his good pleasure he intended to them, and that he would bring the work of
Faith to perfection by his mighty power.

Now the end of all that glory and fullness of all that spiritual good he prays
for, for them, and they should partake of, according to his prayer. The end of
all is, that the Name of Christ (Christ as he is made known in his word and
Offices and the execution of the great work of Redemption) may be made glorious
in you; He from the Father giving al to you. You also may be glorified, not in
your selves, but in your reference and Oneness toward Christ, in receiving and
returning al to the Father by him. And therefore those words are added,
according to the Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: you so in him, as
through him in God. God through Grace in Christ gives himself and Christ to
you: you also through Grace give up your selves to Christ, and through him to
God.

For the opening, do three things.

1. Recall what this oneness is. 2. How this oneness and glorious Grace differ
each from other, or may be rightly discerned in their several considerations.
3. The Reasons of the point, upon what grounds it may rightly be gathered and
concluded: to be one with the Father and the Son is the END, and so of greater
excellency, than all the glorious Grace the Saints do partake of.
1. This unity, or oneness, is not the unity of affection, which the faithful,
as members of the same body ought to maintain in their hearts, and consciences,
and convers; As being of one heart and mind; Keeping the unity of the faith in
the bond of peace.

For, First. The express words of verse. 21. hold forth the contrary, and the
latter looks another way. That they may be one in us. As though our Savior had
purposely added the interpretation of his prayer and words. q. d. If you ask
me, of what unity I speak, when I pray that believers should be one: my
intendment may most easily and fully be understood of this resemblance, As I am
in the Father, and the Father in me, the scope of my prayer is, they should be
one in us. The unity in themselves will surely follow, but that's not it I now so
fully look at.

Again the words of the verse will not admit this sense. The glorious grace
given to the Saints by Christ, is made here distinct from this Oneness; as the
means is different from the end, and less excellent than the end.

But unity of Affection is part of that glorious Grace, which our Savior has
given the faithful.

So that it is the unity of relation. As the Father wholly and alone gives his
being and Sonship to Christ: The Son, as he receives, so he returns his being
to the Father, as things in relation look each to the other, receive and give
consistence one to the other, and so may be said to be in each other, and to be
one in this mutual respect. Joh. 14.10. Beleevest thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me? So here. As the Father is to Christ, looks only
as a Father to a Son, and gives subsistence to him: The Son again looks, only
to a Father, and returns his being and subsistence of a Son to him:

So Christ to the faithful. He gives Spiritual being in Adoption to them, as
his Sons only: They as Sons return all that spiritual being to him again. So our
Savior; As I am one in them, and thou in me, and by spiritual influence
communicate the being of Sons to them. So they are one in me, and to in thee,
by receiving and returning al alone unto us. So that our Savior does not only
bring the Soul of the faithful into the nee^est relation of dearest love as
Adopted Sons; But also into that spiritual intercourse of the peculiar and
divine operation of God upon the Soul whereby the Soul returns unto God, to do
al, and receive al. To do all for himself in man: To receive al to himself by
man.

The Lord Jesus having fitted the Soul for himself, and united the Soul to
himself, and made the Soul acceptable to the Father in his Blood. He sends the
spirit of Adoption into the hearts of his, sets their hearts for God. Holds the
^ent of their hearts toward him.

This is the gracious look of a Father toward them. The faithful receiving
this spiritual being of Sonship, Fasten to Christ as the fountain of life:
leave their hearts with him and abide in him, to be wholly acted by the
influence and assistance of his Spirit, and to hold up the excellency thereof.
Thus they return al to God in Christ.

2. How this glorious Grace, which the Lord imprints upon the Soul, is
distinguished from this Oneness.

Answ. The words in the Text evidence the distinction: i. e. They differ, as
the means appointed to an end are distinct from the end.

This unity of relation carries the glorious operations or motions of the
presence of the Spirit upon the believers Heart.

I call them Stirrings of his presence, as implying that which is somewhat more
general, than the gracious dispositions, spiritual and supernatural habits of
Grace. For though those also Issue from the operation of the spirit, yet they
are somewhat more.

As the Spirit assisting, fastening, holding the heart, and making it to abide
under the stroke of the spirit, pacifying, quickening; Are not so much habits
of Grace poured into the Soul, but rather Dints and stirrings of the Spirit
assisting or inhabiting.

As he that sets or Joints the part that is out, and chafeth it out of its
numness, leaves a remembrance of the power and motion of his Hand: But he that
puts in Oil, leaves a quality or Oily moisture which remains in the part.

So here, The spirit draws, and unites the soul in vocation: leaves the poyse
of the assistance of the spirit upon it in Adoption; whereby it makes the soul
abide in Christ and under the stroke of his spirit, as he abides in it.

And hence follows the impression of the image of God, the gracious habits of
wisdom, holiness, righteousness in the will, and so a liberty to spiritual
good, whereby the believer is enabled, not only to put forth acts of obedience
and observance, which concern the works of the Law, but even to set a going,
and that a fresh, those several operations of the Spirit, unto which he had
been formerly quickened by the virtue of the Gospel, and carried unto by this
covenant of Grace, as to fasten to Christ, to abide in him, and resign it self
to be acted by him, and the power of his spirit and Grace. And this is indeed a
thing of highest excellency, and therefore to this end and purpose the Choicest
of all Graces ought in an eipecial manner to be improved.

And this appears by these Reasons following.

1. That therein the glory of God, and his divine and unconceiveable
excellencies are most magnified and Advanced, for that end, even the glorious
Graces in their highest pitch ought to be improved.

But in this union of relation toward God, all the divine excellencies will
most gloriously appear, and in truth much more than in all the gracious habits
the Soul is capable of.

Thus the Apostle intimates (to my apprehension) with some evidence, as though
he of purpose intended it, and would have al to understand it so. 2 Thessalonians.
1.10. When the Lord shall come at the day of Judgment to render vengeance to
those that obey not the Gospel, then says the Apostle, The Lord shall be
glorified in his Saints but admired in those that believe. True it is, that
those who are Saints do believe, but the Apostle seems apparently to show the
odds, and this glorious excellency of the true Graces.

They who are sanctified and express the power of Gods Grace in their hearts
and lives: God will be glorified in them, that they do express his virtues, and
so set forth the glory of his Name.

But when he comes to consider of the bringing of a man to believe, here the
work of God and the excellency of his dealing, is that which dazels the very
Eyes of Angels, and amazeth the hearts of Devils. There his works are beyond
all admiration.

Admiration implies a thing not expected, or some thing more than we looked
for, or lies open in a common course, we wonder at such a thing when it falls.
And secondly we cannot tell what to make of it, or how to conceive or comprehend
the Reason, its matter of admiration not of comprehension.

When the Devil and wicked men knew such men in their unbeleeving courses,
under the curse of the Law and the power of their corruptions, contemners of
Christ and mercy. The Devils have seen men holy and to walk unblameably; so in
paradise; and therein God is glorified, and his virtues expressed: But when
they shall see such poor wretched creatures at Gods right hand. He was sunk
deep under the curse of the Law, now pardoned: under the Tyranny of Satan, and
so in his Claws, he took him alive, now restored. In the bottom of Hell, now
delivered. In death, and darkness now again restored to life, and he that was
so opposite to Christ, now brought so near to him and the Father, and in them
enjoy the blessed and holy communion, which is beyond the happiness of Heaven.

The Angels will be swallowed with admiration, and the Devils confounded and
astonished, at the wonderment of the unconceivable compassion of the Lord, and
the blessedness of this condition. 1 Cor. 15. The first Adam was a living Soul,
could by natural generation beget one like himself: But the second Adam is a
quickening spirit: That when dead, he can quicken them: when lost, and opposite
to him and Grace, he can and does receive them to himself.

2. That which brings us nearer unto God, and makes us to receive more from
him, that is most excellent, and other things must be subordinate thereunto.

But this unity of relation does so.

For to have glorious Graces, and to put forth obedience there from is no more,
but that a creature may do, from a principle in it self: had Adam stood, his
posterity might have challenged happiness by virtue of a covenant of works done
by a man, and from a man conveyed by natural generation.

But in the covenant of the Gospel, the Godhead of Christ in the Nature of
man, brings man again unto God, and keeps it with him.

The Godhead in our Nature wrought al for us, communicates al to us. The
mutable principle of Grace never brought a man to God, or kept him with him,
nor since the fall can do it.

But it was not a principle in us firstly, but the holy spirit of God, by the
infinite power of the Godhead, carries the bent of our hearts to him, acts it
upon him, keeps it with him, and so inables us to hold up the power and praises
of Christ from the Father. So that a poor creature is compassed about with
nothing but the power of God in Christ, being one with the Father and the son
in his relation to them, and dependence upon them.

USE, 1. Of Reprehension.
This shows the greatness of the sin of unbeleef, and the misery of
unbeleevers, who not only oppose the righteousness of the Law of God, which
should rule them, his statutes and precepts which should direct them: But the
Blood of the covenant, shed by Christ, they trample upon it; the reconciliation
wrought and tendered, they despise it, the Bowels, compassions which would
embrace them, they scorn and cast behind their Back.

If the union to the Father and the Son be beyond Heaven and happiness it self.
Then the opposition to these by unbelief is more bitter than death, and worse
than Hell. And Therefore it seems God comes against such in the fierceness of
his fury, as the marks and Objects of his heaviest i^dignation. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8,
9. He will come in flaming fire to render vengeance to such that obey not the
Gospel. Against these he proceeds in the first place with greatest fury, and
punishes them with everlasting destruction from his face, not have one
favorable cast of his countenance or smile, when before he has woed them, and
wept over them, and entreated in the Gospel to be reconciled. Yea from the
glory of his power.

Object. But is not that an ease, that his power should not plague.

Answ. That is not the meaning, for this is their plague, that they are
secluded from the presence of his glorious power.

The glorious power of all Gods Attributes were put forth in the Gospel, and
they shall be beyond the Hope and thought of it. The glorious power of Gods
wisdom will never contrive any thing for their good, nor his mercy accomplish
it, or goodness communicate it.

2. Its matter and ground of marvailous comfort and Content to the faithful, to
solace them in the interest they have in Christ, and this their Relation to
Christ, as their Redeemer, Head, and Husband, with whom they are made one
Spirit, which is more than to be in Heaven, better than happiness it self. Thus
Asaph Ps. 73. Answers all doubts, supplies al his wants, cures all his fears.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none in Earth that I desire in
comparison of thee. The Covetous have the world, the Epicures their pleasures,
but I, have thee, in comparison of whom, these are not worth the having, nay
not worth the nameing.

Yea in Heaven, when I am come to the end of my Hopes, what would I, what can I
have there? I can have no more but this, but that the Lord will be all in all to
us in glory. As long as he is and will be all in all to us in mercy, what need
we fear, why should we care? But these thoughts be precious, and Meditations
sweet, and let us go to them, and be in them, with the like affection, as we
shall be in Heaven.

Verse, 23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one:
and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as
thou have love me.


THe foregoing verse discovered the means, which our Savior appointed and
improved also for the accomplishment of that Union, which he so earnestly
begged for his disciples, and has pursued by so many expressions.

In this verse we have the Order set down, according to which it is wrought, by
the wise counsel of the Lord: And this our Savior fetches very far; I in them,
and thou in me, that they etc.

Two things we are to attend in this v^rse.

1. The ORDER and several Degrees, by which this Unity and Oneness is
accomplished, and these are here now expressed. 1. The Father is in Christ. 2.
Christ is in them; and that which is implied is, that they are one in them.
2. We have the several ENDS, aimed at in this proceeding of the Lord, and
those are three. 1. That they may be perfected in one. 2. That the world may
know that thou have sent me. 3. That they may know thou have loved them, as
thou love me.

1. As touching The ORDER, our Savior does not mention and propound it as it is
in Nature, but so as it may be best apprehended by us: looks not at things, as
they are, but as they appear to us, and may most familiarly, and easily be
conceived by us: and so to lead us by the hand, as it were, to that fountain
and first rise of all, and so to the highest step and staire in Heaven which
will point at eternity. The Father is in Christ, Christ in the faithful, and so
they come to be perfect in one.

We shall follow the method of our Savior, and look at the words, as they lie in
the Text handle the several pieces, that the frame of the whole may more
thoroughly be searched into and more fully appear with what plainness may be in
the Issue. For there be some depths in some passages of the verse which are
fitter to be admired, than comprehended, and exceed the reach, and discovery of
the most Judicious Jnterpreter, that I can look into, and indeed, seem to be
reserved for another world, when the fruition of the good here mentioned will
prove the best interpretation. We will study to be wise unto sobriety.

I in them. Christ is by his Spiritual Presence in a special manner in the
Faithful.
This was signified to the Church of the Jews in the wilderness, when the Arc,
the Type of the presence of our Savior, encamped in the midst of all the tribes
of Israel, to watch over them, when they rested. Was a Pillar of cloud and fire
to go before them, for special guidance, when they arose and marched in their
travel and this Moses prized so highly, That unless he went with them, he would
not go into Canaan, the land of promise:

The presence of Christ is better than the Land of promise. Exodus 33.15. If thy
presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. Therefore our Savior is said to
dwell between the Cherubims and there to give his Oracles, his Answer to his
people. Isa. 37.16. Psalm. 132.14. The Lord professes; This is my resting
place, here will I dwell for ever. Therefore the faithful are said to receive
Christ. As ye have received Christ, so walk in him. Christ is said to be in
them. 2. Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you, unless ye be reprobates?
To dwell in them. Ephesians. 3.17. To live in them. Gal. 2.20. Yea they live not, but
Christ only.

Open here three things. 1. In what respect Christ is said to be in his. 2.
What kind of presence this is. 3. After what manner communicated. And here the
grounds and the Reasons of the point will be laid.


1. In what respect Christ is said to be in his.

Answ. If we look at our Savior merely and only as the second Person in the
glorious. Trinity, God blessed for ever, not attending or considering his Human
Nature, as he fills Heaven and Earth with his presence, he then would have
filled the hearts of the Sons of men in that manner, being present with them,
as he is every where by his Omnipresence:

But the gracious and spiritual expression of his presence had never been
communicated to Adams posterity: There was so great a distance, such and so
strong opposition betwixt the corrupt and polluted nature of man, and the
purity of the holy nature of the blessed God, that there was no possibility
that ever there should be, any agreement and communion, while man continued in
that corrupt condition. Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Am. 3.3.
Much less dwell together. Yea the Lord professes, Psalm. 5, 4. Wickedness shall
not dwell with him, much less he in it. When his pure eyes cannot endure to
behold iniquity with any approbatio^, he shall be thought to take up his abode
there? No. What commun^o^ between light and darkness, Christ and Belial? that
is, there is none, there can be none. Therefore we must look at Christ, as
God-man, as he had taken our nature into union with him, and so in and by it,
had made way for the communication of himself to his.

By the nature of man he communicates his spiritual presence to the Sons of
men. By this, life is provided for the world of Gods elect. By this they come
to be made partakers of it. John, 6.51. I am the liveing bread which came down
from Heaven, If any man eat this bread, he shall live for ever. But the question
might have been what is that bread? he answers. The bread I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Because his humane nature is
that mean, whereby life was purchased, and the conduit, by which it was
conveyed to lost man. And therefore he adds. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man, ye have no life. And verse. 56. He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood dwells in me and I in him. So that there is no communion with Christ,
no sharing in his spiritual presence and special virtue, but by his flesh.

Christ, God and Man is our spiritual good, otherwise he is not, nay cannot be
digested for the spiritual refreshing of the faithful soul.

2. What kind of presence this is.

Answer. In the words of the doctrine, it is a spiritual presence, not carnal
or corporal; in so much, that the Apostle if he had known Christ after the
flesh, yet he knows him no more after that manner. 2. Cor. 5.16. For the flesh
profits nothing, says our Savior; the words I speak, are spirit and life.
John. 6.63.

Certain it is, the bodily presence of our Savior is not here attended
according to the conceit of the Capernaites, and the Papists at this day: as
though it were possible for the very flesh of our Savior to be in all places, or
in many places, according to the administrations of the ordinances, which
signify or represent the same.

Nor yet can the very flesh of our Savior in it self considered be truly
availeable to purchase any spiritual good or communicate any spiritual virtue.

Yet this is certain and for ever to be observed, that the humane nature taken
with the deity, and in virtue of the deity, puts forth a power in the
expression of his spritual presence; whereof more anon.

And the Lord Christ is thus spiritually present in his Church, as a head may
be truly said to be really and rventually in the body. For this is the office
of our Savior and that in a proper and peculiar manner. He is said to be the
Head of his Church, neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost. The Father is the
Father of the Church: and Holy Spirit the Comforte^r of the Church: but Christ
has this impropriate in him, that He is the Head. Ephesians. 4.15. Grow up in ^o him
in all things which is the head, even Christ. And Chap. 5.23. He is the head of
the Church, and the Savior of the body.

Because this appertains to him, not as God only, for then all the persons had
partaked thereof, as common: but as the second person in the Trinity sent of
the Father working next in order from him, and as so sent and workking,
terminating the same Nature upon himself, for the great work of our Redemption,
and so he is head.

1. Its proper to him to have al Grace firstly in himself, in way and right of
communication, for had he not been the son of man and son of God together, the
way of Grace and life had been shut up from the sons of Adam. Hebr. 10.20. And
in this sense it is said, That with him is the Well of life. Ps. 36.9. And he is
said to be a fountain of living Waters; to have life in himself. Joh. 5.26. And
to quicken whom he will. Joh. 5.21.

2. The right and propriety of immediate dispensation is committed to his hand,
of all Grace and good: Of his Grace we receive Grace for Grace. Joh. 1.16. And
the Holy Spirit takes of his, not of his own, when he communicates to the Souls
of the Saints. Joh. 16.14, 15. He shall show you al things. He shall glorify me,
for he shall receive of mine. Al things that the Father has are mine. Therefore
said I, He shall take of mine and show it unto you.

3. The manner how this spiritual presence is communicated.

Answ. It appears in the Nature and maaner of it in three things,

1. The second person in the glorious Trinity assuming our Nature into mystical
and personal union with himself, remaining the same person after the union
which he was before the union, does therein become surety for the faithful, and
enter into covenant with God the Father in their room, and purchase both Grace
and glory in their behalf. For had he not taken the Nature of man, it had been
unpossible he should have communicated unto man any good. So the Apostle
reasons, when he would show the way how life came to be derived to the seed of
Adam, and not unto Angels, gives this as the ground. Hebr. 2.16. For v^rely ^e
took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham. And therefore
these were redeemed, life was conveyed unto these: the other in their sins and
sorrows.

And being thus fitted for the place of a Surety, He did in special manner
enter upon terms of agreement in the behalf of those, he would do good unto;
The happiness of those were committed to his care by the Father, and undertaken
willingly by himself. Joh. 6.38, 39. This is the will of the Father, that those
that he has given me, I should lose none, but raise them up at the last day.

And he is as careful to attend their spiritual welfare, as may be; therefore
he concludes of them, in their times, and answerable to their conditions. I
have other Sheep, and those I must bring. Joh. 10.16. And when they are
brought, I will in no wise cast away, nor suffer any to take them away. Joh.
6.37.

2. Having thus purchased Grace and glory for them, he has now both right and
liberty to improve al power in Heaven and Earth, to communicate Grace and glory
to them.

Yea the Human Nature of our Savior has liberty and power to let on work any,
and all the Attributes in the behalf of the poorest believer in the world: yea
right to send the good Spirit of the Lord for his spiritual relief. Joh. 17.2.
Thou have given him (that is Christ) power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him. And therefore in verse 4. he
says, I have finished the work, thou gave me to do. q. d. Christ has
nothing to do in this vale of ^eare^, but search ou^, and seek up some
scattered and wildering Servants of the Lord. Yea liberty to send the spirit
upon this employment. Joh. 15.26. When the comforter is come, whom I will send
you from the Father. Yea makes this his main Errand to heaven in his ascension.
Joh. 16.7. It is expedient etc. If I depart, I will send him unto you.

3. He does improve this power and the operation of the Spirit to close the
Soul with himself; and to hold the bent of the heart toward him for ever. 1
Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit.

As by his spirit he sanctified our Nature and took it into personal union with
himself and gave in subsistence, which of it self it had not, nor could attain:
So by the operation of his Spirit he prepares the Soul for himself, carries it
in the promise to himself, and acts it upon himself: The Soul moved by the
virtue of the Spirit, moves to and stays upon the Lord Christ. As in the
Echo, the Air moved by the voice, in such manner returns the same voice, by
virtue of its own motion. Come unto me. I come, Lord. And not only carries and
closes the Soul with himself, but holds it in this holy bent to himself that
way, Christ-ward, Heavenward.

This is like the growing up with Christ, being as scions ingrafted into him,
as the true Vine, and so are truly, and so called, sons, as the scions united
to the stock, may fitly be called the Sons thereof; and hence, Christ is
styled, The eternal Father. Isa. 9.6. Behold a Son is given, and this son is a
Father, and an eternal Father, and begets us as sons unto his Father, and will
deliver us up unto him, at the great day. Here am I and the Children which thou
have given me. Hebr. 2.13. This is that which Christ calls his abiding in us.
If I abide in you, and you in me. Joh. 15.4.

The Reason in a word is this,

He that is the life of the faithful, must be in the faithful: So is Christ.
Gal. 2.20. Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life etc.

USE 1.
CAUTION: To al, especially the wicked and enemies of the Saints: That they do
not offend and wrong them, or do the least evil to them because they do wrong
to the Lord Jesus, and he so takes it, as to himself. Act. 9. Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And the sufferings of the Saints for a good cause are
called the sufferings of Christ. 2. Cor. 1.5. Thus the Lord sends to
Sennacherib. Isa. 37.28. I know thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage
against me. It was bent against Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem, but it
was against the Lord, in them.

True it is, The wicked see not, know not, consider not this, being blinded
with Ignorance and Malice; and therefore Paul asks the question, when Christ
speaks, Who art thou Lord? q. d. I own not thy speech, nor understand thy
person. Our Savior answers, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

Yea this will be for the condemnation of their persons and confusion of their
faces, at the day of Judgment, when the Saints in this sentence shall be
honored, and they set down, for ever abased before their faces. Depart ye
cursed etc. For I was in prison and ye visited me not etc. Why, When Lord saw
we thee etc. They were not acquainted with the presence of our Savior. He add,
In that ye did it not to one of these, ye did it not to me. Therefore if the
Argument was strong, whereby our Savior would persuade all to be fearful of
offending, even one of these little ones, though they were alone, and though
little: because that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the f^ce o^ their
heavenly Father; ready to attend his pleasure, to execute his will for their
preservation, and for the ruin of their enemies. Math. 18.10. Then much more,
this Argument. He that is Lord of glory and has all power in Heaven and Earth
is in them, and suffers with them; and therefore cannot but protect them, and
relieve both his and their wrongs: Is in Heaven at Gods right hand, and is also
in their hearts.

USE 2.
To desire the fellowship and to delight in the society of the faithful: For we
shall keep no worse company than that of our Savior. Though happily they dwell in
a smo^ky cottage, have course fa^e, be in a mean condition; yet if Christ dwell
in them, we need not be ashamed to converse with them, and own them. Go in to
their companies, as resolving to go to Court. For where the King is, the Court
is: his presence makes it. We should look at the faithful, as the great Heirs
of glory, and Courtiers of Heaven: we cannot enjoy their society, but we may
also come to the sight of our Savior, and speech with him. So, 1. Joh. 1.3.
This we write, that you may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship
is with the Father and with the S^n. So they; Zach. 8.13. And therefore as the
Apostle Hebr. 13.2. Be careful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have
entertained Angels unawares: so be ready to entertain the Saints, the poor
members of Christ, hereby we shall entertain Christ. Receive such servants into
your families etc.

USE 3.
Hence by way of TRIAL, we way gain undoubted evidence unto our Hearts, that we
are indeed Believers, and truly beloved of God and his Son: If once we find
this blessed Son the Lord Jesus by his spiritual and special presence in our
souls, Its a never failing argument which will give in assurance of our good
condition, beyond all that the Devils can object, or our fears and discouraged
hearts can question. The Apostle puts it beyond the possibility of any cavil.
If Christ be given to thee, how shall not God, but give al things Else? that is,
hold this ground, and make that good, Thy carnal reason, by all the deluded
Devise, whereby it would daunt thy heart, it cannot put a colorable appearance
of any possibility, but that al things, that are good, should be given thee. He
that has the Son, has life. Make that sure, and then all the rest is safe,
past al peradventure, nay beyond dispute. For all the jealousies and suspicious
that arise in our own hearts, all the darkness and difficulties that appear in all discoveries that are made: all the questions that come upon the most
searching inquiries and examinations touching any soundness of any Grace, or
any work of Grace, and so of the sincerity of the heart, and the truth and
goodness of a man's estate; If any doubt arise, whether sure or no, certain or
no, in conclusion it is lastly resolved, settles and centers, as they say,
Here: If Issues from our not-union with Christ. This may be done by some other
power, proceed from some other principle, than the spirit of the Lord Jesus.
This is not a certain fruit of our union to Christ, or the inhabitation of the
spirit of Jesus in us. And in Issue, unless it lead necessarily to a Christ, or
be derived infallibly from him, and the interest we have in covenant with him.
Its no more than that a man may have, who has no Grace: Its no more, but that
which a man may do, that has no part in a Savior.

And hence, al such evidences fall to the ground and utterly fail. And in truth,
the weakness of expressions in this kind, men taking shows for substance,
seemings and some appearances of things for the truth of things themselves,
has been the cause, that many have been cousened with their own conceits, and
apprehensions: many have denied all evidences, because those which they had and
too much trusted unto, were fall, and failed them utterly at times of need.
Therefore the Holy Ghost presses this so instantly, and checks the failing in
it so sharply. 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove and examine your selves, whether ye be in the
Faith or no, Acted by, and carried by the power of Faith. Why? how shall we
discern that? Know ye not that Christ is in you? If once that be brought about,
the business is offa hand, and its a sin and a shame ye should not. Unless ye
be reprobates. that is drossy men, Christians that have not the right metal,
are not of the right make: you should not but know this.

This presence special and spiritual discovers it self in two things, Not to
trouble you with more;

1. He that has this presence, has something, and finds something above the
bounds of al created abilities, that even the greatest sufficiency of the
creature, the best endeavors and improvements of the best means in providence
could reach unto, A wisdom beyond all a man's Wit and readiest subtilties and
largest apprehensions: a power beyond all the power of Nature, beyond what a
man's abilities and dexterity can compass, education give, skill of art and
sciences attain, practice and experience find out: beyond all the moral
impressions, that the power of all means and help under Heaven can leave upon
the Soul.

It was said of Saul, that the Lord gave him another heart, than formerly he
had, he had the spirit of Government, a special ability to the discharge of the
place that the Lord had called him unto: So it is with every Christian, he has
another heart, than ever before, and performs his duties from another power,
than ever he did before, Gal. 2.20.
even by the power of Christ. So the Apostle professes, He did not live, nor
pray, nor preach. It was not abilities of nature which he had: not knowledge of
Art and learning, in which he excelled, by which he prayed: but it was the
power and gracious presence of the Holy Spirit of Christ, that acted and
carried out al those abilities, yea that spiritual power of grace he had to
this work, either of praying or preaching. So 2. Cor. 13.3. If any man require
a testimony of Christ speaking in me. And therefore its the reason, which he
gives, why the things of God are known by believers, and not known to the
greatest of the world. 1. Cor. 2.11. No man knows the things of God, but the
Spirit of God and we have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit
of God. Nay he comes yet lower, to the very expression of the words: Which
things we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the
Holy Ghost teaches. And the Saints often find, and profess it, they are helped
and carried beyond all the abilities they have, yea beyond all the power of all the grace they have. That look, as when we see a swaddling Child left in his
Cradle in a lower room, come again, we find it laid in the highest loft or
Chamber in the house, each man easily concludes: There was another power than
that it had of it self, that conveyed it thither. So here: when the poor and
ignorant amongst men; come to know and do the things that are spiritual; Ephesians.
2.10. His workmanship. They are enlightened and enabled, beyond al they had, or
ever once apprehended; or could come into their own thoughts, there was a
higher power, even the presence and assistance of a God, the Lord Jesus himself
to help. Math. 11.25. I thank thee O Father, that thou have revealed these
things to babes: and adds, no man knows the Father, but the Son. Therefore the
Prophet begs, that he might not be left to his spirit: Psalm. 143.10. Teach me
the way to thee, thy Spirit is Good; q. d. My spirit is naught.

2. Where the presence of Christ is, The soul at the lowest ebb, and the
greatest under, that ever it comes unto, it is yet ever panting after a Savior,
cannot ^est before it come to him. Isa. 26.8. The desires of our Souls are
toward thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. In the greatest desertion,
that can befall them, the greatest temptation that can assault: by the one, they
are disinabled to do, what they would; by the other opposed and hindered from
attaining that which they do endeavor. Yet they set themselves that way. Though
they see; they are like Captives, and under the Tyranny of their distempers;
they find, they do not: yea may be at such an under, and in a forlorn
condition, that they conclude, they are past Hope and expectation; never shall
be recovered: yet their hearts bless them, that enjoy that happy estate; and Oh
that they might. That as its said of the ungodly: They set themselves in a way
that is not good: These contrariwise, set themselves in the aim and bent of
their heart. Romans 7. As the Pilot that has the Helm in his hand, though, it
may be, the wind is too stiff, and the stream too strong, and al against him,
that he cannot make way forward, nay, it may be, is turned back again, by
contrary storms, yet he tacks about, and keeps her to that point still:

So here: when the Lord Christ takes the Helm of the heart of a believer in his
own hand, though the wind and tide of the most violent temptation, for the
while, stop his course: yet the bent of the heart is that way: My Soul
follows hard after thee. Psalm. 63.8.

USE 4.
This shows the excellency of the Saints, even in the meanest and worst
condition, above the wicked and ungodly, when they are in the greatest ruff
and Sovereignty, that they can attain unto in this world.

The Saints are the Temple of the liveing God. 2. Cor. 6.16. Their Souls are
the throne, where the Lord sits and shows the riches of the glory of his Grace
and mercy; the habitation where he dwells, and takes up his abode: the Kingdom
where he rules by the power of his Grace, the Guidance and Government of his
blessed Spirit, and the scepter of his word.

True he exercises the Sovereignty of his power and justice upon the wicked on
Earth, and the damned in Hell, as amongst his Enemies and Outlaws, whose
rebellion he will revenge, and whose ruin he will work, according to the desert
of their works.

But his Children and servants are his loyal and loving subjects, amongst whom
he sets up the Kingdom and exercises the government of his Grace and mercy,
and they in love and loyalty submit thereunto, and advance the same. The hearts
of his are, as I may say, the Paradise of Gods pleasure, in which he walks, and
takes his content. So the Lord promises. I will walk among them. So the wise
man professes: Wisdom delights in the habitable part of the world. Prove.
8.31. This is my habitation for ever, here I delight to dwell.

But it is not so with the wicked, its not so with them. Those miserable Souls
of theirs are the throne where Satan sits, that Synagogue where he is
worshipped, and even where his throne is seated. Rev. 2. The habitation and Hell
where he abides. Math. 12.45. -- Came and found the House swept and garnished:
The Kingdom of darkness in which he rules. Ephesians. 2.2. He rules in the hearts of
the Children of disobedience, There he sports himself, and there he finds and
takes greatest contentment. Because he has such, as will hear and entertain
his suggestions, and do his will and lusts: and therefore they are said to be
Satan's, and of the Devil, yea to be Devils.

Look therefore what difference there is between Heaven and Hell, the Kingdom
of light, and the Kingdom of darkness, the habitation of Devils, and the temple
of the Lord: Such is the excellency of the Saints, such is the miserable
condition of the ungodly.

USE, 5.
Here is matter of marvelous and unspeakable COMFORT to all the Saints, to cure
us or al Fears, and deliver us from al discouragements that ever we shall meet
withal in this World. The Lord Jesus is a Helper, a strong Helper, ready to
save: so the Apostle Phil. 4, infers, The Lord is at hand. Are Devils at hand
to tempt thee? are Enemies subtle, and mighty at hand to persecute, and oppose
thee? are thy fears and discouragements at hand to over-bear thee? The Lord
Jesus is at hand, near t^ee, nay, in thee, to succor, and supply, add satisfy.

1. Comfort in all thy Spiritual trials, when Satan grows most fell, thy
corruptions most strong, and thy heart begins to fail thee in the apprehension
of thine Infirmities, as that thou shall never be able to subdue, to overcome,
nay, not to resist. Behold, 1 John, 4.4. be they never so great; Greater is he
that is in thee, than be that is in the world. Though thou be never so weak,
and thine Enemies nevers so great, Christ is greater than al Devils, than al
distempers, than all the power of darkness, and malice of the wicked.

Thou see and find a Law in they Members rebelling against the Law of thy
Mind, and carrying thee captive. Behold the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ, shall free thee from the Law of Sin, Rom, 8.3. Here is Law against Law,
Spirit against Spirit, Christ against thy Corruption: That Spirit is in Christ,
and Christ is in thee. Therefore our Savior concludes, None shall take them
our of my hand; neither head of Satan, nor hand and power of Sin and Grave;
John, 10.28.

2. Comfort against WANTS and Necessities, that may surprise, and over-bear
thee. Thy Pressures, and Calamities are present, they pinch, and sit sad: The
Lord Jesus is present to sweeten thy sorrows with the sense of his Love, and to
supply al with the fullness of his sufficient Grace.

It would refreshany in sickness, had he but the Physician by him, that could
heal. It would refresh the Child in Misery and want, were the tender mother by,
that would pity, could relieve. Our Savior is al, and more than al; he can
answer al thy desires, and he is present, and apprehensive of thy grievances.
In all their afflictions, he was afflicted: He is in thee, he shares in all thy
sorrows: Why persecutest thou me? So David, Psalm. 73.26. My heart, and my
flesh, al inward, and outward helps fail, but the Lord is the strength of my
heart; his wisdom was in his mind, his subjection in his will, his sweet calms
and quiet in his distempered affections, that strengthened al.

USE, 6.
Matter of Humiliation to all the Saints, who have Christ so near to them, so
spiritually, so specially present with them, and yet they know so little of
him, are so little acquainted with him: As Paul in another case, Acts, 17.23.
touching the Altar set up to the unknown God, he answers, Whom ye ignorantly
worship, him I show unto you, for he is not far from you; for in him we live,
and move, and have our being. So of Christ, whom ye ignorantly worship, and
desire to see, and enquire of Christ by Christ: As Mary asked of the Lord,
where the Lord Jesus was. O! they go weeping, and seeking after a Savior,
complain they cannot hear of him, etc. mourn after him. He is not far from you,
nay, is in you, and works al your works for you. Your Consciences have been in
terror, and perplexity, and again quelled Tweetly, and calmed: it was Christ
that did it. Your Spirits were sunk down in discouragements, and knew not how
to recover themselves, and yet beyond hope supported: it was Christ that did
it. And therefore, as our Savior complained, and checked Philip, John, 14.9.
Have I been so long with you, and do thou not know me, Philip? Has Christ so
long striven with those rebellious? so long comforted, quickened, in weaknesses
strengthened you, in wants supplied, helped you to call? so often heard, so long
born with all that baseness? and do ye not yet know Jesus Christ? Complain of
thine own blindness, and heedlesness: The Lord Jesus was in this place, in this
heart, and I was not aware of him; wretch that I am, Genesis 28.16.

USE, 7.
Here is matter of Admiration, even to force us to stand amazed at the endless
compassion of a Savior. Why should he pass by so many? as good, and better than
our selves, as we came out of the Lions of Adam, yet to knock at our doors, call
upon us? John, 14.22. Lord, why will thou show thy self to us, and not unto the
world? Why shed his blood for us? send his Spirit to us? why pass by so many
provocations, and pity, and pardon us? As Solomon, Behold the Heaven is not
able to contain thee, how shall this so poor a Tent? So thou of thy heart; and
is it possible? Or as she, How comes it, that the Mother of my Lord is come
unto me? It was Moses his Dispute, Deuteronomy. 4.34. Did ever God assay? etc. Did
ever people hear God? etc. But they have God dwelling in them.

USE, 8. Of Exhortation.
1. To be affected with the presence of so great a Majesty, and so affected
with his presence, as to see our own weakness, and worthlesnes. When God had
Schooled Job out of the Whirl-whind, see how he sits down abased, Behold, I am
vile. How the Centution esteemed the presence of our Savior in the days of
his Humiliation? Behold, I am not worthy thou should come under my Roof. How
we of our Saviors Spiritual presence now in glory? to come so near, as to dwell
in these wretched hearts of ours.

2. Therefore study to give suitable entertainment, and welcome, to so glorious
a Guest; set al our abilities on work, as Abraham his Servants, that we may
answer the coming and kindness of the Lord.

And that is in Two things: 1 Content him with the provision we make. 2 Honor
him with attendance that is meet.


1 Study his Content.

Walk in all well-pleasing, Col. 1.10.
2 Cor. 5.9. Be Ambitious to please: As with persons of great quality, we
enquire of their followers what will please, what Diet they desire, we provide
it if can be purchased with money: So here.

This in four things:

1. Bring truth of Spirit in all our performances. Psalm. 51.6. Thou love truth
in the inner parts: So Hezekiah, Remember how I have walked before thee with.
an upright heart, Isa. 38.3. God seeks for such, who is a God of Truth, just
and right, Deuteronomy. 32.4. only the heart, of all the Sacrifice. 2. Present him with
nothing but his own. That which he commands not, he accepts not, Who required
these things? No man knows what will please him, before he show his pleasure,
Matthew. 15.9. They worship him in vain, when they invent dishes of their own. 3.
Let the Diet be fresh, and new dressed. That which is old and stale, it is not
wholesome, much less honorable, to set it before a stranger. It must be fresh,
fat, and good, and new killed. Psalm. 98.1. David speaks of a new Song of
Thanksgiving. As in the Shewbread, which was daily set before the Lord: it
must be set on fresh, in the several seasons, Levit. 24.8. Exodus 25.30, each
Sabbath.
God gives a new Command: It Is an old Command, but renewed with fresh colors, a
new Covenant Jer. 31.31. So we, bring new Love, Faith, and Repentence, renew,
and stir up a fresh thy Graces.

4. Humility and fear. Mic. 6.8. Isa. 66.2. Men converse with marvailous
underness and awfullness, before great personages, when they are slight and
negligent in the presence of their underlings. So must we be awful and fearful
when we come into Christ's presence, to be negligent here is to dishonor and to
distaste him: it is to use him, as an underling.

2. Honor him with our attencance.

1. Attend him with gladness and cheerfullness of heart. Joy is a sit
Chamberlain to wait; comes and goes readily. Deuteronomy. 28.47. With glad hearts.
Act. 2.46. Eat their meat together with joyfulness of heart God loves a
cheerful look, not lowering.

2. With a ready watchfulness, to listen to the intimation of Gods mind.
Observe every look: take notice of the least beck, listen to the lowest speech,
watch every passage and appearance of the pleasure of the Lord. Luke 12.35.
Stand with your loins girt, and your Lamps burning, waiting for his coming.
Have al trim; our Lamps and Vessels. Here Lord. See what God would, and suit
answerably.

Thou in me. We have handled the first degree, attending the order of our
Savior, who looks at them, as they appear to us; and therefore so propounds
them, as they may be most easily apprehended.

We are now come to the first fountain and original, from whence this spiritual
privilege and unity has his rise dispensed and communicated, That is, from the
In-being of the Father in Christ. This is the highest degree, further than
which, we cannot ascend. God the Father in Christ, and he in him: Christ in
them, and they in Christ, and so in the Father also.

Hence two Points to discuss.

1. The Father is in the Son. Or, There is a mutual subsistence of the Father
in the Son, and of the Son in the Father. 2. The Subsistence of the Father in
the Son, in the first rise, or Original; whence the Saints come to be one with
the Son, and the Father.
The first of these, we had it propounded by way of comparison, to lay forth
the manner of that oneness and unity, for which our Savior here, prays the
Saints might attain unto. And we then reserved the full handling of it unto this
place: the words in the foregoing Verse are so express, as nothing more.

As thou in me, and I in thee. And it is not for nothing that our Savior
carries the thoughts of his Disciples, and keeps them there in the settled,
continual consideration thereof, as if it were the hinge; upon which al
happiness and comfort does hang, and therefore we should stay in a kind of
unmovable attendance thereon.

When Philip made that great request unto our Lord Jesus, as that which would
give satisfying content, beyond al exception; Show us the Father, and it shall
suffice, John, 14.8. Jesus answered, verse 9. He that has seen me, has seen
the Father. And the Ground and Foundation of all this knowledge, and so this
saving comfort, he renders to be this; verse 10. Beleevest thou not that the
Father is in me, and I in the Father? And yet, as though all this were not
enough, he makes them take up their stand in the steady, and most serious
contemplation, and through considering, and believing this Truth: Beleevest
thou not, etc. Heleeve me, that the Father is in me, and I am in the Farther,
at least for the Works sake, q. d. The weight of all the Work lies here, hold
the heart upon this hinge, keep open this door, and the evidence, and certainty
of al saving Truth and Comfort, will come in, yea, of al power, and spiritual
ability to do al good, as in the words following. 2. A ready, and enlarged
Communication of al good unto us: Whatever ye ask in my Name, that will I do.
Shut up this passage, or turn aside from attendance unto this Truth: dam up
this Fountain, we dry up all the stream of Spiritual Power and Comfort, that
would come into our souls.

It is then a Foundation-Truth of the deepest search, and that which has a
Storehouse of Heavenly strength, and refreshing laid up in it.

We shall open the Nature of it in three things. 1 The proper Ground from whence
this In-being issues, and proceeds. 2 The ready way, by which the Nature of it,
may righty be apprehended. 3 How it may be attended in our Savior, as God and
Man.


To the First.

The proper and peculiar Ground, from whence this In-being proceeds, may be
expressed in two Conclusions, thus:

1. This In-being of subsistence of the Father in the Son, and of the Son in
the Father, is not firstly from the Essence, or Deity, considered according to
it self, or in it self as some have conceived: As thus; Because the Deity, or
Essence, which is in the Father, is in the Son, therefore the Father also is in
the Son: for this is neither safe, nor sound, but a dangerous mistake; because
by the same reason, it may be concluded; That the Son is in himself, or the
Father is in the Father. For the same Essence, or Deity (being but one) which
is in the Father, is in the Son also; and then the reason would follow on like
manner, thus: Where the Deity, or Essence of the Godhead, which appertains to
the Son, is, there is the Son. But the Deity of the Son, is in the Son.
Therefore the Son is in the Son.

2. This In-being each in other, though it issues nextly, and immediately from
the persons, yet not as they are in themselves considered, without respect to
the Essence; but as they are subsistences in the same Essence, taking that in
with them, to make up a full, and complete Ground; from whence this mutual
subsisting in each other may be inferred; as thus: 1. Not only because they
have the same Essence. 2. Not because they are distinct persons alone.
But because they are distinct persons subsisting in other. For this mutual
In-being requires both distinction and conjunction. They must be two, for one
cannot be in it self: and they must be together with the same Nature, or else
they cannot be each in other. As we see in the Creatures constantly, as a
Father, or Son; Buyer, and Seller: though they be persons in Relation, yet
because they be in several Natures, separate one from another, therefore they
cannot be said to be each in other. Thus for the Ground of this In-being.

2. The ready way how to apprehend it, is made good in four Particulars. 1. The
same Essence of the Godhead, does equally, and indifferently in the whole
Nature of it, belong to all the Persons in the Deity: So that whatsoever is
said of one, may be affirmed of the other. They are al Eternal, al Infinite, al
Omnipotent, Omniscient, etc. because al God. As a man may be said to teach
himself, and so is a Master, and Scholar; a Master, as he teaches; and a
Scholar, as he is taught. Now the whole man is both, not a part of him a
Scholar, a part of him a Teacher; but the whole Nature of Man bears up both
Relations. 2. Hence the Persons in the Godhead, are distinct, truly amongst
themselves, yet cannot be separated, or divided one from another; but
wherever the Godhead is, they are, and wherever one is, al are; because
the whole Essence is in every one, and every one with the whole Essence. 3.
Subsistence of the Persons, looks at the Essence, yet not as it is Essence
barely, but as it is with the Relative Properties; and so those Relative
Properties by their Mutual Respect or Relation, give being each to other. 2.
Subsistence looks at the Essence, as Essence, and so they attend upon, it
adjoyn to it, and do accompany it, as the manner of the thing, does the thing.


As the Subsistences, or Persons, look at the Essence as Essence, upon which
they do attend, and are adjoined; so they are with the Essence, and one with
another.

As they look at the Essence, not as Essence, but as with his Relative
Properties; as the Nature of Relation, and al things under Relation requires,
they are then causes one of another, give being each to other, and are one in
another.

A word to both.

1. As adjoined to the Essence; for ye have heard, that these Relations are not
qualities inherent in the subject, but attendants; and then I say, they are al
with the same whole Essence, and so one with another. So Wisdom, the Lord
Christ, Prove. 8.27. When he prepared the Heavens, I was there, when he gave to
the Son his decree, ver. 30. I was with him. John, 1.1. The Word with God, that
is, the Father, and it was God, that is, had the Essence of the Deity.

2. As the Subsistences look at the Essence with his Relative Properties, so in
Relation each Person gives being each to another, and is one in another, John,
14.9. The Father dwells in Christ. That cannot in any propriety of speech be
said of the Essence, that the Persons dwell in the Godhead, because they are
Relations, and therefore no impression in the subject. So, hence our Savior is
said to be in the bosom, and come from the Bosom of the Father. Hence he is
said, Joh. 10.15. As the Father knows me, even so I know the Father; Which
Issues from this relation. For its that which appertains to the Nature of
Relates: because they are mutual causes one of another: the knowledge of the
one is the knowledge of the other. And this also seems to be the meaning of
that. Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one. The Jews they conceived, he
blasphemed, because he made himself God. Verse, 33. Our Savior defends himself
thus. Say ye of him, whom the Father has sent, that he blasphemeth because I
said, I am the Son of God? verse, 36. And so the Argument may well stand, that
they are one in relation and so one in another: for having said, that none
shall pluck his sheep out of his hand, he gives this relation; because the
Father, who has given them him, is greater than al, and none can pluck them
out of his hand. If none can puck them out of my Fathers hand, then not out of
mine: If my Father and I be one, then it follows: but we are one: One in this
reference and relation one to another; and so in this action of sending and
being sent, both as one, attend the accomplishment of this work. We here want
examples to Illustrate: because the creature cannot afford in propreity of
speech, one essence to relation: yet a little to help, take that which is
familiar. As my hand is closing and closed: These two as they look to the hand,
are with it, and with one another. As they look to the hand closing. And so
closed, closing and closed are causes each of other, and one in another. So in
the deity: these properties of knowing and being known, like closing and being
closed with it self, as they look at the essence or Godhead, they are with it,
and one with another.

4. This subsisting each in other is not an Individual relative porperty, but a
notional respect, which attend all the relations of the persons in common, and
therefore cannot make any distinct personality. But appertains to al, and is
and may be affirmed of al, as relatives giving being each to other, they abide
each in other. As the Scripture phrase, the Father dwells in the Son.

Three Things for Explication: Viz.

How this may be attended in our Savior, as God and man: for so he seems to
speak of himself in this place, in the several passages. For so he is in the
faithful: so he received glory, and gave glory. verse, 22. So he was sent.
verse, 18.

In such mysteries, that we may be wise unto sobriety, and yet not slorthful;
neither too curious, to search more than we need, nor yet too careless, to
neglect what God reveals: we shall study to walk in a safe path: and therefore
I briefly answer generally, particularly.

Generally.

This In-being or subsistence in the Father belongs firstly to the Son as
second person, and to the human Nature so far, as the relation of Sonship
leaves some impression, and so alteration thereupon, according to the Nature
and condition thereof. So that the second person in the Trinity is no other,
nor acts no otherwise than he did, in himself.

But this manner of existing or acting appears in the Human Nature and leaves
new impressions in a special manner, and the Father also in and by him: and
that in a threefold regard.

Viz. Of Union. Mission. Operation,
The Father his act in the son, and the son from the Father, discover new
impressions here, and all of them in a special manner follow these relations.

1. The second person takes the Human Nature into Personal UNION with himself:
so that there are not two Sons, but one son: and therefore as the son is in the
Father, the Human Nature, by the son, may be said so to be, being one person
with him. For as the Father gives being to the Son, and the son receiving
returns his being unto the Father: So the Human Nature has a total dependence
upon the Son, and reference to him, and in him to the Father. And therefore as
to be reflected is the property of the second person, or looking back to the
Father, or returning his subsistence: So our Nature in Christ, looks to Christ,
having a total dependence upon Christ, and being one person with him, looks as
the second person wholly to the Father. And whether the return of the Saints in
God, and of al things in them, be not firstly from hence, inquire, it will do
you no harm.

2. In regard of MISSION, The son in regard of this relation is said to be
sent; that is a communication of work in order, from one to another, so as the
second person works from the Father, he originally from himself. The second
person takes the Human Nature into this order of Mission, So that al Grace is
bestowed upon it, and it is sent upon commission, in the Mission of the second
person, to which it is now united, to dispense all Grace according to the will
of the Father. Joh. 16.15. All that the Father has is mine.

Thus he becomes the Head of the Church. For the second person in the Trinity,
sent of the Father, works next in order from him.

As so sent and working, terminates the Human Nature upon himself, for the
great work of Redemption. And so its proper to him, bringing our Human Nature
under the commission offending, to have al Grace firstly in way of right of
communication. He being thus sent, and having the commission of al Grace, he is
head of the Church, neither the Father nor the Holy Spirit in propriety of
speech. Thus said to give him authority to Judge, because he is the son of man.
Joh. 5.27. That is because he is taken into personal union and so under that
commission, as sent from the Fathers as the second person was. Thus usually he
shows authority. Joh. 14.20. The word, which you hear, is not mine, but the
Fathers which sent me. And verse, 26. The Father sends the comforter in the
name of Christ; therefore the commission was first his.

3. In regard of OPERATION. For the second person, in virtue of that his
relation, he not only has commission from another, but works from another, and
so executes the will of the Father. And thus lastly the second person takes the
Human Nature into this dispensation, to work al from the Father, and that the
second person does, by virtue of this relation, and so of this Inbeing of the
Father in him. See the very ground given. Joh. 10.10. The word, I speak is not
mine, but the Father that dwells in me etc. Joh. 8.38. For the works sake,
bele^ve, that the Father is in me, and I in the Father. Joh. 5. The Son does
nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do. Issue the whole, Thus.

What ever the second person, and Son of God, as such, does: that he does by
virtue of his eternal generation from the Father, and from his abiding in him.
But as Son he takes our Nature into personal union with himself and as Son
advances it to that privilege and liberty, to set all the Attributes on work,
and to send the Holy Ghost, yea sends al Officers, and appoints al Offices, and
blesses them.

Therefore by virtue of this his eternal generation from the Father, and his
abiding in him, this Union, Mission, and Operation of the Human Nature proceeds.

The second person, by this eternal generation from the Father, and abiding in
him, is reflected upon the Father, and as the Father has an Eye only to the
son, in giving the susibstence of a Son: the Son has an Eye to the Father, in
returning the subsistence of a son to him, they wholly give and take.

So the Son, uniting the Human Nature into one person, holds it in reference
and dependence with himself upon the Father. All is communicated to him as
sent, and so to the Human Nature: All acted by him, and so by the Human Nature.

The In-being or existence of the Father in the Son, is the first rise, whence
the unity of the faithful with the Father and the Son comes to be perfected.

Hither our Savior ascends, and here he stays, Leads us to the Wellhead, and
fountain, whence our spiritual wellface, and everlasting good Issues. And this
is the highest of al, and higher we cannot go; beyond this visible world, and
al creatures therein, even to Heaven, and in Heaven, above Angels to God, and
in the Godhead, to the first original in the glorious and blessed Trinity, and
the first act in that origination.

To this accords that of the Apostle, each place adds mutual light unto the
other. Col. 3.3. We are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God. Christ is
the Treasurer, but the Father is the Author. Christ is the keeper, but the
Father is the first Appointer thereof. For so you must understand the Name God,
not essentially, but personally, being put in opposition and reference unto
Christ, our life is hid with Christ, but Christ, and life, and al is in God, in
the Father. Upon this ground it is, and to the like purpose, that the Apostle
carries the hearts of the Corinthians in the work of their calling unto this
consideration, as that, wherein the lowest part of the foundation of our
comfort lies, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God in
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Christ is
all, even complete Redemption, who delivers from the power and presence of al
evil, and gives all Grace: quickens what he gives, perfects what he quickens,
owns what he perfects.

But he is made this to us, not of himself, but of the Father, for so still the
word, and Name of God is to be taken, as appears, verse, 24. Christ is the
power of God, and the Wisdom of God. Christ is made our Redemption, and we are
made his redeemed ones, and the Father makes both, he our Redemption, and we
his redeemed.

And this is the cause, why the Apostle is so enlarged, inlaying for^h the
sovereignty of the Fathers work, beyond all the compass either of the being of
the creature, or the Graces and apprehensions of all Churches. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
There is one Lord Jesus, one Faith, and one Baptism, one God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you al. Above al, even in the
highest power that is dispensed in his Church; Christ is the Head and Husband,
the Holy Spirit the comforter, God is the Father. Through all the operations and
administrations that are in the Churches and Graces dispensed, He sends his Son
to the great work of our Redemption. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself. 2 Timothy 1.4. -- Given us Grace in Christ Jesus before the world was. He
sends the Spirit in the work of Application. Joh. 26. In all the Saints, as
drawing and conjoining the hearts of the faithful, as fellow Brethren, unto
himself with the Father and one to another in him, and for him. So one in
relation here, as well as in a Savior.

And from hence lastly it is we meet usually with that phrase, which may
receive a right explication and true understanding from t he point in hand. 1
Then. 1.1. To the Church of the Thessalonians in God the Father, and in our.
Lord Jesus. And that so all the Churches, and all the faithful, are in God the
Father, as the Father of the Churches in the Son, as the Head of the Church.

In the Father, who out of the Authority or priority of order, not of dominion,
first appoints our Savior to the word, and the work to him.

In the Lord Jesus, as he is appointed by the Mission, to work from the Father,
and by commission sent as man, united to the second person, to have al Graces
first, in way and right of communication to the Church.

The Father he knows the Son, there is the Deity, and all the excellencies
thereof, reflecting, exemplifying, or characterising upon it self: where the
expressions of the Deity, and all the excellency thereof, exemplifying from it
self, that is to be in the Father, that is, it is in the virtue of the Father,
that it is so done.

The Son again as the Character reflected, or exemplified, and where this
examplification, or excellencies returned again is to be seen, so far the Soul
may be said to be in Christ that is in his virtue not looking so much at the
work or thing done, for that Issues from all, but at the manner of doing, and
carry that along, it will direst and not deceive. Open the Doctrine,

1. Recall what this Oneness is. 2. How its Perfected.
The first I shall not trouble you withal, because I have heretofore opened it
at large, only mention so much, as you may keep your Eye or consideration upon
it, as the White or Mark, that you may discern, how the following expressions
hit it. Briefly then,

This unity, (as ye have heard) is not the Oneness of affection amongst the
Saints, but the Oneness of relation they have to God in Christ, as his Adopted
ones. One with us, nor one with themselves.

This Oneness of Relation lies here, in that our Savior does not bring the
Souls of the faithful in nearest relations of dearest love, as adopted Sons,
but also into that spiritual intercourse of peculiar and divine operation of
God upon the Soul, whereby the Soul returns unto God, to do al, and to take al.

To do al form himself in man, not man to do it.

To receive all to himself by man, not man to take it, which was otherwise in
the covenant of works.

The Lord Jesus having fitted the Soul for himself, and united the Soul to
himself, and made the Soul acceptable to the Father in his Blood. He sends the
spirit of Adoption into the hearts of his, sets their hearts for God, and holds
the bent of their he^rts toward him. This is the gracious look of the Father.
The faithful, the spiritual being of Sonship, 1. Fasten to God in Christ, as
the fountain of life, 2. Leave their hearts there, and abide, to be wholly
acted by the influence and assistance of his Spirit, 3. And to hold up the
excellency thereof; not I, but Christ, by the power of his might. Mark that to
be acted by the influence of the spirit, not by a principle of Grace in our
selves.


This is the Oneness, to be carried beyond the covenant of works, and the work
of Grace, or any principle thereof in our selves: but to cling about God in
Christ, that he may act al in us and by us, and we hold out him in all our works.

2. How is this said to be perfected?

We shall better understand this, if we a little consider the imperfection of
this Oneness, and wherein it appears: the full removal of those weaknesses will
be the perfecting of this privilege in our Souls.

This imperfection lies in three things.

1. In the feebleness and unsoundness of our spirit when we do not abide in the
Lord, we do out leave our selves under the power and stream of the Spirit of
promise, in and through which, al spiritual virtue is dispensed, and the
influence of the Spirit is conveyed unto us. But either we are crowded and
thrust off, by the strength and violence of temptation, which as violent and
boisterous winds, and raging waves, force the Vessel out of the Channel,
carries at upon the shore and shelves, where it is set on ground, if not split.

So Peter in the shock, the assault came so fierce, that it rowted his heart
wholly: and David in have, faid, I shall one day perish etc. Psalm. 16.11. Or Else
We go aside willingly, through the folly and deceiveable lusts of our carnal
mind, which catch at every Twigg, hang upon every Hedge, rawm and reach after re
set by our own devices. Will ye also go away? Joh. 6.67. Jonah has a fetch of
his own, and forlook his own mercies. Jon. 2.8. Sometimes out of sinful
discouragements the Soul, like the Body in a fainting sit, cannot see his way,
nor his Comfort, nor can it help it self by holding that which is next at hand.
Like a man wildering in a dark night, and out of the way, he goes he knows not
which way. Isa. 49.14. My God has forsaken me. This comes thus to be helped,
when God settles, and stakes down the soul, that it will not go away, nor be
carried away. O! entreat me not to leave thee, Ruth 1. Ashur shall not save us,
but with thee, the fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14.3. When we grow up in
Christ, as they, I will wait upon him, that hides his face from the house of
Jacob, and will look upward, Isa. 8.17. not inward, outward, downward,
backward, when nothing from without moves us, nothing from within stirs us, or
makes us turn back, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18 as they, Dan. 3.16.17. We care not to
answer, our God can, and if he please, he will; however, thither they look, and
thence they will not go.

2. As there is feebleness, we abide not, so there is crossness to the power of
the Spirit, which gives not way thereunto. Though God through Christ let in
some intimation to the soul, and our Savior put his hand into the hole of the
door, and his fingers drop Mirrh, leaves sweet insinuations of his favor,
present remembrances of himself, Cant. 4.4. yet the soul is composing it self
to a secure sluggish frame, Psalm. 77.3. My soul refused comfort. Ahaz will not
ask a sign, Isa. 7.12. So Exodus 6.9. As Job in another case, If God will speak
kindly, I could not believe it. As Asa in a desperate pang, refused to hear,
and receive Direction, and Reproof from the Seen, who would have brought him
again to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 16. told him, the eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the world* to show himself stronger. He lost his strength and peace all
his days.

This hindrance is removed, when this crossness of whatever kind it is, that
may ^op the passage and Influence of the Spirit, is taken off; and when it is
wholly removed, then is it fully perfected. I can do nothing against the Truth,
2 Cor. 13.8. I came without gainsaying, Acts, 10.29. Pray without Dialogueing,
1 Timothy 2.8. Abraham considered no^ Sarahs barren Womb, Romans 4.19. Live and walk
in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. As the Soul, when a obstructions are removed, has
his full intercourse in the Body: so when this opposition is removed.

3. When by feebleness we abide not, by crossness we close not, or come to be
fully ingrafted into the Promise. So lastly,

When the Soul will join any thing with Christ, or expect any Principle, or
Power, to quicken, or carry our hearts, or abilities to any Service, beside
Christ, as sharing with him in any quickening virtue, further than he appoints
them, goes with them, works by them. This is a desperate prejudice to the
perfection of this Unity, and returning al to God in Christ. To lean upon
Christ, and our own Wisdom, expect from Christ, and our own Abilities,
Ordinances, Offices, etc. I am Paul's, and I am Christ's, 1. Cor. 1.12. this is
to join a stone and staff together, and so we hold neither in our hand.

This is perfected.

When we come to eye nothing but Christ, to join nothing with him, expect
nothing but from him, no strength but from a Savior, but from Christ, who has
appointed it, sanctified, and blessed it. Paul is nothing, Apollo is nothing,
Word, Ordinances nothing; but Christ in them: they work nor further than Christ
is in them, prosper not further than Christ blesses them. A Sacrament may
poison thee, as well as nourish, if thou discernest not there, who is the Food
of thy Soul. The Word may be a savor of Death, as well as of Life, if Christ
breath not, bless not. Therefore all the Faculties should fasten upon God in
Christ, as Eagles upon their Prey, or as so many lines about the Center, al
meet him. Hopes expect Grace from God in Christ, and from nothing else. Desires
long for mercy from God in Christ, and nothing else. As they, We will remember
thy Name only. Jehosaphat had all the Forces in Israel, yet stays there. There
is no strength in us, our eyes are toward thee. When once it comes to that, we
shall see him as be is, then we shall be like unto him, 1 John, 3.2. When we
are settled so, that we stir not: yield so to al of Christ, that we oppose not;
whatever this Spirit shall express, we eye him only, and expect only what we
need, and join nothing with him, or his excellency: then are we perfect in one.
Abide perfectly in him, be acted perfectly by him, perfectly advance all the
excellencies of God, through Christ; then are we perfectly one with God the
Father, in and through Christ. As the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. When be shall deliver
up his Kingdom (that is, cease the excecution of any Ordinance, or Dispensation
in an immediate manner by any Ordinance, or any Grace by any Ordinance) then
the Father shall be all in all, instead of al Ordinances, Word, Sacraments,
Sabbath, Prayers, Covenants, Promises; but the Father will infinitely let out of
himself to our Savior, and immediately through our Savior, unto the Souls of
his.

USE, 1. Comfort.
This is Ground of strong Support to persuade our hearts: no Temptations from
without, no corruptions from within, no oppositions, be they never so fell and
fierce, never so mighty, and violent, shall ever be able to hinder our Communion
with God in Christ, and so our everlasting happiness. Were the Root of it,
either in the means we use, or abilities we have, or in the power of the
Creatures on Earth, or Angels in Heaven, or Grace in our hearts: It might
indeed, either be wonderfully hindered, or else utterly lost, as in Adam.

But it issues from a Fountain, which is beyond, not only Heaven, but that
which is above Angels there, yea, the highest Stars, even the first Origination
of the eternal, blessed In-being of the Father in the Son: which is without al
Creatures, nothing can further it; above al, nothing can hinder it; before al,
nothing can reach it. This seems to be Paul's ground, Romans 8. and last, Nor
things present, nor things to come, Principalities, Powers, Life, Death,
Angels, etc. Why good Angels do not hinder. It Is from the Love of God in
Christ, therefore it is beyond the reach of al created Power.

2. Exhortation.

See the lowest corner of the Foundation stone of our Eternal happiness, and
look to it, and stay there. Look at al means, as from Christ. The Law as kept
in the Ark: The Truth as in Jesus, dispensed as in the Head of the Second
Covenant, Ephesians. 4.

2. Look at Christ, as from the Father, John, 14.24. The words ye hear, are not
mine, but the Fathers that sent me. This sending, and speaking by Christ, is
because the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son.

Verse 23. That the World may know that thou have sent me, and loved them, as
thou love me.


HERE we have the last thing in the Verse laid out, to wit, The several ENDS
which the Lord aimed at, in the Order, and Degrees, whereby this Unity of
Relation was brought in. Christ was in them, the Father in Christ; and this
In-being of the Father in the Son, brings in this perfection of the Unity of
the Faithful.

These last words set forth a Double and of this Dispensation.

1. That the World may know that thou have sent me. 2. That thou love them,
as thou love me.
To the first of these we have spoken formerly, in verse 21. where it was first
mentioned, and so first came into consideration to be opened and handled; and
therefore we shall say no more of that at this time, but refer your thoughts unto
our former Expressions.

That which now offers it self to a further, and more full enquiry, is thus
expressed: That thou have loved them, that is, That the World may know that
thou have loved them, as thou have loved me.

We have Three Particulars here to open; and then the meaning of the Text, and
the mind of the Lord will appear.

The Father has loved the Son. He loves the Faithful, as he loves the Son,
the Lord Jesus. When the Faithful attain their full perfection of Unity, the
World shall know that he loved them, as he loved the Lord Christ.
To the First of these.

We must know, That when we attribute these Perfections, either to the
Godhead, or Persons, they are not attended in propriety of Speech, as though
the Godhead, or Persons, were subject to such passions and affections, as are
in man signified by such words. But they are spoken by way of resemblance and
similitude, that there be some actions affirmed of the Godhead, and Persons,
and put forth by them, which men out of the Disposition of Love, do put forth.

Sometimes again, Love, as it is affirmed to proceed from God (...) Christ,
discovers not only, nor so much, the act of God properly, but the Fruits and
Effects, which issue, and proceed from Gods Love, and are expressed upon our
Savior Christ, and blessings which flow from, and are procured by his own
Merits.

Which may be truly called the cause of the things, or the fruits of Gods Love,
not properly the cause of any Act, as it issues from the Lord. John, 10.17. The
Father loves me, because I lay down my life for my Sheep. Nothing without God
is the cause of any act of Gods Will, or Understanding; but the laying down of
his life may be the cause of that Glory, which the Father had intended, and he
according to the Fathers intention, had purchased, Phil. 2. He humbled himself
to the Death, the death of the Cross; wherefore God has exalted him, and has
given him a Name, etc.

Or else the manifestation of the approbation, or satisfaction which the Father
took in his Death.

The first of these I conceive to be principally intended in the place, and so
we shall speak unto it.

The Lord Jesus is the Object of the Fathers Love: His heart was wholly after
him, his thoughts wholly set upon him, not once looked off him, taken up wholly
with him from al Eternity. The infinite, and Eternal Favorite of an Infinite,
and Eternal Father, upon whom he spent, as I may speak with Revereace, his whole
affection, John, 3.35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things
into his hand.

We shall, 1. Open it. 2. Give in the Reason. 3. Make the Use.


The Lord Christ is said, and that truly, to be the Object of this Fathers
Love, two ways.

Partly As the Second Person, God with the Father. As God-Man, taking our
Nature upon him.


1. The first respect: If we look at the Lord Jesus as the Second Person, his
Eternal Love then issues from his Eternal Generation. So himself speaks, and
confesses, verse 24. Thou have loved me before the Foundation of the World, and
so termed the only begotten, and welbeloved Son. And it shows it self as the
special operation of the most p^^e, and perfect Love does, in three Particulars:

1. Love affects Union, and where it can it attains it with most strength. So
it is here, after an unconceivable manner, the Father is intimately endeared
unto his Son, that his Eye is never off him, himself never from him. Therefore
it is in Prove. 8.22. the Father is said to possess him in the beginning of his
way. He was all the proper possession the Father had, and holds from Eternity:
and this is the meaning of that other Phrase, verse 30. I was with him, as one
brought up with him. The Phrase is marvelous sweet and pregnant, as one nursed
up with him in his Bosom, and Bowels, from everlasting. God the Father is
compared to a Guardian of the Lord Jesus, whom he keeps under his wing. I am
not alone, the Father is ever with me; yea, the Father and I am one.

2. It Is the Nature of Love, to take full content, and complacence in the thing
beloved: and so the Father does in his Son, after an unspeakable manner, takes
an infinite fullness of soul-pleasing satisfaction; so that before al Creatures
were, he lacks nothing, and he spent his whole thoughts in gazing upon the
through concurrence of al unspeakable excellencies in the Lord Jesus, Prove.
8.30. I was daily his delight. It was his constant, and continued Exercise, the
full employment of his blessed Majesty, to fill himself with the fellowship, and
familiarity of his Son.

When the Atheist enquires what God did, before the World, if the World was not
Eternal? Answ. He was sporting himself with the unconceivable complacency, and
ravishing contents of his wel-beloved Son, the Lord of Glory. So that nothing
was wanting, while he enjoyed him; nothing could be added, while he possesses
him.

3. There is a Love of Benevolence. It Is the Nature of Love to study the good
of the thing beloved. This the Father does also after an unconceivable manner.
The study, and bent of his infinite Understanding, is now to plot for the
Honor, and to lift up the Glory of his Son far beyond al praises. So that more
than the Father gave, could not be enjoyed, no more could be added, no more
could be desired by our Savior, when he would make his request in that behalf.
Hither the Lord Christ repairs, and here he takes up his stand, as though no
more could be conceived, or communicated, John, 17.5. And now, O Father,
glorify me with thine own self, with the glory I had with thee before the
World was: q.d. If he was put to his choice, to his desire, or God the Father
to his free giving, he could wish no other, nor no more glory, but that which
he had with him from Eternity.

2. So the Father loves the Son, as Man, also in all the former particulars and
in all the several properties of them, so far as a finite creature is, or can
be made capable thereof, not only in regard of the compass of its own ability,
but as far, as underpropped and supported by an almighty power. I shall point at
the former specialties in so many words.

1. In regard of union; here in the surpassing excellency of the love of the
Father appeared, that he brought it into so near a fellowship with himself,
that it does not only exceed all the power of the creature, to work such a
union, but even the reach of al reason of men and Angels to comprehend it. For
not only the Essence of the Deity takes up its dwelling and abode there bodily,
but its taken into the very subsistence of the second person, and melts into
the personality of the second person: and hence it is, the Grace of union is
indeed accounted a Grace of the greatest excellency, above al other, and in
truth it is so, not only in regard of the privilege whereby our Human Nature is
advanced one degree above the excellency of the creatures of highest rank: for
of that the place is meant, and that the Apostle intends, Hebr. 2.8 That al
things are put in subjection to our Human Nature in Christ. He took not the
seed of Angels, but of Abraham. When he brings his first born into the world,
worship him, all the Angels, even as God-man but I say, not only in regard of
the height or the privilege, this Grace of union is to be attended: But in
regard of the unmatchable efficacy and Peerlessness of power, that exceeds the
bounds of my created ability: In that the subsistence it has by this, is no
other, but the subsistence of the second person. In that the Angels must sit in
a lower form and aloof off, in the porch as it were, and administer there, by
their attendance, when our Human Nature is taken into the Chamber of presence,
the personal union with the Lord, and so consequently, as thereby Co-partner of
divine honor and worship together with the second person. None of which can be
said of any creature, or any created Grace in the hearts of the Saints.

2. The Father takes full satisfaction in the man Christ Jesus. He proclaims it
openly. Math. 3. last This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. He
alone it is, in whom the Father smells a sweet savor of rest therefore when he
cashieres al other sacrifices, as such in whom there was no sufficiency, our
Savior no sooner offers himself, but therein the Father quiets himself in
fullness of content. Hebr. 10.5, 6. Burnt offerings, and sacrifices thou
would not, then said I, Lo I come, in the Volum of thy Book it is written
of me, I should do thy will.

3. Improves the Sovereignty of his power and good pleasure to promote the Son,
and advance the glory of the man Christ Jesus. Joh. 3.35. The Father loves the
Son and has given all things into his hand. Therefore he sends the comforter
in his name. Joh. 14.26. Nay the Father makes this the maine scope of al his
dispensations by Christ, puts the Administration of all things into his hand.
That al may come to him, depend upon him, and give al glory to him, in what
they do receive, and for what they seek, and hence the Father carries all the
Trade this way. As great Princes when they will advance their Favorites, there
come no petitions but by their hands; no kindnesses or gifts, but by their
means, That al may eye and honor, receive al from them, and by their means,
and return to them. Joh. 5.22. 25. The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son, that all might honor the Son, as they honor
the Father.

REASON.

Here are all the grounds upon which Love grows, and that in more than an
ordinary Nature and measure, and these are three; all which are found in the
Lord.

1. Neerness. 2. Likeness. 3. Suitableness of worth.
1. Neerness.

And that we see to be a forceable argument in Nature to draw men to
inlargedness of affections. Love begins next home. A Country Man we affect,
rather than a Forreiner; one of the same Town before a Country Man; a Kinsman
before a Towns Man: a Child before him; the wife before others; a man's self
before al, wife and Children and Kinsman and Towns Man. So it is here.

The Lord Jesus is most Near to God the Father, and therefore most beloved. Its
said our Savior came from the Bosom of the Father. Joh. 1.18.

2. Likeness is the Lodestone of Love.

The Inlet unto the hearts and affections of others, and calls out and requires
a disposition in another, like unto it self. And this is here in greatest
eminency. Look we at the constitution of the person of our Savior, Hebr. 1.3.
Called, the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person.
Nothing is more like, than a lively Image, resembling the Father, in the most
perfect and infinite manner, none like him. Look at imitation, likeness in
behavior, carriage, and conversation, is that which inlargeth affection also:
and this also is here to be seen. Joh. 5.19. The Son does nothing, but what he
sees the Father do. For whatsoever the Father does, these also does the Son
likewise.

3. There is a suitableness of worth.

The best of our affection, and deserve our dearest love to be bestowed upon
it. So it is here. The Lord Christ, he being in the form of God, counted it no
robbery to be equal with God the Father. And so there is an answerableness and
proportion only here to be found between the affection and the thing here
affected. Whereas all the creatures, taking in all their excellencies together,
are too mean and under for the Lord once to bestow his Love, yea his look upon
(further than his own image is in them, or resembled by them, in them) So the
Prophet gives in the Jnventory of al their worth; All the Nations of the Earth
are less than the Dust of the balance, yea vanity, nothing, less than nothing.
Christ himself it is, whose name is as an Ointment poured out, and perfumes the
world; which if once taken away, they would remain nothing disireable.

USE, 2. Reprehension.
This shows the vileness of the hearts, and the hainousness of the sins of those
wretched persons, who undervalue the Lord Jesus in their hearts and
apprehensions and look at him, as one unworthy their affection and love. How
far are these men from the disposition of the eternal God, the Holy one of
Israel? He sets his heart upon the Lord Jesus, as the only Object of his Love:
These men loath him. He delights in him, They despise him. How divelish are
these distempers? how contrary to the God of glory? even as far as darkness
from light, and Hell from Heaven.

How can such ever expect to see the face of God in Christ in another world,
whose hearts are so contrary to him in this? and yet every place is pestered
with these Rebels. Some of the posterity of those, of whom the prophet speaks,
Zach. 11.8. Their Souls loathed me, and my Soul loathed them, says the Lord of
Hosts. God will pay thee in thine own coin, and recompense thine own ways upon
thy head and heart. Nay how can thou not, but expect the Lord should justly
loath thee, who art a very Dunghill of distempers, and whose works are worthy to
be hated especially in that thou ha^est him.

The name and memory of Judas is accursed and execrable upon Earth. He is
gibb^^ed up with this remembrance, Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

The carriage of the Jews is detestable to the ears of all that have heard of
the Name of Christianity, who preferred Barabbas, before the Lord Jesus. Away
with him, not him but Barabbas. And yet there be multitudes in the world, who
deal worse with the Lord Jesus in their daily course. Who sell Christ, not for
Silver, but for their sins, and the lusts of their own hearts, and that they
may give satisfaction thereunto. And proclaim it in their practices, Away with
the commands of Christ, not they, but mine own carnal desires shall carry me.
Away with the promises and comforts of Christ, not they, but the way wardness
of mine own will and distempered perverseness of mine own heart, that only
pleases me, Oh, but it will be replied, True it is, our infirmities may be
many, and temptations strong, our failings great, by reason of the Body of
death: but should we be haters and despisers of the Lord Jesus, its pity we
should live. Should we hate him, that came to save us? we Hope we be far from
that hellish frame.

I desire ye were far from that, and that is the worst I wish you. Put it then
to trial, according to the truth of the Gospel: yea ye will say with all our
hearts. The Text says thus. He that despises you, despises me. Luke 10.16.
The Text sa^es thus, The Citizens hated him, and sent after him and sa^d, This
man shall not rule over us. Luke 19.14. Examine now thine own heart, and observe
thy carriage. Is it not the word, which Christ proclaims? the messenger he
sends? the work of his Grace, which he requires? the rule and government which
he would ^et up in thy heart, And life that thou set thy self against* that
w^l not have his law Lord it over thee? his Grace take place in thee? know
assuredly, thou art a hater of Christ, and of God the Father. Nay what if it
prove true, that thou hate Christ more, than any thing in the world beside?
will not thou conclude thy condition damnable? and thy self hateful?

Why? thou hate the ordinances of Christ, because of their power and purity.
Thou hate the servants of Christ, because of their Graces, that is, because
Christ is there. If the Theif hate the Lantern for the light sake, he hates
the light much more.

Hie thee out of this hellish condition and hate and loath thine own soul, that
ever thou have loathed Jesus Christ. Lest that doom, that is denounced, be made
good, He that loves not Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Anathema Maranatha.
1 Cor. 16.22. Curse him, all ye Angels in Heaven, Devils in Hell, Churches on
Earth, until Christ come to judgment and he there have that Doom, Depart etc.

USE, 2. Trial.
We may here prove the truth of our love, If it be like Gods love, its then of
the right stamp.

1. The we desire Union, breathing after our coming to him. Phil. 1. I long to
be dissolved and to be with Christ which is far better. I have been too long
with the world, too long with the distempers of mine own heart. Its far better
to be with Christ. Breath after his coming. 2 Timothy last and 8. Love his
appearing, sollace our selves, we shall ever be with him.

2. Then we shall take full contentment in him. I have enough, Christ is mine, as
Joseph. Live upon him, be satisfied with him. Phil. 1.21. Christ is in life and
death advantage. In all gets Christ, and gains in all his wants, has advantages
in all necessities and losses.

3. Then we study how to honor him: lay our crowns at his Feet; live to him,
die to him. Phil. 1.20. That Christ may be glorified in our mortal Bodies,
whether by life or death. Be willing he should pluck his praise out of us. The
Father will own this love, Christ accept it, The spirit bear witness to it. This
is from the Father, through Christ by the spirit. God-like love.

USE 3. Exhort.
Does God love Christ? go thy ways, and do likewife, its a mercy that he will
accept of our love, and suffer us to love him.

1. None more worthy, than our Savior. One of then thousand, altogether
pleasantnesses. Would thou love thy peace? love Christ that procures it,
love thou thy Soul and salvation? love Christ that purchased it.

2. None deserves our love more; whom will ye love, if ye love not Jusus? ye will
love the world, and it will deceive you. Ye will love you friends, and they will
forsake you. Ye will love your own conceits, and those will delude and ruin you.
No: Christ has bought our love dearly, and us also. He loved us more than
Heaven. He emptied himself of his glory. He loved us more than his own life,
loved us more, than the sense and feeling of his Fathers love, which is better
than life it self. Therefore he that has bought our love and us so dearly, we
should dearly love him Let our minds love him, who has enlightened them; our
hearts, who has comforted them: our consciences, because they have been
pacified and refreshed by him.

3. We cannot lay out our love better, to better advantage and improvement for
our own spiritual welfare. Joh. 14.21. If any man will love me he shall be loved
of my Father and my Father and I will come to him, and Sup with him, and
manifest our selves to him. Is there no drooping and distressed Spirit? when
thou breathest after the assurance of Gods love, Oh, but one smile of his
countenance, when thou sit in darkness, and in a disconsolate condition;
what would thou now give, to gain evidence of Gods favor, that he should
make known himself unto thy Soul, and say unto thee, I am thy Salvation? Oh,
thou say, part with any thing, do any thing. Why, Love jesus Christ, lay out
thy affection upon him, and its certain thou shall attain what thou desire.
Prove. 4. Love Wisdom, and she will keep thee, exalt her, and she will preserve
thee: she will bring thee to honor, if thou will embrace her.

Thus we have finished the first point of the three observed from the last end
of our Savior's prayer, Viz. The Father loved the Lord Jesus.

We are now to inquire of the second proposition, that is plainly expressed and
taken for granted, as the main thing that is intended here by our Savior, The
point then is in the express words of the Text; Viz.

God the Father loves the Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ.
He loves the Saints, as he does our Savior, he loves his adopted Sons, as he
does his natural Son, the members as the Head.

I confess judicious Calvin ^asts another Construction upon the word; and
therefore interprets the Particle, which carries a similitude with it,
causally, thus; That thou love them, because thou love me. But since this
Translation which we read, carries the proper signification of the Word with
it; and since that which he intends, is not denied, but included in it; I
therefore choose rather to follow the Native, and Natural signification of the
word, when there is no constraining Argument to the contrary, nor any
inconvenience does accrue thereby, to the Context and Scope of the place. Only
attend this, that ye may not mistake the mind of our Savior, nor the meaning:
It is but AS, for the quality, and likeness of this Love; not so much, as that
it should be equal for the quantity, and greatness of that Love, which was
extended to our Savior, and to his Saints and Children: For that were to
derogate from the Wisdom and Goodness of the Father, from the Honor, and
Excellency of our Savior, and to lift up both the Persons and Privileges of
the Faithful, more than were meet and due.

It suffices, nay, it is unmatchable, and incomparable Mercy, and unconceivable
goodness of the Lord, that poor sinful Dust and Ashes may so far be advanced,
that they may be like to Christ, which they deserve not, though to be equal to
him, is unreasonable to expect, as impossible to attain it.

The like Phrase we have again repeated in the last verse of this Chapter, with
which our Savior ends his Prayer, leaving that, as the last farewell, in which
such spiritual god things, and those glorious Privileges, that ever were
promised, or could be expected or received, were summed up, even the marrow of
al those loving kindnesses the Lord lets out unto his People; the taste and
relish whereof, if it were kept upon the Soul, it would keep a satisfing, and
ravishing content upon the heart of a Christian in all Conditions; yea, carries
him beyond all the fullness of Comforts, that al created Nature can afford,
whether in Earth, or Heaven, being something above Heaven it self, and all the
beauties of all created Excellencies, which the place can afford.

We shall open Two things: 1. Wherein the Love of the Father to the Saints,
shows it self. 2. That it is like to that, wherewith he loved his Son.


1. To discern wherein this Love appears, we shall follow it in these
Particulars, by which Love is in a special manner made known, as before,

Love of Union, Complacence, Benevolence.
Love Desires Union to the thing Rests contented with it, Desires the good of
the thing
beloved

1. God loves his Saints with a Love of Union: that is thus conceived: God the
Father brings the Faithful into a nearer Union with himself, and Christ, than
any Creature by any ability, or excellency received by Creation, could ever be
capable of, or could ever attain unto.

And this will appear, if we compare the surpassing excellency of this Union,
and the intimate neerness, which every Believer has with God in the Covenant
of Grace, with that which Adam could attain unto by the Covenant of Works. Had
Adam stood, and attained the utmost perfection, it was possible for him to be
made partaker of, by the improvement of the Spiritual Stock of Grace bestowed
upon him: The utmost of al his happiness had been confined within this compass.
1. A man by the Principle of Grate, was f^^ to close with God, and perform the
Covenant made betwixt God and him.

But since the Fall of our first Parents, and departure from God, it was
impossible for any Creature, or any created Grace, to bring back the soul to
God; therefore the Godhead of Christ dwelling in the Nature of Man assumed
bodily, must bring the Nature of Man again unto God. Man, out of the mutability
of his Grace, departed from God; but neither man nor Grace, but the infinite
Power of the Godhead, must bring man to God again, and keep him with him. So
that the Second Person in the Glorious Trinity, taking our Nature upon him, did
not only purchase, by the power of the Deity all for us; but by the same power,
enables us to receive the Work of his Spirit, by which he carries us unto
himself, and the Father. So that it is not any created Principle of Grace, or
gracious habit, which either fits us for Christ, or carries us to him, as we
have heard. But the same Spirit by the same power that raised Christ from the
dead, works it. Ephesians. 1.20. No man comes, unless the Father draw. John, 6.44. He
that has heard, and learned of the Father comes, verse 45. He it is that
begets us again by the Word of Truth. Jam. 1.18.

2. Adams closing with God in the performance of this Covenant, was in this;
That he did imitate the Lord in the manner of his Work, for that was the
excellency of his Image, to work as God had wrought.

To do, not what God requited only, but to will Gods Will, that is, to meet with
him, and to concur with him in the Act of his Will: As the Clock does with the
Sun; at the point of such an hour, when the Sun goes twelve, it strikes twelve;
or as ye have heard, sometimes two Clocks meet, and melt into the same stroke at
an instant.

To will as he, love as he, delight as he. Make my heart one with thee, Psalm.
86.11. Acts, 13.22. Col. 4.12.

But every Sa^^ of God, that by his Spirit, is carried to him, he is made one
with Christ in an unspeakable manner.

1. The Soul is pitched immediately upon the Deity, and so the Father, Son, and
Holy. Ghost; and in the most intimate Union that can be imagined. Not as the
Branches to the Vine, John, 15.1. nor as the Members to the Head, Ephesians. 1.22.
but yet nearer, they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, and that is
nearer than to be Members to a Head, Ephesians. 5. and 30.32. yea, are one Spirit
^ith him, 1 Cor. 6.17. and this is beyond the compass of all that sufficiency,
and excellency God impla^ted in Adam. The Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that
ca^ried the Soul to the Father and Christ, closes the ^oul with the Spirit of
the Father and Christ. By the Spirit from the Father and Christ, we close with
the Spirit in Christ, and the Father. If the Spirit which raised Christ from
the dead, be in you, Romans 8.11. As by the same Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Adam had Supernatural Grace, but this ^s more than Supernatural; for that was
not able to incorporate the Soul into Christ. The Lord by his Eternal Spirit
plucks him from his sin, carries him to himself, and pu^s him under the power
of the Spirit of the Second Adam. As the first Adam, by natural Generation,
turns the Soul from God to Sin, puts it under the right, and rule of the
perverted mutability, or disobedience and curse of the first Adam.

Adam traded out of his own Stock, and from those Principles of Grace he had
received, and the Lord had implanted in his Nature, coming into the World,
gifted and qualified from the bounty, goodness, and faithfulness of the Lord:
And therefore it is said, He had wherein to rejoice, had he obeyed and performed
the Covenant, and wrought for his Life.

But believers are not in their own hands, nor at their own finding, but kept
in the hand of Christ, and live merely and immediately upon dependence: have
all their Store and Stock in the hand of the Lord Jesus, are brought, and taken
into fellowship with the Father, and his Son, and thence fetch all that daily
quickening, and efficacious influence of the Favor and presence of the Lord, to
carry them out to all the Duties they do. Thus the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. I live
not, but Christ lives in me, and that I do now live. The Fountain of Life, is
not firstly in himself. Adam might have said, I live by the Power and Principle
of Grace received, and in which I was created, and thereby I have pleased God,
and according to the Covenant of Works, may challenge life and happiness.

But Paul in the Person of al believing sinners, professes, that, I live not;
Christ has brought me to himself, made me one with himself, that he might be
al in all to me, and work al by me. We are dead, and our Life is hid with Christ
in God. Christ is the Keeper of our Life; the Father the Author of it.

So that it is not any Power in Man, or Principle of Grace, whereby we come
firstly to close with God: but the Spiritual Union of the Faithful, is of a
higher or nearer Nature, than that it can at the first readily be apprehended;
namely, not by the Power of Man, or Principle of Grace; for all this is but a
Creature, never brought the Soul to God, or kept it with him.

But the power of the Deity in Christ, by his Spirit, has fitted me for
himself, and has carried me to himself, made me one Spirit with himself, does
al for himself in me, that he may receive al to himself from me, and I might
wholly have such a desire, that all that we have may hold out his Excellency in all these his Dispensations, and so have nothing of my self, do nothing from my
self, which excludes Works wholly. Here the Soul is compassed about with all the
Power of Heaven; nothing but with the power of God in Christ. Whereas Adam, who
did somting of himself, from a Principle he had, so he might have taken
something to himself, he had whereof to rejoice. But God in this way and work,
he does al from himself by man, no man does it: He receives al to himself from
Man, Man must take nothing.

2. Love of complacency, that the Father takes content, and solaceth himself in
the enjoyment of his Faithful, whom he has thus chosen out of the World;
therefore termed, his own, Joh. 13.1. A little of our own, say we, gives to
little content and rest to their owner. A man's own house he delights to lodge
in, delights to converse with his own servants, or little ones. Thus the Lord
is said to know the righteous, not to know the way of the Ungodly: Depart, I
know you not. As a man is said to own such a person so educated: As the
sensible Creatures can own their Mates, and their young by the sense, they scent
the Nature of such, and own something of themselves in them, as generated of
them. So he that has not the Spirit, is none of Christ's; the Spirit which God
the Father sent in Christ's Name, by that his are owned. As sometime a Parent,
when the Child sent into a far Country, and conceived to be lost and dead,
shall yet return, there is some manner of his Speech, some Natural guise in his
Carriage, some cast of his Look, whereby the Parent will own him, and know him
for his. As there was a secret owning, and yerning of Bowels in the true Mother
to the Child, when it could not be determined whose it was. So God the Father,
who has sent the Spirit of his Son into the hearts of his, he cannot but know,
and acknowledge it, and take complacency, and contentment in it. Romans 8.27. he
is said to know the meaning of his Spirit. Hence they are called; Gods precious
ones, Isai. 43.4. his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. yea, Christ professes, he is ravished
with the cast of the eye of the Spouse, Cant. 4.9. That cast of the eye of
Faith, that looks only to God in Christ, takes al from him, holds out nothing
else.

3. Love of Benevolence, God wishes well unto the Faithful, and studies to
advance them and their happiness, with the advancing of Christ, 2 These. 1.12.
That the Name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him,
according to the Grace of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Quest. Why? you will say, Is there any Name higher than the Name of Christ? or
Glory due to any beyond, and after Christ? Why is it added, That Christ may be
glorified, and you in him?

Answ. The meaning may thus be conceived: The Apostle having prayed in the
foregoing verse, That God would count them worthy of their Calling, worthy of
the Glory unto which they were called, and so fulfill all the good pleasure of
his goodness, that is, fully bestow all that Spiritual good, which is the full
purpose of his good pleasure he intended to them, and that he would bring the
Work of Faith to perfection by his mighty Power. Now the end of all that glory
and fullness, of all that Spiritual good he prays for, and they should partake
by virtue of his Prayer, is, That the Name of Christ, that is, Christ as he is
made known in the Gospel, in his Offices, and Execution of the great Work of
Redemption, may be made glorious in you, who from the Father, has given al to
you: you also may be glorified, not in your selves, but in your reference, and
oneness with Christ. As God was made glorious in receiving al; so also in
returning al to the Father by him: And therefore it is added, According to the
Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. God the Father, through Grace in
Christ, gives himself, and Christ to you, so they are glorified in you
receiving; you also through Grace, give up your selves to Christ, and through
him to God, and return al to God in Christ.

Thus he is said to the admired in them that believe. So John, 3.27. The Father
loves the Son, and has given al things into his hands; and in Christ also, he
has given al unto them; for all things are yours, and you Christ's; yea, he
has advanced them, and set them in Heavenly places with Christ, their Bodies
made Spiritual, which Adams could not be, and therefore it is taken down, to be
glorified as Christ's is: Thou fool, unless the Seed fall, it rises not again.
The Saints die, not because of sin, for Christ has freed them from the second
Death, and so from the first: but they die, to be like Christ, and so to be
glorified with him, and then both Bodies and Souls to sit at Gods right hand in
Heaven. It Is a proper Prerogative appertaining to our Savior to ascend and sit;
and therefore to al from him, not from Adam.

USE, 1.
Comfort and Contentation to the Saints, in the meanest and lowest Condition,
though the World hate, and the Wicked pursue, Saran tempt, Ungodly undermine,
they al conspire to cast reproaches upon your Persons, and disgrace upon your
Religion, and shame upon your Faces: when they curse, God will bless. If they
hate, and God love you, you need not fear, you should not care: In Love is no
lack. If thou have Gods Love, thou have himself; art sure to speed when thou
seekeft; sure to obtain when thou ask. So Martha for Lazarus. He whom thou
love, is sick: he whom thou love, is troubled, is tempted, persecuted,
discouraged. What price do thou put upon thy Health, if sick? upon Wealth, if
poor? on Life, if at the point of dying? If thou had these for thy succor, al
was well. Behold, Gods loving kindness, better than Life it self.

2. If God love the Saints, what are they who hate them? This is a certain
evidence of a Son of the Devil, 1 John 3.11. He that hates his Brother, is a
Manslayer, etc.

Therefore they are worthy our love.

This second particular I shall further open as follows, Viz.

That the Farthers love to the Saints is like to that wherewith he loved his
Son. The Father loves the faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ.

This Love carried to them, carries a lively expression, or is as a picture
wherein the love of the Father to the Son is discovered in fresh colors, in an
especial manner.

This love to the faithful, however it is impossible it could, not was it
reasonable or suitable to the wisdom or goodness of the Lord it should equal
the love of God to his Son, in the measure or largeness of it. Because that was
infinite, unconceivable, incomprehensible, and therefore there is no equality
of measure or greatness, which is beyond al measure: yet it comes up to it, as
near as may be, in the proportion and likeness thereof, in like resemblance and
answerableness thereunto, its not to be found in any creature, nor in the whole
creation beside.

As it is in the Parelion. Its like the Sun in appearance and resemblance, yet
in no wise equal, either for bigness or greatness, or the virtues thereof. So
it is with this love of God to the Saints, it lively resembles, not fully
equals the love of the Father to the Lord Jesus. We shall further follow the
several particulars.

1. The Father loves us with the like love of union, as he did Jesus Christ.
The Father wholly and alone gives being to Jesus Christ, and that thus appears.

The Father stands in relation to the Son, looks only toward him, his Eye is
ever upon him: The Son as he receives, so he returns his being as a Son to the
Father. As Relations refer each to other only; and hence the Father is said to
be in the Son, the Son in the Father. Verse, 22. As I told you before, my hand
closing and closed are one in another, both with the hand. The Father looks to
the Son in giving: The Son to the Father in returning his being. They are
perfect in this, wholly give, wholly take. Thus they wholly delighted in each
other, mutually glorified each other. Verse, 2. Now as God in Christ thus
begets and gives being of Sonship: So Christ as Son and second person he so
assumes: for had he assumed as God, all had assumed. But he assumes person, and
to say, that any person assumes, but the Son, is Haeresie. Therefore its
peculiar to the Son, and that as Son, then as begotten, and as such, he
assumes, and becomes the Head of the covenant and so he begets and gives being
of Adopted Sons to the faithful, sending his Spirit immutably to set their
hearts for God, and to hold the bent thereof toward him. Thus receiving this
impression from Christ, and so from God the Father through Christ.

The faithful receiving this impression, as from the Father by Christ they
return it wholly and perfectly to the Father in and through Christ. Namely, The
whole man, under their impression of the begetting Spirit of the second Adam, it
wholly fastens upon God in Christ and so leaves it self wholly to be ac^ed by
the influence thereof, and holds out the excellency thereof; that is, not I,
but Christ; not by my power and might, but by the power of the might of Christ.
Thus the Sinner is wholly beyond the covenant of works. So that the faithful
has nothing of himself, does nothing from himself, or for himself. As Christ
the Son does nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do. Joh. 5.19. But
God in Christ does al for himself in man, man does it not: receives al himself
by man, man can take nothing.

This I said, was the leaving of the Soul under the influence of the spirit,
not under a principle of Grace, or sanctification, for that comes after, is
there, is acted and preserved by this. For the spirit holds nor us only, but
our Graces, quickens and keeps them. But a clinging about God in Christ, that
he may act al in us and by us. Therefore the Apostle joins both these Ephesians.
3.16. Prays that we may be strengthened by the power of the spirit in* the
inward man. The inward man, is the man of Sanctification. Now there is a power
of his spirit, that gives strengthening virtue to that. This is that for Christ
to abide in us and we in him. Joh. 15.

As the Father abides in Christ, so Christ in the Father: so Christ abides in
us, and we in him. Christ gives al, we receive and return all. Christ looks
upon us by his spirit, we look wholly to Christ, or wholly to the influence of
that spirit in Christ; hold out the power and virtue thereof, that it may leave
impression of al virtues in us, preserve, perfect, quicken what it leaves. So
that God is in Christ, and he as from the Father is in them. God out of his
love begets his Son, gives the being of Son to him. Christ out of his love
begets his, gives the being of adoped ones to them. Once more,

As Christ looks only toward the Father, as his Son begotten, as he receives
so he returns. So the faithful, under the impression of the spirit of Christ,
as his begotten and adopted ones, look toward him, leave their hearts with
him, as of him, to receive al, as from him, to do al.

If Christ, as begotten of the Father, and one with him, and abiding in him,
does from the Father beget his adopted ones, and makes them one with the Father
and himself: then does the Father love the faithful with the like love of
union, as his Son issues, from a like ground, is in a like manner dispensed.
Only the odds, is in the measure. His love infinite, immediate, inconceiveable:
This finite, mediate, and proportionable to the condition of a creature. And I
cannot see, by all the little light I have, how to give a savory and seasonable
interpretation of the place, but according to this ground. Joh. 10.14, 15. I
know mine; his sheep, his Sons, whom he has taken to himself; and am known of
them his knowing of them makes himself to be known, and the rise from whence
this comes, verse, 15. As my Father knows me and I am known of my Father.

2. God loves the faithful with a like love of complacency as he does the Son:
still attend the likeness not the largness and equality of it with Christ, God
is first well pleased, and in him, with is; and such a complacency the Father
takes in the Son, as no creature indeed could procure, and therefore no mere
creature was able to receive, and without Christ none ever could have been made
partaker of it. For had Adam obeyed the Law, and done that which suited the
covenant and so answered the rewarding justice of the Lord, yet the revenging
justice of the Lord had not yet been manifested. When then sin was committed,
and an infinite justice wrought, and an infinite punishment deserved it was
beyond the compass of any creature to answer that wrong, pay that debt.
Therefore the Lord Jesus takes our Nature, that he may suffer, and support our
Nature in suffering, by the power of his Deity, that it sink not under the
infinite wrath and justice of the Father: and so this revenging justice is
answered to the very full, and his rewarding justice please also.

And as thus with Christ, so with the faithful. Hebr. 10.14. They who have the
acceptance of God in Christ made theirs, to them the Lord extends the love of
complacency.

But they have the love of God in Christ made theirs. and set the evidence of
this by the proportion.

A finite sin committed against an infinite being, infinitely offends. A finite
suffering infinitely satisfies; because the person was infinite that bore it.
God is infinitely well pleased. Because from the worth of his person, and the
virtue of his Merit, he has laid down full Satisfaction.

But he is infinitely pleased with the Faithful by way of imputation, because
the fruit of that Merit, proceeding from such a person, is accounted theirs.

God loves the faithful with the love of Benevolence, he wishes the like good
to them, procures a like good for them, as for Christ. He makes them sharers
with him in Christ-like privileges. He only has the pre-eminence, and they
the second place.

They are said to ascend into Heavenly places, to sit with Christ, to judge the
world, yea al enemies to be put under feet. Yea when the Kingdom shall be given
up by our Savior, no further dispensation in any outward means. 1 Cor. 15.28.
God the Father shall be all in all, But in the infinite expressions of the
riches of al glorious Grace upon the man Christ Jesus, and in and through him,
upon them.

God the Father has taken the Lord Christ into nearest union with himself.
Taken unconceiveable content in him. Advanced him to infinite glory with
himself. The faithful next to Christ, they are in a like manner united to God,
as Jesus, In like manner accepted, as Jesus, Advanced as Jesus.

And herein lies the Crown of this glory, the Diadem of this Crown, the
excellency above the happiness of Heaven, that none of all this did come from a
man, by the power of any Grace, or performance of any work.

Hence we have matter of admiration in regard of the goodness and kindness of
the Lord, who is all-sufficient of himself, in himself, yet should vouchsafe to
look from Heaven to such poor, worthless creatures, and to extend such tender
compassions unto poor wretches. Tantus, Tantum, Tantillis: but that we have
spoken unto.

There be many Collections yet remaining: we shall touch only some, because we
would willingly put an end to the verse.

1. Instruction. The sins of the faithful are exceeding grievous unto the
Lord, above the sins of al other persons, they go nearest unto the heart of the
Almighty. Not only against light, but again love, yea the greatest love that
could be showed, and therefore cause great distaste. If Enemies abuse and wrong
us: If Strangers, to whom we are not known, nor whom we know, deal harshly and
discourteously with us in our common occasions of commerce: or If those of
alliance and acquaintance, who are profane and ungodly, if they be falls in
their promises, or injust or injurious in their carriages toward us: They deal
like themselves, they do but their kind, as we say. If falls hearted persons
deal falsely, If loose men show themselves base to us, its that they do to al,
yea to their own Souls: we expect no other, and therefore if we find no better
measure, it does not trouble.

If it had been an Enemy, I could have born it, says David, but when it comes
to that, It was thou, my familiar Friend, we took sweet counsel, and went up to
the house of the Lord together, It was he that lift up himself against me, this
is more bitter than death.

It is so with the Lord. If the Ignorant world, who knows him not, who are
strangers from him and the convenant of his Grace: If the wicked and profane,
who are professed adversaries to his Grace and Kingdom, if they dishonor his
name, transgress his Laws, grieve his spirit, and cast his Ordinances behind
their back; It I say, the world deal so with the Lord, he looks for no other,
he hates the world, he never gave his Son for the world, Christ never prayed
for the world. But that his faithful, whom he has owned, embraced in the
Bowels of his tenderest mercies, should deal frowardly in his covenant, this is
killing unkindness. Will ye also go away? Joh. 6.67. When the Crown of those
counterfeit wretches, who followed Christ for the Loaves, when they missed of
their Dinner and sweet morsels, they departed presently, and came no more at
him. Our Savior is content to see so free a riddance of them, and the place
quit of their company. But turns himself to his disciples with that melting
expression, will ye also go away? q. d. That they are gone I care not, it
matters not, I never knew them, nor was known of them, but will ye also go away?
that would be unsufferable.

Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend. And hence it is, The
Lord is compelled with such unreasonable carriages to make his complaint unto
the senseless creatures, as those who would give in witness against such
miscarriages, as professedly cross to the course of things. Hearken O Heaven,
and hear O Earth, I have nourished and brought up Children and they have
rebelled against me. Isa. 1.2. And upon this ground it is, the Lord makes that
so sad an expression, when the Sons of God married with the Daughters of men,
and were carried with the common stream, Genesis 6.6. The Text says, It grieved
God to the Heart. It went to the heart of the Almighty. Bears any thing, but
the Contempt of his love and goodness.

For it is a sin out of measure sinful. Not only that which Nature gainsaies,
and reason rejects, and conscience condemns, and Grace abhorres to the
bottomless pit: But it is a practice more vile than the worst of sinners will
adventure upon. Math. 5.46. If ye love them, that love you, what reward have
ye? Do not the Publicans the same? Not to return love for love etc. Its that
which the Publicans, the worst and most reffuse wretches in the world do loath.
For the faithful, who have been redeemed by the precious Blood of Jesus,
comforted by the spirit of Jesus, beloved of the Father, as the Lord Jesus his
only begotten Son: for them to be tainted with that sin, which the Publicans,
the worst of men will give witness against, Oh, how* hamous are such
miscar^iages, and how grievous must they needs be to the God of love.

I shall Instance in two Evils, unto which the Saints are usually too much
subject, and taken aside withal, which are so professedly opposite to this
enlarged compassion of the Lord.

1. When the Faithful, either question this Love, when it is so sure. Or, 2.
Undervalue it, and little esteem of it, when it is so great, as that it exceeds
the thoughts, and apprehensions of men.
Both are marvelously distastful, and that justly, to the Father of Mercies,
and in truth unsufferable, were it not that he makes us acceptable, and lovely
through his wel-beloved. It could not be that he could bear with the abuse of
his constant kindness, in so gross and unkind manner: and yet this is the
baseness and wretchedness of our unreasonable hearts. He has loved us with an
everlasting Love; he never cease loving, and we never cease questioning, and
quarrelling with his kindness: we are ever of the jealous, and suspicious hand,
that this favor of the Lord, it is but for a fit, it will one day fail, and we
shall be forsaken utterly:

If Christ will cease to be a Son, and to be this wel-beloved of his Father,
with whom he is well pleased; then will he cease to love thee, to accept of thee,
and to be well pleased with thee in him. The one is impossible, the other is
incredible: and therefore stifle those distempered pangs, they are so deeply
injurious to the Lord, and distastful to his Majesty, that he cannot bear them,
but will undoubtedly correct. Such a way-ward, jealous pang ye shall perceive in
the Church of the Jews in the day of Discouragement, when God calls Heaven and
Earth to rejoice in the Consolation of his People; Sing O Heavens, and be
joyful of Earth, break forth into singing, O Mountains; for God has comforted
his People, and will have mercy on his afflicted, Isa. 49.13. but they were
silent in this Quaere, and sat down in sullen discouragement, verse 14. But
Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Can a
Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the
fruit of her Womb? yea, they may, but yet will not I forget thee, verse 15. and
therefore the Lord professes, he takes it unkindly, Isa. 40.27. Why say
thou, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel? amp;c. This is the daily talk of al
dismayed, and gloomy, discouraged Spirits; it is al they speak, and have in
their Meetings; Jacob says, and Israel speaks, this is common. My way in hid
from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over of my God. Thus ye say, but what
says God? Why speak thou? etc. q. d. I cannot abide those words. God cannot
brook such groundless suspicions of his Favor, which is more sure than the
Foundations of the Earth. As it is whith men, who are real and cordial in their
kindness, and sincere hearted in the expression of their Love; so that they
never gave the least appearance of any instability, and feebleness in their
Promises, and Performances, as either their engagements, or others desires or
necessities should require: if yet their Friends, and intimate Familiars,
should out of their jealousy, either cast out such words in their presence, or
give it in their expressions to others to understand, That however they have
ever been free in the manifestation of their Favor, and they have ever found
them faithful, that they cannot challenge them in the least; yet they fear in
the issue, when it comes to a dead lift, they will leave in the lurch: Should
such expressions be daily presented before a man, and such unkind expressions
be laid in his dish; he could not but with indignation cast off such a one.
Why? have I ever failed of my Word? ever been wanting in my labor, to answer al
your desires? bestead you in all your needs? and have I this for my love and
labor, that ye look at me as one feeble, and faithless? Take ye other, and
choose ye better Friends; I will have no more to do with you.

And it is not possible, but our groundless, needless surmises, hard conceits
that we harbor, and unloving thoughts of the Lords dealing and goodness; but it
should imbitter Gods heart against a wretched Creature, and suffer him to sink
in his sorrows; and however he cannot out of his Love forsake his, yet he
cannot, in respect to the Honor of his Love and Faithfulness, but draw, and
withold the sense of it, that the way-ward heart may the better perceive its
own wretchedness, and unreasonable dealing, and learn not to doubt of Gods
Love, when there is no cause. Our groundless surmises of Gods Favor causes,
yea, compels God, to darken our apprehensions, and his expressions.

The Second Evil.

The little and mean account we make of the intimation on Gods Love, unless it
answer our conceits and humors in each particular. Unless we may have what we
will, and when we will, and as much as we will; unless the Lord take measure of
our mind, and please us in every Point, we cast al his kindness behind our
back, and the Love of the Almighty, is in but little esteem with us. when their
complaints are many and sad, that their temptations grow fierce, and their
corruptions get head, and over-bear, their abilities small, and their comforts
less. But yet the Lord loves you notwithstanding, whatever these hindrances be,
which stand in the way, and that is enough to settle and satisfy the heart.

Obj. True, I cannot say but he loves me; but if yet my Graces be so weak, and
my distempers so strong, what is that?

Ans. What is that! It Is of more worth than al thy Graces thou can either
attain or desire; if thou did know how to value things according to the
worth. O! if I had such a measure of Grace, the enlargedness of heart, and
abilities to perform Service in a Spiritual manner, as such and such, then I
might be comforted, and might be persuaded the Lord loved me to purpose. As
though the Child that is now young and small, should conceive his Father did not
carry the strength of Fatherly affection toward him, because his Coat was not
so long, or his Doublet, Jerken, or Apparel was not so large as his Elder
Brothers; when indeed it is not because he wants Love to provide them, but he
is not able to wear them. So it is here, Thou art happily but a Babe in Christ,
not of time and standing in Christianity, can not tell how to wield and
exercise such eminency of Abilities for the present. Let if suffice, he is thy
Father, and loves thee, as he does the most able and excellent Christian upon
Earth; Does not that please your Pallates? What would ye have which would
please, if ye can be pleased? I will say more: He loves thee a^ he does the Lord
Jesus, the Son of his Love: I hope now ye are contented. What! love me so! ye
will say: poor, silly, weak, ignorant, worthless Creature, it is a likely matter
indeed. Yea, thee: Have thou but a grain of Faith, but as a grain of
Mustard Seed, even the least of al others? the poorest, weakest, filliest,
unworthy Worm; be thy place, thy parts never so mean, he loves thee as his Son.
Go thy way, never quarrel, question any more; never murmur, repine any longer,
this is enough on Conscience, nay, it is too much, I could not have thought it,
I durst not have desired it, I could not have believed ^t, but that thou have
said it, that thou should love me, who loath my self, and know my self
worthy to be abhorred. Therefore rest thy weary heart here in thy weaknesses;
do not think to bring such measures of Grace to deserve this Love. Nay, lay
hold upon this Love, it will increase the eminency of al Graces, and that in the
most glorious manner in thy Soul, Ephesians. 3.18. Paul prays, That they might
comprehend with all Saints, the length, breadth, depth, and height, etc. and
know the Love of God which passes knowledge, that so they may be full of all
his fullness. View this Love wistly, and warm thy heart with it, and thou shall
not need to complain of barrenness, or emptiness, thou shall be full of Grace,
not have a scant measure; thou shall be full of Wisdom, and Meekness, Patience,
Holiness, etc. Nay, full of the fullness, nay, of all the fullness of Godlike
Grace: no kind of Grace, no Excellency in any kind, that suits the Station and
Condition thou do obtain in the Body of Christ, but thou shall be possessed
of it.

How the knowledge of this Love brings in this fullness, it is not now a place to
enquire, only the Doctrine now delivered, will lead us by the hand to some
further Light in this Work.

While we know, that is, while we constantly attend to the Dispensation of Gods
Love in Christ, begetting of us, as his adopted ones, by his Spirit to himself;
while we experimentally find this, and so know it, and leave our hearts under
the influence thereof, as of him, to receive al; as from him, to do al, we shall
then be full.

Whatever may be lacking to thy Hope, Meekness, etc. repair to this Love, and
know there is no lack. I have the choicest Love of God, that either Heaven or
Earth affords, and that is beyond the excellency of al Grace, and the chiefest
of al Abilities, that either I do want, or can desire. He loves me, therefore
let him do what he will with me, take what he will, Love will supply al; give that
he will, Love is better than al. Cant. 1.1. His Love is better than Wine. As
Elkanah comforted Hannah in the want of Children, Am not I better to thee, than
ten Sons? 1 Samuel 1.8.

2. Instruction.

We hence infer beyond denial, and conclude beyond al doubt, That the Love of
God to his, is unchangeable. As he loves his Son, he loves his Saints, and
adopted ones. That did never change, this will never fail. We are accepted as
Christ, nothing can prejudice us in Gods Favor, or shall be able to condemn us.
We are advanced as Christ, he wishes al good, and works al good for us, as for
him; sets us far above al Principalities and Powers, and what is named in this
World, or the World to come. Though we know it not, understand it not, if it be
named, or can be conceived, it shall never prevail against our Comforts. We are
brought near to him, and made one with him, as Christ; nothing shall be able to
separate us from his Favor. Christ is in God, we in Christ; and therefore the
power of darkness must pluck us out of his hand, nay, from his bosom. As the
Father cannot be without the Son, nor Christ perfect without us; Satan and Sin,
must take something of Christ his perfection, if he take away our Comforts.
Hither Paul repairs, and here he Lands his Heart and Hopes in safety, Romans
8.38. I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor things present, nor things to come (some troubles and
dangers are over, but it may be, there may be more, and more sharp to come, who
knows what may be? why come what can come) nor height, nor depth (if any thing
in Heaven, nor any thing in Hell) nor any other Creature shall be able to
separate us from the Love of God in Christ. The Holy Apostles intent it, to
settle this conclusion upon the Consciences of the Romans, that the happiness
of their Condition, and the certainty thereof, was beyond the reach of all the
H^sts in Heaven and Earth, and therefore he does not mention the Adversaries of
the Saints, and their Salvation; but musters and marshals all the created forces
within the compass of Heaven and Earth: Nay, not only what are, but what shall
be, it there were a thousand Worlds to come, and should set themselves to shake
the Comforts of the Faithful, it could not be. But what is the ground? It Is
hence: Because the Foundation thereof, is laid in the Love of God in Christ
toward his. It was before al these things, therefore they come too late, they
cannot hinder it: It was without any respect to them, therefore cannot weaken
it: It was only, and wholly in God, and from God, and therefore cannot alter
it: The Devils, and sin, may as well separate Christ from the Father, as they
pull the Love of the Father from his own heart, and so from Christ, as to
separate us from it. Psalm. 103.17. Psalm. 89.33. My loving kindness, I will
never take from him: He may take away our Credits, Comforts, Privileges,
Ordinances, yea, the work of our Grace, our Peace; but never take away his
loving kindness, nor suffer his Faithfulness to fail: Heart, Hopes, Comforts
may fail; but never this Love. Only remember, He may take away the sense of it,
the sweet, and relish of it for a turn and time. So with Christ, when he loved
him: so with us, while he tenders us. So with Christ, while our sins lay upon
him by imputation: so with us, while our sins lie upon us without Humiliation.
So with Christ, while his Justice is satisfied: so with us, until his
Righteousness comes to be imputed.

USE.
Study therefore to answer Gods Love in our manner, and according to our
measure. He thought nothing too good for us, let us account nothing good enough
for him. Let not the Lord have the leanest of our Love, the Female Affection,
the leavings of any thing here below: We had the chief of his Love, let us lay
out the choycest of our Affections wholly, and only upon himself, before al
Creatures we prize. They are nothing, yea, less than nothing, In comparison of
the Lord, let them be so in our Affections: they are nothing, let them have
nothing of our Love; but reserve that only for the Almighty, who is only worthy
of it. The Wife she receives strangers into her House, to entertain, and lodge
them; Neighbors to her Conference, to counsel them; Familiars to her Table, to
welcome them: but her Husband only has her heart and love. So let thy Prudence
order these things, thy hand use them, thy skill and diligence husband them: but
keep thy Love for God alone; yea, give away thy Heart from thy self, to God, to
whom thou owe it, more than to thy self. Let not thy Life be dear unto thee,
that thou may finish thy course; lose that, to gain him; cast away that, to
content him. As Lovers, they count it happiness, that they may have any thing
to pleasure: glad we have it for a Friend. As the Martyr, he was sorry he had
but one Life to lose for God. Yea, love him, as Christ loves him; and that is in
three things.

1. He came not to do his own Will, John, 6.38. but the Will of his Father. Do
thou likewise.

As our Savior in another like case, professed the Zeal of Gods House had eaten
him up, eaten up al his Zeal for his own Honor, or Ends. So let the Will of God,
and Strength, and Authority of it, carry our Wills, as a mighty Stream does the
weaker Current: whatever is cross to us, let nothing be cross to him. Not my
will, etc. The will of the Lord be done. As our Savior, The Son does nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do. John, 5.19.30. So do thou.

2. Our Savior sought not his own Honor, but the Glory of him that sent him.
Let it be in our eye and aim, yea, the Scope of our Lives, to live merely to
lift up his praise, John, 8.50. To live to God, not to our selves, or the
world, or any of those sinful ends.

3. Do not think thou can do enough for him: therefore get more Grace, and
Spiritual Ability, that thou may improve al thou gettest. To finish the work
that is commended to thy trust, and put into thine hand to discharge, John,
4.34. I have them for my wel-beloved, Cant.

That the world may know thou have loved them, as thou love me.
1. That God loves Christ. 2. That he loves believers and.
That he loves them, as he loves Christ; We have spoken to al those particulars
formerly: and because they were al of special consideration, and carried
choice, both comfort and profit with them, we ^taied the longer upon them.

There is one point yet remaining, wherein the scope and end of our Saviors
prayer is expressed, and indeed directly intended in the words.

There is a double end here mentioned by our Savior, why he so earnestly and so
importunately pursues the request at the hands of his Father in so many several
Circumstances. That they might be one as the Father and he was one: The means
how this comes to be attained, and order how dispensed: I in them, and thou in
me. The perfection which was aimed at, That they might be perfect in one. Here
lastly we have a double end;

worlds, foretold by Prophets, exhibited and sent in the fullness of time by God
the Father; and he that has accomplished that great work of our redemption,
and that unto the full. That the ignorant, who never knew him, the stubborn and
rebellious amongst whom he lived, and preached, yet would not receive him, yea
the flinty hearted Jews, that scorned and despised the meanness of his person
and the power of his dispensation; Al these at last should be constrained to
acknowledge that he is the true and only Messiah, set a part and sent to that
work. This is the Son of God, says the Heathen, of whom we have heard, but
never labored to know him. This is the Son of God, says the profane, whom we
in his word have opposed, and hated in his servants. This is the Son of God,
sent to save us, and we have blasphemed his name, and flame, and crucified his
person, despised his government says the Jew. See the lively expression of
this, Rev. 6.13. This, I say, will certainly come to pass, for our Savior has
prayed for it, yea pursued it with re-doubled desires, propounded in the 21.
Verse, repeated in verse, 23. And he is always heard in what he begged.

Hence we have two things.

1. Its lawful to beg the same thing several times, in the same prayer. We
have here a pattern before us, beyond al compare, a practice beyond al
exception, nay in truth, beyond al question or doubt.

He cannot do but well, who could not err in what he did, where he has gone
before us in his example, in things imitable, we may without either fear or
hazard safely go after him. As it was said of his speaking, and its as true of
his praying, he prayed as never man did. And there do not many sentences pass
between, but ye have the very same petition expressed.

What our Savior did, its lawful for us upon the like occasion and like grounds
for us to do, to put up the same petition several times, the same prayer. If we
find we have greater need of that we ask, than any other, or if there be
special worth in it, or that our hearts grow warmer in the work, and increase
into the strength of our affection toward the thing we ask: For then there is
no vain babbling, or empty repetition but the expressions, though the same, have
new strength of fresh apprehensions and affections put upon them, Therefore
David again unto the place striks the same string often, which made best melody
in that music and song of his. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness and declare the wonders he does for the Children of men.

2. We ought to pray most earnestly, that the power of our Savior might be
expressed, that his right appointment to the work of Redemption might be
acknowledged by the world.

Its that which our Savior doubles his desires for the attainement of, as that
wherein the great weight of the work lay, and which he counted worthy such
importunate seeking for, at the hands of his Father. And this carriage should
be a Copy and Sampler to conform our prayers unto. This is that which God the
Father is so Zealous of; Hebr. 1. When he brings his first begotten into the
world, he says, Worship him all ye Angels of God. And to this purpose was the
eight Psalm penned, and is to be understood touching our Savior, as having the
pre-eminence, above al creatures in Heaven and Earth, as Mediator. So the
Apostle to the Hebrews seems to expound it, Hebr. 2.20. Learned Junius judges,
and therefore here the Psalmist dwells and delights to descant on this strain.
Psalm. 8.1. O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world. That Is
most worthy our desires, upon which our Savior spent his. This only from the
repetition.

The point it self we spoke unto on verse, 21. So much of the first end.

The second End is this.

Our Savior prays that they might be perfect in one,

There be two points in the worlds.

1. The world shall know, that the Father has loved the faithful, as he loved
Jesus Christ. 2. This shall then be known, when they come to be perfectly one
with the Father and Son in Heaven.
But we shall handle them both together, because they border so near, each upon
other, and the explication of either will add to the discovery, and so to the
confirmation of both.

Point.
Then shall the world know that the Father has loved the Faithful as his Son,
when they come to be perfected in Oneness with the Father and the Son.
These two the Apostle joins together also in his prayer. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11, 12.
Wherefore we pray always for you, that our God would count you worthy of this
calling, And fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power, That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you:
that is the first, that Christ may be acknowledged, as he that has been sent
for that work, and has done it. Secondly, That ye might be glorified in him:
according to the Grace of God, at and ^u^ Lord Jesus Christ.

Next under the Advancement of his own Name, the Lord provides, and the Apostle
prays for the Advancement of his Servants. ' Matthew. 13.41.43. when the Lord
shall gather out of his Church, whatever does offend, whatever persons that are
wicked, and whatever things, even a^o^gst the godly, that offend: Then shall the
righteous s^ine as the Sun, in the Kingdom of my Father. They have been here
under hatches, cooped, up in Du^g^^ns, there they shall be in their Kingdom, and
that in the Kingdom of their Father. Here they lie among the ports, al din^^ed
^e^co^ed with the shame and disgrace, that has been cast upon them, as the
scum of the world, and the scorn of Heaven and Earth. This is Zion whom to Man
regarded. There they shall shine, and that as the Sun, which every man will see,
because he cannot look of^ the light of it, and will be dazelled with the beauty
of it. This shall be do^e to the man, whom God has now, and will then honor.
They shall sit which the Lord Jesus in his throne, and shall judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel. The wicked when they shall see the Saints next unto Christ,
and judging with Christ, they cannot but acknowledge, and that to the grief of
Their hearts, that they be highly honored, and dearly beloved like unto the
Lord Jesus.

That is the truth of the point, before we can come to the Reason, there must
be two Questions answered which will give in the light of explication to the
several branches of the Doctrine.

Quest. 1. How wicked men, the world, can be truly said, to know the love of
God to believers, which is so special a secret, that it is not (many times)
made known to Gods own, for many years together: nay the Apostle professes, it
exceeds knowledge. Ephesians. 3.19. At least, this new name writ upon the
White-stone no man knows but he that has it. And therefore this love seems to
be beyond the reach of the world, too far off, for their blind Eyes to see: yea
the Apostle professes, they have not received the Spirit of the world, but the
Spirit of God, that they might know the things, that are graciously given them
of God: and is one, if not the chiefest of al those good things given, the
surpassing indearedness of the Fathers affection to his. How then can the
world, who have no other, but the Spirit of the world be able to know this?

Answ. I answer three things, wherein the meaning of the places will be opened,
and the weight of the Objection removed and taken away.

1. To discern and judge of the spiritualness of the work of any saving Grace,
is wholly beyond the ability and reach of any natural man: much more unable is
he to know Gods love therein, or to view the beauty and surpassing sweetness
thereof. These ways of Wisdom are too high for a Fool. He must have Gods
Eye Salve, that must be able to see the things of Gods Grace in himself, much
more in another. All sanctifying works are peculiar to the Saints.

There is sanctifying work in the understanding, to act it, and enable it to
close with its object, as well, as any sanctifying work upon any of the other
faculties: and this is proper to the Saints.

And the Scripture is plain and peremptory, the world knows not the Father nor
Christ: Nor yet any that are begotten of Christ: and so neither the love of the
Father conveyed by Christ unto any. 1 John 3.2. Therefore the world knows us
not, because it knows not him. And upon this ground it is, they are called,
Gods hidden ones.

Though the world and wicked men cannot discern, nor rightly understand what
this love is, nor the spiritual Nature of it, which is done by a spiritual
light; yet they may know, and then they shal-know, that God the Father has and
does affect them with a most peculiar love, both glorious for the manner, and
incomparable for the measure of it, even next unto the Lord Jesus: and this
shall be discovered by the fruits of this love, and the amazing expressions of
the riches of his mercy, which then shall appear upon the faithful, in their
deliverance from so great evils which is wrought for them, the crowning of
them, with that Excessive, Exceeding weight of glory, with which they shall
stand possessed, and that unto the astonishment of the ungodly, and the torment
of their Souls with envy and indignation thereat.

No man knows the affection of a Father, or Husband, but those that are in that
estate and condition: because its a secret of Nature, which is only to be seen
in the impression of the work: yet that a Father loves his Son, above al other
his dearest friends, and nearest acquaintance: That the Husband tenders his
Spouse with an indeared affection above al mortal creatures: This appears by
the expressions of his respect, that all he has, is at her command, al he can
do, is wholly improved for her content and comfort, she lies in his Bosom, and
his heart trusts, in her, which forces al to confess, that the stream of his
affection, like a mighty current, runs with full Tide and strength; Though what
that affection is, he does not know: yet this he knows, The choicest affection
is there.

So it was with Haman, when the Question was by the King made, What shall be
done to the Man, whom the King will Honor? He expressed his opinion, and was
forced to put it also in practice. He then knew who was most deep and dear in
the Kings Royal affection. Mal. 3.20. When God makes up his Jewels, then men
shall discern betwixt him that serves the Lord, and him that serves him not,
how ever happily before they were al shuffled up together, and then there was
no differencing betwixt the most precious Jewel, and the most reffuse Pebble.

3. This knowledge in the full extent of it, as it is here to be attended, and
that which is appropriated to that time in peculiar, it may be expressed in two
particulars, if we would lay out the limits and bounds thereof.

1. They shall then stand persuaded of the love of God to believers, by a settled
and well grounded conviction, that cannot be removed: I say, settled conviction;
because for a time or turn, for a present push and under pressure, they may
freely yield, and confess, and profess as much. So many profane wretches, in
the horro^ of their hearts, they have then honored, then advance^ the faithful
as the most happy. Oh Blessed such, that ever they were Born, Balaam-like, Let
my Soul die the Death of the righteous, and my latter end be like his But this
is but a pang. Now only settled conviction Seizes upon the Souls of the worldly
men,

2. It is a grounded Acknowledgment from a sensible Experience of the contrary.
Condition, which they have observed in their own Souls, and therefore now it is
past gainsaying, when their own sense gives in constant Evidence without
alteration; of which, more afterward.

If Conviction be settled, so as it cannot be removed; their Experience
undeniable, which brings in Evidence that cannot be gain-sayed; then it is true,
The World may be said to know that there is such a Love of God to the Saints.

Quest. 2. Why does not the World come to know this in this Life?

Answ. Upon a double Ground, or for a twofold Reason.

1. Because the Life Spiritual of the Saints, is hid and concealed while they
wilder up and down in this Vale of Tears, clouded partly with sorrows and
miseries which attend them, as a constant Companion in a Christian Course;
partly collied and bemited with corruptions of their hearts and lives: so that
neither the beauty of Gods Grace, nor the tender expressions of Gods Love, does
in any peculiar manner appear in them; and go no further than the Judgment of
Sense, they are the most forlorn, despicable Persons upon the face of the
Earth. And truly, were their hopes only in this life, they were of all men most
miserable; and further than this Life, men do not look, nor can in truth see,
wanting Faiths Prospective, which is the Evidence of things not seen, that they
so judge, nay, conclude it, as beyond controversy.

And this sometime stumbled holy Asaph, Psalm. 73. See also, 1 John, 3.1, 2. Our
Life is hid with Christ in God: when Christ who is our Life shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in Glory.

Because their Understandings are wholly perverted, and their hearts also so
corrupt, that they are not able to judge of the Love of the Lord, or the
evidencing expressions thereof. The god of this World has so blinded their
eyes, that the beauty of Gods Grace, and so the beams and heat of Gods Love
cannot come home to their Consciences, to convince them thereof: And such is
the corrupt distempered frame of their hearts, that they savor only the things
of the Flesh; and not to have things suit their sensual Appetite, or to
contrive Contentments to their own carnal Affections, they count it the
greatest curse and expression of Gods distaste, and displeasure that may be. The
carnal heart savors the things of the Flesh, nothing seems sweet, unless it
suits his corruption. So that,

If the Life of a Believer, and so the Evidences of Gods Love be hid, and
cannot be discerned:

The hearts and minds of the World, be so perverted and surfeted with the
sweetness of their own lusts, that they cannot judge of the fruits of Gods Love,
though presented before them:

Then it is no marvel that they do not know it, nor acknowledge it as dispensed
to the Saints.

The Point now explicated, the Reasons which give in the Proof thereof, will
appear more easy, and more undeniably plain.

1. At the Day of Judgment, the World of the wicked, they come to have
convicting Evidence, which can neither be gain-sayed, nor will ever be removed,
what is a never failing proof of Gods Love, by the sense woeful Experience they
have of Gods direful hatred and displeasure upon their own Souls. Their hearts
now find it, and feel it; their Consciences confess it; their Judgments
acknowledge it, that the Plague of al Plagues, the Curse of al Curses, that
wherein the venom of Gods Vengeance and infinite Indignation and hatred of the
Lord from his Blessing and comforting presence, to be destroyed from the
Presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his Power; the glorious and powerful
expression of his saving Mercy. However formerly the soul while it was
surfeting in its sinful distempers, found no greater content, nor conceived any
greater favor, than to have it full of its own lusts, and not to be crossed with
the Counsel of the Lord; and concluded no other Heaven, nor happiness like the
enjoying of their hearts delight, without check of God or Conscience. Yet now
he sees the sweet and surfets of those sins, become the greatest torment unto
him, the very quintessence of the Curse, and the substance of the Sentence of
Condemnation (Depart from me ye cursed) was the Commission thereof; I thought
nothing so delightful, that I might without gainsaying depart from God by
sinning: therein the execution of Gods Indignation does wholly appear, to cast
me out of his presence, and to stake me down in his departure, never to see his
face, enjoy his presence, come within the smile of his Favor any more.

Therefore those who are brought so near to God, so accepted of him, Christ at
the right hand of the Father, they at the right hand of Christ, being ever with
him; what that Love is, we cannot tell, that is beyond our reach, yet it is a
fruit of the greatest Love, we cannot but see and confess, our departure being
the fearful fruit of Gods fierce displeasure. Thus Ecclesiasticus brings them
in at the day of Judgment taking the shame to themselves, which formerly they
cast upon the Saints. We Fools thought this man's life madness; but now he is
advanced, and we cast out of Gods fight and presence for ever.

2. They are fully convinced, and experimentally persuaded, that all this comes
from Christ, and not from them; and from Christ as the Head of the Second
Covenant: for from Adam it could not come, in whom they had a like share, as all the Sons of Men, hewed out of the same Rock, and dug out of the same Pit,
had the same Nature, as they; had as good Abilities, and as great means as
they: and yet notwithstanding, they found infinitely beyond their power, nay,
their own Apprehensions either to attain this, nay, it could not enter once
into their thoughts, that they who knew not Christ, should receive him, they
who opposed him, should become one Spiritually, and one Spirit with him, even
as near as the Members to the Head: for so they now hear the Saints acknowledge
it, it was the Son that died for them, that was sent from the living Father,
that they might live through him. They now see the Son of God, the Lord Jesus
stands betwixt them, and al their harms, that no Devils can accuse them, that
no malice can charge them; but Christ says, I have undertaken, answered,
satisfied, and they now come to be accepted, as he, advanced as he, set up on
the Throne to judge as he, and to regin as he, through al Eternity.

They who receive all this good from the Father through Christ, as the Head of
the Covenant, for them, and in their behalf; and enjoy al next unto Christ:
they are loved as the Lord Jesus Christ. O! we wretches hated them, when God
loved them; contemned them, when God honored them: we did not know them, and
therefore woe unto us; we despised them, we looked at them, as the basest of al
men, when they were more than men, yea, more excellent than the Angels, the
Spouse of Christ, the Members of Christ, the Beloved of the Father in Christ,
yea, beloved as Christ.

USE, 1.
Hence we have matter of Patience for the Saints of God: they are the contempt
of the wicked, the scorn of the World, the Object of the ignominy and reproach
of ungodly men: But their Life is hid with Christ in God, beyond their ken,
their reach and reason; and no wonder they know nor them nor Christ, The God of
this World has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts: no marvel, that
what they cannot see, they cannot judge aright of, they know not the things of
the God of Heaven, nor the work of his Grace, nor the worth of his Servants.

The Saints are Princes, but they are not in their Country, they are in strange
places, and amongst strange People, who do not know them, and therefore cannot
honor them: and therefore they are content to bear it for the while, to stay
til they come into their own Country, and to the day of Coronation. Says
Paul, I pass not for man's day. This is man's day, but at that day, the day of
Jesus, etc. The Lord Jesus has here been under hatches, and the wicked have
seemed to carry the day against him. This is your hour. But Christ will have his
day, and then ye will have yours. As David encouraged himself in the simplicity
of his heart; I shall be had in account of those Maid Servants. So here.

USE, 2. Of Exhortation.
To persuade the Saints, that they should labor to know this Love, that so they
may know their own honor and happiness. It Is part of their Privilege, their
Propriety, a note of Christ's Sheep, They know me, and are known of me. If the
Lord will have the wicked acknowledge thee, who only see it; how much more does
it concern them that have it? It they who are but Spectators, much more they
who are the Possessors, and do enjoy the same: how would this support in all
wants? It Is but to diet and physic us, not to hurt us; it is out of Love: How
would it sweeten al our Sorrows and Corrections, even the sharpest? It Is out of
love to purge us, and to fit us for himself; nay, solace our souls in Death?
it is out of Love, it is to take down our Bodies, not to destroy them; to take
out of the World, because he loves us, to take us nearer to himself. How should
this settle us, and establish us in all Change? There is an end of al things,
and an end of al Perfections; but whom God loves, he loves to the end. He loved
our Savior, when he brought him to the Grave, that he might bring him to Glory:
And so with us; when we are parted from al things, when we shall be separated
one from another; Wife from the Husband, Child from the Father, nay, our Bodies
separated from our Souls; so that they are not, or if they were, they cannot
live: There is an end of al those Relations, no marrying in Heaven, no trading
in Heaven; yet nothing shall be able to separate us from the Love of God in
Christ.

Verse 24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me, where
I am; that they may behold my Glory, which thou have given me: for thou
loved'st me before the Foundation of the World.


IN this Prayer of our Savior, two things were especially attended. 1. He
prays for himself, to verse 6. 2. The for his Children, from thence to the
end.
And that, Either especially for his Apostles, because the greatness of the
Work now under their hand, their pressures and difficulties that would
necessarily attend them therein, the large measure of Grace and Abilities that
might suit them to so weighty and Spiritual employment, together with the need
of more than an ordinary presence and assistance of the Lord, without which,
they would not only be unfitted for a business of that worth, but wholly
discouraged in it. Therefore the Lord Jesus lays in for a larger measure of
Spiritual supply and relief for them in the first place, and here he is
marvelous importunate, to verse 20.

Or else for all the Faithful, that ever did, or for the future should believe
in him unto the end of the World, whose case he commends from Verse 20. and the
things he begs, are partly such which might concern their Spirittual good in an
especial manner in this Life; and because that was the Root and Treasury of all the rest of their good things, in which they were contained, and from whence
they might be received, he propounds and pursues with much instancy of desire,
That they might be one, as the Father and Son were one. Partly such as did
concern their everlasting welfare in the world to come; and this our Savior (as
though he would carry them to Heaven, being presently to ascend himself) seeks
to the Father for, here in the closure of his Prayer: that so nothing might be
wanting, that either they did need, or could desire; but that they might be
fully furnished with a sufficiency of supply, for whatsoever concerned either
Grace or Glory; the present comfort of this, or the happiness of a better life.

Thus the Lord lays in Provision, and that in a plentiful manner: 1. That
which might fit them for their way and Voyage, while they are traveling
toward their home. 2. That which might give them sweet welcome when they came
at the end of their Hopes.
Our Savior is not satisfied until he see them in the Haven, safely arrived in
Heaven with himself, beyond all the rage of Devils, and malice of Men, dangers
of Sin, or the sorrows of the Grave, and Death.

In this 24. Verse, and Prayer of our Savior, we may attend Four Things: 1. A
Description of the Parties for whom Christ prays, from that Spiritual respect
and relation they had to him, Those that thou have given me, together with the
cause of it; his Father gave them. 2. The thing he desires, That they might be
where he is, namely, That they might enjoy a likeness Condition with our
Savior, in regard of the glory and security of the place, and mutual society of
each others presence: or else a Parity, if we look at the kind. That they, who
had been in the same Storms, might be in the same Haven, enjoy the same ease,
and honorable safety, share in the Society of that glorious and safe Condition,
when their hearts shall be ravished with the remembrance of the wonderful
Salvation and Deliverances that have been wrought for them, the surpassing
excellency of Grace and Glory that has been purchased and bestowed upon them
so unworthy: Swallowed up with the admiration of the sight and presence of our
Savior, who has suffered, ascended, sits at the right hand of the Father, and
has taken possession of al Glory, that they may be possessed of the same by
him, and with him. And the also solacing himself with the sight and presence of
those whom he has so loved, so redeemed, so graced, so advanced, as himself,
as though he could not have been in Heaven, unless they might come to Heaven.
3. The End why he begs this: That they might be with him, that they might see
the Glory of Christ which has been given him of the Father. Not that they
might have any Glory in themselves, or see, or satisfy themselves with their
own glory: but that they might gaze upon the Glory of the Lord Jesus through al
Worlds, and that is al they have to do in Heaven. 4. We have the first Fountain
whence this Glory proceeds, to wit, hence; Because the Father has loved him,
before the Foundation of the World was laid.


In the General, from the Scope of the whole, observe:

It Is the care of our Savior to seek and provide for the welfare of his
Servants, even till they come to the fullness of their perfection.
See here in the words of the Text, the enlarged tenderness of the heart of the
Lord Jesus, he does not content himself to look to his disciples and so
believers, while they were but in the shel, Babes in Christianity; nor
satisfies himself, that he has purchased and bestowed the same glorious Grace
upon them, which he has received from his Father. Nor yet does he count it
enough that he has pressed the Father with such uncessant importunity to
entreat, that they might be kept in that Oneness of relation to the Father and
the Son, as they are one with another, and one in another, which
notwithstanding in reason might have been conceived to have been a large
provision, a goodly portion and inheritance, even for the choicest of Gods
servants, to be so left by God the Father and the Lord Jesus with so fair an
estate; that in reason they might have been able to maintain themselves well,
and not only made a shift to live Christianly, but honorably, and with much
content, since the Lord had left them wherewithal, and aforehand in the world,
so fully stocked and stored:

But alas, this is little in the Eye of the Lord Christ, do we but consider the
endless compassions, which he extends toward such: He lays in with God the
Father, for their welfare in another world, stores up for eternity in their
behalf. Father I will they be, where I am. He will not forsake them, before he
see them well arrived and in safety: therefore does not ascend to Heaven, and
leave them to the wide world, to sink, or swim, and shift for themselves. No,
he has laid in provision of prayer answerable to al their occasions, their
changes, and necessities, in life, in death, after Death. In life, Lead them:
keep them in their Graves, raise them out of their Graves, bring them to glory,
and preserve them in glory for ever: He will not have his glory, but they must
see it, nay his glory will not satisfy, unless he may see them.

If our Savior pray for this their being with him; then prays he for and
provids and also succeeds al means to attain this.

As wise Merchants victual their ships for the longest time: our Savior
victuals, even for a Voyage of eternity; for life, for death, for Grace, for
Glory; for a Momentany passage of time in this world, and for eternity in
another: he lays out for their present needs; but Oh how great is that
goodness thou have laid up for them that fear thee? like Joseph, provide for
the seven years Famine, lays in provision of prayer for their everlasting
supply. The Saints may find even refreshing baits by this prayer of our Savior,
in their most famishing distresses, feast their hearts with it. Hence it is,
the Lord Christ is said, Hebr. 7.25. To be able to save them to the u^most that
come to God by him, that is, by the virtue of his eternal intercession, of
which this prayer is one part. This was signified by those two types, The
Pillar of fire, and the Pillar of cloud, which went before the Israelites in
their travailes. Its said, The Lord went before them in a Pillar. Exord. 13.21,
22. He took not away the Pillar of Cloud by day, and the Pillar of Fire by
night, from before his people, until he brought them into the promised Land.
Thus the Lord Jesus leads his people into the way everlasting, and withdraws
not the power of his prayer, and presence, and provision of al mercies, until
he bring them to himself.

So again Moses left the people in the desert and died before he came into the
good Land: but Joshua brought them to the place of rest, of which it was said,
they shall remove no more. 2. Sam.

The Law leaves a man in sin and misery, even to perish, while he is in his
passage: but our Joshua brings his to rest that yet remains: for there is yet a
rest remaining for Gods people. When he went away, and withdrew his Bodily
presence, yet his Bowels yerned toward his, I will not leave you as Orphans.
Joh. 14.18. He sends the comforter, his blessed spirit to lead them into al
truth, To guide them in the way, while they are wildering here toward the end
of their Hopes: And his care is even in Heaven, to prepare mansions of rest for
their welcome and refreshing, after their weary-some travailes. Joh. 14.2. In
my Fathers House are many mansions, I go to prepare a place for you and I will
come again and receive you. And before he comes, he sends post to meet his poor
servants, and to inquire of their welfare. Joh. 16.22. I will see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice. This was the meaning of the vision, Genesis 18.14,
16. Jacob saw a Ladder, Angels ascending and descending, and the Lord standing
at the top: and he said, I will bless thee, and be with thee where ever thou
go and I will not leave thee, until I have performed that which I have spoken
to thee of.

REAS. I.
1. Its the charge which he has undertaken, and unto which he stands bound, by
free agreement with God the Father, that he will see to the everlasting welfare
of his servants: and therefore in faithfulness he cannot, but with all care
perform it. That by no means, in no case, they do miscarry. It was the main
scope of his sending by the Father, and of his coming into the world. Joh.
6.38, 39. I came not to do mine own will but the will of my Father that sent me,
that of those which he has given me, I should loose none, but raise it up at
the last day. Nay for this purpose he received Power and Commission From God
the Father. Joh. 17.2. Thou have given him power over al flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many, as thou have given him. He has given Jesus
Christ power over al enemies of the salvation of his people, that they should
never be able to hinder them: over al means which might procure their good,
that they should never be wanting, to help and further them in the good ways
of Gods Grace: power over al wants, weaknessess, infirmities, that they should
never be able to discourage their hearts in a Christian course. He will not fail
of his end, they cannot fail of their comforts. 1 Cor. 15.25, 26. He must reign
until he has put al his enemies under his feet: the last enemy, that is to be
destroyed is death. The Lord will see the last enemy destroyed, and see them
beyond death and danger. So that our Savior will come last out of the field, as
Conqueror, and will not leave his people, their Souls under distresses, or their
bodies in their Graves: and make them Conquerors and triumph over al their
Adversaries. O Death, where is thy sting, O Grave, where is thy Victory: thanks
be given to God, who has given us the Victory through Jesus Christ.

2. The love of our Savior constraines him to lay out himself and the
improvement of his power and prayers, and al he has for their good in all
conditions, until they come to be with him. Joh. 13.1. Having loved his own, he
loved them to the end. In love there is no lack: if he love them to the end, he
will care for them, and their comforts unto the end. He loves and tenders in all
their necessities and occasions, therefore will undoubtedly relieve and succor
them in all; Therefore the Apostle concludes so confidently: nor life, nor
death, nor Principalities, no^ Powers, shall ever be able to separate us from
the love of God in Christ.

If death cannot put an end to his love, It skils not though it put an end to
our lives; his love will quicken and raise. If he love us in prison, he will
devise means to free us. Love us in temptation, he will provide Grace and
Comfort to strengthen and sustain us in all our trials. It was an argument which
they pleaded, and by which they supported their hearts for help in the death of
Lazarus. Joh. 11.3. He whom thou love is Sick, and then he recovered him: He
whom thou love is overwhelmed with temptations and distempers, therefore he
shall be comforted and delivered.

3. The necessities of the Saints prevail with our Savior to pity, to help and
to pray for them, who are not able to help themselves in the shock and stress
of the violence of their assaults. He comforts the Abjects. 2 Cor. 7.6. Bears
the Lambs, and little ones in his Arms. Isa. 40.11. Their enemies be many and
mighty, which do pursue them with deadly hatred: Their strength and ability but
weak to oppose, and their Grace but small, and unable to maintain them, if they
should live merely upon the stock; and therefore the Lord lends them daily
supply. For in a man's own strength, no man shall be strong. 1 Samuel 2.9. He
speaks to them, as unto Paul. His Grace is sufficient, when there is nothing
but Insufficiency in themselves. Renewed necessities, renewed mercies; his
power pitcheth his Tent in weakness.

USE, 1.
CONSOLATION: To sustain, and shore up the fainting hearts of the Saints under
their heaviest trials, and in the midst of the many alterations and
temptations, which may attend them in their daily course, to the discomfort and
discouragement of their Hearts.

Its the care of our Savior to provide for their comfort, when happily they
cannot either care, or provide for themselves and their own relief and succor;
ignorant and unskilful to foresee, we^k to oppose, unable to bear the miseries,
and hopeless to deliver themselves from under them: behold, the Lord Jesus has
said in help Beforehand for you in Heaven.

Object. Oh but thou say, Though the assaults be fierce and distempers
strong, and discouragements sad; yet if I had a heart to seek, a spirit to send
to Heaven for some relief I could conceive, there mere some ground of Hope: But
when I have no help in my self, and yet no heart to seek for help elsewhere,
what can I expect, but utter confusion?

Answ. Christ has laid in provision of prayers for thee, when thou can not
pray for thy self: he will provide help, and a heart, to pray also. When Peter
was Marvailously foiled by the sudden surprisal of that over-bearing assault,
that carried him Headlong to the commission of so many notorious evils. Our
Savior leaves a receipt with him, to which he might resort for some relief
after his fall. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow thee, but I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Luke 22.31, 32. It may be thy
condition, as it was Peter's case: Thy assaults may be Fierce, and thy
overthrow and Failings so Foul, that thou may sit down confounded in thy
self: thy Hope, thy Heart, and thy Prayer may fail also. Yet remember, whither
to repair for thy support. It was spoken to Peter, but it was performed for all,
may be applied to all the Saints. The Lord Jesus has prayed that thy faith sail
not. His Prayer is laid in beforehand, to stay thy heart at a dead lift.

In some dangerous and infectious places, men take Antid^tes and Pres^^^atives,
that though they should by occasion take some poison unseen or unsuspected,
which ^^gh^ annoy their Natures, and drive them into some ^^^^ous and
troublesome sickness: yet this would still and maintain the heart in the
heaviest time. I Hope its not deadly, my Antidote will out-bid the force of it,
free me from the deadly danger thereof: Such is the Preservative o^ our Saviors
Prayer, which works out any Poison, otherwise it had cost Peter his life. So
our Savior directs: In the world ye shall have per^ecution, But be of good
comfort, I have overcome the world. In temptations be comforted, though they
have over-bidden thy feebleness, Christ has overcome the violence of them.
Joh. 16. and last. In thy distempers be humbled, and yet comforted, Christ has
overcome the power of them, they may plague thee, they shall not prevail against
thee. The snares may delude, but Christ will deliver. Oh, but they endure still,
live, and are mighty. Answ. His mercy endures for ever, his Prayers live and
will out-bid al their might. It Is true they are through mercy sometimes abated;
but they return again with more violence, and take again. But know Christ will
provide again. Joh. 16. I will see you again. And the virtue of his prayers
has eternal and everlasting Efficacy, and therefore will for ever help thee. As
thy corruption may for ever plague, while thou live, but the power of Christ's
Prayer will outlive thy life, and the life of thy sins, and set Heaven Gates
open before thee.

USE, 2. Instruction.
The worst condition of a believer, is better than the best Estate of the
wicked: The poverty of the Saints better than their wealth: The discouragement
of the Saints better than al their contentments and comfort. Because in all, the
Lord Jesus has provided for their good, and out of al will work their welfare
and happiness. A little that the righteous has, is better than a great deal of
the wicked, for God blesses his store. Though the Diet be but mean, yet the
dressing is much, and the sweetness of the sauce makes it more pleasant, and
cordial, than better provision that wants both. Ps. 37.16, 17. Gods love, that
sweetens al: and the virtue of our Saviors Prayer, that perfumes and gives a
pleasing relish to al. It turns the Water of the Saints into wine, nay make
their Water better than Wine. For thy Love is better than Wine.

But there is a Canker, that Breeds in the best comforts of the wicked; their
table is their snare, their pro^perity their ruin, and a curse accompanies the
choicest of their most comfortable blessings. From hence it is, that holy Asaph
bears up his heart in that heavy temptation, when he was so much taken aside
by the prosperity of the wicked, that his Foot had wel-nigh slipped, he thus
recovers himself, Thou will lead me by thy counsel, and after bring me to Glory.
Ps. 73.24. Thou leavest them in their Errors, they have an easy way, but a
wrong way, that will lead them to confusion. Ps. 17.14, 15.

USE, 3. Of Direction.
Let the practice of our Savior be our DIRECTION How to steer our Course, to
Sail by his compass: Be good Husbands and wisely careful to lay in provision
for every condition. The wise man sends the Sluggard to the Pismire: Go to the
Pismire thou Sluggard, learn her ways and be wise, she prepares in summer,
before the Winter; when there will neither be means nor meat to be got, nor
season to get it. Be we so careful. In peace provide for war, in prosperity for
want, in health for Sickness. This was Jobs care, When his Paths were Buttered
and his Breasts ran full of Milk: he then Feared and expected. Lay in reversion
of Prayers for Children, as in that Fundamental Prayer of Solomon, he provides
for every occasion. If thy people shall be carried Captive, and in the Enemies
Land, if Pestilence etc. Then, what Prayer is made by thy people etc. So lay
thou in reversion of prayers for such times and streits.

Thus we have done with the general scope of the verse, we come now to the
particulars observed therein. And,

1. To the Parties described, (...) Those whom thou have given me. Observe from
hence this point. Viz,

All believers are given unto Christ by God the Father. Doct.

Our Savior presents the persons of the Saints, both here, and often, yea
constantly, and almost continually in the foregoing part of this Chapter, to
God the Father, under this notion and consideration, rather than any other, As
GIVEN by the Father, As that which has the most persuading and prevailing
power with the Father, readily to hear, and willingly to grant, any Prayer or
petition that should be made in their behalfs, and freely and abundantly to
give and bless al means, that shall be desired for their good and welfare: For
which end and purpose, God gave them to Christ, he also prays for them, and
both Father and Son stand engaged to provide for their everlasting happiness.

As though our Savior should have said: It is not the condition of thine
enemies, I now present before thee, nor the cause of Strangers, (righteous
Father) that I desire to recommend to thy Majesty, but it is for Thine own,
whom thou have Given, and over whose Good thou have Given me Charge. For them
and for their good it is, that I pray, and therefore I cannot but speed for
both.

For the Explication of the Doctrine, two Questions are to be considered; and
the meaning of that Phrase opened, and then the Truth will be evident. 1. What
this giving is? 2. How God the Father is said to give?


To the First, I answer three Things: All which being distinctly attended, will
open the Nature of this Work, and make it easy to the Understanding of the
meanest.

1. Giving the Soul to Christ, is not properly the Act of Election: though
several Interpreters of savory Judgment, do so think and speak: but I suppose
their meaning must be further extended, or else their words will not be able to
abide an exact examination by the Rule of Truth. But it is a Consequent which
follows it; an effect which certainly, and infallibly flows therefrom; and of
this, the expressions of Scripture, will give in evident proof.

REASON
It Is usually joined with Election, and made distinct therefrom. John, 17.6.
Thine they were, and thou gave them me. Verse 9. I pray not for the World,
but for them, that thou have given me, for they are thine. Where the former of
these Phrases and Expressions, imply Election, the other a dis^inct and
differing thing therefrom. They are God the Fathers by Election; made Christ's
by Gift and Donation: Yea, the one is used by out Savior, as a Reason and
Ground of the other; I have prayed for those, that thou have given me; for they
are thine; properly so termed. Beside, the very Nature of the Phrase, and the
manner of the Speech, will not easily bear such a converting, being harsh to the
ear, and hardly suitable to sense, to be elected to Christ, as we say, to be
given to Christ; which if giving were electing properly, might truly be so
expressed; which neither the Nature of the thing, nor the Construction of the
words, will easily admit.

2. This Giving, is not the Act of Believing, by which the Soul is carried by
the Power of God unto Christ; but the Scripture is pregnant, and the Dispute
undeniable, John, 6.37. All that the Father has given me, come unto me: and
those that come unto me, I will in no wise cast away. Coming, we know, is
Believing, John, 6.35. I am the Bread of Eternal Life, he that comes to me,
shall never hunger. If it be demanded; what is that Coming? He answers in the
words immediately following; He that believes in me, shall never thirst.
Coming then being Believing, our Savior making this Giving of God the Father to
go before it, without which, the Soul will never come, or believe, it cannot be
it.

3. This Giving, is the Work of the Father upon the Soul, in Vocation, which
goes before the Infusion of Faith, makes way for the working of Faith by
Christ, and receiving it from him; and which being there, the soul never fails
to believe and come: for that is the force of our Saviors Dispute, John, 6.36.
where he gives the reason, why many did not believe. Ye also have seen me, and
bel^eve not; What might be the cause thereof? since their Abilities were as
great, and their Excellencies as many, which they might have improved to that
purpose, before many other. Our Savior sets down the immediate root and rise of
this distinction, and separation: Those that the Father has given me, those
will come, shall beleeve^ where that is not, coming will not be. The manner of
this Dispensation, we shall speak to in the next Question; and that is,

How in God the Father said to give us to Christ, Quest. 2.
as intimating something peculiar herein, and appropriated to himself?

The Lord Christ is to be considered, as God-Man, assuming our Nature, Answ.
when by voluntary Dispensation he put himself into the place o^ Mediator,
becomes our Surety, and undertakes the great Work of our Redemption; and so, as
himself, peaks, is less than the Father, John, 14.28. The Father is greater
than I. And therefore in the transacting of this great Work, by mutual
agreement, may truly be said to have us given to him, not to give us to
himself. And this the Father does on this manner:

1. The Father being the Party, properly, and directly offended, lets in his
heavy displeasure into the heart of the sinner, and forces him to feel the
bitterness of his sin, in that unsufferable, and un^voidable manner, that takes
off, and eats out all the former seeming sweetness the soul has found therein:
and by the almighty, and unresistable power of his blessed Spirit, divorceth
him from the embracings of those base Lusts, and plucks him by his almighty
hand, from under the power of those prevailing distempers, that have taken
place, that so the soul may be for another; which, while it was wedded to its
former Corruptions, and under the Sovereignty, and Authority thereof, it was
utterly impossible, as being against the Principles of Reason, and the Nature
of Grace, and the Covenant of Truth, which the Lord has left in his Word.

This ye shall find most plain in the very express words of our Savior, when he
discovers this Work, John, 17.6. I have manifested thy Name to the Men, which
thou gave me out of the World. He gets them out of the hand of the World,
from the lust of the eyes, and lusts of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, 1
John, 2.16. For that is al, which is in the World; and from al these, whether
the vanity of the Creature, with which our Eye and Senses are taken from
without; or the sensual filth, and dunghill steams of noysom distempers, which
arise of our own Concupiscence; or whether it be Pride, and overweening
Self-confidence, which arises, and issues out of al. this is all that is in the
World, and from al these, the Father gains the Souls of those men, he gives
unto his Son.

For they had given away themselves unto these Lusts of the World, and that
must be repealed, before this could be tendered afresh.

And here again by the way, ye may observe, That this Giving, cannot be the Act
of Electing: for that is an eminent Act, and remains in Gods Breast and Bosom,
and goes not out: This is called a Transient Act, is an Act which passes upon
the Creature.

That is without respect and consideration of Man's being, much less the being
of Sin, as ye have fully heard.

But this supposes a man in the World, that is, under the power of the Vanity
thereof, if he must be given out of the World.

2. God the Father does actually deliver up the Soul into the hand of Jesus,
commends it to his keeping, to rule him in the Kingdom of Grace, while here he
remains in this World, and to bring him to Glory hereafter. He gives the Soul,
and our Savior takes it, and undertakes for it, as his Charge, according to the
terms of the Covenant, and Agreement made between the Father and him.

The Expression of Calvin, is pat and pleasant. God the Father causes the Soul
to pass into the Care and Custody of the Lord Jesus, leaves him in the power
and possession of his Son Jesus, as the Second Adam, the Head of the Covenant
of Grace, that he may see him redeemed.

As the First Adam neglected the Covenant, and destroyed himself, and his
Posterity: There was a Parley and Consultation held between the Father and the
Lord Jesus, touching the Salvation of his Elect, and the Agreement fully
transacted and passed. But now it comes to be put into Execution, and he gives
them into the hand of Christ: The Soul comes into Christ's presence, and Christ
comes to speech with it.

Behold the party I will have redeemed, and the Lord takes him as his Charge,
and provides for him, both to bring him to himself, and so to Life and
Salvation, which he has purchased, and possesses, and can communicate. The
Soul as yet consents not, nor has the powerful impression of Gods Grace come
home to the heart: God gives the Soul, the Soul does not yet give up it self,
but God giving to Christ, as his charge put, and passing under his care; He
undertakes to get the good will of the Soul, and to bring it to himself, and
through himself to Life and Glory.

3. When the Father has thus delivered the Soul unto the care of Christ; he
then gives Christ to the Soul, reveals the Lord Jesus as the Surety and Savior,
that has covenanted with the Father, and has purchased al from the Father for
him; so that there is nothing that can stand betwixt Mercy and him.

This Christ and Mercy, so provided, and intended for his good, is now rendered
and given to him. Behold thy Savior, who is the Head of the Covenant of Grace,
who has purchased, and procured, by the Fathers Appointment, al good for thee,
and can, and will, communicate al good to thee: This leaves a mighty impression
of the sweet of the good upon the Soul.

Thus God tendering Christ, and through him mercy, as he that has covenanted
with the Father, and undertaken for the soul, commended to his care by the
Father. This tender of a Christ, and of Mercy in him, makes the Soul take it:
this offering of Christ, as one, to whom he was before given to save, works the
heart to receive Christ, and that is believing, which is thus wrought (as ye
see) by the giving of the Soul to Christ.

Because Christ gave himself, and Mercy to the Soul, therefore the Soul comes
to him. But because the Soul was given to Christ, and his care, he gave
himself, and mercy to it. Therefore the Soul was given to Christ; therefore it
comes, and believes.

If God the Father had not given the Soul to Christ, he ad never taken care of
him, never given himself to them; they never received him, nor good from him.

Hence Believing is said to be Receiving; and receiving we know, as a
Co-relative, is the cause of giving.

REASON 2.
1. Because they are the Fathers own; and therefore he has most right and
reason to dispose of them, and to give them away, as he sees sit, when it will
be most seasonable to procure the good and comfort thereof. This is the ground
our Savior goes upon, Thine they were, and thou gave etc. Each man has most
to do with that, which is his proper right. Now the Father had set his heart
upon them, before the World, and appointed them to be Vessels of Mercy, in his
everlasting purpose: and therefore it is but equal, that he should order al
things for the accomplishment of the Counsel of his own Will, and the
performance of his Sovereign good Pleasure without control, John, 6. I came
not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me: and this is the will
of him that sent me, That I should lose none that he has given me. It Is sit
that God should do his own Will, whose Will is the absolute First-Cause of all
things that are done.

2. As Gods own Right, so their own proper, and peculiar good, is hereby
especially, if not only, procured. For had not God the Father, given them to
his Son, he would not, nay, I may truly say, he never could have given Grace,
and Mercy, or Good to them, in a righteous way, preserving the Right and Honor
of his Justice, and so the Glory of himself. For had not Christ taken the care
and charge of us, the Justice of God would never have suffered him to have
showed us Mercy: we should never have been fitted, nor enabled to receive
Mercy. For we having wronged his Justice, and provoked his Anger, by reason of
our Transgressions, his Justice would have stood offended, and his Displeasure
incensed against us, by reason thereof. Nay, he did give a Commission to our
sins, under the hand of Divine Justice, to take vengeance of the Soul; and this
stopped the influence of Gods Mercy, or the least intimation of God from coming
to our Souls; and being now under the guilt and power of our sins, though mercy
had been tendered, we were utterly disenabled to receive it, having no power
thereunto.

But when Jesus Christ takes the charge of us, and undertakes in our behalf, he
takes off all the impediments on Gods part, answers his Justice, and appeaseth
his Wrath, that so they will not stand betwixt us and our Comfort; but an open
passage is made for the good pleasure of the Lord, to be fully manifested, and
the intimation and communication of Mercy tendered and offered to us, 2 Timothy
1.9. Who has called us according to the purpose of his Grace, which was given
us in Christ before the world was, that is, was then purposed, and in time
exhibited. It could not be given to us, as in our selves considered: but when
God gave us to Christ, and Christ to us, he gave us himself, and Grace, and
mercy in him, and by him: that as the Head of the Covenant of Grace, being in
our room, and undertaking for our Salvation.

The Father made him the Treasurer and Dispenser of al Grace and Mercy, to give
life to them, that he had given to his hand, betrusted as his Charge, and
bequeathed unto his care.

As he takes away al Impediments on Gods part, that his wrath and justice will
not hinder: So al on our parts, they cannot hinder: that though our corruptions
would oppose, and our selves, being dead, could not receive it; He is a
quickening spirit. 1 Cor. 15.45. Job, 36.10. He commands us to turn, and gives
by his command. He makes the dead hear his voice, and makes us live who hear.
Col. 1.13. He translates us from Darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

USE, 1. Information.
It serves to settle our jugdment in many truths of the Lords, which at this
day are much questioned, and many cavils raised by carnal minds and hearts to
oppose and darken; we may hence have undeniable evidence to convince and quiet
our own minds and hearts, as touching Gods counsel therein.

The Papists, Pelagians, Arminians, all the Popish Schools dispute; whether God
gives sufficient Grace and power to al men, to be saved if they will?

Whether Gods election issues out of his mere good will and pleasure, or from
the prevision and foresight of faith and good works? and they determine
affermatively, unto both these.

Which delusions notwithstanding are fully dashed by the former Doctrins. If
God give sufficient help to al indifferently to be saved, to Judas as to Peter:
Then he gives al into the hand, and commends al unto the care of Christ. For
this is a principal Grace and favor, and an especial means of life, without
which it cannot be attained.

But this God does not bestow upon al. For all that God gives to Christ,
certainly come to him by Faith: for all such he prays, they shall be with him in
glory. But al do not come to him by believing, al shall not be with him in
Heaven.

Again, If coming unto Christ be an effect of giving, unto Christ an effect of
Election. I pray for those thou have given me, becouse they are thine: Thine
they were, and thou gave them me. Then it follows necessarily* That because
Elected, therefore they have these as fruits thereof, not because they have
these, therefore they are Elected.

The Parties for whom this Prayer was made and the description of them we have
opened and finished.

The second Particular. The thing desired.
We are now to inquire after that which is here requested in their behalf: and
it is, That they might be where Christ is.

The Lord Jesus is, as I may so say, fond of their presence, and therefore he
is not willing to be in Heaven, unless they may be with him: as though Heaven
were no Heaven, unless the Saints should take up their abode there. The House
would be forlorn, and Heaven desolate, unless the Inhabitants were there, these
poor servants of the Lord, to fill up their Rooms and mansions,

In this Second Particular there be Three Points especially observeable.

One which is the Foundation of the rest, is taken, as a thing granted, upon
which ground the Prayer is made, To Wit, The presence of Christ and the glory
of which Christ stands possessed; These are things supposed, only the Question
arises, why Christ so earnestly desires their enjoyment of his presence, since
now they had it, conversing with him, and he with them.

What presence therefore does our Savior intend? or what is the glory here
meant? Ans. True, our Savior was now present with them, and they with him, and
therefore that is not the thing he principally aims at: but he looks at his
own being in Heaven, which was immediately to succeed his death; and he speaks
of it, as a thing past, because of the infallible certainty thereof. As it is
the usual course of Scripture, in the like case, so to express things. Rev.
18.2. Babylon is fallen, its fallen. It was to be undoubtedly, and therefore he
speaks of it, as done certainly.

It was impossible that any thing should hinder our Savior from coming thither,
and therefore he takes it as a thing done, That he is, as though he were
certainly there already: q. d. I am now going to my death, and grave, and
thence to rise again, and go to Heaven, and I am desirous they should be there
also, I am not willing to be without them. And by consequence, the glory he
mentions is the glory of Heaven. For should we look at his Present condition,
it was the time of his Humiliation and the very season of his greatest
abasement was growing on, when he was to undertake his sufferings and to empty
himself of his glory. Philip. 2.7. He is said to make himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, humbled himself unto the death of the
Cross; and as his present state was the time of his abasement: So his ASCENSION
is called the time of his Glory, because that great discovery of his glory was
reserved for that season, and was then made manifest. Joh. 17.4. Father
glorify me with thy self, with the glory I had with thee, before the world was.

The words then being clear, the points are plain and those are Three.

1. Christ is in Heaven, and has unconceiveable glory given him of the Father.
2. Its the earnest desire of the Lord Jesus, that his faithful ones should be
in Heaven with him. 3. The end of our being there is; to behold the glory given
to Christ; look at the glory, and look at it, as given of the Father, whose
everlasting good will and love is thereby expressed, and by that communicated
to his.
Its the happiness of Heaven to gaze upon the glory of Christ. The first Point
has two parts in it.

We shall take them asunder, and so handle the several branches; otherwise we
shall not so readily and familiarly and distinctly open the particulars therein,
some whereof desire and deserve special consideration and explication, Namely,
What is that glory that Christ has, and how it is said to be given him?

To begin the with the first Branch.

The Lord Jesus is gone to Heaven. This was Shadowed out by his
Transfiguration. Math. 17.2, 3. When Moses and Elias came down to see this
preparative of his departure, to give tidings of it. Of the passage of our
Savior the Apostles give in undeniable evidence, as such, wherein they could
not be deceived, nor deceive. For it was not done, when they were heedlesly
looking about them and so might easily be mistaken: but while they looked
steadfastly, wishly, considerately, toward Heaven, even while they were gazing
upon our Savior, he was taken up into Heaven. Act. 1.9, 10. And Stephen in the
time of his greatest extremity, being the first Martyr, who laid down his Blood
for his sake, he saw him there arrived. Act. 7.55. Being full of the Holy Ghost,
looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing
at the right hand of God. And Chap. 3.21. Whom the Heavens shall contain, until
the restitution of al things. And its made the upshot of the Mystery of
godliness. 1 Timothy 3. and last. Christ manifested in the flesh, preached in the
world, received into glory. And from hence the Saints expect him, and they shall
see him, descending with a mighty shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the (...) of God. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. The Lord shall come in most glorious and
magnificent state, and these shall be dreadful notice given of his approach: yea
every Eye shall see him: yea such who have pierced him with their sins.

Reas. 1. Taken from the excellency of his Divine Nature, which must be suited
with a place and throne answerable to the dignity and sovereignty thereof. For
however it pleased the Lord, out of his infinite love, to step out of the Chair
of Estate, to visit this inferior world, to be included in the Womb of a
Virgin, and to take his progress into these lowermost parts of the Earth: yet
it carried no proportion, in point of honor, that he should take up his abode
there, but to re^^rn again to the Royal Palace of state. Heaven is my throne,
and the Earth is my footstool. In reason he may stoop to his footstool and
tread upon it, but to stay there, and to make it the chief place and
habitation, where his heavenly majesty should dwell, It suited not the
excellency of his Divine Nature. This is that which the Apostle intimates to be
the ground of the difference between the advancment of the posterity of the
second Adam above the first. The Faithful shall be raised and Translated from
Earth to Heaven: whereas, ad Adam stood in Paradise, he and his posterity had
enjoyed an earthly paradise, that is, God there only; and the reason is rendered
from the point in hand. 2 Cor. 15.45. The first man was a living Soul; able to
beget one like himself, by a natural course of generation. But the second Adam
was a quickening Spirit, able to give life to the dead, and so raise up them
from the Grave, and to make them spiritual Bodies, which was beyond the power
of Adam.

Again, The first man is of the Earth, earthy: His covenant, and his
countenance such. But the second is the Lord from Heaven. And thence he infers,
As is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly: Especially in the main
point of resurrection, whereof now he disputes. And as in resurrection, so in
ascension,

That which first belongs to the Lord Jesus, as the Head of the covenant, that
belongs to al through him and only by him.

But our ascending and sitting is the prerogative Royal of our Savior,
therefore it never did, nor should have belonged to any but through and by him.

Its true our Savior consists of two Natures, Divine and Human; but because the
humanity is the meaner and more inferior, therefore that must follow the
Deity, and be where it is: And we also, whose Nature our Savior took, and whose
places and persons he sustained, we must follow our Nature, and our Nature the
God Head, that has his proper place in Heaven: And therefore the Human Nature
with that, and all those, who are the members of that Head, must be there where
the Head is.

And hence our Savior professes for the comfort of his disciples, That he went
before to prepare a place for them. Joh. 14.4. In my Fathers House there be
many mansions, I go to prepare a place for them. He as God-man, the Head of the
Covenant, goes to Heaven: and the will bring al his to Heaven: by virtue
thereof, he makes way for them thither, Room and entertainment there. Heaven is
the Lords: the place of the Godhead: our Nature assumed follows that, and we
our Nature.

Reas. 2. Taken from the Quality of his Office and the Manner of the
dispensation and execution thereof. He is sent as an Ambassador from the
Father, to transact the work of Redemption, And to bring Jacob back again: And
therefore in reason, he must return, and give an account unto God the Father,
how the great Affairs of Redemption prosper under his hand. Thus he speaks
usually. Joh. 13.3. Jesus Knowing, that is, considering this, That the Father
had given al things into his hands, and that he came from God, and was to go to
God, he forthwith addresseth himself to make way for his death, wherein the
great weight of the work lay. q. d. He had received his commission from the
Father, and he must give account to the Father again. And upon this he
intimates his departure. Joh. 7.33. Yet a little while am I with you, and then
I go to him that sent me.

He that is sent of an errand and service, he must return an account of the
success, and how things prosper under his hand, and by his endeavor. Else there
should be a failing in the faithful discharge of his Office, and that is the
reason, the Lord Jesus is so punctual in each particular. Lo here am I, and
the Children that thou have given me. And of those that thou have given me, I
have not lost one.

Its also the manner of great commanders, when they go upon great exploits and
special service, though they conquer other people, possess the places and
countries where they pervail; yet they return into their native and natural
Country, there to be honored amongst their own, and to have their greatness
Admired amongst them, as Feared amongst the Adversaries. So it was with our
Savior, Ephesians. 4.8. etc. His death was his conquering, his resurrection his
triumph; by his ascension he returned into his own Country and his sitting at
the right hand of God the Father is there crowned with the fullness of all
glory, that is compatible to the condition of a created Nature.

3. The efficacy of the Privilege, as that which so much concerns the
spiritual and eternal welfare of all the faithful, requires this of necessity to
appertain to him, that must procure our good.

So our Savior reasons to quiet the hearts of his disciples, because of his
departure. Joh. 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient I
should go away, for if I go not away, the comforter will not come, but if I
depart I will send him unto you. They could hardly believe it, as that which
carried the face and appearance of any propability with it: that our Savior
puts out of question; know it of a truth, which upon trial ye will find to be
certain. Ye would conceive at the sudden push, that there could be nothing more
inconvenient and cross to the furtherance of their comfort: But its expedient.
Hence those phrases, The Spirit was not yet given, because Christ was not yet
ascended. All the gift of the Spirit was in virtue of that work, and the further
perfection of that in Christ, the further communication of al from Christ. Now
our Savior is far above al principalities and powers, beyond the power, nay the
opposing presence, nay the least appearance of any hinderance, that may be cast
in the way by Satan, to prejudice or stop the work of our Redemption by Christ
for us, or the work of Redemption from Christ in us.

Resurrection is the only proper cause and immediate spring of the Application
of spiritual good: and therefore had he not risen, our Faith had been in vain:
for as his death purchased right unto al, so did his resurrection make
Application of it: for by that he rescued himself, and so us his members then
in him from the power of darkness: that though they pursued, yea crucified
Christ, could not overcome him, but he rose again. But when he ascends, he was
then beyond the ascent of his enemies, yea beyond the fight, the show, the
appearance, of temptation. Far above. And so when we shall be made to ascend, we
shall be like to our Savior, and he freed from the annoyance, the show, or
appearance of evil. Hence observe the Apostle his Connection; He has ascended
on high, he led Captivity captive. Hell, Sin, and Death, were like a miserable
captived company, that now were under the Spear, durst not hush, nor stir: He
then gives Gifts to men. When Christ was crowned Emperor over all the Enemies,
then he sends his royal Gifts, Coronation Mercies abroad.

4. This is for the great Contentment, and Advancement of our Savior, John,
14.28. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go to my Father, for
my Father is greater than I. Any Preferment puts us into Places, which are
above our own ordinary. Now there is none greater than Christ, but the Father;
therefore to go with him, and be with him, is the highest Advancement.

USE 1. Of Instruction.
Therefore they who have made choice of a Christ, have no cause to be ashamed.
If he were a base Christ, ye might have some color to seek another, to make a
change: but it is not so. But though he went from the Cross to the Grave, yet he
went from thence to Heaven, and there is now in the highest Honor. His
suffering was but his entering into Glory, nay, the addition to his Glory:
therefore that should not so much discourage, as content, and cause us to bless
God for our Portion.

A dead Savior was better to Joseph of Arimathea, than his life: his reproaches
better than the riches of the World to Moses.

But now, when he is exalted in Heaven, attended by Angels, received into
Glory, advanced to the right hand of his Father; what madness is it now, to
think we could once have done better? The Crown of Thorns which our Savior
wore, was to be chosen before the Credit of the World; what should we judge of
the Crown of Glory? The Poverty of Christ, is better than the Wealth of the
World; the Shame of Christ, better than the Honor of the World; the Contempt,
and Humiliation of a Christ, better than the greatest Pomp and Advancement that
the Earth can attain. How much more should our hearts be comforted, and
satisfied now, with the Honor, Life, Happiness, and Heaven, where our Savior
now is, upon whom ye have trusted, and depended? How good is your Choice? How
great should be your Content?

USE, 2.
Here is invincible Assurance of the final safety, and glory of the Saints, out
of all those pressures, with which they seem, not only to be assaulted, but
overwhelmed almost beyond strength.

If the Head be above Water, the Body cannot be drowned, though it be under
Water. Christ is in Heaven, and he will never leave his Members in Hell, nor
Grave. So that a man may boldly, and comfortably conclude: He will make this
sick, and weak Body, like to his glorious Body; this sinful Soul, like unto
his, in all Holiness, and happiness.

As Christ of himself, thou may in Christ bear up thy self against the Gates
of Hell. Behold, I was dead, and live for evermore, and have the Keys of Hell
and Death. Rev. 1.18. Behold, I was dead in my sins, sunk in my distresses,
overborn with distempers, and temptations; but I shall be for ever comforted,
quickened, delivered for evermore.

Nay, ye have the Promise and Engagement of our Savior. Because I live, ye
shall live, John, 14.19. He is far above all Principalities and Powers, and we
shall be as he is. He has not only promised what he will do; but he is gone on
purpose to make way for us, to prepare a place for us, and to bring us
thereunto. So he chears the hearts of his Disciples, John, 14.2, 3. He deals
truly, and faithfully, and tenderly with us: If it were not so, he would have
told us. He is gone on purpose to make room, and to see that al things be
ready. And if we know not the way, nor can help our selves in it; he
professes, he will come again. When we are and stands, he will again support
us; when we are foiled, and overborn with Temptations, he will again deliver us,
and receive us to himself; though cast out of Earth, and Societies of men, he
will receive us to himself, shelter us under his wings, put us into his own
bosom, cast up the reckoning that the Apostle does. Romans 6.9, 10, 11. He dies
no more, death has no more Dominion over him, etc. Reckon ye also, shall I
yield to my Corruptions? No, distempers shall have no more Dominion over me.
Yea, grow in upon greater, and more glorious confidence, Romans 5. If justified
by his death, how much more shall we be saved by his life? He has abidden the
shock of Satan's assaults, the source and power of darkness; and when the
Justice of God delivered him into their hand, and they brought him to the death
of the Cross; yet he thence delivered himself, and he lives for evermore to
save to the uttermost them that come to him.

USE, 3.
Therefore be willing to die, and to go to Christ. The Members long to be with
the Head, the Body where the Life is, our Life is in Christ; the Wife where the
Husband is. As Thomas said, Let us go, and die with him: much more, let us die,
to reign with him. If Christ be in Heaven, why are we on Earth? Says Paul, I
desire to be dissolved, to be uncloathed, to put off these rags, that I may put
on the Robes of Immortality. We have been too long with the world, our sins,
etc. let us long to be with him.

USE, 4.
See the Hainousness of their sin, and heavy plague, which appertains to such,
as rebel against this Christ now in Glory.

We have done with the first Part of the Point; we are now to enquire the
meaning of the other. V^z.

That Christ has unconceivable Glory, given him of the Father.

This is taken for granted, and presupposed, That they may behold the Glory
which thou have given me; therefore he has Glory, and it is given of the
Father: And of this now we are to enquire, with Modesty, and Godly fear, as
being a search, and inquisition, far exceeding the meanness of such poor An^s
as we be, creeping here upon ou^ Molehils, sitting here upon our dunghils,
compassed about with the Mud-wals of Mortality, Misery, and Corruption: An
enquiry suitable for such as are come to the highest form the souls of the
blessed now ascended, and the glorious Angels, who are before the Lord, and see
his Face: They may search into the surpassing excellency of his Glory, which is
far removed out of our sight, who sit here upon the Face of the Earth, at so
far a distance from thence.

It shall beseem us then to be wise unto Sobriety, not to peep into Gods
Secrets: Yet because that which is writ, is writ for our learning, it is not
only in our Liberty, but our Duty, and matter of necessity to look after such
things, and to learn them with what pains and endeavor we may. We shall then
open the Sense of the Words. 1. What is meant by Glory in the General. 2. In
what respect it is attributed to Christ, as God, or Man, or both. 3. Wherein
that peculiar Glory consists, which is thus attributed to him. 4. How it is said
to be given him of the Father.


I. What is meant by Glory, in the General.

Answ. It commonly, and usually implies three things in Scripture.

1. The world and excellency that is in any thing, whereby it obtains
Superiority and Eminency, above other of meaner quality and condition. Thus the
Apostle calls the Graces given to us in Adam, Our Glory, Romans 3.23. We have all
sinned, and are deprived of the Glory of God. 2 Cor. 3.18. We are transformed
from one degree of Glory, unto another; that is, of glorious Grace. Thus we call
a man of special, Spiritual Abilities, a glorious Christian, an eminent
Christian. So in verse 22. foregoing, The Glory thou gave me, I have given to
them. So it is said, Joh. 1.14. We beheld the Glory of Christ (what that is, he
ads and explicates) full of Grace and Truth.

2. The Expressions, or putting forth of such Abilities, in the most eminent,
and choice Operations thereof, because in such Actions, the luster and beauty
of all such excellencies shines forth, and discovers it self.

These are termed the Glory of any thing. Thus Acts, 22.11. The shine of the
Light that compassed Paul, is called, The Glory of the Light. The luster, and
majesty which appeared upon Moses Face, when he came from the Mount, is called,
The Glory of his Countenance, 2 Cor. 3.7. And that beauty of the Light of the
Sun, whereby it out-bids the rest of the other Stars, is called, The Glory of
the Sun, I Cor. 15.41. And when our Savior raised Lazarus from the dead, the
expression of that power, he calls, The Glory of God, John, 11.40. Said I not
unto thee, if thou would believe, thou should see the Glory of God? that
is, the glorious expression of Gods Power, and it is the best and only
explication of that place, 2 These. 1.9. They shall be destroyed from the glory
of his power; The infinite and utmost expression of Gods power shall put forth
it self in the destruction of the ungodly.

3. The acknowledgment of all these Excellencies, and of all the expressions
thereof, in all the eminencies that are discovered therein. This is Glory. And
thus we are said to give glory to God or Man, in such acknowledgments which are
suitable and agreeable in some measure to the worth of the things. My Son, give
Glory to God.

The Second Sense is most properly intended in this place. The first is not
altogether excluded, but in part only considered.

II. In what respect is Glory attributed to Christ, as God, or Man, or both?

Answ. It is given to the Person of the Son, both as God and Man, now sitting
at the right hand of God the Father.

1. As God.

That Glory which no mere Creature is capable of, that must appertain to him
that is more than a Creature, and in that respect.

But of this Glory, no mere Creature is capable: For it is such a glorious power
which he possesses, and which is here understood, whereby he subdues al
things, even death, unto himself. Phil. 3. last.

2. This also is evident, by the Question which our Savior Christ makes, and
the Argument he brings for the evidencing and evincing this Sense, that indeed
he was God as well as man, and that this Glory of his exaltation, did in that
behalf; belong to him, Matthew. 22.42, 43. He asked the Pharisees, What think ye
of Christ the Messiah, whose Son is he? They say unto him, the Son of David,
that is, they looked at him, as mere man: Against which he thus reasons; How
then does David in spirit call him Lord? In Spirit, that is, by the dictate and
direction of the Holy Ghost, as Mark, 12.36. The Lord, that is, God, said unto
my Lord, that is, unto my Seed, which is my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. Now if his Son, how is he his Lord?

If David's Seed, be David's Lord, then David's Seed is more than mere Man. For if
he had been mere Man, the Child is inferior, and subject to the Father, is not
Lord over the Father; as it is said, He was subject to his Parents. But David's
Seed, is David's Lord, and therefore more than mere Man. As Christ is David's
Lord, so is he exalted: for it is so affirmed, so attributed to him; He said to
my Lord, sit at my right hand. But as God, he is David's Lord; therefore as God,
he is exalted.

3. It Is plain also by that Prayer, and Expression of our Savior, John, 17.5.
Father, Glorify me thy self, with that Glory which I had with thee, before the
World was. Now that must needs be the Glory which did appertain unto him, as
God: For his Humane Nature was not before the World; and therefore did not, nor
could not partake of any Glory. And hence it is undeniable, it must be meant of
that Glory which he had before the World was, and did in the Phrase, and
according to the meaning of the Scripture, lay aside, in the days of his
Humiliation, and abasement in the form of a Servant, and did now assume, when
he ascended, and while now he sits at the right hand of God the Father.

That Glory which he had before the World was, must be a Glory belonging to the
Godhead.

But that which our Savior desires, and according to his desire; obtains in his
Ascension and Glorification in Heaven, is that which he had before the World,
and therefore it does appertain to his Godhead.

2. As this Glory belongs to him or God; so as Man.

Because this glorious Power is executed by him, as Man now ascending and
sitting in Heaven: So that his Manhood does concur, as an Instrument working
with his Godhead, in the administration of it, John, 5.27. The Father judges
no man, but has given all power to the Son, to execute Judgment, in as much as
he is the Son of Man, that is, Because the Humane Nature is assumed into
personal Union, and therein he has satisfied Divine Justice, and so purchased
Redemption, and so all the power, as that being the only way, by which this
Redemption purchased, comes to be applied to the Saints.

III. Wherein this Glory consists, which is thus attributed to the Person of
our Savior?

Answ. For the right understanding of this Third Particular, wherein the pith,
and life of the Point lies, This is a Rule that must be premised, and carefully
carried along with us in our thoughts, as that which will guide through the
following Explication, namely, That Glory is here to be attended in the several
Branches of it, which the Lord Christ did lay aside by voluntary Dispensation,
out of his own free will, and mutual Agreement with God the Father, Glorify me
with the Glory I had with thee.

That which was laid aside by him, that may be taken up again, and given to
him, by the same Agreement.

And hence all those infinite Excellencies that are in God, the absolute might
of Sovereignty over the Creature, is not properly any part of Glory, unto which
he was exalted. Because this is a property of the Divine Nature, and so does
necessarily appertain to every person that has this Nature, as necessarily as
to be God. This he had of his own, and this could not be given to him, nor laid
aside by him. And this was the first signification of glory before mentioned.
But our Savior by voluntary dispensation did lay aside the right of
present-taking Dominion, and exercising Dominion, over every creature in that
Nature he did assume. And hence Satan and his instruments, he in and by them,
did not only assault our Savior by their outrages and temptations, but by
violence of power did out-bid, and over-bear him for the present. Thus, as it
were with a violent hand, he carried him into the Wilderness, and set him upon
a Pinnacle of the Temple: yea not only assaulted, but prevailed and had the
better for the present, brought him to his death, and held him captive in the
grave by the space of three days: Our Savior by agreement with God the Father
laying aside and cea^ing his own right of taking and exercise dominion over
Devils, and men, and creatures: but giving way hereunto by agreement with God
the Father for the while, that the work of our Redemption was to be
accomplished. Hence are these passages, This is your hour and the power of
darkness. Luke 22.53. q. d. This is the time, when ye have allowance to
Tirannize, and I will not exercise dominion over you (for he could have crossed
and confounded with a word) but suffer my self to be foiled for the present and
held captive by you. This is the power of darkness, when I lay aside the
exercise and expressing of my power. Hence he returned that answer. Know
thou not, that I could but ask my Father, and he would give me more than
twelve. Legions of Angels, but how then should the Scripture be fulfilled? That
agreement that was transacted between me and the Father, and now recorded in
Scripture. Math. 26.53. Hence its said, Though he was in the form of God: Had
the might and sovereignty of God, and was equal in that with the Father, had it
as his own, without any robbery, or taking that which was not his right; Yet he
emptied himself: Laid aside the Right either of taking or exercising that
power. TOOK upon himself The me^nness of the Nature and relation of a surety
and servant, and under-went really the condition of a servant and surety, and
so submitted himself To the Death of the Cross, Because it was the lowest
service he was to do in the work of our Redemption. Thus our Savior laid aside
his glory.

Now the Father gives and he assumes glory to himself,

1. In that he freed him from the former Tyranny and power of darkness, and
exalted him, far above al principalities and powers, and what there is named in
this or another world. Beyond al Gunshot, not only beyond their power, but
their assaults, yea their presence and sight.

2. In that al power and Grace belongs to him in way and right of comunication
for the good of his, therefore called Head of the Church. And this follows the
former. Mark the Coherence; He has exalted him, and given him to be Head
(...), a Head that has life and motion in it, To plot and contrive al for
defense, Ephesians. 2.22.

For had not the second person suffered and satisfied, there had never been way
nor right to communicate Grace to his, or to improve of set on going the power
and providence of God for his. And therefore its his propriety to be Head, not
the Father, nor the spirit. Hebr. 10.20. Joh. 5.26. To have life of himself.
And verse, 21. To quicken whom he will.

3. And immediate dispensation and execution of al power over al creatures, for
the bringing home of his Elect. Thus the Father judges no man, but has
committed al to him: not that the Father has not power for the execution of
the work: for he that gives it has it in a principal manner: but he has
committed the immediate execution thereof unto Christ. 1 Cor. 11.3. The Apostle
speaks not of the Faithful, but of al. For that is the scope.

These different degrees are to be attended in regard of Subordination, and
immediate dispensation:

For, Head Implies Excellency and power to move all in Subordination to it.
Authority to rule al in subjection.


So its not excellency, but power and authority, not at large, but in
Subordination in the next and immediate dispensation.

1. Hence, he crosses and confounds all the power and Policy of all the
enemies of his Church, brings to naught the rage of Devils and Malice of Men,
and each instrument that is formed. Ephesians. 4. Being ascended up on high, he led
Captivity Captive. Nay makes them al serviceable to his Church. 1 Cor. 3.18.
All is yours, and you Christ's, and Christ Gods. This is the order. Christ is
Gods Servant: and all your Servants through Christ.

2. Hence, he restores his Elect from the power of Darkness, and translates
them into the liberty of his own, by an invincible and irresistible power,
breaks in upon the rebellious heart of a sinner, and brings him home unto
himself. No man comes to the Father, but by me. Rev. 1.18. I was dead, and I am
alive, and live for evermore, and I have the Keys of Hell and Death. Joh.
10.16. I have other Sheep, that are not of this fold, and those I must bring.
He sends and succeeds al Officers and ordinances.

3. Hence, from this immediate dispensation of al power, he sends his spirit
the Comforter into the hearts of his, that he may supply al their wants,
furnish them to al their works, and fit them with fullness of power and spirit
to each holy performance. Its requisite I go, because If I go not, the
Comforter will not come: but if I go, I will send him. The glorification of our
Savior makes way for the mission of the Spirit and observe what he adds. Joh.
16.13, 14. He shall take of mine, and give it to you. And what will he give? All
things that the Father has, and mine, therefore I said, he shall take of mine.
They are al Christ's, for the immediate dispensation, and its from the virtue of
a glorified Savior, that the spirit takes them, and conveies them.

4. He gives unto his Eternal life. Joh. 17.2. Thou have given me al power over
all flesh, that I may give unto them eternal life; And this as the second
person in the former sense. For as mere man, he gives not eternal life.

This is the end and Errand. And when this is done, then he professes, He has
finished the work, he gave him to do; when he has gathered and glorified his
Saints, he has done al he has to do in this world.

2. His Human Nature is made glorious, 1. Because it has the full source of all the influence of the divine operations and Graces thereunto, as much as any
creature is capable of. 2. It has liberty and authority to set on work or put
forth any attribute for the good of the Saints. It knows all the necessities of
the Saints, and can have resort, and set on work all the sufficiency of God to
yield supply. Math. 28.18.


USE, 1.
1. TERROR To the wicked, the enemies to, and opposers of the Lord Jesus, and
his Kingdom. See whom ye have despised, he is now advanced to al power, and
therefore will use al his power for your ruin. Upon this ground Peter shook the
hearts of the Jews. Act. 2.36. He now being exalted sheds abroad etc. Let the
House of Israel know assuredly that this Jesus, whom ye have crucisied, God
has raised, and made him Lord and Christ. Math. 25.31. When Christ-shal come
at the day of Judgment etc. He shall come with power and great glory, thousands
before him, and ten thousand thousands ministering to him; Dan. 7.10. Rev. 5.11.
And they shall creep into holes and clefts of the rocks, and corners of the
Dungeons, and not be able to behold the dreadful looks of Christ. Rev. 6.15*16.
But he shall fetch them thence, dragg them out of their Dungeons, draw them out
of their holes. When it shall be said, they have feared, and fled, and hid
themselves, bring hither, says Christ, mine enemies, those who have been
enemies to my Grace, Gospel, Children, Glory, bring them hither, and slay them
before my Face. And however the Lord Jesus abates much of the dreadful
expressions of his direful anger, and almighty power; Now they are terrified,
and then quieted. Now in horror, and then calmed, Yet then he shall destroy them
from the glory of his power; that is from the expression of al his power, and
that unto the utmost, for their ruin, Christ will do his best.

USE, 2.
DIRECTION. It leads us by the hand, the right way, whither to go, and shows us
the ready means, how to derive quickening power and inlivening virtue. Do as
Stephen in his greatest straight, Act. 7.56. He looked, and saw Christ standing
at the right hand of God. Hebr. 7.16. He is the Author of endless life, and
therefore without end, look this way. Hence do two things.

1. Know that he stands possessed of al right of communication and has the
immediate execution of al efficacious power and dominion over al creatures.
Math. 28. This is the commission he has, and in virtue of this, he sends,
quickens, succeeds and therefore look at him, as a glorious Savior. When he
ascended, then was the time of his coronation gifts; then he gave gifts. As we
say, of men honest and able, when we repair to them for relief, its replied,
Alas, they are out of commission. So if we look at Christ's Graces in his
humiliation, and in the days of his suffering, they are out of commission: But
when he comes to ascend, he is then in commission, and so carries al before
him. Being ascended, he sheds abroad etc. Say, there is no power in me, neither
word nor ordinances, but al power and all things are given to thy ministry,
therefore blessed Lord, by thy power subdue our sins, and quicken our Souls.

2. Know, that in virtue of this glory, he is bound to do al for thee, nay has
promised to dispense al unto thee. Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live
also. I am with you. Ephesians. 2.4. He sets us in heavenly places with Christ.

USE, 3. Comfort.
Here is matter of unspeakable and unmatchable comfort to refresh the fainting
hearts of the servants of the Lord, which have an interest in this Christ, and
are possessed of him, who stands possessed of all that glory, that Heaven and
Earth has, or the God of Heaven and Earth can give.

The Chemists they dream of a Catholicon and Medicine of that excellent
confection and composition, and of that sovereign virtue and efficacy, that it
will cure any Disease, recover and remove any distemper. They conceit that which
they could never yet compass, nor yet the skill and industry of al men could
ever find out. That which they dreamed and desired for the Body. The Lord has
provided for the good, and spiritual refreshing of the Souls of his. Here is a
Cordial, that will undoubtedly Cure thee of al discomforts; whatever thy
temptation, thy condition, thy miseries are, can be, shall be: have thou but a
share in this Christ, to whom the Father has given this glory in Heaven, It
cannot but give thee content: do thou but know the value and virtue of the
receipt, and do understand the right way to use it, and art careful to take
it, for thine everlasting refreshing. See the proof of it a little in the
particulars following.

Have this glory of Christ in thine Eye, and keep the savor of it in thy heart*
Thou can not but have glorious peace in thy conscience, joy in thy heart, and
contentment in thy course, as the particulars will evidence.

This will. 1. Cure all thy Fears, 2. Supply all thy wants, 3. Rescue thee from
the rage of all Enemies, 4. Remove the guilt of all thy Sins. 5. Strengthen all
thy Graces, 6. Quicken thee to all Duties, 7. Give unto thee Eternal Life.


1. Cure thee of all thy Fears, Unto which we are subject all our lives by
reason of our own infirmities, and the world of evils with which we are
compassed about, while we live here in this world; considering what our sins
deserve, men and Devils intends, what God in justice may inflict, and our
constant provocations incurr, which are as it were a new mint of Plagues, which
we may daily expect. We have felt somewhat in our selves, heard of more in
others, and what is yet behind we know not.

But we know what Devils can do, what our sins merit, what God in a righteous
judgment may execute: So that the fear of what may be, is worse than that we
feel and find for present.

Here then is our comfort; Our Savior has felt the worst that can be, borne
al, and conquered al, drunk the dregs of the Cup, Grapled with the sting of
death, and the strength of the law; Triumphed over extremities so that there
was no possibility he should be held, or we now hurt by them. There can be no
destroying evil, there need be no fear.

By the glory of Christ, we may glory over al our fears, Terrors and dismayings
of spirit. It cannot be, but Christ in glory will over work al for our good:
nothing should work any dismaying fears in our hearts.

Upon this ground our Savior put these Fears to flight, when John fell at his
feet as dead, in the sense of his own vileness and the sight of the dazelling
excellencies of the Lord. Rev. 1.18. He said, Fear not, I am he that lives,
and was dead, and behold I live for ever. I live as one that has conquered, as
one that has triumphed over al Enemies, and have the Keys of Hell and Death.
So to his Disciples. Joh. 14.27. Let not thy Heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid, not distracted, nay not stirred, Why? ye have heard, I said unto
you, I go away, and will come again. That he goes to his Father, who is greater
than he, the greatest in glory; and with whom he was to possess the greatness
of al glory in greatest excellency: and therefore the hearing of this should
quit them of al Fears, quiet them of al dismayings. He is now gone to take
possession of the greatest power that is in Heaven, that no power on Earth,
Heaven or Hell, should be able to hurt. And therefore we need not Fear. He has
the greatness of power to prevent al evils that are to come; and therefore we
should Fear none, that are to come.

2. Supply all wants, That those need not disquiet, nor the heart be carried
with anxiety, Care, and Solicitousness, how to provide For our Savior is not
only Heir, and has right unto al these as he had in the time of his
Humiliation: But is, as an Heir come to years, entered upon his Revenews, is
seated, settled upon the throne of his glory, and stands possessed of the
treasures in Heaven and Earth, and therefore can and will suit with
Conveniences, according to their needs and desires. It Is that which God
himself professes, Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession.
It Is that wherein the Saints rejoice with joy and thanksgiving, Rev. 11.15. The
Kingdoms of the World, are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign for ever and ever: and verse 17. We give thee thanks, etc.
because thou have taken to thee, thy great Power, and have reigned, and that
thou should give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints,
and them that fear thy Name, great and small, etc. verse. 18. Happily the
Kingdoms of another World would not content, but ye desire something in hand.
Behold, the Kingdoms of this World, are the Lord Christ's; and he has taken to
him that glorious Power that formerly he laid aside, and now he raigns. And if
this will not satisfy, not only the Kingdoms of the World, but al things in the
World, are given to Christ, John, 13.3. Yea, the Glory of al Wealth, and
Pleasures, and Contents, when now he is entered into Glory. And he has given
himself to thee, and al them also. Thou can not want so much, but he has
more than thou can want, and therefore thou can not want supply.

The Child cares not for Apparel, if his Father has Wardropes to cloth him.
The Wife troubles not her self for Money to provide, if she have a Husband,
whom she knows has millions of ready Cash in his Treasury to enrich her, and
relieve her at her asking. So it is with the Saints, who have Christ for their
everlasting Father, and Husband.

3. This also will rescue thee from the rage of all thine Enemies, in the
greatest hazards which may surprise thee, and threaten thy total ruin.

Thou say the subtilty in deep, the malice outrageous, and their power
great. But behold, here the Glory given to Christ, even al power in Heaven and
Earth is given into his hand: He over-works al their vileness, over-powers al
their rage; so that they can work but what he has determined, and will cause to
work to the good of his own. It Is the promise of the Father, when he was
advanced, at the right hand of his Power, Psalm. 110.1, 2. Sit at my right hand,
until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. Rev. 19.7. there we have the marriage
of the Lamb mentioned, and his Wise made her self ready. The Saints humbled by
Faith, they put on their fine Linen, the Righteousness of Christ. No sooner is
the Bride married, but War is raised; Kings, and Captains, and mighty Men, come
into the Field; their outrage, hellish and fiery. But her Husband, whose name
is written on his Thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, appears in her
quarrel. No sooner the Combat is entered, but the Conquest is gotten, the
Bride rescued, and the Enemies totally ruinated; and the Lord invites all to
feast themselves with the slaughter; To eat the Flesh of Kings, Captains,
Horses, Men, free and bond, great and small, verse 18. Yea, it is the provision
Christ makes, Touch not mine anointed: Nay, the portion of the Saints which the
Lord Christ has laid out from Heaven, and the Conquest he has made, John, 16.
last, Be of good comfort, I have overcome the World. Isa. 54.17. No Weapon
against thee shall prosper. This is the Heritage of Gods Servants.

4. This will remove the guilt of all thy Sins, which seems to over-whelm, and
under which thou go up and down, as a condemned man, and sinkest in the
daily apprehensions of Wrath, and expectation when thou shall be arraigned, and
condemned by the righteous Sentence of Gods revenging Justice. Satan accuses,
Conscience gives in witness against thee, and the Justice of God passes
Sentence. Look up to this Glory that Christ stands possessed of now in Heaven,
and al these Accusations, will vanish immediately, nor will once appear to plead
against a believing sinner. Upon this ground, Paul flings out the Gantlet
against al Adversaries, and there is not an Action that can pass, nay, not so
much as a motion made against him, that can find audience in Court, Romans 8.33,
34. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods Chosen? it is God that
justifies, nay, it is Christ that has died, nay, rather risen again, nay, sits
at the right hand of God. Justice cannot condemn, Christ has satisfied, and is
freed, and now is at Gods right hand, and is at the better hand with Justice,
triumphs there; Devils cannot cavil, they are silenced; Conscience accuse, that
is answered; nay, those daily failings which might seem to interrupt the Terms
of Agreement betwixt God and the Soul, and make new Controversies: These are
taken up, and intercepted by the Lord Jesus. Nay, the main Pith of this Glory
was, as ye have read before, That the immediate execution of Gods whole Counsel
toward the Sons of Men, is by his means, comes through his hands. And if there
be any thing against his Members, his Spouse, he will be sure to stop that
proceeding. So Paul disputes, Romans 5.9. If reconciled by his Death, how much
more shall we be saved by his Life?

5. By this all Graces shall be strengthened, and made glorious; answerable,
and in some measure proportionable to the Glory that Christ has possessed. The
Father gives glorious Power and Grace to him, and he dispenses glorious Grace
and Power to us. This is the ground of the Inference; The Spirit was not sent
because Christ was not ascended. That the larger measure of the Spirit, in the
more spiritual and efficacious operations thereof, was not yet given, because
he was not yet in the Throne of Glory, and invested with the fullness of that
power, which then he should reassume, and challenge to himself. And this Peter
renders to be the reason of those extraordinary Gifts that were given, and
admirable Works that were done by the Apostles. When all the People wondered,
and stood amazed, to hear each man speak in his own language, the magnificent
things of God; the holy Apostle Peter carries them hither, as to the first root
and rise of al those miraculous Dispensations, Acts, 2.34, 36. That Christ whom
ye have crucified, God has raised, and made him both Lord and Christ; and
having received the Promise of the Spirit, having as man received the Spirit
without measure, as much as Nature was capable of: and as God, possessed and
recovered the same Glory, which he had with the Father, before al Worlds; He
now sheds abroad this, which ye now see and hear. Great Princes reserve the
greatest Gifts, and Entertainment, unto the days of greatest Solemnity, as
Coronation, or Conquest. The day of Christ's Ascension, and sitting, and so
possession of Glory, is the day of his Coronation and Conquest, returns into
his own Country, and there triumphs, and then gives Gifts, enlarges himself in
the Graces of his Spirit, Ephesians. 1.20, 22, 23. when Christ was set in Heavenly
places, and advanced to his Glory, It was that he might be Head of his Church,
and might fill all in all. By this he comes to be Head, and has all Graces: By
this he comes to communicate himself, not in sparing manner, but fully, and
freely, he fills all in all.

6. By this thou may be enlarged in all Services; not only receive more
Graces, but exercise what thou have received in a more active, and excellent
manner, than ever otherwise thou should, or could have attained unto. The
Glory of our Savior over-shadowing thee, will make thee pray gloriously, lead a
glorious life, and perform glorious Duties. Thus our Savior disputes, John,
14.22. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes in me, shall do the
Works that I do, that is, in regard of the Doctrine he then delivered, or Works
he then wrought: Nay, greater works than these, shall he do; Why? Because, I go
to my Father. He goes to possess al Glory, in all the fullness of the Execution
of al power and dispensation thereof. And therefore having more, dispenses
more vertually, by the power of his sitting at the right hand of God, than he
did when he was bodily present in the days of his Humiliation. Peter by the
virtue of his death, and that glorious power which Christ possessed in Heaven,
he converted at once, three thousand, which our Savior never did while he
preached. Christ healed the Sick, and cured Diseases of such as came to him;
but Peter, such as he sent his Hand-kerchief unto. Nay, our Savior ads,
Whatever ye ask in my Name, in the Name of Christ now in Glory, as he is gone
to his Father: If ye ask any thing never so miraculous, hard, improbable,
impossible to Flesh and Blood, he will bring it about. And upon this Tenure it
is, that promise is made to the Church of Thyatira, That she shall rule the
Nations with a rod of Iron, Rev. 2.26, 27. A poor handful of People, the
mighty, and invincible power of a multitude of Nations: See the Reason, it is,
As I have received from my Father. This power of this glorious Dispensation, is
such as he has received in a more full, and eminent manner, he will so also
communicate it. And therefore our Savior professes, it is expedient that he
should go away; for if he go not, he will not send the Comforter; but if he do,
he will send him, and then he shall lead you into all truth, John, 16.7.13. The
last resolution rests there; Al is Christ's that the Father has, and he shall
take of Christ's, and give to them.

7. By this thou may be sure thou can not miss of Eternal Life. This was
the end why Christ receives, God the Father gives this Glory, that he may give
it unto the Faithful, John, 17. Thou have given me power over all Creatures,
that I may give unto them Eternal Life: Christ cannot miss of his End, nor thou
of Glory. And if al power can bring to Eternal Life, thou can not but enjoy
it. Christ must fail of his intent, if thou fail of thy happiness: and
therefore you shall find our Savior so solicitous to settle the hearts of his
Disciples in this, and himself so unweariable to accomplish it, John, 14.2, 3.
Let not your hearts be troubled, etc. They were, and all the Saints find a hard
shock here, they are troubled what will become of them at last, and how shall
they once arrive at the Haven, the storms so strong, the waves so fierce,
oppositions from without so great, corruptions from within so out-ragious? Why
our Savior says, Be not troubled, I go to prepare a place. True, there be
Mansions enough; but how hard to come at them? He answers, I will come and bring
you to my self.

USE, 4. Of Instruction.
If God give Glory to Christ, how unreasonable is it for us sinful wretches, to
deny our Savior his own, his due? If the Father give it; we should be ready,
and careful ever to acknowledge it. We do not the work of Angels, but the work
of God himself. And this is the Scope of the Father in all his Counsel, and
therefore it should be ours. He turns the Trade this way; The Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men might honor the
Son, as they honor the Father, John, 5.22, 23. As great Princes, when they will
advance any Person, whom they purpose to make a Favorite, they so contrive that
all business must come through his hand, that al may eye him, honor him, and
have dependence upon him. So it is with the Father: Christ is his Favorite, he
has so ordered it, that al must come through his hand, al from the Father by
him, al through him returned to the Father. So the Father professes, Phil.
2.10, 11. He has given him a Name above all Names, that at his Name, all might
bow. As therefore the Father determined, mined, so we resolve: I have both
glorified him, and will glorify him, John, 11.28.

There were Three things, as ye have read before, in the words.

1 The Parties for whom Christ prays: such as the Father had given him. 2 What
he prays for: That they might be where he is. 3 The end of this their being
with Christ: That they might see the Glory which the Father had given him.
Before we could come at the Second of these, there was one Point, which was
supposed, and taken for granted, which makes way for all those that follow:
namely, That Christ was in Heaven, and did enjoy the fullness of Glory there,
given him of the Father, and of both these, that is, both the Parts of the
Point( 1. That Christ is in Heaven. 2. That he is possessed of the fullness of
Glory, by gift from the Father, at his right hand, both as Second Person, and
as Mediator, God and Man, Redeemer of the World
)we have fully written.

And before we can proceed to the Second Thing, which was formerly propounded,
and wherein the pith of the Prayer of our Savior appears, containing the main
thing petitioned, we shall be enforced to take in the last clause of the Verse,
as being nothing else, but an amplification of the former Doctrine, and lays
out unto us, the cause and reason whence it comes, that the Father gave, and
Christ received this so great Glory.

The first Original, from whence this, so great and unconceivable Glory
proceeds, It is, from the Love of the Father, toward our Savior, his blessed
Son. And that Love is not of yesterday, nor of late, or in this last Age of the
World occasioned; but it issues out of his ancient and everlasting Lover,
wherewith he embraced the Lord Jesus, before the World was; and that not only
finished and brought to perfection, but before the first corner stone, before
the Foundation thereof was laid.

I will not give way to any curious Speculation; but I believe it is true, and I
suppose it is suitable to the meaning of the words, That the Father laid the
Foundation of the Love of his Son in his own heart and thoughts, in order of
Nature, before in his everlasting purpose he laid out in his contrivement, the
first Pillars and Principles, upon which the World was founded. He understands
himself directly, al other; Quatenus sui imaginem gerunt. So Wisdom seems to
speak, Prove. 8.22. He possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his
Works of old. The first beginning of Gods way, is to understand himself.

But we shall content our selves with that which is taken up with the current,
and common consent of al. And then we have two Points.

1. The Father loved his Son from everlasting, before the Foundation of the
World: And this we handled formerly in the foregoing verse, 23. 2. That which
is of fresh Consideration, unto which we shall speak a few words very briefly,
is, the force of Argument, or Reason here laid forth, viz. The everlasting love
wherewith the Father embraced his Son, is the first cause why he gave him
everlasting Glory.
The Eternal Glory of Christ, is a Gift of the Eternal Love of the Father.
In grows out of this root, it issues firstly out of this Fountain. Hither our
Saviors thoughts arise, and here he rests. This is the Crown of Glory, and the
Diadem in the Crown; and the luster and shine of that is, The Love of the
Father. To this our Savior ascends, and in this he satisfies himself, and he
would lead al his, as afterward we shall see. Had not the Father given him
glory out of his love, glory it self would never have given our Savior content.
Nay Heaven and glory it self had not been worth the loving nor having, unless
the love of God were in them. That is the quintessence of al.

We shall open shortly two things.

1. What we must understand this love to be. 2. How this love is the cause of
this glory.
For the right discovery and discerning of this love, that we may come as near
the mind of our Savior and the meaning of the text, as we may, we shall with
warines, in some doubtful Seas, sound and cast several passages, that we may
find, where the Channel lies.

1. It cannot then be taken for the spiritual and special fruits and effects of
Gods love, which the Lord dispenses to his, according to the good pleasure of
his will, of which the Apostle speaks. Romans 5.5. The love of God is shed abroad
in our Hearts. This rather looks at the fountain, that those streams, for
which Jude Prays, Grace, Peace, and Love be multiplied. Jude. 2. For this love
is from eternity! so are not those fruits and expressions: because they are put
forth in time.
Beside, the glory of our Savior is one of those fruits which are here said to
Issue from that love. And I suppose it does vertually and summarily include
those spiritual expressions, which makes way for it.

2. Sometime, the love of God is put by a Figurative speech for Election, as
that, in Romans 9.13. Jacob have I Loved, that is, Elected, or set apart, to be
the subject of the expressions of his love.

And this also seems not to fit the place in hand, For it goes somewhat against
the grain of the phrase. The love in the former and following words, in the
verse before and after, leads us to another apprehension, and looks another way.

Beside, the aim of our Savior, and his expression would persuade one to think,
that he eyes something in the Father, which in a peculiar manner relates to him.
Not that which equally and indifferently belongs to the Holy Spirit and himself
also, as that purpose of Election does.

Nor yet is this meaning so fully suitable to the sense of the place and force
of the Argument. For glory was given and does appertain to our Savior, not as
man alone, but as the Second person in the glorious Trinity as we opened, and
gave in undeniable evidence thereof in the former Doctrine. As our Savior was
the subject of this glory, which was given, so is he the subject of that love,
which gives it.

But that Election, properly so termed, should be attributed to Christ, as the
second person, I do not remember that any Scripture evidenceth. Therefore in
the.

Third and last place, I do conceive, that this love is attributed to the
Father, in a personal regard, and for the manner of it, it does in a proper and
peculiar sort, appertain to him, and Issues from that inward and intimate
relation, that is betwixt the Father and the Son. The Father gives al to the
Son, as Son. The Son returns al to the Father, as Father. Nor a Father,
because God, but because he has a Son. Not Son. Because God. But because he
has a Father. And hence it is, they are said to have an In-being each in
other. Beleevest thou, that the Father is in me, and I in the Father? Joh.
14.8, 9. Thou in me, and I in thee, that they may be one, as we are one. And
for that reason it is, the Father is said, To dwell in Christ, the second
person. Joh. 14.10. And that cannot in any propriety of speech be said of the
Essence, because that the person dwells not in the Essence. For relations make
no impression in the subject.

Hence it is, the Lord Jesus becomes the object of his Father love: his heart
wholly affects, his thoughts are wholly set upon him, taken up with him. An
infinite and eternal Favorite of an infinite and eternal Father. Called, the
express Character of his Fathers person. Hebr. 1.3. No such likeness. No such
Love. So that he cannot once look off from him, Enamoured with him, and with an
infinite fullness of Soul-pleasing satisfaction, takes contentment in him. Hence
our Savior professes Prove. 8.30. I was daily his Delight. The Original word
(...) a compound of (...) intueri (...) retinere, so to eye, blande applica^e
fe alteri, ut inclusum retineamus in solidum. So to Eye and pleasingly to apply
our selves to another, as to hold and keep that other with us for ever.

So the Father does gaze upon the infinite beauty of his own image in his Son,
bestows his affection wholly upon him, and holds him to himself for ever.

The Father and the Son being subsistences of the same Essence, they are one
with another, in regard of the Essence, unto which they be adjoined, and one in
another in regard of the personal relation that is between them: they are the
delight one of another, and glorify each other continually. The issue then is,
In that the Father eyes, affects, delights in his Son, as the brightness of his
Glory, the express image of his person, as his only begotten, bearing his
similitude and likeness, in an unconceivable and unmatchable resemblance: This
love in this manner, is proper to the Father, the fountain and first cause of
that glory the Lord Jesus had with the Father, before the world was, and the
first cause whence that glory comes to be restored, after he had emptied
himself of his glory, and suffered the shameful death of the Cross. Father
glorify me with thy self, with the same glory that I had with thee, before the
world was. And hence it is, our Savior is said to be in the bosom, and to come
from his bosom. He lay in the bosom of his love, and from thence was sent to
reveal those bosom secrets of the riches of his free love and Grace, which Else
had never seen Sun.

This is the love wherewith the Father loved the Son, before the world: and
this love is the cause, why he gave him that glory. And that appears by a
double Reason.

REAS. I.
Love lays out it self for the behoof and benefit of the thing beloved, as
much as may be, for the furtherance of the good of it to the utmost of that
perfection its able to contrive, and the other able to receive; says not in
wishes, but is active and working, not desires only in a kind of complementing
formality, but really procures, what may be most useful for the advancement of
the thing beloved. Let us not love in word and Tongue only, 1. Joh. 3.18. But
in Deed.

The love of the Father being of greatest excellency, even of unconceivable
virtue and efficacy, and our Savior being of unmatchable likeness to draw out
the love of the Father, and incomparable worth to deserve it, it could not be,
but so great love should give the greatest good to one of greatest desert: and
therefore must give him that incomprehensible glory, which might be the
amazement of the hearts of men and Angels, through al eternity.

Behold here is the incomprehensible glory of the ever blessed Son, given out
of the unconceivable love of the Father of glory. Hence the Evangelist, Joh.
3.35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. In
love there is no lack; and its bountiful; and studies the advancement of the
thing beloved: So Jonathan to David. I know thou shall be King in Israel, and I
shall be second to thee. He loved him as his own Soul, and could have given that
to him, and therefore did not grudg him the Kingdom.

And however it cannot stand with the glory of the Father, that his Son should
be above him, yet he provides for eminency of honor answerable to his
excellency. He has so provided, carried al things by the counsel of his own
will, and course of his providence, to bring in all praise to this Christ. He
has given power to him, even power to have life, and to quicken whom he will,
and to judge al. Joh. 5.20. to 23. That al might honor the Son, and they honor
the Father.

2. Love is of a cementing Nature, desires union and neerness with the thing
beloved, is not pleased nor satisfied but with the presence of that, which it
does affect: seeks the fellowship, society, and company of that in a special
manner. Its the guise of the Spouse that is sick of Love, when she went to seek
her Savior. Cant. 3. I found him, whom my Soul loved, I held him, and would not
let him go. So Ruth to Naomi, when she persuaded her to depart, and go into her
own Country, Entreat me not to leave thee, where thou go, I will go, where
thou live, I will live, and where thou die, there will I be Buried. Ruth.
1.16, 17.

Now the love of the Father, being of infinite purity and perfection, must
needs have like proportionable operation: and therefore must not only affect
the presence of his Son, but must provide for the enjoyment of it, in the
nearest and fullest communication of himself, that may be: and hence, as he
came out of his bosom, and left his glory: so also he must bring him unto
glory, that he may again lie in the bosom of his love. This our Savior
intimates. Joh. 13.3. Knowing that the Father gave al things into his hand, and
that he came from God, and went to God: he came from the Father for the
accomplishment of the great Work of Redemption, and he furnished him with the
supply of al power, and al provision, al things in Heaven and Earth, to attend
him, until he come again to him; and when he is come into Heaven: as he put the
greatest glory upon him, so he advances him to the nearest familiarity with
himself. By his right hand he has exalted him. Act. 2.33. And set him at his
right hand. Verse, 34. That he might make him full of joy with his countenance,
that the Eye and smiling countenance of the Father might ever be upon him, and
fullness of the perfection of joy in him for ever.

If glory carry with it the greatest perfection that can attend our Savior, and
nearest union unto the Father, then the love of the Father will provide it. But
glory includes both greatest perfection in regard of Christ, and nearest union
unto the Father. Therefore the love of the Father will provide for it.

USE, 1. Trial.
We may hereby try what metal our love is made of, whether it come from the
God of Love, carry his likeness and superscription, that we may be sure, that
he will own it at the great day, and we both now and then may find the
undoubted comfort of it unto our Souls, we shall know the nature of it, by the
efficacy and work of it. As it is in prime, cordial quintessences, if they be
made of lively ingredients, they do not only warm the Mouth and heat the
Stomach a little, but they search into all the Veins, clear all the passages,
Purg all the Humors, and cleanse the Blood, that the Body is recovered to a
lively and healthful constitution: But if it warm a little overly, and work no
further, we conclude it, Its not the right, it has not the right work. So with
thy love, if it be like the love of God, it will have the like work; It aims
ever at the glorious good of the thing or person beloved; stays not in these
lower and inferior things, but in and by these, looks at those which be higher,
and of a more heavenly excellency.

Take then a Survey of the several operations of thy love according to the
several occasions, with which it meets, and therein its exercised. What does it
work in the family, where thou live, in the place, and amongst thy neighbors
with whom thou dwell, with thy Brethren who are linked to thee, and thou to
them in the fellowship of the Faith? Nay what does it do for thine own Soul? if
there be any power and efficacy it will then appear.

In thy family thou castest up and down how to compass the things of this life,
and art marvailous busy to contrive al earthly conveniences to thine own
content. Thou seek what to Eat, to Drink, what to put on, and obtainest what
thou seek, and thy love looks no further. Surely its worldly love, and that
in the lowest degree. Thou will do as much for the beasts of the field, and
Herds of Cattle, as for thy servants, Children, family. Thou dealest
courteously with those, who show Kindness to thy self, yieldest repect to men's
places, honor their persons, carriest thy self honestly and inoffensively
toward al. This love is no great excellency, do not the Publicans and sinners
the same?

Nay, it may be, thou do encourage men in a good course and strengthenest
their hearts and hands in the profession or the Gospel: labourest for some
knowledge of the truth, and ablities to holy services, that thou may carry
out thy profession with applause and approbation of such, with whom thou do
converse. Look after ability to please ears, rather than for humility and
abasedness of heart to please God, and here thou art at thy furthest, desire
to be no other, and do no more. And its the Pitch thou would have others to
aim at. This is but the love of Formalists and moralists. Thou never have the
love of God shed abroad in thy heart, nor yet the true love for the good of
thine own Soul to this day. If thy love had been from God* it would not have
ceased until it had brought thee and others unto Heaven, and glory, and God.
No^ that it is in our power to do this, but its certain, if the Love of God be
in us, it will make us look at this, and be easeless to endeavor after this. So
Paul travels till Christ be formed: not til they had got a form of Godliness,
until Morality, or Civility was formed in them; but Christ, glorious Grace,
Power, Peace. This is God-like, Christ-like Love.

2. TRIAL.
Whether our Love to the Lord Christ, be God-like Love, it is then certain God
will own it, Christ accept it, and we may find comfort in it. If it bear the
Image of the Love of the Father, it will imitate. God loved the Son, and gave al
things to the Son: Do likewise, give thy self, yield and resign thy soul, and
al things unto Christ: Thy Mind, let him teach thee; Heart, let him rule thee;
Affections, let him order thee, Romans 12.1. 1 Cor. 6. last. He out of his Love
exalted him far above all Principalities and Powers, and whatever is named. Do
thou set up the Lord in thy Soul, far above al profits, pleasures, thy dearest
lusts, thy darling delights, al powers, and principalities, the principality of
thine own will; mights and dominions, mighty and domineering distempers; above
every name, the name of thine own Parts and Gifts, the name of thy Glory and
Credit, and that which is named in another World, even thy safety and Salvation.

He gave him Glory, made him Lord and King. Acts, 2.36. Do thou likewise. Let
him Lord it over thy Lusts, thy Pride, thy haughty, and high thoughts, and
bring every thing into obedience. Rev. 4.10. Cast down the Crown of al thy
Excellencies, whatever is most honored, admired, loved, lay it at his foot.
Honor him with all thy substance. As he in the Gospel, if he need, let it go.

USE, 2. For COMFORT to the Saints, whom are beloved of the Father through
Christ.
Where he loves, his love will work alike. He is not the weaker for the working,
nor has the less for his giving. He loves thee as Christ, therefore he will
glorify thee, as he has done to him. Get Love, and gain al; Love carries al
with it. If he love thee, if dead, he will quicken; if weak, he will strengthen;
if damned, he will save; though stubborn, he will draw thee: With an everlasting
Love, I have loved thee; and therefore I have drawn thee.

USE, 3. Of Direction.
How we may gain the Gift of Glory from the hand of God. 1. Set his Love on
work, and that will set his Grace, Power, and Spirit on work, to be enlarged in all the glorious operations thereof. Go, go to this, 2 These. 3, 5. The Lord
direct your hearts into the Love of God. This will give God no rest: This made
him send his Son, and set his Counsel on work, to contrive al for thy good. By
this thou may plead, and wilt certainly prevail, John, 16. I will not say, I
will ask the Father, for the Father himself loves you, q. d. though I shall
speak a good word, yet there is that which will do it, and that it may be more
effectually. That Love sent me, set me on work, therefore I need not set that
on work. As David to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.8. Thou shall deal kindly, for thou
have brought thy Servant into Covenant with God. When Boas his heart was
toward Ruth, Naomi tells her, Ruth, 3. last, He will never rest, until he bath
done the thing.

2. Keep we our selves in this Love, John 15.10. If we keep his Commandments,
we shall abide in his Love. John 14.21, 23. Jude 20.

And thus we have done with this last Clause, which we said we were enforced to
take into consideration, before we would come to the main Point* wherein the
pith of our Saviors Prayer appears, which was the Second Particular observed in
the Verse, and are now to enquire into it.

The thing which our Savior prays here so earnestly for: The 2d Partic.
That they might be where he is.

And thence we have this Point; namely,

Our Savior does affectionately desire to have the presence of the Faithful in
Heaven with himself. Doct.

I say, he affectionately desires, and that appears in his expression, I WILL:
Which implies Three Things in this place, as thus used.

That it is thing which suits the heart of the Lord Christ, and which he
chooses, as a thing, that is well pleasing to him. This is as he would have it.

2. That he presents the efficacy of his Merits, and Obedience before God the
Father; and by virtue of the Covenant and Agreement betwixt him and the Father
transacted, touching his Elect and Chosen, whose Redemption, and Recovery, he
has undertaken: and he challenges, and claims at the hands of the Father,
the enjoyment of Heaven, and Happiness, which he has purchased for his
Servants the Faithful, and his enjoyment of them, and their presence.

3. He earnestly requests, and prays unto the Father for the accomplishment,
and performance of this.

The first and last of these Particulars, ye have fully declared by the same
word, as used upon the like occasion. When our Savior was to enter into his
Agony in the Garden, a little before he was betrayed, he prayed more earnestly,
says the Text; If it be possible, let this Cup pass; and in the close, ends
and issues al with this subjection, Not as I will, but as thou will, Marth.
26.39. that is, according to the Rules of Nature, and Reason, I would choose,
and do desire mine own preservation, as man: yet as Mediator, having undertaken
the Redemption of mine, I submit my Will and Prayers to thy good pleasure, and
purpose. And for the Second Particular, it is thus also plain: Because his
Prayer is one part of his Priestly Office, and of that Intercession, which he
makes for his redeemed ones: and that appears amongst other things, in this; As
he purchased, so in a righteous way he may obtain, the performance of all that
good from the Father in the behalf of his; That they may be with them, and
happy in them for ever, Isa. 53.11. He shall see the travel of his Soul, he shall
see the fruit of his dying and praying, the bringing of his unto God the Father
into Heaven, and their blessedness there. And this our Savior does not as man
only, but as God-man, the Mediator of his Elect, as he voluntarily submitted to
the place of a Surety, and became a Servant for our sakes, and so less than the
Father, John 14.30. The Father is greater than I. Look as his Complaint, so his
Prayer, may be conceived, as issuing and proceeding from the same ground. But
when he complains, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he was not
forsaken of God, by the withdrawing of the sense and sweetness of his Favor, as
man only, but as Surety; therefore as Mediator, and therefore so he prayed, and
so was heard then, and now also heard and accepted of God the Father.

And this affectionate desire of our Savior, appears in this; That as he cannot
take content in Heaven, unless he have his Faithful with him: So he will not
rest in Heaven, but will come again to fetch them to him. John 14.3. I will come
again, and take you to my self. He has betrothed his Bride and Spouse here,
and he will come (as sometimes Princes and States come from their own Places and
Kingdoms) with the great retinue of his Courtiers, and attendance of glorious
Angels, thousands shall go before him, and thousand thousands administering to
him, at the Solemnization of the day of Marriage; and he shall say, as in Psalm.
^0. Gather my Saints to me, those that have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice. We shall al be taken up with him into the Clouds, and he shall carry
his Bride with Triumph into his own Country and Kingdom, into Heaven, and there
we shall be ever with him.

REASON.
1. Hereby the Scope and End of the great Work of Restitution of lost man, is
in part, and in an especial part thereof attained. This is the end of the Death
and offering of our Savior, Heb, 9.7, 8. But into the Second, went the
High Priest alone, once every Year, not without Blood; the Holy Ghost thus
signifying, That the way into the Holy of Holies, (that is, into Heaven) was
not yet made manifest, while the first Tabernacle was standing: but verse 11.
Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come, not by the blood of
Goats, but by his own Blood, he entered once into the Holy Place (that is,
Heaven) having obtained eternal Redemption for us. So that we have boldness to
enter into the Holiest of the Blood of Jesus, by a new, and living way, which
he has consecrated for us through the Vail, that is, his Flesh. This is the
Scope of his Resurrection and Ascension, John 14.3. In my Fathers House, there
be many Mansions, I go to prepare a place for you, that is, He ascended into
Heaven, that by virtue of his Ascension, we also might arise, and ascend, and
sit in Heavenly places with him. For Ascension does firstly appertain to our
Savior; and from him, as our Head, it is communicated to us, as his Members.
Had not the Second Adam ascended, for ought I can see, no Son of Adam had ever
come into Heaven.

When the last Enemy, which is Death, is vanquished, and that he has brought
all the Elect home, and presented them to God the Father; Here am I, and the
Children that thou have given me; then he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God,
even the Father. The Rule and Government of our Savior, in all these outward
Dispensations, shall be at an end. The end and scope of the Death, and
Obedience, Ascension, and Redemption wrought out by Christ, that he must
affectionately desire. But this is so. Therefore,

2. By this means, the perfection of his Body mystical, and himself as mystical
Christ, is accomplished; without this, something would be wanting, to make up
the fullness thereof. Ephesians. 1. last, It Is said of the Church (and is true of each
Member for their measure) It is the fullness of him, who fills all in all: the
hearts of al his Saints, with all saving Graces. If at the last day of that
great assembling of the firstborn, there should be but the poorest Saint
wanting, and out of the way, the mystical Body of Christ, would so far want
it is fullness: if a finger, or a joint be lacking, the Body would lack something
of its full integrity. And therefore Ephesians. 4.13. God never leaves sending
Officers, they never leave gathering, and perfecting the Body of Christ, until
we all arrive and meet at the unity of Faith, and the acknowledgment of the Son
of God. The Head and Members should in reason be present one with another. The
Husband and Wife in comeliness, should co-habit in the same place, and dwell
together. Christ is the Head, his Faithful his Members; Christ the Husband is
gone into his own, out of fair Country; and therefore he cannot but
affectionately desire the coming of his Bride unto him. Nay, rather than fail,
as we heard, he will come down from Heaven, and fetch her. John 14. I will take
you to my self, that where I am, ye may be also.

3. The complete happiness of the Saints, can only by this means be fully
procured.

The Lord redeems, not only from guilt, and punishment, and power of our sins
and miseries, but even from the presence of them. And we cannot be wholly freed
from the presence of the evil of the world, before we be taken out of the
World. And therefore as the Lord has advanced our Savior far above
Principalities and Powers, beyond the gunshot of Satan's temptations, and the
evils of this vale of Tears: So the Lord Jesus provides that we may triumph
with him, as we have suffered with him, Matthew. 13.41. Therefore in the Parable,
while we live in the Field of the World, and the Church is here Militant, there
will be Tares, which will annoy and trouble. But when the Lord shall send his
Angels to gather out of his Kingdom al things that offend, and them which do
iniquity: Then shall his Saints be translated into the Kingdom of the Father.
That which is the end of Christ's Redemption, the perfection of his Body, the
complete happiness of his People: that he must affectionately desire. For the
end ever carries, and commands the affection of the Agent, who works by Counsel
and Reason.

USE, 1. Of Instruction.
Hence all that are given to Christ, must be raised from the dead, and be in an
immortal condition, and in everlasting happiness. As our Savior reasoned
against the Sadduces, God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: God is a God in
Covenant with the Living: Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob must live, and
that in Bodies and Souls, because he is the God of both. So those that must
ever be with Christ, they must have a Being, and be raised out of the dust: nor
matters it, though they were returned to the dust, and that scattered into the
four corners of the World; into the Sea, where they have been drowned; into the
Earth, where they have been buried; into the Fire, where they have been burned.
The Lord will send his Angels, and he will gather his Elect: The Sea shall give up
her dead, the Fire and Earth their dead. They shall be made immortal, that so
they may be ever with the Lord.

USE, 2. Of Reprehension.
It condemns both the Spirits and Practices of such, who cannot abide the
presence, much less prize the communion, and company of the Saints. Christ is
not at rest in Heaven without them: and they are in a Hell, count themselves in
a Prison, while the are in the place, and the presence where they be. Certainly
Christ is deceived, or thou art justly to be condemned, as one who have not the
heart of Christ, the Grace and Spirit of Christ in thee, and that one day thou
shall find. They shall ever be with Christ, and thou that can not endure their
society in the Kingdom of Grace, thou shall never have their company in the
Kingdom of Glory. Such is the exquisite Constitution, and Sovereign temper of
the Irish Mold, that there, poisonous Vermin, Toads, and Spiders, and such
like, they die presently, if confined to the compass of the Earth, and
therefore they forthwith leave the Mold, lest they lose their lives. So here,
if thou countest it a kind of death to be confined to the holy Society, and
gracious, and Spiritual communion of the Saints, it is certain, Thou have the
poison of a profane, and a graceless heart within thee. They went out from us
(says the Apostle) because they were not of us; had they been of us, had they
grown upon the same root, the Lord Jesus, knit one to another by the same
Spirit, They would never have departed from us.

When loos-hearted, and wicked Hypocrites, are hemmed in by the Communion of
the Faithful at unawares, they stand upon coals, and sit upon Thorns; like Fish
out of their Element, their hearts faint, and die away presently, as
professedly contrary to the Spirit of our Savior, as Light to Drakness. Christ's
Will is, They should be where he is: and their will is, To be any where else, but
where they are.

USE, 3. Of Spiritual Comfort.
Hereby we may learn to support our selves in several occasions, that would
prejudice us in our Christian Course: Hence we may fetch supply to bear up our
hearts in all over-bearing pressures. Comfort against al Opposition of our
Spiritual Adversaries, which may hinder our Happiness: Against contempt of the
World that would disparage our persons and Professions: Against our own
weaknesses, and feebleness, that might discourage us in a Christian Course. The
former Doctrine affords Spiritual refreshing against al these: Against the
fiercest of al opposition, which all the Enemies of our Salvation can make
against our progress, and success in a Christian Course. The Prayer of our
Savior, is above the Power of Hell, and Devils, though they rage; above their
malice and policy, though they undermine; above the corruption of mine own
heart, which would betray, and deliver me as a prey, into the hands of Devils,
and their Instruments. This Prayer of our Savior, shall carry the Cause against
them all, and thee to Heaven in despite of al. This Request will not be denied;
this Will of Christ, nothing can resist. The grant of the Father to our Savior,
none in Heaven and Hell can frustrate, to make the Lord repeal his purpose.

This was the best support that shored up Peter, when he was at the hardest
shock, Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow thee as
Chaff; but I have prayed that thy Faith fail not. Thy Heart, and Hope, and
Grace, and al might have failed, and would; but I have prayed that it fail not.

Thou happily wilt say, Satan is subtle indeed, and the snares of the World
secret; but I find most harm from mine own heart, a Will that cannot submit, and
will not come, though I might be saved. Look higher and further for help, to the
Prayer of our Savior now in Heaven, and there thou may certainly find.
Christ says, Father, I will that they be with me. The Devil, and men, and
thine own heart, will the contrary: whether will the Father grant, and which of
al these is like to prevail? The will of Christ shall stand certainly, and he will
do, whatever he will do; the will of Devils shall not hinder it, thine own will
shall not be able to resist.

2. Comfort against all the contempt of the World; when the wicked, and the
mighty despise the meanness of the persons, disdain the presence of the poor
Saints. If thou be rejected on Earth, and received into Heaven: if men
disdain thy Company, and Christ desire it, nay, the World desire it, the more
our Savior longs for it, and thee: Thou have no cause to be discouraged, nor
discomfited. Thus David fenceth himself against the reproach of Michal, Oh how
gloriously, etc. says he, It was before the Lord, who chose me, rather than
thy Fathers house, 2 Samuel 6.21. As Haman solaced himself in this, as no
ordinary favor, in that the Queen had invited him alone to her Banquet, Hesth.
5.12. Yea, Hesther the Queen let no man, etc. Much more here, when the Lord
Christ professes, I pray not for the World, but for all that thou have given
me, etc. John 17.9.

3. Comfort against those feeblenesses which attend upon us in our best Duties.
My Prayers are so poor, my Desires so faint and feeble, that I rather beg a
denial than have any hope to attain what I desire, nor like to see Heaven, nor
Christ there. Nay, sometimes not a heart to ask: and sometimes so much deadness
and heartlesness in asking, that how can I think to come to Heaven, when I have
not a heart to desire it? Be it, thy heart and thy prayers fail thee; yet the
prayer of our Savior ever took place, and found speeding acceptance in Heaven.
Joh. 11.41, 42. Father I know that thou hearrest me always. He is always
soliciting, and pleading our cause before the Father, and he cannot but find
acceptance. Therefore always preserved. Keeps them in the world; always
assisted, always quickened to al perseverance.

USE, 4. Of Exhortation.
If Christ affectonately desire our presence, let us long to be with him, to be
out of the Pesthouse of the world, where we have been infected: out of this
prison of our corrupt Nature, where we have been deeply annoyed with the Body
of death, and the stench of this carcass of abominations we bear about with us.
Long we for the consummation of the marriage, long for this day, that our
Savior so much desires. Our Savior longs for our company, worthless, Wretched
that we be, though he have not need of us, and was ever happy without us, lies
in the Bosom of his Father, and has been his delight from Eternity, who has
millions of Angels to attend and serve him.

Yea so far longed for our company, that he came down from Heaven, and took our
Nature, that he might die for our sins in the days of his humiliation, that
those may not hinder our believing and coming to him; and he would come again
from Heaven, that he may take us to himself, that death may not stop our
passage. Therefore we have more reason to long for him, of whom we have so much
need, and in whom we shall find so much happiness, to sleep out our days in the
bosom of his love through al eternity. If our Feofment and inheritance lay
here, he would be with us here, but it is not, but reserved for us in Heaven,
where he is, and therefore he will have us with himself. So they Isa. 26.8. The
desire of our Souls is toward thy Name, and the remembrance of thee. This is
the last of al desires, where they are complete and ended. The Soul desires
union to the Body in the Grave: but Body and Soul desire union with Christ, To
follow the Lamb, where ever he goes. Why stand we gazing one upon another? go
we to Heaven. When our Savior says, I will, they be with me, Answer, and I will
be with thee, Lord. Say so ye Fathers and Mothers in Israel, ye are almost
within sight of shore: there is one step to Death, that is the Wagon, and then
to Christ. Say so ye Young men and Maidens, though ye may live long, ye cannot
better, this is the marriage I will go also, I will be with Christ also, who has
loved me, died for me, and redeemed me. And if any be yet in a demur, let me
ask them, as Laban asked Rebecca. Genesis 24.57, 58. When Eleazar, Abraham's
servant came to fetch her, Will thou go? and she said, I will go. So let me
propound the will of Christ. He has chosen it, desires it, prays for it, what
say ye? will ye go to Jesus? I will go. Truly, let us go. The time will come, ye
would be glad to hear that voice, Come ye blessed etc. Where then are our
hearts, that your hearts should be thus affected? either the Saints have lost
their interest, or their affections. Either Christ has few servants, or they
have lost their desires.

1. What Hinders? 2. What might help?
Hindrances are Three.

The First Hindrance. When we surfeit on these sinful pleasures and contents in
the world: those eat up our desires, and take off the edge of our Affections.
As Lot near Sodom, then in Sodom, then cannot be persuaded to leave Sodom.
(...), Hemammered, Lime-twigged with the things of the world, as Birds cannot
find their Wing. Genesis 19.16. As surfettings take off our Stomach. Al men seek
their own, none the things of Christ. Phil. 2.21.

The Second Hindrance. When through carelessness and guilt they loose their
evidence, and assurance of their interest in Christ, and acceptance with him.
And therefore fear and so fly him as a Judge, rather than rejoice to be with him
as a Savior. Is it not that Christ, whose Blood I have shed, whose Name I have
dishonored, whose Spirit I have greeved? They think to appear before Christ as
Malefactors before a Judge. As though stubble should be with fire. Who shall dwell
with those Everlasting Burnings? Hence David desires some respit. Oh spare a
little before I go hence. Psalm, 39.13.

The Third Hindrance. When we please our selves with the certainty of what we
have, and settle upon our own sufficiency, and think we can make a shift: and
therefore lay aside the care of a Christ, becauss that dale is mown, that
danger is over, and fall hand-pat to other things. The full Soul despises the
Honeycomb. Wind and raw Humors cloy the Stomach. As Bears will live many months,
and suck the moisture of their Claws.

Helps are Three.

The First Help. Make sure of our interest in Christ. And maintain it. I go to
your God, and my God, your Father and my Father. Joh. 20.17. No man will leave
the poorest cottage, the meanest provision, where he is, for the uncertain
Hopes of a palace, when he knows not whether ever he shall enjoy it. Ye know the
place and the way. Joh. 14. And therefore they desire not to stir. He that
knows he has a Father to go to, he goes freely.

The Second Help. See the daily use and need of a Savior, and that will maintain
a daily desire; as men of an useful, helpful companion. Him we must needs have,
sales one, I pray you call him: him we cannot want, I pray you entreat him. We
can do nothing without him, by any means prevail with him. So they say.

Truly without Christ we can do nothing. Joh. 15.4. He says it, we find it.
Each man desires to maintain his life. Such is Christ to us. Col. 3.4. When
Christ who is our life etc. Therefore Paul saw more of himself and his life in
Christ, than in himself. 2 Cor. 5.8. And therefore desired to be absent from
the Body, that he might be present with Christ. And that he was a Stranger,
while he was in the Body:

The Third Help. There is nothing desirable, but the Lord Jesus.

We have done with the second particular.

The Third and last comes now to be considered and that is, The scope of our
Savior in this his petition, and the maine good and benefit for which our
Savior makes this request for them. Namely,

That they might see his Glory. Not that they might have any glory in
themselves, see or satisfy themselves with their own glory, but that they
might gaze upon the Glory: Which the Father has given to his Son and be
swallowed up with the admiration thereof and that through al Eternity. q. d.
That is the staple commodity for which they trade in Heaven, and the only
business, about which they ought to be employed, and be^^ow themselves through
al worlds. And about this our present inquiry will be spent for this time.

The happiness of our being in Heaven is to behold the glory of the Lord Jesus,
Doct.
which he has received by gift from God the Father.
I say they happiness of our being in Heaven lies in this: for this is the end
at which our Savior aims in this Prayer. This is the end of that Privilege and
blessing for which he Prays. For it is not the place of Heaven, though the
luster and beauty of it, is beyond compare, and indeed unconceivable; nor yet
our being in Heaven, barely and nakedly considered could satisfy either our
desires or wants, and answer the Expectation of the Soul. If Christ were not
there, or we might no enjoy his presence, and ^ee his face, though we were shut
up in a corner of Heaven, certainly Heaven would be no Heaven, our happiness,
no happiness, if we had no Christ. As he said, What availes m^, if I may not
see the Kings face? And therefore the dregs of the vengeance of Hell is
discovered in this, that they shall be destroyed from his presence, and from the
glory of his power.

The End, we say, is better than the Means, as that which adds beauty and
am^bility to them. The End of our being in Heaven, is better than Heaven it
self, and that is to see the glory of Jesus. and hence it is, This spiritual
and special communion betwixt Christ and the Soul is ever implied in such
expressions, as intimate the happiness of our being in Heaven. So when the
Apostle would by a more than ordinary Cordial fetch up the fainting hearts of
the Saints, here he lands al desires, Hopes, endeavors and expectation. 1
^hess. 4. and last. The trump shall blow, the dead shall rise, we shall meet him,
and be taken up into the Clouds, and ^^ere we shall over be with the Lord. Not
be in Heaven, but be with Christ there, that makes the feast, and have glorious
communion with him, and enjoyment of him. Else Gods frowns and displeasure in
Heaven would make it a Hell to the Soul, and that indeed insufferable. Hence
the Prophet makes this the highest pitch of all the Hopes and desires he had,
and the having of that was enough, and did satisfy fully. Psalm. 17.15. Having
spoken of the Pomp and prosperity of the ungodly, they had what they would, and
did what they would in this world, he reposeth his spirit upon this; As for me
I will behold thy Face in righteousness and when I awake I shall be satisfied
with thy likeness. When he awakes at the day of resurrection, The sight of Gods
glory gives full satisfaction. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Its not Heaven
but God in Christ in Heaven, that makes it desirable. All desires of all the
hearts of the Saints empty themselves and end here. Their desires are to thy
Name. And the remembrance of thee. The Soul in Heaven desires the union of the
Body, and the perfection and accomplishment of the number of their fellow
brethren. But when Body and Soul are raised, and the Saints completed, then al
desires are to Gods Name, and to the remembrance of him. There is the
remembrance of nothing else. The things and relations of this life are like
prints left in S^nd, there is not the least appearance or remembrance of them.
The King remembers not his Crown, the Husband the Wife, Father the Child,
nothing that we had, that had any worth and desirableness in it. Its forgotten,
only the Name of God in Christ, that is, so far and so much, as he has
manifested himself in his Christ to the Soul: th^^s now in their Eye and aim,
that only comes into remembrance. This is the top and highest pinnacle of
perfection, which the Apostle has in his Eye. 1 John 3.1, 2. We are now the
Sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be: Why, what is that
excellency that then may be expected? Answ. We shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. The Sight of his Glory is the highest step and stair of ours.

Here we shall enquire three Things: 1. What this Glory is. 2. What it is to see
it. 3. How the sight of this Glory brings in our End, and happiness of our
being in Heaven; and that will be the Reason of the Point.


1. What Glory is.

Answ. There be Two Things in it.

1. One is supposed, and that is the worth and excellency of such Graces and
Perfections, which are in Christ; for all Glory presumes some worth, as the
Basis or Bottom, out of which it does arise. This is included, but not the
special consideration attended. 2. The expression, and putting forth of such
perfection, in the most eminent operations thereof: therein appears the luster
and beauty of such excellencies, and therefore it is said to be the Glory
thereof. Thus the shine of the Sun in its beauty, is called the Glory of the
Sun, as we have more at large opened this Point before.
The Glory of Christ then here attended, Is the meeting, and concurrence of the
expression of all the Divine Perfections and Grace in Christ, in the highest
strain of Eminency, and to the utmost activity of that power they can put
forth, ^or the Creature can receive.

Here is the work of Wisdom, and the power and mercy of Faithfulness,
expressing themselves for the good and welfare the Faithful: But there the
Glory of al these (...) discovered to the utmost of al excellency that is
therein. The magnificent triumph of the sovereign royalty, and Reign of al
those excellent perfections of Wisdom, Mercy, Power, and Faithfulness Christ,
set as it were, in the Throne of Estate, Then will appear the Power of Christ in
the highest strain of Excellency, put forth in the destruction of the wicked to
the utmost, in all that the damned can endure, and not be annihilated: In the
preservation to the utmost of the Saints, that nothing can be added, desired,
received.

The triumph of Wisdom expressed to the utmost, in breaking the Head of the
Serpent, out-bidding al his subtilties, all the slights of sin, and the deceit
of the hearts of the Sons of men, though deceit full above al things.

The triumph of Mercy and Grace, which has put forth the utmost of her
activity, to quit the ^eco^lings of guilt, and fears and terrors, Conscience
never accusing, doubting, fearing any more (...) delivering from the hand of
Hell, and Sin, and Death, and Devil; frees from the Faithfulness performed, and
al promises, nay, has been better than al Promises. Al these perfections of
our Savior, and not only set on the Throne of Glory, but they heads. Wisdom
shall glory over al plots, subtilties policies, deceits of the World, and Sin,
and Devil, it has now defeated al.

The Mercy, and Merits, and Blood of Christ, glories over all the curies and
guilts, punishments, acculations, fears; and miseries, and death, they are al
swallowed up in Victory, they are hereby abolished al. They were upon every
occasion annoying, troubling, molesting distracting nibling; they are now
swallowed up, their name, and place, and presence appear no more.

Grace glories now over all the violence of temptations, the rage of distempers,
the allurements of the World: not only dead, but buried our of the way, and out
of sight, it has now removed al. 1 Cor. 15.24. Christ is said to put down,
(...) take off al activity of rule authority and power (...), no right they can
claim, no authority they can exercise no power they can put forth^ whereas here
Satan, before conversion, has a right, exercises authority, puts forth power;
and al these in part after Conversion.

When thus our Savior is exalted in the Highest strain of Eminency, and
activity or al these Divine Excellencies and Perfections, far above al
Principalities; so that he stands fully possessed of al right in fullness of
Communication, and the fullness of al exercise for immediate dispensation (How
Christ has Glory given him, we have showed before) So that there is no
impediment in regard of Enemies, World, Flesh, Devil to oppose; no weakness on
our part to receive it; no stoppage on Christ's part, either in regard of his
Covenant, or Counsel, and way of his Providence, to cause him to withhold the
letting in of the full ^ou^^^ of his saving Grace and Mercy in that full measure
the Saints can attain in the Body of Christ.

2. What it is to behold this Glory.

For Answer, enquire two Things: 1. What this Beholding implies. 2. The Manner
how it is done.


First: The Word translated here, to Behold, carries three things in it.

1. An attentive eye, and a settled holding of our Mind and thoughts about the
things that are presented to our understanding, Heb. 7.4. Now consider how
great this man was. When the holy Apostle would draw the Hebrews to the serious
attendance of the excellency of the Type, and so of our Savior, who was
typified by Melchizedek; he bid them to consider; hold their thoughts bent to
the object of so worthy attention. 2. It implies a through viewing of the whole
compass of any thing thus presented to consideration, and so the word is very
often used among Heathen Authors, to pass as a Traveller from one place to
another, to acquaint a man's self with the manners, and condition of the place,
and people, to the full. So when the Mind travels to and fro in a serious
contemplation of that which is offered to our Apprehensions, with a careful
search and observation, to take the scantling of whatever on circumstances of
any conceived worth may be in it. Luke, 23.49. It Is said the women that
followed Christ from Galilee stood aloof off, beholding those things. They kept
all the carriages and occurrences of what be^el our Savior from first to last.
3. Not only a man's apprehension comes to be exercised, as in the two former;
but the quality and nature of the thing, comes so to be taken into our
observation and consideration; That the heart comes to be experimentally
affected therewith, John 12.19. Do ye not see how ye profit nothing, The whole
World follows him: that is, your own sense and experience will give you proof
and evidence, that this your opposition, will do no good.
To behold then, the Glory of Christ, is, by an actual and attentive survey of
the excellency thereof, to be suitably, or experimentally affected therewith.

2. The Manner how this is done, appears in three Things: 1. Immediately, as he
is then pleased to shine in, and send in beams of his Grace and Holiness,
directly and nextly upon the Soul, 1 Cor. 13.12. We now see through a Gla^s
darkly: as the excellency of our Savior comes covered and veiled in Providence
and Ordinances, and so made liable to the dimness or our Eye, while we walk in
the shadow of darkness here. As the Soul of a man, which cannot come to our
view in regard of its Spiritual Nature, yet we perceive the presence of it, as
it is speaking in the tongue, and stirring in other parts of the Body. So* 2. We
see him then more fully, wese 11. more of him, and the excellency of his Glory,
than can be attained in this Life, 1 John 3.2. ^^e shall see him as he is, that
is, in himself. We here appre^end so much of Christ as the Ordinances either
present, or convey in the work thereof, either according to its weakness, or
Gods blessing. One text affords matter of Humiliation, another of Comfort,
another of Direction; and that so much of Christ as he will drop in, in this or
that Ordinance: and how little do we see of hin^^ yet that is al we seek; and
that is all the good we can receive to do us good. But them christ in the
glorious sufficiency of the fullness of his Grace, shall shine in a-main upon the
mind, in the full beauty of it. Al Comfort, and Peace, and Grace of al kinds,
shall like a mighty stream, take up the whole man. Here by re-tale, as persons
who are poor, buy, and bring in their Provisions. Then by whol-sale. Here the
Light of the Sun shining in a crevis, and day-hole, leaves yet the place dark,
but then the Lord Christ shall arise as the Sun of Righteousness, and fill (as
that the whole Heaven; so this) the whole heart. So Christ shines in the
Counsels, Comrorts etc. of the Ministry of the Word, and makes us see the
Day Star arising, but still there be shadows: But then he will arise in our
hearts, and al these shadows shall fly away. I shall know as I am known. 3. Most
effectually and powerfully, 1 John. 3.2. It Is the Inference the Apostle makes,
and the reason he brings to force this Consequence, and that infallibly. We
shall be like him; How comes that? We shall see him as be is. For as the Spirit
of Christ, by his Special presence in the Soul, and work upon it, is the only
Author of al Grace and Holiness, which we do here, or shall hereafter possess, 2
Cor. 3.18. We are transformed into one degree of glorious Grace from another,
by the same Spirit. So the Spirit of God, uses first to enlighten our minds,
a^ the first means, whereby he comes to make way for himself into the heart,
and to communicate all that glorious Grace to those, upon whom he is pleased to
bestow it. And hence our Savior, when he would difference his Servants from the
wicked in the World to whom he never intends any saving good, nor do they
partake thereof, he gives this as a ground, John 14.17. The Father will send
his Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but ye know him. No Spirit, no Grace. But the World has
no Spirit, because they cannot receive him; and that because they do not see
not know: But they see, therefore receive, and therefore have the Spirit, and
therefore have Grace: and therefore the Apostle concludes, 1 John 3.6. Whoever
sins, has not seen him, nor known him. True, it is possible the wicked may
have a glimmering of the Truth, and hear tell of a Christ, by the common bruit
of the World, as they read such things writ: But this is a false Light, the
Starlight of some common apprehensions of Reason, Arguments which are
presented to us in Speech and Discourse. But the Apostle ads, Ephesians. 4.20. If ye
have heard and learned Christ, and been taught by him as the Truth is in Jesus.
Ye have heard of the Truth and Christ, as then are in words which report him,
as Arguments and Reasons which discourse and dispute about him; but the Truth
as it is in Jesus, as it issues from a Jesus, from a Savior, and from that
saving, enlightening, over-powring work; when it is set on by the hand of a
Jesus, not by Man, Education, or Disputation, then it will make men to put off
the old man, and be renewed in the spirit of their minds. This the eyeing of
Jesus in a right manner in this Life, will do. But when we come to see Christ as
he is in his Glory, all those impediments which either stopped, or lessened the
work of the Spirit from conveying that fullness of Grace, which otherwise it
would, and by which we might have been perfectly like him, are then taken away.


Now the impediments which stop the current and passage of the Spirit are,
either in regard of the means, whereby he is dispensed, or in regard of our
hearts, wherein he is received.

1. For the means; they are either narrow, as Conduits from the Fountain, or
Creeks from the Sea, of small power, and convey little help in spiritual supply,
as Word and Sacraments.

Or else the Instruments are weak and cracked, and so stop the stream, and
corrupt, and sinful; and therefore though not utterly hinder the work of the
Spirit, yet wrong and defile it much.

But then the Lord Christ will do his work by himself, when his Spirit shall have
full scope; the narrowness of means shall not streighten him, the weakness of
instruments hinder him, to express the full power of his Grace in full
perfection, but God shall now be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28.

1. Whatever Word, and Sacraments, and Prayer, could, or did convey; whatever
the Power of Ordinance, the Ministry of the Word, the Counsel of Saints,
endeavored to work in you; he will be instead of al, and do more than al. Ye
prayed for a Christ, did ye not? Ye heard for a Christ, received for a Christ,
conferred, humbled, to come more near a Christ, to enjoy more of him, do more
for him: Alas, that Christ ye desired to hear some Tidings of, ye shall see him,
not in weakness of Ordinances, Ministry of his Servants, etc. ye shall see him
as he is, in the highest strain of Eminency of al Grace, acting to its utmost
for your good, that which they all could not do.

They did convey but imperfect power against sin, peace and comfort to your
Conscience: but now ye shall find al power perfectly, and constantly, gloriously
conveyed from this Glory of Christ.

2. There shall be no impediment to hinder or streighten the Spirit from
conveying; no impediment on our part, no hindrance in our Souls, because they
shall readily receive the full impression of Grace. The set frame and face of the
Soul being alone for Christ, and toward him. The whole employment of the whole
man being nothing else, but to attend upon Christ, and to submit to him, to be
carried by the presence, power, and influence of his Spirit alone. Look as it
is with In-mates under a Roof; the one is constrained to confine himself, to
heap up, and tumble his Household Stuff together, because he has not room to
set it forth: but when al are outed, and he has full scope in his House and
Family, he may order al in their full beauty. So here, pa^^ly our Corruptions,
partly the World, and Earthly occasions keep house with Christ; thoughts of
Christ, and the Family, ^are for the Promises, and for Provision also; pains
and labor to settle our Spiritual, the like contrivements to suit our temporal
Condition: and al takes up, if not take off, and carri^^ our minds and
thoughts, our hearts, our care; so that Christ, and the works of his Grace, are
crowded into corners and narrows: But then the House will be free, the heart
quit of al these, and Christ will have full scope. Hence the Apostle, 1. These.
4.17. We shall ever be with him. We are now pestered with unwelcome guests,
which we cannot send going, Pride and Peevishness, Wearishness, sluggishness,
etc. and they are with us in our Prayers, Duties, Hearing, Conferences: Whence
it is we crowd Christ into a narrow corner, not an Ear to hear, a Mind to
attend, our Prayers few and faint, etc. We are mated, and molested with
Friends, miseries, wants, necessities, families, occasions, they are calling
and crowding. But then the Coast will be clear, we shall only be with Christ.
Thus the Apostle speaking concerning fasting and Prayer, enjoins the Man and
Wife to part mutual Company and Society, and forsake their Contentments in
their mutual fellowship, 1 Cor. 7.5. that they might give themselves to Prayer.
While we live here, we give away some Love, bestow some delight, spend some
thoughts and affections, take some content in these; therefore he would have
them al laid aside, that we might give our selves, etc. Now this shall be done
at that day: nay not only, and alone bound for Christ: But now it is the whole
employment of the Soul to attend upon him; the Soul has none other to see,
nothing else to do. Rev. 14.4. They follow the Lamb where ever be goes; see no
Wife, nor Child, nor Friend, nor Honor, Pleasure, but Christ only; Old things
are passed: Have none to love, to desire, to delight in, to be satisfied with,
but Christ alone. Now we send our thoughts and affections upon other Errands.
If a man knew nothing, loved nothing, needed nothing, but one thing, how would
that carry him, command him, prevail with him?

3. How this brings in this Happiness.

Answ. Upon a double Ground: and here we have a double Reason of the Point.

1. Because men come to receive more of God, and that in the most intimate and
inward manner: and this is one end of the great Works of God in our Creation
and Redemption, of our being men and Christians, that he might leave the
impressions and manifestations of himself, and his Divine perfections upon us,
whom he would have to be Monuments of those everlasting Mercies, and glorious
Attributes through al Eternity. For God cannot but work for his own Glory; and
because there can be no addition made to himself, who is infinite in all his
Excellencies, therefore there must be only a manifestation of these, and this
is the aim of al Gods Counsels. He will show forth, and make Editions of his
glorious Grace and Mercy, which may be seen, and read, and acknowledged;
therefore a world, therefore a man; and he a Vessel of glorious Grace: When
they partake most of his glorious Mercy, and are tunn'd top full of glory, and
there is nothing else; Then the Lord attains the end of the work of his Grace.
For its not Heaven, the place, nor the freedom from evil, or the presence and
confluence of al pleasure, or our being there that makes us happy: But the
enjoyment of God in all his perfections; and should he withdraw himself, Heaven
were a Hell, and we as miserable as Devils. We then attain our supreme
happiness, when we attain our end, and our good is, to have more of God. Whom
have I in Heaven but thee? That Christ may be glorified in life and death.

Its part of the scope of Gods proceeding at the day of judgment. 2 Thessalonians.
1.10. He will be glorious in his Saints, but admired in all those that believe.
He will be glorious in the Eyes of al standers by, Angels and Devils, for the
Grace that then shall be expressed in the Saints: But that by faith they have
received Christ, and come to be one with God through him, and receive al by
him, this dazels the Eyes of Angels, and amazeth the hearts of Devils. Yea its
a work beyond admiration implies some thing unexpected, such as we cannot tell
the reason of, that is matter of admiration, is not in comprehension.

The Devils have seen men holy and innocent and unblamable, as Adam in
Paradise. But when the Devils shall see such as were haters of Christ and God,
to receive Christ, and to be made one with God, through him: to have God to be
al in all, when they were without God in the world, this will make Angels to be
swallowed up in admiration.

This is an especial part of that reward that God has promised unto his: not
to have freedom from annoyance, nay the presence of evil, but to have himself:
God communicating himself in all the fullness of perfections fully to the Soul,
as it is capable of. God is the Objective happiness to the Soul in himself, and
so its equal to al: but God communicating himself in his fullness, as far as a
sinner is capable, is part of that special reward we have in Heaven. Genesis 15.1.
Lament: 3.24.

2. Reas. More of our Souls are for God. For now the strength of the whole man
is wholly spent and exercised in the enjoying of God, and him only and
immediately. God without means: God instead of al means: God only and no means.
Now some love, and joy, and desire etc. Is spent upon the choice ordinances:

But then none of al these, are in the Eye and desire; but all the faculties of
the Soul are fully taken up with God. This is the errand of our lives, and the
end why we came into the world. This is intimated in. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11, 12.
Wherefore I pray always for you, that God would make you worthy of your
Calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power, That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and
you in him, according to the Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. The
meaning is, That God would Count them worthy of their calling; That is, the
glory unto which they were called: and so Fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness; that is, fully bestow all that special good which in the purpose of
his good pleasure, he intended to them, and the work of Faith with power; that
is, bring the work of faith to perfection.

Now the end of all that glory and fullness of al perfection and spiritual good
he prays for, is, 1. That the Name of Christ] That is, Christ as made known in
his word, Offices, and the great work of Redemption. Might be made glorious in
you, in receiving this and the impression of this, that is, that it may be
said, See what the Lord Christ has done. 2. And you al may be made glorious
and glorified, not in you selves, but as you are in him.


As he made glorious in you by receiving: So you may be glorified in him, by
returning al to him, while you, Put forth the exercise of all upon Christ, and
through him, upon God. You by receiving of Grace become to have his image: by
the exercise of Grace, you become to be like him, and suck out the sweet of
that infinite good that is in him. For herein lies the beatifical Vision of
God. If truly glorious and efficatious, brings in the fruition of him and his
goodness, which is our last end, and chiefest good, which is not to be in
Heaven, but to please God, and choose his will, will his will. We meet with God,
and suck out a satisfying goodness in him in so doing, this is one end.

But both these are to be attended and neither separated from the other. The
wel-working and exercise of our Grace is the end: but that Barely I doubt will
not do it. For no creature can give content to the Soul, but our wel-working is
a creature. Therefore with that I added also, A relish of satisfying goodness,
or comprehending of that goodness, That is, God in his goodness, by acting upon
him, and we communicating from him, all the perfection we are capable of.

We may be said to be like God, and to have his Image, because we have Grace.
But we are most like him, and communicate most of al good from him, when we
close with him in the act of his Grace. Satisfy me with thy mercy. I shall
behold thy Face, and be satisfied. The issue is, If by our beholding of the
glory of Christ so immediately, effectually, we receive more of God, are more
for God in meeting with him, and sucking out satisfying good from him,

Then the happiness of out being in Heaven is to behold the glory of our Lord
Christ.

USE, 1. Instruction.
We have here a Cordial against Death. This should make the Saints willing to
die, that they may gaze upon the unmovable glory of a Christ, and be made truly
and gloriously happy thereby. It was David's longing from that little glimpse he
had once found. Psalm. 63.1, 3. My Soul thirsts etc. That I may see thee, as
sometimes I have seen thee. So say thou, I have seen the Lord in his word, when
he humbled me; in his promises, when he has comforted me, in his sacraments
when he strengthened me; Oh that I may once see him, as he is. The glory of
that Wisdom, that I may never err more, the glory of that mercy, that I may
never fear, stagger any more, that Grace, that I may never be foiled any more.
Thus Job, I know my Redeemer etc. The mariner will be content to split the
Vessel if there be no other way to get to the Haven.

USE. 2. Examine.
Whether we ever knew the Lord aright or no. Whether it be a savor of knowledge,
or a Visard of knowledge. If thou have true sight of the glory of Christ. It will
make thee a heavenly and glorious Christian: It will make thee like the Christ
thou see in part, and hereafter in perfection: then in full measure, but here
in some truth. If the Eye Salve shall be right, it heals the Sore, of the Eye,
as well as recover the sight of it. Otherwise had thou al knowledge, could
thou search al secrets, and yet thy learning and skill left thee as sensual, as
careless as ever, thou have happily seen the glory of some learning and Wisdom
of words but thou never had a speculation indeed of the glimpse of the glory
of Christ in the reality of it. Isa. 6.5. That Vision of the Prophet, see what
a disposition it wrought in him, This sight makes him sit down confounded. This
knowledge is like the Sun rising, that scatters al Clouds, Starlight leaves it
dark. False light, like lightning, leaves the mind and heart as dark and
corrupt as it was before. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. 1 John 3.6.

USE, 3. Of Direction.
What Price we should put upon the knowledge of Christ, how much desire it, what
Endeavor to attain it.

Prize it above Heaven, desire it more than Heaven, endeavor to attain it
rather than Heaven it self; for indeed it is better. There were no glory in
Heaven, but that we behold this glory of Christ. Thus Paul desires. Phil. 3.10.
This the Saints have counted the peculiar evidence of Gods favor, as Moses.
Exodus 33.18.

Its the greatest trade the Saints take up in Heaven; let us then begin Heaven
upon Earth; take up our thoughts with that now, upon which we shall gaze through
al eternity.

This is the end of al ordinances, the scope of our Praying, Hearing,
Preaching, attendance upon al Duties: we preach for this, ye pray for this,
That when all the Churches shall meet together we may come to the unity of the
faith, and the acknowledgment of the Son of God. It was that Son of God, that
pardoned my sin, quieted my conscience, comforted my Soul. And mine also say
ye, or else I had perished: and mine also, or I had been everlastingly
discouraged. When we shall never cease the seeing, admiring, adoring the
glorious perfections of his Son; let us now begin to search after them;

Means are Three.

1. Keep the Conscience convinced, and the heart persuaded, that as al power is
given to Christ in Heaven and Earth, so al good that is done to his in
spiritual things, and al deliverances for his accomplished, are wrought by him,
and he is ready for the relief of his. Act. 2.33. Know assuredly says Peter,
That Christ, whom ye have crucified, him has God raised, he has shed down
that which ye see. I see him standing at the right hand of the Father. Know ye
Devils, I see the glory or that mercy that did rescue me from their rage, else I
had been cooped up with you in the chains or darkness.

Be it known unto you ye damned creatures, this is the Son of God, the glory of
whose conquering Grace has broke my flinty heart, or else I had burned in Hell
with you: that wretched Creature that was proud, and is now humbled, as ye see:
he that was estranged from God and Heaven, and is now called, converted,
comforted, Know that Christ has shed down that Grace ye now see. He has done
there great things.

2. Hold those glorious excellencies unto the Eye of the Soul, that they may
never depart away from it, nor the Soul withdraw it self from them, until they
leave an impression upon it. Therefore if any thing besides come in the way
between the Soul and Christ, or would call off the Soul, attend it not. If any
thing be presented against this to lessen the worth or necessity, hear it not,
regard it not. Keep these in thy thoughts. 1 Chro. 9.18. Be in these. 1 Timothy
4.15.

As in infusions, daily, though easy, Heats leave a Tincture of the vigor and
virtue of the Herb, or metal, behind them

Daily company keeping is the next way of moulding each into other. When men
prohibit al other goods to be brought, so that Chapmen see none beside, then
they sell their own.

3. A heart willing and yieldable to give way to those glorious operations of
Christ and the dispensations of himself unto the Soul. Prove. 2.10. He does not
work because we stop the way, and would not have him work. Ye will find
generally a loathness and going off from a truth, if you want the good of it,
and find not the benefit of it. Jsiah his heart ^^e^^ed. The^ is an instruction
sealed, when al parts be apr^^d.

Your Souls refuse comfort, peace, and assurance, unless it be granted on your
manner, and therefore God seals it not up in the Soul.

VERSE, 25.26. Righteous Father, the world does not know thee but I have known
thee, and these know that thou have sent me. And I have declared etc.


THe verse contains the close of our Saviors prayer; wherein he ascends in his
thoughts and desires to the utmost top of that heavenly happiness, that can be
enjoyed, or in truth begged for the Saints when they shall come to the end of
their Hopes. And herein he reserves the best until last, leaves a sweet ^a^ewel
and relish, that he might raise up his own heart, and the hearts of his
Disciples to the highest pi^ch, not only leads and presents them to the throne
of glory, puts them in the arms of his mercy, but leaves them in the bosom,
yea lodges them in the heart-Blood of his Fatherly love and faithfulness,
which does not only exceed the very expectation of a Creature, as he came out
of Gods hands, and needs look no further than the perfection of Adam and
Innocence would carry him into: but swallows up the Soul in everlasting
admiration: that he should come so near unto God, and be received in that
indeared affection of a Father, that he is entertained with no less, but the
like love, as Jesus Christ has been beloved of God and the Father of love.

We are then come to the Pinnacle of the perfection of happiness it self, and
there seems to be something more, and one step higher, than the glorious Grace
of Heaven; look we only to the glory of that Grace, that shall be imprinted upon
the Saints and perfected in them at that time.

Here we have the Diamond of the Crown of glory even the love of the Father
whereby he has loved Christ himself, and which is better than life it self, or
sanctifying Grace it self; when it is come to the greatest perfection, as we
shall endeavor to speak to it, when we come to that place. Its the last
resolution of Paul's confidence, and the top of the rock, whereon the Soul
rests, Its beyond al gunshot. I am peeswaded etc. That neither Principalities
nor powers etc. Shall ever be able to separate us from the love of God in
Christ. It was before al these, therefore it cannot be reached by any of these.

In the twenty fifth, and twenty sixth Verses we have two things.

1. A description of the person, to whom the Prayer is made; Righteous Father;
an expression not recorded in all the new Testament beside: nor can I suddenly
find it in all the Old. As though it were reserved on purpose for this place.
And for this Prayer of our Savior. 2. The Prayer it self, wherein are four
Particular. 1. The thing our Savior eyes and desires: in the last words, That
the love etc. 2. The Party who entreats in their behalf. 3. The persons for
whom; whose worth and excellency is here set forth by their effects, and that
special Communion, and Communication, or intercourse between them and the
Father. 1. I know thee. 2. These also know that thou have sent me. 3. A
dis-similitude, and unlike Condition of the wicked; The World does not know
thee.
4. The Means here used, and that which is resolved on, to be improved for this
end, that it may be attained, which is sought for with such earnestness: I have
manifested thy Name, and will manifest it.

Begin we with the Description of the Person, Righteous Father.

In the words, our Savior looks at God, and at that in God, which might give
him greatest encouragement to seek, and greatest assurance to speed of that,
which he did desire from the hand of the Lord.

Righteous.] This is attended in a double Consideration, so far as suits the
place and purpose in hand. 1. Properly, speaking according to our apprehension,
and the practice of the virtue in our ordinary converse betwixt man and man;
it is that virtue, whereby we give every one their due: and that is either by
way of distribution, called distributive Justice, in giving Honor to whom Honor
belongs; or of Commutation, in our Contracts and Bargainings, when we make
payment according to the worth and price of things, called Commutative Justice;
or else Corrective Justice, when in Civil Judicature of Causes and Persons, we
respect no man's Person, but the equity and right of the Cause; and give to
every Cause his full due.

Some Needle-headed men, who are sharp, and Eagle-sighted in the search of
Secrets, they have conceived, and concluded; That this Commutative Justice
cannot be attributed to God. For they imagine it would cast some kind of
disparagement and imperfection upon the Majesty of the Almighty.

1. That God should be bound, and become a Debtor to the Creature.

2. Where Commutative Justice is, there one may receive something from another,
as well as give something to another.

With this I will not now meddle, because it is not the special intent of the
place. However, I confess the subtilty of the Conceit, will not easily satisfy
my Apprehension. For I see no more disparagement put upon God to be bound by
the Goodness of his Nature, than to be bound by his free Prom^e. He is Debtor
to his own will in the one, as to his Nature in the other. Nor do I^ee what
prejudice is done to the Sovereignty of Gods Will, and absolute Dominion, to
say, The goodness of his Will, cannot go cross to his Justice, then it cannot
go cross to his infinite Wisdom, and Prudence, which all grant. Besides,
Justice is exercised according to the Nature of that Commerce and Intercourse
which is betwixt the Parties with whom it is exercised.

As the Justice of God, may have wrong by the breach of a Rule: so it may
receive content and satisfaction equally by the full restoring of a Rule.
Though no intrinsecal hurt can be done to the Essence of God; for in that there
is no intercourse of Justice, betwixt the Creature, and Creator. Yet there may
be wrong done to the Covenant of God, in which regard Justice only is to be
attended, as it is exercised betwixt God and the Creature. If it were a
disparagement to God, to receive equal to wrong done; how could the merits of
Christ, give equal satisfaction for our sins, and that to the exact Justice of
God? wherein the Glory of Gods Justice, is not prejudiced, but advanced. It
Justice will require the manifestation of his Goodness, by the work of the
Creature. It Is but equal, in case it be wronged in her Commands, to glorify
his Severity in punishing. By some proportion, in case it be pleased, and
content, it may reward the work by blessing: Neither does Justice deprive her
self of the Dominion of that which she does bestow: but in what she bestows,
and they receive, in all they are bound to serve, and yield obedience unto
Justice.

Besides, by Justice thus to convey a change, deprives God no more of the
Dominion of the thing, than to pass away a right by promise.

If it be said, He becomes a Debtor to his own Fidelity; so also he becomes
Debtor to the Bounty and Goodness of his own Nature. For it was from Gods
Justice that he was made fit to execute, and keep the Covenant; and it was from
the goodness of his Nature, he made him so: and therefore is only bound to the
goodness of his own Nature, in whatever Covenant he enters with him.

We cannot be profitable to God; as a man is profitable to his Neighbor, to
give him something he wanted: but we may be profitable in furthering Gods ends,
by that which we have received from God. But I will not meddle with this.

2, To be righteous therefore, in the Second place, is to be just mour
Promises, when we do what we speak. As in our ordinary Language; he is a man
that is just in his word, he is a just man of his promise. And thus the
Scripture, Psalm. 31.1. and 115.1. and 143.11. therefore the Promise is called
the Word of his Righteousness. Psalm. 119.23. In this lost Condition, in which
forlorn man is, and in the Covenant of the Gospel, in which lies al our
Comfort, we have nothing to plead in regard of our selves, but the faithful
Word of Gods Promise: but in regard of Christ, I find the Scripture joins them
together, 1 John, 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to
forgive, where we have both joined. Faithful in regard of his free Promise made
to us in Christ: just in regard of that purchase, which by Christ has been
laid down, and paid for our sin, and he has merited by way of just payment,
full satisfaction, and forgiveness of our sin. These two cannot be the same: For
the one cannot be put by way of exposition of the other, because then, the more
dark should be used to explicate the more clear; and the improper to expound
the proper; if Justice should explicate what Faithfulness were. So that in a
true sense, both are truly attributed to God: but the Second is specially
intended in this place. Hence we have two Points.

1 We must in our Prayer look at those excellencies in God from whence we may
receive that good we pray for. 2 God in Faithfulness dispenses his Fatherly
love to his.
To the First.

We must in our Prayer look at those Excellencies in God, Point 1.
from whence we may receive that good we pray for.
When our Savior would obtain the highest mercy, that the Love of God might
dwell in them, he eyes him as a Father; in which Relation there is the dearest
and greatest Love of al. He eyes him in his Faithfulness, and there is the
freest and surest, and never failing Love.

God was a Father to Adam in Creation, in giving him his Being, as one of his
Generation, which was brought out of his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness: but this
Love, though it was dear, and the greatest that God extended to any Creature in
the World: yet Adam fell from that Estate, and became a Child of Wrath.

But the Faithful look not to the Love of a Father merely, but to the Love of
his Faithfulness, and that will not fail, not shall they ever fall from it; and
therefore ye shall observe in the Description of our Savior, which is laid forth
at large in the first of the Revelation, in the Sum and full discovery of the
excellency of Christ, that the Lord appears, and presents him to each Church in
the expression of Excellency, which answered the particular necessity of the
Churches Condition.

Smyrna was under great pressures, and the Devil cast some of them into Prison,
so that they were in a dying Condition: therefore Christ appears to them as
first and last, who was dead, and is alive, Chap. 2.8. and therefore could ever
preserve them, and would recover them from death.

To the Church to Thyatira, because they grew sluggish, and tolerated the Woman
Jezebel to set her Forgeries to sale, and vent her Follies, and Filth, and
Profaneness under the name of a Prophetess: therefore Christ appears to that
Church, as one that has Eyes like a flame of Fire, who will search into al
Secrets, verse 18. and Feet of Brass that will trample al to dust, against whom
his indignation proceeds.

Vaunting Laodicea, who mistook her own Estate, and thought she was rich, and
yet was poor, verse 17. he presents himself to her, as a faithful and true
Witness, verse 14. They bear false Witness of their Condition, but he would
give in that which was true.

The Second Point follows now to be attended, which was this: Viz.

God in Faithfulness dispenses his Fatherly Love to his. Point 2.

That Is the aim of our Savior his Expression; not only looks at God, as a
righteous, faithful God, but a faithful Father, has a Fatherly Love and Care
of his People and Children; and he is faithful in the communicating, and
expessing of his Love to them. He bears a faithful, Fatherly Affection to his
Servants.

We shall open two Things:

1. Wherein this Faithfulness, and Fidelity of the Father consists. 2. The
Reason why he thus dispenses his Love.
I. This Fidelity of the Father, consists in Three Things:

1. A full and free engagement of himself; to procure and accomplish the good,
and welfare of his People. Undertakes to see al good done for them, that can be
desired, as needful: al evil removed, which they can fear, as hurtful or
dangerous to their Souls. The Father, as I may say, lays al his excellencies,
and sufficiency to pawn, that he will see the Salvation of his shall not
miscarry. As he is said to swear by himself, he calls his Godhead, as a Witness
to see done what he says. So, I may say, he does by Promise, lay his infinite
sufficiency to pledge; that as Reuben said to Jacob, I will undertake; thou shall
require him at my hand: So God says, require what may be needful, or helpful
at my hand, I will answer it. And this God has left upon Record in his Word,
and under his hand, and therefore as the wise man said of him that is become
Surety for his Friend; Thou art ensnared, and taken in the words of thy mouth,
Prove. 6.2, 3. Deliver thy self when thou art come into the hand of thy Friend.
He is now in the hands of the Creditor; It was in his own hand and will before,
if he would have paid, if not, he might have chosen; but he is now in the hand
of his Friend, he has him bound by Promise. This is implied in that Phrase, 2 Timothy 2.13. He is faithful, he cannot deny himself; q. d. If he should deny to
do good, he should deny himself; for he has laid himself to pawn. 2. As a free
Engagement, so there must be a full Accomplishment, and Performance of all that
is promised, and which he has undertaken to see done in the behalf of his,
Psalm. 119.138. Thy Testimonies are Righteous, and very faithful; not failing in
the least, nor falling short in the performance of whatever was promised. Lam.
3.23. Great is thy Faithfulness, which provides new mercies every morning,
every moment, answering to new occasions: therefore it is said, Psalm. 36.5. Thy
Faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds; and therefore it is noted, that there
failed nothing of al those words that God had spoken. 3. There must be as a
certain, so an immutable continuance of his Fatherly care, through our daily
course, without any interruption: for he has undertaken to see us safely
arrived, he has engaged himself, he will not neglect it, and nothing can hinder
it, unless it can out-bid his Power, or overreach his Wisdom, or out-bid his
Mercy; for all stand bound. Psalm. 89.33. I will not suffer my Faithfulness to
fail: and 119.90. Thy Faithfulness endures through all Generations. Therefore
Genesis 28.15. he would not leave him until he had fulfilled al his Goodness.
II. The Reason.

1. Because hereby the Glory of the Riches of his Mercy and Grace, comes to be
manifested, yea, magnified. When every thing else failed, and was at a loss,
God out of his Faithfulness, he undertakes, he recovers, he preserves his in
the ways of Life; and it is out of Faithfulness that he gives any, continues
and maintains what he gives, succeeds, and gives a Blessing to al means; and
out of Faithfulness, over-works al pressures, and hindrances from good. Thou
out of Faithfulness have corrected me: Psalm. 119.75. So that al is Grace,
Grace, and nothing but Grace. Faithfulness has an influence into al our ways,
walks up and down the World with us. Psalm. 89.24. My Faithfulness and Mercy
shall be ever with him; yea, verse 2. he will build up one Mercy upon another,
until he bring us to Heaven, and there his Faithfulness shall be established.
Therefore the whole Gospel is called a Promise, q.d. that is the Cabinet that
keeps al those precious Jewels of Grace and Glory. 2. Hereby also, the
Salvation and safety of the Saints, is made sure, and established for ever,
Romans 4.16. It was therefore of Grace, that it might be sure to all the Seed.
When Adam had undertaken for all his, to bring them to Life, by his doing and
working, we see that he, and his Grace, and Abilities, and Performances came to
nothing: he was unfaithful in the Trust. But God has engaged himself, and his
Word is gone out of his Mouth, that he will not fail David, Psalm. 89.35. Hence
comes to be a sure Covenant, sure Mercies, sure Peace, Comfort, etc. Surely
persevere, and shall undoubtedly be saved.
USE, 1. Instruction.
Out of Gods Fatherly Love, look for Afflictions, Miseries, Changes, and
Necessities to attend us in our daily Course; because this is one part of Gods
Faithfulness, and according to that he dispenses his Fatherly Love, Psalm.
119.75. I know thy Judgments are right, and thou out of very Faithfulness, have
afflicted me; out of Faithfulness have disparaged me, have brought me to great
extremities, afflicted me in the world, that thou might not condemn me with
the world.

The Psalmist accounts he cannot, in a surfeit, but Diet: in rankness of Blood,
but bleed: in strength of distempers, but purge. Its part of his Faithfulness
to be true to his rule, and that is health.

He has promised, ye shall have Houses and lands with persecution, would ye not
have him Faithful? He has promised he will do you good: and then he must lead
you in the wilderness and prove you, that he may do it. Deuteronomy. 8.4, 5. He has
promised the world shall not be your bane, and he will deliver you from this
present evil world. And therefore if he pluck away, if he keep you to a spare
Diet, its his Faithfulness. Hebr. 12.9. We have had the Fathers of our Bodies,
and they have corrected us: how much more ought we to be subject to the Father
of our Spirits that we may live? Its your life that God intends, and his
Faithfulness.

USE, 2.
Strong and invincible CONSOLATION, and that is the main use; The truth, which
as a mighty stream, issues from all the faithful performances of the Lord. Hebr.
6. That by two Immutables we might have strong consolation. When al fails,
Eyes, and heart, and Hopes, yet God will not suffer his faithfulness to fail.

This is a bottom to bear our hearts, a rock that is higher than we, and higher
than al misery. When thy friends prove false and play fast and loose; It was
thou my familiar friend etc. When they cast thee off; as Paul, at my first
answer no man stood by me, al men forsook me etc. But God stood by me, when
they leave thee, Gods faithfulness and mercy will never leave thee. Psalm. 89.24.
When thy flesh and thy heart fails, the Lord will be the strength of thy heart
and thy portion for ever. Ps. 73.26.

In temptation, when the strength fails thee, and Satan has got the Wind and
Hill and Sun upon thee, faithfulness gives ^hee strength. 1 Cor. 10.12, 13. No
temptation etc. When thy Grace grows feeble, and thou growest behind hand,
little good thou do with all, and little good receivest, wantst life and
power, faithfulness will quicken this, and perfect al. 1 Cor. 1.9.

Nay, when thy faith fails, thou have dealt falsely in his covenant, broken thy
vows, thy promises, been unfaithful under the means and mercy, and have denied
him, faultered in thy profession, as Peter, I know not the man, I know not the
rule, the reproof: yet he is faithful, he cannot deny himself. Here thou will
and thou must smart for it; he will bring thee by Hell, but yet he will recover
thee. Psalm. 89.28. Though thou leave and forsake him, yet he will not leave
thee, but of his faithfulness be mindful, and not forsake thee. Mark how
Nehemiah recovers himself upon this board Neh. 9. Thou art a God that keep
covenant and mercy; they rebelled against thee many times, and did evil before
thee, but thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not, And many times
did deliver them, for thou art a gracious and merciful God, upon this shelf
of the boat he still swims out.

USE, 3. A word of Reproof.
It shows the hainousness of the sin of unbeleef in the Saints departing from
God. Who have had a God faithful to them, and yet they not place their faith in
him, has God ever failed? did ye ever seek, ever humble your selves, ever
trust in him in vain? why have ye done thus? how unkindly, how unreasonably
have ye dealt with him? Ask your Fathers and they will tell you, ask your own
hearts and they can testify: has he spoken and not performed? nay has he not
been better than his word, even abundant in goodness and truth? So Samuel. 1.
Sam. 12.7. So God pleads, Jer. 2.5. What Iniquity have your Fathers sound in
me, That they are gone far from me etc. Be astonished at this ye Heavens, and
be horribly confounded, says the Lord. Verse, 12, 13.

Thus we have done with the first part observed in this Prayer, The person to
whom its directed, Viz. To God as a Righteous Father.

2. The Prayer it self.

The second part comes now into consideration, Viz. The Prayer it self: where
digressing from the order of the particulars as they were laid out in the
opening of the text, and taking the words as they first come to hand, we shall
begin with the description of the parties for whom the Prayer was made: and
therein first that dissimilitude and unlike condition that is between the world
and them. The World has not known thee.

1. By WORLD is meant the wicked of the world. I pray not for the world, but
for those that thou have given me out of the world. Verse, 6.9. 1 John 5.19. We
know that we are of God, and the whole WORLD lives in wickedness: Where these
two are put in way of opposition; To be of God, to be begotten and called of
him, and to be such As lie in Wickedness: they are such as be made up of
Worldly Principles, take up their abode in wickedness, and are brought to bed
in it.

Because the God of this world rules in them. 2. Cor. 4.4.

Because the Spirit of the world acts them, perverted mutability, whereby they
are under the power of the Creature, that carries them along. 1 Cor. 2.12. We
have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit of God. Because they
take content in the things of the world, Mind earthly things. Phil. 3.19. Are
Children of the World.

2. These Wicked persons do not know the Father. Know. That is, they have not a
real and right conceiving of the Father, as in that Faithfulness and Fatherly
affection, wherein he communicates himself to his. For in that special
consideration this knowledge is here to be attended, and so restrained. He says
not, nor yet means that they did not know God, or know the Father as God, or
his Deity: for it is directly contrary to the expression and affirmation of the
Apostle, touching the Gentiles in the general, look at them in the lump, as
they lie in the loins of lost Adam. Romans 1.18. They know God, but did not
glorify God, as God: nay God is not only manifest to them, but in them. Verse,
19.

But look at him, as a Father, and in regard of that Faithfulness he expresses
toward his, and then ye have the meaning of our Savior, and the mind of the
Spirit of God in the place.

The wicked and ungodly of the world, Doct.
they know not the Fatherly Love of God, which he in faithfulness dispenses
toward his.
They know him not as a Righteous Father, though they may, and happily do know
him, as a God.

This our Savior takes as granted, and gives it as the reason of all that
wretched proceeding of the ungodly against the Saints in all Ages. Joh. 16.3.
These things they will do unto you, because they have not known. the Father, nor
me. Joh. 15.12. These things will they do unto you for my Names sake, because
they knew not him that sent me. And this is not only true of those, Who are of
mean place and parts, who happily neither had helps to instruct them, nor
abilities to improve such means of knowledge, as might lead them to the
understanding of the Father: As they spoke of the baser sort: This People that
know not the Law: A company of Poor, silly, deluded, sottish Creatures, that
never had teaching and training up in the knowledge of the Lord: But our Savior
affirms it of such, who thought their penny good Silver, and prided themselves
in the profession and knowledge of the truth, nay Challenged both interest and
acceptance in God as a Father. Joh. 8.54, 55. If I honor my self, my honor is
nothing: It is my Father that honoreth me, of whom ye say, that he is your
Father. And yet ye have not Known him. q. d. Though ye lift up your heads, and
would bear the world in hand, that ye are the only people of the Lord, and
stand in such near relation, and are so dearly affected to him, and so highly
esteemed of him, that he is your Father, when in truth, these are but falls
Presumptions of your Privileges, and vaunting of your Pride: for yet to this
day ye have not known him: you that are the learned Doctors of the Law you who
profess your selves the Guides and Leaders of the people, and to be instructers
of such, who are ignorant, and therefore should know the mysteries of
Godliness, yet ye know not the Father, but I know him.

Object. But you will say, however this may be granted confessed to be true, of
the rude and unlearned multitude, which are marvailous sottish in themselves,
and insufficient to search into the knowledge of the perfections of the Deity.
Yet that the profound Scholars, yea Ministers, though wicked and ungodly, yet
for time, Standing, studies, mervailous eminent, Dextrous and famous for their
skill in all Tongues and Arts: Nay who have Preached both long and much of the
Deity and persons, of Christ, and of the special relation betwixt the Father
and Christ, should yet be ignorant of them, how can this suit with reasonable
apprehension?

Answer four things.

1. Though the perfections of the Deity may be apprehended, by the dictates of
our consciences and the creation of the world: yet the discerning of the
Trinity of the persons in the unity of the Godhead, is beyond the ability of
any of the lost Sons of Adam, being left unto the search, which the light of
their own reason will lead them unto. And because, as the unity of the Godhead
does most appear by the works of creation: so the distinction of the persons is
best perceived by the works of Redemption. Because our natural reason cannot
compass it; its not sufficient to conceive this. And therefore ye shall observe
when ever either question or expression is presented to any of the wisest of
the Heathen, touching Redemption, or resurrection; They look at it as a mere
delusion and dream, and cast it a way with scorn. Act. 17.32. When Paul Spoke
of the resurrection, some mocked, some wondered, and said, we will hear thee
again of this matter.

2. That God the Father should be the Father of Christ, as God-Man, and in
Faithfulness dispense Fatherly love to any of his. It exceeds the reach of al
Humane Reason, and had it not been revealed in the Scriptures, it could never
have been apprehended by the improvement of the best abilities of men and
Angels. 1 Cor. 1.20. When the world in the Wisdom of God knew not God (that is,
by the Wisdom that he had left imprinted on the works of creation and
providence, they could not know God in Christ, nor the way of his dispensation
therein. It pleased God the foolishness of Preaching to save them that bel^eve:
By that which the world calls foolishness. For the Cross of Christ is
foolishness to the Grecian, and a stumbling Block to the Jew.

3. Though it does exceed the reach of reason to find this, or Fathom this,
being improved to the highest pitch, Yet after it is revealed and dispensed
with plainness out of the word, The reason of a carnal man may yield assent
thereto, and by force of Argument be constrained to submit to the convincing
Evidence thereof: for its above reason, but not against reason. Its beyond the
reach of reason to Fathom, but its not Cross to the rule of right reason, but
it may, and will confess it. For its a staple truth, for ever to be held. There
is nothing in the Nature of God, or the actions of God, that can be contrary to
the Wisdom of God (for then God should be contrary to himself, which is
assuredly blasphemous to think) and certain it is, the rule of right reason is
a beam of Gods blessed Wisdom, which he can no more Cross, than in truth he can
be Cross or contrary to himself. Therefore Paul calls it Wisdom in the greatest
Eminency. 1 Cor. 2.6.

4. When this Fatherly love and Faithfulness of God is revealed out of the
Scripture, though the judgment of a carnal man may confess the truth, yet he
cannot conceive it. He may be constrained to yield to the evidence of Argument
which he cannot gainsay, yet the reality and spiritualness of that divine good
that is therein couched, he cannot comprehend.

The Sum in short is this.

When the love and Faithfulness of God is in the Scriptures revealed, or out of
the experience of the faithful recorded in Books, or wrightings, or by
relation; There be these three things carefully to be considered, and as warily
to be distinguished.

1. There is the sound of the word, syllable, and sentences whereby they are
expressed. 2. There is Reason, and Argument which is conveyed by those words,
Arguments clothed with Language and Speech: a man's Apprehensions walk abroad
in a man's Expressions. 3. There is the reality of that Spiritual, and Divine
Good and Truth, that lies couched, and contained within that Reason, as a
precious Diamond in a curious Cabinet.
A carnal man may hear the sound of the words, understand the Grammar Congruity
and signification: His Judgment may see the Evidence of the Argument, and force
of Reason, which concludes beyond gainsaying, what is there disputed.

And yet the reality, and Spiritualness of that Divine Good never apprehended.
Psalm. 25.14. The Secret of the Lord, is with them that fear him, and he will
teach, etc. There be Secrets in Praying, Secrets in Preaching, and there be
Secrets in all the Truths, Divine, and Mysterious, that are spoken and preached:
and a man may speak of the Truths, and preach of them, and yet never know those
Secrets he preaches. As a man may preach the Word, and alledg the Scriptures,
and there be Spiritual Mysteries which are therein contained, that happily he
never knew, though he published the Word, and Reasons, that did convey them to
the hearing of others, when God is pleased to work thereby. There be in the
Several Metals, and Herbs, three things which are secretly enclosed in the
bowels of the Metals; a Salt, an Oil, and a special Sovereign Water, which
Alchymists, that can dissolve, and unbowel the Metals, can bring out: Another
man happily has more Gold, Silver, A timony, take whatever other Metal you
will, and yet he shall never see those Secrets, never know them, nor ever have
the use of them, though he see the view, and Metals daily: But he that is a
skilful Alchymist, he can tell how by his Distillation, to find them, and by his
Art, to use them. So here: There be in the Profession of God, and his Truth,
special Secrets of this Fatherly: Love, and Faithfulness, which the Saints by
believing, as by Spiritual Chemistry, can see, and discern, and have the use,
and find the comfort of: Whereas others, who profess as much, and can speak a^
freely, and it may be, more freely, never come to find really, or truly to
discern what they speak. As Job; I have heard of thee by the Ear, but now mine
Eye has seen. To speak of God by hearsay, but to find God making himself
real, and to see him as he is, though not in Perfection, yet in truth, and in
some kind of proportion: and therefore in effectual Calling and Conversion,
it is said, That the Saints are turned from darkness, to light, and from the
power of Satan, unto God. Sin seems another thing than ever: Gods Love and
Faithfulness, carry an amazing kind of astonishment, that the sinner wonders
where he has been. Now he can see a God in the World, and the wonders of his
God like Love and Mercy: al which were in the dark, and he in the dark before;
al came by report and relation: now he sees them real, and knows what it is to
have Fatherly, pardoning Mercy; and indeed knows, and confesses, he never knew
what God meant, or Sin meant.

There is one only Objection that I know, that is a little to be removed, which
carries some kind of difficulty at the first appearance. John, 7.27. We know
(say the Pharisees, when they would not entertain Christ as the Messiah) this
man, whence he is; but when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is. They
had respect to that of Micah, 5.2, 3. Whose goings have been from ever-lasting.
To which Speech, Jesus replied, Ye both know me, and from whence I am: and I am
not come of my self, but he that sent me, is true (that is, Faithful) whom ye
know not. Whereas our Savior professes, that they ^ever knew him, nor his
Father, John 16.3. And again, if they had seen him, they had seen his Father;
and yet now both these seem to be contradicted.

Answ. Our Savior is to be attended in a double Respect.

1. As Man; and so they spoke of him: We know whence he is: Is not this Jesus,
the Son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know? John, 6.42. 2. As the Son
of God, by eternal Generation; and as God and Man, by Hypostatical Union, who
was appointed by God, and in his time, sent out from the Father, upon the great
work of Redemption.
He gran^s, they knew him as a Man: But as sent from the Father, as God-man,
upon the great work of Mediation, They neither knew the Father, as sending; nor
him, as sent.

REASON.
1. Gods own Secrets must, and can be discerned by Gods own Spirit, and the
Spiritual Light from thence received.

There be some of Gods ordinary Courtesies which he extends in common to al
Creatures; his Rain falls, his Sun shines upon good and bad. He gives Life, and
Breath, and Being to al things, Acts, 17. Al things are at his finding, and the
eyes of al things look to him, and he fills every living thing with his Goodness.

There be also peculiar, and choice Favors, which he has reserved for his
Secret Ones, in the secret Conveyances of his Providence, which none know but
his Favorites. The deep things of God, as Paul, 1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit only
searches these deep things. His everlasting Mercy, and Fatherly Faithfulness
in Christ. These are deep things; and as no man knows what is in man, but the
Spirit of man: so no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God.

And it is the Answer to that Question, 1 Cor. 2. and last, Who has known the
mind of the Lord? q. d. None can pry into the Ark of his Privy Counsel, which
has been from everlasting: and therefore he ads, We have the mind of Christ.
He that has Christ's mind, may know Gods mind, for he is Privy to it. Luke
10.21. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes; even
so, O Father, because it seemed good in thy sight: no man knows who the Father
is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. It must be from the
Revelation of Christ, that any come to the right knowledge of the Father, John,
1.18. No man has seen God at any time; but the only begotten Son, who came out
of the Bosom of the Father, he has revealed him, that is, those Bosom
Affections of his Fatherly Love.

2. Our Apprehensions, and Conceivings of God, hold proportion with his
Dispensations of himself to us. There must be ever some print of some operation
and impression of his Excellencies, or Relation left upon us, before any thing
can be discerned: For he dwells in the Light that no Creature can attain unto:
and to pry into his Secrets, which he has reserved in his own Bosom, as indeed
we should not (Secret things belong to the Lord, but things revealed, to us) so
in truth, we cannot reach them, they are far beyond the scantling of our
shallow Conceits.

Now the expressions which God leaves of his Fatherly Love and Faithfulness,
are sound no where, but in the hearts of his, whom he calls unto himself: Them
he takes into the Bosom of his Love: To them he communicates these Bosom
Secrets, the Footsteps whereof are to be found no where upon Earth, but in the
Souls of the Faithful: Therefore they only can see the Print of them, they only
come to know them.

The great Characters of Gods Power, Wisdom, and Bounty, are left instamped,
and engraven upon each Creature; and therefore they may be seen of al, and read
of al, and so known.

But that he should set his heart upon any lost Son of Adam an his Christ* and
draw him into special, intimate, and spiritual Communion with himself through
his Son; this is only to be found recorded in the Consciences, whom he has
called out of the World.

These are the unknown yernings of the Bowels of a Father, which can be owned
by none, but such who are his own, Rev. 2. He gives a new Name, which no man
knows, but he that has it, unknown Benevolence, and unknown Complacency of a
Fathers Bowels.

USE, 1. Of Instruction.
1. Therefore it is not safe to lean to the Counsel, or be led by the Opinion
of Carnal men, touching the doubts we have, or difficulties we find, concerning
the Love of God unto our souls, and his Faithfulness in the performance of his
gracious Promises. Alas, they know nothing of those things, how shall they be
able to make us know them? They understood nothing themselves, and how shall
they reach others? Is any so weak, and silly, that he would go to a blind man,
to make him judge of Colors? or a deaf man of Sounds? or he that never knew the
way, to be a Guide, to lead him the way? unless he were resolved to miss his
way, and end also. True indeed, they may sometimes speak things by hearsay; but
to speak things from grounded Knowledge and Experience, they cannot, because
they have none.

2. Hence it is plain, That the meanest Saint, and most ignorant, does yet know
more of Gods Fatherly Love, and is better acquainted with the Faithful
Performance of his Promises, than the most learned, and profound Doctors of the
World: Because they know the Father, and are privy to his Secrets, and have his
Bosom Counsels communicated to them, by the Lord Christ, which are Riddles, and
Wonders, and Mysteries to the whole World, and to the Princes thereof.

USE, 2. Of Terror.
It discovers the dreadful Estate, and miserable Condition of al wicked men,
the Children and Darlings of the World, who take content in it, and give
content to it. The World, it is likely, may lay you in her Bosom, for the World
will love her own: but ye be far enough from the Love of the Father, as ye be
far from the knowledge of him. Hence a Sea of Misery breaks in upon thee, able
to over-whelm thy Soul irrecoverably. If it can be once said, Thou know not
the Father, there is enough said to sink thy heart in everlasting
discouragement. In this Estate thou can expect no good, for thon can
receive no good from the hand of the Lord, though he be the Father of Mercies,
and God of al Consolation: There is none for thee, not one Blessing nor
Comfort. For if God communicate any thing of himself unto the Sons of Men, it
is by his Spirit, whose Office it is, To lead them into all Truth, John 16.13.
and to seal them up in the Truth, unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. All that
is the Fathers, is Christ's, and the Spirit takes of Christ's, and so of the
Fathers, and gives it unto such, for whom it is appointed, John, 16.15.

But it is the depth of thy Misery, thou can not receive the Spirit.

1. Thou can receive nothing of the Father, though it were given thee, John,
14.17. I will send the Comforter, whom the World cannot receive, because it
does not see, nor know him. This is thy Condition right: Thou can not see,
nor know the Spirit, and consequently, nor the Father: therefore not receive
him, and therefore receive no good. The Spirit will not take the Mercy of a
Father to pardon thee; the Love of the Father to support; the Peace of the
Father to quicken; Grace of a Father to purge, and sanctify thy corrupt heart.
The holy Spirit, would take of Christ's, and so of the Fathers, and give to
thee: But thou art a worldly, wicked wretch, and thou can not receive the
Spirit, nor Christ, nor Mercy, nor Love, if thou had them laid before thee.

2. And as thou can receive no good from the Father, so thou can perform no
good Duty to him, that may find acceptance with him, or a blessing from him.
Thou know not the Father, therefore thou can not love him, nor fear, nor
honor, nor obey him. That which the Eye sees not, the Mind knows not, the Heart
affects not, fears not, prizeth not at al, nor performs the least Duty to him;
because thou fallest short in thy Apprehensions wholly of him. Nay, mark what I
say, Thou did never pray to this Father of Christ, and of al compassion in
him. If I will pray with my Tongue, I will pray with my Understanding also, says
the Apostle. Upon that Father thou did never call, that thou did never
know to this day. It was a Fancy of thine own devising, it was not the Father
of Christ, and thine in him thou called'st upon: For thou could not seek to
him, that thou could never know to this day. Happily thou have learned the
Lecture without Book, and can speak the words by rote: but thou will not say,
speaking words argues the reality of knowledge. Parrots can prattle words, which
out of Custom they have heard, but understand not the things. Therefore it is an
Idol of thine own making thou petitionest unto, not the true God, and Father of
Mercy: and therefore thou loseft al thy Prayers, and Performances, they never
come nearer to God. As thou know no^ him; he will profess to thee at that
day, Depart from me, ye wicked, I know you not: I own not either Persons, or
Prayers, or Duties: Ye did not call upon me, when ye bowled upon your beds.
When the Dog is hanged upon the pale, Nature teaches him to howl for help and
release out of misery, though he has neither Reason, nor Understanding to know
what that is, which must help. So Nature teaches, and misery forces to howl
out.

3. Thou layest thy self open to the in-rode of al Temptations and Corruptions,
that either the occasion from without, or distempers from within, shall lead
thee into; to turn desperate Opposer of the Truth, Hater and bloody Persecutor
of Gods People. Thou know not God, and thou know not what thou do
against him, or his People. John 16.2, 3.

4. Carnal Men can have no discerning, or right Judgment of a Spiritual
Condition, either their own, or others. The Devil may cozen thee with Colors;
and thou may delude thy self with Dreams, prop up thy heart with vain hopes.
But it is certain; where there is no knowledge, but ignorance, there can be no
evidence, or certainty. Thou know not the Father. nor his Love, nor Mercy,
nor Faithfulness in his Promises; and therefore can have no assurance of his
acceptance of thee.

Object. But I hope I am somewhat, and have somewhat more than the World.

Answ. Try it thus: The whole World lies in wickedness, is brought to bed, sits
at ease in some sinful lusts, out of which they would not be removed. So the
young man: If thou lie, or lodge in a distemper, take up thy rest therein; as
Beetles, though they fly abroad, yet logd last in a Dunghill; know, thou art one
of the World, and shall perish with the World. That they might all be damned,
which love not the Truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. 2. These. 2.12.

Thus we have seen what the Condition of the World is, as touching their
Ignorance of the Father, They know him not.

There is yet something further held out in the Words, as they are set in way of
opposition to our Savior, They do not know, but I do know, and these know.

The Disposition, Doct.
and Carriage of our Savior, and the Saints, toward God, is wholly cross to
the world.
This the Reason, and frame of the Words, fully lay open unto us at the first
view. And hence it is, that they are set forth unto us by way of Contradiction,
which carry the Contrariety of the largest extent that can be. Contradiction
divides the whole breadth of being or entity, al come within the compass of one
of the sides. The World has not known thee, I have known thee, and these have
known that thou have sent me.

Knowledge it is, that makes way for the allowance, and choice of the heart; for
the stirring and moving of the Affections; for the exercise, and putting forth
of al such Operations, that issue from them, and the whole man. Therefore if
they do not know him, then not choose him, love him, fear him, desire, delight
in him, serve him, or seek his Glory in the least measure. And hence there is a
contrariety betwixt Christ, Christians, and the World, in the whole compass, and
largest extent that can be conceived, either in disposition, or action. And
this is made the Evidence, and Ground why the World has nothing to do with
God, nor Spirit, in the things of Grace, John 14.17. The Comforter, the World
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him. And therefore it
is, the Scripture expresses the most perfect, and absolute opposition that can
be, when it would discover the distance betwixt Christ and his, and the world,
1 Cor. 3.19. The wisdom of the world, is foolishness with God. It Is not the
weakness, and the occasional mistakes of the World, or something that is most
erroneous in the world: But the very wisdom of the world, what is it at the
best, or it may seem to be in the highest stream of worth, if any worth be in
it, that is not only foolish, mingled, mixed, or accompanied with something that
was foolish, may be a little blended, or blemished with folly: but it is
foolishness in the Abstract.

The best that is in the world, is the worst that can be conceived in the way
of God. So James takes it for a thing confessed, and notorious, Chap. 4.4. Know
ye not, ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses, that the Friendship of the World, it
is Enmity against God? Al of it is altogether in the highest strain of
Opposition against the Lord. This is that the Apostle John peremptorily
affirms, and that with as much indignation and distraction, as can be, 1 John
5.19. We are of God, but the whole world lies in wickedness. It is not only
wicked, or some of it may be so conceived, but the whole of it is wickedness,
and it lies in it. The whole Frame, Disposition, yea, the very Constitution of
the Circuit of the World, is settled upon such Lees: and therefore the same
Apostle undeniably infers it, Chap. 2.15. Love not the World, etc, for if any
man love the world; these are at that deadly feud, that they cannot stand
together, they destroy each other. If any man, be he what he will, you ever find
it true in all persons, at al times; the Love of the Father is not in him.

REASONS, are three.
1. Consider the highest Fountain, and first author from whence their
dispositions and operations do arise, both in our Savior, in the Saints, in the
World, and in the Wicked. There ye shall perceive the opposition to be in the
highest strain, that can come within the reach of reason, or indeed can be in
the reality of truth.

Hither our Savior looks, when he would discover the rock, out of which they
were hewn, and the first Pedigree of that profaneness and Wickedness which
overflowes in the hearts and lives of the ungodly. Joh. 8.38. When he would
lead the wicked Jews to the Fountain, whence their cruelty and murderous
carriage did proceed, he points at it with the Finger. I speak that which I
have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your Father.
They Answer Abraham is our Father. Jesus says unto them: If ye were Abraham's
Children ye would do Abraham's works; but ye seek to kill me, and this did not
Abraham. But ye do the deeds of their Father. They could not conceive what he
meant: And therefore still reply; We are not born of Fornication, we have one
Father, even God: Our Savior again returns an undeniable evidence. If ye were
of God, ye would love me for I came from God, nor came I of my self, but God
sent me. But because al these were Riddles: he speaks out, and shows them the
Root of their wretchedness. Verse, 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil: and the
lusts of your Father ye will do; He was a murderer, and abode not in the truth:
and what he says of one, he says of al sins in the like case. When he speaks
a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is the Father of lies.

As God is the first cause of truth and goodness, and from his fullness all the
beams and streams of truth are derived to any who share therein: So Satan is
the first cause of falsehood and wickedness, and therefore called. The Wicked
one; And from him al wickedness is derived. And hence ungodly men are called
The Seed of the Serpent. Genesis 3.15. They are said to be of that Wicked one. 1 John 3.11. Cain was of that Wicked one; Put in way of opposition, To be born of
God. This I take to be the meaning of those Phrases and texts, which hence
receive their explication, as belonging I conceive, properly to this place.
Joh. 8.23. When our Savior would show the distance and great disagreement
between himself and the wretched and ungodly Jews, he speaks, Ye are from
beneath, I am from above. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world. Joh.
17.14. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because they
are not of this world, even as I am not of this world. Here we have the
Wel-head of hatred, because they are not of the world. And we see that this
agrees to Christ, as to them, and to them, by means of Christ; that as he
speaks else where. Joh. 8.28. He can do nothing, but what he sees his Father do.
Joh. 14.10. The words that I speak, I speak not of my self, but the Father that
dwells in me, As the first person dwells in the second, he is thus from the
Father, and works from the Father. So his Saints and faithful are of and from
the Father, by him. Whereas the wicked, They are of the world. That is, their
dispositions which are corrupt, they issue firstly from Sa^an, who cast's in
his Seed of rebellion into their hearts, according to which they are framed.
And upon this ground, he is called the God of the world. As he is firstly evil
and cannot but be evil, and al evil is from him, that is in the world. For by
his wickedness, all the world and wicked comes to be tainted, and by the leaven
of his wickedness, defiled. Their minds, so far as erroneous, are made up of
his delusions. Their hearts, as they are stuborne and ungodly, are made up of
his rebellions.

2. Consider the next immediate cause, by which they are acted, this also will
evidence the strength and distance of their opposition, and that in the
greatest extremity. And this you shall find most pregnantly. 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we
have received, not the spirit of the world but the Spirit, which is of God,
that we might know the things, that are graciously given us of God. So that
there is a spirit of the world, which blinds men's minds; and minds which the
light of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, cannot shine upon them,
nor the power of any savory truth or good come near them, or work upon them;
but they stop the passage against al* do most desperately and resolutely oppose
al. And that is perverted mutability set on, or set a going by the provoking
and cursing power of the Law, the malignity of Satan, having leave, and sometime
command from God, to wind up the wickedness of men's spirits to the highest
strain of the activity of evil.

When God said, who will go and deceive Ahab, Satan answers, I will. The Lord
asks, how? I will, says he, Be a lying Spirit in the mouth of the false
Prophets. q. d. It was in his power, if God would give leave, to act their
minds and Tongues, as one man, to speak and persuade unto deceiptful ways,
which would undoubtedly bring to ruin. And this is the meaning of those two
Phrases. Ephesians. 2.2. Men are said to walk according to the course of the world:
one Spirit and guise in them al. If it be asked, what that is, he adds,
According to the Prince of the Air, the Spirit, that now works etc. When the
Prince of the Air, by his impulsions and suggestions draws out the distempers
of the ungodly to the utmost activity. And this is noted in the next words,
They fulfilled the wills of the Flesh and of the mind, what a corrupt heart and
Vain Head would carry a man unto. He must needs go, whom the Devil drives. This
is called the will of the Gentiles, that is, what men, left to the corruption of
their Natures, would will.

Contrarily, The Holy Ghost takes full possession of our Savior, and from
Christ, dwells in the hearts of his Saints, by which they are strengthened, Ephesians.
3.16. Strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. So that there is,
1. The inner man, which is Grace. 2. Strengthened in this. 3. By the might of
his Spirit.
So, led by the Spirit, Romans 8.15. yea, not only strengthen, and lead, but
mightily, and actively works in his, when they are quickened to work the Works
of God, Col. 1. last; I strove, but it is according to the working of Christ,
and that is mightily: therefore Stephen said, They could not resist the Spirit
by which he spoke, Acts, 6. As the Prince of Darkness by his Impulsions, draws
out the Activity of Corruption in the strength of it; So the Prince of Light
and Grace, the Lord Christ, is greater than he that is in the World, and
carries the Faithful by an invincible Power.

3. Look at them in the main ends at which they aim, in all their Operations and
Proceedings. Our Savior came not to do his own will, or seek his own; but to do
the will, and seek the Glory of the Father. Therefore the Scope of his whole
Work, it is, to break the Head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. To destroy the works
of the Devil, 1 John, 3.8. To deliver from the present evil world, Gal. 1.4.
And all the Saints are of the same Heart, follow his Colors, and Command. When
the Devil, and the World; the Prince of this World, and the Children of this
World, they set themselves in all their Contrivements, plottings, practices, to
destroy the Glory of God, the Kingdom of God and Christ; and set up the Kingdom
of darkness, and wickedness, in the minds and hearts of men, Rev. 12.7.
Michael, and his Angels: the Dragon, and his Angels

USE, 1. Of Instruction.
1. Hence there is no reconciliation between such as be of the World, and such
as be of God, to be hoped for; between the Worldlings, and those that are truly
Christians: It Is as possible to make Heaven and Earth meet, Fire and Water,
Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial accord together; Because these are
Contraries, their very Being and Constitution is Dissen^ion; and therefore they
must cease to be, if they cease to oppose, and seek the good and preservation,
each of other.

Let the ungodly, for their own ends, and to serve their own turns, profess
never so fair, promise never so much, pretend never so much Love and
Faithfulness, and seem also somewhat seriously to endeavor to ingratiate
themselves into the hearts of the Godly: Be they never so near in acquaintance,
and familiarity with them: Be they for the present, never so studious, and
laborious in all proceedings to promote their good. It Is certain, their
distempers are but restrained, and the malignity of their Nature curbed, and
confined for the while: Let but occasion suit, and temptation be offered, and
they will be as deadly Enemies, nay, most fierce in their malice, and outrage,
as they have been friendly in appearance in former times. None more inward with
David, than Achitophel, while opportunity served to bring about his own Honor,
by that acceptance he had with David. It was thou my familiar friend, we took
sweet Counsel together, and went up to the House of God together also: complied
in all occasions, temporal, spiritual, were endeared each to other, bore each
other in their very Bosoms: But no sooner is Conspiracy stirred, and Rebellion
raised by Abshalom, that was likely to carry it; but Achitophel, he forsakes
his Colors, forgets al former Engagements, becomes the deadliest Enemy of the
most inward, and endeared Friend, as formerly he did pretend. Judas trained up
under the Wing of Christ, but he had a worldly heart; and when the time served,
he betrayed his Master for it. Never therefore, look what men pretend, but look
what they are: If he be of the World, and Friend to it, know assuredly, he will
be an Enemy to God. And therefore, it checks the deluded Conceits, and
misguided Apprehensions of some of Gods own, that are Novices in Religion, who
are apt to conclude, It Is want of Prudence, and Christian Moderation, Humility,
and sweetness of Carriage, that they do not win every man, even the wicked, and
such as be worldly, and Carnal; that they might have their Approbation, their
Love, and Affections, as they list enlarged. Oh! men are not prudent, they do
not so wisely carry themselves in that courteous manner as they should; they
might win al, and have every man's good word. If a man will not lay aside his
Grace and Holiness, let him walk as prudently, and melt into kindness and
Courtesy; the World will be cross to him, and he to it: and he must conclude,
he shall find contention and opposition. Al his Policy will not work his Peace.
It Is folly to expect, and it is madness to promise it, That Reconciliations, and
Contradictions should meet. Who walked in greater Prudence and Innocence, than
our Savior; beyond the exception of Envy it self: and yet he was not beyond
Opposition, and that most fierce, which he found in the World.

2. We must not judge the worse of men's Persons and Profession, because of that
universal opposition they find abroad. It Is the portion of Christ, and that
which al those that are like him, must expect. It was the Sect of the Saints,
and such as followed the Rule of the Lord, of whom they confessed, as a thing
commonly known. This Sect is spoken against, every where, and yet no Sect
sincere but that, Acts, 28.21. Al men persecuted, and spoke evil of such, of
whom the Word, and our Savior speaks Blessedness: Blessed are ye, when all men
persecute you, and speak evil of you, for my Names sake, Matthew. 5.10. They may
as justly, and reasonably challenge Gods Name guilty, and blameworthy, as
those who profess it, because that is most of al opposed, and condemned, when
men are reviled for that. Therefore it is a shallow, and mis-guided Conceit of
some who are ignorant, to make such Inferences. Certainly, al is not right,
there is some more than ordinary failings in his way, a shrewd suspicion his
course is faulty, else how comes it he should be opposed, and spoken against by
so many, so universally. The World is up in Arms against him. So it was against
Patriarchs, Prophets, Disciples, and Christ. Therefore the Lord hates the
World, prays not for the World, condemns the World. It was no more, but what
Christ found, and those who are most like him shall.

3. Saving Conversion will break the dearest Friendship, and nearest Relation in
the world, amongst those that are of the world.

Because it sets men in greatest opposition, and crossness one to another. It
calls men into Light, and therefore darkness cannot accord with it. It makes men
Righteous, and therefore Unrighteousness cannot agree therewith. Thus Christ is
said to come into the world, to set the Mother-in-Law, against the
Daughter-in-Law, The Father against the Son, a man's Enemies shall be those of
his own House. His saving Grace sets them in greatest opposition, and
contrariety; and therefore must occasion the greatest contention amongst them.
Christ puts Enmity, he lays the Siege, and none can raise it.

USE, 2. Of Examination, and Trial.
This gives in sad Evidence against those who are Neuters in Religion: Such are
discovered by the former Doctrine to have no Religion, nor Truth at al in them.
Such as can plough with an Ox, and an Ass. Your Linsey-woolsey men, who can
take the color of any Company, and occasion; with the Saints they can seem
such; and with the world, they will be such as they are: Can serve Time and
Tide; will be of any side, provided they may be of the safe side. As Neutral
Cities in time of War, they are content to pay to both Armies, that they may
not be spoiled with either. They are content to favor the world, that they may
not be persecuted; yet they would not oppose Religion, lest they should be
justly condemned of gross wickedness. But carry fire in one hand, they would
not be counted profane, but honest: and yet water in the other hand, they
would not be conceived too strict. When indeed there be but two Kingdoms,
thou must be in one, either in darkness or in light. The world is up in Arms,
and there be but two sides, and thou must take the one. He that gathers not,
scatters. Thou can not serve two Masters: Be Follower to two Commanders. If
Christ be God, follow him: If the world be God, follow it. But how shall we know?

1. Observe what affection the world, and worldly men bear to thee. However
happily there is not so fair and full and free familiarity: yet if their hearts
can take contentment and suite, and soder secretly with thee, Certainly they
sent and savor something like themselves, or else they would never love it. Joh.
15.19. The world loves her own: And if it love thee, assuredly it owns thee, as
one of hers really, however thy profession carries another appearance to men,
to whom thou can conform, and with whom thou can comply.

Why, say your companions, such a one a Puritan? Tush; he may and can comply
with his godly Brethren, for to please them: but he is a good fellow: If time,
place, and company fit him. But a man sound at heart, at core, they cannot
endure his company, nay not abide his Name.

As with the Stomach that is chollerick: we can judge the good of the Physic,
by the working of the Stomach, if it can receive and digest it, that it stir
not: we conclude its not right Rhubarb, but a Dock-root, it stirs not the
humor, especially when the Body is so fit to be wrought upon.

2. Consider how thy heart can secretly suit with worldly ones. He is known by
his companion, that cannot be known by his own course and practice in private.
Because, like will to like. Birds of a Feather will flock and fly together. As
here in New England, The color of some Birds is very strange, by reason of the
Climate, hearts and colds: and that causes some wholly to differ from other.
Yet if we see them flock and mate commonly together, we conclude, it is a
Starling, not a Blackbird, she keeps with such: though her color and Feathers
be other, yet her Nature and kind is the same. 1 John 4.5. They are of the
world, and the world hears them. When a man can hug and harbor a varlet, a
scummy wretch, that is not fit to sit among the Dogs of a man's Table; and a
wise holy-hearted man would take the windy side; its certain such a one is a
worldly wretch. Away from me ye wicked. Psalm. 6.8. The wicked is an abomination
to the Righteous. Prove. 29.27.

3. Observe whence the root and rise of thy disposition or thy actions come.
Can thou say as Christ? I do nothing, but what I see the Father do. The words
I speak, they are not mine. Can thou say so? The words I speak, the works I
do, they are not mine, but Christ's?

O Righteous Father, the world has not known thee, but I have known thee etc.
THis verse being a further discovery and description of the parties for whom
our Savior Christ prayed in the foregoing 24. Verse. That they might be with
him, and see, and so enjoy his glory in Heaven.

Each part of the description carries a secret kind of constraining force, to
set home the former conclusion, and provoke the Lord to the grant of his
Prayer, and that Privilege, unto the Faithful, that they might see the glory of
Christ.

1. The world knows not the Father nor yet the Son: and therefore they have, as
no Title to it, so no ability to Fathom it, nor hearts to take delight therein,
or to promote the praise thereof.

2. Our Savior he knows the Father, the depth of that Fatherly affection of
his, and that unconceivable glory, which he has, and will also communicate to
him: And his Saints also know that he was sent by the Father, on that Embassage
of life, and for the accomplishment of that great work of Salvation, by which,
as the highest pitch of glory, might be possessed by himself; so also purchased
for them. And therefore as he is worthy to obtain this of the Father; so they
also fit to enjoy it, and to advance the glory of the Father, and him in it.

3. That he has manifested, and will manifest yet further the name of that
Fatherly love, the glory of that Grace, and mercy, and saving Redemption by him
provided, and al to this end, that Christ might be in them. And Gods love
manifested in them and by them, sharing and enjoying the glory that Christ
should possess, and that they should be spectators and admirers of for ever. If
now the world neither knew the Father, nor therefore could love or honor him,
nor his Son: It was not fit they should be with Christ, or see the glory of
Christ, given him out of his Fathers love.

But if Christ knew the Father, and his Fatherly love, and that he was sent on
purpose upon this Embassage: and being sent for this, did and does endeavor
this, and that for this end, that Christ and that Fatherly love might be in
them, and the Saints know all this: Then he is sit to ask and obtain this mercy:
they fit to receive it, and they shall glorify God herein, and he attain his
glory, while he is pleased thus to grant the Prayer of our Savior, and to
glorify him and them.

We have opened and finished that part of the descripon of the parties which
was laid down by way of dissimilitude, both, as the world, are considered in
themselves, in regard of the ignorance they have of God: and as by way of
dissimilitude they stand in reference, comparison, and consideration with our
Savior and his disciples.

We are now come to inquire the other parts of the description of the parties,
for whom the Prayer is made, whose worth and excellency is see forth by their
effects 1. I know thee. 2. These also know that thou have sent me;
And here with we shall take in the second general, to wit the person who does
pray: intimated in the words where we have two points.

1. From these words.

-- I know thee.

The Lord Christ has the knowledge of the Father in a peculiar manner. Doct.

I say the knowledge of the Father, for that is constantly to be carried along
with us, in our consideration, and to be kept in our Eye, that we may keep to
the scope of the place and aim of our Savior in his Prayer and expression.

For he looks at him, as we have showed, as a righteous Father, such a one as
does dispense his Fatherly affection in Faithfulness unto his. And therefore
those of the world, upon whom his Fatherly affection was never set: nor were
they within the compass of the Covenant of his Grace, had no interest therein,
to whom his Faithfulness and truth was never engaged, and therefore they could
challenge nothing, nor yet was he ^ound to accomplish any thing for their
spiritual and eternal good; And therefore if our Savior had prayed for them,
that they should have been in Heaven, and have seen his glory, he had prayed
for that, which the Father was not bound to grant in Faithfulness, nor were
they fit to enjoy. For they know not that Fatherly love and affection of his
which moved him to give Christ that glory: nor could they be affected with it,
nor receive the good of it.

But He, who knew the Father, he Prays for this Favor: And he Prays for them
also, who have known both the Father and him, in their conjoint purpose: The
one, that is, the Father appointing and sending: The other, Viz. The Son,
coming upon that commission of love and life for the good of his, which they
knew, and in which they rejoice.

That Christ, who was in the commission to work this, and they for whom it was
wrought, and knew it, have an interest in it, and take content to enjoy it:
That such persons should Beg for such Privileges, From such a Father, whose
heart is toward them, and their minds and hearts toward him and his Fatherly
affection: This must of necessity be of great power to prevail with so
righteous a Father to hear and grant, therefore we must hold it to this point
and respect. Christ knows him as a righteous Father. The Lord Christ has the
knowledge of the Father, and his love and Faithfulness in an especial manner.
Take a place or two which will give undeniable testimony to this truth. Math.
11.25. No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. Joh. 1.18. No man has seen the Father at any time, but the only begotten
Son, who was in the Bosom of the Father: He saw al his Bosom secrets, and was
fully acquainted with Gods heart and counsels, he has revealed them unto us.
And therefore the Apostle issues al here: speaking concerning the deep things
of God. The Spirit searches the deep things of God, that is of the Father; but
how come we to relish either the things of the Father or Spirit? who has
known the mind of God? Why, we have Christ's mind, and he knows the Fathers
mind. And our Savior professes as much touching this expression. Joh. 8^38. Ye
speak the things that ye have seen with your Father: and I speak the things
that I have seen with my Father.

Here we shall open three things.

1. How Christ as Second Person is said to kn^w the Father. 2. How as Man
becomes to share in this knowledge. 3. The Reason of it.
To the First.

For the right apprehending, how the Second Person may in a peculiar manner be
said to know the Father, we must conceive that the knowledge of Christ, as
Second person, may be attended upon a double consideration, or ground.

1. As it Issues from the understanding of the Godhead. For God, according to
the expression of the Scripture, being a Spirit, and of al other most
excellent, and therefore reasonable, he must have the most excellent faculties:
and therefore understanding and will. For what is most eminent, that we have
allowance, from the rule, to believe, that it does belong to the Godhead, and
we may so conceive of it.

From this understanding it is, that the Godhead is said to be Omniscient, to
know al things, that are knowable. This being an Attribute of the Deity, it
does equally belong to all the persons: For all the Persons having one and the
same Godhead, they have equally all the Attributes of the Godhead
indifferently, equally, belonging to them. Therefore al are eternal, immortal,
infin^e, Omnipotent, Omni^cient, and so know al things: and ^o know each other
in this general sense: and the Father and spirit know the Son, and He them by
this kind of knowledge. But this is too large, not here attended,

For it is not proper to say, That the Godhead knows the Father to be Father
of it, with that speci^l reference; or that the Godhead should call the Father,
my Father; I say it is not proper, nay it is not true.

For the Father is not the Father of the Godhead, but of the Son.

If it could call the Father as Father of it: then it should be the Son of the
Father, then it should be begotten of the Father.

But the Father begets the Son, not the Godhead.

That which belongs to the Godhead, belongs to all the persons, as being
common: then to the Spirit. Then the spirit might know and call the Father, the
Father of it, but that he is not.

That which belongs to the Godhead belongs to the Father, and so the Father
might be a Son to himself.

2. This knowledge is to be considered, according as it attends the manner of
the work of the understanding, which carries a specialty of respect with it, in
the act thereof, and so it may in a peculiar manner be affirmed of Father and
Son, and in the several regards, appropriated unto either. The reason whereof
we shall scan anon, as it comes in our way; when the understanding of the
Godhead, by knowing it self, conceives an image of it self, makes an impress
or engraven character of it self, which it ever eyes; and owns, this manner of
knowing belongs to the Father, and thence Issues an especial manner of knowing
the Father by and in the Son. As Joh. 10.15.

As the Father knows me, I know the Father. And that appears in a Threefold
act of the Son.

1. The Son takes the Impression of his Image. 2. Returns it. 3. Eyes and
ownes the Imprinter of it.
1. Takes this Impression. The Father gives him Sonship, and the nature of al
relation requires, they give being each to other.

The Father by understanding conceives an Image: the Son is the Image
conceived. As a man is not a Father, because he is a man, but because he begets
a Son. A man is not a Son, because he is a man, but because he is begotten of a
Father.

So the Godhead is not a Father, because Godhead, but because it conceives an
Image of it self. The Son is not a Son, because God, but because he is
conceived of another who did conceive. This is the meaning of the Apostle. The
words are marvailous pat and Pithy and carry wieght with them, but answer
exactly to the thing in Hand. Hebr. 1.3. Christ as the second person is called,
The Engraven Form or Character of the Fathers Person. The word signifies to
ingrave, and implies an Image of a thing, not feigned only in our mind and
Imagination, nor, vanishing and changing, as in a representation in a Glass, as
the form of the face th^re. But a form or resemblance Engraven, Cut, or
instamped on Brass or Wood, which has stability and permanency with it. As
Beza in Locum.

2. Returns this Impression. As the Son takes all from the Father, ^o he
Returns al to the Father. It is the Nature of those things, that are relates,
or in relation to look one toward another, and to give being relative one to
another. That is the meaning of the Apostles other phrase, in the place
formerly alleged, Hebr. 1.3. Christ is the (...), The Shine of his glory: the
word signifies, a Light, or brightness shining from a Light: a shine from a
light reflecting or looking back to that reflection of light again. And here by
the way, ye have the rise and reason of these diverse manners of understanding
in the Godhead, and so the diverse subsistences, and Personalities, Namely,
because the understanding of the Godhead, acting upon it self, it becomes to
be reflected and turned back upon it self.

If there be a reflect act in the Deity upon it self, then there must be diverse
manners of being in the Deity.

But there is such a reflecting; therefore, For the right understanding of
this, ye must conceive the Understanding of the Godhead, being pure act, and
infinite, it must have a proportionable, and therefore an infinite Object:
therefore understand himself, conceive an Image of himself; this Image of
himself, must be conceived, and look back upon himself, or his own conceiving
again.

Now that the shine of this Impression must return again upon it self, and look
back to the impression, is thus made plain, by setting a dis-similitude by it.
When the operative, active Wisdom of God falls upon nothing; purposing to make a
World, it breaks through that nothing, and brings forth an effect, a Creature
out of it, stinted with bounds of being, and time; it is both finite, and
temporary, has a beginning of time, and may have an end.

But this Understanding falling upon the Godhead, which is absolutely first,
and infinite, it cannot break through, make an effect, or give this the Being
of a Creature, being infinite, and first-being.

The Act of Gods Wisdom falls upon that as his Object, and returns again upon it
self, and so does conceive, and has an Image of it self conceived, an engraven
Character from this Impression returned by resemblance upon the Impression.

As take a beam of the Sun, meet with the Glass, it finds way, by reason of the
perspicuity of the body to pass through it.

But let it fall upon a firm, and solid body, pierce, and pass it cannot: and
therefore it falls upon the body, and returns upon it self from the body: the
falling is the reflecting of it, and by returning, it comes to be reflected.

Here note, The Light is one thing; but the reflecting, and returned, or to be
reflected upon it self, is another. These answer each the other, stir up the
act, each of other; no reflecting, no returning; no returning, no reflecting.
They give being to, and maintain being each in other: mark that, The
reflecting, and being reflected, is not the cause of the Light, but each of
other.

So here: The Wisdom of the Godhead, is like the Light reflecting upon it
self, there is a like Image of it self returned again, and conceived. This
being conceived, as it had al from the Father, so it eyes, and answers al in
the Father conceiving.

A man may understand a Truth, but when by understanding, he darts it upon his
mind to enlighten, and so teach and rectify: The mind receives, and stands
rectified, and enlightened The Understanding is one thing, but the darting by
Understanding, rectifying, and enlightening; the mind returning, and standing
rectified, these are diverse manners really distinct, and directly answering
each the other in a peculiar manner.

Thus our Savior is said to manifest the Name of the Father, not his Name as
God, but as Father. As I said before: The Light is not the cause of the
reflecting, or returning; but one of these, is the cause of the other:
reflecting is the cause of returning, and returning is the cause of reflecting.

So the Understanding is not the cause of Teaching, for that may be where no
teaching is: but Teaching, rectifying the Knowledge, is the cause why Knowledge
comes to be rectified. So that Phrase; No man knows the Son, but he to whom the
Father will reveal him; and no man knows the Father, but he to whom the Son
will reveal him. No man knows what the rectifying of the Knowledge is, but he
who has his Knowledge rectified. And this is to be attended, according to the
Second Person in the Deity; for it is true both ways, as well of the Father, who
was never incarnate, as of the Son, who was.

3. Eyes and owns the Impression, and the Imprinter of it in an especial
manner: John 14.9. He that has seen me, has seen the Father also. Not he that
saw him with his Bodily Eyes, or saw only the external, and visible, bodily
presence of our Savior: but he that saw him as a Son, he would own the Father
also, as expressing the lively resemblance of his Father, It answers so fully
in all things. As we see in Sensitive Creatures, the young can own the Dam, by
the scent, smell, or bleating: There is something of their own there.

He that has his Mind rectified by a Truth, will own the rectifying, or
teaching while he lives, John, 10.15. The Father knows me, and I know the
Father.

2. How this belongs to our Savior, as Man, as well as the Second Person: For
so he looks at himself, and in that respect, and consideration, we must
understand his Expression here.

Answ. This Knowledge belongs firstly to the Son as Second Person; but to the
Humane Nature so far, as the Relation of Sonship leaves some impression,
according to the Nature, and Condition thereof. So that the Second Person in
the Trinity, is no other, nor acts any otherwise than he did in himself. But
this manner of acting in the knowledge of the Father, appears in the Humane
Nature, and leave^ new impressions in an especial manner, and the Father also
in, and by him. And that is done in regard of that Union, that the Humane
Nature has to the Second Person: For as we know, the Second Person takes the
Humane Nature into personal Union with him, so that there is not two Sons, but
one Son: and the Lord Christ remains the same Person after the Union, that he
was before. And therefore being one and the same Person with the Son, he may be
said to know the Father, as the Son, in his manner and measure.

For as the Father gives being to the Son, and the Son receives al from the
Father: so the Humane Nature has a total dependence upon the Son, he only
incarnate, and so a sole reference with that respect to him, and so in him, to
the Father: So that it is said, to be one and the same Person, one and the same
Son, with the Son.

2. As to be reflected, is said to be the property of the Second Person,
looking back, and returning his subsistence to the Father: So our Nature having
a total dependence upon Christ in the Union, and being one Person with him,
looks as the Second Person wholly to the Father: He brings back Jacob. Nay, it
eyes, and owns, through the Son, al those Fatherly Impressions, and Affections,
which are in the Father, and wherein he intimately unbosoms himself to his Son.
That is the value of the word, Prove. 8.30. as we have observed before. (...),
as much as, intueri, retinere.

3. The Reason is taken from that Relation which is between the Father and the
Son. The Nature whereof, is to give total Being only one to another, to
maintain that Being only, one in another: and therefore there is a manner of
making known each of other in special appropriate to them.

That which gives a perfect discovery of the thing, that makes way for perfect
knowing. But relates alone give perfect Being. No man can tell what buying is,
but by selling. Our Savior disputes upon this Ground: He that has seen me,
has seen the Father; because I am in the Father, and the Father in me; to wit,
by virtue of that Relation there is in one to the other.

USE, 1. Instruction.
We here see the Reason, why many of the Faithful are at such a loss for the
Knowledge of the Love, and Favor, and Acceptance of the Father. They seek not to
Christ for this: and therefore they are not acquainted, and informed. They take
not the right way to come to the Speech of the Father, John, 14^6. I am the
way: there is none that comes to the Father, nor can be acquainted with his
mind, but by me.

When our Savior was checking Nicodemus for his ignorance, as not reaching the
knowledge o^ Mercy, he gives this as the reason, we repair not to him, who only
can relieve, and reveal, John, 3.13. No man ascends up into Heaven, but the Son
of Man, w^^ is in Heaven.

So our Savior did with Philip, when he so earnestly desired the knowledge of
the Father; Show us the Father, and it shall s^ffice. So many perplexed ones;
Show us the Face of a reconciled Father, and it is enough: they are to be
checked, as he, John 14.9. Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou
not known me? He that has ^een me, has seen the Father; and how say thou
then, Show us the Father?

2. Hence we may discern the Cause how it comes to pass, That men of mean Place
and Parts, shallow Compass and Conceivings, poor, and feeble Abilities, not
able to see much in ordinary occasions; and yet so comforted, assured,
p^rswaded of the Love of the Father. The reason in from hence: They are taught
of Christ; he knows all, and he makes them know. As it was said, when they
wondered at the Answers of the Disciples; They knew they had been with Jesus,
Act. 4.13. He that has intelligence daily from such, as have the Ear of the
King, sit at Counsel-Table, he in the Bosom of his Majesty; if he have an
express, and Intelligence, it is no wonder; because he understands the Mysteries
of State, the mind of the King. So it is here, Christ lies in the Bosom of the
Father, and Christ discloseth those bosom Expressions, and Affections of the
Father.

We have done with the First. The Second follows:

-- And these have known that thou have sent me. Here is another Circumstance
touching the Description of the Parties for whom our Savior prays, which may
yet further his Petition, that it may be of prevailing force with the Father,
for the grant of his desire (to wit) That they may be where he is, and see his
Glory.

Had they indeed been the wicked of the World, who never knew the Father, nor
himself, and therefore were never fit, nor able to see his Glory, or to take
any satisfaction in it, or to return any Glory to the Father, or himself
thereby: It had been bootless for him to have begged such a favor, and it had
been impossible for them to receive any good by it, as having no interest
therein, nor fitness for the enjoyment of such a Privilege.

But he prays, who knows him as a Son, knows his Father, yea, such a Son, such
a Father, known by an Eternal Generation.

And he prays for such, who know that the Father has sent him; and therefore
are well acquainted with him and the Father, and with the Embassage he comes of,
and with that great Work which he had undertaken, and has now discharged, and
for which he shall have a Name, that at the Name of Jesus, every knee shall bow,
both in Heaven and Earth. And therefore they who know what the Father has
purposed, and the Son has performed, and that experimentally to their own
good; They are the fittest to see it, and to celebrate the Name of the Father
and Son for ever in Heaven.

The Saints have a special Knowledge, Doct.
that the Lord Christ is sent of God the Father, for the Work of their
Salvation.
These, all these, and none but these, have this Knowledge, as their privilege,
and peculiar Favor appropriated to them: in which the World has no Portion,
nor yet shall ever be made Partakers of it.

At the great Day, when al Flesh shall appear before God, and al his Saints
gathered, and by Christ brought home to the Father, when he has fully finished
the Work, and done the Will of the Father: That as he now professes, I came not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me: and this is the will of him
that sent me, That of those that thou have given me, I should lose none, but
raise them up at the last day.

Then I say, when the Work is finished, and performed in the Eyes of the
Ungodly, and he shall be admired in his Saints; not of them only, but admired
in them, even by the Wicked, who shall be forced to admire that Power, and Love,
and Mercy, which has done such great things for such undeserving Creatures:
and therefore shall see it, and be constrained to acknowledge the truth and
reality of that great Work: what the Father purposed, and plotted from Eternity
with the Lord Jesus; how out of infinite Love and. Faithfulness he was sent,
and has now accomplished it.

This they shall see, and be forced to know with grief and vexation of Spirit,
that it is so: And for this also our Savior prayed in the former Verse, That
the World may know, that thou have sent me.

But to find, and own this, in the reality of the Work of it; to tract the
footsteps of the unsearchable Wisdom, and Riches of Mercy in marking this good
upon their Souls, in that miraculous, and my sterious manner as he has: this
is peculiar to the Saints.

These, and these alone, know that Christ is sent to this Work: these have
found the excellency of it here; and these are fit to gaze upon it, and admire
it for ever hereafter.

Three things we are to open: 1. How Christ is said to be sent of the Father.
2. For what he is sent; and what was his Errand. 3. How the Saints know this in
a special manner.


1. How sent.

This Sending, is the first inlet, whereby the Fountain of the ever lasting
good Will, and Favor of the Father, is laid open, and let out unto us: And you
shall find the Spirit in the Scripture leading al his by the hand hither; here
he would Land us, and here leave us, and thereby teaching of us, that we should
not stay, before we repair hither, and when we are here, not to stir: But rest,
and repose our Soul, and resolve our Faith, and Confidence, as into the first
Principle; where there is no possibility, either of alteration, or addition: So
firm, it cannot be altered; so fully sufficient, and satisfactory, that nothing
can be added, nor desired.

It is too mysterious a depth, and therefore beyond our scantling to fathom it.
We will a little, make some search with Sobriety, so far as may help us to
understand the place in hand.

Thus our Savior makes it the Head Corner Stone of our Confidence: This is
Eternal Life, to know thee (that is, the Father) to be only God (not he only to
be God, but to be the only God) there is but one only Deity, and he has that
only Godhead, and what beside? and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Know him
as a Christ, anointed, and fitted; and as a Jesus, a Savior, who has
performed the work; and that he is sent for that very End, and Errand, and for
that purpose from God the Father.

For had our Savior done it, if he had not been sent, the Soul would have been
at a loss, whether he had ever satisfied, or should ever be accepted.

But when our Faith can reach this: That the Father, who is the only God, has
sent him, he will then assist, and accept, and we should go no further, seek no
other; we then ^it down, and are at rest, John, 12.44.

We shall therefore make way for the Discovery of the Nature of this Sending,
by the Propositions following:

1. This Sending, taken in a full Sense, is not an Act of the Deity, or Divine
Nature properly; but of the Person, or Persons in the Deity, who nextly, and
immediately dispenses it.

Reas. That which is an Act of the Deity, or Godhead, belongs indifferently,
and equally to all the Persons; in that al are equally God, and have the Essence
of the Deity, and all the Essential Attributes, equally attributed to them al.
As al are Eternal, Omnipotent; all Create, Decree, etc.

But to send (much less to send the Lord Christ) does not belong to all the
Persons: The Spirit is never said to send in the Phrase of Scripture, nor is
the Father ever said to be sent. And this shall be further cleared and proved in
the Conclusions that follow; and by the Nature of Mission, as it is set forth to
us in the Word.

2. This Sending has a double Reference. 1. To the Person that is sent. 2. To
the thing about which he is sent: namely, When the Person sent, leaves a new
act, or impression upon the Creature: so that the Creature is said to be
otherwise than it was, and to have something which formerly it had not, and the
Person is sent on purpose, to leave such operations, and impressions.


God sent his Son made of a Woman, sent him to take our Nature: here the second
person takes our Nature into personal union with him. Sanctifies it, unites it,
supports it.

Though Christ be the same, yet here be new impressions, which appear in the
Creature, which formerly did not. I will send the Comforter, and be shall teach
you and lead you into al truth. Here be new and diverse expressions of the work
of the Spirit appearing, which formerly did not. Joh. 16.10.11. The second
respect implies ever the first; the sending to a work implies a person that
must be, and is sent to that end: though then these may be distinguished, in
our reason and consideration, yet in the Nature of the thing, the one is
included in the other.

3. Sending, when it respects a Person properly, It ever implies in the Nature
of the thing, The Authority of him that sends, in respect of the party that is
sent. I say Authority, but not of rule or Dominion so much, as Authority of
Order and Communication of work from one to another, and in this sense; which
is a proper and true sense; he only can be said to be sent, who works from
another: whether it be in way of Origination, or firstness of Order; to be
first beginner or setter in of a work before al other: or whether it be in
regard of operative or active production when several persons may, as one Joint
principle, put forth a work, for the producing. They are not one in order
before another, but both meet as one principle and producer or bringer forth of
the other; And therefore hence it is plain, and undeniably Evident (which ye
must especially observe) that in this breadth and extent of sending, which the
Scripture speaks to, The Son and the Spirit are only said to be sent, and it is
never, and indeed it can never be, affirmed of the Father.

If sending imply Authority of Order and communication of work from another,
then there is none can send the Father, because there is none in Order before
him: nor can he be sent, because he works of himself, and from himself, nor
from another, therefore cannot be sent from another.

Hence again it follows: The Spirit may be sent from the Father and the Son,
and the Father and the Son may sent: because the Spirit, the Holy Ghost works
in Order from both, and there is Authority of Order and communication from
both. Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the Spirit of the Son. That is, the Father,
as appears by the distinction of Son in the words. Joh. 15.26. When the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father. Joh. 14.26. When
the Comforter is come, whom the Father will send in my Name.

Hence Christ can only be said to be sent of the Father, not of the Holy Ghost
(I speak now of this internal sending, which is attended only in regard of the
Person, not of the thing, about which he is sent) the Reason and ground is the
same.

Sending implies the Authority of Order and Communication of work from one to
another: but the Son works only from the Father, therefore can be said only to
be sent from the Father.

Hence are there so many expressions and confessions of our Savior in this
kind, almost in every verse, when he would settle his commission. Joh. 5.30. I
seek not mine own Will, but the Will of my Father which sent me. And verse, 36. I
have greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father has
given me to finish, they bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me.

4. Propos. This sending of our Savior is the first of al others, and makes way
for all other sending, or spiritual good things, that are sent unto us from God.

Have this, have al: make sure of this, make sure of al: maintain this,
maintain a certain intercourse and Communication of al good things unto our
Souls from the Lord. This is the first out filet of God everlasting love and
goodness. 1 John: 4.9. God so loved us, that he sent his only begotten Son etc.

There is no expectation of the Spirit, there is mo possibility of having, no,
in truth of the sending of the Spirit, but only by this way, and upon this
ground Joh. 16.7. It behooves that I go away, for unless I go, the Spirit will
not come unto you, but if I go, I will send him. No coming of the spirit, unless
he had first come. Unless he go to Heaven, no sending of the Spirit from Heaven.

As it is true for the measure in regard of his ascension: so it is true, for
the reality of the thing, in regard of his Mission from the Father. For the
spirit must be sent from the Father and the Son: And therefore it presumes his
sending. And Hence it is, when he is come, being sent of the Father, He shall
teach you al things, and shall bring to mind, what ever I have said to you. And
that which Christ speaks, he has from the Father, not from the Spirit. Joh.
14.10. -- The words he speaks not of himself. And Verse, 24. The words which ye
hear are not mine, but the Fathers which sent me; He has the message from him.
Joh. 12.49. I have not speken of my self, but the Father, which sent me, gave
me a command what I shall say, and what I should speak.

Nay our Savior does not take of the Spirit, but the Spirit hears from him,
speaks from him. Joh. 16.13. Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth is come he will
guide you into al truth. For he shall not speak of himself, but whatever he shall
hear, that shall he speak. He shall take of mine, and show it unto you. Verse,
15. Christ does not go to take of the graces from the Spirit: but the Spirit,
because Christ is sent to be the Head of the Church, to have al Grace, and to
be the Fountain to communicate al Grace, therefore the Spirit takes of his. Not
takes of the Father, because the Father has given al to him, but takes of his,
who has his commission from the Father, and is sent out his work, of purpose.

The sending of al Officers is hence. As my Father sent me, I send you: And
this is the order and Method of Gods Communication: He that receives you,
receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. Yea the
sending of Gospel and al ordinances. Joh. 17.8. For I have given unto them the
words thou gave me, and they have received them, and have known and believed
that thou did send me.

Yea the ground of al those glorious works he has accomplished in his own
Person, and will perform for his, and against his enemies for their good, is
hence. Joh. 9.4. I must do the works of him that sent me, while it is day. And
5.36. The works which the Father has given me to do, bear witness, that the
Father has sent me. And when he had fulfilled al, he then returns to his
Father.

5. As sending evidenceth an Authority in him that sends: So to be sent
implies, that he that is sent takes this Authoritative Order, stands engaged to
answer it, thus given and taken, And is fully to act under the will of him,
from whom he must work. And thus it is with the Lord Christ, as second person
in the glorious Trinity, being sent by God the Father, to work as from him.

For as the manner of their being, so is the manner of their working: the Son
from the Father, and therefore works from the Father: he is ready to entertain
this Order of working, and ingageth himself to answer the Order and will of the
Father, and stands fitted to have the Nature of man united to him, that he may
go upon the operation of that work of the Father, according to the Order of the
Father given him, and all this in a peculiar manner appropriate to the Son.

What ever belongs to the Second Person, and none else, that he has as a Son
received from the Father.

But to act by Authoritative order form the Father alone: belongs to the Second
Person and none else.

Therefore this as a Son he has received from the Father.

Therefore as he must act from him alone: so he is bound to answer that Order
of his.

Therefore works nothing, but what he sees, his Father work: speaks nothing but
what he hears his Father say.

Therefore does nothing, but what the Father will.

Therefore to be fitted, when his will is, to take the Nature of man into
Personal union that he may go upon the execution of his will.

I say receive it into personal union. Because this belongs to no other Person,
not Father, nor Holy Ghost but himself. For its Haeresie to say, the Father is
incarnate or the Holy Ghost is incarnate. How ever therefore he did not receive
the Human Nature, but in time: Yet he was fitted for this work, by this sending
and eternal mission of his before al time: this makes way for that work of
Redemption,

The Human Nature has a new manner of subsistence and alteration, according to
its being, but there is no alteration in the Second Person. As Gods power is
the same before the things were made: though they cannot be supported, but when
they are made.

Again when the Human Nature is united; this union we know is in reason real,
me non cogitante.

If the proper being of the union issued only from the Human Nature, then there
should be no difference, in regard of the persons, but they should share a like
in it. But that is false and Heretical. For neither Father, nor Holy Ghost are
incarnate. Nor is the Human Nature taken into personal union or becomes one
person with the Father on Holy Ghost. Therefore there is something of this union
issues from the Second Person in an especial manner; and that is to receive it
into personal union: for which he was fitted from eternity by his mission, but
takes it up in the fullness of time, when he was sent by the Father thereunto.

Some such thing I have thought might be intimated in those Scriptures; Joh.
8.42. and 17.8. and 13.2. He came out, proceeded from God, When he was to enter
upon the Execution of the work, and make the Human Nature feel that support,
Leaning, and being terminated in the subsistence of the Second Person, and went
abroad in the execution of the work, and therefore now he returns to God again.

Lastly this sending in regard of the work upon the Creature: This conclusion
may give some light, as much as shall serve our purpose. The Lord Christ as God
and man has some things proper to himself:

1. In the manner of the work and Privilege, where with he stands possessed, he
is the head of his Church, and has the immediate dispensation of al power
committed to him for the good of it, and these are peculiar. He is the Head of
his Church. None but he. Al power is committed to him, and to none but him. But
in regard of the work there is a common concurrence of all the Persons with him.

II. For what he is sent.

1. To bring Jacob again. Isa 49.5. Those I must bring. Joh. 10.16. All that he
has given me, come to me. Joh. 6.37. And Verse, 39. God gives them to him And
Chap. 17.8. And he gives them his word, and they know that he is sent.

2. To keep them, when they are brought. Joh. 6.38. I came to do the will of my
Father. And Verse, 39. This is his will, that I should lose nothing. And
Therefore prays for them, that the Father would keep them. Joh. 17.11.

3. To perfect that life of Grace in Glory. Joh. 12.49, 50. 1 John 4.9. Joh.
6.40. I will raise them up at the last day.

He is sent on this Errand, that he shall see them safe arrived, landed in
Heaven.

USE, 1. Matter of Admiration.
See and be swallowed up with the wonderment of Gods love to such worthless
ones, as we. Had he sent his letters to comfort, his Creatures to visit, his
Angels to administer, it had been more than we worthless worms could have
expected. So the Apostle. 1 John 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the love of
God toward us in that he sent his Son. If any man question his love, or desire
to see the discovery of love: In this its manifested undeniably, infallibly.
Love unmatchable, unconceivable, that he should send his own Son, from his own
bosom, to such worthless dust.

In this is Love, herein is Love, it is here to be adored, admired for ever. Not
that we loved him: for that had been Love, to have owned us, and accepted of
us, But that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our sins.
Elizabeth is drawn to a wonderment at the coming of Mary: How comes it, that
the Mother of my Lord, comes unto me? Luke, 1.43. But how comes it, that the
Lord himself come? It Is more than is usually observed, or indeed can be
expected, that a man should send a choice Pearl from his Closet, a Diamond out
of his Cabinet. But that one should send his whole Treasure, it is more than can
be imagined, Or desired.

But it is so here: God has sent his Son, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge are his; and to us so vile, so unthankful, and unworthy.

Nay, as God, when he would convince Satan of Jobs Sincerity, he impannels a
Jury from Hell; tells him, that he had moved him to afflict Job without a Cause:
for yet he held his Innocence, and the Devil could not deny it.

So consider here for thy shame, if thy heart stir not with admiration, we shall
impannel a Jury from Hell, which will give in a Verdict.

2 These. 1.8, 9. At the day of Judgment, God shall be Glorious in all his
Saints, but admired in them that believe. When all the wicked shall be gathered
at the left hand of Christ, the Devils, and damned Spirits, and all the rabble
of those fulsom Goats, shall see the poor Saints, such as were opposite to
Christ, haters of him, to be made one with him: They who rejected, nay, may be,
persecuted Christ, and the means of Grace, to be now made partakers of Christ
and Grace: The Devils will admire this mercy, though they never share in it; and
shall not thou admire it, who art partaker of it?

2. Comfort, of never failing assurance of our safety and happiness. It Is the
will of the Father, and that must stand; and Christ is sent to do his will, and
he will not fail of doing that, for which he was appointed; and therefore thou
can not fail of Heaven. Christ professes ( John, 6.38, 39.) he came to do
the Will of the Father, and this is his Will, That he should lose none, but raise
them up at the last day; and he resolves he will lose none, but he will raise
them up, verse 40.

We have done with the Two former Things which were to be attended in the
Explication. 1. What it was to be sent. 2. Why, or for what End he was sent.


III. We are now to enquire touching the knowledge of this, so far as it comes
in an especial manner to be appropriated to the Saints: And his is the third
Particular to be opened, for the discovery of the former Point; are we shall
only look at it in that peculiar respect, as it is a proper Brand for Christ's
Sheep, and a Livery of his Servants, and Followers. For so the Text intimates,
and our Savior speaks of it in that regard.

The World knows thee not, they never attained this Learning, nor were trained,
and taught up to it: they are amongst the Petties, and Punies of the world, and
may have some worldly wisdom. These ways of wisdom, they are above, and too
high for a Fool, such as the wicked of the World are. These who are promoted to
the University of the Gospel, and have learned of Christ, these know; such and
such only know, have a special knowledge of God the Father in Christ: they know
him as sent, and therefore must needs know the Father who did send him.

Touching the Specialty of this Knowledge, which is the Portion and Inheritance
appropriated to the Saints, as the wise man says, The Wicked meddle not with
the Joy of the Righteous: so it is as true in this, they reach not their
Knowledge.

Of this we shall enquire: 1. Wherein the Specialty of this Knowledge consists.
2. How it comes to be communicated to them.


First.

The Specialty of this Knowledge, consists in Four Things: 1. In the Ability by
which they know. 2. In the thing known. 3. The Manner of the discovery of that
so known. 4. The settling of the heart by that.


1. This Knowledge is peculiar to the Saints, in regard of that special Ability,
which they do receive from God, in special manner, by which their Judgments are
cleared, and their Understandings enabled to search and see into such
mysterious depths, and secret Dispensations of God unto the Souls of his, in
the Covenant of his Grace, and the Conveyance of his Mercy; which exceeds, and
over-flies the most Eagle-sighted Apprehensions of any Natural Man in the World.

They have the wisdom, and enlightening Grace of the Spirit in their Minds, and
the concurrence, and assistance of the Spirit, to act and lead them out, and
thereby to lead them into al Truths: and these must not be severed, because God
has joined them together, Zach. 4.2, 3. There must not be Lamps only to burn
in the Golden Candle-stick; but there must be Olive Trees, to feed those Lamps,
and to further their Light in their daily burning. As that is true in the
Church of Christ, it is true also in the heart of every Member of the Church,
there is not only a Lamp of Knowledge burning in the Mind, but there must be
also a constant supply of the Oil of the Spirit, which must quicken, and act
out that Spiritual Wisdom, for the right discerning of the things of our Peace.
And this is the Condition of all the Saints, and the ordinary course of Gods
Dispensation of himself, in the way of the Gospel. He has given us a mind to
know him, says the Apostle, 1 John, 5.20 he has given his Spirit, says Paul,
whereby we may know the things, that are graciously given us of God. This is
the end of giving both, without which, it cannot be. So the words run, 1 Cor.
2.11, 12. We have not received the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is
of God, that we might know the things that are graciously given us of God, q.d.
There is no man of the world, who only has the Spirit of the world, that can
know such things: None of the Princes of the World knew them, verse 8. nay, no
Natural Man can know them, verse 14.

But the Spirit searches the deep things of God. There be depths of the
warmings of our minds and hearts, and none but the Spirit of God can discover
them: deep things in the mind of God, and whoever knew his mind? No Creature
ever did, or could; but Christ knew his mind, and we have the mind of Christ,
and so come to know the mind of the Father, verse 16. And hence our Savior
surveys the differencing Reason, why his Disciples might perceive; others, as
Scribes and Pharisees, had eyes, and could not see. To you it is given to know
the things of the Kingdom, but not to them: and upon this ground our Savior
advises the Church of Laodicea: I counsel thee, to buy of me Eye Salve, to
anoint thine Eyes, that thou may see. This Spiritual, and special,
Supernatural Light, is that Eye Salve, which all the Disciples of our-Savior
had, and therefore they knew him. As the Sun is seen by his own Light: It must
be the wisdom from above, that must enable us to see the things that are above.
So John, 14.17. The World has not seen, nor known the Comforter, but ye know
him, that is, by the Light of the Spirit, ye come to see the Spirit.

2. In the thing known, there is a Specialty of Knowledge. They look at it, as
an Embassage of Love, and Life, which the Lord Christ now brings from the
Father, who intends their good in both, and our Savior comes on purpose to work
it.

1. A message of love for the Soul of a sinner under the sight and sense of the
guilt of his iniquity, he does, and cannot but apprehend God as an angry God
against him, that there be many causes of quarrel and controversy, that God
has lying by him, and indeed the controversy lies between the Father and the
sinner: because his work was directly wronged and prejudiced. And Hence its
evident, that the message must come from the Father, touching the terms and
purpose of peace, if ever it be attained, because it is the Wrath and Justice
of the Lord that proclaims War against the sinner, having justly deserved that
his displeasure should break out against him.

The Lord Christ is the Prince of Peace, who is our Peace, and takes up the
Quarrel between the Father, and the Elect, brings the glad tidings of Grace
from God, who not only tenders, but desires reconciliation with the Soul,
through Jesus. And therefore he must come as an Ambassador sent from the
Father, and that the Soul must know; or else he could not attain his end, take
up the Controversy betwixt the Father and him.

So among al Nations, it is a received course in Reason, the Ambassador must
come from the Prince offended, that has intended War; and he must make known
the Commission of his Embassage, as from him Authorized, else Peace and
Agreement will never be accomplished, nor received. So 1 John, 4.9. See also
John 3.16, 17. God so loved the World, that he gave his Son, etc. How is that
to be proved? He answers; For God sent his Son, not that he might condemn the
World; for they condemn themselves; but that the World might live through him.

These are Riddles to the wicked, they may be talked of in the World, the noise
of such things may go up and down: But to know, and own the Embassage, as sent
on purpose to him, this is a Secret peculiar to the Saints. As it was said, My
Message is to thee, O Captain, 2 Kings, 9. The rest heard it, but he came to
the special understanding of it. So it is here.

Therefore John 15.21. This they will do unto you, because they know not him
that sent me.

2. A Message of Life. For the sinner once seriously apprehensive of his many,
and constant departures from God, his provocations are so ha^^ous, that he
cannot but see death in all his ways, he can do nothing, but he sins in all he
does, and therefore the wages of sin, being death, he must die for what he has
done, if God should proceed in severity against him, and recompense his own
ways upon his own Head.

Therefore having forfeited his Life into the hands of Divine Justice, viz. of
the Father, whom he has provoked: Christ must come as an Ambassador from the
Father, and he must know he has a Commission, and a grant of Life under the
Fathers hand, else his Embassage will be in vain, will not accomplish the end
intended by him, and expected by the Faithful Party: He has sent his Son, that
we might live through him, 1 John, 4.9. This is the Record, that God has given
us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son, Chap. 5.11. It Is the Fathers
Gift, it belongs to the same Power, and place of Majesty, to give pardon, and
so Life to a Malefactor; or to take Life from him, John, 6.57. As the living
has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that believes in me, even he
shall live by me. See the Order.

The Father is the Fountain of Life. He as a living God, sends Christ upon an
Embassage of Life. Christ has received power of Life from the Father, and he
as so sent, gives to those that believe in him.

The Faithful know this Commission of Life, and that it is come out on purpose,
and intended to them, as he to Gideon, Judge. 6.23. Peace be unto thee, fear
not, thou shall not die. And they know, and own Christ, as so sent. All which
are Mysteries to the wicked, they see no need of this; or if so, they neither
own it in Christ, nor would receive it from him: They may hear the fame
thereof, and yet know nothing, either of the Excellency of it, or of Gods
Intendment of any good to them in it.

3. The Specialty of this Knowledge, appears in the Manner of communicating this
good, to the Souls of the Faithful; namely, The astonishing Excellency of
Power, that brings the reality of these Ambassages of Love and Life to the
Soul; and the dazelling beauty of that Light that displaies them, and lays
them open to the Eye of the believing Saint. Which things are concealed from
the World, and therefore they count them foolishness; because they could never
conceive, or be persuaded of any such thing. They think they cannot be, because
they cannot perceive how they should be. As Nicodemus, How can these things be?

We will give a little Light to both.

1. They find such a Power, as puts them to astonishment: For the Message of
Love, and Life, are of such unconceivable worth in themselves, and so far
beyond the thoughts of a sinner, that they should be sent from God, who is
offended with them, and was, and is happy without them, and has no need of
them: and that by no other hand, but by the Lord Jesus, the Son of his Love,
blessed for ever: and that to such, as they are, so unworthy, and vile in
themselves, so loathsome, and abominable, by reason of the Number, and Nature of
their Hellish Iniquities. That it seems so cross to the compass of al Reason,
that they cannot but cavil at it, as a thing absurd and unreasonable to
believe, and their distrustful and guilty hearts cannot but reject it, as a
thing impossible. Yea, the Disciples themselves, when the hardness of the work
was resembled by a comparison from our Savior, they cried out, Who then can be
saved?

To make known, and make good this Embassage to the Soul, God must make known
his Almighty Power to the sinner, which he only that feels, is forced to
confess; others cannot conceive. So Paul to the Ephesians, Chap. 1.17. etc.
prays for a Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation; another Spirit, and common
Understanding, cannot come near such things. That they might know the
excessive, exceeding great Activity of the might Power of God in bringing a
sinner home to himself, verse 19. and therefore the Convert, 1 Cor. 14.24. when
he has but a glimpse hereof, in the search of the Secrets of his own heart, he
falls down, and confesses, God is in you of a Truth. It Is the Wisdom, Power,
Sovereignty of a God. It Is beyond al created Power, ever to discover such
things, to work so upon the Soul.

2. As the Power, that settles the Message, so the Light that discovers the
Beauties, and Excellencies that are therein, utterly beyond apprehension,
expectation, admiration. Peter professes that the very Angels of Heaven, pry
into these Secrets, delight to lie down, and look wishly into them, because
they lie so low and deep, beyond their discerning, 1 Pet. 1.11. yea, the
Apostle Paul concludes, the Eye never saw, the Ear never heard, nay, it never
entered into the heart of man to conceive th^se things, 1 Cor. 2.9. Nothing can
be seen by proof, and observation, nothing heard by report from others, no such
thing can be anvilled, and contrived by the conceitings of all the Understanding
of men, and yet they are such things, which God has revealed by his Spirit in
the Gospel. Hence the Phrase, 1 Pet. 2.9. God has called you out of darkness
into his marvelous Light. Every thing is a Mystery, a marvel in the work of
Grace, when once we have an Eye to see. We marvel at our own wretchedness, and
baseness; we marvel at Gods Patience, to bear with such worthless, and sinful
ones as we be; our Peace is marvelous, such as passe^h al understanding; joy
marvelous, unspeakable, and glorious: And the ungodly meddle not in any of
these things, being indeed unknown to them.

There is hid Manna, Revel. 2. Secret, and unconceivable refreshings ^ound in
Christ, a white Stone, and a new Name, which no man knows, but he that has it:
and therefore he judges all things, says the Apostle, he that is Spiritual;
and is judged of no man.

And Lastly: For the settling of the heart, It lets in such an overbearing, both
Power and Sweetness, of the good thus known, that it carries the heart along
with it, and settles and keeps the heart to it. And therefore it ever has
Faith accompanying it. They that know thy name, will trust in thee. Psalm. 9, 10.
Had thou known, who it is, that said unto thee give me to drink thou would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living Water. Joh. 4.10.
Therefore she should have asked in Faith. By this we know that we do know. We
have the science of knowledge, that we have the truth and soundness of Faith.
And sometimes, yea, frequently, in the phrase of Scripture it is put for faith.
Joh. 17.3. This is Eternal life to know thee; that is, to believe in thee.

2. The means how this knowledge comes to settle the faithful.

Answ. It is by the means, which God in the course of his Providence and
appointment has ordained for that end, that is, his good word in the
Scriptures recorded, by his Ministry delivered to them.

It is true, there is a spirit of Wisdom and revelation, that is put forth in
this dispensation; but its as true, that this Spirit goes along with this word,
and works in this word, as seems good to the good pleasure and will of Christ.
The place is more precious than Pearls, and worthy to be retained in the table
of our hearts for ever. Joh. 17.7, 8. Now they (to wit the Apostles) Have
known, that all things, whatever thou have given me, are of thee. Whence comes
that? Answer, verse, 8. I have given to them the words which thou give me,
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee,
and they have believed that thou did send me. Lo: The words that God the
Father gave Christ; the words of he Gospel: Ev^ngelium, that good tidings he
gave the Apostles: And they received them, and by them they knew that Christ
came from God, and believed he was sent of that message.

Quest. Is this the condition of all the Saints?

Answ. For the reality and substance of what has been said, it appertains to
al: though there be much difference in the manner and measure, how these
discoveries come to be dispensed.

Object. But we see by experience, many of Gods own, are Ignorant here.

Answ. There is a discovery of these in a manner and measure to al: for all have
that spiritual light, all have notice of that Embassage of peace of love, and
of life, brought them in, and by Christ: and by that overbearing power and
light, those good things of Christ in the Gospel are discovered so
convictingly, and set on so efficaciously, that the heart is kept to them. By
such a knowledge they come to be apprehended, and receive.

But there is a reflect act, when our understanding views and looks over the
work of the mind and heart, so that we know that we do know, and know that we
do receive. This the Saints may, and do want many times for some while.

We have this dispatched the four Particulars and so cleared our way to the
understanding of the Doctrine proposed, which was; The Saints have a special
knowledge that the Lord Christ is sent of God the Father for the work of their
Salvation. We shall now proceed to the Reasons and Uses in few words

The Reason of the point is double

1. From the Office of our Savior, Reas. 1.
and the Aim and scope he has in the execution of the work thereof. He comes
not to do his own will, nor to seek his own glory, but to do the will, and seek
the glory of him that sent him. Therefore he must dispense al, as from him,
draw al Eyes and hearts toward him. For the Nature of an Embassage does of
necessity imply and require this. It makes al to look to the person who sends
the Embassage, whose power and pleasure is there firstly attended: and leads al
by the hand, so that they must not rest in their returns, until they come to
the Father.

2. The heart of a sinner cannot be quieted, the distressed Soul cannot find
rest, or repose, before it be carried to God the Father. Joh. 12.49, 50. And
Chap. 11.42.

USE, 1.
It teaches the Saints to acknowledge with all thankfulness that enlarged favor
of the Lord toward them, that he would vouchsafe so choice and peculiar
Privileges to them, which he denies to all the world beside: That he will
familiarize himself to them, and admit them into his presence, when he does
estrange himself from al others. It Is no small part of respects, but an argument
and evidence of peculiar and indeared respect; that when no man may come to the
speech or sight of the King, He no sooner comes to Court, but he may come into
presence, and be acquainted with the Secrets of Sat. Nay, if he come, no
sooner is notice given, but he may have entrance at the first appearance; when
he will be seen by none of the Court, or Kingdom beside.

This is your Privilege, O ye blessed of the Lord; when the Lord locks up
himself, and withdraws the discovery of his presence from the greatest part,
yea, from all the world.

The World know him not; yet ye do know him, and may be acquainted with all his
secret purposes, touching his dispensations of the greatest Affairs of the
world, his counsels touching the Salvation, and damnation of men.

This made Judas at a stand, (not Iscariot.) Why will thou show thy self to us,
and not unto the World? They shall understand nothing of those Ambassages of
Peace and Life, which thou have given Christ in Commission to communicate to
the Souls of thine: And why show to us? In our selves as Sinful, and in outward
Conditions more low, and mean, and base than they. Why wilt ^hou? It Is only thy
will, and the wonder of thy free Grace. Thy will be done, and blessed be thy Name
for ever. To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but
not to them. It is a Gift, and that a choice one, which most in the world
attain not unto. Give God the praise and honor of it again.

It Is ever an Evidence of special regard, and intimate Confederacy, when King
or State holds constant intelligence, and correspondence by Agents, and
Ambassadors with one State, but recals them from al other, So it is here. Ye
have an express of the good pleasure, and all the Affairs of Peace and Life,
that are transacted in Heaven, managed and committed to Christ, ye may know
the mind of God, when he imparts no such privacies to any ungodly Person
whatsoever.

USE, 2. Of Examination.
Hence we may discern, whether we be of the Scum, and Reffuse of the World; or
the Favorites, and Followers of Christ, for whom he prays, and Heaven is
prepared. This is an Evidence, a never failing one, whereby the Followers of
Christ may be known; They know God in Christ, and al his purposes of good,
which he has sent his Son to see accomplished for their good.

This our Savior makes the Ear-mark, the Brand-mark of his Flock, John 10.3,
4.27. His Sheep know his Voice; they own the mind of God in his Word, and they
will honor him; and so the good Shep-heard is discerned by the like; I am the
good Shepherd, who know mine, and am known of mine, verse 14. If they be mine,
they will know me; as young Lambs the bleat of the Dam: and the smell of each
other, will make them own each other among many thousands, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye
not in your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates?

This Knowledge discovers it self by Two Evidences.

1. By the Effect of it. They will not follow a stranger. Strange Teachers, and
strange Doctrines, they do not own, they will not follow; and therefore the
Apostle gives this as a certain Demonstration; They went out from us, because
they were not of us; for had they been of us, they would never have gone from
us, 1 John 2.19. Nay, the Apostle goes further, and his Expression is dreadful,
Heb. 10.38. The just by Faith, will hold out; but if any man draw back, my Soul
shall have no pleasure in him; and therefore he quits his hands of that evil,
blesses himself from that. But we are not of those that draw back unto
Perdition. If that be their way, Perdition will be their end. It Is a direful
Doom, which Peter sets down, 2. Pet. 2.20, 21.

2. By the Means, and rise of it. It issues from the word received into the
heart. I gave them thy Word, and they received it, and know, etc. And Prove.
2.10, 11. and Chap. 4.6. Forsake her not, and she will preserve thee; love her,
and she will keep thee. It Is that of the Apostle, 1 These. 2.13. When ye
received the Word of God, ye received it not as the Word of men; but as the
Word of God: Receive the Word, not as a Vessel does Water, but as a Woman does
a Person whom she marries; receive it, to keep it, to live and die with it;
and then it will work effectually. But we entertain it, as a Passenger, as a
Neighbor; and therefore it comes and goes: we never have hearts engaged to it;
if we had, we should understand every good Path, Prove. 2.9. Therefore our
Savior gives the Reason, John, 5.43. I came in my Fathers Name, and ye will not
receive me. Another comes in his own Name, and him ye will receive.

We have now finished the Second and Third General, observed in the opening of
these two Verses, viz. The Parties for whom this Prayer is made, which were
described by way of dis-similitude to the World; and by their Effects, their
Worth, and Excellency of Knowledge, and Grace. And The Party who makes the
Prayer.

The next Branch, as it lies in the order of the words, which was the Fourth
general Observation, is, The Means here used, and that which is resolved on, to
be improved for the attaining of the end, which is sought for, with such
earnestness in this Prayer: and this is expressed in these words:

Verse 26. I have made known thy Name to them, and will make it known.
IN the words, there seems to be the Consideration of a double end: One is by
way of Prevention, to answer a secret Demand, How the Faithful, and Followers
of Christ, come to attain that Knowledge, which is hid from the World, and
whether it were Knowledge of the right make, or no? Both which, he resolves from
hence; That he, who only does know aright, he does make known the Name of the
Father to them; whence it comes that they both must know, and also know in a
right and saving manner: For so good a Teacher, having power, and sufficiency
to make wise unto Salvation, cannot but make them good Scholars. Another End
is, To set home with further Evidence, the main Conclusion in the foregoing
Verse, That the Faithful may be with him, where he is, and so may see the Glory
given him by God the Father: For if he has for the present, made them know the
Name of the Father, and is resolved, and does engage himself, that he will not
cease further daily to inform them, until he has made them perfect in this
Knowledge: then are they fittest to be partakers of that happiness to be with
him, and to behold his Glory. But t his he has done, and resolves still further
to do: Therefore, etc.

We have then, these two Things here to be attended: 1. The Work of our Savior,
what he has done: He has made known this Name: that is, for time past. 2. The
Profession, and Engagement of Christ, what he will do for time to come: He will
make it known.


To the First: I have made known thy Name to them.

The Doctrine we shall observe from hence, it this: Viz.

To make known the Name of the Father to the truly humbled Soul, Doct.
is a Work in a peculiar manner, appropriate to our Savior Christ.
I say, in a peculiar manner appropriate to our Savior; in that he takes it
here unto himself, as a part of that Prerogative Royal, that does appertain to
him: I have made known; I will make known: As though this Trade were wholly, and
only in his hand; this knowledge, and Science were only taught in Christ School,
and is only to be learned there, and that by himself alone.

And this is done to the truly humbled Soul: For such only are to be conceived,
as intended in the word, Them, (...), with an eye, and reference to that, which
was mentioned in Verse 24. To them that thou have given me. These were
Believers; but if ye look at them, as under that Name, and special respect, in
which they must be considered, when they become as proper Subjects, unto which
the knowledge of the Name of the Father, comes to be manifested in the Order
appointed by Christ: this is the most proper expression, that can be made, and
the Holy Ghost speaks most exactly to in this behalf. So John 17.6. I have
manifested thy Name to them, that thou gave me out of the World. This, as
has formerly been proved, cannot imply Election properly: for that is meant in
another Phrase in the same Verse: Thine they were, that is, by Election, and
thou gave them to me: This is an effect of Election, and so distinct from it,
else it would be a vain Repetition, which cannot fall upon the Spirit of God,
nor may by us be once imagined. Those who are given to Christ, are given him
out of the World, so verse 6. that is, out of the corrupt World.

But it is not a Truth, nor Orthodoxal to affirm, that Election is out of the
corrupt Mass.

Ye see then the Scope, and full Purpose of the Doctrine propounded, and so of
the Place in hand.

We shall hence proceed to the Explication, which we shall do by opening of three
Things: 1. What this Name is. 2. What it is to make it known. 3. Why this is
properly given to our Savior.


1. What is meant by the Name of the Father.

The Name of God, in General signifies any thing, by which God comes to be
known as a man is known by his Name, Exodus 20.7. But here it must of necessity
be restrained to a narrower sense: But what that is, is hard to discover. We
may thus gather in upon it, by the several Circumstances in the Text.

Look backward to that which follows: It Is the discovery of that Name, by which
the Love, wherewith the Father Loved Christ, may be in them: and that cannot be
the Name of his Wrath, and Justice of a Judge, and an Avenger: But it must be
the Name of his Mercy, and the Name of his Fatherly Mercy also. For unless it
were the Name of a Father, How could he love them, as he loved Christ? for he
loved him as a Father. Besides, it is such Love as is extended to such as have
provoked him, as the Father, and first Person in the Trinity, and to such as be
miserable, and distressed: therefore it must be Fatherly Mercy, that is, he
must be the Father of Mercy, as well as of men, that must extend such Love to
such undeserving ones.

Again, As such, who are miserable, and forlorn in themselves, cannot have
help, but through Mercy, and the Mercy of him, against whom they had finned:
There must needs be a way how to interest them in this, and entitle them to
this Mercy, which others, as miserable as themselves, do never share in, nor
shall be made partakers of: For what avails it, that there is Mercy, if I cannot
come at it?

And that which must convey this interest, can be nothing on our parts by which
we may deserve it, or purchase it, or once come to challenge it: It must come
from God alone. As there is no mercy but in himself, so there is no way but by
himself to interest any therein.

He being bound to none of the Sons of Adam, who had deserved nothing but wrath
at his hand, by reason of their sins and provocations, If he had been pleased
to have shut up the Bowels of his compassions, and reserved his mercy to
himself, that none should ever have been able to make any claim thereunto, or
have had any expectation thereof, he might have done it.

But as he had Fatherly mercies in himself: though he was free and bound to
none: He out of his Fatherly mercy, that he might give others an interest
therein, he did freely engage himself, and al his sufficiencies, to procure and
accomplish the good and welfare of such, as he should pluck out of themselves
and the world, and put into the hands of Christ. And thus he becomes bound, and
makes himself a debtor, to them, to whom nothing was due, both for the
conveyance of al good to them, and continuance of all that good with them, that
might be for their everlasting comfort. And thus his love might not only be
offered, but comes to be and abide in them. That the love, wherewith thou have
loved me, may be in them.

So that its hence evident, that its the name of Fatherly mercy and
Faithfulness, that is here to be understood, and the name that Christ would
make known; the name of a Father, and a Father of mercies, who has al good,
and of faithfulness, who is engaged to perform all that may be good and helpful
to his servants.

Look we forward a little, the foregoing circumstance gives in the like
evidence also. They know that the Father had sent him, and the making known of
this name makes them know it.

This sending argues, As his Authority, that be can, So his Fatherly affection,
that he will, use his Authority of Order and communication of work, and his
faithful word (which he has engaged) to send Christ ^o this end. And he being
sent stands engaged to answer the Order of the Father, and to act under the will
of him that sends to the full accomplishment of this work, for the procuring of
the welfare of the humbled Soul and then his love may be in them, and Christ in
them also.

We have now got shore and gained thus much, that we understand what this name
is, which is to be made known.

We shall open it in both the Particulars.

1. The Name of the Father of mercies contains four things.

1. That everlasting compassions are firstly and independently in him: he is
the Father of them al: these yerning commiserations come out of his own Bowels.
Isa. 63.15. Where are the sounding of thy Bowels? We should father compassion
upon nothing we have, or do, or deserve, but only upon God. No good we have, or
can do, can cause these: no evil we can do (except the sin against the Holy
Ghost) can hinder these.

2. There is a generation and succession of mercies, which have been extended
through al Ages, to al conditions of men, and that upon al occasions: al which
are of the same House and pedigree, come from the same Father of mercies, are
of the same line and lineage.

All the sins of al his, which have been committed in all Ages and generations,
with all the heightning Circumstance^ thereof, could never lessen, weaken,
interrupt the course of these Fatherly compassions, much less exhaust them, and
draw them dry. The Psalmist finds no end of them. Psalm. 136.23, 24. For his
mercy endures for ever. Though temptations endure, which may annoy: yet his
mercy ind^res for ever. And that which is especially to be attended is, that he
works as the Father* (who has been wronged and provoked) and yet as a Father
pities us..

3. There be renewed and unknown Commiserations, which were never heard of
before, yet may be expected, and will certainly be provided for the good of
those, that he will do good unto. He is the Father of mercies, he begets fresh
and new compassions every day and moment, such as never saw light* nor happily
ever entered into the apprehensions of the sons of men. Such things as well
looked mot for. Isa. 64.3. This props up the heart under overbearing pressures.
Thou say, ordinary medicines will cure ordinary and common diseases; but thy
rebellions are not to be matched; no sinner, no sin, like thine.

Be it so, either in truth, or in thy conceiving: yet here be unheard of
compassions, if thine be unheard of provocations. Lam. 3.22, 23.

4. He has sent Christ on purpose to help those that cannot help themselves.
Hos. 14.3. With thee the Fatherless finds mercy. With this Father of merc, es,
the most helpless, Hopeless Orphane, and Fatherless Soul may find relief. He
was sent on purpose not to call the righteous; not the haughty and self
confident, who pride themselves in their excellencies, conceive they can heal
themselves with their own balsom, and that their own abilities will work their
own welfare. No: but was sent to call the sinner, the brokenhearted and
self-denying sinner. And he is come on this Errand, and will not fail of his
end, or the effecting of that, for which he was sent.

2. There is yet another piece of this name of the Father, which is his
Faithfulness. As he is the Father of mercy and of al good in himself. so he
has freely and fully engaged himself to accomplish the good and welfare of
such, as be truly humbled, and he has given to the Lord Jesus.

He has passed his Word, and signified his Will, to see al good done for them,
that can be desired, as needful; al evil removed, which they can fear, as
hurtful, and dangerous to their Souls: And in this the Psalmist triumphs, Psalm.
56.4.10. In God will I praise his Word, etc. In the Lord will I praise his Word.
For what had it availed, that God has al mercy in himself, unless he had
engaged his word, to improve and employ that for my benefit; I had had no
ground to claim any thing, nor Hope to expect any thing at his hand. Psalm.
138.2. Therefore herein God has magnified his word above al other his Name: he
has laid al his excellencies and sufficiency to pawn, and improved al, that
the Salvation of an humbled sinner shall not miscarry.

This is the sweet that goes through all his names, and gives a pleasing relish
unto al: When his word is in his Power, it will preserve, not destroy etc. As he
sent Christ for to save: so it is his will, which he has expressed, and its the
end which he intended, in furnishing our Savior with all fullness of power. Joh.
17.2. Thou haft given him power over all flesh, that he might give eternal life
to as many as thou have given him. Now there is some ground for our hearts and
Hopes to look unto, that this will shall be accomplished, and this power
improved. See how all the work of life proceeds on pleasantly. They who were
thus given, they shall come: that is, believe. Joh. 6.37. and Joh. 17.8. When
they come, then Christ keeps them. Joh. 17.12. Those whom thou have given me I
have kept and none of them is lost Nay he prays the Father would keep them
also. Yea he will not overly keep them himself, but he entreats the Father: Keep
through thine won Name, that is, the Name of thy Fatherly mercies, for in thy
word those are also engaged for their good. Joh. 17.11. Nay not only kep't, but
quickened, increased, perfected in all Grace and not left, til he see them
Crowned in glory. Joh. 6.39.

No wonder therefore that our Savior should resolve, ever to be making known
this name of the Fathers mercy and Faithfulness, since it comprehends the
beginning, continuance, end, and perfection of al we can have or Hope for, here
or hereafter. Learn this, and learn all; Perfect this, and perfect al. All that
Christ will teach returns to this: All that we can learn is Vertually contained
in this: As a Father of mercies, he has al, begets all good. Out of the
Faithfulness of his word, he dispenses all. Thus we see what the Name of the
Father contains.

2. How does Christ make known this?

Answ. This will appear in a double work.

1. The Lord Christ spreads all those glorious excellencies before the Eyes of
the Soul, darts in the Beams of those surpassing Beauties of mercies and
compassions, and causes all this glorious good to pass before us, (as he
speaks to Moses) which at the first dazels and draws the Eyes of the Soul
toward them, to gaze at such an amazing sight. 2 Timothy 1.10. -- Brought life
and immortality to light through the Gospel. Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended up
into these Heavenly apprehensions but the Son of man, Who is in Heaven, he
brings Heaven down to the Soul. Those were, like dazeling Colors laid forth in
the greatest perfections, laid in a dark Room, not discerned: but the light
came that acted them to the Eyes. The strangeness of the sight takes up the
understanding, makes it stand wondering and gazing. As Moses did by the Bush
burning, he went near to see that wondrous fight. Exodus 3.3.

2. But this is not al: He further sets on those excellencies by the discovery
of some unexpected suitableness to the Soul and the condition thereof, as
appointed and performed with intendment to his good who is given to Christ:
Gods will has determined, Christ has received al power for this very purpose
to communicate them to him.

Its possible for God to dart in some kind of ravishing appearances of the
excellencies of mercies, life, and Salvation, which pass by, as sudden
lightning upon the understanding. So it was with Balaam, who had a glimpse of
the glory of Heaven, and it stirred his affections for the while. Let me die
the death of the Righteous, and let my last end he like his. Numb. 23.10. But
it left nothing behind it, he is as far to seek as before. As a man seeing his
Face in a Glass, so these forget what they were.

But these leave some intimation of some kind of special provision appointed
for the purpose. My Message is to thee. Leaves some impression of Wisdom, to
discover the way of Grace for our own future good: that he comes to a guess of
the way of life and peace: though he has no perfect skill, yet he can say, it
coasts within such a compass, it lies to that point, though he cannot readily
hit the Particular Path. As the poor Man said after God had broken his heart;
It seized upon me like Thunder and Lightning: from that day forwards I could
discern something in every Sermon.

This I take to be the meaning of that which torments Interpreters, and
exercised mine own thoughts many a time, and its very difficult to cut the
Hair, we will speak a word to it. 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made of God to us
Wisdom. We may come at it thus: 1. This Wisdom cannot be justification, not
sanctification, for those are mentioned immediately after: and therefore they
are not there meant. Therefore it must be in vocation.

When Christ sets open the way Of all the good that God will do: And Of the
manner of his communicating of himself, for so the word ^^l^ belongs to a
Syllogism, and impli^^ the laying open of the frame of things as they lie in
inference, and sets it on upon the mind.


3. The Reason why this is properly given to our Savior.

1. Argument is taken from that relation he stands in unto the Father. The
proper Nature of Relates is to manifest and give knowledge each of other. Math.
11.27. No man knows the Father but the Son etc. Joh. 1.18. No man has seen
God at any time, but the only begotten Son.

2. Argument from the commission delegated unto Christ. He it is, Whom the
Father has appointed to communicate his counsel to his faithful Ones. Hebr.
1.2. -- He has spoken in these last days unto us by his Son. Joh. 16.15. All
that the Father has are mine, therefore said I, He shall take of mine and shall
show it unto you. So that the Son has al committed to him, and he communicates
to the Holy Spirit who speaks not of his own, but what he has heard.

Thus we have the explication of the point: And the work of our Savior what he
has done. We shall refer, for application, to what follows in the uses
hereafter made to the ensuing Doctrins.

The Second and next thing in order, it the work of our Savior and his
profession and ingagment; What he will do. I have declared thy Name; This he
has done: And he add's further, And I will declare it.

Before I enter upon that, we shall Observe by the way, the conjoyning and
coupling of these two works of our Savior together; I have, and I will: What he
had done in former times, and what he would do for future.

The Lord Christ extends the same Care at all times, Doct.
to all his Servants, for their Eternal Good.
What he has been, he is, and he will be to the Faithful, in things which
concern their Spiritual Happiness. He deals variously, and dispenses in a
differing manner, the Comforts, and Conveniences of the things of this life. He
advances me, leaves contempt upon another: one is wretched; another
impoverished; another spends his days in health and peace, as Isaac; another
is under daily pressure, and trials.

Because al these things, though good in themselves, yet they are under, and
petty things, and therefore not good for every man. Diets are ever judged, and
directed to men, according to their temper, and disposition: That which is
Cordial to one, as heating and nourishing Provisions to such as be weak, and
languishing: i'ts hurtful to another, that is of a full Body, and Feverish
distemper. Therefore the wise God, as a tender Father, and wise Physician, he
gives liberally to one, when he hold^ another to a spare Diet. So God Diets his
Servants according to their Spiritual Disposition; they are not alike useful,
and therefore he does not in a like manner, and measure dispense them.

But when it comes to Faith in God, Repentance from dead Works, and such things
as concern Gods Eternal Love, and so Eternal Life: there look what care God
showed in former times to his, he will show the like at al times to al, to
provide for their Spiritual welfare.

Compare Genesis 28.15. with Hos. 12.2. He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke
with us. He spoke to Jacob, who was dead and buried long before that
Generation. But what he spoke to him, he spoke to all the Saints, Exodus 13.21,
22. He took not away the Pillar of the Cloud by day, no^ the Pillar of Fi^e by
night. A Type of Christ, who by night and day, in all the Conditions, and times
of a man's Pilgrimage, vouchsafes his guiding, and saving presence to his
People. This also, the rock in the Wilderness typed our unto the Israelites, 2
Cor. 10.2. The Rock that followed, go whether they would, the Water out of the
Rock followed them, and attended upon them for their daily refreshing So does
the Mercy, and Truth of the Lord, follow his all the days of their lives, Psalm.
23.6. And it is the aim of the place, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever, that is, in his saving, overshadowing, guiding
presence to his Saints.

REASON.
1. His Love is the same, and that will set him on work by the like care, and
endeavor to provide for their welfare. If any thing without him, had been a
moving Cause of this Care, and resolute endeavor for their good, when that had
altered or failed, this would have failed also. But his own Love, which only
issues out of his own Bowels, and Bosom, made him do good at one time, and
therefore to the same at al times, for it is the same, Jer. 31.3. With
everlasting Love, I have loved thee: therefore I have drawn thee, therefore
called thee, therefore comforted thee, and will continue so to do for ever, John
13. Having loved his own, he loved them to the end. In love, there is no lack
of labor, pains, providence, to be unweariable, to further the good of that
which is beloved.

2. The Engagement of our Savior, constrains him (...) point of Faithfulness,
and Truth, which are laid to pawn, fully to accomplish whatever he has
undertaken for such, who are committed to his care, that at no time they do
miscarry. Other Sheep I have, and those I must bring, and they shall hear my
Voice. It was the Fathers Will, that Christ should lose none that were given to
him, John, 6.39. and it is Christ's, All that thou have given me, I have kept,
and lost none of them, John, 17.12. So that he has done the Will of the Father,
according to Compact and Agreement between them. Yea, it is Christ's Will, and
Request to the Father, when he left the World, That the Father would shelter
them under the shadow of his Wings, John, 17.11. And now I am no more in the
World; but these are in the World, and I come to thee, holy Father, keep
through thine own Name, those that thou have given me. It is the Will of the
Father which sent Christ, that he should keep al his at al times, that none
should miscarry: It Is the Will of Christ, and his Request to the Father, that he
should preserve all the Faithful, that at no time, none should

3. The Relation continues the same at al times, and the Interest the Saints
have in our Savior; al his Wisdom, Mercy, Merits, and kindness are theirs: and
therefore they claim it, and so expect the benefit thereof at al times. The
Spouse may claim the constant care of her Husband to provide for her, and
supply her necessities. The Child may look for the constant care of the Father
to tender him in all his wants, as he has done in any. So they plead, Isa.
63.16. Though Abraham forget, yet thou art our Father. He cannot forget
himself, and his Faithfulness.

USE, 1. Of Instruction.
It teaches us that Heavenly Skill and Dexterity to gather in upon the goodness
and kindness of the Lord Jesus; and from the proof and experience of former
Favors, to lay in a Reversion of Blessing for future time. Lie at the catch,
and take the advantage of the Lords gracious dealing with the soul. If we get
but Gods Earnest, fetch the whole Bargain by it. If the Work of Saving Grace, be
an Engagement on Gods part, get one, and gain al. Paul is marvelous dextrous
this way, to work upon the graciousness, and Truth of God, 2 Cor. 1.10. He has
delivered, and does; q. d. I have him sure, I have got a Pawn, and earnest
Penny: And he will deliver. He has delivered me from the mouth of the Lion,
and he will deliver me from every evil work.

When Naomi. knew how Booz had acknowledged that Engagement to do the part of a
Kinsman, and knew the trust also, and sincerity of the Man, she thus concludes:
Sit still, my Daughter, until you know how the matter will fall: For the man will
not be at rest, until he has finished the thing this day, Ruth, 3. and last.
So when thou have Evidence of any work of Gods free Grace upon thy Soul, and
that he has engaged himself thereby; sit still, the Lord Jesus will not rest
until he has finished the work of Conversion, Sanctification, and Salvation,
which he has begun.

So the Prophet learns the Saints to make Inferences, and Collections of
Comfort unto themselves, Psalm. 48.12, 13, 14. Go about Zion, tell the Towers,
mark well her Bull-works, take serious Consideration. This God is our God, and
therefore collects, and will be our God unto Death.

He has humbled, and he will humble us: he has comforted, and he will comfort
us; he has strengthened, and he will enliven us for ever; he has taught us,
when we did not know him, and he will teach us still, when we do seek unto him.

USE, 2.
It Is a Ground of unspeakable comfort, and sweet repose to al those, who have
an interest in the Lord Christ, and are committed to his Charge. Thou art the
daily Care of Christ, therefore thou should be daily comforted. This was it,
that fetched up the fainting heart of the Prophet, when he was at the lowest
Eb, and at the greatest under in regard of himself, and al outward Comforts,
Psalm. 40.17. I am poor, and needy; destitute of the ordinary Comforts, and the
meanest Helps that might supply his famishing Condition, so that he was
fainting, and dying away for want of relief: no man looked after him, or
bestowed a thought about him: Yet the Lord thinks upon me; his Eye is over
me, his heart is toward me, and care for my good.

Yet God is good to Israel, Psalm. 73.1. He begins to come to himself: he was
sinking in a fit of discouragement, seeing al things to go cross, and il with
him: yet God is good. The World is naught, yet God is good: my heart is naught,
yet God is good.

It may be, those that have most cause, and reason, and are most able, do not
care for thee, or for thy good: thou do not, or through thy weakness, can
not care for thy self, when thou art overwhelmed with distresses, either
ignorant, doubtful, or unable to put forth that Ability thou have, being under
over-bearing pressures: yet this may quiet, That he cares for thee, that can
and will help thee.

When my Father, and my Mother cast me off, then the Lord takes me up; his
Fatherly Mercy, his Bowels of more than Motherly Compassion, will be instead of
al, yea, better than al, Psalm. 27.10.

Nay, be it, that al helps are improved to the utmost, al thy skill and care
laid out to the best advantage to provide for thy good: yet at some times, yea,
many times, they are too short, and scanted to procure thine own Comfort,
either to prevent the evils that are approaching, or supply, or support thine
own infirmities that do hinder in a Christian Course.

Quiet thine heart, though thy Contrivements fall short; that which is under
the Care of Christ, that cannot miscarry. It Is the ground which the Apostle
gives of encouragement in a Christian Course, and that when Duties grow most
difficult, and the Spirit most hopeless in it self ever to reach them, Heb.
13.7. Remember them who have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you, the
Word of the Lord, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
Conversation: Yea, it might he replied, There were able, and eminent Leaders,
and Guides, their Experience long, their Graces glorious, their Abilities
choice; alas, there is no hope for us to keep pace with them, we are so weak,
feeble, such Babes and Novices, that cannot go alone hardly: it is a likely
matter that we should go after them. The Apostle ads, Jesus Christ, yesterday,
and to day, and the same for ever, verse 8. q. d. It was not of themselves that
they had any Grace or Abilities, but Jesus Christ had al, and gave al: It was
not in the power, and might of any parts they have received, whereby they were
carried on-ward in the Work of Faith, either in doing, or in suffering the
good, and acceptable Will of the Lord; but it was in the Power of the Might of
Jesus whereby they were strengthened therein. That Jesus is yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever; he did yesterday strengthen the Faith of Abraham,
and David, and Paul; and he does strengthen his now, and he will strengthen his
for ever: He has taught, and does teach, and will teach for ever, the humble
his Ways: He has filled, he does fill, and he will fill for ever, the hungry and
thirsty with good things, when they seek for his Mercy, Isa. 27. He keeps his
Vinyard, and the least Graft in it, he keeps it night and day, and he waters it
every moment; be therefore comforted every moment, thou who art preserved, and
watered every moment, by the good hand of Christ, and wilt be so for ever,
Psalm. 142.4, 5, 7.

USE, 3. Of Direction.
It shows us whither to go for relief in our Spiritual Necessities: It Is that
which Nature suggests, and Reason persuades unto: Al men will be sure to go
thither, where they are sure of speed at al seasons. That Is only to the Lord
Christ, who is a Faithful Savior, and a sure Friend, 1 Pet. 5.7. Cast all your
care on him, for he cares for you. When al men are altogether Vanity, feeble,
and false, you know not where to have them; off, and on, weak as water, and
uncertain as the wind; now they favor, anon they frown; love to day, and hate
to morrow; they are but broken Reeds, not only fail us, but pierce us also.

But with our Savior, is no shadow of change, you may know where to have him,
and what to expect from him. Men both prize, and use the Medicine that has a
probatum est with it: It will not fail to cure, and remove the Disease; the
Salve that will not fail to heal. It Is so with the healing Mercy, and
Faithfulness of Christ: So the Psalmist, They that know thy Name, they will
trust in thee; for thou never failest them, Psalm. 9.10. Men's care and kindness,
is soon drawn dry, and spent, that they count it is enough to deny for future,
because they have formerly done a Favor. What! say we, I have dealt so, done so
formerly, ye do not expect I should do so always. But it is otherwise with our
Savior; he has comforted, and he will quicken; he has taught thee in thy
aberrations, and he will teach thee still.

Nay, Thou art so giddy, and un-stable, thou know not what to make of thy
self; so off, and on, feeble and false to thine own Soul, and thine own
Comforts, and there is no hold of that unsteady, and giddy heart: now
promising, and then altering; now resolving, and then changing. If thou had
trusted to thine own heart, thy Hope, and Comforts, and Confidence would have
failed utterly.

But the Lord will not suffer his Faithfulness to fail, notwithstanding al thy
provocations against him, departures from him, unkind dealings with him. Though
thou have failed, and forfeited al his Favors, yet he will not suffer his
Faithfulness to fail. As he was in former, so he is still for future times, and
will he the same for ever; he has, and he will, after the same manner, for ever
comfort thee. Though thou be Faithless to him, and thy own Soul, he will be
Faithful to his own Word, and to thy Comfort.

USE, 4 Exhortation.
As Christ is to you, O be you so to him again. He is enlarged for your Eternal
Good, be you so for his Glory. He never lays aside the care of your Comfort
and welfare, never lay aside the care of his Commands. O! miserable would our
lives be, if the Lord should leave us at uncertainties. It Is the dregs of the
Vengeance, the highest pitch, and the perfection of the Plagues that God
threatens, Deuteronomy. 28.65. The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart, and failing
of eyes, and sorrow of mind, and thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and
thou shall fear day and night, and shall have no assurance of thy Life; In the
morning thou shall say, Would to God it were night, etc. for the fear of thy
heart. If so for our temporal Lives and Comforts, what would it be, if our
Eternal Happiness, and Misery of our Souls were at this pass? Not when our
Life, but our Salvation shall hang in doubt before us: Whether God will comfort
us, or for ever ruinate us? Whether the Lord will once pity, or for ever forsake
us? If he should give us trembling of heart, failing of eyes, and sorrow of
mind, and we should have no hold of Gods Favor or Assurance. I shall one day
perish, and look every day to have the Wrath of the Lord to come out against
us, or else to leave us to our feebleness, and the malice of Satan, and that at
last, God will leave us utterly in the hands of Hell, how miserable would this
Condition be?

But God does not, will not deal thus with us: he comes to certainties with us;
we may know there to have him. Yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Oh
let us be the same for ever to the Lord Jesus. He has given us two immutable
things, that we might have strong consolation: let God know where to find us,
what to make of us. Fickleness and Instability is most loathsome to the Eye and
distastful to the heart of the Almighty. I would thou were either Hot or Cold.
Because thou art lukewarm, I will spue thee out of my Mouth. Rev. 3.15, 16. He
that is profane he may be convinced and made better. He that is zealous is
approved and pleasing to the Spirit of God. But the lukewarm will not be
brought to see his evil, nor yet will he like to be made better. Therefore God
abominates him.

He is the Author and Finisher of your faith: The bottom and the top-stone, He
will not leave you til he has fulfilled al his goodness.

Leave not you, til you have perfected holiness in his fear. 2 Cor. 7.1. He is
at al times the same to thee. Be thou at al times the same to him. Not by ^its,
and starts and aguish qualms, like the morning dew. Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at
al times. I have loved him, and I will love him: I have feared him, and I will
fear him for ever. And when I say that, I say three things.

1. Make it the main end and Errand of thy life to suit Gods mind and do his
service. Let this be the maine stream that may carry al. As it was Gods will to
fend Christ: and Christ's will to accomplish this. This is the will of the Father
that sent me, that those which he has given me I should loose none. So let i^
be thy will also. It was Paul's, I pass not, put nothing into the balance, let
nothing come into comparison nor competition, nay not into consideration. That
I may smash my Course with joy. Its my Meat and Drink says he. Let ^t be as
thy daily Bread, as thy food; have no will but this. So Barnabas persuaded. Act.
13.23. To cleave to God with a decree of heart. Decree this, set it down, and
determine this for a conclusion, that admits no exception or alteration. My God
I must have, my god I will have, his commands I have, and must and will obey.
Whether I shall have honor and credit: whether I shall please my self, or carnal
Reason or corrupt desires, friends, or world, that I pass not for I must please
the Lord: That I set down for a decree.

2. Let al make way to this, and work for this.

So Christ with us. Al things work together for our good. So make our Sorrows
our miseries, our comforts, our peace, prosperity: whatever we have in the
world besides, make them al work together for this, to further our obedience.
As the Mariner tacks about, uses Cross winds, all, to further his voyage.

It was the Fathers will, and Christ's work, that he should lose none, and he did
lose none; he left Heaven, his Honor, his Life, nay the sense of his Fathers
Love: but he lost not one of the poorest Saints: held them in his hand, God
forsook him, he would not forsake them. Let the power of darkness pluck away
ease, and peace, yea his life and al. My Soul it heavy unto the Death, Yet he
would not suffer them notwithstanding al their Malice, Wrath, Rage, Subtilty,
to pluck one of his out of his hands.

So do thou. Lose Credit, Comfort, Peace, Prosperity, yea thy Life; but lose
not one of Gods Commands, but obey it: not one Promise, but trust in it: He
has kept thee at al times: Keep thou the word of his patience. Thou gave
them me, says Christ, and I have kept them. So say thou; Thou gave me these
commands and I have obeyed them; these promises, and I have trusted in them.
Not my will, as Natural, says Christ, to be preserved, but thy will, as God,
that man may be redeemed: So say thou, not my will, as Man, as Father, as
Master, as Servant: not my will which would have mine ease, and Profit, and
Credit: But thy Will be done.

3. Be unmovable in the Work of Christ.

So our Savior, though he suffer the power of Darkness to pluck a way his
Honor, his happiness and Life: yet he held his Children in his Arms, and would
not suffer any to take them out of his hand. So deal thou in like manner; Let
Devils and Men pluck away thy Credit, and dishonor thee, thy Wealth, and
impoverish thee; yet let them not pluck away any one of Gods commands of
Christ's Promises from thee. Christ put a necessity upon it, I must bring these
sheep: lay thou the like necessity upon thy Soul. It is a rule of Christ, I
must obey it, Christ I must love, and fear, and follow. Do not retire, strike
Sail, turn back, nay do not stop in the way, but go on: Its not necessary to
live, but to love Jesus.

We have done with this Point from the connection of the words. We shall now
proceed to the other part of that work, which our Savior professes and
ingageth himself unto that he will further do, for time to come.

-- I will make it known. The profession and resolution of our Savior to
provide for their further inlightening and enlargement in this knowledge,
implies two things.

1. What the wants of the Saints are, as touching this knowledge.

2. What the care and engagement of our Savior is to supply the same.

The first is here supposed, and that by necessary inference. For had they
attended the full measure of this knowledge, that need has our Savior to make
known more? if they had been perfect in the skilful understanding of that
lecture, what need was there that our Savior should be daily learning and
informing them?

Its plain therefore, though they had much of this knowledge, there was yet much
wanting unto them, of which they had, as daily need, so daily use of.

Hence we have two Points of Doctrine.

1. There is much wanting in the full knowledge of Gods Name in the most able
Saints. 2. Christ lends daily supply of knowledge to them, according to their
daily needs.
To the First. There is much wanting in the full knowledge of Gods Name in the
most able Saints.
The most knowing Christians, such as may seem to be in the highest form, near
our Savior, taught and trained up under his Wing, yet have need, that more of
the Name of the Father should be made known to them. The Point is plain in the
words, we shall need say no more to evidence it from the text; but address our
selves to the further explication of it. What this Name is, Viz. The Name of
Gods Fatherly love and mercy and Faithfulness. And what it is to know it, or to
have it made known, we have opened formerly, when the Lord Christ causes all the good and incomparable excellency of this Fatherly mercy and Faithfulness to
pass before the Eye of the Soul, and sets on that suitable sweetness so
effectually upon it, as that it affects and draws the heart to look that way by
the Eye of Faith: so to Eye it, as to own it, and fasten upon it. This is the
knowledge here meant, and much of this is wanting, even in those that are most
eminent. Its a general ground which takes in the Particulars with advantage.

When the holy man Job laid forth at large the ways of God in his Providence,
limmed out to the life his excellencies, he ends with this, and vailes as it
were, what he was not able to express. These are part of his ways, but how
little a portion is heard of him. Job. 26*14. q. d. There is little of that
unconceivable excellency heard of, or reported, though the Earth and Heaven be
full of his goodness, and his mercy over al shines with the greatest luster in all his works; yet this is but a little portion of him, and we know little of
this. And hence Moses, who conversed Face to Face with God, unto whom the Lord
did familiarise himself, as to a friend, yet he finds his necessity most here,
and makes it his chief suit, if I have found Favor in thine Eyes, Lord show me
thy glory. If ever he showed himself to a mortal man, it might seem he did in
an especial manner express himself to him. And therefore it was his
pre-eminence above the Prophets to whom he would make known himself in a vision
and dream; My Servant Moses is not so: to him I will speak Mouth to Mouth
apparently, Visibly, familiarly, and openly. Numb. 12.8. Deuteronomy. 34.10. And yet
he begs this as the greatest honor. Lord show me thy glory. And Gods answer
shows his Aim. Exodus 34.5, 6. I will cause my goodness to pass before thee;
strong, gracious, merciful, abundant in goodness and truth etc. The greatest
part of that we know is the least part of that we know not. And therefore Paul
desires to come to supply that which is lacking in their Faith; and this is the
knowledge especially Aimed at, wherein we shall inquire.

1. In what this want appears. 2. The Reason why there is left such.
1. This want appears and is made good in four Particulars.

1. Much is wanting in regard of incomprehensible and boundless greatness of
this Fatherly mercy and Faithfulness, which cannot be comprehended by the best
ability of the strongest Faith or spiritual understanding. Adepth that cannot
be fathomed. A light unto which we cannot approach: only we are gathering in
something nearer and groping somewhat more, as we attain to the strength and
growth of Faith. Job. 11.7. Can thou by searching find out the Almighty to
perfection? it is higher than Heaven, what can thou do? deeper than Hell, what
can thou know? the measure thereof is larger than the Earth, and broaden than
the Sea. Therefore the Psalmist instead of comprehending, he falls into
admiration of this mercy. Psalm. 31.19. Oh how great is thy goodness, that thou
have laid up for them that fear thee, and laid out for them that trust in thee,
before the sons of men! We are not able to value the goodness that is laid out
in the ways of his providence and Fatherly dispensations toward us. But the
treasuries of compassions that have been hoarded and laid up from al eternity,
Oh how great! If the stock be so large that the Father puts into the hand of a
Child when he is now in his nonage and setting up: what will the whole estate
and revenews be, when he come to his inheritance? therefore the Lord shows the
infinite disproportion betwixt his thoughts of goodness toward his; and the
narrowness of their conceivings to teach at the measure thereof. Isa. 55. As
high as the Heaven is above the Earth, so far are my thoughts above yours. A
point or center that is less than any quantity, and the great Circumference
that is the largest of al quantity.

2. Much is wanting in regard of the clear discerning of that, which is some
measure we do conceive; much of this Name yet conceived, we know not, and that
which we do know, is dimly, and in a dark manner. Its a strange Check of our
Savior to Philip, upon his request expressed, Joh. 14. Show us the Father and
it shall suffice us. Verse, 8. Our Savior by a sharp interrogation casts a
secret shame of feebleness and heedlesnes upon him. What? have I been so long
with you, and yet do thou not know me Philip? he that has seen me has seen
the Father also. And if ye do but cast your Eye upon the 7. Verse. Ye will
perceive that they did know the Father and had seen him. And yet Philip
desires, he might be showed, as though they had never known nor scene. The
issue from hence will be here, that its possible for a Christian to see the
Father, and in a sense to converse with him; and yet he needs to have him made
known whom he knows, and to have him showed, whom he sees. So he is Job. The
Lord passes by and we perceive him not, he speaks once and twice and we hear
him not. That as it was said of the Disciples Luke 24.16. Their Eyes were held,
that they did not know him: they did know discerningly whom they saw, and with
whom they did familiarly converse, and therefore its added. Verse, 31. Their
Eyes were opened and they knew him. So it is with the Eye of our understanding,
in the right conceiving of the mystery of this Fatherly mercy and Faithfulness
of God; though we converse familiarly with this goodness of the Lord, yet
because our apprehensions are marvailous feeble and dim, they must be further
cleared before we can know, and discern that we do know. 1 Cor. 13. We see
through a vail and therefore need to be helped to see what we see? to fee more
fully what we see feebly and imperfectly.

3. Much is wanting in regard of the experience of this Fatherly Faithfulness
which as yet they never found, or having formerly found it, they are now
deprived of it.

Some as yet have never found it. For the Lord dispenses his favors in the
fittest season, and so as his Servants have most need, and may make most
improvement of. So Genesis 22.14. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. And
Romans 5.4. Patience works experience and Hope makes not ashamed because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts. Verse, 5. God steps in seasonably,
and gives proof of his Fatherly Care. Herb. 4.16. We find Grace to help in time
of need. As the Father reserves a special favor for his Child to a season, a
morsel, a bit to give him at a turn.

Some have formerly found it by experience, but are now deprived of it. Hence
is that of the Prophet David, Psalm. 63.2. To see thy power and thy glory, so as
I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. So again Quicken me as thou art wont. Psalm.
89.49. Where are those former loving kindnesses? The lower the Eo the greater
the flow. God withdrawes the expressions of his Favor, that they may be made
more fit and have them more abundantly. For a little while I have hid my Face,
but with everlasting kindness will I have Mercy on thee. Isa. 54.8.

4. Much is wanting, in regard of that full assurance, which they were promised,
and do desire, but yet could never attain unto.

So Heman Psa. 88.14, 15. Lord why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou
thy Face from me? I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I
suffer thy terrors I am distracted. Thy fierce wrath goes over me; thy Terrors
have Cut me off. They came round about me daily like Water: they compassed me
about together. Verse, 16, 17. So David, Mine Eyes fail for looking for thy
Salvation: Ob when will thou comfort me? Psalm. 119.82.

Much then is wanting, in regard of what may be known; in regard of the clear
discovery of what we do know; in regard of the Experience we have had, and
want; in regard of the Assurance we seek, and do not attain.

2. The Reasons hereof are two.

1. Is taken from the Condition of the Saints, while they are in this vale of
Tears: They are as Babes in the Womb, or at the best, as Children born; but in
their nonage, and tender years: and therefore in rational proceedings, their
abilities and performances must carry some resemblance and proportion: they
must be attended with Child-like weaknesses, and imperfections. So the Apostle
disputes, 1 Cor. 13.11. When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as
a Child, I thought as a Child. Their Speech is not full, their understanding is
feeble, their thoughts are under and low, looking at poor and mean things, such
as be most familiar, and liable to the Senses: things of depth and difficulty,
as they cannot conceive them, so they do not for the most part attend them,
because they are beyond their reach.

So it is with our Spiritual Childhood. The things of God and Grace, which are
most easy, and openly familiar, we are most exercised, and taken up withal;
but the great Mysteries of Godliness, the unsearchable Riches of Mercy, and the
deep things of God, we are not able upon the sudden to search into. Our Savior
gives this Reason to his Disciples; I have many things to say, but ye cannot
yet receive them. A Child that is in the lower Form, happily entering into his
Latin, he is not able to carry away his Lecture of Greek, not to touch
difficult things of Philosophy; but his Principles and Abilities must have time
to ripen, before he be set up into so high a Form. So here.

2. Is taken from the freeness of Gods Dispensation, in whose pleasure it is,
to give when, and what he will; and after what manner. And hence he doles his
Grace, answerable to the growth he has appointed, each man to come unto, and
in what time, Ephesians. 4.13. Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, to a
perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Some are
of a larger Stature, and grow more speedily than others; some are of a less,
and stand at a stay for a season, until the Lord by the effectual working of
the Spirit, make them to grow, and so they increase with the encreasings of
God, Col. 2.19.

USE, 1. Of Instruction.
Hence see the Reason of those mis-apprehensions, that the dear, and faithful
Servants of the Lord have, of the Fatherly Mercy, and faithfulness of God
toward them. They want much knowledge of this incomprehensible sweetness, and
goodness of Gods Nature; and that is the Reason they missjudg, and mistake so
much, and make such unkind Constructions, and maintain such groundless surmizes
of his Fatherly kindness.

He that is jealous, and fearful of the Love and Favor of another, who is of
tried Truth and Sincerity, al men will easily, and readily give him the Reason;
because he knows him not. So here, It Is because we know no^ God.

These misconceivings of God, may be referred to two Heads:

1. When they are under pressures, and necessities, and miseries march in upon
them, the Lord seems, like an angry Father, to withdraw himself. They presently
sit down discouraged, and conclude, as they, Isa. 49.14. Sion has said, The
Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me: The Lord answers, from the
consideration of those Fatherly Compassions which rest in his Bowels; Can a
Woman forget her Child, that she should not have compossion on the Son of her
Womb? these may, yet I will not. Psalm. 89.8. Who is like to thee, or to thy
Faithfulness round about thee? it is round about him, per omnes circuitus.

But I have dealt carelessly, yea, unkindly, and faithlesly with him, and
grieved the eyes of his Glory by daily provocations. True, thou have first
broken with him, and thou may see, and know thy falsnels; but thou do not
know his Faithfulness, and Fartherly mercy. Psalm. 89.33. Nevertheless, my
loving kindness, I will not take away from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to
fail. Though he may deserve it, and I may justly do it; yet I will not suffer,
etc. Thou know thine own falsnels, and wretchedness, who keep not touch
with God, but failest; yet my Faithfulness, and my Mercy I will keep with him,
verse 24. And my Covenant shall stand fast, verse 28. Thou know not the heart
of a Heavenly Father, and therefore thou so misjudgest.

2. They conceive their Sins so many, and so heinous, that it is beyond the
compass, and bounds of his Fatherly Compassions to remit, and pardon. Thou do
not know what these Bowels of a Father are, and therefore thou do not judge
aright, what he can, and will do. When Ephraim bemoaned his sin, God yerneth
toward him, and bemoaneth him; though he does not hear God, yet God hears him,
Jer. 31.18. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou have chastised
me, and I was chastised.

See how gods Bowels turn within him, verse 19. My Bowels are turned within me;
I will surely have mercy upon him. Mercy is mourning over thy Soul, when thou
art mourning for thy sin. True, could I repent; but I have been smitten, and
yet walked after the way wardness of my heart; so that I dare not look upon my
sin; and I cannot look to Heaven, because of my guilt: I know not how I can be
pardoned.

Because thou do not know the Name of this Father, and this Mercy; see, and
consider what it can do, that thou can not conceive. Isa. 57. I was angry,
and smote him, and he went away, verse 17. I have seen him, and his ways, and
will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore Comforts unto him, and to his
mourners; q. d. I have seen him and his ways, though he can neither see me,
nor himself; though he has wounded himself, I will heal him: I will make him
mourn, and others with him, and comfort both.

Obj. But I cannot think it.

Ans. This Mercy can do, what thou can not think. Isa. 55.8, 9. My thoughts
are not your thoughts, etc. for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so
are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. And
thou will find it relieving, when thou do least look for it. True, I have
found him sometimes in desperate streights relieving me, when I was linking, and
past hope, my head under water: when al his billows were running over, then
comforting, and supporting me.

This is but a Lightening before my Death, he will leave me at last: it is but a
Reprieval before some more heavy Plague and Condemnation. God has a Secret
purpose to hasten my ruin, even by his Bounty, which I have had, and abused, I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1.

Thou have these hard thoughts of God, because thou do not know the heart of
a Father, and his never-failing Faithfulness.

Thou have been many years preserved, why perish one day? He does thee no harm,
why should thou think he intends thee any? He has said, I will not leave
thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

USE, 2. Of Direction.
Be willing to hear, and willing to follow the Direction of such who are Gods
Favorites, and acquainted with this Name of his, and that by plentiful
Experience. There was never yet a blind man known, but was willing to be
guided: never man ignorant of his way, that was not phrenitick, but was willing
to be directed where he was in doubt.

The Rules are Two.

1. The Counsel thou art not able to gainsay with Reason, know, Thou ought
in Reason, and according to Rule, to submit unto it.

I do not think it, I cannot believe it, I much suspect and fear.

Away with such Dreams, these are al but pangs of way wardness.

It is made a Point of Religion, but it is a delusion, to keep our complaints,
and keep our discouragements. Keep neither, but keep the Direction.

Quest. But must I put out mine Eyes, to see by another Spectacles? or pinion
my self to another Apprehensions?

Answ. Thou do not follow the man, but the light that is brought by him:
Captivate thy Carnal Reason to Gods Counsel, Isa. 50.10. Who is there among you
that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant? etc. Let him stay
himself upon his God. See therefore God in that, and possess thy heart with a
holy fear, not to dare to cavil, or by carelessness, not to attend; as Sampson,
be led to the main Pillar.

2. When thou have no word against thy self, let no wants, miseries,
weaknesses, unworthiness, hinder thee from adventuring thy self upon his
Fatherly Mercy, and expecting supply from it. And who knows but God will show
thee mercy? Thou do not know the height, the length, the breadth, the depth
of his Mercy; and who knows but God may extend his Fatherly Love, and
Faithfulness unto thy Soul?

The Second Doctrine. The Lord Christ lends daily Direction, Doct.
and and Discovery of Mercy according to the daily need of his Faithful
Servants.
See it in the Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Exodus 13.21. So also in his Care to
his Vinyard, watering it every moment, Isa. 27. Not to al at once; not to al
alike: but as in the gathering of the Manna, he that gathered the least, had no
lack. So every one, that which answers his present Condition, Psalm. 21.3. Thou
preventest me with blessings of goodness; take measure, and suitest every
ones wants.

In the opening, attend, 1. The Measure he takes in the supply. 2. The Manner
how he does it.


I. The Measure he takes in this supply, appears in Four thing: 1. When we are
doubtful in our way, he directs us; when we are at a stand, and know not which
way to take, we then have a voice behind us, Isa. 30. And thine Ears shall hear
a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, etc. And Chap. 42.16. I will bring
the blind by a way that they know not, I will lead them, etc, 2. Suitable to
our needs, he supplies, Isa. 40.11. Carries the Lambs in his Bosom: Where there
is most want, he lends most supply. 3. What is most Serviceable to our
occasions, he furthers, and sets forward with success; he does for us, as
occasion does require. My Grace is sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.9. then when the shock
was, he steps in: his Faithfulness is the Magazine, furnishes us fully; he
furnishes with Grace suitable to our Service, ( Phil. 4.13. I can do all
things) with Patience in Journeys; Courage in Difficulties; in the Fire, and in
the Water, Isa. 43.2. and 25.4. 4. Al these in the best Season, Heb. 4. last,
in the time of need, Isa. 41.17. when the four hundred and thirty years were
expired, that very day, Exodus 12.41.


II. The Manner how.

1. Christ has purchased al at the hands of the Father, and so is become the
Head of the Church, John, 16.10. For had not Christ been possessed of Grace, as
our Surety, and purchased the Grace of Adam lost, the corrupt Nature of Man had
been incapable of Mercy. 2. He sends the holy Ghost, who takes of his, and
gives to us, John, 16.15. He shall take of mine; he does not take of the Fathers
immediately, but Christ of the Father, he of Christ, John, 14.26.
The Reason is, Because al is summed up in this:

1. Al depends upon this; I mean, upon the Name of his Fatherly Love, and
Faithfulness. I speak of it now, as it issues peculiarly from the special
manner of the Fathers subsistence, and work. For therein the outgoings of the
Deity are firstly discerned, and lastly resolved. Especially this is to be
attended, because the Father was directly offended by the sin of Adam; and
therefore it must come firstly in order from him, to appoint, and to accept a
Surety for the Conveyance of Grace and Mercy. And herein lies the out-going of
the Godhead first; I look at the manner of his working. The Father works of
himself, the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost from both. So that had not the
Father moved, or put forth this work, the Son would not, the Holy Spirit would
not, because they work in order from the Father, John 5.19. and 12. and last
verse. So John 16.13. Christ speaks what he hears from the Father, the Spirit
what he hears from Christ.

2. Al is contained in this, and from this communicated to the Saints. Hence
the Covenant of Grace, which is here first attended, The Promise of God in
Christ before the World was, 2 Timothy 1.2. This was in Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9. God
fed the Patriarchs with this, nothing but the daily repetition, and
consideration of the Covenant, therefore blessing goes with it, is discovered
by it: I will bless thee. In thee shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. He has sworn that he will bless us, Luke 1.72, 73. that is, he will be
a God in Covenant.

This is the Cause why God so appears: I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, the God of Jacob. And this is the Ground of our Resurrection. God is not
the God of the Dead, but of the Living. God remembers his Covenant with us, and
for us.

Collections hence, are many.

This Truth, this Tree is loaded with abundance of Fruit: We will shake it a
little, and see what is most ripe, and most readily offers it self to our
Observation, for our benefit; that each man may gather, and take that which may
be most for his own Help, and Satisfaction.

1. Collection.

Hence it is clear, The best of the Saints, men of choycest Graces, and best
Abilities, as touching the right Apprehension of the mysterious Deeps of Gods
Fatherly Mercy, the live merely upon a daily dependence, while they have a day
to live in this World, The Lesson is so hard and difficult, that our Savior is
daily spelling and repeating, always teaching, and yet there is more to be
taught; more knots to be untied, secrets to be opened. As to Nathaniel, John
1.50. Thou shall see greater things than these. And therefore David, when he
was a Scholar of the highest Form, he craves the further help of Christ,
because the work was too hard, Teach me the way to thee, thy Spirit is good,
Psalm. 143.8, 10. Open mine Eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. There
were yet more wonders to be seen, though he had seen wonders al his days. This
Name is Wonderful, as the Angel to Manoah.

Beside, The Lesson is marvelous large, we had need be daily learning, and yet
we shall never come to the end of it, before we come to the end of our days. As
men who travel in the main Ocean; they see nothing but Water, and yet see
neither Side nor Shore, Brim nor Bottom, and there is more Water to be seen.

The saving Knowledge of this Name of Gods Fatherly Mercy, when it fills the
mind, as the Waters cover the Sea. Habb. 2.14. we may sail here in daily
search, and when we know, yet there is something still beyond our knowledge, as
Ephesians. 3.19. That we know the Love of Christ, that passes knowledge.

This Name of Gods Fatherly Mercy, is like that Book, Rev. 5.1, 2. So many
Leaves, and so thick written, that we cannot turn over the Pages; much less
able to come to the full knowing, and conceiving of it. So it is here.

The Name of Gods Mercy and Faithfulness, its writ so thick in all the ways and
works of God, in all the ordinances, Nay in all the dispensations of God and his
operations, from election to our glorification, affords so many full vollums,
and so many fresh editions. That we are still new to seek, unless the Lord
Christ be pleased further to make known these unto us.

As the thing to be known is dark and difficult: So we are shallow in our
apprehensions. As our Savior complained of his own, brought up under his own
Wing. Luke 24.25. O Fools and slow of Heart to know these depth's of Gods Grace
and Mercy. Our understandings, like narrow mounh'd Vessels, can take in little
and that in a long time, though never so much be discovered and laid before us.
And Therefore our Savior is constrained to deal with us, as Masters with their
Scholars which are dull and heavy of apprehension, ever pointing at the word,
and putting the Fescue to the Letter: Line upon Line, and precept after
precept, here a little, and there a little, as the Prophet Isa. 28.10. So it is
with such Babe-like feeble ones as we be, though we have Daily help, yet we
have daily need of new help to be continued to us. As little ones, they must be
taken up, dressed, and tended daily, because they are helpless in themselves.

But that which is the maine of al. The very Terms of the Covenant, and the
Office of our Savior, and the condition of the State of Grace calls for this.
For all the Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge are hid in Christ, and he keeps the
Keys in his own hand and Bosom, and gives out our pittance and allowance what
he sees fit. We need our daily direction and instruction in the things of Grace
and eternal life, more than our daily Bread.

The Body needs the constant direction of the Eye and advise of the head, for
every thing it does, and that every moment. Its thus in the natural, its the
same in the spiritual and mistical Body: So the Apostle 2 Cor. 3.5. Of our
selves, as of our selves, we are not sufficient to think a good thought, but
our sufficiency is of God. Without me ye can do nothing. Joh. 15.4, 5. He has
taught you in the morning, he must teach you at Noone, and at Night also. He
has cleared up our doubts, he must help us in the next again, or else we shall
be to seek as much as ever. He must Water us every moment.

Adam has the staff and stock in his own hand, and he lost al, and himself and
his too. Therefore now the Lord Jesus keeps the stock in his own care, in his
own hand, gives us such allowance, as he sees fit, suitable for our good.

As Fathers, when they see their Sons to lavish out their Patrimony, and grow
licencious; they keep the revenewes and state in their own hands, only allow
them some yearly pension or annuity for their relief. So here our Savior makes
us live, not of our yearly, but our daily, yea hourly annuities.

That Grace that helped thee the last month, the last week, the last day, the
last morning, how to see God, how to close with him, and depend upon him, and
gain assurance from him, will not serve thee for the next occasion happily.
Either the work is more difficult, the way more dark, thine own indisposition
makes thee more unfit, thy temptations do more oppose, thy corruptions grow
more active and violent, or thy unskilfulness, forgetfulness bring thee to a
loss, that thou shall not be able to see the way. So that as Christ has made
known, so he must make known for the present, and so for the future.

The beggar when he has got his alms one day, he lives of that and spends it,
and he must have a new alms, as a new day, he is as fresh to seek, and as free
to beg, as ever. Christ is Gods Almner and we are his beggars. So Paul, He has
delivered, does deliver, will deliver. Has made known, does make known, will
make known. As the Moon, every new Month, nay every hour, and minute must
receive new light from the Sun. So here, Psalm. 36.9. In thy light we shall see
light.

2. Collection.

Its easy with Christ to darken the evidence of Gods love and mercy to the
Soul, and to cloud al our knowledge we have, even in the clearest day: to put us
to a loss, that we may be to seek for our assurance and knowledge of Gods
Fatherly goodness, when we think we are most sure of it.

Though he has made known the name of the Father formerly, unless he still make
it known for future, unless he still renew the knowledge we have, we shall not be
able to know what he have known. So Elihu professes Job 34.29. When he gives
quietness, who then can cause trouble? and when he hides his Face, who then
can behold him? whether it be done against a nation or against a man only. q.
d. Its not for want of skill that men do not compass this knowledge for their
numbers or abilities never so many, even a whole nation God can darken them al.
And therefore its said, 1 King. 10.3. When the Queen of Sheba came to try
Solomon with some questions, he told her al, nothing was hid. So that God can
hide even the glimmering Starr-light of the knowledge of Human things from men:
Much more easy is it to conceive, how this may be done in these high,
Heavenly, hidden mysteries; when its hard to know them, when they are made
known to us. How impossible, if the Lord will withold them from us? al our
dexterity and Wisdom will do nothing, if Christ will not direct. Therefore the
Church complained, Lam. 3.44. That God had covered himself with a cloud, that
their Prayers could not come at him. When God sent darkness into Egypt, it was
not all the Fires and Candles that could give any light, but they sat three
days and three nights and stirred not out of their places. Exodus 10.23. If the
Sun of Righteousness will withold or withdraw his beams it will be dark night
with us in our doubtings and dismayings, notwithstanding, all the Learning, yea,
the experiences also we have had. Yea Mercy and Grace may be present with us,
and yet not be perceived. Philip saw the Father, and yet knew not what he saw.

Beware here of three things, which the Scripture mentions as the main Cause
why.

1. Take heed of Carnal Confidence and trusting too much to Earthly
Contentments. Psalm. 30.6.7. I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved, Lord
by thy favor, thou have made my mountain to stand strong: Thou did hide thy
Face, and I was troubled. When we turn our Eyes and hearts to the world, God
turns away his gracious respect he expressed toward us. He will make his
presence welcome, or he will withdraw. Math. 23.38. Ye shall see me no more, til
ye shall say, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. And therefore
our Savior settles himself in this, Math. 11.25. I thank thee O Father, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 John 2.16. 2. Beware of
Resistance of the Truth, when it is made known. If ye will not have his word to
direct you, ye shall not have the knowledge of his Mercy, that may support and
refresh you. When the spirit of truth comes to lead us into al truth, then it
shall take of Christ's and show to us. Joh. 16. and Joh. 17.8. I have given them
thy word, and they have Received it, and they have known that thou have sent
me. This receiving will let in this knowing. Revel. 3.20. If any will open -- I
will come and Sup with him. 1 John 2.24. If the word that ye have heard abide
in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father, so Verse, 27. 3.
Take heed of Sleighting and making little account of any of the Commandments
of the Lord; Presume not to neglect the least, or tamper with any sinful
distemper, or give way to infirmities or passions. So Jonah 2.8. He that
trusts in Lying vanities for saketh his own Mercy. That is the mind of the
context. Joh. 14.23. If any man love me, be will keep my words and my Father will
love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him. And Verse, 21.
I will manifest my self to him; that is, keep him in his purity, keep him in
his power as we keep liquors, that they loose none of their life; they drink
lively, and quick, as when new put up.
3. Collection.

The Faithful should increase in the knowledge and right apprehension of this
Name of Gods Fatherly mercy: and it is their own fault, if they do it not, for
else they might. For where can there be any cause of none Proficiency found, but
in our selves? Christ has undertaken the work, and who more able than he, who
is the Wisdom of the Father, and came out of his Bosom? and therefore is able
to make known those Bosom secrets of Gods Fatherly Love, which never did see
Sun, and reveal them.

Yea he is as willing as able, and ready to communicate these unknown depths of
Gods indeared affections.

Yea you that are faithful, you have experience of his sufficiency this way:
you have a pawn in your hand, a real proof of what he has done, when you were
at the worst, not only unskilful, but incapable of his knowledge.

Yea he has made you know the things belonging to your Peace, when ye never
sought after, nor inquired for him.

And he is the same that ever he was, and professes he will make it known,
there is no fault, nor want in Christ. But you are wanting to him, and your
selves and play the Trevants in this; are laze and heedless to learn that which
is so carefully, so constantly taught you.

If a Scholar had the choicest and ablest man for his parts, most diligent in
his place, to be his ^^acher, yet if he came not on in his learning, but stood
at a stay, every man would conclude, there is no want of sufficiency or
Faithfulness in the Master, he might have grown, and many have come on under
him, but the cause and fault is in his own heedlessness.

Object. But alas, my person is mean, my infirmities so many, my parts so Poor,
I am a very Dullard, heavy headed, long before I can attain a little, but am
never likely to come to any great matter.

Answ. There is no one excepted, not one excluded that is faithful. He has
given thee knowledge, he can as well add to what he has given, and he will do it.
Thy weakness cannnot hinder his Faithfulness who has promised. Yea he is
ready, and professes his willingness, that he will make thee know. Nay he is
unweariable to teach, notwithstanding al thy unteachableness to learn. He has
given thee a mind to know, and he will increase that knowledge, and make him
daily more known that thou may daily increase. Isa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy
God, which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way that thou
should go. And Chap. 42.16. I will lead the Blind by a way that they knew not
etc. This I will do unto them, and not forsake them.

4. Collection.

We here see the Reason, why after many Prayers made, many pains improved, by
diligence, and endeavor of the dear Servants of the Lord, that men might see,
and savingly, and experimentally know the precious Name of Fatherly Mercy; yet
after al, many are at so great a loss, and know so little, find almost nothing
of the sweetnes^ which is to be had out of this Name, that Christ will make
known, and would make known to them.

Truly we do not go to the right door, and we receive not the dole. Christ is
the way to lead us to the Father, and we miss the way, and so attain not to our
end. Christ is said to be the Light, Isa. 49.6. He is given as a Light unto the
Gentiles. In him was the Promise of Life, and that is the Light of men, to lead
them by the hand to the Love of God the Father, and the Faithful Performance of
the Covenant: And we follow not that Light, but we compass our selves about
with our own Sparks, and follow the light of our own Fire, the carnal
conceivings, and contrivements of our own Carnal Reason, and stay not upon the
Name of God, and therefore it is, we lie down in Sorrow, Isa. 50.11.

Christ bids us learn of him, Matthew. 11.29. Buy of him, Rev. 3.18. And we learn
of our own Delusions and Discouragements, we learn of the wrong Master, go to
the wrong Shop, buy of our own Abilities, make Tradings of our own. We should
not look to our own Grace, but to Christ first to quicken our Grace.

5. Collection.

Here is matter of Abasment of heart, and holy fear; in both which, we ought to
walk before the Lord.

1. Ground of Abasement: Not to boast of any measure of enlightening, or
Assurance, which at any time we do partake of: as though by any sufficiency of
ours, or improvement of any Ability of our own, we had attained thereunto.
There is never a spark of this Fire, but it is from Heaven; not one Beam of
holy Light, but it comes from this Sun. The entrance, continuance, perfection,
al is from him, he is the Author and Finisher. If we have known any thing, or
do, or shall, it is Christ that has made us know; we have received, and
therefore why should we boast, as though we had no^ ^^ceived.

The least River should lead us to the Sea; and as Abraham's Servant, when his
Prayer was answered, He bowed and worshipped, Genesis 24.26. So do thou; when he
fills us most, we must be most sensible of our own emptiness.

2. Walk in a holy trembling, and fear: Rejoice before him with trembling,
Psalm. 2.11. Rejoice in what he gives, but fear we do not off end the Giver.
Those of whom we have daily kindness, we are very careful we do not give them
distaste.

6. Collection.

Here is Ground of exceeding thankfulness, and enlargadness of heart, for ever,
to the Lord Jesus.

The unwearied Faithfulness of the Lord Christ to follow his poor Servants,
with the discovery of such Favors, which are not to be found on Earth besides,
should cause them to return such acknowledgment which cannot be matched by any
men in the World.

Hence he so propounds the Question, as for ever to be admired, but never to be
comprehended: Lord, why will thou show thy self to us, and not unto the World?
John 14.22 Why will thou to us? there is no worth in us to deserve i^, nor
ability to conceive it, no reason to be given, which may persuade it. Why? it is
mercy, and that incomparable, incomprehensible, for ever to be adored, and
wondered at.

Yea, our Savior is exceedingly taken up with the Consideration, Matthew. 11.25.
I thank thee, O Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent. These Secrets, these depths of everlasting Compassions, these
Rarities, these Dainties, which the World never tasted, men of highest Place,
chiefest Parts, never came to the sight of. And our Savior presses this a^^
^^eculiar evidence of his dearest Affection, John 15.15. I call you Friends,
because I have declared unto you all things, I have heard of the Father; have
so befriended you with such special Privileges, so familiarized my self unto
you, whereas others have not an inkling thereof.

7. Collection.

We have here a never-failing ground of everlasting refreshing and Comfort, to
fence, and fetch up the fainting hearts of Saints. Whatever oppositions,
desertions, wants, or infirmities they sustain, which might eclipse, and take
away the sight and fence of Gods Love, this Truth preserves, and bears up from
al. I know what troubles you, what your complaints are. It Is Gods Face, and
Fatherly Mercy, it is that ye have long sought, and desired to see: Mine Eyes
fail for waiting for thy Salvation, saying, O! when will thou comfort me? If I
could get a sight of Gods Fatherly Face, and did but know his Mercy were mine,
I could resolve with old Simeon: Let me depart in peace; for mine Eyes have
seen thy Salvation.

Stand still, and stay thy self upon the Consideration of this Truth, and thou
shall see greater things than these. Christ has undertaken to make it known,
and therefore quiet thine own heart; thou shall know this which passes
knowledge. 1. Whatever Oppositions thou have, he will out-bid them. 2. Whatever
Desertions, he will recover them. 3. Whatever weaknesses, he will remove them.
Whatever it is that eclipseth the coming of this Love, he will scatter al.

1. Whatever thy Oppositions be, he will over-bear al, he will disperse al
Clouds, quel al Temptations, quiet al fears, drive away al discouragements,
clear al doubts and difficulties. Christ has said it, and he is able, who has
promised it, and he can perform it: He can make this known, and nothing can
hinder tha^ power of his.

Object. I know he can, but how shall I know that he will?

Answ. He is ready, and resolute; hear his own expression, I will make it known.
So Isa. 46.10. His Will shall stand, and none can resist it; not the will of
Devils, nor distempers, nor temptations, nor thine own corrupt will, Psalm,
115.3. If he will make it known, who has resisted his will?

2. Whatever be thy Desertions, he will recover thee out of al: Thou
complainest, The time was, God did show his Face, and discover his Favor: I
have known his Name; but O! that is my misery; I have: But God has forgotten
to be gracious, and has shut up his loving kindness in displeasure.

No: Quiet thy heart, he has make known, and be assured he will make known: he
was yesterday, he is to day, and he will be the same for ever. Thy Sun is set,
it will rise again. It is eclipsed now, but it will shine again, Isa. 54.8. For a
small moment I have had my Face from thee, but with everlasting kindness, I will
have mercy upon thee.

3. What thy wants be, he will remove, and break through al. Thou say, thy
neglects have been frequent and grievous, many motions, intimations thou have
had, and yet rejected, quenched al, why should he discover any more? thy
disires are very fa^^, thy endeavors weak and sluggish, and in reason unworthy
to attain any mercy.

Answ. He does not make known the Name of his Father, because of thy work or
worthiness; but it is the Office that he has undertaken, he will discharge it:
his Promise and engagement he will perform, notwithstanding al thy neglects, and
weaknesses. He that made known this Name, when thou never inquired'st after it;
he will not deny to manifest it, when thou seek after it, though in much
weakness, Isa. 42.16. I will lead them, and will not forsake them. John, 17.2.
The Father has given Christ power over all Flesh, that he might give Eternal
Life; and this is Eternal Life, to know thee, verse 3. he has power over al
Flesh; Fleshly Reason, the will of the Flesh, infirmities of the Flesh,
inordinate desires of the Flesh.

Lastly, Exhortation.

Wait upon Christ for this Declaration; if the Vision tarry, yet wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Habb. 2.3. How can it tarry, and
yet not tarry, it may tarry to our apprehension, but not tarry in regard of
Gods Determination. This waiting lies in two Rules.

First: See how Christ dispenses it. Therefore consider, 1. That he lies in
the Bosom of the Father, and is acquainted with his Bosom Secrets. 2. That all that the Father has, is his, and he may dispose of it, John 16.15. 3. That he
is sent on purpose, upon this very Errand, John 6.38, 39. John 17.8. 4. He has
received power over al Flesh for the Execution of this, John 17.2, 3. 5. It is
his will, and resolution to do it; I will manifest it.


Secondly: See the way how we are to receive it. 1. Stay his time, manner,
measure: If it be not free, it is not Grace. 2. Carefully observe what falls,
the least intimation, or spark cast in. 3. When we have observed the
Dispensation of God toward us, let us then follow on to improve that spark,
and give way to Christ, and we shall receive more from him.


We are now come to the last, and great thing, observed and expressed in these
words of our Saviors Prayer, with which he issues and closes al: and that is
the Aim, and desire of our Savior, for which he prays; and for the obtaining
of which, he has, and he will declare the Fathers Name unto the Faithful, Viz.

That the Love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.
For the understanding of which words, we shall open these four Things: 1. How
the Father loves Christ. 2. How that Love is said to be in them; that is, the
Faithful. 3. The Means, and Order know this is done. 4. When we shall know this.


To the First.

1. This Love is that, which in an especial manner, is appropriated unto our
Savior: It Is a peculiar Legacy, and Inheritance which appertains to him as a
Son. And therefore look at it, as we must do in this place, as circumstantiated
in the special Respects and Considerations, as proceeding from the Father as
the Father, and terminated, and bounded upon him, as a Son: It Is peculiarized,
and impropriated to him, and to him alone. That however it may be said, and
that truly, in a true sense, of all the glorious Persons in the blessed Trinity,
that they love each other: yet this Love, as it is dyed in the heart of the
Father, has as it were the Tincture of that Relation, out of which, in an
especial manner, it arises, and is resolved, and rests in, and upon the Son.
So it is given to him, and in that respect; and is of the like Nature with some
other Acts, which are so attributed. As the Father sends the Son, the Son is
sent only by the Father.

2. This Love is founded firstly in that Eternal Generation, whereby the Son
was begotten of the Father before al Worlds. For therein is the root of those
Relative Properties, and so that Personal distinction, that appears betwixt the
Father and the Son, and consequently of al those proper respects that appertain
to each, and be attributed to them in a distinct manner.

3. Hence there arises a special knowledge betwixt the Father and the Son,
which answers the Specialty of their Relation. For that is a Consequent which
follows from things that undergo relative Respects, they give special
intimation each of other, because they give relative being each to other: And
therefore our Savior when he checked Philip for his ignorance, because he knew
not the Father; Have I been so long time with you, and know thou not me? he
that has seen me, has seen the Father, John, 14.9. Relatives give Being each
to other, and therefore give Knowledge each of other, Matthew. 11.27. No man
knows the Son, but the Father; and no man knows the Father, but the Son. As
we see it in the Sensitive Creatures, so in all Generations, there is an
especial owning each of other: as the young owns the Dam, the Dam the young, by
smell or bleating. He that has his mind rectified by a Truth, he will own that
Truth that did rectify him. The Son is the shine of the Fathers Wisdom, Heb.
1.3. A Light sprung from a Light, John 10.15.

4. The Father begets his Son; he owns him when he is begotten, the shine, and
engraven Form of his own personal Excellency.

Lastly: He loves whom he thus owns: The heart of the Father is wholly taken up
with him, his thoughts wholly set upon him, his Soul is wholly satisfied in
him; an Infinite, and Eternal Favorite, of an Infinite, and Eternal Father; so
that he cannot look off him, ravished with his beauties, and with an infinite
fullness of Soul-pleasing satisfaction, takes contentment in him.

This Love, look we at the next effects of it, discovers it self in these two
things, which are to be attended in this place.

In Union, that is most near. Communion, that is most intimate, and inward.


Love lays out it self in these two especially, wherein the heart-blood, and
vital Spirits of Love, express themselves.

1. The neerness of Union.

Therefore our Savior presses this with so much instancy, and holds the
thoughts of Philip upon this Consideration: Beleevest thou not, that the Father
is in me, and I am in the Father? q. d. It Is strange thou should fall short
of this: and therefore, verse 11. he sets home this Truth, as the main Corner
Stone of a Christians Comfort. [Beleeve me] I am assured of what I speak, and
it concerns thee deeply to receive what I say, as the lowest Foundation of thy
Faith.

I am in the Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very
Works sake] These Works would never have been done, could never be
accomplished, nor your Comfort maintained therein, unless this In-being (taken
together with the manner of it) as Son and Father, be proper to them. And
therefore it is that the Father is said to dwell in the Son, a Phrase not
attributed to the Holy Spirit in the Sense and manner of Apprehension; nay,
they are said to be one, viz. in point of this Relative Union, John 10.30. For
having said, verse 28. None shall pluck his Sheep out of his hand; he adds,
Because the Father, who gave them him, is greater than all, and he, and his
Father are one; and therefore if they cannot pluck them out of his Fathers
hand, they cannot out of his. Nay, this is made the ground of the great
accomplishment of all the great works he did, John 10.37, 38. If I do not the
works of the Father, believe me not: But if I do, though ye believe not me,
believe the Works; that ye may know, and believe that the Father is in me, and
I in him. And therefore they are always conjoined in the Work by our Savior:
My Father works hitherto, and I work, John 5.17. therefore he is said to come
out of his bosom, and to lie in the Bosom of his Love. And this is true in
regard of Christ, God-man, in regard of that Hypostatical Union, the Humane
Nature has with the Second Person, and subsistence it has in him.

2. The intimateness of Communion.

This Love lays open it self in most inward, and intimate Communion of the
Father and Son, each with other; as we have formerly observed from Prove. 8.30.
I was with him, etc. and was his delight, a word compounded of two, to behold,
and to retain. So to eye, and gaze upon another with ravishment, and so
pleasingly to apply our selves to that other, as to hold, and keep him with us
for ever. They have mutual intercourse in all their Operations. The Son works
nothing but what he sees the Father work: Speaks nothing, but what he hears the
Father speak: does nothing, but what the Fathers Will is.

They mutually glorify one another, and that is their aim in all they do, John
17.1. Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee, ver. 4, 5. I
have glorified thee on Earth; glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
Glory which I had with thee, before the World was.

He has then the Sovereign Dispensation of al Works from the Father, who had
his Being from him, and so his working.

In the days of his Humiliation, he laid aside the Dispensation of Power, and
suffered the Power of darkness to prevail: but now he desires al might be
restored to him, verse 5. Al these belong to Christ; God-man, in regard of the
Union of our Nature with his Person.

And this is the Love that is here intended.

Reas. 1. Love of the highest strain and pitch, of greatest, and choycest
Excellency, is here intended, and understood: This is the Standard to all the
rest. But the Love of God to Christ, is the cause of other the Blessings and
Benefits that are bestowed, John 3.35. The Father loves the Son, and has
given all things into his hands. Therefore this Love, is a peerless, and
unmatchable Love: al other things, which are given to our Savior, Grace, Glory,
al Power in Heaven and Earth, are but the effects of it.

Again Joh. 17.24. The glory that our Savior has given him of the Father, it
is said to Issue from a higher fountain, and to be but a stream of it, Namely,
The Father loved him from the foundation of the World. Love is from Eternity:
the fruits are in time.

Lastly: The whole Tenor of the Prayer and expressions of our Savior in this
Chapter gives further evidence and argument to confirm it.

2. How is this Love said to be in them?

When this love of God in Christ sets God on work to will a like or
proportionable good to the Creature. I would say thus.

When God wills to have a Creature near to him, in his Son, as his Son, to
communicate intimately with the Creature through his Christ, as his Christ.

Then this love leaves a being like it self upon the Creature: Its then in its
virtue and efficacy in the fatithful.

It was with God, put forth upon Christ, before the World was, and therefore
much more before they were.

But our Saviors Prayer is, that this love, which was expressed upon him, might
also be extended unto his, made effectual and operative in his.

Its true, the expressions of common love, and the communication of ordinary
good, is of larger extent and issues from God, as the Creator of al, and he
that is the first being and so gives being to al Creatures.

But special union to be so high unto God, and to communicate so intimately
with him, its firstly here to be seen, and from hence therefore must be derived
to all such, who shall be so Privileged, as to be made partakers thereof.

3. The Means and Order how this is done.

Answ. The means by which God does convey the efficacy of this love, wherewith
he loved his Son, unto his Saints, may be thus conceived; As the eternal
generation of the Son from the Father was the foundation of his love of the
Father to the Son, as we have showed, he begat him, knew, and owned and loved
him: So the virtue of this eternal generation is the Cause, whence this love
comes to have a being in the Saints. For out of this eternal generation it is,
that God sends his Son The Son being sent, acts under that Authoritative Order
and does answer the purpose of the Father. And as Second Adam, and as Son, and
as begotten of the Father, he assumes ou^ Nature into personal union with
himself, becomes Head of the Covenant, and as he was begotten of the Father, so
he begets Children unto God the Father. Therefore he is called the eternal
Father: and the Father is said to beget Children, because Christ does, as sent
by God the Father. 1 Pet. 1.3. The Father begets us through his resurrection.
Joh. 13. Born of God. And thence they have the Spirit of Sons. So in the text.
The love wherewith thou have loved them, may be in them. But how is that? And I
in them. That our Savior adds, to intimate how this comes about

4. When is this done?

Answ. When the love of God in Christ set Gods love, or set God on work, to
send Christ begotten of him, to beget Children to him. And then this love
through Christ, leaves like impression and operations upon the Soul.

1. Brings the Soul into nearest union with God through Christ. 2. Most
intimately communicates of the special operations of the Spirit of the Father
through Christ.
1. Brings the finner into nearest union, to wit, Christ is in the Soul Romans
8.10 If Christ be in you, the Body is dead etc. Yea dwelt in the heart. Ephesians.
3.17. And God by and through Christ. Romans 8.9. So Joh. 17.23. I in them and
thou in me. So 1 John 2.24. Ye shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. The Church which is in God the Father and in our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Leaves like operations, the most intimate and special communion of the
Spirit of Christ and the Soul. So that God does al through Christ by man, he
does nothing of, nor from himself. Thus Christ is al in all, Col. 3.11.

And the sinner is wholly now beyond the covenant of works made with Adam, and
with him in Adam. So that as Paul observes, I live not, but Christ lives in me.
Gal. 2.20. I work, not I but the Grace of God with me. 1 Cor. 15.10. And Christ
in me. Coloss. 1. and last Verse.

When the love of God in Christ sets God on work to send his Son begotten of
him, to beget Sons unto him, so that he brings them to the nearest union: God
in Christ, and Christ, he one in them. They in Christ, and through Christ in
God the Father: So that the Father in Christ does al by them, they nothing of
themselves, receives also al from them, they take nothing to themselves. Then
this love of Christ is in them, and leaves a like efficacious impression upon
them.

Hence a double Collection.

1. We may hence learn, how to come to a right apprehension of Gods special
love, and so to a right explication and understanding of several Scriptures
thereby.

Gods special love is, when he purposes to make the Creature near to him in
his Son, as his Son is near. The Father is in his Son, Christ in the Faithful,
and the Father by Christ in them. Christ is in the Father, the Faithful in
Christ, and by him in the Father. He does intimately communicate with them
through his Christ, as with his Christ. God by Christ, does al by them, they
not of themselves. He through Christ receives al from them, they take nothing
to themselves.

This Love is like the main Hinge, upon which the whole Frame of Gods
Dispensations turn, and many Scriptures seem to be made familiar, and somewhat
open hereby. As this: Because I will make a Creature to me, in my Son, as my
Son; therefore I will Elect him, to set out this Love: And therefore create, and
give Grace; and because his own Grace cannot bring him so near, as my Son, he
shall through his default fall, and then I will send my Son, and he shall take
Humane Nature into Personal Union with him: In that to purchase al Grace, and
have right to communicate al Grace, and in his time to bring them to God, and
implant them in himself, and bestow al Grace and Glory upon them: That when
they have Grace and Glory upon them, they may acknowledge whence they had it:
Cling about that God, and in Christ, that gave it: admire his Love to them; and
cleave wholly in Love to his Son, whence he came to love them.

Hence those places receive Explication: Whom he knew, he elected. it is such a
knowledge that brings in Election; and therefore not common to Reprobation, Romans
8.29, 30. Therefore it is a knowledge with Affection, such as would own, and take
near to himself. So Paul to the Ephesians. 2.4. God who is rich in Mercy, according
to his great Love, etc. God who is rich in his pitying, and compassionating
Mercy, according to his great Love, whereby he would take us to himself, make
us next Neighbor to his Christ, and near as his Christ.

Hence therefore God expressed his pity and Compassion toward us, in
recovering of us out of our distress: God so loved the World, etc. John 3.16.

2. The transcendent Happiness, which the Faithful attain, through the Covenant
of Grace, above that of Adam. A man covenanted for men, and might have
purchased happiness for them, and communicated that to them by Natural
Generation. But here, man lost, can of himself, do nothing for himself: but
God, and the power of a God, does all that for us, which we cannot do for our
selves. This is the Nature of our Glory.

But God in Christ, will be so near to us, as to be in us; and give al, that we
may be so near to him, as to be in the Son, and the Father, and so return al.
This is the Diamond in the Crown.

But that the Love of the Father to his Son, should set his Love on work to
bring us to the like Union and Communion: This is the beauty, and brightness of
the top of the Diamond of the Crown of Glory.

The Words thus opened, and explicated; we have hence these three Points of
Doctrine:

1. It is the Desire, and Endeavor of our Savivior, That the dearest of Gods
Love, which was bestowed on himself, should also be given to his Faithful
Servants. 2. Our Union, and Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our
Happiness in Heaven. 3. Our Saviors manifestation of the Name of the Father, is
the means, and his scope, to bring in the Being of this Love of God unto us.
This last arises from the Coherence of these Words with those which went
before; and we do but name it, and refer the Reader to what we have formerly at
large laid down touching the same, where we have declared both what the Name of
the Father is, what is the Manifestation of it, and what our Saviors Work is
therein; and how, and why, he has, and does manifest it.

The Two former we shall speak something unto, whereof the first, with which we
shall begin, was thus laid down:

It is the Desire, and Endeavor of our Savior, Doct. 1.
That the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on himself, should also be
given to his Faithful Servants.
You see how our Savior is not content to put them off with the least pittance,
the meanest provision, but he would have them have the best, the choycest
rarities: If there were any Dainties better than other, he would carve out them
to his People; as the Love wherewith thou have loved me.

Christ was the only begotten, the Firstborn of God, and had the Firstborn
Affections of God bestowed upon him: and he is not satisfied, unless that
Firstborn Affection of the Father be imparted to them in their proportion.

If there be one bit better than another, some special Rarity that comes
unexpected, and that from far; it is the fashion of tenderhearted Friends, I
would this Carving were but in such a ones hand, though it cost me more than I
would speak: it is the choycest Provision that ever I tasted.

So our Savior, when his heart is ravished with the relish of the unconceivable
Complacency, and Soul-pleasing Satisfaction, he cannot make a meal of it; but
he minds, and remembers the Father of his tender Lambs, and poor feeble
Servants: O that my Members, and Faithful, might have a share of this Love, but
a little relish of it, though it cost me more than will be imagined.

Thou love them as Creatures, thou gave them their Being, and thou
preservest it. He preserves both Man and Beast.

Thou pitiest them as Sinners, thou have appointed a means for their relief,
and thou have revealed it.

Thou providest for them as Christians, thou have sent the means (blessed be
thy Name) and have dispensed al those glorious Helps of Life and Grace.

And this is a high Favor, for thou have not dealt so with any Nation (though
thou dealest well withal) neither have the Heathen knowledge of thy ways.

Thou tenderest them as thy Saints appointed to Eternal Life, with Grace, as
given unto Adam; and he, as a man, had he kept the Covenant for himself, and
his (and so a man by keeping of Covenant) had brought man to Eternal Life.

But, blessed Father, thou have not only communicated thy Grace, but thy self
unto me, thou have loved me before the World, and I have enjoyed the nearest
Union, Thou in me, and I in thee; not as an infinite God, who have created al
things, sustainest what thou have created, governest, guidest al things to
their ends, and in their ends, for which they were created: But as a Father, I
was with thee, as thine everlasting delight, and lay in thy Bosom.

O! this Love, this endeared, and intimate Love of a Father, let my feeble,
poor Servants have some of that, some relish of that: As thou art in me, and I
in thee; so they may be in me, and in thee also.

O! let them have but a relish of this Love, I have enough; that they may be
for ever refreshed, everlastingly settled and established.

When the Spirits of Friends, are most indeared to those that they would
entertain with greatest content, they are not satisfied to take what is next at
hand, or content themselves with ordinary, or common Provision, with course, or
mean Fare; but they send far and near, spare no cost, nor care, nor pains, nor
expenses; but the best Rarities, fetched from the remotest places, purchased at
dearest Rates, preserved in the most especial manner, and that on purpose to
give such Persons wel-come, to whom they are indeared as unto their own Souls,
and would lay out their heart for their hearts content. It is so with our
Savior.

That the Saints may know his endeared Affection to them, and what Provision he
has laid in for their wel-come in Heaven, he leaves this as his last farewell
upon their Souls: He tells them, he does not purpose to set before them,
ordinary Fare, common Courtesies, which he vouchsafes to al, as Life, Breath,
and Being; poor Diet, of these perishing things here below, of Profits,
Pleasures, Honors, and Applause. Nay, he cannot satisfy himself, how he may
give the choycest, satisfying content to them: And therefore he looks out, not
what Provision, Earth, or Heaven can afford; but what the Bosom, and Breast,
and Heart-blood Affection of God the Father can afford.

That Love wherewith thou have loved me the first of al, the greatest of al,
let out some of that, Righteous Father, unto the fainting Souls of my Faithful
Ones.

This, Holy Paul prays for, as for the most precious Favor that could be
obtained, as that indeed wherein the rest issue, begs it upon his Knees, Ephesians.
3.14. I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye may be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man: that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by Faith, that ye may be rooted and grounded in Love: The end of
al is, That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height, and to know the Love of Christ which passes
knowledge, verse 19.

The Height exceeds al Excellency, al Apprehensions, al Admiration. The Length
exceeds the limits of al Time, from everlasting to everlasting. The Breadth
exceeds the Bounds of al Being, none have received the impressions of such Love.

It is the Happiness of the Supreamest of the Angles, to have but the
Reflection, and to come within the Shadow of this Love. Their Work and
Happiness, is to attend upon those, that God has taken so near unto Christ,
and himself in Christ.

As great Personages maintain their Gentlemen honorably, to attend upon their
Heir: They keep them at Cambridg, or some such like place, because they will
have their Son and Heir there.

They are ministering Spirits, sent out for the good of those that shall inherit
Salvation.

No Creature has this, nor indeed is capable of this Love, but Man. As I might
demonstrate to you by the Course of Gods Dispensation.

The Depth being all the most inward, intimate, and enlarged working of al
Creatures, let all the Affections of al Creatures be put together, let there be
a Confluence, and concurrence of al Fatherly, Motherly, Brotherly, Friendly,
Natural, Spiritual Affections put together. This draws deeper than them al.

David expressed Jonathans Love; it was beyond the Love of Women, which are
most ardent, and most vehement. That was but as one Creature might love
another: but this is such a Love, as God loves himself and his Son withal. And
to procure this Love, the heart of our Savior was so strongly carried, that he
left Heaven, and his Glory, yea, lost his Life, yea, was content to lose Gods
Love, that is, the sense and sweetness thereof, which was better than Life it
self, that we might enjoy it. For he became a Curse, that we might be blessed,
Gal. 3.13. He was willing to be forsaken (My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?) that so we might be received, and kept for ever, safe, in the
Bosom of his Love, Matthew. 27.46.

And hither Christ would bring, and here leave us, never to depart from hence.
And therefore he does content himself, that this Love was appointed, provided,
prepared, tendered to the Saints, nay, enfeoffed, and bestowed upon them; but
that it might be with them, and remain in them for ever.

Be in you] that is, That it might take up its Residence, and abode, in them
for ever.

REASON.
1. Love we know, is an Affection of Union, and by this, the nearest Union
betwixt Christ and his Saints, is procured: They are brought to lie both in the
Arms of the Father; nay, to lodge in his Bowels and Bosom together. And
therefore, as has been mentioned before, there is that proper Relation, that
peculiar Disposition, to be found in the Second Person toward our Nature, and
the Saints by that means; which is not to be found in the Father, or in the
Holy Ghost. As the Second Person, he is the Head of his Church, which can be
said of none of the Persons; it is an Heresy to maintain it.

This Union of our Nature, is not only an impression in the Soul, as a work
upon the Creature: For then it had been common to all the Persons. For all the
Operations, which are created Expressions, are indivisae, undivided; what one
does, that al do.

This Union therefore, being a real Union (me non cogitante) though no man in
the World, had a thought or apprehension of it: therefore beside the impression
that is left upon the Creature, there is somewhat a peculiar operation issuing
from the Second Person, which belongs to him alone; and by which it is, he is
said to be united, and none else. And therefore there is a peculiar kind of
propriety and relation, which the Second Person has in this Union, wherein he
suits with our Nature, which is not to be found in any of the other; and that
he must have as Second Person, because it is his Prayer.

Hence we are called, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. Nearer than
Flesh and Bone, as near as one part of the Bone to the other, one part of the
Flesh to the other. So our Savior, John, 6.57. As the living Father has life
in himself, so I live by the Father: and he that eats my Flesh, shall live in
me.

All the whole Aim of our Saviors Prayer is, 1. To bring his Saints as nigh as
may ^e; I will, that those that thou have given me, may be where I am: that is
not enough. 2. That they may see my Glory: nor yet that. But, 3. That they may
gaze upon it. Nay, yet further; not they only in Glory, but, 4. I in them, and
we both in the Cabinet, as nigh to God as may be, and as nigh one to another,
as can be, in him.


2. The greatest good, together with the greatest safety of the Saints, is
provided for: This shows the indeared Affection of the Love of Christ: for Love
ever desires the greatest good to the thing beloved. So he prays, 2 These. 3.5.
The Lord direct your hearts into the Love of God, and the expectation of
Christ. So also he persuades, Jude 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God. If
they be once here, they are beyond either evil or danger, they need fear
nothing. Nothing can separate from the Love of God in Christ. Nothing ye can
want, John 16.26, 27. I say not, that I will pray the Father for you: I need
not that; for the Father himself loves you. His Love sent me, and set me on
work; his Love is the highest Fountain, the first mover; and therefore it will
set me on work.

If once God love his, as his Christ, nothing can alter or hinder: If the same
Love, the same Happiness with Christ. This Love has al, works al, is before
al, overrules al.

3. By this, the Glory of the Father, and Christ, is most advanced.

This Love is the Treasury, and Magazine of all that incomparable, and
unconceivable Mass of Mercy and Goodness: in this it is contained, and by this
it is expressed to the World.

This Love set God on work to create a World, and to set out his Excellencies
therein, to redeem the World out of the World, and to bring to light those
depths of his indeared affections to his, in his Christ, which the world could
not conceive and would not believe. That the world may know thou have loved
them, as thou love me. They did know, and they would not believe it, that
there was such love in God, or such love toward men.

By this, God is admired in them that do believe. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. He is glorious
in his Saints, but his glory is beyond comprehension, admirable, when the
condition of the Saints, what they were, and hereby are, comes to be considered.

USE, 1. Of Reprehension.
It Checks the opinion and carriage of the drooping and discouraged Saints, who
poar upon their own sins, and sit down discouraged in the sight and sense of
their own unworthiness: and then begin to measure the Lord Christ's affections
according to their own disposition: nourish secret Jealousies and surmises: If
there be any blessings which are of especial account that they want, or Graces
which they desire, or Counsels which they need: They secretly conceive, that
Christ, who knows their weakness and wretchedness better than themselves, he
grudgeth the grant of such high favors to such undeserving and sinful wretches
as they be. No, say they, it will never be. Happy they who are sit to receive,
but the Lord sees them too good, and too much for me: And the Devil is ready at
hand to add fuel to the fire, to help forwards such groundless misconceivings
as they be. That he may mint and maintain hard thoughts in the Soul against our
Savior Christ and his intended compassions. So he dealt with our first parents.

The Spark was no sooner stirring and appearing, but he blows and increases
it, until it come unto a great Flame. Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of
every Tree? He knows that ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil. Therefore
he forbids you the means; that ye may not attain the end. He envies the
happiness, otherwise, he that knows what it is, he would have provided for your
spiritual good, that ye might have knowledge, as well as provide the Tree.
Therefore the Lord professes himself offended with this way ward distemper of
his froward Children.

The Father cares not for me, loves not me, thinks al too good for me, Isa.
40.27. Why sai'st thou, O Jacob, and speaks O Israel, my way is hid from the
Lord? This is the daily talk of al dismayed ones, the speech they have in their
meetings. Jacob says, Israel says, This ye say: but what says the Lord
Jesus? Why speak thou thus? Christ cannot abide such unkind surmises and
Jealousies.

To cast an Eye to such a wretched Creature as I, my wants are such etc. But
the Lord knows how better to bestow his supplies. That I should have peace, or
evidence, or assurance etc.

Let it suffice thee, that Christ wishes thy welfare, as he does the most able
and excellent Christian upon Earth. He does not grudge the greatest excellency
in Heaven, no not in the very heart of the Father. He would not have a choice
Sit, but he would have thee to be partaker of it: he would have thee share in
the love of the Father with himself.

Sit down ashamed and confounded in thy self, that ever thou should have a
hard thought of Christ, whose heart is so fully ^nlarged for thy good.

USE, 2. For Instruction.
The Faithful shall certainly be made partakers of the Fathers love in Christ,
and when they have it, its as certain they can never loose it.

1. They may certainly expect it.

They may certainly expect that, which Christ desires, because he ever attaines
his desires at the hands of God the Father. Joh. 11.42. I know that thou
hear me always, he is sure to speed and therefore they are sure to possess.

But Christ desires this; Therefore they may expect it.

Nay, he not only desires, but the strength of his endeavor is spent to this
purpose, and its the end he aims at. His desire is ever answered, his labor
ever blessed: And therefore the faithful may undoubtedly expect this love.

The Lord Christ makes it the main work on Earth, in Heaven, what he has done,
what he will. I have made known, I will make known thy Name. He that has al
power, he is improving al power for this end and purpose, that this love may be
settled and established. Will the Lord Christ loose his labor? can he miss of his
end? can any thing oppose his power or prejudice his success?

2. They can never loose it.

The love of the Father to Christ, nothing can alter that. The love of the
Father to us is the same, nothing can change it. Our union, as his, nothing can
separate or break. Our communion, as his, nothing can interrupt it.

Hither Paul repaires, and lands his heart and Hopes in safety. Romans 8.38. --
Nor things to come; Obj. Something is yet to come. Ans. Come what will come. This
is his aim, to settle the conclusion of their happiness, and the certainty
thereof: To be beyond the reach of all the hosts in Heaven and Earth. Therefore
he musters up al, what are, what shall be. If there were a thousand worlds to
come, and should set themselves to shake the comforts of the faithful, it could
not be.

The ground is hence,

Because of the love of God in Christ. It was before al these things; and
therefore they come too late to hinder it. It was without any repect, and
therefore they could not work it. It was only and wholly from God: and
therefore they cannot alter it. The Devils and sin may as well separate Christ
from the Father, as pull the love of the Father from his own heart, and so from
Christ, as separate us from it.

3. Its ground of greatest contentment to the hearts of al Gods people in all
their conditions.

Christ cannot love thee better than he does, nor provide greater good for thee
than he intends. Thou can have no more, I had almost said, God can give thee
no more.

Be therefore content with what thou have; our Saviors desire is to interest
thee in the heart and love of the Father, as himself. Not to love thee as a
Creature, as a friend, a subject, but as the Son of his love. What me? Yea
thee, poor, weak, silly, worthless Worm, that beleevest in him. Go thy way
therefore, never quarrel, nor question any more; never murmur, nor repine any
more. It is enough, nay it is too much. I would not have thought it. I durst
not have desired it. I could not have believed it, but that our Savior has
said and done it.

What, I beloved of the Lord Jesus, miserable wretch, who cannot but loath my
self, and Judge my self worthy to be condemned? Yea thou. Therefore rest thy
weary heart in all thy weakness: do not think to bring such measure of Grace to
deserve this love. Nay, lay hold of this love, and it will increase the eminency
of all Grace, and that in a glorious manner. Paul Prays that the Ephesians may
know this love, that they may be filled with all Gods fullness. Ephesians. 3.19.

View this wishly, and warm thy heart with it, and thou shall not need to
complain of barrenness, thou shall be full of Grace. Nay, full of al fullness of
glorious Grace. No kind, no excellency of any kind that fits thy station shall
be wanting. How this is done, is not now to inquire, the Doctrine leads us to
the same, while we constantly attend to the dispensation of Gods love in Christ
begetting us as his Adopted ones to himself: while we find this experimentally,
and so know it, it leaves our hearts under the influence of it, as of him to
receive al, and as from him to do al. What ever may be lacking to thy Hope,
patience, meekness etc. repair to this love and know that there is no lack. I
have the Choicest love of God that Earth, or Heaven, or the heart of God can
afford. And that is beyond the excellency of al Grace, and al abilities that
either I do want or can desire. He loves me, therefore let him take what he will
from me, do what he will with me, love will supply al. Give what he will, love is
better than al. As he, Am I not better than ten Sons? Gods love is better than
al Graces and blessings, for it is the fountain of all.

Our Union and Communion with God in Christ is the top of our happiness in
Heaven. Doct. 2.

And therefore this comes in as the last Issue of all that our Savior had prayed
or could pray for, for them. The good of what he did desire for them in Heaven,
Father I will, that those, whom thou have given me, be where I am, that they may
behold the glory, that thou have given me, for thou have loved me, before the
foundation of the world. It was not to be in Heaven, nor to have glory in
themselves, but to gaze upon the glory, which was given to Christ, and was in
him, from his Fathers love

The good and benefit of what he had done, and what he would do for them for
ever here on Earth: yea the end and scope of all that they did in attending and
in receiving direction from our Savior, and the glorious things that he had
revealed unto them, Its here resolved; I have made known, and will make known
thy Name: they learned, and shall learn, what I shall teach on Earth; That they
may be in Heaven and glory in me, That so they may get into the Bosom of the
Father, and the love, wherewith he has loved me, might be in them. And I in
them. Hither he leads them, and here he leaves them, in the arms of Gods
everlasting love.

Here is the landing place, what Christ desires for them in their behalf. The
good of al, that he should provide, and they should receive, under his daily
dispensations, by Hearing, Praying, Word, Ordinances, Providence, its al to
bring them to Heaven, that they might be in glory, and his love might be in
them.

Here he lands al. Ye must go beyond God himself, and the first outgoings of
the Deity, if ye go any further.

We shall open here two things. 1. What this happiness of Heaven is. 2. How this
is the top and highest strain of it.


1. Happiness is a full fruition of al Spiritual good things in so perfect a
manner, as our feeble Natures are capable of,

Two things are to be attended in the Description.

1. There must be a confluence and concurrence of all spiritual good things.

For we now speak of the happiness of the Soul, and that which is inward and
spiritual: not of any outward and temporal happiness, which is to be found in
these outward things, and belongs also to wicked men; For they may prosper in
them. For they grow as the grass, and workers of iniquity flourish. It was that
which Jeremy saw, and that which some repine at; Jer. 12.1. Why does the way of
the wicked prosper?

But we speak now of spiritual, Heavenly, and eternal happiness, and the first
ingredient which is here especially required, is, That there must be a meeting
together of all spiritual good things. The gathering together of the Waters
make the Sea: not the scattering of them in sundry places, or the meeting of
some little rivelets. So the gathering together of al such spiritual
excellencies, which answer the desire and welfare of the Soul: These make a
compound of sufficiency of supply, which we call Felicity. As a Posie of al
Flowers. An Elixer, or Quintessence of al Cordials. Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that
people that is in such a case: Yea, happy is that people, whose God is the Lord.

Now these good things are considered, according to the pith, and substance of
them, or according to the pleasantness and sweetness that does attend upon
them, and accompany them and the enjoyment of them.

The confluence of those good things, wherein the Marrow of a man's happiness
especially consists, may be presented to our apprehensions in three particulars

1. When the whole Soul, and so the whole man, is so wholly possessed of al
Grace, that it can and does put forth the exercise of al virtues, Intellectual
and Moral, of the understanding and will, exactly, to answer all the rules
thereof according as occasion at any time shall call for the same.

Its not to have good, but to do good, which is a man's happiness, Jam. 1.25. --
b^essed in his deed. To do well is our greatest welfare in this world. Adam had
al Grace, but was not happy with that, but fell away from God, destroyed himself
and his posterity. But if these things abound, ye shall never sal. 2 Pet. 1.10.
And it was Epaphras his Prayer, That they might be perfect, and carried full
fail in every good will of God. Col. 4.12. So far, as the Soul misseth, is weak,
or wanting in any work, when God calls, so far he misseth, and falls short of his
happiness, and misseth of the full enjoyment of his last end.

That is to do al Gods wills, to will Gods wills, to meet with him in every act,
to give entertainment to him, and to take contentment in him. When we do his
will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, we are then in the Suburbs of Heaven. He
formed us for himself, and then we attain his end, and our own good also, when
we show forth his praise. Isa. 43.21. And therefore Jam. 1.4. He wishes that
patience may have her perfect work, have the exercise of al trials and
miseries, that we may be handy at al weapons: when we have with meekness borne
one evil, we may with quietness bear al,

But what benefit will there be in that?

Ye shall be perfect, Entire, and wanting nothing. When we grow skilful in the
bearing of al trials, we then out-bid al evils, we meet with, in others, and in
our own hearts: meet with God in the exercise of al his rules, enjoy him in all,
and so our end and good in the bearing of it: and therefore can want no good:
because we are not wanting to any rule, nor exercise of any Grace or Duty.

2. As the whole Soul does put forth the exercise of al virtues to answer Gods
will and please him: The Lord also, he freely and fully lets in himself, and
communicates of al his glorious excellencies to the Soul, and fills it full of
himself, and the glorious expressions and operations of his Spirit, pleases
us, and applies himself to us, whereby the Soul is furnished and fitted to do
more and have more of God. Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and
works righteousness. He that does more for God, God communicates more to him.
A good work is the reward of it self. Do and live. That is, do, and be enabled
to do. For, to live, is to put forth acts of Obedience. And when Adam had
pleased God, and attained this his Chief good and end, he could go no further,
nor have any better, and therefore the reward was, That God would immutably
assist him, that he should be enabled to love him and please him.

So that however the Lord God is the Objective happiness of the Soul, and so
the happiness of al is equal, and the same, as God is the same: Yet the more
the heart is enlarged for God and lays out it self in holy services for his
honor:

The more the Lord will be in the communications of himself, and the more full
and effectual in lettings of his gracious presence and operations of his Spirit
into the Soul. And so the reward is proportioned to the work. Shall I withhold
any thing from Abraham, for I know that he will command his Children, and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and
Judgment etc. Genesis 18.17.19. He that loves and keeps: The Father and Christ will
come and manifest or show themselves to him. Joh. 14.21.23. And 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
He will show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect
toward him.

3. The Soul acting upon God and meeting with him, in all the acts and exercise
of the whole man, does not only close with the operations and expressions of
God, let in: But lays hold upon that infinite excellency and sufficiency in
himself, and sucks out a satisfactory sweetness therein, through al eternity.
For though it be the end of the Soul, being made for God, to work for him, and
put forth al such operations: yet I suspect, the bare working is not al, nor
the full end of the Soul: But in this working to close with God, and suck out a
sufficiency of supply from him. For no Creature, that is finite, can be the end
of the Soul, nor give satisfaction to it. But all the expressions of God, let
in, are such. Therefore there is something more required. Lament. 3. The Lord is
my portion. Whom have I in Heaven? Psalm. 73. Herein lies the pith of our
happiness; our pleasing of God, our taking possession, and so by fruition
enjoying of God. But ever with this good; wherein our blessedness does consist:
There is ever a sweetness and pleasantness, that does accompany the fruition of
this, with a freedom and absence of any evil or grievance in the least kind or
measure that may hurtfully annoy.

For where there is the fullness of an infinite good, letting in it self,
suitable to our desires or wants, there can be no grievance in reason possible.

The Aromatical sent of the Cordial is one thing, the Cordial another. The
Posie is one, the Smell another.

If a man were free from al Grievance in Heaven, if the Soul should not close
with God, nor God let in the expressions of his Grace; Heaven were a Hell.

Therefore this is not our happiness, but an attendant upon it. Psalm. 17.15.
and 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life.

2. Member is.

This is done in so perfect a manner, as our Human Natures are capable of.

That lies in two things.

1. We shall see and enjoy God immediately, not by means. And 1 Cor. 13.12. We
shall see him as he is. And therefore not darkly, but clearly, not as veiled and
covered in the works of Creation, but see him Face to Face. Therefore not see
him sparingly, and little of him, not as he drops himself in the means: and
therefore we can see nor receive him in no other measure than they will
communicate: but we shall l^ve at the Well and Fountain Head, he shall let out
himself fully: We shall know as we are known. 1 Cor. 15.28. God shall be all in
all.

2. As there is nothing to lessen the fullness of the communication of himself
and goodness, so there is nothing to abate and take off the sweetness of the
good we do enjoy.

And this is the privilege of Heaven: the unconceivable beauty and brightness
of the place may d^zel us: but that it is free from the presence of any evil.
Rev. 21.27. No evil thing was ever there to defile it, nor can come there to
annoy it. Ephesians. 1.21. Far above al principalities and powers. Whereas had we
been in the world, we should have been amongst Devils and his Angels, wicked
and ungodly men, the presence whereof would have been grievous to us, though
they should never have prevailed against us through their Malice.

2. How this Union and Communion comes to be the top of this happiness.

1. If we receive more from God, and do more for him: by this then we are more
happy. For the more we have of our end, the more happy we be.

But by this we receive more from God, and do more for him. 1. More for him.
Because it was a principle of Grace which Adam received, when he was created,
and it was that, which should have been increased in a greater degree, if he
had been glorified

But when man was lost, it was not the Creature, nor any mutable principle in
the Creature, that could bring the Soul to God, or keep it with him.

But God sent his Son: and the Godhead of Christ in the Nature of man could
only, and did only bring back the Soul to himself.

Nay God did his best, as I may say, and put forth the highest strain of his
excellency. Here was wisdom above all the Wisdom of Creation to contrive this:
Almighty power above all the power of the Creature to work this; Grace above all the Grace of Creation, that must establish this: for that Grace which Adam had,
he lost.

It was not now saying, Let man be Redeemed, But Christ must shed his Blood, or
Else it could not be. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. -- Admired in them that Believe.
Admiration presumes something not expected, or we cannot tell what to make of it
when the Devils and wicked men, who knew such men in their unbeleeving courses
under the curse shall see them pardoned, reconciled; they that were Enemies to
God, made now one with God in Christ, they will be astonished at it, 2 Thessalonians.
1.12. That the Name of Christ, as he is made known in his word and work of
Redemption may be made glorious, he in the Father giving al, and that merely
out of Grace. Joh. 13.31, 32.

2. We do more for God in Christ. For as he does al by man, and he does
nothing: So he receives al from man, he takes nothing to himself.

Had Adam stood, man by Grace might have purchased life, and communicated it
unto man in way of Covenant. Now the Covenant of works is, do and live. Its God
in Christ does al: and therefore he must through Christ receive al. We were
formed to set forth his praise, and so we do. I live not, therefore work not.
But Christ. Gal. 2.20. We are his workmanship, Its not ours, of our selves.
Ephesians. 2.10. We are kept by the power of God through Faith. 1 Pet. 1.5. And so
sanctified by the power of God, quickened by the power of God through Faith
etc. Its Christ is made of God, Wisdom, Justification, Sanctification,
Redemption, and so all the glory goes to God in Christ.

2. By the neerness of this Union, we suck out the sweetness of our end and
last good, and so become happy thereby. Its Paul's expression of the glory of
Heaven. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. We shall ever be with him. To be in Heaven does not make
us happy (look we at the place Barely as a place) but to be with Christ. This
is but the Suburbs, or the verge and skirts of Heaven, by this we get into the
inmost Room.

Adam by Obedience and the Work of his Grace had met with him, and communicated
of Grace from him, working as he wrought: but here is the Crown of his Glory.

Not to be in Heaven, nor glorious by Grace in us; that is a Creature: but we
to be in Christ, and by Christ in the Father, and the Father through Christ in
us. Not with him, but in him. This is the Diamond in the Crown. And therefore
the Lord Jesus makes it one step into the innermost Room, not to be in the
sight, but in the Arms of Christ. Not to have Christ a Spectator, but an
In-dweller. And therefore our Savior makes this the end of glory, as in the
foregoing verse, and so better than glory. The glory thou have given me, I have
given them, that thou may be it them, and I in them. We are in Heaven, if
glory may be in us, and we in Christ.

3. That which carries the first and most supreme and deepest impression of the
sweetness of the chiefest good; that must cause our chiefest happiness.

Thou art in the bounds of Heaven, but in the Bosom, nay in the Bowels of the
Father.

This is the lowest of al, ye cannot go deeper.

The highest of al, ye cannot go further.

This is somewhat beyond al Graces, beyond al Creatures, something above Heaven
it self. The first corner stone of our everlasting unconceivable happiness.

The first Out-going of the Godhead was, He knew and conceived himself, and so
begot his Son, as a lively Character and shine of his own person, and thence he
owned him, and loved him, and took him into that nearest union and communion.

And at the next turn and stroke, he took a Creature near to himself in his
Son, as his Son, communicated with a Creature through his Christ, as his Christ.

Herein is the deepest, the deearest, the first, the choicest of al.

The expression of common love, in the communication of common good, is of
large extent.

He is the first being, and gives being.

He is Power, gives Power.

He is good, does good to al.

But to be so nigh to him, and not to have common courtesies, but Fatherly
kindness; its here firstly.

He is firstly a Father to Christ, and so loves him, and in Christ, he loves
thee as him. Now thou art at the highest and furthest.

It was the first out-going of Gods love, and the greatest that ever was. More
cannot be conceived, nor indeed expressed, unless we would have more and better
love than Christ, which is unreasonably and unconceivably absurd. He is first
and we second, not in Heaven, but in Gods heart.

USE, 1.
Its matter of Admiration; we may here see and be swallowed up with everlasting
wonderment, at the mysterious and uncomprehensible depth of Gods dispensations
in the covenant of Grace, and the Redemption of a sinner by Christ; where he
brings the greatest good, out of our greatest evil, the greatest glory, out of
the depth of our greatest misery; Advances us to the highest top of Heaven and
happiness, out of the lower-most Hell of sin and wretchedness, out of the
greatest estrangment from God. To bring a sinner to the nearest union and
communion with God.

Thus God comes to be admired in those that believe. The Devils have seen one
holy and gracious, adorned and beautified with the Image of God. But he that
was a Rebel, an enemy unto Christ, and a hater of him, as contrary to him, as
darkness to light, to be near to him, one with him, nay, to be in Christ and
Christ in him: It is the wonderment of Angels, and the astonishment of Devils.
And we should be amazed at this mysterious mercy.

And it is true Lord, says Solomon, That thou will dwell amongst men? 1 King.
8.27. But to be in them, to be one with them, and they with thee, Oh the depth
of the riches of the Knowlegd and Wisdom of God, How unsearchable are his
ways, and his paths past finding out! To work our greatest gains out of our
greatest losses! To bring us by the bottom of Hell, into his own Bosom and
Bowels!

USE, 2. Examination.
We may hence know what interest we have in happiness, how near to Christ, what
Hopes of it.

As far as thou art from Union and Communion with God in Christ, so far from
happiness. 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you, unless ye be
Reprobates? Know ye not? prove and examine. Know ye not that Christ is in you?
ye should, it concerns you, else ye are Reprobates.

Is this the least part of thy care, the furthest off thy thoughts? Thou may
believe it, and conclude it, thou art far enough from happiness, as far as Hell
is from Heaven.

Its a description of the wicked. Job. 21.14, 15. They say to the Almighty
Depart from us. They say so to the ways, the Grace, the Laws, the Government
of God in Christ; we will not walk in those ways, nor receive or be acted by
those Graces, or be ruled by that Scepter.

Do thou dream of Heaven, poor wretched Creature? it would be a Hell to thee:
to have a Christ to redeem, a God, or mercy to tender, and save, thou would
be in Hell, though thou were in Heaven.

Thou shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord and from the glory of his power. Thou have said Depart; God will say,
Depart ye Cursed. Christ came to bless, and ye will have no Christ. We will not
have this man to rule: therefore no blessing. He that loves not the Lord Jesus,
loves him not as a Lord to rule, as a Savior to save him from his sins, let
him be accursed, Maran-atha, to the coming of the Lord. Curse him al ye Angels
of Heaven, al ye Churches on Earth let him be accursed in life, in death, until
Christ come to judgment, and then let him hear that curse; go ye cursed into
Hell Fire. Ye, would no Union, therefore ye shall have an everlasting Separation.

FINIS.

