HEAVENS TREASVRY Opened In a Fruitful Exposition of the Lords Prayer.
Together with The principal Grounds OF Christian Religion briefly unfolded.

By THO. HOOKER.

Great is the Mystery of godliness.

1 Timothy 3.6. LONDON. Printed for R. Dawlman. 1645.

HEAVENS TREASVRY OPENED, In a fruitful exposition of the Lords Prayer.
IN the prayer are three things observable.

1. The preface, Our Father. 2. The prayer it self, divided into six
petitions. 3. The conclusion of Faith in the word Amen, the soul goes up to
heaven and follows the petition, Hallowed be thy Name, let it be Lord as
thou may have glory; look as a man that darts an arrow, he puts the utmost
of his strength to it, so the word Amen speeds all the rest, and brings a good
issue to the soul by all.
First, For the preface, and there we must examine in general 2. things.

1. The sense and meaning of the words. 2. What ground of encouragement it
affords us to seek God.
1. And first observe the party sought to, he is our Father.

2. The excellency of him, which art in Heaven.

3. The interest we have in him: he is our Father.

Q. Why, or in what sense, is God called a Father?

A. 1. He is the Father of Christ by eternal generation.

2. He is the father of men two ways. 1. By creation. So the Scripture runs
Job. 1.6. the Angels are called the Sons of God, because they were created by
God, he is a Father thus to the Just and the unjust, Psalm. 139. 14. I am
wonderfully made, says the text. 2. By adoption and grace, in that, he does
freely take us to be his sons in Christ, he puts us into the right of his
children, as a man puts a stranger into the right of his son: and thus God is a
Father to his chosen only that look what Christ has, they have, Romans 8.17.
If Sons, then Heirs, and Gods chosen children: both these ways God is our
Father.


Q. Do we only pray to the Father in that we say our Father?

A. No: we pray not to the Father only, but we pray to the whole Trinity, we
make mention of the Father only: yet we must direct our prayers to one God in
three Persons in that Godhead; however we mention not all, yet we direct to
all, all our petitions; the reason is this.

Rea. Because otherwise we should have made an Idol of God, I say conceiving
but of one person we make an I doll of God, and call not on him as he is.

Q. How may we apprehend of God aright in prayer?

A. Thus: as God has revealed himself in his word, so we apprehend him, not
putting any Image at all upon him: as Instance thus two ways. 1. He that
creates all, governes all, knows all, sees all, by whom I live, moove and have
my being, to that God I pray. The Scripture has revealed God thus, that he
fills heaven and earth, etc. to that God then that is thus infinite, to him I
call now, not to a blind Image, but to an all-seeing God I come. 2. Instance
thus. Look abroad into the creatures, and in all you shall see a power and a
goodness: now from whence came this power? The power of beasts, came not from
the power of trees, and the like: but there was a first power, which gave al
power to the creatures; the Creator is infinitely more powerful the the
creatures. There is goodness also in the creatures: but all that came from the
first goodness that let out it self. Now that which let forth it self to the
creature is in the Creator infinitely above the creature, that is the Lord:
thus you must quit your selves of an Image; he that gives all is above all; God
gives all, therefore is above all, and to that God I put up my petition.


Q. Why do we not mention the Son and the holy Ghost, as well as the Father?

A. Because the Father is the first person in the Trinity, and the fountain
from whence all good flows; The Father works of himself, the Son of him,
the Holy Ghost from them both; therefore we mention him only, though we may
mention the other.

Q. How does this word Father help a man to call on God by prayer?

A. When we conceive of God as a Father, it puts us in mind of his mercy, that
he will pity us; as a Father will easily be reconciled to his son and will
spare him, though he be a prodigal, yet his father will pass by all. So I
pray to a father: did I pray to a Judge, that would condemn me, or an enemy
that would not be reconciled unto me, little hope had I to speed, because I
wronged him, Luke 15.
yet I will arise and go to him, for, Psalm. 103.
As a father pittieth his son, so God pittieth them that fear him. He is my
child says God, though stubborn, and I must look to him. When a man's
rebellions witness against him, and Satan vexes him, and says, what? thou
think to have mercy, and art so vilde? True, says the soul, I am naught, but
I go to a Father: if a child do but aim at a thing, the father accepts; if
he speak but half a sentence, the father interprets it: so this is the great
encouragement of the faithful, to go to God, that notwithstanding so many
failings, and though he be so dead and so barren, yet a father bears al; The
Lord interprets all, though but broken speeches, yet God accepts and regards
all, we have a father to go to, that is willing to pass by many failings.

2. As we have a ground of pity; if it be but a sigh, he receives it, so this
may persuade us of the willingness of God, to help us. If a man were to go to
him that is hard hearted, little hope had he to speed: we say he is a cruel
man, we had as good pull water out of a flint, etc. a child will not beg of a
stranger, but go to his father. So we pray to our Father that is more willing
to hear and grant then we are to ask. I will go to my Father, says the
prodigal, as who should say, I am unworthy, yet I go to a father; nay the
Lord hears before we call, he prepares the heart to call, and answers what
it craves when they ask. The father puts into the childs mouth what it shall
say, and then he will give what it craves; so God would have us seek for
abundance of mercy; open thy mouth: God would feign give, but none will crave;
it is God that must give a heart to crave, and this is got by prayer. As water
put into a pump will bring forth much water, so pray that you may pray, if your
father know what to give you, how much more can your heavenly Father give you
an heart? Nothing shall be wanting to them that go to God as a Father, God
bows his ear to the prayer of his people, he condescends to our weakness.

3. We are here to take notice of Gods Fatherly providence, to provide what may
be suitable to our occasions; God has all in store; all the beasts of the
field are mine, he is the God of all comfort; he provideth for the ravens,
and causes the Lillies of the field to grow: if God care for these, how much
more for you? Matthew. 6.
has the Lord a care for oxen? he that feeds ravens and clotheth lilies,
will much more provide for his Saints. Who then would not have such a guardian?
as the father provides for the son, so God lays up for all his: let us walk
then in his ways, and commit our selves to his care, for all things.

4. This must teach us an awfulnesse to come before him, whatawe should be in
our hearts, that come before an heavenly Father?

Our Father.

That is the term of relation, and consists in two things.

1. The sense of the words. 2. The motives.
For the sense of the words, three things are implied.

1. A propriety and interest we have in special, not as one friend to
another, or one neighbor to another, or the like, but he is our Father, as we
say, it our land, etc. So when we say our Father, we imply aspeciall claim to
God; all that compassion and mercy in God is mine, as Nabal said, it is my
meat, the word my, implies a possession, like the gods of the heathens; and as
Job says: My Redeemer lives. Deuteronomy. 32.31. their rock, is not as our rock.
2. This laying claim to God implies a Co^munity to all the household of God; as
the Sun is every man's, so God is every man's that is faithful. 3. It notes a
bond of society between the faithful children of the same father: this is the
meaning of the word, our, as the members agree with the head, so they are
helpful; so is God helpful to all his faithful ones. Motives 3.

Now the motives whereby the soul may be furnished to call on God, are three.

1. A cheerful readiness to repair, unto the Lord, and why? we have an
interest in him, he is our father; the interest a child has in his father
stirs him to come readily to his father, he craves not of a stranger as 2.
Kings 4.19. When the child cried, they bad carry him to his mother; if any
thing befalls the child, he says, I will tell my father, and complain to my
father; and the like. So ask the child, who will provide for him? he says, my
father, so it is here with our God. There is a fresh and living way that is
mavelous easy and open, Whosoever seeks shall find, whosoever knocks it
shall be opened unto him: therefore what ever our injury be, we should not
complain to the world, but pour forth your prayers to our Father, who will
be sure to hear us.

2. As there should be a cheary readiness, to come to the Lord, so there should
be a spiritual boldness, to challenge what may be needful at his hands.
Among strangers we are strange, but among friends we are bold, we have a
right and title to these things, and we may be bold with our own. Thus David
challenges God, as thou art faithful, deliver me, I am thy servant. If a
servant want food or raiment, he goes to his master, so says David, I am thy
servant, therefore give me understanding that I may live: when they bragged of
Paul and Apollos, says he, all is yours. This should comfort our hearts; let
us claim our portion, he is our father, and will give it us.

Therefore be humbled in regard of your weakness and unworthiness, but
confident in regard of his mercy, walk cheerfully in regard of the Lord, in
every condition. If I should see the child doubt of my readiness, I should
much wonder. Care not, says Christ. Matthew. 6.
It is your own; he is our Father, and all that is in him is ours.

3. This stirs up our hearts to have a fellowfeeling of our brethrens misery,
in our prayers: therefore God cuts off all encroaching of our selves, Our: as
if he should say. Is there never a Joseph in prison? Never a Daniel in the
Lions den? remember and pray for them: if one suffer, all suffers: we are
real members of one body: we should mourn with them that mourn, and weep
with them that weep: it is said Isay 58. Put up a prayer for the remnant. Oh
that we had a fellowfeeling of others troubles! Paul begs the Ephesians to
pray for me also, and he entreates the Romans to wrestle for him by prayer to
God. Romans 15.30.


Which art in heaven, etc.

Here 1. We are to open the sense of the word heaven.

2. The motives to move the heart thereto.

Q. Whether is God more in heaven then in any other place?

A. No: God in regard of his essence is in all places alike, he is wholly
every where. The Godhead is altogether indivisible, Things of quantity fill a
room, but God is every way indivisible; as he is unchangeable, so is he a
simple being. Psalm. 139.8.
If I go to hell, thou art there: says David. God is in the same manner every
where. If God be immensible, then all of him is every where; but it is so,
therefore he is altogether in every place: all creatures have their being from
God, he is in them and beyond them, he is excluded out of no place, included
in no place.

Q If all of God be in every place, why then is he said to be in heaven
only?

A. 1. Because God would manifest the glory of his power more in heaven then in
earth, not because we see him not here. Acts 17. We grope after him indeed: but
you know the royalty of a King appears most in Parliament; so the excellency
of God appears most in heaven.

2. There are three heavens; The heavens where the birds are, the heaven where
the stars are, and the highest heaven.

Now the third heaven is meant here, for God has reserved this place as the
chair of state for himself: the heavens says David, are the Lords: no
unclean thing can come there. The Angels sinned upon the earth, and all the
visible heavens are defiled: by man, the Sun is abused, the air polluted;
all these creatures that serve man, are by man defiled, but the highest heaven
was never defiled, because it is the chamber of God, who leaseth out these to
man. This is the special reason why God is said to be in heaven.

Q. What motives have we to prepare our hearts to prayer, which is the scope
of the preface?

A. They are specially three.

It teaches us to take notice of the purity of God, Motives. 1. to prepare the
heart to prayer.
what ought to be the frame of our spirits, when we appear before him; he
cannot abide sluggish prayers from an impure heart; heavenly dispositio^s best
suite with Gods holiness, the sanctity of our affections ought to answer Gods
purity, Kings (we know) as they will be entertained, so their entertainment
must be that which suites to their greatness: God is in heaven beyond all
corruption, therefore if we approach near God, we should answer to his purity
with hearts purged; that our spirits may be in heaven, because he is there, to
whom we pray. Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the deceiver that has a male in his
flock, and offers a corrupt thing. Our sacrifice is our service, and prayer is
one of the chief. The God of heaven is a pure God, then cursed be the man that
has a strange love and the like, and serves God with rubbish. Cursed be that
man: the pure God of heaven will not look on such impure performances: God is
holy, therefore the service ought to be so. When men are to sit before Princes,
they are to fit themselves accordingly, so it is here.

Let us then think it an indignity to God to appear with a slovenly
disposition before him: he that is to perform a solemn duty to a Prince,
will lay aside all other occasions, so as he said in an other case well, lie by
all, ly by world, let me now have heavenly joy, for I am come before an
heavenly father.

2. It is a ground of comfort that our spirits may be cheared: since God is in
heaven, he is able to effect what ever our hearts desire; To be in heaven
argues Majesty; now we do not pray to an earthly parent who is liable to
corruption, but to an heavenly Father, who can do what he will; he that is in
an high place has the vantage, so our heavenly Father has the vantage of all
other creatures, therefore what we crave is done already, our God is in heaven,
and can do what he will.

Vileness ever accompanies earthly things, but our Father is in heaven;
Therefore Nehemiah made his prayer to the God of heaven. The King could not
help the woman, but our father is not as an earthly father, we have but
earthly opposition here; but our father is in heaven, who can over power all
wrongs done to his children and turn them to their good.

3. This shows we should with trembling approach to his presence: the God of
heaven is powerful, we are creeping worms; and dare we come carelessly to
such a Father? our Father implies a readiness; in heaven implies an
awfulnesse; the mountains moove, and the devils shake at the presence of God.
Yea the blessed Angels quake before him: how dare we then approach his
presence unseemely, lest we have no answer? to turn the eye one way and the
head another, we dislike it in a child: suffer not then your minds to wander:
how dare you press headily into the presence of God, whereas the Angels cover
their faces before him? Let the fear of the Almighty fall upon us, God is in
heaven, let our hearts be reverently affected in all our approaches near him.

Thus much for the preface; now we come to the petitions which are six, the
Lord condescends to our weakness and feebleness, and therefore contrives
them into a narrow scantling: three petitions there are concerning Gods Name,
Kingdom and Will, and three concerning our selves, things of this life, and
things of grace, which are Justification, and Sanctification. In all observe,
1. The meaning of the petition. 2. The carriage of the heart in the pressing of
it.


Hallowed be thy name, in this observe 2. things.

1. What is here meant by Name? 2. What it is to hallow this name.
Q. What is here meant by Name, or what is the Name of God?

I answer by Name is meant, what ever God is made known to us by; this is his
Name: as a man is known by his name, so the Lord reveals himself by his
Name, to his children: now this consists in two things.

1. All the glorious attributes of God, as Powerful, Pure, Wise, Infinite,
these are the Names of God. 2. All the ordinances of God, the graces of his
Saints, and the providence of God, in the creature, (are not the thing it
self, but) there is a declaration of God in these, the creature is not the
name of God, but God working by the creature; grace is not so much, as the
appearance of God in that grace.
Q. What do you mean by hallowed? can you make God holier then he is, or add
any thing to God?

A. No: we cannot add anything to him that gave us all things.

Q. How then do we hallow Gods name?

A. When we make Gods Name to be discovered as a holy thing, the expressing
of this is that we would.

Q. How shall we do that?

A. There was a consultation in heaven, how that the Godhead might be
manifest, might be observed, else were there none to apprehend it: I will says
God, have my attributes expressed, Therefore God would have a world wherein his
goodness should be discovered. Exodus 33. Thou shall not see my face, but my
back parts shall thou see; as it is with a torch, carry it from one place to
another, and it will leave a glimpse behind, so it is in the surpassing beauty
of God, he leaves some beams behind him, that we may say, Justice and mercy
and holiness it self have been here; we are said then to hallow his name
when as we make this appear, when we deal with Gods name as with a holy
thing, and that appears in three particulars.

1. When we acknowledge the excellency of him, we ought daily to take notice
of the beauty and glory of God: men of place think themselves abused if we
pass by, and do not reverence them: so when we come to deal with Gods
ordinances, do you know what you do? Gods Name is there, therefore ponder
your paths.

3. As we should acknowledge the worth of it, so we should labor to preserve
it: upon things of great weight and worth what a price do we set, and how
tenderly do we look to them, that there be no blemish cast upon them? So
should we do with the name of God, Ier. 2.10. Go to the Isles of Chittim, etc.
they cast the commandments of God behind their backs, the heathen says God,
would not do so, They kissed the threshold where Dagon was; so let us deal
with Gods Name, let no blemish betide it, but deal with it, as with a holy
thing: the least stain of sinful distemper, does not become the name of God:
you respect holy things, so do this.

3. As we should acknowledge its worth, so labor to set it out that others
may see it as occasion shall be offered. When any honor may come to him
thereby, express the beauty of the virtues of God that they may be observed;
holy things are not to be kept secret when opportunity serves; Let your light
shine says the text, that men may see the good in you. What ever we see in the
name of God, as we should keep it from blemish, so we should set it out in the
glory of it; A man must hold out the light of the gospel, not hide it under a
bushel. The coin that is current men show openly: do not show your selves
(for that is not herein intended) but as much of God as we can demonstrate,
that men may say, the Lord has been here indeed.

Q. How does the heart behave it self in the putting up of this petition?

A. This behavior of the soul does mainly appear in two things.

1. It heartily desires in all things it shall do, that it may lift up the
glory of God; now this we do when in all actions there is a disposition for
the furtherance of Gods praise; All our life should be like a lantern to
convey light to others; the heart should desire that in all things Gods glory
may be furthered, that we may do nothing but we may advance Gods glory by it:
silver and gold is fit to stamp the Kings Image upon, so a man's practice should
be good metal to imprint Gods glory upon, not as painted windows to hinder,
Acts.
but to rebound the light, Herod did not give God glory, he took it to
himself, and we see what ensued.

There be some kind of glasses will reflect a man's Image: So there should be
a conveighing of glory from our selves to God; look as it is with a ball, the
falling of it makes it rebound, so it should be with our hearts, they should
rebou^d Gods glory where it falls upon us: This is a great skill; the soul
should have nothing but whereby God might be honored; any sinful course
blemisheth Gods glory, any priding of a man's self no whit furthers Gods glory;
a good soul desires God might be acknowledged and glorified in all it has or
does.

Q. When does the soul do this?

A. When it labors that in all things something more then humane excellency
may appear; for if any thing of a man's own be discerned, we fall short of
Gods Name. In every actio^ such should be our disposition, that somewhat more
may be seen, then a base mean shadow: there is a skill in preaching and
praying, which should be more valued then all parts, and gifts whatsoever. If
nothing appear but self, the Name of God is deprived of what it should have;
as S. Paul said, Do I speak like a man? he demonstrated the spirit in him, so
should we discover what we do, that God works it in us, that he might have
all the honor. God who is the Author of all, should have the glory of all our
actions. We talk of this and that, and say, let God be glorified, but we do
it not in our life and conversation.

Q. What be the several works of the heart in doing this, that it may appear
that God is the Author of all, and we give him the honor is due unto his Name?

A. The acts of the heart are two, whereby it sets forth the glory of God. 1.
In all services: a man should not be quiet in his affections and endeavors
till he come to the highest pitch, that is Gods glory: All Actions are in the
way one toward another, as a pair of stairs, one goes from another and above
the other, a man should go higher and higher til God his glory mounts and
surmounts them all: as a Minister first studies to teach the people that they
may be informed, but why informed? that they may appear to be Christ's, that
Gods grace may appear in their conversation, the soul never rests till it be
here. This should be our desire, that in all our actions God may be
discovered to be the Author and to have the honor of all.

2. The soul must be sure not to go beyond Gods glory, as thus; a Minister
preaches, that the people may be converted and be honored as well as God:
this is to be above God; a man prays to honor God, and that it may be known
he is a glorious professor, thus a man is above God, as a bird steps from one
bough to another, till it comes to the highest, and then it flies away, so we
step to Gods glory and often times go beyond it.

We would have God glorified to glorify us it may be; but this is
hypocrisy, to have God honored that we may be secretly base; this is the
deepest dishonor to God, and he will be revenged of them one day, and pluck
his praise out of their bowels: the three Wisemen would not stay till the
star stood, and then they went no further; so where the star of Gods glory
goes let us go, and not stay till we come thither, and when we are there go
no further; this is the carriage of the heart, that in life and death God may
be honored and exalted: look as it is with a workman that makes a piece of
curious work, we do not give the honor to the tool but to the workman, so
God should receive the honor of all and from all.

2. As a good soul makes God discovered in himself, so he desires that God
might be acknowledged by others: and that appears in two things.

1. That they might embrace the excellency of God, Let your light shine before
men, why so? that they may see your good works that is God in your good works.
Do not think that I would have men see their own good parts, gifts and the
like, but only that they may see God in them; the fisher desires that the fish
may see the bait, not him; so he that angles for the souls of others, does
not desire that others might see him, but the grace of God: An apprentice does
not stand in the shop to call men to look on his propernesse and the like, but
to sell his masters wares. If we desire that God may be exalted, labor not
that men may see your good works so much, as God in them; we should all so
walk, that others may admire Gods grace in us, we are GODS workmanship. 2.
And therefore should have hearts enlarged to bless God that he has been
pleased to reveal himself so sweetly to us: thus much for the first petition.
Thy Kingdom come. 2. Petition.


Q. Why is this added immediately to the former?

A. Because it is a special means whereby the glory of God is advanced. The
first was to hallow Gods Name, and to that end the Kingdom of Christ must be
set up: no natural man can glorify God, for so long as sin and corruption
prevails, we can never yield to him: therefore the rule of Christ's Spirit
must effect it, and by this we must be swayed to the same.

Q. What is the scope of this petition?

A. The maine scope of it, is thus much, that the government of God by Christ,
might be set up, and prevail every where: as before Gods Name was highest, so
here the power and government of Christ, is to be universal; that is in
general. Now we come to the particulars, and here 1. Consider the sense of
the words. 2. The carriage of the heart, in putting up this petition.


1. What is meant by Kingdom. 2. What is the coming of this Kingdom.
Q. What is meant by Kingdom?

A. By Kingdom is meant, that rule that Christ has set up in the hearts of
his (for the providence of God, I take it, is not so much aimed at, in this
place, or that ordinary providence of God over the creatures: this is set forth
in the fourth petition, give us, etc.) but it is the rule of Christ that is set
up in his Church.

Q. How manifold is it?

A. It is that whereby Christ by his Spirit and grace in the ministry of the
word takes place in the hearts of his, and this he does two ways.

1. By overpowering and casting down all other things, which are opposite
thereunto: whatsoever power of sin and Satan are opposite unto him. 2. He
sets up that frame of spirit whereby it is subject to grace, and this takes
place two ways. 1. By cutting down and killing of every sin. 2. The soul
takes the stamp of every command of God, and is ruled thereby.

Q. What is the Kingdom of glory.

A. Gods immediate ruling in the hearts of glorified Saints.

Q. How does the Kingdom of grace and glory differ?

A. Here in the Kingdom of grace, God rules, 1. By his spirit, 2. By the
ministry of his word and ordinances, but in heaven he rules immediately, then
no more word and means, but Christ fills the soul fully, and then he rules
gloriously when the understanding will and affections are full of Christ and
are fully and wholly subject to him, Here in the valley of tears, we meet
with many rubs and oppositions, but then Christ shall shine immediately forth,
in all his ordinances: we seek a Christ now, but then we shall fully
possess him: so that we that have the spirit have a glimpse of heaven,
already, therefore ashamed should we be to be weary of God: let us be weary
of sinfulnes and of this wretched world.
It is a heaven to live here with God upon earth, and if it be so glorious a
thing, to have but a glimpse of God here, how much more to be filled with God
hereafter in his kingdom?

Q. How is this Kingdom said to come?

A. The coming of these two Kingdoms implies three things.

1. That the word may be revealed in those places where it has not been. That
the day spring from on high, may visit them, that sit in darkness; That the
Sun of righteousness, might visit them that want it; That the banquet of the
Gospel may be set up. Matthew. 24. If any man say, he is in the wilderness,
go not out, for where the Carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort. This is
the first thing, a Kingdom is said to-come when a King rules in a place where
he did not before, so it is here, Let all the people praise thee says David,
he desires not, that some tongues only, but that all tongues and languages
should do this. 2. Where ever the Gospel does shine, we desire that it
should discover it self more fully, and spread it self where ever it comes;
we desire the Kings governmet should enlarge the Territories more and more. So
we desire that not only Christ should be revealed, but that more and more may
be gathered, that God may take in every where, and that every knee may bow to
Christ, and lick the dust, that so there may be an addition made to the
Church, that every man in every kind, God would cast his skirt over him, that
more may be caught in his net, that the Jew and Gentile may be gathered into
one sheepfold and have one shepherd. 3. That the power of it may be more
settled: as the house of David grew stronger and stronger, but the house of
Saul grew weaker and weaker; so when Christ sets up his candlestick that the
seed that is sown there may take deep root. When a King has erected Castles
then he has his Kingdom. So we desire God may entrench himself and rear
castles of defense against his enemies which would remove him in us; that he
would set up himself strongly, that every traitor might be crushed and every
base lust subdued, that God would slay the^, and none but his laws might take
place in our soul. In a word the issue returns to thus much; we beseech
Christ, that his Gospel may spread and be strong, and these days of sin may
be wasted, and that he may come in the clouds. Rev. 22. and then come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, that he would accomplish the number of his Elect, and
gather those that belong to his glory, that they may be everlastingly with him.
Q. What is the carriage of the soul in putting up this petition?

A. It appears in three things.

1. The soul desires and labors to be subject to the good pleasure of the
Lord. The heart faith, oh that I might once be so disposed that I might submit
to the pleasure of the Almighty. We desire that all those things that are set
up in our hearts, which are contrary to the good will of the Lord might be
subdued, Psalm. 119.4. Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts: o Lord, that
my soul were so affected! thou have enjoined me to keep thy Law: oh, that I
could do so. The spirit should be as wax to the seal, and ink to the
paper, that the soul might take the impression of every rule that God would
set up in our hearts: thus the soul should be disposed, and wish that the
Lord would put this frame into us: thou have said, seek my face: oh, says the
soul, that I could seek thy face, and echo to it, behold Lord, thy face do I
seek: to submit wholly without any contending: not that the Lord should force
us, but take up your yoke, put our neck to the yoke: let the word of the Lord
bear the sway: when Mary wanted wine and our Savior checked her, she
submitted presently, not a word more; so what the Lord commands us, let us do
without any quarrelling, let the least inckling of the word bear the sway.
When our Savior sent his disciples for the Asses colt, they said, but happily,
the men will not let him go, how then? Tell them says our Savior, the Master
has need of him, and then they will not deny him: It is enough, let the Lord
but speak and it is done, this the soul should labor to attain unto.

2. The soul carries it self with an inward opposition to what ever is
opposite to the government of the Lord Jesus Christ to the uttermost of our
power. It is in vain to say, it were well if it were so; and I would it were
so, and yet stand still and not to set to our hand; but we must join with the
Lord, and as he spoke of Merosh, Cursed be thou, because thou wentest not out
to help the Lord, so truly the Lord Jesus is coming to our towns, to our
families, therefore we should step out and help the Lord against those high
mountains of pride and stubbornenesse of heart; when a proud heart stirs,
would we but cry out, good Lord help down with that stubborn spirit of mine,
how soon would it yield! but if you say, come pride, and you and I will join
together, is this calling for the Kingdom of Christ to come? no, no, you are
traitors and conspirators, and no subjects; therefore stop your mouths; this
is no submitting, but conspiring.

When Iesabel looked out of the window with her painted face, says Iehu, who
is on my side? fling her out: so says the Lord, will you have pride or me? If
you be on my side, fling down that proud, untoward heart, which hinders the
Lord Jesus, for taking place in your souls: you paint your selves in a proud
humor; but if you be on Gods side, down with those painted strumpets. We
must not only oppose great sins, but every sin, we must not sod^r with
any secret corruption although it be but the appearance of evil, it we must
abstain f^o^: Mases said leave not a hoof, neither would he start an hairs
breadth from Gods commandment, in any particular, but subdue all.

3. Though the soul cannot be as it should, yet it does desire the Lord
(whether sin will or no) to rule us, and lay all flat down under the
goveremnt of Christ: when the heart finds a great deal of untowardnesse and
power of sin, then it says, Lord thy Kingdom should prevail, but the
sons of Zerviah are too strong for me; therefore take power to thy self and
pluck away what ever does oppose thee. It was a good speech of a good
Christian, that he desired the Lord to rule whether he would or no. Thus the
soul should be disposed to entreat the Lord that he would break open the
door: when the Lord comes, and we will not open, we desire the Lord would
come in by a kind of violence, the soul intreates the Lord to conquer, to
break in, and make way into the heart, and to take possession wholly in the
soul. Now when the soul is loath this should be, it is a wretched spirit;
when the Lord will subdue sin, and we are loath it should be so, do we then
pray Christ's Kingdom should come? When we are not able to bear a command of
his? no, no, the soul will then labor to oppress sin, and pray to the Lord
for power against it.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

This is the third Petition, 3. Petition.
and in it are three things observable.

1. The order of the same. 2. The sense and meaning of the words. 3. The frame
of the heart in the putting up of this petition.
1. For the order, the reason is, because the two former petitions, make way
for this third, he that glorifies God by all and has his power set up in his
soul, he only does Gods commands; for naturally there is no ability in man
to do the will of God, but when the spirit works within, then we are able to
frame our hearts to Gods will. David being a man after Gods own heart, was
always ready to do his will: this is the reason of the order, of the
petition: from the ground thereof observe two instructions.

1. That he that thinks out of his own power to do Gods will, it is
impossible he should do it: no, he shall never do it. 2. We must first
submit to the Kingdom of Christ before we can do his will; Be under the
government of grace, and then thou may go on cheerfully, we fail, if
before we have submitted we would be doing; first, Christ must do terrible
things to the heart before it will yield to obedience; now for the meaning of
the words.
Q. What is the will of God?

A. It is the purpose of the Almighty, touching the accomplishment of any
thing; there is nothing done but the Lord does it: whatsoever is brought to
pass, that is Gods will in general. Ephesians. 1.

Q. How many kinds of wills is there, or how manifold is the will of God?

A. It is twofold, not in regard of it self, but in regard of us.

1. The revealed will of God. 2. The secret will of God.
2. What is the secret will of God?

A. It is that secret purpose he has in himself, before al worlds, and has
not discovered it to the creature. Ephesians. 1.9. having made known unto us the
mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in
himself: the Gospel was hid in the bosom of the Almighty, not observeable by
man or any creature under heaven, but now it is revealed. 1. Cor. 2. Who knows
the mind of God? the deep things of God? none knows but the Spirit of God; and
as it is not made known, so we have nothing to do with it in this place.

Q. What is the revealed will of God?

A. It is the purpose of God, which he has made known to us by his word, and
revealed to us in his works.

Q. What is this doing of the will of God?

A. It consists in, and implies two things.

1. That what ever God makes known to be his will to lay upon us we should
willingly submit and yield unto: if God would have me poor, when it is done
we should approove of the accomplishment of Gods will. It is the breach of
many commands, that when God thwarts our desire, we are unwilling it should be
done. The wife is discontent that the husband should die, and the husband that
the wife should die: never lost man such a wife as I, this is profestly against
this petition.

I held my tongue and said nothing, said the Prophet, will the Lord have it?
then not a word more, his spirit yields presently, takes the stroke, does not
thwart the good will of God; which likewise was the practice of David, Ely,
Hezechia: It is the Lord, let him do what he will. Nay, our blessed Savior
himself says, not my will, but thy will be done. This is the folly of our
hearts, we take arms against Gods will, God would have us to be poor and we
will be rich. This is not to do the will of God; though God force us to it,
yet that is no thanks to us, we sin desperately in our averseness.

2. The heart is not only content with what God does, whether loss of life,
friends, liberty and the like, but there is another will must be done besides:
what God reveals to be a duty must be discharged by us. If there be a truth
to be made known unto us, we must acquaint our selves with the will of the
Lord, and with all diligence practice it. Make my heart one with thine, that I
may ever fear thy Name, let thy will be mine; oh, says the soul, that I
might ever fear thy name! this is to do the will of God.

We do not say, let it be spoken of, and conferred of by me, but let it be
done, let it be accomplished fully in me; we must not lift at it, and give
GOD good words and talk and leave it undone, but labor to do it thoroughly;
It is not enough for the child to say, I know what my Father commands me, but
I will do what I list: such hearts cannot pray to expect any thing at the
hands of God, now and then to look at a duty saying, I would it were so; away
with that sluggishnesse, to wish the will of God were done, and yet you will
have your own wills, and run according to your own fancies.

To this precept it belongs, that we should set on others to do Gods
pleasure. In vain do we wish it to be done, and do not provoke others to
do it; when Agrippa and Paul were grapling together, says Agrippa, thou have
almost persuaded me to be a Christian, not almost, says Paul, but I would
have thee altogether as I am, except these bonds; I would not have thee
fettered as I am, but enlarlarged in heart to do Gods will.

Therefore says Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord; he that not only
neglects Gods will himself, but hinders others, that man does not pray this
petition aright, he that says, thy will be done, and in the mean time
withdrawes others by his secret allurements and says, what, should I be such
a fool? to be at other men's bow and beck, to sit howling in a corner as thou
do? no, no; well, be it known unto thee, thou that wilt not do Gods will
here, the Lord will have his will done on thee one day to thy cost; he that
will not do Gods will here, God will send him packing to hell hereafter, and
there he will execute his will upon him whether he will or no.

Q. How must we do the will of God? we do now and then stumble on a duty;
and now and then take up a service, but yet we are now and then peevish and
wayward, Is not this enough?

A. No, no, you must do it in earth, as it is done in heaven, not now to be
some thing, and then to be nothing, now a Saint and then a Devil, but you must
constantly obey God.

Q Can a man do the will of God on earth as the blessed Angels do it in
heaven?

A. A man cannot do it in that measure the Angels do it, but we may do it
as they do, and perform the same obedience with them, though not in quantity,
yet in quality; a child follows the father though it cannot run so fast as
the father; a scholar may imitate the copy and write after it, though not
write so fast and well. So the servants of the LORD cannot do the will of God
here in that quantity that the Angels do it in heaven, but in quality like
them: let their obedience be our pattern, not in the measure, but in the
manner of it.

Q. In what things must it be done? how can we express any action like theirs?

A. This resemblance is in four particulars.

1 They do it readily, they are ready pressed at hand to do the good will of the
Lord, upon all occasions. They are not withdrawing themselves, but ready upon
every occasion to do what the Lord requires Job. Job. 1.
It is said, that The Sons of God appeared before him; they are ever in his
sight to give attendance to him, as a handmaid is at the hand of her mistres.
So that of Isaiah, They cover their faces before the mercy seat, they cover
their faces, in token of awfulnesse and reverence, and cry holy, holy, holy.
They are ever before him as a dutiful servant at his masters beck and call.

The Angels ever behold the face of God, he cannot becken but they are at
hand: In this readiness of theirs to do the will of the Lord, we should
imitate them, to be ever prepared to serve him, not to have our affections
straggling, but with Abraham, behold thy servant is at hand: thus it should be
with the soul: The Lord says, you must not have this sin and that
corruption; we must reply, Thy will be done Lord, not as Moses when the Lord
commanded him to go to Pharaoh, says he, who am I Lord, send another? no, it
should not be thus with us, we should be ready at hand: here Lord, speak,
for thy servant hears.

Go to Paul, Act. 9.
says the Lord to Ananias, and he went, for all he had been a persecutor.
Jonah will go to Tarshish rather then to Niniveh. We should not do thus, but
as Cornelius, when he sent for Peter says, we are all here before God, Act.
10.
to take notice of whatsoever it shall please him to reveal to us. Let your
lamps be light and prepared, that whether the bridegroom come at midnight, or
at any other time, all may be in a readiness at a push, when he calls: when
the Lord says, here is a sin to be sorrowed for, I submit Lord, says the
soul.

We must not let God stay for us to be haled to any duty, no, but we must
attend his will, neither must we stand it out, I will be wicked, and I will
walk in mine own way still, so you may perish, and for ever be damned and go
to hell when you have done: this is not to do the will of God as it is done in
heaven.

The Angels came before God, and the text says the Devil came also by force,
full ill against his will; so wicked men dare not, but they must leave some
sins, but that is perforce: they are either constrained to it by the Laws of
men or by the horror of conscience and the like, not with ready and cheerful
spirits.

2. The Angels do the will of God speedily, they delay not, but are willing
and press in the performance of Gods will, if the Lord do but beck they are
gone. Isay 6. The Angels are said to have diverse wings, some to cover their
faces, in token of humiliation, some to cover their feet, to show their speed
and have to perform what God at any time shall enjoyne and command.

This we should as they do, shake off all lingrings of spirit, when we see a
thing should be done, and God requires it: naturally we are mavelous lazy
in our Christian course, and come like a Bear to the stake, is this to do the
will of our heavenly Father as the Angels do? No certainly: David praised the
Lord with his best ability, and ran the ways of Gods commandments, so should
we make have and delay not.

When the Prophet Elisha sent his servant to the woman's son, he bad him
salute no man, make no stay by the way: this mavelous care should be in us:
Pray for our lives, and run on in a Christian course for our lives, not to
trifle, but to go with all speed till we come to our journeyes end, not
sluggishly as if a man cared not, whether he did it or no, If profit or
pleasure would be tampering with us, salute them not, we should take up our
resolutions; if honor and profit would be hanging about us, fling them off,
let us not regard them, but ride post have.

When our Savior sent his disciples out to preach, he bad them carry neither
scrip nor staff to hinder them in their course; when Paul was converted, the
text says, he never consulted with flesh and blood, he advises not with
carnal reasonings, but what God commands he did; so when God calls for duty,
we should not reason with profit, pleasure and honors, ask them leave, to
take up this duty and that performance, If the holy Apostle had done this, it
would have hindered him, but he consulted not with flesh and blood: so we
should do ever what God commands: it matters not what men would have of us,
but let us have an eye to Gods command.

3. The Angels in heaven do the will of God faithfully; that is, they
perform the whole will of God, they fail not to do it to an hairs breadth:
he is a faithful servant that does his masters command fully, so should a
Saint do: now faithfulness appears in 2. things.

1. We must do it all as they do. 2. We must do it in the right manner,
which God requires.
This is faithfulness; the Angels do not accomplish what message they will,
but God sets it down, and his good pleasure takes place. Psalm. 103.21. They
fulfill the good pleasure of the Lord, they start not at any service, no
cross: they stand not at duty, they do it, because he commands, so it ought
to be with the hearts of the people of the Lord, we must not pick and choose,
do it in an aguish fit when we list; It is said of David, he did all the will
of God.

It is sufficient God commands, though it be tedious: the Angels care not
though all the Devils in hell rage: so the Saints of God should do: be it
tedious, that skills not, so we may finish our course with comfort; he does
not pick and choose, but fears every finne, and takes up every duty.

The text says, Caleb and Joshua followed God fully in the days of Macaba and
Meribah, in the times of trouble: here is an Angelike spirit, to go through
with the work. Though father and mother were against the^, yet they would go
on. The contrary was the finne of Sardis, and which God reprooves sharply, I
have not found thy works full: it is nothing to do some of Gods will, but we
must do it all, or else the Lord regards it not. The most wicked will do well
sometimes for their own ends, if they be pleased. That is nothing; thou must
do Gods will pleased or not pleased, or else thou have a Satanicall spirit;
not to say the days are troublesome, but go through, as the Angels do.

Secondly, the manner; as we must do the whole will of God, so we must do it
after the right manner; not as you will, but as he requires. Thus Abraham when
he was commanded to go offer his Son Isaac, went early in the morning: if he
had been to offer an ox it had been nothing: but Abraham must give his only
Son Isaac, the Son of the promise, to be a sacrifice.

So for us not to be drunk, and commit out ragious finnes, such as all the
world cry out of, that's nothing; but thy secret lusts, thy beloved Isaaks,
they must be abandoned.

4. The Angels do the will of God constantly: Matthew. 18.
where they are daily before the face of God, they hold out and persevere to
do Gods will: this should be our practice: though we cannot do it in that
manner and so much as they, yet endeavor for it, continue to the death, says
the text, and what then, I will give thee the crown of life: our reward shall
be for ever, let our labor be so; a Saint should be 4. square, the same for
ever, not to fall back to be good in good company, with professors profess,
and with swearers curse, with drunkards be drunkards, and with devils be
devils. The blessed Angels do not thus. The Lord commends the good steward,
Happy shall that servant be, whom his Master when be comes shall find so
doing, when the Lord shall come and find a Saint persevere unto the end, he
shall be blessed indeed. The Angels will outbid us in the measure of
performance of Gods will: but yet we should be speedy, ready, faithful,
constant, as they are, in uprightnes, though not in that measure of exactnes
that they do.

Q. What is the frame of the heart, in the putting up of this petition?

A. It appears in two things.

1. It is willing to do it, it self. 2. It is willing and desirous to help
and stir up others to the utmost of its power to do the will of God.
1. The soul ought to be forward to know the will of God, and do it, it
self: and this appears in four particulars.

1. The heart is willing to do the will of God, in laying down its own will,
so far as it may be an hinderance in doing Gods will; for oftentimes our
will and the will of God are contrary. There is naturally a refractorie
stiffenesse, that lifts up it self above the Lord; this must be remooved, not
my will says our Savior, but thy will be done. If our wills and Gods, cannot
stand together, we must lay down ours. But sometimes we say desperately (as
they did) we will walk in our own ways, etc. we will have a King as other
nations, we will have our base lusts, to sway and rule us; but so long as this
is in us, we cannot do the will of the Lord, we cannot serve two masters, I
came not to do mine own will, but my Fathers that sent me, says our
Savior. It is oftentimes with our will and the will of God, as with two
buckets, the letting down of the one is the lifting up of the other, and the
lifting up of the other is the letting down of that; so where we let down
our own wills we lift up Gods, but where we lift up our own wills we let
down the good will of the Lord. Now the cause why we stick in service and
cannot come off is, we would have our pleasures, we would be this and that,
so that the will of God is justled against the wall and shut out of doors: but
let this distemper be crushed, and then the will of God will take place.

2. When we have done this, then we must repair to the Lord to know what his
pleasure is, take his warrant before we set upon the work; a conscionable
attendance on Gods will, should be the root and spring of all our actions, not
to go without it, but to have our spirits carried by it. This is a master
controler that swayes and bears all before him: tell me not, I cannot do it
for my liberties sake, etc. But I have no warrant out of GODS will, unless the
good will of the Lord go before me, I dare do nothing. Ephesians. 5.10.11. proving
what is acceptable to the Lord. As the Goldsmiths lays the gold to the
touchston, so prove your selves, see what is acceptable to the Lord. In the
time of the old Law they put on the linen Ephod and went to enquire of the
Lord. Thus Saul enquired of the Lord, whether the men of Kedar would come up:
so should we do, come to the Lord (that is the touchstone) and see what the
Lord would have us to do, and not go to a company of carnal counselors to
consult with honor, ease, wife, family, etc. Whether shall I suffer (says the
soul): says honor, if you do thus, I am laid in the dust; says ease and
profit, for my part, if you take this course I am utterly undone and lost: then
says the souls, if it be thus I will not do it, let all sink and swim:
thus they do not Gods will but their own. But they that do the will of God,
let them enquire what his will is; let honor, ease, profit, world, and all say
what it will, they will do what the Lord will have: we must not master
conscience, (It was the speech of a wicked wretch, one of his companions being
in horror of conscience, he bad him master it as he did, for before that he
could never live quietly; but now he was not at all troubled with it,
mastering of conscience in English, is searing of conscience) but that must
master you and lead you to the performance of duty.

3. When this will of God is revealed, we must yield unto it without any
quarrelling against it, or questioning of it; let the soul be delivered up to
the will of God. As Da vid said, Let my will be one with thine: when the Lord
calls, seek my face, we should echo, thy Face Lord I seek: 2. Tim. 2.19.
we should be prepared for the Lord, so to have our affections strike as the
Lord sets them; then we should do his will a right, then would it be in our
hearts to do the will of God, as David says Psalm. 40.

4. We should have a courageous constant resolution to go on with that work
and in that way God has revealed to us and has laid open before us, so that
the soul should say, not my will, but give me an heart to do thy will: thus
we should have a constant resolution to go on, not to do it by fits and
starts, but as the Apostle says, fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold
on eternal life; and except a man have this, he prays not this petition
aright, but out of hypocrisy; it is his own will, he seeks not the will of
the Lord:now we come to the second thing: as we should do the will of God
our selves, so we should further others, which appears in 2. particulars.

1. We should further others in discharge of duty. 2. We should join sides
with others in the performing of duty.
1. For the 1. To further others, that is a pregnant place Heb. 10. provoke one
another to love, and good works, not only stand by and look on others, but
provoke and egg on, and stir up others to do the will of the Lord. The Lord
there commends the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9.3.
because they gave good examples to their brethren; It is good to have a
stirring heart. Satan sets on others to sin; a little leaven, leavens the
whole lump; a man uses not to be drunk alone, but to draw on others with him;
If Satan and his instruments be so in evil, how much more ought we to do
the contrary good?

There is not a duty that more promotes Gods glory then this: wicked men as
leaprous persons labor to infect others, so should we be forwards to help
others; they provoke their fellow servants, and go about reproving, exhorting
one another:So should a Christian set on every man, and spur on others to do
the will of God.

2. Labor likewise to join sides with them that do Gods will; It was the
practice of the Scribes and Pharisees to lay heavy loads and burdens upon
others, but not stir themselves; but we should lend our helping hand in the
performance of duty; when a Cart is at a set, it is not enough to stand by and
say; I would it were out, and yet never lend a helping hand, but join with
others to help it out: and if one teame will not do, put another to it.

So when another is not able to get out by reason of temptation, then we must
join with him and pray and mourn with him. Zach. 8.21. Let us go to the
house of the Lord, and we will go also: it is not enough to profess our
selves Gods servants, but we must pray and suffer also if need requires. It
was David's speech, Psalm. 34. Let us praise the Lord together, so if we would
do Gods will, it is not sufficient to pray our selves, but we must quicken
others to pray and study together. It is not enough to wish that Gods will
might be done, and we stand by, with our hands in our pockets, and do not
provoke on others, but lay reproaches on them; what you pray? I tell you such a
heart is professedly against the will of God: These are scholars of the
highest form in Satan's school: if ever we desire to effect Gods will, let us
set our shoulders to the burden, and help others, all we can: thus much for
the third petition, Thy will be done.

Give us this day our daily Bread. 4. Petition.


We come now to the other three petitions, and they concern our selves; the
first is, concerning the things of this life, and the other two concerning
spiritual gifts; and it consists partly in Justification, partly in
Sanctification.

Q. But first, for the order, why do we beg for the things of this life
before spiritual mercies, our bodily bread before our spiritual Bread?

A. Because in nature a man must have an outward being here before we have a
better: this life is the time of our trading; and after this life there is no
grace to be had; therefore we must have this life before we can live
everlastingly with God hereafter; no man can get good by the means that does
not live; therefore though the other be more necessary, yet a man except he
have this, cannot have the other, that living here bodily, we may live
spiritually hereafter: Now for the sense of the words.

1. What is meant by giving. 2. What is meant by Bread, with all the
circumstances, daily bread, and our daily bread.
For the first, the word giving implies 3. things.

1. That the Lord out of his goodness and wise bounty, would provide what may
be profitable for us, and which we stand in need of; in a word, that he would
supply whatsoever we want. 2. That he would preserve those good things he
has bestowed upon us, that he would graciously continue our lot and portion
unto us, Psalm. 16. Thou maintainest my lot. The Lord does not only give a
patrimony to his children, but preserves and continues that which is needful
to them. 3. That the Lord would be pleased to send in the sweet of his
blessings and mercies he has been pleased to bestow on us; the blessing of
the Lord is the staff of bread. It is not enough to have these blessings, for
bread may choke us; the houses we inhabit may fall upon our heads, if they
be not blessed to us. The covetous is as if he had nothing, if the Lord let in
but a secret curse and vein of vengeance into his soul: a man may have many
outward blessings, and yet have all the sweetness took off from them, that
many times all that a man has, may be a torment unto him: the Lord can take
off all the sweet, therefore we pray and entreat that the Lord would give us
the sweet of them, that they may be comfortable to us, as they are in
themselves.
Q What is meant by bread?

A. Under this word bread, are included all necessary helps and comforts of
this life, what ever concerns our lives, good name or estate, all things
belonging to these, is bread.

Because bread is the staff of life, most especially useful for life: other
things are necessary, but a man cannot be without this bread, therefore the
Lord puts a part for the whole, it including, all blessings necessary for us.

Q What kind of bread must it be?

A. Our bread, not that we can procure or purchase; but the word our, implies,
that these things may be ours in way of right, between man and man, that we
may not have them by violence, not to have another man's riches and honors, but
that we have a right to the same by the sweat of our own brows; not to pluck
it from them, but that it may be ours by our labor, means, patrimony, etc.

Q. What is meant by daily?

A. The word in the original signifies substantial bread, and not barely so
much food and clothes as will keep the life and soul together, and no more;
but that we may have to our lawful delight, as one spoke, so much as will
keep even at the years end.

Q Why this day?

A. It implies 3. things.

1. A daily need of succor that we have from the Lord; we do not say give us
this month or this quarter, but give us this day, as who should say, we stand
in need of a daily succor from the Lord: the Lord would not have a Christian
have too much, least he might be secure, as the rich man in the Gospel, soul
take thine ease; thou have enough now: but the Lord would have us come for our
breakfast, dinner and supper, and all from him. 2. It shows that a man must
be content with his allowance, his desires should not be catching after
future things; we beg not for our monthly and quarterly bread, but daily
bread, enough for the present time. 3. It implies that we must pray for this
daily bread, every day a man must be begging and craving of the Lord, this is
the meaning of this day: gather then up all and, the sum returns to thus
much; we in this petition beseech the Lord that all good things that concern
life, good name or food, may be supplied to us, that we may have more then
barely enough, not to wring from others, to be content with the least
pittance, and daily and continually to beg for those things we want and stand
in need of.
Q What is the frame of the heart in the putting up of this petition?

A. It appears in three things.

1. A painfulness with care in that course and calling which God calls him
to, and sets him in. 2. An humble dependence on God. 3. A quiet contentedness
with that God allows.
1. For the first, he must be painful; no man can say, give me this day my
daily bread, unless he be painful in his place; if we expect any thing any
otherwise, its a mocking of God; we must be faithful in our places, if we
expect any honor, goods, or good name. It was the Command God gave Genesis 3. In
the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread all the days of thy life;
there is no allowance for idleness and carelessness, the Lord sets Adam to
till the ground; so that if we expect any thing necessary for us, we must take
pains: for says the Apostle, he that will not labor let him not eat; the
diligent hand makes rich.

Obj. But God makes rich you will say.

Arg. It is true, by a diligent hand, a scholar must labor if he will have
learning: look as it is with a man that has promised another so much, and so
much at such a time, and such a place, if he will come for it; now if the man
comes not for it, he loses it; Even so it is here, the Lord promises
success to our labor, the Lord blesses the plowman by his plow, the
tradesman by his trade, the scholar in his study; but except we be
painful in our places, we can expect nothing: the Lord gives us our daily
bread, while we walk with him: so that a man hinders himself more by
idleness than he profits himself by prayer, without diligence.

2. The soul must have a dependence on God, when it has done what it can: a
man should be so painful in the use of the means, as though they could do
all, and yet so depend upon God above the means, as though all outward means,
could not do any good without the Lord; we must not catch it out of Gods
hands but look to God in the way he has chalked out before us, and then
expect of him what we want; It is the Lord, that gives a man substance; In
vain it is, to rise early in the morning and to go to bed late, and eat the
bread of carfulness, except the Lord bless all, all is in vain.

Let us look therefore unto him for all we stand in need of; It is the phrase
of the wise man. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, it is not policy, craft
and outward means that make rich, but the blessing of the Lord: from that
expect all: though the plowman plow, though the gardner manure, cut and prune,
yet nothing thrives unless the dew of heaven falls: so it is here in our
courses, all our labors, pains, means and cost, though it be much and
great, yet it will not thrive unless the Lord bless; The Spirit of the Lord mo
ved on the waters, Genes. 2. Let us therefore look to his blessing upon all: a
scholar may labor and take much pains, and yet shall never attain his ends;
either he shall not have it at all, or if he have, it shalas Vriahs letter
choke him at last; except we depend on God, all labor and pains is nothing.

3. There must be a quiet contentednes, with what God bestows, and we
receive, else we cross our selves: we pray for bread, would we then have
what we list? We do not pray for dainties and costlinesse of apparel, but
for bread that pittance the Lord shall be pleased to bestow upon us: now if
nothing but dainties and curiosities will serve us, it is more than the word
allows, and then we can expect to be bestowed upon us. If we have meat and
cloth, we must not look to the quantity so much, a month or a quarter, but
go to the Lord, and let him dispose of all, or else we beg one thing and
desire another.

The Lord will be content to give us bread, not pearls; not to cocker us, but
to give us what we stand in need of. That of Agar, give me not too much least
I be proud; nor too little, least I put forth my hand to wickedness; but give
me food convenient; shows it is better to be at Gods allowance then our own:
A child happily would have a coat four or five yards long to tire him, and
fire to burn him, but a father will not have it, for fear of harming him.

So we would flow over, but our Father measures out our portions according to
our need. It is with us as with dieted sick men, they would have hot wines, and
salt meats, and eat excessively, but the Physician orders all their dyets; for
if they should have their fill, it would kill them, a full stomach would
increase the humor; so the Lord is a mavelous skillful Physician; we have
proud, hauty hearts, and would have dainties, and if we should have riches as
we would, God should loose his honor which now he has by us being kept
under hatches, therefore the Lord diets us: nothing would serve some, if the
Lord should not stint the^, but they would be as proud and saucy as ever they
could; therefore the Lord is compelled to diet them: thus we should be content
with the least pittance that the Lord sees fit for us: and he that is thus the
Lord will give him enough for his bait in this his pilgrimage; and so much for
this petition.

And forgive us our trespasses, etc.

This is the fifth petition, touching the good of man, three concerning God, and
three concerning us, this life and a better: the first we have handled, and
they that concern our spiritual being follow. Wherein observe,

1. The Order. 2. The Sense and meaning of the words. 3. The frame of the heart
in putting up this petition.
1. The order, why it is thus placed, namely Justification before
Sanctification: the reason is, because Sanctification flows from
Justification; Being justified, we are sanctified: first, we are acquitted of
our sins, whereof we stand guilty before God, and then he sanctifies us:
first this, then the other; the other are the springs, and this the maine
branch: we beg for faith and other graces, but all are included in this.

2. As for the sense of the words, take notice.

1. Here is the petition, Forgive us our trespasses. 2. The reason, as we
forgive others, or, for even as we forgive others, that trespass against us,
so Lord forgive thou our debts: this is the argument whereby we win the
favor of the Lord.
Q. What is meant by debts.

A. By debts are meant all sins, all failings, whether of omission or
commission: Now they are called debts, because we owe all kind of obedience to
God, to love him above all, and our neighbor as our selves. Now these being
the articles of agreement, the slighting and neglect of this same brings us
into debt with God.

For first, we are bound to these: Secondly, by breaking these we deserve the
punishment due to the breach of it: now when we omit any thing we forfeit and
are cast behind hand. Thirdly, we are liable to the execution of the
punishment due for the breach of this. Thus all sins are debts.

Q. What is it to forgive?

A. To forgive is this; we beg that the Lord would be pleased not to take
advantage of us because of our debts; nor yet to proceed in the rigor of the
Law to do that it requires. Now our sins require we should be condemned
and executed: a malefactor forfeiting his bond is cast in his cause, thrown
into prison, and execution sued out, for the satisfaction of his debt: Now we
beg of the Lord, that he would not condemn us in the Court of conscience, nor
execute his Justice on us: this is to forgive, and this proceeds from mercy.

Q. But how can God do this? will this stand with the Justice of God, not to
be satisfied for our facts; to pardon them without satisfaction for them?

A. No, but though the party do not satisfy, yet if the surety do, it is
sufficient; so though he forgive us, yet he looks for it at the sureties
hand. As the Creditor does not require the debt at the debtors hands, yet he
does at his hands that is bound to make satisfaction for the same; so the Lord
does not require satisfaction of us, as he might, to exact the utmost
farthing; because thou sinnest thou shall die: the Lord will not exact this of
us, but he requires this satisfaction of the Lord Jesus. So that God the Father
is satisfied though not by us, therein showing mercy on my part, and Justice on
Christ's part: thus we see what it is to forgive, that the Lord would not
arrest me, but the surety; that he would not exact of me, but take all of
Christ.

For we forgive others.

This is made an argument to prevail with God: we beseech God to forgive us:
because we forgive others: as who should say, If we forgive others, forgive
thou us; as though first we could not forgive others before God forgive us,
hence the question draws on, namely,

Q. Whether is the soul able to forgive trespasses to others, before the Lord
forgive its trespasses?

A. No, our forgiving others does not go before our own forgiveness: God
must first forgive us before we can forgive others, because it is a work of
grace to do this as God requires, and it comes from a gracious disposition of
soul which God must put in us before we can do it, for sanctification
follows Justification. Now to forgive trespasses is a work of obedience,
flowing from sanctification, which sanctification follows Justification; as a
man should say, a tree brings forth fruit from the sap in the root.

Q. But this is used as a cause: we forgive others, therefore forgive thou us,
it seems.

A. No, it is a fruit and effect to make way for this conveiance and assurance:
it makes us not to be just, but declares us to be just: every reason
propounded by the word, because it does not imply a cause; as I prove fire to
be fire thus: that which burns is fire, but that burns, therefore it is fire:
now burning is not the cause of fire, but an effect of it, for first there must
be fire before it can burn: so it is a tree because it bears apples: now
apples are not the cause of the tree, but the tree of the fruit.

Q. What is it to forgive the trespasses of our fellow brethren, and how far
may we do it?

A. In the trespass of a brother three things are considerable.

1. The sin it self. 2. The guilt of that sin. 3. The punishment due to that
sin.
1. Concerning the sin and guilt, we must know two things, wherein is the
answer.

1. We must know, that to forgive properly we cannot, it cannot be done by us,
for who can forgive sins but God only? it is one of Gods prerogatives to
forgive sins, and no creature can do the same. 2. As the guilt has a
respect to God, so it has a respect to us; for as he is injured, so are we;
when a man steals, it is not only a wrong to the Law of God, but also a wrong
to me: so far as the sin does respect God, he pardons it, and as it
concerns me, I forgive him; and this is done when the heart is as willingly
content to do all good to a brother, as though he had never sinned against
him: we say we forgive him, but we will not forget him: this is not to
forgive, but when between him and me there is nothing to stop the doing of
good, this is true forgiving.
Q. Whether is a man bound to forgive punishment to another, as when one has
stolen any thing from us, should we not follow the law on him? how far must
a man go in this case in taking punishment on such an one offending?

A. A man may, nay it may be so, that a man is bound not to forgive it, but to
punish it; and a man should sin deeply in the neglect of it. If a man has
murdered another, a man is bound to follow the law on him, and to give him the
punishment due to the fact.

Q. How far may a man go in this case?

A. It appears in these particulars.

1. When all things considered a man sees it may do good, then he is bound to
give punishment: when there is nothing but a bridewell will do a servant good,
give it him; when a child is stubborn, give him correction and spare him not;
It is as good as his meat: If a wretch belch out his malice, if a man can
reform him by punishment, give it him, who knows but it may be the best
Physic that he ever had? and to let him go unpunished in such a case makes
a man guilty of his sin, because he might have reformed him by this means.

2. If this be a way and means to bind a man's hand, and to hinder him from
the practice of some sin; if a man have a suite of law against him, he is
bound to cast him into prison, for that keeps him from sinning deeply. It is a
work of mercy to take a knife from a mad man; so GOD put an opportunity into a
man's hands, he is bound to take the Law, and it is mercy to him thus to do.

3. When a man cannot otherwise maintain his own honor, life or some other
particular good, for the taking off his own wrong, a man is bound in Justice
so to do; as thus, if one should raise a false report upon a man, it is not a
work of Tyranny, but a work of mercy; he ought to right his own wrong by
punishment, when it cannot be otherwise maintained: we are bound to take this
course, for why? mine own honor, life, and estate is to be preferred before
others.

4. When this course being Just, will maintain the goodness of a man's
profession and Gods glory, this should be done; when a man's profession lies at
the stake, a man is bound to be meal mouthed, but to make those black-mouthed
wretchesknown to others, that they may not dare to bring a scandal upon the
glorious gospel of Christ, nor on the professors thereof: thus a man must
do, and yet forgive a man for all this, if his good or mine, or the profession
of the Gospel may be furthered thereby: and thus far a man may go in these
cases and the like.

Q. Now we come to the force of the argument: how is this an argument to
prevail with God to forgive us, because we forgive others, where lies the
force of the argument, what virtue is there in this?

A. It lies in three particulars, this being a special means to obtain
mercy; Lord I forgive others, therefore forgive thou me.

1. All the mercy I have is not first in my self, it is but a river and spring
coming from the sea; but mercy is first in thy self, O Lord, the fountain and
sea of mercy is in thee; Now Lord if I have but some bowels of mercy and some
drops of that Ocean of thy mercy, and yet can forgive others, much more then
thou the fountain of mercy can forgive me.

The servants you know, fell out, and the one pulled the other by the throat,
saying, pay me that thou owe me; now when the master heard of it, he said, a
thou wretch, do thou deal thus with him, when I dealt so favorably with
thee? if a sinner must forgive his brother 77. times, how much more the God of
mercy? if he that had but some mercy received from the fountain, how much
more the Lord the fountain?

2. As we have it not from our selves, but from God; so also that we have is
mixed with a great deal of spleen; though some compassion, yet mingled with a
great deal of envy; though some mercy, yet mingled with a great deal of
cruelty: there is a great deal of darkness with this little starlight: but
the Lord has all love without any hatred, all mercy without any cruelty, there
is no hinderance in the Lord to hinder him: Now the soul says, Lord, if I
that have a great deal of malice can forgive my brethren, then how much more
thou that have all mercy and no spleen wilt forgive, if men humble their
fowls before thee?

3. That mercy that is in us, is but little; but it is infinite in the Lord:
what we can do is but the first fruit, a drop, a grain, a mustard seed, but
abundant in the Lord: the soul says, Lord thou art boundless and bottomless
in mercy, how much more will thou forgive? true, Lord, the talents and debts
whereby we are engaged unto thee are many, and great; but yet if we poor
creatures that have but from the fountain, and that we have is mingled with a
great deal of malice, and that but a drop, and yet can forgive, how much more
thou that have all first from thy self, and purely without all mixture of
envy, and in an infinite abundance, how much more can thou forgive whom thou will? therefore Lord forgive us, for we forgive others.

Q. How ought the soul to be framed in the putting up of this petition?

A. It appears in four particulars.

1. The soul must see and acknowledge it self guilty of those sins that
appear in his life: we must see our selves stand in need of forgiveness; now
we cannot do this till we see our selves faulty; he that owes nothing, what
need he crave forgiveness? so forgiveness of sins implies, that we are
guilty thereof, and liable to the punishment due to sin.

They that confess sin and forsake it, shall find mercy. Prove. 28.14. first
find thy sins, then find Gods mercy. 1. Cor. 11.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: he that would have
God forgive him, must not forgive himself; as a malefactor that sticks to his
own innocence, and will not acknowledge any guilt, in vain he desires to be
forgiven, so a sinner is a malefactor before Gods tribunal: now if he will
not confess, he shall never find mercy at the hand of the Lord.

2. We must labor to have the heart see its own inability to satisfy for sin,
or to bear Gods Indictment he shall pass upon the soul that is guilty: the
soul acknowledges it self unable to answer one of a thousand. Behold (says
the Psalmist) Lord if thou should enter into Judgment, who were able to
abide it? but there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. We are
banquerouts, we cannot answer the debt, nor bear the suite: if the debtor be
able to answer the debt, or pay the money, he cares for no kindness.

The sinner is the debtor, and if I can satisfy Gods Justice, what need I
care? if I can abide it, what need I crave favor? but when it comes to this,
who can abide it? then it is the LORD must pardon what ever is amiss; where
ever the sinner goes, he cannot avoid the suite, he needs no pursevant to
follow him: conscience is arresting, and the Devil accusing, therefore he
falls down and cries mercy, mercy to pardon the suite; the soul is not able to
bear the suite, the Church complains of it, behold our righteousness is as a
menstruous cloth, and they Ezeoh. 36.31. judge themselves worthy to be
condemned: now in that I say forgive, I say I cannot satisfy for my sin.

3. We should seek to God and his grace, for what we need; we should
knowledge it his free mercy; when the soul sees there is mercy in God for him,
then it is fitted to pray for this petition. For should I conceave God were
severe, though I renounced my sin, yet I could not seek him: God is not
extreme and rigorous, but he has mercy in store for them that seek him in
truth and sincerity, therefore we should apprehend two things.

1. That God desires not to deal rigorously, we should persuade our hearts
that God is desirous to welcome our prayers. The Lord is said to be abundant
in goodness and mercy; Ex. 34.
the Lord is ready to succor our infirmities. If we abound in misery, the Lord
will abound in mercy: the phrase is, multiplying mercy, therefore the Apostle
calls him, the Father of mercy and the God of all consolation: we have new
vexations, he has new compassions, nay, God has more good then we can desire,
he performs more then promises, he is abundant in truth above all that he
has revealed himself to be in his word, Isay 55.7. Our God is merciful and
abundant in forgiveness, he multiplies pardons, he has pardons in store,
mercy to pardon any poor soul, But says the soul, what? my sins
committed and continued in? Mark what he adds, his thoughts of mercy are
larger in giving then ours in craving. Ephesians. 2. he is able to do above what
we can ask orthinke.

It was but cold comfort Isaac gave to Esau, he had but one blessing: so if
GODS mercies should come to an end, it were but poor comfort: when the soul
should say Lord give me, and the Lord should say all is drawn dry; but there
is enough in God to do us good: what availes it though a father have a tender
and a good heart to his child, if he has not to give it what it asks or
stands in need of? but our heavenly father abounds in goodness.

2. God as he has abundance of good, so he is free and ready to bestow it.
Isay 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, let him buy milk and honey without
money or price: we would be content to have wine, but we have no money to
buy it, therefore God adds, though you be not able to pay for it, yet take it.
Mich. 7.18. Who is a God like our God, who pardons sins, because mercy pleases
him? the pardoning of our sins is like the overthrowing of Pharaoh in the
sea: God does it not so much, because we please him, but because his mercy
pleases him, he does it freely.

4. We must be content to wait for this mercy we stand in need of: we must
wait for it and be confidently persuaded of it, else we cross the tenure of
forgivenes, Held. 11. God gives mercy to none but those that wait for it: in
that we ask pardon, we are resolved to wait for it, (for so much is implied)
a pardon in law is not authentical until it be sealed. So God says he, will
pardon us: but this is not ^uthenticall until we have set to our seal; he
says, he will give freely, we say, we will wait constantly. Psalm. 37.5.
Commit thy ways to God, and he will care for thee: he that thus begs
forgiveness shall undoubtedly obtain it at the hand of the Lord.

And lead us not into temptation. 6. Petition.


This consists of sanctification both begun here and ended in glorification,
sanctification frees from the power of sin, glorification frees from the
presence of sin.

1. For the order, sanctification flows from Justification; when sin is
pardoned we have the spirit of Christ which conveyes all to us: we are first
justified, then sanctified.

2. For the sense of the words, here are 2. things: 1. What we desire God
should not do, lead us not into temptation. 2. What he should do, deliver us
from evil.


Q. What is meant by temptation?

A. A trial or assault whereby a man's strength is tried; now they are double.

1. Deliverance into evil.

2. A proof of the soundness of grace: the first is especially intended, all
the assaults of the soul by sin, Satan or the world whereby either our faith
may be shaken or we withdrawn from God to evil: sometimes there are good
temptations of proving or expressing our grace; these in some sense may have
place in this petition: God tries us on this manner, and we pray him that he
would not try us more then we are able to bear.

Q. What is it to be led into temptation?

A. 1. When temptations pursue us. 2. When they do foil us assaulting of us.
3. When temptation does totally vanquish us.


Now we pray in this petition, that temptations may not pursue us, or pursuing
us, that they may not foil us, and though we be foiled by them, yet that we
may recover our selves; we desire that corruptions would not besiege us, or if
they do, yet not conquer, but that we may recover our selves after we are
overcome.

Q. Can God lead into temptation?

A. The Apostle explaines it I am. 1.13. God cannot tempt to evil, he that is
goodness it self cannot provoke a man to sin: the Lord does not put malice
into any man's heart, God cannot be properly the cause of drawing any man to
wickedness. There are trials of proof indeed: the Lord may try his, as he
did Abraham. Genesis 22.1. A man does not hurt his armor if it be good when as
he prooves it: so God intends no evil to a man when as he thus deals with
him.

Q. In what manner does God lead us into temptation.

A. He does it three ways.

1. When the Lord withdrawes not those nets that are laid for us: when GOD
removes not our stumbling blocks: nay, God may put an object of temptation
before us. Thus a master may lay a bait for his servant by putting money in a
corner; now it is lawful thus, for a man to leave his money to discern
whether his servant be faithful or no; he desires not that he should steal,
but that he may try his fidelity. So God justly permits occasions.

There must be heresies for the trial of Gods servants. They that pitch their
net first, let it fall, and then take it up, this is to rain snares. The
favor of God accidentally is but a bait to a wicked man, his prosperity is
his ruin; it is just with God to deal so, because wicked men desire it: So
Judas would feign have gotten something by the ointment; it is just with God to
suffer the Pharisees to give him 30. pence and ruin too. Now his mind is
pleased, he has 30d. and damnation too.

2. As God suffers occasions, so he lets sin and Satan loose; a man's heart
would feign be hankering, and God gives him up to his hearts lusts saying:
take him sin and Satan, let him have field room. 1 King. 22.22. Ahab would
feign go to war, it was a thing not allowed, but he desired it; therefore
God sends the Devil: God asks who will prevail over Ahab? the Devil says,
I will go: then God says, go and do it.

Abimelech and the men of Sichem did very ill; Jud. 9.23.
then God sent an evil spirit, that is, he let loose the spirit of
contention, and they destroyed him, and he labored to destroy them, so God.
Romans 1. is said to give them up, when they departed from the government of the
truth: no, says God, will you not be ruled by holiness? then take
uncleanenesse: many a man that has a wrathful disposition, take him envy
says God, let him bring blood on others, and so ruin to himself: thus God
took away his spirit from Saul, and gave him up to sinful distempers; of all
plagues there is none that is like this.

3. God leaves a man to himself, and lendes him not the assistance of his
grace, but suffers him and Satan to grapple together.

Thus he dealt with He-Zechiah; 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
who because he had a lease of his life, began to be proud: now God left him
to himself, to see what was in him; he thought himself a brave man, therefore
God leaves him; as a father lets a child go when he will not be held, so
says God, see what thou can do, try thine own strength.

But deliver us from evil.

Hence observe, that though God would do nothing against us, yet we are not
able to deliver our selves from our corrupt heart.

Q. What is meant by evil?

A. Not so much trouble or punishment, as sin; in it are three things.

1. The breach of the Law. 2. The guilt that a man gets by this breach, and so
is liable to this punishment. 3. The vigor of sin, which rules over the
soul; the two former, we pray against, in the fifth petition; because we
stand guilty of the breach of the Law. Therefore we pray that he would not
enter into judgment with us: we pray now against the power of sin, and that
is in three particulars.
1. Sin would be a comander over the soul; it is the King, Satan is the
Jaylour; it has a Kingly sovereign authority and would rule over him: sin is
often compared to a King, his servants are his obeyers; sin is a master, (at
least it would be) it is so in every natural foul, and it would be so in
the godly: the law of life, says the Apostle, has freed me from the law of
death. Romans 8.2. sin gives parliament laws and edicts to the soul; and as
the Centurion bad one servant go and he went, and another come and he came,
so does sin say, pride it is my pleasure you should be proud, therefore I
would have you imperial and snappish: says anger, I would have you
spleneticke and rage; says the soul, then I will, it shall be done: thus
sin sets up it self as supreme in the soul: hence a proud heart says, I
will do that I list, say God what he will; tell not me of laws, it is my
mind. Thus your proud heart sets you laws and you yield to them. Now we pray
here that how soever sin be in the soul, yet that God would snib it, that it
may be an underling, and daily be subdued in us.

2. As sin desires to set up a master like rule, and a supreme, sovereign
Lord-like dominion, so sin carries the soul and sometimes separates it from
God; whereas the command of God should be a guide to us and take place in our
hearts, this authority takes up arms, resists, and stands in defiance against
the rule of the spirit; hence came these phrases, they forsook God, and turned
their backs to his Commands.

What says pride, shall I be a slave, that the world should awe me, and snub
me? I will never yield it while I live, I will dye first: this is a Devil that
draws you from God and will carry you to hell, Romans 7.23. That is the meaning
of this place, sin carries a man captive; when the soul sees it self so ruled
by him, a gracious heart would tear it self off if it could; but a natural
man is a slave to sin, and dares not affect any good in another nor labor
for it himself.

3. Sin leaves a kind of blemish and stain upon the soul; after the
Commission of it there is a kind of jarring to the heart and of running wrong
in the soul. Peter after his denial of Christ was averted from Christ; so a
man after sin shall find himself so dull to any good and prone to any evil;
this is the stain of sin: when a man's arm is put out of joint, besides the
fall there is a bruise, so after a man has broken the commandments of the
Lord, the law unjoints him, he is more awke to any good then ever, Gal. 6. If
any man be unjointed by sin, so that of the Romans, wound their own souls,
this sin does. Now these we pray against, partly against the power of sin,
partly against the authority of sin, partly against the stain of sin.

But deliver us from evil.

To deliver from evil implies three things.

1. We pray that the Lord would preve^t those occasions and stragglings of
sin that trouble us; we pray that he would take off these distempers,
whereby sin would lay siege against the soul, that he would remove those
things that would remoove us from him. This wisdom promises. Prove. 6.21. That
she will walk with them, that walk with her; she will keep them from the
way of the wicked woman: sin is like an harlot, therefore the Lord is pleased
to express it after that manner.

Now it is the mercy of God that he will turn our eyes from beholding of
vanity, that there may not be violence of sin assaulting us, now we pray
therefore that we may not come into the battle, if it be possible: and that
sin may not come in against us.

2. That the Lord would assist us in the temptation that the temptation may not
prevail. It is a mercy not to be tempted; but if we must needs be, it is a
great mercy not to be overcome by temptation; if he will not wholly prevent us
by his grace, yet to assist us graciously in it: It is mercy not to be
assaulted, and though assaulted yet assisted.

Now this assistance of God is twofold; either extraordinary, or mediate, by
the means: we speak not so much of the first, though that be true, but we
crave both at the hand of the Lord.

1. Sometimes we crave for the extraordinary help and assistance of the Lord,
to assist us even above means and in the means: we know the Lord in the time
of Queen Mary did help wonderfully; their temptations were grievous, and
afflictions great, yet the Lord did help them extraordinarily, he did let in
abundance of sweetness: but we pass this, and come to the other.

2. We pray especially for such means as may help us, and that appears in
four particulars.

1. That the Lord would discover the enemy before he come, that he would make
known unto us the engines, wiles and depths of Satan, and the subtilty of our
own corrupt hearts, which are ready on every hand to surprise us. For to be
surprised before we are aware is great danger. Therefore we pray that the Lord
would give us the spirit of Revelation, that we may take notice of the engines
of Satan, and that he may be discovered to us. The discovery (we know) of an
evil is a means to prevent it, and not foreseeing misery, we cannot prevent
it; he that sees not an evil before it comes will be overthrown by it when it
comes: Many a man perishes by pride and knows not what hurts him; this
corruption blows up the soul. This the Lord promised, Isay 30.21. Thou shall
hear a word behind thee saying this is the way; that GOD may keep a man from
sin he sends the Spirit of Christ to say, this is the way, walk in it. The
text says, 2 Cor. 2. there speaking of the incestuous man, we are not
ignorant of the methods of Satan: so we pray the Lord that he would discover
the methods of Satan to us. Matt. 26. When the great skirmish was to come, our
Savior forewarned Peter and said, I will smite the shepherd, etc. And says,
watch and pray; for the hour is come: he gives him the warning piece: we
pray the^ that God would make known to us the engines of sin and Satan
before they come. We know it is a great help in war to know the quarters and
orders of enemies, that so a man may order his according thereunto. So we must
know where the Devil and our corruptions lie quartered, and know what be the
haunts of our wretched hearts, and so order the helps God has put into our
hands for the resisting of them.

2. That the Lord as it were, would entrench about us, if we be not foretold
of the enemies; that if we should not see sin to prevent it, yet that God
would lay some heavy impediment upon us, and build some trench about us, that
we may not commit those evils we are tempted unto; that though he does not
reveal the policy of Satan, yet that he would lay some snares that we may
not commit that sin which otherwise we would do: and this is a mavelous
mercy, Genesis 20.7. Abimelech took Sarah and thought she had been Abraham's
sister, as he himself told him; and no question he had a purpose to take her
to be his wife, but the Lord laid an impediment, the LORD kept Abimelech from
Sarah; he took off the edge of his desire and laid a bar between them.

Hos. 2.6.7. The Church was running after her abominations: now how did the
Lord prevent her? The text says, I will hedge thy ways with thorns, and
build a wall about thee: the lovers were corruptions, and the following of them
was the eager pursuit of the^. Now God hedges the ways with thorns, that is,
he lays afflictions on her, that she had no liberty to sin, so that she
has enough to do, to mind her own miseries: sometimes a man is addicted to
base company, and then the Lord lays sickness upon him to prison him and keep
him from that sin, this is Mercy.

3. The Lord puts armor and weapons on them, to fight against their enemies
that are opposite to his grace and children. Ephe. 6. from the 10. to the 18.
be ye strengthened in all might putting on all spiritual abilities, to be
strengthened in every good work: God says, he covers the head of his. 1. Pet.
15. God keeps them by the power of his grace: God gives his the whole armor,
the sword of faith, the breast plate of righteousness to quench the fiery darts of
Satan, and to resist him.

4. God gives a dominion over and a conquest of all our enemies, and over all
our victorious corruptions: he gives a happy issue and success with the
fight, he gives issues with the victory, Rev. 1.6. he has made us Kings,
that is, he has given us a Kingly authority over all our corruptions. So Romans
6. sin shall not have dominion over you: and Psalm. 119.133. Let no iniquity
have dominion over me: thus the Lord assists his in trouble.

3. As we pray that the Lord would prevent the occasions of evil, and if they
come to assist us in them: So lastly, if we be foiled and brought under by the
temptations of Satan and our own corruption, that the Lord would rescue us
from the^, that have had too much power over us, and too too much prevailed
against us. This we know was the request and desire of the Prophet David.
Psalm. 39. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go away hence and
be no more seen: as who should say, my base lusts are too strong for me;
These hands were stout, but now feeble, therefore good Lord give me that
former strength: his sins were as sickness, therefore he says, I knew the
time when I had a broken heart for my transgression, but now a hardened;
therefore O Lord, spare me a little while before I go hence and be no more
seen, that I may recover my former zeal and strength again. Romans 8.2.
The law of the spirit of life in Christ, has made me free from the Law of
sin and death, says Paul. Sin makes Laws, but we entreat the Lord that he
would prevent corruption, that he would assist us in temptations ordinarily and
extraordinarily, that he would discover the enemy before he come, that he
would entrench about us, vouchsafe us armor and weapons to resist, and give us
dominion over our enemies, and if we be overcome, that he would rescue and
recover us out of them all: this is the sum of this petition.

Now we come to the frame of heart that we should bring before God, that so
we may be fit to receive the good we sue for, from his hands.

Q. First, wherein does this appear?

A. The frame of heart and disposition of soul that best beseemes us in the
putting up of this petition appears principally in four things.

1. When we truly desire that the Lord would not let us be drawn as^^^^^ or
lead into temptation, we must labor to avoid all such occasions as may be too
strong for us, or prevail over us. In vain we desire to be delivered from
evil, when we rush into evil; as if a man should take pitch into his hands
and desire not to be defiled, or put fire into his bosom and pray not to be
burnt; this is a slighting of Gods mercy and provoking of him to wrath, rather
then a begging of favor.

We would count it a madness for a man to cast himself into the sea, and then
desire to be saved, to make our selves sick, that God may make us whole
again; it is nothing else but (as we may say so) to make God work: thus to
run into evil and then to pray the Lord, he would deliver us from evil, it
is a provoking and mocking of the Lord: the wise man's rule is here memorable,
Prove. 23.2. and 3. If a man be given to his appetite, Let him put a knife to
his throat; if thou love the wine, look not upon it: if a man be given to
his appetite, it is in vain to pray against it; and yet cate, but put thy
knife to thy throat, abstain therefrom: please not thy appetite.

The promise and the providence of God go together, Psalm. 90.
he will succor and relieve us, but it must be in the way of his providence:
he that goes out of the way, and craves Gods assistance, shall never have it,
but hales on evil to himself. Matthew. 18. Our Savior speaking of offenses,
says, If thy hand cause thee to offend, cut it off, and if thy eye cause thee
to offend pluck it out, that is, were thy sins as dear to thee as thy right
hand in regard of profit, or thy right eye in regard of pleasure, cut them off,
pluck them out, fling them away rather then be foiled by them. In vain we
crave the assistance of the Lord, and in the mean time lay blocks before us,
It is mere presumption.

No marvel then if many times the Lord leaves a man, because he strives not
after that he prays for. It is enough to cause the Lord to curse us, when we
do not avoid the occasions of evil; he that will not fall into the pit, let
him not come near the brinke of it; he that will not be snared by evil, let
him shun, and avoid all the occasions of evil.

2. If we be weak of our selves and cannot prevern the occasions of evil,
yet be careful to seek all such means as may be succourable and holpefull
to us; if we cannot help out, these will surprise us. Let us seek the means
to succor us in our need: the sick man that craves succor of the Lord must
use the means the Lord has appointed; happily thou find temptations
pressing on in thy calling, thou can not avoid it: the more the occasions
are, the more seek for means that may fortify thee; he that will be healed
let him seek the Physician; he that is out of the way and would be set in
the right way, let him enquire it out, and not sit still and say, Lord have
mercy upon me, but seek.

It was that which Joshua did; Jos. 7.
he called, yet the Lord did not help him, but said, Why do thou so? Israel
has sinned, look out the execrable thing. Israel has sinned, look to that;
It is in vain to pray that the enemy may not prevail, if we labor not to
root him out of the Camp; do that thoroughly, and then the overthrow of thine
enemies will be easy to thee.

3. When we have found the means, labor to be content to be ordered by all
the means and helps that God has been pleased to ordain for our good. It is
a madness to crave as Balaam, Oh that I might dye, etc. and yet see the way,
and will not walk in it. Ier. 42. They said to the Prophet, enquire at the
word of the Lord, and what ever he commands we will do; but when they heard
and knew it, they would not obey the same.

In vain it is to crave the pardon of sin, when we look not to the promise;
to desire sin to be subdued, and yet cannot abide the means that should do
it. When a man says, I will not be counseled, but will have my proud heart
and will walk in mine own ways, how can such a one say, deliver me from this
proud heart, when he will not let counsel take place? when a man is in horror
of heart, when conscience flies in his face, it is in vain to whine then, and
yet wilt not thou be ruled by the word of God, but do as vain as ever, as
loose as ever, as idle as ever: thou beggest one thing and do practice
another thing, and so long let us never put up this petition.

4. We must rely on the Lord for a blessing on all, a success in all, so use
the means as if there were no promise to help and yet so depend upon God for
all, as if the means could do nothing, observe all thy occasions, and say
counsel and advice is good, but the Lord must set them on; man lives not by
bread only, but by the blessing of God in the means; go to the spirit of the
Lord, and see there a greater power then in all means; 2 Kings 2.
If thou can see me taken up, then shall thou have my spirit doubled upon
thee. If thou see the God that takes me up, then he will give thee his
Spirit; look to God above all means, and he that is thus disposed, that man
prays aright to be delivered.

For thine is the Kingdom.

We have done with the six petitions, three concerning God his name, Kingdom,
will, three concerning our selves, concerning things of this life, of a better,
Justification, Sanctification: we come now to the conclusion, and in it
consider two things.

1. The thanksgiving. 2. The conclusion of faith in the word Amen.
In the thanksgiving is included both a reason of the petition, as also a form
of thanksgiving, as who should say, we do not presume we can do any thing,
but that thou would work in us what thou requirest of us, for thine is the
Kingdom. It is not in our power to do what we should or what thou requirest,
but the Kingdom is thine, all comes from thee O Lord, and let all the glory of
all be returned to thee again: do we hallow thy name and pray for thy
Kingdom to come and thy will to be done? why it is thou Lord that must give
the power; we beg all from him, and it is included in the word, for we have no
power to do any thing: so that this is the ground whereby we beg all from
him, and return all to him.

Q. What is here meant by Kingdom?

A. 1. The word Kingdom discovers all the right and authority of God to give
all things we want: thou Lord have the disposing of all things we have, no
authority or propriety that is in us, thine is the Kingdom, thou have all
power to do what thou will. The master does what he will in his family, and
the King rules in his realm, so does the Lord rule in the heart of his.

2. The Lord has not only authority to do what he will, but full and
abundant sufficiency to dispose of all according to his will and pleasure,
Kings may want power to do what they would, and the sons of Zerviah may be
too strong for David; but as the Lord has title to al, so his arm is large
enough, his ability sufficient enough to do all; so that the soul says, to
do all, thou have right to al, and sufficiency to do all. There is much
infirmity in us, but none at all in thee.

And the Glory.

The glory of a thing we know appears in two things.

1. In the excellency of it. 2. In the beauty and splendor of its excellency:
this sets forth the glory of things, as who should say, if any beauty,
excellency or glory be in the creature, it is thine O Lord, for thine is the
Kingdom, the power, and the glory.
Thine.

Q. What does this word (thine) imply?

A. It implies three particulars.

1. That all authority, sufficiency and excellency is first in God, all is his
possession and propriety; any thing we have or enjoy, is but what we have of
him, it is but a glimpse and reflection of the glory of God, it is all first in
God, and he leases it out: God is the root of all our being and wel-being. 2.
As all power and sufficie^cie is in him originally, so all comes from him;
whatsoever is in the creature comes from God, all ^re but tenants and Les^ees
of that they have from the Lord, who is the great possessor of heaven and
earth. 3. It implies that we should acknowledge all belonging to him, give
every man his due, whose is this honor and power; the Lords, let him have it
then, and this is to put off all ability, and sufficiency from our selves, and
to acknowledge all to come from him: As though the soul should say; Is there
any thing in me Lord, it is because thou give it. Thou give us hearts to
pray, and it is thou that hear us when we pray. It is all free mercy, all
abilities are from thee; therefore, Lord take all the glory, for all is thine;
Thus the soul disclaimes it self.
For ever and ever, etc.

That is, ever lasting power is in thee, which differs from all other power,
all man's power is from God, but the kingdom of God, his power, and glory, is
for ever and ever; We cannot pray always, our abilities fayl, and our hearts
faint, but thy power endures for ever: the good things of this life, meat,
drink, cloth, etc. sometimes are gone, but yet thy power endures, for ever to
succor us. When our abilities fail, yet there is eternal power in thee to
renew them.

Amen.

The word Amen, implies three things.

1. The term of asseveration, and it discovers the truth of a thing. 2. A
wish, Oh (says the soul) that it might be! 3. The voice of a confident faith.
It is so, it is done Lord. All these three are employed, but this last here
mainely intended. These things we have prayed for, believing according to thy
will that they are verily done. As also there is a secret looking after the
Petition when it is put up, the soul pursues his prayers; now says the soul,
they speed; now the Lord grants my Petitions. As a man that shoots an arrow, he
looks after it; So the soul says, Oh that the Lord would speed it. So when
the petitions are sent to Heaven the heart follows the blow, and looks after
them; it sends his Amen, Oh that it might be so! and then faith says, It is
done undoubtedly, as true as the Lord is faithful, it must needs be done. The
word [Amen] strikes the match through. The soul wishes, Oh that it might be
done! says Faith, it is done already. Prayer is as the key; when a man wants
provision, he goes to the treasury and fetches it; So Prayer fetches comfort,
peace and assurance; etc. and Amen turns the key. It is mine says the soul,
Prayer is as a golden Key.
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF RELIGION.

BY THO: HOOKER.

LONDON, Printed for R. DAWLMAN. 1645.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Principles of Religion.
The first Principle, There is one God, Creator and Governor of all things,
distinguished into three Persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
Here we must consider three things: 1. That there is a God. 2. His Works. 3.
That he is distinct.


Quest. WHat is the reason that there is a God?

Answ. 1. Because in every thing there is a first cause, (that is,
infiniteness and power) which cannot not be attributed to any creature. 2. In
regard that all things were made for man, man for an end, which end must needs
be God.


Q. But can we conceive of God as he is?

A. No, because of the great distance between him and us; for when a man
looks upon the Sun, he cannot possibly endure it, because that is so
glorious, and his eyes so feeble.

Q. How may we conceive of God?

Ans. 1. Cast down thy self before him, confessing thy unfitness to draw
nigh him. 2. Look how he is set forth in his Word, as a gracious, glorious,
eternal being, without any mixture of infirmity or disability. Man has with
power, weakness; with mercy, cruelty; God has not so. 3. Go into the world,
and view the height of its glory, and then conclude, If the Creature be thus
excellent, what must the Creator be?


Q. What is God?

A. A Spirit that has life and being of himself.

Q. What is a Spirit?

A. It is the finest and subtilest subsistence that can be.

Q. Why had God rather be a Spirit then a Creature?

Ans. 1. Because that is the most pure and excellent essence. 2. There is a
great difference between God and us; we have a fleshly part, he is all
spiritual; we borrow our being, but God has life of himself, and gives being
to every thing. 3. That he is an infinite and Almighty God, the sole Creator
and Governor of all things.


Q. What is it to create?

A. To make something of nothing.

Q. Wherein do Man's works, and Gods differ?

Ans. 1. Man must have something to work upon, God needs not any thing; a
word of his mouth is sufficient. 2. Man is subject to be weary, but GOD cannot.


Q. What is meant by Government?

A. A seasonable succouring and guiding of the Creature. Such is the weakness
of poor mortals, that as they were first made of nothing, so unless God
upholds them, they will soon resolve to their first nothingnesse.

Q. What are the particulars of this Government?

A. Two: First, Sustentation, Secondly, Direction.

Q. What is Sustentation?

A. The good providence of God, whereby he protects and provides for his people.

Q. What is Direction?

H. A power of the Lord, whereby he orders every thing to its right end.

Q. How does he direct the creature to its end?

Ans. 1. God gives them direction whereby to work, and puts forth their ability
into action.

Q. What may we learn from hence?

Ans. 1. Comfort to the Saints, seeing God is so great a Creator, and powerful
a Governor; there is no people under heaven (that worship any other God) are
so blessed as they are: Among the Gods there is none like unto thee O Lord,
neither are there any works like unto thy works. Psalm. 86.8. 2. This should
teach us to mind Gods dealing with us in every passage of our lives, and to
stand in awe of his Majesty.


Q. How is God distinguished?

A. Into three Persons.

Q. What is meant by a Person?

A. A Person is a manner of Divine being.

Q. Why do you say a being?

A. Because the Deity and the Person is all one.

Q. Why do you say a manner?

A. Because there be diverse turnings, that the Godhead puts upon it self.

Q. How?

A. The Godhead is full of wisdom and understanding: Now the Fathers
understanding casts it back again upon himself; for if he had understanding
before the world; then there must needs be somewhat to be understood: but there
was none but himself, therefore he casts it back upon himself.

2. This being understood is the Son, the wisdom of the Father, and the third
Person being willed is the Spirit, who not withstanding are all one. As long as
a man teaches, he is a Master; but when he is taught, he is a Scholar:
practice comes from teaching; after a man is taught he becomes a practicioner:
here now be diverse behaviors, yet all but one man. As a Sun beam falling upon
a wall, casts back its heat; so does the Spirit, proceeding from the Father and
the Son.

Quest. What is that which is common to all the Persons?

A. The Godhead is common to them all; and whatever is proper to the Godhead,
is proper to all the rest; with this difference, in regard of the particular
relation that every one of them has; the Fathers property being to beget, the
Son to be begotten, and the Spirit to proceed: none of them exceeding the other
in time, but in order only.

The second Principle: Man wholly corrupted by Adams fall, became a slave of
Satan, and heir of Damnation.
Quest. HOw must we conceive of Adams fall?

A. Look into the height of happiness he once enjoyed, and the depth of misery
his sin produced.

Q. Were any else in this estate?

A. No.

Q. How then came all creatures to have their being?

A. The stamps of Gods Attributes were no farther upon them, then to put
virtues into every one.

Q. Where may we conceive this virtue consists?

A. In the soul and body of man.

Q. How in his souls?

Answ. 1. In the understanding, Adam by that was full of knowledge and capable
of Gods will. Secondly, in the will consisting in holiness and righteousness,
God putting an aptness into Adam to love him above all, and his Neighbor as
himself.

Q. How is Gods Image seen in the affections of men?

A. In regard of that sweet Harmony and agreement which the affection has with
the will.

Quest. How is Gods Image seens in the parts of the body?

Answ. When they are subject to the reasonable will and understanding in such
things as God commands.

Quest. What is the Covenant God made with Adam?

Ans. That which was of works, was, Do this and live; by living is meant a
promise which God made unto Adam, that if he kept Gods Commandments he would
preserve him for ever.

Quest. Had only Adam this?

Answ. It reaches not to him only, but to the good of all his posterity.

Q. What are the signs of this Covenant?

A. 1. The Tree of life, which was a sign and seal whereby God assured Adam,
as sure as he saw the Tree, if he obeyed his command, he should live for ever.
2. The tree of knowledge which persuaded him, that if he obeyed God, he should
certainly know good and evil.


Qu. Did Adam fall from this estate?

A. Yes, by the allurement of Satan in 3. respects: 1. By propounding his
temptations unto him. 2. In pursuing of him. 3. In obtaining his desire.


Q. How by propounding?

A. He came to Eve, changing himself into a Serpent; Satan being now fallen
from God, grudged the happy estate that Adam was in, and thought much that he
should not be in the same condition with himself, whereupon he tempted him.

Q. What was Eves answer?

A. Of any tree of the Garden we may cate, but not of this, lest peradventure
we dye; now he took advantage of this, when she began to doubt of Gods
providence.

Q. How else did they fall?

A. By their own free will attending to, and parlying with Satan, in two
respects: 1. In a light esteem of Gods command. 2. In their delusion, 1.
Saying the fruit was good, when God said the contrary: 2. Harkening to Satan,
who told them it would be the cause of their good, and not evil, when as God
told them when they eat thereof they should dye the death.



Q. What is the third cause of their fall?

A. The holy and blessed Law of God may after a measure be said to have some
influence therein.

Q. What came to Adam after this?

A. He was made guilty and liable unto the Law and Curse.

Q. What follows upon this guiltiness?

A. Punishment.

Q. what was that?

A. Original and actual sin.

Q. What is original sin?

A. A natural depravation of the whole man.

Q. What is actual sin?

A. A transgression of the Law in the least particular.

Q. Why did God punish them so severely?

Ans. 1. Because they sinned against an extraordinary Majesty, loving Satan
more then God. 2. Because they broke all the Commandments at once, which were
included in these two, Love the Lord with all thy heart, and thy Neighbor as
thy self.


Q. Did Adam this only to himself?

A. No, but to his posterity.

Q. How comes it so?

A. We did then what ever he did, for we were in his loins, it was equal
with God to appoint it so, because that if he had done well we should have been
saved; now consequently it must follow, that because he sinned, we must also be
punished.

Q. How did Adams sin become ours?

A. By imputation.

Q. What is imputation?

A. That whereby the fault of one man is put upon another.

Q. How came we to have original sin?

A. By propagation in regard that Adam sent his nature into us, and we become
like him.

The third Principle. Concerning redemption by Christ.
Quest. WAs our Redemption necessary?

A. Yes, because God determined an end of his Creation, now man because fallen,
if he should be destroyed, the end would be frustrate. Secondly, God had
ordained the glorification of his mercy in man; now had there been no
Redemption, where would the glory of his mercy appear? Thirdly, the Elect
fallen without this could have had no comfort.

Q. Who is this Redeemer?

A. Jesus Christ the second Person in the Trinity, he only can subdue our
enemies, and satisfy his Fathers wrath.

Q. Wherefore was Christ the fittest person in the Trinity?

Ans. 1. Because he could most prevail with God, being his Son. Secondly, God
being he who was fully offended, it was not justice that he should pay himself.

Q. Why did Christ take the nature of man upon him?

A. 1. Because it was man that sinned. Secondly, there must be a suffering as
well as a satisfaction.

Q. Did Christ take upon him the person or nature of man?

A. The nature only, for else there should have been two persons, which cannot
be.

Q. How did Christ take man's nature upon him?

A. The Holy Ghost sanctified it, and then Christ took the same.

Q. What are those things observable in this nature?

A. His union, and the manner of his conception.

Q. How is his union?

A. Inseparable, for our nature could not be separated from him; the eternal
Son of God so took the nature of man, that when it met with him, it was not
changed, but remained the same for ever.

Q. How was Christ conceived?

A. By the Holy Ghost, who at this time, and in this thing imitated the nature
of man.

Q. Of whom was Christ conceived?

A. Of the Virgin Mary.

Q. Why had not Christ a Father as well as a Mother?

A. Then had he been liable to sin, which was principally imputed to man.

Q. How did Christ suffer?

A. By his Death, which was twofold, corporal and spiritual; corporal,
whereby his body was separated from his soul; and spiritual, whereby he was
separated from God.

Q. What things are to be observed in the death of the soul?

Ans. 1. The wrath of God and his anger against a man, of which Christ tasted:
Secondly, the consequences which are desperation and continual punishments,
from which Christ was most free.

The fourth Principle. A sinner of an humble and contrite spirit apprehends
Christ by faith, and so is justified and sanctified.
Here are two things; 1. A preparation. 2. The Benefit.


Quest. WHat is contrition?

A. When a sinner is brought to such a sight of sin, that being enforced to
feel the burden thereof, he comes to be sequestered from it.

Q. How many things are here considerable?

A. Three: 1. A sinner must be brought to a sight of his sin. 2. He must be
enforced to feel it. 3. He must come to be sequestered from it.


Q. Why do you say, Brought to a sight of his sin?

A. Because of himself he neither will nor can see his sin.

Q. What do you mean by sight?

A. A clear and convicting sight of sin.

Q. What is it to have clear sight of sin.

A. When a man sees sin as it is in its colors.

Q. What is it to see sin convictingly?

A. When a sinner is persuaded in his conscience that that sin which the
Minister and the Word of God speaks of, is his own sin.

Q. What is meant by sin?

A. In sin there are two branches, the evil of it, and the punishment of it.

Q. Which is worse of these two?

A. The evil of sin, for 1. that which deprives a man of the chiefest good,
must needs be the greatest evil, but sin deprives the soul of God the
chiefest good. 2. We see Christ could suffer punishment, but not be sinful. 3.
And God is often the Author of punishment, but not of sin.


Q. What is the second thing in the definition?

Answ. He is enforced to feel it, men would be flying off from the
meditation of this sin.

Q. How may a man feel his sin as he should do?

Ans. By meditation and application.

Q. How by meditation?

Answ. 1. By considering what a GOD he has offended, how great mercy abused,
and justice provoked, not only in time of ignorance, but since we knew him:
Secondly, A serious meditation of the vile and filthy nature of sin.

Q. How does the vileness of sin appear?

A. It separates us from Gods presence, and procures eternal misery.

Q. How by application?

Answ. 1. By convincing the heart of its loathsome conditon. 2. By dogging the
heart when there is any occasion of sin, and still telling it of Gods
judgment.


Q. Can any man of himself do this?

A. No, it must be Gods humbling hand.

Q. What do you mean by sequestered?

Ans. When a man's hearts desire and hungring, is to get out of sin, though
he cannot, saying with himself, there is no reason why I should be thus ruled
by base lusts.

Q. What is humiliation?

Answ. When the heart of a poor sinner comes to despair of all hope and
help, either in himself or any creature, and is contented to be at Gods
disposing.

Q. How many things are to be considered in this definition?

Answ. He despaireth of all hope in himself, or in the creatures, and is
content to be at Gods disposing.

Q. When does a man come to this despair?

A. When he seeks to the world for succor, and finds none.

Q. When is a man content to be at Gods dispose?

A. When he acknowledges he has no good in himself, and confesses (if at any
time God afflict him) that it is just with God so to do, resolving what ever
trouble lies upon him, still to trust and call upon God. Contrition and
humiliation are two graces which must be wrought in the soul before faith can
enter in.

1. Because every natural man has sin to be his God, now there cannot be
two Gods in any man's heart. 2. Because by faith we go unto Christ to receive
good at his hands; now one cannot go to Christ before he go out of himself;
before we can get the pearl, we must sell all that we have; now Christ is the
pearl; we must sell all our corruptions to enjoy him.
Q. What is faith?

A. A resting upon God, grounded upon knowledge, and assurance that God is my
God in Christ.

Q. How many things are included in this knowledge?

A. A sight of sin, and a sense of it, which will produce three things: 1. A
prizing and seeking for mercy. 2. No content in any thing, till we have
obtained mercy. 3. The testimony of Gods Spirit, which assures Gods children
their sins are pardoned.


Q. What is meant by resting upon God?

A. It is discovered by two particulars: 1. Casting our selves upon the
Promise. 2. A persuasion that they shall be fulfilled to us.


Q. What is lustification?

A. When a believing sinner is accounted just in Gods sight, through Christ,
according to the Law.

Q. Why say you accounted?

A. Because Justification puts nothing into us, nor finds nothing in us.

Q. Does God justify wicked men as they are in themselves?

A. God provided another to be their surety, for whose sake he accepts them.

Q. Can one man's wisdom, understanding and holiness be accounted to another?

A. Yes, if one man's offense be imputed to another, then may one man's
righteousness; but Adams sin was imputed to us, Romans 5. therefore Christ's
Righteousness may be accounted ours. If the Law be, that the surety may be
punished for the debt as well as the debtor, then may the sureties satisfaction
be accounted to the debtor, both because the surety and the debtor took upon
them the same thing, and subjected themselves to the same condition.

Q. What do we learn out of these words, according to the Law?

A. No man can be just, except he be in some measure answerable to the rule of
justice.

Q. What did the Law require?

A. Two things: 1. Dying for sin. 2. Doing that we may live.


Q. Was our sin made Christ^ by commission?

A. No, only by imputation, for when Christ dyed to save us, did we dye also?
no, only his death was imputed to us.

Q. What does Christ receive from us?

A. Guilt and punishment.

Q. What do we receive from Christ?

A. His merits and obedience.

Q. Does faith it self justify a man?

A. We are not justified by faith, for its but an instrument whereby we lay
hold upon Christ, and so are justified.

Q. Must justification be joined to sanctification?

A. Yes, for justification goes, before, and sanctification follows after.

Q. Wherein lies the difference?

A. lustification puts nothing into a man, nor finds any thing in a man:
Sanctification puts a new frame of he art into us.

Q. But does not God put grace into a justified sinner?

A. Yes, but he does it by sanctification, not by justification. We receive
justification all at once, and that neither admits of increase, or decrease,
but holiness is usually increased, and decreaseth many times.

Q. What is sanctification?

A. Its the restoring of a justified man into the image of God wherein he was
created: Not a making new faculties in the soul, but putting them into right
order; as when a clock falls in pieces (the wheels being not broken) the clock
has not new wheels set into it, but they are new made again.

Q. How many things be there in sanctification?

A. Two: Mortification and Vivification.

Q. What is mortification?

A. The first part of sanctification whereby sin is killed in us by the power
of Christ's death applied unto us.

Q. Can sin be wholly subdued in a man?

A. No, but it may be lessened and filed away.

Q. Wherein lies the difference between sin in a wicked, and a godly man?

A. There is the nearest union that may be, between sin, and the soul of a
wicked man: Sin bears greatest rule here, and the soul yields greatest
subjection unto it: He has a secret resolution to sin in spite of God and
his Ordinances.

But in a godly man the power of sin is loosened, and the union broken, sin
is not in him as a King, though it may be as a Tyrant,

Q. Can mortification and vivification be severed?

A. No, where God bestows Mortification, there he likewise bestows
vivification.

Q. Which goes first?

A. Mortification, for before we can receive Christ, we must make room for him
by casting out all wickedness.

Q. What is meant by this word vivification?

A. It is that part of sanctification whereby we are quickened to newness of
life by Christ his Resurrection applied unto us.

Q. How is this wrought by Christ's Resurrection?

A. In sin we must conceive there is, 1. The guilt. 2. The punishment. 3.
The power of it; the guilt and punishment Christ by his Death removed.


Q. But how did he take away the power of them?

A. We having sinned, Christ dyed, and rose again for us, whereas sin and Satan
would have kept him in still if they could, but he came out by force.

The fifth Principle: Faith comes by hearing, and is strengthened by the Word
and Prayer.
Means to get and increase Faith.
Quest. How may we get faith?

Answ. By the hearing of the Word preached.

Q. Why is Faith wrought by the Word?

A. Because God has promised a special blessing thereunto, and the holy
Spirit accompanies the same for this purpose.

Q. Why by the Word preached?

A. Because the Word preached does evidently reveal truths to the soul, and
works more effectually upon a man's heart.

Q. How is Faith increased?

A. By the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. The Word adds fuel unto Faith,
provoking a man to come to Christ, by showing 1. the need we have of him, by
reason of our daily wants and infirmities: 2. The all sufficiency of Christ to
supply us: 3. And his willingness to receive all comers.


Q. When is Faith strong?

Ans. 1. When it grasps as it were a whole handful of Christ; a little child
can grasp but a little of any thing. 2. When it holds firmly that it catches
hold upon.


Q. How do the Sacraments strengthen says?

A. 1. They present Christ nearly and visibly to the soul. 2. They show
Christ's merits and obedience, inflaming our hearts with love to him.


Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a going out of our selves to God, craving things answerable to his
will.

Q. How a going to God?

A. Not a bodily going, but the mind, affection, and understanding, stirting up
themselves to present their suit to him.

Q. Can a wicked man pray?

A. No, 1. Because true Prayer is from the Spirit, and a sanctified heart. 2.
These men oppose what they beg for.


Q. How many parts be there in Prayer?

A. Two: Petition, which is a craving of that we want; and Thanksgiving, which
is a giving God thanks for that we have.

Q. What is the pattern of Prayer?

A. The Lords Prayer, which Christ gave to his Disciples.

Q. Into how many parts is it divided?

A. Into three: 1. A Preface, 2. Six Petitions, 3. A Thanksgiving.


Q. What do you mean by Father?

A. The first Person in the Trinity, who is the fountain from whence all we
have flows.

Q. How is God said to be a Father?

Ans. 1. In regard of Christ, 2. In regard of us.


Q. How is God the Father of Christ?

Ans. 1. By natural generation: 2. By personal union.


Q. How is God a Father in regard of us?

Ans. 1. In regard of Creation, so the Angels are sons of God: 2. In regard of
Adoption, which is the taking one in stead of a child.


Q. How may this word Father be a preparative to Prayer?

Ans. 1. If God be a Father, then he is bountiful, and we may receive what
ever we ask. 2. If God be a Father, he is merciful, ready to pardon all our
sins. 3. He will take in good part any service done in truth of heart, though
never so small.


Q. Why do we say Our Father?

A. Our betokens a kind of propriety and interest; As we say, This is our
house, we have a special interest therein: So here it shows a special
interest that Gods people have in him.

2. Community of God to all his servants, as the light is common to all; none
can say it is My Sun.

3. The fellow-feelingnesse that the godly have of one another misery.

Q. What preparations are there in this Word to Prayer?

A. It causes Reverence; A child comes reverently to his Father, so must we.

2. It teaches us confidence in God, because he is our Father.

And 3. cheerfulness in coming to him, as a child unto his Father.

Q. Is God only in heaven?

A. No, he fills every place.

Q. Why is God said to be in heaven?

Answ. 1. That we may take notice of his power; things above have advantage of
things below. 2. He is an holy God, for he is in heaven, where no unclean
thing is.


Q. What is the scope of the first Petition?

A. That Gods name might be honored of all his creatures.

Q. What is meant by name?

A. That whereby God is made known.

Q. How is God made known to us?

Ans. 1. By his titles and Attributes, as when God is said to be holy,
gracious, etc. 2. By his Word: and 3. by his works, especially in the works of
grace on the hearts of his children;
there is Gods name written as it were in great letters, as the Apostle Peter
says, They express the graces of him that has called them; so that when a
man looks upon a child of God, he may say, Surely God is an holy God, because
his children are so.

Q. When do we honor Gods name?

A. When Gods name is to us as an holy thing; when we see the worth of it, and
manifest it to others.

Q. What is the scope of the second Petition?

A. That God may rule over all, especially over his Church.

Q. Why is it added to the former?

A. Because when God bears rule, then his name is honored.

Q. What does this word Kingdom signify?

A. That rule which he exercises over his servants.

Q. How manifold is this Kingdom?

A. Twofold; the Kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of glory.

Q. How does God rule in the Kingdom of grace?

A. By his Spirit in the Word he rules the hearts of his servants, and aweth
the hearts of hypocrites.

Q. How does God rule in the Kingdom of glory?

A. Immediately by himself, shining into their hearts, and filling them with
his grace.

Q. What do we mean by Thy Kingdom come?

Ans. 1. We desire that God would send his Gospel to such places, Nations, and
Countries, as have not had it: 2. That God would spread and enlarge his Gospel
where it is: 3. That God would confirm and stablish his Gospel, and cause it to
have better entertainment where it is spread.


Q. What is the scope of the third Petition?

A. That all humble subjection may be yielded unto God.

Q. Why is this added unto the former?

A. Because then Gods Kingdom does most of all come, when his will is done.

Q. What is Gods will?

A. Gods good pleasure touching the performance or bringing to pass of any
thing.

Q. What is Gods secret will?

A. That which God reserveth to himself in his own counsel.

Q. What is Gods revealed will?

A. That which he has made known unto us in his Word.

Q. How must we be like the Angels in obedience?

Ans. 1. In readiness; they are they are said to have wings. 2. In
faithfulness; they obey God in every thing: so must we. 3. Their obedience is
constant, so should ours. Nothing should hinder our speedy and cheerful
obedience.


Q. What is the scope of the fourth Petition?

A. We desire a comfortable supply of all things concerning this life.

Q. Why is this put first?

A. A man must have a being, before a well-being; nature before grace.

Q. Why is bread put for all?

Ans. 1. Because this is most necessary for subsistence; All our endeavors ay
me at this. 2. We desire God would give us ability to use the means to attain
it. 3. That we may have a comfortable use thereof, with a blessing attending it


Q. What do you mean by give?

A. First, that God would give us what we want.

Secondly, to continue and preserve still what we have.

Thirdly, that God would give us an heart to make a right use thereof.

Q. Why do you say us?

Ans. Because we must have a fellow-feeling of the necessities of others, we
desire God to give us, that we may help them.

Q. Why do you say our daily bread?

A. We desire here a right and title to these outward things: This title is
twofold; 1. Divine, in regard of God: 2. Politic, in regard of men.


Q. Why do you say this day?

A. First, it shows that we must take care for the time present. Secondly,
we desire a moderation of these outward things. Thirdly, we must daily pray
and depend upon God for our bread.

Q. What rules may we here learn for the ordering of our lives in the desire
of outward things?

Ans. 1. We must go to God for every mercy, and acknowledge we receive all
from him. 2. We must only look to the time present, not caring for the
morrow.


Q. What is the scope of the fifth Petition?

A. Justification, or the forgiveness of sin.

Q. What is meant by debts?

A. Sins.

Q. Why is sin called a debt?

A. Because it makes us liable to Gods judgments.

Q. Can God forgive our sins without satisfaction?

A. No, because its against his justice.

Q. How then is this a mercy that God does forgive us our sins?

A. Gods mercy appears in that he follows the Law against our surety, so that
he is made guilty and liable to punishment, and we cleared. Is it not a great
mercy, that our sins may be removed from us, and Christ's righteousness
imputed unto us?

Q. How far must a man forgive another?

A. In the offense we must consider three things: 1. The breach of the Law. 2.
The wrong done to us. 3. The inflicting vengeance for it.


Q. How far may a man forgive the sin as a breach of the Law?

A. Only thus far he must desire that God would not lay it to their charge;
so Christ prayed, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Q. Must a man always forgive his enemy the wrongs and punishment done?

A. No, when Gods glory and Religion is disgraced thereby, and it may be for
our brothers good.

Q. Does God forgive us, because we forgive others?

A. No, He forgives us before we can forgive others on a right ground. 1.
Because all the mercy we have, we receive from him. 2. All we have is but a
drop in comparison of that Ocean which is in God. 3. Our mercy is mixed with
cruelty and many oppositions, but God is all compassion.


Q. What is the scope of the sixth Petition?

A. Sanctification.

Q. What does temptation properly signify?

A. A proving of grace, so God tempted Abraham, and proved his love: Here by
temptation is meant a solicitation to commit evil.

Q. Why not tentation of trial?

A. Because we ought rather to pray against this then against that.

Q. What do you mean by deliver?

Ans. 1. That God would give us a foresight of sin. 2. That God would give
us power, that we be not thereby overtaken. 3 That God would recover us, being
fallen, and fortify us against sin for time to come.


Q. What do you mean by lead?

Ans. 1. That God would let us have no occasion of evil.

Secondly, if occasions be offered, that he would so assist, and strengthen,
that they prevail not against us.

Q. How has God a hand in the sins of men?

A. Whatsoever may be said in the Law and Word of God, may be said of God; now
the Law may be said to have an hand in the sins of men: As when counsel and
admonition comes, the heart swells immediately; as when a thing is put into a
channel, or any other place, the water increases hugely, not because there is
any water put into it, but by opposition.

Q. What do you mean by evil?

A. There is no kind of evil worse then the evil of sin and punishment:
here is specially meant the evil of sin, and also punishment, so far as it
may hinder us in the ways of godliness.

Q. Why do you say deliver us?

A. Here we desire that God would provide means for others good, and make us
instruments to deliver them. 1 In watching over their conversation. 2 In
telling them of that which is amiss. 3 To follow it, and never leave till we
have convinced them of it.


Q. What is meant by Kingdom?

A. The right ruling over his servants. By power is meant, an ability and
sufficiency to govern.

And by Glory, is meant, 1 The worship of God: 2 The shining of Gods glory.


Q. Why do you say Thy?

A. All this is in God: Secondly, all that men have in the world is from God,
therefore they must render all to his glory.

Q. What is Amen?

A. The voice and word of faith.

Q. What is here employed?

A. Two things: 1 An earnest desire of what we beg; as a man when his friend
goes beyond sea, faith, The Lord be with you. 2 A repose of our selves upon
God, that he would grant our requests, who has promised, whatever we ask in
Christ's Name, we shall have it.


The sixth Principle: All men shall rise with their bodies to judgment, the
godly shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven, but reprobates and unbeleevers
shall be cast into hell fire with the Devil and his angels.
Qu WHat are we to observe out of this Principle?

A. Two things; 1. The judgment. 2. The reward of every man: In the judgment
we must observe two things: First, the preparation to this judgment, that is
the resurrection. 2. The judgment it self.


Q. What is resurrection?

A. It is the re-uniting and knitting the soul and body together, that were
separated by death.

Q. Why is it necessary that there must be a resurrection?

A. There are two grounds; one is taken from the justice, another from the
mercy of God. Wicked men they have the happiness of this life, and therefore
they must have misery in the life to come, else God were not just.

Again, the godly are here in misery, and they that should be most respected,
have the worst entertainment, therefore they must have a happiness in heaven.
So the Author to the Heb. says, God is just that he should not forget their
labor of love. And the Apostle to the Thessal. It is a righteous thing to
render peace to you: it were unjust if they did not see some good days.
Abraham tells Dives, Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy
pleasure, and Lazarus pains; therefore now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. It was the speech of Master Greenham, that wicked men have some good
in them, therefore God gives them outward things, but they have an infinite
evil, therefore they must perish eternally.

Secondly, Gods mercy has promised heaven to his servants, therefore there
must be a Resurrection; heaven is not here. There be two sorts of men that
shall be judged: First, those that dye; Secondly, those that live when Christ
shall come.

Q. How do the godly rise again?

A. By Christ's Resurrection, because Christ was dead, and they are his members;
Christ being their Surety: and whatsoever he does, he does it not for himself,
but for them.

Q. How shall it be with the godly when Christ shall come?

A. They shall be freed from all sin and weakness of body.

Q. Shall the same bodies arise?

A. Yea the same; God shall gather together all the elect: He that is able to
make all things of nothing, is able to raise men, and gather them out of the
dust; for it is lesser to repair a thing of the matter that it is made of,
then to make a thing of nothing.

Q. But is there no change in regard of substance?

A. Only this: The qualities and conditions of the body shall be altered, the
body shall be incorruptible, immortal, whereas here we are subject to death
and diseases.

Secondly, the body shall be spiritual; that is, there shall be no dependence
upon any outward comforts. Here we must use meat and drink for preservation of
our lives; but there shall be no need of them. The Sadduces told Christ, Such
an one had seven brethren, and they all married one woman one after another;
now say they, In the Resurrection whose shall this wife be? and Christ said to
them, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures; for in heaven they neither eat nor
drink, marry, nor give in marriage, but are as the Angels; they need no meat
nor apparel: So the godly shall be there.

3. All imperfections and weaknesses shall then be taken away; If a man dies
sick, he shall be whole when he rises again; If a man be lame, or if he were
born blind, or if one dyed being a child, all these shall be taken away then.

Object. But it seems it shall not be the same body; for if a man shall have
every limb, and be perfect in every part, how can these things stand together?

Ans. There is nothing added to the substance of the body, but only changed and
increased; it is in the nature of many things to increase, when as nothing is
added unto them: As may be observed in an Onyon, take a great Onyon, and hang
it up in the house, and it will grow bigger and bigger; what is the cause of
it? not because any thing is added, but because it speads it self further; so
then there shall be no new body, but the same substance enlarged and increased.

Q. But how comes it to pass that there shall be a change?

A. By the immediate and immutuable assistance of Gods upholding and supporting
the body.

Q. What change shall there be of the soul?

A. The wicked shall be changed from evil to worse, there is sin in the^ here,
but there is some restraining grace, either fear or profit prevails with them
now, and keeps them from sin, but there shall be no restraining grace at all,
but al sin then. 2. There Gods wrath shall be powered in a fuller measure then
now.

1. But the godly souls shall be freed from all sin and corruption that is
now in them. 2. They shall have eternal life, and possess God himself as it
were fully.

Use. How should this stir us up to thirst after the day of our resurrection!
here we have sin and cannot do good, but there all sin shall be taken away.

It should comfort Gods servants, though it fare ill with them in this life,
yet they shall be freed from all afflictions and miseries one day.

Paul says, If a Christians hope were in this life only, he were of all men
most miserable; for who are pursued, who are hated more then they?

Now come we to speak of the last judgment, wherein observe; 1. There must be
a day of judgment. 2. The persons that must come to judgment. 3. The manner of
judgment. 4. Who shall proceed therein.


1. It is called the day of judgment, as the time of the Gospel is the day of
salvation, and the time of affliction the day of visitation: So here the
particular time God has appointed to judge all men, is called the day of
judgment; It is called also the last day, because it shall be the last, and
all others prepare to this; It is also called the General judgment, then all
shall be judge, even those that judge others here.

Q. Why is it necessary there must be a judgment? it seems there need not be a
judgment, for the godly are now acquitted, and wicked men are condemned
already in their own consciences, that fly in their faces; why therefore must
there be a judgment?

A. God does it for these two reasons; 1. That his glory might he more
manifest, even the glory of his justice; for what a great glory is it, which
all shall confess, even the devils and damned, that God is just in all his
proceedings against them? 2. That Christ's glory might be made manifest; here he
was judged, but then he shall be Judge.


Q. When shall the day of judgment come? what shall be the time of it?

A. For the particular time no man knows; only we must conceive thus much, 1.
That Antichrist must be destroyed before. 2. The Jews must embrace the truth,
and both Jews and Gentiles must profess the truth;
after this there must be an universal declining; as Christ says, As it was
in the days of Noah, so now at Christ's coming there shall be a wonderful and
fearful declining, then it will be time for God to come.

Q. What use may we make of this?

A. It is a ground of patience to the godly, let the wicked judge as they will,
there will be another judgment, says Paul, I pass not to be judged of you:
So we when we are wronged and trod upon should lift up our eyes and call to
mind the last judgment, then our causes shall be heard, and we shall be
righted.

Q. Who must be judged?

A. Every man, high and low, rich or poor, all are liable.

1. God that created every man, and has given them several talents, may
justly call them to an account for the same.

2. God is only wise, knowing how to do it, and able to bring all men to
judgment; how should this awe us from sin, as God says, Rejoice and take thy
pleasure, but remember for all these things thou shall come to judgment.

Q. But for what shall we be called to an account?

A. The Apostle Paul says, for what ever is done in the flesh: Those that
dishonor God, he will punish; and those which honor him, he will recompense.

Q. By what rule must every one be judged?

A. By the Law, not by the Gospel, because all men have the Law given them,
Romans 1.24. the Law is engraven in our hearts, that we may be without excuse;
but every one has not heard the Gospel; many Nations and people have not heard
of Christ, therefore they can make their plea, when God shall say, Why did you
not believe in Christ and the Gospel? Why Lord, say they, we never heard of
Christ. 2. This judgment will be clear and open. When as wicked men shall be
condemned by their works, God can then say, Have you not done thus and thus,
committed these and these sins? Have I not seen you? As Elisha said to his
servant Gehasi, Has not my heart gone with thee? S^ God may say, Did not I see
you do such a thing? Then will hypocrites be made known; Gods justice will much
appear when the ungodly shall see their own ways have ruined them.

Object. If this be so, then no man shall have a reward of glory.

A. There is a difference between justification and glorification, a man must
be justified and sanctified before he can perform any thing which God
accepts. Now justification is by Christ, but glorification by works. There is
a two fold obedience, Legal and Evangelicall, legally no man can obey God,
(that is) in every point we cannot serve him so absolutely and exactly as the
Law requires.

Q. What is the difference between Legal and Evangelicall obedience?

Ans. 1. The Law lays hold on a man, and binds him to perfect and personal
obedience. 2. If a man can obey the Law, he may merit salvation; had Adam but
obeyed the Lord in every point, as the Law required, he might have challenged
heaven, for that says, Do, and live.


But now the Gospel 1. takes away the rigor of the Law; 2. It does not require
exact obedience, but sincerity; the will and endeavor, which is taken for the
deed. 3. A Christian obeys God in his Surety; 4. By way of thankfulness, not
to merit: he that merits must bring something in himself, but we have nothing.


1. This is a ground of exceeding comfort to Gods people; though their
abilities be not great, yet if they are sincere in heart, they may be
comforted. It matters not how the world judges us, we stand not, nor fall to
men, but to God: and therefore David being standered by his malicious enemies,
says, Judge we according to my righteousness; he was standered as an
Hypocrite, yet he desires God that he would look upon him according to the
sincerity of his heart. This comforted Hezekiah upon his deathbed, Remember,
says he, O Lord, how I have walked before thee with an upright heart.

2. It serves for terror to all dissemblers, seeing God will judge them
according to their works, there is no tricks to be used then: Here they labor
to bleare the eyes of men, and to carry fair weather before them, that none
can say black is their eye: But God shall unbowell all, and say, This is the
man who had such cunning devises that men might not take notice of him, that
had secret corners to commit sin in, etc. 3. It should teach us to abound in
holy duties, because we shall be judged by them; set somewhat every day upon
the score, not to labor for profit, but to abound in godliness. It is better
to abound in duty then commodity; for a man shall be rewarded, not for that a
man says, but for that which a man has done in the flesh; labor then to
abound in piety, that so your reward may be great, only look you do it
uprightly, considering God be thy Judge.

O. But it is said, The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment
to the Son.

A. God does put it over to Christ and gives him power to judge the world: As
the King is said to judge when others receive Authority from him to do it.

Q. Why shall Christ judge all men?

A. That Christ's glory might be known; here he was judged, but then he shall
judge, which is a ground of much comfort to Gods servants, seeing Christ that
is their Savior shall be their Judge.

Q. How shall Gods proceedings be?

A. By Books, as John says, Rue. 20.12. I saw the Books opened: there are two
books, the book of Conscience, and the book of Gods Prescience, the Conscience
it is a thousand witnesses, and God is ten thousand; so then there are eleven
thousand witnesses against a man: His conscience will say, Are you a professor,
and will you do thus and thus? And if our conscience accuse us, God is greater
then our conscience; He will set our sins in order before us, and say, Look
here, do you not see your pride and filthiness? God will write our sins in the
palms of our hands, that we may take notice of them, he will discover all that
ever we did, to us. Now come we to the sentence it self.

1. Upon the wicked, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire with the
Devil and his angels: Herein we must consider 2. things, 1. The punishment of
loss. 2. The punishment of sense; the punishment of loss, depart from me;
wicked men must be banished from Gods presence.


Ob. But David says, Ps. 139. If I go into heaven, thou art there; if I go
down into the deep, thou art there; How then are the wicked separated from God?

Ans. They cannot depart from the presence of his anger and power; but they
neither find nor feel the work of any of Gods comfortable Attributes: God is
merciful, but this is nothing to them: He that has not God, cannot have any
rest. Who is it that gives us rest by our sleep, but God in sleep? so who is it
that strengthens us by meat, but God in meat? etc.

But now they wanting God, must needs be miserable withal: They shall be
utterly out of hope to attain happiness and life; there shall be salvation,
but none for them, they have nothing to do with it, and this is the greatest
misery of the damned in hell, that they are separated from the presence of God.

2. The punishment of soul, that is, they must be cast into hell fire, which
is set forth by two things: 1. The worm shall never dye. 2. The fire never
goes out.


1. The worm is the sting of conscience, that is compared to a worm, for as a
worm gnaweth a man continually, so conscience is continually gnawing a man's
heart.

2. They shall be cast into hell fire, that is, they shall be filled with the
vengeance of God, they have here but a drop of it, as it were; if we consider
all the punishments that all the men of the world have had and suffered, they
are nothing to this, but as a flea-biting in comparison of this: That which is
the worst, their wickedness shall increase daily, though they be full of Gods
vengeance, yet their sin shall increase it still.

Q. But if the wicked are full of Gods vengeance, how can their punishments be
increased?

A. They shall every day be made more capable of bearing punishment: As a
glass, though it be full, yet if it be made bigger, it will hold more: So,
though a man be full of misery, yet by sin he shall be made capable to
suffer more and more. It shall be eternal, there shall be no end of their
misery, for their punishment shall encreaase daily, so that a man shall be a
Devil incarnate, as it were.

FINIS.

