

AMANDA, A SACRIFICE To an Unknown GODDESS, OR, A Free Will Offering Of a
loving Heart to a Sweetheart.

By N. H. of Trinity-Colledge in CAMBRIDGE.

-- Unus and alter
Forsitan haec spernet juvenis --
-- Sed quisquis es accipe chartas,
Scribe. --
LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Humphrey Tuckey, at the sign of the
black Spread-Eagle, near St. Dunstans Church. 1653.

To the Honorable EDWARD MOVNTAGVE, SON and HEIR Apparent TO THE Honors,
Estate and Virtues Of the Right Honorable EDWARD LORD MOUNTAGUE, BARON of
Boughton.
SIR,
IT may be happily guest I am Planet-struck, and deeply in love with some red
and white rarity; I confess Beauty is a delectable philtre, especially when
the glances of the eyes are amorous; I know love is both Febris Diaria and
Hectica: but I thank my Stars, I never as yet felt those Ephemerical Fevers;
I have had as few fits, and as gentle Paroxysmes of such hearty Agues, as it is
possible for flesh and blood in the like tempes to conceive; I am neither
Atheistical nor Superstitious, neither hot nor cold: I give the world leave to
conclude me tepid and lukewarm, and shall take the like freedom in
conjectures of my next neighbors constitution and motions: But say I were
wounded, and Cupids shast struck fast in my liver, I should think my self in no
respect blameable, but that I stood in the way, and this may pass for a
childs fault: Besides, Amanda is more tempting then ordinary, and (as much as
her sex admits) like your self, good and beautiful; I mean not the issue of
my fancy, for then I should not only basely fall in love with my own off
spring, but commit a Soloecism, worse then that of Incest, in the comparison of
things, which make no more approach to an equality of strength, then taplash
and the best Nectar of the Grape; It is Amanda my Dear Mistress, that bright
lamp of beauty and goodness, which vies perfections with the best constellated
goddess, that ever was deified by the most amorous Enthusiast, and beyond all,
with the admirable Idea of your person. She it is, in whom I love and worship
your picture, in whose likeness I adore you. And in truth, I think my Religion
in this transcendently reasonable to that of the common Catholic, whose best
devotions have not more zeal, but less sense, and not half so lively a
resemblance of a Seraphical being. Had I Vandikes pencil, I durst not give a
draught of your person, I must of necessity forbear that to keep the best and
most chaste Madams from longing; As for your high-borne soul, we can only see
the Sun in the water by some reflexe beams, it is too gloriously
resplendent, and dazles our weak eyes, if we gaze on it in its fiery chariot,
whose horses are flames trapped with rays, whose wheels are lightning without
ratlings of thunder, and whose driver is a bright Angelical Intelligence, ever
darting irresistible flashes of Beauty: I will not undertake to sound a
Triumph of your Virtues, unless my trumpet were silver, and I my self more
blab-check't, that the report and Echo of your name, which hereafter I am
confident will run mazes in the meanders of men's ears, might be clearer,
stronger and more lasting. Yet as short-winded as I am, I cannot but venture at
one blast, and I dare sound it boldly. Neither is your Honor nor Estate,
(though you stand richly possessed of both) equivalent to your Beauty, nor the
incomparable Fabric of your body, (from which a Tytian might learn proportion)
sufficiently answerable to the complexion of your soul, which the best
Princess, might securely take for her tutelar genius, and the most religious
Zealot for his good Angel. And if this be not a public and more general
Confession, the world has not eyes enough to esteem you at your worth. It is
no matter whether I call it want of judgment or oversight; those fine sober
things which the world terms discreet, may be a little guilty of both.

But to give you the main reason of this present to your Honor, beside the
many private obligations, which enforce me; I know none a more competent Judge
in Poesy then your self. You have surveyed more ground in the sweet Tempe of
the Muses, and to better purpose, then many who have walked Parnassus, as often
as Duke Humphreys spider-catchers do Paul's, only to tell steps, and take the
height of a cob-web fancy. You might better have writ man at fifteen, then not
a few; (and those of no mean thoughts,) who have half doubled your age; At
those years when others do usually ride Hobbies, and swagger astride
broomsticks: Your Honor was mounting the great horse, and learning to manage
the noble swift-winged Courser. Me thinks I see the best wits strive to be your
Lackeys, as if you only could create Laureats, which is no small preferment,
for every Poet is Apollo's footman, and consequently Worshipful, and an Esquire
by his place. You differ as much from an ordinary Poet, as a Traveller srom a
Map- Geographer, who by the help of old Ortelius, or John Speed our English
Mercator, has gone beyond sea, and rid post over the Alps in his chamber.
Thalia is proud you admit your self her Familiar, your hands must be kissed, when
others stand aloof, bare-headed like her waiting Gentlemen; you carouse with
the srolique Lady at the Fountain, and sip Helicon in gold goblets, while poor
vulgar Students only refresh their temples with? wet finger, and beg rithmes in
a nightcap. Had you lived sooner at Sucklings Sessions, you had saved Sir W.
Davenant an oath, and wiser Apollo would have known better where to bestow his
Laurel, and given more content to the lesser wits. I assure you, it is seldom
the Muses Nag finds such good pasture amongst Noblemens horses; for most
commonly a Gentleman's Pegasus is as ill favored as Pharaohs lean Cowes, not
pampered, plump and fair buttock't, like the Ass his Master, and yet feeds
upon thistles. You are borne to that which others must ditch and hedge for, and
yet come short, as if Poeta nascitur were your birthright; For my part, if
your Honor shall but smile on Amanda, and entertain the chaste Girl as your
Handmaid. I shall think her better adopted, then if she had brave old Ben, or
some pregnant famous Court-wit for her father.

Sir, though my sweet Amanda dare not venture abroad to see her friends without
you, and your presence be the best of any I know, to make way for a Lady, yet
she presumes not to take so Honorable a personage for a Gentleman Usher, or
one with broad shoulders to thrust aside the croudes and throngs of censures
she shall meet with in her walks; But being yet childish, and not able to go
alone, she humbly kisses the hands of her most noble Guardian, in whose arms
the little Moppet loves to be dandled, and shown out at the window. Indeed she
is so much an Infant, that were not the face of a Godfather, in these
Anabaptistical Antichristian times, worn quite out of fashion, I should have
made bold to call your Honor to the Font; Many a poor man has had (witness
Charles Murrey the Cripple) his Majesty the King himself, (some would have
said, God bless him good man) for his Gossip. But I most of all wish the
Sponsalia were at hand, you might affiance and betroth my Dearest, (I know
whom) to him who never knows sufficiently how to express himself, what he is
ever ambitious to be

The Humblest and most Faithful amongst your Honors most devoted Servants, N.
HOOKS.

To the Author upon his Amanda.
COurage, (my friend,) boldly assay the stage,
Maugre the uncouth humors of the age,
Though wit the unsavory thing be out of date,
And judgment triumph in the fancies fate,
Poetry's heresy, and schism pure,
(As is free will or humane literature.)
Yet shall thy Mistress thaw the Stoics breast,
And prove Amanda to discretions test.
But doubtful whether Muse or Mistress be,
The fair Amanda that is meant by thee;
Resolved that though thy Madam lovely be,
She paints to inhance her endless tyranny.
Had thon (without a rithme) said, Good and Fair,
The had matched the highest loves that couchant are
In mortal breasts, thy zeal forgetting bound,
Has quite o'reshot loves landmarke, and gains ground
On admiration, dull without desire,
As without warmth the elemental fire:
The famous Grecian beauty's stolen face,
And most choice borrowed parts fell short of grace,
She had been more then the intended she,
Had she but filch't Amanda's Poetry.
I Will not assesse thy merits, wise men soon
Will judge thee worthy, and for this thy boon
Each Amarado-Proselyte of thine
Pays his devotion to Amanda's shrine.
But if to please less knowing men seem safe,
Rail at Socinus in a Paragraph:
Confute Arminius in English phrase,
So shall dull men yield suffrage to thy praise.
M. P. Midd. Temp. Gent.
To the most ingenious Author upon his excellent Poems.
THe Press grows honest, and in spite of fate,
Now teems a Wit, that is legitimate:
No thundering Muse, although Jove's daughter still,
Drawing smooth lines 'twixt the horns of Parnasse hill
And yet so strong, that with these nervs I know
Cupid will henceforth string's triumphant bow.
Doubt not ( sweet friend) the Infant-Archer will
Brag that his shafts are feathered from thy quill.
Within thy book an harmless Venus moves,
Yet generous, drawn as anciently by Doves;
Nor do thou make her son obscenely speak,
A bow though Cupids too much bent may break
Thou art not like those wits, whose numbers jump,
Not with Apollo's Lyre, but Flora's trump.
Thou drink'st to the bottom of the Muses stood
Famed Helicon, and yet can shun the mud.
Thy fancie's steadie, not like those that rove
Through Arabia, then to the Indies move,
To fetch in jests, but when the totall's come,
Alas, Caligula brings cockles home.
Thy book's thine own, so rare a Muse 'twas fit
Should not be periwigg'd with dead men's wit.
Yet lives their genius in thee: true it is,
Arts have a kind of metempsychosis.
R. MOYLE, Trin. Col. Soc.
Upon his ingenious friend's most ingenious Poem, entitled Amanda.
J Am mistaken, it is not he,
Though Doctor of loves Harmony;
The Music of all Plato's bliss,
But a Praeludium was to this.
Sure it is some nobler genius, one
That teaches him perfection
In 5 Song, whilst he was penning it,
His lips dropped honey as he writ.
Nay it is more heavenly, more divine,
Sweet Nectar flows from every line,
Whilst he did quaffe the gods Canarie.
An Angel was his Secretary.
It Is pure, although not sanctified,
Clean gold, and current, though untri'd,
A piece as full of beauty, as
The Authors fairest object was.
Nor less inimitable then
That mirror, which if ever seen,
Never expressed by the best conceit,
For who can reach his fancies height?
It makes a question whether she
Or it, be the greatest raritie.
Such as some think soared above,
And took from thence this grace for love,
No, no, it hovered 'bout his mind,
Amanda there a Heaven will find.
A pretty pertly Cupid here,
A Cherubim residing there.
Love with all her glory waiting,
And thus innocently prating,
As if that were a wile to balk
The Justice to do naught but talk.
Read him you must, admire him too,
Courting Amanda, he will win you.
C. IRETON, of Trin. Col. Cambr.
To his Honored friend the Author upon his Amanda.
Whoever shall ask what these rude lines do here,
Tell him Amanda may black patches wear,
Fair Amanda, whom if I name, my heart,
As if I Would sinned in naming, feels the smart
Of hers, not Cupids arrow, Reader please
To turn the leaf, thou wilt catch the same disease,
We Are all in love ( Dear Sir) who e're you see,
Know it, he is or will your rival be;
The world's grown lovesick, and may seem to prove,
Your wit has been injurious to your love.
There Is none shall read Amanda, but every line,
(Heavens!) ten thousand worlds that she were mine!
She Is sure too good to be enjoyed (but I)
Oh that I might but see her once, and die!
Is It not some goddess [that having long desir'd]
At length has stoll'n from Heaven to be admired?
To love her it is presumption, wish I could
That I were better, she not quite so good:
Go boy, go sleep, Cupid unbend thy bow,
Btreak all thy darts, thou'st lost thy trading, go,
Turn Physician, if again thou would be
A heart-wounder, study Loves remedy.
What meant you, Sir, to set the land on fire?
Some wish, some hope, some envy, some desire;
I pray the gods (let me not pray in vain)
Enjoy your love, and put us out of pain;
Amanda deserves the best, it is as true,
There Is none deserves Amanda's love but you.
But let her still retain her name, that all
May her Amanda, you Amandus call.
THO. ADAMS. Trin. Coll. D.
To my deserving friend the Author upon his excellent Poem Amanda.
I Loved thee Dearly, it would soon be guest
That I thus boldly crowd up to be pressed
Amongst thy Giant friends, though he that will
Draw thee to the life must needs have thine own quill,
For who durst boast he could have limm'd so well,
As thou have done thy truest parallel
Amanda thou that virtue thus have dressed,
Do tell the world it lived in thy breast;
If any yet objecting say, no one,
Thou knew'st ingross't so much perfection,
Thy only subject then they will plainly find,
Could be no orher then thy virtuous mind,
From which rich wardrobe thou can easily spare,
Enough to deck and furnish the most rare;
I Have done, for none can reach thy Poems worth,
Amanda wants no foiles to set her forth.
I. A. Gent.
The Author to the READER.
Heaven bless thy sweet face, for in troth, I know,
Though 't's never so ugly, sweet thou think it though,
It Is a good cast of the eye, thou'st looked upon
Things which brought here make no comparison:
Women love gazing eyes, Amanda (Sir)
Is such a toy, then pray now pleasure her;
Perhaps she may seem beautiful, and then
I Am sure she will please and pleasure you again;
He that cracks Optics, and does lose his sight
In viewing Beauty, is no loser by t;
Oh what a sinner that poor mortal is,
That viewes and scannes his Maker's Artifice!
We draw from the order this great world has in it,
An Atheist-confuting Argument;
Then sure in women's world^ so little and fair,
More forcing Logic, better Topics are;
Why is it w' admire the Apostles in the cherrie stones,
Traduskin shows, but cause they are little ones?
Who knows, whilst he at female Beauties stares,
But he may see an Angel unawares;
Howe're'tis not unlikely he may move,
If she be kind, into a Heaven of love;
Yet I Will not make a Stoic an Amorato,
No, I shall leave him still to read his Cato,
Some fine grave head, there be, whose brains are adle,
[A careless Nurse 'twas cracked their sculls in the Cradle]
Whose dull old wrinkled brow, and rotten tooth,
Accept of nothing that is fair and smooth,
By whom my harmless lines will termed be,
Naught less then speculative adultery,
But age and eating crabs, must needs excuse
Their doting, peevish humors, to my Muse:
Some newfound changeling Saints, with looks precise,
Rolling the goggles of their bloodshed eyes,
Will call Amanda light and trull, and scorn her,
Yet read her over, and kiss her in a corner.
But how the things called wits will fling about,
To see my paultrie Mistress new come out!
Oh these are angry beasts, they will kick and throw,
Ware horns, my Dear, or up thy smock will go.
Troth rather then their flings we will endure,
We Will get some slie-slaps for their gad-flies sure:
Yes, yes wits wanton humors to prevent,
We Will shortly have an Act of Parliament.
You noble, Civil souls, whoever you be
Whose modest, frolic ingenuitie
Cleanses your hearts from self-conceit and gall,
If on Amanda you but smile, and call
Her fair, may you find Mistresses as good
As I can fancy, real flesh and blood.
The Author to the Ladies.
GReat and fair Madams, you whose star-like eyes,
Sunne-burn the world and do mock the skies:
You Constellations, who are never seen,
But w' are half blinded, had your Beauty been
Where Hero's blinking Conduct taper stood,
To guide Leander sculling through the flood,
Never had he lost his way for want of light,
He Would swum by day, though he had swum by night:
Confessed, you might have veiled, but then your praise
Were lost true Beauty scorns to mask its rays:
Therefore Amanda comes with open face,
Daring to vie this feature, or that grace,
With the most heavenly, sweetest, lovely, she
That deserves duel: Ladies, pardon me,
And pardon her, she only blushing stands
To mingle lilies with your lilie hands.
ERRATA.
PAge 28 line 6, To Amanda his friend, desiring him, etc. for On Amanda, his
friend desiring him, etc. p. 88. v. 6. down my stairs for down stairs. p, 94.
l, 3, and e contra, pro ut e contra, p, 160, l, 1, nutres cambuca nguines, pro
putris cambucam inguinis. p, 162. fracessis pro fraceseis. p, 128, notho pro
noto p. 120. Ita pro Ito, and fuis pro fuit, in the Epist. Dedic. blab-cheek't
for blub-check't. p, 80, l, 23, Tradesmen for Aradesmen, ibid, Querp. coat for
Querpo coat.

AMANDA.
Beauty.
BEAUTY is Nature's, and the Woman's glory,
The loudest Emphasis in the story
Of female worth and praise, the Alphabet
Where love does spell it is first desire,
The field where red and white are met
To mingle wonder; it is the match,
The spark and tinder, which does quickly catch
And light the fire
Of The lamp of love,
Which flames within the eyes
Of those who toward Cupids Altar move
To offer up their hearts in sacrifice.
2.
Beautie's an honest kind of sorcerie
It has a sweet bewitching faculty;
It is the sauce does tempt loves appetite,
Which to intemperance it does often incite,
Till it provoke a lustful gluttony
Beyond the satisfaction of the eye;
Love is but Beauties creature,
It has its being from its Makers feature;
It Is Beauty deifies
The goddess Woman,
She whom we now so idolize;
Without it, would be adored by no man.
3.
Beauty is Magic works by qualities
Are less occult, how it does charm the eyes
Is visible, but never enough: for still
The more it is seen and viewed, more lovely 'twill
Appear, and tempt with stronger Argument
Then the first glances raised, in the cast
Of punie thoughts and fancies, till at last
It breeds a discontent
In The other senses, which all mutiny,
(Starved in the surfeit of the eye)
To share in its delight,
And never lin
Till they are slain, or fairly win
The place where Beauties flags to love invite.
4.
Both eyes were made for Beauty purposely,
The most delightful object we can see,
It Is that gilds Cupid's wings, and makes the boy
Be entertained with ecstasies of joy;
It Is the best kind of Natures handicraft,
Her choicest piece of pencil-work, her draft,
In colors to the life, suppose
The spotless lilie and the rose,
Should blend their damask and their snow,
The mixture which does flow
From their embrace,
Is Beauty in its pride and state,
Which (never till then) I spied of late
In the rare features of Amanda's face.
LOVE.
1.
LOve is that harmony does sympathize
Betwixt two souls tuned Diapason-wise;
It Is waking man's most pleasant dream, delight
And comfort, makes day pass as sleep does night,
It Is the best part of Heaven man has on earth,
And heaven in heaven 'twill be
Nothing but lovely, loving souls to see
Souls mingling loves, love getting love in the birth.
2.
Love is the Gordian knot, which once unti'd
Or cut, gives way to the Tyrant Victors pride,
It Is honest Cupid's Atlas of the world;
Into a Chaos all things would be hurled,
Were It not for love, the peoples hate
Or love, make or undo
The best of Kings and Kingdoms too:
Love is the moving sinew of the State.
3.
Where it is absent, nothing present is,
But envy, hatred, malice, jealousies,
Deceit and baseness, whence are always born
Horror and anguish, grief, despite and scorn,
Mischief, revenge and wrath, which do torment,
Distract and tear the heart,
Gripe, and unhinge the man in every part,
Till all his bowels burst, and life be spent.
4
Love is our Empress, all that beauteous be
Are maids of Honor to her Majesty,
Yet Love to Beauty often Presents brings,
Presented by the hands of the greatest King;
And it is no wonder Love this course does take,
That the Mistress thus should fee
Her maids, it is pretty ridling Usurie,
For Love bribes Love, for Love and Beauties sake.
5.
Love is our Governesse, me thinks on high
I see her, greatest goddess in the sky,
Sitting and holding all in chains; I see
She labors hard, that all things joined may be
To their most proper objects; but base spite,
Her black Antagonist,
By man and the devils help, whom e're she list,
Forces to deeds of discord, sin and night.
6.
Love is man's health and food, a wealthy feast
Where Beauty often has made great Jove her guest,
Then my Dear, fairer then the fairest she,
Amanda shall be courted by Divinity,
If in her sacred love she prove devout,
With all the viand-joyes that be
In Love, she shall be fed eternally,
Angels themselves shall set the banquet out.
Against Platonic Court-Love.
1.
NO greater comfort to well-minded men,
Then it is to love and be beloved again:
And this sweet love has goodness for its mother,
On which one love does still beget another;
Though beauty nourish love, and make it grow,
Love feeds on other food,
Which is as pleasant, and as highly good;
From other richer sweeter springs does flow.
2.
Love several cellsi' the womb, and Cradles has,
To breed and rock, it is Cupids in; the path
Wherein, with close desire it does pursue,
The started object may be diverse too,
But who the same hare chase, their loves do hit,
And ever meet in this:
What e're their seigned speech and progress is,
All in the shine sent do hunt and follow it.
3.
Loves of one rise, never differ in their end,
What ever Lovers in their love pretend,
Making blind Cupid nothing else but eye,
It Is counterfeit, false, cheating modesty,
Whilst superficial beauty strikes the eyes
The Consort heart strings move,
And play, within a tempting fit of love
To every sense; love it self multiplies.
4.
It Is of a spreading nature, not content
To be at stands, till all its strength be spent;
It is a pleasant itch, infects the blood,
Still gathers heat, whilst it receives its food;
It cannot rest in the eye, the senses do
Mingle joys, what e're we see
And like, if sweet and edible it be,
Surely, we have some mind to eat it too.
5.
It Is true, I know sometimes we use to play,
With fruit that is pleasing to the eye, and say,
It Is pity troth to eat them, they are so fair,
So often keep them till they rotten are,
Yet the teeth water while they rotting lie;
But love provides for you
To eat your apple and have it too:
Cloy th'appetite, and after feast your eye.
6.
Is Admiration love? it is nothing so,
It Is but loves Herald, which before does go
To usher in that Regent Queen to the heart,
Its Palace-royal; only acts the part
Of loves Scenographer, to pitch the tent
In that Elysian field,
Where it encamps; the Ensign who does wield
And flourish beauties flags of ornament.
7.
Platonic love! it is monstrous heresy,
Would scare an Adamtte, in's innocence:
No Eunuch holds it, but where e're he likes
And loves the bait, at least in wish he strikes;
And curses him that blanch't him so; the Nun
When she can please her eye,
Though her vow curb her thoughts, yet happily
She wishes all that might be done, were done.
8.
Platonic love if love it called may be,
Is nothing else but lust in 'ts infancy;
Lust in the womb of thought, which stays not there,
(If thought miscarry not through startling fear,)
But comes abroad and lives, does act and move
To reach its centre-end;
And in the birth, (both which the child commend,)
Francie is Midwife, Beauty Nurse to Love.
9.
Love only placed in Admiration!
Complacencie in Contemplation!
Love and no Cupid! It can never be,
To fancy beauty is thoughts venerie:
It Is newborn childish lust, which puling lies,
Like the babe more innocent
In The Cradle then the standing stool, where pent
It gads, and at each pleasing object flies.
10.
Love flows like time, our motions cause and measure;
What Is past is lost; the life of all our pleasure,
Is in our present instant joy; but yet
As thoughts of past enjoyments do beget
New hopes, and those new hopes get new desire,
Which differs not, but is all one
With lustful love and fond devotion,
So last nights sparks kindle the morning fire.
11.
Nor does a glance only a glance beget,
One looks gets love, the next does nourish it,
And so the next, and next, and the other does,
Till it attain and rise to 'ts perfect growth:
I must confess love may be starved, or fed
With dazie roots or so,
But let it take its course, 'twill surely grow
To flames, and though it must lose its maidenhead.
12.
If beauty do but once inslave the eyes,
It straight takes captive all the faculties;
The Soul invites the senses to a feast,
Wishing the object would allow each guest
The dish it likes most, it would employ
(If nothing hinder from without)
Contrive, and lay its utmostpowers out
TO enrich it self with loves most wealthy joy.
13.
Affection is not fed to please one sense,
It Is never maintained at so high expense
Of spirits, to so small and poor intents,
As to have a thing to please with complements:
In such love-masques, what e're we speak or do,
Surely there is some promise made
[Which hopes and fancy easily perswade]
That we shall please our other senses too.
14.
That love Camelion-like can live by air
Of women's breath, without some better fare;
That man can love, and yet consine his bliss
To the outside kickshaw pleasure of a kiss,
Nay, be surpised with such thin joys as these,
And like them too; yet wish no more,
Platonic love! Say Plato kept a whore,
And lost his smell-smock nose by the French disease.
15.
Well my Amanda, it is no glance o'th eye
I court thee for, that will not satisfy;
It Is not the pretty babies there I praise,
As if to love were nothing but to gaze;
No, guess the best; that love what e're it be,
Chaste, lawful, clean, sincere,
And without smoke, if it be any where;
It Is, it is Amanda betwixt thee and me.
A Mistress.
A Mistress is not what the fancy makes her,
But what her virtue and her beauty speaks her;
She is a jewel, which a rich esteem
Values below its worth, she does not deem
Each servant mad in love, but reconciles
Their fears and hopes, she only smiles
When others laugh and giggle; her lips severe
And close, as if each kiss a promise were:
Fresh as the blossoms of the Apple Tree,
Sweet in the perfumes of Virginity:
She puts a price on love; not proudly coy,
But modest in returns; the life of joy
Which she conceives, i'th'thought of the nuptial bed,
Is not the losing of her Maidenhead,
Or some such ticklish point, but to unite
And knit her Bridegrooms soul in the delight
Of a close twine, and when their lips do greet,
She mingles flesh, that heart with heart may meet.
She Is wary in her gift and choice, but yet
Like an enchanted Lady does not set,
Making her Lover a green-armour-Knight
In a Romance-adventure, who must fight
With monstrous giants, and with conquering hand
Win her from a fantastick-fairie-land;
No she is discreetly chaste, not fond of love,
Nor cruel in her frowns; her heart does move,
Poys'd with her servants worth, and the advice
Of her good friends; she is neither cold as ice,
Nor yet inflamed; she is neat and delicate,
Yet not lascivious in her dress; her gate
Tempting, yet not affected, it has more
Of nature then the dance; her cast of the eye
Is amorous, yet not a glance does fly,
That has a sparkle of lust; she is all divine,
And to be courted like a Cherubin:
Such is Amanda, who deserves to be
Mistress in Cupids Universitie.
In praise of Amanda's beauty.
THe daring and most learned Grotius Writ,
(I must not venture, though to credit it,)
The book of Canticles was made in love:
Love to some tempting beauty, which did move,
Turn and command the wisest Solomon's heart,
Forcing a King to play the Courtiers part:
The little foxes which so much displease,
In spoiling of his Vine, are little fleas,
Rude fleas which still leave freckles, where they stood
To suck the Nectar of a Ladies blood:
But who so e're that royal creature were,
Compared to all that is good beyond compare,
To whom that Prince the Song of Songs did sing,
Though to the daughter of the Egyptian King,
Or some more lovely amorous Concubine,
My fair Amanda who is more divine,
Can make me, if my heart she breath upon,
Court her beyond the Critick's Solomon.
His love to Amanda.
There Is naught like love that pleases me,
Love, love, Amanda, love to thee:
My fancy has no other theme,
Nor while I'wake, nor while I dream;
Not gold, that is made a god by men;
Not gold, which makes men gods again;
Gold which makes men most sordidly,
To Mules and Asses bend the knee;
Not Honor, Glory, or Renown,
To have my name fly up and down:
No title of Worship pleases me,
It Is every Beggars briberie;
I nothing will commit to Fame,
Only my dear Amanda's name;
I only care to live with thee,
To live without thee death 'twill be:
I envy not the Heirs delight,
The hound in's course, the hawke in's flight
Love plays a better game with me,
I always hawke and hunt for thee;
I never frequent the bowling green,
In those mad antic postures seen,
Where in their bowls men court and pray,
And curse and swear their time away:
On what design so e're I go,
Whatever bowl it be I throw,
Amanda's hand does bias it,
She is the Mistress I would hit:
If with they voice thou bless my ear,
May I no other Music hear;
I Will never drink one drop of wine,
May I but sip those lips of thine;
I Will never go abroad to feast:
Oh that I were thy constant guest!
How gladly would I make on you,
My breakfast and my Beaver too!
On thee I Would always dine and sup,
Oh I could almost eat thee up!
All night on thee might I be fed,
Supperlesse would go to bed:
Thy sweetest flesh if I might taste,
Fore such a feast who would not fast?
No greater pleasure can I seek,
Then it is to kiss thy blushing cheek:
No further joy will I demand,
Then it is to touch thy lilie hand;
My heart so lively never does move,
As when I hear thee call me love;
No flowers pleasant are to me,
But roses which do smell of thee:
The primrose and the violet,
Which from thy breast their odours get;
No rich delights can please my eyes,
With all their colored rarities;
But those that represent my Fair,
Such as the matchless, tulips are,
Where Beautie's flourish't flags invite,
In The purest streams of red and white.
Here, here, Amanda, take my heart,
There Is my soul where e're thou art:
I Will be the Monarch, thou to me
A Kingdom and a Queen shall be:
I Will be the Elm, and thou the Vine
About me close shall twist and twine;
And whilst my Dear like the Ivy cleaves,
The Oak shall bend to kiss her leaves;
I Will be thy Landlord, and content,
My body be thy tenement;
I Will be thy Landlord, and consent
That thou with kisses pay me rent;
Then shall I kiss thee over and over,
And daily raise my rent the more:
It Is thee, my Dear, I love alone,
No beauty draws me but thine own;
I never shall see, I never shall find
Another so much to my mind;
Should I pick, and choose, and cull,
Amongst a whole Seraglio full:
There Is naught like love that pleases me,
Love, love, Amanda, love to thee.
To Amanda doubting her mortality.
I Cannot be an Atheist in my love;
And as the dull Cretenses did for Jove,
Build thee a Sepulcher, no, goddess, no;
I nee're shall weeping to thy gravestone go,
And beg thy lovely ghost, to represent
To one short glance thy beauties monument;
Nor haunt the melancholy tombs, to try
If my strong fancy can possess my eye,
With ablest shadow, like to thee my Fair,
Drawing thy portraicture and shape in the air;
Then gaze and wonder till my soul desert
Its trembling dust, and where thou never were,
Fly to an embrace; then look so long about,
To find my fancies vanished Consort out;
Till my unruly Atoms dispossess
The Agent spirits of their Governesse;
And me to marble fear do petrifie,
Leaving my hand to write thy Elegis:
No these are dreams fit for an Infidel,
Whose saucie reason does against faith rebel;
I Am better taught, and with an Eagles eye,
Admit the rays of thy Divinity;
Diana bathes her in the purer Springs
Of thy chaste blood; and when Amanda sings,
My greedy ears let chanting Angels in,
And each notes Echo calls thec Cherubin:
Even at noon, thy blushing modesty
Calls up Aurora; Can thou mortal be?
Then Venus and the graces too must die,
For they are confined, and live within thine eye.
A Sacrifice to Amanda.
1.
J Have an eye for her that is fair,
An ear for her that sings,
Yet don't I care
For golden hair,
I scorn the portion lech'ry brings,
To baudy beauty I Am a churl,
And hate though a melodious girl
Her that is naught but air.
2.
I have a heart for her that is kind,
A lip for her that smiles;
But if her mind
Be like the wind,
I Would rather foot it twenty miles,
Then kiss a less whose moisture reeks,
Left in her clammie glew-pie cheeks
I leave my beard behind.
3.
Is thy voice mellow, is it smart?
Art Venus for thy beauty?
If kind and tart,
And chaste thou art,
Then am I bound to do thee duty:
Though pretty Mal, or bonnie Kate,
Have thou one hair adulterate,
I Am blind, and deaf, and out of heart.
4.
Amanda, thou art fair, well-bred,
Harmonious, sweetly kind;
If thou will wed
My Virgin-bed,
And taste my love, thou 'rt to my mind;
Take hands, lips, heart and eyes,
All are too mean a sacrifice
To the Altar of thy maidenhead.
To Amanda putting flowers in her bosom.
It Is not the pinck I gaze upon,
Nor the pleasant Cowslip I look on;
No nor the lovely violet,
Shutting its purple Cabinet:
Nor the white lilie now and then,
For envy looking pale and wan.
Nor the ruddie scarlet damask rose,
Like thy lips where Coral grows;
Nor the yellow Caltha, whose fair leaves,
From thy bright beauty day receives;
That gilt Sunne-dial which does catch
And hug the Sunbeams, Natures watch,
Which by its strange horoscopic,
To the working whispering Be,
What time of day 'twas once did tell,
Now like the pretty Pimpernel,
When shut, when open it shall lie,
Takes its direction from thine eye:
No nor the primrose, though it be
Modest, and simper too like thee:
Which gladly spoiled of its balm,
Ravished this morning in its bed,
Bequeath's thy hand its maidenhead.
No, but the rarest of the bower,
Leap-up-come-kisse me, is the flower;
I look to see how that looks proud
Made in thy bosom Cupids shroud,
Then whilst you there those flowers, strew,
My love does in Procession go;
Cupid awakes, and is not dead,
His shroud's a garland on his head;
Throu'dst make a posie fit for me,
Oh that my hand might gather thee.
Or could those flowers leave me when they die,
Those sweeter flower-pots a legacy.
To Amanda ouer-hearing her Sing.
Hark to the changes of the trembling air!
What Nightingals do play in consort there!
See in the clouds the Cherubs listen you,
Each Angel with an Otocousticon!
Hark how she shakes the palsy element,
Dwells on that note, as if 'twould never be spent!
What a sweer fall was there! how she caught in:
That parting air, and ran it over again!
In emulation of that dying breath,
Linnets would strain and sing themselves to death;
Once more to hear that melting Echo move,
Narcissus-like, who would not die in love!
Sing on sweet Chauntresse soul of melody;
Closely attentive to thy harmony:
The Heavens checked and stopped their rumbling spheres,
And all the world turned it self into ears;
But if in silence thy face once appear,
With all those jewels which are treasured there,
And show that beauty which so far out-vies
Thy voice; 'twill quickly change its ears for eyes.
To Amanda Reading.
WHat Book or subject. Fairest, can it be,
Which can instruct, delight or pleasure thee?
Poems! Kiss me but once and I Will outvie
The Authors Masterpiece of Poetry;
And rather then not win and please thee in it,
All the nine Muses shall be dressed in print;
I Will quaffe Pyrene off, and write a line
Shall charm Amanda's heart, and make her mine,
I Will drink a Helicon of sack to thee,
And fox thy sense wieh Lovers stuponie.
Read on my Fairest, I am reading too,
A better book, my Dear, I Am reading you;
A fine neat volume, and full fraught with wit,
The woman's best Encomium e're was writ;
Off of my book I never cast my eye,
A Scholar I shall be most certainly;
Nay, who so er'e derives his learning hence,
Doctor of Civil Court-ship may commence;
For who (my pretty Fancy) reads but thee,
Reads over a whole Vatican Library
Of woman's worth, most women in compare
But Ballads, Pamphlets and Diurnals are:
The life and beauty of Art and Learning is
In The very Preface and the Frontispice;
If in my Study read thee over I might,
Oh I could con my lesson day and night;
I and my book in all things treat of thee,
Then prethy dedicate thy book to me;
Make me the binding to it, I only plead
I may be cover to the book I read.
On these my lines if e're thou chance to look,
Read me, Amanda, when thou read'st my book;
If in the print there any errors be,
Accuse the careless Press, and blame not me.
To Amanda leaving him alone.
WHat business calls thee hence, and calls not me?
My business ever is to wait on thee;
Therefore where e're you go
I must go too
What e're your business is,
Be It that or this:
Yet still my business is to wait on you;
Nay prethy, my Dearest, why
So coy and shie?
Yes, yes, you will come again,
But prethy when?
Here must I moap alone;
Whilst you some other love,
Or in your Cabinet above,
Some letters dote upon,
Which teach you how to say me nay;
But know, Amanda, if too long you stay,
My soul shall vanish into air,
And haunt and dodge thee every where.
It Is sit when thou take Heaven from me,
Thou take at least my soul with thee.
A melancholy Fit.
SAd news was sent me that a friend was dead,
It dash't my brains, and my dull heavy head,
Drowsy with thoughts of death, could hardly be
Supported in its doleful agony;
Nature was lost, grief stopped, my circling blood,
All things alike were ill, and nothing good;
Awak't I dreamed, then round about I saw
Death sable Curtains of confusion draw;
All things were black where e're I cast my eye,
The wainscot walls mourned in dark Ebonie,
My giddy fancy into the earth did sink,
I wept, and saw the clouds weep tears of ink;
Ruin and death me thoughts were penitent,
And did in sheers and vailes their sins lament:
Then ghosts and shades in mourning did I see,
All threw deaths-heads, and dead men's bones at me;
But when the pale Idaea of my friend
Past by, I wished my life were at an end;
And courting-night to shut my sullen eyes,
In came Amanda, and did me surprise;
Taught me to live in death, kissed me, and then
Out of a Chaos made me man again.
An Enthusiasm to Amanda feasting.
COme fill a glass with the best blood of the Vine,
Troth it looks well; it is a fresh vaulting wine;
A perfumed Nectar, yet beyond compare,
Amanda's lips more brisk and lively are;
See, see, here is pretty Hebe brings from Jove
A golden Cup filled to the brims in love!
Amongst the tippling gods, me thinks I see
Blithe purple-fac't Augustus drink to thee:
Come, ye immortal Feasters, quaffe it round,
With heads in stead of hats Hung to the ground;
Lay down your godheads in idolatry,
Turn Priests to my Amanda's Deity;
Never fear to stoop and change your selves to men,
Amanda can create you gods again.
To Amanda pledging him.
HOw the wine smiles, and as she sips,
Tempts her most sweet, coy, modest lips!
The Claret friskes, and feign it wooed
Help its pale color in her blood,
And mingling spirits hopes to be
Within her veins immortallie;
I envy it perhaps for ever,
It may dwell within her liver;
However 'twill be conveyed at least
Through the chaste cloisters of thy breast,
And entertained before it part,
In both the chambers of thy heart;
Oh might I too obtain my Fair,
Such friendly entertainment there:
Most happy man then should I be,
As thy heart-blood is dear to thee,
To Amanda drinking to him.
A Better Cordial Heaven cannot give,
Sprinkle a dead man with it, 'twill make him live;
And force the soul, hudling its atoms up
To a retreat only to kiss the Cup;
It Is a soul-saving kindness, can recall
Love to a frolic in its Funeral:
My heart shall never be sad more through despair,
I feel a world of Heavens created there;
I conceive swarms of Cupids newly born,
To which Amanda's Midwife; I Will be sworn,
My flesh turns all to Cupids; here, and there
How I engender Cupids every where!
Still I teem Cupid's; Cupids chaste and pure,
I shall be eaten up with Cupids sure;
On my chap't heart I feel them creep about,
Like Emmets at their crannies in and out;
More and more Cupids still are borne anew,
And all these Cupids are begot on you;
You are their Mother-nurse; Dear, prethy then
Drink to thy Dearest once again.
Then I Will be all over Cupid^, my best blood
Shall be their drink, my heart their chiefest food;
Cupids shall eat me whilst thou drink'st to me.
Eat whilst I pledge thee too; who would not be
Meat for such pretty loving worms my Fair,
Such loving worms as these sweet Cupids are?
Whilst me their feast these worms, these Cupids have,
Amanda shall interre me, she is my grave.
To Amanda not drinking off her wine.
1.
PIsh, modest tipler, to it again
My sweetest joy,
The wine's not coy
As women are;
My Dearest puling, prethie then,
Prethie, My Fair,
Once more bedew those lips of thine,
Mend thy draught, and mend the wine.
2.
Since it has tasted of thy lip,
( Too quickly cloyed)
How overjoyed,
It cheerfully
Invites thee to another sip!
Me thinks I see
(The wine perfumed by thee, my Fair,)
Bacchus himself is dabling there.
3.
Once more, dear soul, nay prethy try;
Bathe that cherrie
In the sherry;
The jocant wine,
Which sweetly smiles and courts thy eye,
As more divine.
Though thou take none to drink to me,
Takes pleasure to be drunk by thee.
4.
Nay, my Fair, off with it, off with it clean;
Well I perceive
Why this you leave,
My love reveals,
And makes me guess what it is you mean,
Because at meals
My lips are kept from kissing thee,
Thou need'st must kiss the glass to me.
To Amanda upon her smile.
NOw in the joy of strength me thinks I find
Armies of pleasures, troop and storm my mind!
How with a Giants arms I could embrace,
And closely clasp my sweet she Boniface!
Amanda gave a pleasant glance, and while
Her flowrie lips bloomed in the modest smile,
Winter withdrew, I felt a forward spring,
As when great Birtha does Elixir bring,
To drench the boughs, which by her Chymistrie,
Mantles in the blossoms of the Apple Tree,
Styled from the cloisters of the spungie earth;
Dead drunk I was, and all embalmed in mirth;
Heaven past through my soul, the Elysian fields,
Are but mere shadows of the joy it yields:
My heart strings move in tune, to its Almains
My panting breast keeps time; through all my veins,
Bubling in wantonness, now here, now there,
My fresh blood frisks in circles every where:
Thus in the Court the fawning Favorite,
When from the King his Master he can get
One pleasing look with vigor tuggs and hales,
Hope and Ambition hoist his full-cheek't sails,
Top and top-gallant-wise, worth or no worth,
Into preferments Ocean lancheth forth.
Thus the blithe Merchant, when with even train,
His wealthy vessel glides through the marble main
Hugs his good fortune, and begins to sport,
While Neptune kindly laughs him to the Port,
Propitious lights which at my birth did shine!
My stars speak dotage in this smile of thine.
To Amanda his friend, desiring him to fall to
A Thousand thanks, good Sir, thanks for you cheer
And this good sign of welcome to your feast;
If you observe your guest,
How heartily he feeds
On these delicious viands h^re:
You Will find his love no invitation needs,
Believe me, Sir, I do not spare.
2.
I am all appetite, my hungry mind
Feeds almost to a surfeit on desire,
This dish it is I admire,
No cates so sweet as these;
Here, here, I feed, here I am pined;
And starved with meat, these juncates only please,
Hither my senses are confined.
3.
Here Is my rich banquet, hither, the little lad
Cupid invites, in sugar here are store,
Of sweet meats candid over,
From those fair lips I see
What choice of Conserves may be had,
The modest cherrie and the barberrie,
The best and sweetest marmalade.
4.
Here I can taste the grape and mulberrie,
No blush of fruits (though served in they are
In pure white China ware)
Is like those cheeks of thine,
Where the freshest straw-berries be,
Most finely tipled in brisk Claret Wine,
Me thinks they seem to swim to me.
5.
Beauty in stead of tempting sauce does woo,
Love feeds my heart, love feeds my eyes,
I for no rarities
Of quails and phesants wish
(Sir, I am well-com'd well by you)
Amanda is my first and second dish:
Would she would make me well-come too.
To Amanda desirous to go to bed.
SLeepie, my Dear? yes, yes, I see
Morpheus is fallen in love with thee,
Morpheus, my worst of rivals, tries
To draw the Curtains of thine eyes;
And fanns them with his wing asleep,
Makes drowsy love play at hopeep;
How prettily his feathers blow,
Those fleshie shuttings to and fro!
Oh how he makes me Tantalize
With those fair Apples of thine eyes!
Equivocates and cheats me still,
Opening and shutting at his will;
Now both now one, the doting god
Plays with thine eyes at even and odd;
My stamm'ring tongue doubts which it might
Bid thee good morrow or goodnight;
So thy eyes twinkle brighter far,
Then the bright trembling, evening star;
So a wax taper burnt within
The socket plays at out and in:
Thus does Morpheus court thine eye,
Meaning there all night to lie;
Cupid and he play hoop-all hid,
Thy eye 's their bed and cover-lid;
Fairest, let me thy night-clothes air,
Come I le unlace thy stomacher;
Make me thy maiden-chamber-man,
Or let me be thy warming-pan;
Oh that I may but lay my head
At thy beds feet in the trundle-bed;
Then in the morning e're I rose
I Would kiss thy pretty pettitoes.
Those smaller feet, with which in the day
My love so neatly trips away:
Since you I must not wait upon,
Most modest Lady, I Will be gone,
And though I cannot sleep with thee,
Oh may my dearest dream of me,
All the night long dream that we move
To the main center of our love;
And if I chance to dream to thee,
Oh may I dream eternally:
Dream that we freely act and play,
Those postures which we dream by day,
Spending our thoughts i the best delight.
Chaste dreams allow of in the night.
To Amanda igoing to Prayer.
STay, stay, Amanda, take a wish from me,
And bless a cushion with thy softer knee;
Whither are all those Virgin- Angels gone,
Who strew their wings, for thee to kneel upon,
Those pretty pinioned boys, fat, plump and fair,
Who joy to be the Echoes of thy prayer.
Those golden Cupids fallen in love with thee
Thy little Nancioes to thy Deity.
Prethy, Amanda, Dearest, prethy stay,
The Cushion, wench, where art? come bring't away
You use your Mistress kindly; here, my love,
Come kneel upon it, and kneel to none but Jove:
What of the bare boards! no sure it cannot be,
Look how they sink, and will not touch thy knee;
They dare not sin so far (my Dear) to press
That flesh, and make it know their stubbornness,
Were there no bones within, thou should command
Under each tender knee thy lover's hand;
Nay, my Amanda, take my better part,
And at thy prayers kneel upon my heart.
On Amanda praying.
AManda kneeled, I straight a Canopie
Of Saints and Angels over her head did see;
Amanda prayed, and all the Spheres stood still,
The Heavens bowed, and stoop't to know her will:
She prayed with zeal, and then the chanting quires
Of Cherubs, lift'ning to her chaste desires,
Stopped their sweet Anthems; still Amanda prayed;
Then on her bosom her pure hand she laid.
Called for her heart, and lifting up her eyes,
Turned her prayer into sacrifice;
Her heart was fixed, She more and more devout,
Did sob and groan as if she would sigh it out;
At length she wept, but could not shed a tear
To wash her cheeks, or the roses that grew there,
Fine, pretty lads came thick about her still,
Their Crystal bottles at her eyes to fill;
Some lodged upon her lips, all as they pass,
Hover, and make her eye their Looking-glass;
Some set upon her cheeks, hard by the springs,
Her blush reflecting on their golden wings,
Some on her eyelids sat, so greedy were,
They spoiled the pearl, and snatched at half a tear:
At last she ended all in giving praise,
Her head was sainted with a crown of rays,
Then I no longer could Spectator be,
Amanda's glory had so dazzled me;
But then I heard all Heaven cry Amen,
And pray, and sing her prayers over again.
To Amanda after her Prayers.
WHat watrie still with relics of a tear?
Oh prethie let me kiss them dry, my Dear.
Religious fountains which still deluged stand,
Where Infant-Angels wade it hand in hand!
What still bedewed? sure yet remaining there
Some of those pretty tankard-bearers are,
Thy late Attendant at thy sacrifice,
Yes, yes, I see those babies in thine eyes,
Those yellow-winged Fairies in thy well
Till thou shall pray again intend to dwell,
Earnest expectants for a tear to fall,
They make within thine eyes a water-gall.
Amanda prayed, I saw the Angels fly
To hear her lectures of Divinity,
And when my Fairest held up those hands of hers,
Thousands of sweet celestial Choristers
Danced on each fingers end, delighting there
To fan themselves in the perfumed air
Of my Ammanda's breath, swarmed at her lip,
As Bees over flowers, where they Nectar sip,
Then some did on her silver bosom rest,
Prunning their golden feathers in her breast,
And when my Dearest sang Te Deum out,
The Intelligences twirl'd the Orbs about,
But when she chanted her Magnificat,
The Angels then first learned to imitate.
Yes, yes, thy prayer always so pithie is,
So full of noly zeal and emphasis,
So fraught with Hallelujahs it might be,
Heavens Landamus, and man's Letanie,
Prethie, my Dearest, since with greatest Jove,
Thy prayers are so prevalent above:
I Am now thy subject, once thy Prince may be,
Pray for thy Prince, Amanda, pray for me.
To Amanda undressing her.
THy hood's pulled off, nay then I Am dead and gone,
Prethie, Amanda put thy night-coif on.
I see a thousand amorous Cupids there.
Which lie in Ambush, lurking in thy hair;
Look with what haste within those locks of thine,
They string their bows to shoot these eyes of mine?
Look how that little blind rogue there with his dart,
Stands aiming and lays level at my heart!
The sympthomes of my wounds, Amanda, see,
Oh I bleed inwards, prethie pity me.
I am all stuck with arrows which are shot
So thick and fast, that there is never a spot
About me free, each distinct atome smarts
By It self, pierced with a thousand thousand darts,
And as a man with pangs surpised by death
Struggles for life to keep his parting breath;
My nerves and sinews stretch, and all within
My body earne to graspe and reach thee in;
How could I knit and weave eternally,
And mingle limbs into a Gordian tie?
Shoot on, sweet Archers, till I Am slain with love,
Then like the bedlam who in's talk does prove
What made him mad, my happy blessed ghost
Of this nights vision shall for ever boast.
Kill me, my boys, it is mercy to be killed
With love; who would not die in such a field
Of damask rose, slain by her lilie hand?
Dart me to death, you pretty b^yes, that stand
Upon her breast, the shafts which thence you send,
Tell me, I am Amanda's bosome-friend.
To Amanda lying in bed.
IN bed, my Dearest? thus my eye perceives
A primrose lodged betwixt its rugged leaves;
Lain down, Amanda? thus have I often seen
A lily cast upon a bed of green;
So the sweet Alablaster Babie lies
Cradled in fresher moss; thy sparkling eyes
Dart forth such active beams, the god of sleep
Dare not come in his nightly court to keep,
He dares not lull thee, whilst so bright they shine.
All Argus eyes watch in each eye of thine:
But when the humor takes you, that you please
To draw your eyelids close, and take your ease;
He hovers over the tester of your bed,
And gently on them will his poppies shed:
Then, my Amanda, (with his leaden crown
And scepter queen'd) let those fair vallins down,
Those fine white satin vallins over thy eye,
With their silk linings of a scarlet die.
Let that soft hand into the bed repair,
Safe from the moisture of the dampish air,
Yet let me taste it first; so keep thee warm,
Lie close, would I might lay thee in mine arm.
Good night, my Dear, never say good night to me,
Till I all night, Amanda sleep with thee.
On Amanda fallen asleep.
SLeep is a kind of death, why may not I
Write my Deares Epitaph, her Elegy?
Here lies Amanda fast asleep,
Whom Cupid guards, and Angels keep;
Here lies the rarest prize
Two pearls within her eyes,
So have I seen a gem
A Princely diadem
Shut in a Cabinet,
A whole treasury
In a small box of ivorie,
Inlaid with bars and grates of jet.
For such Amanda's eyelids are
White and fringed with black hair.
Here lies Amanda dead asleep:
Hither lovers come and weep:
Here Is a hand which does out-goe
In whiteness driven snow;
Upon that sweet bag cast your eye,
There on fine, fresh, green satin see it lie,
With knots of scarlet ribbon by:
Thus interwoven have I seen
Virgius wax candles red and green,
Proud with a fine white twist between.
Hither lovers haste and see,
Her slender fingers circled be,
Like Rings enameled with the Galaxie;
Her locks as soft as sloven silk,
Through her Alps do make their way,
And on her breasts which do outvie
The icie rocks of frozen milk,
And the lovely Swans soft downie thigh,
Her stately amorous curles
The saucie wantons play.
Whilst two fierce Cupids on her niples sit,
To wound the hearts of stupid churles,
Who pass Amanda's tombstone by,
And with so much as half an eye,
Will not vouchsafe to look on it.
Here lies my Dear Amanda chaste and fair,
Don-Cupids charge and Angels care,
Here she lies, and yet not here,
For she is buried otherwhere.
She Is prisoner in my heart,
From whence she can no sooner part
Then dead men from the grave;
And yet she there does move,
Not only in the ghost of love,
No, though a prisoner, yet she is free,
Alas, too free for me,
She lives my bleeding heart to enslave.
Here my sweetest sweet Amanda lies,
The best, the rarest of all rarities,
Shrouded she is from top to toe,
With lilies which all over her grow,
In stead of bays and rosemarie,
Roses in her cheeks there be,
Oh would I thy coffin were!
Amanda's living sepulcher!
Or would within that winding sheet
Our happy limbs might closely meet!
There would I chastely lie till the day of doom,
And mingle dust till the resurrection come;
But since as yet this cannot be,
For Heavens sake,
My Dearest, now awake,
For whilst Amanda sleeps, she is dead to me.
To Amanda waking.
AWake at length! oh quickly, Fairest, rise,
And let the day break from thy brighter eyes,
Hark how the early cockrel crows, my Dear,
It Is not Aurora's, but thy chaunticlere;
Hark how the merry cherpers of the spring
To thee their goddess do their mattens sing!
The purple violets startle from their beds,
Gently erecting their sweet pearly heads
On their fresh leaved boulsters, each would be
A Benefactresse to thy treasury,
And shake into thy snowie breast a tear,
To be congealed into a jewel there:
Look how that woodh^ne at the window peeps,
And slilie underneath the casement creeps!
It Is honey-suckle shows, and tempting stands
To spend its morning Nectar in thy hands;
Look in the gardens of thy cheeks, and see
Aurora painting in thy rosarie:
The ripest mulberries do blush it thus,
Made guilty of the blood of Pyramus:
Nay had that modest fruit been stained with thine,
How like thy lips far brighter would it shine!
Compared with which, who e're betimes has seen
The ruddy, damask, Nabathean Queen,
With her red crimson morning wastcoat on,
Though in her glory she were looked upon
Newly with Sunbeams brush't, shall say at the best;
It Is a pale waterish redness in the East;
Nay, and that beauty which in her we see,
Is not her own, but borrowed too from thee;
The Sun himself reflects, he is but thy Moon,
Hide but thy face, and he is eclipst at noon.
Cast off that drowsy mantle of the night,
And rise, Amanda, or 'twill never be light,
Thy beauty only can drive night away,
Rise, rise, my Fairest, or we lose a day.
A morning Salute to Amanda.
NOw a good morning to my sweetest love,
Health from all mankind and the Saints above;
Ave, Amanda; spare that dew that lies
On thy fair hand to wash my lovesick eyes,
That at my prayers I may better see,
Virgin most sweet, to tell my beads to thee:
I am a Papist, zealous, strict, precise,
Amanda is the Saint I idolize.
To Amanda washing her hands.
HOw prettily those dabchick fingers play,
And sport with the cool Nymph, which does obey
Their doubtful motions, opens every where,
Where e're they please to dive and ravish her!
Cupid with a gold basin and Ewre stands,
Shedding rose water on thy lilie hands;
Officious Venus too her self stands by
With towels like thy maid to wipe them dry.
See from thy fingers pretty bubbles fall,
A fair Narcissus cloistered in them all!
No, no, that broken bubbles echo there,
Told me Narcissus was not half so fair:
See in each bubble a bright smiling less,
Each bubble is Amanda's looking-glass.
To Amanda after she had washed.
Hark how these bubbles talk of thee, and break
Themselves in their last breath thy name to speak!
Hark how they sigh and wish they Crystal were,
They might be ever pendents in thy ear!
That water slung away! No, no, my Fair,
With it no Chymick Essence can compare;
It Is clarifi'd and quick'ned with the balm,
The morning philter of thy dewie palm.
The sweetness of thy hands remains yet,
'Twill make me fair to wash my face with it:
Oh I must drink; Amanda, give it me,
It Is Nectarella, and does taste of thee.
To Amanda walking in the Garden.
ANd now what Monarch would not Gardener be,
My fair Amanda's stately gate to see;
How her feet tempt! how soft and light she treads,
Fearing to wake the flowers from their beds!
Yet from their sweet green pillowes every where,
They start and gaze about to see my Fair;
Look at yon flower yonder, how it grows
Sensibly! how it opes its leaves and blows,
Puts its best Easter clothes on, neat and gay!
Amanda's presence makes it holy day:
Look how on tip-toe that fair lilie stands
To look on thee, and court thy whiter hands
To gather it! I saw in yonder crowd
That Tulip-bed, of which Dame-Flora's proud,
A short dwarf flower did enlarge its stalk,
And shoot an inch to see Amanda walk;
Nay, look, my Fairest, look how fast they grow!
Into a scaffold method spring! as though
Riding to Parl'ament were to be seen
In pomp and state some royal amorous Queen:
The gravel'd walks, though even as a die,
Lest some loose pebble should offensive lie,
Quilt themselves over with downie moss for thee,
The walls are hanged with blossomed tapestrie;
To hide her nakedness when looked upon,
The maiden fig tree puts Eves apron on;
The broad-leav'd Sycomore, and every tree
Shakes like the trembling Aspe, and bends to thee,
And each leaf proudly strives with fresher air,
To fan the curled tresses of thy hair;
Nay, and the Be too, with his wealthy thigh,
Mistakes his hive, and to thy lips does fly;
Willing to treasure up his honey there,
Where honey-combs so sweet and plenty are:
Look how that pretty modest Columbine
Hangs down its head to view those feet of thine!
See the fond motion of the Strawberrie,
Creeping on the earth to go along with thee!
The lovely violet makes after too,
Unwilling yet, my Dear, to part with you;
The knot-grasse and the dazies catch thy toes
To kiss my Fair ones feet before she goes;
All court and wish me lay Amanda down,
And give my Dear a new green flowered gown.
Come let me kiss thee falling, kiss at rise,
Thou in the Garden, I in Paradise.
To Amanda seeming to deny his request.
PRetty, coy, modest thing! how lovingly
She seems to grant me, what she does deny!
Troth, little Cupid, it is a pretty Art
To look another way, and strike a heart;
But why, my boy do teach the women it,
Who whilst they say they will not shoot, do hit?
Well-plaid, good Angler, with thy sportive bait,
To catch it from me when I think I have it.
But why, Amanda, am I thus denied,
And after so long treaty cast aside?
Perhaps thou love to hear me ask of thee,
To laugh at my poor Courtship beggerie:
Can thou be so unkind? must I forbear
To love Amanda? Strange! well though, my Fair,
We must return our Pledges, prethie then
Take all thy surety kisses back again.
First my indebted lips shall pay thee thine,
Then thou shall kiss me till thou pay'st me mine:
Paying our debts shall make's indebted more,
We Will kissing pay, and paying run of the score,
And run so long, so deep in debt, my Dear,
Till neither on's can pay his vast Arrear;
So in loves lawful action by my troth
The catch-heart Cupid shall arrest us both;
And if that little hum-Bayliffe in my suite
Arrest Amanda, and she prosecute
Her Creditor for debt again; for thee
I Will take no bail, none shall be given for me,
But these my arms shall thy close prison be,
And thou shall find a prison too for me;
Bridewel or Gatehouse, Heaven to my heart,
Whilst thou my Keeper and my Prison art:
Nor do I care, but pray there may not be
These hundred years a Jail-delivery.
But what is the meaning of this feigned denial,
Was it to check my hopes, or make a trial
Of my undoubted love? Amanda, know,
The hasty current stopped does overflow.
Thou art a richer jewel, it is not fit
So little asking should obtain thee yet;
Porters with whom such wealthy treasures are,
Open not the door till they know who is there;
Let my Dear know I will not pillage her,
I only ask to be her treasurer.
I love to feel that hand that pats me so,
And seems to say me yes in saying no.
To Amanda desirous to drink.
CAlling for beer! know not the gods they ought
To send thee Nectar for thy mornings draught
I Am sure the Heavens do allow it you,
Ambrosia-Caudles for your breakfast too;
How is it? surely this lazy Ganimed
Sleeps it, and is not yet got out of's bed:
What not yet come! Amanda, by that face
I Will turn this punie Butler out of's place.
And drain the skies till there no Nectar be,
But what the gods shall beg as alms from thee.
To Amanda inviting her to walk.
COme, it is a morning like thy self, my Fair,
Sweet as thy breath the spring perfumes the air
With the fresh fragrant odours of its balm,
Stilled from the last nights dew, a pleasing calm
Invites thee forth; there is no unruly blast,
No saucie wind to give the least distaste;
In the disordering of those curles, which move
As if each hair were with it self in love;
Thy fingers made those rings, and every hair,
Thinks it does still embrace thy finger there:
Hark how the birds play Consorts over and over!
Hark to that modest beggar at the door,
Whose lungs breath spices! gentle Zephyrus
Whispers, and through the keyhole calls to us;
The Sun himself yonder expectant stays,
And strewes the golden atoms of his rays,
To guild thy paths; though in post-haste he be,
Yet he stands still to look and gaze on thee.
The Heavens court thee, Princely Oberon
And Mab his Emp'resse both expect thee yon,
They wait to see thee, sport the time away,
And on green beds of dazies dance the hay;
In their small acorn posnets, as they meet
Quaffe off the dew, lest it should wet thy feet.
The black-birds whistle, and the Finches sing
To welcome thy approach, and not the Spring.
Come then, my Turtle, let us make our flight,
And browse it in the arbours of delight;
To the next me low-Tempe let us move;
Let Us fly to Heaven on the wings of love,
And when kind Cupid has conveyed us thither,
We Will chastely sit and mingle bills together.
To Amanda walking abroad.
COme, come, Amanda, hand in hand we will walk
Hark how the birds of Love and Cupid talk
As if they lately had been drinking wine,
Each chirps a dialogue to his Valentine:
Nay, to their downie breasted Ladies yet,
At yon clear Crystal spring they are bibbing it,
As if all bowls too narrow-belli'd were,
And cups too shallow, with a hearty prayer.
Health afret health, each to his plumie less
Carowseth in the brook, and scorns the glass,
Nay, and as if they feared to drink it dry,
The hot cock-sparrow does still, Fill it, cry;
See how to's Mistress with his tippling bill,
The Nightingal does sweetly jugge it still!
That pretty Linnet seems to drink to me,
I Will pledge thy health, Amanda, kissing thee.
And whilst those feathered lovers water sip,
I Will quaffe the Orleans-claret of thy lip,
And suck those bloody mulberries in,
Till like that fruit my lips seemed stained with sin;
Then sin in 'ts blush shall make me more devout,
I Will kiss and sin, and sin a pardon out;
For thou 'rt so chaste, that who once kiss thee may,
In that one kiss wipes all his sin away;
Though blasphemy and murder it remit,
Pope Ioans Indulgence does come short of it,
It Is Heaven it self, and on that lip to dwell
Is to be sainted; of no greater hell
Can lovers dream, no greater sin commit
Then to leave kissing, and to part with it.
To Amanda like to be taken in a shower.
WEll done, kind unexpected AEolus,
Thy boys have bravely kept the rain from us,
Thank thee, as yet we have not wet a thread;
Me thoughts I saw over Amanda's head
Thy huff't-puff't blub-cheek't Caitiffes hover,
And stretch their lungs to blow the last shower over;
Then the sweet plump-fac't rogues, when fair
And clear it was, as if they breathless were
To save Amanda, begged and kept a stir
To get my leave they might take breath from her
I gave my grant, they kissed, each kiss did prove
They were no winds, but Angels fallen in love.
How can my Dearest, then my dotage blame,
If I so often call on Amanda's name;
The courtly Cherubims my rivals be,
And Heaven makes thee it is Penelope.
To Amanda fearing a second shower.
WHat means this woman-like unconstant weather,
These spungie clouds so strangely squeezed together!
Should my Deares face be once so over-cast,
My eyes would deluge till the storm were past;
But when her pleasing Sunshine once appears,
Her rays of beauty dry up all my tears:
See the clouds blown away, be then to me
Kind as the storms and tempests are to thee;
And like the Heavens cast those vailes away,
Unmuffle, sweetest, and thy beams display;
It has cleared up, yet still it is cloudie though,
The weather's fair, when my Fair makes it so
Fear not, Amanda, but unmask thy eyes,
Come prethy, I Will unpin those mummeries.
'Twill rain no more, I Will kiss thy cheeks, my Fair,
It Is May without an April shower there.
An Answer to Amanda's question.
PHilosophers, who in old days did live,
Say it is Jove makes water through a sieve;
Perhaps their god is drunk he leakes so fast,
Or else some Doctor must his urine cast;
I Will tell thee Fairest, Heavens bank'ront King,
Grown poor through lust does silver hailstones fling
In stead of gold, the shower aimed at thee,
He feign would take thee as his Danae.
I Will tell thee, my Amanda, whence it is,
It rained so much to day, the reason's this,
The Sun espied thy beauty, looked upon it,
And Heaven sneez'd with looking too much on it.
To a Rival.
KEep off presumption; horrid impudence,
Bold monstrous traitor to my love, get hence;
Strange daring faith! venture to step between
A jealous Monarch, and a chaster Queen,
Go tempt a Kingdom kept by the magic spell
Of a Prince politic; I Am loves Machavel;
This is my Florence, and thou tempt'st from me
Not an Italians wife, but Italy;
Ransack the great Turks Seraglio, try
TO out-pimp the lustful Sultans jealousy;
Hug the coy laurel, and expect to see
Daphne throw off her bark and follow thee:
Make old Endymion Pander, and confer
With Luna, till thou get new moons on her;
Surprise an Abbess and her Nunnerie,
Reconcile love to its antipathie;
Go dive amongst the haddocks and the whales,
Make love to Mare-maids and their Conger-tailes
Court some fair skillet-face, and swear she is neat,
For pricking skewers well and spitting meat;
Some greasy Cook-maid whose sweet dugs suck in
Receive and mingle dripping with her chin,
Who nightly with her knife her smock put off,
Scrapes thence some pipkins full of kitchin-stuffe,
Or woo some driv'ling Hag, whose pitfal skin
Makes lust mistake the wonted place of sin.
On some thrum'd Baucis spend thy hopes and labor,
Where thou may bathe thy lips in slime and slabber.
Cuckold the devil, get some Proserpine,
Some Succuba to be thy Concubine.
Engender with the nightmare, and beget
Dreams which may stang thy blood, and jellie it;
This once accomplished, thou may freely ask
Amanda's love, but before thou'st done thy task,
If thou dare once come near this sacred Court,
Wherein my Princess love and beauty sport,
I le stifle thy rebel heart in clotted gore
Of blood, with knives and daggers shroud thee over,
And make thee bear in the face, throat, heart and back,
More signs then he in Swallows Almanac.
A game at Chesse with Amanda.
J And Amanda on a day,
Sat down a game at Chesse to play,
Passing my Bishops with their Lawnes,
She was still for taking pawnes,
She played, I played, she chect me straight,
She wished, I wished it might be mate:
But then (said I) I must check you,
Or else you will check and beat me too.
To his most Noble Friend Sir T. L. B. of Shingle hall.
SIR, THat the only virtue is Nobility,
'Twas spoke in malice, and you will prov't a lie.
The Author of that sentence, lived he now
Would know his wit a scandal, knew he you.
Nay, Sir, that Nobles are the better sort;
Alas! the very times upbraid him for it;
And yet some hope to see our Noblemen
Some such as you consute the times again;
Though in their wisdoms now they dormantly,
Hush't in their private mansions quietly;
Had they such Martial souls, such fighting hands,
Redemption of their rights, three ^ and lands
Were easy work, and they might bravely get
More honor then a been latuit,
And the Art of keeping heads on safe; But I
Intend no plots, although a liberty
Of tongue to speak in this and the other sense,
Is safer far then that of conscience;
Yet te'nt allowed of; but however it is fit,
That Poets still should have their Quidlibet:
It is their charter, notwithstanding now
I Will make no use on it; only thus to you.
Sir, in each cast of your commanding eye,
Such reverend imperious glances fly,
Such royal stately looks, so sweet a grace
Of presence, that when now there is no face
Of Monarch in the land, amongst so many
Kings of the times, if'twill agree to any;
Better I cannot make the Court-salute,
Then with your stature and your greatness suit
(Setting all Steeples and all Fat-guts by)
If It please your Highness or your Majesty:
Such a well-timber'd man, of such a height,
And yet your years be hardly ten and eight!
What ever Nature's second thoughts might be,
Her first allowance was for Gemini.
Sir, there is such mixture in your countenance
Of Mars and Cupid, such a ridling glance,
We doubt what in your eyes those sparklings move;
Or warlike lightnings or the flames of love?
Sometimes I Have seen you (like Prince Paris stand
Ready to kiss his Helens lilie-hand)
All smiles, and then again me thinks I see
Within your face a whole Artillery:
Thus looks a bold adventurous Amazon,
A Lady with Knight-Errant's armor on:
Sure that Greek Cavalier looked something like
To you, who amongst the Spinsters tossed a pike,
Which you may be, I doubt, and pause upon it,
A young Achilles or a Bradamant;
Would any see Venus and Mars embrace,
They meet, and mingle loves upon your face;
By which I mean there is to be seen in you,
Sir Thomas Leventhorp, and Madam too;
Minos was such a Gallant sure, had you been there,
Nisus had sooner lost his purple hair,
( Sylla as lovesick, and as mad to wed)
You Would had a Kingdom and a Maidenhead;
Of all the beauties which in women shine,
Your Nature's wardrobe, but yet masculine.
Sir, in all this, I must commend with you;
Your well-belov'd, the Princely Mount ague.
To Mr. LILLY, Musick-Master in Cambridge.
SIR, I have seen your scip-jack singers fly,
As if their motion taugh't Ubiquitie:
I Have seen the trembling Cat'lin's smart and brisk
Start from the frets, dance, leap, and nimbly frisk
In palsy capers, prattling (a most sweet
Language of Notes) Curranto's as they meet:
I Have heard each string speak in so short a space
As if all spoke at once; with stately grace
The surley tenor grumble at your touch,
And the ticklish-maiden treble laugh as much,
Which (if your bowe-hand whip it wantonly,)
Most pertly chirps and jabbers merrily;
Li'e frolic Nightingals, whose narrow throats
Suck Music in and out, and gargle notes;
Each strain makes smooth, and curles the air again,
Like currents sucked by narrow whirlepits in;
Sometimes they murmur like the shallow springs,
Whose hasty streams forced into Crystal rings,
And checked by pebbles, pretty Music make
In kisses and such language as they speak,
It Is soft and easy, Heaven cannot out-do't,
That under Fairie-ground is nothing to it:
Who e're that earthly mortal Cherub be,
Whose well-tuned soul delights in melody:
He ventures hard, if for an hour he dares
To your surprising strains apply his ears,
We find such Magic in your Harmony,
As if to hear you were to hear and die.
Were you a Batchelour, and bold to try
Fortunes, what Lady's she, though never so high
And rich by birth, should see the tickling sport
Your finger makes, and would not have you for it;
Beyond those Saints who speak ex tempore,
Your well-spoke viol scorns tautologie;
And I in truth had rather hear you teach
Of The Lyra, then the rarest tub-man preach:
In's holy speeches he may strike my ears
With more of Heaven; you with more of the spheres,
I Have heard your base mumble and mutter too,
Made angry with your choleric hand, while you
With hasty jirks to vex and anger't more
Correct its stubbornness and lash it over:
I Have heard you pawse, and dwell upon an air,
(Then make it in the end (as lost to part it were)
Languish and melt away so leasurely,)
As if 'twere pity that its Echo die;
Then snatch up notes, as if your viol broke,
And in the breaking every splinter spoke:
I Have seen your active hands vault to and fro,
This to give grace, that to command your bow;
As if your singers and your instrument
By conspiration made you eminent.
We have good Music and Musicians here,
If not the best, as good as any where:
A brave old Irish Harper, and you know
English or French way few or none out-go
Our Lutanists; the Lusemores too I think
For Organists, the Sack-buts breath may stink,
And yet old Brownes be sweet, of the Violin
Saunders plays well, where Magge or Mel han't been.
Then on his Cornet brave thanksgiving Mun,
Plays on Kings Chapel after Sermon's done:
At those loud blasts, though he is out-gone by none,
Yet Cambridge glories in your self alone:
No more but thus, he that hears only you,
Hears Lilly play, and Doctor Coleman too.
You in the swiftness of your hand excel
All others, my Amanda sings as well,
No Music like to hers; I wish in troth,
That we with her might play in Consort both;
Might I my self, and you my friend prefer,
You with her voice should play, and I with her.
A Passion.
1.
SOlicit not my chaster eyes,
With those fair breasts that fall and rise,
I Will not lie betwixt those dugs
Where Cupid nestles, sleeps and snugs;
There is no goddess I adore,
To fight with those that call her whore:
Thou shall not surfeit in thy pride,
By me so falsely deifi'd.
No, hang a Mistress, I le have none,
No such toy to dote upon.
2.
Beauties faring, Loves conceit,
"Though her face be eighty-eight;
Called faithful, constant, fair,
Though Vaux in the dark plot treason there;
The Phoenix too must build his nest,
In The blessed Arabia of her breast;
Without her little dog though she
Or musk or civet dare not be.
Fie, fie, a Mistress I Will have none,
No such toy to dote upon.
3
I Will be no Merchant; nor sail nigh,
Those tempting India's of thy thigh;
Make an adventure, hit or miss,
And wrack my fancy for a kiss;
Fool to your laughing Ladyship,
To get a smile, or touch your lip;
Protest with oaths high and mighty,
That your spittle is aqua vitae.
No, hang a Mistress, etc.
4.
Amongst the gallants swear and rant,
And of your kindness boast and vant;
Then drink diseases down, and wave
All thoughts of sickness or the grave,
Pledge your health, and pledge it stoutly,
Pray over my cups, and drink devoutly;
Increase the Fever of my lust,
And never dream I am but dust.
Oh hang a Mistress, etc.
5.
Then vault and do some tumblers knack
That speaks me man, and shows my back;
Run in debt and pawn my goods,
To buy you fancies, gloves and hoods;
Then if the catch-pole chance to hale
And drag me to the loathsome goal;
There may your servant die and rot,
You never send, you see him not.
Shame on it, a Mistress, etc.
6.
At least I shall be cursed in this,
Your love, your beauty common is,
Then I receive my Rivals glove,
Murder, or else renounce my love;
Or late at night must walk the street,
Where ten to one some rogues I meet,
Only to watch till one of the clock
In The cold to see you in your smock;
And nothing do
But look at you
And through the keyhole too.
Oh hang a Mistress, I Will have none
No such toy to dote upon.
All that fair and amorous be,
Are Mistresses alike to me;
I Am in love with every one,
No, hanged, in love with none.
Amanda prethy pardon me,
In love with none, with none but thee.
To Amanda mistrusting her love.
IF any Stranger but appear,
Thy jealous Lover straight begins to fear;
If any letters come to thee,
Suspicion swiftly does come post to me;
In private if thou read them over,
I read it is love, and still suspect the more;
If after this thou chance to frown,
Despair brings night on, and my Sun goes down;
From me in anger if thou part,
A fearful palsy shakes my trembling heart;
But should thou bid me once abstain,
My breath would go, and never return again:
To rid me of these killing doubts,
Would I could see thee once make Babie-clouts.
To Amanda, on her picture drawn with a Lute in her hand
A Sweet fair draught, yet not completely true,
No, it must paint again to be like you;
Niggardly Art must be at greater cost,
Else your complexion is in colors lost;
A neat resemblance, yet who ever did do it,
Envied my eye, and drew a curtain to it;
A whimsie limner strange, what meant the toy,
Not like your self to make your picture coy!
Oh it was providence, thoughts of a wife,
Had killed me there, had you been drawn to the life;
But Fairest; that is beyond our modern powers,
Apelles hand ought to be seen in yours,
And Art must to that work a pupil show,
Durst cut a line with skilful Angelo;
Yet in the cast of the eye would like't you would be,
And then where e're I stand, you would look on me;
It was my chance to see it by candlelight,
Had you been there I could have stayed all night;
I kissed those hands, no less nor more could do,
But yet my fancy kissed the substance too,
Me thoughts my lips did some impressions make,
The awful Cat'line seemed to tremble and shake:
Had you been there to play as I did wis,
I Would have kept time with an observant kiss;
A sweeter Lute for you would I prepare,
In tune you should have found my heart strings were;
So mingling aires and lips till break of day,
We would a sweet chaste ravishing Consort play
Without a discord, only this I Would do,
I Would keep false time, false time in kissing you.
Oh Fairest, that thou were it but drawn on me,
Then blessed should I thy happy picture be;
I stretch my arms out, and still wish the same,
Oh that you were but hanging on this frame;
Then for your beauties sake, straight should I be,
Hanged in some princely Monarchs gallery;
Nor would I care could I but often see,
You come, and kindly look and smile on me.
Then would I draw y' again upon my heart,
And be loves masterpiece of Love and Art.
A Dream.
AS in the perfumed garden yesterday,
Amongst the primrose fast asleep I lay,
My busy soul upon a ramble went,
By love and fancy on an errand sent.
In at Amanda's private chamber door
She made her slight, and viewed her over and over.
The more she looked, the more she liked, and fain
She would have staid, and never returned again;
First on her cherrie lip she played, and then
On her fair cheek, so to her lip again;
Where having sucked till she was filled with love,
She dropped into her downie breast; the next remove
Was to the chamber of her heart, to see
If she could take possession there for me;
When in she came, there pretty Cupid sat
In state, and laugh't at her, she glad of that
Kindly embraced and kissed the smiling boy,
And whilst they kissed, my Sweetheart leap't for joy;
Then could my jocant soul no longer stay,
But straight to bring the news came post away:
Her flight was swift, and with her lovingly
She brought along, [most willing companie]
Amanda's soul, so loath to part they were;
The best on it is, she left a Cupid there.
To Amanda on her dimples.
WHen e're I let my meditations fly,
And give them wings to take their liberty,
Like the neat Cyprian bird, the cleanly Dove,
Which no fowl sloven stenement does love,
But a fair stately house and nere forsakes
The pleasant fabric to which once it takes,
So my thoughts fly, (from whence they never will part)
So the comely mansion of a candid heart;
Each winged thought to thee, Amanda, flies,
And under the crystal windows of thine eyes
Lights on thy damask cheeks, where they do play,
The wooing turtles winding every way,
Till by young Cupids craft they are taken in,
Love's dimpled pitfalls of thy cheeks and chin,
Three nests of new-flown smiles on roses near,
To which a thousand unslegg'd Angels are,
Chirping pin-feather'd, pirking Cherubs sit,
Sweet blushing Babes playing at cherrie-pit,
Some win and smile, some lose their cherries, then
Down to thy lips, and gather fresh again,
Sweet kissing lips, which all the Winter show
The ripest cherries, and their blossoms too,
When e're thou weep'st, each Grace does snatch a tear,
And fill a dimple with it, then wash her there,
That pimping Cupids come, to cool their wings,
In these chaste vailes, each from thine eyelid bring
A liquid crystal pearl, whose parts in love
Unto each other as a center move,
So it remains a gemme (though moist and wet)
Whose superficies is its Cabinet,
And loath to break it is, till hastily,
An Infant having snatched it from thine eye,
Flies to a pleasant dimple, and within't
Dissolve the Jewel, and so bath him in it,
Baths in a dimple, which of rosebuds smells,
Thine eyne and cheeks the Graces Bath and Wells.
On Amanda's black eyebrows.
NEar to an eye that sparkles so,
It Is strange so dark an hair should grow
Upon a skin so white and fair,
It Is strange there is so black an hair,
At first 'cause it so near does lie,
I guest 'twas Sunne-burnt with thine eye,
But then I thought if so it were,
'T would melt the snow which lies as near,
And scorch and make those lilies die,
Upon the shuttings of thine eye,
And those fresh roses to which grow,
Upon thy sweeter cheeks below.
Then I conceived that there might be,
In those black brows a mystery,
That Venus for Adonis sake,
Commanded nature there to make.
(A pretty strange conceited thing)
Two arches of a mourning ring.
Thence it is that those black hairs do grow,
Thence are thy brows enameled so.
Good wishes to Amanda.
MAy my Amanda live,
And live in health,
May no desease, no cross,
No sudden loss,
Nor want of wealth,
No angry push, no pain nor smart,
Afflict or grieve,
Her tender melting heart.
2.
May the Heavens and the earth
Conspire her mirth,
By Io I conjure thee Love,
May all that is good
Club her delight,
May Cupid give her all the sweets of love,
And kindly in the coolest night
Most chastely warm her blood.
3.
Never may she wipe a tear,
From her bright eye,
Never may she sigh or wear,
A mourning vale,
In black, look pale,
Till in her cheeks those fresher roses die,
And where they blush it so,
Nothing but ghastly lilies grow.
4.
Never may she scowl or frown,
Or chafe or fret.
Never may she meet a Clown,
That smells of sweat,
By him be kissed
Never may the bristles of a bumpkin's chin,
Or the gripes o's callow fist,
Injure her softer sweeter skin.
5.
Never may my Dearest die,
A sudden death
Nor on her deathbed lie,
Gasping for breath,
Whilst all about
Her friends drop tears.
But like a brighter lamp in the end,
May she burn clear and spend,
Her store of oil, and so go out.
6.
Never may her slender wrist,
Be over-prest,
Nor rudely wrung too hard;
May her fair hand,
Be luckie still;
At what e're game she plays, may she command
The surest winning card,
And never may she want her will.
7.
Amongst great Madams whatsoever,
My fair appear,
Never may she want an eye,
TO admire and gaze,
Nor tongue to praise
Her rare well-featur'd physnomie,
Still may she called be
The sweetest and the fairest she.
8.
And if the greatest Love
Shall bless me so,
So as to make her mine,
And she shall know
No other love,
All the night long upon her slumbring eyne,
May Cupids lodge in swarms,
Never may she startle from mine arms.
9.
But if I cannot be thought
Worthy that love,
For which so long I Have sought,
For which I Have strove,
So zealously,
When I am gone and lost, oh may she find
A heart as kind,
That knows to love as well as I.
Amanda's Beauty preferred.
OF noted pearlesse beauties I shall tell,
Yet leave Amanda without parallel,
From thy bright eyes I have received a wound,
Deeper then Henry from his Rosamond,
I Will be thy Knight and Vaughans office do,
I Will bo thy Labyrinth and Keeper too
As thou art fairer then French Isabel,
So in thy breast far greater comforts dwell;
Thy love can me to richer joys prefer,
Then, e're she did her lovely Mortimer:
Had thou been living when that famous Less
Fitz-waters daughter so admired was,
Sweetest Matilda when to Dunmow gone,
Had never been courted by the Princely John;
If my Amanda e're shall be a Nun,
Oh Heavens may she be a wedded one,
I Will answer all her Vows of chastity,
I Will be her constant Monk and Monastry,
I Will be the careful Abbot, she shall be
My pretty Abbess and my Nunnerie,
What though the Nunn'rie fall, we will love, and then
Replenish with young Monks and Nunns again;
Because thy beauty is of greater power,
Then that of Alice walking on the tower,
Stormed by all features in their excellence,
Edward the black (that stout victorious Prince,)
With less disdain might have been checked by thee,
Then by the Lady of Count Sal'sburie,
If Owen Tudor praised his Madams hue,
'Cause in her cheeks the rose and lilie grew,
You Are more praiseworthy then was Katherine,
There Is fresher York and Lancaster in thine:
Had thy sweet features with thy beauty met
In William de-la-pool's fair Margaret,
The Peers surpised had never given consent,
For the Duke of Suffolks five years banishment,
For the Exchange of Mauns, Anjou and Main,
TO have given a Kingdom for thee had been gain:
What King would not his Crown and Scepter pawn,
To purchase lilies, and the whitest lawne,
From thy pure hands, jems from thy sparkling eyes,
Thy rubie lips, and such rich rarities?
Who would not leave a throne one night to lie
Upon the sweet bags of thy Rosarie?
Most princely Virgin, had thou lived, when
The goddess Beauty was adored by men;
Edward would have preferred thee far before,
The Goldsmiths Jewel, famous Missresse Shore,
Had he but seen thy face, and heard thy wit,
To thee that King his sugared lines had writ,
The great Controwler Love had made thee be,
Great Lady Governesse to's Majesty:
For who Amanda would not put off state,
And lose a Heav^n with thee t'inoculate?
Who would not forfeit all his liberty,
Locked up and folded in thine arms to be?
Were I a Sultan or an Emperor,
Thus would I write to thee my Paramour.
"Off go my robes and these gold chains of mine,
"To twist my legs with those fost legs of thine;
"I Will be no longer Prince, may I but be,
" Square of the body to so fair a she;
"I Will lose my honor and my royal throne,
"And think I have them all in thee alone;
" I who am worshiped with a bended knee,
"Will be thy servant, and bend mine to thee;
"Off goes my Crown, I Will be no King of men,
"That Princely name I Will never put on again;
"Till thou unto thine arms when I am hurld,
Shall make me King of thy sweet lesser world;
"No kingly pleasure like to loves delight,
"Thy kiss shall crown me, I Will be crowned all night;
"And when the pleasant night is past away,
"Then shall succeed my Coronation day;
"We Will spend our time in love's sweet merriments,
"In stately tiltings, justs and tournaments;
"Like the stout Brandon in the Court of France.
"His loved Mary's honor to advance;
"Had he then took (thou brightest Queen of light
"Thy name his signal when he 'gan to fight,
"Without chastisements from his piercing steel,
"The Giant Almain had been forced to kneel;
"Were Surrey traveled now to Tuskanie,
"Offering to reach his gauntlet out for thee;
"If on the guilt tree in the Lift he set.
"Thy pretty, lovely, pretty counterfeit,
"All Planet-struck with those two stars, thy eyne,
"(Outshining far, his heavenly Geraldine;)
"There would no staff be shivered, none would dare,
"A beauty with Amanda's to compare:
"All those fair Ladies which we Beauties call,
"Are Mauritanians, and not fair at all,
"The proudest Madam, and the brightest she,
"Is but a Gypsy, if compared with thee,
"And all those Princely fair ones that live nigh,
"Are tawnie, tanned and sunburned with thine eye;
"Off goes my robe, and these gold chains of mine,
"To twist my legs with those soft legs of thine.
Thou art so fair, that in a Sunshine day,
When Phoebus beams are darted every way,
If thou walk out with thy encountering eyes,
Sweet Daphne fills me with strange jealousies,
Should thy chaste body turn to a Laurel tree,
Oh may my brows be e're impaled with thee;
If I Am a Poet thou have made me so;
Then if thy arms to Laurel branches grow,
It Is fit in justice, and in love thou twine,
Those leavie arms about this head of mine.
In the green pastures, if thou walk about,
Where crooked crystal streams flow in and out,
If Jove should change thee as his Inach is,
Straight would I wish my metempsycosis;
A female shape my loving soul should take,
So would I be a Milkmaid for thy sake;
My lips should milk thee, and thy milk should be
Sack possets, and sweet Syllibubs to me;
Into a Cow by Jove were thou bettaid,
I Would stroke thy tetts, and be thy darie-maid;
The god must needs change me in changing you,
If thou were Io I Would be Argus too.
Within the wood, when thou walk'st here and there,
The chaste Calisto's story makes me fear;
Up to the Sun if thou but lift thy eyes,
I Would read the peevish Clytie's jealousies;
Thinking thou may by Phoebus be preferred,
I think on her who was alive interred,
Interred alive should thou (my Dearest) be,
For Phoebus sake, as was Lencothoe;
Surely the mournful Sun to solemnize
His fairest well-beloveds obsequies;
Would weep upon thy grave, (to sprinkle thee)
Showers of Nectar to eternity;
Styled from thy Corpse then would arise from thence
Nothing but perfumes and sweet frankincense;
From thy dew'd grave still there would flow again,
Odours and incense for the gods of men.
When e're I see the kindled fire flame,
I think how Jove unto AEgina came;
Though I am not so hot a flame as Jove,
His flame was fire, mine is the flame of love;
And if good laws shall stand in force with us,
We will beget the world an AEacn^:
I fear all shapes what e're appear to me,
Least in it some god be come to ravish thee;
It was a Bull that took Europa up,
Bright Theophane makes me dread the tup;
The shepherd minds me of Mnemosyne.
The Eagle, Astria makes me think on thee,
Still I suspect when e're from thee I go,
Some rival counterfeit Amphitrio,
For Laeda's sake I hate the lovely Swan,
I hate not only animals but man.
Nay when I drink a Cup of wine to thee,
I think how Bacchus took Erigone.
Should thou be crusted up like Niobe,
And turned to marble like the Parian she,
In Guido's Temple hugged by the noble boy,)
Thou could not lover want, nor they love's joy;
For should thou die, and over thy grave have set,
Thy heavenly featured carved counterfeit;
Hard by thy tomb I Would stand immoveably,
And on thy image ever fix my eye,
As if both eyes (too narrow flood gates) kept
The moisture back, and I too slowly wept;
Like marble I Would sweat, each pore should drop a tear,
Tear after tear, till dry as dust I were;
Then should my body into ashes fall,
Black ashes, mourners for thy Funeral;
Sweet Cupid, Sexton to this dust of mine,
Should throw in dust to dust, my dust to thine;
Should thou not love me whilst thou live here,
But give thy heart to some one other where,
If thou to Elysium before thy servant went,
I Would make thy very Statue penitent,
So strange a mourner for thy death I Would be.
Thy tomb or ghost should fall in love with me,
Were thou to pass over Cocytus ferrie
In that old Sculler, Grandsire Charons wherrie,
The wrizled gray-beard for his hapennie
Would lick his lips, and ask a kiss of thee;
On those black lakes should thou but drop a tear,
Styx and Cocytus would run crystal clear;
The Cells of darkness should thou go to view,
The scorched souls would 'gin their Barichu;
If with one kiss great Jove thou would but please,
Ixion's ransomed and the Bellides;
Heaven would readmit poor Tantalus,
And grant reprieve to the Pirate Sisyphus:
For one sweet smile from thy pure lip can quell
The wrath of furies, and redeem half hell;
Oh my Amanda you are so rate a she,
There Is none has features to compare with thee,
Should the age present, and the ages past
Club for a beauty, they will come short at last;
I Will name no Helen snatched by old Priam's boy,
For whom a ten years siedge was laid at Troy,
With so great slaughter both of horse and men;
Those we count trulls would have been handsome then:
I Will name no Hero, for the stars have blessed us,
With better beauties then that star of Sestus;
Holland's Diana, and another Moon,
The fair Philippa, like the Sun at noon.
A heavenly daughter of Northumberland's,
Young Cappell's glory, and the Lady Sands,
That blithe smooth Madam; had I thee alone
Amanda, I Would enjoy these all in one;
Thou art a matchless peerlesse Paragon,
One that an Angel might well dote upon;
Had that comparison bin made by thee,
Which once was made by proud Cassiope,
Those water Fairies the Neriades.
Sending no horrid Monster from the seas,
To eat up beasts, and men; would proudly tell,
That thy sweet Beauty was their parallel;
Or to a rock suppose thou chained were,
To be devoured by a Monster there,
As was the heavenly fair Andromeda,
The rock would moulder or else melt away:
With thy sweet self, as deeply fallen in love;
Each Angel would thy Guardian Perseus prove:
With less presumption then Antigone,
Heaven's proud Juno cannot compare with thee;
No, my Amanda, for I dare prefer,
Thee 'sore the stately Queen of the Thunderer,
Fore her and comely Venus both together,
Though Jove bring bolts, and Mars his gauntlet hither.
On Amanda's dimples.
ONce more I Am fallen into an ecstasy!
How I could gaze, gaze till I Have lost my eye
Gaze on those dimples in thy cheeks and chin,
Where the three Graces play at in and in:
Three sacred vaults within whose rosy wombes,
Sweet Venus all her pretty smiles entombes;
Babes which born laughing, laughing live and die
Then are interred within thy rosarie:
They haunt thy lovely cheeks, and here and there,
Their smiling ghosts appearing disappear;
Each from his head has hanging down to's feet,
A lilie leaf in stead of's winding sheet;
Shrouded in damask rose from top to toe,
About thy dimples they pass to and fro,
Still to thy dimples little shades do come,
Thinking thy dimples their Elysium;
And I my self find such an Eden there,
Such heavenly features, Heaven so every where,
That with a willing heart I could resign,
My clay to the dust and shut my dying eyne;
Might my soul be when from my Corpse it flies,
Amanda's Saint, and she its Paradise.
To Amanda on her black brows.
You Are fair and black, thy brows as black as jett,
But never were black and white so lovely met,
The Moor's black Prince would court thee, there is in you
The English Beauty and the Negro's too:
I Have read of Goshen which the light did cover,
When a thick darkness was all Egypt over,
Here Is a transcendent wonder, here is even,
Cimmerian darkness in the face of Heaven:
Enameled black upon thy brows is set,
Which other Madams do but counterfeit;
And those black patches which our Ladies wear,
To set their lilie out, is in thy hair:
Nor do thy twinkling eyes like two, clear, bright
Fair stars appear, 'cause in thy brows it is night,
No but thy brows because so nigh they stand
With thy bright eyes, are Sun-burn't, black't and tan'd,
Thy brows do mourn, and sit it is if e're
Thy ey'n, Amanda, shed one single tear;
^fe're thou weep 'st but once, although thou never,
Weep more, it is sit thy eyebrows mourn for ever.
To his best friend Mr. T.H.
True SIR, THe Country Gentleman who never mist,
When he walked out his Faulc'ner at his fist:
Who once besides his hounds was able,
To keep a pack of servants at his Table;
Now trudges through the streets in any fashion,
To a Committee, and returns in passion,
Chewing his lips for cud; it is not hard,
To known by's silver-haire malignant beard,
And his delinquent boots, in which he goes,
Wetshod in the sweat of's dirtie mellow toes;
It Is pity troth such good old Gentlemen,
Are forced to wear their old boots over again.
Nay Sir, the Prelates beg, his Lordships grace,
Walks with a scurvie Sequestration face,
The good old honest Priest is grown so poor,
He says his grace at another man's door;
You may known by the reliqus of's old Querp-coat,
By's Canonical rags he is a Priest you must know it,
His girdle is greasy, he does all to befat it,
Black puddings he hangs, and sauciges at it,
Though once he preached well, and learnedly spoke,
Now he has not so much as a pig in a poke.
True Sir, the Clergy suffers, none can teach,
The truth with freedom, or with courage preach,
In stead of some good worthy pious Knox,
W' have nothing now but a Jack in a box;
The people without life or soul lie dead,
As under the aspect of Medusa's head;
The Gentry groans, the Nobles muzled are,
The heavy taxes make the Bumpkins swear,
And Aradesmen break; the truth of the storie's this,
The times are bad, and all things are amiss;
It is an iron age, an age that swarms
With vipers, yet had I within mine arms
My lovely sweet one, that same Fairest she,
Whose love accepts my bribing Poetry;
Pretty Amanda's kissing Alchymie,
Can make this age a golden age to me.
To my Noblest and ever-Honoured friend, Sir Thomas Leventhorp, Baronet.
SIR, ME thinks it is time to know the joys of love,
'Toward great Hymen's altar time to move;
And now no longer ward, it is fit you be
Guardian to some transcendent Deity,
And make some wealthy beauty fortunate,
Not only in the share of your estate
And honors, but in the richer treasury
Of your fair person, and your sparkling eye,
Where a bright, radiant soul displayes
Its chaster twinkling flames, like the Suns rays
In a clear Crystal font, when Zephyrus
That modest, lukewarm, Virgin- incubus
Makes the sweet Nymph hold out (the lovers bliss)
Cool trembling lips to take a passant kiss:
It Is pity that so rare a soul should be
Confined to thought, and in the Nunnerie
Of its own lodge, lead a monastic life,
Barred of all Consort joys, which a good wife
Diffuseth like an Amber-box, wherein
Unguents, balm, spice, and perfumed oil have been
Closely imprisoned, which now first take the air,
Like myrrh and spikenard, when they bruised are,
And vie their odours with the violet,
The roses and carnations which are set
In my Amanda's cheeks, whose early breath
In The morning is an Antidote to death;
Sweeter then Cynamon, like Frankincense,
Preservative against the pestilence
Of melancholy fits, the dull disease
Of nods, brown studies, and such plagues as these;
It Is fit so rare a body be possessed
By two fair souls; so fair a soul be blessed
With two fair bodies too; may both your mind
And body pleasure in its likeness find;
May she you choose be such, whose shape and feature
Shall speak her goddess rather then a creature;
May she be Echo to your worth, in which
I fully wish she may be rarely rich,
In whatsoever does Admiration move,
In all the dainties of her sex and love,
As for a single life, it is nothing less
Then Hermitage amongst a wilderness
Of women, who do veil their rarities,
Or else are fruitless or forbidden trees;
Besides, he studies Nature best it is known,
Who has a Physick-garden of his own;
Which is most state, another land to till
And plough in common, or be Lord at will
In a Freehold? Nay, then consider, Sir,
In robbing Orchards what the troubles are;
Though now from climbing private walls you free
Yet think what it is that tempts to th'robberie;
Youth and fair lovely fruit, though never so good
And clean, sometimes the chastest flesh and blood
Must needs be bobbing, now to Tantalize,
And always live by feeding of the eyes,
Is a poor silly banquet, on the thin,
Small, saplesse species that are served in,
By colored atoms, which an Elephant
Is as soon cloid with as the smallest Ant.
I know you have a Martial warlike heart,
Your looks speak valor, which it is fit y' impart
To the next age, and though you would rather make
Your sword eat men, then have a woman take
Your noble spirits prisoners, 'yet to give
Birth to an heir, and that your name may live,
Do like your fathers, left you guilty be
Of The murder of your blood and family.
Nothing like his love to Amanda.
GO ye great Ranters, into the wild embraces
Of your stewed Madams; lick their varnisht faces,
Where slimie snailes have crept; brag of the fee,
Wherewith they bribe your spending lechery;
Then swash it to the Tavern, and confess
That lust maintains your pride and drunkenness.
Go, you mad City-Huffs, who fright young heirs,
And fill those Lack-wits with strange jealous fears
Of your pretended valor make fair shows,
But dare as little as they to come to blows;
Go with your Guardian Hectors who maintain
(Some petty booty, some small prize to gain,)
A windfall Ladies honor, keep for pay
The old Troy-ruines of some Hecuba;
Jumble her bones within her shrivled skin,
And take the mud-walls of her carcass in;
Hug rotten Countesses which pockeaten are,
As if their Master-Coffin-wormes were there,
Who for a legacy would swear 'twere sweet
To spend of the stinking Corpse in the winding sheet.
Go, cursed Misers, dammed over and over,
For grinding the lean faces of the poor;
Morgage your carking souls and bodies to
A Usurer as merciless as you:
To fill your bags seek and scrape every where,
Dig to the center, and die beggars there;
Go cheat and overreach only to fill,
And take up paper with a tedious Will;
Create trouble to the Executors to prize
Your wealthy goods, and pay out legacies,
Then your heir laughing, play at Hoop-all-hid
As once yonr rustie cossin'd money did:
Depart in hopes to be saved after all,
For the repairing an old Hospital,
Or some poor Schoolmasters augmentation,
An exhibition to some Corporation
To set young Tradesmen up or so, then die
Rich in your gifts, and poor in charity.
Go, ye State-leaches, in your blessings cursed,
Sweetly suck blood and money till you burst,
Fleece a whole Kingdom, then like silly sheep,
Which butchers in some fat'ning pastures keep
Only for slaughter, amongst cutthroats fall,
Pil'd, poll'd and snip't, shier'd and cashiered of all,
Empsons and Dudleyes, Speakers and men o'th chair,
Spoiled as the Sultans griping Basha's are.
Go, ye Court-spaniels, quest in honors sent,
Perfumed and polish't with a complement,
Fawn and shake tails to Ladies, keep them fed
With bribing viands of the banquet-bed,
With them their little dogs and Cupids play,
Till you be cracked and broken too as they,
Then your hope's lost, you slighted and forgot,
Down quickly to some Country goal, and rot;
But say, your Princes Favorite you be,
Grace't with the loose-hamm'd Courtiers knee,
Know there is Autumn in the midst of the spring
^'th' Court, and if the smiling face of the King
In which your honor lives, be overcast
With clouds, you only blossom to a blast.
Go, plodding Students, ramble through the Arts,
Learn all that science to the soul imparts,
Let notions huddle, swim and multiply,
Till they do muster into heresy;
Receive those Centaur's and Chimera's in,
Which monster-like against true Reason sin;
Go crack your brains with Elenches which are bred
By swarms within a crazie brooding head,
Bring to the wrack your judgment, reason, sense,
To screw a truth from non-Intelligence;
Infect thy wits, with buzzing thoughts which fly
About like gnats, and sting out Reasons eye;
Read errors till thou squint on truth; and make
Unity double and treble seem, so mistake,
And then at last be served like the Logic elfe,
Proved two eggs three, supped on the third himself;
What a great business it is! what strength we spend,
What wit and time, all to no other end
(...) parts and words, and wrangle still,
As (...), we needs must prove free will!
To hold predistimation or decrees,
Or some such ridling, needless points as these!
What an act it is to write a book, then die,
And be confuted by posterity!
These are sad heavy thoughts of working brains,
Most fruitless projects, yet require pains;
The Huffes and Hector do contrive and plot
To hug a Madam or a pottle-pot.
Both which they love alike, although their drink
And wine be sweet, perhaps their Madams stink:
The Miser toils, and all his carking care
Can seldom purchase from his heir a tear,
Nay, whilst he labors, strives and gaspes for breath
The frolic wag laughs the old fool to death,
The Statesman hatches Cuckows eggs, gets in
A stock, then bever-like dies for his skin:
The Courtier lives on hopes, his Princes frown
Till the next smile kills him, and casts him down,
Still his preferment is adulterate,
Subject alike to honor and to hate:
The Scholar keeps a stir to immortalize
His name, tumbles and tosses Libraries,
Puts on his doting winter-rug at night,
Sits up till two, two or three lines to write.
Well, well, Amanda, be but ruled by me,
We Will spend our time in no such foolerie,
May I but make thee Dearest to my mind,
We will leave children, and not books behind.
To Amanda supposing and wishing she were with child.
WIth what delight and joy, me thinks I see
Thy swelling womb increase its treasury!
What a sweet poison 'twas! if all maids past
Fifteen, could themselves poison so, how fast
They Would kick up heels, be venomed in their beds;
And murder those Chimera's Maidenheads;
How stately my Amanda looks! she seems to me
Diana in her crescent Majesty.
What frozen creature is it, will not wish as soon
As Phebe's spied himself the man in the Moon?
What Virgin thy fair Lunar globe can see,
And not straight wish to be in the full like thee?
I wish, my Dearest, I could hear thee say,
The little boy kicks, willing to make his way
Into his fathers arms: Oh may he be
His own sweet mothers picture, not like me
Ah could I hear it, [I have often smiled
To think upon't] Amanda's great with child!
She looks within a mon'th; would past all fear
I once might say, Welcome down my stairs, my Dear;
Would thou were it church't, and the good wives were come
A gossipping! Now 'twil be guest by some
The maine thing that I wish implicitly
Is this, would I were brought to bed with thee.
MISCELLANEA Poetica: Carmina exequialia, Epigrammata and diversi generis
Poemata colligata in Manipulum; cui Annectuntur Epistolae, ROSAMVNDAE HENRICO,
ET HENRICI ROSAMVNDAE, Quas clarissimus olim Poeta nostras MICHAEL DRAITON
Armiger Nostratibus dedit; Carminibus Latinis redditae; Quarum quae secunda est
OVIDIANO plane stylo nobilitatur ab Elegantissimo and Honoratissimo Iuvene, Dno
EDVARDO MONTACUTIO.

Di^ quis Patronus, quis nunc erit? --
Nos tamen haec agimus, tenuique in pulvere sulcos
Ducimus. --
LONDINI, Excusum Anno Dom. 1653.

Ornatissimo viro, M^o. ALEXANDRO AKEHVRST, S. S. and Individuae Trin. Col.
Cantab. Vice-Praesuli Dignissimo.
NE essem ingratitudinis [qua non est turpior naevus] vel diutule notatissimus
labe, paginas hasce, nominis tu^ and virtutis breve monumentum, tibi,
(Gravissime vir) tutelaris Angeli mei fidelis cultor, non imprudenter, tun
bona, cum venia, dedicaverim; Nec revera naihi t^ ore meo colliquescere solet,
qui memoriam adimat, Galectites, nec socordia seu papaveris lacte, consopitus
discubui, ut qui tantae tuae Beneficentiae indormire potuerim; sacilius utique
decrevero, been merenli non omnino deberi gratias, quam a me non usquequ aque
pro virili meo and obnixius animo rependi: Beneficia vestra, non adeo sinam
deperdita esse, ut quae simul ac data sint, labantur illico and avolent;
Humanitas vestra, tot literis and characteribus se expressit, tot sententias
aureas est locuta, ut, si in me esse^, amori tuo and Bonitatis gloriae,
praesens aetas, nec comma sufsigcret, nec periodum posteritas. At ero ingenii
mei egreg^us Gnatho si eas me putem honori tuo, hoc dispalato carmine, columnas
ponere, quas Poetae majorum Gentium Moecenatibus suis, -- Quas nec Jovis ira
nec ignis, etc.

Quinime tam diversum cogito, and e contra persentiscam h^nc Camoenam meam, (si
vita suppetat) iisdem auspiciis tuis superfuturam quibus olim est nata, nec
enim agere potestillam animam quam a te hausit, quam and puram insuper and
vivacem conservas. Gloriabor tutius tuo nomine, quam si singulus propemodum
versus stricto gladio se defenderet, and quaeque pagina acutissime mucronata
frameas pugionesque minitaret.

At quidego tibi Heliconem cui nihil sapit praeterq^^^^ anima Saturni and Jovis
Spiritus qui Chymicorum -- Caput inter nubila condis. Et adea tantum lectionem
adhibes, quae scribuntur calamis, a Philosophorum Aquila and Phoenice
desumptis? Verim Doctrissime Vir, nonsunt genus hominum inter se t^^ omnino
dissimile Poeta and Chymicus; Hic (...) Aphronitrum and Salem gemmae, ille
Veneres and slorem Salis; Clibanos hic furnosque and equisimum ille Pegasum and
mellificia Attica; Hic venenum and philtrum jactas, ille quesvis in Cupidinis
ignem, imi potest in patibulum agere; Hicherbarum cineribus pristi^as sormas
and (...) induit, Ille etiam jubet ut vivat post funera virtus,
Sac neque vei cineri glora fero venit,
Quin and homines facit Poeta, quam diu manserit mortalitas, immortales;
pulcherrimas fabulas hic and ille ventilat, esque (...), quae veritatem magis
significare, quam exprimere videntur verisimile; jam vero etiam, quicquid id
est quod ostentavit Agrippa, iste scilicet Simon Magus vester, quod medicorum
omnium praestantissimus Theophrastus, quod Hispanus ille cum campanula, quod
illa denique Maga Virgiliana. Quae se carminibus promisit solvere mentes,
Quas velit, ast aliis duras immittere curas,
Sistere aquam fluviis, etc.
Quantacunque sint, a nobilissimis Chymicis, vel effecta, vel excogitata and
ficta tantummodo, non minora a certe prodigia, nec veritatis ratione impari
inventa, attribuebantur olim and etiam nunc hodie ascribuntur Poetis. Vtrique
in monte quodam sublimi and aureo

Quaerunt quod nusquam est gentium, reperiunt tamen. Notum est quod effutiunt
labeones quique, utriusvis facultatis studiosos degeneratum iri in pannosos
mendiculos, at illi nequam homines (...) qui otiosam pecuniam, nummulorum
aeruginem, and captensularum sordes, Chymicorum Poetarumque sapientiae
praefexunt invincibilis ignorantiae rei, me judice, damnabuntur ad Plutonem;
quo nimirum in pretio fuerint, quam ubique gentium cohonestati and celebres,
satis eloqui possunt in Pandulphi Cathedra Rheginus, pro Archia Poeta ipse
Cicero.

At ne hic molem struam, Chymicorum Poetarumque lauds accumulando, inclyta
nomina recensendo, and percurrendo virtutes reciprocas, Argumenti and amoris
duplici catena, eos breviter astringam; qui etenim magis continuo invicem ad
complexum current and oscula, quam (fraterrima capita Gemellorum) Poeta and
Chymicus? uterque nimirum naturae primogenitus; hic materno gremio delectatur;
ille matris subucula involvebatur delicatulus pusio; and -- Post obitum
supremaque funera. -- inter flores and herbas utriusquc circumvolabit animula,
hortulorum illa, haec Parnassi apecula, vagula, blandula;

Quare (Spectatissime Vir) ut comitatem tuam and mansuetudinem taceam (de
quibus permulta nunc essent dicenda) si haec cerebri mei aqua stillatitia
percoletur in capitello tuo, si lagunculam e doliolo nostro, si pusillum hoc
and levidense munusculum, bono animo acceperis, Humanitas tua erit mihi (...),
Et precabor superos, ut Adech tuus and bonus Demon, Antimonii Ar^ana ac novum
indies (...) tibi suggerat, ut idem ille Cherubin coelestis tibi ipsi, qui and
ipsi olim Paracelso opituletur jugiter, and semper adsit ad manus usque eo dum
a coelo avoles spagyrico ad Aniada Paradisi.

VALE. Amplissimo nomini vestro perpetua observantia and officio devotissimus.
N. H.

In obitum gravissimi senis Dni Doctori- COLLINS, Theologiae Professoris Regii
Cantabrigiae.
AMica, ( Lector) suneri pedissequa
Attendat aemula lacryma,
Viduaque matter lugeat Academia
Sponsi ad senilis naenias,
Et vest nubila induantur lugubres
Ecclesiastici chori;
Non janu^e Libitina cardines quatit
Non ostium excussit modo,
Sed ausa vel scientiarum Regium
Evertere monasterium.
Compressus est silentio sidissimus
Propheta and Interpres Dei
Veteranus emeritusque linguae Hebraica
Professor clinguis silet.
Exhaustus est ditissimus Theologiae
Thesaurus, and Oraculum.
Casusque jam tandem per omnes mors rudis
Heterocliton flexit vagum.
Variatur ille quem monoptoton diu
Credidimus invariabile;
^niqua certe mortis absurdae manus
Hominem ferire tam senem,
Veneranda fatis occubuit Antiquitas
Obiit senectus non senex.
Somnus mortis imago.
STabat in Eliaco, nebulis vestita, sacello,
Foemina poene suo nescia stare loco,
Sydera su adebant circumlucentia somnum,
Miscebatque suas Cynthia amica faces;
Visa est nutare and pulvinar quaerere mento,
Inque suo sirm^ labra sepulta sinu;
Nox fuit haec, laeva nigrum est amplexa puellum,
Et puer ad dextram qui stetit albus erat,
Illa fuit somni, fuit alter a mortis imago,
Sic morti semilis somnus, and alba nigris,
To his loving friend M T. G. upon covering his head in the Colledge-Butteries.
WHat is the matter Tom, thou 'rt grown so old,
Hoarie and white of the sudden? fear thou cold
Salt brackish rheumes should falling on thy chest
Thy windpipe rot, thy spungie lungs infest?
Yes, taplash breeds catarrhs, and thereupon
The Butler needs must starch thy nightcap on;
Tom, thou were sudl'd over night, and 'twas for fear,
Thou should in the morning drink too much small beer
After so hot an Orgyan sacrifice,
'Twas wholesome moral Physic not to size.
Over night thou know it was thy fatal lot,
To mug, to quaffe, carouse and bownce the pot;
Next morn I hast'ned to the butterie-hatch,
How much Col-tisse thou would drink I meant to watch;
But when I came, I viewed, looked every where,
The duce of any Tom or heal was there.
First from the bottom of the Tables I spied,
And upwards every name I straightly eyed;
Each name a round of the ladder seemed to me
Then come to the blank which put m' in mind of thee;
It emblem'd out a thief, who before he dies
Looks like thy head with his nightcap over his eyes:
How! proud and coy! Prethy now what do aile,
That like the wenches thou must mask and veil,
And hide thy face (like them in heat of blood,)
In such a dainty, fine, white sarc'net hood?
Way with that muster, show thy face, let us see it:
Prithee leave off doing penance in a sheet.
Thou look like some old scurvie Country- Hag,
That makes a biggen of an oat-meal bag,
Whose face is masked with chin-cloth fine and gay,
To ride on Dick or Brown of the market day:
Thou 'rt like a Corpse old women have laid out,
Whose meagre visage is covered with a clout;
I think they will shroud thee too with time and bays;
For they complain how thou have spent thy days;
Die, Tom, in these bad times? thou must despair
Of being interred with Common Prayer.
Rise prithee, fear not, thou shall namelesse be,
Rascal, do think, we cannot new christen thee;
Nay in the old way too boy, and rather
Then not, I mean to be thy Godfather:
It Is but small charges Sirrah; there needs no fee
Unto the Midwife or the Nurcerie;
Nor need I give my Golson some fine boon,
A Coral-whistle with bells, or silver-spoon:
When thou art grown, can go alone and prattle,
Please thy Nurse and Godfather with tittle tattle;
I Will give thee schooling; for thy books I Will pay,
Horne-books and Primmers, child, to sling away;
Then thou shall ask me blessing, pretty toy,
I Will stroke the oth' head, God bless thee, rise my boy;
Then chuck the oth' chin, and with a Godfathers grace,
It Is my good boy, here is for thee, learn apace:
Now if the black-coat come and cat'chize thee;
Answer him M. or N. Sir, T. or G,
If urgent still he ask thee, what is thy name?
Conjure and mum, cry, Oh Sir, Yes, that same.
But hark thee Tom, have lost thy Surname quite?
Were thou degraded like a new dubbed Knight,
Cashiered with good Sir Hal, Sir James, Sir John,
Who had their Honors dated forty one,
Whose pride by act of State was made a sin,
Calling the last edition of titles in?
Stay the next Platonic forty one, and then
For some few years you shall be Knights again
Thou in the mean while (it is an honorable word
Amongst the Hunch-backs) shall be called my Lord:
Or else some Carter, rather then have none,
Shall lash and name thee, Robbin, Hob or Rhoan;
Yes, yes, thoud'st make a Stallion rare,
To earne thy Master Clod some groat's a mare,
Then for thy motions The, ho, but will do,
The Aldermans Thiller thy namesake too.
And then all day to have thy Tutor sing,
Lash thee and whistle, (then rogue) fresh grass in the spring;
Yes and in the wintertime to have a maw,
To feed on hawme of pease and barley-straw;
Then draw up hill, and when the cart goes dead,
To be well-pun'd with whips in the slanck or head,
And then thy Mastet when thou'st spent thy force,
To clap thy buttocks with Gra-mercie-horse.
But prethy, Tom, tell what the reason is,
You Are harness't in this met amorphosis?
They say that thou were mad, horne-mad, and now
Thou wear'st a kind of Bondgrace like a Cow.
Heaven bless thee, my best chicken, I dare say
Thou were unkindly used, who will say nay?
For troth I know thy heart and temper well,
It Is plain and easy for the world to spell;
Open and free, and lodged within a breast,
Wherein no swelling envious serpents neast;
It always in a grateful posture lies
Thy loving friends most ready sacrifice;
And from thy bosom should he it command,
Thy bosom straight lies open to his hand:
I know thee well, I Have read thee over and over;
Thou only want two or three faces more;
One for thy public use, to Hippocritize,
A Chappel-mask, a garb and Sunday-eyes.
But let that falsehood pass, thou know^st I know
The men of the world are riddles, so let them go,
My civil charity does speak it sin,
To rifle others closets or look in;
Yet if their hearts were hell, I Would never doubt
To venture in, to fetch the devil out;
For some have thought the worst they can of you,
Who dare I Am sure no worse then they dare do;
But I Will not preach in verse, left some of those
Should envy me, who cannot do it well in prose;
No, Tom, at present thou my theme shall be,
And as men name a text, so I Will name thee;
As they do little or naught to the purpose say,
So I Will but name thee just, and then away;
And rather then thou still shall nothing be,
But Entelechia and haecceitie;
I Will name thee Cambridge-Tom, and of thee vaunt,
As they of Munster-Iack, and John of Gaunt;
Thomas Thomasius thou shall be,
Or Thompson of the Danish progeny;
Or Thom ap Thomas like that Welsh device.
And link of names, ap Owen, ap Hugh, ap Rice;
Or else with them I Will borrow from the Jews,
Name thee as they the sons of Rabbi's use,
Rabbi-ben-Majim, who Majims loins came from,
So will I name thee Rabbi Tom-ben-Tom.
An ELEGY on the death of Mr. Frear Fellow of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge, who
died of a Consumption.
AT length upon the wing, haste to possess
The eternal mansions of true happiness;
To Saints and Angels go, and Fellow be
Amongst those Doctors of Divinity;
Long were it admitted, and now sit it were
Thou take thy journey to continue there;
Pity thy soul should be no otherwise
Employed, then to hold open dying eyes,
And yet how loath she sled, as if sh'had rather
Stayed here to keep thy skin and bones together.
Some few days longer had thou drawn thy breath,
Thy frighted friends had taken thee for death;
For which thy meagre shape as well might pass,
As that which holds the spade and houre-glasse;
Thou look as if thou would past through Chir'rgions hall
A live Anatomy, the Belfree wall
Does nothing never so grim a shape present:
So thy kind soul, till all its oil was spent,
Glimmer'd in the socket, as if when 't went out
Thy friends should be in the dark, and all about
The scritchowls of the sable-winged night,
Hither in errors clouds would make their slight;
Thus whilst thou seems to be Iohs living story,
Thy death's head was our best Memento mori.
Alas poor threadbare, worn out Skeleton,
With one short rag of flesh scarce clothed upon,
More bare then in the womb, unto thy Urne
How truly naked did thy Corpse return?
What stranger who had seen thy shriv'led skin,
Thy thin, pale, ghastly face, would not have been
Conceited he had seen a ghost in the bed
New risen from the grave, not lately dead!
Those things in vaults, whose gently touched shrine
Falls into dust, look fresher far then thine.
Which was so dry, as if thy carcass were
For many years embalmed and buried there;
Who e're had argued that thou never would die,
Would have disputed very probably:
At least he might have made this topic good.
Thou were immortal, 'cause not flesh and blood.
But we who know thou spak'st so many tongues,
Will cease to wonder at thy wasted lungs;
And from thy loss of flesh, it was not fit,
We will conclude the worms should feed on it.
'Twas pity such a piece to the grave was hurled,
For the curious volume of thy lesser world
An Enoch-like Translation fitter were,
Then Critic death for an Interpreter:
Thy learning was so rich, that I would dare
[Were it hereditary, I thy heire]
To spend with wealthy Caesar's, and outvie
Europes most learned living library;
Clad all in sackcloth if I were to mourn
In dust and ashes [like a soul forlorn]
Could these externals make me more divine,
Or add to Piety, I Would call for thine.
It Is pity nature did but lend thee us,
Give, and then take away her jewel thus;
Alas! when she perceived how suddenly,
Dull counterfeits would all in fashion be,
And gems that are the right at naught be set,
She locked thee up within her cabinet.
Sow were losers all. But mark his end,
How like a traveller to's loving friend,
He just at's farewell takes a parting cup,
Bids us all adieu, and drinks it up;
Reader, 'twas to thy health, and though in beer
Yet prethy kindly pledge him in a tear.
An ELEGY on the death of Mr. Crane, Apothecary in Cambridge.
AShes to ashes! who! our AEsculape!
Our Cambridge-Chiron! cannot such skill escape?
Such Peons die! strange! dust to dust! who is it!
What noble Crane, that golden Alchymist?
Is It he! then proud Dame Vesta certainly
Will vaunt those atoms to eternity.
Swell, boast, look big, and in her womb
'Teem him an everlasting, growing tomb;
Embalme him Reader in thy memory,
Shroud him with silver-blossom'd rosemarie;
With pennie-royal, marigold-flowers,
And yellow saffron, emblem out what powers
Of Sol and Luna in his coffers lie,
Forced in by his great Art and Industry:
It Is fit this great Preservative of forms
Should never want a medicine against the worms:
Tired with dull elements, he is gone from hence
T'extract and clothe his soul with quintessence;
There is no all-heal, but a funeral;
All things before are mix't with wormwood, gall,
And vinegar; Now he is gone from us;
It Is benedictus without carduus;
No sulphur tinctures, tartar, no disease;
It Is lignum vitae, and no aloes.
His house and shop since death has overcome,
Is furnished with Caput mortuum,
Let your Alembicks freely crystallize,
Fill gallipots with catarrhs from your eyes,
Or rather wipe them, let them not be mistie,
He Is gone for Manna or for manus Christi.
On the immature death of his hopeful friend, Mr. Alexander Rookesby.
1.
MOst cruel death! be so precise?
Take no excuse!
Could not thy nature, nor
Thy well promising youth apologize!
2.
This fit of sickness should have been,
The smallest stop,
Only a comma to thy health.
A short deliquium, then life again.
3.
What so unskilful in Orthographie?
Illiterate fate?
To put a period thus,
Where but a colon at the most shonld be!
4.
Was It not unmannerly in death
Before his tale
Were told, or he had spoke
His better sentence out, to stop his breath!
5.
Of The dawning of his life I look,
As on a short
Brief preface, or a kind salute
To th'gentle Reader, but w' have lost the book.
6.
It Is fit each Scholar over his Hearse,
Weep Elegies,
Nature was scanning him,
As though she meant to make a golden verse.
7.
But death instead of long Hexameters,
Making Adonicks,
Served a warrant in
Which fate had writ in shorthand characters,
8.
So left the learned Hippocrates,
(Giving a dash
Rude Ignoramus like)
To make a guess and spell out the disease.
9.
Himself read only his Contents,
The Chapter must
Be read at's grave, while down
His coffin ives drill watrie monuments.
10.
Farewell, farewell, dear heart,
Is It thine, my friend?
I bid this longest farewell to,
Or rather is it my own with which I part?
11.
Alas! good soul, you are gone;
And were it not
That I should with my death,
I Would wish 'twere time to follow on.
12.
Nor would I any other knell
To drive away
Bad spirits from my grave,
Only the Echo of thy passing bell.
An Epithalantium sacred to the Nuptials of the truly Religious Lady, the Lady
A. H. and the Valiant and Worthy Sir W. W. Knight.
JOy, most victorious, Madam; pardon me,
If I recall a past solemnity;
It Is a review of joy, which is a dish
Not like some strange, outlandish foul or fish,
Or some newfangled sauce, some bo-peep meat,
Which the Antipodes, and we by turns do eat,
Some sullen cates which out of season fly,
To tempt the Ladies with their raritie;
But like your Conserves, with more choice delight.
Feeds all the humors of the appetite,
Plays with a curious palate, and from thence.
Leaps to the eye, then to another sense,
So does enrich the soul, till it surmize,
The body an Elizian Paradise:
This wealthy joy, which at the marriage-tide
Sparkles in the Bridegrooms eyes, perfumes the Bride
With her own cheerful spirits, till they dart
Laughter into her spouses ticklish heart;
This balsame joy, great Lady, I present
In a reunction, to renew its sent,
And call its quickening virtues out, which lie
Not dead, but dormant in their treasury;
I do but rub the herb, and wake from thence
Such fragrant savours, as may feast the sense,
Tell you what flowers in your posie are,
Repeat some notes in shorthand character.
Then pardon, Madam though I come so late,
Ioy's never out of season, still in date,
Where love is fresh, joy never can decay,
Though years be spent, it is still the wedding day.
Then, great triumphant Madam, once again,
Joy to your second Conquest, you have taken
Two noble Warriors Captives in your breast,
Nature has ransomed one, the other's pressed
To succeed prisoner; oh blessed captive he
That Is prisoner in so chaste a Nunnerie!
'Twas pity since your first was forced to yield,
Your second stayed so long, as if the field
Were voted by some pious bosome-law,
For so long time Sir Simons Golgotha;
Good wife! whose body for some years must be
Her first Deare's charnel house, his Calvarie.
But now that cloud of Funeral Obsequies
Has spent it self in tears, and in your eyes
Mirth gins to startle and resume its seat;
Fresh blushes vault in triumph, smiles curveat:
All speak your Conquest of the Conqueror,
What a commanding Amazon you are;
Unto whose service Champions are drawn forth,
Upon the Altar of whose glorious worth,
Great Hymen bids me offer sacrifice,
And the god of war has done devotion twice,
Stately Bellona courts your Ladyship,
And amorous Mars fights duels at your lip:
You take your Spouse in prisoner by your charms,
Sir William takes you in by force of arms,
And then such volley shots of kisses fly,
Would tempe and ravish sworn Virginity.
Now may those chaster lips so closely meet,
At each salute as if your souls did greet,
And since Sir William here has taken quarter,
It Is for his honor to be Knight of the garter:
Nor will I leave him there; no from above
The Heavens greet you with new joys of love;
Joys which must always needs be fresh to you,
Where Christ to both is Bride and Bridegroom too;
Within whose heart the lilie of the valley grows,
That clustered Camphire, that sweet Sharon-rose,
That bundle of myrrh, he whom the Virgins love,
Whose scarlet lips drop honey as they move.
Oh may your Dear Beloved, kiss is Vine
With kisses of his mouth, more sweet then wine;
So shall you spread your fruitful branch, and see
Your children like the plants of the Olive Tree.
These are my hearty wishes, and you know
Although I am no great Divine,
Not only rich but poor men's coin will go,
So may these prayers of mine.
To Mr. John Mors, Merchant in King Lynne, on the death of Ms. A. Mors his
wife. Mors in a Mors Christi.
ALas, good Gentleman, has that sweetest love
That spouse of yours made out her last remove
Has death that great Knight-Errent, who does play
And dodge in's motions, here, there, every way,
Checkmated you in taking of your Queen,
Or is it a Sthale? No 'ts more, then be'nt over seen,
For now she is taken as your pawn, and when
Your time is come, 'twill be check-mate again;
But in the mean while you're loser in a word,
It is but setting another Queen of the board;
Yet must you not begin the game anew,
Till the loser pay what for the l^st was due;
Then (...) Sir, for this six or seven years
You must be daily paying sums of tears,
And all your friends like faithful Clerks stand by
TO help tell, lest for a tear you tell an eye.
With you good S^^thrists common it is to mourn
And weep at th'unconsiderable loss of worn,
Old, decayed b^^ks, whose Stoage is nothing mo^
Then Haberdeen, poor John, or Indigo;
For which such streams the prodigal humor sheds,
That with your ships your eyes sink in your heads;
Then, Sir, at what expense ought you to be,
Your great misfortune will discover t'e;
The best of all your vessels buldg'd and lost,
To be recovered by no charge or cost,
Yonr family- rudder broke, and all your store
Of spice and amber, your perfumes and ore,
Thrown to the deep; for she was more to you,
More then all these, your India, your Peru;
If women's souls be Planets in the air,
And rule like potent Constellations there,
Surely the Merchants wives will there reside,
Darting kind beams their husbands ships to guide;
Then in your voyage if a storm arise,
Lost in the clouds, look for her brighter eyes,
And if a conduct Cynosure you see,
Fall down, do homage and strike sail, it is she.
She who whilst living was more then your Star,
Your heaven on earth, a blessing greater far:
She that did make all beasts, foul fish and men,
As though she would work the Creation over again,
Who wrought the stars into a Canopie,
And in her Samplers taught Astrology,
Where the Heavens face she made so bright appear,
That Tycho might have read new (...) there,
Birds feathered with her ^^ik you would swear did sly,
Camels have past too through her needles eye;
Saw you how the has wrought Eves n^^ed thighs,
You Would think, your self with her in Para life:
Sh' has made the Muses, Venus and her elfe,
And fair Diana, too look like her self;
Then the three Graces all so sweet and neat,
That would ^^ame Nature make a piece complete,
To ^^vish and surprise the worlds eye,
Hence she must take the pattern to work it by:
Then Io, Dan^^e, such pretty things,
You Would swear they are made for gods, and not for Kings.
In shadows she would veil a physnomie,
Then work a candle and light, to see it by;
It Is true most women good at night-work be,
But few or none so good, so neat as she.
Admired fancies! Oh they are so good.
That could she but have wrought in flesh and blood,
And made those beauties speak, and something do,
Surely she might have made my Mistress too;
Nay she has wrought a face, so much to th'life,
I fear you will court it for your second wife.
Troth, Sir, who e're she be shall tempt your blood,
See how she is like your first, so far she is good;
You Will make your self and all your friends rejoice,
To draw her picture in your second choice;
And as in the Indias when you walk about,
To find some precious mineral out,
Some richer rocks of gold, you search and try,
By signs and tokens where the vein does lie:
Be as exact in choosing your new Bride,
Let your last wifes Idea be your guide;
Let her fair visage teach your rambling eye
To know the cloisters of a treasury;
If any like her be, know she is divine,
And fall to work, for she is a wealthy mine,
A pearl fit to be worn on Merchants necks,
Like her the choicest Sampler of her sex,
Oh could you find but such a Matron out,
So loving, chaste, prudent, discreet, devout;
So constant a Colleague, so fair as she,
Who is there that would not your Factor be?
What Coward is it would not make out for her,
Hoist sails, and be a Merchant-venturer?
All Courtship storms, tempests and tides defy,
Waving the flashes of her lightning eye;
And though she threatened shipwreck, think it sport
To split, and so swim naked to the Port.
Then, Sir, be charie in your second choice,
And let the pleasant music of her voice
Speak your first Consort, let your second be
Your first wifes Monument, her Elegy;
Fairly recruit, be the most blessed of men,
And in your second choose your first again:
So let your virtuous spouse survive in this,
That you are wedded to her Emphasis.
On the Anniversarie of the fifth of Novem. to the Fellows of Trin. Coll.
'TWere no absurdity if I should wish;
You had dark lanthornes for a second dish,
Sculls and deaths heads will not be out of season,
To put you all in mind of Vaux his treason,
Yet least poor Scholars should have naught to pick
But bones, pray let your feast be Catholic
And superstitious too, so you will afford
Some holy relics, for Prince Arthurs board,
Let your mirth this day, and your joys be mickle,
Had the powder gone off w'had been in a pickle,
And which invention were most damnable,
Pope or sal Peter had been disputable.
But the plot was found, so by accident
Wicked Pope Urban was Pope Innocent.
An ELEGY on the death of Dr. MEDCALFE, late Vice-Master of Trin. Col. in Cambr.
MOst sacred Relics, at whose Obsequies
Devotion bids us weep not tears but eyes;
It Is but weak sorrow which commands we must
Sprinkle some water only to lay thy dust,
And huddle up the Atoms at so poor expense,
As if we meant to sweep thy ashes hence;
We Will rather spend our springs, and when we are dry
Weep for more tears, another Elegy,
Old Ennius shall preach no Funeral here,
Nor makec, (without a sigh, a sob, or tear)
Expose thee with a Diogenes staff,
Which served the Cynick for an Epitaph;
No we will command the Muses to thy Hearse;
And make Apollo weep in golden verse.
Parnassus clothed in mourning weeds to grace
Thy Corpse, shall stoop to give thee burying place:
And so it for a Golgotha we will have,
And weep a Helicon into thy grave;
Nay, it is fit when such great Doctors die,
Parnassus should appear Mount-Calvarie.
Then shed your grief and labor to outvie
The gravestone sweating in its Agony,
With crystal jems, which from your eyes distill,
In stead of dust the Sextons shovel fill,
Speak and weep volumes at his sepulcher,
As if in learned Medcalfs Coffin were
The ruins of a famous Library,
A Chronicle, a three-ages registrie;
And since w' have lost this jewel-house,
-- This treasury,
It Is fit each Scholar ware
-- A watrie pearl in's eye.
In obitum Revereudi Senis Doctoris R. METCALFI. Carmen Lapidarium.
HEus! heus! morare qui sepulchra obambulas
Siste paulisper gradum,
Vbi semper aliquando sistes,
Moraberis aeternum semel.
C^^cunque jam spei incumbis and invigilas somnio
Hic nonnunquam recubandum and obdermiendum est tibi;
Incertissimum est and quando tu me and quomodo
Quam quod sequeris tandem nibil certius,
Imo incertum est hinc quo veneris
An abeas denuo and te vivum abstuleris:
At priusquam transeas Palabunde mortalis
Sacra haec in monumenta saltem oculos fige
Lacrymisque duri marmoris immisce sletus,
Hic intus urna est in qua cineres suos
Custodiendos misit venerandus senex Robertus Metcalfus
Theologiae Doctor, communis Index and Interpres Theologicus.
S. S. and Individuae Trinitatis Collegii,
Sagax Vice-praesul and Cardinalis Presbyter
Qui crebris curavit Eleemosynis
Refocillandos pauperes:
Qui juventutis indigentioris
Et promovendis usque and usque alendis studiis
Maecenatem se ostendit, sedulo munisicum and munifice sedulum
Sermonis Hebraei radix and Professor long emeritus
Linguarum Orientalium phosphorus occidit:
Oh quam optavit Matter Academia
Ad eruenda sacra artium mysteria
Ejusdem ut aetatis and annis pares forent
Metcalfus and Methusalem
Sic quam optimus fuisset labentis ad Academiae Catastrophen
Scientiarum and doctrinae Epilogus:
Agesis viator vale.
Video te festinare hinc quo festinant omnia;
Vale ut festines lent.
An ELEGY on the death of Dr. Cumber, late Deane of Carlisle, and sometimes
Master of Trin. Coll. in Camb.
WHat gone to sleep? hush't Reader, let him lie,
And with an easy funeral- lullabie,
Weep over his Cradle, which ( poor Sextons fee)
At the next Earthquake may be rock't for thee,
For w' are all sleepie, and fore-morning light
May from our friends receive our last good night;
Nay, 'ts odds if thou or I shall watch so long,
As this good father did to's even-song,
Who wanting but just one year of fourscore,
In The College of the Trinity once more,
Under the Worlds Tutor is gone to be
(...) to Eternity;
Would (...) bosome-pupil were,
Oh but they 're (...) Fellows, all Masters there,
And with the glorious Founder of the place,
Still richly feasting, yet still saying grace.
Now, Royal soul, you shall enjoy your due,
Heaven's mansion- lodge, more sit for you,
There the great King of Kings shall set you down,
And for your Dividend give y'a princely crown,
And that white precious stone of mystery,
Which none except thy self can read to thee.
Those five great Princes, seen by thy dying eye,
Were five of Heavens Kings of Herauldrie,
Sent thence of be thy Conducts on the way,
Thy souls safe convoy from its bedridden clay;
And those sweet youths which thou before death did see,
Were Cherubims with crowns to wait on thee;
Farewell, brave Prelate, go and shine with them,
Sainted with a celestial diadem;
Go and be ravished on Gods holy hill
With melting Echoes, which double and double still
Sweet Hallelujahs with ten thousand charms
By Angels which lie couchant in thy arms,
Farewell, good soul, thou'st bravely done thy task,
Acted thy part, and left us in a mask.
Tire'd out with our first Scene of Tragedy
And mischief, thou would no more Spectator be,
To see Mountebank-worldly goblins play,
The devil juggling the juglers souls away;
No, thou could wear no visard, nor pretend,
And be a changeling for some worldly end;
But thy firm conscience which had searched and tried
For truth, sat up its standard, fought and di'd:
I must not call thee Martyr, go and be
Whatever thy Religion made of thee.
Blessing on thee, Reader, and God grant we may
'Wake as he did, and 'waking watch to pray. --
In obitum Reverendi senis Doctoris THOMAE CVMBER. Carmen Lapidarium.
AUdi, audi, fragile and caducum corpus,
Hodierna Ephemeris, Histrio,
Qui nullo potes gemitu, nullis artibus,
Homicidae mortis consilia frangere;
Etiam hic stando fracessis utique,
Nulla sunt curarum fomenta
Praeterquam cineres atque haec coemeteria
Frigida hominum dormitoria
Et tenacia ligurientium vermium coenacula:
At en! Quis hic lassus in hypogaeo jacet?
Gloriosus olim, grandaevus and elegans senex
Reverendissimus Theologiae Doctor Cumberus undeoctogenarius
Carleoli nuper Decanus Colendissimus
S. S. and Individuae Trinitatis Collegii Cantabrigiae
Aliquando praefectus apex
Sanctissimus Ecclesiasticus Pater
Mirifice; integri and Halcyonci pectoris,
Heliotropium monarchicum and calendula Regia
Literarum centimanus Briareus, and hecatonchiros glossographus
Linguarum gazophylacium and multifaria janua
Nempe graecissaverat in Grajugenam,
Samarita, Chaldaeus, Arabs, AEthiops, Copticus
Qui immutabilis epanadiplosi conscientiae
Mundana fudit, sprevit, neglexit omnia;
Academiarum funditus ruentium calamitatis
Prisca ominosa praesaga calamitas.
Coelestis jam demum Cathedrae Catholicus
Metropolitanus factus, and Archiepiscopus.
Hic vero tritos reposuit centones,
Horsum scilicet nonnunquam omnia:
Nescis viator, nescis revera brevi,
Qui te it a perdite amas and colis adeo
Vermes etiam necne coenaturiant tui,
Campana saepius inopinato vocat
Maximeque dubium est an Calvaster sepulchrum adeas
Abi, abi, ad A podyterium tuum
Et disce carnem exuere.
In Praelia Navalia inter Anglos and Belgas.
ANglia Belgiacae nimium suspecta sorori,
Construit adversas, vix inimica, rates;
Ultraque se Francos secit Gens, aemula utrinque,
Alterutra ad sluctus naumachiamque parat.
Concurrere rates, pugna miscentur in una
^gnis, aquae, venti, tela trisulca, tridens.
Angli ^entorum pugnant obstantibus alis,
Pugnat and adjutus milite Belga notho;
Puppium inaequalis numero non sufficit hostis,
AEolum ia auxilium Belga fretumque manet
Sic contra coelos cum coelo Belga, nec audet
Praelia, ni totus pugnet and Oceanus;
Nostra ratis prima fracta est, sed and illa procellis,
Et non Belgarum class, repulsa fuit;
Scilicet ^ Belgis de ^ictos mergier Anglos,
Est tantum fluctus naufragiumque pati.
Ultima testatur Vantrumpi infamia, quantus
Quot Trumpis major Blaqueus unus erat;
Belgarum ostentat numerosa ^adavera littus,
Ostentat lacera undique Arena rutes;
Nempe homines contra quosvis venisse Britannos
Et venisse pares, usque triumphus erat:
Heu Piscatorum caveas Gen ebria, vestra
Piscinas nobis ni faciat Regio;
Vestra cave ne nos donemus corpora scombris,
Scilicet ad Rhombum haec ultima pugna fuit:
Gallum ita Delphina voces, nam vester inundis
Trux Leo nec pugnat, nec been Belga natat.
In Amboynae homicidia Belgica.
BArbara quae semper bellis and sanguine gaudet,
Quam been tota fuit Belgia dicta Leo?
Saeviit Amboynae quae tam crudelis in Anglos
Non Leo, cum catulis saeva Leaena fuis:
Belgia jejunam superat feritate Leaenam,
Nempe magis saeva est, sedgenerosa minus.
Venerabili Viro, Dno. R. B. S.R. W. A. Et P. suo semper observando.
Dii majorum umbris tenuem and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos, and in urna perpetuum ver.
Qui praeceptorem sancti voluere parentis,
Esse loco. --
INfoelix poterit campus tibi Granta videri,
Foecundus magis est Oxoniensis ager.
Filius inde alter locuples accurrit Homero,
Et tibi Chaldaeus filius alter adest;
Abba ego, nil nisi cunarum pueriliter Abba,
Inter labra foret seu mihi mamma loquor;
Mi Pater ignoscas balbo, titubantia linguae
Festinans cerebrum and pectora plena notat;
Mi Pater indulge veniam; balbutit inepta
Lingua, nec affatur laxior ore Patrem;
At cui filiolo non balbutire necesse est
Cui dicenda Patris cura, Parentis amor?
Quin indigna tuo tanto haec sunt nomine quanto
His majora tuos and meliora doces.
Scholam Regiam Westmonasteriensem Scholarum omnium Reginam alloquuntur
vicissim Cantabrigiae and Oxonii Genii.
Cantab. SAlve Pieridumque and Apollinis incrementum,
Florere in aeternum te pia Granta jubet.

Oxon. Quin a filiolis tibi Musarum decus ingens,
Quos habet Oxonium mittitur alma salus.

Cant. Te juga Parnassi nutantia front gemello,
Iam pene insipidis devenerantur aquis.

Oxon. Et tibi post casum monumenta resigere molem,
Ipsaque te montis stareruina jubet.

Cant. A te si moriar claudi gaudebit ocellus,
Ultimus inque tuos spiritus ire sinus.

Oxon. Same animam fletusque meo^, nam me pereunte
Lachryma Musarum multa bibenda tibi.

Cant. At ne divellar, fatis ne perdar iniquis,
Add, precor, votis, and tua vota meis.

Oxon. Atque ego ne manibus malefiam praeda scelestis,
Et precibus nostris tu precor add preces.

Resp Schola, Stabit and invitis fatis Granta Oxoniumque:
Ox. -- Optima promutis. ( Cant.) Quae been digna fide.
Sed tua, Te Proles, nunquam, nunquamn^ videbit
Nos pater? ( Ox.) Et viset matrem aliquando suam.

Cant ad Ox Te ne prius viset? prius es visenda fatemur
Non quia sis senior, sed quia matter eras.
Illius es ( soror) and nutrix, and matter, and uno hoc
(Quo tantum est majus) cedimus Oxonio.

Carmen Lapidarium in obitum Machaonis Cantabrigiensis Johan. CRANE Magistri in
Artibus. (...)
SIste, Siste paululum Viator
Si non valerudinarie, mortalis tamen
Hem! vagule, Blandule
Properasne? quo properes equidem nescio,
Id certum ex me and id unum est certum tibi
Properarc celeri fatum te versus pede
Libitina pultabit aliquando importuna, inevitabilis,
Ageris quocunque pragmaticus
Atque in haec scias non lent festinas loca.
Mors etenim tenebrio, plagas and tendiculas omnibus,
Quis huc tetendit and quo tendis attend itaque,
Fige osculum mihi, frigide licet rogo, fige;
Peritissimi venerare cineres medici Apothecarii
Odorifera inter thura, aromata and diapasmata
Sublimatus elanguit Mercurius
Dextra contabuit AEsculapii manus.
Cujus memoriae eadem debentur sacra.
[Quae divo Coronidis filio Epidaurii]
Ludi quinquennales, gallus febricitans capra
Illustrior hic gentis Poeoniae gloria and ipse Apollo occidit,
Pharmacopola, olim nobilis Panacaea and Alexicacon
Humanum Cranium calcinatum magis,
Defaecata Paracelsi Alembrot
Magister Artium and Magisterii
Metempsychosin denuo
Passa est Hippocratis vel Galeni animula;
Imminent is qui toties mortis secuerat ungues,
Et fatorum castigaverat praecipitantiam,
Tibi nunc prodromus, and praecidaneus factus:
Meditare hospes and legendo haec facile te intelliges,
In exoranda nempe fatorum numina
Qui morbis ferunt medicinam and remedium omnibus
Simile praescribet recipe and ana simile tibi.
VALE.
Vale viator quantum potes. Vale
At tum demum valebis cum huc redib^s.
Vale.
A medico etiam mortuo Vale.
Elogium seu Sciographica descriptio S. S. and Individuae Trin. Coll. Cantab.
EN tibi diligentiae and industriae domum,
Scientiarum fertilem redundantia and Artium plethora!
Collegiorum erat inter Collegia nobilissima,
Aliquando Alpha, prae quo caetera
Abecedaria nonnunquam and Alphabetica,
Inter florentissima elegantior omnino slosculus,
Britanniae aculissimi oculi Cantabrigiae
Pupilla acies and oculus
Reique publicae and Academiae matris cerebrum and pia Matter
Faciesque caput, and Capitolium,
Quod Regem habuit non Fundatorem mode
Sed and Discipulum and Incolam:
Nec antiquae virtutis manet
Hodiernum solummodo adagium
Sed Artium earundem gremium and tenax sinus
Familiares habet cum Mercurio and Pallade Socios,
Viros totidem Naturae apophthegmata,
Ad controversias cataphactos milites,
Veritatis athleticos pugiles,
Hareseon omnium Antagonistas and antidota,
Gratiarum delicias and Adonides,
Reique publicae literariae
Totidem Optimates Dictatores, Consules,
Piet atis praeterea nardo redolet
Theologiae Myrothecium,
Archipraesulis reclusum manu.
Pastorum spiritualium,
Scaturigo, fons and seminarium
Fundatorum Regum and Reginarum impendiis
Opulentum ad invidiam temporum
Academiae adjecta non Paragoge modo
Sed and Epenthesis etiam and Prothesis
Quid Architectonicen and lapidum aggeres loquar!
Quid spaliosam and patentem aream,
Augustissimum quasi Palatium,
Musarum amoenissimam Regiam and Basilicam
Vacerris palisque distinctam and divisam ornatius!
Quae umbilici loco
Sublimem Aquae ductum exomphalum habet
Cujus e mastis and canalibus saliunt,
Amatrices nymphae and perennes latices
Tripudiantia a^statis refrigeria
Musisque gaudet alludere
Prae foribus Thetis Amabilis;
Ad ostia tranatur perstuitque rivulus
Et amphibolae ebulliunt nymphae,
Quae abnatantes tacit obmurmurant
Lapillul^sque amice remoris
Suaviter insusurrant quam nolentes defluant,
Quid Bibliothecam loquar!
Quot sunt homines, tot non modo sententiae
Sed Authentica capita and Authors Classici.
Quid Aulae excelsa lacunaria,
Epistilia and compactiles trabes.
Crateres, Diotas, Phialas, and capacem illa Nevilis tinam!
Quid coruscantia sacelli laquearia,
Totque tutelares olim glabreones Angelos
Opulentas sacerdotales vestes Phrygias
A cupictum tapetem and vermiculata gausapa,
Lances, patcras, and thuribula argeutea,
Nobiliori pavimenta undique superba lapide,
Cinctosque peribolis amoenissimos hortulos!
Columnis cubicula fornicatamarmoreis
Tot Gratiarum tholamos and cubilia!
Ostentent Collegia caetera
Trinitatis quasi tantum appendices
Lateritios and diplinthios parietes
Literarum plane gurgustia:
Quotcunque structuram nostram spectatum veniunt,
Ore omnes uno conclamant undique
Praeter Oxonienses fratres grandiloquos
Academiarum quas Europa venditat
Omnium facil^ Regina Cantabrigia
Collegiorum quae antiquissima Cantabrigia arrogat.
S. S. and Individuae Trinitatis Collegium primas obtinet.
In festum S. S. Trinitatis ad Socios ejusdem Coll.
EPistomia Collegiensia omnia,
Saliente murmurent mero,
Dubiaeque dum perambulant mensas dapes,
Pingui laborantes bove
Spuent Aristippum Diotae argenteae,
Generosa juvenum munera;
Ad labra mittendus bibentum non nisi
Ingentiori maschal^
Ore aesluans Nevilis illegrandior
Spumet falerno cantharus
Fluctum in rates immanis ut coetus suo,
Iaculatur e Siphunculo;
Haurite calices, amphorasque nobiles
Inebriato margin^,
At ah! quid est! quid ad palatum provoco?
Quid hortor ad cul^um gulae!
Haec magna luoe rationis oculos conterens
Est unicae fidei sacra,
A Patre filius ex utrisque Spiritus
Ambo coaeterni Patris,
Personae in una essen^ia^res, numina
Non sunt tria, at Deus unicus.
Noc Filius Pater est; nec est aut Filius,
Aut Spiritus, dictus Pater.
Et Spiritus nec est Pater nec Filius,
Sed Unitas est; Trinitas
Sic videram triplices lucernam pensilem
Incorporare lampadas,
Sic videram, videndo plus caecutio
Oculique lippiunt magis
Eloque^e verbum, Christ verbum terminos
Hos Trinitatis explica
Ipsum applica te menti, ut evadat mea
Ratione doctior fides,
Et doctior fide ratio.
Voluptates commendat rarior usus.
Assiduis sordet Luculli mensa palatis
Respuit and solitas nausea multa dapes,
Mendicis modo jejunis sportella placebit,
Et si rara magis dulcior esset aqua;
Omne volup volucre est, unde est desumpta voluptas;
Deliciasque vocant, quae quasi deliteant.
Displiceant ne quando, Jovi superisque bibuntur
Ad Phoebi risus Nectar and Ambrosia
Displiceat ne quando tibi mea, Lector, Amanda,
Raro, quam mea sit dul^is Amanda, legas.
To the Fellows of Trin. Coll. at a Feast.
WHen ever you good Fellows please to feast,
We under-graduates, dogrels at the best,
Poor wits to help you laugh away the time,
Must think it our duty to hold forth in rithme;
Would you allow us coats in honest prose,
Like Sturbridge-puddings in their antic hose.
In stead of halting verse, we'd dance on eggs,
Make faces, and show owls between our legs;
'Twould never vex us to afford you sport,
Were but our appetite contented for it;
Whimsies and kick-shaw fancies I confess,
Are better then a feast of laziness;
Yet I had rather be an idle guest,
Then call the Muses up, and get them dressed
All nine for threepence, bonnie Cleio swears
Te'nt worth the lacing of their stomachers.
If verses 'gin to grow so cheap with us,
Smithfield shall dock and rate my Pegasus,
I Will water Hackneys in Pyrene's streams,
Make Helicon as common as the Thames,
Parnassus to the Levellers I Will sell,
Morgage that Tempe and its sacred Well
To that new sinner Doctor Chamberlin,
To buck and runce his Lady dabchicks in,
Himself shall dipper be, and Baptist too,
I Will make my bargain he naught else may do.
To a spurious Poet.
BEtwixt the hawke and buzzard, bastard-kite,
How durst thou try to make an Eagles flight,
And with thy blear eyes in so high a place,
To look my great Apollo in the face?
Sirrah, 'twas mercy he was wrapped about
With clouds, else had thy eyes bin quite burnt out,
Then to thy fancy thou would seem to be
An English Homer, as stark blind as he,
The Ballad-singers should thy dogrels sell,
Thou called the Poet with the dog and bell;
Then rithme in the streets, and on a wad of hay
Kneel, and in verse the learned beggar play
Amongst the scaldheads under White Hall wall,
If it be never so little amongst you all,
For the Muses sake before you go yet
Pray remember the poor blind cripple Poet;
Then roguish waggish boys as they pass by,
Chuck farthings in the hollow of thine eye,
Or else spit charity in thy greasy hat,
Blow oisters in it, There, Poet, take thee that.
Then play the Higins for the regiment
Of lousy tag-raggs till thy lungs be spent,
And on the Sabbath with thy wooden dish
Beg pottage for them, their best Sunday-wish;
And then astride thy raw-bon'd Pegasus,
Like a beggar on horseback, rant it thus.
Mistrisse, I can make Psalms for you,
One Cup of beer I pray
On this good holy day
For I very dry am,
Hopkins and Sternhold too,
Were Poets both as I am.
Thou Salewit, were this sentence past on thee,
'Twere a just judgment for thy heresy;
Impostor! thou a Poet so we call
A Broker, one of Merchant-Taylors hall:
So Crispins boys, who scarce can mend a shoe,
Will be no Cobblers but Translators too:
Thus the dull scrapers, who for six pence play
At wakes and help-ales a whole night and day:
Those lewd squeakers, who have no other shake,
But of their palsie-heads, say you mistake
To call them Fiddlers, as they needs must be
Musicians, the name of Poet's due to thee:
So old wives study Physic, who can make
A Poultis for a felon'd thumb to break
And ripen it, thou good at Poetry!
Annise seed-Robbin skilled in Chymistrie:
So Pettifoggers and Atturneys Clerks,
Innes of Court-gallants, those Ram-alley sparks,
Who with a dash have learned to write their names,
And say vous-aves to the City-dames,
Teach them what fee-simple and fee-tail implies,
Would be thought cunning Lawyers, and advise
In cases which they ken as knowingly,
As thou the mysteries of Poetry;
So Academians call their Sophisters,
That steal positions good Philosophers;
Pin-makers are as good Goldsmiths, if they
That deal in varnish, whose rude fancy may
By license wrong the creatures, in their noses,
Mouths and eyes, painting for Lions, roses;
Chimera's in red-oaker, naggs like hogs,
And hares which hunts-men cannot know from dogs;
If these rude land-skip-drawers, limners be,
Then as a Poet we shall honor thee.
But know thou did that sacred name abuse,
When thou made market of thy cotquean Muse,
Going about from door to door with her,
Not like the Poet but the Stationer;
Nay few of the Poems in thy book, it is known,
Except some nonsense dull ones are thy own;
Thou have been simpling in a ditch, and got
In The fields some Lady-smocks or Melilot,
Blue-bottles or the like, and thou must needs
Like girls make posies of those stinking weeds,
Mingling some sweeter and more fragrant flowers
Of better wits to sent and set off yours;
And yet it is feared both are condemned to die,
For thou were forced to vent thy Poetry;
As haggs for sizings on a Scholars head,
A Tuttie for a loaf of Colledge-bread.
Thou higler, who do make a hackney Jade
Of Pegasus, and wit a rithming trade,
Thy book a kind of Collect is a brief,
At first directed to the heads, and chief
Of The parish whom it may concern, and then
To all other well-affected Gentlemen;
As many Patrons to it as Authors are,
Made like a reckoning where each clubs his share;
Only thou pay'st the drawer, and would get
Credit for spending of another wit:
Huckster, forbear this cheating beggerie,
Or vent thy own, and better Poetry.
Climbing too high upon Parnassus hill,
Thy squeamish fancy straight grew sick and ill,
There thou did cast and spew, the Muses feign
Would have thee lick thy vomit up again.
On the Rout of the disloyal Party of Scots at Dunbarre.
Is Iockie routed? Charon, rig thy boat
If worth thy labor, with fresh rushes strow't;
Waftage enough fear not, but yet prepare
A strong rough stretcher, if thy naul, thy fare
They dare deny thee, break their crags mon, do,
Else scarce will it have one ha'penny for two.
If thou art wise get a blue bonnet on,
They Will pay thee better 'cause their Country-mon.
See here they come mon, what a Scottish drove
Crowds in full flocks unto the Elysian grove!
Four thousand at the least! Hark! what a shrill
Sad noise, the mazes of my ears does fill!
And on their tender parchments beat from thence
Like drum-sticks an Alarm to my sense!
What strange confused Ecchos do I hear,
Howlings for loss of Bernes, of gudes and geer!
Oh prethy see, see how along they gang
With kettles at their gurdles! over their shoulders hang
Course oat-meal bags, as though they would beg a boon
Of Pluto, still to feed on Pattaloon;
Ah Charon, lanch into the deep, there make
Conditions e're they board thee, do not take
A mon into thy skiffe till thou art paid;
See what a tottered Regiment, how dismayed,
Trembling with palsies they make toward thee!
Look, look, what a rude multitude they be!
What gibbrish is it they mutter? how they call,
With de'il take boat, the Ferrie-mon and all!
How they run hastily as if they knew
Some death, some second Cromwell did pursue!
Alas old gray-beard, now thy whirrie breaks
Hark, what a crack it gives! See, see, it leaks,
Go hire a thousand Watermen to play
Next Oars, next Sculler, it is a safer way,
Get cock-boats, barges, lighters, has there bin
No Navy sunk of late to put them in?
But no great matter, let them stay on shore,
Drop into Styx, like Soland-geese swim over.
Cowards! Mars such a bastard brood disdains,
Who whilst their blood congealed in their veins,
Like Ague-shaken Myrmidons did fight,
Till suddenly they thawed into a flight;
And brooking not the lightning which did fly
From the steeled courage of our soldiery,
Like to chill snow in a hot Sunshine day,
These Northern Isickles did melt away:
But are they vanquished, routed horse and mon?
Must treacherous Iockie visit Phlegeton?
Let wilde-sires then cut capers on the ropes,
Appear and vanish like their empty hopes;
Mount rockets to the second region, higher
Then their ambition soared, dart balls of fire;
Let powder-devils, squibs and crackers fly,
And dance us Scottish gigs, to testify
How our triumphant hearts, our arteries
Leap in us, and how mirth smiles in our eyes.
Farewell, poor Scot, thou need'st no more to come
For coin, our States have sent a new-coin'd sum,
Troopers on horseback, pieces that weigh down
Put in the balance, more then half a crown;
Though Magazines of Nobles (doits to us)
Make the scales even as an over- plus.
These new-coin'd pieces which we send to you,
Augment their worth by name of Sterling too.
Ye noxious winds, into some caverns fly:
Vanish, Kirk-mill-dews, ignes fatui:
Farewell, never more, ye fogs of error, dare
Taint with your breath our wholesome English air:
Think you to blast (with your Presbytery)
This fine fair blossom of our liberty?
No, your Geneva black Kirk-liveries,
'Gin to grow threadbare in the peoples eyes;
And if you ben't permitted to renew't,
'Twill but just last you for a mourning suit.
Go haste to Chaul and Cochin, there to try
If you can live on highway charity;
Go feed on grains the Banianes cates,
As Catercousins with the Gusarates,
Like beasts if any wounded, haste you all
For salves unto Cambaia's hospital;
March, wicked Iockie, toward Bengalen,
With the Indian Pagods Priests, (far better men)
To Ganges blessed streams, there cast thee in,
With holy water purge thee of thy sin;
Or turn a superstitious traveller,
Find out the tombe-stone of Jack-Presbyter,
(Like Turkish Pilgrims, who to Mechago,
See th'iron coffin, then will see no more.)
Once having seen where the holy relic lies,
In zealous humor pluck our both thy eyes.
Then if thou safe returnest, or if not,
We Will honor thee with name of Hogie Scot.
Men worse then Gours, whom malice cannot defame,
Cupec and Canzier is too clean a name;
It is a sin to let a Scot compound,
Nay, should you choke and thrust them under ground,
Know that you are no Authors of their death,
The Coward- Scots ran themselves out of breath;
Laugh, laugh to think on it, e're the fight begun,
What preparations Jockie made to run;
Laugh, laugh, to think in what a stormy night,
Death killed their foot and light horse in the flight;
I know of old it has a saying bin,
A Scottish mist (...) the English to the skin;
Whether that proverb's verified or not,
I Am sure such English showers kill a Scot.
In Fugatos Scotos.
BEllica, vicisti trepidantes, Anglia, Scotos;
In sua, contritus truditur, antra Aquilo
Victor, quo fuerat victoria certior Anglus
Scotia, quo minor est gloria, victa fuit.
Anglia Mavortis tum demum Filia pugnas,
Ipsa tibi quando pugna triumphus erit
Astutus, minime pugnax tibi sternitur hostis,
Nunquam bella Scotus, saepius arma gerit.
(...).
LAscivo, lascivus amor sedet hircus, in hirquo,
Ortum habet ^e solo lumine, Diva Paphi;
Turpiter Antique Venerem dixere Aphroditen,
Non est orta mari nempe, nec orta mero;
Constituat Venerem si spuma, vocabitur inde
Sordidior meretrix and lupa quaeque Venus
Nobilis illa Venus, mea quam pupilla venustam,
Novit and orta oculo est deliciosa meo.
Prima, oculi, Veneris sunt incunabula, primas
Ex oculi accendit luce Cupido, faces
Hic Puer Idalius venantem Actaeona prendit
Sen nova in hoc capitis font Diana foret;
Interdum capto capietur ocellus ocello,
Saepe videns capitur, saepe videndo capit;
Rhetina reticulum, and venabula cornea amoris,
Formarum duo sunt caustica vitra oculi
Optica sila suis puer ales cornibus aptat
Non alios nervos arcus amoris habet.
Infantem and Catulum caecum qui dixit Amorem
Fallitur, est oculus totus, and Argus. Amor.
A Mock-sonnet.
1.
WHy so Fair? why so sweet?
My Fairest sweet one, why so coy?
Why so angry? why so fretting?
That pretty face, did thou but see it,
How thy soft cheeks so smooth and fair,
Like to those full fat buttocks are,
Where Venus claps her plump-ars't boy,
How they rise
About thine eyes,
And betwixt thy nose out- jetting;
Would thou but wave thy modesty,
And look from top to toe,
Above, below,
What dainty things there be,
Thy milk-white, full-milch't breast,
Upon whose swelling hills does rest,
Aminta's new wash t flock,
Where the Graces make caresses,
Like most amorous shepherdesses,
Surely thou can not think I mock.
2.
Lovely Fair, why so chaste?
Why so peevish? so untoward?
At what my Dear have took distaste?
Sweetest fair one, why so froward?
Would thou but view impartially,
The rolling gogles of thine eye,
Thy unthatch't brows so neatly set
With scales of scurf all over,
Thy hairelesse eyelids always wet
And stiff with gum good store
Did thou but see
Upon thy nose how prettily
In The pimpled pockholes all about
Cupids play bopeep in and out,
How thy snag-teeth stand orderly,
Like stakes which strut by the waterside,
Stradling to beat off the tide,
Till green and worn to th'stumps they be;
Would thou but once, my Dearest-sweet,
Look thy self over from head to feet,
Below, above,
Thou can not choose but think I love.
3.
Beauty, beauty, what do mean
Cupid sucks my heart-blood out,
And well thou know I cannot wean
The child, for thy sweet dugs do give him life
When I would starve the rogue; then turn about,
Busse me and say thou wilt be my wife,
For troth when e're I see,
Either what is below thy knee,
Or if mine eyes I cast,
On parts above thy waste;
Where e're my sense does move,
I Am more and more in love.
Still from thine eyes there passes,
As from great burning-glasses,
Lightning in such frequent flashes,
That consume my heart to ashes;
Nay, when thou blow'st thy snottie nose,
The bellows of thy nostril blows
The fire of love into a flame,
And the oil of Armpits feeds the same,
Thy legs, breast, lips and eyes inslave me,
But if behind thee once I come,
And view the mountains of thy bum,
Oh then
I Am mad to have thee.
On his bed standing in his study.
WHat are the Muses chambers made to be
A lodge for sleep? their gard'ns his nurcerie?
Must fancie's Hymen, must the god of light
Dance with the dull, dark Bridegroom of the night?
Did e're the sisters for a requiem go
To fields, where slumbring sleepie poppies grow?
Did ever bed-stead on Parnassus stand?
Usurping Morpheus, did thou e're command,
And shake thy leaden scepter, in the Court
Where watchful active Muses use to sport?
Though'st thou to be, though not at all divine,
A bedfellow to any of the nine?
Which sister is it has lost her maidenhead?
The strumpet now must needs be brought to bed;
Which Muse must waiting-Gentlewoman be,
Turn pisse-tail'd Chambermaid to tend on thee?
What, must the noble spritely Pegasus
Engender with the foggie nightmare thus:
Making a stable of my Chamber-room,
My bed the manger, and my self the Groom?
Know crazie god of sleep, a Poet can
Without a nightcap make a hymn to Pan;
Take not thy drowsy blankets, ('it is a sin)
To toss the Muses high-borne children in;
Poets are never so dull to sacrifice,
Watch-lights and tapers to nights Deities;
Is there 'tween Lethe and Pyrene's streams,
No difference? are Enthusiasmes dreams?
Shall Phoebus sons in the bed drive light away,
And with Apollo's curtain blind the day?
Here lies a bedrid-Poet, I Would rather have
A dormitorie without Epitaph,
Then on my monument it should be sed,
Euterpe's smothered in a feather-bed:
Me for no hydromantick novice take,
Who cast my water for experience sake,
I Am no young Paeon, that thus at my hand
My Urine always should so closely stand;
At twelve of the clock it truly may be sed,
To me you're come but newly from your bed.
Somnus the Muses Closet must not be,
A cabin for thine Incubus and thee.
Yet I love sleep, good Morpheus do not frown,
I only wish my feather-bed were down.
De Meryone and Laid ex Auson.
CAnus rogabat Laidis noctem Myron:
Tulit repulsam protinus.
Causamque sensit and caput fuligine
Fucavit atra candidum.
Idemque vultu, crine non idem Myron,
Orabat oratam prius.
Sed illa formam cum capillo comparans,
Similemque non ipsum rata.
Fortasse and ipsum sed volens ludo frui
Sic est adorta callidum,
Inepte quid me quod recusavi rogas?
Patri negavi jam tuo.
Gray Headed Myron ask't to lie one night
With Lais, she in troth denied the wight,
He knew the cause, (resolved to try once more)
With soot and grease he black't his head all over,
Still Myron in his face, though not in's hair,
To her he came, prayed over his former prayer;
But she comparing with his hair his feature,
Thought he was like, if not the self-same creature.
Perhaps she knew in, but minded then to make
Some sport, thus to the cunning knave she spoke,
Cox comb d'ask, why thou may not come over me?
I but even now denied thy father before thee.
Gynochimaera, Puella Abrodiaeta.
EN formosam tibi, Amator, and delicatulam Helenam!
Ab imis unguibus ad usque verticem,
Pulchram, venustam blandulam,
A prima luce mill petitam procis
Sedulo petitam satrapis,
Et aemuli indies Dominae accendunt pretium.
Ubi? ubi? surrexit? dormit? hilares, anxii, lugubres,
Audaces, desperantes, creduli,
Percontantur, accersunt, rogant;
Ientavit nondum meum Nectar, Ambrosia,
Epulae, dapes, cupedia, jentaculum, prandium, coena?
Precatur hoc mane Danae mea?
Deorum nefas! facinus! flagitium! seclus!
Number tale quicquam superi audent sinere?
Surge Titane, surgat centimanus Briareus.
Adeste furiosi Gigantum manes,
Encelade, Polybotes, Hippolyte, Mina,
Ossam reimponite Pelio
Illa number tenellos poplites molliagenua?
Juro per ipsam illam Ursulam meam
Totus Olympus ruet,
Digna est cui preces Jupiter:
Vultis ut caelo parcam
Descendite superi
Ne fracti elabantur orbs
Submissi and humiles veniam petit^,
Non introspiciendas ad fenestras Cubiculi
Cito, cito, flectite and adorate meam,
Been habet numina, humilitatem laudo,
Venerari autem meam and colere,
Qua non est major, non est pulcbrior Dea
Nec in ipsis Superis est Humilitas:
At tu vero, quid ita prope?
Quisnam es? Mars? imo Mavors est^
Ni te auferas, seriam;
Tu autem quis?
Auden' retrorsum oculos
(...)
(...) nebulo quin te ablegas?
Eja, hem! e transenna tandem accersor aedipol,
Ha, nuuc ad amoris Tempe and coelum vado
Quam belle detorquebo cervicem meam
Ad dispensanda and carpenda suavial
Quam gloriose and feliciter ego
Triumphabo hodie in certamine thalami!
Vah graveolentem and teterrimum spiritum!
Quam sunt nivalia and hircosa oscula!
Huccine res! haec illa bellula?
Nil est monstrosum nil belluinum magis,
Mulier Decumani capitis
Crines habet scirpeos,
Viperis immistas colubras;
Subcineritiam, mazonomicam, paradoxam faciem
Inhabitatam manibus;
Frontem aeramentario Fusori utilem,
Scutularum instar limes ab invicem oculi
Spuma cervisiae stagnant,
Pro naso gobium gerit,
Paradromides nares and matulas,
Labra pastomide digna
Sugillata, livida,
Nigriora illinitis calcantho calceis,
In ore fujcinas habet,
A sese abhorrentium and aberrantium dentium
Abecedarium Arabico-persicum;
Ad commiscenda basia
Congrediuntur nasus and mentum simul,
Et senio pensilis
Ictum minatur oculo
Supercilii materiaria incrustatio,
Suoque semper gargarizat phlegmate:
Et ecce grossos tortuosos digitos
Quorum ungues pterigia obtegunt!
Quo plus intueor hoc inhorresco magis,
Ah me! Grandebalas olidas,
Ampullas, and lagunculas pectoris!
Meretrix est opimae Hypocondriae
Doliaris uteri and saginati abdominis,
En and ventris cadum
Panarium and libidinis bulgam
Carnosam, obesam, pinguiusculam!
Sub gremiali carbaso furnarium habet
Putres cambuca inguines
Arcuatas coxendices and Pistoris ischia,
Protuberantes condylos
Quos nec pelvis tegat tonsoria
Gradu quanquam incedit grallatorio
Uncos and dispares si respicias pedes
Scazon est and animal catalecticum:
Corpus scopulosum scabie
Psora, ulceribus, pustulis
(Siliquas corticesque cum deglubat unguibus)
Purgando quotidie coenovectorium non est,
Apage te scraptia, Creationis scoria,
Pythecium, barathrum, naturae scandalum,
Carnis and ossium
Tumultuario constricta sarcina,
Difformitatum Gerontocomii epitome.
Quam qui ducet habiturus est,
Et paranymphum Daemonem and Proserpinam pronubam
Sed tamen adesdum amabo meum suavium
Ah labellorum delicias! Ah dulcedinem!
Quam belle disputant gazae?
Opulenta tua si cum dote veniat
Placebit and amabitur
Maga quaecunque vel anilis succuba.
Ad Academiae Matris Nerones and viperas.
CAballinis Mercuri e fontibus
Aqua fortis fluat stygia,
Totis a Parnassi jugis
Imbres aceti depluant,
Adeste Deliani cacodaemones
Scabiosi pastores ovium
Ego vos perunctos and perlinitos dabo
Oh si vestrorum cadaverum
Nominumque pollinctor
Vel ambidexter corporum lictor forem!
Mallem etenim ad eculeum and patibulum vosmet
Quam vestra ad incudem dogmata:
Quid Heliconiis vos in alveariis
Literarum Cephenes and Bombylii Ecclesiae?
Non ostracismis modo sed bannis digni,
Relegandi non ad Anticyras sed Girgathum,
Diaboli protomystae flamines,
Tartarorum metropolitani and Pontifices stygis,
Apolyonis Heresiarchae Archangeli
Infernalis Mustaphae satellites Janizarii
Concionatores tympanistae
Beelzebub cacozeli apostoli
Non genuini Almae Matris filii
Sed meretricis Babylonicae spurii
Jesuitarum non tibicines modo
Sed and utriculares tibiae
Tam nefaria capita
Quid ni suapte lapides and tegulae involent?
Quin excidant vindices trabes,
Ustulet syderatio vel percellant fulgura?
Dii boni!
Musasque Parnassumque evertere
Literatos omnes and bonos viros pessundare,
Orthodoxam Religionem conspuere
Christum demutilare and destruere Ecclesiam
Quibus ipsorum etiam phaselus in portu navigat,
Rudentem and anchor am praecidere!
Eundemque cui innitantur, baculum frangere!
Tam lusciosos Myopes
Qui quicquid in buccam venit,
Sacrilegi eructant and blasphemi effutiunt
Quin aufer at Charon scaphiarius?
At exitium est felix nimis,
Et culpand^e charitatis votum,
Quod vos feretro and sandapilariis voveat;
Vivos videntesque comedat scabies,
Pediculorum and vermium AEgyptia cohors
Intestina sacrisicentur Proserpinae
Et Diis inferis viscera.
O Homines!
Qui disseminare Evangelium novum,
Abdicare Haeredem vineae
Dehonestare majorum mores,
Rescindere edicta Patrum
Consuetudines, jura, ordines,
Perturbare and confundere
Abhorrere a veritatis lumine,
Sancta and Religiosa templa violare,
Ditis atri patefacere januam,
Bonas animas perdere,
Judaeos and Jesuitas agere
Dissimulare mentiri and fallere,
Munus and pensum ducitis:
Quam net amabilis Christi videtur sponsa,
Cujus in facie vos inhaeretis turpiter
Ignominiosae maculae!
Literatorum illiterata and fa'culenta eluvies,
Sordes and segisterium Populi;
Quin Academiae has quisquilias,
Extercorator publicus ca'novectorio efferat!
The Epistle of Rosamund to King HENRY the Second: Written by M. D. Esquire.
Jf yet thine eyes great Henry may endure
These tainted lines drawn with a hand impure,
[Which feign would blush, but fear keeps blushing back,
And therefore suited in despairing black.]
Let me for loves sake their acceptance crave,
But that sweet name (vile) I profained have;
Punish my fault, or pity mine estate;
Read them for love, if not for love for hate.
If with my shame, thine eyes thou feign would' st feed
Here let them surfeit of my shame to read,
This scribled paper which I send to thee,
If noted rightly does resemble me:
As this pure ground whereon these letters stand,
So pure was I e're stained by thy hand;
E're I was blotted by this foul offense,
So clear and spotless was my innocence:
Now like these marks which taints this hateful scrowl,
Such the black sins which spot my leprous soul.
What by this Conquest can thou hope to win,
Where thy best spoil is but the act of sin?
Why on my name this slander do thou bring,
To make my fault renowned by a King?
"Fame never stoops to things but mean and poor;
"The more our greatness, our fault is the more;
"Lights on the ground themselves do lessen far,
"But in the air, each small spark seems a star:
Why on my woman frailty should thou lay,
So strong a plot mine honor to betray?
Or thy unlawful pleasure should thou buy,
Both with thine own shame and my infamy?
'Twas not my mind consented to this ill,
Then had I been transported by my will;
For what my body was enforced to do,
(Heaven knows) my soul yet never consented to
For through mine eyes had she her liking seen,
Such as my love, such had my lover been
"True love is simple, like his mother truth,
"Kindly affection, youth to love with youth.
"No greater corsive to our blooming years,
Then the cold badge of winter-blasted hairs;
"Thy kingly power makes to withstand thy foes,
"But cannot keep back age, with time it grows,
"Though honor our ambitious sex does please,
"Yet in that honor age a soul disease:
"Nature has her free course in all, and then
"Age is alike in Kings and other men.
Which all the world will to my shame impute,
That I my self did basely prostitute,
And say that gold was fuel to the fire,
Gray hairs in youth not kindling green desire.
O no, that wicked woman wrought by thee,
My tempter was to that forbideen tree:
That subtle serpent, that seducing devil,
Which bade me taste the fruit of good and evil;
That Circe by whose magic I was charmed,
And to this monstrous shape am thus transformed;
That viprous Hag, that foe to her own kind,
That devilish spirit to damn the weaker mind;
Our frailties plague our sexes only curse,
Hells deep'st damnation, the worst evils worse.
But Henry how can thou affect me thus,
TO whom thy remembrance now is odious?
My hapless name with Henry's name I found,
Cut in the glass with Henry's diamond:
That glass from thence fain would I take away,
But then I fear the air would me betray:
Then do I strive to wash it out with tears,
But then the same more evident appears;
Then do I cover it with my guilty hand,
Which that names witness does against me stand:
Once did I sin, which memory does cherish,
Once I offended, but I ever perish.
"What grief can be, but time does make it less?
"But infamy time never can suppress.
Sometimes to pass the tedious irksom hours,
I climb the top of Woodstocks mounting towers;
Where in a turret secretly I lie,
To view from far such as do travel by;
Whither (me thinks) all cast their eyes at me,
As through the stones my shame did make them see:
And with such hate the harmless walls do view,
As even to death their eyes would me pursue.
The married women curse my hateful life,
Wronging a fair Queen, and a virtuous wife;
The Maidens wish I buried quick may die,
And from each place where my abode do fly;
Well knew'st thou what a Monster I would be,
When thou did build this Labyrinth for me,
Whose strange Meanders turning every way,
Are like the course wherein my youth did stray
Only a clue does guide me out and in,
But yet still walk I circular in sin.
As in the Gallerie this other day,
I and my woman past the time away
Amongst many pictures, which were hanging by,
The silly girl at length hap't to epsy;
Chaste Lucrece image, and desires to know
What she should be, her self that murd'red so?
Why Girl (quoth I) this is the Roman Dame;
Not able then to tell the rest for shame,
My tongue does mine own guiltiness betray;
With that I sent the prattling wench away,
Lest when my lisping guilty tongue should hault,
My looks might prove the Index to my fault.
As that lifeblood which from the heart is sent,
In beauties field pitching his crimson tent,
In lovely sanguine suits thy lilie cheek,
Whilst it but for a resting place does seek;
And changing oftentimes with sweet delight,
Converts the white to red, the red to white:
The blush with palenesse, for the place does strive,
The palenesse thence the blush would gladly drive;
Thus in my breast a thousand thoughts I carry,
Which in my passion diversely do vary.
When as the Sun hales toward the western shade,
And the trees shadows has much taller made;
Forth go I to a little current near,
Which like a wanton traile creeps here and there,
Where with mine Angle casting in my bait,
The little fishes (dreading the deceit)
With fearful nibling fly rh' enticing gin,
By nature taught what danger lies therein,
Things reasonlesse thus warned by nature be,
Yet I devoured the bait was laid for me:
Thinking thereon, and breaking into groans,
The bubling spring which trips upon the stones
Chides me away, lest sitting but too uigh,
I should defile the native pnritie:
Rose of the world, so does import my name;
Shame of the world, my life has made the same;
And to the unchaste this name shall given be
Of Rosamond, derived from sin and me.
The Cliffords take from me that name of theirs,
Which has been famous for so many years;
They blot my birth with hateful bastardie,
That I sprung not from their Nobility;
They my Alliance utterly refuse,
Nor will a Strumpet shall their name abuse;
Here in the garden wrought by curious hands,
Naked Diana in the fountain stands,
With all her Nymphs got round about to hide her,
As when Actaeon had by chance espied her;
This sacred image I no sooner viewed,
But as that metamorphos'd man, pursued
By his own hounds, so by my thoughts am I,
Which chase me still which way so e're I fly;
Touching the grass, the honey dropping dew,
Which falls in tears upon my limber shoe;
Upon my foot consumes in weeping still,
As it would say why went thou to this ill?
Thus to no place in safety can I go,
But every thing does give me cause of woe.
In that fair casket of such wondrous cost,
Thou sent'st the night before mine honor lost,
Amimone was wrought a harmless maid,
By Neptune that adult'rous god betrayed;
She prostrate at his feet begging with prayers,
Wringing her hands, her eyes swollen up with tears;
This was not an intrapping bait from thee,
But by thy virtue gently warning me,
And to declare for what intent it came,
Lest I therein should ever keep my shame;
And in this casket (ill I see it now)
That Jove's love Io turned into a Cow;
Yet was she kept with Argus hundred eyes,
So wakeful still be Juno's jealousies:
By this I well might have forewarned been,
TO have cleared my self to thy suspecting Queen;
Who with more hundred eyes attends me,
Then had poor Argus single eyes to see.
In this thou rightly imitatest Jove,
Into a beast thou have transformed thy love:
Nay, worser far (beyond their beastly kind,)
A Monster both in body and in mind.
The waxen taper which I burn by night,
With the dull vaprie dimnesse mocks my sight,
As though the damp which hinders the clear flame,
Come from my breath in that night of my shame,
When as it looked with a dark lowering eye,
To see the loss of my Virginity:
And if a star but by the glass appear,
I straight entreat it not to look in here;
I am already hateful to the light,
And will it too betray me to the night?
Then since my shame so much belongs to thee,
Rid me of that by only murdering me,
And let it justly to my charge be laid,
That I thy person meant to have betrayed;
Thou shall not need by circumstance t'accuse me,
If I deny it, let the Heavens refuse me;
My life's a blemish which does cloud thy name,
Take it away, and clear shall shine thy fame:
Yield to my suit, if ever pity moved thee,
In this show mercy, as I ever loved thee.
Epistola Rosamundae ad HENRICVM secundum Latinis versibus reddita.
HAEc mea si vestris oculis, Henrice, placebit,
Adsit ut impura chartula scripta manu
(Chartula quae voluit simel erubuisse sed exspes
Pullatam jussit (proh dolor!) ire metus.)
Accipias placido vultu, rogo nomine amoris;
Sacrum aliquando fuit nam mihi nomen amor:
Vel culpam plecte, aut nostri miserere doloris
Perlege and ex odio si modo non quo James:
Vis oculos scelerate meo satiare pudore?
En meus impertit pabula lauta pudor.
Est haec, quam mitto tibi sparsam, charta, lituris,
Si been perspicias, turpis imago mei
Haec quam munda fuit, cum nondum scripta maneret
Chartula, and ipsa semel tam quoque munda fui;
At manibus male tacta tuis, sum tota litura
Facta, nec haec maculis tam nigra charta suis:
Quid spolii potes ex illo sperare triumpho
In quo vicisse est turpe patrasse scelus?
Dedecoris usacula mea quid mihi nomina foedas,
Nominibus crescit quid mea culpa tuis?
Nobilis es? titulo scelus est illustrius illo,
Nec solita est humiles visere fama lares;
Elata ad coelos scintillula stella videtur,
Stella sed in terris vix ea lumen habet.
Quid mihi conaris charos ita perdere honores,
Ut dicas tandem foemina victa tibi?
Delicias emit illicitas (quam slebile lucrum!)
Virginis intactae gloria, Regis honos!
In tantas Venerem quae slammas ire coegit
Non mea fax certe non meus ignis erat.
Illa meo quondam quoe sunt in corpore facta
Novit nusquam animae grata fuisse Deus,
Libera si votis essem nec amator amorem
Noster amatorem nec super asset amor:
Verus amor simplex, and matre potentior ipsa
Pulchra sit ut juveni juncta puella jubet:
Virginibus teneris non est magis anxia cura
Quam sit brumalis cana pruina comae;
Quid tua, quod saevos, fugat hosts, Regia virtus
Interea and Regis terga senecta premit;
Foemina conspicuos licet ambiat aemula honores,
Non been commendat Regia pompa senem.
Cancellos minime patitur natura, vagatur
Undique convenient in seen Rex and homo.
Ergo ego per gentes meretrix ingloria dicar
Que me venalem Foemina avara dedi;
Sordida regali dicar mercabilis auro,
Atque auro nostros incaluisse focos
Squallida nam vetuli nec adurit barba puellas
Nec senis accendit fax moritura saces;
At mala, colligerem ve^itos ut ab arbore fructus,
Causa fuit, jussu foemina missa tuo.
Foemina dicebam? ser pens, subtilior anguis
Compulit illa meas in glucupicra manus,
Canidia illa, ferox Medea, venefica Circe,
Quae magico succo pocula mista dedit;
Quae monstri faciem dedit hanc monstrosior ipsa,
Ipsa Hecate, generi trux inimica suo.
Illa infernalis stygii cacodoemonis uxor,
Faeminei sexus pestis and atra lues.
Nostri animi morbus, fera vipera, avernus averni;
Exitium, damnum, perniciisque stygis;
Quid vero Henricus mihi tot prositetur amores
Nomina cum mea sint nunc odiosa tibi.
In vitro Henrici scriptum diademate, nostrum
Turpe sub Henrici nomine, nomen erat.
Tum tremulis manibus vitrum ablatura, verebar
Ne pura impuram proderet aura manum;
Nomina tum volui, lacrymosus ut ^luat imber,
Nomina sunt lacrymis conspicienda magis
Tum super imposita dextra caelasse putabam.
Cons^ia flagitii testis and illa fuit,
Sic vagain a ternum peccati infamia durat
Sons ego facta semel, sed rea semper agar;
Quis dolor, aut luctus, qui nullo tempore languet?
Dedecoris sanat stigmata nulla dies:
Alta supervado interdum fastigia turris
Vt quae longa nimis facta si^ ho a brevis
Ad summos apices, inhonest as scando latebras
Unde viatores transeo luminibus:
In me conjiciunt oculos puto, me quasi reddat,
Conspicuamque daret saxa per ipsa pudor,
Insontes feriunt inimico lumine muros,
Nostram acies oculi quaeque minata necem:
Nunc mihi, quod spreta est Regina and castior uxor,
Optat just a magis, conjugis ira crucem;
Nunc ego ut in gelidum descendam viva sepulchrum,
Casta Puellarum vota precesque petunt:
Me monstrum fugiunt, been nosti quale ego monstrum
Hic mihi constructus cum Labyrinthus erat,
Qui gradibus dubiis and flexibus undiqne curvus,
Maeandro est similis quem meus error habet;
Usque quidem filo circumferor intus and intus,
Huc illuc vitii circulus usque rapit:
Omnia cum nuper passim per claustra vagatae,
Trivimus, ancilla me comitante, diem,
Picturas inter multas and anaglypha multa,
Quae docta artificis sculpta fuere manu
Tarquinii Collatini castissima conjux,
Effigy forti nobilitata stetit
Hanc ubi conspex it simplex ancillula, mortem,
Quoe sibi conscivit, quae precor, inquit erat?
Haec illa est, ego tum retuli matrona Quiritum,
Haec illa, and vetuit plura refer pudor.
Poene fatebatur sontem me prodiga lingua
Garrula quocirca missa puella for as
Turpia per dentes ne praecipitantia verba
Vultu significent indice turpe scelus.
Scilicet ut sanguis vitalis cord reclusus,
Coccinea in bello castra resi it agro,
Et placidos vultus rubicunda vest colorat
Misceturque genis, ut rosa liliolis
Cum requiem quaerens commutat saepius albo
Coccina liliolo, liliolumque rosa;
Contendunt de seds simul pallorque, ruborque
Certat pallorem pellere ab ore pudor;
Sic mihi mill animi dubitantia pectora versant
Dum mea se mutat men's nova and inde nova,
Projectis ramorum umbris, ubi Phoebus Ibero,
Poene fatigatos, gurgite tingit equos;
Vicinos propero ad latices, ubi rivulus undas
Lascivo huc illuc syrmatis instar agit,
Fallacem hic escam injicio praedantibus hamis,
Subdola sed praedam terret arundo suam;
Insidias fugiunt pisces, calamoque recedunt
Edocti timido rodere dente cibos;
Naturae normis animalia bruta monentur
Ipsa ego stult a mihi mista aconita bibi;
Haec ego dum memoro suspiria tristia ducens,
Increpat, irato flumine, bulla frequens;
Ingemo, and objurgat lapidosus marmore rivus,
Ni vitientur aquae lacryma, abire jubet:
Heu Rosamunda ego sum, Rosa mundi nomine dicor
Factaque sum mundi, non Rosa munda, pudor.
Nomine famoso posthaec Rosamunda vocetur,
Improba quae Thais quae modo Lais erat.
Infensi sua Cliffordi mihi nomina demunt,
Nomina tam multo nobilitata die,
Et mea, seu natae populo, natalia delent,
Nec clara illorum stirpe oriunda fui;
Sim licet affinis, cognatio nostra negatur,
Dedixere sui nominis esse lupam:
Hic, dextrae melioris opus spectabile, in horto
Font stat in medio nuda Diana dea.
Nympharum densa circumstipata cohorte
Ut cum Cadmi aderat forte aliquando nepos
Nec citius castae speculabar imaginis ora,
Quin ego ut Actaeon mox variata steti;
Ille molossorum rabie laniatus, idemque
Supplicium curis tradita praeda luo.
Advolitant ubieanque vagor, dum gramina tango
Fletur and in crepidas mellea gutta cadit;
Gemmea se solvens luge^do lacryma, visa est
Dicere quid scelus hoc? turpe quid ausa scelus
Nulla mibi seeds superest, loca nulla quietis
Me luctum, luctu singula plena, monent
A te nocte illa, sceleri quae praevia nostro,
Mire opulenta mihi capsula missa fuit;
Amimone virgo castissima pingitur intus,
Quam tulit in medias Glaucus adulter aquas;
Contorque^s digitos tumidos attollit ocellos
El precibus supplex sternitur ante pedes;
Nonfuit boc, magnidolus and fallacia Regis
Praemonuit virt us me pictisque tua
Dixit and expressit quo sit mihi nomine missa,
Dedecoris nostri ne monumenta foret,
In vaccam mutasse Jovis, Mephitida, amorem
Heu nimium tandem capsula sero docet.
Centenis oculis Jo custodiit Argus,
Zelotipoque vigil lumine Juno Jovem;
Hac ego Reginae poteram ratione fuisse
Inculpata tuae criminibusque carens.
Custodi nostrae si quis jam comparet Argum
Argus centeno lumine pauper erat:
Hoc Jovis obscoenas imitare fideliter arts,
Scilicet in pecudem degener avit amor.
Nec non sordidior quam qua vis bellua sordes?
Tota ad prodigium carne animoque salax.
Cerea, nocturni mult a fuligine Lychni
Illudit teneros caeca lucerna oculos,
Seu faculam interimens, illa sub nocte pudoris
Atrior e nostro fluxerat ore vapor,
Cum vigil abducto prospexit lumine lampas,
Cerneret ut rapta virginitatis opes:
Et si per tenues lucebat stella fenestras,
Huc noli inspicias stella precabar ego,
Vis etiam lunae? sum dudum invisa diei,
Stellula vis etiam prodere nocte scelus?
Quare, ego cum tanti tibi dicar causa pudoris,
Hanc [citome jugules] me jugulando necas,
Insidias, narra, meretrix tibi persida struxi,
Dic majestatem me violasse tuam;
Non opus est multis ambagibus insimulare,
Si modo diffitear tartara nigra petam;
Dum vivo, tibi sum labes, tua nomina nubes
Obtego, at excussa nube relucet honor,
Fac precor excutias, si quid clementia possit,
Si quid possit amor, fac precor excutias.
HENRY to ROSAMVND.
WHen first the Post arrived at my Tent,
And brought the letters Rosamond had sent,
Think from his lips but what dear comfort came,
When in mine ear he softly breathed thy name,
Straight I enjoined him of thy health to tell,
Longing to hear my Rosamond did well,
With new enquiries then I cut him short,
When of the same he gladly would report,
That with the earnest haste my tongue often trips,
Catching the words half spoke out of his lips;
This told, yet more I urge him to reveal,
To lose no time, whilst I unripp'd the seal.
The more I read, still do I err the more,
As thongh mistaking somewhat said before,
Missing the point, the doubtful sense is broken,
Speaking again what I before had spoken;
Still in a swound my heart revives and faints,
'Twixt hopes, despaires, 'twixt smiles and deep complaints.
As these sad accents sort in my desire.
Smooth calmes, rough storms, sharp frosts and raging fires,
Put on with boldness, and put back with fears,
For often thy troubles do extort my tears;
O, how my heart at that black line did tremble!
That blotted paper should thy self resemble:
O, were there paper but near half so white,
The gods thereon their sacred laws would write,
With pens of Angels wings, and for their ink,
That heavenly Nectar, their immortal drink.
Majestic courage strives to have suppressed
This fearful passion stirred up in my breast.
But still in vain the same I go about,
My heart must break within, or woes break out;
Am I at home pursued with private hate,
And wars comes raging to my Palace-gate?
Is meagre envy stabbing at my throne,
Treason attending when I walk alone?
And am I branded with the curse of Rome,
And stand condemned by a Councels doom?
And by the pride of my rebellions son,
Rich Normandy with Armies over-runne?
Fatal my birth, unfortunate my life,
Unkind my children, most unkind my wife.
Grief, cares, old age, suspicion to torment me,
Nothing on earth to quiet or content me;
So many woes, so many plagues to find,
Sickness of body, discontent of mind,
Hopes left, helps rest, life wronged, joy interdicted,
Banished, distressed, forsaken and afflicted.
Of all relief has fortune quite bereft me?
Only my love yet to my comfort lest me:
And is one beauty thought so great a thing,
To mitigate the sorrows of a King?
Barred of that choice the vulgar often prove,
Have we, then they, less privilege in love?
Is it a King the woeful widow hears?
Is it a King dries up the Orphants tears?
Is it a King regards the Clients cry:
Gives life to him by law condemned to die?
Is it his care the Commonwealth that keeps,
As does the Nurse her Baby whilst it sleeps?
And that poor King of all those hopes prevented,
Unheard, unhelp'd, unpitti'd, unlamented?
Yet ler me be with poverty oppressed,
Of earthly blessings robbed and dispossessed;
Let me be scorned, rejected and reviled,
And from my Kingdom let me live exiled,
Let the worlds curse upon me still remain,
And let the last bring on the first again;
All miseries that wretched man may wound,
Leave for my comfort only ROSAMOND.
For thee swift time his speedy course does stay,
At thy command the destinies obey;
Pity is dead, that comes not from thine eyes,
And at thy feet even mercy prostrate lies.
If I were feeble, rheumatick or cold,
These were true signs that I were waxed old;
But I can march all day in massy steel,
Nor yet my arms unweildy weight do feel,
Nor waked by night with bruise or bloody wound,
The tent my bed, no pillow but the ground:
For very age, had I lain bedridden long,
One smile of thine again could make me yonug.
Were there in Art a power but so divine,
As is in that sweet Angel-tongue of thine,
That great Enchantresse which once took such pains
To put young blood into old AEsons veins,
And in groves, mountains, and the moorish fen,
Sought out more herbs then had bin known to men,
And in the powerful potion that she makes,
Put blood of men, of birds, of beasts and snakes,
Never had needed to have gone so far,
To seek the soiles where all those simples are;
One accent from thy lips the blood more warmes,
Then all her philters, exorcismes and charms.
Thy presence has repaired in one day,
What many years with sorrows did decay,
And made fresh beauty in her flower to spring,
Out of the wrinkles of-times ruining.
Even as the hungry winter-starved earth,
When she by nature labors toward her birth,
Still as the day upon the dark world creeps,
One blossom forth after another peeps,
Till the small flower, whose root (at last) unbound,
Gets from the frostie prison of the ground,
Spreading the leaves unto the powerful noon,
Decked in fresh colors smiles upon the Sun.
Never unquiet care lodged in their breast,
Where but one thought of ROSAMOND did rest:
Nor thirst, nor travel, which on war attend,
E're brought the long-day to desired end:
Nor yet did pale fear, or lean famine live,
Where hope of thee did any comfort give:
Ah, what injustice then is this of thee,
That thus the guiltless do^st condemn for me?
When only she (by means of mine offense)
Redeems thy pureness and thy innocence,
When to our wills perforce obey they must,
That Is just in them, whater'e in us unjust,
Or what we do, not them account we make,
The fault craves pardon for the offenders sake:
And what to work a Princes will may merit,
Has deep'st impression in the gentlest spirit.
If It be my name that does thee so offend,
No more my self shall be mine own names friend,
If it be that which thou do only hate,
That name in my name lastly has his date,
Say it is accursed, and fatal, and dispraise it,
If written blot it, if engraven raze it:
Say that of all names, it is a name of woe,
Once a Kings name, but now it is not so:
And when all this is done, I know 'twill grieve thee,
And therefore (Sweet) why should I now believ thee?
Nor should thou think those eyes with envy lowre,
Which passing by thee gaze up to thy tower,
But rather praise thine own which be so clear,
Which from thy turret like two stars appear:
Above the Sun does shine, beneath thine eye,
Mocking the Heaven to make another sky.
The little stream which by thy tower does glide,
Where often thou spend'st the weary evening tide,
To view thee well his course would gladly stay,
As loath from thee to part so soon away,
And with salutes thy self would gladly greet,
And offer up some small drops at thy feet;
But finding that the envious banks restrain it,
TO excuse it self does in this sort complain it,
And therefore this sad bubling murmur keeps,
And for thy want within the channel weep.
And as thou do into the water look,
The fish, which see thy shadow in the brook,
Forget to feed, and all amazed lie,
So daunted with the luster of thine eye,
And that sweet name which thou so much do wrong,
In time shall be some famous Poets Song,
And with the very sweetness of that name,
Lions and Tigers men shall learn to tame.
The careful mother at her pensive breast,
With Rosamond shall bring her Babe to rest:
The little birds (by men's continual sound)
Shall learn to speak and prattle Rosamond;
And when in April they begin to sing,
With Rosamond shall welcome in the Spring;!
And she in whom all rarities are found,
Shall still be said to be a Rosamond.
The little flowers dropping their honied dew,
Which (as thou writ'st) do weep upon thy shoe,
Not for thy fault (sweet Rosamund) do moan,
Only lament that thou so soon art gone:
For if thy foot touch hemlock as it goes,
That hemlock's made more sweeter then the Rose.
Of Jove or Neptune, how they did betray,
Speak not of, lo, or Amimone;
When she, for whom Jove once became a bull,
Compared with thee had been a tawny Trull,
He a white Bull, and she a whiter Cow;
Yet he nor she never half so white as thou.
Long since (thou know) my care provided for,
To lodge thee safe from jealous Ellinor,
The Labyrinths conveyance guides thee so,
(Which only Vaughan, thou and I do know)
If she do guard thee with an hundred eyes,
I have an hundred subtle MERCURIES
To watch that ARGUS which my love does keep,
Until eye after eye fall all to sleep.
And those stars which look in, but look to see,
(Wondering) what star here on the earth should be,
As often the Moon amidst the silent night,
Has come to joy us with her friendly light,
And by the Curtains helped mine eyes to see,
What envious night and darkness hid from me;
When I have wished that she might ever stay,
And other worlds might still enjoy the day.
What shall I say, words, tears and sighs be spent,
And want of time does further help prevent,
My Camp resounds with fearful shocks of war,
Yet in my breast more dangerous Conflicts are,
Yet is my Signal to the battles sound,
The blessed name of beauteous ROSAMOND.
Accursed be that heart, that tongue, that breath,
Should think, should speak, or whisper of thy death:
For in one smile or lowre from thy eye
Consists my life, my hope, my victory.
Sweet Woodstock where my ROSAMOND does rest,
Be blessed in her, in whom thy King is blessed.
For though in France a while my body be,
My heart remains (Dear Paradise) in thee.
THE END.
HENRICUS ROSAMVNDAE.
Appulerat nostrasubi primum nuncius oras,
Et mihi visa tua est chartula scripta manu,
Oh mihi quam gratus fuit ille su surrus in aure,
Illaque quam placuit vox Rosamunda tua!
Quanta per attonisum ruperunt gaudia pectus,
Inque tuo quantum nomine laetus eram!
Illius a tremuli, captavi verba labellis,
Verbaque nescio quae dimidiata tuli.
Deque tua cupide quaesivi multa salute
Hoc ega quam volu^ tum Rosamunda valet.
Quam voluit dixisse valet, corre^ta reliquit,
Verba, ego quaer^bam dum nova and inde nova.
Et raptim celeri rumpo dum pollice ceram,
Ne mora sit lapso tempore, mill peto.
Seu quod praecessit mendax male verteret error
Quo lectum magis est, he mage fallor ego
Plus cupio quo plura lego, dubiusque quid hoc est,
Quodlibet, incertus quid sit, Iota lego.
Hinc velut excusso fragili de corpore morbo,
Sollicitum exultat pectus and inde tremit,
Obruor hinc lacrymis, mox laetor distrahor inde
Dum peragunt variat spesque metusque vices
Cor nimbis agitur, nostroque in pectore regnant,
Cum ventis glacies, stamma, pruina gelu.
Anxia saepe tui turbat mihi cura quietem,
Et cadit in moestos lachrima multa sinus;
Quam tremebundus eram, quum charta simillima dicta,
[Chartula litterulis improba facta] tibi!
Quae si vel simili foelix splendore niteret
Scriberet hic leges Jupiter ipse suas,
Et sibi ab Angelicis pennam decerperet alis,
Quae pro Atramento nectare tincta foret,
Foemineum hunc trepido pulsasse a cord timorem
Bellica (sed frustra) men's mea saepe velit
Fortius inductae feriunt praecordia curae
Ni rumpat dolor e pectore, rumpar ego
Siccine privatis odiis crudeliter uror,
Et pulsant nostras horrida bella fores?
Invidiae tentatne manus mea sceptra ferire
Soeva meamque petit vitam, ubi solus eo?
Me, licet insontem, Synodi sententia damnat
Et famoso urit stigmate Roma suo.
Undique vexatur dives Normandia bello
Agmen ubi infestum silius hostis agit
Ingrati mibi natales, ingrat ique vita,
Natus inhumanus, sponsa benigna minus
Et curae and morbi cruciant mihi corpora, nullas
Delicias, nullam terra ministrat opem,
Gaudia diffugiunt, spes avolat unica cura
Permanet, haec vitae non hene grata come,
Fortuna, auxilium quod erat, nimis aspera dempsit
Solamen misero restat and unus amor.
Forma adeone valet Regis lenire dolores,
Creditur antidoti forma quod una sati^?
Plebs quaecunque velit felicior eligit ora
Libera number Regi vota negabit amor?
Number viduae tristis capit auris Regia quaestus?
Orborum siccat Regia cura genas?
Number rapit a dura trepidantia^ colla securi,
Et dat supplicibus dextera Regis opem?
Servat ut infantem generosum sedula nutrix
Rex sua regna etiam tuta manner facit?
Cogitur ille tamen Rex desperare salutem
Infoelix, spretus, perditus, exul, inops?
At sim tam pauper quam nec miserabilis I rus,
Improba terrenas sors mihi demat opes.
Exul ego long peregrinas mittar ad oras
Stigmaticus, diris undique onustus eam.
Undique contemnar, me publica vota malignent
Communesque legant in mea damna preces,
Caeca tuis totus laedar fortuna sagittis
Unica restabit si Rosamunda mihi:
Pro te tardarunt fugientes tempora gressus
Et parent jussis ardua fata tuis.
Nata tuis si nata unquam clementia occllis,
Quin amor ipse tuos sternitur ante pedes,
Si vel Rheumanticus, gelidusve aut debilis essem
Illa forent senii praescia signa mei,
Sed cataphractus ego totis incedo diebus,
Impositumque humerus non grave sentit onus,
Nec mihi sanguineum perturbant somnia vulnus,
Saxea, promolli, sunt mihi castra toro;
Nunc ego si centum vixissem Clinicus annos
Verteret in juvenem me tua forma senem
Tam modo divinum si numen in art fuisset,
Quale habet a lingua vox Rosamunda tua.
Erravit varios frustra Medea per hortos
Antruque sollicitis vix adeunda viris,
Ignotas ipsis medicis ut quaereret herbas,
AEsoneum poterint quae reparare senem;
Quid mixta humano pro^est medicina cruore
Quid serpentino sanguine vel quid ave?
Oscula chara tuis prosunt subrepta labellis,
Plus tua quam magici pharmaca, philtra valent.
Quantum Parca meis crescentibus addidit annis,
Visu te, tantum detrahit una dies;
Quaque suum ponit sulcum irreparabile tempus
Inseruit blandis lilia mix ta rosis
Sic nempe hyberno sterilescens tempore terra
Naturae, ad partum, vere reposcit opem;
Mane suburbanos dum sol prorepit in hortos
Pullulatinde recens germen and inde recens,
Mox exporrecto prorumpunt vertice slores
Et stricti linquunt vincula dura soli;
Tum fortes toto gaudent se exponere Phoebo,
Ludit and in patulis blandior aura comis,
Pectoribus nunquam dolor improbus haesit in illis,
Vel dubitata quibus spes Rosamunda fuit.
Fecere, ut cuperem noctes mutare diebus
Nec via me, belli me nec anhelasitis
Me, dum chara meo tu sis in pectore, belli
Nec timor invasit, nec macilenta fames;
Et tamen injuste de me sententia sertur,
Insontem, misere dum facis esse reum.
Totus ego foedo maculatus crimine damnor,
Tu tamen ex ipso hoc indice pura manes;
Nempe vel invitos mihi cum submittere oportet
Omnia justa illis quae mihi jus^ta minis
Fas quodcunque peto, stat pro ratione voluntas
Et sons delictum vindicat ipse suum;
Munificus sieri princeps quae cunque jubebit,
Haec animo facili men's generosa capit;
Si modo displiceant oculo mea nomina, dicas,
Nominibusque meis ipse inimicus ero.
Nomina damnentur, damnentur ut impia facsis,
Si, quoniam mea sint, sint odiosa tibi;
Inclyta fac pereat titulorum gloria, nomen
D^le, dic titulus Regius ille perit,
Haec (fingas liceat) fuerint si facta dolebis
Ergo tibi non est chara adhibenda sides,
Invidia obductos nec credere oportet ocellos
Qui turrim aspectant praetereundo tuam,
Sed laudare tuos qui stellae a turre videntur,
Sydere tam claro luminibusque micant
Sol supra est, tuus infra oculus, coelumque minatur,
AEthera deridens, velle creare novum
Limpha tuam turrem quae flumine lambit amico
Qua solita es fessos ludificare dies,
Heu quam si pe, fugax, remorata est aemula ^ivos
In vultus jactans lumina sixa tuos
Quam cupit in teneros labi fluida unda lacertos!
Amplectique tuos quam velit illa pedes!
Irata obstantes ripas culpare videtur,
Et veniam, invito quod fugit amne, rogat;
Obstrepero plangit fugientes murmr campos,
In lacrymas abeunt flumina, tu quod abis,
Dum nitidas oculis radiantibus inspicis, undas,
Pisciculis, quibus es visa, nec esca placet;
Non opus est hamis salientes ducere pisces,
Pisciculos vultu luminibusque capis;
Et tua quae tantum and toties mihi nomina damnas,
Clara olim magni carmine vatis erunt;
Mitescet quibus and rabidus leo, and aspera tigris,
Sic potes Orphaeam vincere sola lyram;
Nomine nempe tuo, non plura crepundia gestans,
Lullabit prolem matter amica suam
Et solitas hominum voces imitata, per hortos
Garrula nil nisi te vere loquetur avis;
Et posthac semper Rosamunda vocabitur illa,
Que forma superat, quaeque de cora magis:
Mella super crepidas (scripsti) stillantur ab herbis,
Et cadit in teneros lacryma fusa pedes;
Non fletur, Rosamunda, tuas abstegere culpas,
Flet ploratque brevem qua libet herba moram;
Nempe tuo pede sit viridis modo tacta cicuta,
Vertitur in blandam, saeva cicuta, rosam;
Neptuni mihi nec raptu^, fraudisve Tonantis,
Neve Isis sletus Amimonesve refer,
Dummodo quam petiit nivei sub imagine tauri
Si tecum certet corpore, foeda fuit;
Sit bos hic niveus, sit and haec mage candida vacca,
Sunt tamen AEthiopes, fuscus uterque tibi,
Cura fuit (nosti) vigilem deludere sponsam,
Hinc tu Daedaleo carcere tuta mane^
Et stexu vario Labyrinthi clauderis intus,
(Quem novit Vaughan, tu quoque and unus ego)
Quid quod centum oculis mea te custodiat uxor,
Mercurios totidem dum meus addit amor.
Novit and insomnes amor ille sopire dracones
Totque Argos, oculos quot vigil Argus habet
Invida quaeque tuam perlustrat stellula turrim,
Miratur quaenam pulcbrior inde nitet;
Saepius inspexit media nos nocte Diana,
Induls^tque suas Cynthia amica faces;
Sic tenuis cortina dedit spectare siguram,
Quae prius est oculis, nocte negata meis;
Quam volui semper noctem lunamque manner,
AEterno Antipodes sole, dieque frui!
Quid dicam? pereunt lacrymae, suspiria, voces,
Quod mihi restat opis saevior hor a negat;
Bellica terribili resonan mea castra boatu
Pejor at in toto pectore miles amor.
Te Rosamunda tubae, te Classica nostra loquuntur,
Pugnandi signum tu Rosamunda mihi,
Illius intereant and vox and spiritus, audet
Qui meditata tua de nece verba loqui,
Nempe incerta tuo victoria ridet ocello
Illinc est mihi spes, vita triumphus, hones;
Tuque domus qua chara manet Rosamunda, beatus
Qua tuus and Rex est, esto beata domus;
Detineat corpus quanquam fera Gallia, tecum
Cor manet, Elysium deliciaeque meae.
FINIS.

