A CONTINVATION OF The most Remarkable Passages in both Houses of Parliament,
and diverse parts of this Kingdom, and elsewhere.

From Saturday the 26 of November, till Saturday the 3 of December 1642.

Namely; 1 The coming of a Danish Ambassador to the King at Reding. 2 The
inclination of diverse Noble men and both the Houses for an accommodation with
his Majesty, if he would hearken to their just Counsels. 3 Thirdly an attempt
made by diverse Papists and Cavaliers for the surprisall of Hull, with their
discovery. 4 The plundring of Alderman Nicksons house in Oxford, to the value
of six hundred pounds by some Cavalier Scholars. 5 The Prince of Orange his
attempt on Amsterdam, with the success thereof. 6 An Order for the advancing
of the Lord General toward the Cavaliers. 7 The plundering the good town of
Ockingham in Surrey by the Cavaliers. 8 Master Iarmines preparation in France
for Ammunition. 9 Colonel Brownes taking in Farnham Castle, and fourscore
Cavaliers prisoners. 10 The Kings return from Reding to Oxford. 11 My Lord
Generals setting forward toward the Cavaliers. 12 A Proclamation from his
Majesty, forbidding plundring, with observations thereon. 13 An Order of both
Houses for sequestring the Earl of Newcastles Estate to the use of the Common
wealth. 14 An Order likewise concerning the Estates belonging to Deans and
Prebends. 15 Likewise another Order for the assessing those that had not
contributed to the Common wealth. 16 The bringing to the town the Cavaliers
that were taken at Farnham Castle. 17 A new Declaration from his Majesty, and
one from the Parliament. 18 A Post from my Lord Fairefax concerning the
delivery of York.


With sundry other Passages.

By G. H.

London, Printed by Richard Herne, 1642.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM

Saturday, November. 26.
THis day was intercepted a Gentleman coming from Gravesend in a pair of
Oars with Letters, which were supposed to be sent from Colonel G^ring to some
in the Kings Army, which discovered all the intentions of the Malignants beyond
Seas against the High Court of Parliament, and the City of London. These
Letters being read in both Houses were ordered to be printed, as also another
Order to it annexed, set forth by the Lord Mayor for the raising thirty thousand
pound toward the maintenance of the Army: which Letter and Order were commanded
to be published in all Churches in and about the City of London, the Ministers
being desired in consideration of the present dangers, to excite the people to
the more liberal contribution.

This day also the King at Reading received an Ambassador from the King of
Denmark, the Contents of whose Message is not known.

This day there was a rumor spread that the Earl of New Castle was at the
Heath five miles from York overthrown by the General the Lord Fairefax and
Master Hotham, much of his Carriages being taken,

This day in the City of London dyed a soldier of certain hurts he had
received from a Watchman: The said soldier being one of those that against
the order of Parliament plundered houses.

This day the House sat long, being in much debate concerning an accommodation
with His Majesty, diverse of the Lords being well inclined to peace, as the
Earls of Pembroke and Northumberland, none indeed being averse if His Majesty
would hearken to their just Counsels.

This day was a treaty at York between the Earl of Cumberland and the
General concerning the delivery of the Town, but it suited to no effect.

There was some rumor of the Marquess Harfords advancing out of South Wales
toward Oxford, but it is altogether unconfirm'd.

Sunday, November. 27.
THe Letter that came out of Holland together with my Lord Majors Order was
read in the Churches about the City, the people blessing God for the discovery
of those plots and mischievous imaginations against their Lives and Liberties,
contributing very willingly toward the raising of the said thirty thousand
pound, the Churchwardens receiving it to deliver to the Lord Mayor.

An attempt was made by certain Papists and Cavaliers for the surprisall of
the good Town of Kingston upon Hull; but they were discovered and delivered
into safe custody till they suffer condign punishment.

This afternoon there was a great huburb in Oxford, some Cavalier Scholars of
lewd life, with some soldiers, rifling the house of one Alderman Nickeson, a
very able man and a religious honest man, only because he was a lover of the
proceedings of Parliament, taking from him to the value of six hundred pound,
as the good Gentleman now in this City testifies, the Sergeant of the Town
being therefore a while in custody, but released by the tumultuous scholars.

Monday, November. 28.
THis day came out an Order for the Lord Generals speedy falling down toward
Oxford.

There was committed to close prison this day Doctor Heywood the Rector of
Saint Giles in the fields for preaching and printing seditious Sermons; he
being an Arminian, and sometimes Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Upon occasion of the former Letter intercepted as aforesaid was raised a rumor
that the Prince of Orange and the King of Denmark in person would put to Sea
this Winter, but there was no such matter.

It was also reported that the said Prince of Orange with ten thousand
soldiers intended to have surprised and plundered Amsterdam; but that when the
soldiers perceived his purpose, none of them could be drawn against that Town.

This day also there was bickering at Manchester by some of the Earl of
Darbyes followers, and the Townes-men; but the Malignants were repulsed with
loss, the Parliament also having set forth a very gracious Order for the
relief of that good Town and those parts against the attempts of Papists.

Tuesday, November. 29.
THe money lent upon the last Contribution was this day brought in to the Lord
Mayor, who does study daily for the advancement of the cause of the
Commonwealth.

To day were brought to Town some ten Cavaliers taken about Reading side by
some of the garrison at Windsor.

An Order came forth also that all soldiers in and about the City of London
should repair to their Colors, the Lord General being instantly to advance
toward His Majesty's Army.

From Westchester this day arrived a Post here with tidings of the proceedings
of the Earl of Darby, who has levied all the Papists and Malignants in those
parts. As also, relating that there has lately been a victory in Ireland
obtained against the Rebels.

Abington in Barkeshire was this day cruelly plundered by the Cavaliers. As
also, a Town of good note in Surrey called Ockingham, which they rifled
without mercy: the poor Inhabitants being enforced to forsake their dwellings.

An Aviso from Calice testifies that Master Iarmin is very busy in making
provision in France of ammunition and the like.

Wednesday, November. 30.
THis day both Houses celebrated their Fast very devoutly at Saint Margats
Westminster.

This day also happened to our side a very memorable victory. Colonel Brown
with his Dragoneers beating the Cavaliers out of Farnham-Castle in Surrey which
they had fortified, taking fourscore of them prisoners which he sent to
Windsor Castle, thence to be conveyed to London.

This day from Excester we understood Sir Ralph Hopton and the Malignants in
those parts are in much distress, having so lamentably plundered the Country,
that it is unable any longer to sustain them. Some parties of the Earl of
New Castle, as Convoyes to some wagons of ammunition sent from thence toward
His Majesty, were valiantly set upon by Master Hothams forces, and put into
rout; the wagons with the ammunition being surprised to a very considerable
value.

There were also some Barques taken from the coast of Norfolk coming from
Dnnkirke toward the North, their lading was men and ammunition.

The King this day returned from Reading toward Oxford to provide for my Lord
Generals approach, who this day set forward with a lawful and courageous army,
having order from the Parliament to pursue and apprehend the Cavaliers.

Thursday, December. 1.
TO day came forth a Proclamation from His Majesty, forbidding his Cavaliers
the plundring of any persons whatsoever under the pain of his displeasure; but
it is conceived only a scar-crow, it being impossible to alter their inhumane
dispositions.

To day also came forth an Order from the High Court of Parliament concerning
the sequestring to the use of the common the Earl of New-Castles estate. As
also, all Rents and profits belonging to all Deanes, Prebends, and the like.

An Order also came forth for the sessing of those who had not yet contributed
to the Commonwealth according to their estates; they being little better then
Malignants, who in so great danger refuse to part with something out of their
fortunes to serve the safety of the kingdom.

Some of the Cavaliers were taken at Farneham-Castle by Colonel Brown this
afternoon were brought up to the Town to the number of forty persons, and
disposed of to several prisons.

It is reported the King has with him fifty and odd good a brass Ordnance.
Lord turn his heart from his ungracious Counselors.

Friday, December. 2.
THis day came forth a new Declaration from His Majesty, and the Parliaments
answer thereunto, and Sir Peter Killigrewes return from the King caused much
and deep agitations in both Houses.

It is hoped about accommodation Drums beat up in the City and Suburbs for more
supply, for his Excellence the Earl of Essex, who is advanced as far as
Windsor, the garrison there being in very good plight.

A Post from my Lord Fairefax this day verified that the Earl of Cumberland
would deliver up the City of York upon the conditions which he had within
enclosed, whether will be received or not is not yet known.

The City of London still persists in their determination of maintaining the
Regiments for pursuit of the Cavaliers, men being taken on in Moore-fields in
great numbers.

This day toward Evening a Ship was sent up the River laden with ammunition,
and taken at Sea by the Earl of Warwickes ships.

The Kings Majesty has fortified Oxford, intending as it is credibly informed,
to remain there all this Winter, though the Country cries out of his
Cavaliers.

FINIS.

