HORACE. The best of Lyrick POETS.

Containing much morality, and Sweetness.

Together with Aulus Persius Flaccus HIS SATYRS.

Translated into English By BARTEN HOLYDAY Sometime Student of CHRIST-CHURCH in
OXFORD.

LONDON Printed for W. R. and J. W. 1652.

To the Reader.
FRiendly, and generous Reader, I present not Horace to thee, in his native
luster, nor Language. Take these rather (if so thou please) for a reflection,
from that brighter body of his living Odes. Behold in them Morality touched,
and Virtue heightened, with clearenesse of Spirit, and accuratenesse of
Judgment. These have I selected amongst many, not with desire to prescribe the
same choice to others, as a rule; nor yet with any diffidence in my own
election. Abundat quisque suo sensu. When in a Garden we gather a Coronet of
Flowers, we intend not the total beauty of that fair piece of prospective,
but particular ornament, and entermingled delight. These supply both. But many
(no doubt) will say, Horace is by me forsaken, his Lyrick softness, and
emphaticall Muse maimed: That in all there is a general defection from his
genuine Harmony. Those I must tell, I have in this Translation, rather sought
his Spirit, then Numbers; yet the Music of Verse not neglected neither, since
the English ear better hears the Distick, and finds that sweetness, and
air in these proportions, which the Latin affects, and (questionless)
attaineth in Saphick or Iambick measures. Some will urge again, why were not
these Wreathes of moral, and serious Odes, for the more variety, and general
entertainment of most, mixed with his wanton and looser strains of Poesy?
These I answer, and with it conclude. The Translatour of these, had rather
teach Virtue to the modest, then discover Vice to the dissolute. The streams
of Helicon, are clear, and Chrystalline. Drink thou goodness from these
purer Fountain^^. Whilst such take unhappy draughts, from the troubled and
muddy waters of Sensuality.

ODES OF HORACE.
The First Book.
Ode. I. To MAECENAS. All things please not all men. HORACE most especially
affects the name of a Lyrick. Poet.
Maecenas atavis.
MAEcenas) sprung from Gransire Kings descent.
O, my defense, and sweetest ornament.
There are, who in their Chariots speedy flight,
To raise Olympique dust, do take delight:
And having with chaft'd wheels, the goal declined
For conquest's meed, have style of Gods assigned.
This man, if wavering Citizens contend,
His worth, with threefold honors to commend:
That other, if he in his Garnier stores,
What ever has been swept from Lybian ores,
From painful Tillage, and the Countries love,
The wealth of Attalus can never move,
That be a mariner in fear of loss,
With Cyprian Bark Myrtoan Seas should cross.
When Southwest winds. Icarian waves do raise,
The Merchant rest, and Country grannge does praise;
Straight his torn Vessel, he repayres again,
The force of want unable to sustain:
Some others use, old Massique Wines to ply,
Nor from, the day some part to take deny;
Now, seeking under Arbutt's shade to cling,
Now near the soft head of some gentle Spring.
In Tents, and Trumpets Echo some delight,
Mixed with the Flute, and Wars that Mothers fright
In Fields the Hunter on the coldest day,
Forge full of his tender Wife, does stay:
Whither his faithful dogs, have viewd the Hind,
Or, Marsyan Bore his round netts have untwin'd.
Me, Ivy the reward for learned Brows.
A place among supernall gods allows.
Light quires of wood Nymphs, that with Satyrs bide,
And shady groaves from Vulger me divide:
So that my pipe Euterpe not restrain,
Nor Polyhimne to tune my Lute refrain.
But if you me, amongst Lyricks will account,
My raised crest above the Stars shall mount,
Ode II. To AUGUSTUS CAESAR. Many storms are powered upon the People of Rome in
revenge of Julius Caesar slain. The only hope of the Empire is placed in the
safty of Augustus.
Jam satis terris.
I Ove, now on Earth, sufficient,
Of Snow, and direful Hayle has sent;
Who snaking Towers, with fiery hand,
Affrighted made the City stand:
He Nations scarr'd, lest Pirrah's Reign
New Monsters should produce again;
As erst when Proteus drove his Flock,
To feed on Cliffe of steepy Rock,
Then to the Elme's Tope Fishes clave,
Which Turtels used for seat to have
And Does, whom sudden frights disease,
Swam boldly over swelling Seas.
Our eyes have yealow Tybers Flood
Beheld, by Tyrrhen shores withstood
With violence; run down to beat,
The Tombs of Kings, and Vest'aes seat.
While Iliae much to him complains,
He vows revenge: though Jove disdaines
His wandering, and uxorious wave,
Upon the City bank, should rave.
Succeeding Youth, through Parents crimes,
Impayr'd shall hear that passed times,
Have sharp'ned swords; shall hear of bralls,
Wherewith the Persian better falls.
To which god, shall we Vows assign,
Now, that our State affairs decline?
What prayer shall holy Virgin Saints,
To Vesta yield, made deaf to plaints?
To whom shall Jove, the power dispense,
Of expiating Sins offense?
(Divining Phoebus) come we pray,
Whose shoulders white the Clouds array.
Or if thou please (smoth Venus) hy
About whom sport and pleasure fly.
Or founder Mars, if Stock, or Kin,
Thou Love, which have neglected been.
O, thou that cloyed art with fight,
Whom clamor, and smoth Helmes delight:
And Mauritanian's visage bold,
When his stern Fo, he does behold.
Or, may thou (gentle Maias Son)
With winged speed be hither won.
Augustus figure changed in thee,
Caesar's revengefull friend to be.
Oh, may thou (late) to heaven retire;
Be present long, to Rom's desire:
Nor may the speedy blast of Time,
Take thee offended with our Crime.
Here Triumphs seek, and lasting fame,
Instil'd with Prince and Fathers name;
Nor suffer Caesar (thou our Guide)
The Medians unrevenged to ride.
Ode XXII. To ARISTIUS. Integrity of life is every where safe, which he
proves, by his own example.
Integer Virae.
FUscus) the man whose lif's entire,
And free from sin, needs not desire;
The Bow nor dart from Moore to borow,
Nor from full Quiver poys'ned Arow:
Whither over Libya's partched Sands,
Or Caucasus, that houslesse stands,
He takes his journey; or those places,
By which the famed Hydaspes traces.
For I, while in the Sabine Grove,
My Lalage do chaunting rove,
Fom me not marking limits dew,
A Wolf (though I unarmed slew.
A Monster such, as all exceeds,
Which in large woods fierce Daunia feeds:
Or those which Iuba's Kingdom has,
The Desert nourse of Lions wrath.
Place me in coldest Champaines, where,
No Summer warmth, the Trees does cheer:
Let me in that dull Climate rest,
Which Clouds and sullen Jove infest:
Yea place me underneath the Carre
Of too near Phoebus: seated far
From dwelling Lalage, I Will love,
Whose smiles, whose words so sweetly move.
Ode XXIV. TO VIRGILL. Who immoderatly bemoned the death of Quintilius.
Quis desiderio sit.
MElpomene) on whom great Jupiter
Did shrillest voice to tunefull Harp confer:
Declare in mournful Notes; what shame, or let
Should on the love of such a friend beset.
Shall then Quintilius sleep eternally?
An equal unto whom, pure Modesty
And Justice Sister, Faith sincere and plain,
And naked Veritic, shall never gain?
Of many Worthy men bemoaned he fell:
But (Virgill) no man's grief can thine excel.
Thou (loving) do (alas) the gods in vain
Quintillius, not so lent thee, ask again.
What if more sweet, then Thracian orpheus wyre,
You Trees persuade, to hearken to your Lyre;
Yet can you not, return of Life command,
To shadow vain; which once with dreadful wand,
God Mercury, unwilling fate t'unlocke,
Has forced to dwell among the Stygian flock.
It Is hard I grant "But Patience makes that light,
Which to correct, or change, exceeds our might.
Ode XXVIII. Architas, a Philosopher and Geometrician is presented, answering
to a certain Mariner, that all men must dye, and entreating him, that be
would not suffer his body to ly on the shore unburied.
Te Maris, and Terrae
THee, who the Sea, Earth, Sands, that none can tell
To bound with measure, knew'st (Architas) well.
The poor gift of a little dust confines,
And near unto the Matine shore enshrines:
Nor could it any help, or profit be:
Death being ready still to call for thee;
Those ay'rie mansions to enquire from hence,
And search in mind the Heavens circumference.
The Sire of Pelops, who with Gods did feast,
And aged Tython, shrunk at Deaths arrest:
And Minos, to Joves Council called was slain,
And Panthois dyed let out of Hell again,
Though he with Shield affixed, proving well
That his first Birth in Trojan ages fell,
Affirmed that death naught killed, but nerves, and skin:
(Noe man in Natures power was better seen:)
But we into one self same night do fall,
And must the paths of Death tread once for all,
The Furies some to games of Mars apply
The greedy, Sayler drencht in Seas does lie.
In death both young and old by heaps do join;
Nor any head escapes sad Proserpine.
Yea, the South wind, croocked Orions mate,
Or'whelm'd me in Illyrian waves of late;
But be thou pleased (gentle) Mariner,)
My bones, and head, in loose sand to interre.
Which done (so thou be safe) may the Eastern wind,
That move, Hosperian billows be assigned,
To bluster lowdly in Venusium woods:
And may on every side, thy traffick'd goods,
In plenty slow to thee, from Joves just hand,
And Neptune, who Tarentum does command:
But if to frustrate me thou be not nice,
Which may thy guiltless issue prejudice;
I wish due punishment, and pround neglect,
May on thy Funeral Obsequies reflect:
Nor may my Prayers be powered forth in vain,
Nor vows have strength to set thee free again.
Yet if thou have, no longer stay I crave,
Then, thrice the dust be thrown upon thy grave.
Ode XXXI. TO APOLLO. He desires not riches of Apollo, but that he may have a
sound mind in a healthy body.
Quid dedicatum poscit.
What does thy Poet ask ( Phoebus divine?)
What craves he, when he powers thee bowls of wine,
Not the rich corn of fat Sardinia,
Nor gratfull flocks of burnt Calabria?
Nor Gold, nor Indian Ivory; nor the grounds,
Which silent Lyris, with soft streams arrounds:
Let those whom Fortune so much store assigns,
Dress with Calenian hook, their fertile Vines:
Let the rich Merchant to the Gods so dear,
(For so I term him right, who every year
Th^ee or four times, visits the Atlantique Seas,
From shipwreck free:) Let him his palate please,
And drink in guilt bowls, wines of higest price,
Bought with the sale of Syrian Merchandise.
Loose Mallows, Succory and Olive plant
Serve me for food. O (great Apollo) grant,
To me in health, and free from life's anoy,
Things native and soon gotten to enjoy;
And with a mind composed old age attain,
Not loathsome, nor deprived of Lyrick strain.
Ode XXXIV. TO HIMSELF. Who repents, that having followed the Epicurean
Sect, he thereby has negligently honored the gods.
Parcus Deorum cultor.
I, Of the Gods a tardy worshipper,
Whilst (skill^d) in frantic wisdom I do err,
Now backward forced am my sails to raise,
And to seek out again forsaken ways.
For Jupiter, who light to day inspires,
Dividing sable clouds, with shining fires,
Has through the clear sky often ordained his drift,
With thunder breathing horse and chariot swift,
Wherewith dull earth, and wandering rivers quacke,
The Stygian Fenne, and horrid Seat does shake
Of hateful Taenerus, and Atlas bounds.
'God in exchang the high with low confounds:
"He abject baseness on the highest flings,
"And casts luster on obscured things.
Hence restless Fortune, height from one man takes,
With shrillest noise, and great another makes.
Ode XXXV. TO FORTUNE. He beseeches her, that she would preserve Caesar
going into Brittany.
O diva gratum.
O Goddess, which beloved Antium swayes,
Still ready with thy powerful arm to raise,
Men from the low degree of wretched thralls,
Or turn proud triumphs into funerals.
The poor, and rustic Clown, with humble plea
Sollicites thee: Thee Lady of the Sea,
He lowdly invocates; who e're does sweep
In Asian vessel the Carpathian deep.
The Dacian rough, the wandering Scythian,
Cities, and Kingdoms; The fierce Latian;
Thee Mothers of Barbarian Kings do fear,
And Tyrants, which bright purple garments wear.
Let not a standing pillar be or'ethrowne
With thy offended foot; nor be it known,
That people apt for arms, yet now at rest,
Take arms again, and Empires peace infest.
Thee sharp Necessity, does still fore-goe,
Holding in brazen hand, as pledge of woe,
Tormenting beams, and racks: and more to dant,
Sharp hooks, and molten lead do never want.
Thee Hope, and simple Faith in white attire,
Does honor and thy company desire,
How e're another habit thou do take,
And made a foe, great houses thou forsake.
But the false multitude, and perjured whore
Does back retire; yea friends when vessels store,
Is to the dregs drunk up; Away they fly,
Shuening the yoke of mutual poverty.
Preserve thou Caesar safe, we thee implore,
Bound to the world's remotest: Brittan shore,
And the late raised troops of youth most able,
To Eastern parts, and red Sea formidable.
We at our scarres do blush, Sin, Brothers fall.
(Vile Age) what mischefes do we shun at all?
What youth, his hand, for fear of gods contains?
Or who himself from Altars spoil restraines?
Ah would thou now our blunted swords new frame
The Arabians, and the Massagetes to tame.
The end of the first Book.
ODES OF HORACE.
The Second Book.
Ode. II. To C. SALUSTIUS CHRISPUS. He prayseth Proculejus for liberality
toward his brothers. Only contempt of money makes a man happy.
Nullus Argento color.
NO color is in Golden vain,
(Oh Salust, enemy of gain)
Hidden within a greedy Mine,
Unless with temperate use it shine.
Never shall Proculcjus die,
Among Brothers marked for piety:
Surviving Fame with daring flight,
Shall yield his name eternal right.
In larger circuit thou do reign,
If greedy humor thou restrain.
Then if thou Gades to Lybia join,
Or both the Carthages were thine.
The selfe-indulgent Dropsy grows,
Nor does the palates thirst unlose,
Till man from veins, the sickness cause,
And pallid watery faintness draws.
Virtue, that vulgar does oppose,
Not in the rank of happy, chose
Phraat with Cyrus throne indude.
And does forbid the multitude
False acclamations to make;
And rule, and Seepter safe partake,
And Bays to him alone apply,
Who viewes huge heaps with careless eye.
Ode III. TO DELIUS. Prosperous, and adverse Fortune are to be moderately
borne, since one, and the self same condition of death, hangs over every man.
Aequam memento.
IN adverse chance, an equal mind retain,
As in best fortunes tempred, free from vain
Of mirth profuse: For (Delius) thou must die.
Whither in sadness, thou do ever ly;
Or, on Feast days retyrd to grassie shade,
Thou with close Falerne wine art happy made:
Where the white Poplar, and the lofty Pine,
Their friendly shade in mutual branches twine:
And Rivers swiftly gliding strive, apace
Bout chrooked banks, their trembling streams to chase.
Bring hither Wine, and odorous Unguents. Bring
The dainty Rose, a fair, but sading thing.
While Fortune, age, and wealth yield seasons sit:
And the three Sisters sable loomes permit:
Thou from thy house must part, and purchasd woods,
And village lav'd, with yellow Tybers floods.
And thy high hoarded heaps of wealths access.
An Heir (perhaps) ungrateful shall possess.
No matter it is, whether thou rich art borne,
Of Argive Kings; or low, exposd to scorn,
Sprung from poor Parents, liv'st in open fields;
Thou art Deaths sacrifice, (who never yields,
We all are thither brought, it is he that turns,
And winds our mortal lif's unceraine Urnes.
Sooner or later each man has his lot,
And exild hence, embarques in Charous Boat.
Ode IX. TO VALOIUS. That now or length he would desist, to deplore his
deceased Myste.
Non semper imbres.
The swelling cloud, not always powers,
On rugged fields impetuos showers.
Nor Caspian Sea ( Valgius beloved)
With tossing storms is ever moved.
Nor on Armenia's bord'ring shore,
The sluggish ice stands all ways hoar:
Or Gargan groves, with North-winds riv'd,
Or Ash-trees are of leaves deprivd.
You still in mournful sort complain
That death, has dearest Myste slain.
Your love not fails, if Vesper rise,
Nor when bright Hesper, Phoebus flies.
But thrice-ag'd Nestor, mournd not still,
That death Antilochus did kill:
Nor Parents; nor sad Sisters, ever
To wail young Troilus persever.
Cease then at length, thy soft complain;
And in our Songs, now let us paint,
Great Coesars Trophics, and command,
And how conjoynd to conquered land,
The Median stream, and Nyphate strong,
Do in less Channels, run along;
And Gelons to less limits tide,
In far more straightned fields do ride.
Ode X. TO LICINIUS. Mediocritie to be used in either Fortunes.
Rectius vives Licini.
YOur safer course (Licin ius) count,
Not always on the Maine to mount:
Nor whilst you (wisely) storms abhor,
Too much to trust the shelfie shore:
He that affects the golden mean,
Lives safe from Cottages unclean,
And (sober) does as much despise,
In envy-breeding Courts do rise.
The blustering winds more often far,
Against lofty Pines do threaten war:
Brave Towers with greater ruin fall,
And Thunder highest hills enthrall:
Each Fortune, minds prepared does glad,
They fear in good, and hope in bad.
Jove brings in horrid Winters rage,
And suddenly does it assuage.
If with thee now, it be but ill,
Think that it cannot be so still.
Sometimes Appollos silent Muse,
Speaks in His Harp; nor does he use,
Always to bend his angry Bow;
In crosses strength, and courage show.
And let your sails with prosperous wind
Too much advanced, be declined.
Ode XI. TO QUINTUS HIRPINUS. Cares laid aside, let us live merrily.
Quid bellicos Cantaber.
What the Cantabrian stout, or Scythian think:
Divided with opposed Adria's brinke,
(Quintus Herpinus) do not thou enquire,
Nor for lif^s use, which little does desire,
Beo thou too careful. Smooth-faced youth, apace
Does bacward fly, and with it beautie's grace.
Dry aged hoarinesse with furrows deep,
Dispelling amerous fires, and gentle sleep.
The Summer flowers keep not their native grace,
Nor shines the bright Moon with a constant face.
Why do thou tire thy mind, subordinate
Unto the Councels of eternal Fate?
Why under this high Plane, or Pine-tre's shade
In discomposed, manner careless laid,
Our hoary hair perfumed with fragrant Rose,
And odours which Assyria does disclose.
Do we (anointed) not to drink prepare?
Free Bacchus dissipates consuming care.
But (oh) what Boy, Falernian wines hot rage,
Will soon for me, with gliding streams assuage?
(Ah) how retired Lyde will require,
Hither to come. Boy with her Ivory Lyre,
Bid her make have, and heir to tie not shame,
In carlesse knot, like a Laconian Dame.
Ode XIV. TO POSTHUMUS. Life is short, and Death is necessary.
Eheu fugaces posthume.
AH Posthumus, swift year do pass,
Nor can religiouse Zeal (alas)
To wrinckles, or decrepit days,
Or Death untamed brings delays:
Not, if thou to harsh Plutoes shrine
Each day three hundred Bulls assign:
Who Geryon, and Tytius bound,
With sable River does surround.
A stream on which each man must sail.
From Royal Scepter to the flayle.
We bloody Mars decline in vain,
Or broken waves of Adrian maine:
And (needless fear in Autumn rife,
The South wind's hurtful to our life.
Wandering Cocytus Flood, with slow
And heavy Current, thou must know.
And Danaus infamous train,
And Sysiphus with endless pain.
Thou House, Land, lovely Wife must want,
Nor of the Trees, which thou do plant,
(Thou dead) will any wait on thee,
But the despised Cypress Tree.
Thy worthier Heir, drinks precious wine.
Which thou with hundred keys did shrine;
And with it the rich pavement dewes;
None such the high Priest Banquet shows.
Ode XV. Against the excess of that Age.
Jam pauca aratro.
MAgnifique buildings will leave shortly now,
Few Akers of firm land, unto the Plough;
Now many are beheld huge Pooles to make
Of much more wide extent, then Lucrine Lake.
The solitary Plane, the Elm supplants,
And now no sort of odorous flowers wants,
As Roses, Violets, and Venus-Mittle,
Where th'Olive grew, to former Lords so fertile.
The Laurel now, to Phoebus piercing eye,
Through his thick branches passage does deny.
No such Praescript did Romulus exact,
Nor Elders, nor rough Cato did enact.
Private Revenues, then, were short, and low,
And each man sought to make the public flow.
Proud Galleries no private man, then made,
Of ten foot wide to let in Northern shade.
Nor did our Laws, then suffer us, disdain,
A casual Turse, for pillow to retain;
Commanding towns to build, at public charge,
And the gods Temples with new stone enlarge.
Ode XVI. TO GROSPHUS. All men desire tranquillity of mind which can neither
with Riches, nor Honors be acquired, but only with bridleing our Appeties.
Otium Divos rogat.
Soon as black clouds have hid the Moons bright eyes
And Pilots cannot best known Stars espy,
The Mariner tossed in Aegcan Sea,
Straight to the gods for rest makes humble plea.
The Thraecians fierce in war do ease require,
And Quiver-bearing Medes repose desire,
Repose, which not with gemms, purple, or gold,
(Believe me Grosphus) will be bought, or sold.
No Wealth, nor Consulls Lictors that make way,
Can from the heart disturbed tumults fray,
Nor cares which round about gilt roofes do fly.
He with a little lives happily,
Who having on his homely Table placed
His Fathers Cup, and Salt kept undefac'd,
So lives, that fear, nor sordid lucre keep
His waking eyes from soft, and gentle sleep.
Why do we (boldly) many things propose
In short lived age, which Time does quickly close?
Why lands with other Son enflamed change?
Who from himself, though far from home can range?
Strong Ships are boarded by consuming Care:
Nor does she bravest troops of Horsemen spare:
More swift she is, then the light-footed Hind,
Or tempest-raising storms of Eastern wind.
The mind in present cheerful, hates to care
For what beyond it lies; And does prepare
To temper bitter things with laughter free.
"Nothing in all respects can happy be.
Death quickly snatched brave Achilles hence,
Nor did with Tythou's long lived age dispense:
And that (perhaps) of time I may obtain,
Which thy expecting hopes shall never gain.
You many fertile flocks of sheep command,
Sicilian Kine about you lowing stand.
Your Mares for Chariot fit, are hard from far,
Lowdly to neigh: Nor garments wanting are,
Of Purple cloth, dipped twice in Afric Die;
While a poor state, by upright destiny,
To me is given; mixed with a slender name,
Of Greckith Muse, and scorn of vulgar Fame.
Ode XVII. TO MAECENAS being sick. Whom he resolves not to survive.
Cur Mc querelis.
WHy kill you me with your laments?
It neither gods, nor me contents,
Maecenas (first) should yield to Fate,
The Grace, and Pillar of my State.
But if a speedier stroke of death,
Rob thee (my souls best part) of breath?
Why stay I in the other, Sole,
Not pleasing to my Self, nor whole?
One day shall see us perish both:
I have not sworn an idle oath.
Go, when you please, I will not stay,
But be your partner in the way.
Chimera's spirit breathing fire,
Nor hundred handed Gyas, Ire;
Shall this my fixed vow abate;
Thus Justice has it pleased, and Eat.
Though Libra in his full aspect,
And feared- Scorpius, direct,
My Horoscope with rage infest,
Or, Capricorn, that rules the West;
Our Constellations both agree
In admirable sort. And thee
Jove's radiant luster, has exempt,
From Saturnes Beam malevolent,
And slack'd the wings of speedy death;
What time the people with loud breath,
Thrice in the Theater did sound
That gladsome news: Even then a wound,
By a tree's fall, my skull had broke.
But VVood-god Faunus, from the stroke,
Me then did happily assist,
(Patron of each Mercurialist.)
Then pay thy vows, thy temple build,
And I a tender Lamb will yield.
Ode XVIII. He affirms himself content with little, while others are wholly
addicted to their desires, and increase of riches, as if they should always
live.
Non ebur, neque aureum.
NO gilded roof, nor Ivory fret,
For splendour in my house is set;
Nor beams are from Hymettia sought,
To lie athwart rich Columns, brought
From Afric; nor an heir unknown,
Attalus wealth, make I mine own.
No honest Clyents wives you see,
L^conian Purples weave for me:
A loyal heart, and gentle vain,
Of wit I have; which does constrain
Rome's richest men, to seek the love,
Of me but poor: Nor gods above,
Do I invoke for larger store;
Nor of Moecenas ask I more.
To me, my only Sabine field,
Sufficient happiness does yield.
"One day thrusts on another fast,
And new Moons to the Wane do have.
When death (perhaps) is near at hand,
Thou fairest Marbles do command
Be cut for use, yet do neglect
Thy grave, and houses still erect,
And would abridge, the vast Seas shore,
Which loudly does at Baia rore:
Enriched little, less content,
With limits of the Continent.
Why often pull you up your bounds,
T^^^large the Circuit of your grounds,
And greedily your list extend
^eyond your neighbor straightly penned?
Both man, and wife with sordid brood,
And ancient household gods, that stood
(...) quiet peace, must be expeld;
Yet is no habitation, held,
^^r the rich Landlord, so assured,
^^s in deep Hell to be immured.
Then whither do you further tend?
(...) 'indifferent Earth, and equal friend,
^s willingly opens her womb,
For Beggars grave, as Prince's Tomb.
^old could of Charon not obtain,
To bear Prometheus back again.
Proud Fantalus, and all his stock,
^ee, in the bands of Fate did lock.
And called, or not called still is pressed,
To give the laboring poor man, Rest.
The end of the second Book.
ODES OF HORACE.
The Third Book.
Ode. I. Life is made happy, not with Riches but Mind's Tranquillity.
Odi profanum Vulgus.
I Hate and from me do exclude,
The most illiterate Multitude.
You knowing Spirits, favor bring
To me the Muses Priest, who sing
To Boys, and spotless Virgins, Verse
Which none did ever yet rehearse.
Kings awful, their own Subjects sway,
And Kings them selves do Jove obey:
Who famous for the Giants fall,
With brow austere does manage all.
Say on, more large in furowes plant
Trees, which an other man does want
What though one boast an nobler strain,
Affected honors to attain:
^^e better life, and Fame pretends,
^other has more troops of friends:
With equal Law, never failing death,
^^e rich, and poor deprives of breath:
^sting that name, from forth his Urne,
^^^ch next by lot to death must turn.
^hun, who over his wicked head,
^drawne sword sees in twine of thread,
(...) than Feasts, with dainties graced,
^ocure noe Palat-pleasing taste;
^^^chaunt of Birds, nor charm of Lyre,
^n^o his eyes, soft sleep enspire:
^^^cious sleep, noe whit disdaines,
^he homely Cortages of Swains:
^or shady banks, nor Tempe grove,
^hare Zephyrus does gently rove.
^ee who desires, but what is enough,
^ares not the Ocean billows rough:
^or stern Arcturus force, that sets,
^or rising Kid, who storms begets:
^^s Vines, nor ruined, are with hayle,
Nor do his crops in Harvest fail:
His fields, now blaming water-falls,
Now parching Stars now winter-thrales,
Yea Fishes feel the Seas grown straight,
With Bulwarks raised of wondrous weight:
Here the Surveyor, with his train,
And Lord himself, filled with disdain;
Of his firm Land's to narrow ring,
Building materials frequent bring:
But angry threats, and restless Fear,
Go with their Master every where.
^lack Care, in ship, with him abides,
And sits behind him when he rides.
But if, nor Phrygian Columns, can,
Nor use of Purples brighter, than
Heavens Lights, disturbed minds content,
Nor Falerne Vine, nor Persian Sent.
Why Pillars proud, should I erect,
Or Gall'ry of new Architect?
Why should I Sabine's Country Grange,
For much more busy wealth exchange?
Ode II. To his FRIENDS. Boys are to be enured from their tender age, to
poverty, warfare, and painful Life.
Angustam amici.
LEt able Youth, it self enure,
By wars sharp use, want to endure,
And mounted on his Horse, with Spear,
No whit bold Parthians valor fear:
Let him exposed to open air,
Live, and attempt, the hard'st affair.
Whom wife of Tyrant, used to war,
Viewing, from hostile walls afar;
And Maid for marriage ripe may cry,
With sighs, which from sad passion fly.
Oh, that my royal Love, untrain'd
In martial feats, would be restrained,
Not to fierce Combats fatal stroke,
That wrathful Lion to provoke,
Whom bloody angers direful rage,
In thickest slaughters does engage.
"It is a sweet, and noble gain,
"In Countries quarrel to be slain.
Death, the swift flying man pursues
With ready steps: Nor does he use,
To spare, from unavoyded wrack,
Youth's supple hammes, or fearful back,
Virtue disdaining base neglect,
Does shine with taintlesse honors decked:
Nor takes, or leaves she honor's choice,
To please the people's ay'ry voice.
Virtue, unlocking Heaven to praise,
Does dauntlesse try, denied ways.
Vulgar assemblies does despise,
And leaving Earth, to Heaven flies.
Yea, trusty Silence is not barred,
To have a merited reward.
He, who to blab the holy Rites,
Of secret Ceres Phane delights,
Under, the same roof shall not be,
Nor in frail Vessel sail with me.
" Jove often neglected, makes the Just
"To smart with those are stayn'd with lust;
"Seldom Revenge, with halting pace,
Leaves bad foregoing men lo trace.
Ode. III. A man with virtue adorned, fears nothing. Juno's Oration of Troy's
overthrow, and the end of that war. And how the Roman Empire shall take
beginning from the Trojans.
Justum and tenacem.
He, that is just, and of resolved mind,
No voyee of of Citizens to bad enclind,
Nor angry brow of hasty Tyrants threat,
Can shake his solid thoughts from Virtue's seat.
Not the South wind, which does rough Adria stir,
Nor potent hand of thundering Jupiter;
Yea, should the world dissolved perish quite,
The sudden ruins would him not affright.
With this same Art, the wandering Hercules,
And Pollux, did the fi'ry Turrets seize.
Twixt whom Augustus placed with rosy lips
Nectar, the Gods eternal liquor, sips.
With this god Bacchus, high this worth did rear,
By Tigers drawn, untaught the yoke to bear.
With this Art Romulus on Mars his steeds,
Leaves Acheron, and to Heavens glory speeds.
What time the gods consulting. Juno said
In grateful accents this; Troy, Troy, betrayed,
A fatal, and incestuous Judge has burned
And a strange woman unto Ashes turned
Even from that time, that Priams wayward Sire,
Bereft the righteous gods their promised hire,
Which Troy by me, and Pallas once contemned,
With Prince and people, were to flames condemned.
Now the known guest, of that adult'rous Dame
Which fled from Greece, no more shall merit fame;
And Priams perjured stock-with Hector's aid,
No more shall make the warlike Greeks dismayed.
The fatal wars, which our seditions fed,
Are now composed, and angry storms are dead.
Henceforth to Mars my fury will I leave,
And Vesta's offspring unto grace receive:
Him I to Heavens bright mansions will admit,
To drink of Nectar, and with Gods to sit:
While the vast Sea, twixt Troy, and Rome is found
Reign happy banished men on any ground:
Whilst herds over Priams tomb, and Paris stray.
And beasts preserve their young from hunters pray,
Let the bright Capitol it is glory spread,
And Rome give Laws unto the conquered Mead.
Yea let her, her far dreaded name extend,
And with the Earth's remotest confines end:
Where the Mid stream, Europe from Africa bounds,
Or swelling Nilus, watreth fertile grounds.
Rome abler far, to scorn gold, yet unfound,
(Which best is placed, when deepest under gru^d)
Then to extract it thence for humane use,
Each hand things sacred foyling with abuse.
What limit of the world, so e're contend,
Let thither Rome, her arms victorious send.
Glad to behold, where the burnt Zones do stand,
Or clowdy Poles, which showry dewes command.
But to the most unvanquish'd Roman State,
On this condition I prescribe this Fate,
Lest they, too pious, and indulgent yield,
The ruined walls of ancient Troy to build.
Yet if that Fortune by unhappy chance,
Should once again decayed Troy advance
I Wife, and Sister of Jove, Heavens King,
With armed troops, would new destruction bring.
If thrice a Brazen wall, by Phoebus hand
Should reared be, it thrice by my command,
The Greeks should raze, and thrice the captive wife
Her child, and husband mourn, deprived of life.
But these things nothing fit my sportive Lyre:
Muse whither go thou? Ah! do not aspire,
The gods discourse, thus boldly to relate
Or great things with low Lays extenuate.
Ode VI. To the ROMANS. Of the corrupt manners of that Age.
Delicta majorum.
( Roman) resolve, thou shall desertlesse taste,
Sinn's scourge, for vice of Predecessor past,
Until thou do again, repair
Decayed Temples and make fair,
The falling houses of the gods, digrac'd,
And cleanse their Images, with smoke defaced.
To think thee less the^ gods, thy power co^mends;
Hence take beginnings, hither aim thy ends.
The Gods neglected, did impose
On sad Hesperia many woes.
Twice Pacorus, and twice Monaeses hand,
Our inauspicious forces did disband:
Who with a plenteous prey made glad.
To little chains new links did add.
The Dacian, and the Aethiop fierce, in wars,
Has almost razed the City, rent with jarres.
One with his Navy formidable,
With darts, the other better able.
This Age in vice abounding did begin,
Chaste Stocks, and Nuptials to pollute with sin:
The woes which from this fountain flow,
People, and Country overthrow.
The Maid for Marriage ripe, much joys to learn,
Ionick Daunces, and can well discern,
With art to feign, and quickly prove,
The plesures of unlawful love.
Straight made a wife in midst of husband's cups,
She with young Gallants, and adulterers sups,
Nor does she care, to whom by stealth,
(Light's out) she yield loves lawless wealth.
But asked, does rise (her knowing husband by)
To prostitute her Marriage modesty:
At Factors call, or Pilot's hyer,
Of lustful shame, a costly buyer.
That youth came not, from such forefathers strain,
Who did the Sea with Punick blood distaine.
By such hands, Pyrrhus did not fall.
Antiocus, nor Hanniball.
But in those days, a brave and manly race
Of rustic Shouldiers lived in this place,
Well skilled in Plough, and Sabine spade,
And so strict obedience made.
That if sharp mothers bad, at home return,
They on their sholders brought logs hewd to burn:
Soon, as the Sun, did change the mountains, shade,
And weary unyoak'd Oxen home-ward made,
Night gave their labors free dispense,
Chasing the Sun's bright Chariot hence.
"What wastes not with Times devouring rage?
"Our fatherslife much worse the grandsire's age,
"Sees us more wicked, to produce
"An offspring fuller of abuse.
Ode IX. TO LYDIA. A Dialogue of his passed Loves, and renewing of them again.
This Ode, though less moral then the rest, I have admitted, for Jul.
Scaliger's sake, who much admireth it.

Donec gratus eram.
Horace. WHilst I was pleasing in thy ey,
Nor any to thy heart more nigh,
Clasped, that white neck in amorous Ring,
More blessed I lived, then Persia's King.

Lydia. Whilst you no other Fire embraced,
Nor Chloe before Lydia placed.
I Lydia then with honor signed,
More then the Roman Illia shin, d.

Horace. Now Thracian Chloe I obey,
Skillful, and prompt in Musick's lay:
For whom I will not fear to die,
So Fate to her the same deny.

Lydia. Calais Ornithus son does fire
My heart with flames of like desire.
For whom I twice to die, will dare
So Fates, the youth surviving spare.

Horace. But what if ancient Love return,
And us with mutual passion burn;
If I shake off bright Chloe's hope,
And doors to scorned Lydia open?

Lydia. Though he be brighter then a Star,
And lighter thou, then Cork by far.
More angry then rough Adria; I
With thee would live, with thee would die.

Ode XIV. To the ROMAN PEOPLE. This Ode contains the praises of Augustus
returning out of Spain, after his Conquest over the Cantabrians.
Herculis ritu.
AS Hercules, sometimes was thought
Bays with life's hazard to have sought;
So Caesar now, to us restores,
Our household Gods from Spanish shores.
The wife that with one husband pleased,
Let her come forth, the gods appeased.
Octavia Caesar's Sister, have,
And Head with humble veyle embraced,
Now Mothers with your Virgins dear,
And sons (late) safe returned, appear.
Now Boys, and you new married train
Of wives, from evil words abstain.
From me this new made holy day
Black sullen cares, shall take away.
Nor fear I in great Caesar's reign,
By force, or tumult to be slain.
(Boy) Crowns, and Unguents now prepare,
And vessel kept, since Marsian war:
If any such concealed has been,
By wandering Spartacus not seen.
Let shrill Neaera here be found,
With golden hair in tresses bound.
But if the Porter, make delay
With churlish answer; Have away.
White hayres do mollify my mind,
To brawles, and quarrels erst inclined
This in Youths heat, I could not brook
When Consul Plancus, Office took.
Ode XVI. TOMAECENAS. All things lie open to Gold, but Horace is content with
his own Fortune, whereby he is made happy.
Inclusam Danaen.
Doors strongly fenced, and a Brazen Tower,
With careful guard of waking dogs had power
Fair Danae in stony walls immured,
From night-A dulterers to have secured:
Did not both Jove and Venus then deride
Acrisius, who the Maid with fear did hide.
For they the way knew free, and safe the hold,
Were but the god once turned into gold
Gold abler, armed tropes to pass, then thunder,
The strongest Fortresses does rent assunder.
The Argive Augur's house, with all his State,
Desire of gain did wholly ruinate.
With gifts the Macedonian did subdue,
Strong City gates, and proud Kings overthrew.
Seamen are snared with gifes, and golden store;
'Care, growing wealth pursues with thirst of more.
Then (dear Maecenas) well may I detest,
To vaunt my self with elevated crest,
"How much the more, man does himself deny,
"So much the more, the gods will him supply.
I poor in state, seek those that naught desire,
And, flying, do from rich men's tents retire,
And better live, Lord of a slender store,
Then, were I said to hold upon my flore,
What the Apulian painfully has tilled,
And in great wealth be poor, and never filled.
My stream of waters pure, my little Copps;
My certain hope of happy fruitful crops,
From him his hidden in my better chance,
Who Empire in rich Afric does advance.
Though me Calabrian Bees, no Honey give,
Nor wines in Loestrigonian Flaggons, live
till age make good the taste, though no man knows
That my rich fleece in fertile Gallia grows.
Yet from me, craving poverty does fly;
Nor should I ask you more, will you deny.
I, better will with limited desire,
Pay Caesar little tributes, then aspire
By greatness, to unite the Phrygian plain,
To Alliatts ample state, and royal reign.
"Who much desire, want much: He richly lives
"Whom God, with sparing hand sufficient gives.
Ode XXIV. Against covetous rich men.
Intact is opulentior.
ALthough you richer be by far,
Then the Arabs Mines untouched, or Indies are:
Though you with deep pyles, land would gain,
Even from the Tyrrhene, and large Pontique Main
If, on your head sad Fate prevayLes,
Transfixing it with Adamantine nails,
Yet can you not your mind set free,
Or life, from snares of death exempted see.
The savage Scithyans better live,
(Who in their Cates, unconstant dwelling drive)
And rigid Getes, whose common ground
Does in full store of Corn and Fruits abound.
And love their tillage to extend,
No longer, then the yearly season's end:
So as whilst one man weary lies,
A Substitute, him with like pains supplies.
The Step-dame, there in peaceful aw,
Commands her mother wanting son in law:
Nor wife, though rich, her husband swayes,
Or, to Adult'rer spruce, her self betrays.
"Virtue of Parents is great Dower,
"And Chastity restrained to Wedlocks power,
"Fearful of others touch; that knows
"The breach is sin, and Death the payment owes,
Oh, he that would quite take away
All impious slaughters, and each civil fray:
If he the Citie's Father, care
On statues to be styled: Ah? let him dare,
(So shall he future glory gain)
Loose liberty with bridle to restrain.
But virtue (living) we despise,
And much admire it, taken from our eyes.
But what need sad complaints be spent,
If vice be not cut off with punishment?
What profit Laws in vain composed,
Without good lives? If neither Climes exposed,
To parched heats: Nor Northern star,
Nor snow hard crusted, can the Merchant scarre:
Wise Mariners, through rough Seas fly,
The greatest imputation (Poverty)
Bids us do that, or suffer this,
Yet does the painful way of Virtue miss.
Then go we to the Capital,
Where vulgar voice, and troops of friends do call:
Or, in the nearest Sea be bold,
Our gems, and precious stones, with fruitles gold.
The root of many ills to cast.
If thou will fully sins repentance taste,
Let this first scope thy thoughts inspire,
To raze the Elements of foul desire:
And in minds tender, apt to ill,
To seek the sharpest studies to instill:
Youth nobly borne, as yet untride,
Fears hunting sport, and speedy horse to ride:
Far better skilled Greek ^ops to ply,
Or Dice, which ancient Roman Laws deny:
Whilst his false Sire, with cunning wiles;
His fellow neighbor, and his guest beguiles,
And all this, that he may prepare
Great heaps of riches, for his worthless heir.
"Thus, though vile riches grow: yet will
"Somewhat to our weak state, be wanting still.
Ode XXVIII. To LYDE. Heeperswadeth Lyde, to spend the day dedicated to
Neptune, pleasantly.
Festo quid potius die.
WHat do we else on Neptune's Feast?
Be therefore (Lyde) ready pressed,
To broach Caecubian Wines, enclosed;
And let strong wisdom be opposed.
Thou see, it is mid-time of the day,
And yet, as if swift time did stay,
A Butt, thou spar'st, was Cellar-stall'd,
When Bibulus was Consul called.
With mutual Songs, we will Neptune please,
And the greene-hayrd Nercides.
On crooked Lyre, sing thou with art,
Latone, and swift Cynthia's dart:
Whilst our last strain, her praise unfolds,
Who Cnidos, and bright Cyclads holds:
And Paphos with payrd swans does view;
Yet (Night) we will pay thee Verses due.
Ode XXIX. TO MAECENAS. He inviteth him to a merry Supper, laying public
cares aside.
Tyrrhena regum.
OH my Maecenas, sprung from royal strain,
Of Tyrrhene Kings; Behold, I do retain,
Long since by me reserved, to be thine,
A vessel, yet unbroach'd of milder wine;
Soft rosy flowers, for thee I will prepare,
And supple Unguents, pressed for thy hair.
Then free thee from delay: Nor always yield,
To view from far AEsulus hanging field,
Moist Tybour's Site. Nor let thy eyes abide,
On hills of Telegon, the Parricide.
Leave off to see, successful Rome rejoice,
In smoaky hopes, much wealth, and vulgar voice.
To great men, changes oft-times grateful are:
And under humble roofes, neat frugall fare,
Without rich hangings, or gay purple state,
Does the most busy brow to mirth dilate.
Now bright Andromeda's refulgent Sire,
Shows to this under-world, his hidden fire:
Now Procyon, and the raging lion swayes,
Pheabus reducing dry, and parched days.
The Shepherd tired with his faint flok does hie,
To find cool shades, or trembling current nigh,
And rough Silvanus thickets: while the shore,
Becalmed stands, from wind's tumultuous rore.
Mean time the good of Rome, in mind you bear^
And of her much sollicitous, do fear
What Scres plot, or Bactria Cyrus state,
Or, Tanais warlike dweller perpetrate.
All knowing God, with cloudy night does close,
Events of future times, and laughs at those,
Who beyond reason fear: Thy present state,
See then with equal mind thou moderate.
All other things, like to a River's source,
Who in the middle Channel of his course,
Now to the Tyrrhene Sea in silence straye;
But when fierce Deluges, calm Rivers raise,
He then in heaps rowls down with dreadful sound
Stones billow gnawn, and trees torn from the ground
With house, and cattle borne along the flood,
Frighting the hill with noise, and neighboring wood,
He after of himself, lives merry days,
Who (this day I have lived) and truly says;
To morrow (Jove) with black clouds heaven imbrac
Or let the Sun show forth his golden face.
Yet notwithstanding God will not agree
That what is passed once shall frustrate be
Nor what the once swift sliding hour hathwroght
Will he unfashion'd leave, or bring to naught,
Fortune in adverse chances, sportive ever,
And bold in scornful pastime to persever
Transferreth her uncertain honors: Now
To me propitious, instantly to you.
I praise her, while she stays; but if she shake
Her fleet wings, I restore what I did take:
And me with my own virtue, do invest;
Making thin honest poverty my guest.
It Is not for me, in prayer time to wast,
When wracking Southern wind has re^t the Mast
And bargain with the gods, that the vast floods,
May to their wealth, not add my Tyrian goods:
When I into such dangerous hazard fall,
The Wind, and Pollux with his brother, shall
Me with a poor two oared Vessels aid,
See, safely through Aegean storms convayd.
Ode XXX. TO MELPOMENE, Horace has obtained eternal glory, by writing of
Lyrick Verses.
Exegi Monumentum.
A Monument by me is brought to pass,
Out-living Pyramids, or lasting brass,
The Sepulcher of Kings; with eating rain,
Nor the fierce Nottherne tempest can restrain:
Nor Years though nu^berlesse:) nor Times swift start,
I will not wholly die; my better part,
Shall escape the sullen hearse: bright fame shall raise
My memory renewed, with future praise:
While in the Capitol the Priest ascends,
With Vestalls pure, whom silence so commends.
I (though) of humble strain will be declared
The first, and able most, that ever dared,
Unto Italian Proportion's use,
Aeolian antique Measures to reduce.
Where Aufidus with wrathful stream does roar
Or Daunus poor in waters, reigns over
Rough barbarous Nations. Take to thee a name,
Which best (Melpomene) may suit thy fame.
And (willingly thy Poet does request,
My hair with Delphick Laurel thou invest.
The End of the third Book,
ODES OF HORACE.
The Fourth Book.
Ode III. TO MELPOMENE. Horace is borne to Poetry, by whose aid, he has
obtained immortal glory.
Quem to Melpomene.
ON whom (Melpomene) with mild aspect,
Thou shall thy favor at his Birth reflect,
Him, Istmian Labor shall not higher rear
With Wrastlers title, nor swift horses bear
By Grecian Chariot drawn, for Victors mee'd
In pompous triumph; nor for warlike deed,
A Captain in the Capitol be made,
And decked with Delian Bays, who durst invade:
And break the swelling threats of hostile Kings:
But rather those soft-falling gentle Springs,
Which wash fat Tybur, and Groves thickly grown,
Shall make his worth in Lyrick Verse be shown.
Rome Queen of Cities, does no whit disdain
Me for the muses sake to entertain,
Amongst the Poets, loved Quires to sit,
So that I now, am less with Envy bit.
(Oh thou Pierian) which with Harp of gold,
Do in sweet notes harmonious air unfold;
(Oh thou) who if thou please, to Fishes mute,
The Swan's delicious Song can attribute:
It wholly is a gift derived from thee,
That by each finger, which does pass by me,
The Roman Lyrick Harper they design.
That I do breath, and please (if please) is thine.
Ode V. TO AUGUSTUS. That now at length he would return into the City.
Divis orte bonis.
(CAEsar) thou from the gods propitious sprung,
Our best preserver; stay'st away too long.
We promise of thy quick return require,
Made to the sacred Senate: Oh retire,
(Good Caesar) on thy Country light reflect,
For where thy Spring-like face does beams eject,
More joyful to the people are the days,
And better does the Sun, transfuse his rays.
Like as a Mother (when the Southern wind,
Her son with envious tempest has confined,
Beyond the billows of Carpathian Straights
More then a year: (His home return awaights
With vows, and prayers; And the gods implores,
Her eye not stirring from the crooked shores.
So stricken with their faithful heart's desire,
Thy Country Caesar) does thy self require.
Behold the Ox, safe, wandreth up and down;
Ceres, and bright Felicity do crown,
And feed the Land. The Seas are calmer framed
For Sailors use. Faith fears to be blamed.
No chaft house, with Adulteri's defiled;
Custom and Law, has spotted sin exiled.
For Sons like Syres, the Mothers we commend.
"Companion punishment does vice attend.
Who fears the Parthian now, or Scythian bold;
Or Monsters, which rough Germany does hold.
Or Caesar being safe, who will regard,
That fierce Iberia stands for arms prepared?
Each man in his own hills, does close the day,
And Vines about the widow Elm display.
Then frolike to his banquet he retires,
And thee a god, in second Cups admites.
With many prayers, he does his Vows inflame,
And powers full goblets out unto thy name;
Thy Godhead seeking with his Lars to please,
As Greece their Castor and great Hercules.
(Good Caesar) render long repose we pray,
To glad Hesperia: This we (sober) say
When day first breaks: This moystned, when to rest
The Sun invites us, waning in the West.
Ode VII. To LUCIUS MANLIUS TORQUATUS. Since time changes all things, let us
live merrily.
Diffugere nives.
NOw snows are quite dissolved, fresh grass we see
To fields returned, and leaves to every tree.
The earth with various change each season ranks,
And falling Rivers glide within their banks.
Aglaia dares (naked) on the ground,
With Nimphs, and her two sisters dance a-round.
The year us warnes immortal things to doubt,
And Hour, which circumvolves the day about.
Soft Western winds, on Winter mildness bring,
Soon withered Summer, wears out the Spring,
Then mellow Autumn, powers his fruits amain,
And instantly dull Winter turne^ again.
Yet speedy Moons celestial harms restore
To after times: when we are gone before,
Where Tullus, good Aeneas, Ancus trade,
Naught are we else (alas) but dust, and shade.
Who is it knows, whether the heavenly powers,
Will add to this days sum to morrows hours.
Your greedy heir in nothig shall have part,
Which you in life shall give with bounteous heart.
But when you once are dead, and powers divine,
To you, an equal sentence shall assign,
Then (oh Torquatus) blood, nor eloquence,
Nor piety, can life again dispense:
For neither chaste Hypolitus, was free
By Dian set, from Hells obscurity;
Nor were Laethean bands, by Theseus
Dissolved, for his dear Pyrithous.
Ode VIII. To MARTIUS CENSORINUS. There is nothing which can more immortalize
men, then Poets Verses.
Donarem pateras.
TO friends I would give freely (Censorine)
Pieces of richest Plate, and Bowls for Wine,
Three footed Tables, (Valiant Greeks reward:)
Nor from my choycest gifts should you be barred
Where I with artfull figures richly sped,
Which Parrhase drew, or Scopas pourtrayed
In colors one, in stone the other bold,
A man sometimes, sometimes a God to mould.
But I have not this power: Nor do suppose,
Your wealth, or wish, wants such delights, as those.
You Verses love; for Verse we make a shift,
And know what price to set on such a gift;
No Marbles with deep Characters engraved,
By which to valiant Captains life is saved,
And spirit after death: Not speedy slight,
Nor threats of Hanniball, rejected quite:
Nor flames of Carthage better sound his praise,
Who did his name from conquered Africa raise,
Then Ennius Muse: Nor can reward be won,
If paper tell not, what was bravely done.
What would become of Mars, and Illa's brood,
If spightfull silence, Romulus withstood?
The strength, and grace of Poets powerful wit,
Makes Aeacus in fields Elizian sit,
Snatched from Stygian floods. "Muses deny,
"A man deserving praise should ever die.
"Muses give heaven: So dauntlesse Hercules,
In Jove's wished Banquets does his palate please:
Castor and Pollux bright Star does redeem,
Storm-beaten Vessels, which do shipwrakt seem.
God Bacchus brow, adorned with verdant Vine,
Does happy end, unto our vows assign.
Ode XIII. TO VIRGILL. He describes the reproach of the Spring, and inviteth
Virgil under condition to a Banquet.
Jam veris comites,
SOuthwinds, the Spring attending still,
Now Seas do calm, and Sails do fill:
Now Frosts do not make Meadows hoar,
Nor Winter-Snow, swollen Rivers rore.
The lucklesse Bird, her nest does frame,
Bewayling Itis, and the shame,
Of Cecrops house; and that so ill,
On Kings rude lust, she wrought her will,
The Shepherds of rich Flocks rehearse,
And to their Pipes chaunt rural Verse:
And seek his Godhead to appease,
Whom flocks, and hills Arcadian please.
These times do thirsty Seasons send.
But if (thou Virgil) Caesar's friend,
With pressed Calenian Liquor hie,
For Wine, thou shall sweet unguents buy.
And purchase with a little Box,
Wine, which Sulpitius safely locks,
New hopes most powerful to create,
And bitter cares to dissipate,
Unto which comfort, if thou have,
Come hither with thy Unguents fast.
I Will not (free cost) my cups carrouse,
As rich men in a plenteous house.
Then leave delays, and Gaine's desire.
And mindful of black Funeral fire,
"Short folly mix with Counsels best.
"It Is sweet, sometime to be in jest.
Ode XIII. Against LYCE. Who being old, is become a scorn to young men.
Audivere Lyce.
THe Gods have (Lyce) heard my vow,
My vow is heard. Thou Art old, yet thou.
Feign would (forsooth) be counted fair,
And quaffe, and wanton with the air:
And (drunk) with trembling voice invite
Slow Cupid; who takes more delight,
O^ Ohia's rosy cheeks to stay,
Both young, and skilled in Musick's lay.
For he, delay not booking, flies
From withered Oaks; and from thee hies,
Whom rotten teeth, and wrinckled face,
And head of snowy hair, disgrace.
N^w cannot Coan Purple's use,
Nor b^ightest gemms, the Time reduce,
Which once swift wing^d Age has closed
In public Calenders disposed.
Where is thy beauty fled? (Ay me)
Thy color fresh, and motion free?
What have thou of that, that entire,
Which erst inspired amorous fire?
And did me from my self divert;
Next Cynaras, thou happy were,
For pleasing beauty, and sweet grace,
Discov'red in a lovely face.
But Fates to Cynaras did owe,
Short life, and Lyce like the Crow;
They here surviving longer hold,
That fervent young men may behold.
Not without laughter, and much scorn,
A flaming torch to ashes worn.
Ode XV. The praises of Augustus.
Phoebus volentem.
MY Muse by Phoebus was rebuked of late
For singing wars, and vanquished cities fate
Like those, who in the Tyrren Ocean's rage,
Do little Sails advance. (Caesar) thy age,
Affords plenteous fruits, unto the fields,
And to Jove's Capitol our Ensigns yields,
From Parthian Pillars snatched, and after jarres
Has closed Ianus Temple free from wars.
Confusion has with Order rectified,
And wandering Liberty in fetters tied.
Has antique arts recalled: By which it is known
Hesueria's strength and Latin name has grow.
Imperial pomp has spread, and glory won,
Stretched from the rising, to the setting Sun.
While Caesar is our Guardian, civil war,
Nor violence, our peaceful rest^ shall mar.
Nor anger, which swords sharpnerh, and confounds
Cities, unhappy made with mutual wounds.
Not they for thirst, that drink in I ster deep,
Shall once refuse, the Julian Laws to keep.
Not Scres, faithless Persians, nor the Getes,
Nor those, which near to Tanais have their seats
And we on holy Eeves, and holy Days,
Amongst free Cups, to merry Bacchus praise:
With wife, and children, standing in our sight,
(First Gods invoking with Religious Rite)
Will gladly (as our Grandsires did) rehearse,
(And tuning Lydian Pipe to various Verse,)
Heroique Captains, Troy, Anchises gone,
And brave Aeneas, Cytherea's son.
The end of the fourth Bohke.
CERTAIN EPODS OF HORACE.
Epod. I. TO MAECENAS. Horace will travel with Maecenas going to the Actiack
wars against. M. Anthony.
Ibis liburnis.
IN low built Barks, thou will not fail,
'Monst lofty towering Ships to sail;
And do (Maecenas) much incline,
To make great Caesar's peril thine.
What shall we do? Whose life is blessed,
If thou survive: If not, distressed.
Shall we (commanded) idle be:
Repose is toil, if not with thee.
Or shall we undergo these pains,
With minds which no soft ease restraines?
We will? And through the Alps ascent,
And Caucasus, where none frequent:
Yea to the utmost Western parts,
Will follow thee, with constant hearts.
You Will ask; How can thy labor please
Untrain'd in arms, and weak with ease?
"In company, Fears little seem,
Which men in absence, great esteem.
As Bird, her plumelesse young ones, left,
More fears to find by Serpents reft;
Not that she can with presence, bring
Force able to resist the sting.
This warfare will I undertake,
Or any other, for thy sake.
Not that my many Ploughs are found,
With Oxen more, to till the ground.
Or Beasts to Lucan Meads are sent,
Calabrian fervors to prevent.
Nor Tusculum, my Village clear,
May to Circaean walls, come near.
Thy favor me enough has stoar'd,
Which I, as Chremes will not hoard
Within the earth, nor ever shall
Spend like a wastfull prodigal.
Epod. II. The praise of the Country life.
Beatus ille qui procul negotiis.
HE happy is, who far from busy toil,
(As elder ages) tills the soil
With his own Cattle, which his father left,
From thralling interest bereft.
He is not moved, when warlike Drums do bear,
Nor fears the angry Ocean's threat.
He Pleas, and Suits abhorres, and does refuse,
The grace of mighty men to use.
But either does to tallest Poplats twine,
The tender offsprings of the Vine.
And cutting branches off, which useless were,
Graft those, which better fruit may bear.
Or, vieweth in some winding valley's maze,
His wandering Herds of Cattle, graze.
Or, does pressed honey in pure vessels keep,
Or, sheare his wool over burdned sheep.
But when with mellow fruit ripe Autumn crowned
His head upreareth from the ground.
How he to taste the grafted Pear delights,
And grape, that with the Purple sights.
Which to Priapus, as a gift redounds,
Ot, old Silvanus, God of Bounds.
Now under aged Oak, he hours does pass,
And now reposeth on the grass.
While gentle Rivers from high banks do glide,
And Birds their warbling notes divide:
Small streams, on purling pibbles murmur keep,
To summon soft, and easy sleep.
But when loud Jove, rough Winter sends below,
In stormy showers, and chilling snow.
Then he the hardy Bore, from place to place,
With Fleet Hounds, into Toils does chase:
Or else, the fearful Hare, and foreign Crane
With pleasing spoil, in grinns are taken.
Ah! who in thought, amongst such delights retains
Least sense, of love's disturbing pains?
But if (in part) a modest wife direct
The house, and children dear affect.
As Sabine erst, or swift Apulian's dame,
Parched with tawney Phoebus flame,
With old dry wood, a blessed fire make to burn,
Against weary husband's wished return:
And folding gladsome flocks in woven grates,
Dryes up their dugges, which milk dilates;
And broaching new wines kept in vessels fair,
And (unbought) Supper does prepare.
The Lucrine Oyster (sure) nor Guilthead bright,
Nor Turbot, yields more delight;
If Winter such, when Eastern tempests rore,
Do drive upon our Terrhene shore.
Ionick Partriges, nor Africa Quail,
Upon my palate more prevail,
Then does the unctious Olive choicely culled,
From fertile Branches newly pulled:
Or Sorrel that in Meadows does abound,
And Mallows, bodies making sound.
Or Lamb, on Terminus his Feast that dies,
Or Kidd-redeem'd, from Wolfe's surprise.
Amongst these dainties, what content it yields,
To see the fed flocks leave the fields.
To see the weary Ox with neck worn bare,
Dragging the turned plough and share:
And Hinds (the plenteous household swarm)
'Bout shining Lars to sit, and warm.
'This said, rich Alphius that money lends,
To lead a Country life intends;
And in the Ides his Debts called in amain,
But in the Calendo lent again.
Epod VII. To the people of ROME. An Execration of the civil war, raised, on
the one side by Brutus, and Cassius; on the other, by Octavian, M. Anthony, and
Lepidus the Roman Consulls.
Quo, quo scelesti.
AH Traitors, whither have you? To what end,
Do your right hands, to shethed swords desce^d?
Is there so little yet, of Latin blood,
Powered on the Champain fields, or Ocean flood?
Not that the Roman should with flames abate,
The Towers of Carthage, envious of our state:
Or Britton should (unconquered to this day)
Be taught, in chains to tread the sacred way.
But that (which now the Parthian would dema^d)
This City should be razed by civil hand.
Amongst Wolves, and Lions never was this use,
But beasts, whom nture different does produce.
Does Fury blind? Or greater power command?
Or sinne's offense? Oh let me understand?
They silent are: Their cheeks are paler made,
And fears their horror-strucken minds invade
It Is so: Sour Fates do Rome with fury stain,
And tyrannous offense of brother slain.
Which on ensuing ages laid the guilt.
When Remus harmless blood on earth was spilt.
Epod XIII. To his merry friends, that they should pass the Winter pleasantly.
Horrida tempestas.
ROugh tempests have the brow of heaven bent,
And showers, and snowes, cause thickened ayr's descent.
Now Thracian North winds, Sea, and woods affray
Friends, let us take occasion, from the day;
While strength is fresh, and us it well becomes,
Let Age be lightened, which the brow benummes.
Boy, see you broach those elder wines were pressed
When Torquate first, the Consul's place possessed.
Speak not of other things. God will perchance,
These to their seat, with happy change advance,
Unguents of ^ersian Odours, now delight;
Cares d^iving with Cylenian Harp to flight;
As noble Chiron to Achilles sang,
Unvanquish'd Mortal, that from Thetis sprang,
Thee Troy expects; which Simois rolling Tide,
And small Scamander's colder streams divide,
Whence to return, so Fates thy thread undo,
Thou can not back with thy blew Mother go,
All Sorrow there, with wine, and Song depresse,
(Sweet comforts, of deformed heaviness.)
The End of the Epods.
On the day of judgment. Mat. chap. 24. V. 29.30.31.
WHen the last Trumpet with a dreadful call
Resounding far and near, shall summon all,
To leave Deaths pitchy dung'on, and awake
Before Jehovah their account to make.
Refulgent Titan must put out his light,
And flee for succor to the sable Night.
While his unharnes'd Steeds, with gilded heels,
Gallop about this Globe, burning the fields
With flames ejected, when their fury ope's
The flaming Caverns of their burning throats.
The silver Moon with black shades must infol'd,
Her Ebon Chariot and be headlong rolled
From her Enameled Throne, while sullen mist
Rap's up her curled flames; those hills which kissed
The Skies with their ambitious height, must now
Their stately Necks below the Center bow,
Mountains shall fall upon their knees, as though
They begged pardon for aspiring, Seas shall flow
With floods of crimson hue; loud roaring thu^der
With sense confou^ding cracks, hal split in sunder
Jove's lofty Pallace^ falling Stars shall crush
Earth with their painted burden, while they rush
In pale affrighted Troops, and jointly try
Which shall amongst them most dejected lie.
The bright spears standing still shall cease to chime
Supposing now that all consuming time
Should in Eternity be quite involved,
And the whole Fabric of the world dissolved.
Then heavens Monarch in a Carre of gold
Shall ride triumphant, sacred truth shall hold
Over his head a Crown, and Cherubs bright
Display their checberds wings effusing light
From their refulgent faces, Crowned quires
Often skie-borne Choristers with sounding Lyres.
Shall chalk forth Hallalujah's, on each hand
Martyrs and Saints in flaming troops shall stand.
A Cloak enchast with Stars and spangl'd over
With sparkling Diamonds shall closely cover
His glittring Members; thus in Majesty
The large Tribunal shall be placed on hye.
Then shall his People hear that lovely voice
Of come ye blessed, and in this rejoice
That you shall dwell where floods of Nectar flow
And endless blisses do for ever grow
But those (alas) whom his revewing ire,
Shall deeply plunged in everlasting fire,
Those shall find Night in flames, and always lie
As daily dying and yet never dye.
A brief Meditation on Man's frailty.
HOw frail is man? Oh how his fortune reels
On giddy Hinges, and unstable Wheels?
Just as a Flower, when the Meadows gay
D'on checkered Garments in the month of May
Lays o'pe its varnisht pride against the Sun,
While perfumed Zephyr through the fields does run
In Aromatic gusts, and often does play
With wanton Cloris prostrate in his way.
But when the Dog with scorching heat is stung
Lapping up Rivers with his blazing toungue;
Then the Inamel'd stem hangs drooping down
And sheads his leaves upon the painted ground.
Thus fade our Days, thus all our joys are gone
Almost before they can be thought upon.
An Elegy on the thrice Renowned Sir PHILIP SYDNEY.
OH let me to some dismal Cypress turn,
That thus transformed I might for ever morn
Over thy Tomb, thou brave Heroic spirit,
Whose choice perfections claimed to inherit
All hearts that knew thee, and whose virtue shall, beds
Survive the Relics of thy Funeral.
You watery Nymphs which makes those mossy
Where Tame and Isis rest their silver heads.
Don sable weeds, and in your Cristall bowres
Playing at drop tears spend the winged hours.
You shepherds all which the Arcaedian plains
With Oaten reeds chant forth melodious strains
Let brinish tears flow from your dropping eyes,
And bath your Muse in weeping Elegies,
Sydney is gone, you wanton Faun that trip
About the enameld Green, and gently sip
The crystal of clear Brooks let sorrows make
Your jollity to cease, and shreiks awake
Echo from the Embroidred Vales, let Philomel
Prepare no more her own sad rape to tell,
But may that melancholy Bird with sighs let fall
Dirges bewayling Sydneys funeral.
Natures whole Fabric seems still to deplore
His fate, fields smile not as they did before.
Gay Lillies fade, nor can the purple Rose
Her gaudy shop to mortal eyes expose.
For lo her Damask leaves half witherd fly
To kiss Earths Bosom, and there drooping dye.
But if they yet their crimson dye retain
They blush at Sydneyes scarrs, Weep, weep amain
Bright Venus with thy winged Boy, oh shall now?
With Nectar dropping pens such furrows plow,
In which the scattered seed of growing fame,
Could bring forth Harvests of a lasting Name.
Who shall record Loves triumphs? Who shall find
New fained stories, to delight the mind
Of all green sickness Girls? Or who shall be
The Prop to stay declining Poetry?
Death has put out this radiant Lamp of light,
And left the world wrapped up in pitchy night.
But stay, why weep I thus? by this he is come
To trace the fields of blessed Elisium:
There shall he comfort those which spend their hours
In melancholy Groves and Mertill bowers.
Rest Honored Ashes in your marble Tomb
Maugre all malice, while Earths teeming womb.
Lays open Flora, s Wardrope to adorn
Thy hearse with pleasing flowers, such as mourn.
Strowes in the Eastern windows, when the dawn
Appears like Roses overspread with Lawne.
Thy soul shall fly on fames high soaring wings
Above the glory of triumphant Kings.
The Book shall live, till time shall be no more.
Till Skies shall want a Sun, and Seas a shore,
FINIS.
Aulus Persius Flaccus HIS SATYRS.

Translated into English, By BARTEN HOLYDAY Dr of Divinity, and late Student of
CHRIST-CHURCH in OXFORD.

And now newly by him reviewed, amended, and enlarged.

Hinc trahe quae dicas. mensamque relinque Mycenis Cum capite and pedibus --
The fifth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1650.

To the Author his most loved Friend, Dr BARTEN HOLYDAY.
WHat None have Dared, Thou have; and might again
With praise, were it undar'd. Did thou abstain
Yet longer, none would dare Thee to Prevent;
If any, what would breed thy more Content
Then, when by victory, thy glory should
Be doubled? yea, although recall some could,
From field of rest, thy PERSIUS to consult:
Yet would no less praise from thy lines result,
Then that unparalleled, which now is due
From those that read thee. Who when they shall view
How truly with thine Author thou do pace,
How hand in hand ye go, what equal grace
Thou do with him observe in every term:
They cannot, but, if just, justly affirm;
That did your times as do your lines agree,
He might be thought to have translated Thee,
But that he is Darker, not so strong; Wherein
Thy greater Art more clearly may be seen:
Which do thy Persius clowdy storms display
With lightning and with thunder; Both which lay
Couched perchance in him, but wanted force
To break, or light from darkness to divorce:
Till Thine Exhaled skill compressed it so,
That forced the clouds to break, the light to show,
The thunder to be heard. That now each child
Can pratle what was meant: whilst thou art styled
Of all, with titles of true dignity,
For lofty Phrase, and perspicuity.
W. CARTWRIGHT.
To his loving Friend Master B. H. upon PERSIVS translated.
THis work me thinks makes my conjecture bold
T'affirme the Athenians paradox is true,
When by years revolution I behold
Men dead revive; things long since old grow new:
For should dead Rome awake, and those loose times
Which feared and felt this scourging Satyrist,
She might again in us review her crimes;
As fertile is Our age, Nor has it mist
The worst of all her ills. Vainly we thought
Thy ashes (Persius) Slept within thine urne;
Feared not thy lash: hoped negligence had wrought
Thy lines worse funeral: and at length would turn
All to obscurity; For how few did strive
TO enlighten thy dark phrase, unless some vice
Made an acute bad comment: So to thrive
And purchase perspicuity, is a price
Thou would have grieved to give. Yet since in ill
We have or' ^ane past times: I must rejoice
That constant industry should get such skill
As tell us our bad in Persius voice:
Whom now all understand: all may endure
To read, but such as would their crimes obscure.
T. GOFFE.
Dark Persius Ambrose threw thy book on ground
With indignation, 'cause 'twas so profound:
But now in Fathers room a Child is sprung,
That reads thy Satyrs in a vulgar tongue,
No Ambrose, yet with ambrose to be fed,
That could so wisely track, where thou could tred,
He takes away thy veil, and makes that line
Transalpine, which the Romans would confine:
Now let thy wandering shadow freely rove,
And seek great place in the Elisian grove,
Where since there is store of Bay, for him one knit,
That makes the looser Britains fear thy wit.
Needs must his own invention radiant be,
That cast such beams through thy opacitie.
Henceforth (bright HOLYDAY) to change refuse
Thine own Terpsichore, with translated Muse.
IN Latio latuit Saturnum filius: Aulum
Sic poterat soboles ista latere suum,
Ante tuas (HOLYDAY) faces; hac luce refulget
Pluribus, and caeco, tectior ante, parri.
Gymnaf^archa puer, festivus ludat u^erque:
Per Festum vobis otia quanta Diem?
Nunquam Pegaseas libavit Persius undas,
Aut clausit docto lumina pigra jugo,
Nempe tibi, fontem laticesque and cu^mina Phoebus
Servarat: pleno dum satur ore mades. Nec sonte, etc. Nec in bicip. etc.

Quidve Aulus traheret? cum sic Helicona refundas,
Vt natet Angligenis Itala Musa labris,
(...)
(...).
JOHN WALL D. D.
Upon the happy Translation of the most difficult Satyrist, performed by his
friend Master B. H.
I Sing the Conquest, which an English rhyme,
With all its force nere won before this time.
Who thought that there would extant be the man
That such stiff, sullen, hardy Romans can
Subdue, and with an hand learnedly fierce,
Bind in the fetters of a Britain Verse?
Yet here is one that does: But not as those
That Ovid. Metamor. Vir, Aeneid.
changed shapes, and wandering Trojans chose
For to translate, with lines a mile in length,
Or Paraphrase that tyres, Such is his strength
And strictness, he his Author without wrong
Lodges in prisons but of five foot long.
Some I have known, that did attempt the same
Which that they Durst, it was their greatest fame,
But it was he, that could disdain to stay
At this praise Margent, only to Assay:
He with impetuous and all-conquering wit
That only had the power to finish it.
For had they don't, I know they must have left
Their graver studies, and have filcht with theft
Guilty of too much sacrilege, more hours,
Then time would lose; or else those sister powers
Invoke to lend them Other lives, to pluck
A vessel with such Remora's bestucke
To wished shore. But as for Him with strange
And easy haste, he did his Roman change
Without complaint of time: No serious part
Of learning murmured, that he did impart
Hours to the work. For all this was begot,
(I speak my conscience) when it was his lot
To be at Truce with study. Then judge you
That shall upon his happy pains, a view
Bestow, that never the Muses Holy days,
Or times of leisure, were with greater Praise,
Or Thrift, or business spent: and likewise since
He conquered has so fierce a Latin Prince
Unto the Rimes and Phrases of Our tongue:
Decree that Bays unto his brow belong.
A. WHITE.
To his kind Friend Master B.H. Upon his PERSIUS.
AS if in travailes far engaged at last
Returned, I gratulate thy labors past.
But when unto thy ways I turn mine eye,
Dangers obscured with dangers I espy,
I think it a task too great for humane sleights,
Vngraveld or undasht to pass those streights.
Admiring thy chaste notes, in which unharm'd
The Sirens lustful language thou have charmed,
That Art I love, when as against faith of sense
By sense of faith I see things flow from thence.
Nor do I (like to his ore wheeling brain)
PERSIUS still a cloud, embrace in vain;
This's the substance gives Vice the fatal blow,
The others thunder few to fear do know.
On envy, summon all the vices spite:
Better they should be conquered then not Fight.
R. WELDON
Aulus Persius Flaccus. HIS SATYRS The Prologue.
ARGUMENT.
Need and not Inspired skill
Makes our Author try his quill.
MY lips did never touch the spring
Of the winged horse: nor can I bring
to mind, that ere I dreamed upon
Two-topt Parnassus, that thereon
I might b' Inspired and So Vp-start
A Poet by Infused art.
And all the Muses that do dwell
'Bout pale Pirene, and the Well
Of Helicon, to Those I leave.
Unto whose statue's brows does cleave
The Ivy-greene incircling Crown.
In humbleness I half a Clown
Do only bring this my rude line,
Unto Apollo's sacred shine.
Yet blame me not for my bold deed:
Alas! I write enforced by A satyricall Ironic Persius was a Knight of Rome of
sufficient wealth.
need.
Who taught the Parrot his kind Hail?
Who taught the Pie to so prevail
To frame our words? 'Twas but to fill
Their belly, master of their skill;
Which skillful is to make them reach
Voices, which Nature cannot teach.
Nay; of there chance to shine but some
Hope, of deceitful Gain to come:
Crow^ Poets and poetique Pies
You Would think did chaunt sweet ayries;
And make (when as they harshly Cry)
A Pegaseian Melody.
THE FIRST SATYR. IN FORM OF A DIALOGUE.
The Speakers PERSIUS. MONITOR.
ARGUMENT.
Inspired Poets Art and Pride
Our Satyrist does here deride.
P. O Cares of men! O empty Vanity
Of things! M. Who Will read these Wondering Satyrs?
Out of the too abundant variety of the interpunctions of these three verses
following, I could find none more accurate then this I have extracted and here
used.
P Why? Do thou say so my Friend?
M. Futh I think none.
P. How say thou? M. Perchance some two, or. P. None?
M. It Is hard. P. Yet Why? Lest Rom'es Ironically here the Poet calls N^to
Polydamas who is much famoused by Homer in diverse places for his virtue, yea
and compared with Hector. ^^ad (...)
Polydamas
And dou^^e Trojans should prefer the ass
A ridiculous Poet, that translated five Books of Homers Iliads into verse,
word for word, with ex^eame obscurity, and no less absurdity.
Lubeo before me? Tu^h; their false doom
Is but a trifle. If disturbed Rome
Proudly slight any thing, scorn to descend
To Their Vain censures: neither strive to mend
The tongue of thy false balance in their scale
Which is as vvrong: but if thou would never fail
Know This: To try thy secret innocence,
The surest witness is thy conscience,
For Who is Not at Rome? O that I might
But freely speak, yet speak no more! then Right!
And So I May, Then, when I cast mine eye
On those whose Faces promise Gravitie:
On our sad Stoickes: on the things we do
Since we left off to play with nuts: and view
Our actions, when we labor much to be
Stern Uncles. Then! then! But, oh, pardon me,
I will not touch. Yet can I hold my peace
Urged Thus? and from revenge so just, Thus cease?
I Am of a Scoffing spleen. I Love to Flout
At Hypocrites: therefore it now Must out.
Then Thus.
Being immured from each man's sight
(...) some obscure retired place, we write
^ome, eu'n-pac'd numbers; Some freefooted prose,
Some weighty thing, which the Author strongly blows
From his large-vvinded lungs. For he rehearses
Unto the people straight his vvel-pen'd verses;
His hair being first kemb'd smooth, and then he dight,
In a fair comely garment fresh and white,
Wearing some precious jevvell, which some friend,
On's birthday to him for a gift did send,
With moyst'ning syrrope having cleared his throat
Apt now to sound it in a various note.
Then is he reading in a seat on high,
Dissolved unto a lustful Acting eye.
Where thou ma^st see even those that bear the name
Of Rome's brave Titi (but unto their shame)
To shake with trembling lust, and to rejoice
Obscenely, with a broken skteaking voice
When a lewd line their inward loins does pierce,
And touch them with a lust provoking verse.
But thou old Dot^rd, do Thou strive to feed
Other men's ears? nay, Theirs who without heed
Or moderate discreation praise thee so,
That (skinne-peel'd Asl^!) thy self do first cry, Hoe?
Here the Poet faineth a reply of this old ambitious Poet defending himself.
Why did I learn unless this leaven here
Inbred, this strong vvild-figtree should appear?
And from its seat the liver breaking forth
Show to the world its own, though unknovvne vvorth?
P. O see ambitious palenesse! see Old Age!
At such corrupted times Who could not rage?
Think thou, thou nothing know, if it be so,
That others know not, that thou this do know?
A second reply.
O but it is brave to hear men cry, See, see?
And pointing with their fingers, say, That Is she,
Say you 'had a Poem which so smoothly runs,
That 'tvvere for lectures read to great men's sons,
Brave lads with curled locks, like gold so yellow?
Would not you think your self a pretty fellow?
P. O that is not all! See, our Romulidans
Profane our sacred poems with foul hands!
Reading, amidst their bowels, poems divine,
Being full up to the throat with flesh and wine.
Where if forsooth one clad in purple clothes,
Su^tile some mustre stuff through's muffling nose
Me^^ing forth fair Hypsipyle's sad song
Or Phillis fortune with a most'ned ^ong
Or some such tales which poetry affordes
His dainty palate tripping forth his words,
The men assent! And are not th'ashes then
Of this rare poet bless? This man of men
Has he no^ now a The Ancient Ethniques did use to pro^^ that the tomb
slones of their dead friends might be light w^^ to them because they believed,
that their Manes or souls r^^^ mained in their sepulchers, and were sensible
of such acc^dents. They held likewise the spring^ng of slowres from t^^ grave
of a deceased friend an argument of his happiness.
lighter mole of earth
Gently pressing his bones? A general mirth
Ensues, the guests with hands and voices wring
His due applauses And shall there not now spring,
E^'n from his Manes, from the hollovv womb
Of his ^^rice-happy urne-inclosing tomb
Sweet Violets? But, Oh, sates one, you touch
Too scoffingly, wrinkling your nose Too much:
For does there breath a man that can reject
A general praise? and his own lines neglect?
Lines vvorth immortal Cedars recompense,
Nere fearing nevv-sold Fish or Frankincense?
Well, vvhosoe're thou art whom I did make
But now, the Adverse part to undertake;
When J my self do write, if from my brain
Do flow by greatest chance some happy strain
(For ris by chance) My heart is not so hard
So hornie, as to fear the due revvard
Of deserved fame. Only J do deny
The scope of virtuous actions to lie
In thy O brave! O fine! for search but this
Thy O fine! and within it What not is?
No; in These papers know thou shall not find
Labe'os hell borated lines confinde
To superstitiously to Words: nor vveake
Love-elegies, such as Rome's Nobles speak:
Whose judgment, like their overcharged mavv,
Wants strong concoctions heat, and is yet raw,
Briefly vvhatse're on The Romans had their' ecti Iucubratorii on which they
studied, and trich^iares, on which they eat: the latter are rather understood
in this place, for be principally speaks against the verses they write
amongst their cups.
Citrean beds is writ,
We hence exclude as th'exerement of wit.
Thou do some dish of good hot meat provide
For some poor wretch (whose belli's his tongs guide)
Or to thy quaking follo'r thou do cast
Thy threadbare cloak (which could no longer last)
Then thus thou speak. You know even from my youth
J hated lies, now therefore tell me true
Of me ( P. Can He tell truth? Wilt let me speak?
Thou triflest (bald^pare alse!) and thy skill's vveake.
Seeing a fat-hog trough-panch before thee struts
Full eighteen inches with a load of guts.
O blessed Janus! happy is thy luck!
Behind Three manner of floutes were used by the Ancients. The first was with
their hand to make a Storkes bill, their fingers being all collected together,
and then let out with a flurt. The second was to put their thumbes to the
temples of their heads, and then wagge their fingers like asses-eares, which
within are somewhat white. The third was to lill out their tongues, like dogs
in the heat of Summer, especially in hot countries such as is ^^ulia a region
in Italy.
thy bac^e, whom never Storkes bill struck
At whom no nimble fingered hand being framed
Lik^ asses white ears, ever yet was aimed:
Nor so much tongue thrust forth in a base flout
As an Apulian bitch for thirst his out.
Yo O Patrician blood whose heads are blind
IN the hinder part, prevent a scorn behind,
What do men say? The answer of the flaterer.
That now your verses flow,
Jn a soft numbered pace both svveet and slow,
Whose vvell^ smoothed parts are so exactly joined
That the severest nail can never find
The least unev'nesse. O says one, he makes
A verse, as he that his true level takes,
Shutting one eye, for to direct his line,
Which dravving, with red-oaker he does sign,
Whether he scourge with his deep-vvounding rimes
The delicate soft manners of the times,
Or the impious banquets of revenging Kings:
Our Poets Muse can well express great things.
P. J, You shall see a fellovv dare assay
To write Heroicke acts, who the other day
But trifle'd out some Fables of small vvorth
Jn scarce true Greek: whose skill cannot paint forth
A pleasant selfe-describing Groue's delights;
Nor praise the full stored Country that even writes
The story of its own abundant store;
Where fruits and fire, vvood and the fat^ned Boar
Are never vvanting, vvh^re the shepherds feast
Sacred to Pales is, t'expell he beast
That hates the lamb: where shepherds on that day
Are purged in a fire of smoking hay.
Whence Remus sprung where ( Q. Cincinnatus.
Quintius) thou vvast borne,
And where thy plovv-share was in surrovves worn;
When as thy wife trembling with joy and fear,
Made thee the great Dictators robes to wear
Before thine Oxen, and to leave them now,
Making the Lictor carry home thy plovv.
Behold then this brave Poet!
Some there are
To whom Fucius Accius Labeo. Briseus, is the surname of Bacchus, fitly here
attributed to Labeo, because of his mad Verses.
Brisean Labeo's book seems rare:
Whose lines swell like full Veins. Others desire
Pacuvius, whom much they do admire,
And love often to read, and even to stay
Upon this knottie harsh Antiopa;
Whose woeful heart was nourished with grief,
The Depth of sorrovv yielding some relief,
When thou shall see the bleare-eyd father teach
His son those things; can thou not quickly reach
To know the cause how this our vile disgrace,
This hissing drying pan of speech took place
First, in our tongues? And yet wherein our smooth
The Knights of Rome were anciently so called, because thy surprised a town in
Herruria called Trossulum, without the help of the footmen.
Trossulians vainly themselves do sooth,
And even leap in their seats, when as they hear
Old words, which please their th^ck false-judging ear.
When thou art accused art not ashamed to be
Not able thy novv-Aged head to free
From fear o'th'lavv, but love the luke-vvarme cry
Of all thy hearers crying, De^ently?
Pedius says one, unto thy charge I lay
The guilt of these. What now does Pedius say?
Jn smooth Antitheta's his fault he vveighes,
And for his learned Figures, vvinnes much praise,
O neat! O neat? Jn judging thou do fail,
Base favvning Roman, do thou vvag thy tail?
For think thou, if some ship-vvrach'd wretch should sing,
He e're from me one Halfe-penny should wring?
Do Sing, when at thy shoulder thou do we are
Thy self and ship, which the sharp rocks did tear?
His tears shall be expressed through's Misery;
Not Studi'd for by Night, that would move Me
To pity. M. Yet in Numbers, O, there shines
Beauteous composure added to those lines
Which were before but raw. P. I, so it seems.
For one, this as the only skill esteems
To end his verse (But, O ridiculous!)
With Berecinthian Atys; or else, thus.
The Dolphin which did out Cerulean Nereus.
Ex'lent! and this our Romans count most serious?
So thus another draws his numbered line,
We drew a ribbe from the long Appenine.
M. Virgils Aeneids, which beginne^, Arma virumque cano.
Arms, and the man I sing, perchance you will dare
To term this frothy, fat-back'd. P.O no, spare
Your too-quick censure, and dissolve your brovv.
This Poem as an aged vvell-grovvne bough
Seasoned with time is with the vvarme Suns heat
Well boyld in its own bark; grown strong and great.
M. What then do you term soft, and to be read
With a loose bending neck, and bovv'd down head?
P. Their writhed horns the Mimallones did fill
With sounds, and Bassari^ about to kill
The scornful calfe, snatching from him his head,
And Moenas as the spotted Lynx she lead
With Ivy-bridles, often did Euion sound
The reparable Echo did rebound.
These, these are brave! But Oh, should such lines be,
Jf any vein of old Nobility
Did live in us? These vveake lines in the Brimme
Of every mouth, in the utmost spittle svvimme.
Moenas and Atys or some foolish songs
Are alvvaies in the moisture of their tongues.
They never buffeted a Deske for these,
Or bit their Nails such lines are writ with ease.
M. Grant this be true yet Sir You have no need
With biting truth to make their soft ears bleed.
Well, look you to it; J fear; be not too bold,
Lest great men's thresholds toward you grow cold.
Me thinks, they are touched already, and I hear
The doggish letter R sound in mine ear,
P. Nay, Sir, rather then so, all is white and free:
All, all is admirable well for Me.
I will not hinder't. Now you are pleased I think,
You Will say, Let no man make my verses stink,
Making a place for This place is thus against the common interpretation more
manerly and truly expounded by M. Bond.
urine, in a scorn,
Among my papers. P. See then you adorn
Your book, and paint too These repre^ed the Genius of the place, and were
painted there to deter any from violating the place by any pollution.
Serpents on it; Boys, None,
Must urine in this Sacred place: be gone;
And I Will go first.
Yet did Lucius cut
Lewd Rome, and thee, O Lupius, that did glut
Thy appetite, and thee (Mutius) grown vveake
With lust, and did on you his Javv-tooth break.
So subtle Horace laughing with his friend
Would cunningly his vices reprehend,
And lying in his bosom, in his heart,
Would biterly deride him with great art,
Skillful he was basely to esteem the rout,
Yet near vvrinkled his nose, or seemed to flout:
And may not J then Mutter? not to the An allusion to the fable of Midas.
Dust?
Not though alone? No where? J will. J must
Dig here, even here, (My ^ooke) J speak to Thee,
J'ue seen, J say, J'ue seen, (my tong's borne free)
Who has not Asses ears? Thou shall not buy
This my obscure concealed mystery,
This my dear scoff, my Nothing, for whole miliade
Of any base Poets long-vvinded Iliads.
Thou vvhoso'ere thou art, that art inspired
With bold Cratinus, or with zeal art fired
Like angry Eupolis, and art grown pale
With' that old man, whose style with a full sail
Bears strong against foul vice, vouchsafe a glance
On these my Salyres also, where by chance
If any thing more perfect thou shall hear,
Among my lines, grow hot with a purged ear.
But him with deepest scorn J do detest
That basely loves to break a jest
At a Philosophers poor Shoe, and vvinkes
At him, whose sight is bad, calling him Blinkes.
Counting himself no mean man, bearing some
Italian honor at Aretium,
Cause, being Market-Clarke (such was his pleasure)
He brake their earthen vessels less then measure.
Nor love I him that counts the counting-table
Of deep Arithmeticians but a fable. Aristophanes.

Nor him that scoffs at Figures made in An allusion to the story of
Archimedes, see Plutarchs Marcellus.
dust
By sound Geometry. Such are unjust,
And Enemies to the Arts. They much delight
To see the bold-fac'd queen Norania fight
With a good honest Cynicke, and will grinne
If that she pull his beard off from his chinne.
These, in the morning next their hearts Jle send
To study the Edicts lest they offend,
Yet after dinner (for they will turn no more
From vice) unto Callirhee their Whore.
THE SECOND SATYR, UNTO HIS FRIEND PLOTIUS MACRINUS.
ARGUMENT.
Profane desires: true sacrifice:
Bold sins: our Poet here descries;
Sign This day (Macrine) with a purer stone,
Which does present to thee times long since gone.
Power wine into thy Genius, for thy care
Js not to win Jove with a Bribing prayer.
Nor crav'st thou, what thou sham'st to name for feare'.
Excepts Jove's drawn aside that none may hear.
Though no small part of Rome's chief Nobles can
Sacrifice with a Lovv-voic'd incense-pan.
It Is not an easy thing to take away
The murmured whispering of those that pray
From the Gods Temples. It Is no easy thing
To live with known desires. This was but the manner of some hypocrites, for
it was the custom of the Romans to pray softly to themselves, as Jos.
Scaliger well observes in his Castigations on the 2. lib. of Tibullus. p. 137.
and Wovverius in his Animadversions on Petronius p. 428.
They use to sing
Alovvd, that strangers and the standers-by
May heare'hem, when they pray for honesty
Or a good mind, good fame. But for the rest
Of their desires, inwardly they are suppressed
Under their murmuring tongues, such as are these
Profane requests, O that some strong disease
Would make my Uncl's brave rich funeral
To bubble up, O that my take would fall,
As I were vvorking, on some sounding pot
Of silver, Antiquity made Hercules the propitious God for the finding out of
hidden Treasure.
Hercules blessing my lot.
Or would I might expunge this young rich Ward,
By whom from great possessions I am barred!
Being the next heir, for he is with scabs perplexed,
And is with swelling choler sharply vexed.
There Is Nereus too, has bu^^'d ye three wives,
And I scarce --! O such men lead happy lives!
That these things thou religiously may crave
Of Jove, in swelling Tybers silver vvave
Early thou vvashest twice or thrice thy head,
Purging the Of this; see Casaubon on T^^eophrastus, p. 292. where he shows
their twofold manner of expiation. And Brisson^^s at large lib. 1. de Formulis.
p. 8.
night pollutions of thy bed.
Do h^a^^? answer n^e this, and but disclose
Thy thought in one small question I Will propose.
What think of Jove? think he may be preferred
Before some? Whom? be'rev'n A wicked fellow, that poisoned his brother and
brotherswife.
Staius, art afeard?
And doubtst thou whether is the fittest Guard
And juster judge for a young guidlesse Ward?
This then, where with thou dare to pressed Jove's ear,
Tell but to Status, would he not even fear
To hears thee speak? and casting up his eye
Cry, O good Jove! and shall not Jove then cry
Unto himself for vengeance? What? do think
Thou art forgiven, because he is pleased to Wink
At thy black deeds, and sooner strikes a Tree,
With horrid Sulphur, then Thy house and Thee,
When with his roaring thunders he does chide
The provvd high-mounting air? Dare thou deride
The povv'r of Heaven, and play with Jove's fond Beard?
As if the had leave, because thou never vvast feared
With some strange judgment? or never yet did lie
A woeful spectacle to each man's eye,
Unholy, to be shunned in some sad grove.
Then ceasing to be sacred unto Jove,
Or the other Gods, until with sacrifice
The Aruspex great Ergenna purifies
The same, by offering the ent^als of two sheep?
Or else, what ift? with what revvard do keep
The bribed ears of the corrupted Gods
That they should only give indulgent nods
At thy vast crimes? ift thy fair offering
Which their sacred altars thou do bring?
Now you shall see some grandames, or fond Aunts,
Whom vvomens Fury Superstition haunts,
Take up a tender infant in their arms,
And being skillful to depell the harms
Of an Of Fascination, see Del. Rio. Mag. disauis. 3. q. 4. Sect x. and
Romirez, in his learned Pentecontarchus, chap. 3 1 at large.
effascinating eye, they will spet
Upon their middle finger, and then wet
With this their purging spettle, the child's brovv
And pretty lips. Then with a humble vovv
Dancing him in their arms, they'lk vainly spend
Their poor lean hope, in praying Jove to send
This babe in time to some such happiness
As once vvealthy Licinius did possess
In fruitful lands: or such as Crassus held,
Who for brave houses, Rome chief Lords excelle'd
They vvish that Kings and Queens may be at strife
To make even their best daughter His blessed wife.
And as for Maids (say they) Ye Gods above!
O let 'hem strongly, strangely fall in love
With his rare beaune^ and that vvhereso'ere
He treads, a crimson rose may spring up there.
Brave! brave! But yet I will not bid my nurse
Pray so^ or if she do; then good Jove curse
Her Prayers, though cloth'd-White she strongly cry,
Yet for thine Own sake, strongly still deny.
Thou vvishest for firm nerves, and for a sure
Sound body, that would healthfully endure
Until old age; why be it, that thy vvish
Is granted by the Gods; yet thy large dish
And full fat sasage make the Gods delay
To bless thee, and do force good Jove to stay.
Thou'd'st feign grow rich: yet do thou sacrifice
An Ox, (is that the way in wealth to rise?)
Then upon Mercury the God of gain
With this thy offering, thus thou cri'st amain,
Let my domesticke Gods (great Mercury)
Make all things happy in my family!
Bless thou my herds of beasts, bless thou my lambs,
And make my tender Yewes the happy damm's
Of many young ones. Mad^man! vvilt thou see?
This is impo^sible! it cannot be?
When as so many Heyfers fats do fry
In flames of sacrifice. Yet does he cry,
And with his Entrals and his dainty Cake
Strives to overcome, and formerly will make
The Gods to hear; nor yet will hold his peace.
Now does my field, now does my fold increase:
Now 'twill be given: now, now, until at last
Deceav'd, his great hope proving but a blast:
His money in his chest may make its moan
For want of company; yet sigh alone.
If for a gift to Thee some friend presents
A silver goblet, or rich ornaments
Curiously graven in a massy bovvle
Of purest gold: straight way thy very soul
Is touched with a strong passion: and thou shak'st
Even Drops from thy left breast (Vain heart that quak'st
Thus with a trembling joy!) Now because gold
Thus pleases Thee, hence it is that thou do hold,
The Gods are pleased so too, and overla^'st
Their statues faces (that thereby thou may
Procure their favor) with gold purchased
From the enemy, which was in triumph led.
For those The brazen Statues of the sons of Aegyptus, all, except one,
slain by their new wives the daughters of Danaus. Which brothers the Romans
adored as Gods, and were vainly persuaded that they sent dreams unto men.
brasse-brother-Gods that send a dream
Most true, and purged from thick, corrupted fleame,
Whereby in sleep men are disturbed, or feared,
Let those be chief, and we are a golden beard.
Gold has the pots of earth, and brass disdained,
Though used when Numa, and good Saturn reigned
Gold likewise has expeld the Vestall Urne:
Gold does the Thuscan Earth to Gold now turn.
Base stooping souls, that groovle on the earth,
In whom there is nothing testifies their birth
To be from Heaven!
Yet, does not this suffice?
But we must bring these our iniquities,
To the Gods Temples, where their powers divine
Do dvvell, and even profane their holy Shrine?
As if there could be any thing in these
Infected Carcases, the Gods to please?
This flesh of ours makes us in vain to spoil
Sweet Casia, by mixing it with oil
To make us ointments. This does make us strain
The soft Calabrian fleece in purple grain,
This makes us with much art to pollish well
Mother of Pearl, drawn from the fishes shell.
This from the unpurged earth made us desire
To strain out veins of gold by purging fire.
This sin, and sins, yet perseveres in sin.
But you great Priests tell, what does gold within
The holy Temple? sure, no greater thing
Then It was a custom among the Ancients, for Virgins about to marry to offer
their Babies as an ensign of their Virginities to Venus, hoping that by her
benefit, shortly after, they should have true Babes of their own.
puppets, which to Venus Virgins bring.
No, let us strive to bring to the Gods, that which
Messala's bleare-eyed offspring, from his rich
Large incense-bason near could give, a mind
By Law and by Religion well confin^d;
A retired soul, a heart not stained by
Foul lust, concoct in Noble honesty.
This let me bring to the Gods, and I Will obtain
Offering but a Small Cake of some Course grain.
THE THIRD SATYR.
ARGUMENT.
Young Gallants Sloth, and their Neglec^
Of Arts, this Satyr does detect.
What Every day thus long? Fie, fie arise:
See how the clear light shamefully descries
Thy sloth: and through thy windows shining bright
Srretcheth the narrovv chinks with his broad light,
We snort till the An hypall, for, till the shadow touch the fifth line; which
about our eleven of the clock. He understands this of the Su^ Dials. You may
see the form of an ancient Roman Su^ Dial in Ramirez his Pentecont. cap. 23.
fifth shadow touch the line,
Enough even to digest strong Falerne wine.
Now what do do? The furious dog-stars heat
Upon the parched corn has long since beat
With its herce scolding influence, and made
The beasts to seek the spreading Elmes cool shade.
Thus the companion of some slothful youth
Does freely chide him. Then says he, in truth
And is it so late? indeed? some body then
Come presently and reach my clothes: why then?
If then no body come: Oh how he swells,
And breaks with Because it is as soon raised as glass is, by 'those that
make it
glasse-like choler; and then yels
With such a foul loud noise, that you would say
Surely some great Arcadian ass did bray.
At last, with much ado^ he does begin
To take his book in hand and some fair skin
Of smooth Yellow on the side the hair grew, and white on the other side.
two-colourd parchment he takes then
Some paper and his knottie reed-like pen.
Then he complains how that his ink does stick
In clots at his pens nose, it is so thick.
Power water then to his black Sep^a is a seafish called a Cuttell, whose
blood the Romans used instead of in ^e
Sepian juice,
He cries, now us too white. Has a device
For every thing. So sometimes he does plead
His pen writes double, or his ink does spread.
Wretched, unhappy man! yet growing still
More vvretched! Think vve'are borne to take our fill
Of sloth? Why do not then like the soft Dove
Or great men's little children, rather love
In delicatest wantonness to lap
Some soft svveet spoone meat, as a little pappe?
Or angry with the teat, why do not cry,
Refusing to be stild with Lu^labie?
This verse is an interjected reply of the slothful youth: the next is spoken
in the person of his companion which reprehendeth him.
Why, can I study, sir, with such a quill?
Alas? whom do thou mock? why pleadst thou still
Such vain ambages? wretched man to flout
Thy self! Thou Art broken! lo, thou leakest out!
And know thou shall be scornd! strike but a pot
Of some raw earth halfe-boyld, and will it not
Tell its own fault, yielding a dull crazd sound?
Well; Yet thou art soft moist clay, and may be vvound
To any form: Now therefore, now make haste
To virtue: present time must be embraced.
Now like the Potters clay, now thou must feel
Sharp disciplines effigiating wheel.
His companions ironicall defense of the others carelesnes
But, oh, thy father left thee land enough,
And a clean salt-seller, with household stuff
Sufficient, needst thou then fear any thing?
Soth have a secure pan wherein to bring
Incense to thy protecting Lares. Well;
But think thou this enough? will it therefore swel,
And break thy lung^ with an ambitious vvinde,
Because that thou the thousandth off, do find
Thy branch to be perchance drawn from a tree
Of some high Thuscan true nobility?
Or that because clad in thy purple grain
Meeting Romes Censor with his pompous train
Thou can salute him, by the name of Cuzze,
And arrogantly ask him how he does?
Away: go pranse before the multitude
In these thy trappings: seek not to delude
My judgment; for I know my soul within,
And see thy faults writ in thy outmost skin,
Art not ashamd to live like dissolute
Loose Natta? but (alas!) he is destitute
Of sense! he stands amazd in vice! the deep
Fat bravvne of sin makes his heart soundly sleep
That now he does not sin! No, he is so gross,
So stupid, that he is senseless of his loss!
And sunk down to the depth of vice, h^^le swim
No more again up to the waters brim!
Great father of the Gods! when cruel lust
Touched with in flaming venom, moves the unjust
Corrupted disposition of fierce Kings,
To act unvvorthy and unkingly things:
Punish them only thus: Le them but see
Fair virtue, and their lost felicity.
Then shall their bowels yearne, and they shall cry
In secret, and wax pale, and pine and die.
Did ever the Sicilian brazen bull
Roar out his torments with a throat more full?
Or did the sword hung by a slender thread
Up in the golden roof over the head
Of the g crovvn'd flatterer, more terrifieg Damocles
His soul, then when a man shall truly cry
Unto himself, I fall, Oh, I do fall
Down headlong, and shall know he is past recall?
And inwardly grow pale (O vvretched life!)
Which he is afeard to tell his near dear wife?
Indeed, when I was young, I like a fool
Would' anoint my eyes with oil to stay from school*
When I Would not learn, through sloth, the stately part
Of dying Cato, though' ^vvere penned with art.
And my too careful Master praised it much:
And my glad father being moved with such
His praises, brought his friends to hear his boy
Bravely act Cato, and would sweat for joy.
For then I cared nor to know any thing,
Except how much the lucky Sice would bring,
Or what the losing Ace would scrape away
Or that my fellow might not put false play
Upon me, nearly cogging forth a die
Out of the small neck'd They used to cast their dice out of boxes, (as now a
days some do out of small saucers) to prevent the sleight of the hand which
notwithstanding some more cunning gamesters did often practice.
casting ^ box. This I
Did learn: and for the scourge-stick I did strive,
That none his Top which greater art might drive.
But now, Thou art not at this age to learn
Betvveene good and bad manners to discern,
No; thou have learned the precepts that are taught
In the wise porch, where curiously are wrought
By Polygnotus skill, the conquered Medes
In their short stops, whose story overspreades
The Walls, and where in searching hidden truths
The little sleeping close-shorne sto^ck Youths,
That feed on husks and a course barley cake,
Early and late industriously do wake.
And unto thee the The letter of Pythagoras, who by birth was a Samian.
Samian letter Y
Whose spreading branches ^^ach Philosophy,
Has marked out even as it were with chalk
The high reared right hand ^a^h, wherein to walk
And snort'st thou Yet? What? is thy head grown slack?
Art javv fallen? Does their frame begin to crack?
Lie yovvning, to evaporate the excess
Of yesterdaies oppressing drunckennesse?
Have thou proposed thy self a certain end^
And with thy best endeavor do thou bend
Thy how at that? Or, careless of thy hurt,
Do throvv at crovves, with stones and clots of dirt
Neglecting where thou runst? have thou no drift,
But only for the present how to shift?
Well, yet be provident, when our sick skin
Does with the puffing dropsy once begin
To swell, it is then, thou knovv'st, but vain to cry
For Hellebore, when a disease draws nigh,
And yet but threatens thee; then, then prevent
And meet a danger that is eminent.
But if thou do delay, il't be too late
And that thy sickness once grow desperate,
Then would thou give Craterus half thy wealth
Yet can he not restore thee to thy health.
Learn then, O vvretched youths, the mystery
Of Nature in profound Philosophy.
Learn who we are, why we were borne, the estate
Wherein vve're set, and know that not by fate
But vvisdome, we may turn our ship with ease
About high-vertues mark placed in the seas
Of this our life. Temperately desire
Silver: learn what it is lavvfull to require
In prayer: and the perfect use, aright
Of money: for which, men so sharply fight:
What likewise to thy Country thou do owe,
And what to thy dear kinsmen; Learn to know
Whom Me thinks these lines of mine Author, and especiolly this word Deus,
seems to be of that high strain of Divinity (in a Heathen) which Plato
reached unto, when he did profess that he writ but in jest, when he said Gods.
God has made thee, and in what degree
And state of life, he here has placed thee.
Learn: neither envy thou at thy full store
Of the greased Lawyer, though he have much more
Provision, then his family can spend
Whilst it is svveet: which the fat Vmbrians send,
As gifts to bribe his tongue. Nor grutch to see
His Marsian Client bring him for a fee,
Pepper, gammons of bacon, or such kind
Remembrances. Nor let it vex thy mind,
Because he has fresh P^lchers to him sent,
Before the former barrel be quite spent.
But here, me thinks, I hear some boistrous rough
Centurion say; Tush, I have wit enough
To serve mine own turn; and I Will never care
To be Arcesilas, or to impair
My health, like Solon: who do lean avvry
Their heads, pearcing the earth with a fixed eye:
When by themselves they gnavv their murmuring
And furious silence, as 'tvvere ballancing
Each word upon their out-stretcht lip: and when
They meditate the dreams of old sick men,
As, Out of nothing, nothing can be brought:
And that which is, can never be brought to naught.
Is it for this they are pale? and that they miss
Their dinner oftentimes, is it for this?
Why yet they are but scorned even by the rout,
The people, and our lusty Lads but flout
Them, and with crisped noses a loose off,
Strongly ingeminate a trembling scoff.
Persius his answer to the objection, which he makes the Centurion here use.
Yet scorn not learning: lest thy falling state
Prove such, as this which here J will relate.
One said to his Phys^tian, pray Sir see:
Me thinks J am not as I use to be.
My heart does qu^ke as if it boaded death,
And my sick javves send forth a loathsome breath,
Pray good Sir feel my pulse: and play your part.
Well, the Physician used his chiefest art,
And bid him rest four days. But when each vein
Began composedly to flow again,
On the third night, he bid his servant take
A A small flaggon.
little thirsting flaggon, and straight make,
All speed to the great house of such a friend,
And tell him, he de^^'d him for to send
Some of his mild Surrentine wine, and so
Having drank that, unto the Baths he would go.
When being there, thither did come by chance
His own Physician, who straight cast a glance?
On this his patient, and to him said,
Why You are pale, and are you not afraid?
Tush man, says he, that is nothing. Yet bevvare,
Said his Physician, and pray have a care.
What ere this nothing is. For I do see,
Your yellow sickly skin svvels secretly.
Well, prithee now, said he, do not thou rail
At me: for thou thy self do look more pale
And worse, be not a Tutor unto me,
One J have had, and buried; now for thee,
Thou yet remainst. On then, and do not cease.
Said his Physician, and I Will hold my peace.
This gallant then swelling with dainty cheer,
Bathes his pale belly, and without all fear:
His throat half stopped with gross corrupted fleame,
Leasurely breathing a sulphurous steame
But midst his vvines a sudden trembling seaz'd
Upon each joint of him, that his diseased
Weak hand could not his luke-vvarme bovvle retain:
And his uncovered teeth even gnasht again,
And then through his loose lips, his fine oild meat
He vomits; which he greedily had eat.
Then were prepared for his funeral
The At the Funerals of great Men, they use Trumpets, as Pipes at the burials
of the meaner sort.
Trumpet, and the Lights, and last of all,
This seeming-happy man that would not doubt,
His health, being composedly laid out
On his high bed, h^s b^ere; and now daubed over
And even bedurted with the abundant store
Of ointments; stretches tovv'rd the Citie-gate
His cold dead heels; and those whose best estate
But yesterday, was but to be his slave,
It was the custom of the Romans before their deaths to manumi^te their
servants, which was by shaving their heads, and putting a capon.
Now wear their caps, and bear him to his grave.
The scornful reply of the Centurion.
What? then belike y' apply this same to me?
But (vvretched fool!) thou art out. For know, J'me free.
Touch but my ve^nes, feel how my heart does beat.
There Is but a wonted moderated heat.
Or feel the bottomes of my feet, or hold
My hands, thou shall perceive they are not cold.
The answer of Persius.
It Is true. But know, seduced man, there stick
Diseases in thy soul, us that is sick
For if thou see by chance much gold, or spy
Thy neighbors smooth-cheek'd vvench to cast an eye
Upon thee, smiling with a vvanton glance
Speak true, does then thy heart orderly dance?
There Is set before thee on thy board, to eat,
In a cold dish hard herbs, somevvhat rough meat;
And course bread sifted in the peoples scarce;
Lets try your chaps. O are ye now averse?
In thy soft mouth there is hid a putrid soar,
Which touched with Common herbs, would make thee roar
So thy heart's cold, when pale fear does affright
Thy hair like ears of corn standing upright.
Again, fierce anger makes thy blood grow hot;
Even as a firebrand does a see thing pot;
And then thy flaring eyes sparkling forth fire,
Thou sai'st and do so in thy furious ire;
That mad Orestes dares swear, such a fact
None but a man stark mad, ere durst to act.
THE FOVRTH SATYR,
ARGUMENT.
Young Rulers: The complaint of Lust
On Avarice, unfit though just.
ART thou a common-vvealths chief Governor?
(Suppose the bearded grave Socr.
Philosopher,
Whom the cold draught of hemlock fo^c'd to die,
Thu^ to demand) on what do thou rely?
What are thy grounds? speak Alcibiades,
Pupil unto the famous Pericles.
Oh, wit and grave discretion, J have heard
Indeed, do many times prevent a beard!
And so thou knovvst no doubt, though the art but young.
Both when to speak and when to hold thy tongue.
When therefore the ^ext multitude grow hot.
With choler, and their duty have forgot,
Thou do but lift up thy majestic hand,
And straight a general silence do command
Ore the tumultuous rout, Then what do say?
These three lines are spoken in the person of this young Governor.
O ye Quiritians (if prevail I may)
J think this is not just that is done by you,
Nor this, 'tvvere better if you thus did do.
For thou can weigh truth in the double scale
Of the most doubtful balance. If it fail,
Straight ways thou knovv'st it, yea, though hid it lie
Betvveen a double crooked falsitie.
Or if a rule (so perfect is thy sight)
Measure not every thing exactly right.
And the black The Judges being about to give sentence of death against a man,
were wont to write his name in a table, and prefix before it, the letter th, as
being the first of (...) signifying he was to be delivered over to death.
Thera sign of deadly shame
Thou can prefixe' fore an offenders name.
Thou can do this. Oh, tvvere a crime to doubt.
Come, come. Thou being fair only without
And in the skin in vain, leave off to shake
Thy tail, before the flattering rout, or make
Suit for great offices, till age and cares
Have made thee fit to manage such affairs.
Thou being fitter yet to drink good store
Of pure unmixt braine-purging Hellebore.
Wherein consists thy last, thy greatest vvish?
The answer of this vain fellow, and the reply of Persius.
In having every day a full fat dish.
Then with svveet oil to' anoint thy skin, and lie
In the Suns pleasant warmth till it be dry.
Why had thou with the self same question tried
This poor old woman; she had so replied,
Go now and boast how thy Nobility
Comes from the illustrious Dinomache.
Puff out thy vaunts and say, I Am comely, ^aire,
To grant thee such vain praises J le not care.
When ragged g^an' ame Baucis, that does cry
Unto the looser servants, Will ye buy
Any sweet herbs, has as much wit as thee
That thus do boast of thy vain pedigree.
That no man will descend to his own heart,
And search the secrets of that hidden part!
No man! But have their eyes fixed ever more
Upon his back and bag that goes before!
For do but ask a man, by chance, Do You know
Vectidius farms? He Will say, Vectidius? Who?
The Chuife of Cures, he whose grounds they say
A Kite can scarce fly over in a whole day?
Him even the Gods oppose and the sure fate
Of an unluckie Genius. Who (the date
Of time, bringing again the Plovv-mens These feasts were called Compitalia,
and were celebrated in honor of their Lares.
feast
When from their painful labors they have ceased,
And now hung up their weary Oxens yoke
By the worn path (upon some aged oak)
When he should freely laugh, and make good cheer
For other plovv-men (it is but once a year)
Most basely fearing to pull off the clay
From his small vvine-vessell; he will fight, and say,
Pray Jove, that this my prodigality
Bring me not in the end, to beguerie!
A coated oignion then with salt he eats;
(His servants much applauding such brave meats:
Nay and rejoicing for their happy lot
And for the ba^ly-pudding in the pot)
Then sparingly he sups instead of beer,
The cloathy dregs of dying Viniger.
But straight replies the other, if thou noint'st
With supple oil thy foul lubberly joints
And lie in the hot Sun letting it beat
Upon thy skin, with its strong parching heat:
There Is one whom thou scarce knovv'st stands here hard by
Even at thy elbow, that could likewise cry
Against thy manners, and thy levvder art,
The depilation of thy modest part,
And of thy longs, to prostitute thereby
Unto a barren lust thy pathick thigh:
Thy Cheeks bearing a^^^emb'd, oil'd beard: Elsewhere
Reader in this line, entendedly depart from the Lette^ of mine Author yet
without thy loss.
Where do thou too-unjustly smooth appear?
Scrape on, but though five lusty vvrastlers would
Root up these springing plants: yea though they should
with crooked pinsers, by their tugging often.
Weaken thy parts of shame, though first made soft,
With Barbers soapie water, so to yield
The better, to the plovvers of this field:
Yet this over spreading fearne will never bovv
Unto the deepest furrovv-making plovv.
Thus we vvound others and do yield again
Our thighs unto the da^^s of other men.
And thus we know ^^ns life pursued to be
By this too much assumed Liberty.
The passage here, was too obscure, wherefore I was forced to be a little
diffuse in the opening of the connection; and so inserted these four verses.
Yet some men's faults, because they hidden lie
From the inquiry of their Enemy,
Are not objected to them; yet are known
To him, to whom they cry, We are thine own.
Thou have a secret vvound under thy side;
But thy broad gold-boss'd girdle does it hide:
So though thou make men say, thou art well (in vain)
Will thy side say so too, that feels the pain?
Thou Wilt here perchance reply, What? when as all
My neighbors Me an exc^lent fellovv, call;
And say, J am not as your common men,
Shall J, ah, can I not believe them then?
The reply of Persius to his own objection.
Alas, blind wretch! if at the sight of gold
With avaricious love thou vvaxest cold
And pale, if every thing thou likewise do,
Which griefe-procuring lust provokes thee to,
If on the table of thy Usurie,
By most oppressing heavy cruelty,
As by a strong deep-vvounded scourge, thou make
Many a sure-imprinted grievous struck,
To the false praising people thou may lend.
Thy spungie, sucking cares; but to no end.
Seem not more then thou art, neither believe
The ignorant applause base Cobblers give.
The curtailed store of thy bare povertic.
THE FIFTH SATYR. IN FORM OF A DIALOGUE.
The Speakers PERSIUS. The Speakers CORNUTVS.
ARGUMENT.
Corni^tus praise: Philosophy:
Opposed desires: true liberty.
P. OUr Poets use to vvish they had large lungst
And a whole hundred voices, mouths, and tongues:
When they would write a buskined Tragoedie,
To be yavvn'd out with the sad Majesty
Of a Tragoedian: or describe the high
Brave-minded Parthian pulling from his thigh
A hook like bearded dart
C. Why speak Thou thus
And he^pest up such vast robustious
And swelling lines, that thou thy self do need
A hundred throats, if thou would attain indeed
The end which such endeavors tend to? Rather
Let them, vvho'se write some lof^ie matter, gather
Clouds off of Helicon, to whom he pot
Of Progne, or Thyeste, shall grow hot;
Of which, the fond Trag^dian Glyco must
Often make his supper. But thou neither dust
Pusse from thy mouths full bellovves much vain vvinde
The whilst the matter boiling in thy mind,
Thy forge: nor with an inward murmuring
Hoarsly crovv-like cavv'st out some idle-thing,
I know not what: nor do thou strive to stuff
The swelling cheeks, to break them with a puff.
Thy words are words of peace, and accurate
Thy style: thy mouth not svvolne, but moderate
Smooths out thy numbers; thou can touch to the quick,
Pale manners: and with an ingenious trick
Strike a crime through; and hence indeed from crimes
Do thou dravv still the subject of thy rimes:
And leave the feast made with the feet and head
Of Plysthenes vvofully murdered,
At sad Mycenae: and do thou descrie
Thy peoples banquets full of luxury.
P. Surely, I strive not that my leaf may rise
With ^vvelling bubbles of vain fopperies,
Fit to give weight to smo^ke. We speak retired:
And inwardly I by my muse inspi^'d
Here offer even my secret heart to be
By thee tried fully. For I Would have thee see
Cornutus, dearest friend, how great a part
Of my dear, yet divided soul thou art.
Knock on my breast: for thou have skill to know
What sounds solid, and the covered shovv
Of a guilt tongue. And oh here I could crave
A hundred voices; that how much I have
Fixed thee within my many-seated breast,
In a pure fluent style might be expressed:
And that which now ineffable does dvvell
Within my heart, in words I here could tell.
When first I did begin to leave to fear
Under a Master: and left off to wear
My purple-Coat, and still preserved free
From violation my vveake infancy:
And when my golden Bosse I newly had
Hung up to my To signify their readiness and expedition in defense of the
house, which was committed to their tutelary charge.
succinct House-Gods: when bad,
And flattering companions guarded me:
When now my white Shield granted l^b^rtie
Unto mine eyes freely to rove throughout
The lewd Sabutra, when I was in doubt
Which way to take: and when my trembling mind
Was by pernicious error almost blind.
Misled into divided paths: I then
Offered my self to thy instruction. When
Thou straight way did embrace my tender youth
In thy Socratique basome: and the truth
Of thy rule vvell-appli'd, skillful to dravv
Feeble inclining minds to reasons law,
Shevv'd me intorted manners: and thy mind
Was pressed by reason, thoroughly confined
To learned precepts, strove to be overcome;
And took a fair form from thy skillful thombe.
For I remember often I with delight
Have spent long days with thee: and of the night
Have borrovv'd the first hours, feasting with thee
O^ the choice dainties of Philosophy.
One work we wrought, we rested both one rest:
Mixing severenesse, with a modest jest.
For doubt not, both our birth-daies joined in one
Sure league, drawn from one constellation:
Or the unchanged Parca vveight'd our time
With an even balance, ^^hit first, that prime
Birth-houre of us ^rue ^^o^os did blessedly
Place our embracing fates in Gemini,
And heavy Saturnes stern malignitie
Was broke by our good Jove's benignity
I know no^ what, but sure some star J see,
Which inwardly disposes me tovv'rds thee.
Yet there is a thousand sorts of men, and strange
Variety does humane actions change.
Each has his several will, nor do all live
With one desire. For, one his mind does give
To Merchandising, and with care does run
Out to the East under the rising Sun;
To get rough peper, and pale Cummin seed
For Roman vvares. Another loves to feed.
His paunch, and then swell with destelling sleep:
A third does Mars-field vvrastlings duly keep;
A fourth turns bank-rupt by the desperate dye;
A sift grows rotten by damned Venerye.
But when the knottie hand-gout has once broke
Their joints, as the boughs of some decayed oak,
Anger and grief do then begin a strife
Within them, for their base and durtie life
Now spent, when now, but now too late, they look
Upon the life they vvretchedly forsook
But thou in learned vvritings do by night
Grow pale. Thou make it thy chief delight
To sovv young purged ears with fruitful truths,
With good Cleanthes fruit dravv hence ye youths,
Ye old men, for yourselves, some certain end,
Some helps from cares your old age to defend.
He brings them in answering for themselves, and then he replies again unto
them.
To morrow we will do this. b Alas! you will do
The same, to morrow, Another answer of theirs, with his own reply.
Why ask we of you
So much, to wit, only day; c But when
The third day comes, we have consumed then
To-morrovv Yesterday: and thus to borrow
Of time, though yet to come, still one to-morrovv;
Will secretly drive out our years at last;
When every day a new day will be past,
Never to be recovered. For thou wheel
Which do about the second Axle reele
Hindermost, may in vain strive to or' take
The first still turning forvvard, which does make
Like have, with equal svviftnesse, though thou be
Hard by it placed under the self same tree.
Whos' eyer then true liberty would gain,
Let him embrace Philosophy, for vain
Is other freedom; such, to wit, whereby
Any new Publius may familiarity
In his (the Veline) tribe coorse corn demand
By bringing but his token in his hand.
O men barraine of truth, that think they can,
Make with a turning, a Quiritian!
Here Is Dama a base horse-keeper, not vvorth
Three halfe-pence, a mere sot that cannot took forth
From out the mist of Ignorance, and one
Who Will lie even for the least occasion,
For horse-bread; whom if's Master turn about,
IN ^h' moment of the vvhirling he goes out
S^raight, Marcus Dama. The Gods! Dare deny
To trust one, Marcus being surety?
O^, Marcus being judge, art pale with fear
Of vvrong? Marcus said it, then thou may swear
It Is true. Now Marcus seal the Bond. Oh, here is
Brave Liberty and true, which our Cap wears
As well as we! The answer of Dama now manumis'd
Why is there any free,
Ba^ he, the which does live at liberty?
J live at liberty, and am not J
More free then Brutus then? Oh here stands by
A vvell-taught Stoicke The reply of Persius.
, whose more purged ear
Is vvash'd, as 'tvvere* with Truths sharp vinegar,
That ^a^^s, J grant the first; but where you say,
I live at liberty, take that away.
Another answer of Dama.
Why? since J came from the Pretors tod mine own
Free man, I Will now be subject unto none;
And why may n't J do with full liberty
Whats'e re A famous Lawyer, and afterward a Knight of Rome.
Masurius does not deny?
Another reply of Persius.
Oh, learn: but this thy anger first depose,
And let fall from thy too-much-vvrinkled nose,
Thy rugged scoff? whilst from thy lungs J pull
These old wives tales, of which thy brest's yet full,
It was not in the Prators povv'r to give
Pure wisdom unto fools, or make them live
By reasons rule. No; thou shall sooner fit
Unto the harp, a rough rude soldiers wit.
Against which reason does stand, and secretly
Whispers him in the ear, and says, Fie, Fie;
Never attempt vvh^^ thou can never reach to,
And only spoil, whilst thou do strive to do.
The law of man and nature both deny
Weak ignorance the privilede to try
Forbidden things. Do thou mix Hellebore
For a sick patient, who never trid'st before
To vveigh't exactly to a dram? The art
Of Physic bids thee not dare act this part.
If a rude high-shoo'd clovvne offer to steer
A ship not knovving his guide Lucifer,
The Sea-God Melicerta may exclaim,
The brow of modesty has lost all shame?
Has virtues ar^ taught ther^to walk upright?
And can thou with a per^p^^^^rous sight
Discern the show of truth from truth? Do know
Counterfeit gold by the sound? and can thou show
What things to follovv, what things to decline,
The first with chalk, the last with coal to sign?
Art of confined desires? have thou a small
And pretty vvell-trim'd house? art kind to all
Thy friends? can vvisely sometimes shut thy store,
Sometimes open thy garners to the poor?
And with a pure affection unhurt
Can thou pass over money ^n ^llusion to the sport that children used, who
typing a piece of money to the end of a string, would cover the string with
dirt, and let the money be seen, which when any greedy fellow passing by,
would stoop to take up, they would pluck in the string; and so delude him.
fixed (...) the dirt?
Nor as a greedy glutton, love to lick
Mereuriall spittle, which does use to stick
Upon the lips of Nig^ards? When as all
These things thou ma^st thine own most truly call;
Then, Oh or wise, enjoy true liberty,
The Praetors yea, and great love blessing thee,
But Thou but the other day of our degree,
Retaining still thy old skin, being free
Only in a smooth brovv, that outvvard part,
Deep sub^^ty lu^k^ng in thy foul heart:
The liberty l^g ^^e thee, I again
Recall, and do ^ye sh^rrer now thy chain.
For Reason unto thee does nothing len^:
Lift but thy Ramirez (in his Commentary on Martial. lib. 1. Epig. 1.) would
persuade us that this place is meant de Medio digito^ but his exposition is
somewhat rank, and I will justly oppose him with that discreet admonition of
Turnebus (Advers. lib. 23. cap. 23. Non sunt ^am ex alto ducendi sensus, de ou^
but (...) ^^thil cogitatit.
Finger ^p, thou do offend;
And what is so s^all? But thou shall never obtain
By any fr^nke (...) use that the least Grame
Of wisdom shall e^e rest vv^^h^n a fool:
To mix these Two, is against Natures rule.
Nor shall thou, thou remaining a Clovvne still,
Ere dance three measures with Bathyllus s^ll.
Another reply of Dama, and the answer of Persius.
I Am Fre^. l How can thou say so, thy affection
Being invassal'd to the vvorst subjection?
Knovvst thou to other M^^ter, but he whom
The Manum^ting rod d^^ free thee from?
Indeed if Now, one say imperiously
To's slave, Go, S^rra, carry presently
This linen to Crispinus Bathes; do stand
Sill, Lazy knave? This his severe command
Does move thee nothing: because now no whip
May scourge Thy Lazy sides, to make Thee skip.
But if within, in thy sick lungs do spring
Headstrong desires, art Thou in any thing
Less servile then, than is such a poote knave,
Whom th'vvhip and fear of's Master made a slave?
Thou lying long in bed, avarice cries,
Up, Up, No^ yet, say thou^ For shame arise,
Cries she; I cannot thou do reply: Why so,
Sa^es thee again? Rise, Rise; do thou not know
What thou should do? Why go to th'Sea, bring thenre
Fish, Beaver^o^le, flax, Eben, frankincense,
And loos^^^g vvines of Co, and be the first
To fetch from th'Camel, vvhilest he yet does thirst,
Fre^h pepper exchange somevvhat, and forsvveare
For Ga^e. O but (alas!) then Jove will hear.
Why, fool, if thou vvilt dvvell with Jove, thou shall
Striving but to get out one taste of salt,
Boar a hole through thy oft-lick'd salt-seller.
Well; being got up, thou do (not to defer
To execute her will) provide thy men
Bags for to lay their clothes in, and then
La^'st in wine, with such other things thou know
Are fit for Navigation: then straight go
To ship, where nothing hinders thee to sail
Over the Aegaean See with a full gaile,
But Luxury. That does seduce thy vveake
Unstayednesse, and thus with Art does speak,
Whither, Oh vvhither madman, do thou run?
Whither? What lackst thou? What would thou have done?
( These two lines the Poet interjects in his own person.
And now thy hot breast with strong ire does swell,
Which a whole po^ of Hemlo^k can scarce quell.)
Will thou pass one the Seas? Will thou ere eat
Thy Supper, making a Stretched Rope thy seat?
Shall a broad-bottom'd tankard that does stink
Of ^^tch fume out the wine, that Thou must drink?
Nay, vile ruddie Veientane wine? striv'st thou
To make thy la^'ring money sweat forth now
Elev'n in twelve, the which did here obtain
Never above Five in Twelve; a modest gain?
Come, come: cherish thy Genius: let us be f^ee
To Enjoy a full delight: for without Me
Life is Not: and remember that ere long,
Thou shall be but a Ghost, dust, and the song
Of The People. Think how thou by death shall pass
Away, like Time. This which I Have spoke, it was.
What do thou now? Two hooks a double way
Now dravv thee; Will thou this, or this obey?
Thou must be slave to both alternately:
Now serving Avarice, now Luxury.
Not may thou, if thou do for Once vvithstand
Their instant and importunate command,
Say straight, I Have broke their bands; For lo,
A dog by tugging breaks his knot, just so,
Who, though he run away and bite and strain,
Yet at his neck does traile much of his chain.
Chaerestratus in serious meditation
B^ting his nail to the quick through deep vexation
Says to his man; Davus, J now intend
All my fore passed griefs and Love to end;
Believe me. For shall I be still a sname,
Unto my sober careful friends good name?
Shall I spend all my stock with infamy
At the levv I threshold of a Stevvs? Shall I
Drunk before Chrysis nointed moist doors stand
Singing, my torch extinguished in my hand?
O Davus his rejoicing at his Masters promised reformation.
rare young Master! Behence-forvvard wise
And offer up a lamb in sacrifice,
To thy protecting Gods. The interrogation of Chae (...) to his servant Davus.
But do believe
Danus, if I forsake her, that she will grieve?
Davus his indignation, at his Masters weak inconstancy.
Do trifle, Idle boy? Then she shall break
Thy pate with herred pantofle, and wreake
Her spite upon thee, that thou shall not dare
To quake, nor bite her fast-entangling snare.
Thou Art Now averse ad violent, but when
She shall perchance but call thee: thou wilt say then;
I come straight vvares, for, why? what should I do^!
Shall Not I go to my Love, when She does Woo,
And sends for me? But if thou can Now, Now
Redeem thy self All and Entire, Thou, Thou
Art that thrice happy man, that only He
Whom only, We judge to be truly free,
Not he, over whom the foolish Lictor vvagges
His rod; and of him, as his Freeman bragges.
For, Oh, can he be truly called his own,
Whom Candidate Chaulk^e ambition
Draws gaping to her lure? To whom she cries,
The words of Ambition.
Unto thy Chems salutations rise
By time, and give a lib call doale of pease
Unto the scrambling multitude: that these
Our large Floralia may be made the talk
Of Aged men hereafter as they walk
In the vvarme Sun; For wha can be more brave?
These words are spoken in the person of Persius.
And art not Superstitious to have
On Hereds birthday, many candles placed
In order i'th'oild vvindovv much defaced
By the far clovvd the which they vomit out,
Though with svveet violets they are decked about;
And to have a Tunies ta^^e, as 'twere to svvimme
In a red dish, thy white bovvle full to th'brimme
with wine, yet do not fall till night, and pray
All the Jews circumcised Sabbath Day?
Then with Hobgoblins, and the feigned fear
Of danger from a crack^ egg, and th'a^st^re
Grave Priests of Cybill, and the one-eyed maid
Of Isis with her umbrell, thou art dismayed.
And think the Gods will puff with some disease
Thy swelling skin: if thou shall them displease:
Refusing by their grave rules to be led,
To taste each morn three times a Garlick-head.
And say thou yet, thou liv'st at liberty,
Being subject to th'extremest vanity?
Yet speak this, which the Gods do know, is true,
Among ful-veind soldiers: what would straight ensue?
Some vast Volpenius with a full deep throat
Would bellow out a laugh, in a base note:
And ten times ten Philosophers of Greece
Would scarcely prize at a clipped Ten-groats piece.
THE SIXTH AND LAST SATYR, TO HIS FRIEND CAESIUS BASSUS a Lyrique Poet.
ARGUMENT.
The pining Niggards fruitless care,
To feed the lust of his lewd heir.
NOW, Bassus, has the cold made thee retire
Thy self, this vvinter, to the Sabine fire?
Do thy own harp and strings live to thee still,
Sounding lovvd music with a stiffer quill?
Great workman! whose blessed Muse svveet lines affords
F^ll of the Native beauty of Old words:
And on the Roman harp with happiness
Of skill, a masculine, strong sound to express:
Now playing young men's sports, now playing some
Brave Old men's actions, with an honest thombe.
The vvarme Ligurian shore grows hot to Me:
And I Am now vvintered at my native Sea;
Where the rocks yield a shore to them that sail;
And where the haven into a large vale
Retites it self. It Is fairly worth the sight,
The ^ort of Luna full of much delight.
Thus sa^d vv^se Ennius Aft'r h'^ ad dreamed he was
Homer, the ^ift formed by Pythagoras
His Peacocke soul. Here ^^en'd live free
From ca^ing what the People think of me:
And what th'unluck e Sou^h-wind does prepare
For Cattle; Nor do^ I take grief or care
If that my neighbors field's more fat then mine.
Let all poore-borne grow rich, He never pine
With stooping age; for That or want good cheer:
Or touch the sign of dreggy sealed beer
In a hoat'd flaggon. Yet another may
Dissent from this. For often the same birthday
Has an Ascendent strongly influent
Producing even in tvvinnes a different
Yea an opposed Genius, For the one
Warily with great circumspection,
And on his Birthday, only dips his dry
Coorse herbs in brinish sauce, which he does buy
In a small cup, His Own self sorinkling
His dish with Pepper as a Holy thing.
The other a brave boy courageously
Spends his large portion in luxury
On his consuming tooth, But as for Mine,
He Use it: yet never let my Freedmen dine
With Turbe^s: nor be curious-mouth'd to know
But by the taste, if'^ be a Thrush or no.
Proportion thy expenses by thy gain:
And grind out freely (for thou may) thy grain
Laid up within thy barnes. What should thou feare^
But harrovv, and behold straight will appear
Another harvest. The covetous man pretended reason in defense of himself.
Why, J would thus spend,
But duty hinders me. For my poor friend,
His ship being split, h^ld by the 'Brutian
Sharp ^ocks; and bur^'d in the Ionian
Rough waves all his estate, and his deafecties
Neglected by the Gods, and himself lies
Upon the shore wi^h his great Gods, which he
Caught from his broken ship, whose ribs now be
Exposed unto the Cormorant. Persius his reply:
Nay, Now
Give him some of thy Land, and do not thou
Think thou can be too free, Let him not lack,
Wandering with agreene The table of his shipwreck.
Table at his back.
But if thou impair thy wealth, thy angered heir
Of thy last funeral ^east will take small care;
And with neglect into thy urne will throvv
Thy bones without perfumes, careless to know
Whether he buy dull-smelling Cinnamum,
Or C^ssi^ corrupt with Cher^y-gumme*
He Will say, What do thou ^dly spend thy wealth,
My portion, being in thy perfect health?
But more; l' me sure the^'s thriftie Bes^us
Does press your learn'dst Grecian Doctors, thus;
Thus it is, since your fond Liberality,
Rather Thus with the most accurate interpreters, I render M^^is Expets taking
M^^is for the genitive case of M^s; not of Mare. For then there were a manifest
contradiction in the sense, because presently after, he says, it came from
Greece, and so by consequent over the Sea.
emasculate soft Luxury,
With pepper, dares, and other vvare has come
From your lewd Greece unto our City Rome,
Our very Movvers do with too much oil
Their ancient wholsome meat savvcily spoil
Persius here answers to the objection, which he himself brought for the
covetous man.
But fear these things beyond thy grave? Dravv near;
Thou vvhosoe're shall be my heir, and hear:
And that into our talk none may intrude,
Let us retire from the thick multitude
My friend, knovv'st not the nevves? Caesar has sent
A Laurel for a sign and ornament
Of his great conquest over Germany:
And the cold ashes which before did lie
Upon the Altars, are now svvept away:
And with great care and joy The Emperor Caligula's wise makes all things
ready for the triumph.
Caesonia
Fixes the conquered Kings arm out of proof
And all their weapons to the temples roof,
Clads all the Captives in a durt-brovvne freize,
Places the Rheni of a huge vast size;
And orders all their coaches; Wherefore I
Will bring for this so happy victory
The Romans counted their Fencers shows and Plays a part of their Religion;
as Turnebus well observes in his Advers. lib. 39. cap. 7. p. 1093.
Toth' Gods and our great Captains Genius
An hundred pair of fencers. I being thus
Freely disposed, who does forbid? Dare thou?
Woe; if thou yeeld'st not. Say, that IN me pleased now
Upon the people to bestovv a doale
Of oil and flesh pies; do thou dare control?
Speak out, and plainly. Why, your land, thou wilt say,
Is not so fat, so bonelesse, but I may,
For any cause J see, not greatly care,
Whether or no, you do make me your heir.
Well then, scorn thou my love; yet thus much know;
Enough will be my heir; and thank me too.
For were none of my fathers sisters left;
No cousin-germane; or were J bereft
Of all my Unkle's neeces daughters, say,
My mothers sister had di'd barren, nay,
That none sprung from my grandame did survive.
Briefly, that not one kinsman were alive.
I Will go but to These were Places not far from Rome, whereby beggars used to
ask alms of Passengers.
Bovillae, or the g hill
Of Virbius, where stands ready still,
Poor Mannius; he shall be my heir. The interrogation of his covetous heir,
and the reply of Persius.
What he?;
A son of the earth? obscure? h Why ask of me,
Who was my fourth Forefather, J cannot well
And readily declare, though J can tell.
But if you'de know his Father, and again
That fathers father, sure you must remain
Satisfied thus; that he did dravv his birth
Immediately from his Mother earth;
And so at last you will find Mannius to be
By right of kin great Uncle unto me.
Yet why at all should thou indeed desire
To be my heir, when thou might be my Sire
For age? and why should thou demand of me
My torch, when J in An allusion to the race celebrated in horour of
Prometheus, where the first running with a torch in his hand, when he was
weary, gave it to the next after him.
course run after thee?
Yet if thou be my heir, me thinks, thou ought
To be content, with what thou never bought'st
I Am Mercury, and come, to Thee, a God,
As he is With a purse of money in his hand.
Painted. With a churlish nod
Scorn'st my free offer? Wilt not thou be glad
For what is left? Why, here is not all you had
L^f^ to you by your Father. The murmuring objection of his covetous heir, and
the reply of Persius.
True indeed.
Ma^h J did spend on my own proper need.
But, briefly, this is all is left, which all
I Will give to thee; and do not thou now bravvle?
Unkindly with me, neither ask me where
Is that which Tadius left me, and never
Give me hard words, as fathers dravving nigh
Their end, do give their sons before they die:
Saying, See thou put out the Principal,
And spend but of the Use, let that be all.
m But yet, What Is left? One murmuring interrogation more, of his greedy
^heire; and the r^ply of Persius full of indignation.
What Is left? Now lib'rally
Povv're boy, povv're oil upon my herbs. Shall I
Upon a high festival day, be fed
With asod ne^tle, and a lean svvines head
Hung up ^'th' smoke by the ear; unto the end
This lewd knave may my goods hereafter spend?
And filled with dainty jiblets, without shame
Levvdly embrace a soft Patrician Dame;
When as his vvayvvard, full svvolne, chiding vein;
With an uncertain lust does sob again?
Shall I be like the vvarpe of bare cloth, that
To him a strutting panch may quag with fat?
A Saryricall Irony in the person of some Third Speaker.
Oh, sell thy soul for gain, to leave thy heir
Wealthy, and so thou gettest by thy vvare.
Never care how honestly. Sift every coast;
Of the whole world, that that thou may truly boast,
No man feeds fatter Cappadocian knaves
In a rough cage, then are thy lusty slaves.
Double thy wealth. The answer of Persius.
It Is done; nay't has increased
Three, four, ten-fold as much. Yet scarce is ceased.
And now, where likewise J may rest, design,
Chrysippus, thou that did thy Sorites, of which kind of Argumentation
Chrysippus was the Author.
heap confine.
The end of PERSIUS.
To the Author his very good Friend, D. BARTEN HOLYDAY
RE^living Persius, days birth, heir of fame;
I wrong not Persius, giving thee his name;
If any, I wrong thee, for what He did
Had thou him not illustred, had been hid.
This being but thy Pedestall of praise.
Oh what a Pyramid will thy Next work raise?
True Laureat, with blessed O men's go thou on;
All-imitable, imitating none.
I speak not this (nor need'st thou it) of Favor:
But as one conscious of thy Great works labor.
My tongue was never oy'ld in the base claw-art.
In Others read thou Wit, in Me my Heart,
W. WEB.
To my learned Friend D. BARTEN HOLYDAY upon his judicious translation of
PERSIUS.
WHat lay imprisoned, and confined alone
Only to deeper apprehension;
Thy more benign, sublimd, transcendent wit
Has reach^, and conquered, and imparted it.
And givn't to all, which makes it more thine own
Since all are heirs of that invention,
Nor does one jot, so sweet congruity,
Adulterate the Latin chastity,
All things conserved, so terse, so nothing lost,
As if thou did consult with the Authors Ghost;
Such height, such sacred indignation
As seems a Persius, no Translation.
On, learned Quill; thus vindicate thy name
From times proud Injury, Traitor to fame:
Nor suffer yet, that Italy so long
Should make her Vice speak^ English, not her tongue:
Whip back her bastards, send them home to Rome;
Let her that was their Parent, be their tomb.
Mean while I dare Congratulate our Crimes
Made happy that they could produce these Rimes.
BRIAN DUPPA. Bishop of Sarum.
AN APOSTROPHE OF THE Translator to his Author PERSIVS,
THou art Redeemed; Nor has the Fate of Time
And Vice seized on thy glory, the worst crime
Which does o'recloud the guilty, adds to Thee
A Luster which out shines obscurity.
Who thought not, that the Great-borne Spirit of Rome
Had lien overwhelmed in her Last Brutus tomb?
Yet did it not: but did at last bring forth
Thee the Example of her Ancient worth.
In whom, had Vesta's fire by which Rome stood
Been out, there might have yet been found as good.
Mount then, thou purer fire, and let thy heat
Strongly exhale from their infectious sent
The envenomed foggs of vice; And then inflame
Them, that they may be lights to their Own shame;
Which, as a Comet, may affright the earth
With horror; at its own prodigious birth;
And, with its darting tail threatening dread
Vengeance, point-out to wrath each guilty head,
Be thou the Vestal fire thy Priest I Will be,
And consecrate my vigilance to Thee.
Be thou the enlivening Sun, I Will be the Earth,
And offer up to thee this grateful birth
Of thanks: which thus now given, though straight it Die,
It has lived Ages in its Infancy.
Action, not Time, does number Age. Who gives
A just praise to great Virtues Patron, lives
Himself by his just gratitude. Let Spite
Then do its worst, and with eternal night
Labor to clowd my name. Obscure to lie
With Virtue, is an immortality.
Barten Holyday.
THis lash has but Six knots: but see thou mend
Or peradventure else I shall intend
(Although my angry Muse says She will be
No more thus Wit-bound, thus Tongue, tied, not She
To come in Fury; and thee Naked strip;
And Scourge thee with a Sixteen knotted whip.
FINIS.

