Pritchard Mayor, Jovis, sexto die Septembr. 1683. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
Secundi Angliae, etc. XXXVto.
THis Court does desire Mr. Hopkins to print his Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen and Citizens of this City, at Bow-Church, on Monday
last, being the day of Humiliation for the Dismal Fire, anno 1666.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, Aldermen and
Citizens Of the CITY of LONDON, In the Parish Church of S. Mary le Bow,
September 3. 1683.

Being the day of Humiliation for the late DREADFUL FIRE.

By William Hopkins, B.D. and Prebendary of Worcester.

Ezra, IX. 13, 14. And after all this is come upon us for our evil deeds, and
for our great trespass; seeing that thou, our God, have punished us less than
our iniquities deserve, and have given us such DELIVERANCE AS THIS:

Should we again break thy commandments -- Would thou not be angry with us
till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM PRITCHARD, LORD MAYOR Of the CITY of
LONDON, AND TO THE HONORABLE COURT of ALDERMEN.
My LORD,
I Am sufficiently conscious that there is nothing in this plain Discourse, but
the honest design it prosecutes, worthy of that acceptance it found with the
Honorable Audience before whom it was preached. Nevertheless, since it is your
Lordship's pleasure, that I should make it more public than I ever designed, I
dare not dispute your commands or doubt your Patronage. I am sure I need it in
a high degree, whether I consider the weakness of the discourse it self, or
into what an ill-natured and censorious World it adventures. But I am little
concerned what reception will be given it by curious and critical Readers, who
read and hear Sermons, as they do Plays, merely for entertainment, and to show
what Judges they are. I was not so sanguine either in the preaching or
publishing of it as to expect it should do much good on that sort of men.

But to persons of Piety and Candor, who receive the Word of God into good and
honest hearts, I hope it may not be unserviceable. And if it may in any measure
contribute toward the making us more truly penitent for what is past, or a more
obedient people for the future, I shall think my self happy, and thankfully
adore him whose strength was made manifest in my weakness.

To the Divine Protection and Blessing I humbly commend your Lordship, your
Honorable Brethren and this great City which flourishes under your just and
prudent Administration, and entreat your acceptance of this poor Testimony that
I am in all humility,

My LORD, Your most obedient and faithful Servant, William Hopkins.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. Sept. 3. 1683.
JOHN, V. 14. -- Behold, thou art made whole: Sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee.


IN the beginning of this chapter S. John relates a memorable passage which is
not recorded by any other Historian either Sacred or Profane. That there was at
Jerusalem a pool called Bethesda, whose waters were at some times endued with a
medicinal virtue. For an Angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and
troubled the waters: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water
stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had, v. 4.

Vide Light-foot, Hor. Heb. in Joan. Tertullian. adversus Jude^^, cap. 13. sub
finem.
How long those waters had been endued with that miraculous virtue, or how long
it continued after our Savior's Ascension is unknown. This only is certain
from History, that Miracles and the Spirit of Prophecy had ceased in the Jewish
Church for several ages before our Savior's birth, and both were restored but
a little while before his manifestation in the flesh: And it is probable this
miraculous water was one of the signs of his coming; it being a fit resemblance
of that more precious (...), or bath, his own blood, whose healing efficacy was
not confined to a single Patient, but redounded to the advantage of the whole
world, and whose purifying virtue was truly universal and able to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. 1 John 1.9.


The silence of the other Evangelists and the Jewish writers, as well as
Theophylact's hint, may have occasioned the Learned Dr. Hammond to suspect,
that the virtue of this pool was not miraculous, but natural. And he offers
this Philosophical account of the matter.

Dr. Hammond on Joh. V. Annot. a.
That the waters were impregnated with some beneficial qualities derived from
the entrails of beasts slain for Sacrifice, which he conceives were cast into
that pool. And that at some set times an Officer or Messenger (not one of God's
Angels) was sent in, who had skill to disturb the waters, i. e. to stir up and
diffuse the particles of the entrails and blood in which the virtue lay;
whereupon for some time after, till the virtuous particles sank again to the
bottom, that pool was an healing Bath.

The Hypothesis is, I confess, very ingenious, and he confirms it with
pertinent observations of what benefit in some distempers the Patient has
received, by the application of the warm skin, or vitals of a beast, or by
putting him into the belly of a beast newly killed and opened.

But if we well consider them, several circumstances of our Evangelist's
Narrative cannot consist with this Hypothesis. For though the entrails of
beasts may have a suppling and restorative virtue, and in the way of a
fomentation may relieve pains and weakness in the limbs, bruises and withered
members, yet this is short of the efficacy which S. John ascribes to this bath,
which seems to have been an universal Medicine. Now there are many distempers
for which bathing and fomentation are no proper methods of cure; and if we must
restrain the universal particle whatsoever to the diseases mentioned by S.
John, V.
I conceive the blind, who are expressly named, very unlikely to receive benefit
thereby.

Again, If those cures were wrought by the stirring up and mixing of the virtue
of the entrails with the water, it might almost constantly have been kept in
motion, and many more might have enjoyed the benefit of cure, than it should
seem there did. For the waters were troubled only (...), seldom, at a certain
season, some think, but once in the year, See Dr. Hammond's Annot.
at the Passover; others, at all the three great Feasts, and though perhaps
several times at each Feast, yet at most but once in the day.

Again, Had the cure been wrought by any natural efficacy, why should the
benefit be limited to him alone who first stepped in after the troubling of the
water? it is scarce credible that the Pool was no larger than to hold one
person, if the entrails of all the Paschal Sacrifices ( No less than 255600
according to the computation Dr. Hammond takes notice of in this Annotation.
whose number was very great) were ordinarily cast into it. If the virtuous
particles of the entrails were well diffused, why might not these waters have
cured as many as went in before they subsided? If it be said, they sunk
quickly, it is much they should cure so much as one patient, for it is by long
continuance in them, and frequent use, that baths relieve inveterate weakness,
whereas it should seem once descending into the pool was sufficient.

And lastly, This account of the matter is contrary to the sentiments of the
Ancients, who ascribe these cures to a supernatural power, and particularly In
Joannem Homil. 35. and Tom. 5. Homil. 62. in Paralyt. demissum per tectum.
S. Chrysostom, more than once comparing the Pool of Bethesda to the Baptismal
waters, makes the former a miraculous type of the latter.

I need not labor farther in confutation of this opinion, which that excellent
Author delivers modestly, and only as a conjecture, and therefore shall
proceed to show how our Blessed Lord, Acts X. 38.
who went about doing good, came to this healing pool, and, among a multitude
of expectants, is pleased to single out this poor Paralytick as the meetest
object for him to show his Divine power and compassion upon. Not that he
deserved better than others, many of whose diseases might be pure infelicities,
whereas his long infirmity was the fruit of his Sins: The miserable
circumstances under which he lay, were the only motives of our Savior's pity.

He considered, 1. the long time he had been in that weak and helpless
condition, 38 years, and perhaps had for the greatest part of that time in vain
waited at Bethesda for cure. V. 6.
Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been a long time in that case. And
then, 2ly, he considered his Impotence and Poverty, which rendered him unlikely
ever to receive help there, being unable to step first into the pool after the
troubling of the waters, V. 7.
and having no friend or servant to put him in. His sad condition moved pity in
the Blessed Jesus, who immediately, with a word, restored spirits to his weak
nerves, and strength and motion to his withered limbs.

Such a surprising mercy might carry a man of no extraordinary devotion to the
Temple with a Soul full of Joy and Thankfulness. Thither the impotent person
quickly went, to offer up his Praises to God; and thither our Savior followed
him, to complete the cure which was scarce half wrought at Bethesda. His Body
indeed was there made whole, but his better part, his Soul, still needed the
Physician; and till that also were healed, the cause of his long infirmity
still remained, and he was in danger of relapsing into a much worse condition
than that out of which he was newly recovered. The Blessed Jesus therefore
applies him to the cure of his spiritual maladies, and in my Text prescribes a
Sovereign Antidote against all possible danger of a relapse, gives him this
Cyril. Alex. in loc.
(...), this wholesome ghostly advice, Behold, thou art made whole: Sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.

In which words I shall observe three Particulars hinted by S. Chrysostom on
this place. (...). Chrysostom. in loc. Joh. IX. 2, 3.


1. An implicit Accusation and gentle Reproof of his past life. A plain
intimation that his tedious bodily distemper was the punishment of his Sins.
Our Savior's infinite candor, which absolved both the blind man and his
parents, and declared, that his calamity ought not to be imputed either to his
own or their Sins, could not acquit this impotent person. Chrysostom. Tom. V. Hom.
62.
He does not openly shame him before the multitudes at Bethesda, He does not
publicly reproach his former lewd conversation: but finds him out in the
Temple; and privately admonishes him to amend his life. Sin no more, or as
(...) may be rendered, Sin no longer now, implies him formerly to have been a
gr^evous Sinner, and that his long infirmity was his punishment.

2. These words are an Admonition, and contain wholesome advice for the future
conduct of his life. Sin no more.

(...). Chrysostom. in loc.
3. This Admonition is enforced with a twofold argument, the one drawn from the
obligation which was laid upon him by this great mercy of his miraculous cure,
and the other from the danger of a relapse. He puts him in mind of the signal
favor he had newly received of God, Behold, thou art made whole, [by a
miracle,] and ought not, in point of gratitude, to offend the Author of so
great a blessing. And then withal he sets before him the danger of returning
to his old vomit, threatening him not only with the forfeiture of the mercy
thus miraculously conferred upon him, but also with some heavier Judgment, lest
a worse thing come unto thee.

Having thus opened the words, I shall deduce from them these three very
natural and easy Observations.

1. That great calamities are generally inflicted by God for the punishment of
Sin.

2. That when God is pleased to remove such calamities, we are obliged to
forsake those Sins for which they were inflicted.

3. That if upon the removal of such calamities we do not forsake those Sins
for which they were inflicted, we may justly dread much sorer Judgments.

I shall speak briefly to each of these in order, and in conclusion apply all
to this Solemn occasion.

I. Great calamities are generally inflicted by God for the punishment of Sin.
I say, generally, not always; for God has other ends in some afflictions, when
they concern only the single persons that suffer them. And yet even these are
for the most part punishments, and should be so esteemed by the Sufferers: but
to great Societies, to Nations and Cities, they are always punishments. Though
God does not now interpose in so immediate and extraordinary a way in the
government of the Kingdoms of the world, as he did in that of the Jews, the
form of whose government was a Theocracy, See Dr. Hicks his Peculium Dei.
Joseph. contra Appionem, and Antiquit. lib. 4. Moses sic loqui docetur, (...).
and the supreme civil Magistrate was but a Vice roy or Deputy to Jehovah, who
was their King, who gave them their Political Laws and frequently executed them
also upon Offenders with his own hand; yet does his Providence still visibly
appear in recompencing politic Bodies in this world according to their works;
in protecting and prospering religious, virtuous and just Nations, and in
punishing such as are profane, dissolute and faithless. And, in truth, if it
please God to punish Cities and Nations, as such, he must do it in this world;
for though every member of any Society must appear at the Judgment seat of
Christ, and may receive the things done in the body, as well Politic as
Natural, whether they be good or bad; yet those Societies themselves will cease
with this world, and cannot be punished in the next.

Now there concur two very different causes to the punishment of Sinners, viz.
The Righteousness of God, and their own Unrighteousness. The latter justly
meriting those calamities which the former inflicts. So that in every sad
Providence we must acknowledge the just hand of God lifted up against us, and
recompensing the evil works of our own hands upon us.

1. In all our Sufferings we must behold the righteous hand of God, by whose
Providence afflictions befall sinful men. For, as Eliphaz says, Job V. 6.
Affliction comes not forth out of the dust, nor does trouble spring out of the
ground. The most inconsiderable and seemingly contingent events, Matt. XI. 29.
Prove. XVI. 33.
such as the fall of a Sparrow, or the turn of a die, are under the government
of Divine Providence. And therefore it must needs be much more interessed in
what befalls so noble a creature as Man, nay great Societies of men. The
Calamities of Cities and Kingdoms must not be imputed to mere chance; nor may
we think that God is no farther concerned with them, than by his general
concourse with the immediate and second causes of them.

If we suffer by Fire or by Sea, by immoderate Rain or Drought, we must behold
these as scourges in God's hand. If we are punished either by War or
Pestilence, we must esteem both our Enemies and the destroying Angel God's
Ministers and the Executioners of his just, though fierce, (...) --
wrath. He makes the creatures his weapons for vengeance on his enemies, Wisd.
V. 18.

If the Sea overflow its banks, and drown a Country, it is by God's commission
that the Ocean enlarges its Territories and swallows up a sinful Land. If
Famine afflict a Nation, whether the immediate causes be excessive drought or
rains, know, that it is the Lord who breaks the staff of bread, Ezekiel. V. 16.
who sends unseasonable rain, and withholdeth it in its season. If the
Pestilence rage in a City and consume its Inhabitants, this evil also is of the
Lord. If we undergo the miseries of War, and our Enemies prevail over us, we
must remember, Isa. XXXIV. 6.
that it is the sword of the Lord that is in their hands and fills it self with
our blood. They shall know that I am the LORD when I put MY SWORD into the hand
of the King of Babylon, Ezekiel. XXX. 25. It is the Lord of hosts that pleads with
us by the Sword; and sells us into the hands of our enemies, because we have
sold our selves to work wickedness. If the Fire consume our dwellings and lay
our Cities in Ashes, the Prophet tells us, that God pleads with sinful flesh
by fire as well as by the sword. Isai. LXVI. 16. Hos. VIII. 14.
He sends fire upon our Cities and flames to devour our Palaces.

In short, by whatever hands we suffer, by whatever instruments he pleases to
afflict us, we must hear the rod and consider who has appointed it, Mich. VI.
9. We must acknowledge our sufferings to be from God, and the chastisement of
our sins.

2. Whilst we behold God as the Author of our calamities, we must ascribe them
to his Justice, A Deo quidem punimur, sed ipsi facimus, ut puniamur, Salvian.
de Gub. Dei, l. 8.
and not forget that the cause of our sufferings is in our selves. For God
would not inflict them, did not we both need and deserve them. The wrath of God
is never revealed but against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. And
even when his hand is heaviest upon us, Ezra IX. 13. Job XI. 6. Psalm. CIII. 10.
our punishments are much lighter than our iniquities deserve. There had been
no such thing as Vengeance belonging to God, but for the Wickedness of his
Rebellious creatures. Sin and Punishment are as nearly related as the Cause and
Effect, and the latter in the very notion of it implies the former: For no
suffering is properly a punishment unless inflicted for Sin. Hence in the
language of the Holy Scriptures to bear sin or iniquity signifies to be
punished or put to death for it. Exodus xxviij. 43. Levit. XXIV. 15, 16.

And Christ is said to bear the sins of many, i. e. in their punishment, Isa.
LIII. 11, 12.


When a man is punished for his Sins, he is said to eat the fruit of his ways,
Prove. I. 31. to be recompensed according to his deeds and the works of his own
hands, Jer. XXV. 14. and to possess his iniquity, Job XIII. 26. All which forms
of speech import our sins to be the meritorious and impulsive cause of our
calamities.

And as we must acknowledge the Justice of God in our sufferings, so must we
likewise own his goodness, his wisdom and fatherly care of us. In our present
lapsed condition, in this state of Sin and Frailty, Rev. III. 19. Heb. XII. 5.
he would not truly love us should he not, when he sees it necessary, rebuke
and chasten us. Should he not visit our transgressions with the rod, Psalm.
Lxxxix. 32, 33, 34.
and our iniquity with stripes, we might have just ground to fear that he had
utterly taken his loving kindness from us, and was about to break his Covenant.
It will neither consist with the Honor of his Justice and Wisdom, nor yet
with his Love to us, that we should be permitted to sin without punishment.

I know some men refer all to irrespective Decrees, or tell us that vindictive
Justice is natural to God, and that he must sacrifice some of his creatures in
Hell fire to the honor of that Attribute. Nay, that he has foredamned the
greatest part of mankind by mere Prerogative, and purely for the exercise of
his Sovereign Power.

But this account of God differs infinitely from that he gives us of himself in
the Holy Scriptures. They represent him merciful and gracious, long-suffering
and abundant in goodness and truth, Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7.
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. They
tell us that, Psalm. CXLV. 9. Ezekiel. xxxiij. 11. 2 Pet. III. 9.
He is good to all, and that his tender mercies are over all his works. That he
has no pleasure in the Death of a sinner. That he is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come unto repentance. He never goes about to
get himself glory in the death of a sinner till he sees the sinner will die,
that he is desperate and incorrigible, that he hardens his heart to that
degree, that neither gentleness nor severity can work upon him.

He seeks no advantages against his wretched creatures. Though to punish be his
work, Isai. XXVIII. 21.
it is his strange work. He never sets about it but with reluctance, and when
we compel him to it, for the vindication of Justice and Providence. He does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, Lam. III. 33. We have no
reason to arraign his Justice, or murmur at the severity of his Judgments,
since we suffer but the punishment and less than the desert of our Sins.

Especially if we add this consideration, That the chastisements we bear are
for our profit; and though for the present, while we feel the smart of them,
Heb. XII. 11.
afflictions are not joyous, but grievous; yet, if we improve them duly, and
with patience wait their issue, they will bring forth to us the peaceable
fruits of Righteousness. As they were intended by our Heavenly Father, so will
they in the event work for our good. If his judgments teach us Righteousness,
and we learn obedience by the things which we have suffered, Isa. XXVII. 9.
Heb. XII. 10.
all their fruit will be to take away our sin, and to make us partakers of his
Holiness. But whatever the effect of our calamities may prove, whether they
operate thus kindly or no, we must needs justify God amidst our sufferings,
and take to our selves shame, confessing with Azarias, Thou art righteous, O
Lord, Song of the 3 Children, v. 3, 4, 5.
in all the things thou have done unto us -- according to truth and Judgment
did thou bring all these things upon us, because of our sins. We have sinned,
we have committed iniquity, departing from thee.

II. That when God is pleased to remove such Calamities, we are obliged to
forsake those Sins for which they were inflicted. Behold, thou art made whole:
Sin no more.

What, Sin no more? This is an hard saying, who can hear it? Does our Savior
oblige us to impossibilities? Does not Solomon assure us that there is not a
just man upon the Earth, that does righteousness, and sins not? Eccles.
VII. 20. Does not the Apostle say that, In many things we offend all? James,
III. 2. How says our Savior then, Sin no more?

But, after all, our Savior's sense is obvious: he does not oblige the
impotent man to perfect and sinless obedience. He too well understood our
frame, and was too well acquainted with the strength of Tentation and the
weakness of frail flesh and blood, to make spotless innocence necessary to his
continuance in that state of health to which he was miraculously restored. But
this is the sum and importance of his advice, that upon his recovery he should
break off his sinful course of life, that he should live no longer in habitual
and wilful disobedience, that he should abstain from all crying Sins and such
as pull down vengeance on men's heads; especially, that he should beware of
those sins (whatever they were) for which God had afflicted him with eight and
thirty years weakness. This was our Savior's meaning, and in this sense our
Apostle must be understood, 1 John, V. 18. where he says, he that is born of
God sins not, i. e. not habitually, not deliberately, not presumptuously.

Decepti aut lubrico aetatis, aut nubilo erroris, aut vitio ignorantiae, aut
postremo lapsu fragilitatis humanae. Salvian. contra Avarit. l. 1.
God does not use to follow men with heavy plagues for light offenses. It is
not every transgression, that is recompensed in the Earth. Such sins as are in
a sort the unavoidable effects of humane frailty and ignorance, and are
incident to the best of men in this state of imperfection and tentation, do not
provoke his severe resentments. No, they are Sins of a deeper die, of a more
enormous and scandalous nature for which God is wont to visit. Such as have a
mixture of presumption and malice, or at least proceed from the gross neglect,
if not from the direct contempt of God and Religion. Such Sins as are highly
injurious to our Brethren and pernicious to humane Society. These are the Sins
whose punishment God will not turn away. And when at any time he has punished
a people for them, and afterward remembering mercy lays aside his rod, he
expects that such a people should remove those abominations out of the midst of
them.

For God prosecutes the same design both in the severe and in the more gentle
dispensations of his Providence. He labors to reclaim a perverse and crooked
generation, and omits no kind of method proper to effect it. When he threatens
us, he admonishes us of our duty and danger; when he chastens us, he calls our
Sins to remembrance, he admonishes us to amend our ways, and put away the evil
of our doings: when he removes his rod, and again exercises patience and
longsuffering toward us, he vouchsafes to make a farther experiment, what
effect goodness will have upon us, and whether it will (at least after
severity) lead us to repentance.

Though in their prosperity Sinners are too apt to despise the Riches of God's
goodness, yet after they have been humbled by his heavy Judgments Mercy will be
likely to have a more kind and successful operation. In War we commonly see,
that the Sword only begins the Conquest, which is finished and crowned by the
Victour's clemency. The stubborn enemy who valued not his friendship, when
subdued by his victorious arms, will gladly submit to the Conquerour's Mercy.
Nay, even wild beasts that are fierce and mischievous, are only brought under
by chains, blows and hunger, and prepared to be thoroughly tamed and made
serviceable by their Keeper's kindness. So that unless we are more savage and
brutish than they, after afflictions we must needs yield to the irresistible
force of God's goodness and loving kindness.

Though we had no sense of our deep obligations to his infinite goodness whilst
his blessings flowed in a continual and uninterrupted stream from that
fountain, yet since our pipes have been cut off, and bitter waters have flowed
instead of sweet and refreshing streams, certainly if God please to remember
his old loving kindness, Psalm. CVII. 10.
it will relish the sweeter. After we have been bound in affliction and iron
for our Rebellion against God, if we be once released, surely the cords of a
man, Hos. XI. 4.
and the soft bands of love will hold us faster than ever. This good success
God seems to expect when his mercy heals those wounds which he made for our
Sins. He seems to make trial whether the good effects which appear to have been
wrought on us by our Afflictions are real and durable. For whilst we are under
the lash, the success cannot be so well and certainly observed. The Dog must
recover his sickness before he will return to his vomit. Whilst we feel the
smart of the rod, we are apt to call those Sins to remembrance for which we
think our selves to suffer; we are apt to take up good Resolutions against
them; to make fair Promises of reformation, and to bind them with most solemn
Vows. But the Rod must be removed before we can come to the Test; before it can
appear how firm and steady our Resolutions, how sincere our Promises were, and
whether we will faithfully pay unto the Lord those Vows which we made in the
day of Trouble.

So that when it pleases God to deliver us out of those miseries which our Sins
have brought upon us, we are to consider, that we are in a state of Probation,
we are upon Trial. And we are farther under a double obligation to forsake
those Sins for which we lately smarted. We have the voluntary obligation of our
own Vows upon us, and we are bound in point of Gratitude to God to Sin no more.
He will esteem the faithful performance of our Holy Resolutions the most
Authentic Evidence of our Thankfulness, and our future Obedience our best
Peace Offering. When God has put an end to his controversy with a land, Psalm.
Lxxxv. 8.
and vouchsafes yet once more to speak peace to his people, he expects that
they should not turn again unto folly. But in case they do not answer so
reasonable an expectation, if they offer him fresh affronts, or repeat their
old ones, they will find the Truce broken by their own Treachery, and Vengeance
returning armed with double fury. Men have no reason to promise themselves
Peace so long as they boldly put Heaven to defiance, and fight against God. He
may perhaps give them a little respite, he may change their punishment, and not
continually lash them with the same Rod, but till they cease provoking him
there will be no end of their calamities.

III. That if upon the removal of such Calamities we do not forsake those Sins
for which they were inflicted, we may justly dread forer Judgments. Lest a
worse thing come unto thee.

Almighty God in dealing with his sinful creatures is pleased to observe the
method of skillful Physicians, who begin with the most gentle and easy
remedies, searching and cleansing the wound with as little pain as may be to
the Patient; but if the wound putrify and gangrene, they are forced to proceed
to more painful operations, such as launcing, incision and searing; and when
after all they find the malignity and venom of the gangrene is such as no
remedies can conquer, they are forced to cut off the incurable member. Thus
does God at first exercise the Sinner with gentle corrections, seeming to be
not without hope that they may prove strong enough to work his Reformation, but
if they fail of success, he proceeds to greater severities in proportion to the
guilt and obstinacy of the Offender. Thus he dealt with his ancient people the
Jews, Isai. IX. 1.
At first he lightly afflicted the land of Zabulon and the land of Napthali,
and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the Sea. As men do
not mount per saltum at one leap to the height of all Impiety and Profaneness,
but wax worse and worse by degrees, till at last they become desperately
wicked: So neither does God use extremity at first, he does not pour out the
full vials of his Indignation at once, but his Judgments grow gradually
heavier, till at length vengeance accomplisheth the ruin of the incorrigible
and desperate Rebel.

A remarkable instance of what has been said we have in Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, who oppressed Israel, and refused to obey the voice of the Lord, who
by his Prophets commanded them to let his people go. He began with light
afflictions, and as often as Pharaoh seemed to repent he removed them: When
Pharaoh saw there was respite, he hardened his heart; whereupon God sent other
Plagues upon Egypt, and followed them with one Judgment after another,
punishing them first in their Waters, then in their Corn and Cattle, next in
their Bodies with sore Blains and Boils; after that, in the Death of their
Firstborn; and lastly, Pharaoh having many times wilfully hardened his own
heart, God hardened it penally to his ruin; so that pursuing the Children of
Israel through the Red Sea he was drowned with his whole Host.

Nor was this a singular case, a particular method wherein God dealt only with
Pharaoh and the Egyptians. For thus he treated his own peculiar people Israel,
for whose sake he had sent all those prodigious Plagues on Egypt. When they
murmured in the Wilderness, he chastised them several ways. When they waxed
wanton in the Land of Canaan and revolted to Idolatry, he suffered the
neighbor Nations to infest their Land, to take their Cities, to defeat their
Armies, to oppress them and bring them under Tribute: after a while he would
deliver them; when they revolted again, he punished them some other way. As
their obstinacy increased, so did his severity. He suffered the X Tribes first
to go into Captivity, and after a while he caused the King of Babylon to carry
away Juda Captive, and lay waste both the City and Temple of Jerusalem. For 70
years they sat in Babylon, and then God brought back their Captivity, and so
favored them that they rebuilt the City and Temple; but as they returned to
their ancient dwellings so did they to their Sins, and continued a stifnecked
and rebellious generation, despising the goodness of God, contemning his
threatenings, killing his Prophets, crucifying his own Son; and having now
filled up the measure of their iniquities, God delivered them into the hands of
the Romans, who destroyed their Nation, burnt the City and Temple of Jerusalem,
rased their foundations, and literally fulfilled our Savior's Prediction,
Matt. XXIV. 2.
that there should not be one stone left upon another.

Now there are several ways in which God is wont to bring worse things upon
obstinate and unreformed Sinners. I shall instance in Three.

1. When he brings the same Calamities thicker and oftener upon them, and though
he scourge them with the same Rod, yet he increases the number of their
stripes. Their enemies make frequent incursions upon them, they suffer by
frequent Plagues and Fires. Psalm. XXXII. 10.
Thus, as the Psalmist threatens, many sorrows shall be to the wicked. God will
raise them up enemies on every side, and as he threatens the Jews, he will send
many fishers, and they shall fish them, and after, he will send many hunters,
and they shall hunt them, and make a prey of them, and he will recompense their
iniquity and their sin double. Jer. XVI. 16, 18. God will double his blow upon
every fresh provocation; and as the Sinner multiplies his Transgressions, so
will the Divine vengeance multiply his Plagues. If ye will walk contrary to me,
says the Lord, and will not hearken unto me, I will bring seven times more
Plagues upon you, according to your sins. Lev. XXVI. 21.

2. A worse thing happens to a relapsed Sinner when God inflicts sorer and
heavier Judgments than before. 1 Kings XII. 14.
And this is not unusual. Those whom whips will not reform he chastises with
Scorpions. If the ordinary instrument of Discipline, the Rod, has been long
used in vain, he whets his glittering Sword, and bends his Bow. Jer. L. 25.
He opens his Armory, and ransacks all the Treasures of his Wrath for
Instruments of Cruelty and Death, and brings forth the weapons of his
Indignation.

Or, which is worse than the severest Temporal calamity that can befall men, he
gives them up to a Reprobate sense, Jer. v. 23.
because they have (as the Prophet speaks) a revolting and rebellious heart. He
casts them off, as unworthy to be under his farther care and discipline; he
abandons them to their own lusts, resolving to strike them no more, Isai. 1.5.
that he will cause his fury toward them to rest, and that his Jealousy shall
depart from them, that he will be quiet, and be angry no more, Ezekiel. XVI. 42.

3. A worse thing happens to revolting Sinners when God inflicts punishments
for a worse purpose, not for the Sinner's reformation, but for his own honor.
When the sufferings that befall them are vindictive, and not designed for their
correction. When Judgments are not intended to teach them righteousness, but to
make them examples for the terror and warning of others. When God smites, but
not in kindness, and there drops no balm from his Rod, but he wounds them with
the wounds of an enemy, and with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the
multitude of their iniquities, and because their sins were increased The
Syriack adds, even to impenitence.
, Jer. XXX. 14. And when neither frequent and severe punishments, nor yet
intervals of mercy produce fruits meet for repentance, there is all the reason
in the world for Sinners to expect in some or other of the forementioned ways
they shall feel sadder effects of God's displeasure. It Is both necessary and
just that some worse thing should come unto them.

1. It Is Necessary. Obstinate and revolting Sinners need sharper afflictions
and heavier judgments to rouse and work upon them. For by frequent relapses
into Sin, and perseverance in it, they contract an ill habit of Soul; their
distempers get strength; and the more inveterate they are, the greater
difficulty there will be in removing them. For this reason relapsed Sinners
will need to repeat their bitter potions the oftener, and the dose must be
increased in proportion to the malignity of the disease, ease, if gentle
medicines have no effect, the bills must be altered, strong Physic must be
administered, and the ill humors evacuated by more violent and churlish
Purgatives. When men grow worse and worse under the milder dispensations of
Providence, and presume to add sin to sin, Isai. XXX. 1. Psalm. LXIX. 27.
there is no help for them, but God must also, as the Psalmist speaks, add
iniquity to their iniquity, i. e. increase the severity of their punishments.

2. As it is Necessary, so also is it Just. It is a righteous thing with God,
in regard such obstinate and backsliding Sinners deserve sorer judgments.
Repeated Sin contracts a deeper guilt, and all mitigating pleas are
insignificant, when crimes become habitual, especially under the circumstances
of the person in my Text. When men sin on after great Judgments and great
Deliverances, it is an argument of great Presumption and Malice; that men are
wilful and stubborn, and, as Elihu speaks, Job XXXIV. 37. Add rebellion to
their sin. Their guilt is also farther aggravated by their Ingratitude, which
is a Sin of the foulest complexion and deepest stain. No Provocation is more
unpardonable than the abuse of Mercy. It is recorded by the Psalmist as an
aggravation of the stupid perverseness of the Israelites; That they understood
not God's wonders in Egypt, Psalm. CVII. 7.
that they remembered not the multitude of his mercies; but provoked him at the
Sea, even at the RED SEA. Every part of the verse is a smart reproach of their
sottish Unthankfulness. That they took no warning by God's Prodigious Judgments
on the Egyptians; that they forgot his Mercies toward themselves no less
wonderful; not single mercies, but great multitudes of them; and, after all,
provoked him at the Sea, even at the RED SEA. The repetition is an emphatical
aggravation of their Ingratitude, Even at the red Sea, through which God had
just before miraculously opened them a safe and dry passage, where he had
destroyed their enemies before their eyes, and secured them from ever returning
to their former bondage; there they murmured against him and provoked him. When
the hand of the Lord has been lifted up against the wicked but they will not
see it, Isai. XXVI. 10, 11.
and afterward favor has been shown them, but they will not learn
righteousness, it is an argument that they offend of malicious Wickedness, and
are not only unworthy but incapable of mercy. That they are incorrigible and
desperate, Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, that farther long-suffering
will be a sort of Cruelty to them, and swift destruction a degree of mercy; nay
the only mercy they are capable of: For it may be some little abatement of
their miseries in the next world, that they lived no longer in this, and were
not permitted to treasure up so immense a weight of wrath as in a long life
they would have heaped up unto themselves.

In Conclusion, when neither Judgments nor Mercies will work reformation, and
men presume to Sin on against all sorts of admonitions and obligations to Sin
no more, what can such wretched creatures expect, but worse and worse
calamities, even the very worst of all Plagues: That Vengeance should come
armed with flames of fire unquenchable and triumph in their Eternal Ruin.

Thus I have briefly considered the three observations I made from the words,
and am to crave but a little more of your Patience, whilst I apply what has
been said to this Solemn occasion.

The words of our Savior in my Text, are a Subject very proper for the
entertainment of our most serious thoughts this day: (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
and though they were spoken to the impotent man alone, yet were intended for
the admonition of us all, who are in circumstances exactly parallel with his.
God had wounded us for our Transgressions, and has healed us by a miracle of
his mercy. And as Christ found him in the Temple, so are we all here before the
Lord in his house of Prayer: and considering the happy change of the State of
this eminent City, since the appointment of this Anniversary Fast, I may say we
are in the Temple upon a much like occasion.

Blessed be the name of the Lord, we are not now assembled to weep over her
smoking Ruins, and to mingle our tears with her ashes. We have no reason to
bewail her as a disconsolate Widow, for she sits as a Queen again, Psa. CXLVII.
13.
and her Children within her are blessed. She lies no longer on ruinous heaps,
the Scorn and Derision of her Enemies, but she is risen as a Phoenix out of her
Ashes, the astonishing joy of her friends, and the envy of all that hate her.
As that dreadful Fire which consumed her, has been thought a lively
resemblance of the general Conflagration at the last day, so methinks this City
risen out of the dust, is no faint Emblem of the Resurrection. It is raised in
glory. It is rebuilt with greater beauty, its structures both private and
public, Civil and Sacred, are far more magnificent than before. So that I may
very well apply the first part of our Savior's words to this great and eminent
City. Behold, thou art made whole: and add St. Chrysostom's gloss, not by thy
merit, but by the Divine mercy and power. For the rebuilding of it in so short
a time and so great Splendor, is little short of a miracle.

But though we do upon this account, in some measure forget our Sorrows, yet
there is still just occasion for our solemn Humiliation this day; to spend it
in mourning, and in all sorts of Penitential exercises. For though the
calamitous effects of the Fire be well nigh worn off, yet whilst our Sins which
kindled it remain, they will afford us perpetual cause of Fasting, and give us
occasion to look back with Sorrow, and to look forward with Fear. When we
reflect and see what destruction they have already wrought in this Land and
City, who among us has so hard a heart as not to melt into Tears? And when we
forecast what farther and greater Calamities we have reason to apprehend from
them, is not the dreadful prospect enough to make our hearts tremble and melt
within us like wax? What is only intimated in the case of the Paralytick is a
notorious truth in ours, Our Sins were the cause of the Fire. We confess it in
the Public Office of the Day, we have erected a Pillar of Infamy in the midst
of our City, to be an everlasting memorial of the dreadful Judgments of God,
and the dreadful Sins of this Generation, and which is sad to consider, our
Sins themselves reign in the midst of us, and testify against us. I hope
therefore no man will have either the Folly or the Impudence to wash his hands
and say, I have contributed no Fuel to these Flames of London.

Though a late Inscription charge the Papists with the Fire, it was not
designed to absolve our Sins, the undoubted Boutefeus, and the worst sort of
Incendiaries. Though it might be intended to continue an immortal hatred of
Popery; sure it was never meant to reconcile us to our provoking abominations.
This would have been to ridicule the Wisdom and Piety of our Governors, and
contradict the best design of the Monument.

There is nothing so much hinders the good effects of Chastisements, as
transferring the blame on others, or imputing them to accidents, and resting in
the second causes of them. But certainly we have the least Temptation that may
be to any thing of that kind: For never were there more visible tokens of the
just Vengeance of God, than in the Fire of London. Those circumstances which we
are too prone to call accidents, that concurred to the spreading of the Fire,
show the Providence of that God whom we had provoked. Whatever creatures
assisted to the swift propagation of the Flames; whether evil Instruments, or
the heat and drought of the preceding Summer, or the Winds, they were all God's
Militia armed against us. And neither strong East-winds nor the famous Popish
or French Fireballs carried on the Fire so much as the Trains our Sins had
laid in all quarters of the City, and the fierce Blasts of God's just
displeasure.

Having so severely smarted for our Faults already, methinks we should be well
disposed to receive our Savior's advice, Sin no more. One would think our sad
experience should afford us some security against suffering again in the same
way, and on the same account. We see that Beasts and Birds will not be twice
taken in the same snare; and shall we be more irrational than Brutes, and
suffer our selves to be often overtaken with the same Faults? Oh that we could
be blessed with so happy a sight as that Reformation one might reasonably expect,
Jer. VI. 28. Iis ipsis quibus coercebantur plagis scelera crescebant; ut
putares, poenam ipsam criminum quasi matrem esse vitiorum, Salv. de Gub. l. 6.
that either so heavy a Judgment as the Fire, or so great a Mercy as the
Resurrection of this City, should singly produce! But alas, we are all grievous
Revolters. We have been made worse by our Afflictions and hardened by our
Sufferings, we like the Anvil have reverberated the strokes of God's hammer,
and they have made no impression upon us.

It is a sad Observation that Lactantius makes of the Heathen Romans, Lactant.
Instit. l. 2. c. 11. nisi dum in malis sunt.
That they never remember God but in times of public Calamity. And yet
Salvian's observation of the incorrigible temper of the Christian Romans is
much more lamentable; Neque ullam penitus Romani orbis aut Romani nominis
portionem, quamlibet graviter plagis coelestibus caesam unquam fuisse
correctam. Salvian. de Gub. l. 6.
That no part of the Roman Empire, though chastised with the severest plagues
by Heaven, was reformed thereby. It behooves us to consider how far both these
sad observations may be verified of us, and whether what the Prophet says of
Judah may not be too truly and pertinently applied to us. This is a Nation that
obeys not the voice of the Lord, neither receives Correction, Jer. VII. 28.
How little influence had this sore Judgment upon us? Did those of us that
escaped that Plague repent of their Sins? Zach. XI. 2.
Did the Fir Tree howl because the Cedar was fallen, or the Oaks of Bashan for
the Forest of the Vintage? Did our lesser Cities and neighboring Places take
warning by this Calamity of our Metropolis? No sure, for then they would not,
as since they have done, have tasted of the same cup. How did the Sufferers
behave themselves? was there any visible amendment? did they come purer out of
the Fire? Nothing less. The Fire that consumed our estates, abated nothing of
our Luxury; and the Flames of our Lust raged, when most of the fuel that had
maintained them was spent. How many here, as Salvian observes at Triers, lay
drunk up and down in the warm ruins? How did we ruffle it in rich Silks, Lace
and all sorts of bravery, when it would have better become us to have lain
prostrate before God in Sackcloth and Ashes? How many were feasting and
carousing at the Tavern, when they should have been in the Temple fasting and
deprecating farther miseries? When the greatest part of the City lay in heaps,
and the poor remainders of it were black and disfigured by the Fire, when which
way soever we turned our eyes, we could not avoid observing our desolations,
and the sad marks of God's displeasure, how few of us abated the least delight,
saw one Play the less, or spent in Devotion one hour the more? If any did not
run to the same excess of riot they had done before, Salv. de Gub. l. 6.
was it not, as Salvian speaks, Miserioe beneficium, non disciplinoe, rather to
be ascribed to their Poverty than their Virtue?

But perhaps these severe courses suited not our temper, it may be we are of
that generous disposition which is to be wrought on by kindness, and favors
have not been ill bestowed upon us. I would to God it were so.

But alas, is not the contrary evident? Does not Prosperity make us proud and
wanton? Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15.
Have we not with Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, have we not forsook the God
that made us, and lightly esteemed the Rock of our Salvation? Quievit parumper
Inimicorum audacia, nec tamen nostrorum malitia. Recesserant hosts a civibus
nec cives a suis sceleribus, Gildas de Excid. Britan. (...), etc. Philo in vita
Mosis.
How have we in the midst of God's blessings forgotten all Sobriety and
Gratitude, forgotten both God and our selves? The lucid Intervals of mercy have
not brought us into our right minds, nor yet prevailed with us for the least
intermission of sinning. As Gildas complains of our Ancestors. Nay, as it is
observed of Pharaoh, the only use we have made of that respite we have had
between Judgments, has been like Wrestlers, to take breath, to recover spirits
and strength for a fresh combat with Heaven, and that we may be able with
greater fury and violence to sly in the face of God.

Had we been (as is suggested) of that generous temper that must be managed by
fair means, God has made sufficient Trial of us in that way.

He has heaped favors upon us, and even laden us with his benefits. Isai.
XLIII. 24.
But in return we have made him to serve with our sins, and wearied him with
our iniquities. If the Fire drove out the unclean Spirit that haunted our old
buildings, he seems to be now returned with seven other evil Spirits more
wicked than himself, and to have taken possession of our new habitations. For
our Impiety and Contempt of God is greater than ever, our Pride and Vanity
prodigious, our Luxury and Debauchery has outstript all examples of former
ages, and are not to be outdone, Nil erit ulterius quod nostris moribus addat
Posteritas -- Juv. Sat. 1.
I wish they never may be matched by the generations to come. Have not
Oppression, Deceit and Perjury overspread us? And may not that be said of
London that the Prophet spoke of Gilead, Hos. VI. 18.
It is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood? Are not
Adultery and Whoredom esteemed so venial Sins, that they are seldom chastised
with greater severity than a smile? Is not the cry of Sins gone up to Heaven,
like the cry of Sodom, and yet we dread not a like overthrow?

Nay, as though our Wickedness brought on ruin too slowly whilst it operated
only in a moral way, as the meritorious cause of it, we have of late traded in
those Sins which have a natural and more quick tendency to Destruction. We have
rent the Church by causless Schisms, and divided the Kingdom against it self by
disloyal Factions. We have been Heady and Ungovernable, which is the most
certain sign of approaching ruin. In the heat of our clamorous zeal for the
Protestant Religion we have dishonored it in the highest degree: and after all
our fierce outcries against Popery, the worst of its abominations have been
committed amongst us. God speaks thus to Judah. Thou that have judged thy
Sisters [Samaria and Sodom] bear thine own shame for thy sins which thou have
committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: be
confounded and bear thy shame, in that thou have justified thy sisters, Ezekiel.
XVI. 52. Is not this discourse very applicable to us? May not God thus reproach
us, You have judged your Sister Rome, but have equalled if not outdone her
abominations. And the villainies you condemn in her you have justified by worse
practices?

Are there Jesuits among the Papists, so are there among us, if agreement with
them in their worst principles and practices may entitle men to the Name who
want almost nothing else but the Order and Habit? Are their Jesuits dangerous
Incendiaries? so are ours. Do the Romish Jesuits subject Princes to the Pope?
ours subject them to the People. Do their Jesuits contrive the deposing and
murdering of Kings? so do ours. Do they give the Pope a power to absolve
Subjects from their Allegiance, and dispense with their Oaths? ours make
quicker work of it, and without that piece of Superstition and Formality allow
every man to do it for himself. Do they allow Equivocation and mental
Reservation? ours do worse, who condemn it in the Principle, but admit it in
Practice. Do they make Oaths and Sacraments the Bonds of iniquity, the Seals of
secrecy in their hellish designs? ours are not very unlike them, who conceal as
hellish Treasons, contrary to their Oaths to discover them; who take Oaths and
Sacraments to qualify them for the service of a Faction, and to possess
themselves of Power to ruin both Church and State. Do they at Rome propagate
Religion by Assassination and Massacres? there have been also those among us
who stuck at neither for the accomplishment of their Devilish Plots. And though
they do not canonize or saint Traitors as the Pope does, they dub them HEROES,
and ASSERTORS of RELIGION and LIBERTY; which poor reward may for ought I know
animate our Zealots to as desperate attempts, as a Saintship does the Romish.

When I consider what zeal for the Purity of Religion these men pretend, that
they are for purer Congregations not only than the Roman, but even the best
reformed Churches; that they would be thought Reformatissimi, the most sincere,
most zealous, nay the only Protestants in the Nation, these pretenses
aggravate their crimes beyond those of Romish Traitors. And I shall not fear to
say, they have justified their Sister, and the Papists are more righteous than
they.

In short, our blood Feuds, and the devilish Confederacies of Atheists and
Enthusiasts presage ruin to us: and we act as though we designed to prevent
the stroke of divine Vengeance, and become our own Executioners.

When the greatest part of this City lay in ashes, and its wealth was consumed
by the Fire, when nothing but desolation presented it self to our view, and
thousands lay in the Fields, a man would have thought London was as miserable
as it could be made. But when I behold the universal Corruption of manners, the
Debauchery, the Uncleanness, Profaneness and other abominations which are
committed in it, without shame, and though not with allowance, yet with
impunity; when I see how factious, Non tam maenium subversione, domorumque
exustione Civitas perire dicenda est, quam justitiae exterminio, and morum
corruptione. Nic. de Clemangiis Ep. 101.
heady and ungovernable men are, I must needs profess, that in all its present
Splendor I look upon the condition of this City to be worse than when it lay
in ruins. For a City is not so effectually undone, by the demolishing of its
Walls, and burning of its Houses, as by the banishing Religion, Righteousness,
Truth and Peace out of the midst of it, and the general corruption of manners.
And it is a far less lamentable sight to behold a people under such calamities,
than to see them unreformed nay worse after them.

This seems to be our case. We have passed through the Fire, but are not
purified, our dross remains in us. We are stupid and insensible, and it was but
necessary to erect a Pillar in remembrance of it, for the Sufferers themselves
seem to have forgotten it. For this solemn Anniversary Humiliation is dwindled
into almost nothing, saving (I am loath to say the Pomp, I hope it is the
Devotion of) this Great Appearance. How do many fly the Penance of this Fast,
and entertain themselves with all sorts of Pleasures at their Country-Houses?
Isai. XXII. 12.13.
On this day when the Lord of Hoasts calls us to weeping and mourning, there is
nothing but joy and mirth eating Flesh and drinking Wine. I should not have
mentioned this to this Honorable Auditory, but that I have my self with some
trouble and concern observed it to be the Practice of many grave and eminent
Citizens. They seem to have no remembrance of that dreadful Fire, and no fear
of those worse Judgments we have to apprehend. In one sense they will never
forget the Fire, they will tell you they feel it yet in their Estates, they
will with the impotent man as St. Chrysostom speaks, (...) tell tragical
Stories of their losses, Chrysostom. Tom. 5. hom. 62.
how many hundreds and thousands they are the worse for it, and perhaps magnify
their losses beyond truth; but they forget why God brought this great calamity
upon the City, and how much fuel their own Sins contributed to its flames.

If ever our Savior's advice was necessary, sure it is so now, and I can never
too often repeat and press it. O sin no more, sin no more. The measure of our
iniquities seems to be well nigh filled up, and unless a speedy and general
Reformation appease the wrath of God, it will be too great a favor for us to
expect that he should smite us any more for our Correction, we must look for
some worse thing than either Plague or Fire or any other of those Judgments
that have hitherto come upon us.

Lest a worse thing happen unto us? How is it possible? No Fire can ever spread
in these new brick buildings, as the former did in the old timber-houses. Some
worse thing? What can be worse than such a general Calamity, which ruined
thousands, which not only impoverisht the City, but the whole Kingdom, what
have we worse to fear?

My Brethren, be not deceived: Though ye have drunk of a bitter cup, Rev. XIV.
10. (...) And^. Caesar. in loc.
yet its bitterness has been hitherto taken off with a large mixture of mercy:
ye have not yet tasted (...) the Wine of his wrath unmixt, ye have not drunk up
the dregs thereof. Flatter not your selves with the thoughts that the worst is
already past. Psalm. XC. 11.
Ye do not understand the power of his Anger, and therefore do not entertain
just fears of his displeasure. He can if he see good punish you again in the
same way, and with as much ease lay waste your Stately New-Buildings, as he did
the old Rotten ones. Though your City be raised in glory it is not raised in
incorruption. If it be not in so great danger of casual Fire, yet sure the
Vengeance of God can propagate such a Calamity farther than all the Malice, Art
and Industry of the worst Boutefeus. Where the breath of the Lord kindles a
Fire, all things are as Hay and Stubble before it.

Have ye nothing worse to fear? recollect your selves, and consider what ye at
that time feared, but through the mercy of God escaped a Massacre by the bloody
hands of those, who burnt your City. Your fire might have been like that Rev.
VIII. 7. Mingled with blood. God might have made your ruins everlasting
Desolations; and whereas he has graciously said unto this City thou shall be
built, Isai. XLIV. 28.
and to our Temples your Foundations shall be laid. The Lord might have devoted
London as he did Jericho, Josh. VI. 26.
and have laid a Curse upon the man, who should have presumed to lay the first
Stone of its New-Buildings.

Have ye nothing worse to fear? has not God by a miracle of mercy newly
discovered and delivered us from a greater danger? There wanted only the
PERMISSION of HEAVEN to have brought a worse thing upon us. For HELL was ready
to BREAK LOOSE again upon us with more Barbarous fury than ever, See his
Majesty's Declaration.
In the Murder of our KING and his Royal Brother, in the Assassination of the
Public Ministers of State, and the Principal Magistrates of this City, and all
the mischeivous consequences of Cruelty, and Confusion. Had not God by his
wonderful Providence prevented them, the Combustions of Eighty three, might
have proved more fatal to the City and Nation than the Flames of Sixty six.

Methinks I hear the Voice of God our Savior after this great deliverance
saying to us of this Nation and City, as he did to the Impotent man in my Text,
Sin no more. And if we can be but so wise and happy as to receive his
Admonition, we are secure from the Threatening that follows it, Lest a worse
thing come unto thee.

Let me then beseech you, Brethren, in Christ's stead, both by the Judgments
and mercies of the Lord, Romans XII. 1. 2 Cor. V. 20.
be reconciled to God. As ye desire the continuance of his blessings, or as ye
would avert worse Calamities than any ye have yet felt. As ye tender the peace
and Prosperity of this City. 1. Cor. XV. 34.
Awake to Righteousness, and sin no more: Wash you, make you clean; Isai. I.
16.17.
put away the evil of your doings before the eyes of the Lord, cease to do
evil, learn to do well. Have compassion on your selves, forsake those
iniquities which separate between you and your God, and have hid his face from
you, Isai. LIX. 2.
if you hope to prevail with him to be merciful to you and bless you. Improve
this opportunity of making your peace with him, which the Wisdom and Piety of
our Government has put into your hands. Let the remembrance of the late
dreadful Fire teach you the Fear of the Lord, which is the truest Wisdom, and
the best Preservative from the like Calamities. Let the sincerity of this days
Humiliation appear in its happy influence on the future conduct of your lives.
Let it so refresh the memory of God's Judgments and your sins, as to make you
walk humbly with him the whole year after. The good effects of a Fast depend
not so much upon the solemnity as the seriousness of our Repentance: not so
much upon the number of our Prayers or the noise of our cries, as on the
lifting up of holy hands and clean hearts to God. In vain do we lift up our
voice, Frustra etenim vox ad Deum clamat cum scelerata vita reclamat. Nic. de
Clemang. Ep. 77.
and cry mightily to the Lord for mercy, whilst our Sins cry out against us,
and call louder to heaven for Vengeance. Without reformation we may proclaim,
but cannot sanctify a Fast; the calling of a solemn assembly this day will be
but an affront to God: Our Sacrifice will be numbered among our abominations,
and our Prayers will be turned into Sin.

If we desire to appease the wrath of God, which seems not to be yet turned
away, we must sanctify such a Fast as he has chosen. Dan. IV. 27.
We must break off our Sins by Righteousness, and our Iniquities by showing
Mercy on the poor; especially such as have been Sufferers by this and the like
Calamities. We must loose the bands of wickedness, Isai. LVIII. 6, 7, 8, etc.
and let the oppressed go free; we must deal our bread to the hungry, and bring
the poor outcasts into our houses; when we see the naked, we must cover them,
and not hide our selves from our own flesh. We must draw out our soul to the
hungry, and satisfy the afflicted. Then shall we CALL upon the LORD, and he
will ANSWER; we shall CRY, and he will say, HERE I AM. Our few old waste places
shall be built, and our imperfect foundations shall be raised up, and the Lord
shall for ever be the REPAIRER OF OUR BREACHES.

THE END.

